Connectivity and Creativity in Semantic Neural Networks Nagendra Marupaka and Ali A . Minai , Senior Member , IEEE Abstract —Creativity and insight are distinctive attributes of human cognition , but their neural basis remains poorly understood due to the difﬁculty of experimental study . As such , computational modeling can play an important role in understanding these phenomena . Some researchers have proposed that creative individuals have a “deeper” organization of knowledge , allowing them to connect remote associates and form novel ideas . It is reasonable to assume that the depth and richness of semantic organization in individual minds is related to the connectivity of neural networks involved in semantic representation . In this paper , we use a simple and plausible neurodynamical model of semantic networks to study how the connectivity structure of these networks relates to the richness of the semantic constructs , or ideas , they can generate . This work is motivated , in part , by research showing that experimentally obtained semantic networks have a speciﬁc connectivity pattern that is both small - world and scale - free . We show that neural semantic networks reﬂecting this structure have richer semantic dynamics than those with other connectivity structures . Though simple , this model may provide insight into the important issue of how the physical structure of the brain determines one of the most profound features of the human mind – its capacity for creative thought . I . I NTRODUCTION Creativity and insight are often seen as arising from the ability to connect disparate concepts or ideas , i . e , to make unexpected connections in semantic space [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] . The experience of unusual combinations leading to creativity has been documented by several scientists . For example , Einstein is quoted as saying , “Taken from a psychological viewpoint . . . combinatory play seems to be the essential feature in productive thought – before there is any connection with logical construction in words or other kinds of signs which can be communicated to others” ( quoted in [ 2 ] , [ 4 ] ) . Similarly , Poincare , described his own creative thinking process as follows : “Ideas arose in crowds ; I felt them collide until pairs interlocked , so to speak , making a stable combination . . . . the only combinations that have a chance of forming are those where at least one of the elements is one of those atoms freely chosen by our will . Now , it is evidently among these that is found what I called the good combination . . . . among the great numbers of combinations blindly formed almost all are without interest and without utility” [ 7 ] ( quoted in [ 4 ] ) . The latter quote Nagendra Marupaka is with the School of Electronic and Computer Systems , University of Cincinnati , Cincinnati OH 45221 , Email : maru - pana @ mail . uc . edu . Ali Minai is with the School of Electronic and Com - puter Systems , University of Cincinnati , Cincinnati OH 45221 , Email : Ali . Minai @ uc . edu Acknowledgement : This work was supported in part by a National Science Foundation Human and Social Dynamics Program grant to Ali Minai ( BCS - 0728413 ) , which includes support from the Deputy Director of National Intelligence , and by a National Science Foundation CreativeIT grant to Ali Minai ( IIS - 0855714 ) points to both the utility and dangers of unusual combinations – most combinations generated by the creative mind are not useful , or even nonsensical , but this is the price for discovering the rare combination of uncommon value . Since conceptual combinations arise in the minds of indi - viduals , they must be the product of the cognitive dynamics of these individual minds . The key idea is that creativity depends on how associations between concepts are organized in the mind . Presumably , individuals whose minds link concepts that most people do not are likelier to ﬁnd them when needed . This idea was formalized by Mednick [ 2 ] as an associative hierarchy , which relates the uniqueness ( or “unusualness” ) of associations in the individual’s mind with the strength of these associations . He argued that non - creative individuals ( or individuals thinking in contexts where they are non - creative ) have a steep associative hierarchy , where common associations are very strong , but uncommon ones are much weaker . Such an individual is likely to think mainly in terms of common associations and generate conventional , non - creative ideas . The creative individual , in contrast , has a ﬂatter association hierarchy where even unusual concepts are fairly strong , and therefore likelier to be discovered during associative search . Another important factor in creativity is the problem of ﬁxation – the inability to break out of conventional thinking or standard practices . This often occurs in individuals with high expertise in narrow domains because the associations underlying their standard methods are much stronger than those that would lead to non - standard ones . Faced with a particular task , such individuals are likelier to keep return - ing to the same standard ideas . One interesting aspect of Mednick’s hypothesis is that creative individuals may be less likely to generate conventional combinations than non - creative ones , thus avoiding ﬁxation . It has been argued that individuals with broad but relatively shallow expertise may be more creative than those with deep and narrow expertise [ 6 ] . Indeed , experiments have shown that the inclusion of a few unconventional thinkers can enhance the creativity of a whole group even if these thinkers are not especially knowledgeable [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] . Given the signiﬁcance of how conceptual associations are organized , it is important to ask three questions : 1 ) What is the actual organization of associations is in the minds of individuals ? 2 ) How do these associations generate a “train of thought” that may lead to creativity ? 3 ) Are some types of associative organization more con - genial to creative thinking than others ? The focus of this paper is on the last question . Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Neural Networks , San Jose , California , USA , July 31 – August 5 , 2011 978 - 1 - 4244 - 9637 - 2 / 11 / $ 26 . 00 ©2011 IEEE 3127 II . B ACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION The organization of associative memory has been studied very widely , typically using word association or cued recall tests [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] . Such studies have generated a rich body of data on association norms , which have been used to develop theories of associative recall ( e . g . , [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 15 ] , [ 13 ] ) . Very interesting results have emerged from a network analysis of word association data by Steyvers and Tenenbaum [ 16 ] , who showed that such associative networks possess two interesting properties : 1 ) A small - world archi - tecture ; and 2 ) A power - law degree distribution . They also proposed a model of semantic evolution that could produce such networks , and have argued that these properties might be representative of associative semantic networks in general . While these networks represent data averaged over a large number of test subjects , they provide a good starting point for investigating the relationship between associative network structure and creativity . In particular , one may ask how the two characteristics found by Steyvers and Tenenbaum impact the search for conceptual combinations separately and jointly . The degree distribution of complex networks has recently been a subject of great interest , with particular attention focusing on networks with power - law degree distribution [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] , i . e . , p ( k ) ∼ k β , where p ( k ) is the probability of a node having k connections . Random networks with homogeneous uniform probability of connection between all node pairs are expected to have a Poisson degree distribution with a pronounced mode and an exponential tail , unlike the “fat tail” of the power - law distribution . Networks with the latter degree distribution are called scale - free networks , and are known to be generated by processes of preferential attachment , where new nodes join the network by connecting preferentially to already well - connected nodes [ 17 ] . This results in the emergence of hub nodes with very high con - nectivity , which lie in the fat tail of the degree distribution . It has been proposed that many real - world networks , including the Internet and the World - Wide Web , are scale - free [ 19 ] , [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] . Small - world networks [ 22 ] , [ 23 ] are networks with a high degree of clustering , C , among nodes as well as low mean shortest path length , D , between node pairs . Clustering is deﬁned as the mean probability that the neighbors of two directly connected nodes are also directly connected . Networks with uniform random connectivity typically have low D and low C , whereas networks with local connectivity have high D and C . Thus , small - world networks , with low D and high C , represent a distinct class of networks , and have been found to be good models for many types of real - world complex networks such as power grids , neural networks and social networks [ 22 ] , [ 21 ] . It has been shown that neural networks with small world structure are very efﬁcient as associative memories [ 24 ] , and small world characteristics have been found in cortical neural networks [ 25 ] . It has been suggested that small - world connectivity in the brain may underlie high creativity in individuals [ 6 ] . Scale - free networks have low D , but not necessarily low C , while small world networks do not necessarily have a power law degree distribution . Thus , the networks found by Steyvers and Tenenbaum represent a special subclass of networks lying in the intersection of the two sets . In this paper , we describe a simple but neurally plausible computational model for associative search through the space of conceptual combinations in semantic neural networks , and use it to compare the characteristics of the resulting search in networks with four different types of connectivity : Random ( RA ) , Localized ( LO ) ; small - world ( SW ) ; and Steyvers - Tenenbaum ( ST ) . In particular , we consider the following issues : 1 ) Do networks with distinct connectivity differ signiﬁ - cantly in the richness of their search through the space of conceptual combinations ? 2 ) Does the ST model provide any advantage in terms of the search for conceptual combinations , and if so , does this arise from the small - world property , the scale - free property , or any from a combination of both ? It is important to emphasize that our work differs nomi - nally from most models of associative recall ( e . g . , [ 15 ] ) in two ways : 1 ) We consider the recall of conceptual combi - nations rather than single associates ; and 2 ) We consider free recall ( or spontaneous thinking ) rather than cued recall . However , insofar as conceptual combinations can themselves be seen as more complex concepts , our model can be considered as implementing distributed form of associative chaining . III . M ODEL D ESCRIPTION A . Network Model The neural semantic network model we use is an extension of one we have recently developed as part of a larger model of cognitive function [ 26 ] , [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] . It is based on the concept of competitive itinerant dynamics , as described below . The semantic network is modeled as a network of N concept units , each representing one concept . Each unit can be seen as a neural assembly tuned to a particular concept . Since our purpose in this paper is just to study the dynamics of networks with various types of connectivity , we use abstract concepts instead of actual words . The connections between units represent associations , with the connection from unit j to unit i denoted by w ij . For simplicity , we assume that the connections are binary and symmetric , i . e . , either two concepts are mutually associated with a weight of 1 or not associated , with a weight of 0 . The output of unit i at time t is denoted by x i ( t ) , and the net input to a unit i and time t is given by : x i ( t ) = N (cid:88) j = 1 w ij ( t ) x j ( t ) + γ noise ξ i ( t ) ( 1 ) where x j are the outputs from units j , w ij are binary weights to concept unit i from concept unit j , ξ i ( t ) is uniform 3128 white noise between 0 and 1 , and γ noise , is a ﬁxed gain parameter . The state of concept unit i at time t is given by : y j ( t ) = αy j ( t − 1 ) + ( 1 − α ) x i ( t ) ( 2 ) where α is an inertial parameter . Activity in the network is competitive , and the K non - refractory units with the highest y ( t ) > 0 are allowed to ﬁre at time t . The output of unit i is calculated as : x i ( t ) = f ( y i ( t ) ) = (cid:40) 1 , if y i ( t ) ∈ { k most excited units } 0 , otherwise ( 3 ) Unit activity and excitability are modulated by two other processes : Refractoriness and synaptic modulation . Refractoriness : Once ﬁred , unit i may remain active for an activity duration ϕ if y ci ( t ) remains sufﬁciently high , after which it enters a refractory period . This is modeled through a resource , r i ( t ) ∈ R ( t ) , with the following dynamics : r i ( t ) = (cid:40) ( 1 − λ − ) r i ( t − 1 ) , if active r i ( t − 1 ) + λ + ( 1 − r i ( t − 1 ) ) , if inactive ( 4 ) where λ − is the resource depletion rate , and λ + is the resource recovery rate . A neuron is said to be in a refractory state if : r i ( t ) ≤ Θ r ( 5 ) Thus , a unit’s resource is depleted when it ﬁres and recovers when it is inactive ( due to lack of stimulus or refractoriness ) . Synaptic Modulation : Synapses that are excited repeat - edly by pre - synaptic activity temporarily become habituated to it and diminish in strength while the activity persists , and then recover gradually when activity ceases . This is modeled as follows : w ij ( t ) = (cid:40) ( 1 − ψ − ) w ij ( t − 1 ) , if active w ij ( t − 1 ) + ψ + [ w ij 0 − w ij ] if inactive ( 6 ) where ψ - and ψ + represent the synaptic decay and recovery rates respectively and w ij0 represents the initial weight of the synapse . Synaptic modulation has recently been proposed as an important component of neural information processing and short - term memory [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] . B . Network Connectivity Generation Since the Steyvers - Tenenbaum model is the focus , we ﬁrst generate that network , and then generate the other three networks to be comparable to it . All connections in the networks are undirected , resulting in symmetric connectivity . The networks are generated as follows : Steyvers - Tenenbaum ( ST ) Network : This network is generated according to the method described by Steyvers and Tenenbaum in [ 16 ] . The network begins with M fully interconnected nodes , followed by the addition of N − M Fig . 1 . Degree distribution for the four networks nodes one at a time . Each new node is added in two steps : 1 ) An existing node , i , is chosen with probability P i = k i / (cid:80) j k j , where k j is the degree of node j ; 2 ) The new node is connected randomly to M other nodes from the set of nodes to which i is already connected . Thus , the new node can be seen as a partial replication of node i , which is chosen with a preference for higher degree nodes . The resulting network is both small - world and scale - free , with an exponent near 3 . For the simulations described here , we use N = 500 and M = 6 , giving a total of n c = 2979 bidirectional connections , so the network is extremely sparse . Random ( RA ) Networks : The RA network comprises N nodes with n c connections assigned between node pairs chosen randomly with equal probability . This results in a Poisson degree distribution for the nodes [ 21 ] . Localized ( LO ) Networks : For the LO network , nodes are placed randomly in 2 - dimensional Euclidean space , and each node makes connections within a certain radius , r , of itself . The radius is chosen so that the total number of connections in the network is approximately n c . Small - World ( SW ) Networks : The SW network is ob - tained by rewiring short connections in the LO network randomly to more distant nodes until the mean clustering coefﬁcient of the network matches that of the ST network . Thus , to summarize , all nodes have the same number of nodes and connections , the ST and SW networks have the same clustering coefﬁcient , and the LO and SW networks have the same basic connection radius . Figure 1 shows the degree distributions for the four networks in log - log coordinates . It is clear that the RA , LO and SW networks have distributions with exponential tails while the ST network’s distribution has a power law tail . It is interesting to interpret these connectivity patterns in light of Mednick’s associative hierarchy . In the three networks with exponential degree distributions , each concept has approximately the same number of associations , whereas the ST network has concepts with very different numbers of associations , including some with a very large set . Thus , the associative hierarchies associated with the RA , LO and 3129 Fig . 2 . Graph characteristics for the four networks : Top - mean shortest path length ; Bottom - mean clustering coefﬁcient SW networks have a single scale and can be seen as being “shallower” than the multi - scale hierarchy associated with the ST network . Figure 2 shows the mean shortest path length and mean clustering coefﬁcients for the four networks . As expected , the RA network has short path length and almost no clustering , while the LO network has very long paths and very high clustering . The ST and SW networks have path lengths similar to the RA networks but much higher clustering , showing small - world characteristics [ 22 ] . IV . I DEA D YNAMICS As discussed earlier , we consider ideas to be conceptual combinations . In terms of the semantic network described above , an idea is represented by a set of persistently co - active concept units , or a metastable attractor . As the network activity moves through the state - space , it is itinerant [ 31 ] or “sticky” , with periods of stable activity patterns punctuated by intervals of transient activity . Since each unit in the network represents a concept , any set of co - active units is a potential idea . However , we assume that only those co - active sets that persist beyond a certain duration termed the awareness threshold , Θ th , are perceived consciously as ideas , whereas the rest remain subconscious . The intuition is that only units that form sufﬁciently strongly connected sets will be able to sustain co - activity until refractoriness or synaptic Fig . 3 . Degree distribution for the four networks Fig . 4 . Number of unique ideas produced by the four networks modulation ends it . Such groups thus represent a metastable activity pattern – or temporary attractor – in state space . The connectivity of the network , which is deﬁned by inter - concept associations , embeds a large number of such latent ideas in the system , which are unmasked emergently by the dynamics of the system . In an intuitive sense , such attractors bring together concepts that “make sense together . ” Functionally , the dynamics of the system can be seen as generating a sequence of ideas with intervening periods of transience . We characterize this functional dynamics in terms of the following attributes : 1 ) Productivity , ρ , is measured by counting the number of unique ideas generated over a ﬁnite period . 2 ) Efﬁciency , η , is a measure of how much time is “wasted” generating repeated ideas . This is calculated as : η = ρ / ρ all ( 7 ) where ρ all is the total number of ideas ( including re - peated ones ) generated by the network . Low efﬁciency can be seen as a signature of ﬁxation . 3 ) Coherence , ω , quantiﬁes how internally coherent the generated ideas are relative to the knowledge embed - 3130 Fig . 5 . Mean efﬁciency of the four networks ded in the network . This is measured by calculating the clustering – or mutual connectivity – among the nodes participating in the idea . If idea I k has K active nodes , ω ( I k ) = q ( I k ) / K ( K − 1 ) ( 8 ) where q ( I k ) is the number of connections that exist between the K nodes active in I k . The use of cooperatively co - active groups of concepts as representations of ideas has been considered indirectly by Nelson et al . [ 13 ] in the context of implicit memory . They found that concepts that are part of such highly connected ( or clustered ) groups are easier to recall than those that are not . From a neurophysiological viewpoint , a more plausible instantiation of our co - activity patterns might be in terms of emergent synchronization among neuronal assemblies , which has been suggested as the brain’s main mechanism for representational binding [ 32 ] , [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] , [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] . Several computational models have been developed for such systems ( e . g . , [ 38 ] ) , but we use a simpler model for clarity . Finally , it should be noted that , while we use the term “concept” for the information represented by each network unit , they could equally well be seen as “features” . The distinction between feature , concept and idea is largely a matter of position in a representational hierarchy rather than an essential difference . V . S IMULATIONS AND R ESULTS Identically sized networks ( N = 500 ) of all four types were simulated and evaluated in terms of the four metrics described above . The results were compared to characterize each network in terms of its semantic richness . The ﬁrst issue is to set the awareness threshold , Θ th , in a meaningful way given the other dynamical parameters in the system . Figure 3 shows the distribution of how long single units remain persistently active in all four networks . This bimodal distribution indicates that , in most cases , units remain active only for a few steps before switching off . This Fig . 6 . Number of unique and repeated ideas generated by the four networks for various awareness thresholds is clearly indicative of transient activity . However , in some instances , neurons remain persistently active for durations between 48 and 53 steps , which is the limit set by the resource decay rate . We hypothesize that these are the units participating in a metastable attractor – i . e . , an idea – and remaining active as long as physically possible . Based on this ﬁgure , we set the awareness threshold near the lowest point of the distribution at Θ th = 20 . Figure 4 shows the average number of total and unique ideas generated by each network over 20 runs of 4000 time steps each . As can be seen , the LO and SW networks generate a lot of ideas , but a large fraction of these are repeated ones . In contrast , the RA network generates fewer ideas but nearly all are unique . Finally , the ST network generates the highest number of unique ideas with a relatively low level of repetitions . The useful productivity of the four networks is shown explicitly in Figure 5 , which plots the efﬁciency , η of each system . It shows that the RO network is the most efﬁcient , followed by ST , with the SW and LO networks faring rather poorly . An interesting aspect of productivity is its dependence on the awareness threshold . A larger awareness threshold makes the system more selective , with only very persistent activity patterns regarded as ideas . Figure 6 shows the number of unique and repeated ideas counted at various awareness thresholds from 20 to 54 . As can be seen , very few unique 3131 Fig . 7 . Mean coherence of the unique ideas generated by the four networks ideas are seen for high awareness thresholds . Over the range from Θ th = 20 to 35 , the ST network produces more unique ideas that SW or LO , whereas after that point , all three networks have similar productivity . This means that the ideas produced by the ST network last for relatively short durations compared to those generated by the LO and SW networks , again suggesting less ﬁxation in the ST network . The SW and LO networks generally have very similar performance over most of the awareness threshold range . These networks also consistently generate more repeated ideas than the ST network . Figure 7 shows the internal coherence of the generated unique ideas , measured as described above . We make the plausible assumption that coherence is a measure of both consistency with prior knowledge and novelty . An idea with very high coherence represents an “old” idea , since all its component concepts are already well associated with each other . In contrast , an idea with very low coherence can be seen as bordering on absurdity – a quirk of the system’s dynamics . However , ideas with a moderate degree of coher - ence can be regarded as sensible but novel . The ability to generate moderately coherent ideas can , therefore , been seen as a signature of creativity , and from this viewpoint , the ST and SW networks are most supportive of creativity . VI . D ISCUSSION The combination of recurrent connectivity , competitive activity and modulation creates a rich dynamics in all the model networks . The purpose of this study was to see what difference the type of connectivity made to the emergence of metastable patterns of activity , since these are seen as corresponding to the signiﬁcant cognitive representations ( ideas ) implicit in the system . The results shown in Figures 4 - 7 lead to two important observations : 1 ) ST connectivity , which is both small - world and power law , generates a large number of distinct metastable patterns which persist for a moderate duration , whereas LO and SW connectivity lead to a smaller number of distinct patterns which are generated repeatedly and persist somewhat longer . Thus , the dynamics of the latter two networks is not as rich as that of the ST network , even though the amount of time spent in metastable states is higher for LO and SW networks . Since the SW and ST networks have the same degree of clustering ( and LO much higher clustering ) , the results suggest that the richer dynamics is a consequence of the power law aspect of connectivity in the ST network . On the other hand , the RA network , which has a degree distribution similar to the SW and LO networks , generates a higher number of metastable patterns than either of these , but fewer than the ST network . 2 ) The internal coherence of the metastable patterns gen - erated by the networks is directly proportional to the clustering in their connectivity . This is not surprising , but does show the value of structural clustering in con - ﬁning the dynamics to generating more “meaningful” patterns . From these two observations , we conclude that the ST network represents an elegant way to obtain the primary advantage of clustered connectivity – coherence – without the associated loss of richness in the dynamics . We speculate that clustering tends to conﬁne the dynamics to localized regions of activity space , leading to repetitions . The existence of high degree nodes implied by the power law connectivity counters this tendency by creating more options for the dynamics at each step . This results in a more “tangled” dynamics , and a richer sampling of metastable states . Thus , ST networks may be a neural instantiation of Mednick’s deep associative hierarchies . A detailed investigation of this is left to future studies . VII . C ONCLUSIONS In this study we systematically investigated the effect of connectivity on the dynamics of a neural network model of semantic search in the space of conceptual combinations . The study showed that networks with clustered connectivity and non - fat tailed degree distributions are prone to generating repeated but internally coherent metastable activity patterns , while networks with unclustered connectivity generate more diverse but less coherent patterns . A network with small - world connectivity and power - law degree distribution is able to combine the advantages of both while avoiding their dis - advantages . This type of connectivity has been observed em - pirically in real - world semantic networks [ 16 ] . This provides an intriguing correspondence between semantic organization and semantic richness , raising the question of whether the observed semantic organization has evolved to support richer semantic possibilities . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank Laxmi Iyer , Vince Brown , Simona Doboli , Paul Paulus and Dan Levine for useful discussions and ideas . 3132 R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . Campbell , “Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other knowledge processes , ” Psychol . Rev . , vol . 67 , pp . 380 – 400 , 1960 . [ 2 ] S . Mednick , “The associative basis of the creative process , ” Psycho - logical Review , vol . 69 ( 3 ) , pp . 220 – 232 , 1962 . [ 3 ] V . Brown , M . Tumeo , T . Larey , and P . Paulus , “Modeling cognitive in - teractions during group brainstorming , ” Small Group Research , vol . 29 , pp . 495 – 526 , 1998 . [ 4 ] D . Simonton , “Scientiﬁc creativity as constrained stochastic behavior : the integration of product , person , and process perspectives , ” Psychol . Bull . , vol . 129 , pp . 475 – 494 , 2003 . [ 5 ] B . Nijstad and W . Stroebe , “How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups , ” Personality and Social Psychology Review , vol . 3 , pp . 186 – 213 , 2006 . [ 6 ] M . Schilling , “A small - world network model of cognitive insight , ” Creativity Res . J . , vol . 17 , pp . 131 – 154 , 2005 . [ 7 ] H . Poincar , The Foundations of Science . Science Press , 1921 . [ 8 ] J . March , “Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning , ” Organization Science , vol . 2 , pp . 71 – 87 , 1991 . [ 9 ] C . Nemeth , “Dissent as driving cognition , attitudes , and judgments , ” Social Cognition , vol . 13 , pp . 273 – 291 , 1995 . [ 10 ] J . Raaijmakers and R . Shiffrin , “Search of associative memory , ” Psychological review , vol . 88 , 1981 . [ 11 ] G . McKoon and R . Ratcliff , “Spreading activation versus compound cue accounts of priming : Mediated priming revisited , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , vol . 18 , pp . 1155 – 1172 , 1992 . [ 12 ] R . Ratcliff and G . McKoon , “Retrieving information from memory : Spreading - activation theories versus compound - cue theories , ” Psycho - logical Review , vol . 101 , pp . 177 – 184 , 1994 . [ 13 ] D . Nelson , D . Bennett , N . Gee , T . Schreiber , and V . McKinney , “Implicit memory : Effects of network size and interconnectivity on cued recall , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , vol . 19 , pp . 747 – 764 , 1993 . [ 14 ] D . Nelson and J . Xu , “Effects of implicit memory on explicit recall : Set size and word frequency effects , ” Psychological Research , vol . 57 , pp . 203 – 214 , 1995 . [ 15 ] D . Nelson , T . Schreiber , and C . McEvoy , “Processing implicit and explicit representations , ” Psychological Review , vol . 99 , pp . 322 – 348 , 1992 . [ 16 ] M . Steyvers and J . Tenenbaum , “The large scale structure of semantic networks : Statistical analyses and a model of semantic growth , ” Cognitive Science , vol . 29 , pp . 41 – 78 , 2005 . [ 17 ] A . - L . Barabasi and R . Albert , “Emergence of scaling in random networks , ” Science , vol . 286 , pp . 509 – 511 , 1999 . [ 18 ] R . Albert and A . - L . Barabasi , “Statistical mechanics of complex networks , ” Reviews of Modern Physics , vol . 74 , pp . 47 – 97 , 2002 . [ 19 ] M . Newman , S . Strogatz , and D . Watts , “Random graphs with arbitrary degree distribution and their applications , ” Physical Review E , vol . 64 , p . 026118 , 2001 . [ 20 ] H . Yook , S . - H . ad Jeong and A . - L . Barabasi , “Modeling the inter - net’s large - scale topology , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , vol . 99 , pp . 13382 – 13386 , 2002 . [ 21 ] M . Newman , Networks : An Introduction . Oxford University Press , 2010 . [ 22 ] D . Watts and S . Strogatz , “Collective dynamics of “small - world” networks , ” Nature , vol . 393 , pp . 440 – 442 , 1998 . [ 23 ] D . Watts , Small Worlds : The Dynamics of Networks between Order and Randomness . New Jersey : Princeton University Press , 1999 . [ 24 ] J . Bohland and A . Minai , “Efﬁcient associative memory using small - world architecture , ” Neurocomputing , vol . 38 - 40 , pp . 489 – 496 , 2001 . [ 25 ] O . Sporns and J . Zwi , “The small world of the cerebral cortex , ” Neuroinformatics , vol . 2 , pp . 145 – 162 , 2004 . [ 26 ] L . Iyer , A . Minai , S . Doboli , V . Brown , and P . Paulus , “Effects of relevant and irrelevant primes on idea generation : A computational model , ” in Proceedings of IJCNN 2009 , 2009 , pp . 1380 – 1387 . [ 27 ] L . Iyer , S . Doboli , A . Minai , V . Brown , D . Levine , and P . Paulus , “Neural dynamics of idea generation and the effects of priming , ” Neural Networks , vol . 22 , pp . 674 – 686 , 2009 . [ 28 ] L . Iyer , V . Venkatesan , and A . Minai , “Neurcognitive spot - lights : conﬁguring domains for ideation , ” in Proceedings of WCCI 2010 , 2010 , pp . 3026 – 3033 . [ 29 ] R . Zucker and W . Regehr , “Short - term synaptic plasticity , ” Annual Review of Physiology , vol . 64 , pp . 355 – 405 , 2002 . [ 30 ] L . Abbott and W . Regehr , “Synaptic computation , ” Nature , vol . 431 , pp . 796 – 803 , 2004 . [ 31 ] I . Tsuda , “Towards an interpretation of dynamic neural activity in terms of chaotic dynamical systems , ” Behavioral and Brain Sciences , vol . 24 , pp . 793 – 847 , 2001 . [ 32 ] R . Eckhorn , R . Bauer , W . Jordan , M . Brosch , W . Kruse , M . Munk , and H . J . Reitboeck , “Coherent oscillations : A mechanism of feature linking in the visual cortex ? ” Biological Cybernetics , vol . 60 , pp . 121 – 130 , 1988 . [ 33 ] W . Singer and C . M . Gray , “Visual feature integration and the temporal correlation hypothesis , ” Annual Reviews of Neuroscience , vol . 18 , pp . 555 – 586 , 1995 . [ 34 ] W . Singer , A . Engel , A . Kreiter , M . Munk , S . Neuenschwander , and P . Roelfsema , “Neuronal assemblies : Necessity , signature and detectability , ” Trends in Cognitive Sciences , vol . 1 , pp . 252 – 260 , 1997 . [ 35 ] A . Engel , P . Fries , and W . Singer , “Dynamic predictions : oscillations and synchrony in top - down processing , ” Nature Reviews Neuroscience , vol . 2 , pp . 704 – 716 , 2001 . [ 36 ] F . Varela , J . - P . Lachaux , E . Rodriguez , and J . Martinerie , “The brainweb : phase synchronization and large - scale integration , ” Nature Reviews Neuroscience , vol . 2 , pp . 229 – 239 , 2001 . [ 37 ] S . Bressler and E . Tognoli , “Operational principles of neurocognitive networks , ” International Journal of Psychophysiology , vol . 60 , pp . 139 – 148 , 2006 . [ 38 ] D . L . Wang and D . Terman , “Locally excitatory globally inhibitory oscillatory networks , ” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , vol . 6 , pp . 283 – 286 , 1995 . 3133