ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org A C XXXX American Chemical Society Physical Principles of Nanoparticle Cellular Endocytosis Sulin Zhang , † , ‡ , * Huajian Gao , § , * and Gang Bao ) , * † Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics , The Pennsylvania State University , University Park , Pennsylvania 16802 , United States , ‡ Department of Biomedical Engineering , The Pennsylvania State University , University Park , Pennsylvania 16802 , United States , § School of Engineering , Brown University , Providence , Rhode Island 02912 , United States , and ) Department of Bioengineering , Rice University , Houston , Texas 77005 , United States T hepastdecadehaswitnessedenormous research e ﬀ orts undertaken in the de - velopment of nanosized particulate platforms for biological studies , early stage cancer detection , simultaneous diagnosis and treatment of pathological conditions , and targeted therapy with minimal toxicity to achieve “ personalized ” medicine . 1 (cid:1) 12 To enable cell - type speci ﬁ c targeting , nano - particles ( NPs ) are often surface - coated with biopolymers or macromolecules , bioconju - gated with targeting ligands that bind spe - ci ﬁ cally to the complementary receptors on the cell membrane . Armed with drug mol - ecules and / or diagnostic reporters , the NPs may transport in the bloodstream , adhere to the endothelium , di ﬀ use through the inter - cellular space , speci ﬁ cally adhere to the dis - eased cells , enter the cells via di ﬀ erent pathways ( Figure 1 ) , and release the drug molecules e ﬀ ectively . Accordingly , the e ﬃ - cacy of NP - based agents depends on the e ﬃ ciency of these subprocesses , many of which remain poorly understood . Instead of giving an exhaustive review on the research progress in all the subprocesess , this review setsforthtoprovideatheoreticalfoundation for the biophysics of NPs entry into the cells via endocytosis . The theoretical focus renders this review distinctive from and complementary to several existing reviews on similar topics that are primarily focused on either the novel concepts and experi - mental observations 13 (cid:1) 15 or computational simulations . 16 It also signi ﬁ cantly extends previous reviews on the mechanics of cell (cid:1) NP interactions 17 and of vesicle wrapping NPs . 18 In particular , we probe the mechan - ical forces generated at the NP (cid:1) cell inter - face and the kinetics and energetics of the NP (cid:1) cell interactions . We then describe how the size , shape , elastic modulus and surface chemistry of NPs a ﬀ ect the interactions and consequently dictate the cellular uptake pro - perties . The integrated theories presented here may form a basis for the rational design of NP - based diagnostic and therapeutic agents with improved targeting e ﬃ ciency . Dependingontheparticlesizeandsurface treatment , engineered particles may enter cells via di ﬀ erent pathways , as schematically showninFigure1 . Micrometer - sizedparticles can enter the cellsthrough phagocytosis 19 or macropinocytosis . 20 , 21 Phagocytosis ( Figure1a ) * Address correspondence to suz10 @ psu . edu , huajian _ gao @ brown . edu , gb20 @ rice . edu . Received for review May 26 , 2015 and accepted August 8 , 2015 . Published online 10 . 1021 / acsnano . 5b03184 ABSTRACT This review article focuses on the physiochemical mechanisms underlying nanoparticle uptake into cells . When nanoparticles are in close vicinity to a cell , the interactions between the nanoparticles and the cell membrane generate forces from di ﬀ erent origins . This leads to the membrane wrapping of the nanoparticles followed by cellular uptake . This article discusses how the kinetics , energetics , and forces are related to these interactions and dependent on the size , shape , and sti ﬀ ness of nanoparticles , the biomechanical properties of the cell membrane , as well as the local environment of the cells . The discussed fundamental principles of the physiochemical causes for nanoparticle (cid:1) cell interaction may guide new studies of nanoparticle endocytosis and lead to better strategies to design nanoparticle - based approaches for biomedical applications . KEYWORDS : nanoparticles . endocytosis . nanomedicine . cellular uptake . ligand (cid:1) receptor binding . coarse - grained model . membrane bending . membrane tension R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org B directs the formation of cup - shaped membrane pro - trusions that gradually surround and close the parti - cles . The shape and size of the phagosomes , i . e . , the closed membrane protrusions , are dictated by the particles being taken up ( typically a few micrometers ) . Phagocytosis is primarily used to uptake dead cells , cell debris , and pathogens . Macropinocytosis ( Figure 1b ) is an actin - regulated process that involves engulfment of a large quantity of extracellular ﬂ uid and particles through plasma membrane ru ﬄ ing . The membrane ru ﬄ es exhibit di ﬀ erent shapes , and when close , form large organelles called macropinosomes . 19 Because of the micrometer length scale of phagocytosis and macropinocytosis , actin assembly plays an imperative role in the uptake process . 21 , 22 In clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Figure 1d ) , receptor (cid:1) ligand binding triggers the recruitment and formation of “ coated pits ” ( clathrin ) on the cytosolic side of the plasma membrane . 23 The pits self - assemble into closed poly - gonal cages that facilitate the endocytosis . Clathrin assembly is also responsible for the formation of vesicle necking and the pinch - o ﬀ process in the late stage of membrane wrapping of NPs . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is the most common endocytic pathway exploited by viruses . 24 , 25 Caveolin - dependent endocytosis ( Figure 1c ) involves the assembly of the hairpin - like caveolin coats on the cytosolic side of the plasma membrane , forming a ﬂ ask - shaped caveolae of ∼ 50 (cid:1) 80 nm in diameter . 26 , 27 It is generally known that Clathrin - and Caveolin - dependent endocytosis in - volves complex biochemical signaling cascades . 28 However , to what extent the entry of engineered NPs is regulated by the biochemical signaling remains poorly understood . Whileclathrin andcaveolinprovide additional driving force for endocytosis , clathrin and caveolin independent endocytosis 29 , 30 ( Figure 1e ) can also occur through receptor (cid:1) ligand binding . NPs with - out conjugated ligands may be endocytosed through non - speci ﬁ c interactions as well ( Figure 1f ) . For large NPs , transmembrane penetration may occur provided the interaction force is su ﬃ ciently large . 31 (cid:1) 35 This process , however , may be harmful to cells since large membrane pores must open for particle entry . Small NPs and molecules ( < 1 nm ) may enter the cell by simply di ﬀ using across the lipid bilayer ( Figure 1g ) . With the rapid advance of nanotechnology , NPs of di ﬀ erent types can now be synthesized with well - controlled size uniformity and shape ( Table 1 ) , many of which have manifested a great potential for a broad range of biomedical applications including in vitro / vivo diagnostics , 36 cell tracking , 37 molecular imaging , 38 (cid:1) 41 anddrug / genedelivery . 42 (cid:1) 44 These NPs have acommon core / coating structure . The cores are either inorganic or organic , while the coating layer is generally formed by natural macromolecules , synthetic biopolymers or their VOCABULARY : Membrane wrapping - the action that cell membrane curves to wrap around an object ; Endocy - tosis - the process that cell membrane wraps around an object and takes it inside the cell ; Adhesion Strength - measures how strong two surfaces cling together ; Ligand density - refers to the number of ligands per unit area ; Entropy - a thermodynamical quantity that measures the disorder of a system ; Enthalpy - de ﬁ ned as a thermody - namic potential that consists of the internal energy of the system plus the product of pressure and volume of the system ; Coarse - grained model - a simulation model that uses pseudoatoms ( coarse grains ) to represent groups of atoms , insteadof explicitly representing every atom inthe system ; Molecular dynamics simulation - a computer simulation of physical movements of atoms and mol - ecules ; Bending energy - the energy stored in an object when it is curved ; Deformation - the action or process of changing in shape of an object through the application of force Figure 1 . Possible internalization pathways of NPs . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org C combinations . The coating layer renders NPs water - dispersible , prevents aggregation , reduces nonspeci ﬁ c adsorption in biological systems , and provides a plat - form for conjugation of targeting ligands or other functional molecules ( such as a chelator ) . The length , charge , hydrophobicity , and ﬂ exibility of the coating molecules , 45 and the overall size , shape , and elastic modulus of the NPs are critical mediators for the in vitro and in vivo performance of NPs . 41 , 46 , 47 Bioconjugated NPs in manyaspects arebiomimicsof viruses , 30 , 48 , 49 which represent the most relevant nano - scale objects in nature to arti ﬁ cial nanomedicine . Just as engineered NPs , viruses are typically of size from 10 to 300 nm , feature a diverse collection of shapes ranging from icosahedral to spherical to ﬁ laments to bullet / rod , and are coated with ligands on their surfaces . Many viruses , such as HCV 50 and in ﬂ uenza , 29 enter host cells via protein - mediated endocyto - sis , 24 , 25 , 51 , 52 are replicated inside the host cells , and exit from the host cells via exocytosis ( known as budding ) . While viral entry is a highly active process involving a set of biochemical signaling , budding , 53 , 54 in contrast , is largely passive and can be regarded as the reverse process of endocytosis of synthetic NPs . The high e ﬃ ciency and speci ﬁ city of viruses have stimulated enormous research e ﬀ orts to uncover the physical principles harnessed by the evolutionary design of viruses , which can conveniently lend to engineer NPs for disease targeting . For example : How fast does viral entry / budding occur ? How many repli - cated viruses can simultaneously bud out from host cells ? Why viral entry / budding is size selective and shape sensitive ? Why are that many ligands needed for viral entry / budding and what if the virus is a few ligands less or more ? Does nature design via evolution the number of ligands and the size / shape such that these parameters work in concert for virus infection ? Does local biomechanical environment in ﬂ uence viral entry ? Answering similar fundamental questions in the cellular uptake of synthetic NPs will pave the way toward the development of better principles for the biomimetic design of highly e ﬀ ective NPs . NP (cid:1) CELL MEMBRANE INTERACTIONS : FORCES AND ENERGETICS WhenaNPdocksoncell membrane , itformsahighly heterogeneous NP (cid:1) cell interface and initiates dy - namic physiochemical interactions and a sequence of kinetic processes . The interaction forces of di ﬀ erent origins shape the interactions , modify the associated energy landscapes , and dictate the endocytosis of the NPs . 55 Wrapping NPs necessitates curving the cell membrane and pulling the membrane against mem - brane tension to the wrapping site , presenting resis - tance to endocytosis . All the other forces , including electrostatic , van der Waals ( vdW ) , hydrophobic forces , ligand (cid:1) receptor binding etc . , can be lumped together as the adhesion force that drives endocytosis . The adhesion force can stem from either speci ﬁ c or non - speci ﬁ c interactions , or both . 56 Speci ﬁ c interactions involve recognition and binding of the ligands coated on the NP surface to the complementary receptors on the cell membrane . Analogous to a molecular key - and - lock system , ligand (cid:1) receptor binding enforces target - ing speci ﬁ city of NPs . All the other interactions are nonspeci ﬁ c , which generate an overall attraction or repulsion between molecules and generally a ﬀ ected by ionic strength and pH . Speci ﬁ c interactions di ﬀ er from nonspeci ﬁ c interac - tions in at least three distinct features , which have pro - found implications in the uptake kinetics . First , unlike nonspeci ﬁ c interactions in which the driving force is spontaneously in action when a NP docks onto the cell membrane , speci ﬁ c interaction through ligand (cid:1) receptor bindings introduces a time delay : wrapping necessitates di ﬀ usion of the receptors to the binding sites , thereby setting a characteristic time scale of endocytosis . 57 , 58 Second , much like cleavage fracture ( or crack healing ) in crystals that involves discrete bond breaking ( or formation ) , 59 , 60 ligand (cid:1) receptor binding proceeds in a discrete manner . As the chemical energy release ( the driving force ) is only available after each discrete membrane unit ( the area covered by each ligand ) wraps the NP , an energy barrier between two consecutive binding events arises from membrane bending and tension . 53 The wrapping area and hence the energy barrier in each discrete step can be tailored by the spacing of the ligands ( i . e . , the ligand density ) coated on the NP surface . This barrier further delays wrapping , but the relevant time scale is thought to be shorter by several orders of magnitude than that of the receptor di ﬀ usion . However , when the coated ligands are sparse , the barrier becomes non - negligible . Third , receptors , in addition to providing adhesion force , also carry translational entropy . 61 (cid:1) 63 Wrapping is thus TABLE 1 . Various Types of NPs as Diagnostic and / or Therapeutic Agents NP type size range typical shapes Metallic 5 (cid:1) 500 nm Sphere / cube / rod Oxides 5 (cid:1) 200 nm Sphere / cube Quantum dot 2 (cid:1) 30 nm Sphere / ellipsoid Silica 10 (cid:1) 100 nm Sphere Carbon nanotube 1 (cid:1) 10 nm Cylinder Graphene 10 (cid:1) 1000 nm 2D sheet Polymer 10 (cid:1) 1000 nm Spherical / cylindrical / rod - like / elliptical / cubic / disk - like Nanogel 10 (cid:1) 1000 nm Cylinder Liposome 100 (cid:1) 1000 nm Spherical Bacteria 500 (cid:1) 5000 nm Rod / spirals / ellipsoid Dendrimers 1 (cid:1) 100 nm Spherical Micelles 10 (cid:1) 100 nm Spherical / rod - like / worm - like / cylindrical / elliptical Virus 10 (cid:1) 300 nm Icosahedral / spherical / ﬁ lament / rod R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org D no longer a local event but global in nature as it causes redistributions of the receptors on the entire cell membrane . Concentration of receptors to the NP sur - face through ligand (cid:1) receptor binding involves entro - pic penalty . The dual character ( releases chemical energy upon binding and at the same time carries entropy ) renders the adhesion strength in receptor - mediated endocytosis a variable quantity , 63 (cid:1) 66 in dis - tinct contrast to the adhesion strength in nonspeci ﬁ c uptake that is locally de ﬁ ned . During wrapping , membrane bends away from its intrinsically curved state characterized by the sponta - neous curvature κ 0 . The spontaneous curvature arises from the asymmetry of the lipid bilayers and / or the presence of asymmetrically shaped transmembrane proteins in general , and the assembly of the protein coats in particular in the case of clathrin and caveolin dependent endocytosis . The bending energy density ( per unit area ) is quanti ﬁ ed by 1 / 2 B ( κ h (cid:1) κ 0 ) 2 , where B is the membrane bending sti ﬀ ness , κ h = ( κ 1 þ κ 2 ) / 2 is the mean curvature of the membrane , and κ 1 and κ 2 are the two principal curvatures of the NP surface . To pull the surrounding membranes toward the site for wrapping , work against membrane tension needs to be done . Cells may actively modulate their mem - brane tension under di ﬀ erent physiological conditions through various mechanisms , for instance , membrane reservoir release . 67 Membrane wrapping ﬁ rst activates the release of membrane reservoirs during which membrane tension remains nearly constant . Once the excess membrane area is used out , the membrane elastically extends to further wrap the NP during which membrane tension increases . The coupling between membrane bending and stretching in the wrapping process complicates the calculation of the membrane deformation energy . For a partially wrapped NP with a wrapping extent η ( the areal ratio of the wrapped and the total surface area of the NP ) , the deformation energy consists of three contributions : the bending energy C ( η ) and the stretching energy Γ ( η ) stored in the membrane seg - ment wrapped onto the NP ( the black line segment in Figure 2 ) , and the additional deformation energy Λ ( η ) ( including both bending and stretching ) stored in the curved membrane detaching from the contact to the NP 68 , 69 ( the green line segment in Figure 2 ) . For spherical NP , C ( η ) ∼ η , and Γ ( η ) ∼ η 2 , and Λ ( η ) is generally a nonlinear function of η . The total mem - brane deformation energy at the degree of wrapping η ( 0 e η e 1 ) is the sum of the three components : W ( η ) = C ( η ) þ Γ ( η ) þ Λ ( η ) . Determining Λ ( η ) generally requires numerically calculating the equilibrium shapes of the membrane segment , 68 , 69 but becomes trivial under two special conditions : for a fully wrapped NP ( η = 1 ) , the host membrane sets back to its original curvature at this special stage , and Λ = 0 ; under the tensionless condition , Λ ( η ) = Γ ( η ) = 0 for all η since the equilibrium membrane pro ﬁ le is a catenoid , a minimal surface with zero mean curvature . Membrane curves locally but gets tensed globally . A characteristic length scale that weighs the relative signi ﬁ cance of bending and stretching energies characterizes the locality of an event : λ = ( 2 B / σ ) 1 / 2 , 68 where σ is the membrane tension . For typical values of B = 15 k B T , σ = 0 . 05 m N / m , one ﬁ nds λ ≈ 50 nm . For NP radius R < λ , bending dominates the wrapping process and membrane tension is negligible ; as R increases from λ , membrane tension e ﬀ ect becomes progres - sively more pronounced . CELLULAR UPTAKE OF SPHERICAL NPS : SIZE EFFECT When Can a NP be Endocytosed ? Given a spherical NP of radius R , a first question one asks is whether it can be internalized by the cell . We begin with a simple case in which nonspecific adhesion is the only driving force for membrane wrapping . The total adhesion energy supplied for fully wrapping the NP ( η = 1 ) is 4 π R 2 R ns , where R ns is the adhesion strength . Assuming a vani - shing spontaneous curvature ( κ 0 = 0 ) , the bending energy for fully wrapping the NP is C = 8 π B , indepen - dent of NP size , and the stretching energy is Γ = 4 π R 2 σ . Balancing the adhesion energy and membrane defor - mation energy defines a lower limit of the NP radius below which the NP cannot be endocytosed R min ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 B = ( R ns (cid:1) σ ) p ( 1 ) As R min < λ generally holds , the effect of membrane tension is negligible , and R min ≈ ( 2 B / R ns ) 1 / 2 . Consider - ing a typical value of membrane bending rigidity B ∼ 15 k B T , and of the nonspecific adhesion strength R ns ∼ 1 k B T / nm 2 , R min ∼ 5 nm . NPs smaller than R min may enter the cells by other pathways , such as trans - location ( Figure 1g ) . It is also possible that several small NPs may agglomerate into a cluster through mem - brane curvature mediated attraction . 70 The agglomer - ated NP cluster may well exceed the lower size limit , and thereby be able to be internalized together . 71 One notes from eq 1 when R ns = σ , R min f ¥ , a condition under which endocytosis will never occur regardless of its size because the adhesion energy is fully paid to the stretching energy , leaving none to pay the curvature Figure 2 . Membrane deformation energies when wrapping a NP . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org E energy . As pointed out previously , the self - regulated rest membrane tension by cells is usually small . How - ever , with increasing NP size , wrapping the NP would put the membrane in increasingly high tension . Thus , there also exists an upper limit of NP radius beyond which endocytosis does not occur either . 72 This upper limit ought to be at the same length scale of the cell . In the case that membrane wrapping is primarily driven by speci ﬁ c interaction , the adhesion strength can be partitioned into two components : 64 , 65 R s = R h þ R r , where R h and R r are the enthalpic and entropiccomponents , respectively . Theenthaplic com - ponent is provided by the ligand (cid:1) receptor binding , R h = μξ b , where μ is the chemical energy release upon the binding of a ligand (cid:1) receptor pair and ξ b is the receptor density bound to the NP surface ( see Figure 3a ) . Note that in the case that every receptor binds to a ligand on the NP surface ( one - to - one corresponding binding ) , ξ b reaches its maxi - mum , ξ l , the density of ligands coated onto the NP surface . Nonspeci ﬁ c interaction can be lumped into enthalpic adhesion strength by adopting an e ﬀ ective μ e ﬀ . The entropic term , R r , always negative , depends on the local receptor density . A reasonable approximation gives rise to R r = ln ( ξ þ / ξ l ) , where ξ þ is the receptor density in the depletion zone near the NP ( see Figure 3a ) . Assuming at the minimal NP radius the number of receptors consumed by wrap - ping is insigni ﬁ cant , causing negligible redistribu - tion of receptors . One then approximates ξ þ ∼ ξ 0 , the receptor density at the remote region . Neglect - ing membrane tension , the energy balance de ﬁ nes a lower limit of the NP radius for the case of speci ﬁ c interaction : R min ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 B = [ μξ l þ ln ( ξ 0 = ξ l ) ] p ( 2 ) One notes a singular condition R h = | R r | exists under which endocytosis is not possible ( as R min f ¥ ) because recruiting receptors to wrapping the NP is entropically too expensive . The singular con - dition implies an upper NP radius ( with a ﬁ xed ligand density ) beyond which wrapping is source ( receptor ) - limiting . How Fast Can a NP Be Endocytosed ? Once a NP exceeds the minimal size , endocytosis becomes thermodyna - mically possible . An immediate question that follows is the time duration for completing endocytosis . To see this , we note that the wrapping rate is limited by several barrier - crossing events . As pointed out pre - viously , an energy barrier arises due to the discreteness ofligand (cid:1) receptorbinding . Withadetailedcalculation of the deformation energy landscape of membrane wrapping of a NP at different wrapping extents η , Deserno identified another energy barrier that sepa - rates the partially and fully wrapped states , indicating the transition is nonspontaneous . 68 , 69 For typical values of σ = 0 . 05 mN / m , R = 30 nm , and B = 20 k B T , the barrier can be as high as Δ E = 40 k B T , which is too high to be thermally crossed . Wrapping can thus be kinetically trapped at a partially wrapped state . The energy barrier scales with the membrane tension and vanishes in the tensionless condition . Increasing the adhesion strength beyond a certain value diminishes the barrier as well . When the adhesion strength and the ligand density aresu ﬃ ciently high , thetimescalesassociatedwiththe above - mentioned two barrier crossing events are gen - erally considered to be shorter than that of receptor di ﬀ usion , and the wrapping rate is predominantly lim - ited bythe receptordi ﬀ usion . UponaNPdockingonthe cell membrane , binding of the receptors to the surface ligands of the NP depletes the receptors in the vicinity of the NP , forming a depletion zone with a reduced receptor density . The concentration gradient of recep - tors drives di ﬀ usion of the receptors from the remote region to the depletion zone , making subsequent wrapping possible . To quantify the endocytic time , Gao et al . 57 have developed a front - tracking di ﬀ usion model that couples conservation of receptors and chemical potential balance of the receptors in the Figure 3 . ( a ) Schematic illustration of membrane wrapping of a single NP , driven by ligand (cid:1) receptor binding . Wrapping depletesthereceptorsinthenearvicinityoftheNP , creatingareceptorconcentrationgradientthatdrivesthedi ﬀ usionofthe receptors from the remote region to the binding sites . ( b ) Interrelated e ﬀ ect of NP size and ligand density on the endocytic time of a NP . 66 Reproduced from ref 66 . Copyright 2010 American Physical Society . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org F depletion zone and on the NP surface . The model predictedthattheendocytictimeisNPsizedependent , as t w ¼ β R 2 = D ( 3 ) where D is the di ﬀ usivity of the receptors , and β is dimensionless , but dependent on R , referred to as the “ speed factor ” . The speed factor can be analytically calculated for cell membrane of in ﬁ nite size wrapping a spherical or a cylindrical NP . With physiologically rele - vant parameters , the model identi ﬁ ed an optimal NP size of 27 (cid:1) 30 nm in radius at which the endocytic time is the shortest . The scaling law can also be followed from the conservation of receptors , 57 , 58 , 66 which de ﬁ nes a char - acteristic length scale of the impact region L from which receptors are depleted for wrapping : π L 2 ξ 0 = 4 π R 2 ξ l . For all the receptors to di ﬀ use and bind to the surface ligands of the NP , the wrapping time is then t w ∼ L 2 / D ∼ R 2 ξ l / D ξ 0 . This scaling analysis also reveals that the endocytic time correlates positively with the ligand density but negatively with the receptor densities on the cell membrane . These above analyses assumed that every ligand binds to a receptor in wrapping the NP , i . e . , one - to - one corresponding binding . However , in the case of densely coated ligands on the NP surface and high ligand (cid:1) receptor a ﬃ nity , wrapping may proceed with some ligands unbound to receptors . This is bene ﬁ cial asfarastheendocytic timeisconcerned becausefewer receptors are required , but detrimental due to the loss of targeting speci ﬁ city . A thermodynamic model by Yuan et al . predicts the bindingdensity of the receptors relative to the ligand density on the NP surface 66 ξ ^ (cid:3) ξ b = ξ l ∼ 1 (cid:1) e (cid:1) K ^ ( 4 ) Here , κ ^ = 2 B / R 2 ξ l isthe curvature energyin the unit area covered by each ligand . Clearly from eq 4 , one - to - one corresponding binding ( ξ ^ = 1 ) occurs only when the unit bending energy κ ^ is su ﬃ ciently large . For a su ﬃ ciently large NP ( thus relatively small κ ^ ) but ﬁ xed ligand density ξ l , ξ ^ can be signi ﬁ cantly smaller than 1 . Under this condition , membrane wrapping may pro - ceed with many ligand missed by receptors . Yuan et al . further predicts the speed factor for wrapping a spherical NP : 66 β ¼ 4 ξ ^ ξ l = ( ξ 0 (cid:1) ξ þ ) ( 5 ) where ξ þ = e (cid:1) μ ξ ^ / ( 1 (cid:1) ξ ^ ) . On the basis of eq 5 , a phase diagram of 1 / t w can be constructed in the space of the two controlling parameters , NP radius R and ligand density ξ l , as shown in Figure 3b . One identi ﬁ es a lower phase boundary below which t w f ¥ and an upper phase boundary beyond which the same limit occurs . The lower phase boundary is enthalpically governed , as de ﬁ ned in eq 1 , and the upper phase boundary is entropically governed , as in eq 2 . Between these two extreme conditions , there exists an optimal condition at which the endocytic time minimizes , corresponding to the ridgeline in the phase diagram . At the saturated ligand density , the optimal NP radius for the shortest endocytic time is ∼ 25 nm , which agrees well with the prediction of the front - tracking di ﬀ usion model 57 and previous experimental data . 73 , 74 How Many NPs Can Be Taken up by a Cell ? Another problem , equally important to the endocytic time of a single NP , is the cellular uptake of NPs by cells . The total cellular uptake of NPs matters for a range of biomedical applications of NPs , including the maximum drugdosagethatcanbereachedwhentheNPsareused for drug delivery , or the signal intensity when the NPs are used for intracellular imaging and disease diagnosis . When the cell in in vitro experiments is immersed in culture medium loaded with dispersed NPs of a bulk density j , the system eventually reaches a steady state with ﬁ nite cellular uptake . 71 , 75 , 76 The steady state can be regarded as a thermodynamic equilibrium at which a total of n NPs are associated with the cell . Of the n NPs , some are wrapped by the cell membrane with di ﬀ erent degrees of wrapping ; 63 , 64 some are interna - lized , as schematically shown in Figure 4a . The exact partition of the NPs is driven by the chemical potential di ﬀ erence between the NPs that are bound to the cell membrane , those suspended in the solution and inter - nalized into the cell . The cell membrane is also parti - tioned into two parts : a free , planar membrane region and a curved membrane region bound to the NPs . Figure4 . SimultaneousentryofmultipleNPs . ( a ) Schematics . ( b ) Phasediagramofcellularuptakeinthespaceofparticlesize and ligand density . Reproduced from ref 66 . Copyright 2010 American Physical Society . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org G The energetics description of multiple NP (cid:1) membrane interactions remains nearly the same as in single NP endocytosis for either nonspeci ﬁ c or speci ﬁ c interac - tions , with the only added entropics of NP distribution . Equating the chemical potential of the NPs in the bulk solution and on the cell membrane gives rise to the cellular uptake ( the total number of endocytosed NPs ) : 64 , 65 N ¼ A φ e 4 π R 2 [ R M (cid:1) w ( η ¼ 1 ) ] ( 6 ) where A is the surface area of the cell accessible by the NPs , R M is the adhesion strength and the super - script “ M ” denotes the case of multiple NP entry , and w ( η = 1 ) = 2 B / R 2 þ σ is the membrane deformation energydensity ( perunitarea ) atthefullywrappedstate η = 1 . Figure 4b plots the phase diagram of the cellular uptake in the space of NP radius and ligand density driven by speci ﬁ c interactions . Similar to the phase diagram for the endocytic time in Figure 3b , there exists a lower and an upper bound of the cellular uptake , with the enthalpic and entropic origins , re - spectively , as previously discussed . Indeed , one notes from eq 6 that N is small when the adhesion energy is insu ﬃ cient to pay the membrane deformation penalty : R M e w ( η = 1 ) . This follows essentially the same lower bound dictated by eq 1 . Increasing the NP size and / or ligand density intensi ﬁ es the competition for receptors by the NPs , 77 , 78 leading to increasingly high entropic cost and thus decreased R M . This entropic limit corre - sponds to the upper bound de ﬁ ned by eq 2 . The phase diagram also identi ﬁ es a small region ( the red region ) within which cellular uptake is maximized . This region corresponds ∼ R ∈ ( 25 , 30 ) and ξ l ∈ ( 0 . 8 , 1 ) , with a total cellular uptake of a couple of thousand for physiologi - cally relevant parameters . Both the range of the pre - dictedtotal cellularuptake andtheoptimal rangeofNP size agree with the experimental data . 71 , 74 , 75 The Optimal Condition . From an energetics viewpoint , multi - NP entry is mechanistically similar to single - NP endocytosis . The energy balance of single - NP endocy - tosis remains to be met in multi - NP entry , giving rise to thesameenthalpicallyregulatedlowerphaseboundary . Irrespective of a single NP or multi - NPs , wrapping con - sumes receptors and is thus source - limiting , leading to the same entropically modulated upper phase boundary . It should be pointed out that in the case the NPs in multi - NP entry are spatially too close on the cell membrane such that their membrane curvature - mediated interactions 70 are not negligible , the lower phase boundary may deviate from that of single - NP endocytosis . Nevertheless , the same mechanisms reg - ulatingthe phaseboundaries for theendocytictimeand cellular uptake allow us to define a nominal cellular uptake rate , 79 as Θ ( R ; ξ l ) ¼ N = t w ( 7 ) Noticeably , the optimal conditions for the shortest endocytic time ( Figure 3b ) and highest cellular uptake ( Figure 4b ) , and hence Θ , are similarly close to the lower phase boundary : R 2 ξ l = 2 B / μ . Indeed , both the ridgelines follow a hyperbolic ﬁ tting : n opt ≈ 4 π R 2 ξ l , where n opt is the optimal number of ligands coated on NP surface . This is not surprising : once the number of ligands coated onto the NP surface exceeds the minimal value , the energy balance condition is met . Coating additional ligands is no longer bene ﬁ cial , but only increases the number of receptors required for wrapping and thus intensi ﬁ es the competition for receptors among NPs , leading to longer wrapping time and less cellular uptake . Given the biophysi - cally relevant ranges for membrane bending rigidity ( 10 (cid:1) 40 k B T ) and receptor (cid:1) ligand binding energy μ ( 10 (cid:1) 20 k B T ) , the optimal number of ligands n opt ( ≈ 8 π B / μ ) coated onto NPs falls in the range ∼ 10 (cid:1) 100 , irrespective of the NP size . The extensively studied model system , the Semliki Forest virus ( SFV ) , is about 35 nm in radius , covered with 80 glycoproteins ( ligands ) , 80 , 81 which appears to follow the optimal condition . The above energetics analysis suggests that tailor - ing enthalpics and entropics shift the phase bound - aries and modi ﬁ es the cellular uptake . For su ﬃ ciently large NPs , the cortical actin network may play a resist - ing role in endocytosis . 82 This factor may be taken into account by simply de ﬁ ning an e ﬀ ective bending rigidity B e ﬀ . Nonspeci ﬁ c interactions , including hydro - phobic , electrostatic and van der Waals interactions , may also contribute to additional adhesion energy . Lumping the speci ﬁ c and nonspeci ﬁ c interactions together de ﬁ nes an e ﬀ ective ligand (cid:1) receptor binding energy , μ e ﬀ . A relative variation of both B e ﬀ and μ e ﬀ alters the enthalpics and hence the lower bound of the phase diagrams . 79 On the other hand , increasing receptor population ( i . e . , increasing ξ 0 ) lowers the entropic penalty for the receptors to bind with NPs , and hence shifts the upper bound upward . A high bulk density of NPs j in solution yields a high surface concentration of NPs on cell membrane , leading to intensi ﬁ ed competition for receptors among adhering NPs and high entropic penalty . 77 , 78 This follows that increasing j shifts the upper bound of the uptake rate downward . One further notes that the e ﬀ ect of mem - brane tension is negligible for small NPs but signi ﬁ cant for large NPs . This follows that membrane tension primarily regulates the upper bound of the uptake rate , but hardly a ﬀ ects the lower bound . 79 SHAPE EFFECT Nonspherically shaped NPs are also widely used in biomedical diagnostics and therapeutics . Their poten - tial nanotoxicities have also attracted much attention . Typical 1D nanomaterials include nanotubes , nano - wires , and ﬁ lamentous bacteria with radius at the R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org H nanoscale but length at a much larger scale ; typical 2D nanomaterials are plate - like materials with thick - ness at the nanoscale but lateral dimensions at a much larger scale , including mica nanosheets , boron nitride nanosheets , and graphene - family nanomaterials , as listed in Table 1 . For 3D nonspherical NPs , their three dimensions are comparable . For all these nonspherical nanomaterials , the fundamental biophysics of cell (cid:1) NP interactions established for spherical NPs remains valid . However , owing to their asymmetrical geo - metries , they exhibit unique wrapping modes during endocytosis . 83 (cid:1) 88 Coarse - Grained Models . The energetics of endocytosis of a nonspherical NP is complicated by the symmetry breaking of cell membrane deformation morphology , for which the deformation energy is analytically non - trivial , particularly when membrane tension is non - negligible . To investigate the effects of NP shape on the kinetics of endocytosis , computational modeling at different length scales provides a powerful alternative . Since the length and time scales involved in NP endocytosis are on the order of 100 nm or more , and milliseconds to minutes , respectively , they are typically beyond the reach of the full - atom molecular dynamic ( MD ) simulations ( Figure 5a ) . To the other end of the length spectrum , the triangulated membrane simula - tion models 89 , 90 ( Figure 5e ) spatially discretize mem - brane into triangles in the general framework of Helfrich theory . 91 However , these continuum models suffer from additional numerical burden in addressing lateral diffusion of lipids and receptors , which is the key factor dictating the time scale of endocytosis . To gain a molecular - scale understanding of NP targeting , it is essential to develop multiscale models that link interactions on the molecular level and NP absorption / uptake by the cells at the subcellular level . Coarse - grained ( CG ) methods 92 (cid:1) 100 ( Figure 5b (cid:1) d ) havegained popularity for their ﬂ exibility anddiversity . CG models typically involve grouping a cluster of atoms into a single CG agent , thereby reducing the total number of the degrees of freedom by several orders of magnitude , and accordingly improving the computational a ﬀ ordability . Such CG approaches vary in their level of details , depending on the number of agents per lipid and complexity of the inter - agent interactions . Early CG models for lipid bilayers used explicit solvents that are also coarse - grained . As the solvent occupies a 3D volume , the associated degrees of freedom outnumber those of the 2D lipid bilayers , and the majority of the computational cost goes to the solvent , rather than the lipid bilayer . Thus , CG models with implicit solvent are particularly attractive . Stabiliz - ing the coarse - grained lipid bilayer in a 2D ﬂ uid phase and under solvent - free condition with physiologically relevant membrane properties was numerically non - trivial . Varying such solvent - free CG models need to use complicated multibody potentials to achieve bio - physically relevant membrane properties . Solvent - free CG models with simple pairwise potentials have only been recently developed ; of particularly noteworthy are the 3 - bead model by Cooke et al . 93 , 94 and the one - agent - thick model by Yuan et al . 95 These models are computationally highly e ﬃ cient while biophysically faithful to the underlying molecular interactions in a wide range of membrane - mediated processes , includ - ing endocytosis . The one - agent - thick lipid bilayer model 95 ( Figure 5d ) coarse - grains the lipid membrane as a single layer of agents that are self - assembled into a 2D ﬂ uid surface in a solvent - free environment . The inter - agent interaction potential is anisotropic but of a pairwise form , composed of two functions that separately control the distance and orientation depen - dence . The model membrane properties are highly tunable through only four key model parameters that control separately the lipid di ﬀ usivity , bending and area compression moduli , and spontaneous curvature , respectively . The simple interaction potential can lead to robust self - assembly of randomly distributed agents in 3D space into 2D ﬂ uid membranes . Through careful mapping to the membrane bending modulus and the in - plane lipid di ﬀ usivity , the in - plane agent dimension of our model is found to be ∼ 0 . 5 nm and the basic time scale of our model is ∼ 0 . 1 μ s . Both the length and time scales are at least one order of magnitude higher than other solvent - free CG models . 92 , 99 , 100 The model was successfully applied to study homogeneous vesi - cle shape transformation under osmotic conditions , 101 protein - mediated lipid sorting and domain coarsen - ing of ternary membranes , 102 and red blood cell disorders . 103 , 104 Simultaneous Rotation and Wrapping of 3D Nonspherical NPs . Huang et al . 83 adopted the one - agent - thick membrane model to characterize the endocytic mode of spherocylindrical NPs with different aspect ratios . In thismodel , NPsurface isalsocoarse - grainedto discrete agents , some representing ligands ( see Figure 6a (cid:1) c ) . The lipid membrane is made to be tensionless by scaling the membrane area in the CGMD simulations . The aspect ratio of the spherocylindrical NPs is defined Figure 5 . Simulation models of lipids at di ﬀ erent length scale . ( a ) All - atom model of the DMPC lipid molecules ; ( b and c ) CG models , a 10 - agent 92 ( b ) and a 3 - agent 93 , 94 ( c ) CG model ; and a one - agent - thick membrane model 95 ( d ) . ( e ) Triangulated membrane model . 89 , 90 R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org I by F = ( R þ 0 . 5 L ) / R , where R and L are the radius of the hemispherical caps at both ends and the length of the cylindrical portion , respectively . In the simulations , the spherocylindrical NPs are initially docked on the pre - equilibrated membrane , with their long axes normal to the membrane surface ( θ = 90 (cid:2) ) . Figure 6a (cid:1) c depicts the snapshots of the endocytic process of the NPs with three different aspect ratios , F = 1 , 1 . 5 , and 2 . Note F = 1 represents a spherical NP . All the three NPs can be completely endocytosed through a general process involving membrane invagination , membrane necking and pinch - off . Distinct entry modes are observed in the wrapping process of the spherocylindrical NPs , as shown in Figure 6a (cid:1) c . For F = 1 , wrapping is accompanied by NP rotation . For F = 1 . 5 , the NP tilts by an angle of ∼ 20 (cid:2) from its initial upright docking position once wrapping begins . Membrane wrapping of the NP then proceeds at this angle until the NP is fully internalized . The invagination of the NP with a larger aspect ratio ( F = 2 ) involves two symmetry - breaking processes . At the initial wrapping stage , the NP rotates until it completely lays downonthemembranesurfacewithitslongaxis . TheNP then stands up and is ﬁ nally endocytosed with a nearly 90 (cid:2) entry angle . Such a lying - down - then - standing - up sequence appears to be universal for spherocylindrical NPs with F > 2 . If the initial docking angle θ = 0 (cid:2) with the longaxisparalleltothemembranesurface , theNPwould simply stand up and then be endocytosed . At prescribed ligand density and NP radius and assuming one - to - one corresponding binding of ligand (cid:1) receptor pairs , the endocytic time is propor - tional to the total number of receptors required for fully wrapping the NP . One then follows the scaling law : t w ∼ F . However , from the CGMD simulations by Huang et al . , 83 the spherical NP takes longer time to be fully endocytosed than the spherocylindrical NP of F = 1 . 5 , but shorter time than the spherocylindrical NP of F = 2 , as shown in Figure 6d . Further increasing F leads to increasing endocytic time , obeying the scaling law . This nonmonotonic behavior may be due to the dis - tinct entry modes from spherical to spherocylindrical shape transitions . The scaling law and the simulation results indicate frustrated uptake of NPs with very high aspect ratios , such as 1D nanorods . The wrapping energy landscape explains the se - quence of simultaneous membrane wrapping and rotation during the internalization of a spherocylind - rical NP . Figure 7a plots the curvature energy pro ﬁ les for theNP ( F = 2 ) asafunctionofthewrappingextent η , as if the NP were wrapped with a ﬁ xed entry angle , θ = 0 (cid:2) ( horizontally ) or θ = 90 (cid:2) ( vertically ) . The analy - tical energy pro ﬁ les , denoted by solid lines , agree very well with the CGMD simulations , denoted by symbols . For horizontal wrapping ( θ = 0 (cid:2) ) the curvature energy linearly scales with the wrapped areal fraction . For vertical wrapping ( θ = 90 (cid:2) ) , the energy pro ﬁ le is constituted of three linear curves with di ﬀ erent slopes . Since the twowrapping angles representthe extremes , the curvature energy pro ﬁ les of all the other wrapping angles are enveloped by these two curves . The energy pro ﬁ les indicate the sequence of membrane wrapping and NP rotation . At a small wrapping extent ( η < 0 . 5 ) , the relatively smaller curvature energy for θ = 0 (cid:2) suggests that an initially vertically docked or titled ( 0 (cid:2) < θ < 90 (cid:2) ) NP would tend to lay down by rotation , i . e . , aligning its long axis with the membrane surface . Once η > 0 . 5 , the NP would tend to stand up to gain a larger wrapping angle θ since wrapping with a large angle involves a smaller energy penalty . Upon comple - tion of rotation , the NP would be wrapped with this angle until it is completely endocytosed . Thus , an initially vertically docked NP would take a laying - down - then - standing - up sequence to complete endocytosis , as schematically shown in Figure 7b . The laying - down - then - standing - up wrapping se - quence is consistent with the CGMD simulations for capped multiwalled carbon nanotubes ( MWCNTs ) by Figure6 . ( a (cid:1) c ) SimulationsnapshotsoftheendocyticprocessofspherocylindricalNPswithdi ﬀ erentaspectratios . Forallthe cases shown , R = 14 nm . ( a ) F = 1 ; ( b ) F = 1 . 5 ; ( c ) F = 2 . Here , τ is a characteristic time scale of the model . Color - coded beads represent di ﬀ erent coarse - grained constituents . Green , lipids ; blue , receptors ; yellow , ambient NP surface ; red , ligands . ( d ) . Shape e ﬀ ects on the endocytic time of NPs . Evolution of the areal wrapping fraction of NPs with the same radius ( R = 10 . 0 σ ) but di ﬀ erent aspect ratios . In the simulations , the spherocylindrical NPs are initiallydocked on the membrane with their long axes perpendicular to the membrane . Reprinted from ref 83 . Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org J Shi et al . 84 using the 3 - agent lipid model and the accompanying experimental observations . A very long capped CNT can be considered as a 1D rod , the limiting geometry of the spherocylindrical NPs . The simulations demonstrated that at a relatively low receptor density the CNT rotates and is internalized with an entry angle close to 90 (cid:2) , exhibiting a tip - entry phenomenon . Also consistent to the analysis in Figure 7a , the rotation is driven by the relaxation of the deformation energy in the membrane during wrapping . The tip rotation from a kinetics point of view by noting two relative time scales involved in the endo - cytosis of the CNTs , as pointed out by Shi et al . : 84 the wrapping timecontrolled by receptor di ﬀ usion andthe NP rotation time controlled by the torsional force . In the case of physiologically relevant receptor density , wrapping is the limiting process compared to rotation . Thus , the NP has su ﬃ cient time to rotate so as to fully relax the deformation energy to achieve tip entry . On the contrary , in the case of very high receptor density , receptors are always immediately available for wrap - ping and wrapping would proceed very fast , leaving no time for rotation to occur . Under this condition , the NP is endocytosed with a low entry angle and tip entry becomes less predominant . 105 Uptake of 1D and 2D Nanomaterials . Compared with the endocytosis of 3D nanorods whose interaction mode exhibits a lying - down - then - standing - up sequence as identified in Figures 6 and 7 , recent work has revealed two fundamental modes of interaction between a 1D nanomaterial and the cell membrane : a perpendicu - lar entry mode and a parallel adhering mode ( see Figure 8a ) . 88 Theoretical analysis showed that these two basic modes are controlled by a single dimension - less parameter , the normalized membrane tension σ h = 2 σ R 2 / B with R being the radius of the 1D nanomaterial . From an energetic point of view , σ h represents the relative ratio of the membrane stretching and bending energies in the total elastic energy of the membrane . The membrane bending energy tends to rotate the nanotube to a perpendicular entry angle while the membrane stretching energy prefers a vanishingly small entry angle . When σ h falls below a critical value σ h c ( σ h < σ h c ) , the membrane bending energy dominates over the stretching energy and the 1D nanomaterial rotates to a high entry angle during uptake . For σ h > σ h c , the 1D nanomaterial is driven by the dominating stretching energy toward a low entry angle and even - tually adheres to the membrane surface in a near - parallel configuration ( see Figure 8b ) . This σ h - governed uptake behavior is ubiquitous in the interactions be - tween 1D nanomaterials and cell membranes , and the theory can be employed to understand many biologi - cal phenomena such as the regulation of filopodia Figure 7 . ( a ) The bending energy pro ﬁ le for internalizing a spherocylindrical NP ( F = 2 ) with di ﬀ erent wrapping angles explains the laying - down - then - standing - up process . ( red : θ = 0 (cid:2) ; black : θ = 90 (cid:2) . ) . ( b ) Schematics of the laying - down - to - standing - up process . Images reprinted or adapted from ref 83 . Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society . Figure 8 . ( a ) Two modes of interaction between a cell membrane and a nanotube . 88 Reproduced from ref 88 . Copyright2014 AmericanChemicalSociety . ( b ) Elasticenergychange asa function ofthe normalized membranetension σ h , where σ h c = 2 π / 5 is the critical point of transition between these two interaction modes . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org K radius and the instability of microtubules confined by cell membranes . 88 The reason why the receptor - mediated endocytosis of nanorods exhibit a single interaction mode of a lying - down - then - standing - up sequence ( Figure 7 ) , while that of 1D nanomaterials exhibits two interaction modes depending on the scaled membrane tension σ h could be understood as follows . Note that receptor - mediated endocytosis is usually regarded as a process limited by the di ﬀ usion of receptors in the cell mem - brane toward the contact region . 57 The membrane wrapping of the curved tip of a 1D nanomaterial is governedby2Ddi ﬀ usionofreceptorsinthemembrane plane , while the wrapping of the cylindrical wall is regulated by 1D di ﬀ usion of receptors . This means that the tip , rather than the lateralwall , ofa 1D nanomaterial should be wrapped ﬁ rst . As long as the speci ﬁ c energy ofreceptor (cid:1) ligandinteractioncanovercomethemem - brane deformation energy penalty induced by the tip wrapping , the subsequent interaction should be con - trolled by the two tension - dependent interaction modes . 88 In comparison , for short nanorods with two curved tips and a much smaller lateral wall , the di ﬀ er - ence between receptor di ﬀ usion between the tip and wall regions is not as evident . Therefore , the wrapping of short nanorods would be mainly governed by the elastic energy of the deformed membrane that adopts the lying - down - then - standing - up sequence to reduce the membrane deformation energy . Depending on their size , geometry and surface pro - perties , 2D nanomaterials can exhibit several di ﬀ erent con ﬁ gurations in the cellular interaction . 85 Recently , a theoretical analysis has been performed to study two modes of interaction between the cell membrane and a rigid 2D nanomaterial : near - perpendicular trans - membrane penetration and parallel attachment onto a membrane . It was shown that the splay ( bending ) and membrane tension energies serve as the main driving force for the near - perpendicular ( parallel ) con - ﬁ guration of a transmembrane ( membrane attaching ) 2D nanomaterial . 87 As 2D nanomaterials enter the cells typically not via endocytosis but other pathways , their internalization mechanisms are not detailed here . UPTAKE OF SOFT NPS For soft NPs with comparable bending modulus as the lipid bilayer , such as vesicles , liposomes , micelles , polymeric capsules , and NPs coated with long poly - mers , boththecell membraneandthe NPitselfdeform . The partition of the total deformation energy into the cell membrane and the NP alters the energy landscape , giving rise to di ﬀ erent kinetics of endocytosis . During the wrapping process , the NP deforms into di ﬀ erent shapes , thus the e ﬀ ect of elastic modulus is inherently coupled with the shape e ﬀ ect . Yi et al . 106 developed a theoretical model concern - ing the endocytosis of a ﬂ uid vesicular NP such as a lipo - some in the framework of Helfrich theory . By solving the equilibrium shape equations of the cell membrane aswellasthevesicularNP , thetotaldeformationenergy of the system can be obtained at di ﬀ erent wrapping extents ( see Figure 9a ) . Their energetics analyses showed that endocytosis is very sensitive to the relative sti ﬀ ness of the NP to the cell membrane , as shown in the phase diagram of the scaled membrane tension σ h and adhesion energy density R = 2 R R 2 / B , where R is the adhesion energy density ( see Figure 9b , c ) . As NP becomes softer , the transition lines separating from partial to fully wrapping shift downward , indicating endocytosis is more di ﬃ cult to complete . The result that sti ﬀ vesicular NPs can achieve full wrapping more easily than soft NPs has been con ﬁ rmed recently in a combination of experiments and molecular dynamics simulations on the cell uptake of core (cid:1) shell NPs with a lipid shell . 107 Similar elasticity e ﬀ ects have also been observed in the cell uptake of spherical solid nano - capsules 108 and ( 2D cylindrical ) nanorods . It was found that solid nanocapsules require less adhesion energy to achieve full wrapping than ﬂ uid vesicular NPs with the same bending sti ﬀ ness . 108 To explain why softer NP is more di ﬃ cult to be endo - cytosed , one observes that cell membrane wets soft NPs once they dock on the cell membrane , as shown in Figure 9a . The softer the NP is , the larger the wetting angle , and the higher extent of spreading of the NP on the cell membrane . The highly spread NP forms large curvaturesatthespreadingfront . Furtherwrappingthe Figure 9 . ( a ) Schematic of typical wrapping states and ( b and c ) wrapping phase diagrams with respect to normalized adhesion energy and membrane tension σ h at di ﬀ erent values of the rigidity ratio B L / B , where B L is the bending rigidity of the liposome ; ( b ) 2D case ; ( c ) 3D case . Dashed lines , boundaries between no wrapping and partial wrapping states ; solid lines , boundaries between partial and full wrapping states . Adapted with permission from ref 106 . Copyright 2011 American Physical Society . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org L NP involves overcoming a very large bending energy barrier inherent to the spread shape . The energy barrier may be su ﬃ ciently large to completely stall the wrapping . Interestingly , Yi et al . 106 noted that many viruses exploit the sti ﬀ ness to facilitate the infectious process : they soften before uptake via fusion , while harden before budding out of the host cells via exocytosis . LOCAL MECHANICAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS Our previous analyses reveal that cellular uptake of NPs depends on not only the size , shape and chemo - physical properties of NPs , but also the biomechanical properties of cell membrane , including membrane tension and bending modulus . In parallel to the theo - retical and computational studies , numerous in vitro experiments 71 , 75 , 109 , 110 have been carried out to assess the delivery e ﬃ ciency of NPs and provided rich data sets for validating the theoretical and computational models . However , in these in vitro experiments the cells were exclusively cultured on glass or plastic substrates , which are both mechanically sti ﬀ and topo - graphically ﬂ at . In contrast , the ECMs in vivo are soft and consist of ﬁ brils such as collagens . These dis - crepancies raise an immediate concern regarding to what extent the in vitro experimental results are trans - ferrable to in vivo conditions . It has well established from the study of mechanobiology 111 (cid:1) 116 that local physical cues of various kinds modulate cell responses , resulting in changes in cell morphology and surface mechanics , which may in turn a ﬀ ect the cellular uptake of NPs . To characterize the role of local physical environ - ment on the cellular uptake of NPs , Huang et al . 117 carried out in vitro studies with di ﬀ erent characteristics of cell culture substrates . In a ﬁ rst study , polyacryla - mide ( PA ) hydrogels of varying sti ﬀ nesses , soft ( Young ' s modulus : 1 . 61 ( 0 . 11 kPa ) , intermediate ( 3 . 81 ( 0 . 12 kPa ) , and sti ﬀ ( 5 . 71 ( 0 . 51 kPa ) were used in the in vitro experiments to explore the e ﬀ ect of substrate sti ﬀ ness on the cellular uptake . 117 Bovine aortic endothelial cells ( BAECs ) were cultured on the gels for 12 h before loading ﬂ uorescent polystyrene NPs ( 100 nm ) into the culture medium . The seemingly small di ﬀ erence in the gel sti ﬀ ness is su ﬃ cient to induce changes in cell morphology , as shown by the phase contrast images ( Figure 10 , left ) . Endocytosis was driven by nonspeci ﬁ c interactions , since the NPs are not conjugated with antibodies . The in vitro experiments con ﬁ rmed that substrate sti ﬀ ness plays a signi ﬁ cant role in altering the cellular uptake of NPs . The total ﬂ uorescence yield per cell was measured at di ﬀ erent times after NPs were loaded , indicating the uptake level of NPs . With increasing substrate sti ﬀ ness , the cellular uptake per cell increases ( Figure 10 , right ) , but the cellular uptake per cell surface area decreases ( not shown here ) . 117 Using poly ( methyl methacrylate ) ( PMMA ) ﬁ brous sub - strates fabricated via electrospinning , Huang et al . 118 further explored the e ﬀ ects of substrate topography , characterizedbythe ﬁ brildensity , onthecellularuptake of NPs . Substrates of three types of topographies , ﬂ at PMMA surface , and sparse and dense PMMA ﬁ brous substrates , were used . The responses of human osteo - sarcoma SaOS - 2 cells to substrate topography were investigated using ﬂ uorescence microscopy by simul - taneously staining F - actin , vinculin , and cell nuclei , as shown in Figure 11 ( left ) . The 100 nm ﬂ uorescent polystyrene NPs were again used to assess the cellular uptake . Figure 11 ( right ) shows that the cellular uptake Figure10 . Left : Cellularuptakeofthe ﬂ uorescentNPsbythecellsonpolyacrylamidesubstratesofvaryingsti ﬀ ness . Cellswere cultured on substrates for 12 h before loading the NPs . Images were taken after loading the NPs for 6 h . Right : The total ﬂ uorescence yield of individual cells on the polyacrylamide substrates of varying sti ﬀ ness obtained by multiplying ﬂ uorescence per unit area by the projected cell area on a cell by cell basis . 117 The di ﬀ erence between any two groups at any speci ﬁ ed time point of measurement is statistically signi ﬁ cant ( p < 0 . 01 using Student t test ) . Reproduced from ref 117 . Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org M of NPs on sparse ﬁ brous substrates was reduced by about30 % ascomparedwith thecellsonthe ﬂ atPMMA substrates . The regulative role of substrate sti ﬀ ness and topo - graphy on the cellular uptake stems from the altered mechanical properties of cell membrane and the cell spreading area , as indicated by eq 6 . First , substrate sti ﬀ ness modulates the mechanical properties of cell membrane . Recent MD simulation results suggested that the ﬂ uorescence lifetime of DiI chromophores embedded in lipid bilayer is an e ﬀ ective indicator of relative membrane tension , 119 which was con ﬁ rmed in experiments . 120 Indeed , ﬂ uorescence lifetime mea - surements of DiI - C 12 within cells demonstrated that cell membrane is less tense on softer PA gels . 117 This predicts that thecellularuptake ofcells onsofter PA gels or denser ﬁ brous substrates is higher on a per mem - brane area basis . Second , substrate sti ﬀ ness modulates cell spreading . The sti ﬀ er the substrate is , the larger the spreading area of the cell . 117 As shown in eq 6 , the cellularuptakelinearlyscaleswiththesurfaceareaofthe cellmembrane , sinceitrepresentstheassessableareato theNPs . Itturnsoutthatthecellsurfaceareaisdominant factoroverthemembranetensione ﬀ ect , andhence , the cellular uptake on a per cell basis increases with increas - ing substrates sti ﬀ ness . The observed e ﬀ ect of substrate topography on the cellular uptake can be explained by the same principle . First , ﬂ uorescence lifetime measurements of DiI - C 12 showedthat cell membraneon sparse ﬁ broussubstrate is more tensed than those on ﬂ at and dense ﬁ brous substrates ; membrane tension of cells on the latter two substrates is comparable . 118 The spreading area of cells on ﬂ at substrate is nearly 2 - fold higher than that of cells on ﬁ brous substrates , whereas the spreading areasofthecellsondenseandsparse ﬁ broussubstrates are comparable . 118 Since the cell surface area is the dominant factor over the membrane tension e ﬀ ect , the cellular uptake on ﬂ at substrate is the highest . For cells on ﬁ brous substrates , the higher membrane tension renders lower cellular uptake by cells on sparse ﬁ brous substrate than on dense ﬁ brous substrate . CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTIVE OUTCOME The NP (cid:1) cell interface is highly heterogeneous , gen - erating forces ofdi ﬀ erent origins thatshape the energy landscape of NP (cid:1) cell interactions . These forces are determined by a suite of variables inherent to the NPs and the cells ( size , shape , sti ﬀ ness , surface chemistry of the NPs , elasticity of the cell membrane , and receptor di ﬀ usivity , etc . ) , rendering cellular uptake NP size selective , shape sensitive , and sti ﬀ ness dependent . As cell morphologies and surface mechanics are depen - dent on the local microenvironment and disease states , cellular uptake of NPs may not only be cell type speci ﬁ c , but also tissue - environment and disease state speci ﬁ c . It is clear that the e ﬀ ects of key parameters impor - tant to the cellular uptake are strongly interrelated , as exempli ﬁ ed by the phase diagrams in the space of NP radius and ligand density . The interrelated e ﬀ ects de ﬁ ne a narrow window in the parametric space within which the cellular uptake is optimized . In addition to the interplay between NP size and ligand density , manyotherinterrelatede ﬀ ectsareyetto bequanti ﬁ ed . Forexample , whenasoftNPisbeingwrapped , itsshape dynamically changes , i . e . , the e ﬀ ects of NP sti ﬀ ness and shape are coupled and interrelated . The interrelated e ﬀ ects indicate that improving one parameter may adversely impact another , making the search of the optimal parametric window experimentally cost - ine ﬀ ective . Coarse - grained modeling discussed here will continue to be a powerful tool to de ﬁ ne the complex interrelations . Challenges remain to identify the most e ﬃ cient targeting strategy suitable and speci ﬁ c to diseased tissues . Chemotargeting is currently the most popular targeting strategy , wherein NPs conjugated with ligands target cell surface receptors that are speci ﬁ c Figure 11 . Left : Representative ﬂ uorescence imagesof SaOS - 2 cells on various substrateswith distinct surfacetopographies . Right : Cellularuptake of ﬂ uorescentNPsby cells onsubstratesofdi ﬀ erent surfacetopographies . The ﬂ uorescence intensities arenormalizedbytheintensityon ﬂ atPMMAsurface . 118 * * Signi ﬁ canceat p < 0 . 01betweenanytwogroups . Reproducedwith permission from ref 118 . Copyright 2015 Wiley & Sons , Inc . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org N to the diseased cells . Such an active targeting method has been proven e ﬃ cient so long as unique receptors can be identi ﬁ ed and are overexpressed on diseased cells compared with normal cells . The work reviewed here provide compelling evidence that mechanical properties of the cells and the NPs can also bias the cellular uptake of NPs , which suggests a new targeting strategy , mechanotargeting . Given that mechanical properties of many tumors are di ﬀ erent than those of the normal tissues , mechanotargeting is complemen - tary to chemotargeting and may be useful in achieving more e ﬀ ective cancer diagnosis and treatment . This opens up a new paradigm for the design of NP - based nanomedicine with improved targeting selectivity and reduced toxicity . To facilitate a unifying understanding , this review aims to provide a coarse - grained picture on the inter - action forces that mediate the cellular uptake of NPs . Namely , all the atomicand molecular forcesarelumped into driving ( adhesion ) and resistance forces without di ﬀ erentiating their atomic and molecular origins . Not - ing that endocytosis is essentially a multiscale process initiated by single protein conformational changes and subsequently involving large - scale membrane de - formation ; therefore , information regarding how the atomic and molecular scale events trigger the cellular level functions could be lost due to the coarse - grained treatment . For example , to ensure targeting speci ﬁ city , tethered ligands on the NP surface necessarily adopt appropriate conformations so as to be recognized by and accessible to the cell - surface receptors . A single parameter , i . e . , ligand (cid:1) receptor binding a ﬃ nity , may not su ﬃ ce to describe the conformational changes of the proteins during the binding events . Further ad - vancement of highly targeted NP - based therapy may hinge upon the quantitation of the interaction forces at the atomic and molecular levels and linking the atomic and molecular events to cellular functions . We expect that multiscale modeling coupling di ﬀ erent length and time scales will play an important role in this aspect . To date , clinical application of NPs is still hampered by frequent high - uptake in the liver , systematic toxicity of the carriers , and insu ﬃ cient selectivity and uptake by tumor and / or cancer cells . From a biomimetic point of view , the current state - of - the - art design of NP - based therapeutics remains far less e ﬃ cient than nature - synthesized NPs ; viruses and bacteria . Numer - ous studies have made it clear that the extremely e ﬃ cient and robust biological processes , such as viral infection and white cell attacking bacteria , come with the sophisticated ways that living system harnesses physical principles . Further design of smart , multi - functional biomimetic NPs necessitates continuing unraveling the underlying biophysics of the biological counterparts . Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . Acknowledgment . S . L . Z . gratefully acknowledges supports from the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) grants ( Career Award : CMMI - 0754463 / 0644599 ; CBET - 1067523 ) and the Na - tionalInstitutesofHealth ( NHLBIR21HL122902 ) . H . J . G . acknowl - edges supports from NSF ( CMMI - 1028530 and CBET - 1344097 ) . G . B . acknowledges supports from the National Institutes of Health as an NHLBI Program of Excellence in Nanotechnology Award ( HHSN268201000043CtoG . B . ) andanNIHNanomedicine Development Center Award ( PN2EY018244 to G . B . ) . We are also gratefulto Mr . PengZhao atPenn State Universityfor producing a few images of endocytosis in this manuscript . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . Liu , X . ; Dai , Q . ; Austin , L . ; Coutts , J . ; Knowles , G . ; Zou , J . ; Chen , H . ; Huo , Q . AOne - StepHomogeneousImmunoassay for Cancer Biomarker Detection Using Gold Nanoparticle Probes Coupled with Dynamic Light Scattering . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2008 , 130 , 2780 – 2782 . 2 . Mani , V . ; Chikkaveeraiah , B . V . ; Patel , V . ; Gutkind , J . S . ; Rusling , J . F . Ultrasensitive Immunosensor for Cancer Biomarker Proteins Using Gold Nanoparticle Film Electrodes and Multienzyme - Particle Ampli ﬁ cation . ACS Nano 2009 , 3 , 585 – 594 . 3 . Stoeva , S . I . ; Lee , J . S . ; Smith , J . E . ; Rosen , S . T . ; Mirkin , C . A . Multiplexed Detection of Protein Cancer Markers with Biobarcoded Nanoparticle Probes . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2006 , 128 , 8378 – 8379 . 4 . Qian , X . ; Peng , X . - H . ; Ansari , D . O . ; Yin - Goen , Q . ; Chen , G . Z . ; Shin , D . M . ; Yang , L . ; Young , A . N . ; Wang , M . D . ; Nie , S . In Vivo Tumor Targeting and Spectroscopic Detection with Surface - Enhanced Raman Nanoparticle Tags . Nat . Biotechnol . 2008 , 26 , 83 – 90 . 5 . Nie , S . ; Xing , Y . ; Kim , G . J . ; Simons , J . W . Nanotechnology Applications in Cancer . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 2007 , 9 , 257 – 288 . 6 . Moghimi , S . M . ; Hunter , A . C . ; Murray , J . C . Nanomedicine : Current Status and Future Prospects . FASEB J . 2005 , 19 , 311 – 330 . 7 . Peer , D . ; Karp , J . M . ; Hong , S . ; FaroKhzad , O . C . ; Margalit , R . ; Langer , R . Nanocarriers as an Emerging Platform for Cancer Therapy . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2007 , 2 , 751 – 760 . 8 . Petros , R . A . ; DeSimone , J . M . Strategies in the Design of Nanoparticles for Therapeutic Applications . Nat . Rev . Drug Discovery 2010 , 9 , 615 – 627 . 9 . Wang , M . ; Thanou , M . TargetingNanoparticlestoCancer . Pharmacol . Res . 2010 , 62 , 90 – 99 . 10 . Yezhelyev , M . V . ; Gao , X . ; Xing , Y . ; Al - Hajj , A . ; Nie , S . ; O ' Regan , R . M . Emerging Use of Nanoparticles in Diagnosis and Treatment of Breast Cancer . Lancet Oncol . 2006 , 7 , 657 – 667 . 11 . Fischer , H . C . ; Chan , W . C . W . Nanotoxicity : The Growing Need for in Vivo Study . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 2007 , 18 , 565 – 571 . 12 . Kim , B . Y . S . ; Rutka , J . T . ; Chan , W . C . W . Current Concepts : Nanomedicine . N . Engl . J . Med . 2010 , 363 , 2434 – 2443 . 13 . Albanese , A . ; Tang , P . S . ; Chan , W . C . W . The E ﬀ ect of Nanoparticle Size , Shape , and Surface Chemistry on Bio - logical Systems . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 2012 , 14 , 1 – 16 . 14 . Canton , I . ; Battaglia , G . Endocytosis at the Nanoscale . Chem . Soc . Rev . 2012 , 41 , 2718 – 2739 . 15 . Chou , L . Y . T . ; Ming , K . ; Chan , W . C . W . Strategies for the Intracellular Delivery of Nanoparticles . Chem . Soc . Rev . 2011 , 40 , 233 – 245 . 16 . Ding , H . - m . ; Ma , Y . - q . Theoretical and Computational Investigations of Nanoparticle - Biomembrane Interac - tions in Cellular Delivery . Small 2015 , 11 , 1055 – 1071 . 17 . Gao , H . ProbingMechanicalPrinciplesofCell - Nanomaterial Interactions . J . Mech . Phys . Solids 2014 , 62 , 312 – 339 . 18 . Bahrami , A . H . ; Raatz , M . ; Agudo - Canalejo , J . ; Michel , R . ; Curtis , E . M . ; Hall , C . K . ; Gradzielski , M . ; Lipowsky , R . ; Weikl , T . R . Wrapping of Nanoparticles by Membranes . Adv . Colloid Interface Sci . 2014 , 208 , 214 – 224 . 19 . Swanson , J . A . Shaping Cups into Phagosomes and Macropinosomes . Nat . Rev . Mol . CellBiol . 2008 , 9 , 639 – 649 . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org O 20 . Lewis , W . H . Pinocytosis . Bull . Johns Hopkins Hosp . 1931 , 49 , 17 – 27 . 21 . McNeil , P . L . Mechanisms of Nutritive Endocytosis . Iii . A Freeze - Fracture Study of Phagocytosis by Digestive Cells of Chlorohydra . Tissue Cell 1984 , 16 , 519 – 533 . 22 . Mooren , O . L . ; Galletta , B . J . ; Cooper , J . A . Roles for Actin Assembly in Endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 2012 , 81 , 661 – 686 . 23 . Roth , T . F . ; Porter , K . R . Yolk Protein Uptake in the Oocyte of the Mosquito Aedes Aegypti . J . Cell Biol . 1964 , 20 , 313 – 332 . 24 . Marsh , M . ; Helenius , A . Virus Entry : Open Sesame . Cell 2006 , 124 , 729 – 740 . 25 . Mercer , J . ; Schelhaas , M . ; Helenius , A . Virus Entry by Endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 2010 , 79 , 803 – 833 . 26 . Palade , G . E . An Electron Microscope Study of the Mito - chondrial Structure . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 1953 , 1 , 188 – 211 . 27 . Yamada , E . The Fine Structure of the Gall Bladder Epithe - lium of the Mouse . J . Cell Biol . 1955 , 1 , 445 – 458 . 28 . Cavalli , V . ; Corti , M . ; Gruenberg , J . Endocytosis and Signaling Cascades : A Close Encounter . FEBS Lett . 2001 , 498 , 190 – 196 . 29 . Lakadamyali , M . ; Rust , M . J . ; Zhuang , X . W . Endocytosisof In ﬂ uenza Viruses . Microbes Infect . 2004 , 6 , 929 – 936 . 30 . Sieczkarski , S . B . ; Whittaker , G . R . In ﬂ uenza Virus Can Enter and Infect Cells in the Absence of Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . J . Virol . 2002 , 76 , 10455 – 10464 . 31 . Ding , H . M . ; Tian , W . D . ; Ma , Y . Q . Designing Nanoparticle Translocation through Membranes by Computer Simu - lations . ACS Nano 2012 , 6 , 1230 – 1238 . 32 . Wong - Ekkabut , J . ; Baoukina , S . ; Triampo , W . ; Tang , I . M . ; Tieleman , D . P . ; Monticelli , L . Computer Simulation Study of Fullerene Translocation through Lipid Membranes . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2008 , 3 , 363 – 368 . 33 . Yang , K . ; Ma , Y . Q . ComputerSimulationoftheTransloca - tionofNanoparticleswithDi ﬀ erentShapesacrossaLipid Bilayer . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2010 , 5 , 579 – 583 . 34 . Zhang , H . ; Ji , Q . ; Huang , C . ; Zhang , S . ; Yuan , B . ; Yang , K . ; Ma , Y . - q . Cooperative Transmembrane Penetration of Nanoparticles . Sci . Rep . 2015 , 5 , 10525 . 35 . Lin , J . ; Alexander - Katz , A . Cell Membranes Open 00 Doors 00 for Cationic Nanoparticles / Biomolecules : Insights into Uptake Kinetics . ACS Nano 2013 , 7 , 10799 – 10808 . 36 . Josephson , L . ; Perez , J . M . ; Weissleder , R . Magnetic Nanosensors for the Detection of Oligonucleotide Sequences . Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . 2001 , 40 , 3204 – 3206 . 37 . Lewin , M . ; Carlesso , N . ; Tung , C . - H . ; Tang , X . - W . ; Cory , D . ; Scadden , D . T . ; Weissleder , R . Tat Peptide - Derivatized Magnetic Nanoparticles Allow in Vivo Tracking and Recovery of Progenitor Cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 2000 , 18 , 410 – 414 . 38 . Lee , J . - H . ; Huh , Y . - M . ; Jun , Y . - w . ; Seo , J . - w . ; Jang , J . - t . ; Song , H . - T . ; Kim , S . ; Cho , E . - J . ; Yoon , H . - G . ; Suh , J . - S . ; et al . Arti ﬁ cially Engineered Magnetic Nanoparticles for Ultra - Sensitive Molecular Imaging . Nat . Med . 2007 , 13 , 95 – 99 . 39 . Gao , X . H . ; Cui , Y . Y . ; Levenson , R . M . ; Chung , L . W . K . ; Nie , S . M . In Vivo Cancer Targeting and Imaging with Semi - conductor Quantum Dots . Nat . Biotechnol . 2004 , 22 , 969 – 976 . 40 . Nahrendorf , M . ; Ja ﬀ er , F . A . ; Kelly , K . A . ; Sosnovik , D . E . ; Aikawa , E . ; Libby , P . ; Weissleder , R . Noninvasive Vascular Cell Adhesion Molecule - 1 Imaging Identi ﬁ es In ﬂ amma - tory Activation of Cells in Atherosclerosis . Circulation 2006 , 114 , 1504 – 1511 . 41 . Tong , S . ; Hou , S . ; Zheng , Z . ; Zhou , J . ; Bao , G . Coating Optimization of Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nano - particles for High T2 Relaxivity . Nano Lett . 2010 , 10 , 4607 – 4613 . 42 . Alexiou , C . ; Arnold , W . ; Klein , R . J . ; Parak , F . G . ; Hulin , P . ; Bergemann , C . ; Erhardt , W . ; Wagenpfeil , S . ; Lubbe , A . S . Locoregional Cancer Treatment with Magnetic Drug Targeting . Cancer Res . 2000 , 60 , 6641 – 6648 . 43 . Namiki , Y . ; Namiki , T . ; Yoshida , H . ; Ishii , Y . ; Tsubota , A . ; Koido , S . ; Nariai , K . ; Mitsunaga , M . ; Yanagisawa , S . ; Kashiwagi , H . ; et al . A Novel Magnetic Crystal - Lipid Nanostructure for Magnetically Guided in Vivo Gene Delivery . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2009 , 4 , 598 – 606 . 44 . Yezhelyev , M . V . ; Qi , L . ; O ' Regan , R . M . ; Nie , S . ; Gao , X . Proton - Sponge Coated Quantum Dots for Sirna Delivery and Intracellular Imaging . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2008 , 130 , 9006 – 9012 . 45 . Ding , H . - m . ; Ma , Y . - q . Role of Physicochemical Properties of Coating Ligands in Receptor - Mediated Endocytosis of Nanoparticles . Biomaterials 2012 , 33 , 5798 – 5802 . 46 . Torchilin , V . P . ; Trubetskoy , V . S . Which Polymers Can Make Nanoparticulate Drug Carriers Long - Circulating ? Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 1995 , 16 , 141 – 155 . 47 . Tromsdorf , U . I . ; Bigall , N . C . ; Kaul , M . G . ; Bruns , O . T . ; Nikolic , M . S . ; Mollwitz , B . ; Sperling , R . A . ; Reimer , R . ; Hohenberg , H . ; Parak , W . J . ; et al . Size and Surface E ﬀ ects on the Mri Relaxivity of Manganese Ferrite Nanoparticle Contrast Agents . Nano Lett . 2007 , 7 , 2422 – 2427 . 48 . Silverstein , S . C . ; Steinman , R . M . ; Cohn , Z . A . Endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 1977 , 46 , 669 – 722 . 49 . Goldstein , J . L . ; Anderson , R . G . W . ; Brown , M . S . Coated Pits , CoatedVesicles , andReceptor - MediatedEndocytosis . Nature 1979 , 279 , 679 – 685 . 50 . Blanchard , E . ; Belouzard , S . ; Goueslain , L . ; Wakita , T . ; Dubuisson , J . ; Wychowski , C . ; Rouille , Y . Hepatitis C Virus Entry Depends on Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . J . Virol . 2006 , 80 , 6964 – 6972 . 51 . Dimitrov , D . S . Virus Entry : Molecular Mechanisms and Biomedical Applications . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 2004 , 2 , 109 – 122 . 52 . Gruenberg , J . ; van der Goot , F . G . Mechanisms of Patho - gen Entry through the Endosomal Compartments . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2006 , 7 , 495 – 504 . 53 . Lerner , D . M . ; Deutsch , J . M . ; Oster , G . F . HowDoes a Virus Bud . Biophys . J . 1993 , 65 , 73 – 79 . 54 . Garo ﬀ , H . ; Hewson , R . ; Opstelten , D . J . E . Virus Maturation by Budding . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 1998 , 62 , 1171 – 1190 . 55 . Nel , A . E . ; Maedler , L . ; Velegol , D . ; Xia , T . ; Hoek , E . M . V . ; Somasundaran , P . ; Klaessig , F . ; Castranova , V . ; Thompson , M . UnderstandingBiophysicochemicalInteractionsatthe Nano - Bio Interface . Nat . Mater . 2009 , 8 , 543 – 557 . 56 . Decuzzi , P . ; Ferrari , M . The Role of Speci ﬁ c and Non - Speci ﬁ c Interactions in Receptor - Mediated Endocytosis of Nanoparticles . Biomaterials 2007 , 28 , 2915 – 2922 . 57 . Gao , H . ; Shi , W . ; Freund , L . B . Mechanics of Receptor - Mediated Endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2005 , 102 , 9469 – 9474 . 58 . Bao , G . ; Bao , X . R . Shedding Light on the Dynamics of Endocytosis and Viral Budding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2005 , 102 , 9997 – 9998 . 59 . Zhang , S . L . ; Zhu , T . ; Belytschko , T . Atomistic and Multi - scale Analyses of Brittle Fracture in Crystal Lattices . Phys . Rev . B : Condens . Matter Mater . Phys . 2007 , 76 , 094114 . 60 . Terdalkar , S . S . ; Yuan , H . Y . ; Huang , S . ; T , Z . ; Rencis , J . J . ; Zhang , S . L . NanoscaleFractureinGraphene . Chem . Phys . Lett . 2010 , 494 , 218 – 222 . 61 . Freund , L . B . ; Lin , Y . The Role of Binder Mobility in Spontaneous Adhesive Contact and Implications for Cell Adhesion . J . Mech . Phys . Solids 2004 , 52 , 2455 – 2472 . 62 . Shenoy , V . B . ; Freund , L . B . Growth and Shape Stabillity of a Biological Membrane Adhesion Complex in the Di ﬀ usion - Mediated Regime . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2005 , 102 , 3213 – 3218 . 63 . Tzlil , S . ; Deserno , M . ; Gelbert , W . M . ; Ben - Shaul , A . A Statistical - Thermodynamic Model of Viral Budding . Biophys . J . 2004 , 86 , 2037 – 2048 . 64 . Zhang , S . L . ; Li , J . ; Lykotra ﬁ tis , G . ; Bao , G . ; Suresh , S . Size - Dependent Endocytosis of Nanoparticles . Adv . Mater . 2009 , 21 , 419 – 424 . 65 . Yuan , H . Y . ; Li , J . ; Bao , G . ; Zhang , S . Variable Adhesion StrengthRegulates Cellular Uptake . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2010 , 105 , 138101 . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org P 66 . Yuan , H . Y . ; Zhang , S . L . E ﬀ ects of Particle Size and Ligand Density on the Kinetics of Receptor - Mediated Endocytosis of Nanoparticles . Appl . Phys . Lett . 2010 , 96 , 033704 . 67 . Kosmalska , A . J . ; Casares , L . ; Elosegui - Artola , A . ; Thottacherry , J . J . ; Moreno - Vicente , R . ; Gonzalez - Tarrago , V . ; del Pozo , M . A . ; Mayor , S . ; Arroyo , M . ; Navajas , D . ; et al . Physical Principles of Membrane Remo - delling During Cell Mechanoadaptation . Nat . Commun . 2015 , 6 , 7292 . 68 . Deserno , M . ; Bickel , T . Wrapping of a Spherical Colloid by a Fluid Membrane . Europhys . Lett . 2003 , 62 , 767 – 773 . 69 . Deserno , M . Elastic Deformation of a Fluid Membrane Upon Colloid Binding . Phys . Rev . E 2004 , 69 , 031903 . 70 . Reynwar , B . J . ; Illya , G . ; Harmandaris , V . A . ; Muller , M . M . ; Kremer , K . ; Deserno , M . Aggregation and Vesiculation of MembraneProteinsbyCurvature - MediatedInteractions . Nature 2007 , 447 , 461 – 464 . 71 . Chithrani , B . D . ; Ghazani , A . A . ; Chan , W . C . W . Determin - ing the Size and Shape Dependence of Gold Nano - particle Uptake into Mammalian Cells . Nano Lett . 2006 , 6 , 662 – 668 . 72 . Dietrich , C . ; Angelova , M . ; Pouligny , B . Adhesion of Latex Spheres to Giant Phospholipid Vesicles : Statics and Dynamics . J . Phys . II 1997 , 7 , 1651 – 1682 . 73 . Aoyama , Y . ; Kanamori , T . ; Nakai , T . ; Sasaki , T . ; Horiuchi , S . ; Sando , S . ; Niidome , T . Arti ﬁ cial VirusesandTheirApplica - tiontoGeneDelivery . Size - ControlledGeneCoatingwith Glycocluster Nanoparticles . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2003 , 125 , 3455 – 3457 . 74 . Osaki , F . ; Kanamori , T . ; Sando , S . ; Sera , T . ; Aoyama , Y . A Quantum Dot Conjugated Sugar Ball and Its Cellular Uptake on the Size E ﬀ ects of Endocytosis in the Subviral Region . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2004 , 126 , 6520 – 6521 . 75 . Chithrani , B . D . ; Chan , W . C . W . Elucidating the Mechan - ism of Cellular Uptake and Removal of Protein - Coated Gold Nanoparticles of Di ﬀ erent Sizes and Shapes . Nano Lett . 2007 , 7 , 1542 – 1550 . 76 . Xing , X . L . ; He , X . X . ; Peng , J . F . ; Wang , K . M . ; Tan , W . H . Uptake of Silica - Coated Nanoparticles by Hela Cells . J . Nanosci . Nanotechnol . 2005 , 5 , 1688 – 1693 . 77 . Lamblet , M . ; Delord , B . ; Johannes , L . ; van E ﬀ enterre , D . ; Bassereau , P . KeyRoleofReceptorDensityinColloid / Cell Speci ﬁ c Interaction : A Quantitative Biomimetic Study on Giant Vesicles . Eur . Phys . J . E : Soft Matter Biol . Phys . 2008 , 26 , 205 – 216 . 78 . vanE ﬀ enterre , D . ; Roux , D . Adhesion of Colloids ona Cell Surface in Competition for Mobile Receptors . Europhys . Lett . 2003 , 64 , 543 – 549 . 79 . Yuan , H . Y . ; Huang , C . J . ; Zhang , S . L . Virus - InspiredDesign Principles of Nanoparticle - Based Bioagents . PLoS One 2010 , 5 , e13495 . 80 . Garo ﬀ , H . ; Simons , K . Location of Spike Glycoproteins in Semliki Forest Virus Membrane . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1974 , 71 , 3988 – 3992 . 81 . Strauss , J . H . ; Strauss , E . G . The Alphaviruses : Gene - Expression , Replication , and Evolution . Microbiol . Rev . 1994 , 58 , 491 – 562 . 82 . Sun , S . X . ; Wirtz , D . Mechanics of Enveloped Virus Entry into Host Cells . Biophys . J . 2006 , 90 , L10 – L12 . 83 . Huang , C . J . ; Zhang , Y . ; Yuan , H . Y . ; Gao , H . J . ; Zhang , S . L . Role of Nanoparticle Geometry in Endocytosis : Laying Down to Stand Up . Nano Lett . 2013 , 13 , 4546 – 4550 . 84 . Shi , X . H . ; von dem Bussche , A . ; Hurt , R . H . ; Kane , A . B . ; Gao , H . J . Cell Entry of One - Dimensional Nanomaterials OccursbyTipRecognitionandRotation . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2011 , 6 , 714 – 719 . 85 . Li , Y . F . ; Yuan , H . Y . ; von dem Bussche , A . ; Creighton , M . ; Hurt , R . H . ; Kane , A . B . ; Gao , H . J . Graphene Microsheets Enter Cells through Spontaneous Membrane Penetra - tion at Edge Asperities and Corner Sites . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2013 , 110 , 12295 – 12300 . 86 . Yi , X . ; Gao , H . J . Phase Diagrams and Morphol - ogical Evolution in Wrapping of Rod - Shaped Elastic Nanoparticles by Cell Membrane : A Two - Dimensional Study . Phys . Rev . E 2014 , 89 , 062712 . 87 . Yi , X . ; Gao , H . J . CellInteractionwithGrapheneMicrosheets : Near - Orthogonal Cutting Versus Parallel Attachment . Nanoscale 2015 , 7 , 5457 – 5467 . 88 . Yi , X . ; Shi , X . H . ; Gao , H . J . A Universal Law for Cell Uptake of One - Dimensional Nanomaterials . Nano Lett . 2014 , 14 , 1049 – 1055 . 89 . Atilgan , E . ; Sun , S . X . Shape Transitions in Lipid Mem - branes and Protein Mediated Vesicle Fusion and Fission . J . Chem . Phys . 2007 , 126 , 095102 . 90 . Noguchi , H . ; Gompper , G . Shape Transitions of Fluid Vesicles and Red Blood Cells in Capillary Flows . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2005 , 102 , 14159 – 14164 . 91 . Helfrich , W . Elastic Properties of Lipid Bilayers - Theory and Possible Experiments . Z . Naturforsch . , C : J . Biosci . 1973 , 28 , 693 – 703 . 92 . Lyubartsev , A . P . Multiscale Modeling of Lipids and Lipid Bilayers . Eur . Biophys . J . 2005 , 35 , 53 – 61 . 93 . Cooke , I . R . ; Deserno , M . Solvent - Free Model for Self - Assembling Fluid Bilayer Membranes : Stabilization of theFluidPhaseBasedonBroadAttractiveTailPotentials . J . Chem . Phys . 2005 , 123 , 224710 . 94 . Cooke , I . R . ; Kremer , K . ; Deserno , M . Tunable Generic ModelforFluidBilayerMembranes . Phys . Rev . E 2005 , 72 , 011506 . 95 . Yuan , H . Y . ; Huang , C . J . ; Li , J . ; Lykotra ﬁ tis , G . ; Zhang , S . L . One - Particle - Thick , Solvent - Free , Coarse - Grained Model for Biological and Biomimetic Fluid Membranes . Phys . Rev . E 2010 , 82 , 011905 . 96 . Drou ﬀ e , J . M . ; Maggs , A . C . ; Leibler , S . Computer - Simulations of Self - Assembled Membranes . Science 1991 , 254 , 1353 – 1356 . 97 . Yamamoto , S . ; Maruyama , Y . ; Hyodo , S . Dissipative Par - ticle Dynamics Study of Spontaneous Vesicle Formation ofAmphiphilicMolecules . J . Chem . Phys . 2002 , 116 , 5842 – 5849 . 98 . Brannigan , G . ; Philips , P . F . ; Brown , F . L . H . Flexible Lipid Bilayers in Implicit Solvent . Phys . Rev . E 2005 , 72 , 011915 . 99 . Noguchi , H . ; Gompper , G . Meshless Membrane Model Based on the Moving Least - Squares Method . Phys . Rev . E 2006 , 73 , 021903 . 100 . Marrink , S . J . ; Risselada , H . J . ; Ye ﬁ mov , S . ; Tieleman , D . P . ; de Vries , A . H . The Martini Force Field : Coarse Grained Model for Biomolecular Simulations . J . Phys . Chem . B 2007 , 111 , 7812 – 7824 . 101 . Yuan , H . ; Huang , C . ; Zhang , S . Dynamic Shape Transfor - mationsofFluidVesicles . SoftMatter 2010 , 6 , 4571 – 4579 . 102 . Huang , C . J . ; Yuan , H . Y . ; Zhang , S . L . Coupled Vesicle Morphogenesis and Domain Organization . Appl . Phys . Lett . 2011 , 98 , 043702 . 103 . Li , H . ; Lykotra ﬁ tis , G . A Coarse - Grain Molecular Dynamics Model for Sickle Hemoglobin Fibers . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . Mater . 2011 , 4 , 162 – 173 . 104 . Zhang , Y . ; Huang , C . J . ; Kim , S . ; Golkaram , M . ; Dixon , M . W . ; Tilley , L . ; Li , J . ; Zhang , S . L . ; Suresh , S . Multiple Sti ﬀ ening E ﬀ ects of Nano - Scale Knobs on Human Red Blood Cells Infected with Plasmodium Falciparum Malaria Parasite . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2015 , 112 , 6068 – 6073 . 105 . Vacha , R . ; Martinez - Veracoechea , F . J . ; Frenkel , D . Receptor - Mediated Endocytosis of Nanoparticles of Various Shapes . Nano Lett . 2011 , 11 , 5391 – 5395 . 106 . Yi , X . ; Shi , X . H . ; Gao , H . J . Cellular Uptake of Elastic Nanoparticles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2011 , 107 , 098101 . 107 . Sun , J . S . ; Zhang , L . ; Wang , J . L . ; Feng , Q . ; Liu , D . B . ; Yin , Q . F . ; Xu , D . Y . ; Wei , Y . J . ; Ding , B . Q . ; Shi , X . H . ; etal . Tunable Rigidity of ( Polymeric Core ) - ( Lipid Shell ) Nanoparticles for Regulated Cellular Uptake . Adv . Mater . 2015 , 27 , 1402 – 1407 . 108 . Yi , X . ; Gao , H . J . Cell Membrane Wrapping of a Spherical Thin Elastic Shell . Soft Matter 2015 , 11 , 1107 – 1115 . 109 . Jiang , W . ; KimBetty , Y . S . ; Rutka , J . T . ; ChanWarren , C . W . Nanoparticle - Mediated Cellular Response Is Size - Dependent . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2008 , 3 , 145 – 150 . R E V I E W ZHANG ET AL . VOL . XXX ’ NO . XX ’ 000 – 000 ’ XXXX www . acsnano . org Q 110 . Jun , Y . - w . ; Huh , Y . - M . ; Choi , J . - s . ; Lee , J . - H . ; Song , H . - T . ; Kim , K . ; Yoon , S . ; Kim , K . - S . ; Shin , J . - S . ; Suh , J . - S . ; etal . Nanoscale Size E ﬀ ect of Magnetic Nanocrystals andTheirUtilization for Cancer Diagnosis via Magnetic Resonance Imaging . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2005 , 127 , 5732 – 5733 . 111 . Bershadsky , A . D . ; Balaban , N . Q . ; Geiger , B . Adhesion - Dependent Cell Mechanosensitivity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 2003 , 19 , 677 – 695 . 112 . Pelham , R . J . ; Wang , Y . L . Cell Locomotion and Focal Adhesions Are Regulated by Substrate Flexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1997 , 94 , 13661 – 13665 . 113 . Vogel , V . ; Sheetz , M . Local Force and Geometry Sensing Regulate Cell Functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2006 , 7 , 265 – 275 . 114 . Wang , N . ; Butler , J . P . ; Ingber , D . E . Mechanotransduction across the Cell Surface and through the Cytoskeleton . Science 1993 , 260 , 1124 – 1127 . 115 . Wozniak , M . A . ; Chen , C . S . Mechanotransduction in Development : A Growing Role for Contractility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2009 , 10 , 34 – 43 . 116 . Hamill , O . P . ; Martinac , B . Molecular Basis of Mechano - transduction in Living Cells . Physiol . Rev . 2001 , 81 , 685 – 740 . 117 . Huang , C . J . ; Butler , P . J . ; Tong , S . ; Muddana , H . S . ; Bao , G . ; Zhang , S . L . Substrate Sti ﬀ ness Regulates Cellular Uptake of Nanoparticles . Nano Lett . 2013 , 13 , 1611 – 1615 . 118 . Huang , C . J . ; Ozdemir , T . ; Xu , C . ; Butler , P . J . ; Siedlecki , C . ; Brown , J . L . ; Zhang , S . L . TheRoleofSubstrateTopography on the Cellular Uptake of Nanoparticles . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , Part B 2015 , 10 . 1002 / jbm . b . 33397 . 119 . Muddana , H . S . ; Gullapalli , R . R . ; Manias , E . ; Butler , P . J . Atomistic Simulation of Lipid and Dii Dynamics in Membrane Bilayers under Tension . Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 2011 , 13 , 1368 – 1378 . 120 . Tabouillot , T . ; Muddana , H . S . ; Butler , P . J . Endothelial Cell Membrane Sensitivity to Shear Stress Is Lipid Domain Dependent . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 2011 , 4 , 169 – 181 . R E V I E W