Review Lipid Rafts and Caveolae as Portals for Endocytosis : New Insights and Common Mechanisms Robert G . Parton * and Ayanthi A . Richards Institute for Molecular Bioscience , Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , and School of Biomedical Sciences , University of Queensland , Queensland , 4072 , Australia * Corresponding author : Robert G . Parton , r . parton @ imb . uq . edu . au Clathrin - coated pits and caveolae are two of the most recognizable features of the plasma membrane of mam - malian cells . While our understanding of the machinery regulating and driving clathrin - coated pit - mediated endo - cytosis has progressed dramatically , including the eluci - dation of the structure of individual components and partial in vitro reconstitution , the role of caveolae as alternative endocytic carriers still remains elusive 50years after their discovery . However , recent work has started to provide new insights into endocytosis by caveolae and into apparently related pathways involving lipid raft domains . These pathways , distinguished by their exquisite sensitivity to cholesterol - sequestering agents , can involve caveolae but also exist in cells devoid of caveolins and caveolae . This review examines the cur - rent evidence for the involvement of rafts and caveolae in endocytosis and the molecular players involved in their regulation . Key words : caveolae , cholera toxin , endocytosis , GPI - anchored protein , raft , SV40 Received 9 July 2003 , revised and accepted for publica - tion 15 July 2003 Caveolae and Caveolins Caveolae were first described by early microscopists as smooth - surfaced flask - shaped pits of typically 55 – 65 nm diameter covering the surface of many mammalian cell types ( 1 , 2 ) . Identification of a major protein constituent of caveolae , VIP - 21 or caveolin - 1 ( 3 , 4 ) , provided the first molecular marker of caveolae and accelerated progress in the elucidation of caveolae formation and function . It was soon shown that cells , such as lymphocytes , that did not express caveolin - 1 lacked morphological caveolae , and transient expression of the protein in these cells was sufficient to generate the characteristic structures identifi - able by electron microscopy ( 5 ) . Thus , caveolin - 1 appears to have an integral role in the formation of caveolae . It is now known that caveolin - 1 is expressed as alternatively spliced a and b isoforms ( 6 ) , and that two other members of the family also exist ; caveolin - 2 ( 7 ) is coexpressed with and often associates with caveolin - 1 in the same cell / tissue types ( 8 ) , while expression of caveolin - 3 ( 9 ) is found predominantly in skeletal and cardiac muscle . Caveolin - 1 null mice lack caveolae in all cell types , except for differentiated striated muscle where caveolin - 3 takes over the role ( 10 – 12 ) . While caveolin - 2 may facilitate caveolae formation in some cell types ( 13 , 14 ) , caveolin - 2 null mice have normal caveolae densities ( 15 ) . Caveolins are integral membrane proteins consisting of a putative 33 amino acid central hydrophobic domain ( which forms a hairpin loop in the lipid bilayer ) flanked by cytoplasmically exposed N - and C - terminal domains ( 16 – 18 ) . Caveolin - 1 has been shown to bind cholesterol and fatty acids directly ( 19 , 20 ) , is palmitoylated in its C - terminal domain ( 17 ) , and forms high molecular weight oligomers ( 18 ) . These proper - ties are believed to be important in caveolae formation although the exact mechanisms involved remain unclear . Unlike clathrin - coated pits , caveolae are abundant in some cell types ( adipocytes , endothelia , muscle ) but undetect - able in others ( lymphocytes , many neuronal cells ) . These observations , and the relatively mild phenotype of caveolin knockouts ( 21 ) , raise the vital question of the role of the caveolae invagination in cellular function . How does a caveolin - 1 null cell compensate for the lack of caveolae , which could comprise up to 35 % of the plasma membrane surface , and why do only some cell types in an organism have caveolae ? The highly conserved structure of caveolae in higher and lower eukaryotes suggests that the caveolar form plays some important role . One attractive possibility , suggested by their unique morphology , is that caveolae can bud off to form endocytic carriers . In this review we consider the evidence for caveolae involvement in endo - cytosis and draw comparisons with endocytosis mediated by related domains , lipid rafts . We will first briefly consider aspects of lipid rafts relevant to this field [ for a more extensive review , see e . g . ( 22 ) ] . Lipid Rafts Over the last decade , evidence has accumulated for organ - ization of the cell surface into lipid - based microdomains . Lipid rafts are envisaged as islands of highly ordered satur - ated lipids and cholesterol that are laterally mobile in the Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 Copyright # Blackwell Munksgaard 2003 Blackwell Munksgaard ISSN 1398 - 9219 724 plane of a more fluid disordered bilayer of largely unsat - urated lipids ( 22 – 25 ) . The straight acyl chains of the saturated polar lipids permit their close packing with cholesterol molecules to form liquid ordered micro - domains ( 25 ) . By comparison , the bent hydrocarbon chains of unsaturated phospholipids which make up the surround - ing ‘liquid - disordered’ bilayer cannot pack so closely together . These properties contribute to different bio - chemical properties of raft and non - raft domains ; they are relatively resistant to non - ionic detergents and are present in low - density fractions after density centrifugation . This can be used as a diagnostic tool for lipid raft association . As these properties depend on concentration of choles - terol within rafts , cholesterol - sequestering agents have been used to selectively disrupt rafts . This has been used to great effect to determine whether proteins are bona fide lipid raft components or merely copurified contaminants ( 26 ) , as well as to determine the role of rafts in cellular processes ( 27 ) . Raft residents include glycosylphospha - tidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins , dually acylated proteins ( e . g . the Src family tyrosine kinases and G a sub - units of the heterotrimeric G proteins ) and cholesterol - associated and palmitoylated proteins ( e . g . caveolins , Sonic Hedgehog ) ( 22 ) . Some molecules associate / dissoci - ate from rafts in a regulated manner depending on their state of activation [ e . g . H - Ras ( 28 ) ] . The raft hypothesis provides a means to explain the spatial segregation of certain signaling pathways emanating from the plasma membrane . For example , signaling by H - ras , but not K - ras , to the same downstream effector is inhibited by agents which reduce surface cholesterol levels ( 29 ) . However , visualization of native raft domains has been difficult and , despite the use of a range of tech - niques , a consensus on size and density of rafts is presently lacking ( 30 – 33 ) . Surface labeling methods can also influ - ence the segregation of markers into raft domains or caveolae , as outlined below . These difficulties have hin - dered progress in understanding the dynamics of lipid raft domains and , particularly relevant to this review , their involvement in endocytic events . However , recent studies have implicated lipid raft domains in specific clathrin - independent endocytic processes . Caveolae in Endocytosis The endocytic function of caveolae still remains controver - sial half a century after their first description . If caveolae are an endocytic vehicle comparable to a clathrin - coated vesicle , then certain predictions can be made about caveolae endocytosis . Firstly , cargo molecules should be specifically concentrated in caveolae through specific sorting mechan - isms ( protein or lipid - based ) . Second , caveolae would be expected to be dynamic , with rapid replenishment of budded caveolae . Caveolin , as an integral membrane protein marker of caveolae , would be expected to cycle between the surface and internal compartments . Third , if caveolae are truly endocytic carriers analogous to clathrin - coated pits , then cargo molecules would not be efficiently internalized in cells lacking caveolae . In fact , very few studies have been able to show that any of these criteria are satisfied . Only a limited number of markers have been shown to be restricted to caveolae on the cell surface ( as judged using non - perturbing methods , such as on - section post - embed - ding EM labeling ) . The non - caveolar pool of a putative caveo - lar marker could be rapidly internalized by clathrin - coated pits , making this a significant factor in studying caveolae - dependent pathways . The subcellular distribution of caveo - lin would also be expected to provide insights into the endocytic pathway . Caveolin - 1 in most cultured cells is evi - dent on the cell surface and within the Golgi complex ( see Figure 1 ) with only partial colocalization with endosomal markers such as EEA1 ( Figure 1A – C ) , a marker of the early sorting endosome ( 34 ) . However , visualization of the intra - cellular itinerary of caveolin may be hampered by epitope masking in specific locations [ e . g . ( 35 ) ] . Caveolin tagged with fluorescent reporters appears to reveal more intracel - lular labeling but may not completely mimic the untagged protein ( caveolin proteins are smaller than the GFP ‘reporter’ ) . The association of caveolin - 1 with large structures which are apparently inside the cell but actually connected to the cell surface can also be misleading [ see Figure 2 and ( 36 ) ] . These considerations have made study of caveolae endocytosis difficult but , nevertheless , it is apparent that endocytosis via caveolae in most cells shows very different properties to that mediated by clathrin - coated pits . Endothelial cells , in which up to 30 % of the cell surface can be occupied by caveolae ( 1 ) , provide the most compel - ling case for constitutive caveolae endocytosis . Early studies suggested a role for caveolae in transendothelial transport of fluid and solutes across the endothelial barrier ( 37 ) , but failed to agree on the question of caveolae detachment ( or budding ) from the plasma membrane ( 38 ) . Analysis of capillary endothelial cells by ultrastructural techniques revealed single caveolae or clusters of inter - connected caveolae extending from either the lumenal plasma membrane ( facing the capillary lumen ) or the ablu - menal surface ( facing the interstitial space ) almost to the opposite cell front ( 38 ) . This prompted the proposition that interconnected caveolae may increase transendothelial permeability by forming channels from one side of the cell to the other ( 39 ) . Subsequent work demonstrated the GTP - dependent budding of pre - formed caveolae from silica - coated endothelial plasma membranes in an in vitro assay ( 40 ) and identified the presence of molecules known to mediate budding , docking and fusion of transport vesicles in purified preparations of endothelial caveolae ( 40 , 41 ) . The GTPase , dynamin , was also localized to the neck of the caveolae in endothelial cells by immunoEM ( 42 ) consistent with a role in regulating caveolae budding . If endothelial cells rely on caveolae for transendothelial transport , is this process dependent on caveolae ? The Caveolae / Lipid Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 725 availability of caveolin - 1 null mice lacking endothelial caveolae meant that this question could now be addressed experi - mentally . Caveolin - 1 null mice showed no difference in albumin levels in cerebrospinal fluid , suggesting that trans - endothelial albumin transport was normal ( 10 ) . However , other studies showed that endocytosis and transcytosis of albumin was significantly impaired in the endothelium of caveolin - 1 null mice ( 11 , 43 ) . BSA - gold perfused into the lungs of WT or knock - out ( KO ) mice was seen by transmis - sion electron microscopy on both the capillary lumenal surface and ablumenal surface of endothelial cells in WT lungs but was excluded from the ablumenal surface of KO endothelial cells ( 43 ) . Similarly , aortic ring segments from KO mice were unable to take up the labeled BSA at 37 (cid:1) C , while competent uptake competed by unlabeled BSA was observed in WT aortic rings ( 43 ) . Other cell types such as adipocytes and fibroblasts also have abundant caveolae but a role for these structures in constitutive endocytosis is less clear . Early electron micro - scopic studies revealed gold - conjugated cholera toxin ( CT ) bound to its glycosphingolipid receptor , GM1 , in uncoated invaginations of the PM ( 44 , 45 ) , later identified as caveolae ( 46 ) . After warming the cells , gold particles appeared in early endosomes , suggesting that the toxin is internalized by caveolae budding . Similar ultrastructural studies showed the GPI - anchored folate receptor in PM caveolae ( 27 ) . The finding that GPI - anchored proteins are greatly enriched along with caveolin in detergent - resistant raft fractions from polarized MDCK cells ( 47 ) and the inhibition of folate uptake in cells depleted of cholesterol ( 48 ) appeared to strengthen the possibility of caveolae - mediated endocytosis . However , other electron micro - scopic studies revealed that GPI - anchored proteins such as the folate receptor were not restricted to caveolae but were present over the whole plasma membrane and were only partitioned into caveolae upon clustering by anti - bodies ( 49 ) . These studies demonstrated the difficulties in analyzing the distribution of surface molecules by labeling with multivalent probes . In A431 cells , GPI - anchored alka - line phosphatase was only clustered into , and internalized by , caveolae after crosslinking ( 50 ) . As in previous studies , CT - binding subunit ( CTB ) - coated gold particles were shown to be highly concentrated in caveolae and excluded from coated pits when bound to GM1 on the cell surface . In contrast , labeling for the GM1 ganglioside on sections Figure1 : Caveolin - 1 and endo - somes in cultured human cells . Human primary skin fibroblasts labeled for endogenous caveolin - 1 ( A ) and EEA1 ( B , marker of the early sorting endosome ) show labeling of caveolin - 1 in the Golgi complex ( reticular labeling ) and at the cell surface whereas EEA1 is predominantly in distinct structures throughoutthecytoplasm . However , asmallnumberofpunctaconsistentlylabelforbothmarkers ( merge panel C ; arrowheads in insets which show higher magnification views from same cell ) . Panel D shows an A431 cell allowed to internalize 14nm cholera toxin - gold for 10min and then labeled for caveolin - 1 ( 10nm gold ; arrow - heads ) . The labeled structure has the classical morphology of the sorting endosome , and parallel labeling showed that these structures are positive for EEA1 [ see ( 34 ) ] . Bars A – C ; 500nm ; inset 100nm ; D , 100nm . Parton and Richards 726 Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 after low - temperature embedding showed only a slight concentration of GM1 in caveolae as compared to coated pits . These studies suggest that crosslinking of GM1 not only causes concentration in caveolae but causes exclu - sion from coated pits . Recent studies using fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) on living cells showed cholesterol - dependent clusters of GM1 ( putative lipid rafts ) labeled with multivalent CTB are also excluded from coated pits ( 51 ) . Cholera toxin has been extensively studied as a caveolar / raft marker and analysis of the toxic entry pathway is providing new insights into a novel entry pathway . Cholera Toxin Entry Cholera toxin belongs to a family of structurally homo - logous hexameric AB 5 bacterial toxins which includes Escherichia coli ( E . coli ) heat - labile enterotoxin type I ( LTI ) , Shiga toxin and Verotoxin ( also called Shiga - like toxin ) ( 52 – 54 ) . These toxins consist of an enzymatic A ( active ) subunit anchored within the central pore of a pen - tamer of B ( binding ) subunits , each of which binds one or more molecules of the toxin receptor . The B subunits of LTI and CT both bind to the same glycolipid receptor , the GM1 ganglioside ( 55 ) , while Shiga toxin and Verotoxin share a different glycolipid receptor , globotriaosyl cera - mide ( Gb3 ) ( 52 , 56 ) . All four toxins must reach the endo - plasmic reticulum ( ER ) from where their A subunits presumably translocate into the cytosol to mediate toxicity ( 57 – 59 ) . Early studies showing labeling of caveolae with CT - gold ( 44 ) have favored the frequent use of this toxin as a marker for caveolae . However , cells that do not express caveolin and have no morphological caveolae are also sensitive to CT internalization and toxicity ( 60 ) . Thus caveolae are clearly not essential for cholera toxin entry . On the other hand , the raft - dependence of internalization of CT leading to toxicity has been clearly demonstrated ( 60 , 61 ) . The latter study showed that CT bound to GM1 in polarized human intestinal epithelial cells was present in rafts , as determined biochemically , while the closely related E . coli heat - labile type II enterotoxin ( LTIIb ) which preferentially binds the ganglioside , GD1a , was found in detergent - soluble fractions ( 61 ) . Although the enzymatic A subunits of both toxins are homologous , only the raft - associated toxin ( i . e . CT ) in these cells was able to elicit a cAMP - dependent Cl – - secretory response . Construction of a chimeric toxin composed of the enzymatic ( A ) subunit of CT and the B subunit of LTIIb demonstrated loss of the toxic response when CT - A was bound to GD1a . Reciprocally , a competent secretory response was initiated by the opposite chimera , composed of CT - B subunit and the enzymatic subunit of LTIIb , which was shown to be raft - associated ( 61 ) . It is possible that CT localization in rafts at the PM causes activation of crucial signaling events leading to toxin endo - cytosis or it allows the toxin to follow a distinct post - endocytic trafficking pathway leading to toxicity . After receptor - binding and internalization , CT - gold was seen by electron microscopy in an early endosomal com - partment also positive for ligands internalized by clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( 44 , 45 ) . This led to the proposition that the two endocytic pathways converge at the level of the early endosome . More recently , and consistent with those earlier findings , CT - gold - containing endosomes were shown to be EEA1 - positive sorting endosomes [ ( 34 ) ; also see Figure 1 for caveolin - 1 and EEA1 / CTB - gold distribu - tions ] . As CTB - gold is concentrated within caveolae to a greater extent than is GM1 ( 46 ) , CTB - gold can be used as a marker of caveolae endocytosis , but it may not be repre - sentative of the native toxin , and certainly not of the receptor , GM1 . In fact , consistent with the presence of GM1 in clathrin - coated pits , substantial evidence exists for clathrin - mediated internalization of the native toxin in add - ition to the non - clathrin raft - dependent pathway in a variety of cell types ( 60 , 62 – 64 ) . However , unlike raft - dependent CT uptake ( 61 ) , the productive toxicity of toxin molecules internalized by the clathrin route remains to be determined [ see ( 65 ) ] . After internalization , the toxin reaches the Golgi complex , from where it traffics to the ER by a coatomer ( COP ) Figure2 : Surface - connected caveolae - covered domains in adipocytes . Low magnification image of a 3T3 - L1 adipocyte which was surface - labeled at 4 (cid:1) C with CTB - peroxidase . The labeled structures ( termed ‘caves’ , indicated by arrowheads ) are surface - connected structures which have numerous caveolae , as seen in the inset ( higher magnification view of a single cave ) , and some clathrin - coated pits [ see ( 36 ) ] . By light microscopy , the caves appear as intracellular caveolin - 1 labeled ring - like structures . Note the proximity to lipid bodies ( L ) . N , nucleus . Bars , main panel 500nm ; inset 200nm . Caveolae / Lipid Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 727 I - mediated retrograde pathway sensitive to brefeldin A and microinjection of antibodies to the coatomer component , b - COP ( 66 , 67 ) . This transport step is facilitated by ( although it is not dependent on ) a KDEL retrieval motif in the A subunit of the toxin ( 57 ) . Retrograde transport of the closely related LTI is also facilitated by an ( R ) DEL sequence ( 57 ) ; however , both Shiga toxin and Verotoxin use a KDEL - independent transport route ( 67 , 68 ) which is COPI - independent and Rab6 - dependent ( 67 ) . Once in the ER , redox - dependent unfolding of CT by protein disulfide isomerase ( 69 ) and reduction of the A subunit results in release of the active peptide CTA 1 which translocates into the cytosol via the sec61 protein translocation complex ( 70 ) . Once in the cytosol , ADP - ribosylation of the a - subunit of heterotrimeric G proteins by the toxin results in persist - ent activation of adenylate cyclase and an elevation of cAMP in the cell ( 71 ) . This pathway , from PM rafts to the ER and then cytosol , may be shared with other agents such as the virus , SV40 . Simian Virus 40 Simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) , first known as vacuolating virus ( 72 ) , is a member of the papova ( pa pilloma , po lyoma and va cuolating virus ) family of DNA tumor viruses ( 73 ) . The primary receptor of SV40 on the cell surface has been proposed to be the Major Histocompatibility Complex ( MHC ) class I molecule as specific antibodies to this pro - tein inhibit virus adsorption to cell surfaces and subse - quent internalization ( 74 , 75 ) . After cell - surface binding , SV40 virions were observed by EM to be enclosed in close - fitting noncoated invaginations of the plasma mem - brane ( 76 ) . These membranes were later shown to be caveolin - rich caveolae , proposed to form around the virus to mediate its internalization ( 75 ) . At later times in the infection process the SV40 virions accumulate in a smooth - membraned subdomain of the ER [ ( 76 ) ; see Figure 3 ] . The virus is then proposed to pass into the cytosol , by an unknown mechanism , before entering the nucleus via the nuclear pores ( 77 ) . The exact route taken by SV40 from cell - surface caveolae to the ER has until recently remained a mystery due to difficulties in identifying any other intermediates in the infection process . Real - time video microscopy observa - tions have now provided exciting new insights into this process . SV40 was shown to be co - internalized with fluor - escently tagged caveolin - 1 ( caveolin - 1 - GFP ) into a nonclas - sical endosomal compartment . The ‘caveosome’ , as it was termed , was shown to be negative for classical early endo - somal markers such as EEA1 and transferrin and , more - over , was not acidic but of neutral pH . The caveosome was also clearly shown to be an internal compartment rather than a surface - connected domain of the plasma membrane by making use of the pH - sensitivity of fluores - cein - labeled virus . This is an important consideration for other morphological studies of caveolae - associated endo - cytic pathways , as large caveolin - 1 - labeled structures con - nected to the cell surface are observed in many cultured cells [ e . g . see Figure 2 and ( 36 , 46 ) ] . Such structures , com - prising a vacuolar domain studded with apparently fusing caveolae , can be assumed to be internal structures in the absence of surface markers . After delivery of SV40 and caveolin - 1 - GFP to the caveosome , the virus was sorted away from caveolin - 1 - GFP and was transported to the perinuclear region in a microtubule - dependent fashion ( 78 ) . Dual immunolabeling for Golgi markers revealed no apparent colocalization with the virus - containing compart - ment . Instead , the virus was seen to colocalize with syn - taxin 17 , a marker for the smooth ER . This led the authors to propose a direct route for virus transport from the caveosome to the ER . A number of features of the pathway are worth noting . Firstly , as discussed below , endocytosis was a stimulated process triggered by the virus ; in control cells caveolae were extremely static . This is consistent with detailed observations of caveolae using caveolin - 1 - GFP ( 79 ) . Fluid phase markers could not be detected within the caveo - some , consistent with caveolae transport to the compart - ment being a low - capacity selective pathway . Secondly , the study provided the first description of a novel organelle which may be of great importance in cellular function . It also raises a number of new questions . Can caveolae only Figure3 : SV40 accumulates in domains of the RER . Image of the perinuclear area of a Vero cell incubated with SV40 for 24h . Electron dense virions ( e . g . indicated by arrowheads ) accumulate in smooth - surfaced domains of the ER after transport from surface caveolae via caveosomes . From the ER , virions pass to the cytosol and then nucleus via as yet uncharacterized mechanisms . Bar , 500nm . Parton and Richards 728 Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 fuse with the caveosome or can they also fuse with the conventional sorting endosome ( EEA1 - positive ) , as sug - gested by studies with CT - gold ? If so , what dictates traffic to the two compartments ? A related question concerns the relationship between the caveosome and the conven - tional endocytic pathway . Caveolin - 1 is detected in some elements of the sorting early endosome ( Figure 1 ) as well as in recycling endosomes ( 80 ) . Are there membrane - trafficking pathways between the caveosome and these ‘conventional’ endocytic compartments ? To address some of these issues , a recent study com - pared the SV40 trafficking pathway with the trafficking itinerary of CTB ( 81 ) . CV1 , COS7 and NRK cells expressing caveolin - 1 - GFP were allowed to bind and internalize fluorescently labeled CTB . The toxin was found to be internalized by either of two pathways ; one involving clathrin - independent , filipin - sensitive entry to caveolin - 1 - GFP - positive endosomes [ the ‘caveosomes’ of ( 78 ) ] , and the other route delivering the toxin to EEA1 - positive early endosomes via clathrin - dependent uptake ( 63 , 81 ) . Uptake of GPI - anchored proteins , GPI - GFP and endogenous CD59 [ which had previously been shown to be co - internalized with CT by the clathrin - independent pathway ( 63 ) ] , also resulted in delivery to caveolin - 1 - positive structures but not to transferrin - positive endosomes in these cells ( 81 ) . Since CT is internalized by both clathrin - dependent and - independent pathways , in order to selectively observe the clathrin - independent route taken by the toxin , cells were transfected with a dominant - negative truncation mutant of the clathrin adaptor protein , AP180 , which specifically inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Transferrin uptake was efficiently blocked in these cells , as was CT uptake to EEA1 - positive endosomes . The toxin accumulated almost exclusively in caveolin - 1 - positive endosomes and was still efficiently internalized to the Golgi ( 81 ) . The two studies show significant differences . For example , the internal - ization of dextran to caveosomes in the latter studies suggests a constitutive fluid phase pathway to the caveosome . A clathrin - independent , dynamin - mediated endocytic path - way similar to that taken by CT was also shown to mediate internalization of fluorescent analogues of glycosphingo - lipids , such as lactosylceramide and globoside ( 82 ) . Endo - cytosis of these markers by human primary fibroblasts was found to be insensitive to inhibitors of the clathrin pathway ( chlorpromazine and dominant negative eps15 ) but was greatly inhibited by cholesterol depletion ( using nystatin ) , inhibition of tyrosine kinases ( by genistein ) and a dominant negative dynamin II mutant ( K44A ) . An absence of colocalization of the glycosphingolipid markers with markers internalized by the clathrin pathway was also observed at early times , but these markers showed a striking colocalization with transfected caveolin con - structs . Subsequently the markers were observed in transferrin - containing endosomes suggesting that caveolin - containing carriers , presumably budded caveolae , fuse with the conventional sorting endosome ( 83 ) . This system , in which the lipid probes are internalized very efficiently via a clathrin - independent mechanism , should provide import - ant new insights into this raft - dependent entry pathway . Many similarities between the SV40 infectious pathway and the endocytic itinerary of CT leading to intoxication are apparent . Both markers are internalized within caveolae / rafts and are targeted to the ER . In addition , translocation of both the virus and the toxin out of the ER lumen into the cytosol appears to be necessary for productive infection and toxicity , respectively . In addition , both markers have now been shown to be internalized by a clathrin - independ - ent pathway to the same caveosome compartment , at least in cells expressing caveolin - 1 - GFP constructs ( 81 ) . These observations strongly suggest that SV40 infectious entry may occur by the same intracellular trafficking route as CT toxic entry . However , the SV40 entry pathway appears to differ from that of CT with respect to the involvement of the Golgi complex . Although CT is readily visualized within the Golgi complex by light or electron microscopy , SV40 virions are rarely observed in the Golgi complex . Recent studies ( 84 , 85 ) have found SV40 infec - tion to be sensitive to the Golgi - disrupting drug , brefeldin A ( BFA ) , as is the transport of CT from the PM to the ER . Other inhibitors of COPI - dependent retrograde transport previously shown to inhibit Golgi - to - ER delivery of CT ( such as the GTP - restricted mutant of Arf1 ( Arf1Q71 L ) and microinjected antibodies to the coatomer subunit b - COP ) also elicit a potent inhibition of productive infection by the virus ( 84 ) . The inhibition , by these agents , of Arf1 / COPI - dependent trafficking steps other than retrograde trans - port from the Golgi to ER cannot be excluded , however , and precise identification of the affected step in viral infec - tion is now required . Interestingly , membrane - permeant TAT fusion proteins have recently been shown to follow a similar raft - dependent internalization step before BFA - sensitive intracellular trafficking ( 86 ) . Like both CT and SV40 , these agents also translocate to the cytosol , suggesting that this trafficking pathway may be important for the agent to reach the correct environment to allow translocation . Bacterial Pathogens Certain bacterial pathogens have also been shown to exploit caveolin - 1 - rich membranes for infectious entry into cells . FimH - positive strains of E . coli evade the immune system by infecting macrophages ( 87 ) and mast cells ( 88 ) through interaction of their cell - surface FimH molecules with the GPI - anchored protein , CD48 , on the host cell membrane . This results in receptor clustering and enclosure of the bacterium in a tight - fitting caveolin - positive cell - surface - derived membrane compartment which displays all the characteristics of caveolar membranes , being enriched in GM1 and cholesterol ( by immunoelectron Caveolae / Lipid Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 729 microscopy ) and readily isolated in a detergent - resistant , low - density membrane fraction from infected cells ( 88 ) . While the bacterium - containing membrane structure is clearly not a caveola according to the classical morpho - logical definition of ‘small , flask - shaped pits’ , the bio - chemical composition of both membrane compartments appears to be similar . The caveolin - rich bacterium - contain - ing compartment is non - degradative , unlike the loose - fitting phagosomal compartment into which antibody - coated ( opsonized ) bacteria are internalized through interaction with Fc receptors on the immune cell PM ( 87 , 88 ) . A similar pathway has now been described for non - degradative entry of another bacterial pathogen , Chlamydia trachomatis , into both epithelial cells and macrophages ( 89 ) . Common Features of Caveolae and Raft Pathways ; Stimulated Internalization of Caveolae While it is still difficult to obtain a consensus view on caveolae internalization pathways , some common features of caveolae - mediated endocytosis are now emerging . Earlier studies in A431 cells found that antibody - clustered GPI - anchored proteins could be internalized by treatment with the general phosphatase inhibitor , okadaic acid , which was found to cause surface - connected caveo - lae to bud into the cell en masse ( 50 ) . Staurosporine , a general kinase inhibitor , and ( to a lesser extent ) genistein , a tyrosine kinase inhibitor , blocked the okadaic acid - induced internalization of clustered alkaline phosphatase , as did the actin depolymerizing agent , cytochalasin D ( 50 ) . Thus , the internalization of caveolae was proposed to be regulated by phosphorylation and to require the involve - ment of the actin cytoskeleton . These early observations are consistent with recent real - time studies of caveolin - 1 - GFP in control and okadaic acid - treated cells ( 79 ) and of SV40 entry ( 90 ) . Exposure of cells to SV40 also leads to activation of a tyrosine kinase signaling pathway . This results in both recruitment of dynamin to virus binding sites on the PM , and cortical actin rearrangement and recruitment to these sites , to mediate budding of virus - containing caveolae into the cell . Thus dynamin may not be constitutively associated with the caveolae of non - endothelial cells , consistent with immunoEM observations in various cell types ( R . Parton , unpublished observations ) . Treatment of cells with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor , gen - istein , abolished both the recruitment of dynamin and the rearrangement and recruitment of actin to virus binding sites on the membrane , resulting in a block in viral entry ( 90 ) . Actin depolymerization ( using Latrunculin A ) and actin stabilization ( using jasplakinolide ) also inhibited virus entry . In contrast , an increase in binding and uptake of the virus was elicited by the tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor , vana - date , and by okadaic acid . Immunolabeling infected cells with a phosphotyrosine antibody confirmed the tyrosine phosphorylation of some component of virus - containing caveolae . Thus , binding of SV40 to MHC class I molecules in the membrane appeared to simulate the effects of crosslinking alkaline phosphatase , resulting in activation of a tyrosine kinase signaling pathway , which led to dynamin and actin recruitment and caveolae budding . Tyrosine kinase activity is now also implicated in CT internalization to the Golgi , since genistein inhibits this process ( 91 ) . It remains to be determined whether the same mechanisms mediate FimH - dependent entry of E . coli within caveolin - 1 - positive membranes of macrophages and mast cells after cell - surface binding and clustering of the GPI - anchored FimH receptor , CD48 ( 87 , 88 ) . Recent years have seen the identification of other caveo - lae markers which follow an endocytic route closely resembling that of SV40 and CT . One such molecule is the autocrine motility factor receptor ( AMF - R ) . By electron microscopy , this seven transmembrane domain receptor is localized to PM caveolae and membranes of the smooth ER at steady state ( 92 ) . Endocytosis of AMF - R leading to ER delivery is sensitive to cyclodextrin treatment and the dynamin mutant , K44A , as well as inhibition of tyrosine kinases by genistein ( 93 ) . However , unlike CT and SV40 , AMF - R arrival to the ER is unaffected by both brefeldin A and nocodazole treatments ( 91 ) , arguing against Golgi involvement in ER targeting of the receptor . Tyrosine phosphorylation has also been implicated in the ligand - induced internalization of G protein - coupled recep - tors and receptor tyrosine kinases by dynamin - mediated endocytosis ( 94 , 95 ) . While these events are clathrin - dependent , they display characteristics distinct from the constitutive clathrin - mediated uptake of nutrients such as transferrin . Agonist - stimulation of the EGF receptor ( a receptor tyrosine kinase ) and of b 2 - adrenergic receptor ( a G - protein coupled receptor ) results in activation of the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase , c - src , and phosphorylation of dynamin by this enzyme ( 94 – 96 ) . Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation was shown to be critical for dynamin self - assembly ( 94 ) and resulting stimulated endocytosis of these agonist receptors ( 94 , 95 ) . Interestingly , mutation of key tyrosine residues in dynamin , which are the phosphoryl - ation targets of c - src , only inhibits agonist - induced endo - cytic events ( like EGF receptor and b 2 adrenergic receptor internalization ) and appears not to perturb constitutive clathrin - dependent uptake of nutrient molecules like trans - ferrin ( 97 ) . The induced and constitutive pathways differ also in temperature sensitivity , since stimulated uptake of b 2 adrenergic receptor was greatly inhibited at 16 (cid:1) C , while transferrin receptor uptake was little affected ( 98 ) . It is possible then that the same molecular mechanisms which regulate the agonist - induced clathrin - mediated inter - nalization of hormones / growth factors are also in play for the regulation of caveolae - mediated endocytosis of SV40 and antibody - crosslinked GPI - anchored proteins . The receptor - mediated uptake and transcytosis of albumin in endothelial cells has also been suggested to be Parton and Richards 730 Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 a stimulated process . Here also , a requirement for tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by Src kinase activation is sug - gested ( 99 ) . Albumin uptake in endothelial cells depends on the albumin receptor , gp60 , and antibodies to this receptor competitively inhibit specific binding of albumin to the endothelial cell surface ( 100 ) . Ligand binding of gp60 , which has been localized to caveolar membranes ( 40 , 101 ) , results in physical association of the receptor with caveolin followed by activation of albumin internalization and trans - cytosis ( 99 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of both caveolin - 1 and gp60 was also found to be induced upon albumin binding of gp60 ( 102 ) , and expression of dominant - negative Src kinase inhibited gp60 - stimulated albumin uptake ( 99 ) . These obser - vations and the well - known enrichment of Src family kinases in rafts and caveolae make these enzymes likely candidates for the tyrosine phosphorylation events mediat - ing SV40 uptake in non - endothelial cells . Stimulated Internalization of Rafts Are tyrosine phosphorylation and recruitment of dynamin and actin features only of caveolae - budding or can the same signaling pathways induce the budding of non - caveo - lar rafts ? Antibody - induced clustering of the GPI - anchored protein , CD59 , or of CT - bound GM1 molecules in raft domains of human lymphocytes ( which neither express caveolin - 1 nor display cell - surface caveolae ) has also been shown to result in activation of the Src family kinases , Lck and Fyn , and in localized protein tyrosine phosphorylation ( 103 ) . Again , accumulation of F - actin was observed in CD59 clusters and was inhibited by a specific inhibitor of Src kinases , PP2 . By contrast , antibody crosslinking of a non - raft protein , the transferrin receptor , produced clusters which were not enriched in Src kinases or tyrosine phos - phorylated proteins and did not accumulate F - actin . Ligand stimulation of the Interleukin - 2 ( IL2 ) receptor in lymphocytes also results in partitioning of this molecule into Triton X - 100 - insoluble lipid rafts , a phenomenon imitated by antibody crosslinking of the receptor at the cell surface ( 104 ) . Subsequent internalization of the receptor occurred by a clathrin - independent pathway ( unaffected by expression of a dominant - negative mutant of Eps15 ) , which was , how - ever , inhibited by the dynamin mutant , K44A ( 104 ) . Internal - ization was also dependent on activation of the Rho family GTPases , Rac1 and Rho A , which may play a role in actin rearrangement and recruitment ( 105 ) . Thus , it appears that the budding of non - caveolar rafts in caveolin - deficient cells occurs by very similar mechanisms to those described for caveolae - budding in caveolin expressors . What then is the role of caveolin itself in the endocytic process ? What Is the Role of Caveolin in Endocytosis ? The availability of cells lacking caveolin - 1 and caveolae provides an excellent opportunity to dissect the role of caveolin , and the caveolar invagination , in specific endo - cytic events ( 21 ) . If the caveolar invagination is required for internalization , then endocytosis should depend on caveolin - 1 , as shown in endothelial cells for albumin trans - endothelial transport ( 43 ) . However , in only a limited num - ber of cases has this been demonstrated . SV40 currently provides one of the best markers for endo - cytosis by caveolae . Caveolin mutants inhibit SV40 infec - tion ( 29 ) , but this alone does not prove a dependence on caveolae per se [ e . g . the caveolin truncation mutant , cavDGV , generally perturbs lipid raft domains ( 29 ) ] . In fact , recent studies suggest that SV40 infection proceeds efficiently even in the complete absence of caveolae although , unlike internalization in caveolae - containing cells , in caveolin - null cells the entry process is dynamin - independent ( Damm , E , Pelkmans , L . and Helenius , A . , manuscript in preparation ) . Our recent studies also show that CT internalization , via a clathrin - independent pathway , occurs normally in caveolin - 1 null embryonic fibroblasts which completely lack caveolae ( Kirkham , M . and Parton , R . G . , unpublished results ) . Although these findings contra - dict a recent report ( 106 ) , they are consistent with the reported sensitivity of other caveolae - deficient cells to cholera toxin ( 60 ) and with studies employing more acute means of down - regulating caveolin - 1 expression ( 81 ) . In the latter study , the internalization of CT into SV40 - contain - ing caveosomes occurred in cells cotransfected with an AP180 truncation mutant ( which abolished clathrin - mediated uptake ) and caveolin - 1 specific duplex RNA oligonucleotides which reduced caveolin - 1 expression to background levels ( 81 ) . Thus , in this system , uptake of CT was supported equally well by a non - caveolar , clathrin - independent pathway as by caveolin - 1 - positive membranes . Reduction of caveolin - 1 levels has proven either to have no effect on , or to accelerate , raft - mediated uptake of other markers of caveolae such as the AMF - R . The function of caveolin in endocytic uptake of AMF - R was examined in ras - and abl - transformed NIH3T3 cells which , as a result of transformation , expressed reduced levels of caveolin - 1 and fewer caveolae ( 93 ) . Surprisingly , instead of an inhib - ition of cyclodextrin - sensitive AMF - R internalization to the ER , an increase was observed in the transformed cells . Furthermore , overexpression of caveolin - 1 in these cells decreased the rate of internalization to that in untrans - formed cells ( 93 ) . These findings point to a role for caveolin - 1 , not as part of the essential machinery mediating raft / caveolae - dependent uptake but rather as a negative regulator of raft - mediated uptake . The presence of caveo - lin in endocytic raft domains may stabilize these structures at the PM and reduce their budding frequency , in keeping with the findings of Thomsen et al . that cell - surface caveolae are largely static ( 79 ) . A similar observation was reported in endothelial cells where overexpression of caveolin - 1 inhibited receptor - mediated uptake of albumin ( 99 ) . In this case , sequestration of G a i by overexpressed caveolin - 1 Caveolae / Lipid Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 731 and the resulting impedance of signal activation was proposed to be the mechanism of inhibition ( 99 ) . Taken together , these studies support a model of raft - mediated endocytosis that is not dependent on the presence of caveolin - 1 in raft microdomains , but instead may be negatively regulated by this cholesterol - binding integral membrane protein . Different Types of Rafts Mediate Distinct Endocytic Events The examination of many raft - dependent pathways in dif - ferent cell types ( summarized in Table 1 ) has uncovered a common theme of Src kinase activation and tyrosine phos - phorylation , leading to actin rearrangement and recruit - ment and dynamin recruitment and activity . However , not all raft - dependent pathways conform to this descrip - tion . A novel raft - dependent internalization pathway has recently been described which is clearly distinct from the pathways discussed above . This is a micropinocytic path - way specific for unclustered GPI - anchored proteins , which is not dependent on ligand binding and is also independent of both clathrin and dynamin function ( 107 ) . GPI - anchored GFP ( GFP - GPI ) and native GPI - anchored proteins like the folate receptor and decay accelerating factor were all found to be in a compartment distinct from transferrin - containing classical sorting endosomes after 2 min at 37 (cid:1) C . This compartment was acidic and did not label for endogenous caveolin - 1 or for transiently transfected caveolin - 1 - GFP , unlike the ‘caveosome’ compartment to which both SV40 and CT are internalized [ see ( 78 , 81 ) ] . However , the fluid - phase marker , dextran , was internal - ized to the ‘GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endo - somal compartments’ ( GEECs ) and together with the folate receptor was found to colocalize with transferrin in recycling endosomes after 20min . Clathrin - and dynamin - independence of internalization to GEECs was demonstrated using dominant - negative mutants of Eps15 and dynamin 2 , respectively , and RhoA and Rac1 dominant - negative mutants [ which inhibit raft - dependent IL2 receptor uptake ( 104 ) ] were also shown to have no effect on internalization to GEECs . On the other hand , internalization to this com - partment was inhibited by a dominant - negative mutant of another Rho family GTPase , cdc42 , which caused the redirection of GPI - anchored proteins into sorting endo - somes . The lack of colocalization of fluorescent dextran and the folate receptor with GFP - rab5 , GFP - rab4 or endo - genous rab7 , and the failure of rab5 dominant - negative or dominant active mutants to perturb GEECs , further con - firms that this compartment is not a classical endosomal compartment . Neither is this a non - specific pathway for molecules excluded from the clathrin internalization path - way , since simply removing clathrin - targeting sequences from the transferrin receptor was not sufficient to direct this molecule into GEECs . On the other hand , the pres - ence of a GPI anchor was found to be essential for targeting to GEECs and substitution of a transmembrane domain for this lipid anchor resulted in exclusion from this compartment . The existence of two distinct raft - mediated internalization pathways which are differentially regulated and result in delivery to distinct subcellular compartments prompts questions as to what factors distinguish these pathways and the raft domains involved . Could it be that rafts of differing protein ( and lipid ? ) composition selectively medi - ate internalization of different sets of cargo to preferred subcellular destinations ? Alternatively , the cargo itself may dictate the regulation of a raft - mediated endocytic event ( e . g . through interaction of sequences in raft - associated receptors with specific regulatory molecules ) to determine subcellular targeting . Certainly , different species of lipid raft domains , distinguished by their associated proteins , are known to be present in cellular membranes ( 108 ) . Conclusions It is now clear that a number of clathrin - independent endo - cytic pathways exist in mammalian cells , but the relation - ships between the different pathways are still unclear . A recent review proposes that internalization via caveolae or internalization via lipid rafts are fundamentally similar pro - cesses ( 109 ) . In this model caveolin / caveolae would not be required for endocytosis but would stabilize a potentially endocytic raft domain and decrease endocytosis . However , caveolae and caveolin can clearly be internalized in response to specific stimuli , as shown with SV40 ( 78 ) or by treatment with okadaic acid ( 79 ) . To combine these observations , it might be envisaged that caveolin - 1 normally acts as a negative regulatory mechanism preventing internalization via raft domains . However , to allow caveolae budding in response to a specific stimulus ( e . g . SV40 binding ) , the inhibitory effect of caveolin would have to be overcome , presumably through phosphorylation of caveolin and / or associated proteins and the recruitment of other proteins such as dynamin . In caveolin - 1 null cells these constraints would be absent . It is certainly evident that in most sys - tems the caveolar invagination is not required for endo - cytosis , raising the question of what other mechanisms are involved in generating the endocytic carrier . Is it a property of the lipid raft domain itself and , if so , how is the process regulated in the absence of caveolin ? Further work should elucidate the properties of the caveo - some , its role in normal cellular function , and how this compartment is linked to the better - characterized endo - cytic compartments in the clathrin pathway which are involved in sorting , recycling , and degradation of internal - ized components . Recent studies have suggested that the caveosome might also play a role in receptor degradation . Internalization of transforming growth factor ( TGF ) b recep - tors was shown to occur by two distinct endocytic Parton and Richards 732 Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 T a b l e1 : S u mm a r y o f k no w n li p i d r a ft / cav eo l a e - dependen t endo cy t i c p a t h w ays E ndo cy t i c C av eo l a e / r a ft - dependen c e D y n a m i n S r c k i n as e / A c t i n dependen c e D e li v e r y t o : m a r k e r / p a t h w ay de t e r m i ned b y : dependen c e t y r o s i ne k i n as e - dependen c e C ho l e r a t o x i n F ili p i n - s en s i t i v i t y o f Y e s Y e s – C l ass i ca l e a r l y endo s o m e s i n t e r n a li z a t i on ( 60 ) – d y n a m i n I ( K 44 A ) ( 42 ) E ndo cy t o s i s t o t he G o l g i a nd cav eo s o m e s ( 44 , 45 , 81 ) . – m i c r o i n j e c t i on o f i nh i b i t ed b y gen i s t e i n ( 91 ) E v en t u a ll y t o G o l g i a nd a n t i - d y n a m i n ( 111 ) ( b y C O P I - dependen t r e tr og r a de tr a n s po rt ) t o E R ( 66 , 67 ) A b - c l u s t e r ed E M l o ca li z a t i on i n – Y e s Y e s C l ass i ca l endo s o m e s G P I - a n c ho r e d cav eo l a e ( 50 ) – endo cy t o s i s – i nh i b i t ed b y ( 50 ) p r o t e i n ( a l ka li ne s en s i t i v e t o gen i s t e i n , cy t o c h a l as i n D pho s ph a t as e ) s t i m u l a t ed b y o ka d a i c ( 50 ) ac i d ( 50 ) S i m i a n V i r u s 40 N ys t a t i n - s en s i t i v i t y ( 112 ) Y e s Y e s Y e s C av eo li n - 1 - G F P ( SV 40 ) o r N ys t a t i n / p r oge s t e r on e – d y n a m i n II – gen i s t e i n o r – l a tr un c u li n A o r po s i t i v e cav eo s o m e ( 78 ) . s en s i t i v i t y ( 90 ) o f ( K 44 A ) ( 90 ) s t a u r o s po r i n j as p l ak i no li de E v en t u a ll y t o i n t e r n a li z a t i on E M i nh i b i t i n f e c t i on i nh i b i t i n f e c t i on E R ( 76 , 78 ) l o ca li z a t i on i n ( 90 ) ( 90 ) cav eo l a e ( 75 ) . I n f e c t i on i s un a ff e c t ed b y do m i n a n t neg a t i v e ep s 15 ( 90 ) A l bu m i n P r e s en c e o f gp60 r e c ep t o r – Y e s – – i n endo t he li a l gp60 - ac t i va t ed up t ak e budded cav eo l a e a nd tr a n scy t o s i s fr ac t i on ( 40 ) . s en s i t i v e t o F ili p i n s en s i t i v i t y o f he r b i m yc i n A a nd i n t e r n a li z a t i on ( 99 ) . gen i s t e i n ( 102 ) C o - i mm unop r e c i p i t a t i on o f gp60 w i t h cav eo li n - 1 i n a l bu m i n - s t i m u l a t ed c e ll s ( 99 ) Caveolae / Lipid Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 733 A M F - R Lo ca li z a t i on i n cav eo l a e Y e s Y e s – E R ( 91 - 93 ) b y E M ( 92 ) . – d y n a m i n ( K 44 A ) G en i s t e i n i nh i b i t s I n t e r n a li z a t i on t o t he E R i nh i b i t s i n t e r n a li z a t i on i n t e r n a li z a t i on t o i s s en s i t i v e t o m e t h y l - b - t o t he E R ( 93 ) t he E R ( 91 ) cyc l ode x tr i n ( 92 ) I L2 - R T r i t on X - 100 - i n s o l ub ili t y Y e s – P o ss i b l y – o f I L2 - R ( 104 ) . – d y n a m i n I ( K 44 A ) – do m i n a n t neg a t i v e A b s en c e fr o m c l a t h r i n - i nh i b i t s i n t e r n a li z a t i on m u t a n t s o f R ho A a nd c o a t ed p r o f il e s a t P M . ( 104 ) R ac 1 i nh i b i t I n t e r n a li z a t i on i n s en s i t i v e i n t e r n a li z a t i on t o i nh i b i t o r y ep s 15 ( 104 ) m u t a n t s ( 104 ) U n c l u s t e r ed T r i t on X - 100 - i n s o l ub ili t y N o – P o ss i b l y G P I - a n c ho r ed G P I - a n c ho r e d ( 113 ) . – d y n a m i n II ( K 44 A ) – i n t e r n a li z a t i on i s p r o t e i n en r i c hed e a r l y p r o t e i n s I n t e r n a li z a t i on un a ff e c t ed h a d no e ff e c t on i nh i b i t ed b y do m i n a n t endo s o m a l c o m p a rt m en t ( Fo l a t e - R , b y K þ - dep l e t i on o r i n t e r n a li z a t i on t o neg a t i v e m u t a n t o f c d c 42 ( G EE C ) bu t no t C D 59 , D A F , do m i n a n t neg a t i v e G EE C s ( 107 ) bu t no t do m i n a n t neg a t i v e cav eo li n - 1 - G F P po s i t i v e G F P - G P I ) ep s 15 ( 107 ) m u t a n t s o f R ac 1 a nd cav eo s o m e s R ho A ( 107 ) ( 107 ) G l yc o s ph i ng o - N ys t a t i n - s en s i t i v i t y o f Y e s Y e s – C av eo li n - 1 - li p i d s i n t e r n a li z a t i on ( 82 ) . – i n t e r n a li z a t i on – i n t e r n a li z a t i on G F P - po s i t i v e s tr u c t u r e s ( L ac t o sy l c e r a m i de I n t e r n a li z a t i on no t i nh i b i t ed b y d y n a m i n i nh i b i t ed b y ( 82 ) a nd t hen t o tr a n s f e rr i n a nd g l obo s i d e ) i nh i b i t ed b y c h l o r p r o m a z i ne , II ( K 44 A ) ( 82 ) gen i s t e i n ( 82 ) po s i t i v e endo s o m e s ( 83 ) K þ - dep l e t i on o r be f o r e R a b7 - , R a b9 - i nh i b i t o r y m u t a n t s o f a nd P I 3 K i n as e - dependen t ep s 15 ( 82 ) tr a n s po rt t o G o l g i c o m p l e x ( 114 ) A bb r e v i a t i on s : A b , a n t i bod y ; D A F , de cay acc e l e r a t i ng f ac t o r . Parton and Richards 734 Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 pathways , one mediated by clathrin - coated pits and leading to productive signaling in EEA1 - positive endosomes , and a second involving caveolin - 1 - positive vesicles and leading to Smad7 – Smurf2 - dependent receptor degradation ( 110 ) . The data suggest that internalization via the clathrin - coated pit pathway sequesters receptors to the signaling pathway , so avoiding degradation in the lipid raft - dependent , caveolin - stimulated pathway . Precise characterization of the com - partments and mechanisms involved in TGF b receptor degradation will be of considerable interest . The complexity of lipid raft - dependent pathways appears to be increasing as new studies with specific markers reveal pathways with differing properties . However , com - mon themes are emerging , and new studies should be able to establish whether the underlying mechanisms involved in apparently different pathways are actually the same . It is clear that the molecular mechanisms involved will be quite distinct from those characterized so thor - oughly for clathrin - coated pit - mediated internalization , and understanding the properties of specific lipids and lipid microdomains will be of great importance . Dissection of the molecular basis for these novel endocytic mechanisms now presents an exciting challenge for the cell biologist . Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Alpha Yap , John Hancock , and Matthew Kirkham for comments on the manuscript and Ari Helenius and Lucas Pelkmans for communicating unpublished data prior to publication . References 1 . Palade GE . Fine structure of blood capillaries . J Appl Phys 1953 ; 24 : 1424 . 2 . Yamada E . The fine structures of the gall bladder epithelium of the mouse . J Biophys Biochem Cytol 1955 ; 1 : 445 – 458 . 3 . Kurzchalia TV , Dupree P , Parton RG , Kellner R , Virta H , Lehnert M , Simons K . VIP21 , a 21 - kD membrane protein is an integral component of trans - Golgi - network - derived transport vesicles . J Cell Biol 1992 ; 118 : 1003 – 1014 . 4 . Rothberg KG , Heuser JE , Donzell WC , Ying YS , Glenney JR , Anderson RG . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 1992 ; 68 : 673 – 682 . 5 . Fra AM , Williamson E , Simons K , Parton RG . De novo formation of caveolae in lymphocytes by expression of VIP21 - caveolin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 : 8655 – 8659 . 6 . Kogo H , Fujimoto T . Caveolin - 1 isoforms are encoded by distinct mRNAs . Identification of mouse caveolin - 1 mRNA variants caused by alternative transcription initiation and splicing . FEBS Lett 2000 ; 465 : 119 – 123 . 7 . Scherer PE , Okamoto T , Chun M , Nishimoto I , Lodish HF , Lisanti MP . Identification , sequence , and expression of caveolin - 2 defines a caveo - lin gene family . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996 ; 93 : 131 – 135 . 8 . Scherer PE , Lewis RY , Volonte D , Engelman JA , Galbiati F , Couet J , Kohtz DS , van Donselaar E , Peters P , Lisanti MP . Cell - type and tissue - specific expression of caveolin - 2 . Caveolins 1 and 2 co - localize and form a stable hetero - oligomeric complex in vivo . J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 29337 – 29346 . 9 . Way M , Parton RG . M - caveolin , a muscle - specific caveolin - related protein . FEBS Lett 1995 ; 376 : 108 – 112 . 10 . Drab M , Verkade P , Elger M , Kasper M , Lohn M , Lauterbach B , Menne J , Lindschau C , Mende F , Luft FC , Schedl A , Haller H , Kurzchalia TV . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 2001 ; 293 : 2449 – 2452 . 11 . Razani B , Engelman JA , Wang XB , Schubert W , Zhang XL , Marks CB , Macaluso F , Russell RG , Li M , Pestell RG , Di Vizio D , Hou H Jr , Kneitz B , Lagaud G , Christ GJ et al . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascular abnormalities . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 38121 – 38138 . 12 . Park DS , Woodman SE , Schubert W , Cohen AW , Frank PG , Chandra M , Shirani J , Razani B , Tang B , Jelicks LA , Factor SM , Weiss LM , Tanowitz HB , Lisanti MP . Caveolin - 1 / 3 double - knockout mice are viable , but lack both muscle and non - muscle caveolae , and develop a severe cardiomyopathic phenotype . Am J Pathol 2002 ; 160 : 2207 – 2217 . 13 . Lahtinen U , Honsho M , Parton RG , Simons K , Verkade P . Involvement of caveolin - 2 in caveolar biogenesis in MDCK cells . FEBS Lett 2003 ; 538 : 85 – 88 . 14 . Sowa G , Pypaert M , Fulton D , Sessa WC . The phosphorylation of caveolin - 2 on serines 23 and 36 modulates caveolin - 1 - dependent caveolae formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 : 6511 – 6516 . 15 . Razani B , Wang XB , Engelman JA , Battista M , Lagaud G , Zhang XL , Kneitz B , Hou H Jr , Christ GJ , Edelmann W , Lisanti MP . Caveolin - 2 - deficient mice show evidence of severe pulmonary dysfunction without disruption of caveolae . Mol Cell Biol 2002 ; 22 : 2329 – 2344 . 16 . Dupree P , Parton RG , Raposo G , Kurzchalia TV , Simons K . Caveolae and sorting in the trans - Golgi network of epithelial cells . EMBO J 1993 ; 12 : 1597 – 1605 . 17 . Dietzen DJ , Hastings WR , Lublin DM . Caveolin is palmitoylated on multiple cysteine residues . Palmitoylation is not necessary for localiza - tion of caveolin to caveolae . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 6838 – 6842 . 18 . Monier S , Parton RG , Vogel F , Behlke J , Henske A , Kurzchalia TV . VIP21 - caveolin , a membrane protein constituent of the caveolar coat , oligomerizes in vivo and in vitro . Mol Biol Cell 1995 ; 6 : 911 – 927 . 19 . Murata M , Peranen J , Schreiner R , Wieland F , Kurzchalia TV , Simons K . VIP21 / caveolin is a cholesterol - binding protein . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 : 10339 – 10343 . 20 . Trigatti BL , Anderson RG , Gerber GE . Identification of caveolin - 1 as a fatty acid binding protein . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999 ; 255 : 34 – 39 . 21 . Parton RG . Life without caveolae . Science 2001 ; 293 : 2404 – 2405 . 22 . Simons K , Toomre D . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2000 ; 1 : 31 – 39 . 23 . Simons K , Ikonen E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 1997 ; 387 : 569 – 572 . 24 . Wang TY , Silvius JR . Cholesterol does not induce segregation of liquid - ordered domains in bilayers modeling the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane . Biophys J 2001 ; 81 : 2762 – 2773 . 25 . Brown DA , London E . Structure and origin of ordered lipid domains in biological membranes . J Membr Biol 1998 ; 164 : 103 – 114 . 26 . Foster LJ , De Hoog CL , Mann M . Unbiased quantitative proteomics of lipid rafts reveals high specificity for signaling factors . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 : 5813 – 5818 . 27 . Rothberg KG , Ying YS , Kamen BA , Anderson RG . Cholesterol controls the clustering of the glycophospholipid - anchored membrane receptor for 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate . J Cell Biol 1990 ; 111 : 2931 – 2938 . 28 . Prior IA , Harding A , Yan J , Sluimer J , Parton RG , Hancock JF . GTP - dependent segregation of H - ras from lipid rafts is required for biological activity . Nat Cell Biol 2001 ; 3 : 368 – 375 . 29 . Roy S , Luetterforst R , Harding A , Apolloni A , Etheridge M , Stang E , Rolls B , Hancock JF , Parton RG . Dominant - negative caveolin inhibits H - Ras function by disrupting cholesterol - rich plasma membrane domains . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 98 – 105 . Caveolae / Lipid Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 735 30 . Varma R , Mayor S . GPI - anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell surface . Nature 1998 ; 394 : 798 – 801 . 31 . Pralle A , Keller P , Florin EL , Simons K , Horber JK . Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 148 : 997 – 1008 . 32 . Zacharias DA , Violin JD , Newton AC , Tsien RY . Partitioning of lipid - modified monomeric GFPs into membrane microdomains of live cells . Science 2002 ; 296 : 913 – 916 . 33 . Prior IA , Muncke C , Parton RG , Hancock JF . Direct visualization of Ras proteins in spatially distinct cell surface microdomains . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 160 : 165 – 170 . 34 . Wilson JM , de Hoop M , Zorzi N , Toh BH , Dotti CG , Parton RG . EEA1 , a tethering protein of the early sorting endosome , shows a polarized distribution in hippocampal neurons , epithelial cells , and fibroblasts [ In Process Citation ] . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 2657 – 2671 . 35 . Luetterforst R , Stang E , Zorzi N , Carozzi A , Way M , Parton RG . Molecular characterization of caveolin association with the Golgi complex : identification of a cis - Golgi targeting domain in the caveolin molecule . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 145 : 1443 – 1459 . 36 . Parton RG , Molero JC , Floetenmeyer M , Green KM , James DE . Characterization of a distinct plasma membrane macrodomain in differentiated adipocytes . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 46769 – 46778 . 37 . Palade GE , Simionescu M , Simionescu N . Structural aspects of the permeability of the microvascular endothelium . Acta Physiol Scand Suppl 1979 ; 463 : 11 – 32 . 38 . Bundgaard M . Vesicular transport in capillary endothelium : does it occur ? Fed Proc 1983 ; 42 : 2425 – 2430 . 39 . Simionescu N , Siminoescu M , Palade GE . Permeability of muscle capillaries to small heme - peptides . Evidence for the existence of patent transendothelial channels . J Cell Biol 1975 ; 64 : 586 – 607 . 40 . Schnitzer JE , Oh P , McIntosh DP . Role of GTP hydrolysis in fission of caveolae directly from plasma membranes . Science 1996 ; 274 : 239 – 242 . 41 . Schnitzer JE , Liu J , Oh P . Endothelial caveolae have the molecular transport machinery for vesicle budding , docking , and fusion including VAMP , NSF , SNAP , annexins , and GTPases . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 14399 – 14404 . 42 . Oh P , McIntosh DP , Schnitzer JE . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 141 : 101 – 114 . 43 . Schubert W , Frank PG , Razani B , Park DS , Chow CW , Lisanti MP . Caveolae - deficient endothelial cells show defects in the uptake and transport of albumin in vivo . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 48619 – 48622 . 44 . Montesano R , Roth J , Robert A , Orci L . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and tetanus toxins . Nature 1982 ; 296 : 651 – 653 . 45 . Tran D , Carpentier JL , Sawano F , Gorden P , Orci L . Ligands internalized through coated or noncoated invaginations follow a common intracel - lular pathway . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987 ; 84 : 7957 – 7961 . 46 . Parton RG . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides ; GM1 is concen - trated in caveolae . J Histochem Cytochem 1994 ; 42 : 155 – 166 . 47 . Sargiacomo M , Sudol M , Tang Z , Lisanti MP . Signal transducing mol - ecules and glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insoluble complex in MDCK cells . J Cell Biol 1993 ; 122 : 789 – 807 . 48 . Chang WJ , Rothberg KG , Kamen BA , Anderson RG . Lowering the cholesterol content of MA104 cells inhibits receptor - mediated trans - port of folate . J Cell Biol 1992 ; 118 : 63 – 69 . 49 . Mayor S , Rothberg KG , Maxfield FR . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science 1994 ; 264 : 1948 – 1951 . 50 . Parton RG , Joggerst B , Simons K . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 127 : 1199 – 1215 . 51 . Nichols BJ . GM1 - containing lipid rafts are depleted within clathrin - coated pits . Curr Biol 2003 ; 13 : 686 – 690 . 52 . Lindberg AA , Brown JE , Stromberg N , Westling - Ryd M , Schultz JE , Karlsson KA . Identification of the carbohydrate receptor for Shiga toxin produced by Shigella dysenteriae type 1 . J Biol Chem 1987 ; 262 : 1779 – 1785 . 53 . LingH , BoodhooA , Hazes B , CummingsMD , Armstrong GD , Brunton JL , Read RJ . Structure of the shiga - like toxin I B - pentamer complexed with an analogue of its receptor Gb3 . Biochemistry 1998 ; 37 : 1777 – 1788 . 54 . Merritt EA , Hol WG . AB5 toxins . Curr Opin Struct Biol 1995 ; 5 : 165 – 171 . 55 . Holmgren J . Comparison of the tissue receptors for Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli enterotoxins by means of gangliosides and natural cholera toxoid . Infect Immun 1973 ; 8 : 851 – 859 . 56 . Waddell T , Head S , Petric M , Cohen A , Lingwood C . Globotriosyl ceramide is specifically recognized by the Escherichia coli verocyto - toxin 2 . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988 ; 152 : 674 – 679 . 57 . Lencer WI , Constable C , Moe S , Jobling MG , Webb HM , Ruston S , Madara JL , Hirst TR , Holmes RK . Targeting of cholera toxin and Escher - ichia coli heat labile toxin in polarized epithelia : role of COOH - terminal KDEL . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 131 : 951 – 962 . 58 . Sandvig K , Ryd M , Garred O , Schweda E , Holm PK , van Deurs B . Retrograde transport from the Golgi complex to the ER of both Shiga toxin and the nontoxic Shiga B - fragment is regulated by butyric acid and cAMP . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 126 : 53 – 64 . 59 . Arab S , Lingwood CA . Intracellular targeting of the endoplasmic reticulum / nuclear envelope by retrograde transport may determine cell hypersensitivity to verotoxin via globotriaosyl ceramide fatty acid isoform traffic . J Cell Physiol 1998 ; 177 : 646 – 660 . 60 . Orlandi PA , Fishman PH . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 141 : 905 – 915 . 61 . Wolf AA , Jobling MG , Wimer - Mackin S , Ferguson - Maltzman M , Madara JL , Holmes RK , Lencer WI . Ganglioside structure dictates signal transduction by cholera toxin and association with caveolae - like mem - brane domains in polarized epithelia . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 141 : 917 – 927 . 62 . Schapiro FB , Lingwood C , Furuya W , Grinstein S . pH - independent retrograde targeting of glycolipids to the Golgi complex . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 274 : C319 – C332 . 63 . Nichols BJ , Kenworthy AK , Polishchuk RS , Lodge R , Roberts TH , Hirschberg K , Phair RD , Lippincott - Schwartz J . Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and golgi complex . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 153 : 529 – 542 . 64 . Torgersen ML , Skretting G , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . Internalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 3737 – 3747 . 65 . Fishman PH , Orlandi PA . Cholera toxin internalization and intoxication . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 431 – 432 . 66 . Majoul I , Sohn K , Wieland FT , Pepperkok R , Pizza M , Hillemann J , Soling HD . KDEL receptor ( Erd2p ) - mediated retrograde transport of the cholera toxin A subunit from the Golgi involves COPI , p23 , and the COOH terminus of Erd2p . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 143 : 601 – 612 . 67 . Girod A , Storrie B , Simpson JC , Johannes L , Goud B , Roberts LM , Lord JM , Nilsson T , Pepperkok R . Evidence for a COP - I - independent trans - port route from the Golgi complex to the endoplasmic reticulum . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 423 – 430 . 68 . Jackson ME , Simpson JC , Girod A , Pepperkok R , Roberts LM , Lord JM . TheKDEL retrieval system is exploited by Pseudomonas exotoxin A , but not by Shiga - like toxin - 1 , during retrograde transport from the Golgi complex to the endoplasmic reticulum . J Cell Sci 1999 ; 112 : 467 – 475 . 69 . Tsai B , Rodighiero C , Lencer WI , Rapoport TA . Protein disulfide isomerase acts as a redox - dependent chaperone to unfold cholera toxin . Cell 2001 ; 104 : 937 – 948 . 70 . Schmitz A , Herrgen H , Winkeler A , Herzog V . Cholera toxin is exported from microsomes by the Sec61p complex . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 148 : 1203 – 1212 . Parton and Richards 736 Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 71 . Sharp GW , Hynie S . Stimulation of intestinal adenyl cyclase by cholera toxin . Nature 1971 ; 229 : 266 – 269 . 72 . Sweet BH , Hilleman MR . The vacuolating virus , SV40 . Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1960 ; 105 : 420 – 427 . 73 . Melnick JL , Allison AC , Butel JS , Eckhart W , Eddy BE , Kit S , Levine AJ , Miles JAR , Pagano JS , Sachs L , Vonka V . Papovaviridae . Intervirology 1974 ; 3 : 106 – 120 . 74 . Breau WC , Atwood WJ , Norkin LC . Class I major histocompatibility proteins are an essential component of the simian virus 40 receptor . J Virol 1992 ; 66 : 2037 – 2045 . 75 . Stang E , Kartenbeck J , Parton RG . Major histocompatibility complex class I molecules mediate association of SV40 with caveolae . Mol Biol Cell 1997 ; 8 : 47 – 57 . 76 . Kartenbeck J , Stukenbrok H , Helenius A . Endocytosis of simian virus 40 into the endoplasmic reticulum . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 109 : 2721 – 2729 . 77 . Parton RG , Lindsay M . Exploitation of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules and caveolae by simian virus 40 . Immunol Rev 1999 ; 168 : 23 – 31 . 78 . Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Helenius A . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat Cell Biol 2001 ; 3 : 473 – 483 . 79 . Thomsen P , Roepstorff K , Stahlhut M , van Deurs B . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains , which are not involved in constitutive endocytic trafficking . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 238 – 250 . 80 . Gagescu R , Demaurex N , Parton RG , Hunziker W , Huber LA , Gruenberg J . The recycling endosome of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells is a mildly acidic compartment rich in raft components . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 2775 – 2791 . 81 . Nichols BJ . A distinct class of endosome mediates clathrin - independent endocytosis to the Golgi complex . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 374 – 378 . 82 . Puri V , Watanabe R , Singh RD , Dominguez M , Brown JC , Wheatley CL , Marks DL , Pagano RE . Clathrin - dependent and - independent internal - ization of plasma membrane sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 154 : 535 – 547 . 83 . Sharma DK , Choudhury A , Singh RD , Wheatley CL , Marks DL , Pagano RE . Glycosphingolipids internalized via caveolar - related endocytosis rapidly merge with the clathrin pathway in early endosomes and form micro - domains for recycling . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 7564 – 7572 . 84 . Richards AA , Stang E , Pepperkok R , Parton RG . Inhibitors of COP - mediated transport and cholera toxin action inhibit simian virus 40 infection . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 1750 – 1764 . 85 . Norkin LC , Anderson HA , Wolfrom SA , Oppenheim A . Caveolar endo - cytosis of simian virus 40 is followed by brefeldin A - sensitive transport to the endoplasmic reticulum , where the virus disassembles . J Virol 2002 ; 76 : 5156 – 5166 . 86 . Fittipaldi A , Ferrari A , Zoppe M , Arcangeli C , Pellegrini V , Beltram F , Giacca M . Cell membrane lipid rafts mediate caveolar endocytosis of HIV - 1 tat fusion proteins . J Biol Chem 2003 ; in press . 87 . Baorto DM , Gao Z , Malaviya R , Dustin ML , van der Merwe A , Lublin DM , Abraham SN . Survival of FimH - expressing enterobacteria in macrophages relies on glycolipid traffic . Nature 1997 ; 389 : 636 – 639 . 88 . Shin JS , Gao Z , Abraham SN . Involvement of cellular caveolae in bacterial entry into mast cells . Science 2000 ; 289 : 785 – 788 . 89 . Norkin LC , Wolfrom SA , Stuart ES . Association of caveolin with Chlamydia trachomatis inclusions at early and late stages of infection . Exp Cell Res 2001 ; 266 : 229 – 238 . 90 . Pelkmans L , Puntener D , Helenius A . Local actin polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 2002 ; 296 : 535 – 539 . 91 . Le PU , Nabi IR . Distinct caveolae - mediated endocytic pathways target the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 1059 – 1071 . 92 . Benlimame N , Le PU , Nabi IR . Localization of autocrine motility factor receptor to caveolae and clathrin - independent internalization of its ligand to smooth endoplasmic reticulum . Mol Biol Cell 1998 ; 9 : 1773 – 1786 . 93 . Le PU , Guay G , Altschuler Y , Nabi IR . Caveolin - 1 is a negative reg - ulator of caveolae - mediated endocytosis to the endoplasmic reticu - lum . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 3371 – 3379 . 94 . Ahn S , Kim J , Lucaveche CL , Reedy MC , Luttrell LM , Lefkowitz RJ , Daaka Y . Src - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation regulates dynamin self - assembly and ligand - induced endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 26642 – 26651 . 95 . Ahn S , Maudsley S , Luttrell LM , Lefkowitz RJ , Daaka Y . Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of dynamin is required for beta2 - adrenergic receptor internalization and mitogen - activated protein kinase signal - ing . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 1185 – 1188 . 96 . Kim YN , Bertics PJ . The endocytosis - linked protein dynamin associ - ates with caveolin - 1 and is tyrosine phosphorylated in response to the activation of a noninternalizing epidermal growth factor receptor mutant . Endocrinology 2002 ; 143 : 1726 – 1731 . 97 . Vallis Y , Wigge P , Marks B , Evans PR , McMahon HT . Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr Biol 1999 ; 9 : 257 – 260 . 98 . Cao TT , Mays RW , von Zastrow M . Regulated endocytosis of G - pro - tein - coupled receptors by a biochemically and functionally distinct sub - population of clathrin - coated pits . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 24592 – 24602 . 99 . Minshall RD , Tiruppathi C , Vogel SM , Niles WD , Gilchrist A , Hamm HE , Malik AB . Endothelial cell - surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and trafficking via G ( i ) - coupled Src kinase signaling pathway . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 150 : 1057 – 1070 . 100 . Tiruppathi C , Finnegan A , Malik AB . Isolation and characterization of a cell surface albumin - binding protein from vascular endothelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996 ; 93 : 250 – 254 . 101 . Schnitzer JE , Oh P . Albondin - mediated capillary permeability to albumin . Differential role of receptors in endothelial transcytosis and endocytosis of native and modified albumins . J Biol Chem 1994 ; 269 : 6072 – 6082 . 102 . Tiruppathi C , Song W , Bergenfeldt M , Sass P , Malik AB . Gp60 activation mediates albumin transcytosis in endothelial cells by tyrosine kinase - dependent pathway . J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 25968 – 25975 . 103 . Harder T , Simons K . Clusters of glycolipid and glycosylphosphatidyl - inositol - anchored proteins in lymphoid cells : accumulation of actin regulated by local tyrosine phosphorylation . Eur J Immunol 1999 ; 29 : 556 – 562 . 104 . Lamaze C , Dujeancourt A , Baba T , Lo CG , Benmerah A , Dautry - Varsat A . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol Cell 2001 ; 7 : 661 – 671 . 105 . Ellis S , Mellor H . The novel Rho - family GTPase rif regulates coordinated actin - based membrane rearrangements . Curr Biol 2000 ; 10 : 1387 – 1390 . 106 . Sotgia F , Razani B , Bonuccelli G , Schubert W , Battista M , Lee H , Capozza F , Schubert AL , Minetti C , Buckley JT , Lisanti MP . Intracel - lular retention of glycosylphosphatidyl inositol - linked proteins in caveolin - deficient cells . Mol Cell Biol 2002 ; 22 : 3905 – 3926 . 107 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev Cell 2002 ; 2 : 411 – 423 . 108 . Wang J , Gunning W , Kelley KM , Ratnam M . Evidence for segregation of heterologous GPI - anchored proteins into separate lipid rafts within the plasma membrane . J Membr Biol 2002 ; 189 : 35 – 43 . 109 . Nabi IR , Le PU . Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 161 : 673 – 677 . Caveolae / Lipid Raft - Dependent Endocytosis Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738 737 110 . Di Guglielmo GM , Le Roy C , Goodfellow AF , Wrana JL . Distinct endocytic pathways regulate TGF - beta receptor signalling and turn - over . Nat Cell Biol 2003 ; 5 : 410 – 421 . 111 . Henley JR , Krueger EW , Oswald BJ , McNiven MA . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 141 : 85 – 99 . 112 . AndersonHA , ChenY , NorkinLC . Boundsimian virus40translocatesto caveolin - enrichedmembranedomains , anditsentryisinhibitedbydrugs that selectively disrupt caveolae . Mol Biol Cell 1996 ; 7 : 1825 – 1834 . 113 . Mayor S , Maxfield FR . Insolubility and redistribution of GPI - anchored proteins at the cell surface after detergent treatment . Mol Biol Cell 1995 ; 6 : 929 – 944 . 114 . Choudhury A , Dominguez M , Puri V , Sharma DK , Narita K , Wheatley CL , Marks DL , Pagano RE . Rab proteins mediate Golgi transport of caveola - internalized glycosphingolipids and correct lipid trafficking in Niemann - Pick C cells . J Clin Invest 2002 ; 109 : 1541 – 1550 . Parton and Richards 738 Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 724 – 738