Quantifying Lamella Dynamics of Cultured Cells by SACED , a New Computer - Assisted Motion Analysis Boris Hinz , * , † Wolfgang Alt , * Christa Johnen , † , ‡ Volker Herzog , † , § and Hans - Wilhelm Kaiser† , ‡ , 1 * Division of Theoretical Biology , ‡ Department of Dermatology , § Department of Cell Biology , and † Bonner Forum Biomedizin , University of Bonn , Bonn , Germany Formation of lamellipodia and the retraction of rufﬂes are essential activities during motility and migration of eukaryotic cells . We have developed a computer - assisted stroboscopic method for the con - tinuous observation of cell dynamics ( stroboscopic analysis of cell dynamics , SACED ) that allows one to analyze changes in lamellipodia protrusion and ruf - ﬂe retraction with high resolution in space and time . To demonstrate the potential of this method we an - alyzed keratinocytes in culture , unstimulated or stimulated with epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , which is known to induce cell motility and migra - tion . Keratinocytes stimulated with EGF exhibited a 2 . 6 - fold increase in their migration velocity , which coincided with enhanced rufﬂe retraction velocity ( 144 % ) and increased rufﬂe frequency ( 135 % ) com - pared to control cells . We also recorded an enhanced frequency of lamellipodia ( 135 % ) , whereas the veloc - ity of lamellipodia protrusion remained unchanged . These results on rufﬂe and lamellipodia dynamics in epidermal cells show that SACED is at least equal to established methods in terms of accuracy . SACED is , however , advantageous concerning resolution in time and therefore allows one to analyze the activity of lamellipodia and rufﬂes in as yet unknown detail . Moreover , SACED offers two opportunities that ren - der this technique superior to established methods : First , several parameters relevant to cell motility can be analyzed simultaneously . Second , a large number of cells can conveniently be examined , which facilitates the compilation of statistically sig - niﬁcant data . © 1999 Academic Press Key Words : EGFR ; human keratinocytes ; lamellipo - dia ; migration ; motility ; rufﬂes ; stroboscopic analysis of cell dynamics ; wound healing . INTRODUCTION Most eukaryotic cells are permanently , intermit - tently , or at certain stages of their life cycle able to move . Cell motility comprises a sequence of events involving cytoskeletal reorganization , lamella exten - sion , substratum adhesion at the leading edge , contrac - tion to move the cell forward , and detachment of the trailing tail [ 1 – 5 ; for reviews see 6 , 7 ] . Dynamic structures observed in motile cells in cul - ture are deﬁned as ﬁlopodia , lamellipodia , or rufﬂes [ 8 – 10 ] . These structures occur at the cell lamella , a cytoplasmic region that borders the organelle - contain - ing main cell body . Filopodia are spike - like protrusions that radiate from the tip of the lamella , whereas lamel - lipodia are ﬂat , sheet - like structures that protrude from the lamella margin . After their protrusion lamel - lipodia are retracted toward the main cell body . Retrac - tion of lamellipodia is frequently accompanied by the formation of rufﬂes , which are actin - containing folds rising above the lamella surface [ 8 , 11 ; for review see 12 ] . Rufﬂes start at the cell edge , move centripetally , and ﬁnally disappear at the border between the la - mella base and the main cell body . Centripetal move - ment is the main feature that distinguishes rufﬂes from other , immobile or centrifugally moving cell mem - brane structures [ 8 ] . The sequence of cell membrane protrusions and rufﬂe retraction results in a regular periodic oscillation of these cell membrane structures [ 13 – 15 ] . Formation of lamellipodia and formation of rufﬂes are important and likely rate - limiting events occurring during cell motility . To elucidate the mechanisms underlying cell motil - ity , the quantitative analysis of cell migration and of lamella dynamics , including lamellipodia and rufﬂe formation , is important [ for review see 16 ] . Several methods have been developed that allow such quanti - tation , such as Boyden chamber assays [ 17 ] , phagoki - netic tracks [ 18 , 19 ] , artiﬁcial wound scratches [ 20 ] , spheroid outmigration [ 21 ] , and gel invasion assays [ 22 ] . Only few assays , however , such as computer - as - sisted on - line tracking methods [ 23 – 27 ] , allow one to quantify changes in cell migration instantaneously . A 1 To whom correspondence and reprint requests should be ad - dressed at Department of Dermatology and Bonner Forum Biomedi - zin , University of Bonn , Sigmund - Freud - Strasse 25 D - 53105 Bonn , Federal Republic of Germany . Fax : 49 228 287 - 4333 . E - mail : hwkaiser @ mailer . meb . uni - bonn . de . 234 0014 - 4827 / 99 $ 30 . 00 Copyright © 1999 by Academic Press All rights of reproduction in any form reserved . Experimental Cell Research 251 , 234 – 243 ( 1999 ) Article ID excr . 1999 . 4541 , available online at http : / / www . idealibrary . com on major step in analyzing cell motility was made by applying computer - assisted tools to quantify cell pe - rimeter dynamics either of amoeboid cells [ 28 ] or of ﬂattened tissue cells [ 13 , 27 , 29 ] . However , no systems were available to satisfactorily quantify subcellular dy - namics at high resolution . In most cases instant changes in cell motility are qualitatively described as “enhanced rufﬂing and lamellipodia activity” or semi - quantitatively expressed as the “number of rufﬂing cells” [ 30 – 34 ] . Recently , a pol - scope technique was re - ported , which allows one to study the dynamic behav - ior of the cytoskeleton in the lamellipodia of growth cones using polarized light [ 35 ] . This technique pro - vides useful information on the dynamics of cytoskele - ton components , but it is not designed to quantitate cell motility . We have developed a new tool , which consists of a computer - assisted stroboscopic analysis of cell dynam - ics ( SACED ) . This technique is suitable for quantifying lamellipodia protrusion and rufﬂe retraction simulta - neously with cell migration velocity . SACED allows subcellular movements to be revealed at deﬁned re - gions of the cell membrane on the order of seconds and for a large number of cells . The technique proved to be generally applicable to any kind of microscopy of living cells in culture and was implemented on phase - con - trast observations in this study . Keratinocyte migration and the development of ﬁlo - podia , lamellipodia , and rufﬂes are regulated by exter - nal factors like epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) [ 36 – 38 ] and transforming growth factor a ( TGF a ) [ 39 – 41 ] . These factors act as “motogens” [ for review see 42 ] that stimulate keratinocyte migration and lamella dynam - ics . To demonstrate the potential of SACED we stimu - lated human keratinocytes with EGF and compared our results with data previously obtained by other techniques . With SACED we quantitated the effect of EGF on lamellipodia protrusions , rufﬂe retraction , and cell translocation . Our measurements show agreement with previously reported observations . Our observa - tions , however , show also that the regulation of motil - ity and migration of eukaryotic cells can now be ana - lyzed quantitatively with high precision and at high resolution in space and in time . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture . Cultures of human epidermal keratinocytes ( HEK ) were obtained from newborn foreskins and initiated into culture by modiﬁcation of a method by Rheinwald [ 43 ] and Green et al . [ 44 ] . Subcultures were grown in MCDB 153 medium supplemented with bovine pituitary extract ( 240 m g / ml ) , epidermal growth factor ( 0 . 1 ng / ml ) , ethanolamine ( 0 . 1 mM ) , insulin ( 750 m g / ml ) , penicillin ( 100 U / ml ) , phosphoethanolamine ( 0 . 1 mM ) , and streptomycin ( 100 U / ml ) . Medium was further supplemented with the following essential amino acids : glutamine ( 4 mM ) , histidine ( 240 m M ) , methionine ( 90 m M ) , phenylalanine ( 90 m M ) , tryptophane ( 45 m M ) , and tyrosine ( 75 m M ) . Supplemented MCDB containing 0 . 03 mM calcium was taken as control medium . Cells were generally used from third passage . Wound scratch assay . HEK were grown to conﬂuence on 8 - well glass slides ( ICN Biomedicals , Eschwege , Germany ) . Artiﬁcial wounds were scratched into the monolayer with a sterile 100 - m l pipette plastic tip . The medium was then changed twice to remove cellular debris before cells were again cultivated in different media containing or lacking EGF ( see below ) . Media were replenished every hour . Migration of keratinocytes into the artiﬁcial wound was visu - ally controlled and pictures were taken 15 h after scratching . Microscopy of living cells . Microscopy was performed using a 63 3 1 . 4 NA phase plan apochromat objective on an Axiovert 10 inverted microscope ( Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) , equipped with a video system containing a low - light video camera ( AVT Horn BC - 5 with control unit , Aalen , Germany ) and a time - lapse videocassette re - corder ( Panasonic AG 6720 A ) . Keratinocytes from third passage were seeded at 5000 cells / cm 2 in observation chambers constructed of a 35 - mm - diameter silicone rubber ring mounted on a 50 3 80 mm glass coverslip . Cells were then grown for 18 h in control medium to 50 % subconﬂuence before experiments started . Temperature was held constant at 37°C by keeping the microscope in a ventilated incubation chamber . Computer - assisted stroboscopic analysis of cell dynamics ( SACED ) —Characterization of lamella dynamics with high resolu - tion . Phase - contrast images of motile keratinocytes were digitized using a video frame grabber card ( OFG 768 PAL ) and analyzed by computer - assisted SACED . SACED is based on programmable image processing software ( BioScan OPTIMAS ) . In order to monitor dy - namics of one cellular region an area of interest in the shape of a line was marked on the phase - contrast image of isolated keratinocytes . This line extended from inside the cell body ( x 5 0 ) to the substrate outside the cell ( x 5 20 ) by crossing the lamella region transversally to the cell edge . Distinct gray values of structures visible in phase contrast and included in the area of interest were then digitally recorded . By the digitizing process a snapshot of the included cell region with a width of one pixel was obtained . The position of the cell edge , of dark lamella structures , of the main cell body , and of the nucleus could be identiﬁed on this segment when compared to the original cell image ( see Results ) . Dynamics of this particular cell region were then visualized by recording gray values included in the area of interest at regular time intervals while the cell edge was protruding and retracting . It should be pointed out that SACED recorded lamella dynamics relative to the substrate since the position of the area of interest ( the line ) was ﬁxed . In the next processing step the digital snapshots were lined up on a time scale in sequence of their acquisition . The resulting com - posite phase - contrast picture allowed the translocation of the re - corded structures to be continuously followed over time . We named the composite picture a “stroboscopic image” since it resembled a series of ﬂashlight snapshots . The entire process resulting in a stroboscopic image was automated by a computer program . Quantiﬁcation of cell motion by SACED with statistical signiﬁ - cance . To quantify lamella dynamics stroboscopic images obtained from SACED recording were displayed on a computer screen . In a second computer routine structures such as protruding lamellipodia and retracting rufﬂes were manually labeled with lines by using a computer mouse . Since space and time were deﬁned in stroboscopic images ( 20 m m in 5 min ) , a number of values were automatically deducible from the label lines . First , the computer algorithm identiﬁed a descending label line as a labeled rufﬂe and an ascending label line as a labeled protruding cell edge . Second , the values of motility parameters were extracted from the label lines and saved to a ﬁle that was analyzed by statis - tical software . Characteristic parameters of protruding lamellipodia and retracting rufﬂes were their velocity ( micrometers per minute ) , their persistence ( minutes ) , rufﬂe migration distance over the la - mella ( micrometers ) , extension of lamellipodia at the lamella tip 235 HIGH - RESOLUTION ANALYSIS OF LAMELLA DYNAMICS IN HUMAN KERATINOCYTES ( micrometers ) , the frequency of lamellipodia ( lamellipodia per minute ) , and rufﬂe frequency ( rufﬂes per minute ) . The migration velocity of cells ( micrometers per minute ) was simultaneously quan - tiﬁed by exploiting the clear halo around the main cell body and the nucleus . Marking this outstanding halo allowed one to calculate the cell body displacement in relation to the substrate , which is a com - mon deﬁnition for cell translocation [ 28 ] . The visible border of the cell body was also used to calculate the minimum and maximum extensions of lamellae ( micrometers ) . To cover the whole cell periphery we increased the number of SACED lines crossing the lamella region of keratinocytes . Using a radial arrangement of section lines allowed changes in the leading edge position to be followed over time . SACED allowed the number of lines ( areas of interest ) per cell as well as their position , starting points inside the cell , their length , and arrangement , to be chosen . Eight lines of 20 m m length covered the lamella periphery of a motile keratinocyte . A radial arrangement of lines was chosen since these cells mostly exhibited a circular spreading area . In order to evaluate the motility state of cells a standard recording time of 5 min per cell was adequate . The computerized drawing of the lines was initiated ﬁrst by marking the cells centroid on the computer screen and second by indicating the cells’ orientation ( position of the dominant lamella ) . Subsequently , all lines were automatically calculated and displayed . The SACED recording process resulted in eight stroboscopic images per cell that were separately displayed to quantify lamella dynamics as described above . For quantiﬁcation by SACED , lamella dynamics were recorded on eight regions at 15 different isolated cells for 5 min per cell at 37°C . Cells were allowed to equilibrate under modiﬁed conditions for 15 min . Mean values were calculated from the values extracted at all eight regions of the 15 cells per experimental condition . Results were expressed as the percentage of mean control values that were ob - tained from 15 untreated cells for each experimental series . To exclude aging effects , untreated control cells were recorded before and after each experiment . In order to quantify the changes in cell motility and cell migration following tyrosine kinase stimulation we applied EGF at concentrations 0 , 5 , 10 , 25 , 50 , 75 , 100 , and 200 ng / ml . All experiments were performed three times . Statistical analysis . For statistical evaluation , the results were analyzed by means of Student’s t test . Differences from control cells were considered to have a high statistical signiﬁcance at values of P # 0 . 01 . RESULTS To demonstrate the effect of stimulation of keratin - ocyte migration by EGF by a classical approach we used scratch assays . Fifteen hours after an artiﬁcial wound was scratched into a conﬂuent monolayer of keratinocytes ( Fig . 1a ) , untreated cells had insufﬁ - ciently covered the wound by migration ( Fig . 1b ) , whereas EGF - stimulated cells had nearly closed the wound by migrating into the gap ( Fig . 1c ) . To test the SACED , migration and lamella activ - ity , such as lamellipodia and rufﬂe formation , of keratinocytes during scratch wound closure were an - alyzed . In addition , the morphology of normal , un - stimulated keratinocytes ( Fig . 2a ) was characterized on phase - contrast micrographs . In order to analyze morphological structures by SACED , a cellular re - gion was labeled by a line ( Fig . 2a , black line ; Fig . 2b , frame ) that extended from the cell body ( Fig . 2a , dashed black line ) to a cell - free region including the leading edge of the keratinocyte ( Fig . 2b , arrow - head ) . The morphological structures present in this area of interest ( Fig . 2b , frame ) corresponded to pixel gray values ( Fig . 2c ) that were digitized . In the re - gion of the cell body ( 0 – 7 m m ) , large grayscale dif - ferences ranging between light gray and dark gray values were observed . In contrast , the lamella ( 7 – 15 m m ) showed medium - range gray values . The border between cell and culture medium ( Fig . 2c , arrow - head ) was deﬁned by a characteristic sequence of gray values , beginning with dark gray ( lamella / lamellipodia edge ) followed by light gray values and medium gray values representing the substrate . Lamella dynamics were analyzed in a series of images acquired every 0 . 5 s . In every picture the area FIG . 1 . Effect of EGF on scratch wound closure . In order to examine the effect of EGF on keratinocyte migration , artiﬁcial scratches were produced in a monolayer of conﬂuently grown cells ( a ) . The migration of keratinocytes into the wound gap was documented 15 h after scratching ( b and c ) . Note that treatment with 100 ng / ml EGF ( c ) induced earlier wound closures compared to untreated cells ( b ) . Bar , 100 m m . 236 HINZ ET AL . FIG . 3 . Visualization of lamella dynamics by SACED . To visualize the dynamics of gray values included by the frame in Fig . 2 , the area of interest was digitized every 0 . 5 s . The resulting digital segments were then lined up on a time scale producing a so - deﬁned stroboscopic image . The segments were here reduced to the original width of the line ( 5 area of interest ) of one pixel . Moving gray values corresponded to dynamic cell structures as described under Results . White brackets include retrograde moving rufﬂes , also indicated by a white line . Black lines were used to indicate the protruding and retracting cell edge . The arrowhead points to a rufﬂe not originating from a retracting lamellipodium but forming during the process of lamellipodia protrusion . FIG . 2 . The SACED method was initiated by placing a line of deﬁned length ( here 20 m m ) over the phase - contrast image of a motile keratinocyte ( a ) . This line extended from inside the cell body ( 0 m m ) to the substrate ( 20 m m ) by crossing the lamella transversally to the cell edge . Subdivisions are displayed on the line at distances of 5 m m . A dotted white line marks the border of the nucleus , whereas a dashed black line indicates the border between the cell body and the lamella . The area of interest marked by the line is magniﬁed in ( b ) and displayed as a frame . Gray values of structures included by the frame were digitized ( c ) . Originally , the digitized line ( 5 area of interest ) had a width of 1 pixel but was here artiﬁcially broadened for the purpose of better visualization . By correlating gray values on the digitized area of interest ( c ) with gray values in the phase - contrast image ( b ) , cell structures were identiﬁed as shown in Fig . 3 . The position of the cell edge is indicated by arrows in ( b ) and ( c ) . Rufﬂes are marked by brackets . 237 HIGH - RESOLUTION ANALYSIS OF LAMELLA DYNAMICS IN HUMAN KERATINOCYTES of interest labeled by a line was digitized . The arrange - ment of the digitized area of interest in a sequence over time produced an image that we termed stroboscopic image according to the fast acquisition of data ( Fig . 3 ) . Movements of dynamic structures like lamellipodia , rufﬂes , or the cell edge corresponded to changes in the location of gray values on the stroboscopic image . Stro - boscopic images were subdivided into three zones ( see above ) : The ﬁrst zone ranging from 0 to 7 m m corre - sponding to the cell body showed stake gray values that remained in identical locations over time . The second zone , i . e . , the lamella , showed variable exten - sions over time ranging from 7 – 13 m m at 7 s to 7 – 17 m m at 38 s . In this zone darker gray values moved continuously from the cell edge toward the cell body . The dark gray regions had a width of 0 . 5 – 2 m m . These structures corresponded to rufﬂe movement over the observed period as evaluated by time - lapse video ob - servation . Generally , rufﬂe movement was reproduc - ibly identiﬁed on stroboscopic images of keratinocytes by three features ( Fig . 3 ) : ( i ) their dark appearance in phase contrast ( low gray values ) , allowing a clear sep - aration from other structures at the lamella ; ( ii ) their characteristic maximal width of 2 m m ; and most impor - tant ( iii ) their unmistakable centripetal movement , starting at the cell edge and ending at the border of the cell body . In contrast , the pixel gray values within the third zone , which represented the culture medium , remained unchanged . The border between the second and the third zones was characterized by an undulat - ing line over time ( Fig . 3 ) . This bright undulating line corresponded to extending and retracting lamellipodia at the lamella tip of the keratinocyte , bordering the culture medium . The beginning of a lamellipodia pro - trusion in stroboscopic images was marked by turning points where the previously declining edge started to increase again ( Fig . 3 ) . Correspondingly , the ending of lamellipodia protrusion and the beginning of retraction were localized at turning points where the line started to decline again . As the SACED technique revealed , untreated cells formed and subsequently retracted a lamellipodium at the lamella tip within 60 s ( labeled by black lines in Fig . 3 ) . Lamellipodia retraction led to the formation and movement of a rufﬂe ( labeled by a white line and brackets ) starting at the lamella edge . Rufﬂes contin - ued the retrograde movement of the lamellipodium with identical velocity . During rufﬂe retraction ( 60 – 120 s ) a new lamellipodium formed ( 75 s , dotted black line ) . Visualization of Instant Changes in Lamella Dynamics by SACED after Stimulation with EGF To demonstrate immediate changes in lamella dy - namics following EGF stimulation , isolated keratino - FIG . 4 . Effect of EGF on lamella dynamics . To analyze the immediate effect of EGF on keratinocyte motility , we recorded lamella dynamics by 8 - line SACED during cell stimulation . The period of measurement was 12 . 5 min . Phase - contrast images of the motile cell were produced during recording ( a ) as a control of the stroboscopic images ( b ) . Only one of eight stroboscopic images is demonstrated here , recorded along the boldface line in ( a ) . Cells were ﬁrst recorded for 6 min in control medium before EGF concentration was shifted to 100 ng / ml ( white arrow ) . Changing the medium produced disturbances in the stroboscopic image that left the plane of focus . Descending white lines label rufﬂe retraction , and ascending black lines indicate lamellipodia protrusion . The descent or ascent of the lines corresponded to the velocity of the respective lamella structure . Black arrows on top of the stroboscopic image indicate formation of lamellipodia . 238 HINZ ET AL . cytes were assayed . Eight cell areas were marked by lines of 20 m m length , which included the lamella and the cell edge , and were recorded simultaneously by SACED for 12 . 5 min . First , keratinocyte motility and lamella dynamics were digitized at the areas of inter - est in control medium for 6 min ( Fig . 4 , shown for only one selected region ) . The switch to a medium contain - ing 100 ng / ml EGF at 6 min induced an increase in the number of lamellipodia protrusions at the cell edge as observed by time - lapse video ( Fig . 4b ) . These changes were reﬂected in the digitized area of interest ( line in Fig . 4a ; Fig . 4b ) . Following EGF stimulation ( white arrow in Fig . 4b ) cells enhanced the frequency of lamellipodia ( number of black label lines per time ) after a lag phase of 2 min , whereas the velocity of lamellipodia protrusion ( ascent of black label lines ) was not altered . Rufﬂe formation ( white lines ) as well as rufﬂe retraction velocity increased . Immediately after EGF stimulation ( 7 – 10 min ) lamella dynamics accelerated but regained a periodic behavior after the acceleration phase ( . 10 min ) . Periodicity was most evident from the formation of rufﬂes with similar re - traction velocity in regular time intervals . To exclude the possibility that the observed effects were caused by changing the medium , we also performed a series of experiments shifting cells to BSA - containing medium . In neither case was a change in rufﬂe and lamellipodia dynamics observed . FIG . 5 . Quantitation of keratinocyte motion . ( a ) In order to quantify cell motion , the course of retracting rufﬂes , protruding lamellipodia , and the translocating cell body were labeled on the stroboscopic images ( continuous label lines ) . Along the label lines , characteristic values were calculated for rufﬂe retraction velocity ( dx ruf / dt ruf , m m / min ) , lamellipodia protrusion velocity ( dx lam / dt lam , m m / min ) , rufﬂe migration distance ( dx ruf , m m ) , lamellipodia extension ( dx lam , m m ) , rufﬂe frequency ( 1 / period ruf , ruf / min ) , lamellipodia frequency ( 1 / period lam , lam / min ) , maximum lamella extension ( X max L , m m ) , minimum lamella extension ( X min L , m m ) , and cell migration velocity , indicated by the cell body translocation over time ( dx mig / dt mig , m m / min ) . ( b ) Lamella dynamics were simultaneously analyzed around the whole cell periphery of a single keratinocyte by placing eight lines of 20 m m in a radial arrangement . 239 HIGH - RESOLUTION ANALYSIS OF LAMELLA DYNAMICS IN HUMAN KERATINOCYTES SACED Quantiﬁed Changes in Cell Motion Following EGF Stimulation To determine the mean values of typical motility parameters , lamella dynamics in keratinocytes were quantiﬁed on a single - cell scale by applying SACED to keratinocytes in the absence of EGF ( Fig . 5a ) . The parameters measured included the following : rufﬂe re - traction velocity ( dx ruf / dt ruf ; micrometers per minute ) , lamellipodia protrusion velocity ( dx lam / dt lam ; microme - ters per minute ) , rufﬂe migration distance ( dx ruf ; mi - crometers ) , lamellipodia extension ( dx lam ; microme - ters ) , rufﬂe frequency ( 1 / period ruf ; rufﬂes per minute ) , lamellipodia frequency ( 1 / period lam ; lamellipodia per minute ) , maximum lamella extension ( X max L ; mi - crometers ) , minimum lamella extension ( X min L ; mi - crometers ) , and the cell migration velocity ( dx mig / dt mig ; micrometers per minute ) . Mean values , obtained from 100 cells , were calculated from eight areas of interest per cell . The radial arrangement of these eight areas is illustrated in Fig . 5b . In untreated keratinocytes , la - mellipodia protrusion was found to be much faster ( 7 . 5 6 2 . 5 m m / min ) than rufﬂe retraction ( 4 . 1 6 1 . 3 m m / min ) . Conversely , rufﬂe frequency was about two times higher ( 2 . 4 6 1 . 5 rufﬂes / min ) than lamellipodia frequency ( 1 . 3 6 0 . 8 lamellipodia / min ) . These results were in line with the observation from time - lapse re - cordings that rufﬂe formation may not only occur dur - ing lamellipodia retraction but may also be initiated during lamellipodia extension ( arrowhead in Fig . 3 ) . Keratinocytes showed characteristic and signiﬁcant changes in lamella dynamics and cell migration de - pending on the presence of EGF . Migration velocity , TABLE 1 Mean Values of Human Keratinocyte Motion Obtained from SACED Control EGF Migration velocity 0 . 5 1 . 3 ( dx mig / dt mig ; m m / min ) 6 0 . 3 6 0 . 4 Rufﬂe retraction velocity 4 . 1 6 . 0 ( dx ruf / dt ruf ; m m / min ) 6 1 . 3 6 2 . 0 Lamellipodia protrusion velocity 7 . 5 7 . 3 ( dx lam / dt lam ; m m / min ) 6 2 . 5 6 2 . 8 Rufﬂe frequency 2 . 4 3 . 2 ( 1 / period ruf ; ruf / min ) 6 1 . 5 6 1 . 8 Lamellipodia frequency 1 . 3 1 . 8 ( 1 / period lam ; lam / min ) 6 0 . 8 6 0 . 9 Note . We here show absolute values for a selection of typical parameters that express the motility of tissue cells jointly with cell migration velocities . Mean values and standard deviations were calculated from 8 - line SACED . Values are compared among 100 cells grown in control medium with 15 cells that were subsequently stim - ulated and recorded for maximum 1 h in medium containing 100 ng / ml EGF . FIG . 6 . Quantitation of EGF - stimulated keratinocyte motility . Human keratinocyte motility was stimulated by EGF in a concentration - course experiment . Before EGF stimulation cells were grown for 18 h in control medium , followed by stimulation with EGF at concentrations of 5 , 10 , 25 , 50 , 75 , 100 , and 200 ng / ml , 15 min before SACED analysis . For each concentration eight areas of interest of 15 different cells were analyzed . To exclude aging effects control cells were recorded at the beginning and at the end of each experiment . Mean values of rufﬂe retraction velocity ( continuous line ) , lamellipodia protrusion velocity ( disconnected line ) , and migration velocity ( dotted line ) were calculated as percentage of the respective control mean values . Experiments were performed three times ; error bars indicate 95 % conﬁdence intervals . Values that deviate from the controls with high signiﬁcance ( P # 0 . 01 ) are depicted as black symbols . White symbols refer to values that do not differ signiﬁcantly from control values . 240 HINZ ET AL . rufﬂe retraction velocity , rufﬂe frequency , and lamelli - podia frequency increased after stimulation with EGF , whereas lamellipodia protrusion velocity remained constant ( Table 1 ) . SACED offered the possibility of demonstrating these changes in concentration - course experiments ( Fig . 6 ) . Mean values were calculated and plotted as percentage of controls . With increasing EGF concentration , rufﬂe retraction velocity was gradually enhanced to maximum of 144 % of controls at 100 ng / ml EGF ( Fig . 6 ) . This correlated with a signiﬁcantly en - hanced migration velocity , reaching 255 % of the con - trol at 100 ng / ml EGF . In contrast , the velocity of lamellipodia protrusion did not change signiﬁcantly even at high EGF concentrations . Both lamellipodia frequency and rufﬂe frequency were enhanced to a maximum of 135 % by 100 ng / ml EGF ( not shown ) . DISCUSSION The aim of this study was to characterize the motion of keratinocytes by a new technique consisting of com - puter - assisted stroboscopic analysis of cell dynamics , SACED . This method is a major improvement in that it creates the possibility of quantitatively analyzing the motion of cells by characterizing simultaneously the dynamics of lamellae , including lamellipodia and rufﬂe formation , of cultured cells with high resolution in space and in time . Changes in these dynamics can be investigated in deﬁned regions of one cell . Owing to the high rate of data acquisition , a statistically signiﬁcant number of cells can reliably be examined by SACED . Keratinocyte migration is usually evaluated by cell migration assays such as wound scratch assays , colony dispersion assays , or phagokinetic assays [ 37 – 39 , 45 – 48 ] . A number of previous studies allowed quantitative data on rufﬂe and lamellipodia dynamics in epidermal cells [ 49 ] , ﬁbroblasts [ 8 , 11 , 14 , 50 , 51 ] , or neuronal growth cones [ 52 ] to be acquired . In contrast to SACED , however , the methods used in these studies involved time - consuming manual analyses of lamella dynamics with only limited resolution in time . More - over , time - consuming manual measurements limited the number of cells to be examined . According to these studies rufﬂe retraction velocity in cultured tissue cells was determined in the range of 3 – 5 m m / min . Lamellipodia extension velocity was ob - served to range from 2 to 8 m m / min . The magnitude of the observed velocities corresponds to our quantiﬁca - tion of keratinocyte dynamics . Until now , the velocity of rufﬂe retraction or lamellipodia protrusion in human keratinocytes has not been documented . The effect of EGF on cell migration has been ana - lyzed in human keratinocytes . Using a phagokinetic assay Chen et al . [ 53 ] reported an increase in keratin - ocyte migration after 1 ng / ml EGF stimulation from 1 . 7 - to 6 . 3 - fold after 16 h , depending on the substrate . In ﬁbroblasts , stimulation with 25 m M EGF increased cell migration rates to 60 % after 24 h as measured by scatter assays [ 36 ] . On the other hand , wound scratch assays reported an increase of cell migration of 200 % [ 36 ] and of 220 % [ 54 ] after 24 h . In terms of absolute single - cell velocity recordings only few data are avail - able regarding EGF stimulation . In a recent publica - tion , a sophisticated computer analysis was used to demonstrate a maximal 3 . 5 - fold increase of ﬁbroblast migration velocity from 0 . 5 – 0 . 7 to 0 . 5 – 1 . 5 m m / min 8 h after EGF stimulation depending on substrate density [ 27 ] . However , these studies did not address quantitative aspects of EGF stimulation on lamella dynamics , espe - cially on a short - term scale . At present , EGF has only qualitatively been reported to possess stimulatory ef - fects on cultured cell membrane rufﬂing [ 31 , 55 ] and lamellipodia extension [ 56 ] . In this study we have ap - plied SACED to analyze the instant increase of lamella dynamics after shifting cells to high EGF concentra - tions . The novel observations indicate that lamellipo - dia protrusion and rufﬂe retraction may be separately regulated , since only rufﬂe retraction velocity is en - hanced , whereas lamellipodia protrusion velocity re - mains unaffected . Increased lamella and rufﬂe retrac - tion is presumably compensated for by an enhanced frequency of lamellipodia protrusion formation . Preliminary results with AG1478 , an inhibitor of EGFR kinase , conﬁrmed that EGF exerts a differential effect on lamella dynamics . Application of this inhibi - tor predominantly reduced rufﬂe retraction velocity , whereas the velocity of lamellipodia protrusion was affected to only a minor extent ( unpublished results ) . It is generally agreed that lamella dynamics are an important prerequisite for cell migration [ 7 , 10 , 11 , 26 , 57 – 60 ] . In this study we have shown that the EGF - induced cell migration is associated with increased ruf - ﬂe retraction velocity . Hence , our observations show that rufﬂe retraction velocity and the frequency of la - mellipodia formation have a major regulatory inﬂuence on promoting cell migration , whereas the velocity of lamellipodia protrusion is of minor importance . We thank Michael Spielberg ( Division of Theoretical Biology , Uni - versity of Bonn ) for his assistance in displaying the data obtained by SACED . We gratefully appreciate the help of Dr . Scott Simon , Hous - ton , Texas , and Dr . Wolfgang Neumu¨ller , Munich , Germany , in critically reading and discussing the manuscript . This work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and by Fonds der Chemischen Industrie ( VH ) and performed in cooperation with the Bonner Forum Biomedizin . REFERENCES 1 . Magee , A . I . , Lytton , N . A . , and Watt , F . M . ( 1987 ) . Calcium - induced changes in cytoskeleton and motility of cultured human keratinocytes . Exp . Cell . Res . 172 , 43 – 53 . 241 HIGH - RESOLUTION ANALYSIS OF LAMELLA DYNAMICS IN HUMAN KERATINOCYTES 2 . Schmidt , C . E . , Horwitz , A . F . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1993 ) . Integrin – cytoskeletal interactions in mi - grating ﬁbroblasts are dynamic , asymmetric , and regulated . J . Cell Biol . 4 , 977 – 991 . 3 . Malliri , A . , Symons , M . , Hennigan , R . F . , Hurlstone , A . F . , Lamb , R . F . , Wheeler , T . , and B . W . O . ( 1988 ) . The transcription factor AP - 1 is required for EGF - induced activation of rho - like GTPases , cytoskeletal rearrangements , motility , and in vitro invasion of A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1087 – 1099 . 4 . Palecek , S . P . , Huttenlocher , A . , Horwitz , A . F . , and Lauffen - burger , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Physical and biochemical regulation of integrin release during rear detachment of migrating cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 929 – 940 . 5 . Shelden , E . ( 1999 ) . Major role for active extension in the for - mation of processes by ras - transformed ﬁbroblasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 42 , 12 – 26 . 6 . Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1991 ) . Models for receptor - mediated cell phenomena : Adhesion and migration . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Bio - phys . Chem . 20 , 387 – 414 . 7 . Sheetz , M . P . ( 1994 ) . Cell migration by graded attachment to substrates and contraction . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 , 149 – 155 . 8 . Abercrombie , M . , Heaysman , J . E . M . , and Pegrum , S . M . ( 1970 ) . The locomotion of ﬁbroblasts in culture . II . “Rufﬂing . ” Exp . Cell Res . 60 , 437 – 444 . 9 . Condeelis , J . ( 1993 ) . Life at the leading edge : The formation of cell protrusions . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 , 411 – 444 . 10 . Stossel , T . P . ( 1993 ) . On the crawling of animal cells . Science 260 , 1086 – 1094 . 11 . Felder , S . , and Elson , E . L . ( 1990 ) . Mechanics of ﬁbroblast locomotion : Quantitative analysis of forces and motion at the leading lamellas of ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 2513 – 2526 . 12 . Ridley , A . J . ( 1994 ) . Membrane rufﬂing and signal transduc - tion . BioEssays 16 , 321 – 327 . 13 . Alt , W . , Brosteanu , O . , Hinz , B . , and Kaiser , H . W . ( 1995 ) . Patterns of spontaneous motility in videomicrographs of human epidermal keratinocytes ( HEK ) . Biochem . Cell Biol . 73 , 441 – 459 . 14 . Abercrombie , M . , Heaysman , J . E . , and Pegrum , S . M . ( 1970 ) . The locomotion of ﬁbroblasts in culture . I . Movements of the leading edge . Exp . Cell Res . 59 , 393 – 398 . 15 . Grebecki , A . ( 1990 ) . Dynamics of the contractile system in pseu - dopodial tips of normally locomoting amoebae , demonstrated in vivo by video - enhancement . Protoplasma 54 , 98 – 111 . 16 . Manske , M . , and Bade , E . G . ( 1994 ) . Growth factor - induced cell migration : Biology and methods of analysis . Int . Rev . Cytol . 155 , 49 – 96 . 17 . Boyden , S . V . ( 1962 ) . The chemotactic effect of mixtures of antibody and antigen on polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J . Exp . Med . 115 , 453 – 466 . 18 . Albrecht - Buehler , G . ( 1977 ) . The phagocinetic tracks of 3T3 cells . Cell 11 , 395 – 404 . 19 . Chen , J . D . , Helmold , M . , Kim , J . P . , Wynn , K . C . , and Woodley , D . T . ( 1994 ) . Human keratinocytes make uniquely linear phago - kinetic tracks . Dermatology 188 , 6 – 12 . 20 . Lipton , A . , Klinger , J . , Paul , D . , and Holley , R . W . ( 1971 ) . Migration of mouse 3T3 ﬁbroblasts in response to a serum factor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 68 , 2799 – 2801 . 21 . Lund - Johansen , M . , Bjerkvig , R . , Humphrey , P . A . , Bigner , S . H . , Bigner , D . D . , and Laerum , O . D . ( 1990 ) . Effect of epider - mal growth factor on glioma cell growth , migration , and inva - sion in vitro . Cancer Res . 50 , 6039 – 6044 . 22 . Kramer , R . H . , and Nicholson , G . L . ( 1979 ) . Interaction of tumor cells with vascular endothelial cell monolayers : A model for metastatic invasion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 5704 – 5709 . 23 . Titus , M . , Wessels , D . , Spudich , J . , and Soll , D . R . ( 1992 ) . The unconventional myosin encoded by the myoA gene plays a role in Dictyostelium motility . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 233 – 246 . 24 . Dunn , G . A . , and Zicha , D . ( 1993 ) . Phase - shifting interference microscopy applied to the analysis of cell behaviour . Symp . Soc . Exp . Biol . 47 , 91 – 106 . 25 . Zicha , D . , and Dunn , G . A . ( 1991 ) . A new direct - viewing che - motaxis chamber . J . Cell Sci . 99 , 769 – 775 . 26 . Allen , W . E . , Zicha , D . , Ridley , A . J . , and Jones , G . E . ( 1998 ) . A role for cdc42 in macrophage chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1147 – 1157 . 27 . Ware , M . F . , Wells , A . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Epi - dermal growth factor alters ﬁbroblast migration speed and directional persistence reciprocally and in a matrix - dependent manner . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2423 – 2432 . 28 . Soll , D . R . ( 1995 ) . The use of computers in understanding how animal cells crawl . Int . Rev . Cytol . 163 , 43 – 104 . 29 . Hinz , B . , and Brosteanu , O . ( 1997 ) . Periodicity in shape changes of human epidermal keratinocytes . In “Dynamics of Cell and Tissue Motion” ( W . Alt , A . Deutsch , and G . Dunn , Eds . ) , Birkhaeuser , Basel . 30 . Michiels , F . , Habets , G . G . M . , Stam , J . C . , Van der Kammen , R . A . , and Collard , J . G . ( 1995 ) . A role of rac in tiam - 1 - induced membrane rufﬂing and invasion . Nature 375 , 338 – 340 . 31 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Dieckmann , D . , and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rac regu - lates growth factor - induced membrane rufﬂing . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 . 32 . Azuma , T . , Witke , W . , Stossel , T . P . , Hartwig , J . H . , and Kwi - atkowski , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Gelsolin is a downstream effector of rac for ﬁbroblast motility . EMBO J . 17 , 1362 – 1370 . 33 . Myat , M . M . , Anderson , S . , Allen , L . A . , and Aderem , A . ( 1997 ) . MARCKS regulates membrane rufﬂing and cell spreading . Curr . Biol . 7 , 611 – 614 . 34 . Huttenlocher , A . , Lakonishok , M . , Kinder , M . , Wu , S . , Truong , T . , Knudsen , K . A . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1998 ) . Integrin and cadherin synergy regulates contact inhibition of migration and motile activity . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 515 – 526 . 35 . Katoh , K . , Hammar , K . , Smith , P . J . S . , and Oldenbourg , R . ( 1999 ) . Birefringence imaging directly reveals architectural dy - namics of ﬁlamentous actin in living growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 197 – 210 . 36 . Chen , P . , Gupta , K . , and Wells , A . ( 1994 ) . Cell movement elic - ited by epidermal growth factor receptor requires kinase and auto - phosphorylation but is separable from mitogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 4 , 547 – 555 . 37 . Ando , Y . , and Jensen , P . J . ( 1993 ) . Epidermal growth factor and insulin - like growth factor enhance keratinocyte migration . J . Invest . Dermatol . 100 , 633 – 639 . 38 . McCawley , L . J . , O’Brien , P . , and Hudson , L . G . ( 1997 ) . Over - expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor contributes to enhanced ligand - mediated motility in keratinocyte cell lines . Endocrinology 138 , 121 – 127 . 39 . Cha , D . , O’Brien , P . , O’Toole , E . A . , Woodley , D . T . , and Hudson , L . G . ( 1996 ) . Enhanced modulation of keratinocyte motility by transforming growth factor - alpha ( TGF - alpha ) relative to epi - dermal growth factor ( EGF ) . J . Invest . Dermatol . 106 , 590 – 597 . 40 . Ju , W . D . , Schiller , J . T . , Kazempour , M . K . , and Lowy , D . R . ( 1993 ) . TGF alpha enhances locomotion of cultured human ker - atinocytes . J . Invest . Dermatol . 100 , 628 – 632 . 242 HINZ ET AL . 41 . Turksen , K . , Choi , Y . , and Fuchs , E . ( 1991 ) . Transforming growth factor alpha induces collagen degradation and cell mi - gration in differentiating human epidermal raft cultures . Cell Regul . 2 , 613 – 625 . 42 . Chicoine , M . R . , and Silbergeld , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Mitogens as mo - togens . J . Neurooncol . 35 , 249 – 257 . 43 . Rheinwald , J . G . ( 1975 ) . Serial cultivation of strains of human epidermal keratinocytes : The formation of keratinizing colonies from single cells . Cell 6 , 331 – 336 . 44 . Green , H . , Kehinde , O . , and Thomas , J . ( 1979 ) . Growth of cultured human epidermal cells into multiple epithelia suitable for grafting . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 5665 – 5670 . 45 . Donaldson , D . J . , and Mahan , J . T . ( 1988 ) . Keratinocyte migra - tion and the extracellular matrix . J . Invest . Dermatol . 90 , 623 – 627 . 46 . Zhang , K . , and Kramer , R . H . ( 1996 ) . Laminin 5 deposition promotes keratinocyte motility . Exp . Cell Res . 227 , 309 – 322 . 47 . O’Toole , E . A . , Marinkovich , M . P . , Hoefﬂer , W . K . , Furthmayr , H . , and Woodley , D . T . ( 1997 ) . Laminin - 5 inhibits human ker - atinocyte migration . Exp . Cell Res . 233 , 330 – 339 . 48 . Chen , J . D . , Lapiere , J . C . , Sauder , D . N . , Peavey , C . , and Woodley , D . T . ( 1995 ) . Interleukin - 1 alpha stimulates keratin - ocyte migration through an epidermal growth factor / transform - ing growth factor - alpha - independent pathway . J . Invest . Der - matol . 104 , 729 – 733 . 49 . Dipasquale , A . ( 1975 ) . Locomotory activity of epithelial cells in culture . Exp . Cell Res . 94 , 191 – 215 . 50 . Chen , W . T . ( 1979 ) . Induction of spreading during ﬁbroblast movement . J . Cell Biol . 81 , 684 – 691 . 51 . Chen , W . T . ( 1981 ) . Surface changes during retraction - induced spreading of ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 49 , 1 – 13 . 52 . Suter , D . M . , Errante , L . M . , Belotserkovsky , V . , and Forscher , P . ( 1998 ) . The Ig superfamily cell adhesion molecule , ApCAM , mediates growth cone steering by substrate - cytoskeletal cou - pling . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 227 – 240 . 53 . Chen , J . D . , Kim , J . P . , Zhang , K . , Sarret , Y . , Wynn , K . C . , Kramer , R . H . , and Woodley , D . T . ( 1993 ) . Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) promotes human keratinocyte locomotion on col - lagen by increasing the alpha2 integrin subunit . Exp . Cell Res . 209 , 216 – 223 . 54 . Xie , H . , Pallero , M . A . , Gupta , K . , Chang , P . , Ware , M . F . , Witke , W . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , Murphy - Ullrich , J . E . , and Wells , A . ( 1998 ) . EGF receptor regulation of cell motility : EGF induces disassembly of focal adhesions inde - pendently of the motility - associated PLCgamma signaling pathway . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 615 – 624 . 55 . Diakonova , M . , Payrastre , B . , van Velzen , A . G . , Hage , W . J . , van Bergen en Henegouwen , P . M . , Boonstra , J . , Cremers , F . F . , and Humbel , B . M . ( 1995 ) . Epidermal growth factor induces rapid and transient association of phospholipase C - gamma 1 with EGF - receptor and ﬁlamentous actin at membrane rufﬂes of A431 cells . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 2499 – 2509 . 56 . Segall , J . E . , Tyerech , S . , Boselli , L . , Masseling , S . , Helft , J . , Chan , A . , Jones , J . , and Condeelis , J . ( 1996 ) . EGF stimulates lamellipod extension in metastatic mammary adenocarcinoma cells by an actin - dependent mechanism . Clin . Exp . Metastasis 14 , 61 – 72 . 57 . Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1996 ) . Making connections count . Nature 383 , 390 . 58 . Felder , S . , and Kam , Z . ( 1994 ) . Human neutrophil motility : Time - dependent three - dimensional shape and granule diffu - sion . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 28 , 285 – 302 . 59 . Lin , C . - H . , Espreaﬁco , E . M . , Mooseker , M . S . , and Forscher , P . ( 1996 ) . Myosin drives retrograde F - actin ﬂow in neuronal growth cones . Neuron 16 , 769 – 782 . 60 . Heidemann , S . R . , and Buxbaum , R . E . ( 1998 ) . Cell crawling : First the motor , now the transmission . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1 – 4 . Received December 2 , 1998 Revised version received April 1 , 1999 243 HIGH - RESOLUTION ANALYSIS OF LAMELLA DYNAMICS IN HUMAN KERATINOCYTES