138 Copyright © 2010 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 7 Designing E - Learning Applications with Students : The Case of the We ! Design Methodology George N . Triantafyllakos Aristotle University of Thessaloniki , Greece George E . Palaigeorgiou University of Thessaly , Greece Ioannis A . Tsoukalas Aristotle University of Thessaloniki , Greece IntroductIon The participation of users at diverse levels and phases in the design process of technology products has become common practice within the HCI com - munity . As pointed out by Kay ( 1990 ) and further elaborated in the seminal work of Druin ( 2002 ) “…the actual dawn of user interface design first happened when computer designers finally noticed , not just that end - users had functioning minds , but that a better understanding of how AbstrAct In years past , many methodological approaches , methods and techniques have been implemented based on the belief that users can and should be involved in the design process of technology products that af - fect them . Inspired by the findings of research involving users and particularly students at diverse levels and phases of the design process of technology products , we have developed the We ! Design methodol - ogy , a student - centered participatory design methodology that assigns students a primary role in the design process . We present the various phases of the We ! Design methodology , examine the results of its application in four different design projects ( a web - based e - assessment application for tertiary educa - tion , a course website , an e - Portfolio application , and a Tablet - PC - based e - assessment application for secondary education ) and elaborate upon our overall experiences with the methodology during the past 3 years . Participant evaluations indicated that the We ! Design methodology was an adequate means for successful elicitation of students’ needs and their application in educational software design . DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 60566 - 940 - 3 . ch007 139 Designing E - Learning Applications with Students these minds worked , would completely shift the paradigm of interaction . ” In recent years , many methodological ap - proaches , methods and techniques have strived to achieve such a goal . The overarching link between all of these approaches is a commitment to the belief that users can and should be involved in the design process of technology that affects their work or their life ( Ehn & Kyng , 1991 ; Bødker et al . , 1991 , Muller , 1991 ) . There are only a few exceptions to this rule ( Webb , 1996 ) . Children , and particularly students , comprise a unique group of participants whose perspectives as designers or merely initiators of educational activities in learning environments have not been adequately conveyed . This conclusion is further confirmed by Könings ( 2007 ) in a recent study investigating the desirability and feasibility of use of participatory design in education . In one of his questions on whether students convey their ideas about education to teachers , none of the students gave a positive answer . Various reasons are pre - sented as justifying this negative result ; namely , the fear that teachers will not use the information given by students , the fear of conflicts with teach - ers , and the lack of opportunities for students to convey their ideas . However , as shown in the same study , the majority of the students ( 58 . 3 % ) would appreciate the opportunity to engage in the participatory design of their education , while only 20 . 8 % objected to that idea ( Könings , 2007 ) . In this chapter , our objective is to present the main principles and issues governing the idea of the participation of students in the design process of educational technology products . We present the We ! Design methodology , a student - centered participatory design methodology which aims at involving students in the design of e - learning applications and we look into the results of its ap - plication in four different design projects . Finally , we elaborate upon our overall experiences with the methodology for the past 3 years . desIGnInG educAtIonAl tecHnoloGy Products wItH cHIldren While the literature is quite rich in case studies of adult users participating in the design of technol - ogy products ( e . g . Bødker et al . , 1991 ; Muller , 1991 ) , it is nevertheless limited when it comes to children as participants ( Nesset & Large , 2004 ) . There are two main reasons why this is the case . The first and most important reason is that children are an extremely diverse and special user group per se . Markopoulos & Bekker ( 2003 ) adopt Akuff and Reiher’s four developmental stages to distinguish the following age groups for children : ( a ) the de - pendency / exploratory stage ( ages birth – 2 years ) , ( b ) the emerging - autonomy stage ( ages 3 – 7 ) , ( c ) the rule / role stage ( ages 8 – 12 ) , and ( d ) early and late adolescence ( age 13 upwards ) . Each age group is characterized by its specific cognitive abilities , social behavior patterns , relations , preferences in technology products and interfaces , and so on . Thus , it is imperative that any team involved in design projects that plans to involve children in the design process should establish beforehand a deep understanding of children’s cognitive , social and developmental traits and adapt its methods and techniques to the corresponding age group . The second reason refers to the nature of technological products being designed by and for children . Any kind of technology designed for chil - dren is characterized by its inherent educational nature . Even though a more traditional perspective would suggest that technology for children could be divided into two broad categories , recreational and educational , the “all - learning” disposition of a child ( Druin , 2002 ) gives a more or less evident educational character to all technology products . Typically , they must be conceived and designed in a way that they embody specific and complex learning theories and interface principles that , as a rule , children are aware of . Thus , it is not clear how children can contribute to the design of such products , when neither the domain knowledge 15 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / designing - learning - applications - students / 40555 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , InfoSci - Educational Technologies , Cognitive Informatics , Library Science , Information Studies , and Education , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Education , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content Theoretical and Practical Considerations in the Design of Web - Based Instruction Susan M . Miller and Kenneth L . Miller ( 2000 ) . Instructional and Cognitive Impacts of Web - Based Education ( pp . 156 - 177 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / theoretical - practical - considerations - design - web / 23905 ? camid = 4v1a From e - Learning to e - Education : Goals , Strategic Assessment and Implications Zohar Ben - Asher ( 2010 ) . Affective , Interactive and Cognitive Methods for E - Learning Design : Creating an Optimal Education Experience ( pp . 1 - 31 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / learning - education - goals - strategic - assessment / 40549 ? camid = 4v1a Managing in the Learning Organization Luca Iandoli and Giuseppe Zollo ( 2007 ) . Organizational Cognition and Learning : Building Systems for the Learning Organization ( pp . 235 - 250 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / managing - learning - organization / 27900 ? camid = 4v1a Technology Collaboration ( Level 2 . 0 ) Lawrence A . Tomei ( 2005 ) . Taxonomy for the Technology Domain ( pp . 126 - 146 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / technology - collaboration - level / 30048 ? camid = 4v1a