J . Cell Sd . Suppl . 8 , 35 - 54 ( 1987 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1987 35 THE PHYSICS OF CELL MOTILITY G E O R G E F . O ST E R Departments of Biophysics , Entomology & Zoology , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA ' - - - • - a n d ALAN S . PE R EL SO N Theoretical Division , Los Alamos National Laboratory , Los Alamos , NM 87545 , USA SUMMARY Cell locomotion begins with a protrusion from the leading periphery of the cell . What drives this extension ? Here we present a model for the extension of cell protuberances that unifies certain aspects of this phenomenon , and is based on the hypothesis that osmotic pressure drives cell extensions . This pressure arises from membrane - associated reactions , which liberate osmoticallv active particles , and from the swelling of the actin network that underlies the membrane . i n t r o d u c t i o n : w h a t a r e t h e f o r c e s d r i v i n g c e l l m o t i l i t y ? Cells possess several mechanisms for exerting forces on their surroundings . In particular , a number of mechanochemical enzymes have been identified , including myosin , dynein and kinesin ; other molecules will probably be identified in the future . All of these molecules share a common characteristic : they enable the cell to exert only contractile forces . This is a puzzling situation , since in order to move about cells must also be capable of generating protrusive forces . Placing cells in hypertonic media seems to suppress all protrusive activity , suggesting that protrusive force generation may be produced by simple osmotic pressure ( Harris , 1973 ; Trinkaus , 1984 , 1985 ) . But osmotic pressure is an isotropic force : it acts equally in all directions . Therefore , in order to use pressure for protrusion , the cell must devise means to focus the force in particular directions . In the next section we propose a mechanism by which osmotic forces drive cell protrusion , and which is coordinated with the polymerization of the actin network that fills such protrusions . This model is an extension of two previous models we have proposed for lamellipod and acrosomal extension . MODELS FOR CELL PROTRUSION Cells move by extending their periphery in a number of motile appendages . These protrusions are usually classified according to their appearance : lamellae , filopods , microspikes , pseudopods or blebs ( Trinkaus , 1984 ) . The chemical steps involved in creating these appendages are turning out to be extraordinarily complex , and it is easy to lose sight of a simple fact of physics : in order to extend its periphery the cell must generate a protrusive force . Since actin polymerization is generally associated 36 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson with protrusive activity , there seems to be a general feeling that this polymerization can ‘push’ the cell periphery outwards . Upon closer examination , however , this idea seems untenable , for there is no evidence that the event of actin polymerization is associated with any conformational change that could produce a mechanical force , such as that produced by myosin head movements . But if the chemical process of polymerization cannot itself generate a protrusive force , how can one explain the intimate association of actin polymerization with protrusive activity ? We propose here a physicochemical mechanism for resolving this apparent paradox . Our model is built on the notion that the processes involving actin polymerization upset the local osmotic pressure equilibrium , and it is this unbalanced osmotic force that drives protrusion . However , there are several ways in which a cell can generate and control an osmotic pressure differential . We begin with a particularly simple system : the acrosomal process in the sea cucumber , Thyone . Elongation of the acrosomal process in Thyone One of the most dramatic examples of cell protrusive activity is the elongation of the acrosomal process in the sperm of echinoderms . In the sea cucumber , Thyone , the acrosome can extend 90 fim in less than 10 s . The acrosomal process is filled with actin fibres ; Tilney & Kallenbach ( 1979 ) , on the basis of evidence cited below , concluded that actin polymerization must drive the elongation process . As we will show , however , it turns out that actin polymerization is too slow to account for the dramatically rapid growth of the Thyone acrosomal process , and so we present an alternative explanation ( Oster et al . 1982 ) : that osmotically generated hydrostatic forces drive the extension and that actin polymerization acts to form and stabilize the tube - like shape of the growing structure . That is , actin ultimately forms a rigid supporting structure that allows the acrosome to keep its shape once equilibrium is reached , but actin polymerization does not push the acrosome outwards . Does actin polymerization drive acrosomal extension ? Fig . 1 is a schematic illustration of the acrosomal reaction in Thyone . When the sperm comes in contact with the jelly coat of an egg the acrosomal reaction is initiated . The acrosomal vacuole fuses with the plasma membrane , and actin monomers stored in the peri - acrosomal cup begin polymerizing from the actomere , a nucleation site on the cell nucleus ( Tilney et al . 1983 ) . Once nucleated , filaments grow outward from the actomere . Labelling with myosin subfragment 1 indicates that the growing fibres are unidirectionally polarized with their barbed end oriented toward the plasma membrane ( Tilney & Kallenbach , 1979 ) . The actin within the periacrosomal cup is not free , but is complexed with profilin and two other actin binding proteins to prevent spontaneous nucleation within the periacrosomal cup ( Tilney et al . 1983 ) . Experiments by Tilney & Inoue ( 1982 , 1985 ) show that , as the acrosome grows , its length increases in proportion to the square root of time , a dependence that is generally characteristic of diffusion processes . If monomer has to diffuse from the periacrosomal cup to the growing tip of a fibre before it can polymerize , one might expect the rate of fibre growth to be limited by the rate of monomer diffusion , and hence the length of the fibres would increase as the square root of time . If this is the Physics of cell motility 37 1 1 0 • 05 / zm L ( t ) Fig . 1 . A . A schematic diagram of the acrosomal process in Thyone . The acrosomal process grows from the acromere , a nucleating structure at the base of the acrosomal cup , which contains concentrated actin - profilin complexes . B . Upon activation , the mem­ brane of the acrosomal vesicle fuses with the plasma membrane and there ensues a rapid influx of water into the acrosomal cup , doubling its volume in some 70 ms . The acrosomal cup is filled with profilin - actin complexes , which diffuse to the growing tip , dissociate , and the G - actin polymerizes onto the ends of the actin fibres . The acrosomal process extends some 90 / im in less than 10 s ( see Tilney et al . 1978 ; Tilney & Inoue , 1982 , 1985 ; Oster et al . 1982 ) . Note the bulbous tip region , which may indicate osmotic swelling in this region . C . A schematic diagram of the model acrosome . After inflation by osmotic influx of water , J v , the acrosomal cup has a volume V ' = 10 _ 1J cm3 . Because of the elasticity of the cup , there is a hydrostatic pressure , p B . The tip extends at velocity AL / At , where L { t ) is the length of the acrosome at time t . The driving force for extension is the pressure drop at the tip : pT ~ po , where pQ is the external pressure . The only forces opposing the extension are frictional drag , F v , and membrane tension Tm . 38 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson case , then would this not prove that the extension of the acrosome is driven by the actin polymerization reaction ? The answer appears to be no . We show in Appendix 1 that diffusion of monomer and actin polymerization at the growing tip does lead to a fibre growth rate that is proportional to f . However , unlike estimates made by Tilney & Kallenbach ( 1979 ) , we find that the growth rate of the acrosomal process , when limited by monomer diffusion , is approximately an order of magnitude smaller than that observed . Hydrostatic pressure could drive the elongation o f the acrosome . The periacro - somal cup contains a very high concentration of protein . Tilney & Inoue ( 1982 ) estimated the concentration of actin , profilin and other actin binding proteins to be 370 mg ml - 1 . The protein would occupy a substantial fraction of the volume of the periacrosomal cup and , because of excluded volume effects , would generate a considerable osmotic pressure ( cf . Minton , 1983 ) . The molecular weights of actin and haemoglobin are similar . Using the data in fig . 3 of Minton ( 1983 ) for haemoglobin we conclude that at a concentration of 370 mg ml - 1 profilactin would generate an osmotic pressure of approximately 400torr ( T ) . Experiments by Dan et al . ( 1964 , 1967 ) on the early events in the acrosomal reaction demonstrated that in the sea - urchin sperm there is roughly a threefold volume increase in the region occupied by actin , and an even larger increase in volume in starfish sperm . Inoue & Tilney ( 1982 ) found that within 50 - 70 ms after induction , the volume of the acrosomal region nearly doubles and there is a precipitous drop in the refractive index of the periacrosomal region . Taken together , these data indicate that there is a considerable influx of water into the periacrosomal region of the sperm ( see also Green , 1978 ) . We believe that such a rapid water influx could create a temporary hydrostatic pressure increase , which could extend the acrosomal process . The rapid water influx could be considered analogous to taking a deep breath when about to blow up a balloon , and then exhaling , which relieves the increase in pressure and inflates the balloon , analogous to the extending acrosomal process . Oster et al . ( 1982 ) constructed a detailed mechanical model for such a mechanism . This model for acrosomal elongation assumes that a pressure differential drives the elongation . Interestingly , the model also predicted that the length of the acrosome should grow in proportion to the square root of time . Further they were able quantitatively to fit the data of Tilney & Inoue ( 1982 ) for the rate of acrosomal extension with their data . Because the mechanical properties of the acrosomal membrane have not been measured , there is still some uncertainty as to whether the parameter values Oster et al . chose to fit the data are realistic . However , this modelling exercise does show that hydrostatic pressure can drive acrosomal elongation at realistic rates . In order to test these predictions , Tilney & Inoue ( 1985 ) varied the tonicity of the medium outside the sperm . As predicted by the model , increasing the osmolarity of the medium , which would reduce the osmotic driving force for water inflow and hence the subsequent hydrostatic pressure increase , decreased the rate of acrosomal elongation and the final length the process obtained . At a tonicity of 1 - 5 times that of normal sea water acrosomal process formation is Physics of cell motility 39 Fig . 2 . A plot of the square of the acrosome length , Lr , as a function of time , t . The data points are from the experiments of Tilney & Inoue ( 1982 , 1985 ) ; the continuous line is computed from the osmotic model ( see Oster et al . 1982 , for the exact parameter values employed in the simulation ) . The broken line is computed from the diffusion - limited polymerization model ( Perelson & Coutsias , 1986 ) . Even assuming polymerization is instantaneous , the slope of the diffusion model is less than 35 / im2s , compared with 960fim2s _ l for the experimental points . Therefore diffusion - limited polymerization of actin at the tip of the acrosome cannot drive the extension process fast enough . completely inhibited . Conversely , decreasing the tonicity of the suspending medium ( which should increase the osmotic driving force ) led to an increased rate of acrosomal elongation and increased the final length of the process . Water inflow into the acrosome is a transient process . Thus it can create the force necessary to extend the acrosome , but it cannot maintain that force . The pressure will eventually equalize throughout the system , and unless a cytoskeletal rearrange­ ment occurs , the acrosomal process cannot remain extended . However , during its transient existence the hydrostatic pressure imbalance can do more than simply extend the membrane of the acrosome : it can also drive flows of cytoplasm up the acrosome and hence transport profilactin at a rate that is greater than that attainable by pure diffusion . At this increased rate of transport actin polymerization could keep up with the growth of the acrosomal process , so that the acrosome always appeared to be filled with actin filaments . Simulation of the model acrosome . The model acrosome is shown schematically in Fig . IB ; the equations are given in Appendix 2 . Fig . 2 shows a plot of the square of the acrosome length as a function of time . The osmotic pressure model can fit the data quite well , for the frictional drag forces on the acrosomal cylinder conspire to 40 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson produce a linear L 1 versus t plot just as a pure diffusion process would ( cf . Appen­ dix 1 ) . Data from Tilney & Inoue ( 1985 ) show that varying the osmotic environment of the sperm changes both the extension rate and the maximum length of the acrosomal process . The osmotic model is capable of simulating the extension rate quite well ( Perelson & Oster , unpublished data ) ; however , this should not be taken as proof that the acrosome is driven by osmotic pressure from the acrosomal cup . We can only make two claims . First , simple diffusion of actin is not fast enough to account for the extension rate . Second , the osmotic model can account for the linear relation between the square of the length and time as well as the dependence of the slope on external osmolarity . At the very least , the success of the model in fitting the data should call attention to controlled osmotic forces as a general mechanism for cell protrusion . With this encouragement , we shall outline below a model for other kinds of extension processes in motile cells . First , however , we shall investigate a modification of the above model that incorporates some additional considerations , which may explain the bulbous tip of the acrosomal process ( see Fig . IB ) . Osmotically coupled polymerization . In the above model the driving force for elongation was generated in the acrosomal cup by its large concentration of profilactin . This may not be the complete story , however . In order to form actin filaments , actin - profilin complexes diffuse to the tip of the acrosome where they dissociate into actin and profilin , the actin adding to existing filaments and extending them ( Tilney et al . 1983 ) . Why does the actin - profilin complex dissociate only at the acrosome tip ? One possibility is that there are cleaving enzymes associated with the tip structure . In this connection , Lassing & Lindberg ( 1985 ) showed that the inositol lipid , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) can mediate the cleavage of profilactin into actin monomer and profilin . This cleavage increases the particle number at the membrane and , coupled with consequent counterion changes , may drive an osmotic influx of water at the growing tip of the acrosome . One might expect the tip to take on a slightly bulbous shape due to this water influx , and indeed this is observed ( Tilney & Inoue , 1982 , 1985 ) . In order to quantify possible osmotic effects associated with dissociation of profilactin , we have developed a model for acrosomal extension that couples osmotic drive due to profilactin dissociation and actin polymerization . We call this process osmotically coupled polymerization ( Fig . 3 ) . We assume that profilactin stored in the base of the acrosome diffuses to the tip of the growing acrosome . At the tip it is cleaved ( e . g . by PIP 2 ) into actin and profilin . The free actin diffuses within the acrosome and adds to filament free ends via a reversible reaction . The free profilin also diffuses within the acrosome away from its source of generation , the acrosomal tip . The tip of the acrosome is assumed to move outwards due to the generation of an osmotically driven inflow . We impose volume conservation so that each / ¿m 3 of water that enters increases the volume of the acrosome by the same amount . As space is created and actin monomers released , actin filaments are able to elongate until they reach the membrane . The equations describing the model are given in Appendix 3 ( full details of the model will be published elsewhere ) . Physics of cell motility 41 Fig . 3 . The osmotically coupled polymerization model . Actin - profilin complexes diffuse to the plasma membrane where they are cleaved by the enzyme , E , to G - actin and profilin . The particle gain creates an osmotic influx , J v , which drives the boundary , b ( t ) to the right at velocity d b / dt . The G - actin polymerizes onto the fibres , F , which grow at a rate da / dt . Preliminary simulations of this model indicate that , as a model for acrosomal elongation , it suffers from the same diffusional limitations as does the pure polymerization model of Appendix 1 . That is , the rate of diffusion of profilactin from the periacrosomal cup to the membrane limits the rate of elongation of the acrosomal process below that observed by Tilney & Inoue . If enough osmotically active particles are created at the tip per profilactin cleaved , then the acrosome will be able to elongate at speeds consistent with observation . However , under such circum­ stances the actin fibres will not be able to keep up with the elongating membrane and a gap will form between the two . A combined model , which takes into consideration convective transport of prolifactin to the tip , due to osmotic water inflows at the base , along with osmotic extension of the tip due to reactions associated with the cleavage of profilactin , may well be able to account for all of the experimental observations . We shall report on this model elsewhere . Indeed , it is likely that the acrosome extension is driven by a two - step process , the initial extension being driven by the hydrostatic pressure generated at the base , and the final stages by the osmotic influx at the tip . While our analysis of the acrosomal process demonstrates that osmotic forces are physically capable of driving the acrosomal extension , it does not prove that acrosomal elongation actually works this way ; this issue can only be settled experimentally . For protuberances , such as microspikes and lamellipodia , which grow much more slowly than the acrosome , the speed of diffusional transport of profilactin to the growing membrane would not be limiting , and the osmotically coupled polymerization model may be appropriate . In any event , such a model is 42 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson useful for it provides a unified view of how force generation and actin polymerization are coordinated during cell locomotion . Protrusion o f the cell periphery : microspikes and lamellipodia Two common locomotory appendages are lamellipodia and microspikes . Lamelli­ podia are broad , flat cytoplasmic sheets , filled with an actin network , and largely devoid of other organelles . Microspikes are slender protuberances that resemble the acrosomal process , except that the actin fibres do not terminate in an electron - dense cap , as in the acrosome , but flare into a meshwork gel , i . e . they often appear to terminate in tiny lamellipodia . Typically , microspikes and lamellipodia are extended and retracted during motile activity ; when they adhere to the substratum , the retractive forces pull the cell forward . Frequently , a neural growth cone will advance by ‘filling in’ a lamellipod web between two microspikes . Here we shall present a model for the protrusion of these organelles , but we shall not address the problem of attachment or of subsequent retraction . In a previous model for lamellipodia we suggested that the swelling of the actin gel could drive protrusion ( Oster , 1984 ; Oster & Perelson , 1985 ) . Since then , however , the role of inositol lipids regulating protrusive activity has received much attention . In the light of these recent findings we propose an elaboration of our earlier model * . Cortical events accompanying protrusion . When a chemoattractant binds to cell surface receptors it triggers a complex sequence of events that culminates in extension of the cell surface in the neighbourhood of those receptors . The chemical reactions that cascade from the ligand - receptor interaction are quite complex , and have yet to be completely elucidated ( Omann et al . 1987 ) . Even were they known , it would be idle to attempt a model that incorporates all of these reactions . However , by focusing only on the mechanical consequences of the biochemistry , one can make some progress in understanding the physics underlying cell protrusion . Fig . 7B summarizes some of the cortical events that may be involved . 1 . Inositol lipid metabolism . Binding of a ligand to a chemoattractant receptor initiates a sequence of reactions in the cell cortex . The ligand binding event is first translated into an intracellular signal through the agent of a G - protein , which , by binding GTP , activates a phosphodiesterase on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane ( Berridge , 1986 ; and Fig . 4 ) . This lipase cleaves the inositol lipid , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , into diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and inositol triphosphate ( IP 3 ) . Each of these substances participates in subsequent reactions , which have the following mechanical effects on the cell cortex . ( 1 ) Membrane bending moments . The cleavage of PIP 2 into DAG can produce a mechanical effect since the shape of the lipid changes from cylindrical to conical ( Cullis & Hope , 1985 ; Chernomordik et al . 1985 ) . Thus the DAG that remains in the # Most of the ideas for this proposal grew from conversations with T . Stossell , K . Zaner , P . Janmey , J . Hartwig & H . Yin , of the Hematology & Oncology Unit of the Massachusetts General Hospital . Physics of cell motility 43 Fig . 4 . Part of the inositol lipid pathway that affects cell protrusion . PIP 2 , phosphatidyl - inositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; IP 3 , inositol triphosphate ; DAG , diacylglvcerol ; PKC , protein kinase C ; G , G - actin ; Pr , profilin ; CaS , calcium sequestered in the endoplasmic reticulum . PIP 2 cleaves profilactin into G + Pr , and is itself cleaved into DAG and IP 3 . IP 3 is released into the cytoplasm where it joins G and Pr as osmotically active particles . The broken line indicates the resynthesis pathway for PIP ? . membrane generates a bending moment that can be several orders of magnitude above kT . This bending moment can buckle the membrane outwards if the local concentration of DAG is sufficiently high . While we do not believe this effect is very important in cell protrusion , we do not have enough information to discount its importance . ( 2 ) Intel facial osmotic effects . The receptor - ligand signal initiates several reactions that result in the release of osmotically active particles at the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane . These arise from the following sources : ( a ) PIP 2 can cleave profilactin into actin and profilin , resulting in a net doubling of the particle count ( Lassing & Lindberg , 1985 ) . We note in passing that , since G - actin is negatively charged and profilin positively charged , there can be a counterion osmotic effect ; its magnitude will depend on the titration properties of the macromolecules . Unfortunately , there seems to be little titration data on cortical proteins , ( b ) Cleavage of PIP 2 releases IP 3 into the cytoplasm . This hydrolysis may also expose charge , which will induce counterions that are osmotically active . 2 . Calcium release and remodelling of the cortical actin gel . IP 3 releases sequestered calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum ( Berridge , 1986 ) . Ip 3 ( i . e . Ins ( l , 4 , 5 ) P3 ) is thence phosphorylated to IP 4 ( i . e . Ins ( l , 3 , 4 , 5 ) P4 ) . This appears to open Cai + channels in the plasma membrane , which may serve to replenish the release of internally sequestered Ca2 + ( Houslay , 1987 ) . While this rise in cytosolic Ca2 + also produces an osmotic effect , it is likely to be negligible compared to the osmolarity of the cortical cytoplasm . The rise in cytosolic Ca2 + produces a number of important mechanical effects on the actin network adjacent to the plasma membrane ( cf . Fig . 5 ) . ( 1 ) The elastic modulus of the cortical cytogel is regulated bv solation and gelation proteins . An important class of cortical proteins regulates the degree of gelation of the cortical actin . For example , gelsolm binds two Ca ions , which appear to activate it to bind one or two actin monomers . With one bound actin , the 44 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson Fig . S . Remodelling of the actin network during extension . Gelsolin ( Gs ) binds two calciums and either one or two G - actins . With one bound actin it can solate the actin gel by severing F - actin fibres , and cap the barbed end . With two bound actins it can nucleate the growth of new fibres . Crosslinking proteins , some of which may be calcium activated , promote gelation . Calcium also stimulates the slower process of contraction via calmodulin ( CaM ) and myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) , which phosphorylates myosin : M —¡ > M # ( cf . Oster , 1984 ) . actin—gelsolin complex ( AGs ) can sever actin filaments and cap the ( barbed ) ends , thus preventing further elongation from the barbed ends . However , monomers can still add to the free ( pointed ) ends , since the concentration is probably above the critical concentration for elongation . Moreover , with two bound actins the complex ( A 2 GS ) can nucleate the growth of new filaments . The net effect is an increase in F - actin . Because of excluded volume effects , this probably causes a rise in osmotic pressure ( K . Zaner , personal communication ; Minton , 1983 ) . More importantly , severing of the network weakens its elastic modulus , which enables it to expand under its gel osmotic pressure ( Oster , 1984 ; Oster & Perelson , 1985 ) . There are a number of other actin solation and gelation factors . However , for the purpose of modelling the cortical cytogel we can lump them all into a surrogate substance that can modulate the gelation state , and thus the elastic modulus , of the cytogel . It is worth emphasizing that the osmotic pressure of a gel is different from the interfacial osmotic pressure generated by the collisions of solute particles with a membrane interface . Solute osmotic pressure induces water influx through the plasma membrane , and the resulting hydrostatic pressure is distributed uniformly over the cell . Gel swelling , however , is localized to the vicinity of the network disruption ( Oster , 1984 ) . ( 2 ) Network reannealing . While the calcium - activated gelsolin severs network strands and nucleates new strands , actin binding proteins Physics of cell motility 45 MECHANICALEFFECTS 3 NETWORK SEVERING g EXPANSION Fig . 6 . Summary of the mechanical effects accompanying protrusion of the cell surface . 1 . Cleavage of PIP 2 into DAG creates a membrane bending moment . 2 . Profilin , G - actin and IP 3 ( and perhaps counterions ) create a membrane osmotic pressure . 3 . Severing of F - actin by solating factors allows the network to expand under its gel swelling pressure . 4 . Calcium stimulates fusion of vesicles with the plasma membrane , to supply the extra membrane for protrusion . ( ABP ) are crosslinking the strands and reannealing the gel ( ABPs are generally calcium - independent ) . Thus , the shift in gel - sol equilibrium results in remodelling of the network : first , it swells under its internal osmotic pressure as the fibres are severed , then it resolidifies as the new and remodelled fibres are crosslinked . ( 3 ) Other calcium - stimulated events . In addition to the foregoing events , the rise in cytosolic calcium also initiates many other reactions . Two that are relevant to protrusion are : ( a ) Contraction of the gel . Calcium release initiates phosphorylation of myosin light chain kinase , which leads to contraction of the gel . This is a slower process than protrusion ; however , we shall not deal with this phase of the motility cycle here ( Oster , 1984 ) . ( b ) Exocytosis of vesicles . In many systems calcium stimulates exocytosis of membrane vesicles ( Moore et al . 1987 ) . Since protrusion necessitates an increase in the membrane area of the leading periphery , new membrane must either be inserted at the protuberance , or there must be surface flow of lipid into the region ( Bretscher , 1984 ) . Indeed , solation of the cortical cytoskeleton may facilitate the insertion of vesicles into the plasma membrane ( Perrin et al . 1987 ) . The mechanochemical events listed above are summarized in Fig . 6 and Table 1 . The theory cannot predict what fraction of the protrusive force arises from each of these processes : this will have to be settled by experiments . A dynamical model for cortical protrusion . The cortical chemistry that ac­ companies protrusion is quite complex , and the description we outlined above will certainly have to be extended as more details become known . However , since our focus is on the physics of protrusion rather than the chemistry , we can give the 46 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson Table 1 . Some cortical reactants and their mechanical effects Component Biochemical effect Physical effect PIP 2 Cleaves profilactin DAG Activates PKC Creates membrane bending moment IPs Releases intracellular calcium Osmotic solute Profilin Binds G - actin , prevents polymerization Osmotic solute Gelsolin Binds calcium , severs F - actin , caps barbed end , nucleates fibres Solation : reduces elastic modulus Gelation : increases elastic modulus Calcium Regulation of gelation and solation factors , activation of PKC Negligible osmotic effect ; possible counterion effect PIP 2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; IP 3 , inositol triphosphate ; DAG , diacylglycerol ; PKC , protein kinase C . following scenario for extension of the cell periphery ( cf . Fig . 7A ) . A complete mathematical treatment and numerical study of the model will be presented elsewhere ; however , the equations of motion are very similar to that described in Appendix 3 for the acrosome model , with an additional contribution from swelling of the solated actin gel , a contribution probably not present in the acrosome . Profilactin is free to diffuse in the cytoplasm . We regard the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane as a catalytic surface , where actin - profilin complexes are split ( e . g . by PIP 2 ) . There is a net particle gain at the cytoplasmic interface due to this cleavage and through the release of other osmotically active particles ( e . g . IP3 ) . The effect of this release is to draw water in through the leading edge . ( In writing the model equations , the net particle gain , including the counterion contributions , is incorporated into the osmotic coefficients of the actin and profilin . ) Meanwhile , the actin network is being solated by the calcium - activated solation factors ( e . g . gelsolin ) . This leads to an osmotic expansion of the network as its elastic modulus is weakened ( Oster , 1984 ) . The combined effects of the two osmotic forces push the leading edge outwards . In the model calculations we have not explicitly included membrane insertion coupled to the calcium release , nor have we modelled the growth and reannealing of the network due to nucleation and crosslinking . The effects of these processes are sufficiently complex to require separate treatment . DISCUSSION The physical chemistry underlying cell protrusion is quite complex , with reactions involving not only cytoskeletal components , but membrane - associated reactants as well . We have attempted to cut through this complexity by focusing on the mechanical forces that drive cortical extensions . We propose that osmotic forces of two sorts power these motions . First , interfacial osmotic pressure is generated on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane by the release of osmotically active particles into the cytoplasm . Some of these reactions probably involve the inositol lipids , since PIP 2 is known to cleave profilactin into profilin and G - actin , and is itself Physics of cell motility 47 GELATION M SOLATION 0 RECEPTOR BINDING K © EXPANSION CA + + RELEASE © © VESICLE FUSION - > - * Fig . 7 . A . The sequence of events accompanying cell protrusion . Receptors bind a chemoattractant ( 1 ) , which , via a G - protein , stimulates lipid cleavage ( 2 ) , which creates a bending moment ( 3 ) . Osmotic particles are released ( 4 ) creating a membrane osmotic pressure , which drives a water influx ( 5 ) . Calcium release ( 6 ) stimulates solation of the actin network allowing it to expand ( 7 ) , and triggers vesicle fusion to supply membrane to the protrusion site ( 8 ) . B . Schematic drawing of the model for microspike extension ( from Perelson , Glasser & Oster , unpublished ) . Actin - profilin complexes are split , the free actin polymerizing onto the fibres ( F ) . The osmotically driven water influx resulting from the particle gain and from the gel expansion pushes the boundary ( b ( l ) ) to the left at velocity V = db / dt . cleaved to DAG and IP 3 , with the latter being released into the cytoplasm . Second , IP 3 triggers the release of intracellular calcium . Calcium , in turn , activates solating factors such as gelsolin , which sever actin strands , thus reducing its elastic modulus 48 G . F . Oster and . 4 . S . Perelson and enabling it to expand due to its gel osmotic swelling pressure . In addition to solating the gel , solating factors create free growing ends and new nucleating sites for the growth of actin fibres . Therefore , the expanded network can be quickly reannealed into a stable dilated configuration by crosslinking proteins such as ABP . Indeed , without reannealing the protrusion formed by the osmotic forces would collapse , as happens during the formation of blebs . In order to investigate this scenario , we have modelled a simple protrusive system : the acrosome of Thyone . We find that osmotic forces can reproduce the experimental observations . The model is entirely consistent with the observation that increasing external osmolarity slows the extension process . Moreover , we can show that a process that involves only actin polymerization at the growing tip , with actin monomers supplied by diffusion , cannot match the speed of extension . Finally , our analysis suggests that , using the inositol lipid pathway , cells can control local osmotic conditions so as to achieve directed locomotion in response to external stimuli . If this view has merit , it may suggest some new experimental interventions , and help explain the ubiquitous inhibition hyperosmotic conditions impose on cell protrusive activity . APPENDIX 1 Diffusion is not fast enough to drive the acrosomal process Perelson & Coutsias ( 1986 ) provided a detailed mathematical analysis of diffusion - limited actin filament growth . They analysed two models , one first presented by Tilney & Kallenbach ( 1979 ) and based on work of Hermans ( 1947 ) , and a more realistic model that includes the reversibility of the polymerization reaction and the required movement of cytoplasm into the acrosome as it grows . Both models lead to roughly the same conclusion ; here we present only the simpler analysis . Assume the periacrosomal cup contains monomer at concentration c0 . For simplicity we shall assume Cq remains constant throughout the growth process . This will overestimate the rate of acrosomal elongation , since depletion of monomer would slow down the growth process . Further , we assume that a set of fibres are nucleated and begin growing in one dimension from x = 0 to a position x = L ( t ) at time t . Monomer must diffuse from the reservoir at x = 0 to the fibre tip at x = L { t ) , where they can add to the end of the fibre and extend it . To calculate the maximal possible rate of growth we shall assume that the polymerization reaction is irreversible and that monomer addition occurs infinitely fast ; that is , as soon as a monomer gets to x = L ( t ) it instantaneously adds to the end of the fibre . This implies that c , the concentration of free monomer at x = L ( t ) is zero , i . e . c ( L , t ) = 0 . Between x = 0 and x = L ( t ) monomer simply diffuses and hence must obey the diffusion equation : — = d — m a t d x 1 ' ( 1 ) where D is the diffusion coefficient . The motion of the fibre tip at x = L ( t ) is determined by mass conservation . The number of molecules reaching a unit area of Physics of cell motility 49 the tip per unit time is the diffusional flux at x = L ( t ) . Assume that at the tip there are / fibres per unit area . Each time a monomer adds a fibre grows by a length A . If there were 50 fibres per unit area and 100 molecules arrived per second then fibres would elongate at a rate of 2A . Thus , / / A is the concentration of free ends at the tip , where the following relation must hold : d L _ . ~ T ~ ~ ' i d t ( 2 ) Perelson & Coutsias ( 1986 ) , following Hermans ( 1947 ) , show that the solution to the diffusion equation ( 1 ) with the boundary moving as in equation ( 2 ) is : c ( x , t ) = C ' ( 1 _ leifjx / V 4 P i ) \ ‘ \ eif { L / V \ Dt ) ) . ( 3 ) where erf ( x ) is the error function ( Abramowitz & Stegun , 1964 ) , and the motion of the fibre tip at x = L ( t ) is the solution of the equation : ■ / l n \ ^ / a \ ze ' eij ( z ) = constant = — 7 = - - - - , ( 4 ) VJT f where s ' 2 = L l / ADt . Once we solve equation ( 4 ) for 2 we can determine the speed at which polymerization can drive acrosomal elongation * . Tilney & Kallenbach ( 1979 ) estimate that the diffusion coefficient for actin ( or profilactin ) is approximately 5x 10 _ / cm 2 s _ 1 . More recent experimental measurements confirm that this is probably the fastest that actin diffuses within a cell . Each actin filament contains 370 monomers per ¡¿m and hence A = 2 - 7X 10 - J / um . Electron microscopic pictures of the acrosomal process show that on average it contains 60 filaments ( Tilney & Inoue , 1982 ) . Correcting for possible sample shrinkage in EM pictures , Tilnev estimates that the diameter of the acrosomal process is approximately 0 - 05 fim . Thus / = 3 X 10 4 jUm - 2 . The last parameter required is C q , the actin monomer concentration in the periacrosomal cup . Tilnev & Inoue ( 1982 ) estimated that the fully developed acrosomal process contains lT x l0 b actin monomers . If we assume that the periacrosomal cup , whose volume is approximately 0 - 5 fim ] ( Tilney & Inoue , 1982 ) , contains twice this number of monomers ( a clear overestimate ) then co = 4 - 4x 10 6 ; Um ~ J . Using these values , the right - hand side of equation ( 4 ) = 0 - 226 . Solving for z and using the value of D given above we find L2 / 1 = 35 [ imz s ~ 1 . Hence in 10 s , with no depletion of monomer from the periacrosomal cup , the acrosome would only grow 18 - 7 / im . The more refined model of Perelson & Coutsias ( 1986 ) predicts that the acrosome would only extend lOjUm in 10 s . Both of these estimates are considerably smaller than the experimental value of 90 fim . To summarize our mathematical analysis we find that growth limited by diffusion of monomer to the growing tip would lead to a rate of growth in which L 2 increased * Tilnev & Inoue incorrectly use the actin concentration at the tip , Op , rather than the concentration of free ends , f / X . This yields a constant on the right - hand side of four orders of magnitude too large . 50 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson linearly with t as was found in the experiments of Tilney & Inoué ( 1982 , 1985 ) . However , if actin polymerization from the barbed end of the actin filaments were the sole driving force responsible for the extension of the acrosome , the acrosome would grow considerably slower than observed . APPENDIX 2 The osmotic model for acrosomal protrusion Oster et al . ( 1982 ) provided a detailed model for the growth of the acrosome driven by osmotic forces . Here we summarize the highlights of that model . The model is derived by taking into account three dynamic processes : ( 1 ) the mechanical motion of the acrosomal process through the fluid medium ; ( 2 ) an osmotically driven influx of water , which increases the volume of the periacrosomal region of the acrosome ; and ( 3 ) the transport of profilactin to the growing tip of the acrosome . For each process we can write a kinetic equation . The mechanical equation of motion is derived from a balance of forces . If there is a hydrostatic pressur ^ difference , p - \ • — po , between the tip of the growing process and the external medium , it will drive the elongation of the process . This driving force will be counter - balanced by the drag forces and any membrane tension . Thus , ( . pT ~ P o ) A T = F D + Tm , ( 5 ) where A r is the area of the growing tip across which the force is acting , / , ' D are the drag forces caused by the movement of the acrosomal membrane through the external medium and the cell’s cytoplasm , and Tm is the membrane tension . The drag forces will be proportional to the velocity at which the acrosome moves , dL / dt , and to the surface area of the acrosome , which in turn is proportional to its length L . During the acrosomal reaction new plasma membrane appears to be inserted at the base of the acrosome ( Sardet & Tilney , 1977 ; Tilney & Inoué , 1982 ) and thus Tm is probably negligible . If excess membrane becomes depleted , then Tm could become appreciable and cause a cessation of growth . Note that if the pressure difference remains approximately constant during some period of acrosomal growth , then equation ( 5 ) predicts that L dL / dt is constant or that L 2 grows linearly with t . The osmotically induced water influx leads to an increase in the volume of the periacrosomal region and the growing acrosomal process . For water transport driven by osmotic and hydrostatic pressure differences we have : , - L pAB [ ( pB - p Q ) - A j z ] = ^ + A x ^ , ( 6 ) where Lp is the hydraulic permeability coefficient and Ab the area of the membrane through which water is flowing . For convenience we refer to this region as the ‘base of the acrosome’ and hence the subscript B . The hydrostatic pressure difference between the base and the medium ispB ~ Po > while the osmotic pressure difference is Ajt . Here A n refers to the total effective osmotic pressure difference caused by both ions and macromolecules . If the membrane is not ideally semipermeable , then a Physics of cell motility 51 reflection coefficient would be included in A jt , which would decrease its magnitude . The base increases in volume at rate d lB / d t , whereas the growing tube with cross­ sectional area / lx increases in volume at the rate AxdL / dt . To complete the model we need to relate the hydrostatic pressure in the tip , / ) T , to the hydrostatic pressure in the base , p B , and relate the pressure in the base to its volume . To a good approximation one can show that : r P ' v = Pv , — constant ■ ( ' ) Central to this model is the assumption that as the volume of the periacrosomal region increases pressure is built up . We thus treat this region as an elastic vessel , i . e . we assume : P b ~ Pa = K ( V b — Vo ) , ( 8 ) where K is the elastic modulus of the vessel and Vo is its original unstressed volume . Because we assume that there is excess membrane , the elasticity comes not from the membrane , but rather from the cytoplasmic material in this region . Combining equations ( 7 ) , ( 8 ) and ( 5 ) we find that : AT2 = ci ( V”b — Vo ) — c { Tm , ( 9 ) where c \ and c 2 are constants . As shown by Oster et al . ( 1982 ) the rate of change of VB can be determined from equation ( 6 ) . However , since in Thyone the base doubles in volume in 50 - 70 ms , we can simply assume that VB is initially twice V 0 and then study the development of the acrosomal process on a time - scale of seconds . Since the total volume of the extended acrosomal process is only a small fraction of 2V0 , the enlarged volume of the base ( —18 % if we assume the process to be a 90 fim long cylinder with a 0 - 05 ; Um diameter ) , we can assume VB remains approximately constant during acrosomal elongation . ( Oster et al . did not make this approximation , but rather considered in detail the osmotic flows , the dilution of the material in the base due to water inflow and the transport of profilactin to the growing tip . From our analysis we conclude that VB is approximately constant . ) Thus as long as Tm remains negligible one should observe growth in which L z increases linearly with time . However , once excess membrane runs out Tm will become appreciable and the elongation process will slow down and eventually stop . APPENDIX 3 Osmotically coupled polymerization In this Appendix we summarize the osmotically coupled polymerization model . We assume that substantial variations in the chemical concentrations of actin , profilin , etc . only occur in one dimension ( see Fig . 3 , main text ) . Along this axis , which we call the x - axis , the tip of the acrosome is located at x — b ( t ) . The left boundary at b ( t ) is free to move . The boundary of the actin filaments is assumed to lie 52 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson at x = a ( t ) ; this boundary will move to right as the filaments elongate . Our goal is to determine the motion of the boundaries a ( i ) and b ( t ) . The model is built around the following assumptions : ( 1 ) G - actin ( A ) is combined with profilin ( P ) to form profilactin , an actin - profilin complex ( PA ) . ( 2 ) PIP 2 cleaves the complex ( PA ) into profilin ( P ) and actin . The reaction is localized at the membrane , x = b ( t ) , and its rate is given by Michaelis—Menten kinetics : cv _ ^ ' max [ PA1 Jr A ' m + [ PA ] - ( 1U ) ( 3 ) The freed monomeric actin diffuses away from the membrane to the actin filament boundary at ( x — a ( t ) ) and polymerizes onto an F - actin fibre according to the overall reaction : F + A ^ ±F , ( 11 ) where F is the F - actin filament tip concentration . If / is the number of actin fibre tips per unit cross - sectional area , and A is the length a filament extends when an actin monomer adds to the end , then at x = a ( t ) actin disappears at a rate ( Perelson & Coutsias , 1986 ) : d / 4 f - ~ = \ ( k iA ( x = a ) - k 2 ) , ( 12 ) and the actin boundary located at a ( t ) moves to the right with a velocity given by : = X [ k \ A — & 2 ] , ( 13 ) where k \ and k 2 are the forward and reverse rate constants at the barbed end . ( 4 ) The net particle gain in the reaction at the membrane and boundary interface generates an osmotic pressure , which drives a water influx : y v = Lpn = V ? 7T [ PA + A + ? ] x = b - Co ) , ( 14 ) where Co is the concentration of osmotically active material in the solution surrounding the cell and L p is the hydraulic permeability of the acrosomal tip membrane . Note that we can incorporate the contributions of other osmotically active solutes by adjusting the osmotic coefficients of A , P and PA . ( 5 ) The membrane is driven to the right by the water influx at a rate proportional to J v , i . e . : ^ j = M PA + A + P - C 0 ) • ( 15 ) ( 6 ) Each of the component particles diffuses according to Fick’s law , and reacts Physics of cell motility 53 only at the membrane or the actin - filament interface . Denote by vi , y ? _ and v 3 the concentrations of actin , profilin and actin - profilin complex , respectively . Then : = n - J - dt 1 dx 2 A = - T ( ^ O’i ( a ) - k zô ( x - a ) ( 16 ) dyz _ n d y 2 dt ~ 2 dx 3 _ _ r f 5 “V3 / 1 ° \ where ô ( x — a ) is the Dirac delta function . ( 7 ) As initial conditions , we assume that at t = 0 profilactin is present throughout the domain , but that free actin and free profilin have not yet been generated . Thus : vi ( 0 , x ) = 0 , v 2 ( 0 , x ) = 0 and v 3 ( 0 , x ) = v30 . ( 19 ) ( 8 ) As boundary conditions , we assume that at x = 0 conditions are as in the interior of the cell ( periacrosomal cup ) . Thus : y , = Ci , ¿ = 1 , 2 , 3 , ( 20 ) \ j ■ „ cH’l ^ m ax [ P A ] / 01N Act , n : = - v ' d 7 - / < „ , + [ PA ] ' ( 21 ) r» / ' i * T ' \ ^ ' m a x [ P ^ - ] / o o \ P r o f i l , ( 22 ) Actin - profilin : - D , ^ = y , ^ + ^ + [ pA ] . ( 23 ) Thus the problem reduces to a set of linear diffusion - reaction equations with the two moving boundaries , a ( t ) and b ( t ) . These equations were solved numerically by means of a moving finite - element algorithm ( Perelson et al . unpublished ) . We thank Lew Tilney for supplying us with his data , and for many stimulating conversations . J . P . Trinkaus made valuable comments on the manuscript . G . F . O . was supported by NSF grant MCS - 8110557 . A . S . P . was supported by the Department of Energy . REFERENCESA bramowitz , M . & S tegun , I . A . ( 1964 ) . Handbook of Mathematical Functions . Washington , DC : National Bureau of Standards . B erridge , M . J . ( 1986 ) . Cell signalling through phospholipid metabolism . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 4 , 137 - 153 . B retscher , M . ( 1984 ) . Endocytosis : relation to capping and cell locomotion . Science 224 , 681 - 686 . C hernomordik , L . , K ozlov , M . , M elikyan , G . , A bidor , I . , M arkin , V . & C hizmadzhev , Yu . ( 1985 ) . The shape of lipid molecules and monolaver membrane fusion . Biochim . biophvs . Acta 812 , 643 - 655 . ' ' C ullis , P . & H ope , M . ( 1985 ) . Physical properties and functional roles of lipids in membranes . In Biochemistiy of Lipids and Membranes ( ed . D . Vance & J . Vance ) . Menlo Park : Benjamin / Cum­ mings . 54 G . F . Oster and A . S . Perelson Dan , J . C . & H agiw ara , Y . ( 1967 ) . Studies on the acrosome . IX . Course of acrosome reaction in the starfish . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 18 , 562 - 579 . D an , J . C . , O hori , Y . & K ushida , H . ( 1964 ) . Studies on the acrosome . VII . Formation of the acrosomal process in sea urchin spermatozoa . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 11 , 508 - 524 . G reen , D . ( 1978 ) . The osmotic properties of the acrosome of guinea - pig sperm . J . Cell Sci . 32 , 165 - 176 . H arris , A . ( 1973 ) . Cell surface movements related to cell locomotion . In Locomotion of Tissue Cells . Ciba Fdn Symp . 14 ( new series ) , pp . 3 - 26 . Amsterdam : North Holland . H ermans , J . J . ( 1947 ) . Diffusion with discontinuous boundary . J . Coll . Sci . 2 , 387 - 398 . H ouslay , M . ( 1987 ) . Egg activation unscrambles a potential role for IP4 . Trends Biochem . Sci . 12 ( 1 ) , 1 - 2 . Inou£ , S . & T iln ey , L . G . ( 1982 ) . The acrosomal reaction of Thyone sperm . I . Changes in the sperm head visualized by high resolution video microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 93 , 812 - 820 . L assing , I . & L indberg , U . ( 1985 ) . Specific interaction between phosphatidvlinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate and profilactin . Nature , Lond . 314 , 472 - 474 . M inton , A . P . ( 1983 ) . The effect of volume occupancy upon the thermodynamic activity of proteins : some biochemical consequences . Molec . cell . Biochem . 55 , 119 - 140 . M oore , H . - P . H . , O rci , L . & O ster , G . ( 1987 ) . Biogenesis of secretory granules . In Protein Transfer and Organelle Biogenesis ( ed . R . C . Das & P . W . Robbins ) . New York : Academic Press ( in press ) . Om ann , G . , A lle n , R . , Bokoch , G . , P ain ter , R . , T ray n o r , A . & S k lar , L . ( 1987 ) . Signal transduction and cvtoskeletal activation in the neutrophil . Physiol . Rev . 67 , 285 . O ster , G . F . ( 1984 ) . O n the craw ling of cells . . 7 - Embiyol . exp . Morph . 83 ( Suppl ) , 329 - 364 . O ster , G . F . & P erelso n , A . S . ( 1985 ) . Cell spreading and motility : a model lamellipod . J . math . Biol . 21 , 383 - 388 . ' O ster , G . F . , P erelso n , A . S . & T iln ey , L . G . ( 1982 ) . A mechanical model for elongation of the acrosomal process in Thyone sperm . J1’ . math . Biol . 15 , 259 - 265 . PERELSON , A . S . & C outsias , E . A . ( 1986 ) . A moving boundary model of acrosomal elongation . J . math . Biol . 23 , 361 - 379 . ' P errin , D . , L angley , O . K . & A unis , D . ( 1987 ) . A nti - a - fodrin inhibits secretion from permeabilized chromaffin cells . Nature , Lond . 326 , 498 - 501 . S ardet , C . & T ilney , L . G . ( 1977 ) . Origin of the membrane for the acrosomal process : Is actin complexed with membrane precursors ? Cell Biol . Int . Rep . 1 , 193 - 200 . T iln ey , L . G . , B onder , E . M . , C oluccio , L . M . & M oosaker , M . S . ( 1983 ) . Actin from Thyone sperm assembles on only one end of an actin filament : a behavior regulated bv profilin . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 112 - 124 . ' ' ‘ T ilney , L . G . & I nou £ , S . ( 1982 ) . The acrosomal reaction of Thyone sperm . II . The kinetics and possible mechanism of acrosomal process elongation . J . Cell Biol . 93 , 820 - 827 . T ilney , L . G . & iNOUfi , S . ( 1985 ) . Acrosomal reaction of the Thyone sperm . III . The relationship between actin assembly and water influx during the extension of the acrosomal process . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 1273 - 1283 . ' ' T ilney , L . G . & K allenbach , N . ( 1979 ) . Polymerization of actin . VI . The polarity of the actin filaments in the acrosomal process and how it might be determined . J ' . Cell Biol . 81 , 608 - 623 . T iln ey , L . , K ich art , D . , S ard et , C . & T iln ey , M . ( 1978 ) . Polymerization of actin . IV . Role of Ca + + and H + in the assembly of actin and in membrane fusion in the acrosomal reaction of echinoderm sperm . J . Cell Biol . 77 , 536 - 550 . T rinkaus , J . P . ( 1984 ) . Cells into Organs . The Forces that Shape the Embryo , 2nd edn . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . ‘ T rin k au s , J . P . ( 1985 ) . Protrusive activity of the cell surface and the initiation of cell movement during morphogenesis . Expl Biol . Med . 10 , 130 - 173 .