S - 1 Supplemental Data Three - Dimensional Structure of Vinculin Bound to Actin Filaments Mandy E . W . Janssen , Eldar Kim , Hongjun Liu , L . Miya Fujimoto , Andrey Bobkov , Niels Volkmann , and Dorit Hanein Figure S1 . Cosedimentation Assays of Full - Length His - Tagged Vinculin , α - Catenin Vinculin - Binding Domain CD3 , and F - Actin Show that F - Actin Binding Activity of Vinculin Is Enhanced in the Presence of CD3 These gels were quantified in arbitrary units for Figure 4b , the quantified amount of protein recovered from the two low - speed and the two high - speed pellets were added up for each protein to give the total S - 2 amount of material bound to F - actin . Relative concentration of 1 corresponds to 7 µ M . The supernatant of high - speed pellet I was incubated with fresh F - actin and re - assayed ( pellets II ) . This step was done to test for equilibrium effects and to remove bias from partially unfolded or denatured vinculin molecules . The second band and the lowest band in the gels ( marked with - ) correspond to cleavage products of full - length vinculin . The single band in the alkaline native gel ( upper right of figure , concentration 14 µ M on left , 7 µ M on right ) of the full - length vinculin construct after purification shows that all the material is fully folded and maintains its quaternary structure , indicating that the cleavage does not affect the structural integrity of the molecule . This is why both cleavage products are pelleted down with F - actin . Only after denaturation on the SDS gels , the cleavage products separate . Figure S2 . Light Scattering Experiments Indicate that the Interaction of Vt with Actin Is a Complex Multistep Process In Figure S2 , the black sigmoidal curve shows increase in the light scattering associated with polymerization of 12 µM G - actin induced by addition of 3 . 0mM MgCl 2 . 1 . 0 µM Vt had no effect on the light scattering of 12 µM G - actin ( blue curve ) . Upon addition of 2 . 5 µM Vt initial increase in light scattering was followed by decrease ( green curve ) . At higher Vt concentrations , the initial jump in light scattering was followed by decrease and then increase ( magenta and red curves ) . Clearly , all of the curves collected in the presence of Vt deviate from a typical polymerization curve ( black line ) and demonstrate the multi - step nature of the Vt - actin interactions . This complexity is most likely related to actin - induced dimerization of Vt and cross - linking of F - actin by Vt dimers . S - 3 Figure S3 . Differential Scanning Calorimetry ( DSC ) Probes Protein Conformations in Solution Previous studies ( Bertazzon et al . , 1990 ; Le Bihan and Gicquaud , 1991 ; Levitsky et al . , 1998 ) demonstrated that DSC is sensitive to the structural state of actin and to the conformation of the inter - protomer contacts in actin in particular . For instance , F - actin melts at a much higher temperature and more cooperatively than monomeric G - actin . This effect results from the interaction of actin monomers in the polymer . Also , ligands known to stabilize intermolecular contacts in F - actin ( e . g . , phalloidin , BeF x ) increase the melting temperature of F - actin ( Le Bihan & Gicquaud , 1991 ; Levitsky et al . , 1998 ) . Fig . S3 shows DSC scans obtained for 33 µM F - actin ( dotted line ) , 33µM Vt ( solid line ) and 1 : 1 Vt - F - actin complex ( dashed line ) . While the melting temperature ( T m ) of F - actin alone was 69 . 1 o C , the melting temperature of the Vt - F - actin complex was 76 . 2 o C . This ~ 7 o increase in T m indicates strong stabilization of F - actin by Vt . There is no evidence for the presence of Vt dimers in the DSC curve of Vt in solution ( solid line ) . S - 4 Binding of Vt to pyrene G - actin Vt ( µ M ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 P y r ene f l uo r e sc en c e 0 20 40 60 80 100 Figure S4 . Pyrene Fluorescence Experiments of Labeled G - Actin in the Presence of Vt The figure shows that Vt promotes actin polymerization ( Fig . S4 ) , again implicating that the F - actin structure is stabilized by Vt binding . In addition , binding of Vt to pyrene G - actin is cooperative , which is not consistent with regular 1 : 1 molar ratio , supporting the formation of actin induced Vt dimers . Supplemental References Bertazzon , A . , Tian , G . H . , Lamblin , A . & Tsong , T . Y . ( 1990 ) . Enthalpic and entropic contributions to actin stability : calorimetry , circular dichroism , and fluorescence study and effects of calcium . Biochemistry 29 , 291 - 298 . Le Bihan , T . & Gicquaud , C . ( 1991 ) . Stabilization of actin by phalloidin : a differential scanning calorimetric study . Biochem Biophys Res Comm 181 , 542 - 547 . Levitsky , D . I . , Nikolaeva , O . P . , Orlov , V . N . , Pavlov , D . A . , Ponomarev , M . A . & Rostkova , E . V . ( 1998 ) . Differential scanning calorimetric studies on myosin and actin . Biochemistry ( Moscow ) 63 , 322 - 333 .