RESEARCH ARTICLE Structural organization and energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies Rui Ma 1 , 2 , Julien Berro 1 , 2 , 3 * 1 Departmentof MolecularBiophysicsand Biochemistry , Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut , United States of America , 2 Nanobiology Institute , Yale University , West Haven , Connecticut , United States of America , 3 Departmentof Cell Biology , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , Connecticut , United States of America * julien . berro @ yale . edu Abstract During clathrin - mediated endocytosis in yeast cells , short actin filaments ( < 200nm ) and crosslinking protein fimbrin assemble to drive the internalization of the plasma membrane . However , the organization of the actin meshwork during endocytosis remains largely unknown . In addition , only a small fraction of the force necessary to elongate and pinch off vesicles can be accounted for by actin polymerization alone . In this paper , we used mathe - matical modeling to study the self - organization of rigid actin filaments in the presence of elastic crosslinkers in conditions relevant to endocytosis . We found that actin filaments con - dense into either a disordered meshwork or an ordered bundle depending on filament length and the mechanical and kinetic properties of the crosslinkers . Our simulations also demon - strated that these nanometer - scale actin structures can store a large amount of elastic energy within the crosslinkers ( up to 10 k B T per crosslinker ) . This conversion of binding energy into elastic energy is the consequence of geometric constraints created by the heli - cal pitch of the actin filaments , which results in frustrated configurations of crosslinkers attached to filaments . We propose that this stored elastic energy can be used at a later time in the endocytic process . As a proof of principle , we presented a simple mechanism for sus - tained torque production by ordered detachment of crosslinkers from a pair of parallel filaments . Author summary In many cellular processes that involve the deformation of membranes or the movement of vesicles and organelles , the energy from biochemical reactions is converted into forces . The biological filaments called actin are one of the major force producing machineries of the cell . It is commonly believed that the elongation of these filaments at their tip is the only way actin filaments can exert force . However , the amount of force produced by this mechanism can only account for a small fraction of the force in key cellular processes , such as clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In this paper , we demonstrate that connecting actin filaments with each other with flexible proteins called crosslinkers is a new way to transform biochemical energy into mechanical energy , and that this stored mechanical PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 1 / 25 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : Ma R , Berro J ( 2018 ) Structural organizationand energystorage in crosslinked actin assemblies . PLoS ComputBiol 14 ( 5 ) : e1006150 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 Editor : James R . Faeder , University of Pittsburgh , UNITEDSTATES Received : January 2 , 2018 Accepted : April 18 , 2018 Published : May 29 , 2018 Copyright : © 2018 Ma , Berro . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand source are credited . Data Availability Statement : The code used performthe simulations and data analysis is available at : https : / / github . com / ruima86 / ActinSimulation . git . Funding : This research was supported in part by National Institutesof Health / National Institute of General Medical SciencesGrant R01GM115636 . The funders had no role in studydesign , data collection and analysis , decisionto publish , or preparationof the manuscript . Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . energy can be used to rotate filaments in a sustained direction . This mechanism of chemi - cal energy conversion into mechanical work is a new paradigm for understanding how the actin filaments can produce forces without considering polymerization or molecular motors . Introduction The cytoskeleton protein actin assembles into three major structures in yeast cells , including endocytic actin patches , actin cables , and the contractile ring [ 1 , 2 ] . In actin cables and the con - tractile ring , formin - nucleated actin filaments are crosslinked into long bundles with a length on the order of microns [ 3 – 5 ] . Computational models of these actin structures typically treat actin filaments as semi - flexible polymers that are connected by rigid segments [ 6 – 9 ] . In con - trast , the organization of the actin network in actin patches formed during clathrin - mediated endocytosis is drastically different from that in actin cables or the contractile ring . The length of filaments in actin patches is strongly limited by capping and severing proteins [ 10 ] , and mathematical modeling predicted that the average length of filaments is less than 200 nm [ 11 ] . Filaments of this length scale can be considered as straight rods , because the persistence length of actin filaments is on the order of 10 μ m [ 12 – 14 ] , which allows them to sustain forces larger than 10pN without buckling [ 15 ] . At the endocytic actin patch , a small area of the flat plasma membrane invaginates towards the cytoplasm upon assembly of actin . In budding yeast , the invagination elongates up to 140nm in depth , and then is pinched off , releasing a tear - shaped vesicle [ 16 ] . Actin is essential for many of these steps , from the initiation of invagination to vesicle scission [ 17 – 19 ] . Despite extensive experimental work that characterized the overall dynamics of assembly , disassembly and ensemble movements of proteins of the actin meshwork [ 19 – 26 ] , the precise structural organization of actin filaments within the endocytic patch remains unknown . Indeed , individ - ual filaments are not resolvable even in electron micrographs , in which the actin network appears as a ribosome - exclusion zone , which is about 200nm in depth and 100nm in width [ 16 ] . Actin crosslinking proteins play a crucial role in determining the mechanical responses of the actin network to force perturbation [ 27 – 29 ] . Fimbrin ( Fim1p ) is the second most abundant protein recruited to the endocytic patch during clathrin - mediated endocytosis in fission yeast , after actin [ 20 ] . It has two actin binding domains that enable it to crosslink adjacent filaments . Deletion of fimbrin results in significant defects in endocytic internalization [ 24 , 30 , 31 ] . In vitro experiments have shown that fimbrin efficiently bundles long actin filaments , but bun - dling efficiency is reduced in the presence of capping protein as a result of decreased filament length [ 31 ] . It remains unclear how this length - dependent bundling activity arises and how this activity is related to the role of fimbrin during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Internalization of the endocytic membrane is hindered by the high turgor pressure ( P * 0 . 8 × 10 6 Pa [ 32 , 33 ] ) inside yeast cells [ 34 ] . Under such high pressure , theoretical studies suggest that the force needed to initiate membrane invagination is on the order of 3000pN [ 35 , 36 ] and actin polymerization is thought to provide the driving force . However , assuming no more than 150 filaments are simultaneously generating the force [ 11 , 20 , 21 ] , each of these fila - ments has to generate a force of at least 20pN , an order of magnitude larger than the maximum polymerization force of * 1pN of actin filaments measured in vitro [ 37 ] . This number of 20pN is likely an underestimate since the calculation here uses a very generous estimate for the num - ber of growing filaments , up to 20 - fold of what mathematical modeling predicts [ 11 ] . Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 2 / 25 Therefore , actin polymerization alone is not enough to provide the force necessary to elongate a clathrin - coated pit . Even though type - I myosins participate in endocytosis , their low power output over a narrow range of forces suggest that they are more likely force - sensing tethers rather than force generators [ 38 – 40 ] . In this paper , we present a computational model for dynamic crosslinking of rigid actin fila - ments in conditions relevant to clathrin - mediated endocytosis . We show that kinetic and mechanical properties of the crosslinkers finely tune the structural transition of actin network between bundles and meshworks . In addition , we show that the chemical binding energy is converted into elastic energy upon binding of crosslinkers . The elastic energy stored in indi - vidual crosslinkers is significantly higher than their thermal energy . This surprising property is a consequence of the helical pitch of actin filaments , which leads to torsional strains between crosslinkers attached to a common pair of filaments . We discuss the mechanical implications of these torsionally stressed crosslinkers and propose a possible mechanism to generate directed rotation of filaments by orderly detaching the crosslinkers . Results Model of crosslinked rigid actin filaments We model actin filaments as rigid cylindrical rods with subunits that carry a helical pitch ( Fig 1A ) . The length of filaments is restricted to the range of actin filament size during endocy - tosis ( 81nm to 216nm ) , around 2 orders of magnitude shorter than their persistence length * 10 μ m . Filaments of this length scale remain virtually straight under * 10pN of force and untwisted under * 100pN (cid:1) nm of torque ( see the Methods section ) . Therefore we can neglect bending and twisting , and describe the motion of a filament by its translational velocity V c of Fig 1 . Model description . ( A ) Actin filaments are modeled as rigid rods made of subunits carrying an orientational vector O i that represents the normal vector to the binding surface of the actin crosslinker . For visualization , each subunit is depicted as a sphere but is actually a disk - shape with a diameter of b = 6nm and a height of δ = 2 . 7nm . The orientation of a filament is described by the unit vector N , pointing from the pointed end ( - ) to the barbed end ( + ) , and the first subunit’s orientational vector M = O 1 . Two consecutive subunits have an angle of π 14 / 13 in their orientations . ( B ) Crosslinker turnover is described by stochastic formation and breakage of bonds between two actin subunits in different filaments , with rate constants k f and k b , respectively . ( C ) Each crosslinker is modeled as a combination of three springs , one extensional spring with stiffness κ ext , which characterizes the stretchiness l c between the two actin binding domains , and two torsional springs with stiffness κ tor , which characterizes the flexibility of the angles θ i and θ j between the axis of the crosslinker ( which links the centers of each subunits it is attached to ) and the vector normal to the binding surface of each actin subunit in each filament ( O i and O j ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 . g001 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 3 / 25 center of mass , and angular velocity O relative to the center of mass . Details of the model can be found in the Methods section . We model actin crosslinkers as elastic springs that connect two actin subunits in different filaments . Each spring has three elastic components : one in extension , which represents how much the spring is stretched , and two in torsion , each one representing how much the orienta - tion of the axis of the crosslinker linking both actin subunits deviates from the vector normal to the binding interface of each actin subunit ( Fig 1C ) . This elasticity is the simplest model to account for : ( i ) the intra - molecular flexibility between both actin binding domains , and ( ii ) the flexibility in the binding interface between each actin binding domains and the actin subunits they are bound to . Specifically , the elastic energy E of a crosslinker is composed of an exten - sional part E ext and a torsional part E tor , E = E ext + E tor . The extensional energy accounts for ( i ) , E ext ¼ 1 2 k ext ð l c (cid:0) l 0 Þ 2 ; ð 1 Þ where κ ext denotes the extensional stiffness , l c denotes the length , and l 0 denotes the rest length of the crosslinker ( Fig 1C ) . The torsional energy accounts for ( ii ) , E tor ¼ 1 2 k tor ð y 2 i þ y 2 j Þ ; ð 2 Þ where κ tor denotes the torsional stiffness , θ i and θ j denote the angles between the actin subunits and the axis of the crosslinker ( Fig 1C ) . Note that our model does not take into account the stiffness of the rotation of filaments around the axis of the crosslinker . Doing so would force us to consider a preferred relative orientation of the filaments with each other , and strongly favor either bundles or meshworks . No experimental values for the extensional and torsional stiffnesses of fimbrin are available in the literature . For our simulations , we used values within a few orders of magnitude of stiffnesses measured for fascin and antibodies [ 41 , 42 ] . Crosslin - ker turnover is modeled as Poisson processes with a crosslinker formation rate constant k f and a breakage rate constant k b , which increases exponentially with the total elastic energy ( Fig 1B ) . A more detailed description is presented in the Methods section . The length of filaments is kept constant in a given simulation and the total number of actin subunits in the filaments is fixed to N actin = 7000 for all simulations [ 20 ] . The maximum occu - pancy of crosslinkers on filaments is constrained to remain under 25 % ( or 1 crosslinker for 4 subunits ) , which is equivalent to a maximum of 875 attached crosslinkers , close to the peak value * 900 measured experimentally [ 20 ] . We initiate each simulation with uncrosslinked filaments that are randomly positioned and oriented . Reflecting boundary conditions are imposed to ensure filaments stay in a cubic box of 500nm in size . Simulations are performed using the reference values listed in Table 1 unless otherwise mentioned . To quantify the organisation of actin filaments , we introduced the global and local nematic order parameters S global and S local . These quantities characterize the degree of alignment between filaments in the entire simulation space , or in a local neighborhood , respectively . Their values range from 0 to 1 , and a larger value indicates that filaments are more aligned with each other globally , for S global , or locally , for S local . Note that , in practice , the minimum reachable value for S local is usually close to 0 . 4 ( S6 Fig ) . The detailed mathematical definition of these parameters can be found in the Methods section . Actin assembly and disassembly takes tens of seconds during endocytosis . We set the total simulation time to be 50s . Within this period , in most of our simulations , the metrics reach steady state . However , there are cases where the system is in a transient state , mostly due to slow convergence of the global nematic order parameter S global ( S8 Fig ) . Therefore , we chose the local nematic order parameter S local averaged from 40s to 50s as the major metric to Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 4 / 25 characterize the organisation of actin networks . Conclusions based on S local are more robust than based on S global . Long filaments form bundles and short filaments form meshworks We first studied how filament length influences the structure of actin clusters . For crosslinking rates k f below 0 . 1 s −1 , the number of attached crosslinkers remained small , and actin filaments did not organize into higher order assemblies ( S1 Fig ) . When the crosslinking rate k f was high enough , initially disconnected short filaments ( 81nm ) quickly formed small clusters that even - tually coalesced into three to four larger clusters ( Fig 2A ) . The number of attached crosslinkers rapidly saturated to a dynamic steady - state ( Fig 2C ) , as the crosslinkers underwent constant turnover . Filaments within the cluster are organized into a disordered meshwork , which is characterized by a small local nematic order parameter ( S local * 0 . 4 , Fig 2B ) . Long filaments ( 216nm ) rapidly aligned with their neighbors into small bundles ( Fig 2D ) , as indicated by the fast convergence of the local nematic order parameter S local to its steady state value around 1 ( Fig 2E ) . Throughout the simulation , these locally aligned filaments remained connected with each other , and the number of clusters remained small ( Fig 2F ) . These connected bundles slowly adjusted their orientations to eventually coalesce into a few large bundles . When filament length was increased from 135nm to 162nm , the structure of the actin net - work transitioned from meshwork to bundle , indicated by the sharp increase of the local nematic order parameter S local from * 0 . 5 to above 0 . 9 ( Fig 2G ) . The global nematic order parameter S global showed similar trend as S local , but with a smaller magnitude , since filaments formed 2 to 4 independent clusters ( Fig 2H ) . Altogether these results show that crosslinked actin filaments with a size and crosslinker density comparable to what is measured during Table 1 . List of parameters . Symbol Meaning Reference value Varied Range Unit Reference L Filament length 135 81 - 216 nm [ 11 ] b Filament diameter 6 6 nm [ 43 ] δ Length elongation of filaments by incorporation of a subunit 2 . 7 2 . 7 nm [ 43 ] κ ext Extensional stiffness of the crosslinker 0 . 1 0 . 01 - 10 pN / nm [ 41 ] κ tor Torsional stiffness of the crosslinker 10 0 . 1 - 100 pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 [ 42 ] a l 0 Rest length of the crosslinker 10 10 nm [ 44 ] k f Rate constant of crosslink formation 1 0 . 01 - 1 s −1 [ 31 , 45 – 47 ] k 0 b Strain - free rate constant of crosslink breakage 10 0 . 01 - 100 s −1 [ 31 , 45 – 47 ] b E c Critical energy of the crosslinker 10 10 k B T [ 48 ] r c Reaction distance between actin subunits for crosslinker binding 20 20 nm (cid:3) f st Magnitude of the repulsive force between filaments 100 100 pN (cid:3)(cid:3) k B T Thermal energy unit at room temperature 4 . 1 4 . 1 pN (cid:1) nm [ 49 ] N actin Total number of actin subunits 7000 7000 [ 20 ] η Viscosity of the medium 10 0 . 1 - 10 Pa (cid:1) s (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) Δ t Simulation time step 10 −5 10 −7 − 10 −5 s a The torsional stiffness of a protein - antibody complex measured in Ref . [ 42 ] is * 10 3 pN / nm . We believe this value is an upper - bound for filament - crosslinker torsional stiffness . b The strain - free detachment rate of fimbrin measured in Ref . [ 31 ] is * 0 . 04 s −1 . We studied this regime in ( S3 Fig ) but the reference value was chosen to demonstrate the phase transitions at higher detachment rates . (cid:3) We chose a value that is 2 - fold the rest length . (cid:3)(cid:3) This force was tested to be large enough to avoid filaments crossing each other . (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) The reference value is on the higher end , and was chosen to minimize computational times . Our results did not change significantly for smaller viscosity ( S7 Fig ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 . t001 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 5 / 25 Fig 2 . The structure of crosslinked actin networks depends on filament length . ( A ) Snapshots of an actin network formed by 81nm - long filaments in a 500nm - wide cubic box . Each filament is represented by a blue line and each crosslink by a red line . ( B ) Local ( blue ) and global ( red ) nematic order parameters of the actin network over the course of the simulation shown in ( A ) . ( C ) Number of attached crosslinkers ( magenta , left axis ) and number of clusters ( black , right axis ) for the simulation in ( A ) . ( D - F ) Similar figures as in ( A - C ) but for 216nm - long filaments . ( G ) Local ( blue ) and global ( red ) nematic order parameters as a Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 6 / 25 endocytosis can self - organize into either meshworks ( for short filaments ) or bundles ( for long filaments ) , and the phase transition is tightly controlled by filament length . Crosslinkers with high extensional stiffness drive bundle formation Next , we explored the influence of the mechanical properties of actin crosslinking proteins on the organization of actin filaments . The organization of medium length filaments ( 135nm ) var - ied dramatically for different combinations of κ ext and κ tor ( Fig 3A – 3C ) . For low extensional stiffness κ ext , actin filaments organized into a meshwork ( Fig 3A ) , while they formed bundles for higher κ ext values ( Fig 3B ) . The transition between meshwork and bundle was tightly con - trolled , since the local nematic order parameter had a sharp increase around κ ext = 0 . 1pN / nm ( Fig 3E , red ) at given κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad − 1 . This sharp transition was even more pro - nounced for longer filaments ( 189nm ) , as reported in both local and global nematic order parameters ( Fig 3E and S2A Fig , orange ) . In contrast , when filaments were short ( 81nm ) , the transition was relatively smooth ( Fig 3E , blue ) . From the above results , we conclude that crosslinkers with large extensional stiffness favor bundle formation . This result can be intuitively explained by the following simplified but heu - ristic example involving only two filaments . If two filaments are initially aligned with each other , a slight change in orientation between both filaments results in the stretching of cross - linkers bound at different positions , which leads to a restoring torque to realign the filaments . The torque is proportional to the extensional stiffness and the distance between the positions of attached crosslinkers , thus stiffer crosslinkers create larger realignment torque than softer crosslinkers . Longer filaments not only have more crosslinkers , but also crosslinkers that are more distantly positioned , therefore more extended and more inclined to create a larger torque that will restore the parallel alignment of filaments . Crosslinkers with high torsional stiffness disfavor bundle formation We next investigated the impact of torsional stiffness κ tor on the organization of actin net - works , keeping the extensional stiffness at a relatively small value ( κ ext = 0 . 1pN / nm ) . Torsional stiffness had virtually no influence on the organization of short filaments ( 81nm ) ( Fig 3F , blue ) . However , medium length filaments ( 135nm ) had a sharp transition from bundle to meshwork at κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 ( Fig 3F , red ) . A similar trend was also observed for long filaments ( 189nm ) ( Fig 3F , orange ) . At highest torsional stiffness tested ( κ tor = 100pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 ) , crosslinker attachment lifetime was extremely short because their torsional energy often became much larger than the critical energy E c that modulates the detachment rate ( see Eq 16 ) , therefore the number of attached linkers was significantly reduced ( S2H Fig ) . The uncrosslinked actin network formed at this regime was different from the connected mesh - work formed at κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 , though their nematic order parameters S local were similarly low . The above results show that crosslinkers with high torsional stiffness disfavor bundle for - mation . This result can be explained by the fact that , when torsional stiffness is high , formation of several crosslinks between two aligned filaments results in very high torsional energies , due to the frustrated interactions between crosslinkers . This will become clear later in the paper . Therefore , it is energetically more favorable to form a few but over - stretched crosslinkers with many distant filaments than to form many but under - stretched crosslinkers with a few function of filament length . ( H ) Number of attached crosslinkers ( magenta , left axis ) and number of clusters ( black , right axis ) as a function of filament length . In ( G ) and ( H ) , for each simulation , the means of the metrics were calculated from the data between 40s to 50s and the error bars indicate standard deviation over 10 simulations . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 . g002 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 7 / 25 proximal filaments . In the former situation , filaments form a highly entangled actin mesh - work . This explanation is supported by the decreasing number of clusters ( S2E Fig ) , as well as the increasing extensional strains with κ tor in the neighbourhood of κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 ( S4C Fig ) . Turnover of crosslinkers is necessary for large bundle formation We have shown that high extensional stiffness of crosslinkers favors bundle formation . When the breakage rate k 0 b was reduced to 0 . 01 s −1 , even for large extensional stiffness ( 1pN / nm ) , fila - ments formed a structure where small bundles were interconnected but did not align with each other ( Fig 3D ) , as indicated by the relatively low local nematic order parameter at k 0 b ¼ 0 : 01 s (cid:0) 1 compared with S local at k 0 b ¼ 10 s (cid:0) 1 ( Fig 3G ) . The difference in the global nematic Fig 3 . Influence of the crosslinker’s mechanical and kinetic properties on the organization of the actin network . ( A - D ) Organization of 135nm - long actin filaments at the end of the simulation ( t = 50 s ) for different values of extensional stiffness κ ext , torsional stiffness κ tor , and breakage rate k 0 b , as indicated above the figure . ( E ) Local nematic order parameter S local as a function of the extensional stiffness κ ext , with κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 and k 0 b ¼ 10 s (cid:0) 1 . ( F ) Local nematic order parameter S local as a function of the torsional stiffness κ tor , with κ ext = 0 . 1pN / nm and k 0 b ¼ 10 s (cid:0) 1 . ( G ) Local nematic order parameter S local as a function of the strain - free breakage rate k 0 b , with κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm and κ ext = 1pN / nm . In ( E - G ) , simulations were performed for filaments of various lengths : 81nm ( blue ) , 135nm ( red ) , 189nm ( orange ) . For each simulation , the means of S local were calculated from the data between t = 40 s to 50 s and the error bars indicate standard deviation over 10 simulations . S local corresponding to the networks in panels ( A - D ) are identified by the red symbols with corresponding shapes . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 . g003 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 8 / 25 order parameters S global was even more pronounced for long filaments ( 189nm ) ( S2C Fig , orange ) . At very high breakage rate , the lifetime of bonds between filaments was so short that filaments formed an essentially random , uncrosslinked network . Altogether , we conclude that crosslinker turnover is essential for bundle formation , as alignment of bundles requires the breaking of the bonds that disfavor filament alignment . Phase diagram of filament organization Parameter dependence of the actin network structure is summarized in Fig 4 where we plotted the local nematic order parameter S local and the number of attached crosslinkers N attach as a function of crosslinking rate constant k f and filament length L . For a combination of low extensional and high torsional stiffnesses ( κ ext = 0 . 1pN / nm , κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad − 1 ) , values of S local are concentrated either close to 1 or close to 0 . 5 ( Fig 4A , yellow and blue regions , respectively ) . These two regions are separated by a narrow transition band around S local = 0 . 75 ( Fig 4A , green ) . Values of N attach are clustered either close to the saturation number 875 , or less than 100 , divided by a transition band around N attach = 300 ( Fig 4B , yellow , blue and green regions , respectively ) . Therefore we chose the lines S local = 0 . 75 and N attach = 300 as the boundaries to define the phase diagram ( Fig 4C ) . These two lines divide the parameter space into three regions : ( 1 ) Above the line S local = 0 . 75 , actin filaments are locally aligned into a Fig 4 . Phase diagram of actin network organization as a function of the crosslinking rate k f and filament length L . ( A , D ) Local nematic order parameter S local as a function of k f and L . ( B , E ) Number of attached crosslinkers N attach as a function of k f and L . ( C , F ) Classification of actin network organizations as a function of k f and L . The extensional stiffness κ ext is 0 . 1pN / nm in panels ( A - C ) , and 1pN / nm in panels ( D - F ) . In panels ( A , B , D , E ) , plots are constructed by interpolation of results obtained for increment Δ L = 27nm of L between 81nm and 218nm , and increment Δ k f = 0 . 1 s − 1 of k f between 0 . 1 s − 1 and 1 s − 1 . The value for each parameter set is an average over 10 simulations . In ( C ) and ( F ) , the border separating bundle ( light gray ) from meshwork ( gray ) is defined by S local = 0 . 75 . The border separating meshwork ( gray ) from uncrosslinked ( dark gray ) is defined by N attach = 300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 . g004 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 9 / 25 bundle ; ( 2 ) Between the lines S local = 0 . 75 and N attach = 300 , filaments form a crosslinked , disordered meshwork ; ( 3 ) Below the line N attach = 300 , filaments are essentially uncrosslinked over the entire simulation time . For larger extensional stiffness ( κ ext = 1pN / nm ) , the relative positions of the regions are similar , but most of the phase diagram corresponds to bundles ( Fig 4F ) , and only the shortest filaments ( 81nm ) form meshworks . In all cases , the existence of three regions in these phase diagrams requires moderate to high breakage rates . When the breakage rate is low ( k 0 b ¼ 0 : 01 s (cid:0) 1 ) , meshworks occupy the entire parameter space ( S3 Fig ) . Crosslinked actin networks store elastic energy Though crosslinkers in our model were not active elements , we found that crosslinkers rapidly became stretched in length , and twisted in angle . To quantify the crosslinkers’ deformations , we introduced the extensional strain (cid:15) = ( l c − l 0 ) / l 0 , which measures the relative change of a crosslinker’s length l c from its rest length l 0 , and the torsional strain θ , which measures the angle between the crosslinker and its bound actin subunits . For all stiffness values , the distribu - tions of the extensional strain (cid:15) and the torsional strain θ significantly deviated from the corre - sponding Boltzmann distribution for a single independent free spring ( Fig 5A – 5C ) . Strikingly , the extensional strain (cid:15) peaked at * 0 . 5 but not zero ( Fig 5A – 5C , top ) , indicating that the crosslinkers were stretched on average . The distribution had a narrower width for higher extensional stiffnesses κ ext . The peak of torsional strain θ decreased with increasing torsional stiffness , while the widths of the distributions were essentially the same as in the Boltzmann distribution ( Fig 5A – 5C , bottom ) . The deviation from the Boltzmann distribution can be primarily accounted by the coupling between crosslinkers that are attached to the same pair of filaments . Indeed , a simpler 1D example of the Brownian motion of two particles each subject to a spring follows similar prop - erties ( S5 Fig ) . In this example , each spring generates a force of − κ x if the particle is displaced from the equilibrium position 0 to x . If the movement of the two particles were independent ( S5A Fig ) , the joint distribution of their positions x 1 and x 2 would simply be the product of identical individual distribution p ( x 1 , x 2 ) = g ( x 1 ) g ( x 2 ) , where g ð x Þ ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ k 2 p k B T q e (cid:0) k x 2 = 2 k B T denotes the Boltzmann distribution of an individual particle . However , if the movements of the two particles are coupled , for instance , subject to the constraint x 1 − x 2 = 2 x 0 ( S5B Fig ) , the position distribution of particle 1 becomes p ( x 1 ) = Cg ( x 1 ) g ( x 1 − 2 x 0 ) , where C is the normalization con - stant . Therefore particle 1 is displaced by x 0 due to the coupling with particle 2 . Similarly , if two rigid filaments are bound by several crosslinkers , the extensional and torsional strains of these crosslinkers are coupled , and this coupling gives rise to significant strains in the crosslinkers . We then determined the dependence of the elastic energy stored in the crosslinkers on the crosslinker stiffness . At fixed torsional stiffness κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 , the average magni - tude of the extensional strain | (cid:15) | decreased with increasing extensional stiffness κ ext ( Fig 5D ) . However , the average extensional energy per crosslinker E ext ¼ 12 k ext l 20 (cid:15) 2 increased ( Fig 5E ) , from * 0 . 3 k B T for soft extensional springs up to * 5 k B T for stiff ones , with only a weak depen - dence on filament length ( Fig 5E ) . The average torsional energy per crosslinker reads E tor ¼ 12 k tor ð y 2 i þ y 2 j Þ , with θ i and θ j being the average torsional strains at the two actin subunits . They have the same magnitude θ . At fixed extensional stiffness κ ext = 0 . 1pN / nm , E tor increased with torsional stiffness κ tor from * 0 . 2 k B T to up to * 10 k B T , with again a weak dependence on filament length ( Fig 5G ) . Both extensional and torsional energies vary relatively smoothly with the corresponding stiffnesses over three orders of magnitude , which is in stark contrast Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 10 / 25 Fig 5 . Straining of crosslinkers and energy storage . ( A - C ) Probability density distribution ( PDF ) of the extensional strains ( top ) and torsional strains ( bottom ) of crosslinkers with various stiffness values as indicated above the figure , at the end of individual simulations ( t = 50 s ) . For comparison , red lines indicate the corresponding Boltzmann distributions of a free spring with the same stiffness , P ð (cid:15) Þ ¼ C 1 e (cid:0) k ext l 20 (cid:15) 2 2 k B T and P ð y Þ ¼ C 2 sin y e (cid:0) k tor y 2 2 k B T , where C 1 and C 2 are the normalization constants for (cid:15) 2 ( −1 , 1 ) and θ 2 ( 0 , π ) respectively . Note that for the extensional strain , when we calculate the Boltzmann distribution , the energy contribution from Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 11 / 25 with the sharp structural transition between meshwork and bundle when stiffnesses are varied over the same range ( Fig 3E and 3F ) . Compared with the increase of the extensional energy E ext with κ ext ( * 8 − 17 fold ) , the increase of torsional energy E tor with κ tor ( * 40 − 50 fold ) was more pronounced . This was likely due to stronger coupling between torsional strains of crosslinkers than between exten - sional strains . Elastic energy plateaued and then slightly decreased for very high stiffnesses ( κ ext = 10pN / nm or κ tor = 100pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad − 1 ) , which was the consequence of higher detach - ment rate leading to a smaller number of attached linkers , thus reducing the frustrated interac - tions ( S2 Fig ) . Possible mechanism for torque production by release of the stored elastic energy We have shown that crosslinking of filaments leads to elastic energy stored in the crosslinkers . How can this energy be transformed into mechanical work ? Here , we propose a mechanism for torque generation through orchestrated detachment of crosslinkers by studying a simple model with only two filaments . Let us consider a pair of short filaments , where every other subunit of each filament is crosslinked ( Fig 6 ) . For simplicity , we assume the two filaments are parallel and consider only the rotation of filaments around their axes . We show that consecu - tive detachment of crosslinkers from the pointed end to the barbed end lets the filament rotate in the same direction by π / 13 for each detachment ( Methods ) . Building on this simple proof of principle , we show that sustained directional rotation can be achieved with any filament length and crosslinker spacing and configurations such that ( i ) the angles between two consecutive crosslinkers along the pair of filaments have the same sign , and ( ii ) the sum of all these angles is smaller than 2 π . Under these conditions , breakage of crosslinkers from one end to the other produces directional torque ( see Methods ) . Discussion Organization of actin filaments in diffraction limited assemblies In this paper , we showed that highly crosslinked actin networks made of rigid filaments ( < 200nm ) can form either disordered meshworks or ordered bundles , depending on the fila - ment length and the mechanical and kinetic properties of the crosslinkers . A recent in vitro study of short actin filaments ( 200nm ) showed that with increasing density of filamin , the ini - tially sparsely distributed actin filaments condensed into a spindle - shaped aggregate , in which the organization of actin filaments displayed nematic order [ 50 ] . This observation is consistent with the phase diagram in Fig 4C of our study for filaments of 200nm with increasing cross - linking rate . We investigated the possible structures formed by actin filaments in the presence of elastic crosslinkers . However , our study does not take into account other actin regulating proteins involved in endocytosis , such as the Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein , and thus does not completely resolve the question of the organization of filaments crosslinked with fimbrin at steric interactions , which lead to the empty region at highly negative strains in the histogram , is neglected . ( D , E ) Average absolute value of the extensional strain (cid:15) ( D ) and the corresponding extensional energy E ext ( E ) as a function of the extensional stiffness κ ext . ( F , G ) Average torsional strain θ ( F ) and the corresponding torsional energy E tor ( G ) as a function of the torsional stiffness κ tor . In ( D - G ) , simulations are performed for filaments of various lengths : 81nm ( blue ) , 135nm ( red ) , and 189nm ( orange ) . For each simulation , the means of the energy were calculated from the data between 40s to 50s and the error bars indicate standard deviation over 10 simulations . Energies corresponding to the networks in panels ( A - C ) are identified by the red symbols with corresponding shapes . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 . g005 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 12 / 25 the site of endocytosis in yeast . Even with this limitation , these results provide valuable insights about possible actin filament architectures for endocytosis and other cellular processes that involve short actin filaments . Using the rate constants for fimbrin that have been measured in vitro [ 31 , 45 ] , and the fimbrin concentration in fission yeast cytoplasm ( 3 . 7 μ M ) [ 20 ] , these val - ues correspond to rates in our model k f = 0 . 2 s −1 and k 0 b ¼ 0 : 04 s (cid:0) 1 . Our simulations suggest that the slow off - rate of fimbrin should favor an assembly of actin filaments into a meshwork ( S3 Fig ) . Further simulations with branched filaments , and with geometries and dynamics more representative of endocytosis will tell us which type of structure is present at endocytic Fig 6 . Schematic illustration of a possible mechanism for torque generation by sequential detachment of crosslinkers . ( A ) Two filaments in parallel are crosslinked on every other subunit . From left to right , crosslinkers are detached from the pointed end ( − ) to the barbed end ( + ) sequentially . Upon detachment of a crosslinker ( yellow symbols ) , both filaments rotate around their axes counterclockwise . ( B ) The angular displacement of the filament upon every detachment is π / 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 . g006 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 13 / 25 sites . In addition , further experimental characterization of the mechanical properties of fim - brin and other crosslinkers will be key to understanding the self - organization of actin fila - ments in diffraction limited structures , and to test the predictions of our simulations . Mechanisms of energy storage by actin crosslinkers Our simulations demonstrate that individual actin crosslinkers are able to store up to 10 k B T of elastic energy , which is one order of magnitude higher than the elastic energy stored in an uncoupled spring in a thermal bath ( 1 . 5 k B T ) , and about half of the energy released by ATP hydrolysis ( * 25 k B T ) . To get a better sense of the amount of energy stored in the crosslinkers , one can make a comparison with the energy necessary to deform the plasma membrane into an endocytic vesicle . A back of the envelope calculation estimates the work needed to create a cylindrical invagination of R t = 25nm in radius and D t = 140nm in depth [ 16 ] against the turgor pressure P * 0 . 8 × 10 6 Pa is P p R 2 t D t ¼ 5 : 4 (cid:2) 10 4 k B T . The results of our model suggest that crosslinking filaments once with * 900 crosslinkers , around 10 4 k B T energy could be stored , or about 1 / 6 of the total energy needed . One may wonder where this large elastic energy comes from . We can show in a simplified model that the chemical binding energy of crosslinkers is indeed the source of the elastic energy . Let us consider two filaments with fixed positions and orientations , each having N sub - units . In the following , we will consider the chemical balance between configurations where there is either n = 0 or 1 crosslinker between the two filaments . The rate at which a crosslinker is formed is k f Γ ( 1 ) , where Γ ( n ) denotes the number of possible pairings to form n crosslinkers between subunits in the two filaments . The value of Γ ( 1 ) depends on the orientations and posi - tions of the two filaments , and the mechanical properties of the crosslinkers , and could vary from 1 for very stiff crosslinkers and orthogonal filaments , to N 2 for infinitely soft crosslinkers and parallel filaments . Here we assume Γ ( 1 ) = N , which implies that for each subunit in one fil - ament , there is a unique subunit in the other filament that is within the reaction distance to allow a crosslinker to be formed . When one crosslink is formed , its detachment rate is k 0 b e E = E c , assuming the crosslinker bears an elastic energy E . If the attachment rate is greater than the detachment rate , the system is more likely to be crosslinked , even though the elastic energy E stored in the crosslinker tends to drive down the crosslinker occupancy . Noting m eff (cid:17) E c ln ð Nk f = k 0 b Þ the effective chemical binding energy that tends to drive up the occupancy of crosslinkers , this condition can be expressed as comparison between the effective chemical binding energy and the elastic energy μ eff > E . Using the parameters k 0 b ¼ 10 s (cid:0) 1 , k f = 1 s −1 , E c = 10 k B T and N = 50 , we estimate μ eff = 16 k B T for the first crosslink formation , which is larger than the 10 k B T of elastic energy per crosslinker computed in our simulations . If we now con - sider the case where there are n crosslinkers formed between the filaments , the effective energy for binding an extra crosslinkers becomes m eff ð n Þ ¼ E c ½ ln ð k f = k 0 b Þ þ ln ð G ð n þ 1 Þ = G ð n ÞÞ(cid:138) . The second term in the bracket represents an entropic contribution that comes from the different ways of building n or n + 1 crosslinks between subunits of both filaments . This simplified two filament system illustrates how in our simulations with multiple filaments crosslinker occu - pancy is driven up by a similar entropic contribution in the chemical binding energy . Our model considers “slip - bond” crosslinker detachements , i . e . crosslinkers are more likely to detach if force and torque are exerted on them ( Eq 16 ) . However , we could consider the case of “catch - bond” detachments , where crosslinkers are less likely to detach under force and torque , as it has been shown for some cytoskeleton proteins [ 40 , 51 , 52 ] . In this case , we expect that the elastic energy stored in crosslinkers would be larger than what we have observed in Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 14 / 25 our simulations , and the conformational change required for the catch - bond behavior would increase the available energy limit . The main reason energy storage is possible is that short actin filaments are rigid , which cre - ates geometrical constraints on bound crosslinkers , forcing virtually all of them to fluctuate around average lengths and angles that are different from their rest lengths and angles . This implies that the crosslinkers are rigid enough to store elastic energy , but not as rigid as the fila - ments , so that filaments cannot be twisted or bent when crosslinked , or the distance over which filaments are twisted and bent in order to reduce the frustration , noted L tb , is much lon - ger than the filament length L . In the opposite case , when filament length L (cid:29) L tb , filaments could form bundles in which individual filaments are twisted . Experiments conducted at this regime suggest that the frustrated interaction serves as a mechanism to control the size of the bundle [ 53 ] and cooperative binding of actin crosslinkers [ 54 ] . The two regimes have been the - oretically studied by C . Heussinger and G . Grason [ 55 ] . How can the stored energy be used productively in cellular processes ? Only a small fraction of the force necessary to deform the plasma membrane during clathrin - mediated endocytosis in yeast can be accounted for by actin polymerization alone . We predict that at least some of the missing force can come from the conversion of the elastic energy stored in the crosslinkers into force and / or torque . In this paper , we proposed a specific mechanism for torque production by orchestrated detachment of crosslinkers . This mechanism is different from the Brownian ratchet mecha - nism of force production that is directly coupled to ATP hydrolysis [ 56 , 57 ] . However , the ordered detachment has to be coupled to a non - equilibrium process to provide the informa - tion necessary for the ordered detachment . Treadmilling of filaments coupled to ATP hydroly - sis could play such a role . To estimate the order of magnitude of free energy necessary to provide this information , let us consider a pair of short actin filaments ( e . g . 50 - subunit long ) that are crosslinked by 10 crosslinkers . The free energy cost of detaching the crosslinkers in a specific order among all the 10 ! possibilities is * k B T ln 10 ! = 15 k B T , which is only a small frac - tion of the energy provided by the ATP hydrolysis of two actin filaments undergoing tread - milling ( 50 × 25 = 1250 k B T ) . We stress that this ordered detachment is only one possible mechanism to use the energy and more mechanisms need to be discovered . Future work with more realistic models for endocytosis or other actin - based processes will likely uncover new orchestrated mechanisms for force production . In our system , crosslinkers are driven up to a mechanically pre - stressed state by chemical binding energy . In principle , in order to release the elastic energy stored in crosslinkers , change in energetics of crosslinker binding / unbinding is necessary to induce col - lective detachment of crosslinkers . When actin polymerization is considered , ATP - bound actin is incorporated at the barbed end and undergoes hydrolysis after incorporation . The nucleotide content change could alter the crosslinkers’ binding affinity , causing rapid detach - ment of crosslinkers , which is accelerated by the pre - stressed structure . Elastic energy released during this process could be converted into work by the reorganization of actin filaments . Conclusion We developed a computational model to study the dynamic assembly of actin filaments medi - ated by elastic crosslinkers . The organization of actin filaments were classified into either a meshwork or a bundle , characterized by their nematic order parameter and the number of attached crosslinkers . We showed that the elastic energy stored in crosslinkers increased with their stiffness due to coupling between crosslinkers bound to rigid filaments . As a proof of Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 15 / 25 principle , we showed that the elastic energy could be converted into mechanical work by orchestrated detachment of crosslinkers between two parallel filaments . Our work provides a new perspective to study the mechanisms of force and torque production by actin filaments , in addition to the traditional end polymerization . It also provides an alternative energy source to account for the insufficient force production by actin polymerization during clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis . Methods Model of actin filaments Actin filaments are modeled as rigid cylindrical rods with diameter b and length L . The posi - tion of a filament is represented by its center of mass C . A unit vector N pointing from the fila - ment’s pointed end to the barbed end indicates the orientation of the filament . The i - th subunit ( counting from the pointed end ) carries a unit vector O i , which is normal to the bind - ing surface with a crosslinker ( Fig 1A ) . We assume all O i - s are perpendicular to the filament’s orientation N . Based on the atomic structure of actin filaments [ 43 ] , two consecutive subunits O i and O i + 1 span an angle of 14 π / 13 calculated counter - clockwise from O i to O i + 1 . This means two consecutive subunits on different strands have their binding interface in almost opposite directions , and two consecutive subunits on the same strand have their binding interface at an angle of 2 π / 13 ( 28˚ ) . We arbitrarily choose the filament’s rotational vector M as the normal vector of the first subunit M = O 1 . Thus the orientational degree of freedom of the filament is fully captured by three orthonormal vectors N , M and N × M . The motion of a filament is described by its translational velocity V c and angular velocity O , which are defined by the following equations : d C dt ¼ V c ; ð 3 Þ d N dt ¼ Ω (cid:2) N ; ð 4 Þ d M dt ¼ Ω (cid:2) M : ð 5 Þ The velocities V c and O are governed by the force - balance and torque - balance equations : X t V c ¼ F e þ F s ; ð 6 Þ X r Ω ¼ T e þ T s : ð 7 Þ Here the 3 × 3 matrices X t and X r denote the frictional matrix associated with translational and rotational motion of the filament , respectively . The vectors F e and T e denote the total deterministic force and torque generated by crosslinkers or induced by steric interactions between filaments . The vectors F s and T s denote the stochastic force and torque , which obey the fluctuation - dissipation relations : h F si ð t Þ F sj ð t 0 Þi ¼ 2 k B T d ð t (cid:0) t 0 Þ X t ij ; ð 8 Þ h T si ð t Þ T sj ð t 0 Þi ¼ 2 k B T d ð t (cid:0) t 0 Þ X r ij : ð 9 Þ Here the subscript indicates the element of the vectors or matrices . The frictional matrices are Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 16 / 25 anisotropic , and given by [ 58 ] : X t ¼ x t k N (cid:10) N þ x t ? ð I (cid:0) N (cid:10) N Þ ; ð 10 Þ X r ¼ x r k N (cid:10) N þ x r ? ð I (cid:0) N (cid:10) N Þ ; ð 11 Þ where x t k and x t ? are the frictional coefficients for translational movement parallel with and perpendicular to the filament’s central axis , and x r k and x r ? are the corresponding frictional coefficients for rotation . The 3 × 3 identity matrix is denoted by I , and (cid:10) denotes the outer product of two vectors . The anisotropic frictional coefficients depend on filament length L and diameter b via the relations [ 43 ] : x t k ¼ 2 pZ L ln ð L = b Þ (cid:0) 0 : 2 ; x t ? ¼ 4 pZ L ln ð L = b Þ þ 0 : 84 ; ð 12 Þ x r k ¼ pZ b 2 L ; x r ? ¼ pZ L 3 3 ð ln ð L = b Þ (cid:0) 0 : 66 Þ : ð 13 Þ Here η denotes the viscosity of the medium . To account for the steric interaction between filaments , if the shortest distance r min between two filaments is less than the diameter b of a filament , a constant repulsive force f st is applied along the lines connecting the two nearest points . In each time step , we calculate all the forces and torques acting on a filament and determine the translational velocity V c and angular velocity O of the filament according to Eqs ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) . The center of mass of a filament is then updated as : C ð t þ D t Þ ¼ C ð t Þ þ V c D t : ð 14 Þ The updated orientations are : N ð t þ D t Þ ¼ Rot ð Ω D t Þ N ð t Þ ; ð 15 Þ where Rot ( O Δ t ) denotes the rotation matrix defined by the vector O Δ t . The rotation vector M ( t ) is updated in the same way . Model of actin crosslinking proteins Each actin crosslinking protein is modeled as an elastic spring that bridges two actin subunits in two separate filaments . The crosslinking of two unoccupied subunits proceeds with a rate constant of k f , as long as the subunits are less than r c apart . The breakage of an established crosslink is assumed to follow a “slip - bond” mechanism and occurs with an energy - dependent rate constant : k b ¼ k 0 b e E = E c ð 16 Þ where k 0 b denotes the strain - free breakage rate constant , E denotes the total elastic energy , and E c denotes the critical energy that determines the sensitivity of the bond breakage on the forces and torques . The elastic energy E of a crosslinker that bridges actin subunits in filaments α and β is a function of the positions , orientations and rotations of both filaments , as well as its positions in the filament , E = E ( C α / β , N α / β , M α / β ) . The force generated by the crosslinker on filament α Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 17 / 25 reads : F a ¼ (cid:0) @ E @ C a : ð 17 Þ To determine the torque generated by the crosslinker on filament α , we choose three orthnor - mal vectors e 1 , e 2 , e 3 and virtually rotate filament α by an infinitesimal angle ϕ i around the axis e i . These operations are equivalent to applying the following infinitesimal changes to the orien - tational vectors of filament : N a ! N a þ (cid:30) i e i (cid:2) N a ; ð 18 Þ M a ! M a þ (cid:30) i e i (cid:2) M a : ð 19 Þ The elastic energy correspondingly has an infinitesimal change E ! E + Δ E . The torque then reads : T a ¼ (cid:0) X 3 i ¼ 1 @ D E @ (cid:30) i e i ð 20 Þ Forces and torques acting on filament β are derived in a similar way . The total elastic force and torque are obtained by summing ( 17 ) and ( 20 ) over all the crosslinkers bound to the filament . Events performed in a single simulation step At each time step Δ t of the simulation , we perform the following operations : 1 . Calculate all the deterministic and stochastic forces and torques on each filament . These forces and torques determine the translational and angular velocities of filaments according to Eqs ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) . The positions and orientations of filaments are then updated according to Eqs ( 14 ) and ( 15 ) . 2 . For each pair of filament α and β , determine the number N a of crosslinkers to be attached between them by drawing a random number from the Poisson distribution , Pois ð N a mon N b mon k f D t Þ , where N a mon and N b mon are the number of actin subunits in each fila - ment . Then randomly pick N a pairs of subunits ( i , j ) with i in filament α and j in filament β . If they are not already occupied by a crosslinker and distance between them is shorter than the interacting distance r c and the total number of already occupied subunits in each fila - ment is less than g max N a = b mon , a crosslinker is built between the subunits ( i , j ) . 3 . For each already existing crosslinker , determine whether it will be detached by comparing a uniformly distributed random number u on the interval [ 0 , 1 ] with the energy - dependent breakage rate k b in Eq ( 16 ) . If u < 1 − e − k b Δ t , the crosslinker is detached . In our simulation , we always set the time step Δ t at least 100 times smaller than the relaxa - tion time of the spring t ¼ min ð x t k = ? = k ext ; x r k = ? = k tor Þ to ensure that we correctly capture the dynamics of the springs . For computational reasons , we used a high viscosity value η = 10Pa (cid:1) s , such that the relaxation time τ * 0 . 01s for κ ext = 0 . 1pN / nm and κ tor = 10pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 . We tested values of lower viscosity down to η = 0 . 1Pa (cid:1) s . There is no significant difference in the local nematic order parameter S local and the elastic energies E ext and E tor between η = 0 . 1Pa (cid:1) s and η = 10Pa (cid:1) s . However , the global nematic order parameter S global for long filaments is increased to 1 at lower viscosity ( S7 Fig ) . This is because the enhanced diffusion increases the probability of filaments moving close to each other . As a result , the separated bundles observed Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 18 / 25 at high viscosity merge into a single bundle when the viscosity is low , increasing the global nematic order parameter . Metrics to describe local and global organization of filaments We characterize the structure of actin clusters by introducing local and global nematic order parameter S local and S global . We map the connections between filaments into an undirected graph , with filaments being the nodes , and the number of crosslinkers being the value of the edges connecting two nodes . Filaments in a connected component of the graph are said to form a cluster if the number of filaments in the component is more than 10 . The nematic order parameter S for a group of filaments is the maximum eigenvalue of the following matrix [ 59 ] : Q ¼ 1 G X a ð N a (cid:10) N a (cid:0) 1 3 I Þ ; ð 21 Þ where G denotes the number of filaments in the group , N α denotes the orientational vector of filament α . For global nematic order parameter S global , the group in Eq ( 21 ) includes all the fila - ments . For a particular filament α (cid:3) , S a (cid:3) local is defined by grouping the filament α (cid:3) and its con - nected nodes in Eq ( 21 ) . The local nematic order parameter S local is the average of S a local over all the filaments that have at least 2 connected nodes . Both S local and S global are in the range of [ 0 , 1 ] . Values of S local close to 1 indicate that fila - ments are locally aligned with their connected neighbors . Values of S global close to 1 indicate that all the filaments are aligned . In general S local is greater than S global , and reaches steady state more rapidly , because filaments that are in close proximity can rapidly align , but it takes time for distant clusters of filaments to collide and reorient . S local is also more consistent over differ - ent simulations than S global , as reported by smaller error bars for S local than for S global ( e . g . Fig 2G ) . If the viscosity of the medium η is reduced to 1Pa (cid:1) s , filaments form a single cluster and the error bars of S global become comparable with S local ( S7B and S7C Fig ) . Note that in a sparsely connected network with filaments in random orientation , S local * 0 . 5 ( S1B Fig ) is higher than one should expect ( * 0 ) . This artifact is due to the fact that the sum in Eq ( 21 ) is done over a very small number of filaments ( * 3 ) . We confirmed this prop - erty by numerically calculating the nematic order parameter for three unit vectors with ran - dom orientations . The resulting distribution of S local has a peak at 0 . 45 ( S6 Fig ) . This almost uncrosslinked network should be distinguished from the densely connected actin meshworks , which have local nematic order parameters S local in the same range ( * 0 . 4 Fig 2B ) but possess a large number of attached crosslinkers . Therefore , the number of crosslinkers in the mesh - work is required to distinguish these two structures . Validity of the rigidity assumption In our model , we assumed that filaments are rigid . This rigidity assumption implies that ( i ) thermal fluctuations , and ( ii ) forces and torques exerted by crosslinkers do not signifi - cantly bend or twist the filaments . We can verify a posteriori that these conditions are actu - ally fullfiled in our simulations . Indeed , the maximum force produced by a crosslinker in our simulations is * 10pN when the extensional stiffness κ ext reaches 10pN / nm , and the maximum torque is * 100pN (cid:1) nm when the torsional stiffness κ tor reaches 100pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 . Given the persistence length of actin filament for both bending and twisting is L p * 10 μ m [ 12 , 14 , 60 , 61 ] , for a filament of length L = 200nm which consists of N = L / δ = 74 sub - units , the angular change between two consecutive subunits due to thermal fluctuation is Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 19 / 25 arccos ð e (cid:0) L = L p Þ = N ¼ 0 : 15 (cid:14) . The angular change due to bending caused by a force of f = 10pN in the middle of the filament when the two ends are fixed is arctan ð fL 2 48 L p k B T Þ = N ¼ 0 : 15 (cid:14) [ 62 ] . The twisting angle by a torque of T = 100pN (cid:1) nm is ð TL L p k B T Þ = N ¼ 0 : 37 (cid:14) . Therefore , it is safe to consider filaments as stiff , and the energy stored in crosslinkers would not be dramatically different even if the finite stiffness of filaments was taken into account . Direct rotation of filaments by consecutive detachment of crosslinkers We consider the rotation of two parallel filaments around their axes by consecutive detach - ment of crosslinkers from the pointed end to the barbed end . We assume that every other sub - unit of each filament is crosslinked , such that the i - th crosslinker has an angle of y i ¼ y 1 þ ð i (cid:0) 1 Þ 2 p = 13 ð 22 Þ with its attached actin subunit . The torque generated by the i - th crosslinker on the filament thus is − κ tor θ i . Here the crosslinker label i is ordered according to their distance to the pointed end of filaments . At torque balanced state , i . e . , P ni ¼ 1 y i ¼ 0 , we have θ 1 = − ( n − 1 ) π / 13 . Upon detachment of crosslinker 1 , the total torque becomes imbalanced and the filament makes a rotation of angle Δ ϕ to reach a new torque balanced state , i . e . , P ni ¼ 2 ð y i þ D (cid:30) Þ ¼ 0 . This leads to Δ ϕ = − π / 13 . Similarly we can show that attachment of a new crosslinker at the ( n + 1 ) - th position θ n + 1 = θ 1 + n 2 π / 13 will cause the filament to rotate the same angle in the same direc - tion as caused by detachment of the first crosslinker . Note that even though the rotation angle Δ ϕ is independent of the number of attached crosslinkers , it is required that crosslinkers are present in large enough number or are stiff enough to ensure that rotation will be significantly larger than thermal fluctuations , i . e . 12 k tor y 21 (cid:29) k B T . For instance , if the number of crosslinkers n = 10 , this requires κ tor (cid:29) 2pN (cid:1) nm (cid:1) rad −1 . The above calculation can be easily extended to situations with more relaxed conditions than Eq ( 22 ) . The angular rotation Δ ϕ ( i ) of the filament upon detachment of the i - th crosslin - ker satisfies the recursive relation : D (cid:30) ð i Þ ¼ y i þ P i (cid:0) 1 j ¼ 1 D (cid:30) ð j Þ n (cid:0) i : ð 23 Þ Directed rotation requires that Δ ϕ ( i ) have the same sign for all i . This condition is equivalent to considering that the angles between consecutive crosslinkers ( θ i − θ i −1 ) have the same sign for all i . Derivation of the effective binding energy μ eff We consider a simplified model in which , when there are n crosslinkers formed , each crosslin - ker stores an elastic energy of E n . In fact , E n is varied among different crosslinkers and depen - dent on their positions and orientations in the filaments . Here we assume E n only depends on n , and the probability distribution P ( n , t ) for the number of crosslinkers is governed by dP ð n ; t Þ dt ¼ k f F ð n j n (cid:0) 1 Þ P ð n (cid:0) 1 Þ þ ð n þ 1 Þ k 0 b e E n þ 1 = E c P ð n þ 1 Þ (cid:0) k f F ð n þ 1 j n Þ þ nk 0 b e E n = E c (cid:2) (cid:3) P ð n Þ ; ð 24 Þ where F ( n | n − 1 ) denotes the number of ways to build the n - th crosslinker , given there are Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 20 / 25 already n − 1 crosslinkers formed . The steady state distribution reads P ss ð n Þ ¼ P ð 0 Þ k f k 0 b (cid:18) (cid:19) n G ð n Þ e (cid:0) 1 Ec P n i ¼ 1 E i ; ð 25 Þ where G ð n Þ ¼ 1 n ! Q ni ¼ 1 F ð i j i (cid:0) 1 Þ is the number of possible ways to build n crosslinkers . By comparing the distribution of P ss ( n + 1 ) with P ss ( n ) , we have P ss ð n þ 1 Þ P ss ð n Þ ¼ e (cid:0) En þ 1 (cid:0) m eff ð n Þ E c ; ð 26 Þ where μ eff ( n ) is the effective binding energy defined in the text . If μ eff ( n ) > E n + 1 , the system is driven up to the ( n + 1 ) - state , storing an elastic energy of E n + 1 . Supporting information S1 Fig . Filaments do not cluster if the crosslinker formation rate k f is low . ( A ) Snapshots of an actin network with 81nm - long filaments in a 500nm - wide cubic box . The crosslinking rate is k f = 0 . 1 s −1 . Each filament is represented by a blue line and each crosslink by a red line . ( B ) Evolution of the local ( blue ) and global ( red ) nematic order parameter of the actin network over the course of the simulation shown in ( A ) . ( C ) Evolution of the number of attached cross - linkers ( magenta , left axis ) and the number of clusters ( black , right axis ) for the simulation in ( A ) . ( TIF ) S2 Fig . Influence of the crosslinker’s mechanical and kinetic properties on the organization of the actin network . ( A - C ) Global nematic order parameter as a function of the extensional stiffness κ ext ( A ) , the torsional stiffness κ tor ( B ) , and the linker breakage rate k 0 b ( C ) . ( D - F ) Number of clusters as a function of the same set of parameters . ( G - I ) Number of attached link - ers as a function of the same set of parameters . Simulations are performed for filaments of vari - ous lengths : 81nm ( blue ) , 135nm ( red ) and 189nm ( orange ) . For each simulation , the means of the metrics were calculated from the data between 40s to 50s and the error bars indicate standard deviation over 10 simulations . ( TIF ) S3 Fig . Phase diagram of the actin network organization with low strain - free breakage rate k 0b ¼ 0 : 01 s (cid:0) 1 and high extensional stiffness κ ext = 1pN / nm . ( A ) Local nematic order parame - ter S local as a function of k f and L . ( B ) Number of attached crosslinkers N attach as a function of k f and L . ( C ) Classification of actin network organizations as a function of k f and L . Meshworks occupy the entire parameter space . The criteria delimiting each possible organization are the same as in Fig 4E and 4G , i . e . S local = 0 . 75 and N attach = 300 . ( TIF ) S4 Fig . Straining of crosslinkers and energy storage . ( A , B ) Average torsional strain θ ( A ) and torsional energy ( B ) as a function of the extensional stiffness κ ext . ( C , D ) Average absolute value of the extensional strain | (cid:15) | ( C ) and extensional energy ( D ) as a function of the torsional stiffness κ tor . Simulations were performed for filaments of various lengths : 81nm ( blue ) , 135nm ( red ) , and 189nm ( orange ) . For each simulation , the means of the metrics were calcu - lated from the data between 40s to 50s and the error bars indicate standard deviation over 10 simulations . ( TIF ) Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 21 / 25 S5 Fig . Schematic illustration of the one - dimensional Brownian motion of two particles attached to each other with springs . The black dot on the spring is constrained to stay at posi - tion 0 . ( A ) The movements of the two particles are independent . ( B ) The movements of the two particles are strongly coupled ( by the black bar ) and constrained such that x 1 − x 2 = 2 x 0 . ( C ) The position distribution of the particle 1 is shown in the decoupled case ( blue ) and in the coupled case ( orange ) . ( TIF ) S6 Fig . Distribution of the nematic order parameter for three unit vectors with random orientations . This distribution shows that randomly oriented vectors have a nematic order parameter centered around 0 . 4 , rather than 0 . The distribution was drawn from 200 simula - tions . ( TIF ) S7 Fig . Effect of viscosity on the structure of actin filaments and the elastic energy of cross - linkers . ( A - C ) Nematic order parameter as a function of filament length at various viscosities as indicated above the panel . Global and local nematic orders are shown in red and blue , respectively . ( D - F ) Elastic energy as a function of filament length at various viscosities as indi - cated above the panel . Extensional and torsional energies are shown in blue and red , respec - tively . The total simulation time is 10s for η = 0 . 1Pa (cid:1) s , and is 50 s for η = 1 − 10Pa (cid:1) s . For each simulation , the means of the metrics were calculated from the data between 40s to 50s ( for η = 1 − 10Pa (cid:1) s ) or between 8 s and 10 s ( for η = 0 . 1Pa (cid:1) s ) , and the error bars indicate standard devi - ation over 10 simulations . ( TIF ) S8 Fig . Convergence test of the simulation . ( A , C , E ) Temporal evolution of local ( blue ) and global ( red ) nematic order parameter for filaments of length 81nm ( A ) , 135nm ( C ) and 189nm ( E ) . ( B , D , F ) Temporal evolution of number of attached crosslinkers for filaments of length 81nm ( B ) , 135nm ( D ) and 189nm ( F ) . All the metrics are averaged over 20 simulations for total 75s ( A , B ) or 150s ( C - F ) . ( TIF ) Acknowledgments We thank the members of the Berro lab for helpful discussions and Prof . Jonathon Howard , Prof . Enrique De La Cruz , Prof . Michael Murrel , Dr . Wenxiang Cao , Dr . Pablo Sartori , and Danny Seara for critical reading of the manuscript . Author Contributions Conceptualization : Rui Ma , Julien Berro . Formal analysis : Rui Ma . Funding acquisition : Julien Berro . Investigation : Rui Ma , Julien Berro . Methodology : Rui Ma , Julien Berro . Project administration : Julien Berro . Software : Rui Ma . Supervision : Julien Berro . Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 22 / 25 Visualization : Rui Ma . Writing – original draft : Rui Ma , Julien Berro . Writing – review & editing : Rui Ma , Julien Berro . References 1 . Amberg DC . Three - dimensional imagingof the yeast actin cytoskeleton through the buddingcell cycle . Mol Biol Cell . 1998 ; 9 ( 12 ) : 3259 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 9 . 12 . 3259 PMID : 9843567 2 . Kovar DR , Sirotkin V , Lord M . Three’s company : the fission yeast actin cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 2011 ; 21 ( 3 ) : 177 – 87 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2010 . 11 . 001 PMID : 21145239 3 . Bi E , Park HO . Cell polarizationand cytokinesis in buddingyeast . Genetics . 2012 ; 191 ( 2 ) : 347 – 87 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1534 / genetics . 111 . 132886 PMID : 22701052 4 . Moseley JB , Goode BL . The yeast actin cytoskeleton : from cellularfunction to biochemicalmechanism . MicrobiolMol Biol Rev . 2006 ; 70 ( 3 ) : 605 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MMBR . 00013 - 06PMID : 16959963 5 . PollardTD , Wu JQ . Understanding cytokinesis : lessons from fission yeast . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2010 ; 11 ( 2 ) : 149 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2834 PMID : 20094054 6 . Tang H , BidoneTC , VavylonisD . Computational model of polarizedactin cables and cytokinetic actin ring formation in budding yeast . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 2015 ; 72 ( 10 ) : 517 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 21258 7 . BidoneTC , Tang H , VavylonisD . Dynamicnetwork morphologyand tensionbuildupin a 3D model of cytokineticring assembly . Biophysical journal . 2014 ; 107 ( 11 ) : 2618 – 2628 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 10 . 034 PMID : 25468341 8 . Tang H , Laporte D , VavylonisD . Actin cable distribution and dynamicsarising from cross - linking , motor pulling , and filament turnover . Molecularbiologyof the cell . 2014 ; 25 ( 19 ) : 3006 – 3016 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 05 - 0965 PMID : 25103242 9 . StachowiakMR , LaplanteC , Chin HF , Guirao B , Karatekin E , PollardTD , et al . Mechanism of cytoki - netic contractilering constrictionin fission yeast . Dev Cell . 2014 ; 29 ( 5 ) : 547 – 61 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 04 . 021PMID : 24914559 10 . Michelot A , Grassart A , OkreglakV , Costanzo M , Boone C , Drubin DG . Actin filament elongationin Arp2 / 3 - derived networks is controlledby three distinct mechanisms . Dev Cell . 2013 ; 24 ( 2 ) : 182 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2012 . 12 . 008 PMID : 23333351 11 . Berro J , Sirotkin V , PollardTD . Mathematical modelingof endocyticactin patch kinetics in fission yeast : disassembly requiresrelease of actin filament fragments . Mol Biol Cell . 2010 ; 21 ( 16 ) : 2905 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 06 - 0494PMID : 20587776 12 . Gittes F , Mickey B , NettletonJ , HowardJ . Flexuralrigidity of microtubules and actin filamentsmeasured from thermal fluctuations in shape . J Cell Biol . 1993 ; 120 ( 4 ) : 923 – 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 120 . 4 . 923 PMID : 8432732 13 . Isambert H , Venier P , Maggs AC , Fattoum A , Kassab R , PantaloniD , et al . Flexibilityof actin filaments derived from thermal fluctuations . Effect of boundnucleotide , phalloidin , and muscle regulatorypro - teins . J Biol Chem . 1995 ; 270 ( 19 ) : 11437 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 270 . 19 . 11437PMID : 7744781 14 . Graham JS , McCulloughBR , Kang H , Elam WA , Cao W , De La Cruz EM . Multi - platform compatible software for analysisof polymerbendingmechanics . PLoS One . 2014 ; 9 ( 4 ) : e94766 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0094766PMID : 24740323 15 . Berro J , Michelot A , BlanchoinL , Kovar DR , Martiel JL . Attachment conditions control actin filament bucklingand the production of forces . Biophys J . 2007 ; 92 ( 7 ) : 2546 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 094672PMID : 17208983 16 . Kukulski W , Schorb M , KaksonenM , Briggs JA . Plasma membranereshapingduringendocytosis is revealedby time - resolved electron tomography . Cell . 2012 ; 150 ( 3 ) : 508 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 046 PMID : 22863005 17 . Galletta BJ , CooperJA . Actin and endocytosis : mechanisms and phylogeny . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2009 ; 21 ( 1 ) : 20 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2009 . 01 . 006 PMID : 19186047 18 . Mooren OL , Galletta BJ , Cooper JA . Roles for actin assembly in endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem . 2012 ; 81 : 661 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - biochem - 060910 - 094416 PMID : 22663081 19 . KaksonenM , Sun Y , DrubinDG . A pathwayfor associationof receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell . 2003 ; 115 ( 4 ) : 475 – 87 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00883 - 3 PMID : 14622601 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 23 / 25 20 . Sirotkin V , Berro J , Macmillan K , Zhao L , PollardTD . Quantitative analysisof the mechanismof endocy - tic actin patch assembly and disassembly in fission yeast . Mol Biol Cell . 2010 ; 21 ( 16 ) : 2894 – 904 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 02 - 0157PMID : 20587778 21 . Picco A , Mund M , Ries J , NedelecF , KaksonenM . Visualizing the functionalarchitecture of the endocy - tic machinery . Elife . 2015 ; 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04535 PMID : 25675087 22 . GaidarovI , Santini F , Warren RA , Keen JH . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol . 1999 ; 1 ( 1 ) : 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 8971 PMID : 10559856 23 . MerrifieldCJ , FeldmanME , Wan L , Almers W . Imagingactin and dynaminrecruitment duringinvagina - tion of singleclathrin - coatedpits . Nat Cell Biol . 2002 ; 4 ( 9 ) : 691 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb837 PMID : 12198492 24 . KaksonenM , Toret CP , DrubinDG . A modulardesign for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell . 2005 ; 123 ( 2 ) : 305 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 09 . 024 PMID : 16239147 25 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , DanuserG . Measuring the hierarchyof molecularevents duringcla - thrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic . 2011 ; 12 ( 7 ) : 815 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2011 . 01197 . xPMID : 21447041 26 . CocucciE , Aguet F , Boulant S , Kirchhausen T . The first five seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell . 2012 ; 150 ( 3 ) : 495 – 507 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 047 PMID : 22863004 27 . Tseng Y , Kole TP , Lee JS , Fedorov E , Almo SC , Schafer BW , et al . How actin crosslinkingand bundling proteins cooperate to generatean enhanced cell mechanical response . Biochemical and biophysical research communications . 2005 ; 334 ( 1 ) : 183 – 192 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2005 . 05 . 205 PMID : 15992772 28 . Kim T , Hwang W , Lee H , Kamm RD . Computationalanalysisof viscoelastic propertiesof crosslinked actin networks . PLoS computational biology . 2009 ; 5 ( 7 ) : e1000439 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1000439PMID : 19609348 29 . Kim T , Hwang W , Kamm RD . Dynamic role of cross - linking proteins in actin rheology . Biophysical jour - nal . 2011 ; 101 ( 7 ) : 1597 – 1603 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 08 . 033 PMID : 21961585 30 . Kubler E , Riezman H . Actin and fimbrin are requiredfor the internalizationstep of endocytosisin yeast . EMBO J . 1993 ; 12 ( 7 ) : 2855 – 62 . PMID : 8335001 31 . Skau CT , CoursonDS , Bestul AJ , WinkelmanJD , Rock RS , Sirotkin V , et al . Actin Filament Bundlingby Fimbrin Is Important for Endocytosis , Cytokinesis , and Polarizationin Fission Yeast . Journal of Biologi - cal Chemistry . 2011 ; 286 ( 30 ) : 26964 – 26977 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 239004PMID : 21642440 32 . Minc N , BoudaoudA , ChangF . Mechanical forces of fission yeast growth . Curr Biol . 2009 ; 19 ( 13 ) : 1096 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 05 . 031 PMID : 19500986 33 . Goldenbogen B , Giese W , Hemmen M , Uhlendorf J , HerrmannA , Klipp E . Dynamics of cell wall elastic - ity pattern shapes the cell duringyeast mating morphogenesis . Open Biol . 2016 ; 6 ( 9 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsob . 160136PMID : 27605377 34 . Basu R , MunteanuEL , ChangF . Role of turgor pressure in endocytosis in fission yeast . Mol Biol Cell . 2014 ; 25 ( 5 ) : 679 – 87 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E13 - 10 - 0618 PMID : 24403609 35 . Dmitrieff S , NedelecF . MembraneMechanicsof Endocytosis in Cells with Turgor . PLoS Comput Biol . 2015 ; 11 ( 10 ) : e1004538 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1004538PMID : 26517669 36 . Tweten DJ , Bayly PV , CarlssonAE . Actin growth profile in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Phys Rev E . 2017 ; 95 ( 5 - 1 ) : 052414 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 95 . 052414 PMID : 28618637 37 . Footer MJ , Kerssemakers JW , Theriot JA , DogteromM . Direct measurement of force generationby actin filament polymerization using an optical trap . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2007 ; 104 ( 7 ) : 2181 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0607052104PMID : 17277076 38 . Pyrpassopoulos S , Arpag G , Feeser EA , Shuman H , Tuzel E , Ostap EM . Force Generation by Mem - brane - Associated Myosin - I . Sci Rep . 2016 ; 6 : 25524 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep25524PMID : 27156719 39 . Greenberg MJ , Arpag G , Tuzel E , Ostap EM . A Perspective on the Role of Myosins as Mechanosen - sors . Biophys J . 2016 ; 110 ( 12 ) : 2568 – 2576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 05 . 021 PMID : 27332116 40 . Laakso JM , Lewis JH , Shuman H , Ostap EM . Myosin I can act as a molecularforce sensor . Science . 2008 ; 321 ( 5885 ) : 133 – 136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1159419 PMID : 18599791 41 . ClaessensMM , Bathe M , Frey E , Bausch AR . Actin - bindingproteins sensitivelymediate F - actin bundle stiffness . Nat Mater . 2006 ; 5 ( 9 ) : 748 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat1718PMID : 16921360 42 . Janssen XJ , van Noorloos JM , Jacob A , van Ijzendoorn LJ , de Jong AM , Prins MW . Torsion stiffness of a protein pair determinedby magneticparticles . Biophys J . 2011 ; 100 ( 9 ) : 2262 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 03 . 034PMID : 21539795 Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 24 / 25 43 . HowardJ . Mechanicsof motor proteins and the cytoskeleton . Sunderland , Mass . : SinauerAssociates , Publishers ; 2001 . 44 . VolkmannN , DeRosierD , Matsudaira P , Hanein D . An atomic model of actin filaments cross - linkedby fimbrin and its implications for bundleassembly and function . The Journal of cell biology . 2001 ; 153 ( 5 ) : 947 – 956 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 5 . 947 PMID : 11381081 45 . Skau CT , Kovar DR . Fimbrin and tropomyosin competitionregulatesendocytosis and cytokinesis kinet - ics in fission yeast . Curr Biol . 2010 ; 20 ( 16 ) : 1415 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 06 . 020PMID : 20705466 46 . KuhlmanPA , Ellis J , Critchley DR , BagshawCR . The kinetics of the interactionbetweenthe actin - bind - ing domainof α - actininand F - actin . FEBS letters . 1994 ; 339 ( 3 ) : 297 – 301 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 5793 ( 94 ) 80434 - 6PMID : 8112470 47 . Xu J , Wirtz D , Pollard TD . Dynamic cross - linking by α - actinindetermines the mechanicalpropertiesof actin filament networks . Journal of BiologicalChemistry . 1998 ; 273 ( 16 ) : 9570 – 9576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 16 . 9570PMID : 9545287 48 . Ferrer JM , Lee H , Chen J , Pelz B , Nakamura F , Kamm RD , et al . Measuring molecularrupture forces betweensingle actin filaments and actin - bindingproteins . Proceedingsof the NationalAcademy of Sci - ences . 2008 ; 105 ( 27 ) : 9221 – 9226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0706124105 49 . PhillipsRB , Kondev J , Theriot J . Physical Biologyof the Cell . GarlandScience ; 2009 . Available from : https : / / books . google . com / books ? id = iTBvQgAACAAJ . 50 . Weirich KL , BanerjeeS , DasbiswasK , Witten TA , Vaikuntanathan S , Gardel ML . Liquidbehaviorof cross - linkedactin bundles . Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences . 2017 ; 114 ( 9 ) : 2131 – 2136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1616133114 51 . HuangDL , Bax NA , Buckley CD , Weis WI , Dunn AR . Vinculin forms a directionally asymmetric catch bond with F - actin . Science . 2017 ; 357 ( 6352 ) : 703 – 706 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aan2556 PMID : 28818948 52 . Luo TZ , Mohan K , Iglesias PA , RobinsonDN . Molecularmechanisms of cellularmechanosensing . Nature Materials . 2013 ; 12 ( 11 ) : 1063 – 1070 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat3772 53 . ClaessensMMAE , Semmrich C , Ramos L , Bausch A . Helicaltwist controls the thickness of F - actin bun - dles . Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences . 2008 ; 105 ( 26 ) : 8819 – 8822 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0711149105 54 . Shin H , Drew KRP , Bartles JR , Wong GC , Grason GM . Cooperativity and frustration in protein - medi - ated parallelactin bundles . Physical review letters . 2009 ; 103 ( 23 ) : 238102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 103 . 238102 PMID : 20366178 55 . HeussingerC , Grason GM . Theory of crosslinkedbundles of helicalfilaments : Intrinsic torques in self - limiting biopolymer assemblies . The Journal of chemicalphysics . 2011 ; 135 ( 3 ) : 07B609 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 3610431 56 . Mogilner A , Oster G . Force generationby actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered fila - ments . Biophysical journal . 2003 ; 84 ( 3 ) : 1591 – 1605 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 03 ) 74969 - 8 PMID : 12609863 57 . Mogilner A , Oster G . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophysical journal . 1996 ; 71 ( 6 ) : 3030 – 3045 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 96 ) 79496 - 1 PMID : 8968574 58 . SchreiberCH , Stewart M , Duke T . Simulationof cell motility that reproducesthe force - velocity relation - ship . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2010 ; 107 ( 20 ) : 9141 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1002538107 PMID : 20439759 59 . Doi M . Soft matter physics . Oxford University Press ; 2013 . 60 . Yasuda R , Miyata H , Kinosita J K . Direct measurement of the torsional rigidity of single actin filaments . J Mol Biol . 1996 ; 263 ( 2 ) : 227 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 1996 . 0571 PMID : 8913303 61 . Tsuda Y , Yasutake H , Ishijima A , YanagidaT . Torsionalrigidity of single actin filaments and actin - actin bond breakingforce under torsion measureddirectly by in vitro micromanipulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1996 ; 93 ( 23 ) : 12937 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 93 . 23 . 12937 PMID : 8917522 62 . Gere JM , TimoshenkoSP . Mechanics of materials . PWS - KENT PublishingCompany . 1997 ; 534 ( 92174 ) : 4 . Structural organizationand energy storage in crosslinked actin assemblies PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006150 May 29 , 2018 25 / 25