Information Exchange and Use in GSS and Verbal Group Decision Making : Effects of Minority Influence flan R . Dennis , Kelly M . Hilmer , Nolan J . Taylor , Anthony Polito Dept . of Management , Terry CoIIege of Business , University of Georgia , Athens , GA 30602 adennis @ uga . cc . uga . edu Abstract The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of GSS use on the exchange and use of information in group decision making under two couditions : when there was and was not a majority / minority split of opinion in the group . When there was a distinct majority / minority , groups using a GSS exchanged more information , made better decisions , and took no more time than when they did not use a GSS . In the uniform treatment where there was no majority / minoriiy , groups using a GSS exchanged more information , but made worse decisions , and took more time than when they did not use a GSS - 1 . Introduction Individual managers seldom have access to all relevant information , so when truly important decisions have to be made , a group is typically formed to make the decision or to advise the individual who must make it [ 9 ] . Group discussion enables members to share information so that the group as a whole can access a larger pool of information than any one member acting alone [ 23 ] . However , information exchange in group decision making is often done poorly ; much unique information known to some group members is never shared with the group [ 24 ] . Individuals , particularly low status participants , may withhold information due to apprehension about the group’s reaction to it or may feel pressured to conform to the views of the group majority [ 7 , 9 , 131 . This unique information can be important , leading to poor decisions when it is not considered [ S , 251 . Information technologies such as Group Support Systems ( GSS ) have the potential to fundamentally change the nature of information exchange in group discussion [ 6 , 201 . The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of GSS use on the exchange and use of information in group decision making under two conditions : when there was and was not a majority - minority split of opinion in the group . 2 . Information and group decision making 2 . 1 . Information distribution In decision making situations , group members typically know a host of information about possible alternatives . This information shapes members’ pre - discussion preferences and , as members communicate information during discussion , shapes the group’s decision . The information that members have can be distributed in a variety of ways . It can be known to all members before group discussion ( “common” ) , known to only one before group discussion ( “unique” ) or known to some but not all before discussion ( “partially shared” ) . Unique information can be distributed so that it is unbiased ; that is , each group member has a baland set of information that indicates the optimal alternative . In this case , the group should reach the same decision with or without the unique information However , information can be distributed so that the optimal alternative is hidden ; that is , the common information indicates a nan - optimal alternative , but if the group were to pool the unique information , they would be able to discover the optimal alternative . This situation is called a “hidden profile task” by Stasser [ 24 ] . In this case , if discussion does not raise all available but unique information , the group likely will make a poor decision . Here , the value of unique information is high , but empirical studies have found that much of it is not exchanged [ 26 , 271 . In this paper , we focus on two conditions of information distribution in hidden profile tasks . One well - studied condmon is when a mjorityhninority exists in the group [ 19 ] . In this case , a majority of group members favor one alternative ( a sub - optimal one ) and a minority favor a second altemative ( the optimal one ) . Another , less - studied , condition is when no majorityhninority exists in the group ; members are evenly divided among the alternatives in their opinions . We term this a “unif ~ rm” condition . We begin with the uniform condition and then consider how this may change when a majority / minority exists . 84 1060 - 3425 / 97 $ 10 . 00 0 1997 IEEE 2 . 2 . Information exchange and use In order to reach a group decision , members engage in three activities simulmmusly : information recall ( either from memory or notes ) , information exchange ( either giving or receiving information ) , and information promsing ( actually using the i n € o d o n : assessing the cognitive and social implications of the information and storing it in memory ) [ 2 ] . Humans have a limited amount of cognitive resources to spread across these three activities [ l ] . Most people can engage in only one activity at one time , so that engaging in any one activity limits the ability to engage in the other two . For example , actively listening to discussion blocks the processing of newly received information and the recall of related Mormation [ 13 ] . We wusider each activity in turn . ’ 2 . 2 . 1 . Information recall . lnformaton recall of the group as a whole is biased toward common idormation , due to the laws of probability . Coxtunon Momation known by all members is more likely to be remembered by at least one individual than is unique information known only to one member [ 27 ] . Thus , groups are more likely to focus discussions on common rather than unique information , because common information is more likely to be redled . Yet in a hidden profile task , it is the unique information that is critical to success ; without adequate consideration of the udique information , & roup members will miss the optimal decision . 222 . Information exchange : The exchauge of information in verbal discussion is not perfii Members must first decide to matribute the infomation , and then have the opportunity to contribute it . Individuals are often motivated to Mend or support their initial preference , so the information they choose to contribute often favors their pmfmnces or challenges an alternative [ % I . Idormation contradicting the preferences of the majority is also less likely to be exchanged [ 9 ] , because members may fear a negative evaluation oftheir comments [ 7 , 13 ] . In verbal discussion , only one group member can speak at one time , so all other members are blocked from contriiuthg . This “production blocking” sipficantly reduces the exchange of information because members who are prevented fiom contributing information as they choose , often forget or suppress it because it seems less relevant or less important later in the discussion [ 7 , 13 ] . In a situation where a group majority favors one alternative , the tendency to support one’s own choice will result in a majority of members contributing information that SUPPIIS the @ on @ choice . Likewi ~ , the tendency not to contribute idormation contradicting the group majority ( e . g . , information challenging it , or favoring a competing alternative ) may also result in incomplete information exchange . The result may be a very biased exchange of information that favors the majority alternative , further reinforcing its apparent superiority . 2 . 2 . 3 . Information processing and use . Once information is exchanged , members must actually process it Wore it can affect decisions . Petty and Cacioppo [ 21 ] argue that there are two “routes” by which information is processed . The first is the “central route , ” in which members actively assess the information and integrate it into their overall understanding of the situation and their preferences ( also called persuasive arguments or information influence ) . This theoq argues that unique information not previously known should be more persuasive than information already known and considered [ 18 , 321 . However , empirical evidence has found the opposite : unique information is more likely to be ignored , while common information known to all members prior to discussion has a greater influence on the groups decision 1281 . There are at least two plausible reasons . First , during verbal discussions , members must constantly pay attention to other members or miss their contributions , and therefore the unique information first received during discussion is processed only superficially and not considered as fully as information studied before discussion . Second , information that supports pre - discussion choices is more thoroughly processed and integrated into an individual‘s cognitive schema [ 21 ] , while information challenging initial decisions is discounted 114 , 341 . The processing of information is also affected by the presence of a majority opinion within the group . When Ehced by a group mjority whose preferences are Merent from theirs , members assume the majority to be correct , and focus on comparing their preferences to the majority’s . “The world of alternatives is reduced to two” [ 19 , p . 251 . This stimulates a comparison process of convergent thought , of viewing the issues from the majority’s preference [ 17 ] . In contrast , when faced by a minority with a different preference , members are motivated to assume that minority members are incorrect , and initially dismiss them 115 , 191 . However , if the minority is consistent in presenting information and opinions , and does not yield to majority pressure , members realize that the minority is convinced of its position . They make attempts to understand it - a validation process of divergent thought [ 171 . Information is re - examined from many perspectives , not just that of the minority ? to understand why it has led to different conclusions [ 15 , 191 . Information from minority members may be more thoroughly processed than 85 information from the majority because minority members are perceived to be more independent or more dissimilar from one another than are me The second route by which information is processed is the “peripheral route , ” in which members’ preferences are shaped more by peripheral cues such the number of people arguing for a position or their attractiveness , rather than the quality of the information itself ( also called social comparison or normative influence ) . This theory argues that members are motivated to conform to the opinions of others to preserve a Eavorable self - perception and self - presentation [ 18 ] . After obtaining information about others’ preferences , memben may change their preference to more closely match others , either through choice or coercion [ 9 ] . Also , publicly stating a preference may make that preference stronger , public commitment may make changing preferences more diacult without losing face [ 22 ] and may cause stronger internalization to reduce cognitive dissonance [ 18 ] . In a majorityhinority situation , normative influence is usually quite strong [ 15 ] . Members may not actually change their preference , but just state a more socially acceptable preference than their true preference . They may simply comply with the majority preference to avoid further stress , without examining any information [ 15 ] . of the majority [ lo ] . 2 . 3 . GSS effects on information exchange and use GSS provide new opportunities for information exchange that may differ in important ways from non - GSS environments . One of these is electronic communication that can augment or replace verbal communication . This electronic communication provides a package of many different components , each of which may introduce new dynamics into the information exchange process . Three components in particular should affect information exchange and use : parallelism , group memory , and anonymity [ 20 ] . The first , parallelism , is the ability of all group members to enter information at the same time . All group members have computer workstations , which enable them to contribute information and opinions by typing ideas , which are immediately shared with all other members . Since all members can type at the same time , no participant need wait for others to finish before contributing information . This parallelism mitigates the blocking that inhibits the exchange of information in vedxdly interacting groups [ 3 11 . The second , group memory , means that all remarks typed into the computer are stored so that members can refer to them later in the discussion . One of the key problems in verbal discussion is that listening to group discussion blocks processing of new information , and information processing blocks the receipt of new information from discussion . A group memory enables members to enter or read information at their discretion ; they can more easily pause to process information without risk of missing information . The third component is anonymity ; group members make contributions without attaching their names , which may motivate them to participate differently . Anonymity may reduce the reluctance to contribute information that contradicts the dominant group preference [ 20 ] . Members are also often motivated to defend or support their initial preference , so the information they choose to contribute favors their preferences or attacks an alternative [ 26 , 271 . To the extent that this motivation stems from the need to save face about a publicly advocated decision preference , anonymity , which can obscure both the initial public statement of preference as well as any subsequent arguments for or against it , may reduce the tendency to contribute information supporting one’s initial preferences . 2 . 4 . Summary and hypotheses 2 . 4 . 1 . Information exchange . There is often an incomplete exchange of information in verbal discussions , which may lead to poor decisions . GSS use may increase the amount of information exchanged because it provides garallelism ( which reduces blocking ) and anonymity ( which may reduce the reluctance to contribute information challenging one’s own preference or that of the majority ) . These factors are likely to af€ect common and unique information equally . Therefore : H1 : Members of GSS groups will exchange more common information and more unique information than members of non - GSS groups . In a majorityhinority situation , there is more pressure on minority members to accede to the majority , encouraging less discussion of the available information ; they may simply agree with the majority without much discussion because swaying the majority will be more diflicult than swaying the few members required in the uniform situation . The shield provided by anonymity will be more strongly felt when there is a majority / minority within the group . Minority members who oppose the preference favored by the group majority will be more likely to oppose the majority viewpoint when they use a GSS . Because they will present their opinions more are more likely to persist in their opinions , to exchange more information . Therefore : €32 : The difference in information exchange between GSS and non - GSS groups will be the greatest in majorityhinority groups . 86 2 . 4 . 2 . Intormatic above , GSS should process information 1 that enables memh Previous GSS resean u s e o f f a c t u a l i n preferences ; that is , ratherthallWlmatiV ~ H3 : Members of consider the % om decisions than are m There will be processing between m groups . Minoritym the majority witha parallelismandthes minority llEembers a more sttongly and p likely to trigger tl Moscovici [ 17 ] . The H 4 The differem and non - GSS grc majority / minority gn 2 . 43 . oute4mea information sbould i decision compared t enables groups to I fiwer . There is evid part because GSS rz slower than talking . I H5 : GSS groups than non - GSS group In a ma . . rity / min ~ on the minority ml encouraging less di infomation . The eq the shield of anonym to present their opin theirOpini0 ~ requil H6 : The meren aoa - Gss groups wil groups - In certain situati greater use of uniqu better identi @ the o alSOreducethepreSS aodreducettze loss E positions , making it pdb - ences . Thew0 H7 : When inf ' om of GSS groups will ofnon - GSS groups . roeessiag and use . As argued ter enable group members to se it provides a group memory o review information at will . IS found GSS use to increase the ation rather than members ' increase idormation influence Uewe [ 5 , 121 . groups are more likely to 3 exchanged in making their rs Ofnon - GSS groups . Lrent e f f i i on information ity / minonty groups and uniform xs are more likely to accede to the equal time provided by 1 of anonymity . JII GSS groups , ikely to present their opinions . longer , and therdore are more " ive validation prooess of e : idonnation use between GSS will be the greatest in ae discussion and use of more ue the time required to reach a n - GSS groups , unless the GSS ibute and process informaton I that GSS use takes longer , in e participants to type , which is [ Therefore : take longer to reach a decision situation , there is more pressure m to accede to the majority , Eion and less consideration of me provided by parallelism and dl encourage minority members more strongly and to persist in more time . Thedore : i time taken between GSS and the greatest in majority / minority such as hidden profile tasks , formation will enable groups to al alternative . Anonymity may o conform to others ' preferences , e in backing down from previous , er for members to change their I distribution is biased , members e better decisions than members In a mjority / minority situation , the minority members are more likely to accede to the group majority , unless the parallelism and anonymity encourages more thorough exchange and use of the available information . Therefore : H8 : The difference in decision quality between GSS and non - GSS groups will be the greatest in majorityhinority groups . 3 . Method 3 . 1 . Subjects One hundred and f ? @ sophomore , junior , and senior business students drawn from a core business cause participated as members of 15 ten - pemn groups ( 5 majority / minority task groups ; 10 uniform task groups ) . The average age was 21 years ; 56 % were male . 3 . 2 . Independent variables This study used a 2 x 2 repeated measures design , crossing GSS use with the decision situation ( mjority / minority or uniform ) . Each group was assigned into either the majority / minority or uniform condition , and performed two tasks , one using a GSS and one without . The order of the two tasks and the GSS and verbal treatments were reversed for half the groups . In the non - GSS treatment , subjects interacted verbally . In the GSS treatment , subjects used TCBWorks , a GSS developed at the University of Georgia [ 30 ] that provided electronic communication with parallelism , anonymity , and group memory . Subjects were instructed to use the software to exchange information until their first vote . After the first vote they were instructed to use both the software and to discuss the issues verbally . The majorityhinority task was designed such that seven subjects received a subset of information favoring the same sub - optimal alternative , while three received a subset of information favoring the optimal alternative . In the uniform task thnee subjects received a sub - set of information favoring the optimal alternative , four received a subset of information favoring a sub - optimal the alternative and three received information favoring a Merent sub - optimal alternative . Any session in which the tasks did not produce the intended majority / minority ( defined as at least six members favoring the sub - optimal alternative ) or an uniform split ( defined as no more than five members favoring the sub - optimal choice and at least three favoring the optimal choice ) for both tasks was discarded . We studied 21 groups , but only IS met these criteria and were used in the study ; i . e . , the intended task split failed in one of the two tasks for six groups ( a failure rate of six in 42 tasks or 14 % ) . 87 3 . 3 . Tasks There were two tasks . Subjects performed both tasks , one in the GSS condition and the other in the non - GSS condition . Subjects were informed at the start of each task that they each had only a subset of all available information and would have to share their information to make a good decision . Both tasks underwent extensive design and pilot testing for both the complete information version and the incomplete information versions of the task given to each individual subject ( i . e . , at least six rounds of redesign and pilot testing and as many as ten for one set of incomplete information versions that proved diacult to refine ) . One task asked subjects to select one student from a set of four students for admission to the university . The complete information set included positive , negative , or neutral information on 18 criteria for each alternative for a total of 72 pieces of information . Five pieces of information for all four alternatives ( verbal SAT , math SAT , GPA , sex , major ) were " common " - i . e . , given to all subjects . The remaining information was " unique . " This task was designed with the assistance of the university Admissions Office . The complete information version of the task was independently validated by three admissions officers ( the director of admissions and two associate directors ) to ensure the alternative designed to be optimal , was optimal . The complete information version was also validated by 28 subjects drawn from the same subject pool but who did not participate in the study . Twenty - two ( 79 % ) chose the optimal choice ; five ( 19 % ) chose next alternative ; one YO ) chose the third alternative . The second task asked subjects to select a computer to be the " standard " computer required of all College of Business students from a set of four computers . The complete information set included positive , negative , or neutral information on 18 criteria for each alternative for a total of 56 pieces of information . Four pieces of information for all four alternatives ( price , CPU , RAM , hard drive size ) were " common . " The remaining information was " unique . " This task was designed in conjunction with the College ' s computer lab staff . The chair of the College ' s computer users committee ( who was also a lab manager ) and two instructors independently validated the task to e w e the alternative designed to be optimal , was optimal . The complete information version of the task was validated by 21 subjects drawn from the same subject pool but who did not participate in the study . Sixteen ( 76 % ) chose the optimal choice ; four ( 19 % ) chose the second best alternative ; one YO ) chose the third alternative . 3 . 4 . Procedures The procedures followed those of Stasser and Titus [ 26 ] . Subjects first read the task and made an individual decision . Then they worked together as a group ( using either a GSS or no GSS ) to arrive at a unanimous group decision or until 25 minutes had elapsed . ( Some subjects using the GSS may have been less experienced with computers than others , but this was not seen as a hindrance since groups using GSS were trained on the GSS before starting the group task . These subjects were shown how to add and view comments using the GSS . ) Subjects then individually completed the post - session questionnaire that asked them to make another individual decision ( the same as or Werent from the group decision ) and to report several perceptions . After a five - minute break , these steps were repeated for the second treatment . 3 . 5 . Measures 3 . 5 . 1 . Information exchange . The amount of information exchanged was measured by three raters , who counted the pieces of correct information in the group discussions ( video - tapes for non - GSS treatments ; printed computer records and video - tapes for GSS treatments ) . The video camera failed during the last three sessions ( it appeared to be recording but did not ) , so only the data for the 12 sessions for which the video tapes were available were used in these analysis ) . A set of six randomly selected groups ( three uniform , three majority / minority ) was selected to determine inter - rater reliability . The raters agreed on . 94 of the ratings ( measured as 1 - ( number of disagreementdinformation exchanged ) ) , indicating adequate agreement . 3 . 5 . 2 . Information processing and use Determining information processing and use was done in three ways . First , a perceptual measure was used . The post - session questionnaire included two scales designed to measure perceived information usage : " I - thought " ( i . e . , the extent to which the respondent thought about the information contributed by others , 3 items , Cronbach alpha = . 84 , l = low , 7 = high ) , and " others - thought " ( i . e . , the extent to which the respondent believed other group members thought about the information contributed by respondent , 3 items , alpha = % , I = low , 7 = high ) . While perceptions of information usage can be unreliable , they are one way of triangulating on this concept 1211 . Second , information use was considered by examining the information recalled by each group member at the end of the group discussions [ 4 ] . Information recalled at the 88 end of the experimdnt must have been received and processed during di & ions because information must be processed to be stored in memory ( 271 . Subjects were asked to list infohnation they remembered in a free recall question on the post - session questionnaire . Two raters coded the quesrionnaires and counted the number of correct idormation ptovided . Inter - rater agreement was again adequate ( . 93 ) . j Third , information , use was considered by examining the unique informatio learned by each group member at the end of the group k ' scussions . Information learned is the information s u b j p recalled at the end of the experiment that they idid not have in their initial task descriptions ( 41 . Thib was done using the information coded above , but codting only the information that the subject did not have at ithe beginning of @ up discussion . 33 . 3 . Outcome merurures . Decision time was measured by the number of minutes required for the group to Teach a decision . W s i o n quality was measured by the number of groups making the optimal decision . Three additiona ~ perceptual heasures were also included on the post - session questionspire , all with scales of l = low , 7 = high : satisfacton ( 4 litems , dpha = . 83 ) , apprehension ( 4 items , alpha = . 78 ) , an4 information credibility ( i . e . , the degree of accuacy that subjects attributed to information contributed by others , 4 items , alpha = . 82 ) . 4 . Results I 4 . 1 . Information exchange I I but there was no difference in the amount of common information exchanged ( see Tables 1 and 2 for the means and all statistical results ) . H2 was not supported . There was no interaction between the majority / minority status of the groups and GSS use . 4 . 2 . Information processing and use We used three measures of information use . The first were perceptual data . Participants perceived themselves and others to have thought about information to a lesser extent when using the GSS than when not . There were interaction effects indicating that members of the majorityhinority groups perceived themselves and others to have thought less about the information than members of the uniform groups . The second measure was the recall of information . There were significant interaction effects on the recall of both " m o n and unique information between the use of GSS and the majorityhinority and uniform treatments . Participants in the uniform treatment recalled less common and less unique information when using the GSS . Members of majorityhinority groups recalled more common information when using the GSS , but there were no differences in the recall of unique information . The third measure was the recall of unique information unknown at the start of the discussions ( i . e . , the information learned from the discussion ) . Participants learned less initially unknown information when working with the GSS , suggesting that they were less likely to process previously unknown unique information received during the discussion . H1 was partiaUy supported . Groups exchanged more unique information wl $ % using the GSS than when not Table 1 : Means and Standard Deviations Uniform Majority / minority I GSS Verbal GSS Verbal Group Measures mean std mean std mean std mean std Common informaton exchanged 9 . 40 4 . 84 5 . 88 3 . 18 10 . 20 6 . 05 8 . 25 1 . 71 Unique informatiop exchanged 12 . 30 2 . 63 5 . 00 3 . 55 13 . 40 7 . 83 12 . 25 4 . 35 Common informatjon tecaued 3 . 91 3 . 67 4 . 58 3 . 61 5 . 28 4 . 04 4 . 20 2 . 93 uniqw information recalled 2 . 12 2 . 10 3 . 78 2 . 86 3 . 54 4 . 63 3 . 76 4 . 53 In€ormation learned 1 . 19 1 . 44 2 . 32 2 . 25 2 . 12 3 . 11 2 . 72 2 . 84 Time 1400 205 422 227 943 331 848 603 Decision quality 0 . 10 0 . 32 0 . 80 0 . 42 0 . 60 0 . 55 0 . 00 0 . 00 Subject Perceptions ( I = IOW , 7 = high ) I thought 5 . 25 1 . 52 5 . 63 1 . 19 4 . 92 1 . 75 6 . 01 0 . 91 4 . 83 1 . 30 5 . 12 1 . 31 4 . 91 1 . 38 5 75 0 . 98 5 . 85 1 . 10 6 . 11 0 . 75 5 . 44 1 . 33 5 . 68 1 . 18 others thought Satishaion Apprehension 1 . 97 1 . 12 2 . 52 1 . 28 1 . 68 0 . 78 1 . 96 1 . 03 Information credibility 4 . 21 1 . 65 4 . 80 1 . 42 4 . 17 1 . 80 5 . 17 1 . 42 I I 89 Group Measures Common information exchanged Unique information exchanged Common information recalled Unique information recalled Information learned Time Decision quality Subject Perceptions I thought Others thought Satisfaction Apprehension Information credibility . Table 2 : Statistical Results GSS Minority 8 1 . 91 ns 1 . 17 ns 8 7 . 54 . 025 1 . 06 ns 146 0 . 34 ns 0 . 01 ns 145 10 . 12 . 002 1 . 68 ns 145 15 . 28 - 001 0 . 28 ns 11 16 . 11 . 002 0 . 22 ns 11 0 . 17 ns 1 . 41 ns df F P F P GSS x Minority F P 0 . 03 ns 3 . 28 ns 6 . 36 . 013 9 . 80 . 001 2 . 46 ns 7 . 69 . 018 21 . 48 . 001 These three measures indicate that groups in the d o r m treatment were less likely to process and use the information present in their discussions when using the GSS . The perceptual and learning measures suggest that participants in majorityhinority groups were less likely to process and use the information when using the GSS , but the recall measures suggest otherwise . H3 is not supported . H4 is partially supported . 4 . 3 . Outcomes There was a main effect on time due to GSS use , but also an interaction effect . Groups took longer to reach a decision when using a GSS in the uniform condition , but there were few differences in the majorityhinority condition . H5 was partially supported , but H6 was not . The effects on decision quality were rather unusual , producing an interaction eff ' but no main effects . In the majorityhinority treatment , groups made significantly better decisions when using the GSS . The reverse was true for the uniform condition : groups made significantly better decisions when not using the GSS . H7 was not supported , but H8 was supported . Participants in the uniform treatment reported less satisfaction , less apprehension , and less credibility in the information discussed when using the GSS than when interacting verbally . Participants in the majority / minoxity treatments reported more satisfaction but no differences in apprehension or information credibility . 5 . Discussion The objective of this study was to examine the information exchange and use processes in group decision making . The results were rather surprising . 146 22 . 42 . 001 0 . 19 ns 4 . 99 . 027 146 18 . 19 . 001 2 . 48 ns 4 . 83 . 030 146 4 . 95 . 028 5 . 00 . 027 0 . 08 ns 146 14 . 66 . 001 3 . 72 ns 1 . 15 ns 146 21 . 63 . 001 0 . 30 11s 1 . 05 ns 5 . 1 . Majoritylminority groups In groups that had a pre - discussion majority favoring a sub - optimal alternative , verbal interaction without a GSS led to poor decisions : groups almost uniformly choose the sub - ~ ptimal alternative favored by the group majority . The exchange of unique information key to the optimal decision was done poorly ; very little of the information needed to identify the optimal alternative was contributed . The final group decision depended more on the biased information members received before the meeting than the unique idormation first exchanged during the meeting . For these groups , the use of GSS added considerable value . When using the GSS , these same groups exchanged more unique information and almost uniformly made the optimal decision in no more time than when not using the GSS . Without the GSS , normative influence dominated , and the group majority convinced the minority to accede to its preference . With the GSS , information influence dominated , and the minority was able to induce the majority to listen to the information presented and to convince them to change their minds to the optimal alternative . We attribute the value of the GSS to its ability to provide parallelism , anonymity , and group memory . 5 . 2 . Uniform groups The situation was quite different in the uniform treatment . When not using the GSS , members exchanged only a small portion of the available information , appeared to think about it more , and yet generally quickly 90 found the optimal members exchanged I 5 . 3 . Lack of informp ) ion processing decision . When using the GSS , more information , but appeared to information processing in GSS is unclear . We offer for future research credibility , and lack offocus . 5 . 3 . 1 . One possibility may to integmte newly existing base of engage in three sim ~ taneous activities ( information recall , information and information use ) , and because humans amount of cognitive resources , engaging in by one activity limits the ability to engage in the otber I $ w . Factual information quires more cognitive than information about others ' pnfe - [ Zl ] . [ 29 ] argue that if factual than one item every three difticulty integrating it with we do not believe the volume was very high [ 27 ] , it more than one piece of information every + minutes . ~ n the uniform treatmenf there were thfee competing alternatives ( versus treatment ) , and no minority When using the GSS , members generated about twice as much information as when not using it . Therefore , one plausible explanation for the lack of information processing may lie in the cognitive limitations of individuals ' ability to integrate information . Participants may have suffered fiom information overload and an inability to focus their analysis on the dominant alternatives to a greater extent when using the GSS and therefore failed to process the information it contained as thoroughly as information received in the verbal discussions . By limiting the amount of information available , the production blocking in the non - GSS groups may actually have helped by filtering the available information [ 111 . Under this interpretation , there are two implications for future research . First , we need research varying the information load to determine if GSS use helps or hinders in situations of high and low information load . Second , we need to better understand how to structure the information in the GSS to minimize overload and enable better integration of information . 5 . 3 . 2 . Information credibility . Another possibility for the reduced processing of unique information in GSS groups may lie in the credibility of the information . Morley and Walker 1161 suggest that to cause a change in a previous decision ( in this case , the individual decision made prior to group discussion ) , information must be important , novel ( i . e . , not previously processed ) , and credible . In this case , the unique information received during discussion was both important and novel . However , participants were less likely to find it credible when using the GSS , and unlike in the mjority / minority treatment , there was no subgroup lobbying hard for a spec & alternative . Thus participants may have intentionally disregarded the information in the GSS . There are at least two plausible explanations for this r e d u d credibility . The first is a negative anonymity effect on credibility . The credibility of the source of information can be important to the acceptance and processing of a message , particularly when the information is ambiguous or difficult to process [ 21 ] . It may be that the anonymity of the GSS used in this study made the information more suspect , because it was more difficult to verifjr the source ' s credibility . Anonymity may also conceal the number of information sources . Information perceived to be from several independent sources is seen as more credible than information from one source [ 10 , 3 I ] . Thus information from several distinct individual sources in the non - GSS groups may have been seen as more credible than the pool of information from an unknown number of sources in the GSS . A second reason for reduced credibility may be a i 91 reduced ability to challenge the information’s contributor . In most non - GSS groups , we observed at least one ( usually several ) occasions when unique information presented to the group was immediately challenged ( e . g . , “Really ? I didn’t get that . ” ) . The contributor would then confirm the validity of the information and discussion would move on . Similar challenges were seen in GSS groups , but the response would come much later or not at all . It may be that the reduced ability to provide immediate confirming feedback reduces the credibility of the information . Under this interpretation , we need additional research to determine if anonymity is useN in this situation . Anonymity has been found to be important for groups whose members have different power and status , but to have fewer benefits for peers 1201 . 5 . 3 . 3 . Information focus . A third possibility may be the ease of ignoring the information because its presentation is unfocused . When a person speaks verbally and contributes information it may focus the group’s attention on that information [ lo ] - it can be difficult to ignore a person speaking right in front of you . In contrast , when using a GSS , information is contained in lines of text in a pool of information . Without a GSS , informaton is presented to you ; with a GSS , you must actively peruse the group memory . When using the GSS , participants may not have actively searched out and reviewed all available information . Under this interpretation , we need research to discover how GSS can better engage participants and encourage them to actively seek and use the information it contains ( i . e . , a GSS like a video game that draws participants in ) . 5 . 4 . Implications for practice This study has several implications for managers striving to understand and improve the exchange and use of information in organizational problem solving . For groups that had a majority / minority , GSS use improved the exchange of information and the quality of the decision . However , for groups without a mjoritylminority , GSS use impaired the quality of decision making . One implication is to use a GSS only when there are strong differences of opinion within a group , where the GSS’s ability to focus the group on the information will be valuable . We believe that the key problem in using this information for both GSS and non - GSS groups was the difficulty in assessing and integrating the new information received during group discussion into their existing information base , which encouraged members to overlook this information . A second implication is therefore to structure group meetings to provide sufficient ’ time for members to study , assess , and integrate this new information before they must make decisions . Separating information exchange from the decision it is one option . Members could hold discuss a problem or opportunity , break for several hours or days to evaluate and integrate the information , and hold a second meeting to make the actual decision . This structure is similar to the “incubation” period recommended for idea generation . A third implication deals with knowledge of having all of theinformation . We informed subjects that they had incomplete information and would need to share information . In a meeting , participants do not know if they have complete information . Do they assume that they do have all of the information needed ? The answer to this may change how GSS is used or not used . Clearly another alternative is to develop new group processes and GSS tools to help members better integrate information , but this will have to wait for more research . 6 . References [ l ] Ball , S . A . and Zuckerman , M . ‘‘Sensation See @ and Selective Attention : Focused and Divided Attention on a Dichotic Listening Task , ” Joumal of Personaiity and Social PsyChOlOgv , ( 63 ) 1992 , 825 - 831 . [ 2 ] Brigs , R . O . ”Focus Theory : An Explanation of Group Productivity for Developers and Users of Electronic Meeting Systems , ” presented at INFORMS , Singapore , 1995 . [ 3 ] hbasat , I . and Lim , L . H . “The Effects of Group , Task , Context , and Technology Variables on the Usellness of Group Support Systems : A Meb - Analysis of Experimental Studies , ” SmalI Group Research , ( 24 ) , 1993 , 430462 . [ 4 ] Cacioppo , J . T . , Petty , R . E . and Morris , K . ‘Zffects of need for cognition on message evaluation , recall , and persuasion , ” Joumal of Personality and Social Psychologv , ( 45 ) 1983 , 805 - 818 . [ 5 ] Clapper , D . L . , McLean , E . R . and Watson , R . T . “An Experimental Investigation of the Effect of a Group Decision Support System on Normative Influence in Small Groups , ” Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Information Systems , New York , 1991 , 77 - 87 . [ 6 ] DeSanctis , G . L . and Gallup , R . B . “A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems , ” Management Science , ( 33 ) 1987 , 589409 . [ I Diehl , M . and Stroek W . ‘Roductivity Loss in Brainstorming Groups : Toward the Solution of a Riddle , ” Journal of Personality and Social Pqchologv , ( 53 ) , 1987 , 497 - 509 . 92 . ‘The Common Knowledge Group Judgment , ” Journal of ” ( 65 ) , 1993 , 959 - 974 . an , R . E . “Interventions into Group Improving the Effectiveness of , ( 5 ) , 1974 , 459480 . [ lo ] Harkins , S . G . and the Multiple Source E R . E . “Infonaation Utility and JaUMr of Personality and wkcz ; LF M . “Structuring Computer - Systems to Avoid Information Overload , ” Communicati ofthe ACM , ( 28 : 7 ) , 1985 , 680 . K . S . , and Wei , K . K . “A process S and Task Type on I n f i t i d 1 Groups , ’’ Roceedm . gs of the on Information systems , G . “Group versus Individual Ideational Proficiency Journal of Social [ 14 ] Lord , C . G . , and Lepper , M . R . “Biased Joumal of III , R . D . “Hidden Impact of Minority Muence Research’’ K . B . ‘Tbe Role of Importance , Producing Belief Change , ” 54 ) , 1987 , 436 - 442 . a Theory of Conversion ( ed . ) , Advances in Experimental 13 , New York Academic Press , H . “The Group Polarization lletin , ( % 3 ) , 1976 , 602627 . al Contributions of Minority and Majority Influence , ” logical Review , ( 93 ) , 1986 , l - 10 . [ 20 ] N d e r , Jr . , J . F . , D . R . , and George , J . F . Support Group Work , ” 1991 , 40 - 61 . [ 21 ] Pet & R . E . and Persrrasion , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , Meeting Systems to of the ACM , ( 34 : 7 ) , CommunicatioPt und ( 221 Salancik , G . R . “Commitment and the Control of Organizational Behavior and Belief , ” in B . M . Staw and G . R . Salancik ( Eds . ) , New Directions in Otganimtional Behavior , Chicago : St . Clair , 1977 , 1 - 54 . [ 23 ] Shaw , M . Group Dynamics : The Psychology of Small Group Behavior , ( 3rd ed . ) 1981 , New York : McGraw Hill . [ 24 ] Stasser , G . “Information Salience and the Discovery of Hidden Profiles by Decision - Making Groups : A ‘Thought Experiment , ”’ Otganizutional Behavior and Human Decision h e m e s , ( 52 ) . 1992 , 156 - 181 . [ 25 ] Stasser , G . and Stewart , D . ‘I > iscovery of Hidden Profiles by Decision - making Groups : Solving a Problem versus making a Judg ~ nent , ” Journal of Personality and Social P ~ h o l o g y , ( 63 ) , 1992 , 426434 . [ 26 ] Stasser , G . and Titus , W . “Pooling of Unshared Information in Group Decision making : Biased Information Sampling During Group Discussion” Joumal of Personality d S o c i a l Psychology , ( 48 ) , 1985 , 1467 - 1478 . [ 271 Stasser , G . and Titus , W . ‘Effects of I n f i t i o n Load and Percentage of Shared Information on the Dissemination of U & ed Information During Group Discussion , ” Joumal of Personality andsocial Psychologv , ( 53 ) , 1987 , Sl - 93 . [ 28 ] Stasser , G . , Taylor , L . A . , and Hanna , C . “ M o d o n and Six - Person Groups” Journal of Personality and Social Sampling in Structured and Unstructured Di ~ ~ Ussion ~ of Three - PSYC ~ O ~ O ~ V , ( 57 ) , 1989 , 67 - 78 . [ 29 ] Streuffert , S . and Swezey , R . S . Complexity , Mmgem , and Orgruizations , 1986 , Academic Res , Orlando . [ 30 ] TCBWorks at http : / / tcbworks . mgmtuga . edu : 8080 . [ 31 ] Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , and Connolly , T . “Group Versus Individual Brainstorming : A New Ending to an Old Stoq , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , ( 57 ) , 1994 , 448 - 467 . [ 32 ] Vinokur , A . , Trope , Y . , and Bumstein , E . “A Decision Making Analysis of Persuasive Argumentation and the Choice - Shift Effect , ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , ( 1 1 ) , 1975 . 127 - 148 . 1331 Wilder , D . A . “Some Deter”ts of the Persuasive Power of In - G ~ oups and Out - Groups : Organization of Information and Attribution of Independence , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , ( 59 ) , 1990 , 1202 - 1213 . [ 34 ] Wood , W . ‘‘ReDrieval of Attitude Relevant Information fiom Memory : Effects on Susceptibility to Persuasion and on Intrinsic Motivation , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , ( 42 ) , 1982 , 798 - 81 0 . 93