Helicobacter pylori persistence : biology and disease Martin J . Blaser , John C . Atherton J Clin Invest . 2004 ; 113 ( 3 ) : 321 - 333 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI20925 . Helicobacter pylori are bacteria that have coevolved with humans to be transmitted from person to person and to persistently colonize the stomach . Their population structure is a model for the ecology of the indigenous microbiota . A well - choreographed equilibrium between bacterial effectors and host responses permits microbial persistence and health of the host but confers risk of serious diseases , including peptic ulceration and gastric neoplasia . Science in Medicine Find the latest version : http : / / jci . me / 20925 - pdf The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 321 Helicobacter pylori persistence : biology and disease Martin J . Blaser 1 and John C . Atherton 2 1 Department of Medicine and Department of Microbiology , New York University School of Medicine , and New York Harbor Veterans Affairs Medical Center , New York , New York , USA 2 Wolfson Digestive Diseases Centre and Institute of Infection , Immunity and Inflammation , University of Nottingham , Nottingham , United Kingdom Helicobacter pylori are bacteria that have coevolved with humans to be transmitted from person to person and to persistently colonize the stomach . Their population structure is a model for the ecology of the indigenous microbiota . A well - choreographed equilibrium between bacterial effectors and host respons - es permits microbial persistence and health of the host but confers risk of serious diseases , including pep - tic ulceration and gastric neoplasia . J . Clin . Invest . 113 : 321 – 333 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI200420925 . disease processes as diverse as chronic inflammation , oncogenesis , and hormonal dysregulation and may be relevant to modern epidemic problems such as obesity and diabetes . A general model of host - microbial persistence Much evidence indicates that Helicobacter species are the indigenous biota of mammalian stomachs , and that H . pylori is the human - specific inhabitant ( Figure 1a ) , having been present for at least tens of thousands of years , and probably for considerably longer ( 7 – 9 ) . Therefore , coevolution of microbe and host might be expected , and for H . pylori , substantial evidence sup - ports this notion ( 10 ) , with important implications . Microbial colonization of a host locale affects the surrounding tissue through the occupation of nich - es , utilization of resources , and excretion , all of which may be considered as signals to the host ( Fig - ure 1b ) . The host also signals the microbe in the form of pressure , temperature , and chemical milieu ( including host - defense molecules ) . Although these signals could be uncoordinated , coevolution implies linkage , in which the signals of one party affect the signals of the other ( Figure 1c ) . Microbial persistence requires equilibrium , which only can occur when negative feedback is present ( 1 , S1 ) . This simple model forms the basis for understanding H . pylori persistence , and microbial persistence in general . If the microbial population includes differing strains , as clearly occurs for H . pylori ( 11 , S2 , S3 ) , then the host signals are selective forces ( Figure 1c ) , as it is this selected microbial population rather than the individual cell that is the host - signaling entity ( Fig - ure 1d ) . Many bacterial populations are not entirely clonal , reflecting both point mutations and recom - bination ; H . pylori is a particularly extreme example with both a high mutation rate and a very high The twin hallmarks of the interaction between Heli - cobacter pylori and humans are its persistence during the life of the host , and the host’s responses to its continuing presence . This conflict appears paradox - ical , but both the microbes and the host adapt to the other in the form of a long - standing dynamic equi - librium ( 1 , S1 ) . Our understanding of the phenome - na underlying these interactions is growing . The rela - tionships are important , both because of the major role of H . pylori in promoting risk of peptic ulcer dis - ease ( 2 ) and non - cardia adenocarcinoma of the stom - ach ( 3 ) , and because of the emerging evidence that gastric H . pylori colonization has a protective role in relation to severe gastro - esophageal reflux disease and its sequelae , Barrett esophagus and adenocarci - noma of the esophagus ( reviewed in ref . 4 ) . New stud - ies suggest other important impacts of H . pylori colo - nization on human physiology ( 5 , 6 ) . We now present a general model for this host - microbial interaction and then turn to examples of specific operating mechanisms . Although H . pylori is unique in colonizing the human stomach , the prin - ciples governing the interaction are paradigms for understanding both commensalism and long - term parasitism . Such insights aid our understanding of The Science in Medicine series is supported by a generous grant from the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation . Address correspondence to : Martin J . Blaser , New York University School of Medicine , 550 First Avenue , OBV - 606 , New York , New York 10016 , USA . Phone : ( 212 ) 263 - 6394 ; Fax : ( 212 ) 263 - 3969 ; E - mail : martin . blaser @ med . nyu . edu . Conflict of interest : As co - discoverer of cagA and vacA , Martin Blaser may benefit from commercial exploitation of the intellectual property held by Vanderbilt University . Nonstandard abbreviations used : C - terminal Src kinase ( Csk ) ; G protein – coupled receptor kinase - interactor 1 ( Git1 ) ; Toll - like receptor ( TLR ) . SCIENCE IN MEDICINE 322 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 recombinational frequency ( 12 , 13 ) . Thus , each host is colonized not by a single clone but rather by a cloud of usually closely related organisms ( 11 ) , resembling the “quasispecies” observed with persist - ent RNA viruses , such as hepatitis C and HIV . This microbial variation affects the signals to the host ; for example , within an H . pylori population , individual cells may or may not express specific host - interaction molecules ( e . g . , CagA ) that affect host biology in a directed manner . Consequent host “signals , ” ranging from increased nutrient supply through immune effectors to changes in the gastric microenviron - ment , are differentially selective for specific H . pylori genes . Thus , each host is colonized by a fluid bacte - rial gene pool , with genotype dominance determined by selection ( Figure 1e ) . In sum , concepts of such highly plastic populations subject to host - specific selection provide models to explain the facility of H . pylori to persist , the presence of different strains as well as variants of these strains in individual hosts , and the ability of H . pylori to colonize essentially all humans ( Figure 1f ) , despite our heterogeneity . H . pylori adaptations that facilitate persistence H . pylori mechanisms to increase diversity . The remarkable diversity of H . pylori ( 12 , S4 ) may be viewed as evidence of a versatile population , able to maximize resource utilization in a variety of niches and microniches and to avoid host constraints . Such constraints include not only host immunity but also developmental changes in the gastric epithelium , acidity , and nutri - ent availability . Generation of diversity typically involves endogenous ( point ) mutations , and recom - bination ; H . pylori has mechanisms for each ( Table 1 ) . Mutation rates are not constant in bacterial popula - tions but subject to environmental signals , and with - Figure 1 Models of the cross - signaling between obligate parasites and their hosts . ( a ) H . pylori in the gastric ( antral ) niche , inhabiting the luminal mucus layer overlaying the epithelium . Scale bar : 1 µ m . ( b ) Model 1 : A coevolved microbe sends chemical and physical ( contact ) signals to its host . The host’s signals , including motion , temperature , and chemicals ( including host - defense molecules ) , affect microbial growth . In a local niche , equilibrium can be reached if there is negative feedback in the cross - signaling ( 1 , S1 ) . The microbial signals may alter selection of growing host - cell populations ( e . g . , by antiapoptotic mechanisms ) . ( c ) Model 2 : The microbial population includes genetic variants . Now , the host signals select for different bacterial phenotypes , and thus genotypes . ( d ) Model 3 : Due to ongoing variation and selection , each microbe becomes a microbial population of related variants . The signals of each variant affect not only the local host signals , but also those affecting other microbial populations . This is represented by two distinct microbial populations , with each signaling the host ( S 1 , S 2 ) and inducing specific host signals ( HS 1 , HS 2 ) . Increasing numbers of populations markedly and nonlinearly increase the complexity . ( e ) Model 4 : The microbial populations are not clonal but can exchange genetic information ; host selection , based on microbial genes or gene frag - ments rather than cells , determines the ( dynamic ) equilibria between the microbial populations ( MP n ) . For the naturally competent , exten - sively recombining H . pylori cells , model 4 best reflects the fluidity of population structures during persistent colonization ( 11 , S2 , S3 ) . ( f ) Schematic of adaptation to individual hosts . After H . pylori acquisition and expansion into a major niche , early selection allows occupation of microniches , where further local selection determines predominant populations . Both local selection and global selection determine over - all population structure , and the probability of transfer of particular genotypes to new hosts . Local resource differences and barriers to dif - fusion of bacterial cells allow establishment of distinct subpopulations . External fluctuations , such as incomplete antibiotic treatment , can markedly change genotype distribution . The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 323 in large populations a small proportion of cells arise that have heightened mutation rates ( S5 ) . For H . pylori , most strains would be considered to have this hypermutator phenotype ( 13 ) , which favors the emer - gence of variants after selective pressure . A good example of efficient adaptive point mutation by H . pylori is the rapid development in the bacterial popu - lation of high - level resistance to commonly used antibiotics , such as the macrolide clarithromycin ( 14 ) . H . pylori cells are also highly competent for uptake of DNA from other H . pylori strains ( S6 , S7 , S8 ) . Analysis of H . pylori sequences shows strong evidence of recom - bination between strains , to the degree that clonal lin - eages are largely obscured ( 12 , 15 ) . Substantial intrage - nomic recombination occurs , based largely on the presence of repetitive DNA sequences ( 16 , 17 ) . Repet - itive DNA allows for high - frequency deletion and duplication , including slipped - strand mispairing ( 18 , S9 ) . However , because H . pylori is naturally competent , any genetic element that is lost may be regained from either unaffected sectors of the population of that strain or from another strain ( 17 , S10 ) . A lack of mis - match - repair systems ( 19 ) may increase the frequency of random variation , but it also may facilitate gene conversion , which minimizes genomic diversity of those alleles present in multiple copies ( 20 ) . Thus , H . pylori can maximize diversity of sequences under strong selective pressure , while maintaining alleles that are critical for its lifestyle . Introduction of a new H . pylori strain into an already colonized host increases the total diversity in the pop - ulation , since each resembles a quasispecies ; however , transformation of one strain by the other reduces diversity . All H . pylori strains contain multiple restric - tion - modification systems , but rarely do any two have the same complement ( 21 , S11 ) . Thus , there are restriction barriers to transformation , a property that may maximize coexistence of parallel gene pools , by slowing genetic exchange ( S12 ) . Local selection also may add to genetic diversity within an individual stomach ; separate gastric microniches are likely colo - nized by subpopulations that have particular attrib - utes to maximize fitness , for example , ligand specifici - ty for local receptors ( 22 , 23 , S13 ) . Human interaction domain 1 : cag island . In 1989 , a strain - specific H . pylori gene , cagA , was identified ( 24 ) , which now has been recognized as a marker for strains that confer increased risk for peptic ulcer disease ( 25 , 26 ) and gastric cancer ( 27 , S14 ) . No homologs are known for cagA in other Helicobacter species or in other bacteria , suggesting that it reflects a human gastric - specific gene . cagA ( S15 , S16 ) is a marker for the 35 - to 40 - kb cag ( pathogenicity ) island that is flanked by 39 - bp direct DNA repeats ( S17 , S18 ) . Strains without the island possess a single copy of the 39 - bp sequence , in a conserved gene ( glutamate racemase [ glr ] ) , and through transformation the entire island may be restored or lost ( 28 ) . H . pylori strains with partial cag islands also have been identified , and variation in island size and genotype within individual hosts is well described ( S3 , S19 , S20 ) . The island contains genes encoding a type IV secre - tion system , which in other bacteria inject macro - molecules ( i . e . , DNA and proteins , such as pertussis toxin ) into host cells ( 29 ) . One substrate for the type IV system in H . pylori is the cagA product ( 30 , 31 , S21 – S23 ) , which is injected into epithelial cells , both in vitro ( 30 , 31 , S22 , S23 ) and in vivo ( 32 ) ( Figure 2 ) . In many strains , the CagA protein contains tyrosine - phosphorylation sites ( 30 , 31 , 33 , S21 – S23 ) that are recognized by the host cell Src kinase ( 34 ) . Once phosphorylated , CagA interacts with SHP - 2 , a tyro - sine phosphatase ( 35 ) , which affects spreading , migration , and adhesion of epithelial cells ( 32 ) . This phenomenon can be assessed in vitro by a change in epithelial cell morphology to the scattered , or “hum - mingbird , ” phenotype ( 31 ) . The injected CagA protein also interacts with Grb2 and activates the Ras / MEK / ERK pathway , leading to the phenotypes of cell scattering ( in AGS cells ) and proliferation ( in MDCK cells ) ( 36 ) . Tyrosine - phos - phorylated CagA binds and activates C - terminal Src kinase ( Csk ) via its SH2 domain , which in turn inac - tivates the Src family of protein - tyrosine kinases . Since this signaling may induce apoptosis , the Csk pathway may attenuate the other CagA interactions ( 37 ) . By inactivating Src , tyrosine - phosphorylated CagA induces dephosphorylation of cortactin , which then colocalizes with filamentous actin ( F - actin ) , in the tip and base of hummingbird protrusions ( 38 ) . Thus , the H . pylori CagA protein interacts with sever - al of the major signal - transduction pathways present in epithelial cells . H . pylori cells with the cag island deleted have remarkably little interaction with AGS cells in tissue culture ( 39 ) ; conversely , the cag appara - tus promotes antiapoptotic pathways , which may aid persistence by slowing turnover of the epithelial cells to which they are attached . There is extensive H . pylori variation in this major interactive modality ; clonality and the lack thereof each imply important , albeit different , selective pres - sures . In individual strains , parts of the cag island , including cagA , may be deleted ( S3 , S19 , S20 ) ; cagA Table 1 H . pylori mechanisms to increase diversity Mechanism Example Reference Endogenous Mutator phenotype 13 mutation Intragenomic Nonrandom , extensive repetitive DNA 16 recombination Lack of mismatch - repair systems 19 Active gene conversion 20 Intergenomic Natural competence S6 , S7 recombination Niche sectoring Strain - specific restriction 21 , S10 , S12 Ligand specificity 22 , 23 , S13 324 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 itself shows phylogeographic variation with Eastern , Western , and hybrid genotypes ( S24 ) . The DNA sequences encoding the tyrosine - phosphorylation motifs are variable in number and flanked by repeti - tive elements , allowing their deletion or duplication , which affects the phenotype of the injected CagA protein ( 33 ) . Thus , H . pylori populations possess extensive repertoires that permit variation of Cag phenotypes in response to particular hosts , micro - niches within these hosts , or changing environmen - tal circumstances . Nevertheless , antibody responses to CagA remain relatively constant over at least 20 years ( 40 ) in an individual host , implying an overall stability in the interactive relationship , best repre - sented in Figure 1e . Human interaction domain 2 : vacA . Culture super - natants from some H . pylori strains release a high – molecular weight multimeric pore - forming protein , VacA , that causes massive vacuolation in epithelial cell lines ( 41 , S25 ) . As with cagA , no close homologs of vacA exist in other Helicobacter species or in other bacteria ( 42 , S26 – S28 ) , which suggests its importance in the specific relationship of H . pylori with the human stom - ach . However , unlike cagA , vacA is conserved among all H . pylori strains , although significant polymorphism exists ( 43 ) . vacA alleles possess one of two types of sig - nal region , s1 or s2 , and one of two mid - regions , m1 or m2 , occurring in all possible combinations ( Figure 3 ) . Research has focused on the most interactive ( vacuo - lating ) type , s1 / m1 . VacA has several specific effects that may contribute to H . pylori persistence in the gastric niche . Firstly , it forms pores in epithelial cell membranes , allowing egress of anions and urea ( 44 , 45 , S29 , S30 ) . This is important since urea hydrolysis , catalyzed by H . pylori urease , protects against gastric acidity ( S31 ) . VacA also induces loosening of epithelial tight junctions , poten - tially allowing nutrients to cross the mucosal barrier to H . pylori ’s gastric luminal niche ( 46 , S32 ) . Recent work in vitro suggests that VacA may help H . pylori per - sistence by specific immune suppression . VacA blocks phagosome maturation in macrophages ( 47 ) , selec - tively inhibits antigen presentation in T cells ( 48 , S33 ) , blocks T cell proliferation , and downregulates Th1 effects by interacting with calcineurin to block signal - ing ( 49 ) . Besides these actions that may benefit H . pylori persistence , VacA also has direct cell - damaging effects in vitro , inducing cytoskeletal changes , apop - tosis , and suppression of epithelial cell proliferation and migration ( 50 – 52 , S34 , S35 ) , as well as cell vacuo - lation . Whether these effects are germane in vivo is unknown , but cell damage could aid nutrient delivery from the gastric mucosa . Which in vitro effects of VacA are most important for H . pylori persistence in vivo is unclear , and animal models have not clarified this . In piglets , gerbils , and mice , VacA - null strains persist without apparent dis - advantage ( S36 – S38 ) , although in competition exper - iments in mice , VacA - null mutants colonize less well than their VacA + wild - type parents ( S38 ) . However , ani - mal models have proved useful for characterizing the damaging effects of VacA . Although VacA is not nec - essary for gastric ulcer formation , in H . pylori – colo - nized Mongolian gerbils its presence increases the risk ( 53 ) . Mice administered VacA orally develop gastric ulcers ( 54 , S28 ) , but mice deficient in the protein tyro - sine phosphatase receptor type Z , polypeptide 1 ( Ptprz – / – mice ) do not ( 54 ) . Ptprz is one of several puta - Figure 2 CagA interaction with epithelial cells . H . pylori cells with intact cag islands , including an active type IV secretion system , possess a pilus composed of CagY protein . The cagA product is injected into the cytoplasm of the host cell , where tyrosine ( Y ) residues near its COOH - terminus are phosphorylated . Phos - photyrosine - CagA interacts with several major signal - transduction pathways in the host cell ( 40 , S113 ) , affecting phenotypes including cell morphology , proliferation , and apoptosis ( see text ) . ERK , extracellular sig - nal – regulated kinase ; PTPase , protein - tyro - sine phosphatase ; P , phosphate . The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 325 tive VacA cellular receptors , and VacA - induced activa - tion increases tyrosine phosphorylation of G pro - tein – coupled receptor kinase - interactor 1 ( Git1 ) , lead - ing ultimately to epithelial cell detachment ( 54 ) . VacA also may have important effects on nonepithelial cells : in rats , only VacA + strains induce macromolecular leakage from the gastric microcirculation ( S39 ) . H . pylori strains with different forms of vacA exhibit varied phenotypes and have particular associations with gastro - duodenal diseases . The vacA signal region encodes the signal peptide and the N - terminus of the processed VacA toxin : type s1 VacA is fully active , but type s2 has a short N - terminus extension that blocks vacuole formation ( 55 , 56 ) and attenuates pore for - mation in eukaryotic membranes ( S40 ) . vacA s2 strains are rarely isolated from patients with peptic ulcers or gastric adenocarcinoma ( 43 , 57 , S41 , S42 ) . The vacA mid - region encodes part of the toxin cell binding domain . s1 / m2 forms of VacA bind to and vacuolate a narrower range of cells than s1 / m1 forms and induce less damage , yet they also act as efficient membrane pores and increase paracellular permeability ( 56 , S30 , Figure 3 VacA polymorphism and function . ( a ) VacA polymorphism . The gene , vacA , is a polymorphic mosaic with two possible signal regions , s1 and s2 , and two possible mid - regions , m1 and m2 . The translated protein is an autotransporter with N - and C - terminal processing during bacterial secretion . The s1 signal region is fully active , but the s2 region encodes a protein with a different signal - peptide cleavage site , result - ing in a short N - terminal extension to the mature toxin that blocks vacuolating activity and attenuates pore - forming activity . The mid - region encodes a cell - binding site , but the m2 type binds to and vacuolates fewer cell lines in vitro . ( b ) VacA biological activities . Secreted VacA forms monomers and oligomers ; the monomeric form binds to epithelial cells both nonspecifically and through specific receptor binding , for example , to Ptprz , which may modulate cell signaling . Membrane - bound VacA forms pores . Following VacA endocytosis , large vacuoles form , but , although marked in vitro , these are rarely seen in vivo . VacA also induces apoptosis , in part by forming pores in mitochondrial membranes , allowing cytochrome c ( Cyt c ) egress . Although the presence of cytoplasmic VacA is implied rather than demonstrated , yeast two - hybrid experiments show potential for specific binding to cytosolic targets including cytoskeletal proteins , consistent with observed cytoskeletal effects . Finally , VacA has suppressive effects on immune cell function . The relative importance of these effects on H . pylori per - sistence and host interaction remains unclear . 326 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 S32 , S43 ) . vacA s1 / m1 strains are most closely associ - ated with gastric carcinoma ( 58 , 59 , S44 ) . Natural per - sistence of distinct polymorphic forms of vacA in diverse human populations implies that each offers a survival advantage . That particular forms of VacA potentially induce different levels of H . pylori – host interaction fits well with the general model in which less interactive strains cause diminished tissue injury and disease , and highly interactive strains , while ben - efiting from their interaction , are more likely to affect their niche and thus injure their host . Interaction between the interacting domains . The cag island and vacA are far apart on the H . pylori chro - mosome ( 19 , 60 ) , yet there is a strong statistical link - age between the s1 genotype of vacA and the presence of the cag island ( 43 , S24 ) ; similarly , the s2 genotype is associated with lack of the cag island ( 43 ) . Although these phenomena may reflect founder effects , the panmixis of H . pylori ( 12 ) suggests selec - tion for the skewed relationships . This is not a sim - ple interdependence of function : in a cag + / vacA s1 / m1 strain , cag mutagenesis does not abolish vacuolating cytotoxin activity , nor does disruption of vacA abol - ish the cag + phenotype ( 29 , 31 , 39 , S45 , S46 ) . Howev - er , there are subtle quantitative effects : vacA disrup - tion slightly reduces early tyrosine phosphorylation of CagA during epithelial cell interaction , whereas , in contrast , cag disruption slightly increases VacA - induced vacuolation ( 61 ) . One contributor to these effects may be the colocalization on lipid rafts of tyrosine - phosphorylated Git1 / Cat1 ( substrate mole - cules of the VacA receptor phosphatase Ptprz ) and tyrosine - phosphorylated CagA ( 61 ) . The minor interactions between CagA - induced and VacA - induced effects on epithelial cells are unlikely to explain their close linkage in H . pylori . An alternative hypothesis is that VacA selects for a functional cag island , since VacA - induced immune suppression might not permit adequate nutrition of the H . pylori population ( Figure 1 ) . The effect of cag + strains in weakening epithelial tight junctions ( 62 ) may enhance nutrient flow to the bacteria and allow bet - ter VacA delivery to the mucosa . For the less potent s2 strains , this selection would be less substantial and might be counterbalanced by the phenotypic costs of maintaining the cag island . Whatever the true selective benefits VacA and cag offer each other , in conditions with multiple strains colonizing individual hosts , each major genotypic combination ( cag + / vacA s1 or cag – / vacA s2 ) could occupy a relatively exclusive phys - iological niche . Recombination events mixing the loci would be selected against . With diminishing multi - plicities of H . pylori colonization ( 7 ) , the strain ( and genotype ) diversity within a host would be reduced , diminishing the resource base for the overall popula - tion . Thus , once H . pylori transmission within a human population declines , the decline may acceler - ate because of diminished vitality of the colonizing bacterial populations in individual hosts . Immune evasion and manipulation by H . pylori . If a microbe is to persist in a vertebrate host , its biggest challenge is to avoid clearance by the immune system . Transient H . pylori colonization has been document - ed in both primates and humans ( 63 , 64 , S47 ) , imply - ing that persistence does not inevitably follow acqui - sition . The race between H . pylori adaptation to a specific host ( Figure 1 ) and the development of effec - tive immunity also implies the feasibility of vaccine development . However , usually , following H . pylori acquisition , there is rapid host recognition in the form of both innate and acquired immune responses , including generation of specific local and systemic antibodies ( 65 , S48 – S51 ) . Once chronicity is estab - lished , the immune stimulation appears remarkably constant ; for example , antibody titers remain stable for over 20 years ( 40 ) , consistent with a model of dynamic equilibrium ( Figure 1 ) . The ubiquity and duration of host recognition of H . pylori and yet the lifelong colonization by the bacterium demonstrate the effectiveness of H . pylori ’s strategies to evade host immunity . The important first step is to survive with - out tissue invasion ( Table 2 ) , and the bulk of H . pylori cells , if not all of them ( Figure 1a ) , reside in the gas - tric lumen ( 66 , S52 ) beyond the reach of most host immune recognition and effector mechanisms ( S48 , S52 , S53 ) . However , even in this niche , some H . pylori cells establish intimate contact with the surface epithelium ( S52 , S54 ) , some H . pylori proteins cross the epithelial barrier ( 67 ) , and both innate and acquired immune systems are activated ( 65 , S48 – S50 ) . Although it is not able to completely avoid immune activation , H . pylori has evolved mechanisms to reduce recognition by immune sensors , downregulate activa - tion of immune cells , and escape immune effectors . Innate immune system recognition of microorgan - isms involves Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) that discrim - inate pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( S55 ) . TLR stimulation triggers proinflammatory signaling through NF - κ B activation , and H . pylori has evolved to minimize such stimulation . TLR5 recognizes bac - terial flagella such as those of Salmonella typhimurium but is not stimulated by H . pylori flagella ( S56 ) . TLR9 recognizes the largely unmethylated DNA of most bacteria ( S57 ) , but the highly methylated H . pylori Table 2 Immune evasion by H . pylori Mechanism Example Reference Sequestration Lumenal colonization 66 , S52 Minimization of innate Low toxicity of LPS S58 – S60 immunity DNA methylation S11 Downregulation of VacA suppression of T cell 48 , 49 immune effectors responses Interference with 76 phagocytosis Mimicry of host antigens Lewis expression 74 Antigenic variation CagY 75 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 327 DNA likely minimizes recognition ( S11 ) . H . pylori LPS is anergic compared with that of other enteric bacteria because of lipid A core modifications ( S58 – S61 ) , and while it stimulates macrophage TLR4 ( 68 , S61 ) , it does not stimulate gastric epithelial TLR4 ( 69 ) . Although H . pylori is relatively camou - flaged from innate immune sensors on cell surfaces , cag + strains do stimulate NF - κ B activation in epithe - lial cells ( 70 , S62 ) , apparently through recognition by Nod1 ( S63 ) , an innate intracellular pathogen - recog - nition molecule that detects soluble components of bacterial peptidoglycan ( 71 ) . How such components are delivered to the epithelial cytoplasm by the cag - encoded type IV secretion system remains unclear , but the resultant NF - κ B – induced proinflammatory cytokine expression is an important and continuing stimulus to inflammatory cell infiltration and thus to pathogenesis ( 65 , S49 ) . H . pylori also activates the acquired immune system , as indicated by both humoral and cellular recognition of its antigens ( 72 , S48 , S50 , S53 ) , although it has evolved to substantially downregulate and avoid acquired immune effectors . Recognition by the acquired immune system requires antigen presenta - tion , and H . pylori interferes with both uptake and processing of antigens , partially through a VacA effect ( 48 ) . H . pylori also suppresses T cell proliferation and activation and induces selective T cell apoptosis , again partially through specific VacA effects on signaling ( 49 , 73 , S64 – S66 ) . It evades host adaptive responses by mimicry of the gastric epithelial fucosylated ( Lewis ) antigens ( 74 , S67 ) , and by antigenic variation of sur - face proteins including a critical pilus molecule , CagY ( 75 ) . As this high - frequency antigenic variation occurs through mutation ( usually slipped - strand mispair - ing ) and intragenomic recombination between homologous sequences ( 19 , 23 , S9 , S68 ) , these genet - ic mechanisms are important contributors to immune evasion . Finally , H . pylori can also suppress less specific immune mechanisms such as phagocyto - sis ( 47 , 76 ) . The relative contributions of the different host manipulation and evasion strategies to H . pylori persistence are not established , possibly differing in individual hosts , but the existence of these varied mechanisms implies that immune surveillance of the gastric lumen is powerful , and that bacterial survival requires its subversion . Host responses to H . pylori and their role in disease The immune response to H . pylori and its importance in pathogenesis . Despite the mechanisms H . pylori has evolved to avoid and downregulate host immune responses , substantial immune activation occurs fol - lowing H . pylori infection . This is manifested by con - tinuous epithelial cell cytokine signaling and gastric mucosal infiltration by neutrophils , macrophages , and lymphocytes , all of which are more pronounced in colonization with a cag + strain ( 25 , 65 , 77 , S69 ) . There is a pronounced specific acquired immune response , including generation of antibodies and effector T cells , and although this includes both a Th1 and a Th2 component , mucosal cytokine pro - files imply Th1 predominance ( 72 , S50 ) . This is unusual for extracellular , toxin - producing bacteria , which usually are met by B cell activation and high - level antibody production ( Th2 responses ) . However , studies in mice suggest that the predominant Th1 response is appropriate to control H . pylori : Heli - cobacter colonization density is lower in mice with predominant Th1 responses , whether genetically pro - grammed or manipulated by experimental helminth infection ( 78 , 79 , S70 , S71 ) . Despite its apparent propriety , the immune response , and in particular its Th1 component , is a major factor in H . pylori – associated pathogenesis ( 78 , 80 , 81 , S70 ) . Mice with a predominant Th1 response develop more gastric inflammation during Helicobac - ter colonization than those with a Th2 response ( 78 , 79 , 81 , S70 , S71 ) . Experiments that use T cell trans - fer between mice show that these effects are depend - ent on Th1 cells ( 78 ) . Gastric inflammation and atrophic changes are abrogated in the absence of the key Th1 cytokine IFN - γ ( 81 , S70 ) and are induced by IFN - γ infusion , even without Helicobacter ( S72 ) . In humans , peptic ulceration is rare during immune suppression with cyclosporin A ( S73 ) and pregnancy ( S74 ) , a Th2 - predominant state . One hypothesis is that the relative sparsity of H . pylori – associated dis - ease in Africa despite high H . pylori prevalence ( the “African enigma” ) may be due to predominant Th2 responses to H . pylori among black Africans . These responses may be induced by endemic helminth infection ( 79 ) or may reflect a genetic predisposition selected by malaria ( 82 ) . The importance of heterogeneity in immune respons - es among human populations and individuals is fur - ther demonstrated by the contribution of cytokine polymorphisms to disease risk . Polymorphisms that increase the IL - 1 β response to H . pylori are associated with an increased risk of developing gastric atrophy , hypochlorhydria , and adenocarcinoma ( 83 – 85 , S14 , S75 ) . Polymorphisms in TNF - α and IL - 10 genes have a similar , but less pronounced , association ( S14 , S76 ) . Thus the degree of activation of the immune response , which underlies H . pylori – associated pathology , is dependent on both H . pylori strain determinants and host genetic factors ; the combined effect of these on disease outcome appears synergistic ( S14 ) , as predicted by the equilibrium model ( Figure 1 ) . Effect of H . pylori – induced inflammation on acid home - ostasis and its importance in upper - gastrointestinal diseases . H . pylori – induced proinflammatory cytokine expression and inflammation affect various cell types in the stom - ach that are important in acid homeostasis , including somatostatin - producing D cells , gastrin - producing G cells , and acid - producing parietal cells ( 86 , 87 , S77 – S79 ) . H . pylori gastritis causes a reduction in somatostatin levels ( 87 , S77 , S80 ) and , since somato - 328 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 statin negatively regulates gastrin , hypergastrinemia ( 88 ) . Gastrin is a specific growth factor for H . pylori ( 89 ) , so this potentially creates a positive - feedback loop . Gas - trin expression may be enhanced by a direct stimulant effect of H . pylori – induced proinflammatory cytokines on G cells ( S78 ) . Removal of H . pylori reverses these effects ( S81 , S82 ) ( Figure 4 ) . The effects of gastrin levels on acid homeostasis and disease depend crucially on the topographic dis - tribution in the stomach of the H . pylori – induced inflammation ( Figure 4 ) . In antral - predominant gas - tritis , the enterochromaffin - like and parietal cells in the gastric corpus are relatively uninvolved ; thus , high gastrin levels lead to greater acid secretion ( 90 , S83 , S84 ) . Persistently increased gastrin levels also increase parietal cell mass , enhancing these effects ( 90 , 91 ) . The increased acid load delivered to the duo - denum induces gastric metaplasia , a protective phe - notypic change . H . pylori cannot colonize the normal duodenum but colonizes gastric metaplasia , with resultant inflammation and ulceration ( 92 – 94 , S85 ) . When the inflammation involves the corpus ( pan - gastritis or corpus - predominant gastritis ) , H . pylori – induced inflammatory mediators suppress acid pro - duction both indirectly , by inhibiting enterochro - maffin - like cell histamine production , and directly by inhibiting parietal cell function ( 86 , S79 ) . Reduced acid secretion further augments gastrin levels , which , while ineffective in raising acid production from the inflamed gastric corpus , provide an ongoing prolif - erative stimulus to gastric epithelial cells . Continu - ing proliferation and inflammation affect epithelial cell cycle characteristics ( 95 , 96 , S86 – S88 ) and lead to progressive loss of gastric glands . Such atrophic changes markedly increase risk of gastric ulceration and non - cardia gastric adenocarcinoma ( 4 , 97 , S89 ) but , because acid production is lowered , are protec - tive against duodenal ulceration , and probably against acid - induced complications of gastroe - sophageal reflux ( 98 , 99 ) . The topographic distribution of gastritis during chronic H . pylori colonization is at least partly host specific ; for example , polymorphisms leading to high IL - 1 β production are associated with pan - gastritis with its accompanying reduced acid production and gastric atrophy ( 84 ) . However , environmental factors likely also play a crucial role ; duodenal ulceration ( and so presumably antral - predominant gastritis ) is largely a 20th - century disease ( 100 , S90 ) associated with socioeconomic development . Prior to 20th - cen - tury increases in duodenal ulcer incidence , the pre - dominant gastritis pattern was probably that found commonly today in developing countries : pan - gastri - tis and progressive atrophy . As humans have coevolved Figure 4 Relation of topography of inflammation to gastric physiology and clinical outcome . ( a ) H . pylori – induced antral - predominant inflamma - tion . Antral inflammation results in hypergastrinemia , which stimulates a physiologically intact corpus to secrete acid , increasing risk for duodenal ulceration . ( b ) H . pylori – induced pan - gastritis . The inflammatory process suppresses corpus acid production , despite the gastrin stimulus from the antrum . Hypochlorhydria enhances risk of gastric ulcer and adenocarcinoma but conversely decreases risk for severe gas - tro - esophageal reflux disease and its sequelae . ECL , enterochromaffin - like . The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 329 with H . pylori over at least thousands of years ( 8 , 9 ) and our genes cannot have evolved appreciably over the last century , unknown environmental influences such as older age at acquisition , reduced number of colonizing strains , changed proportion of strains preadapted by passage through family members , reduction in other microorganisms colonizing the stomach , and improved nutritional status must be responsible for this change . In even more recent times , absence of H . pylori from late 20th - and 21st - century stomachs in developed countries , perhaps for the first time in our evolutionary history , may have had further effects on human acid homeostasis and health . As the predominant historical result of colo - nization was pan - gastritis and reduced acid produc - tion , absence of H . pylori would be expected to increase mean acid production in the general popu - lation , and we speculate that this has contributed to the observed rise in acid - associated complications of gastro - esophageal reflux ( severe reflux esophagitis , Barrett esophagus , and esophageal adenocarcinoma ) in the late 20th century ( 101 ) . In support of this , patients with severe or complicated acid - esophageal diseases have a reduced H . pylori prevalence , particu - larly of cag + strains ( 101 – 103 , S91 ) , and a low preva - lence of gastric atrophy ( 98 , 99 ) . Consequently , the current iatrogenic H . pylori removal may have impor - tant costs as well as benefits . The ubiquity of H . pylori in unacculturated human populations has led to speculation that colonization also may be beneficial to the pre - reproductive host ( S92 , S93 ) . We speculate that over the long course of human evolution , adult stomachs were mainly atroph - ic , and antral - predominant gastritis and hyperchlorhy - dria were largely conditions of childhood ; children would be most likely to benefit from H . pylori coloniza - tion , by an enhanced acid barrier protecting against diarrheal pathogens ( 104 ) . If so , there would be strong selection for maintenance of H . pylori in populations with poor sanitation ; with improvement , such selection would be progressively lost . Effects of H . pylori on leptin and ghrelin , hormones involved in appetite and satiety . Recently , gastric H . pylori colonization has been shown to affect expression of leptin and ghrelin , hormones that control appetite and satiety ( 5 , 6 , S94 ) ( Figure 5 ) . Leptin is secreted from adipose tissue and from the stomach ( S95 , S96 ) ; gastric leptin is produced by chief and parietal cells , and released in response to meals and associated hor - monal stimuli ( 105 , S96 , S97 ) . Leptin signals satiety to the hypothalamus , causing reduced food intake , increased energy expenditure , reduced gastrin and acid secretion , and increased gastric mucosal cell pro - liferation ( 106 , S98 , S99 ) . Ghrelin , produced in oxyn - tic glands , is released during fasting , and suppressed by feeding and leptin ( 107 , 108 ) . In rats , ghrelin stim - ulates food intake , reduces energy expenditure , and increases acid secretion ( 107 , S100 ) . Gastric leptin levels are higher in H . pylori – colonized than in noncolonized adults , and eradication leads to their reduction , although serum levels may not be affected ( 5 , S94 ) . Evidence conflicts as to whether serum ghrelin levels are higher in H . pylori – negative persons ( 109 , S101 ) , but they increase after H . pylori eradication ( 6 ) . In an animal model , immunity to Heli - cobacter is associated with upregulation of adipocyte genes , including adipsin , resistin , and adiponectin ( 110 ) . Inquiry in this field is at an early stage , but if early findings are confirmed , the implications may be important . Weight gain after H . pylori eradication is Figure 5 The described effects of H . pylori on lep - tin and ghrelin , and postulated subse - quent effects on satiety , energy expendi - ture , weight , and height . Although leptin and ghrelin have other important paracrine , autocrine , and endocrine effects , here we concentrate on actions that affect body habitus . The observed effects of H . pylori on leptin and ghrelin are based on observational and inter - ventional ( H . pylori eradication ) human studies . Other observational human studies support the portrayed effects of H . pylori on weight and height . 330 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 common ( 5 ) , and these changes in hormonal levels may contribute ( Figure 5 ) . Similarly , obesity is in - creasing in developed countries , as H . pylori prevalence is falling . In developing countries , most children acquire H . pylori by age 5 , and nearly all by age 10 , whereas progressively fewer children in developed countries are becoming colonized ( 111 , S102 ) . Whether H . pylori genes represent microbial contribu - tions to the complement of “thrifty” ( calorie - conserv - ing ) genes of humans , and whether H . pylori disap - pearance plays a role in childhood ( and adult ) adiposity , remain to be determined . Chronic effects of H . pylori on the gastric epithelium and car - cinogenesis . Persistent microbial colonization resulting in inflammation and cell damage is an important cause of carcinogenesis . Examples include H . pylori and distal gastric adenocarcinoma , Schistosoma haematobium and bladder carcinoma , and hepatitis B virus and hepatoma ( 112 , S103 – S105 ) . In evolutionary terms , such cancers are probably neutral ; their expression is mostly mod - ern , possibly because of increased human lifespan , and they may be regarded as a cost of chronic colonization , which for gastric cancer occurs in about 1 – 3 % of H . pylori – colonized persons . H . pylori – induced gastric carcinogenesis is more like - ly when the interaction between H . pylori and the host is more interactive ; inflammation is more intense and the effects on epithelial cells are more damaging ( S106 ) . This may reflect colonization by more interac - tive H . pylori strains : cag + strains induce more inflam - mation and cell cycle effects ( 4 ) , and vacA s1 / m1 strains cause more direct epithelial damage ( 27 , 58 , 59 , S105 ) . Host cytokine polymorphisms enhance the inflamma - tory response ( 83 , 84 , S14 , S75 ) . Damaging environ - mental factors , such as smoking and high - salt diets , further increase risk , whereas diets high in antioxidants are protective ( 113 , S89 , S107 ) . Although risk factors for gastric cancer now are well established , the mechanism of carcinogenesis is less clear . Carcinomas arise in stomachs with pan - gastritis ; the more common intestinal type occurs following pro - gressive atrophy ( with loss of glands and hypochlorhy - dria ) , intestinal metaplasia , and dysplasia ( S89 , S108 ) , whereas the diffuse type ( S109 ) may arise de novo from H . pylori – colonized mucosa ( 112 ) . H . pylori colonizes the atrophic stomach poorly , and intestinal metaplasia hardly at all , suggesting that the bacteria may create the environment for intestinal - type gastric carcinogenesis ( atrophy and hypochlorhydria ) rather than causing the cancer directly . In support of this concept , mutations in gastric carcinoma appear random , as expected from nonspecific DNA damage from environmental car - cinogens ( 114 , S110 ) . Disturbance of the epithelial cell proliferation / apop - tosis balance is considered a risk factor for gastric atrophy and for neoplastic transformation . When cocultured with epithelial cell lines , H . pylori are antiproliferative and proapoptotic ( 115 , S111 ) , al - though cag signaling is essentially pro - proliferative ( through MAPK signaling and expression of the tran - scription factor AP - 1 ) ( 116 , 117 ) and pro - and anti - apoptotic ( through NF - κ B signaling ) ( 70 , 118 ) . Animal models and human studies suggest that the net effect of H . pylori colonization is pro - proliferative and proapoptotic ( 95 , 96 , 119 , 120 , S87 , S88 ) . Pro - prolifer - ative signaling increases cell replication and the chance of mutation , whereas apoptosis may be protective by inducing death of DNA - damaged cells . However , the consequences of both effects on the epithelial stem cell compartment is likely to be pro - proliferative ( to replace apoptotic cells ) , potentially predisposing to senescence and atrophy or increased mutation and diffuse - type malignant transformation . Stem cell proliferation also may potentially arise more directly from H . pylori – induced hypergastrinemia , since gastrin is pro - prolif - erative for gastrointestinal epithelia ; in H . pylori – infect - ed gerbils , epithelial proliferation correlates well with serum gastrin levels ( 96 ) . Ultimately , carcinogenesis requires DNA damage , which can be induced directly by H . pylori products or indirectly through oxygen free radicals released by neu - trophils ( 118 , 121 , 122 ) . Gastric ascorbic acid , which neutralizes free radicals , is reduced in H . pylori – positive stomachs ( S112 ) , and H . pylori can also directly inter - fere with the epithelial mismatch - repair system ( 122 ) . In the atrophic stomach , H . pylori colonization is sparse , but atrophy is associated with continuing epithelial proliferation and an inflammatory cell infil - trate . Reactive oxygen species survive longer in the low - acid environment of the atrophic stomach , and ascor - bic acid concentrations remain low ( 123 ) ; colonization by oral and intestinal bacteria , which themselves can release reactive oxygen and nitrogen species , may occur . By leading to gastric atrophy , H . pylori may be permit - ting its replacement by more genotoxic bacteria in the postreproductive - age gastric niche . While carcinogenesis may be merely an evolutionar - ily irrelevant consequence of H . pylori colonization , affecting individuals largely in their postreproductive years , we advance an alternative theory ( 124 ) . Carcino - genesis may be one mechanism by which H . pylori and other commensal bacteria contributed to the fitness of premodern human populations , by the removal of senescent ( postreproductive ) individuals from the population in a programmed ( “safe” ) manner ( 124 ) . This would lead to a selective advantage for colonized populations , as groups dominated by senescent indi - viduals likely have reduced survival during times of scarcity , or epidemic disease . Conclusions The human body is teeming with microbes , especial - ly bacteria , but their role in human physiology has been little explored ( 124 , 125 ) . H . pylori is unique in that it is both the major inhabitant of an ecological niche and is disappearing from human populations as a consequence of modernization . As such , the effects of H . pylori on physiology and pathophysiolo - The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 331 gy can be measured and are a paradigm for our per - sistent indigenous biota , with both local and distant physiological effects . Other microbes also may be disappearing from the human “microbiome” ( 125 ) . We cannot yet ascertain this phenomenon because of the complexity of the indigenous flora , but parallels likely are present . Could extinction of H . pylori and other coevolved microbes have affected our physiological signaling ? If so , could this in part be responsible for diseases that have increased in modern times , such as gastro - esophageal reflux , obesity , diabetes , asthma , and sev - eral malignancies ? Acknowledgments This work was supported in part by the NIH ( R01GM63270 , R01DK53707 , R01CA97946 , and R21DK063603 ) , the Medical Research Service of the Department of Veterans Affairs , a Cancer Research United Kingdom grant , and the award of a Medical Research Council ( United Kingdom ) Senior Clinical Fellowship to John C . Atherton . Note : Due to space constraints , a number of impor - tant references could not be included in this reference list . Interested readers can find a supplementary refer - ence list at http : / / www . jci . org / cgi / content / full / 113 / 3 / 321 / DC1 . 1 . Blaser , M . J . , and Kirschner , D . 1999 . Dynamics of Helicobacter pylori col - onization in relation to the host response . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 : 8359 – 8364 . 2 . Nomura , A . M . Y . , et al . 2002 . Helicobacter pylori cagA seropositivity and gastric carcinoma risk in a Japanese American population . J . Infect . Dis . 186 : 1138 – 1144 . 3 . Helicobacter and Cancer Collaborative Group . 2001 . Gastric cancer and Helicobacter pylori : a combined analysis of twelve case - control studies nested within prospective cohorts . Gut . 49 : 347 – 353 . 4 . Peek , R . M . , and Blaser , M . J . 2002 . Helicobacter pylori and gastrointesti - nal tract adenocarcinomas . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 2 : 28 – 37 . 5 . Azuma , T . , et al . 2001 . Gastric leptin and Helicobacter pylori infection . Gut . 49 : 324 – 329 . 6 . Nwokolo , C . U . , Freshwater , D . A . , O’Hare , P . , and Randeva , H . S . 2003 . Plasma ghrelin following cure of Helicobacter pylori . Gut . 52 : 637 – 640 . 7 . Blaser , M . J . 1998 . Helicobacters are indigenous to the human stomach : duodenal ulceration is due to changes in gastric microecology in the modern era . Gut . 43 : 721 – 727 . 8 . Ghose , C . , et al . 2002 . East Asian genotypes of Helicobacter pylori : strains in Amerindians provide evidence for its ancient human carriage . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 : 15107 – 15111 . 9 . Falush , D . , et al . 2003 . Traces of human migration in Helicobacter pylori populations . Science . 299 : 1582 – 1585 . 10 . Blaser , M . J . , and Berg , D . E . 2001 . Helicobacter pylori genetic diversity and risk of human disease . J . Clin . Invest . 107 : 767 – 773 . 11 . Kuipers , E . J . , et al . 2000 . Quasispecies development of Helicobacter pylori observed in paired isolates obtained years apart in the same host . J . Infect . Dis . 181 : 273 – 282 . 12 . Suerbaum , S . , et al . 1998 . Free recombination with Helicobacter pylori . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 : 12619 – 12624 . 13 . Bjorkholm , B . , et al . 2001 . Mutation frequency and biological cost of antibiotic resistance in Helicobacter pylori . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 : 14607 – 14612 . 14 . Sjolund , M . , Wreiber , K . , Andersson , D . I . , Blaser , M . J . , and Engstrand , L . 2003 . Long - term persistence of resistant Enterococcus species after antibiotics to eradicate Helicobacter pylori . Ann . Intern . Med . 139 : 483 – 487 . 15 . Falush , D . , et al . 2001 . Recombination and mutation during long - term gas - tric colonization by Helicobacter pylori : estimates of clock rates , recombina - tion size , and minimal age . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 : 15056 – 15061 . 16 . Aras , R . A . , Kang , J . , Tschumi , A . , Harasaki , Y . , and Blaser , M . J . 2003 . Extensive repetitive DNA facilitates prokaryotic genome plasticity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 : 13579 – 13584 . 17 . Aras , R . A . , Takata , T . , Ando , T . , Van der Ende , A . , and Blaser , M . J . 2001 . Regulation of the HpyII restriction - modification system of Helicobacter pylori by gene deletion and horizontal reconstitution . Mol . Microbiol . 42 : 369 – 382 . 18 . Wang , G . , Ge , Z . , Rasko , D . A . , and Taylor , D . E . 2000 . Lewis antigens in Helicobacter pylori : biosynthesis and phase variation . Mol . Microbiol . 36 : 1187 – 1196 . 19 . Tomb , J . F . , et al . 1997 . The complete genome sequence of the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori . Nature . 388 : 539 – 547 . 20 . Pride , D . T . , and Blaser , M . J . 2002 . Concerted evolution between dupli - cated genetic elements in Helicobacter pylori . J . Mol . Biol . 316 : 629 – 642 . 21 . Xu , Q . , Morgan , R . D . , Roberts , R . J . , and Blaser , M . J . 2000 . Identification of type II restriction and modification systems in Helicobacter pylori reveals their substantial diversity among strains . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 : 9671 – 9676 . 22 . Ilver , D . , et al . 1998 . Helicobacter pylori adhesion binding fucosylated histo - blood group antigens revealed by retagging . Science . 279 : 373 – 377 . 23 . Pride , D . T . , Meinersmann , R . J . , and Blaser , M . J . 2001 . Allelic variation within Helicobacter pylori babA and babB . Infect . Immun . 69 : 1160 – 1171 . 24 . Cover , T . L . , Dooley , C . P . , and Blaser , M . J . 1990 . Characterization and human serologic response to proteins in Helicobacter pylori broth cul - ture supernatants with vacuolizing cytotoxin activity . Infect . Immun . 58 : 603 – 610 . 25 . Crabtree , J . E . , et al . 1991 . Mucosal IgA recognition of Helicobacter pylori 120 kDa protein , peptic ulceration , and gastric pathology . Lancet . 338 : 332 – 335 . 26 . Nomura , A . M . Y . , Perez - Perez , G . I . , Lee , J . , Stemmerman , G . , and Blaser , MJ . 2002 . Relationship between H . pylori cagA status and risk of peptic ulcer disease . Am . J . Epidemiol . 155 : 1054 – 1059 . 27 . Blaser , M . J . , et al . 1995 . Infection with Helicobacter pylori strains pos - sessing cagA associated with an increased risk of developing adenocar - cinoma of the stomach . Cancer Res . 55 : 2111 – 2115 . 28 . Kersulyte , D . , Chalkauskas , H . , and Berg , D . E . 1999 . Emergence of recombinant strains of Helicobacter pylori during human infection . Mol . Microbiol . 31 : 31 – 43 . 29 . Tummuru , M . K . R . , Sharma , S . A . , and Blaser , M . J . 1995 . Helicobacter pylori picB , a homologue of the Bordetella pertussis toxin secretion pro - tein , is required for induction of IL - 8 in gastric epithelial cells . Mol . Microbiol . 18 : 867 – 876 . 30 . Odenbreit , S . , et al . 2000 . Translocation of Helicobacter pylori CagA into gastric epithelial cells by type IV secretion . Science . 287 : 1497 – 1500 . 31 . Segal , E . D . , Cha , J . , Lo , J . , Falkow , S . , and Tompkins , L . S . 1999 . Altered states : involvement of phosphorylated CagA in the induction of host cel - lular growth changes by Helicobacter pylori . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 : 14559 – 14564 . 32 . Yamazaki , S . , et al . 2003 . The CagA protein of Helicobacter pylori is translocated into epithelial cells and binds to SHP - 2 in human gastric mucosa . J . Infect . Dis . 187 : 334 – 337 . 33 . Aras , R . A . , et al . 2003 . Natural variation in populations of persistently colonizing bacteria affect human host cell phenotype . J . Infect . Dis . 188 : 486 – 496 . 34 . Selbach , M . , Moese , S . , Hauck , C . R . , Meyer , T . F . , and Backert , S . 2002 . Src is the kinase of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein in vitro and in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 6775 – 6778 . 35 . Higashi , H . , et al . 2002 . SHP - 2 tyrosine phosphatase as an intracellu - lar target of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein . Science . 295 : 683 – 686 . 36 . Mimuro , H . , et al . 2002 . Grb2 is a key mediator of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein activities . Mol . Cell . 10 : 745 – 755 . 37 . Tsutsumi , R . , Higashi , H . , Higuchi , M . , Okada , M . , and Hatakeyama , M . 2003 . Attenuation of Helicobacter pylori CagA x SHP - 2 signaling by interaction between CagA and C - terminal Src kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 3664 – 3670 . 38 . Selbach , M . , et al . 2003 . The Helicobacter pylori CagA protein induces cortactin dephosphorylation and actin rearrangement by c - Src inacti - vation . EMBO J . 22 : 515 – 528 . 39 . Guillemin , K . , Salama , N . , Tompkins , L . , and Falkow , S . 2002 . Cag pathogenicity island - specific responses of gastric epithelial cells to Helicobacter pylori infection . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 : 15136 – 15141 . 40 . Perez - Perez , G . I . , et al . 2002 . Evidence that cagA + Helicobacter pylori strains are disappearing more rapidly than cagA - strains . Gut . 50 : 295 – 298 . 41 . Cover , T . L . , and Blaser , M . J . 1992 . Purification and characterization of the vacuolating toxin from Helicobacter pylori . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 10570 – 10575 . 42 . Cover , T . L . , Tummuru , M . K . R . , Cao , P . , Thompson , S . A . , and Blaser , M . J . 1994 . Divergence of genetic sequences for the vacuolating cyto - toxin among Helicobacter pylori strains . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 10566 – 10573 . 43 . Atherton , J . , et al . 1995 . Mosaicism in vacuolating cytotoxin alleles of Helicobacter pylori : association of specific vacA types with cytotoxin pro - duction and peptic ulceration . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 17771 – 17777 . 44 . Iwamoto , H . , Czajkowsky , D . M . , Cover , T . L . , Szabo , G . , and Shao , Z . 332 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 1999 . VacA from Helicobacter pylori : a hexameric chloride channel . FEBS Lett . 450 : 101 – 104 . 45 . Tombola , F . , et al . 2001 . The Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin is a urea per - mease that promotes urea diffusion across epithelia . J . Clin . Invest . 108 : 929 – 937 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI200113045 . 46 . Papini , E . , et al . 1998 . Selective increase of the permeability of polar - ized epithelial cell monolayers by Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin . J . Clin . Invest . 102 : 813 – 820 . 47 . Zheng , P . Y . , and Jones , N . L . 2003 . Helicobacter pylori strains expressing the vacuolating cytotoxin interrupt phagosome maturation in macrophages by recruiting and retaining TACO ( coronin 1 ) protein . Cell . Microbiol . 5 : 25 – 40 . 48 . Molinari , M . , et al . 1998 . Selective inhibition of Ii - dependent antigen presentation by Helicobacter pylori toxin VacA . J . Exp . Med . 187 : 135 – 140 . 49 . Gebert , B . , Fischer , W . , Weiss , E . , Hoffmann , R . , and Haas , R . 2003 . Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin inhibits T lymphocyte acti - vation . Science . 301 : 1099 – 1102 . 50 . Pai , R . , Cover , T . L . , and Tarnawski , A . S . 1999 . Helicobacter pylori vacuo - lating cytotoxin ( VacA ) disorganizes the cytoskeletal architecture of gastric epithelial cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 262 : 245 – 250 . 51 . Kuck , D . , et al . 2001 . Vacuolating cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori induces apoptosis in the human gastric epithelial cell line AGS . Infect . Immun . 69 : 5080 – 5087 . 52 . Cover , T . L . , Krishna , U . S . , Israel , D . A . , and Peek , R . M . , Jr . 2003 . Induc - tion of gastric epithelial cell apoptosis by Helicobacter pylori vacuolat - ing cytotoxin . Cancer Res . 63 : 951 – 957 . 53 . Ogura , K . , et al . 2000 . Virulence factors of Helicobacter pylori responsi - ble for gastric diseases in Mongolian gerbil . J . Exp . Med . 192 : 1601 – 1610 . 54 . Fujikawa , A . , et al . 2003 . Mice deficient in protein tyrosine phos - phatase receptor type Z are resistant to gastric ulcer induction by VacA of Helicobacter pylori . Nat . Genet . 33 : 375 – 381 . 55 . Letley , D . P . , and Atherton , J . C . 2000 . Natural diversity in the N termi - nus of the mature vacuolating cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori deter - mines cytotoxin activity . J . Bacteriol . 182 : 3278 – 3280 . 56 . Letley , D . P . , Rhead , J . L . , Twells , R . J . , Dove , B . , and Atherton , J . C . 2003 . Determinants of non - toxicity in the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 26734 – 26741 . 57 . Atherton , J . C . , Peek , R . M . , Tham , K . T . , Cover , T . L . , and Blaser , M . J . 1997 . The clinical and pathological importance of heterogeneity in vacA , encod - ing the vacuolating cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori . Gastroenterology . 112 : 92 – 99 . 58 . Kidd , M . , Lastovica , A . J . , Atherton , J . C . , and Louw , J . A . 1999 . Hetero - geneity in the Helicobacter pylori vacA and cagA genes : association with gastroduodenal disease in South Africa ? Gut . 45 : 499 – 502 . 59 . Miehlke , S . , et al . 2000 . The Helicobacter pylori vacA s1 , m1 genotype and cagA is associated with gastric carcinoma in Germany . Int . J . Cancer . 87 : 322 – 327 . 60 . Alm , R . A . , et al . 1999 . Genomic - sequence comparison of two unrelat - ed isolates of the human gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori . Nature . 397 : 176 – 180 . 61 . Asahi , M . 2003 . Helicobacter pylori CagA containing ITAM - like sequences localized to lipid rafts negatively regulates VacA - induced sig - naling in vivo . Helicobacter . 8 : 1 – 14 . 62 . Amieva , M . R . , et al . 2003 . Disruption of the epithelial apical - junction - al complex by Helicobacter pylori CagA . Science . 300 : 1430 – 1434 . 63 . Dubois , A . , et al . 1996 . Transient and persistent experimental infection of non - human primates with Helicobacter pylori : implications for human disease . Infect . Immun . 64 : 2885 – 2891 . 64 . Perez - Perez , G . I . , et al . 2003 . Transient and persistent Helicobacter pylori colonization in Native American children . J . Clin . Microbiol . 41 : 2401 – 2407 . 65 . Peek , R . M . , et al . 1995 . Heightened inflammatory response and cytokine expression to cagA + Helicobacter pylori strains . Lab . Invest . 73 : 760 – 770 . 66 . Warren , J . R . , and Marshall , B . 1983 . Unidentified curved bacilli on gas - tric epithelium in active chronic gastritis . Lancet . 1 : 1273 – 1275 . 67 . Mai , U . E . H . , et al . 1992 . Surface proteins from Helicobacter pylori exhib - it chemotactic activity for human leucocytes and are present in gastric mucosa . J . Exp . Med . 175 : 517 – 525 . 68 . Maeda , S . , et al . 2001 . Distinct mechanism of Helicobacter pylori - medi - ated NF - kappa B activation between gastric cancer cells and mono - cytic cells . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 44856 – 44864 . 69 . Backhed , F . , et al . 2003 . Gastric mucosal recognition of Helicobacter pylori is independent of Toll - like receptor 4 . J . Infect . Dis . 187 : 829 – 836 . 70 . Foryst - Ludwig , A . , and Naumann , M . 2000 . p21 - activated kinase 1 acti - vates the nuclear factor kappa B ( NF - kappa B ) - inducing kinase - Ikap - pa B kinases NF - kappa B pathway and proinflammatory cytokines in Helicobacter pylori infection . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 39779 – 39785 . 71 . Giardin , S . E . , et al . 2003 . Nod1 detects a unique muropeptide from Gram - negative bacterial peptidoglycan . Science . 300 : 1584 – 1587 . 72 . Bamford , K . B . , et al . 1998 . Lymphocytes in the human gastric mucosa dur - ing Helicobacter pylori have a T helper cell 1 phenotype . Gastroenterology . 114 : 482 – 492 . 73 . Wang , J . , et al . 2001 . Negative selection of T cells by Helicobacter pylori as a model for bacterial strain selection by immune evasion . J . Immunol . 167 : 926 – 934 . 74 . Wirth , H . P . , Yang , M . , Peek , R . M . , Tham , K . T . , and Blaser , M . J . 1997 . Helicobacter pylori Lewis expression is related to the host Lewis pheno - type . Gastroenterology . 113 : 1091 – 1098 . 75 . Aras , R . A . , et al . 2003 . Plasticity of repetitive DNA sequences within a bacterial ( type IV ) secretion system component . J . Exp . Med . 198 : 1349 – 1360 . 76 . Allen , L . A . , Schlesinger , L . S . , and Kang , B . 2000 . Virulent strains of Heli - cobacter pylori demonstrate delayed phagocytosis and stimulate homo - typic phagosome fusion in macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 191 : 115 – 128 . 77 . Atherton , J . C . , Tham , K . T . , Peek , R . M . , Cover , T . L . , and Blaser , M . J . 1996 . Density of Helicobacter pylori infection in vivo as assessed by quan - titative culture and histology . J . Infect . Dis . 174 : 552 – 556 . 78 . Mohammadi , M . , et al . 1997 . Murine CD4 T - cell response to Heli - cobacter infection : TH1 cells enhance gastritis and TH2 cells reduce bacterial load . Gastroenterology . 113 : 1848 – 1857 . 79 . Fox , J . G . , et al . 2000 . Concurrent enteric helminth infection modulates inflammation and gastric immune responses and reduces helicobac - ter - induced gastric atrophy . Nat . Med . 6 : 536 – 542 . 80 . Guiney , D . G . , Hasegawa , P . , and Cole , S . P . 2003 . Helicobacter pylori pref - erentially induces interleukin 12 ( IL - 12 ) rather than IL - 6 or IL - 10 in human dendritic cells . Infect . Immun . 71 : 4163 – 4166 . 81 . Smythies , L . E . , et al . 2000 . Helicobacter pylori - induced mucosal inflam - mation is Th1 mediated and exacerbated in IL - 4 , but not IFN - gamma , gene - deficient mice . J . Immunol . 165 : 1022 – 1029 . 82 . Blaser , M . J . 1993 . Malaria and the natural history of Helicobacter pylori infection . Lancet . 342 : 551 . ( Letter ) 83 . Machado , J . C . , et al . 2003 . A proinflammatory genetic profile increases the risk for chronic atrophic gastritis and gastric carcinoma . Gastroenterology . 125 : 364 – 371 . 84 . El - Omar , E . , et al . 2000 . Interleukin - 1 polymorphisms associated with increased risk of gastric cancer . Nature . 404 : 398 – 402 . 85 . El - Omar , E . M . , et al . 2003 . Increased risk of noncardia gastric can - cer associated with proinflammatory cytokine gene polymorphisms . Gastroenterology . 124 : 1193 – 1201 . 86 . Beales , I . L . , and Calam , J . 1998 . Interleukin 1 beta and tumour necro - sis factor alpha inhibit acid secretion in cultured rabbit parietal cells by multiple pathways . Gut . 42 : 227 – 234 . 87 . Moss , S . F . , Legon , S . , Bishop , A . E . , Polak , J . M . , and Calam , J . 1992 . Effect of Helicobacter pylori on gastric somatostatin in duodenal ulcer disease . Lancet . 340 : 930 – 932 . 88 . Levi , S . , et al . 1989 . Campylobacter pylori and duodenal ulcers : the gas - trin link . Lancet . 1 : 1167 – 1168 . 89 . Chowers , M . Y . , et al . 2002 . A defined human gastrin sequence stimu - lates the growth of Helicobacter pylori . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 217 : 231 – 236 . 90 . El - Omar , E . M . , et al . 1995 . Helicobacter pylori infection and abnormalities of acid secretion in patients with duodenal ulcer disease . Gastroenterology . 109 : 681 – 691 . 91 . Gillen , D . , et al . 1998 . The acid response to gastrin distinguishes duo - denal ulcer patients from Helicobacter pylori - infected healthy subjects . Gastroenterology . 114 : 50 – 57 . 92 . Hamlet , A . , and Olbe , L . 1996 . The influence of Helicobacter pylori infec - tion on postprandial duodenal acid load and duodenal bulb pH in humans . Gastroenterology . 111 : 391 – 400 . 93 . Khulusi , S . , et al . 1996 . Pathogenesis of gastric metaplasia of the human duodenum : role of Helicobacter pylori , gastric acid , and ulcera - tion . Gastroenterology . 110 : 452 – 458 . 94 . Ohkusa , T . , et al . 2003 . Helicobacter pylori infection induces duodenitis and superficial duodenal ulcer in Mongolian gerbils . Gut . 52 : 797 – 803 . 95 . Peek , R . M . , Jr . , et al . 1997 . Helicobacter pylori cagA + strains and dissocia - tion of gastric epithelial cell proliferation from apoptosis . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 89 : 863 – 868 . 96 . Peek , R . M . , Jr . , et al . 2000 . Helicobacter pylori alters gastric epithelial cell cycle events and gastrin secretion in Mongolian gerbils . Gastroenterology . 118 : 48 – 59 . 97 . Kuipers , E . J . , et al . 1995 . Long - term sequelae of Helicobacter pylori gas - tritis . Lancet . 345 : 1525 – 1528 . 98 . Yamaji , Y . , et al . 2001 . Inverse background of Helicobacter pylori anti - body and pepsinogen in reflux oesophagitis compared with gastric cancer : analysis of 5732 Japanese subjects . Gut . 49 : 335 – 340 . 99 . Koike , T . , et al . 2001 . Helicobacter pylori infection prevents erosive reflux oesophagitis by decreasing gastric acid secretion . Gut . 49 : 330 – 334 . 100 . Baron , J . H . , and Sonnenberg , A . 2001 . Period - and cohort - age contours of deaths from gastric and duodenal ulcer in New York 1804 - 1998 . Am . J . Gastroenterol . 96 : 2887 – 2891 . 101 . El - Serag , H . B . , and Sonnenberg , A . 1998 . Opposing time trends of pep - tic ulcer and reflux disease . Gut . 43 : 327 – 333 . 102 . Chow , W . H . , et al . 1998 . An inverse relation between cagA + strains of Helicobacter pylori infection and risk of esophageal and gastric cardia adenocarcinoma . Cancer Res . 58 : 588 – 590 . The Journal of Clinical Investigation | February 2004 | Volume 113 | Number 3 333 103 . Vaezi , M . F . , et al . CagA - positive strains of Helicobacter pylori may pro - tect against Barrett’s esophagus . Am . J . Gastroenterol . 95 : 2206 – 2211 . 104 . Rothenbacher , D . , Blaser , M . J . , Bode , G . , and Brenner , H . 2000 . An inverse relationship between gastric colonization by Helicobacter pylori and diarrheal illnesses in children : results of a population - based cross - sectional study . J . Infect . Dis . 182 : 1446 – 1449 . 105 . Sobhani , I . , et al . 2002 . Vagal stimulation rapidly increases leptin secre - tion in human stomach . Gastroenterology . 122 : 259 – 263 . 106 . Goiot , H . , et al . 2001 . Antral mucosa expresses functional leptin recep - tors coupled to STAT - 3 signaling , which is involved in the control of gastric secretions in the rat . Gastroenterology . 121 : 1417 – 1427 . 107 . Asakawa , A . , et al . 2001 . Ghrelin is an appetite - stimulatory signal from stomach with structural resemblance to motilin . Gastroenterology . 120 : 337 – 345 . 108 . Lee , H . M . , et al . 2002 . Ghrelin , a new gastrointestinal endocrine pep - tide that stimulates insulin secretion : enteric distribution , ontogeny , influence of endocrine , and dietary manipulations . Endocrinology . 143 : 185 – 190 . 109 . Nishi , Y . , et al . 2003 . The relationship between ghrelin and Helicobacter pylori infection . Helicobacter . 8 : 402 . ( Abstr . ) 110 . Mueller , A . , et al . 2003 . Protective immunity against Helicobacter is charac - terized by a unique transcriptional signature . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 : 12289 – 12294 . 111 . Parsonnet , J . 1995 . The incidence of Helicobacter pylori infection . Aliment . Pharmacol . Ther . 9 : 45 – 51 . 112 . Nomura , A . , et al . 1991 . Helicobacter pylori infection and gastric carci - noma among Japanese Americans in Hawaii . N . Engl . J . Med . 325 : 1132 – 1136 . 113 . Hansson , L . E . , et al . 1993 . Helicobacter pylori infection : independent risk indicator of gastric adenocarcinoma . Gastroenterology . 105 : 1098 – 1103 . 114 . Simpson , A . J . , Caballero , O . L . , and Pena , S . D . 2001 . Microsatellite instability as a tool for the classification of gastric cancer . Trends Mol . Med . 7 : 76 – 80 . 115 . Wagner , S . , et al . 1997 . Regulation of gastric epithelial cell growth by Heli - cobacter pylori : evidence for a major role of apoptosis . Gastroenterology . 113 : 1836 – 1847 . 116 . Meyer - ter - Vehn , T . , et al . 2000 . Helicobacter pylori activates mitogen - acti - vated protein kinase cascades and induces expression of the proto - oncogenes c - fos and c - jun . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 16064 – 16072 . 117 . Naumann , M . , et al . 1999 . Activation of activator protein 1 and stress response kinases in epithelial cells colonized by Helicobacter pylori encoding the cag pathogenicity island . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 31655 – 31662 . 118 . Maeda , S . , et al . 2002 . Analysis of apoptotic and antiapoptotic signal - ing pathways induced by Helicobacter pylori . Mol . Pathol . 55 : 286 – 293 . 119 . Fan , X . J . , et al . 1998 . The effect of class II major histocompatibility complex expression on adherence of Helicobacter pylori and induction of apoptosis in gastric epithelial cells : a mechanism for T helper cell type 1 - mediated damage . J . Exp . Med . 187 : 1659 – 1669 . 120 . Rudi , J . , et al . 1998 . Involvement of the CD95 ( APO - 1 / Fas ) receptor and ligand system in Helicobacter pylori - induced gastric epithelial apop - tosis . J . Clin . Invest . 102 : 1506 – 1514 . 121 . Smoot , D . T . , et al . 2000 . Influence of Helicobacter pylori on reactive oxy - gen - induced gastric epithelial cell injury . Carcinogenesis . 21 : 2091 – 2095 . 122 . Kim , J . J . , et al . 2002 . Helicobacter pylori impairs DNA mismatch repair in gastric epithelial cells . Gastroenterology . 23 : 542 – 553 . 123 . Ruiz , B . , et al . 1994 . Vitamin C concentration in gastric juice before and after anti - Helicobacter pylori treatment . Am . J . Gastroenterol . 89 : 533 – 539 . 124 . Blaser , M . J . 1997 . The ecology of Helicobacter pylori in the human stom - ach . J . Clin . Invest . 100 : 759 – 762 . 125 . Lederberg , J . 2000 . Infectious history . Science . 288 : 287 – 293 .