Ezrin Contains Cytoskeleton and Membrane Binding Domains Accounting for its Proposed Role as a Membrane - Cytoskeletal Linker Marianne Algrain , Ossi Turunen , * Antti Vaheri , * Daniel Louvard , and Monique Arpin Unite de Biologie des Membranes , CNRS URA 1149 , Institut Pasteur , D ~ partement de Biologie Moleculaire , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France ; and * Department of Virology , University of Helsinki , Haartmaninkatu 3 , SF , 00290 Helsinki , Finland Abstract . Ezrin , a widespread protein present in actin - containing cell - surface structures , is a substrate of some protein tyrosine kinases . Based on its primary and secondary structure similarities with talin and band 4 . 1 it has been suggested that this protein could play a role in linking the cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane ( Gould , K . L . , A . Bretscher , F . S . Esch , and T . Hunter . 1989 . EMBO ( Eur . MoL Biol . Organ . ) . J . 8 : 4133 - 4142 ; Turunen , O . , R . Wmqvist , R . Pakka - hen , K . - H . Grzeschik , T . Wahlstr6m , and A . Vaheri . 1989 . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 16727 - 16732 ) . To test this hypothesis , we transiently expressed the complete hu - man ezrin eDNA , or truncated cDNAs encoding the amino - and carboxy - terminal domains of the protein , in CV - 1 cells . Protein epitope tagging was used to un - ambiguously determine the subcellular distribution of the protein encoded by the transfected eDNA . We show that this protein is concentrated underneath the dorsal plasma membrane in all actin - containing struc - tures and is partially detergent insoluble . The amino - terminal domain displays the same localization but is readily extractable by nonionic detergent . The carboxy - terminal domain colocalizes with microvillar actin filaments as well as with stress fibers and re - mains associated with actin filaments after detergent extraction , and with disorganized actin structures after cytochalasin D treatment . Our results clearly demon - strate that ezrin interacts with membrane - associated components via its amino - terminal domain , and with the cytoskeleton via its carboxy - terminal domain . The amino - terminal domain could include the main deter - minant that restricts the entire protein to the cortical cytoskeleton in contact with the dorsal plasma mem - brane and its specialized microdomains such as microvilli , microspikes and lamellipodla . ZRIN was first characterized as a minor component of intestinal brush border microvllli ( Bretscher , 1983 ) . Related proteins were subsequently identified in vari - ous actin - based cytoskeleton structures . These include a 75 - kD protein called cytovillin in microvilli of choriocarcinoma cell ( Pakkanen et al . , 1987 ; pakkanen , 1988 ) , an 80 - kD phosphoprotein ( called 80 K ) in induced microvilli of gastric - stimulated parietal cells ( Urushidani et al . , 1989 ) and the p81 protein from A 431 human epidermoid carci - noma cells ( Hunter and Cooper , 1981 ; Bretscher , 1989 ) . Im - munological studies ( Gould et al . , 1986 ; Pakkanen and Va - heft , 1989 ; Hanzel et al . , 1991 ) and eDNA sequencing data ( Gould et al . , 1989 ; Tumnen et al . , 1989 ) have now estab - fished that ezrin , cytovillin , p81 , and 80 K are the same pro - tein . It is present in a wide range of cells where it is concen - trated in surface protrusions ( Bretscber , 1983 ; Pakkanen , 1988 ; Gould et al . , 1986 ; Everett and Nichol , 1990 ) . Several observations suggested that this microvillus - asso - ciated protein could be involved in membrane - cytoskeleton interactions . Firstly , ezrin was rapidly redistributed in newly emerging microviUi on the cell surface after viral infection ( Pakkanen et al . , 1988 ) , growth factor induction ( Bretscher , 1989 ) , and hormonal stimulation ( Hanzel et al . , 1991 ) . Fur - thermore , the redistribution of ezrin in A431 cells after treatment with EGF occurred concomitantly with the phos - phorylation of the protein on serine and tyrosine residues ( Bretscher , 1989 ) . Relocalization of ezftn in parietal gastric cells was also accompanied by the phosphorylation of r on seftne residues ( Urushidani et al . , 1989 ) . However , the contribution of ezrin to the formation of these surface struc - tures and the functional role of this pbosphorylafion have not been elucidated . Secondly , subcellular fractionafion of EGF - treated cells , and of stimulated parietal cells , indicated that ezftn remains partially associated with the cytoskeletal frac - tion . Sedimentation assays revealed a weak interaction be - tween ezrin and F - actin at low salt conditions , but none at all at physiological salt concentrations ( Bretscber , 1983 , 1991 ) . The hypothesis that ezrin plays a role in modulating the as - sociation of the cortical cytoskeleten with the membrane was further supported by the analysis of the cloned human ezrin eDNA ( Gould et al . , 1989 ; Turunea et al . , 1989 ) . The pri - mary structure shows 37 and 23 % amino - terminal domain identifies with the human erythrocyte protein 4 . 1 ( Conboy et al . , 1986 ) and the focal adhesion protein talin , respectively ( Rees et al . , 1990 ) . Futhermore , the secondary structure (cid:14)9 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 01 / 129 / 11 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , Number 1 , January 1993 129 - 139 129 prediction indicates that the carboxy - terminal region of ezrin contains an extensive ~ x - hefical region similar to that found in the carboxy - terminal domain of band 4 . 1 and talin . Moreover , this domain in each of these proteins , is followed by a region rich in charged amino acids ( see Fig . 1 A ) . These similarities in primary and secondary structure indicate that ezrin is a member of the submembranous cytoskeleton - associated protein family , whose best characterized mem - bers are band 4 . 1 and talin . The role of band 4 . 1 in Jinking the spectrin - actin network to the plasma membrane in erythrocytes has been extensively studied . Band 4 . 1 hinds to the transmembrane protein glycophorin and band 3 ( Ander - son and Lovrien , 1984 ; Anderson and Marchesi , 1985 ; Pasternack et al . , 1985 ; Bennett , 1989 ) . The glycophorin binding site in band 4 . 1 has been localiT ~ ' d to the amino - terminal domain , while the cytoskeleton - binding site has been mapped in the carboxy - termhud region of the protein ( Correas et al . , 1986 ) . Binding assays suggested that both the amino - and carboxy - terminal ends of talin are involved in the interaction with integrins ( Horwitz et al . , 1986 ; Simon , K . O . , and K . Burridgo . 1991 . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 35la . ) , while the 190 kD carboxy - termhud fragment of talin binds to vinculin ( Burridge and Mangaat , 1984 ) . Much less information is available for ezrin . Although its distribution in transient and stable microvillar structures and its homologies with talin and band 4 . 1 suggest that ezrin could also connect the cytoskeleton to the plasma mem - brane , no direct evidence for such interactions has been ob - tained so far . In particular , proteins that might interact with ezrin have not yet been identified . The identification of such components would help us to better understand the role played by ezrin in the reorganization of the cortical cytoskeleton produced by various physiological signals . In an attempt to define the functional domains of ezrin which interact with membrane components or with the cytoskele - ton , we have transiently expressed the complete ezrin cDNA or truncated cDNAs encoding the amino - and carboxy - terminal domains of the protein in CV - 1 cells . Here we report investigations on the subcellular distribution of these pro - teins by immunocytochemistry . We show that the complete ezrin and its amino - terminal domain localize underneath specialized cell surface structures containing microfila - ments . In addition , its carboxy - terminal domain contains a binding site which enables it to interact directly or indirectly with the stress fibers observed near the plasma membrane at the ventralrfaces of cultured cells . We also discuss the advan - tages of using epitope protein tagging to unambiguously as - sess the subcellular distribution of ezrin . Indeed , recent studies report the presence in various cell types of proteins highly homologous to ezrin , such as radixin ( Funayama et al . , 1991 ) , moesin ( Lankes and Furthmayr , 1991 ) , and the EM10 protein of Ech / nococcus mult / / ocu / ar / s ( Frosch et al . , 1991 ) . These recent findings have emphasized the diversity of this protein family , and suggest specific interactions with cellular membranes , the physiological relevance of which re - mains to be elucidated . Materials and Methods Materials Cell Cu / ture . CV1 monkey kidney cells ( American type cells culture ATCC CCL 70 ( American Type Culture Collection , Rockville , MD ) were grown in Dulbecco ' s minimum essential medium supplemented with 10 % FCS , at 37 ~ under a 10 % CO2 atmosphere . Antibodies . mAb ( P5D4 ) raised against the ll - amino acid carboxy ter - minus of the vesicular stomafitis virus glycoprotein G was previously de - scribed ( Kreis , 1986 ) and was kindly provided by Dr T . Kreis ( European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Heidelberg , Germany ) . Affinity - purified polyclonal anfi - ezrin antibody was obtained as previously described ( Pakka - nen , 1988 ) . The rhodamine - coupled sheep anti - rabbit antibody and fluo - rescein - linked sheep anti - mouse IgG were purchased from Amersham Corp . ( Arlington Heights , IL ) . Rengents . Cytochalasin D and rho & qmlne - labeled wheat germ aggluti - nin were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) . Restriction enzymes were purchased from Amersham Corp . , SfiI from New England Biolabs , Inc . ( Beverly , MA ) and Ampll Taq Polymerase from Cetus Corp . ( Berkeley , CA ) . Recombinant DNA Constructions Expression of the Vf ~ ld - type Human Ezrin cDNA . Human exrin cDNA containing the complete codin _ g sequence flanked by 90 and 400 bp of the 5 ' and 3 ' untranslated regions , respectively , ~ ts inserted in the EcoRI sites of the Blnescript - KS plasmid ( KS - pCV6 ) . For transient expression in the CV - 1 cell line the EcoRI fragment was inserted in the corresponding sites of the eucaryotic expression vector pCB6 ( a kind gift of Dr . M . Roth , University of Texas , Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX ) . In the con - struct , the Y - end of the exrin cDNA was located downstream of the cyto - megalovirus promoter . Construction of the Fusion Ezrln - G cDNA . Ezrin was tagsed by incor - porating an ollgonucleotide encoding the 11 carboxy - terminal amino acids of the vesicular stomafitis virus glycoprotein G into the 3 ' cDNA coding sequence ( Kreis , 1986 ) . This oll8onucleofide is flanked at the Y - end either by the SfiI restriction site alone or by the SmaI - SfiI restriction sites , and at the T - end by XbaI , BgllI , and Kpnl restriction sites ( see Fig . 1 B ) . To ligate the T - end of the ezrin cDNA coding sequence with this oligonucleo - tide , the ezrin cDNA starting at the unique Sinai restriction site and ending upstream of the translation termination codon was amplified . The oligonu - cleotidns used for the amplification were designed to allow the two frag - meres to be ligated across the SfiI restriction site and to allow the deletion of the translation termlr ~ tion codon . The sense primer ( 5 ' - GC ~ CCOGGA - ~ T C - 3 ' ) corresponded to the sequence 999 - 1019 and con - tained the unique SmaI site at the Y - end . The reverse primer ( 5 " TGOC ~ C - TGG ~ CCA ~ C ' I ~ GAACTC - 3 ' ) contained an oligonucleotide complementary to the bases 1820 - 1834 at its 5 ' end and the SfiI restriction site at its 3 ' end . Amplification of the cDNA fragment was performed using a Perkin - Elmer thermal cycler ( The Forkin - Elmer Corp . , Norwalk , CT ) with 1 # g of DNA plasmid ( KS - pCV6 ) , primers at 100 pmoles , and 2 . 5 U of Ampll Ihq Polymerase . The cycling parameters were 94 ~ for 1 min , 54 ~ for 1 rain , and 72 ~ for 1 min , for 24 cycles . The amplified frasment was purified on a 1 ~ agarose gel and digested with SmaI and SfiI endo - nuclcases . This 1 - kb fragment was then llgated with the ollgonucleotide encoding the peptide G sequence , digested by SmaI and Sill , and with the plasmid KS - pCV6 dighted by SmaI - Xbal . This llgafion resulted in the repent of the 3 ' region of ezrin cDNA starting at the SmaI site by the amplified fragment linked to the tag oligonucleotide sequence . The result - ing plasmid , referred to as KS - pCV6 - G , was checked by double - strand se - quencing using the T7 Sequencing kit ( Pharmacia Fine Chemicals , Fiscata - way , NJ ) . The complete cDNA fused to the oll8onucleotide was then excised from this vector after digestion by HindlII - XbaI and inserted into the corresponding restriction sites of the expression vector pCB6 , down - stream from the cytomegalovirus promoter ( see Fig . 1 B , b ) . Construction of Mutant eDNA EncoM ~ the Carboxy - termtnal Do . ma / n of Eofn . The 5 " untranslated region and the 5 ' - codin ~ sequence were removed by digesting the plasmid KS - pCV6 - G with Hindm and eamI - n . This fragment was replaced by an amplified sequence containing the 5 ' - un - UmnJtlsted region of ezrin cDNA and an ATG initiation codon . The am - pUtication was performed according to the conditions described above . The sense primer ( SLATAAF _ ~ ~ TIUGGACA - 3 ' ) was located in the un - translated region ( 1 - 12 ) and was flanked at the 5 ' end by HindIII restriction site . The reverse primer ( 5 ' - AACCGAAAAIUCGGATCCTG - Y ) contained the sequence upstream from the initiation codon ( 69 - 76 ) , an initiator ATG and a BamHI site in frame with the coding sequence located downstream from the BamHI site ( see Fig . 1 B , d ) . Construction of Mutant cDNA Encodi ~ the Amtno - ~ Domain of Ezrln . The amlno - terminal domain of exrin was obtained by removal of the 3 ' - coding region 1002 - 1834 by digestion of the vector KS - pCV6 with The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 130 Smal and Xbal . This fragment was replaced by the SmaI - Xbal - digested oli - 20 rain at 37 ~ After washing with Dulbecco ' s minimum essential medium , gonucleotide encoding the tag sequence ( see Fig . 1 B , c ) . the cells were rapidly fixed with a 3 % paraformaidehyde solution . Transient cDNA Expression in CV I Cells Exponentially growing CV - I cells were seeded 24 h before DNA transfer on 3 . 5 - cm plastic culture dishes . DNA transfer was performed following the procedure of Chen and Okayama ( 1987 ) . Cells were first incubated in the presence of the calcium - phosphate DNA precipitated for 18 h under 3 % CO2 at 37 ~ washed twice with PBS con - taining 0 . 9 mM CaC12 and 0 . 5 mM MgCI2 . Dulbecco ' s minimum essential medium supplemented with 10 % FCS was then added . Cultures were ana - lyzed for production of proteins encoded by the transfected DNA after 18 - or 20 - h incubation under 10 % CO2 at 37 ~ Immunoblotting The transfected cells plated on 3 . 5 - cm - diameter dishes were washed three times with PBS , scraped off with a rubber policeman in the presence of PBS and 1 mM PMSF and centrifuged for 10 win at 300 g at 4 ~ After removal of the supernatant , the pellet was resuspended in Laemmli buffer ( Laemmli , 1970 ) . The samples were heated to 100 ~ for 2 mill , then sonieated and I0 mM DTT added . Proteins were separated by electrophoresis on a 7 % polyacrylamide gel in the presence of SDS . Electrotransfer to nitrocellulose and immunolahellug of the proteins were performed essentially according to the method described by Coudrier et al . ( 1983 ) . Indirect Immunofluorescence Transfected CV - 1 cells were fixed with 3 % paraformaldehyde and permeabi - lized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 . Endogenous ezrin and ezrin encoded by the transfected DNA were analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence . Staining was performed in two sequentiai incubation steps . First , cells were in - cubated with polyclonal anti - ~ zrin or monoclonal anti - peptide ( 3 antibodies depending upon the experiment . Second , cells were incubated with fluores - cent anti - IgG antibodies ( conjugated to either rhodamine or fluorescein ) . These reagents were rabbit IgG specific in the case of pelyclonal anti - ezrin antibodies or mouse IgG specific in the case of mAbs . For fluorescent double lahellng of the cell surface and ezrin , living cells on cover slips were washed with PBS at 20 ~ cooled on ice , and externally labeled for 5 min at 4 ~ with fluorescent wheat germ agglutinin ( conjugated to either rhodamine or fluorescein 10 / ~ g / ml ) . After three washes with cold PBS , 3 % paraformaldehyde was added and cells were allowed to warm up to 20 ~ After fixation , cells were permeabilized and processed for ezrin labeling as described above . For fluorescent double - labeling of F - actin and ezrin , cells were incubated with a mixture of fluorescent phalloidin ( conjugated to either rhodamine or fluorescein , 2 U per dish ) and the anti - peptide G antibody . Detergent Extraction Two approaches were used to define the association of the proteins encoded by the transfected cDNAs with the cytoskeleton following the procedure de - scribed by Kreis ( 1987 ) . Indirect Immunofluorescence of Detergent - Extracted CV - 1 Cells . In this case , cells were briefly washed with PBS containing 0 . 9 mM CaCI2 and 0 . 5 mM MgCl2 . The coversllp was then dipped four times for 5 sec in four different beakers each containing 30 ml of extraction buffer MES ( 50 mM MES , 3 mM EGTA , 5 mM MgCh , 0 . 5 % wt / vol Triton X - 100 , pH 6 . 4 ) . Cells were then fixed immediately with a 3 % paraformaldehyde so - lution . Cell Fractionatton into Detergent - Soluble and Insoluble Fractions . CV - l - tmnsfect ~ cells ( 3 . 5 - cm dishes ) were extracted on the dish for 40 sec at room temperature with 300 # 1 of the extraction buffer ( MES ) described above . Detergent - soluble fractions were precipitated 4 h in 85 % acetone at - 20 ~ and the pellets recovered after centrifugation 10 rain at 300 g at 4 ~ Detergent - insoluble material was scraped off with a rubber policeman in the presence of PBS and 1 mM PMSF and centrifugated for 10 rain at 300 g at 4 ~ Pellets containing either the detergent - soluble or insoluble material were resuspended in the same volume of Laemmli buffer ( Laemmli , 1970 ) before separation on a 7 % SDS - PAGE . Cytochalasin D Treatment Cells seeded on 3 . 5 - cm dishes were treated with 2 . 5 ~ M cytochalasin D for Results Construction of cDNAs Coding for the Wffd - type Human Ezrin and Its Amino - and Carboxy - terminal Domains To study the subcellular distribution of ezrin and its putative functional domains , three recombinant plasmids encoding the entire human ezrin or the amino - and carboxy - terminal domains were inserted in the pCB6 eucaryotic expression vector under the control of the cytomegalovirus promoter . Figure 1 . Representation of ezrin domains and cDNA constructs . ( . 4 ) Model of the predicted structural organization of ezrin deduced from its primary structure ( Gould et al . , 1989 ; Turunen et al . , 1989 ) . The amino - terminal domain ( shaded oral ) is followed by a c ~ - helical domain ( ~ ) and by a region rich in cha ~ ed amino acids ( [ ] ) . ( B ) cDNA constructs for production of human ezrin and its mutants in CV - 1 cells . Details of the cDNA constructs are described in Materials and Methods . For expression in the CV1 cells , three constructs ( b , c , and d ) were prepared from the human ezrin cDNA ( a ) and were inserted into the eukaryotic expression vector pCB6 under the control of the cytomegalovirus promoter . ( a ) Ezrin cDNA . Only the restriction enzyme sites that were used for the cDNA constructs are indicated . ( b ) The ezrin cDNA was fused through the SfiI site to the oligonucleotide encoding the eleven amino acids of the vesicular stomatitis virus giycoprotein tail , re - ferred to as the tag and represented by a black box . ( c ) cDNA cod - ing for the ezrin amino - terminal domain . The 3 ' - coding sequence starting at the Sinai site was deleted . The cDNA encoding the amino - terminal domain was fused to the tag sequence through the Smal site . ( d ) cDNA coding for the ezrin carboxy - terminal domain . After deletion of the Y - sequence by digestion with HindHI and BamHI of the czrin cDNA construct shown in ( b ) , the 5 " noncoding sequence and the ATG initiation codon were . fused through the BamHI site to the cDNA encoding the carboxy - terminal domain of ezrin . Algrain et al . Cytoskeleton and Membrane Binding Domains of Ezrin 131 Figure 2 . Immunoblot analysis of protein lysates from cells trans - fected with eDNA encoding the wild - type ezrin and its amino - and carboxy - terminal domains . CV - 1 ceils were transfected with wild - type or deleted ezrin eDNA and cell lysates were analyzed 48 h af - ter transfecfion by SDS - PAGE , on a 7 % polyacrylamide gel . Pro - reins were transferred onto nitrocellulose filters and the presence of endogenous ezrin and proteins encoded by the transfec ~ eDNA were revealed by immunoblotting , with polyclonal anti - ezrin anti - body ( A , B , C , and D ) and monoclonal anti - peptide G antibody ( A ' , B ' , C ' , and D5 . ( , 4 and Ab Lysates from nontransfected ceils . ( B and B ' ) Lysates from ceils transfccted with the complete wild - type ezrin eDNA . ( Cand C ' ) Lysates from cells transfected with the ez - fin eDNA encoding the amino - terminal domain of the protein . ( D and D ' ) Lysates from cells transfected with the ezrin eDNA encod - ing the carboxy - terminai domain of the protein . Proteins encoded by the transfecting eDNA were detected with the anti - peptide G an - tibody ( B ' , C ' , and D ~ and are indicated by arrows . Polyclonal anti - ezrin antibody recognizes , in addition to ezrin ( 80 kD ) , two minor protein bands which could be breakdown products ( A , B , C , and D ) . The two domains corresponding to the amino - and car - boxy - terminal ends of the protein were previously defined on the basis of their similarities to the primary and secondary structures of band 4 . 1 and talin ( Fig . 1 A ) . Deletion of the 3 ' eDNA sequence resulted in a truncated protein corre - sponding to the amino - terminal domain of ezrin ( amino acids 1 - 309 ) . The carboxy - terminal domain ( amino acids 280 - 585 ) was obtained by deleting the 5 ' coding sequence of ezrin eDNA . According to secondary structure predic - tions , this domain has extensive a - helical structure , as do ta - tin and band 4 . 1 . The resulting truncated proteins overlap by 30 amino acids ( 280 - 309 ) . Because ezrin is present in a large variety of cell lines , and its synthesis varies from cell to cell , epitope tagging was necessary to discriminate ezrin encoded by the transfected eDNA from endogenous ezrin . The eleven carboxy - terminal amino acids of the vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein G , preceded by a proline - rich secondary structure breaker ( GPPGP ) , were linked in frame to the carboxy terminus of either wild - type ezrin or its deletion mutants , upstream of the stop codon ( Fig . 1 B ) . Cells transfected with any of these three constructs synthesized a fusion protein detectable with antibodies raised against either wild - type ezrin or against the tag corresponding to the carboxy - terminal end of the glyco - protein G . Synthesis of Vc ] ld - type Ezrin or its Amino - and Carboxy - terminai Domains in Transfected CV - 1 Cells Proteins in CV - 1 cells ttansfected with DNA constructs cod - ing for wild - type ezrin or its amino - or carboxy - terminal do - mains were monitored by immunoblotting , using polyclonal anti - ezrin or monoclonal anti - peptide G antibodies . The protein lysates from untransfected cells and CV - I cells transfected with the wild - type czrin cDNA were analyzed by immunoblotting with the polyclonal antibody directed against ezrin ( Fig . 2 , A and B ) or with the monoclonal anti - peptide G antibody ( Fig . 2 , A ' and B ' ) . In transfected cells ( Fig . 2 B ' ) , the monoclonal anti - peptide G antibody reacted with a protein having the same apparent molecular mass ( 80 kD ) as endogenous ezrin ( Fig . 2 A ) . When the lysate from CV - I cells transfected with the eDNA encoding the tagged amino - terminal domain was ana - lyzed with anti - peptide G antibody a protein of 38 kD was recognized ( Fig . 2 C ' ) . This is the molecular mass of the amino - terminal domain ( 38 , 287 D ) calculated from the hu - man ezrin eDNA sequence . The anti - ezrin antibody only recognized the 80 - kD polypeptide corresponding to endoge - nous ezrin ( Fig . 2 C ) . The fact that different antibodies raised against the entire ezrin produced in gscherichia coli ( C . Andre , off and P . Mangeat , personal communication ) , or purified from human ceils , failed to detect this amino - terminal domain ( Fig . 2 C ) indicates that they react mainly with the carboxy - terminal domain of ezrin . Cells transfected with the eDNA coding for the carboxy - terminal domain of ezrin produced , in addition to the endog - enous protein , a protein recognized by both polyclonal anti - body against ezrin and monoclonal antibody against peptide G ( Fig . 2 , D and D ' ) . This protein is , 046 kD , while the cal - culated molecular mass of the carboxy - terrninal domain deduced from the eDNA sequence is 35 , 339 D . The same ab - normal electrophoretic migration was observed with the whole protein . Ezrin contains 585 amino acid residues , which give it a molecular mass of 69 , 290 D , , 012 kD smaller than its apparent molecular mass . The reduced mobility on SDS - PAGE of the entire protein , or of its carboxy - terminal domain , may be due to the presence of the seven consecutive prolines in this domain ( residues 469 - 475 ) or to the high number of acidic amino acids ( Turunen et al . , 1989 ; Gould et al . , 1989 ) . lntraceUular Distribution of Valid - type Ezrin in CV - 1 Cells Transient transfections of CV - 1 cells with wild - type ezrin eDNA with or without tag confirmed that this protein was produced in large amount in transfected cells compared with nontranfected cells as indicated by immunofluorescence staining with anti - ezrin antibody or anti - peptide G antibody . To study the subcellular location of ezrin , double fluores - cence staining of CV - 1 cells tmnsfect ~ with tagged ezrin eDNA was performed with anti - peptide G antibody and rhodamine - labeled wheat germ agglutinirl , which allowed observation of ceil surface organization ( Fig . 3 , A and A ' ) . This experiment indicated that ezrin was predominantly dis - tributed underneath the plasma membrane and highly con - centrated in all actin - containing membrane protrusions ( e . g . , microspikes , filopodia , and microvilli ) . In addition , ezrin was also detected in ruffles and leading edges ( data not shown ) . Overexpression of ezrin eDNA did not induce strik - ing modifications of the overall cell surface specializations . Finally , it is important to notice that the addition of the tag at the carboxy - terminal end of ezrin did not modify its sub - cellular localization , as compared with the oversynthesized The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 132 Figure 3 . Localization of the wild - type ezrin in transfected cells . CV - 1 cells were transfected with the tagged wild - type ezrin cDNA and analyzed by double fluorescence labeling 48 h after transfection . Double - fluorescent labeling of CV - 1 cells was performed with fluorescent wheat germ agglutinin ( A ) and anti - peptide G antibody ( A ~ . Living cells were labeled with rhedamine - coupled wheat germ agglutinin at 4 ~ for 5 rain . After fixation and permeabilization of the cells with detergent ( 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 for 5 rain ) , ezrin was immunostained with anti - peptide G antibody and fluorescein - coupled anti - mouse IgG antibody . A focal plane on the dorsal face of the cell is shown . Insets correspond to twice the magnification of the area indicated by arrows . They illustrate the localization of ezrin in microviUi covering the cell surface . Double labeling of F - actin ( B ) and ezrin ( B ~ . Paraformaldehyde - fixed and detergent - permeabilized cells were double labeled with anti - peptide G mAb , followed by incubation with fluorescein - coupled second antibody , and for F - actin using rhodamine - coupled phal - loidin . The ezrin label is concentrated in F - actin containing cell surface structures . Ezrin does not colocalize with stress fibers . Double labeling of F - actin ( C ) and ezrin ( C ~ . Cells were extracted with nonionic detergent before fixation and labeled as described above . Ezrin relIaain . q associated with the F - actin microvilli after extraction . Insets correspond to twice the magnification of the area indicated by arrows . The small arrows indicate the colocalization of ezrin with microviUi containing F - actin . Bar , 10 / ~ m . Algrain r al . Cytoskeleton and Membrane Binding Domains of Ezrin 133 Figure 4 . Loc ~ liTAtion of the ezrin amino - terminal domaim CV - 1 cells were transfected with the mutant ezrin cDNA coding for the amino - terminal domain and analyzed 48 h after transfection . Double - fluorescent labeling of CV - 1 cells with rhodamine - labeled wheat germ aggluti - nin ( A ) and anti - peptide G antibody ( A9 was performed as described in Fig . 3 . The labeled amino - terminal domain of ezrin is located in microvilli present on the cell surface ( see arrows ) . Double - labeling of F - actin ( B ) and the amino - terminal domain of ezrin ( Bg . The cells were labeled as described in Fig . 3 . The amino - terminal domain of ezrin is concentrated in the F - actin containing cell surface structures but does not appear to be associated with stress fibers . Insets correspond to twice the magnification of the area indicated by arrows . The small arrows indicate the colocalization of labeled amino - terminal domain of e , zrin with microvilli containing F - actin . Bar , 10 ttm . protein encoded by the wild - type ezrin cDNA ( Fig . 1 B , a ) ( data not shown ) . To determine whether ezrin colocalized with the actin - based cytoskeleton , CV - l - tran . qfected cells were analyzed by fluorescent double staining with anti - peptide G antibody and fluorescent phalloidin . As shown in Fig . 3 , B and B ' ezrin labeling and phalloidin staining were observed in the same dorsal plasma membrane structures . The diffuse stain that was also observed in these cells may be due to an excess of the synthesized protein distributed throughout the cyto - plasm . However , no ezrin labeling was found associated with stress fibers , nor was there any obvious reorganization of actin - containing structures . This result suggests that ezrin can interact directly or indirectly with the cortical actin cytoskeleton . To check this possibility , we used a mild deter - gent extraction of living cells before fixation or cell fraction - ation , following a procedure described by Kreis ( 1987 ) . It is well established that this extraction procedure solubilizes membrane proteins and releases cytosotic proteins , but maintains cytoskeletal integrity . Double fluorescence stain - ing with anti - ezrin antibody and phalloidin was performed after extraction and fixation of the cells ( Fig . 3 , C and C ' ) . Under these conditions , ezrin remained associated with the actin filaments which compose the cortical cytoskeleton . This observation was confirmed by fractionation into detergent - sohible and insoluble material of CV - 1 transfected cells . Immunoblotting performed with the anti - peptide G an - tibody on soluble ( see Fig . 6 A ) or insoluble fractions ( see Fig . 6 A9 indicated that the protein encoded by the ezrin cDNA was present in both fractions . A large fraction of syn - thesized protein was recovered into the soluble fraction probably due to its overproduction in transfected cells . How - ever , a significant fraction of protein remained associated with the insoluble material , in agreement with our im - munofluorescence studies performed on transfected cells treated in the same conditions ( Fig . 3 , C and C9 . IntraceUular Distribution of the Amino - and Carboxy - terminal Domains of Ezrin in CV - 1 Cells To assess the contribution of ezrin domains to its specific lo - calization and to its association with the cytoskeleton , we transfected CV - 1 cells with the cDNAs encoding the two ez - rin domains . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 134 Figure 5 . Localization of the carboxy - terminal domain of ezrin . CV - 1 cells were trans - fected with the mutant ezrin cDNA coding for the carboxy - terminal domain . Double flu - orescent labeling of CV - 1 cells with rhodamine - labeled wheat germ agglutinin ( . 4 ) and anti - peptide G antibody ( AS was performed as described in Fig . 3 . Insets correspond to twice the magnification of the area indieated by arrows . The small arrows indicate the colocaliza - tion of labeled carboxy - termi - hal ezrin with stained micro - villi present on the cell surface . Double labeling of F - actin ( B and C ) and the carboxy - ter - minal domain of ezrin ( B ' and C ' ) . Cells were labeled as de - scribed in Fig . 3 . The focal plane ( B and B9 on the dorsal face of a positive cell is shown . The carboxy - terminal domain is concentrated in microvilli . The focal plane ( C and C ~ ) shows the bottom of the cell where stress fibers can be clearly seen . Note the colo - calization of the label of the carboxy - terminal domain with that of stress fibers . Double labeling of F - actin ( D ) and the carboxy - terminal domain of ezrin ( D ' ) was performed on cells extracted with non ionic detergent , before fixation , as described in Fig . 3 . The im - ages are focused at the bottom of the cells . The association between the carboxy - terminal domain and stress fibers is maintained after the extrac - tion procedure . Bar , I0 / zm . TheAmino . terminal Domain . CV - I cells transfected with the recombinant cDNA coding for the amino - terminal do - main were analyzed by a double - fluorescence procedure with the anti - peptide G antibody and rhodamine - labelcd wheat germ agglutinin . A pattern of localization similar to that ob - served with the wild - type protein was obtained . This domain was concentrated in cell surface protrusions ( Fig . 4 , A and A 9 . Moreover , it colocalized with actin filaments present in these structures , as shown by double fluorescence labeling with rhodamine - labeled phalloidin and anti - peptide G anti - body ( Fig . 4 , B and B ' ) . This colocalization was restricted to the cortical actin cytoskeleton since no labeling was found Algrain et al . Cytoskelaon and Membrane Binding Domains of Ezrin 135 Figure 6 . Immunoblot analysis of cell fractions obtained by deter - gent extraction . CV - I cells transfected with the wild - type or deleted ezrin cDNAs were detergent extracted ( see Materials and Meth - ods ) . Stoichiometric amounts of the detergent soluble ( , 4 , B , and C ) and insoluble fractions ( A ' , B ' , and C ' ) were separated on a 7 % polyacrylamide gel and the proteins were transferred onto nitrocel - lulose filters . Proteins encoded by the transfccted cDNA were probed with the monoclonal anti - peptide G antibody . ( , 4 and A ' ) Ly - sates from cells transfected with the complete ezrin cDNA . ( B and B ' ) Lysates from cells transfected with the ezrin cDNA encoding the amino - terminai domain of ezrin . ( C and C ' ) Lysates from cells transfected with the ezrin cDNA encoding the carboxy - terminai do - main of ezrin . associated with stress fibers . However , a major difference was observed in the behavior of the wild - type protein and the amino - terminal domain . While the wild - type protein re - mained associated with the actin filaments present in mem - brane protrusions after detergent extraction , the amino - terminal fragment was fully extracted ( data not shown ) . Immunoblotting analysis of the detergent - soluble ( see Fig . 6 B ) and insoluble ( see Fig . 6 B , ) fractions indicated that the amino - terminal fragment was mainly present in the soluble fraction . This suggests that this domain is not associated or is only weakly associated with the actin cytoskeleton . Whether the extracted protein is associated or not with ex - tracted plasma membrane proteins remains to be elucidated . The Carboxy - terminal Domain . When immunostaining was performed with the anti - peptide G antibody and rho - damine - labeled wheat germ agglutinln on cells transfected with the truncated ezrin cDNA coding for the carboxy - ter - minal domain ( Fig . 5 , A and A , ) , we detected this protein fragment in all cell surface structures . Moreover , double - fluorescence labeling performed with anti - tag antibody and rhodamine - labeled phalloidin showed a colocalization of this protein fragment with actin - containing structures under - neath the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5 , B and B ' ) . But , in con - trast with what was observed with the wild - type protein or with the amino - terminal domain , images focused at the ven - tral faces of cells also showed a colocalization of the carboxy - terminal domain with stress fibers ( Fig . 5 , C and C ' ) . The carboxy - terrninal domain appeared to be distributed along the stress fibers , but excluded from focal contacts ( data not shown ) . In a few cells transfected with this construct , we also observed that stress fibers were disorganized and aggregated ( Fig . 5 D , ) . However , concomitant disorganization of micro - tubules or intermediate filaments was not seen in any sam - pies ( data not shown ) . Double - fluorescence labeling performed on the detergent - extracted cells allowed us to confirm the tight association of the carboxy - terminal domain with the dorsal cortical micro - filament network , as well as with stress fibers of ventral faces ( Fig . 5 , D and D ' ) . FkLrthermore , after detergent extraction and fractionation , most of the earboxy - terminal fragment was found in the insoluble fraction as shown by immunoblot - ting analysis ( Fig . 6 , C and C , ) . Cytochalasin D Treatment of Transfected Cells The observations reported above provided indirect evidence that ezrin plays a role in linking the actin cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane . However such a direct interaction of ez - rin with actin filaments was not found in in vitro binding as - says ( Bretscher , 1983 ) . Our observations on the association of the carboxy - terminal domain of ezrin suggest the presence of an actin - binding site in this region of the molecule . In an attempt to further analyze this association and to determine whether the disorganization of the actin filaments would also lead to a redistribution of the carboxy - terminal donmin , a concentration of cytochalasin D known to disrupt the stress fibers ( 2 . 5 ~ , M ) was applied for 20 rain to cultured cells . Double - fluorescence labeling with anti - peptide G antibody and fluorescent phalloidin performed on cells treated with cytochalasin D showed that the wild - type protein and the amino - terminal domain remained evenly distributed under - neath the membrane ( Fig . 7 , A , A ' , B , and B , ) . We did not observe a codistribution of these proteins with actin foci resulting from the cytochalasin D action on the stress fibers . In contrast , in ceils transfected with the cDNA coding for the carboxy - terminai domain and treated with cytochalasin D , we observed a codistribution of the carboxy - terminal domain and the actin patches ( Fig . 7 , C and C , ) . Discussion Immunofluorescence studies , subcelhlar fractionation , and analysis of the primary structure of ezrin have suggested that this protein belongs to a class of proteins able to link the cytoskeleton to the membrane . However , no direct evidence for such a function has yet been reported . In an attempt to map the functional domains of this protein , we expressed wild - type and truncated human ezrin cDNAs in CV - 1 cells . In this paper , we show that transient transfection of human ezrin cDNA in these cells led to a production of the protein , which displayed a specific distribution pattern . The ezrin la - bel was concentrated in the dorsal microvillar surface struc - tures , all of which contain actin filaments . This is in agree - ment with the localization of endogenous ezrin reported in a wide range of cells by immunofluorescence studies ( Bretscher , 1983 , 1989 ; Pakkanen and Vaheri , 1989 ; Hanzel et al . , 1989 ) . In contrast to what was previously observed upon over - production of two actin - binding proteins , microvilhs induc - tion by villin ( Friederich et al . , 1989 ) and stress fiber disrup - tion by gelsolin ( Finidori et ai . , 1992 ) , high level production of ezrin did not induce changes in cell surface organization or modification of the cytoskeleton . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 136 Figure 7 . Localization of wild - type ezrin and its domains after disruption of stress fibers by cytochalasin D . Cells were transfected with the complete ezrin cDNA ( A and A ' ) , the cDNA coding for the amino - terminal domain ( B and B ' ) , or the cDNA coding for the carboxy - terminal domain ( C and C ' ) . Cells were incubated with 2 . 5 / ~ M cytochalasin D for 20 min at 37 ~ subsequently fixed , and double labeled for F - actin with rhodamine - phaUoidin ( , 4 , B , and C ) and for recombinant ezrin with anti - peptide G antibody ( A ' , B ' , and C ' ) as described in Fig . 3 . Note the colocalization of the carboxy - terminal domain with the F - actin patches ( clearly visible in the frame ) , while wild - type ezrin and its amino - terminal domain remain localized underneath the plasma membrane . Bar , 10 / tin . Algrain et 8 . 1 . Cytoskeleton and Membrane Binding Domains of Ezrin 137 Considering the structural relationship between ezrin , ta - lin , and band 4 . 1 , we investigated the subcellular distribution of ezrin domains . The amino - terminal domain of ezrin , which shares sequence homology with the amino - terminal domain of band 4 . 1 and talin , is located in the same parts of the cell as the complete protein , primarily underneath the dorsal membrane . Neither the wild - type nor the amino - terminal domain of ezrin appeared on ventral membrane sur - faces . Interestingly , no preferential labeling was observed in the focal contacts where talin concentrates ( Burridge and Cormel , 1983 ) . The carboxy - terminal domain of ezrin was also distributed in a similar pattern to ezrin and its amino - terminal domain ; it was detected underneath the dorsal face of the cell membrane in actin - containing cell surface struc - tures . Somewhat surprisingly , this domain also accumulated along the stress fibers , where the entire protein is not nor - really detected . The same overall patterns of distribution of ezrin and its domains were observed in 3T3 fibroblast cells ( data not shown ) . The colocalization of ezrin with actin - containing struc - tures suggested that this protein is associated with actin fila - ments . To determine whether only one or both of the two do - mains were involved in the interaction with the eytoskeleton , we examined , by immunofluorescence and cell fractionation the behavior of the proteins encoded by the transfected eDNA in living CV - 1 cells treated with nonionic detergent . lmmunofluorescent analysis and biochemical fracfionafion into detergent - soluble and insoluble fractions demonstrated that ezrin and the carboxy - terminal domain remained as - sociated with the cytoskeleton , while the amino - terminal do - main was readily solub ' flized . But if the carboxy - terminal do - main was found almost exclusively in the detergent - insoinble fraction , a significant proportion of the wild type protein en - coded by the eDNA was found in the soluble fraction . This may suggest that there exists , for this protein , a saturable number of attachment sites to the membrane or to the cyto - skeleton . Unlike the complete protein , the carboxy - terminal domain does not discriminate between the F - actin structures present in the fibroblast and its association along the stress fibers provides an increased number of binding sites . The associafion of the carboxy - terminal domain alone with the microfilaments was confirmed using cytochalasin 13 . While the submembranous location of ezrin and its amino - terminal domain was not significantly affected by this treat - ment , the catboxy - terminal domain colocalized with the patches resulting from the disorganization of stress fibers . Moreover , we have shown , using different expression con - structs , that the carboxy - terminal region of ezrin is capable of binding to actin in cell extracts ( Turunen and Vaheri , manu - script in preparafion ) . Altogether , these results show that the entire protein and its carboxy - terminal domain have at least one site that contributes to a direct or an indirect association with the F - actin cytoskeleton . Whether the complete protein and its carboxy - terminal domain interact with the actin cyto - skeleton through the same site remains to be determined . For instance , a cryptic actin - binding site in the carboxy - terminal domain that is unmasked in the ezrin variant lack - hag the amino - terminal domain may account for this obser - vafion . Altogether , these data suggest an association of the com - plete ezrin by its carboxy - terminal domain with the eytoskeleton , and favor the idea that the amino - terminal do - main could interact with membrane components . Although the homologous amino - terminal domain of talin and band 4 . 1 have been assigned a role in the binding of these proteins to membrane proteins ( Anderson and Lovrien , 1984 ; Ander - son and Marehesi , 1985 ; Pasternack ct al . , 1985 ; Horwitz et al . , 1986 ) , a recent report indicates that this association may not be restricted to this domain ( Simon , K . O . , and K . Burridge . 1991 . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 351a ) . Our experiments do not allow us to exclude the presence of a low affinity cytoskeleton binding site in the amino - terminal domain or the association of the carboxy - terminal domain with the membrane , as has been shown for talin in recent studies ( Si - mon , K . O . , and K . Burridge . 1991 . J . Cell BioL 115 : 351a ) . Moreover , the different behavior of complete ezrin and its carboxy - terminal domain stress the importance of sequences located throughout the complete protein for correct local - ization . To further understand the physiological function of ezrin , the molecular nature of its interaction with both aetin fila - ments and with membrane components remains to be clarified . Our experiments show that ezrin interacts only with F - actin present in the cortical cytoskeleton . Whether this specificity of interaction is due to a particular organiza - tion of these actin filaments or to the proteins associated with them has to be elucidated . Another unanswered question concerns the role of membrane components in this localiza - tion of ezrin on cortical cytoskeleton . Finally , the possibility that a posttranslational modification of ezrin changes its ca - pacity to interact with the plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton has to be considered . Protein tagging allowed us to analyze unambiguously the subceUular distribution of ezrin and its domains , and to dis - criminate between the proteins encoded by transfected eDNA and the endogenous gene , as well as related proteins . Indeed , three other members have recently been included in this band 4 . 1 - ezrin - talin family : moesin ( Lankes and Furth - mayr , 1991 ) , radixin ( Funayama et al . , 1991 ) , and EM10 pro - tein ( Frosch et al . , 1991 ) , which share 72 , 74 . 9 , and 42 . 6 % identifies with ezrin , respectively . Ezrin , radixin , and moe - sin are eoexpressed in various cell types and concentrated in regions where actin filaments are associated with the plasma membrane ( Sato et al . , 1992 ) . However precise localizafion of these proteins requires the obtenfion of antibodies specific to each member . Each of these proteins may be restricted to a specific comparunent of polarized cells . If this is the case , it will be important to understand which features determine their specific association with specialized cell surface struc - tures . We wish to thank Dr . Evelyne Friederich for helpful suggestions and fruit - ful discussions and Dr . Anthony Pagsley for carefully reading the manu - script and for his constructive comments . We also wish to thank Dr . Thomas Kreis for the generous gift of the enti - peptide G polyclonal and mAbs and Dr . Sourdive for the plasmid containing the tag oligonucleotide sequence . Thank ~ are also due to Jean - claude Benichou for his help with the photographic work . This work was supported by grants from the Association pour la re - cherche sur le cancer ( ARC - N ~ 6379 ) , the Fondation pour la recherche medicale , the Institut National de ht Sant6 et de la Recherche M ( ~ dicale ( INSERM N ~ 86 - 7008 ) , and the Ligue Nationale Franfaise contre le Cancer . Received for publication 16 June 1992 and in revised form 9 Segtember 1992 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 138 Re ~ renc ~ Anderson , R . A . , and R . E . Lovrien . 1984 . Glycophorin is linked by band 4 . 1 protein to the human erythrocyte membrane skeleton . Nature ( Lond . ) . 307 : 655 - 658 . Anderson , R . A . , and V . T . Marchesi . 1985 . Regulation of the association of membrane skeletal protein 4 . 1 with glycophorin by polyphosphoinositide . Nature ( Land . ) . 318 : 295 - 298 . Bennett , V . 19 ~ 9 . The spectrin - actin junction of erythrocyte membrane skele - tons . Biochfim . Biophys . Acta . 988 : 107 - 121 . Bretscher , , ~ . 1983 . Purification of an 80 , 000 - dalton protein that is a component of the isolated microvillus cytosketeton , and its localization in nonmuscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 425 - 432 . Bretscher , A . 1989 . Rapid phosphorylation and reorganization of ezrin and spectrin accompany morphological changes induced in A - 431 cells by epi - dermal growth factor . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 921 - 930 . Bretscher , A . 1991 . Microfilament structure and function in the cortical cyto - skeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell . Biol . 7 : 337 - 374 . Burridge , K . , and L . Connel . 1983 . A new protein of adhesion plaques and ruffling membranes . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 359 - 367 . Burridge , K . , and P . Mangeat . 1984 . An interaction between vinculin and talin . Nature ( Lond . ) . 308 : 744 - 746 . Chen , C . , and H . Okayama . 1987 . High - efficiency transformation of mam - malian cells by plasmid DNA . Mol . Cell . Biol . 7 : 2745 - 2752 . Conboy , J . , Y . W . Kan , S . B . Shohet , and N . Mohandas . 1986 . Molecular clon - ing of protein 4 . 1 , a major structural element of the human erythrocyte mem - brane skeleton . Pro , : . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 9512 - 9516 . Correas , I . , T . L . Leto , D . W . Speicher , and V . T . Marchesi . 1986 . Identifica - tion of the functional site of erythrocyte protein 4 . 1 involved in spectrin - actin associations . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 3310 - 3315 . Coudrier , E . , H . Reggio , and D . Louvard . 1983 . Characterization of an integral membrane glycoprotein associated with the microfilaments of pig intestinal microvilli . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 2 : 469 - 475 . Everett , A . W . , and K . A . Nichol . 1990 . Ezrin immunoreactivity in neuron sub - populations : cellular distribution in relation to cytoskeletal proteins in sen - sory neurons . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 38 : 1137 - 1144 . Finidori , J . , E . Friederich , D . J . Kwiatkowski , and D . Louvard . 1992 . In vivo analysis of functional domains from villin and gelsolin . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 1145 - 1155 . Friederich , E . , C . Huet , M . Arpin , and D . Louvard . 1989 . Villin induces microvilli growth and actin redistribution in transfected fibroblasts . Cell . 59 : 461 - 475 . Frosch , P . M . , M . Frosch , T . Ptister , V . Schaad , and D . Bitter - Suermann . 1991 . Cloning and charncterisation of an immunodominam major surface an - tigen of Echinococcus maltilocularis . Mol . Biochem . ParasitoL 48 : 121 - 130 . Funayama , N . , A . Nagafuchi , N . Sato , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsukita . 1991 . Radixin is a novel member of the band 4 . 1 family . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1039 - 1048 . Gould , K . L . , J . A . Cooper , A . Bretscher , and T . Hunter . 1986 . The protein - tyrosine kinase substrate , pS1 , is homologous to a chicken microvillar core protein . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 660 - 669 . Gould , K . L . , A . Bretscher , F . S . Esch , and T . Hunter . 1989 . eDNA cloning and sequencing of the protein tyrosine kinase substrate , ezrin , reve ~ s homol - ogy to band 4 . 1 . EMBO ( Fur . Idol . Biol . Organ . ) . I . 8 : 4133 - 4142 . Hanzel , D . K . , T . Urushidani , W . R . Usinger , A . Smolka , and J . G . Forte . 1989 . Immunological localization of an 80 - kDa phosphoprotein to the apical membrane of gastric parietal cells . Am . J . Physiol . 256 : 1082 - 1089 . Hanzel , D . , H . Reggio , A . Bretscher , J . G . Forte , and P . Mangeat . 1991 . The secretion - stimulated 80K phosphoprotein of parietal cells is ezrin , and has properties of a membrane cytoskeletal linker in the induced apical microvilli . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 10 : 2363 - 2373 . Horwitz , A . , K . Duggan , C . Buck , M . C . Beckerle , and K . Burridge . 1986 . Interaction of plasma membrane fibronectin receptor with talin - a transmem - brane linkage . Nature ( Lond . ) . 320 : 531 - 533 . Hunter , T . , and J . A . Cooper , 1981 . Epidermal growth factor induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins in A 431 human tumor cells . Cell . 24 : 741 - 752 . Kreis , T . E . 1986 . Microinjected antibodies against the cytoplasmic domain of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein block its transport to the cell surface . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 5 : 931 - 941 . Kreis , T . E . 1987 . Microtubules containing detyrosinated mbniin are less dy - narmc . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 6 : 2597 - 2606 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage 1 " 4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 681 . Lankes , W . T . , and H . Furthmayr . 1991 . Moesin : a member of the protein 4 . 1 - talin - ezrin family of proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 8297 - 8301 . Pakkanen , R . 1988 . lmmunofluorescent and immunochemical evidence for the expression of cytovillin in the microvilli of a wide range of cultured human cells . J . Cell Biochem . 38 : 65 - 75 . Pa ~ kanen , R . , and A . Vaberi . 1989 . Cytovillin and other microvillar proteins of human choriocarcinoma cells . J . Cell Biochen ~ 40 : 1 - 12 . Pakkanen , R . , K . Hedman , O . Turunen , T . Wahlstr6m , and A . Vaheri . 1987 . Microvillus - specific Mr 75 , 000 plasma membrane protein of human chorio - carcinoma cells . J . Histochem . C ~ ochem . 35 : 809 - 816 . Pakkanen , R . , C . - H . yon Bonsdorif , O . Turunen , T . Wahlstr6m , and A . Va - heft . 1988 . Redistribution of Mr 75000 plasma membrane protein , cytovil - lin , into newly formed microvilli in herpes simplex and Semliki Forest virus infected human embryonal fibroblasts . Fur . J . Ceil Biol . 46 : 435 - 443 . Pasternack , G . R . , R . A . Anderson , T . L . Leto , and V . T . Marchesi , 1985 . Interactions between protein 4 . 1 and Band 3 . An alternative binding site for an element of the membrane cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 3676 - 3683 . Rees , D . J . G . , S . E . Ades , S . J . Singer , and R . O . Hynes . 1990 . Sequence and domain structure of talin . Nature ( Land . ) . 347 : 685 - 689 . Sato , N . , N . Funayarna , A . Nagafuchi , S . Yonemura , S . Tsukita , and S . Tsu - kita . 1992 . A genc family consisting of ezrin , radixin and moesin . Its specific localization at actin filament / plasma membrane association sites . J . Cell Science . 103 : 131 - 143 . Turunen , O . , R . Winqvist , R . Pakkanen , K . - H . Grzeschik , T . Wahlstr6m , and A . Vaheri . 1989 . Cytovillin , a microvillar Mr 75 , 000 protein , cDNA se - quence , prokaryotic expression , and ch ~ mosomal localization . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 16727 - 16732 . Urushidani , T . , D . K . Hanzel , and J . G . Forte . 1989 . Characterization of an 80 - kDa phosphoprotein involved in parietal cell stimulation . Am . J . Physiol . 256 : 1070 - 1081 . Algrain et al . Cytoskeleton and Membrane Binding Domains of Ezrin 139