Banothu Ganesh * et al . ISSN : 2250 - 3676 [ IJESAT ] [ International Journal of Engineering Science & Advanced Technology ] Volume - 6 , Issue - 1 , 109 - 113 IJESAT | Jan - Feb 2016 1 Available online @ http : / / www . ijesat . org Markets and Hierarchies : Analysis and Antitrust Implications : A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization Banothu Ganesh AsstProfessor , Department of MBA , Princeton College of Engineering and Tecnology , Ghatkesar , TS , India Abstract This study analyzes organization of economic activity within and between markets and hierarchies . It considers the transaction to be the ultimate unit of microeconomic analysis , and defines hierarchical transactions as ones for which a single administrative entity spans both sides of the transaction , some form of subordination prevails and , typically , consolidated ownership obtains . Discusses the advantages of the transactional approach by examining three issues : price discrimination , insurance , and vertical integration . Develops the concept of the organizational failure framework , and demonstrates why it is always the combination of human with environmental factors , not either taken by itself , that causes transactional problems . The study also describes each of the transactional relations of interest , and presents the advantages of internal organization with respect to the transactional condition . The analysis explains why primary work groups of the peer group and simple hierarchy types arise . The same transactional factor which impede autonomous contracting between individuals also impede market exchange between technologically separable work groups . Peer groups can be understood as an internal organizational response to the frictions of intermediate product markets , while conglomerate organization can be seen as a response to failures in the capital market . In both contexts , the same human factors , such as bounded rationality and opportunism , occur . Examines the reasons for and properties of the employment relation , which is commonly associated with voluntary subordination . The analysis attempts better to assess the employment relation in circumstances where workers acquire , during the course of the employment , significant job - specific skills and knowledge . The study compares alternative labor - contracting modes and demonstrates that collective organization is helpful in enhancing the acquisition of idiosyncratic knowledge and skills by the work force . The study then examines more complex structures - - the movement from simple hierarchies to the vertical integration of firms , then multidivisional structures , conglomerates , monopolies and oligopolies . Discusses the market structure in relation to technical and organizational innovation . The study proposes a systems approach to the Banothu Ganesh * et al . ISSN : 2250 - 3676 [ IJESAT ] [ International Journal of Engineering Science & Advanced Technology ] Volume - 6 , Issue - 1 , 109 - 113 IJESAT | Jan - Feb 2016 2 Available online @ http : / / www . ijesat . org innovation process . Its purpose is to permit the realization of the distinctive advantages of both small and large firms which apply at different stages of the innovation process . The analysis also examines the relation of organizational innovation to technological innovation . ( AT ) Introduction May you live in interesting times . – Ancient Chinese proverb Post the 2008 financial crisis , the Chinese proverb quoted in the epigraph received much attention because the only thing that is interesting is ―uncertainty‖ . The definition of uncertainty has evolved and become more complicated over the years due to development and increasing integration among various financial market segments , domestically and internationally—a result of globalisation and economic liberalisation . The development of an economy is largely influenced by financial markets—they competitively allocate financial resources that are mobilised from savers and investors among users in the economy . India‘s central bank , the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) , has proactively shaped the development of financial markets in India through its series of economic policy reforms— market - determined interest and exchange rates , current account convertibility , monetary policy dealing with price - based instruments , auction - based allocation in the government securities market ( GSM ) , and phased capital account . Such a closely monitored development of the financial market is essential in an emerging and developing economy such as India to avoid financial instability , which is likely to occur otherwise ( Gopinath , 2008 ) . Literature Review Conceptual framework : The various stages and the steps involved for the development of financial markets of a country are broadly outlined in this section . ii . Behavioural relationship between macro - economic and financial environment : This section discusses how developments on the macro - economic front in India impact its financial markets , depicted through changes in key macro - economic and financial variables during 2003 – 2013 . iii . Stylised facts on financial markets developments : This section outlines the phased development ( since 1990 ) and the current defining statistics of the four financial markets that are the focus of this study . iv . Financial market integration in an economy : This section discusses the importance , the associated benefits and risks , and the measures for the integration of financial markets . Empirical Analysis Behavioural relationship between macro - economic and financial environment : The relationship between macro - economic fundamentals and financial market variables is evaluated in this section . ii . Liquidity , volatility , and efficiency of four financial markets : The depth , stability , and efficiency of the financial markets that are the focus of this study are assessed using corresponding indicators and statistical variables . Cross - correlation analysis to evaluate level of market integration : The co - movement of various indicators is analysed to understand the level of integration and impulse transmission from one financial market to another . This assessment is done for a decade ( 2003 – 2013 ) and on a temporal basis ( pre - crisis , crisis , and post - crisis ) . The analysis also includes a Banothu Ganesh * et al . ISSN : 2250 - 3676 [ IJESAT ] [ International Journal of Engineering Science & Advanced Technology ] Volume - 6 , Issue - 1 , 109 - 113 IJESAT | Jan - Feb 2016 3 Available online @ http : / / www . ijesat . org comparative assessment of cross - correlation studies conducted at different timeframes to understand the evolution of market integration . Motivation for development of domestic financial market segments In response to the 1997 Asian crisis , the development of the domestic bond market became significant not only for fund channelization but also for the diversification of the external sector risk in the financial system ( Reddy , 2002 ) . In general , governments are motivated by different factors for developing the domestic bond market . For instance , the Singaporean government viewed it as a means of financial intermediation for credit allocation , while the Hungarian government was motivated to reduce monetisation of the government deficit and increase competitiveness in the banking sector ( that possessed wide spreads between deposits and advances ) to encourage foreign investment . Whatever be the motivation factor , the macroeconomic fundamentals of an economy do impact the performance of its domestic financial markets to a certain extent . International financial market integration refers to an increase in capital flows and a tendency for prices and returns on internationally - traded financial assets to equalise on a common - country basis . The validity of various international parity conditions—purchasing power parity ( PPP ) , covered interest parity ( CIP ) , uncovered interest parity ( UIP ) , and real interest parity ( RIP ) — provides a direct test to analyse the degree of international market integration . On the other hand , indirect tests include the measurement of the degree of correlation between national savings and investments ( Jain and Bhanumurthy , 2005 ) . This paper , however , deals only with the analysis of the integration levels of domestic financial markets . Behavioural Relationship between Macro - Economic and Financial Environment Post the 1991 balance of payments crisis , the Indian economy really opened up to the outside world . The end of the License Raj , the liberalisation of the economy in terms of bold economic reforms , and globalisation for true economic developments were the key changes of this era . India reaped the benefits of these reforms in the truest sense during the 2003 – 2008 global bullrun . The Indian economy was growing at a stupendous rate of 8 . 7 % on average ( Table 1 ) , wholesale price index ( WPI ) and consumer price index ( CPI ) inflation were at normal levels , the government had negative primary deficit , the current account deficit was just 0 . 3 % of the gross domestic product ( GDP ) , foreign inflows—foreign direct investments ( FDIs ) , foreign institutional investments ( FIIs ) , and non - resident Indian ( NRI ) deposits—were high , the import cover was at 14 months , and there was a net increase in the foreign exchange reserves of the economy . Truly , it was the golden period of the Indian economy . The 2008 financial crisis , whose epicentre was the U . S . , had repercussions on the entire world . India‘s initial reaction to the global meltdown was that since it was a closely - monitored and decently regulated economy , it should remain insulated from the crisis , unlike many other countries of the world . However , this was only the partial truth . By this time , the Indian economy had integrated well enough with the global economy to feel the effects of this slowdown . The export sector of the Indian economy was significantly impacted because both the key markets for exports—the U . S . and Europe—were reeling under the effects of the crisis . Slowly and steadily , the Indian economy also started feeling the impact of the crisis . The GDP growth rate dropped to 6 . 7 % , WPI and CPI Banothu Ganesh * et al . ISSN : 2250 - 3676 [ IJESAT ] [ International Journal of Engineering Science & Advanced Technology ] Volume - 6 , Issue - 1 , 109 - 113 IJESAT | Jan - Feb 2016 4 Available online @ http : / / www . ijesat . org levels were high , reserve money fell to 6 . 4 % , the CAD / GDP and government deficits increased , and there was a decline in the net capital inflows , which ultimately resulted in a fall in the foreign reserves The true impact of these developments was felt when the financial indicators in the domestic economy started showing signs of distress . Short - term borrowing rates shot up , the turnover of the GSM dropped , and the overall liquidity of the system was impacted . In order to address these developments , the Indian authorities made adjustments in the policy rate ( the repo rate decreased from 6 . 8 % to 5 . 0 % ) to increase , or rather to sustain the money supply in the system . Circumstances improved over the next couple of years , only to deteriorate once again in 2012 – 2013 . This time , though , the crisis was more due to domestic reasons . However , the impact of the fragile global economy cannot be neglected . What remained constant during both these difficult times was that distress in the macro - economic indicators was quickly translated to distress in the financial indicators . Thus , it would not be incorrect to comment that there is moderate correlation / co - movement between the macro - economic indicators and the financial indicators of the Indian economy . This study includes an empirical analysis to test this hypothesis CONCLUSIONS The price difference in these two markets is stationary and the speed of mean reversion varies according the stock . Roughly the result conformed to the law of one price reasonably . We suppose that arbitrage opportunities appeared to exist when stock - broking houses trade for their own accounts , obviously with no transaction costs References [ 1 ] Anat , R . Admati , and Paul Pfleiderer . 1988 . A Theory of Intraday Trading Patterns . The Review of Financial Studies 1 : 3 – 40 . Andersen , Torben G . , and Tim Bollerslev . 1997 . [ 2 ] Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in financial markets . Journal of Empirical Finance 4 : 115 – 58 . [ CrossRef ] [ 3 ] Andersen , Torben G . , Tim Bollerslev , and Jun Cai . 2000 . Intraday and Interday Volatility in Japanese stock market . Journal of International Financial Market Institution and Money 10 : 107 – 30 . [ CrossRef ] [ 4 ] Arouri , M . H . 2005 . IntégrationFinancièreet , Diversification internationale des Portefeuilles . ÉconomieetPrévision 168 : 115 – 32 . [ CrossRef ] [ 5 ] Baele , Lieven , and Koen Inghelbrecht . 2010 . Time - varying integration , interdependence and contagion . Journal of International Money and Finance 29 : 791 – 818 . [ CrossRef ] [ 6 ] Bollerslev , Tim , Jun Cai , and Frank M . Song . 2000 . Intraday periodicity , long memory volatility and macroeconomic annoucement effects in the US Treasury bond market . Journal of Empirical Finance 7 : 37 – 55 . [ CrossRef ] Doidge , Craig , G . Andrew Karolyi , and René M . Stulz . 2004 . Why are foreign firms listed in the US worth more ? Journal of Financial Economics 71 : 205 – 38 . [ CrossRef ] [ 7 ] Foerster , Stephen R . , and G . Andrew Karolyi . 1998 . Multimarket Trading and Liquidity : A Transaction Data Analysis of Canada - US Interlistings . Journal of International Financial Markets Institutions and Money 8 : 393 – 412 . [ CrossRef ] [ 8 ] Froot , Kenneth A . , and Emil M . Dabora . 1999 . How are stock prices affected by the location of trade ? Journal of Financial Economics 53 : 189 – 216 . [ CrossRef ] Banothu Ganesh * et al . ISSN : 2250 - 3676 [ IJESAT ] [ International Journal of Engineering Science & Advanced Technology ] Volume - 6 , Issue - 1 , 109 - 113 IJESAT | Jan - Feb 2016 5 Available online @ http : / / www . ijesat . org [ 9 ] Gallant , A . Ronald . 1981 . On the Bias in Flexible Functional Forms and an Essentially Unbiased Form . Journal of Econometrics 15 : 211 – 45 . [ CrossRef ] [ 10 ] Goodhart , Charles A . E . , and Maureen O’Hara . 1997 . High Frequency Data in Financial Markets : Issues and Applications . Journal of Empirical Finance 4 : 73 – 114 . [ CrossRef ]