Journal of Documentation Models in information behaviour research T . D . Wilson Article information : To cite this document : T . D . Wilson , ( 1999 ) , " Models in information behaviour research " , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 Iss 3 pp . 249 - 270 Permanent link to this document : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / EUM0000000007145 Downloaded on : 31 January 2015 , At : 01 : 41 ( PT ) References : this document contains references to 0 other documents . To copy this document : permissions @ emeraldinsight . com The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 18309 times since 2006 * Users who downloaded this article also downloaded : T . D . WILSON , ( 1981 ) , " ON USER STUDIES AND INFORMATION NEEDS " , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 37 Iss 1 pp . 3 - 15 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / eb026702 DAVID ELLIS , DEBORAH COX , KATHERINE HALL , ( 1993 ) , " A COMPARISON OF THE INFORMATION SEEKING PATTERNS OF RESEARCHERS IN THE PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCES " , Journal of Documentation , Vol . 49 Iss 4 pp . 356 - 369 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / eb026919 Brenda Dervin , ( 1998 ) , " Sense - making theory and practice : an overview of user interests in knowledge seeking and use " , Journal of Knowledge Management , Vol . 2 Iss 2 pp . 36 - 46 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 13673279810249369 Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by 402646 [ ] For Authors If you would like to write for this , or any other Emerald publication , then please use our Emerald for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all . Please visit www . emeraldinsight . com / authors for more information . About Emerald www . emeraldinsight . com Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society . The company manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2 , 350 books and book series volumes , as well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and services . Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant . The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics ( COPE ) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation . * Related content and download information correct at time of download . D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib MODELS IN INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR RESEARCH T . D . WILSON t . d . wilson @ shef . ac . uk Department of Information Studies University of Shefﬁeld This paper presents an outline of models of information seeking and other aspects of information behaviour , showing the relationship between communication and information behaviour in general with information seeking and information searching in information retrieval systems . It is suggested that these models address issues at various levels of information behaviour and that they can be related by envisaging a ‘nesting’ of models . It is also suggested that , within both information seeking research and information searching research , alternative models address similar issues in related ways and that the models are complementary rather than conﬂicting . Finally , an alternative , problem - solving model is presented , which , it is suggested , provides a basis for relating the models in appropriate research strategies . 1 . INTRODUCTION The aim of this paper is to review the status of models of information behaviour * to discover how they may relate one to another and , perhaps , propose an integration of the models into a more general framework . To this end , this paper offers a view of the existing research as a set of ‘nested’ models bound together by a dependency upon one another and by an increasing concern , as we move to deeper levels , with ﬁner and ﬁner details of human information seeking and searching behaviour . 249 THE Journal of Documentation VOLUME 55 NUMBER 3 JUNE 1999 249 * By information behaviour is meant those activities a person may engage in when identifying his or her own needs for information , searching for such information in any way , and using or transferring that information . Journal of Documentation , vol . 55 , no . 3 , June 1999 , pp . 249 – 270 D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) Research in information behaviour has occupied information scientists since before the term ‘information science’ was coined . We can take its origins back to the Royal Society Scientiﬁc Information Conference of 1948 [ 1 ] , when a number of papers on the information behaviour of scientists and technologists were pre - sented . Of course , the term information behaviour was not used in the papers , which were generally about document and library use , but the origins are clearly there . This was seven years before Chris Hanson ( of Aslib ) coined the term ‘infor - mation science’ and ten years before the establishment of the Institute of Information Scientists in the UK , the ﬁrst professional society devoted to the ﬁeld . Over the intervening period since the Royal Society Conference literally thou - sands of papers and research reports have been produced on user needs , infor - mation needs , and information - seeking behaviour ( see , for example : [ 2 – 6 ] ) . Throughout the period the one constant complaint of commentators has been that researchers have not built upon prior research in such a way as to cumulate a body of theory and empirical ﬁndings that may serve as a starting point for further research . A number of reasons can be advanced for this situation : ﬁrst , in the positivist tradition , quantitative research methods were adopted that were inappropriate to the study of human behaviour : many things were counted , from the number of visits to libraries , to the number of personal subscriptions to journals and the number of items cited in papers . Very little of this counting revealed insights of value for the development of theory or , indeed , of practice . Secondly , researchers in the ﬁeld of information science seem generally to have ignored allied work in related areas that might offer more robust theoretical models of human behaviour ( see Wilson [ 7 ] for a review of such research ) . Thirdly , general models of infor - mation behaviour have only begun to emerge , and attract much attention , in the past ten to ﬁfteen years . The situation is now changing ( as Wilson has suggested [ 3 ] ) : the general adop - tion of qualitative methods ( from the early 1970s in the UK ) has resulted in work that is in the wider tradition of the investigation of human behaviour and which , therefore , is more likely to ﬁnd theories and models in the social sciences that can be applied to the study of information behaviour . At the same time , the models and theories proposed by certain researchers ( e . g . Dervin , Ellis , Kuhlthau , Wilson ) , have gained strength as they have been adopted as the basis for further research by other investigators . 2 . A MODEL OF INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR A model may be described as a framework for thinking about a problem and may evolve into a statement of the relationships among theoretical propositions . Most models in the general ﬁeld of information behaviour are of the former variety : they are statements , often in the form of diagrams , that attempt to describe an information - seeking activity , the causes and consequences of that activity , or the relationships among stages in information - seeking behaviour . Rarely do such models advance to the stage of specifying relationships among theoretical propo - sitions : rather , they are at a pre - theoretical stage , but may suggest relationships that might be fruitful to explore or test . JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 250 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) Models of information behaviour , however , appear to be fewer than those devoted to information - seeking behaviour or information searching . Figure 1 is a variation on Wilson’s model of 1981 [ 8 ] . The aim of this model was to outline the various areas covered by what the writer proposed as ‘information - seeking behaviour’ , as an alternative to the then common ‘information needs’ , but it is clear that the scope of the diagram is much greater and that it attempts to cover most of what is included here as ‘information behaviour’ . The model suggests that information - seeking behaviour arises as a conse - quence of a need perceived by an information user , who , in order to satisfy that need , makes demands upon formal or informal information sources or services , which result in success or failure to ﬁnd relevant information . If successful , the individual then makes use of the information found and may either fully or par - tially satisfy the perceived need – or , indeed , fail to satisfy the need and have to reiterate the search process . The model also shows that part of the information - seeking behaviour may involve other people through information exchange and that information perceived as useful may be passed to other people , as well as being used ( or instead of being used ) by the person himself or herself . One of the results of the analysis that led to the diagram was the recognition that information use had received little attention and , within information science , that statement is still relatively true today . Nor has much attention been devoted to the phenomenon of the informal transfer of information between individuals since Allen’s pioneering work [ 9 ] on transferring to the research laboratory the ‘two - step’ ﬂow of communication model of the ‘gatekeeper’ . The identiﬁcation of these areas as relatively lacking in research attention demonstrates one of the functions of these models . The limitation of this kind of model , however , is that it does little more than provide a map of the area and draw attention to gaps in research : it provides no June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 251 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Information transfer Satisfaction or non - satisfaction Information use Need Information - seeking behaviour Demands on information systems Demands on other information sources Failure Success Other people Information user Information exchange Figure 1 . Wilson’s model of information behaviour D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) suggestion of causative factors in information behaviour and , consequently , it does not directly suggest hypotheses to be tested . 3 . MODELS OF INFORMATION - SEEKING BEHAVIOUR When we turn to information - seeking behaviour the models are rather more numerous : ﬁve will be discussed here : Wilson’s ( 1981 ) model of information - seeking behaviour [ 8 ] ; Dervin’s ( 1983 ) Sense - Making theory [ 10 ] ; Ellis’s ( 1989 and 1993 ) behavioural model of information seeking strategies [ 11 , 12 ] ; Kuhlthau’s ( 1991 ) model of the stages of information - seeking behaviour [ 13 ] ; and Wilson’s ( 1996 ) model [ 2 , 7 ] , which expands his 1981 model through an analysis of the literature in ﬁelds other than information science . 3 . 1 Wilson , 1981 Wilson’s second model of 1981 is based upon two main propositions : ﬁrst , that information need is not a primary need , but a secondary need that arises out of needs of a more basic kind ; and second , that in the effort to discover information to satisfy a need , the enquirer is likely to meet with barriers of different kinds . Drawing upon deﬁnitions in psychology [ 14 ] , Wilson proposes that the basic needs can be deﬁned as physiological , cognitive or affective . He goes on to note that the context of any one of these needs may be the person him - or herself , or the role demands of the person’s work or life , or the environments ( political , eco - nomic , technological , etc . ) within which that life or work takes place . He then suggests that the barriers that impede the search for information will arise out of the same set of contexts . This model is shown in a simpliﬁed version ( which also shows the search behaviours deﬁned by Ellis [ 11 ] in Figure 2 ) . Wilson’s model is clearly what may be described as a macro - model or a model of the gross information - seeking behaviour and it suggests how information needs arise and what may prevent ( and , by implication , aid ) the actual search for information . It also embodies , implicitly , a set of hypotheses about information behaviour that are testable : for example , the proposition that information needs in different work roles will be JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 252 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Context of information need Barriers Personal Role - related Environmental Environment Social role Information - seeking behaviour StartingChainingBrowsingDifferentiatingMonitoringExtractingVerifyingEnding ( Ellis ) Person Physiological , affective , and cognitive states Figure 2 . Wilson’s model of information - seeking behaviour D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) different , or that personal traits may inhibit or assist information seeking . Thus , the model can be regarded as a source of hypotheses , which is a general function of models of this kind . The weakness of the model is that all of the hypotheses are only implicit and are not made explicit . Nor is there any indication of the processes whereby con - text has its effect upon the person , nor of the factors that result in the perception of barriers , nor of whether the various assumed barriers have similar or different effects upon the motivation of individuals to seek information . However , the very fact that the model is lacking in certain elements stimulates thinking about the kinds of elements that a more complete model ought to include . 3 . 2 Dervin , 1983 , 1996 Dervin’s Sense - Making theory has developed over a number of years , and cannot be seen simply as a model of information - seeking behaviour : it is , rather , as she says [ 10 ] , ‘… a set of assumptions , a theoretic perspective , a methodological approach , a set of research methods , and a practice’ designed to cope with infor - mation perceived as , ‘… a human tool designed for making sense of a reality assumed to be both chaotic and orderly’ . However , Sense - Making is implemented in terms of four constituent elements : a situation in time and space , which deﬁnes the context in which information problems arise ; a gap , which identiﬁes the difference between the contextual situation and the desired situation ( e . g . uncertainty ) ; an outcome , that is , the con - sequences of the Sense - Making process , and a bridge , that is , some means of closing the gap between situation and outcome . Dervin presents these elements in terms of a triangle : situation , gap / bridge , and outcome , which can be represented as in Figure 3 . However , it may be preferable to use the bridge metaphor more directly and present the model as Figure 4 . The strength of Dervin’s model lies partly in its methodological consequences , since , in relation to information behaviour , it can lead to a way of questioning that can reveal the nature of a problematic situation , the extent to which information serves to bridge the gap of uncertainty , confusion , or whatever , and the nature of the outcomes from the use of information . Applied consistently in ‘micro - moment , June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 253 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Figure 3 . Dervin’s Sense - Making framework Gap Outcome Situation D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) time - line interviews’ such questioning leads to genuine insights that can inﬂuence information service design and delivery , e . g . [ 15 , 16 ] . 3 . 3 Ellis , 1989 and Ellis , Cox and Hall , 1993 Ellis’s elaboration of the different behaviours involved in information seeking is not set out as a diagrammatic model and Ellis makes no claims to the effect that the different behaviours constitute a single set of stages ; indeed , he uses the term ‘features’ rather than ‘stages’ . These features are named and deﬁned below : l starting : the means employed by the user to begin seeking information , for example , asking some knowledgeable colleague ; l chaining : following footnotes and citations in known material or ‘forward’ chaining from known items through citation indexes ; l browsing : ‘semi - directed or semi - structured searching’ ( Ellis [ 11 , p . 187 ] ) l differentiating : using known differences in information sources as a way of ﬁltering the amount of information obtained ; l monitoring : keeping up - to - date or current awareness searching ; l extracting : selectively identifying relevant material in an information source ; l verifying : checking the accuracy of information ; l ending : which may be deﬁned as ‘tying up loose ends’ through a ﬁnal search . The strength of Ellis’s model , as with Kuhlthau’s is that it is based on empirical research and has been tested in subsequent studies , most recently in the context of an engineering company [ 17 ] . Of the features , Ellis notes that , ‘the detailed interrelation or interaction of the features in any individual information seeking pattern will depend on the unique circumstances of the information seeking activities of the person concerned at that particular point in time’ [ 11 , p . 178 ] . However , it is clear that ‘starting’ must initi - ate a process and that ‘ending’ must end it . It also seems reasonable to suggest that ‘verifying’ is a penultimate stage in a process and that ‘extracting’ must follow on from a speciﬁc search behaviour such as ‘browsing’ . Indeed , drawing attention to this fact leads to the conclusion that ‘extracting’ is not an information behaviour of the same kind as ‘browsing’ , or ‘chaining’ or ‘monitoring’ , and further suggests that ‘differentiating’ is also a different kind of behaviour : browsing , chaining and monitoring are search procedures , whereas differentiating is a ﬁltering process and extracting may be seen as an action performed on the information sources . JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 254 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Bridge _ _ _ _ _ time / space _ _ _ _ _ Situation Gap Outcome Figure 4 . Dervin’s Sense - Making framework modiﬁed D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) The remaining behaviours do not necessarily take place in a speciﬁc sequence and may be initiated in different sequences at different times in the overall search process . Ellis’s account , therefore , in terms of the different kinds of features it embodies , appears to sit between the micro - analysis of search behaviour ( starting , chaining , extracting , verifying , ending ) and a more macro - analysis of information behaviour generally ( browsing , monitoring , differentiating ) . If these points are accepted , it is then possible to suggest a diagrammatic pre - sentation of the model , as in Figure 5 . Thus , the models of Wilson and of Ellis are intended to function at different levels of the overall process of information seeking and this fact is demonstrated by the ability to nest one within the other . 3 . 4 Kuhlthau , 1991 Kuhlthau’s work [ 13 , 18 ] complements that of Ellis by attaching to stages of the ‘information search process’ the associated feelings , thoughts and actions , and the appropriate information tasks . This association of feelings , thoughts and actions clearly identiﬁes Kuhlthau’s perspective as phenomenological , rather than cog - nitive . The stages of Kuhlthau’s model are : Initiation , Selection , Exploration , Formulation , Collection and Presentation . As an example , the Initiation phase of the process is said to be characterised by feelings of uncertainty , vague and general thoughts about the problem area , and is associated with seeking background infor - mation : the ‘appropriate task’ at this point is simply to ‘recognise’ a need for infor - mation . The remaining appropriate tasks are : Identify , that is , ﬁx the general topic of the search ; Investigate , or search for information on that general topic ; Formulate , focus on a more speciﬁc area with in the topic ; Collection , that is , gather relevant information on the focus ; and Complete , end the information search . Kuhlthau’s model is thus more general than that of Ellis in drawing attention to the feelings associated with the various stages and activities . In this regard , Kuhlthau acknowledges her debt to Kelly’s ‘personal construct theory’ [ 19 ] which describes the affective experience of individuals involved in the process of con - structing meaning from the information they encounter [ 20 ] . The fundamental proposition is that the feelings of uncertainty associated with the need to search for information give rise to feelings of doubt , confusion and frustration and that , as the search process proceeds and is increasingly successful , those feelings change : as relevant material is collected conﬁdence increases and is associated with feelings of relief , satisfaction and a sense of direction . June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 255 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Browsing Monitoring Starting – – – Chaining – – – Differentiating – – – Extracting – – – Verifying Ending Figure 5 . A stage process version of Ellis’s behavioural framework D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) In effect , what Kuhlthau postulates here ( and conﬁrms by empirical research ) is a process of the gradual reﬁnement of the problem area , with information searching of one kind or another going on while that reﬁnement takes place . Thus , a successive search process is implicit in Kuhlthau’s analysis of the search activ - ity . Although Kuhlthau’s early work was a series of longitudinal studies of high school students , more recently she has shown the applicability of the model to the work of a securities analyst [ 21 ] . It is interesting to explore whether the Ellis and Kuhlthau models may be brought together , and this is attempted in Figure 6 , where my representation of Ellis’s categories is accompanied by the stages of Kuhlthau ( the latter in italic ) . Through this merger of the two models , we can see strong similarities and the major difference appears to be that Ellis speciﬁes the modes of exploration or investigation . The point must be reiterated , however , that Ellis does not present his characteristics as stages but as elements of behaviour that may occur in dif - ferent sequences with different persons , or with the same person at different times . Thus , the two models are fundamentally opposed in the minds of the authors : Kuhlthau posits stages on the basis of her analysis of behaviour , while Ellis suggests that the sequences of behavioural characteristics may vary . 3 . 5 Wilson , 1996 Wilson’s 1996 [ 2 ] model ( Figure 7 ) is a major revision of that of 1981 , drawing upon research from a variety of ﬁelds other than information science , including decision - making , psychology , innovation , health communication and consumer research . The basic framework of the 1981 model persists , in that the person in context remains the focus of information needs , the barriers are represented by ‘interven - ing variables’ and ‘information - seeking behaviour’ is identiﬁed . However , there are also changes : the use of the term ‘intervening variables’ serves to suggest that their impact may be supportive of information use as well as preventive ; infor - mation - seeking behaviour is shown to consist of more types than previously , where the ‘active search’ was the focus of attention ; ‘information processing and use’ is shown to be a necessary part of the feedback loop , if information needs are to be satisﬁed ; and three relevant theoretical ideas are presented : stress / coping JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 256 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Browsing Monitoring Starting – – – Chaining – – – Differentiating – – – Extracting – – – Verifying Ending Figure 6 . A comparison of Figure 5 with Kuhlthau’s stage process model Activity : Recognize Identify / formulate Gather Complete Stage : Initiation Selection / exploration Formulation Collection Presentation D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) theory [ 22 ] , which offers possibilities for explaining why some needs do not invoke information - seeking behaviour ; risk / reward theory [ 23 , 24 ] , which may help to explain which sources of information may be used more than others by a given individual ; and social learning theory , which embodies the concept of ‘self - efﬁcacy’ , the idea of ‘the conviction that one can successfully execute the behavior required to produce the [ desired ] outcomes’ [ 25 ] . Thus , the model remains one of macro - behaviour , but its expansion and the inclusion of other theoretical models of behaviour make it a richer source of hypotheses and further research than Wilson’s earlier model . We can also attempt to relate this model to the others discussed above . It is fairly obvious that the models of both Ellis and Kuhlthau relate to the active search mode of information - seeking behaviour and provide , in effect , an expan - sion of that box in the diagram above . Dervin’s model is completely different in character , since its aim is to provide a framework for exploring the totality of information behaviour from the exploration of the context in which information needs arise to the means whereby that need is satisﬁed , whether through active searching or otherwise . In effect , it is a model of a methodology , rather than a model of a set of activities or a situation . 4 . SUMMARY OF THE INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS I have labelled these models ‘information behaviour’ models because it is clear that they are not ‘information search’ models in the sense that might be understood by the information retrieval researcher . They are concerned with , on the one hand , generalised behaviours surrounding the actual initiation of information - seeking June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 257 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Context of information need Person - in - context Activating mechanism Stress / coping theory Psychological Demographic Environmental Source characteristics Information processing and use Role - related or interpersonal Intervening variables Activatingmechanism Information - seeking behaviour Passive attention Risk / reward theory Self - efﬁcacy Passive search Active search Ongoingsearch Social learning theory Figure 7 . Wilson’s 1996 model of information behaviour D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) and , on the other , with a broader perspective of the information search than simply the use of computer - based information retrieval systems . This is an important point to make , since the implications for IR systems from research in the general area of information behaviour may inform the overall design principles of such systems , and may enable the information content developer to specify more clearly what navigational routes are needed through the information and exactly what kind of information or data types need to be in the record , but the speciﬁca - tion of rules for the design of interactive systems on the basis of information behaviour research may not be possible . Thus , from Wilson’s 1996 model we can reasonably hypothesise that an IR system should be designed so as to reduce the risk of failure by the user and , thereby , increase his or her sense of self - efﬁcacy , but the means whereby the risk is reduced must be a matter for the system designer . However , better systems are likely to be designed if the designer understands the ideas of risk / reward and self - efﬁcacy . Again , Ellis’s work suggests that an IR system ought to provide more naviga - tional routes for the user , providing not only Boolean or best - match search strate - gies , but also the capacity to chain through citations in texts both backwards and forwards in time , and with intelligent agents to monitor additions to the database according to , say , the user’s last search or an established proﬁle . Similarly , given that virtually all studies of information - seeking behaviour show the importance of personal networks , IR systems could well embody rou - tines that would enable users to indicate their willingness to be put in contact with others interested in the same research areas . By doing so , IR systems could become genuine tools for collaborative work , not only within but across disci - plines : the potential for this has been made real by the development of the Internet and by modern software tools that allow the ‘desk - top’ to act as the interface to the Internet and World Wide Web . 5 . INFORMATION SEARCHING MODELS The relationship between information - seeking behaviour in the general sense and information retrieval behaviour is obviously a close one : the use of IR systems is one possible strategy in the collection of information and , hence , constitutes a potential sub - stage in the information - seeking process . From the perspective of the interaction of users with IR systems , Saracevic [ 26 ] has provided a useful review of the various models of users in interaction with IR systems . Saracevic identiﬁes three models : the ‘traditional’ model , which ‘represents IR as a two prong set ( system and user ) of elements and processes converging on comparison or matching’ ; Ingwersen’s cognitive model [ 27 ] , which ‘concentrates on identifying processes of cognition which may occur in all the information processing elements involved’ ; and Belkin’s ‘episode model’ [ 28 ] , which ‘considers user interaction with an IR system as a sequence of differ - ing interactions in an episode of information seeking’ . Saracevic then goes on to propose what he calls a ‘stratiﬁed interaction model’ developed within an overall framework of an ‘acquisition - cognition - application’ model of information use . The levels or strata posited by Saracevic are simpliﬁed ( in his words ) to three : ‘surface’ , or the level of interaction between the user and the system interface ; JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 258 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 259 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib ‘cognition’ , or the level of interaction with the texts or their representation ; and the ‘situation’ , or the context that provides the initial problem at hand . Ingwersen’s model is shown in Figure 8 . When we examine this model , we can see its close family resemblance to other models of information seeking behav - iour . In particular , the elements ‘user’s cognitive space’ and ‘social / organisational environment’ resemble the ‘person in context’ and ‘environmental factors’ spec - iﬁed in Wilson’s models and the general orientation towards queries posed to an IR system point to a concern with the ‘active search’ , which is the concern of most information - seeking models . Ingwersen , however , makes explicit a number of other elements : ﬁrst , he demonstrates that within each area of his model the functions of the information user , the document author , the intermediary , the interface and the IR system are the result of explicit or implicit cognitive models of the domain of interest at that particular point . Thus , users have models of their work - tasks or their information needs , or their problems or goals , which are usu - ally implicit , but often capable of explication . Again , the IR system is an explica - tion of the system designer’s cognitive model of what the system should do and how it should function . Secondly , Ingwersen brings the IR system into the picture , suggesting that a comprehensive model of information - seeking behaviour must include the system that points to the information objects that may be of interest to Figure 8 . Ingwersen’s model of the IR process Models D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) the enquirer . Thirdly , he shows that various cognitive transformations take place in moving from the life - world in which the user experiences a problem or identi - ﬁes a goal to a situation in which a store of pointers to information objects can be satisfactorily searched and useful objects identiﬁed . Finally he points to the need for these models or cognitive structures and their transformations to be effectively communicated throughout the ‘system’ , which will include the user , the author and the IR system designer . Thus , Ingwersen’s model , to a degree , integrates ideas relating to information behaviour and information needs with issues of IR system design , and this , together with the focus on cognitive structures and the idea of polyrepresentation , is an important strength of the model . Saracevic suggests that [ 26 ] : ‘The weak - ness is in that it does not provide for testability … and even less for application to evaluation of IR systems’ . However , recently , Borlund and Ingwersen [ 29 ] have developed and tested an evaluative strategy on the basis of this model and have demonstrated its value in testing interactive IR systems . A potential weakness that remains is that the whole of information behaviour as deﬁned in other mod - els examined in this paper is subsumed under the heading of the ‘user’s cognitive space’ . Issues of how users arrive at the point of making a search , and how their cognitive structures are affected by the processes of deciding how and when to move towards information searching , may be lost . From the point of view of Wilson’s 1996 model the signiﬁcant part of Ingwersen’s model ( apart from its explicit cognitive theory orientation ) is in the description of the ‘active search’ process and the elements of that process . Belkin’s ‘episode’ model might be better termed an ‘activity’ model or ‘interac - tion’ model , since its focus is upon the actions carried out in an information search , from ‘scanning’ to ‘searching’ , within a framework of three other dimensions : ‘goal of interaction’ ( learning - selecting ) ; ‘mode of retrieval’ ( recognition - speciﬁ - cation ) ; and ‘resource considered’ ( information - meta - information ) . According to Belkin et al . [ 28 ] : ‘Any single ISS ( information - seeking strategy ) can be described according to its location along these four dimensions’ . However , in the terminology used in this paper , these would be better described as information - searching strate - gies , since , although couched in terms of a generalised interaction between infor - mation - searcher and information - provider , the focus of Belkin’s work is on the design of IR systems . Belkin and his colleagues then advocate the evolution of ‘scripts’ or plans ‘… for a dialogue between the user and the rest of the system … Such scripts , based for instance , on , and abstracted from , observations of people as they engage in information seeking , could be used as a means for structured human - computer interaction aimed at achieving the goal of that particular ISS’ . While such a goal appears desirable , there may , of course , be signiﬁcant problems in identifying suf - ﬁciently generalised behaviour to produce a limited range of scripts for IR system use . If , however , the underlying rules for script creation from user input could be determined , a more intelligent system might be devised which would create an appropriate script in response to the user’s initial interactive behaviour . Saracevic’s own model ( Figure 9 ) is described as a ‘stratiﬁed interaction model’ and posits a ( simpliﬁed ) three level structure : surface , cognitive , and situ - ational [ 26 ] . Again , this model shows a strong resemblance to that of Ingwersen . At the surface level , a user interacts with a system through an interface by issuing JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 260 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) commands or queries that represent , in some way , a problem statement . At the same level , the system responds either with meta - information , or texts ( including images , etc . ) or with queries of its own designed to elicit from the user further information on the nature of the problem . At the cognitive level , the user interacts with the output of the system , or with texts obtained subsequent to system inter - action , in ways that enable the user to assess the utility of the text in relation to the initial problem . At the situational level , ‘… users interact with the given situation or problem - at - hand which produced the information need and resulting question . The results of the search may be applied to the resolution or partial resolution of the problem’ . Spink proposes a model of the search process , derived from empirical research , which identiﬁes user judgements , search tactics or moves , interactive feedback loops , and cycles as constituting the search process of a person in interaction with an IR system [ 30 ] . The model is shown , in simpliﬁed form , in Figure 10 . Spink describes the model as follows : Each search strategy may consist of one or more cycles [ one or more search commands ending in the display of retrieved items … ] . Each cycle may consist of one or more interactive feedback occurrences ( user input , IR system output , user interpretation and judgement , user input ) . An input may also represent a move within the search strategy … and may be June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 261 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Environment Situation User knowledge , etc Query characteristics Interface Computationalresources Informationalresources I n t e r ac t i o n l e v e l s A d a p t a t i o n A d a p t a t i o n I n f o r m a t i o n u s e Figure 9 . Saracevic’s model of the IR process D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) regarded as a search tactic to further the search … . Each move consists of a user input or query requesting a system’s output’ [ 30 , p . 392 ] . The value of this view of IR interaction is that it is based directly on empirical research and that the appearance of user judgements , search tactics and interac - tive feedback loops links IR interaction directly with information - seeking behav - iour in general . Thus , judgements made by users must be based upon prior experience gained in the overall activity of information seeking , and tactics and moves may well be derived from behaviour that proves to be useful in settings other than the interactive IR system . 6 . DISCUSSION Models of information behaviour do not all attempt to describe the same set of phenomena or activities : some , as in the case of Ellis [ 11 ] are concerned with behavioural patterns in the actual search activity ; others , like Kuhlthau [ 18 ] pre - sent stages of activity , within which the behavioural patterns may occur . The model presented here is of this second type in that it presents problem solving as the overall framework for the activity of information seeking and shows that Kuhlthau’s model may ﬁt within the various stages of the information seeking process . We can also suggest that Ellis’s behavioural model is a set of activities within what Kuhlthau calls ‘collection’ and that all three of these are nested with - in Wilson’s 1996 model of information behaviour in general . This analysis of various models leads me to suggest that the various areas of research within the general ﬁeld of information behaviour may be seen ( as JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 262 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Search Process Cycle Cycle Cycle Search tactic Search tactic Search tactic Search tactic or move or move or move or move User User User User judgement judgement judgement judgement … Search strategies… Interactive feedback loops Figure 10 . Spink’s model of the IR interaction process D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) intimated above ) as a series of nested ﬁelds : information behaviour may be deﬁned as the more general ﬁeld of investigation ( as shown in Figure 11 ) , with information - seeking behaviour being seen as a sub - set of the ﬁeld , particularly concerned with the variety of methods people employ to discover , and gain access to information resources , and information searching behaviour being deﬁned as a sub - set of information - seeking , particularly concerned with the interactions between information user ( with or without an intermediary ) and computer - based information systems , of which information retrieval systems for textual data may be seen as one type . * We might also extend the nested model further by showing that information behaviour is a part of human communication behaviour : given the amount of information - related research in various aspects of communication studies , such as that on consumer behaviour , it may be particularly useful to remember this in cer - tain contexts . There are models in the ﬁeld of communication theory that are of interest to the information researcher ( see [ 32 ] for a review of these ) most of which take the Shannon and Weaver [ 33 ] communication model as their starting point . In particular , the model of Maletzke [ 34 ] shows aspects of the communica - tion process that are either included in one or other of the models presented here or could be added to the models to make them more all - inclusive ; for example , he suggests that the receiver’s ( user’s ) self - image , and ‘the receiver as a member of the audience’ are aspects to be considered . Maletzke , of course , also details aspects of the ‘communicator’ that need to be considered in a full elaboration of June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 263 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Information behaviour Information - seeking behaviour Information search behaviour Figure 11 . A nested model of the information seeking and information searching research areas * An anonymous reviewer drew my attention to a similar nested model in Rasmussen et al . [ 31 ] , which , although not directly related , offers a basis for incorporating informa - tion - seeking behaviour within a general model of task performance and analysis . D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) communication : self - image , personality structure , working team , social environ - ment , organisation , and ‘pressure and constraints caused by the public character of the media content’ . The focus of studies in information behaviour is on the information seeker of known or unknown communications , while , although the communication recipient is considered in research in communication studies , there is also a strong focus upon the communicator and the channels of communication . So , while attention is drawn to the connection here , Figure 1 does not include communication studies as an all - embracing ﬁeld . However , we can show the general relationship between communication and information - seeking behaviour in Figure 12 . The diagram simpliﬁes Figure 7 , renames information sources ‘channels of communication’ , links the basic model to the communicator as the originator of messages over the channels of communication and shows a feedback loop through which the communicator learns of the recipient’s response to the communication . Enlarging the original model in this way enables us to link the two ﬁelds and may enable us to identify and consider relationships in the information - seeking process that have not had detailed treatment in information science research . We can also suggest that the areas in Figure 12 interact with the ﬁeld of human - computer interaction ( HCI ) , as indeed they must and , because HCI is con - cerned with all aspects of human and computer interaction , including computer - based information retrieval , we can perceive it as a related ﬁeld that intersects with communication behaviour and its sub - ﬁelds . This nested model may be used by researchers in the various ﬁelds to remind themselves that the study of a particular topic needs to be undertaken in the con - text of the surrounding ﬁeld : thus , information searching should be explored with an understanding of information seeking and the latter with an understanding of information behaviour in general . We can also argue that research may concern itself with one of these ﬁelds , as a central subject for investigation , but also that an investigation could , in fact , explore the relationships across the ﬁelds . We can envisage this as taking a slice across the circles to explore the behaviour of a group or an individual in terms of overall information behaviour , information - seeking JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 264 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Person in context Intervening variables Informationseeking behaviour Feedback Processing and use Communicator Channels of communication Figure 12 . Linking information seeking and communication D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) within that broad area , and information searching when the person interacts with computer - based systems . 7 . ANOTHER MODEL Given the abundance of models in the ﬁeld , it may seem unhelpful to introduce another , but this model is intended ( although it may not accomplish this ) to pro - vide a kind of linking or integration of at least some of the models discussed above . This entire paper was stimulated by reading a paper by Saracevic [ 35 ] , in which he comments : ‘If the IR pioneers did not embrace relevance , but lets [ sic ] say uncertainty as the basic notion , IR theory , practice , and evaluation would have looked very different’ . It occurred to me that , although the concept has not been used in evaluating IR systems ( as Saracevic rightly says ) , nevertheless , it is , in effect , ‘the ghost at the feast’ since we may assume that much ( perhaps most ? ) information seeking and retrieval are occasioned by uncertainty . Research in IR evaluation may not have made much of the idea , but , from the perspective of the user , it is always there . In the ﬁeld of communication theory , also , uncertainty has a place in some writers’ work : for example , Newcomb [ 36 ] suggests that communication is a ‘learned response to strain’ ( taking us back to the idea of stress as a causal factor ) and that we are more likely to ﬁnd increased communication activity in the form of information seeking , giving and exchange ‘under conditions of uncertainty and disequilibrium’ . If we accept this proposition , we will naturally ask , ‘What is the cause of the uncertainty ? ’ A generalised answer is , ‘a problem’ : the problem may be more or less recognisable as a problem in the normally understood sense of the word , but something in the individual’s life - world , which may be the world of everyday life of the citizen , or the world of work of the scientist , professional worker , or what - ever , has led in Schutz and Luckmann’s terms [ 37 ] to a discrepancy between the typiﬁcations applied to the life - world and a phenomenon that , at ﬁrst sight , can - not be ﬁtted into those typiﬁcations . In other words , the individual is faced with a problematic situation . * The solution of the problem , the resolution of the discrepancy , the advance from uncertainty to certainty ( or at least some pragmatic solution of the problem ) then becomes a goal of the person and we typify the resulting behaviour as goal - seeking June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 265 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib * Schutz’s notion of typiﬁcation can be explained by quotation : ‘What is newly experi - enced is already known in the sense that it recalls similar or equal things formerly perceived . But what has been grasped once in its typicality carries with it … a series of typical characteristics still not actually experienced but expected to be potentially experi - enced’ [ 38 ] . Thus , once we have experienced any phenomenon we have certain expec - tations of things we experience as similar – we typify them as belonging to particular categories of our experience of the world . Once I experience a tree , I have certain expectations of anything that occurs in my life - world as being tree - like : it will be rooted in one place , rather than moving ; if my ﬁrst experience has been in the summer - time , a tree - like object will be expected to have leaves , and so on . Similarly , we identify all kinds of events in our life - worlds as being similar to previously experienced events . Schutz makes the connection between relevance and typiﬁcation , in that those facts or experi - ences that enable us to identify phenomena as members of a particular object group or sub - set of such a group may be viewed as relevant to the typiﬁcation of those phenomena . D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) behaviour . We then argue that en route to the goal , the individual moves from uncer - tainty to increasing certainty and that there are stages in the problem - resolution process that are identiﬁable and recognisable to the individual . These stages are : problem identiﬁcation ( where the person is asking the question , ‘What kind of prob - lem do I have ? ’ ) , problem deﬁnition ( ‘Exactly what is the nature of my problem ? ’ ) , problem resolution ( ‘How do I ﬁnd the answer to my problem ? ’ ) and , potentially , solution statement ( ‘This is the answer to the problem’ , or , if a pragmatic , rather than a theoretically - based resolution has been found , ‘This is how we are going to deal with the problem . ’ ) Clearly , the transition from problem identiﬁcation to solution statement is not without difﬁculty : if it was , there would be no problem , since ( as Schutz and Luckmann argue ) the issue would be dealt with through the individual’s existing typiﬁcations of phenomena in the life - world and his or her existing stock of knowledge applicable to those typiﬁcations . We hypothesise that , ( a ) each stage sees the successive resolution of more and more uncertainty , and ( b ) where uncer - tainty fails to be resolved at any one stage , it may result in a feedback loop to the previous stage for further resolution . We may represent this as in Figure 13 . In other words , and for example , failure to ﬁnd a useful deﬁnition of the prob - lem may result in a return to the problem identiﬁcation stage , for further consid - eration of the problematic situation if the uncertainty - resolution loop fails . The important question at this point is , ‘How is uncertainty resolved ? ’ This is where we can bring into the model the previous attempts at modelling informa - tion behaviour and , speciﬁcally , those of Kuhlthau and of Ellis . One proposition may be that Kuhlthau’s ‘stages’ can be seen not as steps in a single information seeking activity , but reiterated steps that may occur in exploratory loops between each link in the problem resolution chain shown above . The clue to this is Kuhlthau’s suggestion that Collection ( identiﬁed as one of the stages ) actually takes place within other stages and it is reasonable to ask , therefore , why collec - tion should be typiﬁed as a separate , single stage , when it recurs . Kuhlthau’s model ( discussed earlier ) has the stages Initiation , Selection , Exploration , Formulation , Collection , and Presentation , which are described more fully above . The model proposed here suggests that some of these terms can be used to identify the stages through which an individual moves to resolve uncertainty : uncertainty – initiation – selection – exploration – formulation – collection formulation / reformulation – resolution JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 266 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Uncertainty resolution Uncertainty resolution Uncertainty resolution Problem Identiﬁcation Problemdeﬁnition Problemresolution Solutionstatement Figure 13 . A problem solving model of the information seeking and searching process D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) Alternatively , we might use Ellis’s behavioural model with its ‘features’ ( starting , browsing , chaining , etc . ) as the basis for an in - depth analysis of the reiterated search activities at each phase of the problem - solving process . The idea that problem solving is the underlying motivation for information searching is supported by Spink and Greisdorf on partial relevance [ 39 ] . In an analysis of three studies of information search behaviour Spink and Greisdorf show that the assessment by users of documents as partially relevant correlates highly with variables such as a change in the user’s deﬁnition of the problem , a change in the user’s relevance criteria , and a change in the user’s knowledge of the problem . Spink and Greisdorf note that the assumptions of research into IR system use that only the highly relevant items retrieved in a search are valued by users and that categorical scales of relevance can be conﬂated to binary scales ( relevant / non - relevant ) without loss of information , are erroneous and need to be addressed by IR researchers . Given the ﬁndings of Spink and Greisdorf , the model of information search behaviour suggested above may provide a sound basis for the development of research ideas . 8 . CONCLUSION The various models of information behaviour , information - seeking behaviour and information searching represent different aspects of the overall problem : they are complementary , rather than competing , as Figure 4 suggests . The key questions for research , therefore , are : l to what extent are the different models complete , or reasonably com - plete representations of the reality they seek to model ? l in what ways are the models complementary ; that is , how does knowl - edge of one level of analysis aid another ? l speciﬁcally , in the case of information - searching behaviour ; how does knowledge of modes of information - seeking behaviour aid our under - standing of the search process , if at all ? Research to answer the last question might best focus on projects that take a view of information searching as a complex process embedded in the broader perspec - tive of information - seeking behaviour , and information behaviour in general , rather than on the micro - level of analysis that is typical of the dominant paradigm of information retrieval research . APPENDIX : A NOTE ON FEEDBACK Not all of the models presented above speciﬁcally include feedback [ 40 ] as an ele - ment , but it is clear that feedback loops must exist within all models , since pro - gression towards a goal is hardly ever unproblematic . For example , a person at any of Kuhlthau’s stages may have to revisit an earlier stage as a result of prob - lems experienced or new information found and , in Ellis’s model , a person engaged in , for example , extracting may , as a result , need to return to chaining or browsing to gather further information . Similarly , in Dervin’s model , a person June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 267 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) moving from situation to outcome may , as a consequence of ﬁnding information , need to review the situation and proceed in a different way towards the outcome . When feedback is explicitly introduced into models of information behaviour the process can be seen to require a model of the process that views behaviour as iterative , rather than one - off and the idea of successive search activities intro - duces new research questions . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The ideas presented in this paper have beneﬁted from discussions and comments on drafts from Dr David Ellis , Nigel Ford , Dr Amanda Spink and Professor Peter Willett . For whatever problems remain , however , I am entirely responsible . I acknowledge the copyright owners’ permission to reproduce diagrams . REFERENCES 1 . The Royal Society Scientiﬁc Information Conference , 21 June – 2 July 1948 . Report and papers submitted . London : The Royal Society , 1948 . 2 . Wilson , T . D . and Walsh , C . Information behaviour : an interdisciplinary perspective . Shefﬁeld : University of Shefﬁeld Department of Information Studies , 1996 . 3 . Wilson , T . D . Information needs and uses : ﬁfty years of progress ? In : Vickery , B . C . , ed . Fifty years of information progress : a Journal of Documentation review . London : Aslib , 1994 , 15 – 51 . 4 . Westbrook , L . User needs : a synthesis and analysis of current theories for the practitioner . RQ , 32 , 1993 , 541 – 549 . 5 . Paisley , W . J . I . Information needs and uses . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 3 , 1968 , 1 – 30 . 6 . Dervin , B . and Nilan , M . Information needs and uses . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 21 , 1986 , 3 – 33 . 7 . Wilson , T . D . Information behaviour : an interdisciplinary perspective . Information Processing and Management , 33 ( 4 ) , 1997 , 551 – 572 . 8 . Wilson , T . D . On user studies and information needs . Journal of Documentation , 37 ( 1 ) , 1981 , 3 – 15 . 9 . Allen , T . J . Managing the ﬂow of technology : technology transfer and the dissemination of technological information within the R & D organization . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1977 . 10 . Dervin , B . An overview of sense - making research : concepts , methods and results to date . In : International Communications Association Annual Meeting . Dallas , Texas , 1983 . 11 . Ellis , D . A behavioural approach to information retrieval design . Journal of Documentation , 45 ( 3 ) , 1989 , 171 – 212 . 12 . Ellis , D . , Cox , D . and Hall , K . A comparison of the information seeking patterns of researchers in the physical and social sciences . Journal of Documentation , 49 ( 4 ) , 1993 , 356 – 369 . 13 . Kuhlthau , C . C . Inside the search process : information seeking from the user’s perspective . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 42 , 1991 , 361 – 371 . JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 268 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 14 . Eysenck , H . J . , Arnold , W . and Meili , R . Encyclopaedia of psychology . London : Search Press , 1972 . 15 . Dervin , B . and Dewdney , P . Neutral questioning : a new approach to the ref - erence interview . RQ , 25 ( Summer ) , 1986 , 506 – 513 . 16 . Dervin , B . From the mind’s eye of the user : the sense - making qualitative - quantitative methodology . In : Glazier , J . D . and Powell , R . R . , eds . Qualitative research in information management . Englewood , CO : Libraries Unlimited , 1992 , 61 – 84 . 17 . Ellis , D . and Haugan , M . Modelling the information - seeking patterns of engineers and research scientists in an industrial environment . Journal of Documentation , 53 ( 4 ) , 1997 , 384 – 403 . 18 . Kuhlthau , C . C . Seeking meaning : a process approach to library and infor - mation services . Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing , 1994 . 19 . Kelly , G . A . A theory of personality : the psychology of personal constructs . New York : Norton , 1963 . 20 . Kuhlthau , C . C . A principle of uncertainty for information seeking . Journal of Documentation , 49 ( 4 ) , 1993 , 339 – 355 . 21 . Kuhlthau , C . C . The inﬂuence of uncertainty on the information seeking behav - ior of a securities analyst . In : Vakkari , P . , Savolainen , R . and Dervin , B . , eds . Information seeking in context : proceedings of an International Conference on Research in Information Needs , Seeking and Use in Different Contexts , 14 – 16 August , 1996 , Tampere , Finland . London : Taylor Graham , 1997 . 22 . Folkman , S . Personal control and stress and coping processes : a theoretical analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 46 , 1984 , 839 – 852 . 23 . Murray , K . B . A test of services marketing theory : consumer information acquisition activities . Journal of Marketing , 55 , 1991 , 10 – 25 . 24 . Settle , R . B . and Alreck , P . Reducing buyers’ sense of risk . Marketing Communications , 14 , 1989 , 34 – 40 . 25 . Bandura , A . Self efﬁcacy : towards a unifying theory of behavioural change . Psychological Review , 84 , 1977 , 191 – 215 . 26 . Saracevic , T . Modeling interaction in information retrieval ( IR ) : a review and proposal . In : Hardin , S . , ed . 59th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science . Silver Spring , MD : American Society for Information Science , 1996 , 3 – 9 . 27 . Ingwersen , P . Cognitive perspectives of information retrieval interaction : elements of a cognitive IR theory . Journal of Documentation , 52 ( 1 ) , 1996 , 3 – 50 . 28 . Belkin , N . J . et al . Cases , scripts and information seeking strategies : on the design of interactive information retrieval systems . Expert Systems with Applications , 9 , 1995 , 379 – 395 . 29 . Borlund , P . and Ingwersen , P . The development of a method for the evalua - tion of interactive information retrieval systems . Journal of Documentation , 53 ( 3 ) , 1997 , 225 – 250 . 30 . Spink , A . Study of interactive feedback during mediated information retrieval . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 48 ( 5 ) , 1997 , 382 – 394 . 31 . Rasmussen , J . , Pejtersen , A . M . and Goodstein , L . P . Cognitive systems engi - neering . New York : Wiley , 1994 , xviii , 378 . June 1999 INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR MODELS 269 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 32 . McQuail , D . Mass communication theory : an introduction . 3rd ed . London : Sage , 1994 . 33 . Shannon , C . E . and Weaver , W . W . The mathematical theory of communica - tion . Urbana , Ill . , London : University of Illinois Press , 1949 . 34 . Maletzke , G . Psychologie der Massenkommunikation . Hamburg : Hans Bredow - Institut , 1963 . 35 . Saracevic , T . Relevance reconsidered ’96 . In : Ingwersen , P . and Pors , N . O . , eds . Information science : integration in perspective . Proceedings [ of ] COLIS 2 , Second International Conference on Conceptions of Library and Information Science . Copenhagen : Royal School of Librarianship , 1996 , 201 – 218 . 36 . Newcomb , T . An approach to the study of communication acts . Psychological Review , 60 , 1953 , 393 – 404 . 37 . Schutz , A . and Luckmann , T . The structures of the life - world . London : Heinemann , 1974 . 38 . Schutz , A . On phenomenology and social relations : selected writings . Edited and with an introduction by Helmut R . Wagner . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1970 . 39 . Spink , A . , Greisdorf , H . and Bateman , J . From highly relevant to nonrele - vant : examining different regions of relevance . Information Processing and Management , 35 ( 5 ) , 1998 , 599 – 622 . 40 . Spink , A . and Losee , R . M . Feedback in information retrieval . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 31 , 1996 , 33 – 78 . ( Revised version received 12 January 1999 ) JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 55 , no . 3 270 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 55 , No . 3 , June 1999 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Staple Hall , Stone House Court , London EC3A 7PB Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0000 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 903 0011 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) This article has been cited by : 1 . Andrew Thatcher , Ana C . Vasconcelos , David Ellis . 2015 . An investigation into the impact of information behaviour on information failure : The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power disaster . International Journal of Information Management 35 , 57 - 63 . [ CrossRef ] 2 . Joachim Griesbaum , Nadine Mahrholz , Kim von Löwe Kiedrowski , Marc Rittberger . 2015 . Knowledge generation in online forums : a case study in the German educational domain . Aslib Journal of Information Management 67 : 1 , 2 - 26 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 3 . Petros A . Kostagiolas , Charilaos Lavranos , Nikolaos Korfiatis , Joseph Papadatos , Sozon Papavlasopoulos . 2015 . Music , musicians and information seeking behaviour . Journal of Documentation 71 : 1 , 3 - 24 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 4 . Reijo Savolainen . 2015 . The interplay of affective and cognitive factors in information seeking and use . Journal of Documentation 71 : 1 , 175 - 197 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 5 . Peter Stokes , Christine Urquhart . 2015 . Profiling information behaviour of nursing students : part 2 : derivation of profiles . Journal of Documentation 71 : 1 , 52 - 79 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 6 . Dragan Gašević , Shane Dawson , George Siemens . 2015 . Let’s not forget : Learning analytics are about learning . TechTrends 59 , 64 - 71 . [ CrossRef ] 7 . Sarita K . Davis . 2014 . Health - Seeking Behaviors among HIV - Negative , High - Risk Black Women Living in an Urban Southern City . Social Work in Public Health 29 , 641 - 655 . [ CrossRef ] 8 . Professor Peter Willett , Mark Hepworth , Philipp Grunewald , Geoff Walton . 2014 . Research and practice . Journal of Documentation 70 : 6 , 1039 - 1053 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 9 . Joselice Ferreira Lima , Gustavo Miranda Caran , Luiz Fernando R . Molinaro , Daniela Favarro Garrossini . 2014 . Analysis of Accessibility Initiatives Applied to the Web . International Journal of Web Portals 4 : 10 . 4018 / IJWP . 20121001 , 48 - 58 . [ CrossRef ] 10 . Valerie NessetDepicting the Intersection between Information - Seeking Behavior and Information Literacy in the Research Process : A Model 39 - 66 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] [ PDF ] 11 . Spencer C . LilleyThe Social Information Grounds of Māori Secondary School Students 191 - 213 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] [ PDF ] 12 . Jamshid Beheshti , Mohammed J . AlGhamdi , Charles Cole , Dhary Abuhimed , Isabelle LamoureuxDesigning an Intervention Tool for Students with Students 295 - 331 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] [ PDF ] 13 . Nicola Brennan , Sarah Edwards , Narcie Kelly , Alice Miller , Lucy Harrower , Karen Mattick . 2014 . Qualified doctor and medical students ' use of resources for accessing information : what is used and why ? . Health Information & Libraries Journal 31 : 10 . 1111 / hir . 2014 . 31 . issue - 3 , 204 - 214 . [ CrossRef ] 14 . Mark Hepworth , Fatmah Almehmadi , Sally MaynardA Reflection on the Relationship between the Study of People’s Information Behaviour and Information Literacy : Changes in Epistemology and Focus 51 - 65 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] [ PDF ] 15 . Bibliography 125 - 163 . [ CrossRef ] 16 . Peggy Alexopoulou , Anne Morris , Mark Hepworth . 2014 . A New Integrated Model for Multitasking during Web Searching . Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 147 , 16 - 25 . [ CrossRef ] 17 . Davide Nicolini , John Powell , Maja Korica . 2014 . Keeping knowledgeable : how NHS chief executive officers mobilise knowledge and information in their daily work . Health Services and Delivery Research 2 , 1 - 96 . [ CrossRef ] 18 . Sally Burford , Sora Park . 2014 . The impact of mobile tablet devices on human information behaviour . Journal of Documentation 70 : 4 , 622 - 639 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 19 . Christopher Peter Lueg . 2014 . Characteristics of human perception and their relevance when studying information behavior . Journal of Documentation 70 : 4 , 562 - 574 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 20 . Kyongseok Kim , Jameson L . Hayes , J . Adam Avant , Leonard N . Reid . 2014 . Trends in Advertising Research : A Longitudinal Analysis of Leading Advertising , Marketing , and Communication Journals , 1980 to 2010 . Journal of Advertising 43 , 296 - 316 . [ CrossRef ] 21 . Curtis Watson . 2014 . An exploratory study of secondary students ' judgments of the relevance and reliability of information . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 65 : 10 . 1002 / asi . 2014 . 65 . issue - 7 , 1385 - 1408 . [ CrossRef ] 22 . Jamshid Beheshti , Charles Cole , Dhary Abuhimed , Isabelle Lamoureux . 2014 . Tracking middle school students ' information behavior via Kuhlthau ' s ISP Model : Temporality . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology n / a - n / a . [ CrossRef ] 23 . Evagelos D . Lioutas . 2014 . Food Consumer Information Behavior : Need Arousal , Seeking Behavior , and Information Use . Journal of Agricultural & Food Information 15 , 81 - 108 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 24 . Ann Hallyburton , Lori A . Evarts . 2014 . Gender and Online Health Information Seeking : A Five Survey Meta - Analysis . Journal of Consumer Health On the Internet 18 , 128 - 142 . [ CrossRef ] 25 . Sunday O . Popoola , Olaronke O . Fagbola . 2014 . Innovation capability of managers in Nigerian large - scale manufacturing companies . SA Journal of Information Management 16 . . [ CrossRef ] 26 . Anik Legault , Marie Marquis . 2014 . Nutrition Information - seeking Behaviour of Low - income Pregnant Maghrebian Women . Canadian Journal of Dietetic Practice and Research 75 , 22 - 28 . [ CrossRef ] 27 . Chirag Shah . 2014 . Collaborative information seeking . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 65 : 10 . 1002 / asi . 2014 . 65 . issue - 2 , 215 - 236 . [ CrossRef ] 28 . Pervaiz Ahmad , Mark Brogan , Michael N . Johnstone . 2014 . The E - book Power User in Academic and Research Libraries : Deep Log Analysis and User Customisation . Australian Academic & Research Libraries 45 , 35 - 47 . [ CrossRef ] 29 . Chun Wei Choo , Indrani Nadarajah . 2014 . Early warning information seeking in the 2009 Victorian Bushfires . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 65 : 10 . 1002 / asi . 2014 . 65 . issue - 1 , 84 - 97 . [ CrossRef ] 30 . LiLi LiAcademic and scholarly search : strategies , methods , and roadmaps 125 - 165 . [ CrossRef ] 31 . References 237 - 264 . [ CrossRef ] 32 . Nan Xiao , Raj Sharman , H . R . Rao , Shambhu Upadhyaya . 2014 . Factors influencing online health information search : An empirical analysis of a national cancer - related survey . Decision Support Systems 57 , 417 - 427 . [ CrossRef ] 33 . Arvind Karunakaran , Madhu C . Reddy , Patricia Ruma Spence . 2013 . Toward a model of collaborative information behavior in organizations . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 64 : 10 . 1002 / asi . 2013 . 64 . issue - 12 , 2437 - 2451 . [ CrossRef ] 34 . Tumsifu Elly , Ephraem Epafra Silayo . 2013 . Agricultural information needs and sources of the rural farmers in Tanzania . Library Review 62 : 8 / 9 , 547 - 566 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 35 . Dale E . Brashers , Timothy P . Hogan . 2013 . The appraisal and management of uncertainty : Implications for information - retrieval systems . Information Processing & Management 49 , 1241 - 1249 . [ CrossRef ] 36 . Farzana Shafique , Khalid Mahmood . 2013 . Administration of Education Enterprise and Gaps in the Provision of Needed Information : The Case of Pakistan . The Journal of Academic Librarianship 39 , 535 - 545 . [ CrossRef ] 37 . I - Chin Wu , Guan - Wei Chen , Jia - Lien Hsu , Chun - Yu Lin . 2013 . An entropy - based query expansion approach for learning researchers’ dynamic information needs . Knowledge - Based Systems 52 , 133 - 146 . [ CrossRef ] 38 . L . Rollin , J . Ladner , A . Gislard , F . Monfrin , J . - Y . Larchevesque , P . Deslandes , J . - F . Gehanno . 2013 . Hazard information needs and information seeking in French workers . Occupational Medicine 63 , 473 - 478 . [ CrossRef ] 39 . Fourie Ina , Bakker Suzanne . 2013 . Value of a manageable research life cycle for LIS . The Electronic Library 31 : 5 , 648 - 663 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 40 . Jisu Lee . 2013 . A Comparative Analysis of Collaborative Information Behavior Models in Information Behavior Research . Journal of the Korean Society for information Management 30 , 183 - 205 . [ CrossRef ] 41 . Anne Sen Barbara , Spring Hannah . 2013 . Mapping the information - coping trajectory of young people with long term illness . Journal of Documentation 69 : 5 , 638 - 666 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 42 . Helen Egestad . 2013 . Radiographers relationship with head and neck cancer patients . Journal of Radiotherapy in Practice 12 , 245 - 254 . [ CrossRef ] 43 . Shuyuan Mary Ho , Michael Bieber , Min Song , Xiangmin Zhang . 2013 . Seeking beyond with IntegraL : A user study of sense - making enabled by anchor - based virtual integration of library systems . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 64 : 10 . 1002 / asi . 2013 . 64 . issue - 9 , 1927 - 1945 . [ CrossRef ] 44 . Jisu Lee . 2013 . Exploring Collaborative Information Behavior in the Group - Based Research Project : Content Analysis of Online Discussion Forum . Journal of the Korean Society for Library and Information Science 47 , 97 - 117 . [ CrossRef ] 45 . Lorie A . Kloda , Joan C . Bartlett . 2013 . Formulating Answerable Questions : Question Negotiation in Evidence - based Practice 1 , 2 . Journal of the Canadian Health Libraries Association 34 , 55 - 60 . [ CrossRef ] 46 . Mesfin Awoke Bekalu , Steven Eggermont . 2013 . Determinants of HIV / AIDS - Related Information Needs and Media Use : Beyond Individual - Level Factors . Health Communication 28 , 624 - 636 . [ CrossRef ] 47 . Jelmer Jeuring , Susanne Becken . 2013 . Tourists and severe weather – An exploration of the role of ‘Locus of Responsibility’ in protective behaviour decisions . Tourism Management 37 , 193 - 202 . [ CrossRef ] 48 . Richmond Davies , Dorothy Williams . 2013 . Towards a conceptual framework for provider information behaviour . Journal of Documentation 69 : 4 , 545 - 566 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 49 . Zahed Bigdeli , Morteza Kokabi , Gholam Reza Rajabi , Ali Gazni . 2013 . Patterns of authors’ information scattering : towards a causal explanation of information scattering from a scholarly information - seeking behavior perspective . Scientometrics 96 , 103 - 131 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 50 . Yan Zhang . 2013 . Toward a layered model of context for health information searching : An analysis of consumer - generated questions . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 64 : 10 . 1002 / asi . 2013 . 64 . issue - 6 , 1158 - 1172 . [ CrossRef ] 51 . Abdus Sattar Chaudhry , Husain Alansari . 2013 . Use of electronic and digital information by investment professionals in Kuwait . Library Review 62 : 3 , 157 - 176 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 52 . Valerie Nesset . 2013 . Two representations of the research process : The preparing , searching , and using ( PSU ) and the beginning , acting and telling ( BAT ) models . Library & Information Science Research 35 , 97 - 106 . [ CrossRef ] 53 . Sung - Bum Kim , Kyu Whan Choi , Dae - Young Kim . 2013 . The Motivations Of College Students’ Use Of Social Networking Sites In Travel Information Search Behavior : The Mediating Effect Of Interacting With Other Users . Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing 30 , 238 - 252 . [ CrossRef ] 54 . Mary F . Cavanagh . 2013 . Interpreting reference work with contemporary practice theory . Journal of Documentation 69 : 2 , 214 - 242 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 55 . Amy Catalano . 2013 . Patterns of graduate students ' information seeking behavior : a meta‐synthesis of the literature . Journal of Documentation 69 : 2 , 243 - 274 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 56 . Andrew Robson , Lyn Robinson . 2013 . Building on models of information behaviour : linking information seeking and communication . Journal of Documentation 69 : 2 , 169 - 193 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 57 . Patty Kostkova , Gemma Madle . 2013 . What impact do healthcare digital libraries have ? An evaluation of national resource of infection control at the point of care using the Impact - ED framework . International Journal on Digital Libraries 13 , 77 - 90 . [ CrossRef ] 58 . Hunter Mulcare , Yoshihisa Kashima , Jeannette Milgrom , Greg Wheeler , Andrew Wirth , Michelle Bishop , Penelope Schofield . 2013 . Avoidant adjustment predicts lower information seeking in people with lung cancer . Psycho - Oncology 22 : 10 . 1002 / pon . v22 . 3 , 540 - 547 . [ CrossRef ] 59 . Victor OdumuyiwaCollaborative Information Seeking in the Competitive Intelligence Process 69 - 91 . [ CrossRef ] 60 . Tanja Svarre , Marianne Lykke . 2013 . Professional e - government seeking behavior . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 50 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v50 : 1 , 1 - 10 . [ CrossRef ] 61 . Yusuke Ishimura . 2013 . Information Behavior and Japanese Students : How Can an Understanding of the Research Process Lead to Better Information Literacy ? . Public Services Quarterly 9 , 20 - 33 . [ CrossRef ] 62 . Nicole Marie Gaston , Dan Dorner , David Johnstone . 2013 . Information behaviour in transition : A developing country perspective . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 50 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v50 : 1 , 1 - 16 . [ CrossRef ] 63 . Chaang - Iuan Ho , Meng - Hui Lin , Hui - Mei Chen . 2012 . Web users’ behavioural patterns of tourism information search : From online to offline . Tourism Management 33 , 1468 - 1482 . [ CrossRef ] 64 . Prasanna BidkarCost of Information Overload in End - User Documentation 125 - 143 . [ CrossRef ] 65 . Kathrin Ambrozic , Ina Fourie . 2012 . A call for libraries to go green . Library Hi Tech 30 : 3 , 428 - 435 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 66 . Klaar Vanopstal , Robert Vander Stichele , Godelieve Laureys , Joost Buysschaert . 2012 . PubMed searches by Dutch - speaking nursing students : The impact of language and system experience . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 63 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v63 . 8 , 1538 - 1552 . [ CrossRef ] 67 . Lisa A . Cranley , Diane M . Doran , Ann E . Tourangeau , Andre Kushniruk , Lynn Nagle . 2012 . Recognizing and Responding to Uncertainty : A Grounded Theory of Nurses’ Uncertainty . Worldviews on Evidence - Based Nursing 9 , 149 - 158 . [ CrossRef ] 68 . Nujoud Al‐Muomen , Anne Morris , Sally Maynard . 2012 . Modelling information‐seeking behaviour of graduate students at Kuwait University . Journal of Documentation 68 : 4 , 430 - 459 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 69 . Malcolm Clark , Yunhyong Kim , Udo Kruschwitz , Dawei Song , Dyaa Albakour , Stephen Dignum , Ulises Cerviño Beresi , Maria Fasli , Anne De Roeck . 2012 . Automatically structuring domain knowledge from text : An overview of current research . Information Processing & Management 48 , 552 - 568 . [ CrossRef ] 70 . Jeong Yeob Han . 2012 . A Longitudinal Study of Use of an Interactive Health Communication System . Health Communication 27 , 319 - 330 . [ CrossRef ] 71 . Christine Marton , Chun Wei Choo . 2012 . A review of theoretical models of health information seeking on the web . Journal of Documentation 68 : 3 , 330 - 352 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 72 . Nancy K . Lankton , Cheri Speier , E . Vance Wilson . 2012 . Internet - based knowledge acquisition : Task complexity and performance . Decision Support Systems 53 , 55 - 65 . [ CrossRef ] 73 . J . Dinet , A . Chevalier , A . Tricot . 2012 . Information search activity : An overview . Revue Européenne de Psychologie Appliquée / European Review of Applied Psychology 62 , 49 - 62 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 74 . Edin Tabak , Michele Willson . 2012 . A non - linear model of information sharing practices in academic communities . Library & Information Science Research 34 , 110 - 116 . [ CrossRef ] 75 . Se - Na Oh , Jee - Yeon Lee . 2012 . A Study on Information Searching Behavior of Smart Phone Users . Journal of the Korean Society for information Management 29 , 191 - 209 . [ CrossRef ] 76 . Esther Argelagós , Manoli Pifarré . 2012 . Improving Information Problem Solving skills in Secondary Education through embedded instruction . Computers in Human Behavior 28 , 515 - 526 . [ CrossRef ] 77 . Martijn D . F . Rhebergen , Annet F . Lenderink , Frank J . H . van Dijk , Carel T . J . Hulshof . 2012 . Do dutch workers seek and find information on occupational safety and health ? . American Journal of Industrial Medicine 55 , 250 - 259 . [ CrossRef ] 78 . Andrew K . Shenton , Naomi V . Hay‐Gibson . 2012 . Information behaviour meta‐models . Library Review 61 : 2 , 92 - 109 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 79 . Nirupama Dharmavaram Sreenivasan , Chei Sian Lee , Dion Hoe‐Lian Goh . 2012 . Tweeting the friendly skies . Program 46 : 1 , 21 - 42 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 80 . Denise Fiona O’leary , Siobhán Ni Mhaolrúnaigh . 2012 . Information - seeking behaviour of nurses : where is information sought and what processes are followed ? . Journal of Advanced Nursing 68 : 10 . 1111 / jan . 2011 . 68 . issue - 2 , 379 - 390 . [ CrossRef ] 81 . Manuel Burghardt , Markus Heckner , Christian WolffChapter 2 The Many Ways of Searching the Web Together : A Comparison of Social Search Engines 19 - 46 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] [ PDF ] 82 . Aurora González - Teruel , M . Francisca Abad - García . 2012 . Grounded theory for generating theory in the study of behavior . Library & Information Science Research 34 , 31 - 36 . [ CrossRef ] 83 . Arthur Taylor . 2012 . User relevance criteria choices and the information search process . Information Processing & Management 48 , 136 - 153 . [ CrossRef ] 84 . Yan Zhang . 2012 . Consumer health information searching process in real life settings . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 49 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v49 : 1 , 1 - 10 . [ CrossRef ] 85 . Alton Y . K . Chua , Dion Hoe - Lian Goh , Chei Sian Lee . 2012 . Mobile content contribution and retrieval : An exploratory study using the uses and gratifications paradigm . Information Processing & Management 48 , 13 - 22 . [ CrossRef ] 86 . Martijn RHEBERGEN , Frank VAN DIJK , Carel HULSHOF . 2012 . Can Workers Answer Their Questions about Occupational Safety and Health : Challenges and Solutions . Industrial Health 50 , 239 - 249 . [ CrossRef ] 87 . Joselice Ferreira Lima , Gustavo Miranda Caran , Luiz Fernando R . Molinaro , Daniela Favarro Garrossini . 2012 . Analysis of Accessibility Initiatives Applied to the Web . Procedia Technology 5 , 319 - 326 . [ CrossRef ] 88 . Fang Wang , Yongbo Chen . 2012 . From potential users to actual users : Use of e - government service by Chinese migrant farmer workers . Government Information Quarterly 29 , S98 - S111 . [ CrossRef ] 89 . Kalervo Järvelin , Peter IngwersenUser - Oriented and Cognitive Models of Information Retrieval 47 - 64 . [ CrossRef ] 90 . Paolo Gardois , Roberto Calabrese , Nicoletta Colombi , Annamaria Deplano , Carla Lingua , Filomena Longo , Maria C . Villanacci , Roberto Miniero , Antonio Piga . 2011 . Effectiveness of bibliographic searches performed by paediatric residents and interns assisted by librarians . A randomised controlled trial . Health Information & Libraries Journal 28 : 10 . 1111 / hir . 2011 . 28 . issue - 4 , 273 - 284 . [ CrossRef ] 91 . Feng Gu , Gunilla Widén‐Wulff . 2011 . Scholarly communication and possible changes in the context of social media . The Electronic Library 29 : 6 , 762 - 776 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 92 . Kumar Laxman . 2011 . Dynamic and spatial representation of web movements and navigational patterns through the use of navigational paths as data . Instructional Science 39 , 881 - 900 . [ CrossRef ] 93 . Daniel Backhausen , Claus - Peter Klas , Matthias Hemmje . 2011 . Adaptive Benutzerunterstützung in interaktiven Informationssuchprozessen . Datenbank - Spektrum 11 , 149 - 160 . [ CrossRef ] 94 . Carola Carstens , Dorothea Mildner . 2011 . Query Reformulation Behavior in an Interactive Query Expansion Environment . Datenbank - Spektrum 11 , 161 - 172 . [ CrossRef ] 95 . Seong - Hee Kim . 2011 . A Study on the Social and Cultural Characteristics of Web Queries . Journal of Information Management 42 , 155 - 174 . [ CrossRef ] 96 . Tae - Sul Seo , Hee - Yoon Choi . 2011 . Global Dissemination of Domestic Scholarly Journals Using DOI and Open Access . Journal of Information Management 42 , 1 - 21 . [ CrossRef ] 97 . Peter Stokes , Christine Urquhart . 2011 . Profiling information behaviour of nursing students : part 1 : quantitative findings . Journal of Documentation 67 : 6 , 908 - 932 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 98 . Adam Grzywaczewski , Rahat Iqbal , Anne James , John Halloran . 2011 . An Investigation of User Behaviour Consistency for Context - Aware Information Retrieval Systems . International Journal of Advanced Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 1 : 10 . 4018 / ijapuc . 20091001 , 69 - 90 . [ CrossRef ] 99 . Roland Grad , Pierre Pluye , Vera Granikov , Janique Johnson - Lafleur , Michael Shulha , Soumya Bindiganavile Sridhar , Jonathan L . Moscovici , Gillian Bartlett , Alain C . Vandal , Bernard Marlow , Lorie Kloda . 2011 . Physicians ' assessment of the value of D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) clinical information : Operationalization of a theoretical model . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v62 . 10 , 1884 - 1891 . [ CrossRef ] 100 . Andrew K . Shenton , Naomi V . Hay‐Gibson . 2011 . Modelling the information behaviour of children and young people . Aslib Proceedings 63 : 5 , 499 - 516 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 101 . Nicolette M . Kupper , Hanneke Schreurs , Peter M . ten Klooster , Christina Bode , Erik J . C . van Ameijden . 2011 . Prevention for elderly people : Demand - oriented or problem - oriented ? . Health Policy 102 , 96 - 103 . [ CrossRef ] 102 . Christopher E . Beaudoin , Traci Hong . 2011 . Health information seeking , diet and physical activity : An empirical assessment by medium and critical demographics . International Journal of Medical Informatics 80 , 586 - 595 . [ CrossRef ] 103 . Marzena Świgoń . 2011 . Information limits : definition , typology and types . Aslib Proceedings 63 : 4 , 364 - 379 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 104 . Stephann Makri , Ann Blandford , Anna L . Cox , Simon Attfield , Claire Warwick . 2011 . Evaluating the Information Behaviour methods : Formative evaluations of two methods for assessing the functionality and usability of electronic information resources . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 69 , 455 - 482 . [ CrossRef ] 105 . Charles Cole . 2011 . A theory of information need for information retrieval that connects information to knowledge . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v62 . 7 , 1216 - 1231 . [ CrossRef ] 106 . Xiaofeng Ji , Jian Xiong , Jianshi LiResidents ' Travel Information Searching Behavior and Cognitive Mode Based on Travel Decision 488 - 494 . [ CrossRef ] 107 . Ina Fourie . 2011 . Personal information and reference management . Library Hi Tech 29 : 2 , 387 - 393 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 108 . Ron Houston . 2011 . CNI : Compelled Nonuse of Information . Information Processing & Management 47 , 363 - 375 . [ CrossRef ] 109 . H . Mulcare , P . Schofield , Y . Kashima , J . Milgrom , A . Wirth , M . Bishop , G . Wheeler . 2011 . Adjustment to cancer and the information needs of people with lung cancer . Psycho - Oncology 20 : 10 . 1002 / pon . v20 . 5 , 488 - 496 . [ CrossRef ] 110 . I‐Chin Wu . 2011 . Toward supporting information‐seeking and retrieval activities based on evolving topic‐needs . Journal of Documentation 67 : 3 , 525 - 561 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 111 . Geoff Walton , Mark Hepworth . 2011 . A longitudinal study of changes in learners ' cognitive states during and following an information literacy teaching intervention . Journal of Documentation 67 : 3 , 449 - 479 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 112 . Peter Gerjets , Yvonne Kammerer , Benita Werner . 2011 . Measuring spontaneous and instructed evaluation processes during Web search : Integrating concurrent thinking - aloud protocols and eye - tracking data . Learning and Instruction 21 , 220 - 231 . [ CrossRef ] 113 . Peter Willett , Catherine A . Beverley , Peter A . Bath , Rosemary Barber . 2011 . Health and social care information for visually‐ impaired people . Aslib Proceedings 63 : 2 / 3 , 256 - 274 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 114 . Paula Ormandy . 2011 . Defining information need in health - assimilating complex theories derived from information science . Health Expectations 14 , 92 - 104 . [ CrossRef ] 115 . Mohammed Nasser Al - Suqri . 2011 . Information - seeking behavior of social science scholars in developing countries : A proposed model . The International Information & Library Review 43 , 1 - 14 . [ CrossRef ] 116 . Andrew K . Shenton , Naomi V . Hay‐Gibson . 2011 . Modelling the information‐seeking behaviour of children and young people . Aslib Proceedings 63 : 1 , 57 - 75 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 117 . Maria Souden , Joan C . Durrance . 2011 . Information use in chronic illness care : The role of the electronic health record in bridging patient experience and healthcare contexts . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 48 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v48 : 1 , 1 - 11 . [ CrossRef ] 118 . Tan Xu , Douglas W . Oard . 2011 . Wikipedia - based topic clustering for microblogs . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 48 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v48 : 1 , 1 - 10 . [ CrossRef ] 119 . Jacek Gwizdka . 2011 . Visualizing search sequences . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 48 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v48 : 1 , 1 - 4 . [ CrossRef ] 120 . Steve Whittaker . 2011 . Personal information management : From information consumption to curation . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 45 : 10 . 1002 / aris . 144 . v45 : 1 , 1 - 62 . [ CrossRef ] 121 . Chirag Shah , Roberto González - Ibáñez . 2010 . Exploring information seeking processes in collaborative search tasks . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 47 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v47 : 1 , 1 - 7 . [ CrossRef ] 122 . Morten Hertzum . 2010 . Breakdowns in collaborative information seeking : A study of the medication process . Information Processing & Management 46 , 646 - 655 . [ CrossRef ] 123 . Isto Huvila . 2010 . Information sources and perceived success in corporate finance . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61 , 2219 - 2229 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 124 . Jamshid Beheshti , Dania Bilal , Allison Druin , Andrew Large . 2010 . Testing children ' s information retrieval systems : Challenges in a new era . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 47 : 10 . 1002 / meet . 145 . v47 : 1 , 1 - 4 . [ CrossRef ] 125 . Tiffany Veinot . 2010 . A multilevel model of HIV / AIDS information / help network development . Journal of Documentation 66 : 6 , 875 - 905 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 126 . Youngok Choi . 2010 . Effects of contextual factors on image searching on the Web . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v61 : 10 , 2011 - 2028 . [ CrossRef ] 127 . Olugbade Oladokun . 2010 . Information Seeking Behavior of the Off - Campus Students at the University of Botswana : A Case of Two Satellite Centers . Journal of Library Administration 50 , 883 - 898 . [ CrossRef ] 128 . Karl V . Fast , Kamran Sedig . 2010 . Interaction and the epistemic potential of digital libraries . International Journal on Digital Libraries 11 , 169 - 207 . [ CrossRef ] 129 . Yuelin Li , Nicholas J . Belkin . 2010 . An exploration of the relationships between work task and interactive information search behavior . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v61 : 9 , 1771 - 1789 . [ CrossRef ] 130 . N . K . Sheeja . 2010 . Science vs social science . Library Review 59 : 7 , 522 - 531 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 131 . Laila Marouf , Mumtaz A . Anwar . 2010 . Information‐seeking behavior of the social sciences faculty at Kuwait University . Library Review 59 : 7 , 532 - 547 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 132 . Olle Persson . 2010 . Identifying research themes with weighted direct citation links . Journal of Informetrics 4 , 415 - 422 . [ CrossRef ] 133 . G . K . B . HALKETT , L . J . KRISTJANSON , E . LOBB , C . O ' DRISCOLL , M . TAYLOR , N . SPRY . 2010 . Meeting breast cancer patients ' information needs during radiotherapy : what can we do to improve the information and support that is currently provided ? . European Journal of Cancer Care 19 : 10 . 1111 / ecc . 2010 . 19 . issue - 4 , 538 - 547 . [ CrossRef ] 134 . Rebecca Van de Vord . 2010 . Distance students and online research : Promoting information literacy through media literacy . The Internet and Higher Education 13 , 170 - 175 . [ CrossRef ] 135 . Jin Ha Lee . 2010 . Analysis of user needs and information features in natural language queries seeking music information . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61 , 1025 - 1045 . [ CrossRef ] 136 . Kelly Blessinger , Paul Hrycaj . 2010 . Highly cited articles in library and information science : An analysis of content and authorship trends . Library & Information Science Research 32 , 156 - 162 . [ CrossRef ] 137 . Joakim Ekberg , Leni Ericson , Toomas Timpka , Henrik Eriksson , Sam Nordfeldt , Lena Hanberger , Johnny Ludvigsson . 2010 . Web 2 . 0 Systems Supporting Childhood Chronic Disease Management : Design Guidelines Based on Information Behaviour and Social Learning Theories . Journal of Medical Systems 34 , 107 - 117 . [ CrossRef ] 138 . Sally Harridge‐March , Boram Park , SooKyoung Ahn , HaeJung Kim . 2010 . Blogging : mediating impacts of flow on motivational behavior . Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing 4 : 1 , 6 - 29 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 139 . Ágústa Pálsdóttir . 2010 . The connection between purposive information seeking and information encountering . Journal of Documentation 66 : 2 , 224 - 244 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 140 . Seong - Sin Lee . 2010 . Library Service Users ' Information Seeking Behavior Model Based on the Grounded Theory Methodology . Journal of the Korean Society for Library and Information Science 44 , 5 - 28 . [ CrossRef ] 141 . Andrew K . Shenton . 2010 . Uniting information behaviour research and the information professional . Library Review 59 : 1 , 9 - 23 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 142 . T . D . Wilson . 2010 . Fifty years of information behavior research . Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 36 : 10 . 1002 / bult . 172 . v36 : 3 , 27 - 34 . [ CrossRef ] 143 . Joan Ruthven . 2010 . The Information - Seeking Behavior of Online Public Library Clients : A Conceptual Model . The Australian Library Journal 59 , 30 - 45 . [ CrossRef ] 144 . Caroline F . Timmers , Cees A . W . Glas . 2010 . Developing scales for information‐seeking behaviour . Journal of Documentation 66 : 1 , 46 - 69 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 145 . Alan Brine , John Feather . 2010 . The information needs of UK historic houses : mapping the ground . Journal of Documentation 66 : 1 , 28 - 45 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 146 . Bernard J . Jansen , Soo Young Rieh . 2010 . The seventeen theoretical constructs of information searching and information retrieval . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology n / a - n / a . [ CrossRef ] 147 . Kendra Albright . 2010 . Multidisciplinarity in Information Behavior : Expanding Boundaries or Fragmentation of the Field ? . Libri 60 . . [ CrossRef ] 148 . David Arnott . 2010 . Senior Executive Information Behaviors and Decision Support . Journal of Decision Systems 19 , 465 - 480 . [ CrossRef ] 149 . Leanne Bowler . 2010 . A taxonomy of adolescent metacognitive knowledge during the information search process . Library & Information Science Research 32 , 27 - 42 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 150 . Jung - Yeoun Lee . 2009 . A Study on the Development of the Broadcast Content Creators ' Information Behavior Model through Analysis of the Planning Process . Journal of the Korean Society for Library and Information Science 43 , 59 - 81 . [ CrossRef ] 151 . Yunfei Du . 2009 . A review of structural equation modeling and its use in library and information studies . Library & Information Science Research 31 , 257 - 263 . [ CrossRef ] 152 . Tiffany C . Veinot . 2009 . Interactive acquisition and sharing : Understanding the dynamics of HIV / AIDS information networks . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 60 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v60 : 11 , 2313 - 2332 . [ CrossRef ] 153 . Bernard J . Jansen , Danielle Booth , Brian Smith . 2009 . Using the taxonomy of cognitive learning to model online searching . Information Processing & Management 45 , 643 - 663 . [ CrossRef ] 154 . Muh‐Chyun Tang . 2009 . A study of academic library users ' decision‐making process : a Lens model approach . Journal of Documentation 65 : 6 , 938 - 957 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 155 . Linda Isabella Fainburg . 2009 . Information seeking and learning : a comparison of Kuhlthau ' s information seeking model and John Dewey ' s problem solving model . New Library World 110 : 9 / 10 , 457 - 466 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 156 . Art Taylor , Xiangmin Zhang , William J . Amadio . 2009 . Examination of relevance criteria choices and the information search process . Journal of Documentation 65 : 5 , 719 - 744 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 157 . Ina Fourie . 2009 . Learning from research on the information behaviour of healthcare professionals : a review of the literature 2004 - 2008 with a focus on emotion . Health Information & Libraries Journal 26 : 10 . 1111 / hir . 2009 . 26 . issue - 3 , 171 - 186 . [ CrossRef ] 158 . J . David Johnson . 2009 . An impressionistic mapping of information behavior with special attention to contexts , rationality , and ignorance . Information Processing & Management 45 , 593 - 604 . [ CrossRef ] 159 . Julie Bourbeillon , Catherine Garbay , Françoise Giroud . 2009 . Mass data exploration in oncology : An information synthesis approach . Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 , 612 - 623 . [ CrossRef ] 160 . Maria E . Burke . 2009 . The exploration of relationships between information fulfilment and organisational design . Journal of Documentation 65 : 4 , 561 - 577 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 161 . Ming H . Hsieh . 2009 . Human centric knowledge seeking strategies : a stakeholder perspective . Journal of Knowledge Management 13 : 4 , 115 - 133 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 162 . Anna Maria Tammaro . 2009 . Digital Consumers : Reshaping the Information Profession . Performance Measurement and Metrics 10 : 2 , 151 - 153 . [ Citation ] [ Full Text ] 163 . Jae Whoan Lee . 2009 . Personal Traits and Information Behavior : The Case of College Freshmen . Journal of Korean Library and Information Science Society 40 , 161 - 182 . [ CrossRef ] 164 . Sudatta Chowdhury , Forbes Gibb . 2009 . Relationship among activities and problems causing uncertainty in information seeking and retrieval . Journal of Documentation 65 : 3 , 470 - 499 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 165 . Juan M . Fernández - Luna , Juan F . Huete , Andrew MacFarlane , Efthimis N . Efthimiadis . 2009 . Teaching and learning in information retrieval . Information Retrieval 12 , 201 - 226 . [ CrossRef ] 166 . Jeonghyun Kim . 2009 . Describing and predicting information - seeking behavior on the Web . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 60 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v60 : 4 , 679 - 693 . [ CrossRef ] 167 . Theodora Ngosi , Ashley Braganza . 2009 . Toward a component - based design framework of the international information technology standardization process . Journal of Information Technology 24 , 103 - 125 . [ CrossRef ] 168 . Ramesh Srinivasan , Alberto Pepe , Marko A . Rodriguez . 2009 . A clustering - based semi - automated technique to build cultural ontologies . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 60 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v60 : 3 , 608 - 620 . [ CrossRef ] 169 . Andrew K . Shenton . 2009 . Search images , information seeking and information literacy . Library Review 58 : 2 , 109 - 115 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 170 . Alica C . White , Yunshan Ye , Margaret Guccione . 2009 . Study Abroad Students : Designing Library Services to Meet Their Needs . Journal of Library Administration 49 , 187 - 196 . [ CrossRef ] 171 . Monica Vezzosi . 2009 . Doctoral students ' information behaviour : an exploratory study at the University of Parma ( Italy ) . New Library World 110 : 1 / 2 , 65 - 80 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 172 . Alesia Zuccala . 2009 . The lay person and Open Access . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 43 : 10 . 1002 / aris . 144 . v43 : 1 , 1 - 62 . [ CrossRef ] 173 . Keisuke Inoue . 2009 . Discourse analysis of online chat reference interviews for modeling online information - seeking dialogues . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 46 , 1 - 15 . [ CrossRef ] 174 . Yusuke Ishimura , Joan Bartlett . 2009 . Analysis of Japanese undergraduate students ' information behavior during academic tasks in a Canadian university . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 46 , 1 - 6 . [ CrossRef ] 175 . Heather L . O ' Brien . 2009 . Exploring engagement in the qualitative research process . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 46 , 1 - 4 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 176 . Ryen W . White , Resa A . Roth . 2009 . Exploratory Search : Beyond the Query - Response Paradigm . Synthesis Lectures on Information Concepts , Retrieval , and Services 1 , 1 - 98 . [ CrossRef ] 177 . Jette Hyldegård . 2009 . Beyond the search process – Exploring group members’ information behavior in context . Information Processing & Management 45 , 142 - 158 . [ CrossRef ] 178 . Karen E . Fisher , Heidi Julien . 2009 . Information behavior . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 43 : 10 . 1002 / aris . 144 . v43 : 1 , 1 - 73 . [ CrossRef ] 179 . References 233 - 247 . [ CrossRef ] 180 . Mozhdeh Salajegheh , Zouhayr Hayati . 2009 . Modelling Information - Seeking Behaviour Patterns of Iranian Medical School Academic Staff . Libri 59 . . [ CrossRef ] 181 . Georgia K . B . Halkett , Michala Short , Linda J . Kristjanson . 2009 . How do radiation oncology health professionals inform breast cancer patients about the medical and technical aspects of their treatment ? . Radiotherapy and Oncology 90 , 153 - 159 . [ CrossRef ] 182 . Jung - Yeoun Lee . 2008 . A Qualitative Study of Film Creators ' Information Behavior Model . Journal of the Korean Society for Library and Information Science 42 , 417 - 439 . [ CrossRef ] 183 . Stephann Makri , Ann Blandford , Anna L . Cox . 2008 . Using information behaviors to evaluate the functionality and usability of electronic resources : From Ellis ' s model to evaluation . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 59 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v59 : 14 , 2244 - 2267 . [ CrossRef ] 184 . Stephen A . Roberts , Abigail McBirnie . 2008 . Seeking serendipity : the paradox of control . Aslib Proceedings 60 : 6 , 600 - 618 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 185 . Yuelin Li , Nicholas J . Belkin . 2008 . A faceted approach to conceptualizing tasks in information seeking . Information Processing & Management 44 , 1822 - 1837 . [ CrossRef ] 186 . Mikko Tanni , Eero Sormunen . 2008 . A critical review of research on information behavior in assigned learning tasks . Journal of Documentation 64 : 6 , 893 - 914 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 187 . Ellen Ter Huurne , Jan Gutteling . 2008 . Information needs and risk perception as predictors of risk information seeking . Journal of Risk Research 11 , 847 - 862 . [ CrossRef ] 188 . Niels Ole Pors . 2008 . Traditional use patterns ? . New Library World 109 : 9 / 10 , 431 - 443 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 189 . Charles Cole . 2008 . A socio - cognitive framework for designing interactive IR systems : Lessons from the Neanderthals . Information Processing & Management 44 , 1784 - 1793 . [ CrossRef ] 190 . Sharon K . Byrne . 2008 . Healthcare Avoidance . Holistic Nursing Practice 22 , 280 - 292 . [ CrossRef ] 191 . Sei - Ching Joanna Sin , Kyung - Sun Kim . 2008 . Use and non - use of public libraries in the information age : A logistic regression analysis of household characteristics and library services variables . Library & Information Science Research 30 , 207 - 215 . [ CrossRef ] 192 . Ziming Liu , Xiaobin Huang . 2008 . Gender differences in the online reading environment . Journal of Documentation 64 : 4 , 616 - 626 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 193 . Juliet A . Harland , Peter A . Bath . 2008 . Understanding the information behaviours of carers of people with dementia : A critical review of models from information science . Aging & Mental Health 12 , 467 - 477 . [ CrossRef ] 194 . Giannis Tsakonas , Christos Papatheodorou . 2008 . Exploring usefulness and usability in the evaluation of open access digital libraries . Information Processing & Management 44 , 1234 - 1250 . [ CrossRef ] 195 . Saskia Brand - Gruwel , Peter Gerjets . 2008 . Instructional support for enhancing students’ information problem solving ability . Computers in Human Behavior 24 , 615 - 622 . [ CrossRef ] 196 . Iwan Wopereis , Saskia Brand - Gruwel , Yvonne Vermetten . 2008 . The effect of embedded instruction on solving information problems . Computers in Human Behavior 24 , 738 - 752 . [ CrossRef ] 197 . Andrew K . Shenton . 2008 . The information‐seeking problems of English high schoolers responding to academic information need . Library Review 57 : 4 , 276 - 288 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 198 . Nor Shahriza Abdul Karim , Ramlah Hussein . 2008 . Managers’ perception of information management and the role of information and knowledge managers : The Malaysian perspectives . International Journal of Information Management 28 , 114 - 127 . [ CrossRef ] 199 . Peter W . Hung , Stephen B . Johnson , David R . Kaufman , Eneida A . Mendonça . 2008 . A multi - level model of information seeking in the clinical domain . Journal of Biomedical Informatics 41 , 357 - 370 . [ CrossRef ] 200 . Morten Hertzum . 2008 . Collaborative information seeking : The combined activity of information seeking and collaborative grounding . Information Processing & Management 44 , 957 - 962 . [ CrossRef ] 201 . Stephann Makri , Ann Blandford , Anna L . Cox . 2008 . Investigating the information - seeking behaviour of academic lawyers : From Ellis’s model to design . Information Processing & Management 44 , 613 - 634 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 202 . Charles Inskip , Richard Butterworth , Andrew MacFarlane . 2008 . A study of the information needs of the users of a folk music library and the implications for the design of a digital library system . Information Processing & Management 44 , 647 - 662 . [ CrossRef ] 203 . Gashaw Kebede , Abebe Rorissa . 2008 . A model of information needs of end - users ( MINE ) in the electronic information environment . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 45 , 1 - 3 . [ CrossRef ] 204 . Kyung - Sun Kim . 2008 . Effects of emotion control and task on Web searching behavior . Information Processing & Management 44 , 373 - 385 . [ CrossRef ] 205 . Ann Blandford , Anne Adams , Simon Attfield , George Buchanan , Jeremy Gow , Stephann Makri , Jon Rimmer , Claire Warwick . 2008 . The PRET A Rapporter framework : Evaluating digital libraries from the perspective of information work . Information Processing & Management 44 , 4 - 21 . [ CrossRef ] 206 . Charles Cole . 2008 . People transforming information - information transforming people : What the Neanderthals can teach us . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 45 , 1 - 10 . [ CrossRef ] 207 . Carol C . Kuhlthau . 2008 . From Information to Meaning : Confronting Challenges of the Twenty - first Century . Libri 58 . . [ CrossRef ] 208 . Elaine G . Toms , Sandra Toze , Elizabeth Kelley . 2008 . Integrating the group within models of information processes . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 45 , 1 - 12 . [ CrossRef ] 209 . Delia Neuman . 2008 . I - LEARN : A model for learning in the information age . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 45 , 1 - 10 . [ CrossRef ] 210 . Heather L . O ' Brien . 2007 . Exploring information systems research approaches : Readings and reflections . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v58 : 14 , 2402 - 2403 . [ CrossRef ] 211 . Bradley M . Hemminger , Dihui Lu , K . T . L . Vaughan , Stephanie J . Adams . 2007 . Information seeking behavior of academic scientists . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v58 : 14 , 2205 - 2225 . [ CrossRef ] 212 . Andrea Lösch , J . Siân Lambert . 2007 . E - Reverse Auctions Revisited : An Analysis of Context , Buyer – Supplier Relations and Information Behavior . The Journal of Supply Chain Management 43 : 10 . 1111 / jscm . 2007 . 43 . issue - 4 , 47 - 63 . [ CrossRef ] 213 . Dorothy Williams , Louisa Coles . 2007 . Evidence‐based practice in teaching : an information perspective . Journal of Documentation 63 : 6 , 812 - 835 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 214 . Maria E . Burke . 2007 . Cultural issues , organizational hierarchy and information fulfilment . Library Review 56 : 8 , 678 - 693 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 215 . Jeroen Kraaijenbrink . 2007 . Engineers and the Web : An analysis of real life gaps in information usage . Information Processing & Management 43 , 1368 - 1382 . [ CrossRef ] 216 . Denise E . Agosto . 2007 . Library & Information Science Research 29 , 438 - 441 . [ CrossRef ] 217 . Jeff Niederdeppe , Robert C . Hornik , Bridget J . Kelly , Dominick L . Frosch , Anca Romantan , Robin S . Stevens , Frances K . Barg , Judith L . Weiner , J . Sanford Schwartz . 2007 . Examining the Dimensions of Cancer - Related Information Seeking and Scanning Behavior . Health Communication 22 , 153 - 167 . [ CrossRef ] 218 . Chingning Wang . 2007 . New directions in human information behavior . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v58 : 10 , 1553 - 1553 . [ CrossRef ] 219 . Andrea Lösch , J . Siân Lambert . 2007 . Information behaviour in e‐reverse auctions . Journal of Enterprise Information Management 20 : 4 , 447 - 464 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 220 . John E . Leide , Charles Cole , Jamshid Beheshti , Andrew Large , Yang Lin . 2007 . Task - based information retrieval : Structuring undergraduate history essays for better course evaluation using essay - type visualizations . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v58 : 9 , 1227 - 1241 . [ CrossRef ] 221 . Yang - Woo Kim . 2007 . Interactive Information Retrieval ( IR ) Models : Tradition and Development . Journal of the Korean Society for information Management 24 , 45 - 69 . [ CrossRef ] 222 . Athulang Mutshewa . 2007 . A theoretical exploration of information behaviour : a power perspective . Aslib Proceedings 59 : 3 , 249 - 263 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 223 . Ina Fourie , Theo Bothma . 2007 . Information seeking : an overview of web tracking and the criteria for tracking software . Aslib Proceedings 59 : 3 , 264 - 284 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 224 . Kalervo Järvelin . 2007 . An analysis of two approaches in information retrieval : From frameworks to study designs . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v58 : 7 , 971 - 986 . [ CrossRef ] 225 . Catherine A . Johnson . 2007 . Social capital and the search for information : Examining the role of social capital in information seeking behavior in Mongolia . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v58 : 6 , 883 - 894 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 226 . Ray Hackney , Steve Jones , Andrea Lösch . 2007 . Towards an e - Government efficiency agenda : the impact of information and communication behaviour on e - Reverse auctions in public sector procurement . European Journal of Information Systems 16 , 178 - 191 . [ CrossRef ] 227 . Pierre Pluye , Roland M . Grad , Martin Dawes , Joan C . Bartlett . 2007 . Seven reasons why health professionals search clinical information - retrieval technology ( CIRT ) : toward an organizational model . Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 13 : 10 . 1111 / jep . 2007 . 13 . issue - 1 , 39 - 49 . [ CrossRef ] 228 . Amanda Spink , Allen Foster , Elena Prigoda , Pamela J . McKenzie . 2007 . Purls of wisdom . Journal of Documentation 63 : 1 , 90 - 114 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 229 . Amanda Spink , Allen Foster , Mark Hepworth . 2007 . Knowledge of information behaviour and its relevance to the design of people‐centred information products and services . Journal of Documentation 63 : 1 , 33 - 56 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 230 . Amanda Spink , Allen Foster , C . A . Beverley , P . A . Bath , R . Barber . 2007 . Can two established information models explain the information behaviour of visually impaired people seeking health and social care information ? . Journal of Documentation 63 : 1 , 9 - 32 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 231 . Harriet LönnqvistThe Research Processes of Humanities Scholars 175 - 202 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] [ PDF ] 232 . Peiling Wang , Dimitris A . Dervos , Yan Zhang , Lei Wu . 2007 . Information - seeking behaviors of academic researchers in the internet age : A user study in the United States , China and Greece . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 44 , 1 - 29 . [ CrossRef ] 233 . Makiko Miwa . 2007 . Verification of information behavioral grammar : Role of searchers . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 44 , 1 - 12 . [ CrossRef ] 234 . Eric M . Meyers . 2007 . Bridging social and private interactions : Collaborative Information Retrieval in K - 12 learning contexts . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 44 , 1 - 7 . [ CrossRef ] 235 . Roland Grad , Pierre Pluye , Marie - Eve Beauchamp , James Hanley , Bernard Marlow , Michael Shulha , Janique Johnson - Lafleur , Ann Macaulay , Kimiz Dalkir . 2007 . Validation of a Method to Assess the Clinical Impact of Electronic Knowledge Resources . e - Service Journal 5 : 10 . 2979 / esj . 2007 . 5 . issue - 2 , 113 - 136 . [ CrossRef ] 236 . John MillsCreating desire : bringing the library client and the librarian together 91 - 106 . [ CrossRef ] 237 . Christina Courtright . 2007 . Context in information behavior research . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 41 , 273 - 306 . [ CrossRef ] 238 . Wingyan Chung , Alfonso Bonillas , Guanpi Lai , Wei Xi , Hsinchun Chen . 2006 . Supporting non - English Web searching : An experiment on the Spanish business and the Arabic medical intelligence portals . Decision Support Systems 42 , 1697 - 1714 . [ CrossRef ] 239 . David Bawden . 2006 . Users , user studies and human information behaviour . Journal of Documentation 62 : 6 , 671 - 679 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 240 . Sudatta Chowdhury , Monica Landoni , Forbes Gibb . 2006 . Usability and impact of digital libraries : a review . Online Information Review 30 : 6 , 656 - 680 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 241 . Dorothee Blocks , Daniel Cunliffe , Douglas Tudhope . 2006 . A reference model for user - system interaction in thesaurus - based searching . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 57 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v57 : 12 , 1655 - 1665 . [ CrossRef ] 242 . M . E . Burke . 2006 . Achieving “information fulfilment” in the networked society . New Library World 107 : 9 / 10 , 444 - 449 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 243 . Wingyan Chung . 2006 . Studying information seeking on the non - English Web : An experiment on a Spanish business Web portal . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 64 , 811 - 829 . [ CrossRef ] 244 . Ina Fourie , Theo Bothma . 2006 . Addressing the digital divide in teaching information retrieval . The Electronic Library 24 : 4 , 469 - 489 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 245 . 2006 . A User Study on Information Searching Behaviors for Designing User - centered Query Interface of Content - Based Music Information Retrieval System . Journal of the Korean Society for information Management 23 , 5 - 19 . [ CrossRef ] 246 . Maureen E . Hupfer , Brian Detlor . 2006 . Gender and Web information seeking : A self - concept orientation model . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 57 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v57 : 8 , 1105 - 1115 . [ CrossRef ] 247 . James Kalbach . 2006 . “I ' m feeling lucky” : The role of emotions in seeking information on the Web . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 57 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v57 : 6 , 813 - 818 . [ CrossRef ] 248 . Carol Davy . 2006 . Recipients : the key to information transfer . Knowledge Management Research & # 38 ; Practice 4 , 17 - 25 . [ CrossRef ] 249 . Ina Fourie . 2006 . Learning from web information seeking studies : some suggestions for LIS practitioners . The Electronic Library 24 : 1 , 20 - 37 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 250 . Chern Li Liew , Siong Ngor Ng . 2006 . Beyond the Notes : A Qualitative Study of the Information - Seeking Behavior of Ethnomusicologists . The Journal of Academic Librarianship 32 , 60 - 68 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 251 . Sheng - Cheng Huang . 2006 . A semiotic view of information : Semiotics as a foundation of LIS research in information behavior . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 43 , 1 - 17 . [ CrossRef ] 252 . Bibliography 157 - 172 . [ CrossRef ] 253 . Jette Hyldegård . 2006 . Collaborative information behaviour – – exploring Kuhlthau’s Information Search Process model in a group - based educational setting . Information Processing & Management 42 , 276 - 298 . [ CrossRef ] 254 . Amanda Spink , Charles Cole . 2006 . Human information behavior : Integrating diverse approaches and information use . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 57 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v57 : 1 , 25 - 35 . [ CrossRef ] 255 . Theresa Dirndorfer Anderson , Marcia J . Bates , Jennifer Berryman , Sanda Erdelez , Jannica Heinstrom . 2006 . Designing for uncertainty . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 43 , 1 - 9 . [ CrossRef ] 256 . Jennie A . Abrahamson , Karen E . Fisher . 2006 . Modeling the information behavior of lay mediaries . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 43 , 1 - 4 . [ CrossRef ] 257 . Theresa Dirndorfer Anderson . 2006 . Analyzing uncertainty tolerance in information discovery and use . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 43 , 1 - 7 . [ CrossRef ] 258 . 2005 . Review of Research Trend in Models of Information Seeking Behavior . Journal of the Korean Society for information Management 22 , 235 - 254 . [ CrossRef ] 259 . Dong Y . Jeong , Sung Jin Kim . 2005 . Knowledge structure of library and information science in South Korea . Library & Information Science Research 27 , 51 - 72 . [ CrossRef ] 260 . 2005 . Incorporating Users into System Design Processes : Overview and a Proposed User Model . Journal of the Korean Society for information Management 22 , 23 - 38 . [ CrossRef ] 261 . Florence Gonod Boissin . 2005 . Information - seeking behaviour and use of the Internet by French general practitioners : a qualitative study . Health Information & Libraries Journal 22 , 173 - 181 . [ CrossRef ] 262 . Ann Lind , Bertil Lind . 2005 . The practice of information system development and use : a dialectical approach . Systems Research and Behavioral Science 22 , 453 - 464 . [ CrossRef ] 263 . Katriina Byström , Preben Hansen . 2005 . Conceptual framework for tasks in information studies . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 56 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v56 : 10 , 1050 - 1061 . [ CrossRef ] 264 . Laura Slaughter , Alla Keselman , Andre Kushniruk , Vimla L . Patel . 2005 . A framework for capturing the interactions between laypersons’ understanding of disease , information gathering behaviors , and actions taken during an epidemic . Journal of Biomedical Informatics 38 , 298 - 313 . [ CrossRef ] 265 . Saskia Brand - Gruwel , Iwan Wopereis , Yvonne Vermetten . 2005 . Information problem solving by experts and novices : analysis of a complex cognitive skill . Computers in Human Behavior 21 , 487 - 508 . [ CrossRef ] 266 . Polona Vilar , Maja Žumer . 2005 . Comparison and evaluation of the user interfaces of e‐journals . Journal of Documentation 61 : 2 , 203 - 227 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 267 . Jela Steinerová , Jaroslav Šušol . 2005 . Library users in human information behaviour . Online Information Review 29 : 2 , 139 - 156 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 268 . Jean P . Shipman , Sarah Barbara Watstein , William Hemmig . 2005 . Online pathfinders . Reference Services Review 33 : 1 , 66 - 87 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 269 . Joan C . Bartlett , Elaine G . Toms . 2005 . Developing a protocol for bioinformatics analysis : An integrated information behavior and task analysis approach . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 56 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v56 : 5 , 469 - 482 . [ CrossRef ] 270 . Joanne E . Callinan . 2005 . Information‐seeking behaviour of undergraduate biology students . Library Review 54 : 2 , 86 - 99 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 271 . Gloria J . Leckie , Lisa M . GivenUnderstanding Information - Seeking : The Public Library Context 1 - 72 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] [ PDF ] 272 . Mary B . Ruvane . 2005 . Annotation as process : A vital information seeking activity in historical geographic research . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 42 , n / a - n / a . [ CrossRef ] 273 . Judit Olah . 2005 . Shifts between search stages during task - performance in mediated information seeking interaction . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 42 , n / a - n / a . [ CrossRef ] 274 . Ren - Jye Dzeng , Shih - Yu Chang . 2005 . Learning search keywords for construction procurement . Automation in Construction 14 , 45 - 58 . [ CrossRef ] 275 . Kyung - Sun Kim . 2005 . Experienced Web users ' search behavior : Effects of focus and emotion control . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 42 : 10 . 1002 / meet . v42 : 1 , n / a - n / a . [ CrossRef ] 276 . Nigel Ford . 2004 . Creativity and convergence in information science research : The roles of objectivity and subjectivity , constraint , and control . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 13 , 1169 - 1182 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 277 . Nor Shahriza Abdul Karim . 2004 . The link between environmental scanning ( ES ) and organizational information behavior : implications for research and the role of information professionals . Library Review 53 : 7 , 356 - 362 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 278 . John D ' Ambra , Concepción S . Wilson . 2004 . Explaining perceived performance of the World Wide Web : uncertainty and the task‐technology fit model . Internet Research 14 : 4 , 294 - 310 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 279 . Raya Fidel , Annelise Mark Pejtersen , Bryan Cleal , Harry Bruce . 2004 . A multidimensional approach to the study of human - information interaction : A case study of collaborative information retrieval . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 11 , 939 - 953 . [ CrossRef ] 280 . Gashaw Kebede . 2004 . The information needs of end - users of Sub - Saharan Africa in the digital information environment . The International Information & Library Review 36 , 273 - 279 . [ CrossRef ] 281 . Amanda Spink . 2004 . Multitasking information behavior and information task switching : an exploratory study . Journal of Documentation 60 : 4 , 336 - 351 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 282 . Byron Marshall , Daniel McDonald , Hsinchun Chen , Wingyan Chung . 2004 . EBizPort : Collecting and analyzing business intelligence information . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 10 , 873 - 891 . [ CrossRef ] 283 . Nils Pharo , Kalervo Järvelin . 2004 . The SST method : a tool for analysing Web information search processes . Information Processing & Management 40 , 633 - 654 . [ CrossRef ] 284 . Moshe Yitzhaki , Gloria Hammershlag . 2004 . Accessibility and use of information sources among computer scientists and software engineers in Israel : Academy versus industry . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 9 , 832 - 842 . [ CrossRef ] 285 . Wingyan Chung , Yiwen Zhang , Zan Huang , Gang Wang , Thian - Huat Ong , Hsinchun Chen . 2004 . Internet searching and browsing in a multilingual world : An experiment on the Chinese Business Intelligence Portal ( CBizPort ) . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 9 , 818 - 831 . [ CrossRef ] 286 . Nigel Ford . 2004 . Modeling cognitive processes in information seeking : From Popper to Pask . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 9 , 769 - 782 . [ CrossRef ] 287 . Hung - Pin Shih . 2004 . Extended technology acceptance model of Internet utilization behavior . Information & Management 41 , 719 - 729 . [ CrossRef ] 288 . Andrew K . Shenton . 2004 . Information‐seeking research in schools : opportunities and pitfalls . Aslib Proceedings 56 : 3 , 180 - 186 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 289 . Karen E . Fisher , Joan C . Durrance , Marian Bouch Hinton . 2004 . Information grounds and the use of need - based services by immigrants in Queens , New York : A context - based , outcome evaluation approach . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 8 , 754 - 766 . [ CrossRef ] 290 . Mark Hepworth . 2004 . A framework for understanding user requirements for an information service : Defining the needs of informal carers . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 8 , 695 - 708 . [ CrossRef ] 291 . John D ' Ambra , Concepci�n S . Wilson . 2004 . Use of the World Wide Web for international travel : Integrating the construct of uncertainty in information seeking and the task - technology fit ( TTF ) model . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v55 : 8 , 731 - 742 . [ CrossRef ] 292 . Andrew K . Shenton , Pat Dixon . 2004 . The nature of information needs and strategies for their investigation in youngsters . Library & Information Science Research 26 , 296 - 310 . [ CrossRef ] 293 . Nigel Ford . 2004 . Towards a model of learning for educational informatics . Journal of Documentation 60 : 2 , 183 - 225 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 294 . Andrew K Shenton , Pat Dixon . 2004 . Issues arising from youngsters ' information - seeking behavior . Library & Information Science Research 26 , 177 - 200 . [ CrossRef ] 295 . A . D . Madden . 2004 . Evolution and information . Journal of Documentation 60 : 1 , 9 - 23 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 296 . Diane Nahl . 2004 . Measuring the affective information environment of web searchers . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 41 , 191 - 197 . [ CrossRef ] 297 . Robert Ikoja - Odongo , Dennis N . Ocholla . 2004 . Information Seeking Behavior of the Informal Sector Entrepreneurs : The Uganda Experience . Libri 54 . . [ CrossRef ] 298 . Mark Hepworth , Janet Harrison , Nicole James . 2003 . Information needs of people with multiple sclerosis and the implications for information provision based on a national UK survey . Aslib Proceedings 55 : 5 / 6 , 290 - 303 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 299 . Eric Thivant . 2003 . Information seeking and use behaviour for the design of financial products . The New Review of Information Behaviour Research 4 , 45 - 61 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 300 . Jarkko Kari , Reijo Savolainen . 2003 . Towards a contextual model of information seeking on the Web . The New Review of Information Behaviour Research 4 , 155 - 175 . [ CrossRef ] 301 . Andrew K . Shenton , Pat Dixon . 2003 . A comparison of youngsters ' use of CD - ROM and the Internet as information resources . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v54 : 11 , 1029 - 1049 . [ CrossRef ] 302 . Simon Attfield , Ann Blandford , John Dowell . 2003 . Information seeking in the context of writing . Journal of Documentation 59 : 4 , 430 - 453 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 303 . Nigel Ford , David Miller , Nicola Moss . 2003 . Web search strategies and approaches to studying . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v54 : 6 , 473 - 489 . [ CrossRef ] 304 . Lokman I . Meho , Helen R . Tibbo . 2003 . Modeling the information - seeking behavior of social scientists : Ellis ' s study revisited . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v54 : 6 , 570 - 587 . [ CrossRef ] 305 . Brian Detlor . 2003 . Internet - based information systems use in organizations : an information studies perspective . Information Systems Journal 13 , 113 - 132 . [ CrossRef ] 306 . 2003 . A Comparative Study on Models of Information Seeking Behavior . Journal of the Korean Society for information Management 20 , 93 - 119 . [ CrossRef ] 307 . Pamela J . McKenzie . 2003 . A model of information practices in accounts of everyday‐life information seeking . Journal of Documentation 59 : 1 , 19 - 40 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 308 . Pertti Vakkari . 2003 . Task - based information searching . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 37 , 413 - 464 . [ CrossRef ] 309 . Anu Macintosh - Murray , Chun Wei Choo . 2002 . Information failures and catastrophes : What can we learn by linking information studies and disaster research ? . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 39 , 239 - 249 . [ CrossRef ] 310 . Sanda Erdelez , Elaine G . Toms , Kevin Rioux , Makiko Miwa . 2002 . Opportunistic acquisition of information : The new frontier for information user studies . Sponsored by SIG USE . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 39 , 521 - 522 . [ CrossRef ] 311 . David Ellis , T . D . Wilson , Nigel Ford , Allen Foster , H . M . Lam , R . Burton , Amanda Spink . 2002 . Information seeking and mediated searching . Part 5 . User - intermediary interaction . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 53 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v53 : 11 , 883 - 893 . [ CrossRef ] 312 . Nigel Ford , T . D . Wilson , Allen Foster , David Ellis , Amanda Spink . 2002 . Information seeking and mediated searching . Part 4 . Cognitive styles in information seeking . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 53 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v53 : 9 , 728 - 735 . [ CrossRef ] 313 . Giorgio Brajnik , Stefano Mizzaro , Carlo Tasso , Fabio Venuti . 2002 . Strategic help in user interfaces for information retrieval . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 53 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v53 : 5 , 343 - 358 . [ CrossRef ] 314 . T . D . Wilson , N . J . Ford , D . Ellis , A . E . Foster , A . Spink . 2002 . Information seeking and mediated searching : Part 2 . Uncertainty and its correlates . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 53 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v53 : 9 , 704 - 715 . [ CrossRef ] 315 . Kyung - Sun Kim , Bryce Allen . 2002 . Cognitive and task influences on Web searching behavior . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 53 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v53 : 2 , 109 - 119 . [ CrossRef ] 316 . Amanda Spink , T . D . Wilson , Nigel Ford , Allen Foster , David Ellis . 2002 . Information - seeking and mediated searching . Part 1 . Theoretical framework and research design . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 53 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v53 : 9 , 695 - 703 . [ CrossRef ] 317 . Marianne Lykke Nielsen . 2001 . A framework for work task based thesaurus design . Journal of Documentation 57 : 6 , 774 - 797 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 318 . Maija - Leena Huotari , Elfreda Chatman . 2001 . Using everyday life information seeking to explain organizational behavior . Library & Information Science Research 23 , 351 - 366 . [ CrossRef ] 319 . Ellen Bonnevie . 2001 . Dretske’s semantic information theory and meta‐theories in library and information science . Journal of Documentation 57 : 4 , 519 - 534 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 320 . Pertti Vakkari . 2001 . A theory of the task‐based information retrieval process : a summary and generalisation of a longitudinal study . Journal of Documentation 57 : 1 , 44 - 60 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 321 . Elin K . Jacob . 2001 . The everyday world of work : two approaches to the investigation of classification in context . Journal of Documentation 57 : 1 , 76 - 99 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 322 . Karen E . Pettigrew , Lynne ( E . F . ) McKechnie . 2001 . The use of theory in information science research . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 52 : 10 . 1002 / 1532 - 2890 ( 2000 ) 52 : 1 & lt ; & gt ; 1 . 0 . CO ; 2 - H , 62 - 73 . [ CrossRef ] 323 . Nigel Ford , David Miller , Nicola Moss . 2001 . The role of individual differences in Internet searching : An empirical study . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 52 : 10 . 1002 / asi . v52 : 12 , 1049 - 1066 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T ) 324 . A . D . Madden . 2000 . A definition of information . Aslib Proceedings 52 : 9 , 343 - 349 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 325 . Christine L . Borgman . 2000 . Digital libraries and the continuum of scholarly communication . Journal of Documentation 56 : 4 , 412 - 430 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 326 . Micheline Beaulieu . 2000 . Interaction in information searching and retrieval . Journal of Documentation 56 : 4 , 431 - 439 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 327 . Patricia Layzell Ward . 2000 . An overview of the literature of management and of information and library services management 1999 . Library Management 21 : 3 , 128 - 152 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 328 . Niels Ole Pors . 2000 . Information retrieval , experimental models and statistical analysis . Journal of Documentation 56 : 1 , 55 - 70 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] 329 . Ethelene Whitmire . 2000 . Book review : Information seeking in the online age : Principles and practice , by Andrew Large , Lucy A . Tedd , and R . J . Hartley . Journal of the American Society for Information Science 51 : 10 . 1002 / 1097 - 4571 ( 2000 ) 51 : 10 & lt ; & gt ; 1 . 0 . CO ; 2 - K , 964 - 964 . [ CrossRef ] 330 . Tom Wilson . 1999 . Exploring models of information behaviour : the ‘uncertainty’ project . Information Processing & Management 35 , 839 - 849 . [ CrossRef ] 331 . DENNIS N . OCHOLLA . 1999 . Insights into Information - seeking and Communicating Behaviour of Academics . The International Information & Library Review 31 , 119 - 143 . [ CrossRef ] 332 . Thomas Mandl , Christa Womser - HackerInformation Retrieval 3923 - 3931 . [ CrossRef ] 333 . Linda L . LillardA Comparison of the Information Needs and Information Seeking Behavior of Entrepreneurs in Small to Medium Sized Enterprises ( SMEs ) in Developing and Developed Countries 126 - 143 . [ CrossRef ] 334 . Adam Grzywaczewski , Rahat Iqbal , Anne James , John HalloranAn Approach for Capturing Human Information Behaviour 322 - 347 . [ CrossRef ] 335 . Ian Stoodley , Christine Bruce , Helen Partridge , Sylvia Lauretta Edwards , Helen CooperHealth Information Literacy and the Experience of 65 to 79 Year Old Australians 102 - 123 . [ CrossRef ] 336 . Guangzhi ZhengWeb Navigation Systems for Information Seeking 7693 - 7701 . [ CrossRef ] 337 . Mohammed Nasser Al - SuqriContextual Factors Influencing Information Seeking Behavior of Social Scientists 190 - 210 . [ CrossRef ] 338 . Homo Informaticus 34 - 66 . [ CrossRef ] 339 . Martha Sabelli , Jorge Rasner , María Cristina Pérez Giffoni , Eduardo Álvarez PedrosianThe Information and Communication Strategies Focused on Young People and Adolescents within the Field of Public Health 247 - 267 . [ CrossRef ] 340 . Aida Varela , Marilene Lobo Abreu BarbosaThe Complexity of Finding Information in Collaborative Information Systems 87 - 120 . [ CrossRef ] 341 . Rebecca L . MillerEnvironmental Context of Information Seeking Behavior 63 - 77 . [ CrossRef ] 342 . Christine B . Glaser , Amy Tan , Ahmet M . KondozAn Intelligent Information Management Tool for Complex Distributed Human Collaboration 110 - 143 . [ CrossRef ] 343 . Anabel Quan - Haase , Jacquelyn A . Burkell , Victoria L . RubinThe Role of Serendipity in Digital Environments 3962 - 3970 . [ CrossRef ] 344 . Jeroen Kraaijenbrink , Fons WijnhovenExternal Knowledge Integration 308 - 319 . [ CrossRef ] 345 . John K . Lee , Meghan M . ManfraTPACK Vernaculars in Social Studies Research 158 - 175 . [ CrossRef ] 346 . Charles ColeInformation Need and the Beginning of Information Search 4117 - 4128 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by T u l a n e U n i v e r s it y A t 01 : 41 31 J a nu a r y 2015 ( P T )