Current Biology 16 , 1685 – 1693 , September 5 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 07 . 056 Article Potential for Control of Signaling Pathways via Cell Size and Shape Jason Meyers , 1 , 2 Jennifer Craig , 1 , 2 and David J . Odde 1 , * 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering University of Minnesota Minneapolis , Minnesota 55455 Summary Background : In order for signals generated at the plasma membrane to reach intracellular targets , acti - vated messengers , such as G proteins and phospho - proteins , must diffuse through the cytoplasm . If the deactivators of these messengers , GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) and phosphatases , respectively , are sufﬁciently active in the cytoplasm , then the signal could in principledecaybefore reaching thetargetanda stable spatial gradient in phosphostate would be generated . Recent experiments document the existence of such gradients in living cells and suggest a role for them in mi - totic spindle morphogenesis and cell migration . How - ever , how such systems behave theoretically when em - bedded in a cell of varying size or shape has not been considered . Results : Here we use a simple mathematical model to explore the theoretical consequences of a plasma membrane bound activator ( i . e . , guanine nucleotide ex - change factor , GEF , or kinase ) and a cytoplasmic deac - tivator ( i . e . , GAP or phosphatase ) , and we ﬁnd that as a model cell grows , the substrate becomes progres - sively dephosphorylated as a result of decreased prox - imity to the activator . Conversely , as a cell spreads and ﬂattens , the substrate becomes globally phosphory - lated because of increased proximity of the substrate to the activator . Similarly , in the leading edge of polar - ized cells and in protrusions such as lamellipodia or ﬁlopodia , the substrate is highly phosphorylated . As a speciﬁc test of the model , we found that the experi - mentally observed preferential activation of the G pro - tein Cdc42 in the periphery of ﬁbroblasts that was recently reported is consistent with model predictions . Conclusions : We conclude that cell - signaling pathways can theoretically be turned on and off , both locally and globally , in response to alterations in cell size and shape . Introduction It is now well accepted that extracellular morphogen gradients play a key role in embryonic tissue develop - ment [ 1 , 2 ] . More recently it has been argued that intra - cellular morphogen gradients exist and that they play a key role in such processes as cell division and cell motility [ 3 – 11 ] . Spatial gradients in putative intracellular morphogenscouldbegeneratedbyspatiallysegregated , antagonistic reactions , such as the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions mediated by kinases and phosphatases , respectively . Provided that the antago - nistic kinase and the phosphatase are not colocalized , then there will exist a spatial gradient in the phosphos - tate of the substrate at steady state . Similarly , a spatially segregated guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) and GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) pair will establish a steady - state gradient in the GTP / GDP state of its mo - nomeric G protein substrate . For simplicity , the present discussion will use the terminology of the kinase / phos - phatase system but will be illustrated with the experi - mentally observed local and global activation of Cdc42 , a G protein controlled by a GEF / GAP system , as recently reported by Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] . Once established , intracellular morphogen gradients could be used to deﬁne regions where speciﬁc enzy - matic reactions may proceed , and other regions where they may not , as a function of their proximity to the kinase . For example , in the case of cell division , a recent study showed that dephosphorylated Op18 / stathmin , which is known to promote microtubule disassembly , exists in mitotic cells at high concentration at the cell pe - riphery and at low concentration in the vicinity of chro - mosomes [ 3 ] . The gradient in Op18 / stathmin phosphor - ylation correlates well with the experimentally observed recruitment of microtubules to the mitotic spindle in the central region of the cell and is presumed to be me - diated by a chromosome - associated kinase ( e . g . , Polo kinase ) and cytoplasmic phosphatase ( e . g . , PP2A ) [ 3 ] . In general , spatially segregated antagonistic reactions potentially enable the cell to spatially control enzymatic activities . To be effective in establishing spatial control , gradi - ents need to be exerted over subcellular dimensions . As shown theoretically by Brown and Kholodenko [ 11 ] , the distance over which the spatial gradient in the con - centration of the phosphorylated form of the substrate decays , L gradient , is given by L gradient = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ D k p s ; ( 1 ) where k p is the ﬁrst - order phosphatase reaction rate constant ( typically 0 . 1 – 100 s 2 1 [ 11 ] ) , and D is the diffu - sion coefﬁcient ( typically 1 – 10 m m 2 / s for globular pro - teins [ 13 , 14 ] ) . From these values , it is estimated that the decay length will vary from w 0 . 1 m m to 10 m m , sufﬁciently broad so as to potentially play a role in the behavior of a broad range of cell types , from bacteria to embryos . Recent experimental results conﬁrm the ex - istence of gradient decay lengths on the scale of w 1 m m in both Xenopus extracts and in living cells [ 3 , 7 ] . More generally , the size of the gradient can be scaled by a dis - tance characteristic of the cell size , R , to yield the Thiele modulus , F , given by F = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ k p R 2 D r = R L gradient : ( 2 ) * Correspondence : oddex002 @ umn . edu 2 These authors contributed equally to this work . When F > > 1 , then the gradient decays very abruptly on the scale of the cell , and when F < < 1 , then the gradient decays hardly at all on the scale of the cell . Thus , a third parameter that characterizes the diffusion - reaction sys - tem is size of the compartment in which the reactions occur . Although the theoretical possibility of intracellular phosphostate gradients has been appreciated [ 11 ] , and two recent studies provide supporting experimental evidence [ 3 , 7 ] , the theoretical consequences of varying cell size and geometry have not been considered previ - ously , even though cells come in a great variety shapes and sizes . Here we analyze how phosphostate varies both glob - ally and locally in response to changes in cell size and shape . From the analysis it becomes apparent that the physical size and shape of the cell are expected to be key inﬂuences that control whether a signaling cascade will be active , provided there is spatial segregation of the kinase and phosphatase . Speciﬁcally , in the case where the kinase is bound to the plasma membrane and the phosphatase is uniform in the cytoplasm , small and thin cells will be more phosphorylated than large and thick cells . The reason that large and thick cells fail to become activated is that there are large regions of the cytoplasm that are distant from the plasma mem - brane , thus making it very difﬁcult for the phosphory - lated form of the substrate to diffuse from the plasma membrane to distant regions without ﬁrst being dephos - phorylated by the phosphatase . The results may at least partially explain how cells are able to change their be - havior as a function of cell shape [ 15 , 16 ] . In general , the purpose of the analysis is not to explain how any par - ticular signaling pathway operates , but rather to explore some of the generic responses of signaling systems that we might expect as they encounter normal changes in cell size and shape as mediated by the external mechan - ical environment and by the internal cytoskeleton as it generates forces to deform the cell . Nevertheless , we also speciﬁcally illustrate the behavior by comparison of model predictions of Cdc42 activation to recent experimental observations . Results To theoretically investigate the role of cell size and shape in controlling the phosphostate of the cell , we ﬁrst considered the consequences of spherical cell size in the case where the kinase is attached to the plasma membrane and the phosphatase is located in the cyto - plasm . As pointed out previously by Brown and Kholo - denko [ 11 ] , as the cell grows in size ( i . e . , as the radius R increases ) , the cell will experience a progressive de - crease in the concentration of the phosphorylated form of the substrate at the center , c A ( 0 ) , as shown in Figure 1 . While the length of the gradient is determined by the phosphatase reaction rate constant and the diffu - sion coefﬁcient ( Equation 1 ) , the actual molar concentra - tion of the phosphorylated form of the substrate at the plasma membrane is determined largely by the kinase reaction rate constant [ 9 , 11 ] . In the limit of a very high kinase reaction rate constant , the fraction of substrate that is phosphorylated in the immediate vicinity of the plasma membrane approaches unity [ 9 , 11 ] . In addition to these local effects , there will be a global effect on the phosphorylation state . Integrating the con - centration of the phosphorylated form of the substrate , c A ( r ) , over the entire cell , we obtained an expression for the average concentration of the phosphorylated form , < c A > , given by Equation 9 . As shown in Figure 1 , the average concentration of the phosphorylated form decreases with increasing cell size , manifested qualita - tively as a shift from a cell that is largely phosphorylated when it is small ( i . e . , orange / red in Figure 1A ) to being largely dephosphorylated when it is large ( i . e . , blue in Figure 1C ) . Note that this shift requires that the molar concentration of the phosphatase be held constant and not simply be diluted by the increasing volume . Such constant concentration , albeit with some degree of stochastic ﬂuctuation , is presumably maintained in many situations , and naturally arises when there is zeroth - order synthesis and ﬁrst - order degradation [ 17 ] . The reason for this shift is that it is very difﬁcult for the phosphorylated form of the substrate to diffuse to the Figure 1 . Increasing Cell Size Decreases Global Phosphorylation Levels Theconcentrationproﬁleofthephosphorylatedformofthesubstrateisshownforaplanarslicethroughthecenterofasphericalcell . Parameters used : D = 10 m m 2 / s , k p = 10 s 2 1 , L gradient = 1 m m , k kin = 50 s 2 1 , c T = 1 m M . ( A ) A small cell ( radius = 2 m m ) will be largely phosphorylated ( < c A > = 0 . 79 m M ) becausethe majority of the cytoplasm is within the gradientdecay length ( L gradient ) of the plasma membrane ( F = 2 ) . ( B ) A slightly larger cell ( radius = 4 m m ) will be less phosphorylated ( < c A > = 0 . 51 m M ) because the cell size has increased while the gradient decay length has remained constant , so that a lesser fraction of the cytoplasm is within the gradient decay length of the plasma membrane ( F = 4 ) . ( C ) Alargecell ( radius = 8 m m ) willbemostlydephosphorylated ( < c A > = 0 . 31 m M ) becauseonlyarelativelysmallfractionofthecytoplasmiswithin the gradient decay length of the plasma membrane ( F = 8 ) . Thus , a 4 - fold increase in cell radius results in 2 . 5 - fold decrease in the average con - centration of the phosphorylated form of the substrate , even as the activity levels of the kinase and phosphatase remain constant . Current Biology 1686 center of the large cell without ﬁrst being dephosphory - lated . The difﬁculty is quantiﬁed by L gradient , which is approximately the average distance that the phosphor - ylated form of the substrate diffuses before the phos - phatase reaction occurs . If the cell is much larger than this distance , then it is very unlikely that the phosphory - lated form will make it to the central regions of the cell , and instead it will be conﬁned to a thin region just beneath the plasma membrane , a ‘‘shell’’ of thickness L gradient . In chemical reactor analysis and design [ 18 ] , the characteristic system dimension scaled by the gra - dient length deﬁnes a dimensionless quantity known as the Thiele modulus ( see Equation 2 ) . When F z 1 , then the cell is similar in scale to the gradient length , and the cell will be largely phosphorylated . Alternatively , when F > 1 , then the cell is relatively large and will be largely dephosphorylated . Therefore , a change in the cell size alone will cause a global shift in the phosphos - tateof thecell , andtheThiele modulus provides aconve - nient dimensionless quantity with which to characterize the phosphostate regime . We next considered the consequences of a cell changing its shape while maintaining constant volume . Such changes are common during cell adhesion and mi - gration , both in vivo and in vitro , as mediated by assem - bly and rearrangement of the cytoskeleton in concert with extracellular adhesion molecules [ 19 ] . For simplic - ity , we treated the cell as a cube , and then calculated its phosphostate as it ﬂattened in one dimension and spread equally in the other two dimensions , all while maintaining constant volume . Again , we assumed that the kinase is associated with the plasma membrane and that the phosphatase is distributed uniformly throughout the cytoplasm . For example , as an epithelial cell spreads , it shifts from cuboidal to sheet - like ( i . e . , squamous ) . As shown in Figure 2 , such a model cell be - comes progressively more phosphorylated as it ﬂattens . The reason for this is that in a very ﬂat cell , the entire cytoplasm is within a distance L gradient of the plasma membrane . Thus , a cell would change its phosphostate simply by changing its shape . The dependence of phos - phorylation on shape could play a role in mediating the phosphorylation changes that occur during the cell cycle , since it is often observed that ﬂat cells round up as they enter mitosis . Note that the membrane curvature per se is not important ; the sharp corners of the cube in Figure 2A ( which have very high curvature ) are only slightly more activated than the adjacent faces of the cube ( which are ﬂat ) . Rather , curvature allows the plasma membrane to fold back onto itself so that two re - gions of the cytoplasm can face each other and activate the intervening cytoplasm ( provided the gap between the two regions is smaller than L gradient ) . A common prin - ciple in these ﬁrst two examples is that for a particular shape ( e . g . , a sphere or rectangular box ) , the larger the surface - to - volume ratio , the greater the fraction phos - phorylated . Cells frequently exhibit asymmetry in their shape so that there is a deﬁned axis of polarity with a leading edge and a trailing edge [ 19 ] . Cell polarity is established and maintained by the cytoskeleton in response to the local chemical and mechanical environment . We there - fore considered the consequences of cell polarity for the phosphostate of the cell . For simplicity , we treated the cell as a three - dimensional triangle ( i . e . , a wedge ) and then calculated the phosphostate as a function of the asymmetry in the position of the peak of the triangle . As shown in Figure 3 , as a cell changes its shape from symmetric to asymmetric , it induces a high degree of phosphorylation in the thin , leading edge of the cell rel - ative to the thicker trailing edge . Note also that in the symmetric case , the edge of the cell is more highly phos - phorylated than the center of the cell . The same princi - ples identiﬁed in the cell ﬂattening example apply here as well : in the thin leading edge , the dorsal and ventral membrane surfaces are closely apposed to one another , whereas in the thick trailing edge they are relatively distant from one another . Figure 2 . Cell Flattening at Constant Volume Increases Global Phosphorylation Levels The concentration proﬁle of the phosphorylated form of the substrate is shown for planar slices through rectangular boxes of various thickness , but constant volume . Parameters are the same as in Figure 1 . ( A ) A cuboidal cell ( 10 m m 3 10 m m 3 10 m m = 1000 m m 3 ) is largely dephosphorylated ( < c A > = 0 . 39 m M ) because the majority of its cytoplasm is more than the gradient decay length away from the plasma membrane . Three planar slices through the 3D ﬁnite element solution are shown . ( B ) As the cell ﬂattens at roughly constant volume ( 3 m m 3 18 m m 3 18 m m = 970 m m 3 ) , a greater fraction of the cytoplasm lies within the gradient decay length of the plasma membrane and so becomes generally more phosphorylated ( < c A > = 0 . 55 m M ) . Two planar slices through the 3D solution are shown for this intermediate case . ( C ) Further cell ﬂattening ( 1 m m 3 33 m m 3 33 m m = 1000 m m 3 ) results in a sheet - like cell shape where the cytoplasm is nearly all phosphorylated ( < c A > = 0 . 93 m M ) . One planar slice through the 3D solution is shown . Thus , as a cell ﬂattens , it switches from being largely dephosphorylated to being largely phosphorylated , even as all other parameters remain constant , including cell volume , kinase rate constant , and phosphatase rate constant . Size and Shape Control of Phosphostate 1687 From the analysis of spread and polarized cells , it is apparent that the cytoplasm within any thin protrusion , such as a ﬁlopodium that has a relatively small diameter of w 1 m m , will be highly phosphorylated . Computer simulations conﬁrm this expectation and show that the cytoplasm contained within the ﬁlopodium is highly phosphorylated even as the adjacent cytoplasm re - mains highly dephosphorylated , as shown in Figure 4 . Thus , the cell can differentiate its cytoplasm into two biochemically distinct regions simply by extending a narrow cytoplasmic protrusion . These results suggest that it would actually be the norm that the biochemistry of these cytoplasmic extensions be dissimilar from the bulk of the cytoplasm . Furthermore , these results are general in that the same principles should apply to other cytoplasmic extensions , such as axons , ﬂagella , cilia , and stereocilia . Again , these compartments would be expected to be intrinsically distinct , in terms of their cytoplasmic biochemistry , from the bulk cytoplasm from which they extend . Finally , we wished to compare the model to experi - mental data . It is currently of interest to develop probes that report not only the localization of G proteins and phosphoproteins , but also their activation as a function of time and space in living cells [ 3 , 20 , 21 ] . There is pres - ently only limited data on the activation dynamics , but a common observation is the existence of activation gradients in the cell . As a speciﬁc example , we consid - ered the activation of Cdc42 , a member of the Rho family of small GTPases . Recently , Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] experi - mentally measured the activation of Cdc42 in cultured ﬁbroblasts by using a ﬂuorescent probe they developed , called MeroCBD , that ﬂuoresces strongly when bound to activated Cdc42 ( GTP - Cdc42 ) . With MeroCBD - injected ﬁbroblasts , Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] found that Cdc42 activation is greatest at the leading edge in extending protrusions . However , they did not identify a speciﬁc mechanism that might give rise to the localization of Cdc42 activity to the cell perimeter . To test whether the principles that we outlined above might play at least some role in achieving the experimentally observed ac - tivation of Cdc42 , we obtained the original cell thickness ( GFP signal ) and activation ( MeroCBD signal ) data , and then we predicted the relative activation of Cdc42 as a function of the pixel position by means of Equation 11 . Figure 3 . Cell Polarization Results in Phosphorylation at the Leading Edge and Dephosphorylation at the Trailing Edge With the parameters from Figure 1 , the concentration of the phosphorylated form of the substrate was calculated for both unpolarized and polarized cells . Cell width = 20 m m , length = 20 m m , height = 5 m m . ( A ) An unpolarized cell is largely phosphorylated at its edges , especially where the angles are acute . However , there is no asymmetry in phos - phorylation with respect to the polarity axis in the asymmetric cell . Five planar slices through the 3D solution are shown . ( B ) As acell becomes polarized , the leading edge becomes relatively thin compared to the trailing edge and sothe leadingedge becomes highly phosphorylated , while the trailing edge becomes largely dephosporylated . The leading edge is highly phosphorylated because the cytoplasm it containsisallwithinthegradientdecaylengthoftheplasmamembrane , whereasatthetrailingedgethecytoplasmisgenerallymoredistantfrom the plasma membrane . Five planar slices through the 3D solution are shown . Thus , cell polarization , characterized by a thin leading edge and a thick trailing edge , will naturally result in a relatively phosphorylated leading edge and dephosphorylated trailing edge . Figure 4 . Thin Protrusions Will Be Highly Phosphorylated With the parameters from Figure 1 , the concentration of the phos - phorylated form of the substrate was calculated for a cylindrical cell ( radius = 8 m m , height = 5 m m ) having a single cylindrical ﬁlopo - diumextendingfrom it ( radius = 0 . 5 m m , length8 m m ) . Asingleplanar slice is shown through the midpoint of the 3D solution . The ﬁlopo - dium is highly phosphorylated , while the bulk cytoplasm is generally dephosphorylated . Thus , it is expected that a thin process , such as a ﬁlopodium , axon , ﬂagellum , or cilium , will have a phosphostate distinct from the rest of the cell . In addition , simply by extending many thin processes , the cell could shift to a state that is globally more phosphorylated . Current Biology 1688 Note that we conﬁrmed the validity of the slab geometry solution by Monte Carlo simulation of the three - dimen - sional reaction - diffusion problem ( not shown ) . With this approach , we were able to predict the extent of Cdc42 activation on a pixel - by - pixel basis to generate a simulated image of the MeroCBD signal , as shown in Figure 5A . We found that the model - predicted simulated image successfully reproduces the general behavior that was observed experimentally by Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] ( compare our simulated image in Figure 5A to Nalbant et al . ’s experimental image in their Figure 2A ) . Speciﬁ - cally , the model predicts that Cdc42 activation should be greatest where the cell is thinnest , which is generally near the edges of the cell , and lowest where the cell is thickest , generally near the nucleus . There is generally a good , but not perfect , inverse correlation between the extent of activation and the cell thickness as shown by the line scan proﬁle in Figure 5B . The origin of the dis - crepancies may be ( 1 ) noise and nonlinearity in the ex - perimental signal and ( 2 ) variability in local microtubule mass or microtubule plus end concentration ( found by Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] to globally potentiate Cdc42 activa - tion ) . In addition , Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] observed that overall Cdc42 activity increased during cell spreading ( Figures 3A and 3B in [ 12 ] ) , as predicted by the model ( Figure 2 ) . Overall , the model captures the general features of Cdc42 activation in ﬁbroblast cells as measured by MeroCBD ﬂuorescence . Discussion Our analysis shows that cell size and shape are ex - pected to inﬂuence phosphorylation level locally and globally . In the results presented above , it was assumed that the kinase was tethered to the plasma membrane , while the phosphatase was homogeneously distributed in the cytoplasm . The conclusions drawn here do not de - pend on such a speciﬁc arrangement , only that the two enzymes be spatially distinct from each other . When spatially segregated , then the intervening space will serve as a battleground upon which the antagonistic phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions are carried out , with the kinase winning the battle in its vicin - ity , and the phosphatase winning in its vicinity . When the cell changes shape , for example through the underlying dynamics of the cytoskeleton , two surfaces can come close to one another , allowing the surface - associated enzyme to prevail locally . If this enzyme is a kinase , then the local state will be phosphorylated . If the enzyme is a phosphatase , then the local state will be dephos - phorylated . In either case , the local phosphostate will be different from that of the bulk cytoplasm . So the con - clusions drawn do not depend on the kinase being at the plasma membrane , only that its location be distinct from the phosphatase . It is important to note that if the kinase and phosphatase are colocalized , then the gradients disappear altogether . For example , if both the kinase and phosphatase are associated with the plasma mem - brane , then there will be no gradient of phophostate within the cell . Similarly , if the kinase and phosphatase are both freely diffusing in the cytoplasm , then there will again be no gradient . So , in principle , gradients can be turned on and off simply by redistribution of one of the two enzymes to a speciﬁc structure not ac - cessible to the other . In some intermediate cases , the two enzymes might be very close to each other , but not exactly colocalized . In this case , the gradient will ex - ist in the intervening space , but if this distance is much less than L gradient , then the gradient will be very small and the phosphostate effectively uniform throughout the cell . The model developed here is intentionally simpliﬁed to illustrate the underlying principles . In any particular sig - naling pathway , it will be important to consider the myr - iad complexities that will enter into the analysis . These complexities include nonlinear kinetics of activation and Figure 5 . Model Predictions for Cdc42 Activation in Fibroblasts With the data obtained by Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] , the activation of Cdc42 was simulated with the experimentally observed cell thickness data as the input to the model . ( A ) SimulatedactivationofCdc42 withtheGFPdataofNalbantetal . ( Figure2Cin [ 12 ] ) asinputtothemodel . TheactivityofCdc42ispredictedto be greatest near the edge of the cell ( compare to Figure 2A in [ 12 ] ) . ( B ) InversecorrelationofCdc42withcellthickness . Takingalinescanacrossthelowerrightportionofthecellin ( A ) ( i . e . , alongthewhitelinein [ A ] ) that runs from the perinuclear region to the cell perimeter , the experimental ratio of MeroCBD ﬂuorescence ( activated Cdc42 reporter ) to GFP ﬂuorescence ( cell thickness reporter ) was measured in arbitrary ﬂuorescence units . From these data , a ratio was calculated and then the model used to approximate the experimental data . As predicted by the model , the Cdc42 activity ( measured by the ratio ) is greatest where the cell is thinnest ( measured by GFP ) . Size and Shape Control of Phosphostate 1689 deactivation ( e . g . , second - orderorhigher - orderreaction kinetics ) , spatially varying diffusion coefﬁcients , spa - tially distributed activators and deactivators , stochastic ﬂuctuations in copy number , and parallel pathways for activationanddeactivation , tonameafew . Inthisregard , it will be especially interesting to consider the effects of nonlineardeactivationasameansofachievinggradientsthatlackaparticularlengthscaleatdistancesfarfrom the activation reaction , as theoretically outlined recently for extracellular morphogen gradients decaying via self - enhanced degradation [ 22 ] . Regardless of the details of the kinetic scheme , as long as a particular component of a signaling pathway has spatially segregated activa - tors and deactivators , then there will exist a spatial gradient of activation with a length scale at which the concentration is some fraction of the maximum ( e . g . , half - maximal ) . If this length scale is similar to the length scale of the cell or smaller , then the size - and shape - dependent effects described here can be expected to inﬂuence the extent to which the signaling pathway is active , both locally and globally . Perhaps the strongest experimental evidence of G protein state gradients comes from the studies reported by Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] . By using a ﬂuorescent probe that they called MeroCBD , they observed the activation of Cdc42 , a member of the Rho - family of small GTPases , in living ﬁbroblasts . They observed that the activation of Cdc42 was highest at the cell edge , where the cell is thinnest . The authors did not offer a mechanistic expla - nation for the observation , because it is not clear in gen - eral how the cell identiﬁes its leading edge . Their obser - vation of high activation at the leading edge is consistent withthegeneralpredictionofourmodeling ( Figure3 ) and was conﬁrmed to be consistent with the cell thickness dataobtainedbyNalbantetal . ( Figure2in [ 12 ] ) asadirect input into our model . Comparison of our model output ( Figure 5 ) to the actual experimental output ( Figure 2 in [ 12 ] ) conﬁrms that the basic assertion of the model is consistent with the experimental observations . In addi - tion , the model predicts ( Figure 2 ) the observed global increase in Cdc42 activation upon cell spreading ( Fig - ure 3 in [ 12 ] ) . So the model successfully predicts the basic features of Cdc42 activation in ﬁbroblasts . We do not claim that the model outlined here explains all features of Cdc42 activation . For example , Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] observed that the activation in ﬁlopodia was lower than the adjacent lamellipodial regions ( see Figure 3C in [ 12 ] ) , which is inconsistent with the present model ( Figure 4 ) . This inconsistency suggests that a component that is required for Cdc42 activation is present in lamellipodia but is absent from ﬁlopodia . The analysis of Nalbant et al . [ 12 ] suggests that a key regulator of Cdc42 activation may be the microtubule cytoskeleton , since nocodazole ( which depolymerizes microtubules ) diminishes the overall activation of Cdc42 , whereas cytochalasin D ( which depolymerizes actin ﬁlaments ) has little effect on Cdc42 activation . Since microtubules invade ﬁlopodia less frequently than lamellipodia , it may be that microtubule plus ends provide a factor that is necessary for efﬁcient Cdc42 ac - tivation . Thus , the recruitment of microtubules , which is necessary to establish cell polarity , may deliver a stimu - lus that triggers actin protrusion via localized Cdc42 ac - tivation . This new protrusion then provides microtubules with new intracellular space to explore , and a feedback loop is created . This feedback loop would be broken if the protrusion failed to provide adequate signals to promote the net assembly of microtubules , which is necessary in order for the protrusion to retain invad - ing microtubules . Such a feedback mechanism may ex - plain why some regions of the cell edge were more acti - vated than others ( see Figures 3 and S5 in [ 12 ] ) . Clearly , the present model is not the only model that could explain the experimentally observed Cdc42 activation . Rather , it is more appropriate to merely conclude that the model successfully predicts the general behavior of spatial gradients of Cdc42 activation , the basis of which is unclear at the moment , with fairly simple arguments . The strongest evidence documenting the existence of phosphostate gradients comes from an analysis of the spatial distribution of the phosphostate of Op18 / stath - min [ 3 ] , a regulator of microtubule dynamics that is over - expressed in a number of cancers and that mediates neuron growth [ 23 ] . By using ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer - based probes that were speciﬁc to either the phosphorylated or dephosphorylated forms of Op18 / stathmin , Niethammer et al . were able to visual - ize gradients in the phosphostate of Op18 / stathmin in mitotic and interphase Xenopus cell lines [ 3 ] . In inter - phase cells , Op18 / stathmin is relatively phosphorylated in the leading edge of the migrating cells . To explain this asymmetry , Niethammer et al . [ 3 ] postulated that up - stream regulators of Op18 / stathmin , such as Rac1 / Pak , are localized to the leading edge . This explanation is supported by the observation that microtubule as - sembly , which is promoted when Op18 / stathmin is phosphorylated [ 23 ] , is favored near the leading edge of migrating cells and that suppressing the Rac1 / Pak pathway suppressed the assembly of microtubules near the leading edge [ 24 ] . Our results here demonstrate that it is not necessary to invoke such localization . Rather , simply by extending a thin lamellipodium from the edge of the cell , the Rac1 / Pak pathway ( or other unknown Op18 / stathmin regulatory pathways ) may be locally activated , as illustrated in Figure 3 , without any requirement for redistribution of upstream regulators to the leading edge . As argued above in the case of Cdc42 activation , microtubules may play an important role in establishing a feedback mechanism between actin - based protrusion and microtubule invasion / reten - tion at the leading edge . The present results provide an explanation for how cells can regulate and control their activities as a func - tion of their size and shape . Previous experimental work by Ingber , Chen , and coworkers demonstrated that cell fate can be determined by cell shape [ 15 , 16 , 25 ] . For example , bovine aortic endothelial cells cultured on micropatterned islands switch from growth to apo - ptosis as they change from well - spread to rounded , even when the total surface area available for interaction with the adhesive surface is held constant . How a cell could sense its own shape has remained enigmatic , but one possibility is that cells that are well - spread have a greater internal mechanical tension within their cytoskeleton , perhaps via RhoA - mediated contractility , as compared to rounded cells [ 16 ] . Even so , this is not likely to be the entire explanation , since RhoA activity Current Biology 1690 by itself is not able to control human mesenchymal stem cell differentiation , indicating that shape itself is still im - portant [ 16 ] . Our results suggest that cell shape could be sensed by the close apposition of membranes that oc - curs in ﬂat cells to turn on the global phosphorylation of substrates whose activators are plasma membrane associated and whose deactivators reside in the bulk cytoplasm , as shown in Figure 2 . In a similar vein , the shape dependence of phosphos - tate could be used to mediate mechanosensing . For example , as a cell is subjected to a mechanical stress , such as ﬂuid shear stress on endothelial cells [ 26 ] or tensional stress on neurons [ 27 – 29 ] , it deforms . These deformations could then be used to locally or globally activate or inactivate signaling pathways , as shown in Figures 2 – 4 . That mechanosensing could occur simply through changes in the size of an extracellular compart - ment has recently been established in the case of normal human bronchial epithelial cells subjected to compressive stress in vitro [ 30 ] . Tschumperlin et al . demonstrated that changes in the volume of the inter - cellular space create changes in the concentration of an extracellular autocrine ligand , which in turn controls downstream signaling pathways [ 30 ] . Subsequent anal - ysis by Maly et al . showed that similar extracellular mechanisms could play a role in EGFR autocrine signal - ing in cardiac tissue [ 31 ] . A separate study by Maly et al . established also that spatial asymmetry in the presenta - tion of an extracellular ligand would be predicted to result in intracellular gradients of the second messen - gers [ 32 ] . However , these studies did not consider the theoretical consequences of changes in the size or shape of the cell itself in the signaling process . The present results demonstrate that cell size and shape by themselves are expected to inﬂuence the signal - ing process both locally and globally , as long as the antagonistic enzymes are spatially segregated from each other . In this light , the analysis of signaling pathways re - quires consideration of the physical size and shape of the environment within which they occur . For example , in the bacterial chemotaxis pathway , the activation of ﬂagellar motors , which are distributed approximately at random over the plasma membrane , depends on the binding of phosphorylated CheY , which is generated by the signaling complex located at the anterior end of the cell and consumed there as well [ 33 ] . It is worth not - ing that the ATP consumption rate of CheY is expected to be appreciable , since there are w 8000 molecules of CheY in the bacterium ( volume w 2 m m 3 ) and the average cycle time of CheY phosphorylation - dephosphorylation is w 2 s [ 33 ] . This results in a potential consumption rate of ATP of w 2000 ATP / m m 3 s via this signaling pathway . Such high consumption rates are needed if the cell is to maintain gradients on the micrometer scale and if the signaling system is to respond rapidly ( seconds ) . Appar - ently such an energy demand is worthwhile from the point of view of the bacterium because it enables the bacterium to avoid toxins and locate food sources . Were the activator and deactivator not colocalized , then a spatial gradient in phosphorylated CheY is ex - pected to develop such that motors close to the signal - ing complex are more likely to be activated than those that are farther away [ 33 ] . As the cell grows , the motors would be expected to be , on average , progressively far - ther from the signaling complex . This will have the effect of making the cell progressively less motile , especially if the effector of the signaling pathway has a highly allo - steric response to the signal , as is the case for the bac - terial ﬂagellar motor [ 34 ] . If larger cells were to evolve from smaller cells , then they would need to also evolve their signaling systems to avoid being placed at a com - petitive disadvantage relative to their ancestral cells in terms of food accumulation and avoidance of toxins . So it may be that the colocalization of activators and deactivators is important for suppressing gradients in some contexts [ 33 ] . The high consumption rate of ATP in either case can be used to support rapid response , with or without a spatial gradient . In summary , it is expected that models that treat cell signaling as simply a network of spatially homogeneous reactions will not be able to accurately predict the extent to which a given signaling pathway will be active . There - fore , to fully understand signaling pathways , and their evolution , it seems that it will be necessary to incorpo - rate cell size and shape into the analysis . Experimental Procedures Governing Equations and Boundary Conditions Thegoverningequationforallthegeometriesconsideredwasthatofthree - dimensional diffusion and ﬁrst - order phosphatase reaction at steady - state , which is 0 = D V 2 c A 2 k p c A ; ( 3 ) where D is the diffusion coefﬁcient , k p is the ﬁrst - order phosphatase reaction rate constant , and c A is the molar concentration of the phosphorylatedformofthesubstrate . Notethatthephosphatasere - action kinetics are more generally considered to obey Michaelis - Menten kinetics , which is of the form r A = 2 V max c A K M + c A ; ( 4 ) where r A is the rate of disappearance of the phosphorylated form , V max isthemaximumrateofthereaction ( proportionaltotheenzyme concentration ) , and K m is the Michaelis - Menten constant . When c A < < K m , then the kinetics become ﬁrst - order r A = 2 V max K m c A = 2 k p c A ; ( 5 ) where the ratio of V max to K m deﬁnes k p . In the opposite limit when c A [ K m , then the kinetics become zeroth - order r A = 2 V max : ( 6 ) In between these regimes , the kinetics are of a fractional order ( between 0 and 1 ) . Since the zeroth - order solutions behave similarly to the ﬁrst - order solutions ( not shown ) , and the transition between them is gradual , we used ﬁrst - order kinetics for simplicity . Under some circumstances , the kinetics may be higher than ﬁrst - order , such as the second - order kinetics associated with dimerization . In thiscase , thesolutionwill still decay inamannerqualitatively similar to zeroth - and ﬁrst - order kinetics , but it will decay more rapidly . Such kinetic schemes require numerical solutions , but will still have a characteristic length scale for the decay . Provided the length scale is comparable to that of the cell , or smaller , then the principles described here apply . We focused on Michaelis - Menten kinetics in this initial report because they describe the kinetics of enzymes , which are believed to mediate the deactivation reactions . Typical values of K m for phosphatases range from 0 . 1 to 20 m M [ 11 ] . The boundary condition is at the plasma membrane , which is the physical boundary to the reaction - diffusion system , where there is a balance between the kinase reaction rate that is localized to the Size and Shape Control of Phosphostate 1691 plasma membrane and the diffusive ﬂux of the phosphorylated form of the substrate . Speciﬁcally , this can be written as 0 = 2 D ð (cid:1) n (cid:1) V c A Þj boundary + k kin c B j boundary ; ( 7 ) where (cid:1) n isthevectornormaltotheplasmamembranesurface , k kin is theﬁrst - orderkinasereactionrateconstant , andc B isthemolarcon - centration of the dephosphorylated form of the substrate . Note that the kinase reaction is treated as ﬁrst - order for the same reasons described above for the phosphatase reaction . Conservation of the substrate requires in this model that c T = c A + c B ; ( 8 ) where c T is the total molar concentration of the substrate , which is everywhere a constant . Analytical Solution to the Average Concentration within a Sphere The concentration proﬁle of the phosphorylated form of the sub - strate has been solved analytically for a sphere [ 11 ] and for rectan - gular coordinates in one dimension [ 9 ] . These relations allow one to calculate the local concentration of the phosphorylated form of the substrate . In addition to these local effects , there will be a global effect on the phosphorylation state . Integrating the concentration of the phosphorylated form of the substrate , c A ( r ) , over the entire sphericalcell , weobtainedanexpressionfortheaverageconcentra - tion of the phosphorylated form , < c A > in a sphere , which is given by C c A D = 6 C 1 R (cid:2) cosh F F 2 sinh F F 2 (cid:3) ; ( 9 ) where C 1 is an integration constant deﬁned by C 1 = k kin c T R 2 (cid:2) 3 D (cid:4) 1 = L gradient 2 1 = R (cid:5) + k kin R (cid:3) e F + (cid:2) 3 D (cid:4) 1 = L gradient + 1 = R (cid:5) 2 k kin R (cid:3) e 2 F ð 10 Þ and F is the Thiele modulus ( used in chemical reactor analysis [ 18 ] ) , here deﬁned as in Equation 2 . Equation 9 was used to generate Figure 1 . Analytical Solution to the Average Concentration within a Slab By using the same approach of integration as described above for a sphere , we obtained an expression for the average concentration in a slab , which is given by C c A D = c T F (cid:6) A (cid:7) 1 2 e 2 F (cid:8) + B (cid:7) e F 2 1 (cid:8)(cid:9) ; ( 11 ) where A = F * e 2 F = ½ F (cid:7) e 2 F 2 1 (cid:8) + F * (cid:7) e 2 F + 1 (cid:8)(cid:9) B = F * = ½ F (cid:7) e 2 F 2 1 (cid:8) + F * (cid:7) e 2 F + 1 (cid:8)(cid:9) ; ( 12 ) F = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ k p L 2 D r F * = k kin L D ; ( 13 ) and L is half the thickness of the slab . These relations were used to calculate the relative activation of Cdc42 in ﬁbroblast cells , which are very thin relative to their width . Finite Element Solutions Fornonsphericalobjects , thesolutiontothereaction - diffusionprob - lem was obtained by numerical integration with a commercially available solver ( FEMLab 3 . 1i , Comsol , Inc . , Burlington , MA ) running on a dedicated workstation ( Sun Blade 2000 , Sun Microsystems , Inc . , Santa Clara , CA ) . Typically , 15 , 000 – 25 , 000 elements were used and a single solution required 30 – 60 s . The ﬁnite element solu - tion was used to generate the full three - dimensional solution , and then a limited number of planar slices through the solution was obtained to generate Figures 2 – 4 . Acknowledgments The authors thank L . Hodgson and K . Hahn for providing their orig - inalMeroCBDﬁbroblastdata , B . EarnshawandJ . Howardforhelpful comments , V . Barocas for technical assistance with the ﬁnite ele - ment modeling and helpful discussions , and the Minnesota Super - computing Institute for providing computing resources . This article is dedicated to the memory of Raymond A . Odde , P . E . The work was supported partially by a grant from the National Science Foun - dation ( BES - 0119481 ) and from the National Institutes of Health ( GM - 71522 ) . Received : June 7 , 2006 Revised : July 14 , 2006 Accepted : July 21 , 2006 Published : September 5 , 2006 References 1 . Turing , A . M . ( 1952 ) . The chemical basis of morphogenesis . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 237 , 37 – 72 . 2 . Alberts , B . , Johnston , A . , Lewis , J . , Raff , M . , Roberts , K . , and Walter , P . ( 2002 ) . Molecular Biology of the Cell , fourth edition ( New York : Garland Publishing ) . 3 . Niethammer , P . , Bastiaens , P . , andKarsenti , E . ( 2004 ) . Stathmin - tubulin interaction gradients in motile and mitotic cells . Science 303 , 1862 – 1866 . 4 . Carazo - Salas , R . E . , andKarsenti , E . ( 2003 ) . Long - rangecommu - nication between chromatin and microtubules in Xenopus egg extracts . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1728 – 1733 . 5 . Gruss , O . J . , Wittmann , M . , Yokoyama , H . , Pepperkok , R . , Kufer , T . , Sillje , H . , Karsenti , E . , Mattaj , I . W . , andVernos , I . ( 2002 ) . Chro - mosome - induced microtubule assembly mediated by TPX2 is required for spindle formation in HeLa cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 871 – 879 . 6 . Gruss , O . J . , Carazo - Salas , R . E . , Schatz , C . A . , Guarguaglini , G . , Kast , J . , Wilm , M . , Le Bot , N . , Vernos , I . , Karsenti , E . , and Mattaj , I . W . ( 2001 ) . Ran induces spindle assembly by reversing the inhibitory effect of importin alpha on TPX2 activity . Cell 104 , 83 – 93 . 7 . Kalab , P . , Weis , K . , and Heald , R . ( 2002 ) . Visualization of a Ran - GTP gradient in interphase and mitotic Xenopus egg extracts . Science 295 , 2452 – 2456 . 8 . Gardner , M . , Pearson , C . , Sprague , B . , Zarzar , T . , Bloom , K . , Salmon , E . D . , andOdde , D . J . ( 2005 ) . Tension - dependentregula - tion of microtubule dynamics at kinetochores can explain meta - phase congression in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 3764 – 3775 . 9 . Sprague , B . L . , Pearson , C . G . , Maddox , P . S . , Bloom , K . S . , Salmon , E . D . , and Odde , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Mechanisms of microtu - bule - based kinetochore positioning in the yeast metaphase spindle . Biophys . J . 84 , 3529 – 3546 . 10 . Wollman , R . , Cytrynbaum , E . N . , Jones , J . T . , Meyer , T . , Scholey , J . M . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2005 ) . Efﬁcient chromosome capture re - quires a bias in the ‘‘Search - and - Capture’’ process during mi - totic spindle assembly . Curr . Biol . 15 , 828 – 832 . 11 . Brown , G . C . , and Kholodenko , B . N . ( 1999 ) . Spatial gradients of cellular phospho - proteins . FEBS Lett . 457 , 452 – 454 . 12 . Nalbant , P . , Hodgson , L . , Kraynov , V . , Toutchkine , A . , andHahn , K . M . ( 2004 ) . Activation of endogenous Cdc42 visualized in living cells . Science 305 , 1615 – 1619 . 13 . Salmon , E . D . , Saxton , W . M . , Leslie , R . J . , Karow , M . L . , and McIntosh , J . R . ( 1984 ) . Diffusion coefﬁcient of ﬂuorescein - labeled tubulin in the cytoplasm of embryonic cells of a sea ur - chin : video image analysis of ﬂuorescence redistribution after photobleaching . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 2157 – 2164 . 14 . Jacobson , K . , andWojcieszyn , J . ( 1984 ) . Thetranslationalmobil - ity of substances within the cytoplasmic matrix . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 81 , 6747 – 6751 . 15 . Chen , C . S . , Mrksich , M . , Huang , S . , Whitesides , G . M . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 1997 ) . Geometric control of cell life and death . Sci - ence 276 , 1425 – 1428 . 16 . McBeath , R . , Pirone , D . M . , Nelson , C . M . , Bhadriraju , K . , and Chen , C . S . ( 2004 ) . Cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Dev . Cell 6 , 483 – 495 . Current Biology 1692 17 . Paulsson , J . ( 2004 ) . Summing up the noise in gene networks . Nature 427 , 415 – 418 . 18 . Froment , G . F . , and Bischoff , K . B . ( 1990 ) . Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design , second edition ( New York : John Wiley & Sons , Inc . ) . 19 . Ridley , A . J . , Schwartz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , Parsons , J . T . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Cell mi - gration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . 20 . Pertz , O . , and Hahn , K . M . ( 2004 ) . Designing biosensors for Rho family proteins—deciphering the dynamics of Rho family GTPase activation in living cells . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 1313 – 1318 . 21 . Fujioka , A . , Terai , K . , Itoh , R . E . , Aoki , K . , Nakamura , T . , Kuroda , S . , Nishida , E . , and Matsuda , M . ( 2006 ) . Dynamics of the RAS / ERK MAPK cascade as monitored by ﬂuorescence probes . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 8917 – 8926 . 22 . Eldar , A . , Rosin , D . , Shilo , B . Z . , and Barkai , N . ( 2003 ) . Self - enhanced ligand degradation underlies robustness of morpho - gen gradients . Dev . Cell 5 , 635 – 646 . 23 . Cassimeris , L . ( 2002 ) . The oncoprotein 18 / stathmin family of microtubule destabilizers . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 18 – 24 . 24 . Wittmann , T . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of leading edge microtubule and actin dynamics downstream of Rac1 . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 845 – 851 . 25 . Singhvi , R . , Kumar , A . , Lopez , G . P . , Stephanopoulos , G . N . , Wang , D . I . C . , Whitesides , G . M . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 1994 ) . Engi - neering cell shape and function . Science 264 , 696 – 698 . 26 . Davies , P . F . , Zilberberg , J . , and Helmke , B . P . ( 2003 ) . Spatial microstimuli in endothelial mechanosignaling . Circ . Res . 92 , 359 – 370 . 27 . Bray , D . ( 1984 ) . Axonal growth in response to experimentally applied mechanical tension . Dev . Biol . 102 , 379 – 389 . 28 . Zheng , J . , Lamoureux , P . , Santiago , V . , Dennerll , T . , Buxbaum , R . E . , and Heidemann , S . R . ( 1991 ) . Tensile regulation of axonal elongation and initiation . J . Neurosci . 11 , 1117 – 1125 . 29 . Fass , J . N . , and Odde , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Tensile force - dependent neu - rite elicitation via anti - b 1 integrin antibody - coated magnetic beads . Biophys . J . 85 , 623 – 636 . 30 . Tschumperlin , D . J . , Dai , G . , Maly , I . V . , Kikuchi , T . , Laiho , L . H . , McVittie , A . K . , Haley , K . J . , Lilly , C . M . , So , P . T . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Mechanotransduction through growth - factor shedding into the extracellular space . Nature 429 , 83 – 86 . 31 . Maly , I . V . , Lee , R . T . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 2004 ) . A model for mechanotransduction in cardiac muscle : effects of extracellular matrix deformation on autocrine signaling . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 32 , 1319 – 1335 . 32 . Maly , I . V . , Wiley , H . S . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Self - organization of polarized cell signaling via autocrine circuits : computational model analysis . Biophys . J . 86 , 10 – 22 . 33 . Lipkow , K . , Andrews , S . S . , and Bray , D . ( 2005 ) . Simulated diffu - sion of phosphorylated CheY through the cytoplasm of Escher - ichia coli . J . Bacteriol . 187 , 45 – 53 . 34 . Bray , D . , and Duke , T . ( 2004 ) . Conformational spread : the prop - agation of allosteric states in large multiprotein complexes . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 33 , 53 – 73 . Size and Shape Control of Phosphostate 1693