Abstract By modeling extruded unilamellar lipid vesi - cles as thin - walled ellipsoidal shells , mathematical analy - sis provides simple equations which relate the mean elon - gation and other morphological characteristics of a vesi - cle population to quantities readily obtained from com - bined static and dynamic light scattering measurements . For SOPC vesicles extruded through a 100 nm pore - size filter into a 72 . 9 m M NaCl solution , the inferred elonga - tion ratio ( vesicle long axis to short axis ) is approximately 3 . 7±0 . 6 . When these vesicles were dialyzed into hyper - tonic or hypotonic solutions , this elongation ratio varied from 1 ( for spherical liposomes ) in strongly hypotonic so - lutions to greater than 6 in increasingly hypertonic solu - tions , beyond which abrupt morphological transformations appear . These results are quantitatively consistent with a mechanism of vesicle formation by extrusion and with the expectation that vesicle volumes change to equalize inter - nal and external osmolarity via water flow , subject to the constraint of constant bilayer area . Our analysis also pro - vides simplified equations to assess the effects of vesicle elongation and polydispersity on liposome parameters that are commonly required to characterize vesicle preparations for diverse applications . The implications of this study for routine light scattering characterization of extruded vesi - cles are discussed . Key words Membrane · Liposome · Morphology · Elongation · Osmotic effect Introduction Liposomes ( i . e . , lipid bilayer vesicles ) have received much attention because of their numerous current and potential applications ( Ostro 1987 ; Philippot and Schuber 1995 ; Lasic and Barenholz 1996 ; Woodle and Storm 1998 ) . These applications cover areas such as gene therapy and drug de - livery vehicles ( Allen et al . 1991 ; Liu et al . 1991 ; Hontoria et al . 1994 ; Tabak et al . 1994 ; Fresta and Puglisi 1997 ; Hill et al . 1997 ; Templeton et al . 1997 ; Walker et al . 1997 ) , food processing microcapsules ( Arshady 1993 ; Fresta et al . 1995 ) , and defined substrates for quantitative basic re - search ( Ertel et al . 1993 ; Komatsu et al . 1993 ; Mui et al . 1993 ; Monshipouri and Rudolph 1995 ; White et al . 1996 ; Huster et al . 1997 ) . Among the various methods of lipo - some preparation , pressure extrusion through polycarbo - nate filters having uniform circular pores has emerged as a standard procedure , leading to unilamellar vesicles of about 100 nm in diameter . For these stringent applications , characterization of the liposomes has been crucial . Addi - tionally , dedicated liposome characterizations have been explored by many research groups by employing light scat - tering ( Aragon and Pecora 1976 ; Selser et al . 1976 ; Hal - lett et al . 1991 ; Hallett et al . 1993 ; Kolchens et al . 1993 ; Strawbridge and Hallett 1994 ; Korgel et al . 1998 ) and other methods including electron micrographic imaging , nuclear magnetic resonance , gel and column filtration , and theo - retical inference ( Lesieur et al . 1991 ; Lentz et al . 1992 ; Winterhalter and Lasic 1993 ; Choquet et al . 1994 ) . An important conclusion from these studies is that such extruded liposomes have a rather uniform size distribution , with a small polydispersity that can be readily measured by dynamic light scattering . The extruded liposomes also retain many other desirable features such as a high degree of unilamellar structure , long - term stability , and con - trolled responsiveness to the environment . As demon - strated by various modeling studies in the applications cited above , knowledge of liposome size and polydisper - sity is important for quantitative interpretations of results . It is reasonable to expect that vesicle shape , being the other Eur Biophys J ( 1999 ) 28 : 187 – 199 © Springer - Verlag 1999 Received : 31 July 1998 / Revised version : 26 October 1998 / Accepted : 5 November 1998 Albert J . Jin · Daniel Huster · Klaus Gawrisch Ralph Nossal Light scattering characterization of extruded lipid vesicles ARTICLE A . J . Jin ( ‰ ) Laboratory of Physical Biology , NIAMS , Bldg . 6 / Rm . 408 , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20892 - 2751 , USA e - mail : ajjin @ helix . nih . gov D . Huster · K . Gawrisch Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics , NIAAA , NIH , Rockville , MD 20852 , USA D . Huster Institute of Medical Physics and Biophysics , University of Leipzig , D - 04103 Leipzig , Germany R . Nossal Laboratory of Integrative and Medical Biophysics , NICHD , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA aspect of vesicle morphology , also may be significant . Al - though for reasons of simplification it often is assumed that the vesicles are spherical , it has been convincingly argued that liposomes in most applications have various degrees of elongation ( Deuling and Helfrich 1976 ; Lipowski 1991 ; Seifert et al . 1991 ; Clerc and Thompson 1994 ; White et al . 1996 ) . Here we present a combined dynamic and static light scattering method that provides an easy measurement of liposome elongation in addition to the usual measures of mean size and polydispersity . We also show how one can use both aspects of morphological characterizations , i . e . , vesicle shape and size , to properly evaluate other liposome parameters . Our results show that liposome elongation has a very significant effect on experimental quantitations in liposome applications , and point to ways to handle such complexity . A central simplification adopted in our analysis is that the extruded liposomes can be modeled by thin - walled el - lipsoidal particles of prolate revolution , with certain dis - tributions in size but a unique elongation ratio . While this ellipsoidal model minimizes the number of essential model parameters , it is comparable to a previously proposed ex - truded vesicle formation mechanism ( Clerc and Thomp - son 1994 ) and is in agreement with membrane vesicle prop - erties uncovered over the last decade ( e . g . , see the review by Seifert and Lipowsky 1996 ) . According to Clerc and Thompson ( 1994 ) , vesicles from extrusion in osmotic me - dia through 100 nm filter pores arise from uni - bilayer frag - ments enclosing a reduced internal volume and having the same basic dimensions . Current theoretical understanding and experimental observations offer converging views for vesicle shapes under constraints likely to be encountered during such an extrusion process , but still preclude exact shape expressions . Consequently , any vesicle shape model will necessarily be approximate . Nevertheless , we believe that the ellipsoidal model above is quite good . First , cryo - electron microscopy ( EM ) visualization of the extruded vesicles in isotonic media often reveal a majority of cylin - drical - looking vesicles ( e . g . , see Mui et al . 1993 ) . While one might have concerns about the fidelity of EM proce - dures ( including the cryo method ) and 2D projections of the vesicles from EM are difficult to quantify , such direct visualization is clearly supportive of the adopted model . Second , theoretical shape descriptions from energy mini - mization suggest that the ellipsoidal shapes are good ap - proximations for extruded vesicles under a broad range of conditions ( Seifert 1996 ; Seifert and Lipowsky 1996 ; White et al . 1996 ) . Finally , our results and discussion pre - sented in the balance of this paper will further demonstrate that the adopted ellipsoidal model both provides many practical advantages and leads to consistent descriptions of the extruded vesicles for practical applications that are of the main concern here . In Materials and methods we first revisit the basics of light scattering measurements leading to the mean hydro - dynamic radius , polydispersity , and effective radius of gyra - tion of a liposome population . Using analytic expressions compiled in the Appendix , we then explicitly explain our method of combining information about these quantities to evaluate the mean vesicle elongation p – 1 via a simple equation that is based on modeling liposomes as thin - walled ellipsoidal particles . Two illustrative unimodal size distributions are considered , together leading to the result p – 1 = [ ( R g + l / 2 ) / R h ] [ 1 + 1 . 5 D 2 + 1 . 9 D 4 ] , where R g is the ra - dius of gyration , R h is the hydrodynamic radius , D 2 is the polydispersity , and l is the thickness of the vesicle bilayer . We also demonstrate our scheme of incorporating the ef - fects of vesicle elongation and size distribution by evalu - ating experimental liposome parameters which are com - monly involved in many applications . The Results section contains experimental results ob - tained by applying our method to a series of osmotically swollen and shrunken 1 - stearoyl - 2 - oleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( SOPC ) liposomes produced by extrusion through 100 nm polycarbonate filters in a NaCl solution ( 72 . 9 m M ) . We find that our extruded liposome samples , when suspended in an isotonic medium , have a rather large mean elongation parameter p – 1 ( defined as the ratio of long axis to short axis ) of approximately 3 . 7±0 . 6 , a value that is insensitive to presumed vesicle size distribution func - tions . We also obtain mean vesicle sizes and size ranges which , however , depend somewhat on specific parameter - rizations related to the size distribution functions . With these complete morphological properties ( elongation , and size with polydispersity ) , correct values for a number of experimental parameters are produced . We then show that the derived elongation parameter varies from 1 ( for spher - ical liposomes ) in strongly hypotonic milieus to larger than 6 . 0 as the ambient osmotic stress increases to weakly hy - pertonic , and stays around 5 . 0 in the highly hypertonic re - gime . This variation for near - isotonic conditions corre - sponds to an anticipated linear adjustment of vesicle inter - nal volume , in accordance with the flow of water across the lipid membrane to achieve osmotic balance . Finally , some Discussion and conclusions , emphasizing the consistency of the proposed approach , are offered . The deduced liposome elongation and osmotic response are found to be consistent with a mechanism of vesicle forma - tion via extrusion proposed by Clerc and Thompson ( 1994 ) and SOPC membrane energetic and mechanical behavior under osmotic stress ( Needham and Nunn et al . 1990 ; White et al . 1996 ; Koenig et al . 1997 ) , and some limita - tions of this characterization are also noted . This work of - fers for the first time a complete scheme for obtaining ex - truded liposome shape elongation , and provides some new insights into the large unilamellar vesicle populations that are most relevant to applications . Materials and methods Extrusion of liposomes The procedure for obtaining extruding liposomes has been described previously ( Hope et al . 1985 ; Mayer et al . 1986 ; Huster et al . 1997 ) . Briefly , after freezing and thawing five times with liquid nitrogen , SOPC ( 18 : 0 – 18 : 1 PC ) lipid 188 samples ( Avanti Polar Lipids , Alabaster , Ala . ) were pre - pared at a concentration of 0 . 7 – 1 . 0 wt % in 72 . 9 m M NaCl by extrusion through polycarbonate filters ( Nuclepore , Cambridge , Mass . ) in a three - step process ( Huster et al . 1997 ) . This extrusion process consists of successively forc - ing the lipid sample three times through 400 nm filters , fol - lowed by three passages through 200 nm filters and six pas - sages through 100 nm filters , always under argon gas pres - sure . The final extruded SOPC samples , which appeared to be translucent , were dialyzed overnight against NaCl so - lutions of molality varying from 12 m M to 150 m M . Before performing light scattering characterizations , dilutions of the samples were performed 10 - to 100 - fold by adding a measured amount of sample to the corresponding dialysis solution . Dynamic and static light scattering Morphological characteristics of lipid vesicles were as - sessed by light scattering measurements . Measurements for various vesicle samples , at typical lipid concentrations of 0 . 01 % by weight , were carried out on a BIC light scat - tering spectrometer ( Brookhaven Instrument , Holtsville , New York ) consisting of a model BI - 200SM goniometer , an EMI - 9863 photomultiplier tube ( PMT ) , a BI - 9000AT digital correlator , and a Lexel 95 - 21 argon ion laser oper - ated at a wavelength of 514 . 5 nm and power of 100 mW . The scattering cell was immersed in a refractive index matching fluid whose temperature was controlled at 25± 0 . 1°C . Data for dynamic and static scattering were col - lected simultaneously , and later analyzed with software supplied with the instrument . For each sample , data were acquired – typically for a duration of 15 min – for 1 – 3 runs at angles 30° , 45° , 60° , 90° , 120° , and 150° . The count rate was monitored to exclude runs containing artifacts due to infrequent passage of dust particles through the scattering volume . Static light scattering intensities were corrected for background / solvent contributions and PMT dead - time , and normalized with respect to scattering from spectropho - tometric - grade benzene . This normalized scattering inten - sity is the Rayleigh ratio , I s ( Q ) , where Q = 4 p n l – 1 sin ( q / 2 ) is the magnitude of the scattering - angle - depen - dent wave - vector . The I s ( Q ) were classically analyzed ( e . g . Nossal et al . 1983 ; Schmitz 1990 ; White et al . 1996 ) via [ I ( Q ) / I ( 0 ) ] – 1 / 2 = 1 + Q 2 Æ R g2 æ z / 6 + o ( Q 4 ) ( 1 ) which yields the scattering - intensity averaged ( “ Z - aver - aged” ) radius of gyration , Æ R æ g ” ( Æ R g2 æ ) 1 / 2 ( see Fig . 1 ) . For extruded liposomes of about 50 nm in radius , the higher order terms , o ( Q 4 ) , etc . , are negligible . Other studies car - ried out in our laboratory indicate that weak vesicle aggre - gation , possibly present because the scattering samples were of finite lipid concentration , is inconsequential at the concentrations used here . The autocorrelation function g 1 ( t ) , given as a function of delay time t , was independently fitted at each scatter - ing angle using histogram methods ( e . g . “CONTIN” , BI - 9000AT Instrument Manual , Brookhaven Instrument ; Dah - neke 1983 ) . We thereby verified that the distributions of the suspended lipid vesicles essentially were unimodal . Consequently , the autocorrelation function was fitted by a second - order cumulants expansion ( see Fig . 2 ) ln ‰ g 1 ( t ) ‰ = – ( Æ D æ z Q 2 ) t + ( m z Q 4 / 2 ) t 2 + o ( t 3 ) ( 2 ) which yielded the Z - averaged and rotationally averaged apparent translational diffusion coefficient Æ D æ z and sec - ond moment m z ( Nossal et al . 1983 ; Dahneke 1983 ; Schmitz 1990 ) . Then , for each scattering angle , the Z - averaged , ap - parent hydrodynamic radius Æ R h æ z was calculated via Æ R h æ z = k B T / ( 4 ph s Æ D æ z ) ( 3 ) where k B is the Boltzmann constant , T is the absolute tem - perature , and h s is the solvent viscosity . Also , we obtained 189 Fig . 1 Typical static light scattering intensities , plotted as I s ( Q ) – 1 / 2 vs Q 2 , where Q is the magnitude of the Bragg scattering vector . In accord with Eq . ( 1 ) , linear fits yield the Z - averaged square radius of gyration , Æ R g2 æ z . Data are for the “standard sample , ” i . e . , vesicles sus - pended in an isotonic , 72 . 9 m M NaCl solution Fig . 2 Typical photon autocorrelation function , g 1 ( t ) , fitted ( dashed line ) according to a second - order cumulant expansion as given in Eq . ( 2 ) . ( For comparison , the dotted line shows a single exponential fit , obtained by setting m z = 0 . ) The high quality of the cumulant fit , as indicated in the inset by the residuals to the fit , indicate a relatively narrow , unimodal vesicle size distribution . The inset shows the g 1 ( t ) residues of the cumulant fit ( + ) and the single exponential fit ( l ) . Data for 90° scattering angle , standard 72 . 9 m M NaCl sample the convenient quantity D z which is related to m z by D z 2 ” m z / Æ D æ z 2 = ( Æ 1 / R h2 æ z – Æ1 / R h æ z 2 ) / Æ1 / R h æ z 2 ( 4 ) Values of Æ R h æ z and D z 2 , for a typical sample , are shown as functions of Q in Fig . 3 . Note that D z 2 usually falls within the range 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 , signifying that the underlying unimodal size distribution is relatively narrow . This measure of poly - dispersity seems to have no significant dependence on Q in the present investigation . However , the apparent hydro - dynamic radius Æ R h æ z shows a slight dependence on scat - tering angle ( see Fig . 3 ) . In a subsequent analysis , we pro - pose to take Æ R æ h and D 2 for each sample to be an error - weighted average of the { Æ R h æ z } and { D z 2 } measured at the various angles . Determination of vesicle elongation The above - described light scattering measurements pro - vide one set of data , Æ R æ g , Æ R æ h , and D 2 . These quantities depend on , and are averaged over , the shape and size dis - tributions of the vesicles in the sample suspension . To pro - duce the vesicle parameters of interest , we model these lip - osomal vesicles as thin - wall prolate ellipsoids by two al - ternative size distributions and a constant elongation . In the Appendix , we have presented basic expressions for ideal ellipsoids , the effects of the two size distributions [ i . e . , a log - normal distribution p LN ( R ; R 0 , d ) or a square - wave distribution p SW ( R ; R˜ 0 , d ˜ ) ; see Eqs . ( A9 ) and ( A10 ) and Fig . 4 ] , and the corrections due to the finite bilayer thickness [ Eqs . ( A1 ) – ( A14 ) ] . The rational for this ellip - soidal model is presented in the Introduction and further addressed in the Discussion section . Combining these basic equations for ideal ellipsoidal vesicles , size - distribution and thin - wall corrections , we can now obtain the basic equation for vesicle morphology . It follows , by rearranging Eqs . ( A6 ) , ( A7 ) , and ( A13 ) or ( A14 ) , that the average shape of the vesicle can be assessed via the ratio ( 5 ) where ( 6 ) are available directly from the combined dynamic and static light scattering measurements . For our examples of log - normal or square - wave size distribution [ Eqs . ( A9 ) and ( A10 ) ] , the vesicle morphology is affected via the term [ af - ter using Eqs . ( A11 ) – ( A14 ) ] ( 7 ) or ( 8 ) respectively , where the leading order D 2 - terms agree with each other but the coefficients of the D 4 - terms – which were determined from best truncation approximations to the two respective model size distributions ( via TableCurve 2D , Jandel Scientific Software ) – differ slightly . Since the ex - plicit forms of f g ( p ) and f h ( p ) are defined in Eqs . ( A1 ) and ( A2 ) , the vesicle elongation parameter p – 1 can be deduced from Eq . ( 5 ) by following any standard method of solving nonlinear equations . To make this process more conven - ient , we have discovered ( again via TableCurve 2D ) an ex - b M SW = = - + + @ - + ( ( ) . D D D D D ) D 2 4 5 2 4 1 32 14740 1 32 2 3 O b M LN = = + = - + + @ - + ( ( ) ( ) . – / D D D D D D D ) 2 2 4 6 2 4 1 1 32 158 1 32 1 5 3 2 O r b a a a L g h M and ” + ” Ø ºŒ ø ßœ R R l / ( ( ( ( / 2 4 3 6 1 2 D D D D ) ) ) ) 3 2 f p f p g h e L M ( ) ( ) ( ) = ” r r b D 190 Fig . 3 Typical scattering wave - vector dependence of the reduced hydrodynamic radius Æ R h æ z [ squares , see Eq . ( 3 ) ] and polydispersity D z 2 [ circles , see Eq . ( 4 ) ] with uncertainty derived from cumulant fits . Data are for standard 72 . 9 m M NaCl vesicle suspension Fig . 4A , B Examples of vesicle size distribution functions p ( R s ) obtained by assuming a square - distribution [ dashed line , see Eq . ( A10 ) ] or log normal distribution [ solid line , see Eq . ( A9 ) ] . The pa - rameters { R 0h , d } and { R˜ 0 , d ˜ } are those which are obtained for the standard 72 . 9 m M NaCl sample ( see below ) . Intensity weighted dis - tributions are shown in A , and corresponding number distributions appear in B ceedingly good approximate solution to be ( 9 ) where the coefficient of the D 4 - term is adopted to reflect the average over the small differences between the log - nor - mal and square - wave distribution . This expression pro - vides p – 1 values in the range 1 ≤ p – 1 < 7 for values 1 ≤r e < 1 . 4 and 0 ≤D 2 < 0 . 3 , covering the range of liposome morphol - ogy that turns out to be most relevant . For any given ( r e , D ) within that range , differences between the calculated values of p – 1 are only a few percent when using either the exact functions of f h ( p ) and f g ( p ) or the D 4 - terms specific to the distributions p LN ( R ) and p SW ( R ) . If r e ≤ 1 , spherical liposomes corresponding to p – 1 = 1 can be presumed . Calculation of vesicle size parameters and entrapped volume The above derivations , leading to the determination of the elongation parameters , show that one must carefully iden - tify each liposome size parameter in order to provide any meaningful values . Staying with the log - normal or square - wave distributions [ Eqs . ( A9 ) and ( A10 ) for equations ] , the size range of liposomes most responsible for the light scat - tering intensity may be characterized either as lying within the range ( R 0 e – d , R 0 e d ) with the geometric mean of R 0 , or within [ R˜ 0 , R˜ 0 ( 1 + d ˜ ) ] with the geometric mean of R˜ 0 EDD 1 + d ˜ , respectively [ see Eqs . ( A9 ) and ( A10 ) and Fig . 4 ] . Then Eqs . ( A11 ) and ( A12 ) allow the evaluations of the distribution width factors ( 10 ) For the mean distribution size , one obtains , by rearranging Eqs . ( A7 ) and ( A13 ) or Eqs . ( A12 ) and ( A14 ) ( 11 ) where very good approximate expressions for f h ( p ) and a nSW ( D ) have been introduced ( via Table Curve 2D ) for the relevant liposome parameter values , 1 ≤ p < 7 and D 2 < 0 . 3 . Note from the above that R 0 = R˜ 0 EDD 1 + d ˜ , i . e . , that the geo - metric means of the two distributions coincide with each other . The expressions given in Eq . ( 11 ) are intensity weighted measures of mean vesicle size . If one’s experimental ap - R f p R p R R f p R p R 0 1 0 1 2 1 1 0 05 1 1 1 1 0 05 1 1 1 12 15 5 = @ - + = @ - + + + h 3LN 4LN h h h 3 SW 4 SW h h ( ) ( ( . ( – ) ˜ ( ) ( ( . ( – ) ( ) ( ( . ) ) – – a a a a D D D D D D D D ) ) ) ) 2 2 2 2 d d = + @ + ln ( ) ˜ ( . ) 1 12 15 5 D D D 2 2 2 2 and p R R - @ + - - - @ + - + ØºŒ øßœ 1 1 9 3 1 1 2 1 32 1 9 . ( ) ln ( ) / . r r r e e e g h with l D D 2 4 plications require the size range of liposomes that are most numerous , the characteristic liposome sizes have to be de - rived from the number distributions and will move to smaller values . Taking the log - normal distribution as the example , this size range for liposome particle number be - comes ( R 0N e – d , R 0N e d ) with the center ( geometric mean ) value shifted to the smaller value R 0N = R 0 exp ( – 4 d 2 ) . Similarly , the number distribution corresponding to the square - wave shows a sharp cutoff at the lower limit , R˜ 0 , and decays to less than e – 1 of maximum probability for R s > R˜ 0 e 1 / 4 , so it also reflects a shift to smaller sizes ( see Fig . 4 ) . Thus , especially when the polydispersity is small , the two illustrative distributions possess many mutually consistent features that should be taken seriously . The dif - ferent distribution forms can be thought of as alternative parametrizations of the size range for the vesicle popula - tion . Combining these parameterized size ranges with mean elongation allows evaluation of related parameters such as the mean long - axis dimension , a 0 = R 0 p – 2 / 3 , and short - axis dimension , b 0 = R 0 p 1 / 3 . Another liposome parameter common to a number of applications is the vesicle entrapped volume , V e , i . e . the total internal volume of vesicle per unit lipid mass ( e . g . , see Huster et al . 1997 , where this quantity is used to quan - tify water permeation rate across bilayers ) . We take this as our final example of liposome parameters where valuations are significantly affected by vesicle morphological factors for which we must carefully include corrections from liposome size distribution and bilayer thickness . Because , for a given lipid , the surface area occupied by each mole - cule , A L , is approximately independent of vesicle shape and size , this entrapped volume is proportional to the lipo - some radius parameter introduced before , in Eq . ( A4 ) , as ( 12 ) Here , as previously , A is the vesicle surface area , V is ves - icle internal volume , M L is the molar mass of the lipid , and N A is the Avogadro’s number . For liposomes with a nar - row size distribution and thin walls , the relevant averaged quantity denoted as Æ V æ e can be calculated according to Æ V æ e (cid:181)Æ R æ e ”3 ( ∫ V ) / ( ∫ A ) ( Huster et al . 1997 ) . Thus , by a der - ivation similar to that which gave rise to Eq . ( A7 ) for Æ R æ h , we find that the parameter pair { Æ R æ e , Æ V æ e } may be related to the elongation p – 1 and the moments Æ R s n æ as ( 13 ) In the above , the effect of substracting 2 l G 8 . 0 nm from bilayer thickness for a thin - wall correction approximately takes into account both the adjustment of – 3 l for the vol - ume ( from the inner to the outer surface ) and the adjust - ment of 2 ( l / 2 ) for the area ( from the middle to the outer surface ) . Such first - order approximation for the thin - wall correction is sufficient because its magnitude is still small R V M A N V R p R R A R p R R f p R R s s e e L L A s s s s s s e d d ” = (cid:215) Ø ºŒ ø ßœ = - (cid:242) (cid:242) 6 3 2 3 2 [ ( , ) ] ) [ ( , ) ] ) ( ) ( ( p p l V V M A A N R A N M e L L A e L A L 6 ” = ( / ( ) ) 2 191 [ see discussion following Eq . ( A14 ) ] . Therefore , by using Eqs . ( A7 ) and ( A8 ) , one gets the expression ( 14 ) Note that this equation happens to be independent of any assumed form for the size distribution , with the effect of vesicle polydispersity accounted for by the factor ( 1 + D 2 ) . The vesicle elongation affects Æ R æ e via the ratio f e ( p ) / f h ( p ) , which can calculated exactly from the definitions given by Eqs . ( A1 ) and ( A4 ) ; we find that the approximate expression given in the bracket in Eq . ( 14 ) deviates less than 3 % from its true value for the relevant range of liposome morphol - ogy 1 ≤ p – 1 < 7 , for which we find that 1 ≤ f e ( p ) / f h ( p ) < 0 . 45 . Results The above - described light scattering measurements and data reduction methods demonstrate that the vesicle pa - rameters of interest – mainly the mean vesicle elongation and size range – can be determined from analyzing light scattering data and be used to infer experimentally rele - vant quantities like vesicle entrapped volume . We have ap - plied our characterization method to three sets of SOPC li - posome samples produced by repeated extrusions of SOPC R f p f p R p p p R e e h h h 1 1 = + - @ - - + - - Ø ºŒ ø ßœ + - ( ) ( ) ( ) . ( ) ln ( ) – – – D D 2 2 l l 1 011 1 1 0 6 1 1 2 1 2 1 1 lipid – suspended in a 72 . 9 m M NaCl solution – through 100 nm pore - size polycarbonate filters ( see Materials and methods ) . Table 1 contains the light scattering results and various derived elongation and other parameters for lipo - some samples diluted into an isotonic medium . In addition , results are given for aliquots of these samples that were di - alyzed overnight against NaCl solutions of molarity vary - ing from 12 m M to 150 m M . The osmotic responses of lipo - some morphology are shown in Figs . 5 and 6 . Liposome morphology in isotonic milieu Combined dynamic and static light scattering measurements on each sample directly yield three characterization param - eters , { Æ R æ g , Æ R æ h , D 2 } , i . e . , the radius of gyration , hydro - dynamic radius , and polydispersity , respectively ( see Ma - terials and methods and Figs . 1 – 3 ) . We find , for three sets of samples diluted in an isotonic milieu , Æ R æ g = 98±13 nm , Æ R æ h = 69±9 nm , and D 2 = 0 . 16±0 . 03 nm , where the varia - tions noted by the standard deviations are indicative of sample differences as well as light scattering measurement inaccuracies ( Table 1 ) . These results agree with the expec - tation that the liposomes have relatively uniform sizes comparable to that of the filter pore . The difference be - tween Æ R æ g and Æ R æ h is quite noticeable , and demonstrate that one must refer to specific size parameters in address - ing questions like “what is the vesicle size ? ” . Following our analysis scheme ( see Materials and meth - ods ) , liposome shape and size distributions can be deter - mined from the set of light scattering results , { Æ R æ g , Æ R æ h , D 2 } . We find these extruded liposomes in isotonic milieu to be decidedly non - spherical with mean elongation ratio ( i . e . , prolate ellipsoidal long axis to short axis ratio ) of p – 1 = 3 . 7±0 . 6 [ Eq . ( 9 ) and Table 1 ] . When the liposome sizes are parameterized by the equivalent spherical radius R s ( i . e . , the radius of a sphere with an equal volume ) , we find that the light intensity is most probably scattered from lipo - somes having R s @ R 0 = 56 nm . The liposome size range for the scattering intensity can be parameterized either by a log - normal distribution [ Eq . ( A9 ) ] with the standard deviation lower and upper limits of { R 0 e – d , R 0 e d } = { 38 , 82 } nm , or by a square - wave distribution [ Eq . ( A10 ) ] with the lower and upper cutoff limits of { R˜ 0 , R˜ 0 ( 1 + d ˜ ) } = { 29 , 109 } nm ( see Fig . 4 and Table 1 ) . To use the determined liposome morphological charac - terizations in other applications , we stress that one must critically evaluate the given application to determine those parameters that are truly relevant for particular quantita - tions ( see Materials and methods ) . Owing to the non - sphe - ricity of the extruded vesicles in an isotonic milieu , these relevant parameters will involve shape functions like f h ( p ) , f g ( p ) , f A ( p ) and f V ( p ) [ see Eqs . ( A1 ) – ( A5 ) , etc . ] . The highly non - spherical liposome shape means that the ex - perimentally inferred shape functions deviate noticeably from unity ( Table 1 ) . Although the central equivalent spherical radius R 0 is very close to the filter pore radius of about 50 nm , the central long - axis radius and short - axis ra - dius of the sample , { a 0 , b 0 } = [ 134 , 36 } nm , differ consid - 192 Table 1 Liposome morphological parameters in an isotonic medi - um ( s . d . = standard deviation based on three data sets ; see the text for notations ) ( A ) Combined light scattering measurements Radius of gyration , Æ R æ g ±s . d . 98±13 ( nm ) Hydrodynamic radius Æ R æ h ±s . d . 69±9 ( nm ) Polydispersity , D 2 ±s . d . 0 . 16±0 . 03 ( B ) Calculated morphological parameters Liposome elongation , p – 1 ±s . d . 3 . 7±0 . 6 Radius distribution ( log - normal ) , { R 0 e – d , R 0 , R 0 e d } 38 , 56 , 82 ( nm ) Radius distribution ( square - wave ) , { R˜ 0 , R˜ 0 EDD 1 + d ˜ , R˜ 0 ( 1 + d ˜ ) } 29 , 56 109 ( nm ) ( C ) Inferred liposome parameters Shape functions , f h ( p ) , f g ( p ) 1 . 16 , 1 . 35 Shape functions , f A ( p ) , f v ( p ) 1 . 25 , 1 . 40 Liposome long - axis , a 0 ” R 0 p – 2 / 3 134 ( nm ) Liposome short - axis , b 0 ” R 0 p 1 / 3 36 ( nm ) Size distribution for vesicle number ( log - normal : { R 0N e – d , R 0N , R 0N e d } 21 , 31 , 45 ( nm ) ( square - wave : { R˜ 0 , R˜ 0 e 1 / 8 , R˜ 0 e 1 / 4 } 29 , 33 , 37 ( nm ) Entrapment radius Æ R æ e ±s . d . 38±7 ( nm ) Entrapped volume Æ V æ e ±s . d . 2 . 7±0 . 6 ( m l / mg ) erably from R 0 . In applications where the liposome size range for particle numbers is relevant , our approach sug - gests that the largest portion of liposomes have R s @ R 0N = 32 nm . When the vesicle number distribution is parameter - ized either by a log - normal distribution or by a square - wave distribution , the lower and upper limits of the equivalent radius for the majority of the vesicles are about 29 nm and 37 nm , respectively ( see Fig . 4 and Table 1 ) . This size shift between the vesicle number distribution and the scattering intensity distribution correlates with the observed size poly - dispersity for the extruded vesicles . Although small , it nev - ertheless must be accounted for . Finally , we apply the analysis in Materials and methods to the evaluation of a pair of related entrapped volume pa - rameters , { Æ R æ e , Æ V æ e } , relevant to a vesicle permeation study ( Huster et al . 1997 ) . The final results , inferred di - rectly from our light scattering data [ see Eqs . ( 13 ) and ( 14 ) ] , are Æ R æ e = 38±7 nm and Æ V æ e = 2 . 7±0 . 6 m l / mg , where the variations are standard deviations from the three sample sets ( Table 1 ) . The values M L = 824 . 16 for the molar mass and A L = 0 . 666 nm 2 for the monolayer area per lipid of SOPC , used for calculating Æ V æ e from Æ R æ e via Eq . ( 14 ) , were adopted from the literature ( Huster et al . 1997 ) . Osmotic effect Figure 5 shows the deduced elongation parameter , p – 1 , for aliquots of the extruded samples that were dialyzed over - night in hypo - and hyper - osmotic NaCl solutions ( A ) , to - gether with ratio r L and the polydispersity D 2 ( B ) . The el - ongation values in Fig . 5a were inferred from the light scat - tering measurements in Fig . 5B according to Eqs . ( 6 ) and ( 9 ) . The polydispersity value D 2 shows no appreciable change related to dialysis for the entire ambient osmotic concentration range of 12 m M ≤ [ NaCl ] ≤ 150 m M , and al - ways is close to 0 . 14 ( with a standard deviation of 0 . 02 for 18 sample sets , including the three involving an isotonic milieu ) . The elongation parameter p – 1 , on the other hand , tracks the ratio r L [ evaluated via Eq . ( 6 ) ] , which varies due to changes in the Æ R æ g and Æ R æ h that occur when the ex - truded vesicles are dialyzed . For hypotonic media with [ NaCl ] e 40 m M , the resulting elongation of p – 1 h 1 implies that the vesicles have become spherical . When ambient os - molarity is increased beyond that of the isotonic NaCl con - centration ( [ NaCl ] 0 = 72 . 9 m M ) , the vesicles become more elongated and reach a value of p – 1 h 6 near [ NaCl ] = 90 m M . For yet stronger hyper - osmotic milieus , the derived elon - gation parameter settles around p – 1 h 5 . Figure 6 shows the corresponding values of the relative volume ratio f V ( p ) as a function of the osmotic stress ra - tio [ NaCl ] / [ NaCl ] 0 . The ratio f V ( p ) has been calculated via Eq . ( 5 ) to emphasize the difference between actual vesicle volumes and those of spherical vesicles having the same bilayer surface areas . This shows more distinctly the three regimes of behavior : ( I ) spherical vesicles for hypotonic milieu , with [ NaCl ] / [ NaCl ] 0 e 0 . 6 ; ( II ) elongated vesicles with linear osmotic response in the isotonic neighborhood , with 1 . 0 e f V ( p ) e 1 . 8 and 0 . 7 e [ NaCl ] / [ NaCl ] 0 e 1 . 2 ; and ( III ) elongated vesicles with non - linear osmotic response , with [ NaCl ] / [ NaCl ] 0 R 1 . 3 . ( Note that the line fitted through regime II has only one adjustable parameter , as it was con - strained to pass through the coordinate origin . ) This is quantitatively in accord with the notion that vesicles in the isotonic neighborhood always achieve osmotic stress balance by adjustment of the internal NaCl concentration ( via water flow across the bilayer ) to that of the dialysis milieu . 193 Fig . 5A , B Shape change induced by dialysis of vesicles into hypo - or hypertonic media : A inferred elongation parameter , p – 1 ; B param - eters r L and D 2 , determined from light scattering and used to calcu - late p – 1 according to Eqs . ( 5 ) , ( 6 ) , and ( 9 ) . Isotonic condition ( 72 . 9 m M NaCl ) is indicated by the vertical line Fig . 6 Variation in relative vesicle volume due to change in elon - gation arising from vesicle swelling or shrinkage in hypo - or hyper - tonic media . f V , defined in Eq . ( A5 ) as the inverse ratio of liposome volume to that of a hypothetical spherical vesicle having the same surface area , is a simple measure of vesicle non - sphericity . This vol - ume ratio , f V , is related via a simple fractional power - law to an area ratio , f A [ see Eq . ( A5 ) ] , measuring the relative excess of the ves - icle surface over that of an equal volume sphere . The three regimes of behavior are discussed in the text . Isotonic condition corresponds to [ NaCl ] = [ NaCl ] 0 = 72 . 9 m M Discussion and conclusions Consistency of the results The isotonic results and osmotic effects , taken together , provide consistency support for the validity of the present approach for liposome characterization . The deduced non - spherical nature and size distribution of the liposomes ex - truded in osmotic solutions is expected from a mechanism for extruded vesicle formation proposed by Clerc and Thompson ( 1994 ) . Membrane fragments are envisioned to assume long cylindrical shapes during the pressure - driven extrusion , and to slide with viscous flow along the straight pores of the polycarbonate filters . Because of a well - known fluctuation instability ( Walstra 1983 ) , the long cylindrical membrane fragment will break periodically into a string of elongated cylinders , each having the length of l h 2 p r , where r is the radius of the cylinder . We believe that , after such breakage , the membrane cylinders reseal to eliminate free edges that are energetically costly , thereby trapping within a cylindrical volume of osmotic fluid . Because of the requirement to balance the osmotic stress across the bi - layer , the sealed vesicles are under constraints of both sur - face area and internal volume , and may not be able to ad - just their shape greatly even after emerging from the pores . Thus , typical liposomes should maintain an elongated shape with the volume ratio value of ( 15 ) which is evaluated from the cylinder surface area of A C = 2 p r l + 2 p r 2 and volume of V C = lp r 2 together with the instability condition , l h 2 p r [ see Eq . ( A5 ) ] . The above mechanism therefore predicts that all the ex - truded vesicles should have the same degree of non - sphe - ricity , although their short - axis radius varies within a size range that is somewhat smaller than the slightly dispersed filter pore sizes of approximately 50 nm . The morpholog - ical results deduced from our three isotonic samples matches these predictions extremely well . The volume ra - tio f V , that was inferred via Eq . ( A5 ) from the stated elon - gation parameter p – 1 = 3 . 7±0 . 6 , has a mean value of 1 . 4 ( in Table 1 ) , close to the value of about 1 . 5 extrapolated from the data shown in Fig . 6 . Both values are in close agree - ment with the prediction given in Eq . ( 15 ) . These f V val - ues correspond well with the observation that the liposome internal volume is about 30 – 40 % less than the maximum spherical volume allowed by its surface area ( Clerc and Thompson 1994 ; Huster et al . 1997 ) . The inferred size ranges , expressed in terms of equivalent spherical radius , and the corresponding long - axis and short - axis radii , are also very reasonable in comparison with the filter pore size distribution available from the manufacture ( Nuclepore , Cambridge , Mass . ) . The behavior of f V ( p ) shown in Fig . 6 , and the implied liposome morphological changes upon liposome osmotic dialysis , are quantitatively in accord with the following os - motic stress response mechanism ( White et al . 1996 ) in f A V V C C @ @ ( / ) ( / ) . / 4 3 4 1 475 3 2 p p which vesicle internal volumes change in order that the li - posome interiors be in osmotic balance with the exterior dialysis milieu . The osmotic pressures of the NaCl solu - tions are given by the standard equation ( e . g . Rock 1969 ) ( 16 ) where R gas , V 0H 2 O , X 0H 2 O , and T are the molar gas constant , the molar volume of the water , the mole fraction of the wa - ter , and the ambient temperature , respectively . On the other hand , the membrane bending elastic energy , with which liposomes maintain their morphology , is adequately given by the Helfrich “effective Hamiltonian” of the form ( 17 ) where C 1 and C 2 are two principle curvatures and C 0 , k , and k G are the spontaneous curvature , bending rigidity , and gaussian curvature modulus ( Deuling and Helfrich 1976 ; Lipowsky 1991 ; Seifert and Lipowsky 1996 ) . Because the gaussian curvature term remains constant upon inte - gration , the change in bending energy for each vesicle cor - responding to shape change is of the order of the bending energy for spheres with zero spontaneous curvature , i . e . , D H B = 8 p k ≤ 2 · 10 – 18 J , where k = 10 – 20 K B T is used for a typical membrane formed by lipids like SOPC ( Lipow - sky 1991 ) . For an extruded liposome having equivalent spherical radius R s = 50 nm , this bending elastic energy equals the osmotic deformation energy , D H p = p os ( D [ NaCl ] ) ( 4 p / 3 ) R s3 , when the concentration difference across the bilayer is D [ NaCl ] = 0 . 03 m M . Therefore , within our os - motic stress range of 12 m M < [ NaCl ] < 150 m M , nonspher - ical liposomes must always have their internal NaCl con - centration adjusted to that of the dialysis milieu . Because Na + and Cl – ions cannot diffuse across an in - tact SOPC membrane , the internal NaCl concentration changes only via water permeation across the membranes . When the osmolarity of the ambient solution is decreased or increased , liposomes expand to become more spherical or shrink to become more elongated . Quantitatively , one expects that the internal vesicle volume of each vesicle scales inversely with its final [ NaCl ] and , hence , the vol - ume ratio behaves as ( 18 ) where f V0 is the volume ratio in an isotonic milieu for which [ NaCl ] = [ NaCl ] 0 . However , when the osmolarity of the ambient solution is decreased greatly such that [ NaCl ] < [ NaCl ] 0 / f V0 , liposomes which are already fully swollen may withstand a certain amount of osmotic stress before experiencing lysis ( Needham and Nunn 1990 ; Ertel et al . 1993 ; Mui et al . 1993 ; Koenig et al . 1997 ) . Membrane ex - pansion and breakage can be quantitatively estimated via the standard Laplace’s law t = Dp os r / 2 ( 19 ) f f V V0 NaCl NaCl = [ ] [ ] 0 H A k C C C k C C k C C B G d = + + + + { } (cid:242) – ( ) ( ) 0 1 2 1 2 2 1 2 12 p os gas H O 0 H O 2 2 atm ) [ NaCl ] ( [ ] ) ln ( ) ( . NaCl = - » R T V X 0 049 m M 194 where t is lateral tension experienced by the spherical ves - icle of radius r that are fully swollen under the osmotic stress Dp os across the bilayer . For SOPC membranes , an elastic tensile strength of t lys = 5 . 7 dyn / cm was previously estimated ( Needham and Nunn 1990 ) . Therefore , for ves - icles of 50 nm spherical radius , the membrane can with - stand an ambient NaCl concentration that is lower than that of the internal volume by as much as D [ NaCl ] lys H [ ( 2 t lys / r ) / 0 . 049 atm ) ] m M H 46 m M , as derived from Eqs . ( 16 ) and ( 19 ) . Larger vesicles can withstand proportionally lower values of D [ NaCl ] lys . If D [ NaCl ] lys is surpassed , vesicles experience lysis to release some of their osmotic components and then reseal into vesicles that are essentially spherical , for which one expects a constant value f V = 1 . On the other hand , under a sub - lysis lateral tension of t < t lys , SOPC membrane area expansion and its thickness reduction will be fairly insig - nificant because of the large membrane lateral compress - ibility moduli ( Koenig et al . 1997 ) . In either case , lipo - somes will remain as spherical vesicles of similar radii when the ambient osmolality decreases below the point of full swelling at [ NaCl ] = [ NaCl ] 0 / f V0 . Our data for volume fraction in Fig . 6 are fully consis - tent with the above interpretation for both in the hypotonic regime ( I ) and in the near isotonic regime ( II ) . A straight line fits the data of regime II ( values 1 . 0 ≤ f V < 1 . 8 and 50 < [ NaCl ] < 90 m M ) with only one adjustable parameter according to Eq . ( 18 ) . Because [ NaCl ] 0 / f V0 H 49 m M and most of the liposomes in our samples have radii smaller than 100 nm ( Table 1 ) , a large majority of vesicles will not ex - perience lysis in our hypotonic media in regime I . Corre - spondingly , the elongation factor p – 1 varies over the range from 1 to 6 ( see Fig . 5 ) . For regime III in hypertonic dialy - sis solutions ( [ NaCl ] > 100 m M ) , for which the vesicle inter - nal volume would have dropped to less than half of the al - lowed spherical volume , the data show a break in pattern . We believe that the pattern break suggests that vesicle mor - phology changes from that of a prolate ellipsoid of revo - lution to a more complicated structure for which our mor - phological relations no longer apply . The insets in Fig . 6 depict likely shapes of typical extruded vesicles . Such shape transition at highly reduced internal entrapped volume is expected from the viewpoint of bilayer shape energy minimization ( Deuling and Helfrich 1976 ; Lipow - sky 1991 ; Seifert 1996 ; Seifert and Lipowsky 1996 ) . Al - though the noise in the experimental data is fairly large , the transition boundary is probably around f V = 1 . 7±0 . 2 , i . e . when the internal volume reduction reaches around 41 % of the maximal spherical volume . This transition point corresponds [ via Eq . ( A5 ) ] to a membrane surface area that is about 41 % in excess of its minimal need for enclosing the reduced volume . These transition boundary values may be somewhat higher than some earlier experimental obser - vations ( e . g . Kas and Sackmann 1991 ; Farge and Devaux 1992 ) that , however , are mostly for micrometer and larger membrane vesicles and may involve different constraints . In a previously reported study ( Huster et al . 1997 ) , a pair of entrapped volume parameters { Æ R æ e , Æ V æ e } was as - sessed for the quantitation of water permeation rates across bilayers . The liposome sample used in that investigation was prepared identically to those used here . The isotonic values Æ R æ e = 38±7 nm and Æ V æ e = 2 . 7±0 . 6 m l / mg for SOPC , inferred in this study , are in excellent agreement with an in - dependent entrapped Mn 2 + measurement , performed under similar conditions , that yielded Æ V æ e = 2 . 4±0 . 3 m l / mg ( Huster et al . 1997 ) . In addition , we have derived such en - trapped volume parameters for other liposome lipid com - positions and solvent conditions ( data not shown ) . We find that , under identical filtering and extrusion procedures in their isotonic media , these vesicle populations all have similar morphological parameters , e . g . the elongation p – 1 = 3 . 7±0 . 6 and the radius Æ R æ e = 38±7 nm . This is con - sistent with the above - discussed liposome formation mech - anism by extrusion where bilayer properties only have sec - ondary effects ( see also Hunter and Frisken 1998 ) . Assumptions about liposome morphology : model limitations The results based on Eq . ( 19 ) will represent long axis to short axis ratios only when vesicle shapes are close to that of prolate ellipsoids . Otherwise , the elongation parameter derived from Eq . ( 19 ) no longer will have a simple mean - ing , although it still should be indicative of vesicle elonga - tion . Indeed , modeling vesicles as prolate ellipsoids is a simplification ( see Introduction ) . While an ellipsoidal ves - icle may correspond approximately to energy minimum under certain conditions , alternative membrane energetic models have been advanced recently ( Seifert 1996 ; Seifert and Lipowsky 1996 ) . In any case , vesicle shape fluctua - tions can induce further complications given the smallness of the bending energy change estimated under Eq . ( 17 ) ( Deuling and Helfrich 1976 ; Lipowsky 1991 ; Seifert et al . 1991 ; Seifert 1996 ; White et al . 1996 ) . For example , such complications may involve a fluctuation - induced renormal - ization of the effective Hamiltonian for constraint mem - branes ( Seifert 1996 ) , which can easily alter minimal en - ergy shapes and shape transition phase diagrams . A strong consequence of such renormalization was discovered for interfaces undergoing wetting transitions ( Jin and Fisher 1993 ) . The lack of full understanding for vesicle morphol - ogy and dynamics under constraints of the sort experienced by extruded vesicles preclude exact treatment of the vesi - cle populations . In the mean time , the consistency of our data in the regimes I and II suggests that the prolate ellip - soidal model for the extruded vesicles is very good , as long as the internal volume is more than half of the correspond - ing spherical volume . On the other hand , if the internal vol - ume turns out to be near or less than half of the spherical value , one must consider the possibility of drastically differ - ent vesicle shapes , and treat the deduced results with caution . A related assumption adopted in our analysis of mor - phological polydispersity is that liposomes have a substan - tial size range , but unique elongation ratio . As stated in the Introduction , this simplification is at first for the sake of having a minimal number of unknown model parameters . However , it is reasonable in light of the above - discussed extruded vesicle formation mechanism ( Clerc and Thomp - 195 son 1994 ) , where the fluctuation instability ( Walstra 1983 ) suggests a constant length to diameter ratio for all cylindri - cal fragments from which vesicles are formed [ see Eq . ( 15 ) ] . It is also directly supported by the fact that the measure - ment values of polydispersity D 2 for our extruded vesicles remained constant around 0 . 14±0 . 2 during the broad range of osmotic expansion and shrinkage ( see Fig . 5B ) . If there was a significant distribution in vesicle elongation , the mea - sured values of D 2 should have decreased with the osmotic expansions as an increasing fraction of the vesicles become fully swollen and spherical . No decrease is observed at all for our extruded samples ( Fig . 5B ) . Also in Fig . 6 , the tran - sition between regime I and regime II behavior appears quite abrupt , indicating that most vesicles expand into spheres near the same ambient osmolality . The choice of analytic form for size distribution , p ( R ) , affects vesicle size range parameterizations , but is not cru - cial to our main morphological results . In the evaluation of the elongation , for example , the choice of p ( R ) enters only via the term b M ( D ) defined in Eq . ( 6 ) and approximated in Eqs . ( 7 ) – ( 9 ) . For our typical values of D 2 = 0 . 14±0 . 2 , the difference in higher - order terms on the right - hand side of Eqs . ( 7 ) and ( 9 ) is negligible [ as one finds , e . g . , b M = LN ( 0 . 15 ) = 0 . 819 vs . b M = SW ( 0 . 15 ) = 0 . 835 ] . Although the precise characterization of the function p ( R ) is still un - certain ( Kolchens et al . 1993 ; Strawbridge and Hallett 1994 ; Korgel et al . 1998 ) , the size distribution for extruded vesi - cles appear to be narrow enough to allow the use of any rea - sonable and convenient form . In conclusion , we have presented a simple scheme to evaluate , by combining results of static light scattering and dynamic light scattering , the morphological elongation of the extruded liposomes , their characteristic size range , and experimental parameters relevant to specific applications . Because extruded vesicles in osmotic solutions are both el - ongated and have a notable size distribution range , one must be sure to include the effect of specific liposome parame - ters that are truly relevant to the required quantitations . For these purposes we have derived various simplified equa - tions [ e . g . Eq . ( 9 ) for liposome elongation ] in order to en - courage their usage in diverse applications . The parameter values and osmotic response behavior demonstrated here for SOPC vesicles are , to a good approximation , applicable to other similarly extruded liposome systems because many morphological characteristics of extruded liposomes are in - sensitive to bilayer properties . Appendix : vesicle morphology relations for data analysis Relations for ideal ellipsoidal vesicles Consider , first , ideal ellipsoidal vesicle suspensions , i . e . , that all vesicles are prolate ellipsoids having a uniform ma - jor axis a and a uniform minor axis b = c = a p with p ≤ 1 , and having smooth infinitely thin shell walls . In the balance of the text , we often refer to p – 1 > 1 as the vesicle elonga - tion parameter . The hydrodynamic radius for such particles is among one of few cases that have been explicitly solved and is given by ( Schmitz 1990 , p 50 ) ( A1 ) where R S ” ( 3 / 4 p V ) 1 / 3 = ( a b 2 ) 1 / 3 is the “equivalent spher - ical radius” . The availability of this analytic expression for R h is one of the main reasons why ellipsoidal vesicle mod - els are practically convenient . Similarly , the radius of gy - ration for such prolate ellipsoids can be straightforwardly computed as White et al . ( 1996 ) have previously reported Eq . ( A2 ) and several other relations for ideal ellipsoidal vesicles , using different notation . This expression for R g depends on the assumption that the scattering intensity is proportional to the square of the membrane area and approximately inde - pendent of local vesicle curvatures and optical differences between vesicle interior / exterior media ( White et al . 1996 ) . To link R S and p to the vesicle entrapped volume – i . e . , to the amount of internal volume per unit of lipid mass , which is often used for vesicle characterization – we intro - duce another geometrical radius parameter , R e ( R s , p ) ” 3 V / A = 4 p R 3s / A ( R s , p ) , where the surface area A ( R s , p ) for the ves - icles is given as ( A3 ) Hence the quantity R e is expressed in terms of R S and p as ( A4 ) Note that in general R h , R g , and R e differ but , in the limit p ﬁ 1 ( the case of a sphere ) , these radii tend to the same value , i . e . , R h = R g = R e = R s , and each liposome shape func - tion approaches unity , i . e . f h ( p ﬁ 1 ) = f g ( p ﬁ 1 ) = f A ( p ﬁ 1 ) = f e ( p ﬁ 1 ) = 1 . Finally , we define the quantity , f V , to be the ratio of liposome volume to that of a spherical vesicle having the same surface area . This parameter provides another useful measure of vesicle non - sphericity . Following Eq . ( A3 ) , we have the expression ( A5 ) with f V ﬁ 1 in the limit p ﬁ 1 for spherical vesicles . f A V f p V A ” = ( / ) ( / ) ( ) / / 4 3 4 3 2 3 2 p p R R p V A R p p p p p f p R e s s e s ( , ) ( ) ( ) arcsin [ ( ) ] ( ) / / / / ” = - - + - ” 3 2 1 1 1 1 3 2 1 2 2 1 2 2 1 2 A R p R p p p p R f p ( , ) arcsin [ ( ) ] ( ) ( ) / / / s s2 s2 A = + - - Ø ºŒ ø ßœ ” 2 1 1 4 1 3 2 1 2 2 1 2 p p R R p R p p p p p p p p f p R g s s g s ( A2 ) ( , ) ( ) arcsin [ ( ) ] ( ) arcsin [ ( ) ] ( ) / / / / / / = (cid:215) + - + - - + - (cid:230) Ł(cid:231) (cid:246) ł(cid:247) Ø ºŒ ø ßœ ” 2 3 2 2 1 2 2 1 2 2 1 2 2 1 2 1 2 14 2 1 2 1 1 1 R R p R p p p p f p R h s s h s ln [ ( 1 ( , ) ( ) ( ) ) / ] ( ) / / / = - + - ” 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 2 1 2 196 Effects of unimodal vesicle size distribution and thin - wall corrections Equations ( A1 ) – ( A5 ) pertain to vesicles of exactly uniform size and infinitely thin shell . To apply the same strategy to characterize the extruded vesicles , we must first consider modifications resulting from a narrow distribution of ves - icle sizes and / or shapes , in accord with the small but non - zero values of D 2 determined from dynamic light scattering measurements . Such measured dispersion affects the inter - pretation of the experimentally determined values Æ R æ g , Æ R æ h , and many other parameters relevant to specific appli - cations . The intensity - weighted quantities Æ R æ g and Æ R æ h de - pend in unlike ways on the population distribution of vari - ous species of particles . Assuming , here , that the particles in our lipid suspensions differ in size R s but not in the ax - ial ratio p , we may express Æ R æ g as where p ( R S ) d R S is the number fraction of particles in the suspension having an equivalent radius lying between R S and R S + d R S , and the subscript - free notation Æ R S n æ” ∫ R S n p ( R S ) d R S represents the simple number - weighted av - erage over the vesicle population . Note that , in the above , the surface area A ( R S , p ) [ see Eq . ( A3 ) ] is proportional ap - proximately to the number of lipid molecules in a thin - shell particle , so [ A ( R S , p ) ] 2 is proportional to the intensity of light scattered by such a particle . Similarly , Æ R æ h can be ex - pressed as where f h ( p ) and f g ( p ) are the geometrical factors defined in Eqs . ( A1 ) and ( A2 ) . It is clear from Eqs . ( A6 ) and ( A7 ) that R g and R h have different dependences on the statistical moments of R s because they are different measures of “av - erage” radius when particle size is not strictly uniform . For our extruded vesicles , dynamic light scattering measurements suggest relatively narrow , unimodal distri - butions with small polydispersity , D 2 [ see Eq . ( 4 ) of the text ] . In the same way that the expression given in Eq . ( A7 ) for Æ R h – 1 æ z has been derived , one can relate Æ R h – 2 æ z to the sta - tistical moments Æ R S2 æ , Æ R S4 æ , etc . Hence , by Eq . ( 4 ) , we find an alternative expression for D 2 , as D 2 = Æ R s2 æ Æ R s4 æ / [ Æ R s3 æ ] 2 – 1 ( A8 ) Thus the measured value of polydispersity represents a con - straint that needs to be satisfied by the actual distribution R R A R p R R R R p A R p R R f p R R z h h – 1 s s s h s s s s h s s d d ” = Ø ºŒ ø ßœ = (cid:242) (cid:242) 1 2 1 2 4 3 [ ( , ) ] ( ) [ ( , ) ] [ ( , ) ] ) ( ) – ( p p R R R R p A R p R R A R p R R f p R R z g g2 g s s s s s s s g s s d d ” = Ø ºŒŒ ø ßœœ = (cid:242) (cid:242) 1 2 2 2 2 1 2 6 4 / / [ ( , ) ] [ ( , ) ] ( ) [ ( , ) ] ) ( ) ( p p p ( R S ) , whereas the specific form of p ( R S ) is not uniquely determined a priori . Although determination of the details of p ( R S ) appears problematic , many relevant liposome pa - rameters may turn out to be rather insensitive to reasonable choices of such analytic form , so long as the distribution is relatively narrow . To assess the effect of p ( R S ) on our morphological anal - ysis , we focus on two illustrative distributions for scattered intensity p I ( R ) , the latter being the fraction of the intensity scattered from particles between size R and R + d R and known to have a relatively narrow and unimodal profile . We assume , as the first example , that p I ( R S ) can be approx - imated by a log - normal distribution ( A9 ) and , as the second example , by a square - wave distribution ( A10 ) where { F ( x ‡ 0 ) = 1 , F ( x < 0 ) = 0 } is the usual step function and the pre - factors assure the normalization , ∫ p I ( R ) d R = 1 . Note that p I ( R ) is related to the vesicle number distribu - tion p ( R ) according to p I ( R ) (cid:181) R 4 p ( R ) . As seen in Fig . 4 , a unique feature of the log - normal distribution is that the corresponding particle number distribution p LN ( R ) is also log - normal , having the same d but the center value shifted to R 0N = R 0 exp ( – 4 d 2 ) . However , the particle number dis - tribution p SW ( R ) for the square - wave form is a truncated power - law with abrupt cutoffs . These distributions can be used to evaluate the moments , Æ R S2 æ , Æ R S3 æ , etc . , which appear in Eq . ( A8 ) , leading to ex - pressions that relate the distribution parameters d and d ˜ to the polydispersity D 2 . For the log - normal distribution , we find ( A11 ) and correspondingly for the square - wave distribution d ˜ 2 = 12 D 2 + ( 12 D 2 ) 3 / 2 + O ( D 4 ) h 12 D 2 + ( 15 . 5 D 2 ) 2 ( A12 ) The latter is obtained from the exact relation D 2 = d ˜ 2 [ ( 1 + d ˜ ) ( ln ( 1 + d ˜ ) ) 2 ] – 1 , using an equation discovery program ( Ta - bleCurve 2D , Jandel Scientific software ) . These allow us to express the moments Æ R S2 æ , Æ R S3 æ , … in terms of the un - known distribution center value R 0 or R˜ 0 and the measured parameter D as ( A13 ) and , ( A14 ) R R R n n n n n n s SW 0 0 – 3 ” = + (cid:215) + [ ] - a d d ( ˜ ˜ ( ˜ ( – ( ˜ ( ) ) – / [ – ] D D D ) ) ) 3 1 1 1 1 3 3 R R R R n n n n n n n n n s LN 0 0 0N ” = + = + - + a ( ( ) ( ) ( ) / ( ) / D D D ) 2 2 1 1 6 2 2 2 d 2 1 12 13 = + = - + + ln ( ) ( ) D D D D D 2 2 4 6 8 o p ISW s s s ( ) ˜ ˜ ( ˜ ) ( ˜ ( ˜ ) ) R R R R R R = (cid:230) Ł(cid:231) (cid:246) ł(cid:247) - - - + [ ] 1 1 0 0 0 d d F F p ILN s 2 s ( ) exp ( – / ) exp – ( ln ( ) ln ) / ( ) R R R R = - { } d p d d 2 2 2 0 0 2 2 197 ( A6 ) ( A7 ) where , as n ﬁ 3 , [ ( 1 + d ˜ ) n – 3 – 1 ] / ( n – 3 ) ﬁ ln ( 1 + d ˜ ) is under - stood . The expressions reveal that the effect of a narrow dispersion in vesicle sizes is to cause the factors a n LN ( D ) or a n SW ( D ) to increase as the power n increases in ways de - pending on the analytic form of the assumed size distribu - tion . The use of Eqs . ( A13 ) , ( A14 ) , etc . , in our analysis will show that the main results are fairly insensitive to particu - lar distribution forms . Returning to consideration of the measured quantities Æ R æ h and Æ R æ g , we note that the finite thickness of the ves - icle walls necessitates some additional consideration . Be - cause Æ R æ h is related to the diffusive motions of the vesi - cles , it is a measure of a dimension linked to the outer sur - faces of the vesicles . However , Æ R æ g , which is determined from the total scattering intensity , should roughly corre - spond to the middle plane of the bilayer , whereas the en - trapped volume parameter depends on the inner dimensions of the vesicle walls . Because the wall thickness l of a typ - ical vesicle is approximately 4 nm , we can arbitrarily choose the outer surface as a reference , and increase the measured values of Æ R æ g and Æ R æ e by l / 2 and l , respectively , to obtain comparative expressions for R 0 . Since our ex - truded vesicle samples have a typical measured radius of 50 nm , these thin - wall corrections are of about 4 % and 8 % , respectively , and the slight error in the value of l ( e . g . , that due to the vesicle bilayer structural changes under small os - motic stress and a hydation layer of about 0 . 3 nm ) is not significant . Acknowledgement The light scattering measurements were carried out in the Laboratory of Molecular Biology , NIDDK , NIH . References Allen TM , Austin GA , Chonn A , Lin L , Lee KC ( 1991 ) Uptake of liposomes by cultured mouse bone marrow . Biochim Biophys Acta 1061 : 56 – 64 Aragon SR , Pecora R ( 1976 ) Theory of dynamic light scattering from polydisperse systems . J Chem Phys 64 : 2395 – 2404 Arshady R ( 1993 ) Microcapsules for food . J Microencapsulation 10 : 413 – 435 Choquet CG , Patel GB , Beveridge TJ , Sprott GD ( 1994 ) Stability of pressure - extruded liposomes . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 42 : 375 – 384 Clerc SG , Thompson TE ( 1994 ) A possible mechanism for vesicle formation by extrusion . Biophys J 64 : 475 – 477 Dahneke BE ( ed ) ( 1983 ) Measurement of suspended particles by quasi - elastic light scattering . Wiley , New York Deuling HJ , Helfrich W ( 1976 ) The curvature elasticity of fluid mem - branes : a catalogue of vesicle shapes . J Phys ( Paris ) 37 : 1335 – 1345 Ertel A , Marangoni AG , Marsh J , Hallett FR , Wood JM ( 1993 ) Me - chanical properties of vesicles I : coordinated analyses . Biophys J 64 : 426 – 434 Farge E , Devaux PF ( 1992 ) Shape changes of giant liposomes induced by an asymmetric transmembrane distribution of phospholipids . Biophys J 61 : 347 – 357 Fresta M , Puglisi G ( 1997 ) Corticosteroid dermal delivery with skin - lipid liposomes . J Controlled Release 44 : 141 – 151 Fresta M , Wehrli E , Puglisi G ( 1995 ) Neutrase entrapment in stable multilamellar and large unilamellar . J Microencapsulation 12 : 307 – 325 Hallett FR , Marsh J , Nickel BG , Wood JM ( 1993 ) Mechanical prop - erties of vesicles II . A model for osmotic swelling and lysis . Bio - phys J 64 : 435 – 442 Hallett FR , Watton J , Krygsman P ( 1991 ) Vesicle sizing : number dis - tributions by dynamic light scattering . Biophys J 59 : 357 – 362 Hill KJ , Kaszuba M , Creeth JE , Jones MN ( 1997 ) Reactive liposomes encapsulating a glucose oxidase - peroxidase system with antibac - terial activity . Biochim Biophys Acta 1326 : 37 – 46 Hontoria F , Crowe JH , Crowe LM , Amat F ( 1994 ) Potential use of liposomes in larviculture as a delivery system through Artemia nauplii . Aquaculture 127 : 255 – 264 Hope MJ , Bally MB , Webb G , Cullis PR ( 1985 ) Production of large unilamellar vesicles by a rapid extrusion procedure . Characteriza - tion of size distribution , trapped volume and ability to maintain a membrane potential . Biochim Biophys Acta 812 : 55 – 65 Hunter DG , Frisken BJ ( 1998 ) Effect of extrusion pressure and lipid properties on the size and polydispersity of lipid vesicles . Biophys J 74 : 2996 – 3002 Huster D , Jin AJ , Arnold K , Gawrisch K ( 1997 ) Water permeability of polyunsaturated lipid membranes measured by 17 O NMR . Bio - phys J 73 : 855 – 864 Jin AJ , Fisher ME ( 1993 ) Stiffness instability in short - range critical wetting . Phys Rev B 48 : 2642 – 2658 Kas J , Sackmann E ( 1991 ) Shape transitions and shape stability of giant phospholipid vesicles in pure water induced by area - to - vol - ume changes . Biophys J 60 : 825 – 844 Koenig BK , Strey HH , Gawrisch K ( 1997 ) Membrane lateral com - pressibility determined by NMR and x - ray diffraction : effect of acyl chain polyunsaturation . Biophys J 97 : 1954 – 1966 Kolchens S , Ramaswami N , Birgenheier J , Nett L , Obrien DF ( 1993 ) Quasi - elastic light scattering determination of the size distribu - tion of extruded vesicles . Chem Phys Lipids 65 : 1 – 10 Komatsu H , Guy PT , Rowe ES ( 1993 ) Effect of unilamellar vesicle size on ethanol - induced interdigitation in dipalmitoylphosphat - idylcholine . Chem Phys Lipids 65 : 11 – 21 Korgel BA , van Zanten JH , Monbouquette HG ( 1998 ) Vesicle size distributions measured by flow field - flow fractionation coupled with multiangle light scattering . Biophys J 74 : 3264 – 3272 Lasic DD , Barenholz Y ( eds ) ( 1996 ) Handbook of nonmedical applica - tions of liposomes : theorey and basic scienes . CRC Press , New York Lentz BR , Mcintyre GF , Parks DJ , Yates JC , Massenburg D ( 1992 ) Bilayer curvature and certain amphipaths promote polyethylene glycol - induced fusion of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine unila - mellar vesicles . Biochemistry 31 : 2643 – 2653 Lesieur S , Grabielle Madelmont C , Paternostre MT , Ollivon M ( 1991 ) Size analysis and stability study of lipid vesicles by . Anal Bio - chem 192 : 334 – 343 Lipowsky R ( 1991 ) The conformation of membranes . Nature 349 : 475 – 481 Liu D , Mori A , Huang L ( 1991 ) Large liposomes containing gangli - oside gm - 1 accumulate effectively in spleen . Biochim Biophys Acta 1066 : 159 – 165 Mayer LD , Hope MJ , Cullis PR ( 1986 ) Vesicle of various sizes pro - duced by a rapid extrusion procedure . Biochem Biophys Acta 858 : 161 – 168 Monshipouri M , Rudolph AS ( 1995 ) Liposome - encapsulated algi - nate : controlled hydrogen particle formation and release . J Micro - encapsulation 12 : 117 – 127 Mui BLS , Cullis PR , Evans EA , Madden TD ( 1993 ) Osmotic prop - erties of large unilamellar vesicles prepared by extrusion . Biophys J 64 : 443 – 453 Needham D , Nunn RS ( 1990 ) Elastic deformation and failure of lip - id bilayer membranes containing cholesterol . Biophys J 58 : 997 – 1009 Nossal R , Weiss GH , Nandi PK , Lippoldt RE , Edelhoch H ( 1983 ) Size and mass distributions of clathrin - coated vesicles from bovine brain . Arch Biochem Biophys 226 : 593 – 603 Ostro MJ ( ed ) ( 1987 ) Liposomes : from biophysics to therapeutics . Dekker , New York Phillippot JR , Schuber F ( eds ) ( 1995 ) Liposomes as tools in basic re - search and industry . CRC Press , Ann Arbor Rock PA ( 1969 ) Chemical thermodynamics : Principles and applica - tions . Macmillan , London Schmitz KS ( 1990 ) An introduction to dynamic light scattering by macromolecules . Academic Press , Boston 198 Seifert U ( 1996 ) Morphology and dynamics of vesicles . Curr Opin Coll Int Sci 1 : 350 – 357 Seifert U , Lipowsky R ( 1996 ) Shapes of fluid . In : Lasic DD , Baren - holz Y ( eds ) Handbook of nonmedical applications of liposomes : theory and basic sciences . CRC Press , New York , pp 43 – 68 Seifert U , Berndl K , Lipowsky R ( 1991 ) Shape transformations of vesicles : phase diagram for spontaneous - curvature and bilayer - coupling models . Phys Rev A 44 : 1182 – 1201 Selser JC , Yeh Y , Baskin RJ ( 1976 ) A light scattering characteriza - tion of membrane vesicles . Biophys J 16 : 337 – 356 Strawbridge KB , Hallett FR ( 1994 ) Size distributions obtained from the inversion of I ( Q ) using integrated light scattering spectrosco - py . Macromolecules 27 : 2283 – 2290 Tabak A , Hoffer E , Taitelman U ( 1994 ) Evaluation of a liposome system for the delivery of desferrioxamine to lungs in rats . J Pharm Pharmacol 46 : 789 – 796 Templeton NS , Lasic DD , Frederik PM , Strey HH , Roberts DD ( 1997 ) Improved DNA : liposome complexes for increased systemic de - livery and gene expression . Nat Biotechnol 15 : 647 – 652 Walker SA , Kennedy MT , Zasadzinski JA ( 1997 ) Encapsulation of bilayer vesicles by self - assembly . Nature 387 : 61 – 64 Walstra P ( 1983 ) Basic theory . In : Becker P ( ed ) Encyclopedia of emulsion technology , vol 1 . Dekker , New York , pp 57 – 127 White G , Pencer J , Nickel BG , Wood JM , Hallett FR ( 1996 ) Optical changes in unilamellar vesicles experiencing osmotic stress . Bio - phys J 71 : 2701 – 2705 Winterhalter M , Lasic DD ( 1993 ) Liposome stability and formation : experimental parameters and theories on the size distribution . Chem Phys Lipids 64 : 35 – 43 Woodle MC , Storm G ( eds ) ( 1998 ) Long circulating liposomes : old drugs , new therapeutics . Springer , Berlin Heidelberg New York 199