The Domestic Economy : a Broader Unit of Analysis for End User Programming Jennifer A . Rode Informatics , UC Irvine Irvine , CA , USA jen @ ics . uci . edu Eleanor F . Toye Intel Research Cambridge Cambridge , UK eft20 @ cl . cam . ac . uk Alan F . Blackwell University of Cambridge Cambridge , UK Alan . Blackwell @ cl . cam . ac . uk ABSTRACT Domestic ubicomp applications often assume individual users will program and configure their technology in isolation , decoupled from complex domestic environments in which they are situated . To investigate this assumption , we conducted a two week study of VCR use by eight families . Each household member old enough to write completed a diary , interviews were conducted before and after , and information on demographics and appliance ownership was collected . Our key finding supports the notion of the domestic economy and the trading of programming expertise . We use the Attention Investment paradigm , and discuss how the model fits with multi - user programming situations . We discuss the importance of the parent v / s child roles in VCR use , as well as , the tension between direct manipulation ( e . g . pressing record ) and programming ahead of time . We propose that future work on end user programming must focus on the household as a domestic system rather than on the individual . AUTHOR KEYWORDS Diary Study , VCRs , Attention Investment , Domestic Appliances , Programming , Families , Children ACM CLASSIFICATION KEYWORDS H . 1 . 2 [ Models and Principles ] : User / Machine Systems— Human Information Processing , H . 5 . 3 [ Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : Group and Organizational Interfaces – CSCW INTRODUCTION Ubiquitous computing is complex and being increasingly developed for domestic environments . The programmability of appliances is central to domestic ubicomp . We are interested in looking at existing household appliance practices , because members of larger households come to rely on one another to meet daily needs . Technology expertise is one such possible area of specialization and trading . Skills like VCR programming may be learned by only one member of the household , and might be traded off against chores with other household members . Using the broader definition of programming as advocated by Blackwell [ 2 ] we focused on its social situatedness in a domestic environment . Attention Investment is a cognitive model that simulates a single user’s programming decisions [ 1 ] . In this context of VCRs , we define ‘programming’ as scheduling a recording ahead of time , but not simply pressing record . The model generates decisions about whether to engage in programming activity or to perform the same task by direct manipulation , by comparing projected effort and risk for each . Because users ' expertise at programming tasks varies , and the importance and timescale of their goals also vary , the model generates different decisions for different users , or for the same user under different external constraints . In this study , we gathered data on individual programming decisions in the home , with the purpose of investigating how well the Attention Investment model maps onto TV recording behaviour in practice . However , as households are systems of individuals that have come to rely on one another for domestic programming among other things , we could not focus solely on the single user or on a single task when trying to understand patterns of domestic appliance use . Therefore we recruited whole households , to enable us to look at individual programming decisions within the context of a domestic ecology of effort , roles and skills . We chose to look at families’ use of TV recording appliances ( VCR , DVD - r , Sky + and TiVo ) . TV recording appliances are of interest for three reasons . Firstly , TV recording technology in the form of the VCR has been widely used in the home since the mid - 1980s , so it is now integrated into the life of most households in Europe and North America . Secondly , TV recording appliances offer users a clear choice between recording using direct manipulation ( i . e . pressing a button to record what is currently on ) or setting up recordings ahead of time , i . e . programming . Thus this type of technology is a good test case for the accuracy and usefulness of the Attention Investment model for describing domestic programming decisions . Thirdly , according to contemporary folklore , VCRs are a particularly difficult and frustrating domestic appliance to use – in spite of the fact that the VCR is by now a mature technology and is more or less ubiquitous . We were therefore interested in building on previous work [ 7 , 10 ] in investigating whether this common perception is an accurate reflection of video use in the home . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2005 , April 2 – 7 , 200 5 , Portland , Oregon , USA . ACM 1 - 59593 - 002 - 7 / 05 / 0004 CHI 2005 | Late Breaking Results : Posters April 2 - 7 | Portland , Oregon , USA 1757 We chose to look at families with children after conducting an informal survey ( sample size = 50 ) to find out how often respondents used their VCR or other TV recording technology . According to our UK sample ( recruited via colleagues and acquaintances ) , single people and couples without children used their VCRs very rarely . The one demographic group we sampled who reported using TV recording technology regularly and recently were parents with children still living at home . For these reasons we choose to focus on families with children for our study . RELATED WORK Technology is often a means by which a well - run household is judged ; for instance , O’Brien’s informants believed that good parents monitor what children watch on TV [ 8 ] . One way of monitoring television is allowing children to watch commercial - free videotapes of appropriate age - related content . The adoption curve of the VCR was far steeper than that of the household PC , facilitating its now near ubiquity [ 11 ] . Both Venkatesh and Mateas point out the PC often exists in a separate space from the rest of domestic activity [ 11 , 6 ] ; whereas the VCR is in the thick of things . These two factors in combination made the VCR a good vehicle for investigating domestic programming . The existing work on VCR programming focuses on cognitive models of individual users’ VCR programming [ 2 ] rather than the larger household ecology . Work by Mateas , Logan and O’Brien looked at PCs , new televisions and household appliances respectively within the ecology of the household [ 6 , 3 , 8 ] , but this work did not focus on the programmability of appliances . Kiesler looked at the household ecology and saw that often one household member takes the role of technology manager [ 4 ] . Plaisant et al stress the need to understand distributed , multigenerational families when designing technologies [ 9 ] ; we feel this holds especially with programmable technologies . Venkatesh argues it is the relationship between the social and technological space that shapes usage patterns of technology in the home ; thus we wanted to look at the household ecology surrounding programming . METHOD Our 8 participant households were in or around Cambridge ( UK ) . Potential participants were screened to ensure they were VCR - owning families with at least one child . None of our households had DVD - r or PVRs , like TiVo . The age range of the 16 adult participants was from 25 to 63 years , mean age 42 . 8 years . These households included 15 children , 8 girls and 7 boys , ranging in age from 18 months to 17 years . All participants were non - programmers , and non - computer scientists . Households came from a range of backgrounds - employment ranged from cleaners to lecturers . Three households had children under the age of six ( # 1 , 4 , 8 ) , three had older children ( # 3 , 6 , 7 ) and two families had older teens ( # 2 , 5 ) . We aimed to gather broad descriptive data rather than statistically significant data . PROCEDURE Households were asked to participate in two 45 - minute interviews , at the beginning and end of a two week period during which we asked them to complete a diary listing all of their recording appliance use , including start , stop , show name , and whether they were watching , manually recording or programmatically recording . On days they did not use the VCR , subjects were asked to record why . Our study took place in the evening with the intent that the entire household could be at home . We requested all household members to be present at the sessions . In reality the adults actively participated in the study , and were always present . Younger children usually participated in the early stages of the interview when we asked what they did with their VCR or DVD player , but would often lose interest and go back to playing midway through the session . The four teenagers ( 14 - 17 ) were a challenge : while we tried to include them in the study as much as possible , only one teen completed both interviews ( # 7 ) . Two were absent for both interviews , but completed diaries ( # 5 ) , and one completed a diary and one interview only ( # 1 ) . The younger children were eager to ‘be helpful’ , and completed diaries with their parents’ assistance . During the first session we collected demographic information , information on what recording appliances the household owned , and which members of the household used appliances for what purpose . We also collected information on history of the appliances , including how they were obtained , how long each was owned , and previous ownership of appliances of the same type . Finally , we gave members of the household an opportunity to relate key memories of each appliance’s use . We also explained how to complete the diary itself . During the second session we reviewed and discussed the diary , as well as any video - related problems or interesting situations encountered during the course of the study . RESULTS Trading Programming Expertise We looked at the number of shows recorded versus those viewed in each household . Perhaps unsurprisingly , we found that viewed episodes outnumbered recorded episodes in all but one household ( # 5 ) . During our two week study , VCR use for all households was 106 viewing episodes , 44 manual recordings and 9 pre - recordings . Four out of 8 households made no pre - recordings . Three households ( # 4 , # 7 and # 8 ) made no recordings at all during the fortnight of the study . The other five households made 3 - 27 manual recordings and 0 - 6 pre - recordings . For instance , 15 of the 27 manual recordings in household # 5 were by a teenage girl who was in the middle of exams at school , and wanted to catch up on her favourite soaps when she had completed her work . There were significantly more manual recordings ( 44 ) than pre - recordings ( 9 ) suggesting a preference for manual recording . Table 1 . Summary of VCR viewing and recording activities V i e w i n g E p i s o d e s V i e w i n g E rr o r s M a nu a l R ec o r d i n g M a nu a l E rr o r s P re - s e t R ec o r d i n g P re - s e t E rr o r s total 106 1 44 1 9 1 range 4 - 23 0 - 1 0 - 27 0 - 1 0 - 6 0 - 1 Our data did not show many errors occurring with VCR use , but they do provide examples of potential risks to be factored into Attention Investment decisions . Our data revealed only one of each type of error ; viewing , manual recording and pre - recording . The viewing error occurred because a visitor did not know how to use the AV function on the TV . The manual recording error occurred when a user forgot to press ‘record’ and missed 10 minutes . The pre - recording error in household # 6 occurred when a babysitter unwittingly reset the VCR ; the daughter unsuccessfully tried to fix it , so Mom had to sort it out . We observed that VCR problems often occurred because of intervention by people other than the ‘expert user’ ; which may suggest that in households that do a lot of recording , contention and confusion between different users may be significant issues . This small number of errors suggests that our households had settled into a pattern of VCR use that they understood and with which they could cope ; however , it does not mean that all household members were equally competent and willing to attempt VCR recording . Instead , we saw responsibility for TV recording falling on individuals who had mastered VCR programming , which to some extent , they were able to trade in exchange for cooperation from other household members . We also saw that when other people besides the household ‘expert’ tried to use the VCR , confusion could result . Household # 6 illustrates this particularly clearly . The VCR was mostly used by the mother and son aged 9 . Mom was a fan of Casualty , which shows on Saturday evenings , when the family was often out . The soccer matches the son was interested in often did not finish until after his bedtime . Therefore Mom and son both had typical ‘soap and sport’ motivation for pre - recording TV programmes ; in fact 6 of the 9 pre - recordings we gathered data about came from this household . Dad and daughter both used the VCR very little , and in a distinctly different way , manually recording . Only Mom knew how to use the pre - record function , but as the family pointed out , the numbers had worn off the VCR remote , and it would have been difficult for anyone else to learn . Mom was responsible for ensuring that Casualty , important soccer matches , and a show each for her husband and her daughter were recorded . In the case of the daughter , Mom did this favour explicitly in exchange for the daughter hurrying to get ready for school . While data from 8 households can only be suggestive , it is interesting that mothers were responsible for 24 recordings while fathers made 11 recordings . We observed women using VCRs as a child management tool . This is consistent with our work and that of others which indicate that women tend to take on the role of household manager [ 12 ] . Parents and Children We were struck with how poorly designed VCRs are for operation by households with children . We watched a 2 year old boy operate the VCR by kicking an ejected tape to start it playing automatically . Most of the VCRs in our sample were stored at floor level , as this is how most TV carts are designed . Unfortunately , as four of our households reported , this permits children to ‘post’ objects into the VCR’s tape slot , which resembles a mailbox . Objects placed into the VCR included crayons , cereal box toys , jigsaw pieces and a ‘jam butty’ ( jelly sandwich ) . One informant mentioned that in her sister’s household the VCR was used as a piggy bank . We find it amazing that a mature technology intended for the domestic environment possesses such fundamental problems . Yet , as one parent pointed out , VCRs require substantially less dexterity than a DVD player ; consequently our youngest DVD user was 8 . Older adults reported similar difficulties , and described crawling down to reach VCRs near the floor and finding it hard to read in dark cabinets ( # 2 ) . This underlines Plaisant’s point , that we must design domestic technology for the intergenerational family . The ability to program the VCR allows the programmer to take on the role of media provider for other individual family members . This can cut across the parent / child power dynamic , or complement it . The 15 year old son in Household # 2 explicitly cited the “power” it gave him over his dad as the reason he learned to program the VCR . He could threaten not to record something unless conditions were met . They missed an episode of NYPD Blue due to confusion over who was supposed to adjust the VCR clock during British Summer Time . The father was supposed to adjust all of the clocks , and the son assumed this included the VCR clock . The father said he was very “sanguine” about missing NYPD Blue . The interview clarified it was a mistake , but the way programming ability cut across the power dynamic impacted the conflict resolution process . Even in this household we saw time - shifting ( recording for later , by scheduling it or pressing record ) occur to permit parental monitoring . Actually , this type of “good parenting” was commonplace in households # 2 , 3 , 6 & 8 , which is consistent with O’Brien’s findings . Households with younger children ( # 1 & 4 ) accomplished the same effect , because children must ask for help to start – or in the case of our resourceful 2 year - old – change a cassette . The household rhythm , the pattern of when the household does what , was often echoed by VCR recording and watching . Rainy days and vacations resulted in more VCR usage . A parent in household # 1 remarked guiltily that the duration of the tape represented a predictable unit of time where a parent could engage in something else , or it can be a way to help a working dad control the kids ( # 4 ) . Most households with younger children had explicit routines surrounding children watching ( # 1 ) or not watching ( # 3 ) TV in the morning , after school ( # 8 ) or before bed ( # 1 , 6 , 7 ) . TV in the evening represented “adult time” in one household’s words . Programmability permits time - shifting which impacts household rhythms . DISCUSSION Our families’ relationship to technology was more complex than individuals programming in isolation for themselves . They formed a domestic economy , trading expertise for mutual benefit . As Webley puts it , “Utility - maximizing individuals can benefit… by means of gains in trade through specialization , the sharing of ‘public goods’ ( such as housing ) and economies of scale” [ 12 ] . Even when we see the emergence of a technology “czar” within the household , they are providing for other household members’ needs , impacting the whole household’s technology usage . In domestic ubicomp , programming becomes a household responsibility , like loading the dishwasher and taking out the trash . Our data broadly supports the Attention Investment model , i . e . that individual programming behaviour occurs when it is strongly motivated and is considered to be relatively low risk ( because of the programmer’s expertise ) . We saw that users primarily favoured direct manipulation either by watching TV live ( N = 106 ) or pressing record ( N = 44 ) , but occasionally circumstances did motivate a user to schedule recordings ( N = 9 ) . Social issues within the domestic economy , such as screening TV shows suitable for children or time - shifting so TV does not conflict with household activities provide motivation to program , and therefore contribute to the risk / benefit calculation . However , we have also seen that households seem to benefit from a division of programming labour . This specialization and trading of expertise needs to be included in an Attention Investment model for programming behaviour in its social context . Therefore we propose an extension to Attention Investment for domestic programming . It must work with the household as an operational unit , taking into account the risk for the household as a whole , and trade it off against effort for all possible programmers . In this way Attention Investment can be effectively extended to domestic settings , and we wish to continue to verify this model CONCLUSION Households engage in programming decisions through a complex process of programming specialization , informal calculations of risks , benefits and effort for the household . Attention Investment can be extended to work with the whole domestic economy as a broader unit of analysis for end user programming . Still these cost / benefit calculations of risk depend in part on social factors surrounding technology use – including roles , power balance and household rhythms . The programming needs of distributed , multigenerational families are highly situated – social and technological space shapes the programming patterns of technology in the home . As we move increasingly towards the vision of a highly - programmable smart home we must accommodate the complexity of the household ecology . To do so we must focus not on the individual , but on the household . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Mark Stringer , Paul Dourish , Jack Muramatsu and the EPSRC Council for grant GR / R87482 " Cognitive Ergonomics for Ubiquitous Computing " . REFERENCES 1 . Blackwell , A . F . First steps in programming : A rationale for Attention Investment models . Proc . IEEE Symposia on Human - Centric Computing Languages and Environments ( 2002 ) 2 - 10 . 2 . Blackwell , A . F . What is programming ? In Proc . PPIG 2002 , ( 2002 ) 204 - 218 . 3 . Gray , W . D . and Sabnani , H . Why You Can’t Program Your VCR , or , Predicting Errors and Performance With Production System Models of Display Based Actions . CHI 94 . 79 - 80 . 4 . Kiesler , S . B . Zdaniuk , V . Lundmark , and R . Kraut . Troubles With the Internet : The Dynamics of Help at Home . Human - Computer Interaction , 15 , ( 2000 ) 323 – 51 . 5 . Logan , R . L . , Augaitis , S . , Miller , R . H . , and Wehmer , K . Living Room Culture - An Anthropological Study of Television Usage Behaviors . Proc . Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 39th Annual Meeting . ( 1995 ) , 326 - 330 . 6 . Mateas , M . , Salvador , T . , Scholtz , J . , and Sorensen , D . Engineering ethnography in the home . CHI 96 . 283 - 4 . 7 . Norman . D . The Design of Everyday Things . ( 1989 ) Basic Books . 8 . O’Brien , J . , Rodden , T . , Rouncefield , M . , and Hughes , J . At Home with Technology : An Ethnographic Study of a Set - top Box Trial . ACM Transactions on HCI 6 , 3 ( 1999 ) , 282 - 308 . 9 . Plaisant , C . , A . Druin , & H . Hutchinson . Technologies for Families . CHI 02 . ( 2002 ) 938 - 9 . 10 . Thimbleby H . Frustrations of a pushbutton world . Encyclopaedia Britannica yearbook of science and the future . ( 1993 ) 202 – 219 11 . Venkatesh , Alladi . Computers and other interactive technologies for the home . Communications of the ACM 39 , 12 , ( 1996 ) 47 - 54 . 12 . Webley , P . , Burgoyne , C . , Lea , S . , and Young , B . Economic Behavior in the Family . The Economic Psychology of Everyday Life . ( 2001 ) 75 - 98 . The columns on the last page should be of approximately equal length .