To Ontologise or Not To Ontologise : An Information Model for a Geospatial Knowledge Infrastructure Kristin Stock * a , b , Tim Stojanovic c , Femke Reitsma d , Yang Ou e , Mohamed Bishr f , Jens Ortmann f and Anne Robertson g * a Centre for Geospatial Science , School of Geography , University of Nottingham , NG7 2RD , UK , kristin . stock @ nottingham . ac . uk , Phone : + 44 ( 0 ) 115 846 8413 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 115 951 5249 b Allworlds Geothinking , UK c University of Cardiff , UK d University of Canterbury , NZ e Department of Geosciences , University of Edinburgh , UK f University of Muenster , Germany g EDINA , UK A geospatial knowledge infrastructure consists of a set of interoperable components , including software , information , hardware , procedures and standards , that work together to support advanced discovery and access to geoscientific resources , including publications , data sets and web services . Such advanced discovery is intended to support scientists in finding resources that meet their needs , and focuses on representing the semantic details of the scientific resources , including the detailed aspects of the science that led to the resource being created . This paper describes an information model for a geospatial knowledge infrastructure that uses ontologies to represent these semantic details , including knowledge about domain concepts , the scientific elements of the resource ( analysis methods , theories , scientific processes ) and web services . This semantic information can be used to enable more intelligent search over scientific resources , and to support new ways to infer and visualise scientific knowledge . The work describes the requirements for semantic support of a knowledge infrastructure , and analyses the different options for information storage based on the twin goals of semantic richness and syntactic interoperability to allow communication between different infrastructures . Such interoperability is achieved by the use of open standards , and the architecture of the knowledge infrastructure adopts such standards , particularly from the geospatial community . The paper then describes an information model that uses a range of different types of ontologies , explaining those ontologies and their content . The information model was successfully implemented in a working geospatial knowledge infrastructure , but the evaluation identified some issues in creating the ontologies . Keywords : ontology ; semantics ; spatial data infrastructure ( SDI ) ; coastal applications 1 . Introduction In the process of conducting science , scientists typically search for existing related work already carried out by other scientists , in the hope that they will extend this work or develop unique work , without duplicating what has already been done . Scientists currently have a limited set of tools available to identify this existing work . Such tools usually consist of internet or digital library search engines that are mostly based on keyword , author or title searches , or sometimes basic metadata . This paper describes the information model component of a knowledge infrastructure that is intended to support scientists in identifying existing research in a more advanced way . Knowledge infrastructures support an approach to the discovery of scientific resources ( publications , web services and data sets ) that is based on their meaning , or semantic content ( Pike and Gahegan , 2007 ) . The knowledge infrastructure discussed in this paper allows a wider range of resources to be identified that may be of interest . Such resources may include those that are in the same subject area but that are labelled differently , but also may include work that exists in a different discipline , but that uses similar techniques and approaches that may also be useful for extending research in new ways . Thus the knowledge infrastructure is intended to support scientists in developing and extending science more easily and more richly . This paper presents the information model component of the knowledge infrastructure , focussing on the issue of what semantic content is required to support the kinds of queries that the infrastructure supports , and the most appropriate structure for this content , and justifies and evaluates the approach An overview of the infrastructure ( including a summary of aspects not covered in this paper , namely the software architecture and the user interface ) can be found in Stock et al ( 2009 ) . The knowledge infrastructure described in this paper was developed under the COastal and Marine Perception Application for Scientific Scholarship ( COMPASS 1 ) Project , which designed and implemented a knowledge infrastructure for the marine and coastal domains . Figure 1 shows the user interface that was developed under this project to allow users to interact with the knowledge infrastructure , including boxes that allow the user to select domain concepts from a structured ontology , informal user tags , scientific knowledge concepts ( for example , theories , models , analysis methods ) and spatial and temporal extents . The next Section presents a user scenario to illustrate the potential use of the knowledge infrastructure and identify its requirements . Section 3 provides background information about knowledge infrastructures . Section 4 identifies the content that is stored in the registry to meet the requirements for the knowledge infrastructure . Section 5 explains the different information model options in terms of the ontology structures and the other structures that exist outside the ontologies but within the registry . Section 6 presents the information model and justifies the design . Section 7 evaluates the model , and Section 8 concludes the paper . 1 http : / / compass . edina . ac . uk / 2 . User Scenario The knowledge infrastructure is intended to offer enhanced discovery of and access to scientific resources , which has the potential to support the work of scientists in a number of different ways . This Section outlines an example user scenario to illustrate some of the ways in which the knowledge infrastructure may be used . Jenny , a marine scientist is part of a consortium considering the environmental impact of a proposed port extension in the Severn Estuary in the United Kingdom . Jenny began using the knowledge infrastructure to search for resources relating to the marine environment that are relevant to the wider area of the Severn Estuary and Bristol Channel . Of particular pertinence is the discovery of data relating to the hydrography of the dredged channel that would need to be constructed for the port extension , which she would like to be able to download . In order to further examine the extent of dredging required , Jenny searches for resources ( data , web services or publications ) that relate to or were captured by LIDAR , soon discovering that they are not available but that data from instruments that are semantically related to LIDAR can be accessed ( e . g . using other types of methods for capturing information about the sea floor ) . Jenny also wishes to examine sediment information , and a search for data captured by the Grab and Corer instruments provides some data that is described in a paper using an analysis method that she is not familiar with . Browsing across to related publications she quickly learns more about this method , and discovers that the analysis method is based on a model of wave movement that she believes has not been used for many years and has been superseded by other models . The knowledge infrastructure allows her to examine the temporal distribution of scientific resources that use that particular scientific model and deepen her knowledge of the model in its use in other disciplines to evaluate its appropriateness for her work . Jenny remembers that during her PhD studies in New Zealand , this model was commonly used and wonders whether use of the model has been neglected in the UK . She investigates the spatial distribution of use of the model in the last 10 years to further evaluate its potential , and identifies other researchers using the model around the world who may collaborate with her to extend its application to the UK . The knowledge infrastructure is intended to support these kinds of investigations by allowing scientists to discover resources using semantic relationships related to domain , as well as links based on scientific methods and models and their variations in time and space . 3 . Knowledge Infrastructures The most predominant current approaches to discovery of scientific resources ( for example , Google Scholar ) have their roots in the original index card approach to library search . From the point of view of the goals for resource discovery described in this paper , these searches do not provide sufficient flexibility . They do not allow search based on semantics ( the actual underlying meaning of the concepts involved in the work , rather than the surface terminology used ) or the deeper scientific basis for the work ( including methods , models and theories ) . For example , users are not able to easily find resources using particular scientific approaches , regardless of the topic area , unless the approach is a prominent part of the paper and is mentioned in the title or keyword ( which traditional search methods rely upon ) . It is also not possible for users to focus only on research based on a particular scientific model . These current approaches are also limited in their ability to derive and deduce new information ( for example , temporal or spatial patterns ) on the basis of existing scientific resources . A first step towards the creation of more useful methods for scientific resource discovery began with attempts to create models that describe scientific knowledge and discovery , and to implement those in an online system ( Hars 1998 ; Hars , 2001 ) . Another early step in the development of knowledge infrastructures is Science Commons 2 . It aims to facilitate communication and collaboration between researches , and to address issues of security , copyright and licensing so that these do not become barriers to the discovery and sharing of scientific resources . GEON 3 ( the Geosciences Network ) provides an example of a knowledge infrastructure , focussed around supporting integrative research in the geosciences . It particular addresses the organisation of scientific resources that include data , tools , web services and knowledge , and also provides collaborative tools for earth scientists . Recently , several collaborative tools have been developed to support scientists in connecting with other scientists working in similar areas . Most of these tools focus on collaboration and networking , but some also include options for literature search , combined with some semantic search capabilities . For example , ResearchGate ( www . researchgate . net ) includes semantic search based on text matching of publication abstracts . These research activities provide various components or capabilities of a knowledge infrastructure , some of which are incorporated in the work described in this paper ( for example , Hars’ ( 1998 ; 2001 ) model is used as a basis for the scientific knowledge ontology ( Brodaric et al , 2008 ) used in the project . However , the work described in this paper represents an extension beyond the previous work by providing discovery tools based on scientific knowledge and creating a framework to support inference to identify patterns in the progress of science . 4 . Knowledge Infrastructure Content The goal of creating a knowledge infrastructure that allows advanced discovery , inference and visualisation leads to the need to store a number of information components . These information components can then be used to explore and extend scientific knowledge . This Section outlines the high level requirements for the infrastructure and then describes the information components that are needed to meet those requirements . 4 . 1 Knowledge Infrastructure Requirements On the basis of the above scenarios , a basic set of requirements for a geospatial knowledge infrastructure includes the following : 1 ) Users should be able to discover resources based on : 2 http : / / sciencecommons . org / 3 http : / / www . geongrid . org / a . Domain concept ( for example , waves , sediment ) ; b . Semantic similarity to a domain concept ; c . Scientific theory , model or method ( for example , principal components analysis , the Sapir - Whorf hypothesis ) ; d . Informal user tags ; e . Geographic location ; f . Time period and g . Any combination of the above . 2 ) Users should be able to access resources including : a . Publications ( for example , books , journal articles , conference proceedings ) ; b . Data sets and c . Web services conforming to published geospatial standards ( OGC ) . 3 ) Systems should be able to automatically execute web services to allow immediate access to data and processes . 4 ) Users should be able to derive and visualise new information about the static knowledge by inferring relationships . 4 . 2 Knowledge Infrastructure Information Components In order to meet these requirements , a number of information components must be included in the knowledge infrastructure , as shown in Table 1 . 4 . 3 Options for Content Representation The knowledge infrastructure combines semantic approaches to knowledge representation with approaches to the design of interoperable distributed systems , specifically in a geospatial context . Interoperable geospatial distributed systems use standards - based registries to store all of the information that supports and enables the infrastructure . The use of such registries ensures that the knowledge infrastructure is interoperable with other systems , because registry standards define information models and interfaces to ensure such interoperability . Thus any other system can access knowledge infrastructure content through the registry standard . A key aspect of the design of a knowledge infrastructure involves the design of the detailed information model for the registry . Typically , registry standards include a high level information model that represents the types of information components that are commonly required in an interoperable system ( for example , basic metadata , web service descriptions ) . In addition to this , the information model may be extended and specialised to contain more purpose - specific content . This can be done in two ways . Firstly , the high level model usually includes some generic objects that may be used to store information that is not already included in the high level model . This is suitable for content that is similar in nature to existing registry content and that does not have its own internal structure that needs to be retained ( since the registry information model imposes a new , additional meta - structure ) . Secondly , the information model may be extended to include new objects that have their own structure and information model . This is most suited to information that already has its own internal structure that for some reason should be retained . This applies in the case of ontologies , because the retention of the existing ontology structure is important for inference tools to be used . The decision about whether to represent each of the information components presented in Section 4 . 2 using the existing high level information model , employment of generic information objects or extension of the information model to include new objects depends on the following factors : 1 ) Whether or not inference and reasoning is required for the information component ( for example , to identify non - asserted relationships that logically follow from relationships that are asserted ) . If this is the case , the component should be represented as an ontology . 2 ) Whether or not the discovery and visualisation mechanisms offered by the knowledge infrastructure require the types of querying of the content that benefit from ontology representation structures ( for example , if semantically - related objects are of interest ) . This differs from item 1 in that asserted relationships are useful , even if inference and reasoning are not performed . 3 ) Whether or not it would be useful for the meaning ( or semantics ) of the component to be interpreted or understood by the knowledge infrastructure ( non - human ) . For instance , this may be used for automated interpretation or orchestration of web services . 4 ) Whether or not ontology standards exist for storage of the relevant component either as is or with easy extension . 5 ) Whether or not the existing registry standards represent the component either as is or with easy employment of generic elements . The following Section identifies candidates for 4 ) and 5 ) above , and is followed by an assessment of each of the information components against each of the above factors . 5 . Existing Information Structure Standards 5 . 1 Existing Ontology Standards Broadly speaking , the information required to support the knowledge infrastructure includes data and metadata about domain concepts ( this depends on the domain being represented in the infrastructure , and is theoretically unlimited ) ; scientific resources ( including publications , data sets and web services ) and scientific knowledge and the scientific discovery process . Domain Ontology Standards A wide range of ontologies exist describing the concepts within different domains , but none are officially sanctioned standards , and in any case , ontologies for a specific domain are vulnerable to context and view dependence , so it is difficult to create one - size - fits - all ontologies . Upper level ontologies like SUMO 4 and DOLCE 5 have been 4 http : / / www . ontologyportal . org / 5 http : / / wiki . loa - cnr . it / index . php / LoaWiki : Ontologies created to describe generic , high - level concepts from which more specific concepts can specialise . A large number of ontologies have been created in the geospatial domain for individual projects and purposes , but often these are little known or represent the world view of a specific group . However , there are some mid - level ontologies that may be considered de jure standards ( for example , SWEET 6 ) . The knowledge infrastructure was implemented as a prototype using the marine domain , and while there were some ontologies existing in the marine domain , there were no existing ontologies ( standard or otherwise ) for the selected sub - domain of marine instruments and parameters . Considering the more general case , ontologies exist for some domains and not others , so the creation of a general knowledge infrastructure will not enjoy the existence of complete ontologies for all domains . Scientific Resource Ontology Standards There are no recognised standard ontologies specifically designed to express the semantics of data sets or publications . However , a number of standards have been created for web service ontologies . These are normally designed to assist with automatic discovery , invocation and composition , and include OWL - S 7 , WSMO 8 and SWSO 9 . Web service ontology languages vary in the elements that they include , but for example , OWL - S includes elements to describe : • a natural language description of the web service ; • the parameters , inputs , outputs , preconditions , results used or returned by a web service ; • the process flow of the web service and its composition of other web services and parameter bindings between them ; • the service binding ( how to invoke the web service ) and • metadata about the service ( quality , reliability , etc . ) . Scientific Knowledge Ontology Standards There are no recognised scientific knowledge ontology standards , but existing work to model scientific knowledge has been adapted to create the Science Knowledge Infrastructure Ontology ( SKIo ) ( Brodaric et al , 2008 ) . This also provides a semantic description of scientific resources . 5 . 2 Existing Registry Standards The most commonly used registry standard for geospatial information is the OGC Catalog Services for the Web ( CSW ) ( Nebert et al 2007 ) , which defines an interface to a registry ( consisting of a number of services ) , a query language and binding to the 6 http : / / sweet . jpl . nasa . gov / 7 http : / / www . w3 . org / Submission / OWL - S / 8 http : / / www . wsmo . org / 9 http : / / www . daml . org / services / swsf / 1 . 0 / swso / HTTP protocol , and uses Dublin Core metadata elements . This standard is thus far coupled with two different information models : ebRIM ( Martell 2005 ) and ISO 19115 / 19119 ( Voges and Senkler , 2005 ) . The OASIS / ebXML Registry Information Model ( ebRIM ) ( OASIS / ebXML Registry Technical Committee 2002 ) information model is a comprehensive standard that was developed for generic registries ( it is not geospatially - specific ) . It includes core components that can be used to store generic objects and associations and extended to meet additional requirements , as well as provisions for storing classification systems , organisations , contact information , services , events and access control information . The ebRIM application profile for CSW ( Martell 2005 ) combines the CSW interface with the ebRIM information model , and has also been extended to include feature types with associations , constraints and operations ( Stock et al , forthcoming ) . The ISO 19115 / 19119 application profile for CSW uses an information model based on the ISO 19115 ( International Standards Organisation 2003 ) and ISO 19119 ( International Standards Organisation 2005 ) standards for metadata , and includes components to store general metadata , information about organisations and contact people , services and data sets ( Voges and Senkler , 2005 ) . These two profiles are the prevailing standards for geospatial information registries , and while there are some variations between the two profiles , they contain similar information in terms of their capacity to handle the different information components required by the knowledge infrastructure . 6 . The Information Model for the Knowledge Infrastructure Registry The previous Sections have presented the information components that are required for the knowledge infrastructure and presented the options for their representation . The information components vary in their suitability for representation in an ontology or a traditional registry . Table 2 lists each of the information components for the knowledge infrastructure from Section 4 . 2 and assesses them against each of the factors listed in Section 4 . 3 . This Section discusses the information components and proposes an information model . In the context of a knowledge infrastructure , the ability to perform reasoning and interpret meaning of domain concepts , relationships , constraints and characteristics is important . This allows users to discover and visualise semantically linked domain concepts , and allows semantic searches to be performed . The existence of ontologies depends on the domain in question , but in most cases ( including the work described in this paper ) , existing ontologies are not found to be sufficient and additional work is required . However , ontology languages are certainly available to represent domain concept semantics . Registries have also been used to store some semantic information ( Stock et al , forthcoming ) , but not with the level of formality and richness provided by ontology languages . Inference and reasoning , semantic relationships and interpretation of meaning may be important for metadata , although this depends on the nature of the metadata . For example , metadata about the creator of a resource may be used with semantic tools to establish networks of people who collaborate and infer other possibly fruitful connections . Some metadata appears in current ontologies ( for example , SKIo ( Brodaric et al 2008 ) ) , and registry standards focus very strongly on metadata as an important method for resource discovery . Textual descriptions are not typically stored in registries and are not suited to inference or automated interpretation of meaning . They are , however , regularly included in registry standards ( for example , as an abstract ) . Bindings to publications and data sets ( for example , a URL ) may be included in an ontology as can any information , but this is not regularly done and the binding itself is not suited to inference or interpretation of meaning in any direct way . Registries regularly store binding information for all kinds of resources , as automatic invocation is an important goal for registry technologies . The storage of semantic information about publications and data sets ( for example , the domain concepts to which they relate ) can be used in inference and reasoning , and relationships between concepts and their links to publications may also be useful in inferring new knowledge . Ontologies of publications and data sets are rare . Registries do not typically include the semantics of resources , hence the work described in this paper . Semantic descriptions of the scientific process are potentially very useful in a knowledge infrastructure if used with inference and reasoning tools , and may then provide additional discovery and visualisation options as indicated in the user scenario in Section 2 . An ontology describing scientific knowledge does exist and was used in this project ( Brodaric et al 2008 ) , but such information is not included in registry standards . There is some potential benefit in the ability to reason over and interpret informal user tags , since they contain semantic information . A tag ontology has been proposed ( Gruber , 2005 ) but not formalised , and some software tools provide their own tag ontologies ( for example , Gnizr 10 ) . Tags may typically be included in registries in the form of keywords or classification systems ( the latter in the case in which the informal user tags have their own semantic relationships , which some tools allow ) . Data set schemas provide a different kind of semantic description of concepts , usually more focussed on syntactic representation . However , they do include semantic content and reasoning , inference and interpretation of meaning could certainly be useful . Schemas are not usually included in ontologies , and while not included in registry standards , they have been included in actual registry implementations ( for example , the Oceans Portal 11 ) . Web service specifications ( for example , the Open Geospatial Consortium specifications ) describe common interfaces that may be used for web services 10 http : / / code . google . com / p / gnizr / 11 http : / / www . aodc . gov . au / index . php ? id = 34 performing a particular function with a particular data type ( for example , geospatial data ) . The actual specifications are static and largely syntactic , so there is little scope for inference and interpretation . Thus such specifications are not usually represented in ontologies , although the work described in this paper is part of a project that also described web service specification using web service ontologies to allow common elements of web service interpretations to be reused . Many aspects of web services ( for example , parameters , user interactions and semantics ) may be used with inference and reasoning tools to assist in automatic discovery , chaining and execution of web services . A number of standards have been developed to this end ( see Section 5 . 1 ) . Much of this content ( although with less emphasis on semantics ) is also included in registry standards . Items 1 , 5 , 6 , 10 , 12 , 14 and 15 in Table 1 are clearly ideal candidates for representation using ontologies . They require reasoning and semantic capabilities , and either there is an existing ontology or they are not fully represented in existing registry standards . Items 3 , 4 , 9 , 11 and 13 are more suitable for representation in the existing registry information model , since they do not require reasoning or other semantic capabilities and are already included in the registry information model . However , this results in only partial use of the web service ontology standards , since such ontologies also include service binding , which is most appropriately represented outside an ontology . Therefore , in order to fully use the web service ontology , it is thought most appropriate that the bindings for web services be included in the web service ontology , and the web service specifications also be added to keep all of the web service content together . The bindings for publications and data sets are also thought best represented in an ontology structure that reflects the web service bindings , in order to achieve consistency in storage of binding information . Given that this only leaves items 2 , 7 and 8 , all of which require or may require semantic augmentation and item 3 which clearly does not , it was decided for the implementation of the knowledge infrastructure that all information components would be stored in ontologies in order to retain consistency and allow for potential future development of new tools for reasoning and inference . The information architecture was thus based on the use of ontologies of various kinds to store the content for the geospatial knowledge infrastructure . Figure 2 illustrates the ontologies that were used to store the content for the knowledge infrastructure , and Table 3 describes the types of ontology . 7 . Evaluation The information model described was implemented using a CSW registry . The ontologies were created ( or existing ones employed in the case of the upper level ontology and the scientific knowledge ontology ) , and used as the basis for a web - based application for discovery and access to scientific resources . This Section provides an evaluation of the information model as described in this paper , including the use of ontologies to support a knowledge infrastructure and the specific approach to the use of ontologies described in Section 6 . 7 . 1 Ontology Development Effort In the course of the work described in this paper , a number of ontologies were created , the most significant of which were the information source ontology , the marine instruments domain ontology , the web service ontologies and the application ontologies . Other smaller ontologies were also developed ( the location ontology and the OWL CSW ontology ) , but these did not require significant effort . The development of the marine instruments ontology was most significant , and involved two workshops with domain experts as well as extensive ( several weeks ) effort on the part of the ontology engineers . The details of this ontology engineering exercise are not covered here , but only a small , quite specific part of the marine instruments domain was covered , and the amount of effort was significant . The information source ontology was also not a minor exercise , requiring some weeks’ work . The OWL - S OGC ontology was a smaller exercise requiring perhaps two weeks effort . However , the most problematic part of the work from the point of view of developing a viable knowledge infrastructure was the amount of effort required to create the application ontologies and the web service ontologies for each implemented web service . The development of a complete application or web service ontology for a scientific resource could be expected to take about 3 hours once the source ontologies are well understood by the person creating the new ontology , and would potentially be required for all resources in the knowledge infrastructure ( possibly millions ) . This effort can be broken down into the following components : 1 ) The description of the bibliographic details of the resource . This is the kind of metadata that is typically stored for a resource and it may be possible to generate this automatically using harvesting from existing digital library sources . Such harvesting was done in a limited way as part of the project . 6 ) The attachment of domain ontology concepts to the resource . This allows discovery to be done by ontology visualisation and also allows related concepts to be discovered as well as those directly attached . 7 ) The description of the scientific knowledge involved in the resource . This is the most time consuming part of the work and involves the description of the details of the scientific process undertaken , including assertions , hypotheses , scientific theories , analysis methods and processes of induction , abduction and deduction . This requires the person creating the ontology to understand the processes involved in the research , and although it is the most time consuming , it is also potentially the most useful aspect of the knowledge infrastructure , because it allows new types of inference , visualisation and pattern searching both within and across disciplines to be performed . This is also the most difficult part of the ontologies to automate , as it requires understanding of the content of a scientific resource . One possible future development in a world in which knowledge infrastructures were well established would be for a scientist to describe the scientific knowledge aspects of his or her resource himself or herself , as part of a metadata annotation process when a resource is published . This may be feasible with user friendly tools and appropriate incentives . 7 . 2 Absence of Suitable Domain Ontologies For the purposes of this work , a domain ontology was developed for the marine instruments domain , based on the selection of a limited subset of instruments . This decision was made because ontology development effort is significant , and so it was only practical to model a domain with limited scope . However , most scientific resources that relate to or use marine instruments also relate to the broader marine or coastal context . For example , although a depth sounder may be used to measure depth , this is often done in the context of some broader marine science problem . However , a comprehensive ontology of the coastal environment was not available ( although some work is being done to that end as part of the CoastNet project 12 ) , and it was not practical to develop such a broad ontology as part of this work . The approach discussed in this paper relies on the existence of ontologies of the relevant domains , and these would need to be developed in order for the knowledge infrastructure to work properly using the information model described herein . 7 . 3 Scope for Integration and Extension of Ontologies As the work developed , it became apparent that there was some overlap between the content of the scientific knowledge ontology , the information source ontology and the web services ontologies . The scientific knowledge ontology includes some content about information sources , the information source ontology duplicates some of the content of the OWL - S web service ontology that was used to describe web services . Due to limited time , the three ontologies were used concurrently ( although the information source ontology was used for non - web service resources and the web service ontology was used only for web services ) , but future work could beneficially integrate the three ontologies . 8 . Conclusions This paper has presented an approach to the storage of content to support a geospatial knowledge infrastructure using ontologies . It has first established the reasons for doing this , and identified which information components in the knowledge infrastructure might benefit from being ‘ontologised’ , recommending that all components should be stored using ontologies to maximise the opportunity for semantic discovery and inference . The paper has then presented the design of an information model that was used to implement a knowledge infrastructure . This paper also evaluated the approach to information representation from the point of view of the process of creation and development of the ontologies . The work has presented an information model and shown how ontologies may be used to store knowledge infrastructure content in a way that will allow reasoning , inference and visualisation to establish new knowledge understanding about the 12 http : / / www . coastnet . org . uk / coastal - and - marine - ontology scientific process , as well as assisting in the discovery of scientific resources that would not be discovered using existing techniques . Acknowledgements This work as funded under the COMPASS Project by the Joint Information Systems Committee of the UK , and their assistance is gratefully acknowledged . References Brodaric , B . , Reitsma , F . , Qiang , Y . , 2008 . SKIing with DOLCE : toward an e - Science Knowledge Infrastructure . In : Eschenbach , C . , Gruninger , M . , ( Eds . ) , Formal Ontology in Information Systems , Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference ( FOIS08 ) , IOS Press , Amsterdam , pp . 208 - 219 . de la Beaujardiere , J . , 2006 . Web Map Service Implementation Specification . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 06 - 042 . Gruber , T . , 2005 . TagOntology - a way to agree on the semantics of tagging data [ online ] . Presentation to Tag Camp , October 29 , 2005 . http : / / tomgruber . org / writing / tagontology . htm [ Accessed 4 June 2009 ] . Guedon , J - C . , 1996 . The seminar , the encyclopedia , and the eco - museum as possible future forms of electronic publishing . In : Peek , R . , Newby , G . , ( Eds . ) , Scholarly publishing : the electronic frontier , MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts : Hars , A . , 1998 . USC Cybrarium : An infrastructure for the creation and management of information systems knowledge . In : Baets , W . R . J . , ( Ed . ) , Proceedings 6th European conference on information systems , 4 - 6 June 1998 Aix - en - provence , pp . 75 - 85 . Hars , A . , 2001 . Designing scientific knowledge infrastructures : the contribution of epistemology . Information Systems Frontiers 3 , 63 - 73 . International Standards Organisation , 2003 . Geographic Information – Metadata . Reference number ISO 19115 : 2003 ( E ) . International Standards Organisation , 2005 . Geographic Information - Services . Reference number ISO 19119 : 2005 ( E ) . Martell , R . , 2005 . OGC Catalogue Services – ebRIM ( ISO / TS 15000 - 3 ) profile of CSW . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 05 - 025r3 . Nebert , D . , Whiteside , A . and Vretanos , P . , 2007 . OGC Catalogue Service Specification . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 07 - 006r1 . OASIS / EbXML Registry Technical Committee , 2002 . OASIS / ebXML Registry Information Model v2 . 0 [ online ] . Approved OASIS Standard . http : / / www . oasis - open . org / committees / regrep / documents / 2 . 0 / specs / ebrim . pdf [ Accessed 1 December 2009 ] . Pike , W . , Gahegan , M . , 2007 . Beyond Ontologies : Toward Situated Representations of Scientific Knowledge , International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 65 , 674 - 688 . Stock , K . , Atkinson , R . , Higgins , C . , Small , M . , Woolf , A . , Millard , K . and Arctur , D . , in press . A semantic registry using a Feature Type Catalogue instead of ontologies to support spatial data infrastructures . International Journal of Geographical Information Science . Stock , K . , Robertson , A . , Bishr , M . , Stojanovic , T . , Ortmann , J . , Reitsma , F . , Medyckyj - Scott , D . , 2009 . eScience for Sea Science : A Semantic Knowledge Infrastructure for Marine Scientists . In : 5th IEEE International Conference on e - Science , Oxford , UK , December 9 - 11 . Voges , U . and Senkler , K . , 2005 . OGC Catalogue Services – ISO 19115 / 19119 Application Profile for CSW 2 . 0 . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 04 - 038r2 . Vretanos , P . , 2005 . Web Feature Service Implementation Specification . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 04 - 094 . Whiteside , A . , 2007 . OGC Web Services Common Specification . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 06 - 121r3 . Table 1 : Required Information Components to Support the Knowledge Infrastructure Item Required for Publications Required for Data Sets Required for Web Services Concepts relating to the domain Yes Yes Yes Semantic relationships between the concepts Yes Yes Yes Constraints and characteristics describing the concept Yes Yes Yes Informal user tags Yes Yes Yes General metadata ( title , author , date ) using recognised standard formats and content models ( for example , Dublin Core ) Yes Yes Yes Textual descriptions Yes Yes Yes Publication bindings ( actual instructions for how to automatically retrieve the publication so that applications can link to it directly ) Yes A semantic description of the research described in the publication , including the scientific discovery process undertaken , the theories and models used and the related domain concepts Yes The schema used , including metadata and annotations Yes Data set bindings ( actual instructions for how to automatically retrieve the data set so that applications can link to it directly ) Yes A semantic description of the data set , including references to domain concepts and the theories , methods and models it depends on , uses or tests ( if any ) Yes The web service specification used ( for example , OGC13 Web Feature Service ( Vretanos 2005 ) if any ) Yes Parameters that the web service requires to be executed , their default values ( if appropriate ) and any need to prompt the user for input Yes Web service bindings ( actual instructions for how to automatically execute the web service so that applications can use this information in combination with the web services specification and parameters to execute the web service ) Yes The data sets used or returned ( if appropriate ) Yes A semantic description of the web service , including its behaviour and the domain concepts that it uses and the theories , methods and models that it depends on , uses or tests ( if any ) Yes Table 2 : Assessment of Information Components Against Criteria Information Component Inference and reasoning required Semantic relationships important Interpretation of meaning important Included in existing ontologies Included in existing registry standards 1 Domain concepts , relationships , constraints , characteristics . Yes Yes Yes Partial Partial 13 Open Geospatial Consortium 2 General metadata for all scientific resources . Maybe Maybe Maybe Partial Yes 3 Textual descriptions for all scientific resources . No No No No Yes 4 Publication bindings . No No No No Yes 5 Publication semantics ( domain concepts and scientific process ) . Yes Yes Yes Partial No 6 Semantic description of the scientific process . Yes Yes Yes Not in standard , but ontology exists . No 7 Informal user tags Maybe No Yes Partial Partial 8 Data set schemas Maybe Maybe Maybe No No , but has been done in previous projects . 9 Data set bindings No No No No Yes 10 Data set semantics ( domain concepts and scientific process ) . Yes Yes Yes Partial No 11 Web service specifications No No No No Yes 12 Web service parameters , values and user interactions . Yes Yes Yes Partial Partial , and has been done in previous projects . 13 Web service bindings . No No No Yes Yes 14 Web service data sets . Yes Yes Yes Partial No , but has been done in previous projects . 15 Web service semantics ( domain concepts and scientific process ) . Yes Yes Yes Yes No Table 3 : Types of Ontologies Used in the Geospatial Knowledge Infrastructure Ontology Type Description and Role Upper Level Ontology DOLCE was used as the upper level ontology for the Scientific Knowledge Ontology , as it contains many foundational elements that are relevant to the modelling of scientific knowledge . Scientific Knowledge Ontology The Scientific Knowledge Ontology describes the scientific content of resources in the infrastructure , and was developed by Brodaric et al ( 2008 ) . The ontology was slightly revised by its creator for the purposes of this project , in particular to cater for scientific resources that were focussed on measurement , sampling and analysis rather than the creation of scientific models . Information Source Ontology The information source ontology was developed as part of the project , and provides a framework for the description of publications and data sets . It does not address web services , as they have their own ontology . Domain Ontologies The architecture can incorporate any number of domain ontologies . For the purposes of this work , an ontology of marine instruments was used . This describes the actual concepts that are addressed by the scientific resources , the relationships between those concepts and their semantic characteristics . OWL CSW Ontology An ontology that was created as part of the work on the ontology registry . This contains the elements that CSW requires in the ontology in order to meet the requirements of that specification . Most of these elements used by that specification are from Dublin Core , so did not require additional modelling , with the exception of the bounding box . The OWL CSW ontology contains an OWL description of the bounding box used in OGC standard and defined in UML in the OGC Web Services Common Specification ( Whiteside , 2007 ) . Location Ontology This small ontology provides a mechanism for applying the bounding box to specific types of scientific resources in application ontologies . OWL - S OGC Ontology The OWL - S OGC ontology describes some OGC web service specifications using the OWL - S web services ontology . For the purposes of this project , the OGC specifications included were Web Feature Service ( Vretanos 2005 ) and Web Map Service ( de la Beaujardiere , 2006 ) , but others may be added . The ontology describes the components in the specification that are relevant in the OWL - S context , including the operations that the web service specification offers , the parameters to those operations ( inputs and outputs ) and generic metadata about the web service specifications . For the purposes of this project , the preconditions and effects were not fully described , as web services orchestration was not included , but this may be added in the future , as may other web service specifications . The ontology also provides for the definition of user interactions ( see item 12 in Table 1 ) . That is , they allow the ways to be specified in which a user may dynamically enter or select particular parameters for the invocation of the web service at run time , rather than having to know this in advance . For example , a Web Feature Service may offer a range of feature types to be queried , and the user may be prompted at run time to specify the feature types of interest . The ontology allows bindings to controls in dynamically generated web forms so that the entire process of invoking and executing a web service can be done dynamically at run time . Web Service Ontologies The web service ontologies use the OWL - S OGC Ontology and create instances of actual web services based on the OGC specifications . They also describe which operations are actually implemented by the web service ( web services may not implement all operations defined by the specification ) , provide general metadata for the web services , connect to or create instances of concepts from the domain and scientific knowledge ontologies , and allow user interactions to be defined using the structure specified in the OWL - S OGC ontology . Tag Ontology The Tag Ontology contains all the tags that users have created and the scientific resources to which they have been added . It is not connected to the other ontologies , and describes informal , rather than formal semantics . Application Ontologies An application ontology describes each scientific resources , although the web services are described with web service ontologies and are not referred to as application ontologies in this work , although technically they are a type of application ontology . For each publication and data set , an ontology was created using instances of concepts from the information source ontology , the scientific knowledge ontology , the domain ontologies and the location ontology . These application ontologies describe both semantics and metadata for the scientific resources concerned , but do not include keywords . Table 1 : Required Information Components to Support the Knowledge Infrastructure Table 2 : Assessment of Information Components Against Criteria Table 3 : Types of Ontologies Used in the Geospatial Knowledge Infrastructure Figure 1 : The COMPASS User Interface Figure 2 : The High Level Information Architecture for the Geospatial Knowledge Infrastructure