DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research Norbert M . Seel 1 Published online : 11 January 2017 (cid:2) Association for Educational Communications and Technology 2017 Abstract This article provides a review of theoretical approaches to model - based learning and related research . In accordance with the deﬁnition of model - based learning as an acquisition and utilization of mental models by learners , the ﬁrst section centers on mental model theory . In accordance with epistemology of modeling the issues of semantics , ontology , and learning with models as well as structural aspects and functions of mental models ( such as simpliﬁcation , idealization , analogy , simulation ) will be discussed . Starting with early theoretical approaches in the realm of cognitive science , the emphasis will be on recent theoretical developments in the ﬁeld of reinforcement learning that distinguish between model - based and model - free learning . These new theoretical approaches conﬁrm , to a large extent , the early theories of mental models but they also contribute new insights in age - related aspects of model - based learning . The second main section of the article provides a review of basic and applied research on model - based learning . A short overview of basic research on mental models aims at sketching an ‘‘overall picture’’ followed by a more detailed description and discussion of ﬁndings in the ﬁeld of instructional research , especially with regard to K - 12 STEM education and the support of model - based learning through teaching and technology . Keywords Mental models (cid:2) Model - based reinforcement learning (cid:2) Model - oriented instruction (cid:2) Scaffolding (cid:2) Animation and modeling (cid:2) Simulation Introduction ‘‘The great game of science is modeling the real world’’ ( Hestenes 1992 , p . 732 ) . Since ancient times , scientists have spent a lot of time and effort to build , test , compare and revise models to explain phenomena of the physical and social world . Among others , & Norbert M . Seel seel @ ezw . uni - freiburg . de 1 University of Freiburg , Freiburg , Germany 123 Education Tech Research Dev ( 2017 ) 65 : 931 – 966 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11423 - 016 - 9507 - 9 Bohr’s model of the atom , the corpuscular model of light , the Lorenz atmosphere model , the double helix model of DNA are popular examples in physics , but modeling plays also an important role in the social sciences ( e . g . , evolutionary models ) , in economy ( e . g . , the Mundell - Fleming model ) , in psychology ( e . g . , Piaget’s model of intellectual development ) , and even in the science of history ( e . g . , Turchin 2004 ) . In information science of the 1960s , one can ﬁnd the idea that learning consists of procedures people use to construct internal models of their environments ( e . g . , Steinbuch 1961 ) . Similarly , over decades the concept of models for understanding was emphasized in education ( e . g . , Seeliger 1948 ; Ford and Hall 1970 ; Mayer 1989 ) until it became a major issue of science and mathematics education in the 1990s . Helping students to develop powerful models should be among the most important goals of mathematics instruction ( Lesh and Doerr 2000 ) , and similarly , in sci - ence education an important goal consists of enabling students to develop powerful models for making sense of their daily experiences of biological , physical and chemical phe - nomena ( Clement 2000 ) . To date , the idea of model - based learning takes center stage in K - 12 science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) education . Occasionally , model literacy is claimed a central goal of STEM education ( Bryce et al . 2016 ) . For a long time , pragmatic approaches of model - based learning were predominant in the ﬁeld of education , and in consequence , some authors complained about the lack of a sound theoretical foundation . ‘‘There is no coherent theory that outlines the cognitive processes involved in model - based learning , nor are there any coherent theories of how model - based teaching should be approached‘‘ ( Gobert and Buckley 2000 , p . 891 ) . At that time , several theoretical approaches , however , already had focused on the cognitive processes involved in the construction of models ( e . g . , Johnson - Laird 1983 ; Rumelhart et al . 1986 ; Seel 1991 ; Wilson and Rutherford 1989 ) . In the aftermath of these early approaches , a signiﬁcant progress in the theoretical foundation of model - based learning and instruction could be observed ( Seel 2014 ) . The same holds true with regard to correspondent research on model - based learning and instruction . One main objective of this article is to provide a comprehensive overview of the theoretical foundation of model - based learning by referring to the issues of the semantics and ontology of modeling as well as to the particular issue of learning with models as propagated in epistemology and mental model theory . Another main objective consists in providing a synthesis of research on model - based learning . First , major lines of research will be delineated . After the discussion of some methodologial issues , the article focuses on ﬁndings of basic research on mental models in the area of cognitive science , especially in the realm of model - based reinforcement learning . In addition , ﬁndings of developmental psychology will be reported inasmuch as they are relevant for education and instruction . Against this background , results of educational research on model - based learning will be reported whereupon a distinction will be made between learning from models with an emphasis on social aspects , learning about models as used in expository teaching , and inquiry learning with models . By proceeding from general to speciﬁc considerations , the next section of the article foregrounds ﬁndings of empirical research on instructional and technological support of model - based learning . Pursuant to the guiding idea that students need help to develop powerful models in STEM education , the effectiveness of instruc - tional and technological support on model - based learning will be discussed . In accordance with the mission of this journal , particular attention will be turned to computer - based tools of visualization and simulation . 932 N . M . Seel 123 Model theory—an interdisciplinary synthesis According to the central importance of models in science , the interest in a general model theory has a long tradition in the philosophy of science ( e . g . , Freudenthal 1961 ; Wartofsky 1979 ) where a model is conceived as a simpliﬁed representation of a phenomenon that needs to be explained . This model relation is inherently ternary : ‘‘ To an observer B , an object A * is a model of an object A to the extent that B can use A * to answer questions that interest him about A ’’ ( Minsky 1965 , p . 45 ) . According to Craik ( 1943 ) , an individual who intends to give a rational explanation for something must develop practicable methods to generate adequate explanations based on available knowledge . Hence , models represent knowledge about the world that can be used to answer questions about a hypothetical experiment without actually performing it ( Seel 1991 ) . In the philosophy of science , this representational function of models is closely connected with the issues what kind of things models are and how people can learn with models . Accordingly , a distinction can be made between the semantics , ontology and epistemology of modeling ( Frigg and Hartmann 2006 ) . Semantics of modeling A common semantic approach on modeling operates with a meta - mathematical notion according to which the model relation corresponds with a homomorphism between a model M and its original O ( Weiss and D’Mello 1997 ) : g : O ! M with O ¼ O ; R Oi ; f Oj ; c h i and M ¼ M ; R Mi ; f Mj ; c h i g results in R iO ( o 1 , … , o n ) . R iM ( g ( o 1 ) , … , g ( o n ) ) for i [ I , and f jO ( o ) = o´ . f jM ( g ( o ) ) = g ( o´ ) for all j [ J . g is a surjective function , and therefore , g : O ? M does not imply that g must be deﬁned with regard to all elements of O but rather only to particular elements o [ O and the corresponding g ( o n ) . That is : M regularly contains fewer elements and relations than O . What elements and relations of the original are omitted in a model depends on its function . This can be illustrated with the example of globes as models of the earth . Clearly , a globe is not a reduced earth but rather should give answers to particular questions asked for the locations of different places or for distances between places on earth . With regard to the chemical composition of the earth , a globe is not signiﬁcant . Most models are constructed in accordance with the intention to simplify its original in several respects . This regularly implies a visualization in order to make the invisible visible as well as an idealization , i . e . , a process to assume facts about the phenomenon that might be false but make models easier to understand something ( Wimsatt 1987 ) . The Bohr model , for instance , is not entirely correct . The correct theory of the atom is called quantum mechanics , which , however , is difﬁcult to understand . The Bohr model is only an approximation to quantum mechanics but has the virtue of being understood much easier . Another function of models consists in identifying relationships within a known base domain in order to identify similar relationships within a target domain . The resulting analogical models are hypotheses about structural similarities of different domains ( Gentner 1983 ) . For example , according to Bohr’s solar system model of the atom , atoms consist of a nucleus with a number of electrons orbiting around the nucleus , similar to the solar system . Inversely , the solar system can be considered as similar to the model of Oxygen that has a nucleus and eight smaller electrons orbiting around the nucleus . The analogy results from an isomorphism between the two models . That means , there exists a Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 933 123 model of the atom , g 1 : O 1 ? M 1 as well as a model of the solar system , g 2 : O 2 ? M 2 , and the analogical model results from f : M 1 ? M 2 . Holyoak and Thagard ( 1995 ) have exempliﬁed this thread as follows : Our general knowledge about water enables us to create a mental model of how water moves . In the same way , our knowledge about sounds enables us to create a mental model of how sound is transmitted through the air . Each of these mental models links a representation with a phenomenon in the physical world . Now , when we create an analogy between waves in the water and the spreading of sound through the air , we build an isomorphism between two mental models . We use our model of water to progressively modify and improve our model of sound . In the end , we must validate this explanation by testing whether the analogy between the two models helps to achieve a better understanding of the transmission of sound in the physical world . ‘‘If the organism carries a ‘small - scale model’ of external reality and of its own possible actions within its head , it is able to try out various alternatives , conclude which is the best of them , react to future situations before they arise , utilize the knowledge of past events in dealing with the present and the future’’ ( Craik 1943 , p . 61 ) . According to Craik , a simulation runs as a thought experiment based on a mental model , which allows a person to simulate real actions in the imagination and to anticipate the events that would take place in the world if particular actions were to be performed . Mental models ‘‘enable individuals to make inferences and predictions , to understand phenomena , to decide what action to take and to control its execution’’ ( Johnson - Laird 1983 , p . 397 ) . Speaking about mental models means speaking about theoretical constructs that are not observable but must be communicated—preferably by language—or inferred from speciﬁc behavior . Hence , a distinction can be made between implicit mental models providing the tacit knowledge , maybe inexpressible in words , for conducting deductive or inductive reasoning ( Betsch and Fiedler 1999 ) and explicit mental models that can be externalized and communicated by using language , pictures and symbols—not to forget the use of physical objects . Ontology of modeling In the philosophy of science , a basic distinction is made between models of phenomena and data models ( Frigg and Hartmann 2006 ) . By describing how a database is structured data models aim at supporting the development of large information systems , and thus , play an important role in software engineering ( West 2011 ) . In education , commonly models of phenomena are in the foreground whereas data models are virtually irrelevant . In dependence on the modality of its external representation , models of phenomena appear as physical or material models by craftsmanship ( e . g . , Penner et al . 1997 ) or as formal models expressed by language , graphical representations , and / or abstract symbols ( Lesh and Doerr 2000 ) . Material models include especially scale models , such as model cars , model railroad , scale buildings and ﬁgures . Characteristically , a scale model con - serves the relative proportions of the original object and all parts of the model are changed at the same rate . Scale models are used in many ﬁelds including engineering , architecture , salesmanship , and , of course , hobby model building but rarely in school settings where pictorial models and several forms of display notations are more convenient . The basic idea of pictorial models ( expressed by drawings , graphics and diagrams ) is to retain the similarity in the appearance of the model and the original . Therefore , they are also called 934 N . M . Seel 123 appearance models ( Johnson - Laird 1983 ) . Inasmuch as pictorial models maintain simi - larity with appearances of the physical world they are concrete but often they also represent ﬁctional entities referred to as thought models ( Frigg and Hartmann 2006 ) . Appearance models represent the external world in static manner , whereas thought models correspond with qualitative process models to represent dynamic systems . Figure 1 provides an example of a thought model about economy . This ﬁve - sector model of economy could also be represented verbally ( e . g . , Gubitzer 2012 ) but ‘‘sometimes a picture is worth a thousand words’’ ( Fiore et al . 2003 ) . The depicted model is an idealization of national economy , and it is hypothetical - deductive because it goes far beyond a description of the observable . The quintessence of the model , however , consists in the mathematical equations to produce emergent behaviors of the system . The model depicted in Fig . 1 is static . To become a process model it would be necessary to apply a computer program , such as Minsky , to overtly simulate the dynamics of economy ( Keen 1995 ) . External representations of process models generally rely on Fig . 1 External representation of a thought model about economy ( Seel 1999 , p . 167 ) Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 935 123 computer - based animations and simulations that necessarily presuppose mathematical models operating with partial differential equations to produce analytical solutions . Mathematical models are best examples of symbolic models . Summing up , thought models may appear as physical , verbal , pictorial , and / or symbolic representations of phenomena of the real or ﬁctive world . By their nature , models always are simpliﬁed and idealized versions of phenomena of the physical and social world . They help to understand complex phenomena and to predict events , they provide the framework for successful experimentations and simulations , and they assist people in learning . However , they occasionally can also impede learning due to a tendency to overgeneralizations . Learning with models From the perspective of philosophy of science , the issue of model - based learning is a constituent part of the epistemology of modeling ( Frigg and Hartmann 2006 ) . In educa - tional psychology , a popular approach says that learning occurs when people construct meaningful representations , such as coherent mental models that represent and commu - nicate subjective experiences , ideas , thoughts , and feelings of a person ( Mayer 1989 ) . Thus , ‘‘ model - based learning is the formation and subsequent development of mental models by a learner ’’ ( Buckley 2012a , p . 2300 ) . Hence , to clarify model - based learning presupposes to grasp mental models . The theoretical foundation and formal speciﬁcation of mental models has been a major topic in the 1980s ( e . g . , Johnson - Laird 1983 ; Seel 1991 ; Wilson and Rutherford 1989 ) . For example , ( Rumelhart et al . 1986 ) introduced a cognitive architecture with two modules of cognitive processing . One of them operates as an interpretation network , which is con - cerned with the activation of schemas and serves pattern matching . The interpretation network takes inputs from the world to be assimilated into schemas and produces spon - taneous responses in accordance with the defaults of schemas . The other module is similar but it is concerned with creating a model of the world to produce an interpretation of ‘‘what would happen if we did that’’ . The main function of the model of the world consists in generating expectations about states of the world and in predicting the outcomes of pos - sible actions . In other words , a ‘‘mental simulation runs’’ by anticipating the possible results of actions ( see above ) . Almost 30 years later , one can ﬁnd a similar theoretical conception in the ﬁeld of human neuroscience where theories on reinforcement learning propose two distinct cognitive systems to control thoughts and actions in compliance with objectives . This cognitive control may proceed proactively or reactively ( Braver 2012 ) . In reactive control , attention responds to an interference event that mobilizes a correction mechanism , whereas proac - tive control relies upon the anticipation and prevention of interferences before they might occur . This distinction between proactive and reactive control is echoed in a dichotomy of ( deliberate ) model - based vs . ( reﬂexive ) model - free reinforcement learning ( Forstmann and Wagenmakers 2015 ) . In model - free learning actional choices are made on the basis of former rewards , whereas in model - based learning candidate actions are evaluated with regard to the expected outcomes in accordance with a ‘‘world model’’ ( Doll et al . 2012 ) . Correspond - ingly , learners may activate two different types of knowledge to perform a cognitive skill : One type is a conscious mental model , the other one is a schema based on memories of instances and regulates habitual behavior ( Decker et al . 2016 ; Gillan et al . 2015 ) . Model - based learning basically contains a simulation of potential actions and their consequences , 936 N . M . Seel 123 and thus , results in goal - directed decision , whereas the model - free strategy evaluates actions only due to their reward history and triggers schemas which run automatically ( Seel 1991 ) . The idea of model - based reinforcement learning conforms perfectly to the cognitive architecture proposed by ( Rumelhart et al . 1986 ) . However , the major contribution of research on reinforcement learning consists in ﬁnding neural evidences that indicate the ‘‘existence’’ of something that can be called a mental model ( e . g . , Gla¨scher et al . 2010 ; Lee et al . 2014 ; Orban de Xivry and Ethier 2008 ) . Although research on reinforcement learning did produce neural evidence for the ‘‘existence’’ of a cognitive module to construct mental models it cannot explain how this construction occurs in the brain . This explanation is a matter of functional approaches as proposed , for instance , by Buckley ( 2000 ) , Clement ( 2000 ) , and Seel ( 1991 , 2003 ) . According to these approaches , the creation of a mental model starts with the activation of preconceptions that provide domain - speciﬁc knowledge being tentatively integrated into the design of an initial working model which is tested to meet the requirements of the task . Usually , the initial model is not sufﬁcient with regard to its purpose and must be modiﬁed by means of accretion , tuning , and restructuring ( Seel 1991 ) . After substantial modiﬁca - tions the model is tested again and possibly must be complemented and reﬁned . These steps are iterated until a ‘‘target’’ model results that can be used to explain the phenomenon in question or to predict outcomes of actions ( see Fig . 2 ) . Notably , this process of a step - wise enrichment of mental models corresponds with Johnson - Laird’s ( 1983 ) idea of ‘‘ﬂeshing out’’ . The use and validation of a model corresponds with a reduction to absurdity ( Seel 1991 ) , i . e . , an iterative process of testing whether a current model can be replaced with a better one . As long as this is not possible , a model is considered as plausible and suit - able with regard to its purpose . Due to the fact that mental models represent knowledge about the world , the validity of a model is tested foremost with regard to its correspon - dence with the world knowledge of the model - constructing individual ( Seel 1991 ) . Both the step - wise evolution ( ‘‘ﬂeshing out’’ ) of mental models and the reduction to absurdity have been conﬁrmed by case - studies and experimental research in different subject matter domains ( e . g . , Clement and Steinberg 2002 ; Herna´ndez et al . 2015 ; Schwarz et al . 2009 ) . The results of this research have been discussed in relation to the gradual nature of mental Intermediatemodels model use & valida on Targetmodel model forma on model reinforcement model revision model rejec on tasks Fig . 2 Buckley’s model of model - based learning ( Buckley 2012a , p . 2100 ) Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 937 123 models , their developmental and learning - dependent progression as well as potential failures of modeling due to resounding misconceptions ( e . g . , Plummer et al . 2015 ) . Synthesis of research on model - based learning The idea of model - based learning has a long past but short history . ( Schichl 2003 ) and Johnson - Laird ( 2004 ) have traced the roots of modeling back to the cultures of the Ancient Near East and Greek philosophy . However , throughout the centuries modeling had been taken for granted in physics , biology , chemistry , geography , architecture , and other dis - ciplines . It became a matter of empirical research as recently as in the second half of the 20th century , particularly propelled by the emergence of mental model theory . Major lines of research on mental models Over the past decades , thousands of articles and book chapters have been published that focus on the role of mental models in learning . A review of this research reveals different epistemological and theoretical foundations ( Seel 2014 ) . Particularly , the constructivist approach provoked a lot of studies on mental models in the ﬁelds of discourse processing , logic , and informatics . In a nutshell , research on discourse processing focused on the use of situation models to create semantic coherence in reading texts ( Tapiero 2007 ) . Another ﬁeld of interest con - sisted in the investigation of the effects of illustrations on text comprehension ( e . g . , Butcher 2006 ) and , particularly , on the role of spatial mental models in discourse pro - cessing ( e . g . , Tversky et al . 1994 ) . Spatial reasoning with mental models advanced also to a major line of research in the ﬁeld of logic ( e . g . , Rauh et al . 2005 ) , but for a long time this research focused on deductive and inductive reasoning within the realm of a controversial debate about different cognitive systems of reasoning ( e . g . , Evans and St . B . T . 1993 ; Johnson - Laird 2006 ; Sloman 1996 ) . Beyond logic and discourse processing , mental models became also popular in informatics with a particular emphasis on human – computer interaction . Notably , speaking about ‘‘learning about systems by making models’’ ( Riley 1990 , p . 255 ) as well as an emphasis on the facilitative role of mental models in computer programming point to a strong educational impetus of this research ( e . g . , Can˜as et al . 1994 ) . Parallel with research on mental models , pragmatic approaches focused on model - based learning in mathematics , science , and technology education . These approaches correspond , to some extent , with the current movement of STEM education ( e . g . , Gilbert and Justi 2016 ) . Figure 3 illustrates the major trends of research on mental models from 1980 to 2015 . Figure 3 illustrates the up and down movements of research on mental models : The ‘‘traditional’’ ﬁelds of mental model research ( discourse processing , logic and informatics ) had their peaks about 10 years ago and became increasingly less important , whereas research on model - based learning within the realm of STEM education has its peak just now . In geography , medical and economy education a moderate but continuous progress of research on model - based learning can be observed since 1995 . Altogether , Fig . 3 reﬂects the various mainstreams of mental model research across the past decades . 938 N . M . Seel 123 Methodological issues of mental model research Mental models are theoretical constructs , which must be inferred from observable data . Accordingly , the research on mental models is characterized by a variety of designs and assessment methods : The scope reaches from single - case studies to sophisticated experi - mental studies , from qualitative research based on interviews and think - aloud protocols up to quantitative research with a large inventory of measures , such as tests to assess the retention of contents to be learned , transfer and qualitative reasoning , as well as ques - tionnaires and ratings , the time needed for learning or accomplishing learning tasks , the frequency and type of errors . Other assessment methods include hands - on simulations , drawings and diagrams as well as crafting material models ( e . g . , Kurland and Pea 1985 ; Penner et al . 1997 ) . Shortly said , research on model - based learning typically uses a composite methodology ( Grenier and Dudzinska - Przesmitzki 2015 ) . Traditionally , the designs of studies follow a similar procedure : After a pretest to assess the participants’ preconceptions a short initial training prepares the participants to accomplish a series of tasks which are considered as essential steps of the step - wise development of a mental model ( e . g . , Clement 2000 ) . The sticking point of this method - ology is to operationalize everything , especially the tasks and processes to be performed in such a way that their accomplishment provides precisely those behavioral data that can be considered as reliable and valid indicators of the theoretical construct ( Seel 1999 ) . A minimum requirement is to specify the processes that operate on a particular internal representation in order for behavior to occur . Consistent with the theory of mental models , an internal representation is most probably a model if a mental simulation runs ( e . g . , Kieras and Bovair 1984 ; Kurland and Pea 1985 ) . If a mental simulation is not required , the internal representation can also be a mental image ( e . g . , Frick et al . 2009 ; Markman 1998 ) . Another methodological issue concerns the necessary distinction between a mental model and a schema . According to Rumelhart et al . ( 1986 ) and Seel ( 1991 ) , the activation of a schema leads to automatic and rapid information processing whereas the acquisition and utilization of a mental model is a deliberative and time - consuming process . Hence , the 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Logic / Reasoning Discourse processing Informatics Geography / Environment Economy / Management Medicine / Nursing / Health STEM Education Fig . 3 Trends of research on mental models from 1980 to 2015 ( percentages based on a sample of 2695 publications ) Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 939 123 time spent for accomplishing learning tasks becomes a decisive criterion : If a task can be solved ‘‘quick and easy’’ then a schema occurs . In case of tasks with barriers to come to a solution , a mental model must be constructed and iteratively modiﬁed until the problem can be solved . However , this assumption is not undisputed in the literature insofar some authors ( e . g . , Brewer 1987 ; Jones et al . 2011 ) explain successful problem solving by means of emerging schemas . As Anderson ( 1978 ) has pointed out ‘‘it is not possible for behav - ioral data to uniquely decide issues of internal representations’’ ( p . 262 ) . Without neural evidence it is not possible to establish whether an internal representation is a mental image , model or a schema . Thus , the concept to rely the evidence of cognitive processes on neural evidence is quite popular in cognitive science ( e . g . , Jonides et al . 2006 ; Mahon and Cantlon 2011 ; Poldrack 2006 ) just as well as in mental model research . Results of basic research on mental models In cognitive science , the neural evidence of mental models always has been beyond all question ( e . g . , Johnson - Laird 1995 ; Knauff et al . 2003 ; Thagard 2010 ) , but it took a long time to ﬁnd it . An increasing number of studies , mostly using functional magnetic reso - nance imaging ( fMRI ) and measuring dopamine release , supports the dissociation of model - based from model - free reinforcement learning ( e . g . , Gla¨scher et al . 2010 ; Sharp et al . 2016 ) . As pointed out above , model - based learning requires cognitive control that primarily occurs in the lateral prefrontal cortex ( LPFC ) and exerts its inﬂuence through top - down interactions between LPFC regions and associative cortices in order to coordinate thoughts or actions in relation with internal goals ( Appelbaum et al . 2014 ) . So far so good . It seems clear that the prefrontal cortex subserves cognitive control but , according to ( Koechlin et al . 2003 ) , little is known about how the brain exactly determines which of both systems controls behavior at one moment in time . As a matter of course , nothing stored in the human mind corresponds with a schema or mental model . These mental representations are created when individuals try to accomplish speciﬁc tasks ( Rumelhart et al . 1986 ) . Thus , fMRI and other physiological methods assess the neural correlates of processes in performing cognitive tasks , which often appear as sequential decision tasks . One popular sequential desicion task has been developed by Daw et al . ( 2011 ) and subsequently used in numerous physiological studies to dissociate model - free and model - based learning ( e . g . , Gillan et al . 2015 ; Sharp et al . 2016 ) as well as to explore the effects of personality traits . Indeed , several studies have shown that the limited capacity of working memory ( e . g . , Otto et al . 2013 ) as well as personal traits , such as extraversion or reward sensivity ( e . g . , Skatova et al . 2013 ) , impact the effectiveness of model - based learning . Consistent with the theory of mental models , some experiments demonstrated that model - based training leads to slow but accurate accomplishment of learning tasks , whereas instance - based training leads to fast , but less accurate responding ( Domangue et al . 2004 ; Gillan et al . 2015 ) . However , Economides et al . ( 2015 ) could show that model - based reasoning becomes gradually automatic with continuous training due to the fact that cognitive load does not impair model - based learning if subjects receive prior training on the task . This corresponds with ﬁndings of psychological studies ( e . g . , Lane et al . 2008 ) that demonstrate the utility of providing model - oriented knowledge before the accom - plishment of learning tasks . These results are very important for education and model - based instruction . The same holds true with regard to studies focused on developmental aspects of modeling . 940 N . M . Seel 123 Developmental differences From its beginning , research on mental models focused on developmental aspects in children’s understanding ( e . g . , Ehrle´n 2008 ) , conceptual change ( e . g . , Smith et al . 1992 ) , and analogical reasoning ( e . g . , Richland et al . 2006 ) . However , recent research on rein - forcement learning has added some remarkable and surprising ﬁndings of developmental differences in model - based learning . For example , Decker et al . ( 2016 ) investigated age - related effects on performing a sequential reinforcement learning task completed by children ( aged 8 – 12 ) , adolescents ( aged 13 – 17 ) , and adults ( aged 18 – 25 ) . Whereas a model - free strategy was apparent across all age groups , a model - based strategy was absent in children , but became evident in adolescents and strengthened in young adults . Comparable age - related differences in accomplishing sequential decisions tasks were also found in other studies with participants in the age from 8 to 25 years ( e . g . , Crone et al . 2008 ; Jones et al . 2014 ) . Data collected from fMRI scanning show changes of the functional connectivity between separable neural systems that underlie age - related differences in reinforcement learning . Obviously , an extensive structural and functional brain development continues throughout adolescence and affects distinctly the capacity of model - based learning that declines in the course of adulthood . For example , ( Eppinger et al . 2013 ) investigated differences in habitual ( i . e . , model - free ) and goal - directed ( i . e . , model - based ) decision - making between younger adults ( aged 20 – 30 ) and older adults ( aged 56 – 78 ) and could observe a substantial decrease in the capacity of model - based learning for older adults . This corresponds with results of psy - chological studies that showed signiﬁcant differences in the acquisition and utilization of mental models between younger and older adults ( e . g . , Gilbert and Rogers 1999 ; Rad - vansky et al . 1996 ) . The developmental changes in model - based learning during adolescence are not only related to differences in neural correlates of internal representations but also to changes in social and affective processing , which results in a greater ﬂexibility of adolescents to adjust their motivations and goal priorities to changing social contexts ( Crone and Dahl 2012 ; Jones et al . 2014 ) . However , adolescents occasionally appear as less open - minded and less successful in learning than children ( e . g . , Gopnik et al . 2015 ) . This obeservation corre - sponds with the ‘‘annealing idea’’ according to which an early period of neural ﬂexibility and plasticity in young children is succeeded by a more narrow and inﬂexible , though more efﬁcient , cognitive processing , such as model - based learning ( Thompson - Schill et al . 2009 ) . Altogether , these studies in the area of reinforcement learning support the necessity to take age - related trends of model - based learning into serious account . In their conjunction , the empirical data point to an age - related inverted U - curve of model - based learning : The increase during adolescence points to the central importance of STEM education for model - based learning because it seems to cover exactly the period of life being favorable for model - based learning . Educational research on model - based learning A strong pedagogical momentum pervades the research on mental models since its beginning and many publications focused on model - based learning in the realm of edu - cation . Correspondingly , several approaches of model - based teaching emerged since the Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 941 123 end of the 1990s ( Ifenthaler et al . 2008 ) , and established a fundamenal basis for instruc - tional research in the realm of STEM education . Buckley ( 2012b ) deﬁnes model - based teaching as ‘‘instruction designed to support the development and evolution of learners’ mental models’’ ( p . 2312 ) . Hence , the learning - dependent progression of mental models comes into effect : ‘‘What is at issue is how such models develop as an individual progresses from novice to expert , and whether there is any pedagogical advantage in providing people with models of tasks they are trying to learn’’ ( Johnson - Laird 1989 , p . 485 ) . In general , the practice of model - based teaching corresponds with the process of model - based learning as depicted in Fig . 2 , and thus , emphasizes the explanatory , predictive and evaluative function of modeling . Some authors ( e . g . , Henderson and Tallman 2006 ; Sch - warz et al . 2009 ) additionally focus on the communicative and diagnostic function of modeling in education . The communicative function enables others to understand and to share the externalization of an individual’s mental model . The diagnostic function of modeling is associated with the development of metacognitive awareness and control ; it comes into play when a cognitive dissonance results from mismatches of prior knowledge with a new mental model . Despite their transient character , mental models are thought having a memory function , too . According to Frigg and Hartmann ( 2006 ) , this function aims at converting knowledge about a model into knowledge about the target domain . In a review of 81 research articles , Campbell et al . ( 2015 ) found clear references to most of these functions of modeling . Additonally , they found also references to experimental modeling as a form of inquiry learning and to cyclic modeling as part of long term projects . In half of the reviewed articles , modeling was associated with the use of computer tech - nology . On the whole , educational researchers seem to agree that modeling should not be considered simply an add - on activitiy to the curriculum . Rather , the curriculum should be reformulated to give primacy to students’ constructions of mental models through an inquiry process of analysis , experimentation , and simulation . According to Johnson - Laird ( 1989 ) , three general procedures of model - based learning and corresponding teaching can be distinguished : ( 1 ) Everyday observations of the outside world ( in the sense of observational and imitational learning ) . This approach corresponds with learning from models . ( 2 ) Other people´s explanations , especially in the classroom . This corresponds with learning about models . ( 3 ) The ability of an individual to construct mental models either from components of world knowledge or from analogous models that the individual already possesses . This approach can be called learning with models and is closely associated with discovery learning . Learning from models ‘‘Most human behavior is learned observationally through modeling : from observing others one forms an idea’’ ( Bandura 1977 , p . 22 ) . Hence , changes of behavior may occur as result of imitation learning . The renowned experiment on the transmission of aggression through the imitation of aggressive role models ( Bandura et al . 1961 ) originated a mainstream of research on imitation - based learning and the emergence of ‘‘mental models of self’’ ( Hart and Fegley 1994 ) . Many studies have focused on the development of aggressive mental models in young children as response to videotaped role models ( e . g . , Farrar et al . 2006 ) . Albeit the general 942 N . M . Seel 123 ﬁnding of a coincidence between involvement in violent video games and reporting greater hostility and aggressive intentions ( e . g . , McGloin et al . 2016 ) , several studies have pro - vided resounding evidence that children’s imitative behavior is primarily affected by the physical prescence and social nature of the model ( e . g . , Nielsen et al . 2008 ) and the children’s ability to integrate different social perspectives ( Xavier et al . 2013 ) . On the whole , the research on imitation learning points to three critical factors ( Over and Car - penter 2012 ) : ( a ) the individual’s goals in the situation , ( b ) the identiﬁcation with the role model , and ( c ) the social pressure within the situation . This can be demonstrated with a study of Werhane et al . ( 2011 ) who replicated the Milgram experiment in which social pressure encourages a climate of obedience beyond moral questions . However , several studies ( e . g . , Bucciarelli and Daniele 2015 ; Roskos - Ewoldsen et al . 2004 ) demonstrate the particular role of mental models in moral reasoning . In accordance with approaches of moral education that emphasize the role of teachers as models for moral development and character formation of students ( e . g . , Abebe and Davis 2004 ) , one can ﬁnd many articles focusing on the ‘‘what’’ and ‘‘why’’ of moral education , but empirical research is sparse . Teachers are aware of being a good role model in interactions with students but research reviews ( e . g . , Sanderse 2013 ; Schuitema et al . 2008 ) show that role modeling in the classroom is rarely used as an explicit teaching method . Modeling as teaching through example is not limited to moral education but can also be found in the areas of speech and discourse processing ( e . g . , Chappell 2012 ) , and especially , in special and curative education ( e . g . , Ingersoll and Schreibman 2006 ) . Another ﬁeld of extensive research on role models is situated in medical education ( e . g . , Haider et al . 2016 ) . In general , this research suggests that role modeling can be an important component of clinical training if it contains the demonstration of skills , provision of feedback , and reﬂective imitation of speciﬁc professional behaviors ( Benbassat 2014 ) . Whereas research on role modeling in conventional classroom teaching is sparse model - based imitation learning has attracted the ﬁeld of technology - enhanced instruction oper - ating with virtual pedagogical agents . Based on the concept of ‘‘computers as social actors’’ ( Reeves and Nass 1996 ) , the social dimension of human interaction with virtual agents advanced to a major topic of educational research on cognitive and social learning . In the past two decades , many research articles have been published , and could be sub - jected to meta - analytical reviews with regard to cognitive , motivational and social effects of virtual pedagogical agents ( e . g . , Heidig and Clarebout 2011 ; Schroeder and Adesope 2014 ) . In general , these reviews show mixed results . According to Schroeder and Adesope , pedagogical agents may facilitate cognitive learning and provide motivational beneﬁts for some populations ( e . g . , K - 12 students ) —under certain conditions . Principally , the same holds true with regard to the effects of pedagogical agents on social learning ( Kra¨mer and Bente 2010 ) . While pedagogical agents are widely discussed in the ﬁeld of educational technology , in artiﬁcial intelligence and informatics the idea of agent - based modeling of human social behavior provides an important research area ( Gilbert 2008 ) . Agent - based modeling cor - responds with a computational model operating with ‘‘agents’’ that represent actors in the social world as well as an ‘‘environment’’ in which the agents act . The agents are pro - grammed to respond to the computational environment and to simulate pro - actively the behavior of individual agents . Agent - based modeling is closely related with simulations in different domains , such as social sciences ( Gilbert and Troitzsch 2005 ) , marketing ( Rand et al . 2011 ) , and even higher education ( Gu and Blackmore 2015 ) , but it does not corre - spond with the educational understanding of model - based imitation learning . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 943 123 Learning about models No understanding without explanation ( Strevens 2013 ) or something like that corresponds with Johnson - Laird’s ( 1989 ) emphasis on other people’s explanations as initial point of model - based learning . In the classroom , explanation is a key activity of teachers to describe why the world works the way it does . Principally , different procedures can be distinguished : ( 1 ) Expository teaching where the teacher provides explanations by means of examples , conceptual models , and analogies ; ( 2 ) discussion - based teaching where explanations result from the verbal interactions between teacher and students ; and ( 3 ) collaboration - based teaching where students work together in groups monitored and guided by the teacher . In practice , these procedures are integrated into a more comprehensive framework of model - based teaching along some basic principles , such as to begin a lesson with a review of previous learning , to provide models , to guide student practice , to check for student understanding , and to allocate scaffolds for solving difﬁcult tasks ( Rosenshine 2012 ) . Expository model - based teaching Since the 1980s , research on expository model - based teaching has focused on the effects of teaching analogies and conceptual models , which are—according to Norman ( 1983 ) and Greca and Moreira ( 2000 ) —devised tools for teaching . Teaching conceptual models cor - responds with Mayer’s ( 1989 ) assumption that students given model - relevant instruction may be more likely to build mental models of what they are studying . Accordingly , the effects of teaching conceptual models on the acquisition of mental models were examined in several studies ( e . g . , Bayman and Mayer 1988 ; Seel et al . 2000 ; Sein and Bostrom 1989 ; Smith et al . 1992 ) . An excellent example of this research is a study of McNeill and Krajcik ( 2008 ) with thirteen teachers and nearly 1200 students . In this study the instructional practice of introducing conceptual models and their effects on the students’ ability to create scientiﬁc explanations were investigated . Videotaped data indicate the effectiveness of four strategies : Modeling , explicating the rationale of scientiﬁc explanation , deﬁning expla - nations , and connecting them to everyday explanation . More speciﬁcally , Lane et al . ( 2008 ) conducted two experiments with undergraduate students to examine the effects of providing model - related information before training on the participants’ ability to control a dynamic system . The results of both experiments show that students who received model - related knowledge before training performed much better at controlling the system than students who received hints or relied on experiences ( i . e . , simply practicing the tasks ) . This superiority of providing model - related instruction before practice corresponds with other studies that point to the semantic sensitivity of learners to model - relevant information ( e . g . , Anzai and Yokoyama 1984 ; Seel and Dinter 1995 ) . However , learning in this manner has also its ‘‘costs’’ , such as slowed retrieval and modest transferability to new tasks ( Do - mangue et al . 2004 ; Seel 1995 ; Shih and Alessi 1993 ) . ‘‘Making science concepts meaningful to students : teaching with analogies ’’ ( Glynn 2008 ) paraphrases the second major line of expository teaching aimed at model - based learning . An implication of Glynn’s teaching - with - analogies model is that teachers have to select appropriate analogs to foster understanding and to capture students’ interests . A review of the literature shows that teaching with analogies is a favored ﬁeld of educational 944 N . M . Seel 123 research since decades ( e . g . , Brown 1992 ; Clement 1993 ) . Teaching with analogies has been studied across several age groups ( from preschool to college ) and different subject - matter domains . As result of a research review , Boerger and Henley ( 1999 ) maintained that ‘‘the best teachers are often those who can effectively use analogies to transmit new information , particularly abstract concepts , to their pupils’’ ( p . 195 ) . Actually , many studies consistently demonstrate the effectiveness of using analogies in teaching . Instructionally designed analogies not only promote a profound understanding of complex scientiﬁc concepts , but it also helps students overcome their misconceptions ( e . g . , Chiu and Lin 2002 ; Stavy 2006 ) and to modify their attitudes towards lessons ( e . g . , Ugur et al . 2012 ) . It seems that students like , pay attention to , and remember the analogies their teachers provide ( Orgill and Bodner 2004 ) . Clearly , the effectiveness of teaching with analogies depends on different conditions . For example , how analogies are presented ( visual or verbal ) seems an important aspect ( Spezzini 2010 ) , but according to Guerra - Ramos ( 2011 ) the most salient aspects of analogies are situated in the context in which they are used to promote understanding . An important contextual aspect refers to the degree to which students are involved in eliciting the relations between analogs . In this regard , the research on teaching with analogies suggests that the more guidance students receive , the more likely they will attend to the relationships in the analogy to be detected ( e . g . , Richland and McDonough 2010 ) . This guidance can take the form of question prompts that explicitly structure the comparison process or of visual aids ( Vendetti et al . 2015 ) . Questions can be asked in the course of discussions to help clarify the process of modeling . Some case studies ( e . g . , Barab et al . 2000 ; Clement and Steinberg 2002 ) illustrate how a ‘‘conversation’’ between teachers and students may unfold on attempts to produce understanding through models . ‘‘A real discussion [ … ] is an interplay of meanings and ideas from both students and the teacher’’ ( Schwarz et al . 2009 , p . 44 ) . The constitutive signiﬁcance of discussion for conceptual understanding is beyond all question in pedagogy ( e . g . , Henning 2008 ) , and regarding model - based learning one can ﬁnd a consensus that challenging students’ misconceptions , referring questions back to students rather than giving answers , and focusing on different opinions and conceptions are adequate teaching strategies to foster discussion - based modeling in the classroom ( e . g . , van Zee et al . 2001 ) . In a case study , Williams and Clement ( 2014 ) could demonstrate the effectiveness of these instructional strategies to encourage students in communicating their ideas while con - structing explanatory models of scientiﬁc concepts . Data from video recordings of whole - class discussions and reﬂective interviews also exposed evidence for dialogic strategies to support cycles of model generation , evaluation , and modiﬁcation . Similarly , Hogan et al . ( 2000 ) examined discourse components , interaction patterns , and complexity of reasoning while 12th graders constructed mental models of the nature of matter on their own and with teacher guidance . Video and audio recordings of peer and teacher - guided small group discussions show that the teachers acted as promoters in discussions by prompting students to extend and clarify their models . Remarkably , teacher - guided discussions revealed higher levels of reasoning and better quality of explanations , whereas peer discussions revealed more exploratory . Collaboration and shared mental models Nevertheless , the notion of learning as a social activity in communities of practice that may leverage model - based learning is very popular in education . The practical idea behind this notion is that through communication individual mental models are exposed and over time Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 945 123 a collective model results that is shared by the group members ( Allard - Poesi 1998 ) . In consequence , collective models are called shared mental models ( Mathieu et al . 2000 ) . This collaboration - based modeling provides a double beneﬁt : First participants can use more than one model , and secondly , the process of model validation occurs with less individual work load . The crux of collaboration is the problem of knowledge convergence deﬁned as ‘‘the process by which two or more people share mutual understanding through social inter - action’’ ( Jeong and Chi 2007 , p . 287 ) . These authors examined the knowledge convergence of twenty pairs of college students who developed mental models of the human circulatory system in collaborative dialogues . Drawings of mental models show that the participants integrated their individual knowledge to form a coherent model of the circulatory system . Lee ( 2015 ) found evidence that in generating knowledge convergence students proposed and shared the most important variable ﬁrst . In the course of continued collaboration , the shared mental models became more reﬁned and expanded as compared to the mental models the students built individually before the start of collaboration . According to a study of Lee and Kim ( 2013 ) , the synergy of collaboration depends on the group members’ shared presuppositions in the initial phase aiming at the identiﬁcation of the problem and the alignment of the individuals’ objectives for the required problem solving process . These and many other studies ( e . g . , Matteson 2010 ; Maynard and Gilson 2013 ) illustrate the effectiveness of shared mental models on learning , decision making and problem solving . Actually , DeChurch and Mesmer - Magnus ( 2010 ) found in a meta - analysis of 23 independent studies statistically signiﬁcant effects of shared mental models on team pro - cesses and performances . On the whole , collaborative - based modeling promotes effectively team reﬂection , communication and planning . However , what are the characteristics of reﬂection , com - munication and argumentation in small groups engaged in model - based learning ? Based on Toulmin’s Argument Pattern ( Toulmin 1958 ) , Park ( 2016 ) examined students’ dialogic argumentations in collaboration - based learning . In a model - based learning environment , 122 high school second graders had to generate competing explanations for a physical phenomenon followed by the opportunity to examine , discuss , and evaluate their expla - nations . Comparisons of two teams show that a great variety of model exploration was necessary to achieve team models . A combination of model - related statements ( e . g . , questions about the model , observations on the model ) , claims based on observations or prior knowledge , and reasoning about rebuttals and backings revealed as an effective pattern in collaboration - based modeling . According to Berland and Reiser ( 2009 ) , con - structing explanations in argumentative discourse serves three purposes : Sensemaking , articulation , and persuasion . The authors examined the challenges of explanation and argumentation in the context of a curriculum which provided students and teachers a framework for constructing and defending scientiﬁc explanations . The results demonstrate that students consistently aimed at sensemaking and articulation of their understandings but they did not aim consistently at a persuasion of others . The effectiveness of collaboration - based modeling depends on exchanges of mutual beliefs of group member , joint attentional engagement , and the alignment of the group members’ objectives for the required learning process ( Kanno et al . 2010 ) . In addition to cognitive processes , which regulate knowledge convergence in groups social framing processes play a signiﬁcant role in the development of shared mental models . By making comparisons with others , teammates seek to maintain social identity ( Breakwell 2001 ; Maynard and Gilson 2013 ) . To share mental models team members must agree upon the task to be solved and the necessary operations . Then they can predict what their teammates 946 N . M . Seel 123 will do in order to meet the task requirements . Hence , similar mental models of teams members facilitate the coordination of activities which may lead to improved team per - formance ( Lim and Klein 2006 ; Mathieu et al . 2000 ) . An important ingredient of model similarity within a team seems dependent on moderating effects of model accuracy as Santos et al . ( 2016 ) could show in their study with 68 teams ( 319 individuals ) operating a management simulation . In case of high accuracy the similarity of shared mental models was not related to team learning , whereas lower accuracy resulted in more similarity of the team members’ individual mental models but also in less engagement in learning . In general , this result suggests that sharing inaccurate mental models may lead to ‘‘closed minds’’ of team members when it comes to considering alternatives . As a result , often bad decisions are made ( Harris and Hartman 2002 ) . Learning with models The idea that individuals have the ability to construct mental models on the base of inquiry or discovery learning pervades the literature since decades ( e . g . , Johnson - Laird 1989 ; Seel and Dinter 1995 ) and corresponds with a major issue education reform since the 1990s ( Furtak et al . 2012 ) . Particularly , current programs of STEM education focus on model - based inquiry learning in education ( National Research Council 2011 ) in order to engage students in developing explanatory models and realizing experimentations to validate the models . Included is also the idea of collaboration with others ( Windschitl et al . 2008 ) , and , in conclusion , model - based inquiry is related with the development of scientiﬁc reasoning ( Gobert et al . 2011 ) . Several frameworks have been developed to design inquiry - oriented learning environ - ments . For example , the Engage - Investigate - Model - Apply ( EIMA ) framework was developed by ( Schwarz and Gwekwerere 2007 ) with the aim to encourage students to create , apply and revise ‘‘scientiﬁc models’’ to improve scientiﬁc reasoning . Similarly , the Practice Framework of Passmore , Stewart and Cartier ( 2009 ) emphasizes the role of models in asking questions , recognizing data patterns , and constructing explanations : ‘‘Instructional activities [ … ] place students at the centre by making them responsible for clarifying their own understanding or providing explanations to others’’ ( Passmore and Svoboda 2012 , p . 1537 ) . Educational researchers have devoted great efforts to investigate model - based inquiry , from Kindergarten ( e . g . , Van Hook and Huziak - Clark 2008 ) to college level ( e . g . , Chiou and Anderson 2010 ) . Actually , the value of the model - based inquiry in education has been veriﬁed in many studies but , as per usual , positive ﬁndings contrast with considerably less positive results . This can be illustrated by some selected examples . In a large study with 1100 middle and high school students , Gobert and Pallant ( 2004 ) implemented a curriculum unit on plate tectonics that provided the students with rich model - based activities in accordance with two principles , namely ‘‘make thinking visible ‘‘and’’ help students learn from one another’’ . A pretest – posttest comparison of content knowledge revealed signiﬁcant gains in understanding the nature of tectonic models . A similar improvement in understanding could also be measured in a study of ( Hale - Hanes 2015 ) with 11th graders who were performing a sequence of hands - on and virtual labo - ratories that progressively became more inquiry - based in the course of teacher - guided discussions of conceptual models . A discussion - based strategy of model - based inquiry was also applied in a study of Maia and Justi ( 2009 ) situated in the chemistry classroom of 14 – 15 years old students . Data collected from videorecords and texts produced by the Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 947 123 students support the effectiveness of particular teacher actions ( e . g . , providing a ‘‘model of modeling’’ diagram ) on the students’ inquiry learning . Several studies focused on the learning - dependent progression of students’ models for understanding in science . Qualitative and quantitative data collected from knowledge tests , interviews , drawings and videorecordings generally demonstrate the effectivencess of K - 12 students’ inquiry activities on the progression of mental models ( e . g . , Herna´ndez et al . 2015 ; Supasorn 2015 ) . Particularly , collaborative inquiry has the potential to foster a signiﬁcant progress of models for understanding ( Sun et al . 2014 ) . Positive effects of inquiry learning on students’ mental models were not only observed on higher K - 12 grades but also in studies with younger students . For example , Hokayem and Schwarz ( 2014 ) investigated 5th graders’ inquiry learning about evaporation and condensation . Qualitative and quantitative data indicated a progress in constructing explanatory models used to predict other physical phenomena but this progress was less sophisticated as assumed by the researchers . In principle , this result corresponds with ﬁndings of a former study of Schwarz et al . ( 2009 ) in which the effectiveness of an instructional sequence containing the steps anchoring phenomena ( in prior knowledge ) , construct a model , empirically validate the model , test the model against other ideas , revise the model , and use the model to predict or explain , was examined successfully . Qualitative data from interview questions and drawings of mental models show that 5th and 6th graders were productively engaged in constructing and revising increasingly accurate explanatory models , and applied them successfully on making predictions for closely related phenomena . Altogether , these and other studies ( e . g . , Cheng et al . 2014 ; Feng 2012 ) support the effectiveness of inquiry learning on the acquisition and utilization of mental models in K - 12 education . However , there are also several experimental and case studies with younger students that show less positive results ( e . g . , Larson et al . 2012 ; Seel and Dinter 1995 ) . Possibly , children and early adolescents may lack the cognitive and metacognitive skills necessary for effective model - based inquiry learning . In consequence , they hang on incorrect mental models that impede a causal analysis necessary in many forms of inquiry learning . For example , Keselman ( 2003 ) and Kuhn ( 2007 ) found that 4th and 6th graders participating in extended instructional interventions improved their causal understanding of multivariable systems but when asked to predict outcomes of various constellations of variables , they did not take into account the effects of all of the causal variables they had identiﬁed . According to Kuhn , childrens’ mental models of multivariable causality remain to deviate from target conceptual models as taught in the classroom . Other studies indicate that the learning - dependent progression of mental models often corresponds with model accretion only , and implies the pertaining to an initial model ( e . g . , Dolphin and Benoit 2016 ) . Finally , com - parisons of expository teaching versus guided - discovery learning in the science classroom occasionally showed that students who receive explicit instruction in explaining physical phenomena and in making predictions based on mutiple factors outperformed students who participated in guided - discovery learning ( Keselman 2003 ; Seel and Dinter 1995 ) . In a more recent study , Ifenthaler and Seel ( 2011 ) examined the effects of different conditions of self - guided discovery learning on college students’ performance in solving inductive reasoning tasks . Throughout a series of forty logical tasks the learning - dependent progression was measured ten times . In one treatment of self - guided discovery learning , the strategy for solving the tasks changed at every measurement point , whereas in the other treatment of self - guided discovery the strategy did not vary . A third condition realized a scaffolding - based strategy ( i . e . , providing feedback to the students ) with no variation of the solution strategy . On the whole , no signiﬁcant differences were found for the overall task solution scores between the three experimental conditions . However , the analysis of results 948 N . M . Seel 123 at the different measurement points indicate interesting differences . For example , at the beginning of the learning process the scaffolding condition ( i . e . , feedback ) was very effective and the learners were able to solve the task signiﬁcantly better than students who did not receive feedback . At the following nine points of measurement only a few sig - niﬁcant differences between the experimental groups could be assessed . Throughout the course of learning , the varying condition of self - guided discovery revealed superior to the other conditions . That means , having learned different strategies to solve logical tasks produces better performances after a relatively short learning period . These results could be replicated in another study of Ifenthaler and Seel ( 2013 ) , and they also correspond with ﬁndings of Seel et al . ( 2006 ) who have pointed out that within any given domain of activity , the richness and ﬂexibility of learners’ mental models inﬂuence the quality of the task performance . However , these experimental results contradict those studies which showed poor results for guided - discovery strategies compared with expository teaching . Most probably , the differences go back to age - related conditions of model - based learning as described above . At ﬁrst glance , the superiority of expository model - based teaching in the realm of K - 12 education seems to conﬁrm the contention of Kirschner et al . ( 2006 ) that minimally guided instruction is less effective and less efﬁcient than instruction that places a strong emphasis on guidance of the students’ learning processes . However , in view of those studies which show the effectiveness of inquiry learning in K12 - education , the general attack of Kirschner et al . on ‘‘constructivist , discovery , problem - based , experiential , and inquiry - based teaching’’ is not sustainable ( see Hmelo - Silver et al . 2007 ) . The issue is not to ‘‘to guide or not to guide’’ but rather how to efﬁciently support students in model - based inquiry learning . Instructional and technological support of model - based learning Albeit the fact that the design of model - based instruction entails considerable changes in classroom management practices ( Harris and Rooks 2010 ) , both expository and inquiry - oriented strategies of instruction have the potential to improve model - based learning but they require different roles of teachers and students . Correspondingly , several case studies have focused on teachers’ comprehension of model - based learning and their readiness to implement inquiry - oriented instruction ( e . g . , Dass et al . 2015 ; Van Hook et al . 2009 ) . In general , these studies show that instructional frameworks , such as EIMA , can be beneﬁcial for helping teachers attend to important components of model - based learning ( Schwarz and Gwekwerere 2007 ) . More speciﬁcally , Lim ( 2004 ) analyzed some representative cases in the context of teacher professional development and identiﬁed several issues of designing effective learning environments for model - based inquiry , such as guidance through a human facilitator , scaffolding the inquiry process ( e . g . , asking the right questions ) , providing visual representations as well as coordinating resources , tools and a community of inquiry practice . As a matter of fact , instructional interventions aimed at model - based inquiry must be concrete and speciﬁc as a study of Hogan ( 1999 ) suggests . In this study , the effects of an intervention called Thinking aloud Together on 8th graders’ collaborative construction of mental models and metacognitive knowledge about collaborative reasoning were examined in a 12 - week science unit . Compared to students in control classrooms , students who received the intervention improved their metacognitive knowledge about collaborative reasoning but they did not differ in applying the acquired knowledge on the construction of Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 949 123 mental models . Talking about modeling is not enough . To become successful , it must be supported with appropriate scaffolds . Scaffolded model - based learning In the educational literature , the importance of scaffolding for inquiry learning is undis - puted , and with regard to STEM education , Wojnowski and Pea ( 2014 ) argue that ‘‘scaffolding speciﬁc scientiﬁc practices such as creating and testing scientiﬁc models and constructing scientiﬁc explanations’’ are ‘‘important approaches to classroom inquiry’’ ( p . 39 ) . In its original use ( Bruner 1975 ) , scaffolding was related to personal interactions between an instructor and a student with the aim to provide the student with sufﬁcient support to progress in learning . To date , the notion of scaffolding is used to describe assistance in learning provided by teachers , software tools , curricula , and other resources ( Puntambekar and Hu¨bscher 2005 ) . A variety of supports ( e . g . , prompts , questions , hints , stories , conceptual models , visualizations ) should assist the students’ progress through learning tasks ( Hogan and Pressley 1997 ) . Depending on the instructional method , the techniques of scaffolding may be integrated or used individually . In each case , the goal consists of offering just enough assistance to guide the students toward independence and self - regulation of learning . In consequence , scaffolding is fading when students become less dependent on instructional support to accomplish learning tasks . Numerous studies show that teachers can successfully scaffold inquiry learning by using question prompts and peer interactions to encourage students to express their own ideas during reﬂective discussions ( e . g . , Bjønness and Kolstø 2015 ; van Zee et al . 2001 ) . On the whole , research indicates that guided discussions , questions to help students clarifying their ideas and exploring alternative points of view encourage inquiry learning and metacog - nitive control ( Jin et al . 2016 ) . Beyond extensive educational research on general aspects of scaffolding , some studies have highlighted how teachers’ questions and prompts can foster the students’ model - based learning ( e . g . , Maia and Justi 2009 ; White and Frederiksen 1998 ) . Evidently , scaffolds provided by teachers support model - based learning when they help students to understand the practice of modeling ( Fretz et al . 2002 ) . Questions asked to prompt the students to think in certain ways can impact the dynamics of model con - struction and modiﬁcation ( e . g . , Tien et al . 1999 ; Corpuz and Rebello 2011 ) . This is also the result of several investigations of Clement who can be credited for being among the ﬁrst to identify guidelines for supporting learners during inquiry learning with modelling ( e . g . , Clement 2008 ) . In a recent qualitative study , Williams and Clement ( 2014 ) focused on how teachers can support students in constructing and reﬁning mental models for scientiﬁc concepts during the instructional process . Based on the concept of GEM ( i . e . , model Generation , Evaluation , and Modiﬁcation ) cycles , Willams and Clement analyzed two experienced teachers with regard to their discussion strategies . The data collected from 30 h of viderecordings show that both teachers attempted to support students’ generation of explanatory models starting from their prior knowledge about the concepts being explored . It could also be observed that the teachers acted successfully to scaffold students’ repeated evaluation and modiﬁcation of their models . The ﬁndings of this case study correspond with the large - scale study of Gobert and Pallant ( 2004 ) in which middle and high school students were provided with scaffolds to construct and revise their mental models about plate tectonics as well as to reify what they have learned by reﬂecting on the beneﬁts of the revised explanatory models compared to their initial models . In this study , teachers scaf - folded successfully their students’ knowledge acquisition from models through question 950 N . M . Seel 123 prompts , and they also guided the learners to pose their own questions with the aim to improve their conceptual understanding , reﬂect on the own understanding , and to evaluate and critique their peers’ models . In their sum , the results of the reported studies correspond with the scaffolded knowl - edge integration instructional framework ( KIE ) , which involves four components ( Linn 2000 ) : First , instruction should ‘‘make thinking visible’’ to students by means of illustra - tion . Secondly , instruction should make science accessible by identifying models for sci - entiﬁc phenomena that make sense to students and can be connected with prior knowledge . Thirdly , instruction should provide social support to encourage collaborative learning . Finally , students should become autonomous learners who develop metacognitive skills for revising their mental models . Notably , the framework of KIE has been developed as a central part of the Computer as Learning Partner project , and aims at the design of technology - enhanced learning environments carefully equipped with scaffolds to enhance learning and problem solving . Their effectiveness has been investigated in a variety of studies . For example , Buckley et al . ( 2004 ) implemented BioLogica TM , an interactive envi - ronment for learning genetics , in several high schools and found signiﬁcant effects of assessment - oriented scaffolds on students’ performances and the progression of mental models . In accordance with the cognitive apprenticeship approach , Sandoval and Reiser ( 2004 ) examined the effects of epistemic scaffolds on 9th graders’ inquiry learning in two biology courses by using the software ExplanationConstructor . Speciﬁcally , the students’ inquiry learning was posed as an effort to answer particular questions aiming at causal explanations . Additionally , teachers continuously encouraged the students to use evidence for support their explanations . The ﬁndings of both studies document the general effec - tiveness of designed tools on students’ inquiry learning but they also highlight the necessity of additional social scaffolds provided by teachers . In a mixed - method study , Azevedo et al . ( 2011 ) examined the effectiveness of three scaffolding conditions in facilitating undergraduate students’ learning about the circulatory system and the deployment of metacognitive processes . An adaptive content and process scaffolding ( ACPS ) condition was contrasted with an adaptive process scaffolding ( APS ) condition and a control condition without scaffolding . The product data ( i . e . , the students’ mental models of the circulatory system ) revealed that the ACPS condition outperformed both the APS and control condition in gains of declarative knowledge and in qualitative shifts of the emerging mental models . Data collected from verbal protocols show that students in the ACPS condition utilized only a few regulatory processes and relied on the tutor’s scaffolds to regulate their learning whereas students in the APS condition regulated their learning by using several monitoring activities and learning strategies . As expected , students of the control group were less effective at regulating their learning and used fewer self - regulatory processes during the activity . In general , the ﬁndings reported by Azevedo et al . correspond with the results of the study of Seel and Dinter ( 1995 ) in which problem - oriented prompts ( i . e . , content and process scaffolds ) outperformed result - oriented prompts ( content scaffolds only ) in a hypermedia environment designed for discovery learning of 5th and 9th graders in physics . Technology support of model - based learning Since decades , a recurrent theme in the educational discussion about model - based learning consists in the postulation to make thinking visible by means of visualizations which include graphical representations ( e . g . , drawings and diagrams ) or , more advanced , Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 951 123 computer - based animations , simulations , and virtual realities . ‘‘If students are presented with visualizations and asked to think about the material at a deeper level [ … ] , they are more likely to construct mental models with which they can consider an array of scientiﬁc issues’’ ( Rapp 2005 , p . 54 ) . The teacher’s use of visual representations is one option to advance model - based learning , the other option consists in encouraging the students to generate visual representations of their mental models ( Chang et al . 2014 ) . Teachers’ use of visual representations in the classroom is well documented ( e . g . , Cook 2011 ; Gilbert et al . 2008 ) , and many empirical studies demonstrate the effectiveness of visualizations on model - based learning ( e . g . , Davies et al . 2005 ; Sharp et al . 1995 ) . In considering visualizations as scaffolds , the question is how much guidance is necessary for interpreting visualizations . To answer this question , Ryoo and Linn ( 2013 ) compared designs of guidance to support students while interacting with dynamic visualizations of complex scientiﬁc phenomena in inquiry instruction . A sample of 332 students ( 7th grade ) were randomly assigned to two different conditions of guidance : While interacting with a dynamic visualization of energy transformation , one group of students got guidance in form of text explanations , whereas the other group of students had to generate their own explanations about key concepts . Both reading and generating explanations helped stu - dents’ understanding of the visualization , but generating their own explanations was more beneﬁcial . That means , well - designed visualizations do not need much guidance to be understood by students ( see also Sanger et al . 2001 ; Tasker and Dalton 2006 ) . An alternative approach of using visualizations to facilitate model - based learning consists in the learners’ active use of visual tools to support the construction , communi - cation , revision , and application of mental models . Since decades , pictorial representa - tions , such as drawings and concept maps , were continuously used as a method to assess mental models and to promote model - based learning across K - 12 and undergraduate classes ( e . g . , Glynn 1997 ; Gray 1990 ; Schwarz et al . 2009 ) . Altogether , these studies show that self - made drawings are effective in supporting model - based learning . Advances in graphical technology make it possible for learners to create their own dynamic visualizations of their mental models . The effectiveness of graphical technologies to reveal model - based learning has been studied across different age groups of students . Exemplarily , van Joolingen et al . ( 2015 ) examined model - based learning with a sample of 247 children ( aged 7 – 15 ) who used the modeling system SimSketch to create freehand drawings of the solar system . Similarly , the visualization tool eChem was effectively used by 11th graders in a study of Wu et al . ( 2001 ) to build molecular models , and ( Cheng et al . 2014 ) examined how students use a drawing tool to visualize their mental models of chemical reactions processes . In a former study , ( Chang et al . 2010 ) applied Chemation , a learner - centered animation tool , to investigate whether the understanding of the particulate nature of matter by 8th graders was improved by self - made molecular animations of chemical phenomena . All these studies show that students who created dynamic visual - izations outperformed students who created static visualizations of mental models . Depending on the level of learner control and persistance in task accomplishment , com - puter - based dynamic visualizations have the potential to open up various exploration possibilities ( Wilkerson - Jerde et al . 2015 ) . This applies also to computer technologies which make it possible for students to manipulate three - dimensional virtual models . Correspondent research has focused on the effectiveness of operating with concrete physical and virtual models , especially in chemistry education ( e . g . , Dori and Barak 2001 ) . Excellent examples of this kind of research have been provided by Hegarty and her team . For instance , Stull et al . ( 2013 ) developed a virtual modeling system and compared the representational competence of students using a virtual model with the competence of 952 N . M . Seel 123 those students who used concrete scale models for accomplishing learning tasks of organic chemistry . Overall , virtual models were comparably effective as hand - held models in promoting learning but a greater efﬁciency with virtual models was observed when stu - dents matched diagrams and models . This efﬁciency also transferred to the later use of concrete physical models . In more recent studies ( Stull and Hegarty 2016 ; Stull et al . 2016 ) , this result could be replicated . Evidently , manipulating virtual 3D models can facilitate the understanding and use of these representations . Technologically even more advanced are virtual reality interfaces that combine a 3D model of a real situation with a visualization of virtual actions . The use of virtual realities in education has been propagated since the 1990s ( e . g . , Dede et al . 1999 ) but due to substantial constraints on time and money the use of virtual realities in education is less common than in commercial games . Nevertheless , one can ﬁnd easily good examples of using dynamic educational virtual environments in physics and mathematics education ( e . g . , Kontogeorgiou et al . 2008 ; McGrath et al . 2010 ) . These examples show that to reach the full potential of virtual realities , the learners must not only become immersed in the virtual reality but appropriate scaffolding must also be provided to guide effectively the students’ interactions with the virtual environment ( Wieman and Perkins 2006 ) . However , in contrast to the relatively large amount of research on the effectiveness of virtual realities in educational settings ( Merchant et al . 2014 ) , only few studies have examined their impact on the acquisition and utilization of mental models ( e . g . , Shirehjini et al . 2016 ; Zhang et al . 2008 ) . These few studies show that virtual realities have the potential to impact the creation of models for understanding due to the possibility of simulations . Modeling and simulation in K - 12 education Since the 1990s plenty of research has focused on the use of computer - based simulations to affect the development of mental models ( see for an overview : Landriscina 2013 ) . The basic idea of computer simulations is to ‘‘imitate’’ the processes of complex dynamic systems and related thought models . In education , computer simulations are used as tools to provide students with oppor - tunities to re - create and visualize phenomena and processes of the real world . Ideally , computer simulations are ﬂexible , dynamic , and interactive , and encourage model - based inquiry by altering values of variables and observing their effects ( Milrad et al . 2002 ; Sokolowski and Banks 2009 ) . For some authors ( e . g . , Tversky et al . 2002 ) interactivity is the most important ingredient of simulations to improve learning because it provides students a sense of control and ownership of their exploration and discovery . The use of computer - based technology in K - 12 classrooms is well established , and various commercial simulation tools are available , such as GeoGebra , Modellus , Mathe - matica , Evolve , Layered Earth Geology or the PhET collection of the University of Colarado ( https : / / phet . colorado . edu / ) . Not only phenomena of the physical world , such as the formation of stars and galaxies , can be explored by means of computer simulations but also phenomena of the social world , such as the outbreak of wars and moral behavior as well as decision making in organizations ( Gould et al . 2007 ; Gustafsson and Peterson 2012 ; Liebrand et al . 1998 ) . In addition to pre - designed modeling tools , such as PhET sims or GeoGebra , experienced instructors and students can also use programing tools , such as Matlab or XPP for the creation of mathematical models and simulations ( Ermentrout 2002 ; Lee et al . 2015 ) . However , the application of these tools usually exceeds the capabilities of teachers and students in the realm of K - 12 education . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 953 123 A large body of research exists on computer simulations in education . Several reviews ( e . g . , Scalise et al . 2011 ; Smetana and Bell 2012 ) report mixed results on the effect of simulations on enhancing students’ learning in K - 12 education . On the one side , numerous studies demonstrate the effectiveness of computer simulations on student learning com - pared to traditional instruction ( e . g . , Bowen and Deluca 2015 ; Trundle and Bell 2010 ) . On the other side , several studies show that computer - based simulations might be appealing to students but are not more beneﬁcial in understanding complex concepts than traditional methods of teaching , such as using physical models ( e . g . , Edsall and Wentz 2007 ) . Based on the outcomes of 61 empirical studies , Smetana and Bell ( 2012 ) concluded that ‘‘as with any other educational tool , the effectiveness of computer simulations is dependent upon the ways in which they are used [ … ] Computer simulations are most effective when they ( a ) are used as supplements ; ( b ) incorporate high - quality support structures ; ( c ) encourage student reﬂection ; and ( d ) promote cognitive dissonance’’ ( p . 1337 ) . Similarly , D’Angelo et al . ( 2013 ) summarize the results of their meta - analysis that computer - based simulations may have a positive effect on K - 12 students’ performance— in some settings and under some conditions . Particularly , scaffolding , feedback , and speciﬁc group structures for collaborative learning are important instructional mediators to intensify the effects of simulations . A correpondent picture report Cook et al . ( 2013 ) as result of their meta - analysis in the realm of medical education , according to which several instructional design features , such as repetitive and distributive practice , interactivity , and group learning intensify the effects of computer - based simulations on learning . In their sum , the reviews and meta - analyses point out that scaffolding and guidance are necessary to help students in developing the necessary background knowledge and skills to explore the scientiﬁc phe - nomena in question . With a proper balance between the level of necessary guidance and the students’ capability to use computer simulations on their own , simulation programs provide ﬂexible tools for model - based learning . Creating executable computer models by means of simulation software might be a powerful approach to learning , but students can get overwhelmed by the inherent com - plexities of the task ( Adams et al . 2008 ) and eventually fail to develop adequate mental models . Based on this assumption , ( Kopainsky et al . 2015 ) investigated the effect of a prior exploration strategy which allowed learners to manipulate a simulation model and see the results in practice mode before managing a similar simulation in a more ﬁnal mode . In an experiment with college students , this strategy revealed effective with regard to the par - ticipants’ performance and understanding of the simulated phenomenon but only to a limited degree . In a follow - up study , Kopainsky and Alessi ( 2015 ) found that model transparency ( i . e . , presenting the internal structure of a model ) turned out to be an effective prior exploration strategy to improve the students’ understanding of the underlying model . ( Mulder et al . 2016 ) used partially worked - out models to reveal the overall structure of models embedded in simulations , and to enable students to create better mental models . This hypothesis was tested in high school biology classes where students should develop their own models of the human glucose - insulin regulatory system . Students either received support in the form of a partial model which outlined the basic structure of the glucose - insulin system , an extended partial model that additionally contained a set of variables students could use to complete the model , or no support ( control condition ) . Consistent with the expectations , the increase of knowledge in the two model conditions outperformed the control condition . Students in both partial model conditions also ran their model more often to check its accuracy , and eventually , they built better models than students from the control condition . Evidently , more extensive support enhanced knowledge acquisition , model quality , and model testing activities . Alternatively , Wijnen et al . ( 2015 ) investigated 954 N . M . Seel 123 the effectiveness of simulating a predeﬁned model and constructing a model in comparison with learning from a model , which contained errors to be corrected by the students in order for the simulation to generate correct outcomes . As predicted by the researchers , the participants ( high - school students aged 14 – 17 ) performed successfully the simulation of glucose – insulin regulation but learning from erroneous models enhanced the acquisition of domain - speciﬁc knowledge better than running a simulation or constructing an own model . The relation between the use of computer simulations and mental models is twofold . On the one hand , the successful use of a simulation presupposes an ‘‘a priori’’ mental model in order to understand what happens when the simulation runs . On the other hand , the computer simulation can be internalized to substitute a mental model . However , limitations of the computer simulation may translate into constraints in thinking when using the internalized mental model . A few studies have investigated the effects of computer models and simulations on the development of mental models . For example , Darabi et al . ( 2009 ) examined the progression of mental models of engineering students throughout a computer simulation of a chemical plant requiring complex cognitive skills of troubleshooting . The progression of the participants’ mental models were assessed before and after three instructional phases : supportive information presentation , problem solving practice , and ﬁnal performance . The results indicate a sig - niﬁcant change in mental models after receiving the supportive information but only little changes after practice and ﬁnal performance . Similarly , Swaak et al . ( 1998 ) examined the effects of model progression ( i . e . , gradual increase of model complexity ) and exercises within a computer simulation on oscillation . Special attention was given to assessing intuitive knowledge as compared to deﬁnitional knowledge . Three experimental conditions were created : one group of learners used both model progression and exercises , another group was only supported with model progression , and the third group served as control group with no treatment . Whereas a small gain in deﬁnitional knowledge could be mea - sured for the three conditions , the gain in intuitive knowledge was considerable in the experimental groups , especially in favour of the ﬁrst condition . In series of experiments with high school students , Mulder , Lazonder and de Jong investigated the effectiveness of different conditions of model progression while exploring a complex computer simulation . In one study , ( Mulder et al . 2011 ) compared a model order progression with model elaboration progression . The ﬁrst condition asked the students to build increasingly speciﬁc models , whereas in the second condition the participants had to build models for increasingly elaborated simulations provided in three subsequent instructional phases . Consistent with the expectations , both conditions of model progres - sion enhanced students’ task performance compared with a control group , but the model order processing revealed superior to the elaboration condition . In other studies ( Mulder et al . 2014 , 2015 ) , high - school students were offered a simulation of an electrical circuit and a modeling tool and the condition of model progression was contrasted with supporting the learning process through worked examples . In general , both interventions enhanced the students’ inquiry performances . Although , only few students were able to create a model reﬂecting a full understanding of the electrical circuit , model progression as well as heuristic worked examples have the potential to improve students’ inquiry learning . In sum , learning from computer models is a promising approach . Principally , modeling tools and construction kits of dynamic simulations can be integrated in teacher - centered as well as student - centered approaches of education to support collaborative discovery learning ( Bu and Hohenwarter 2015 ; Hannaﬁn and Scott 2001 ; Milrad et al . 2002 ) . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 955 123 Concluding remarks Model - based learning is both a new and old paradigm of psychology and education ( see for an overview , Seel 2014 ) . In pedagogy we can ﬁnd this idea since decades and various conceptions of model - based learning have been developed in the ﬁelds of mathematics , physics or geography education aiming at guided discovery and exploratory learning . Traditionally , there are two major approaches of theory and research on model - based learning : A functional - pragmatic approach and a constructivist approach , which is closely related with the theory of mental models that emerged in the 1980s as a central theoretical construct to capture situated cognition and pragamatic reasoning . Actually , there are cognitive psychologists who consider mental models as the best organized representations among learning results ( Glaser 1990 ) . More speciﬁcally , it has been argued that compre - hension and reasoning in speciﬁc situations ( e . g . , in schools and real - life situations ) nec - essarily involve the use of mental models of different qualities ( Greeno 1989 ) . Most people can cope effectively with a complex phenomenon by constructing and maintaining a mental model that provides them with enough understanding of phenomenon to control it . In this sense , the notion of mental models is interrelated with the investigation of problem solving in complex systems , which provides a unique challenge for research in the ﬁeld of learning and instruction . Consequently , mental models and model building activities are closely related with the discussion on higher - order instructional objectives concerning problem - solving and discovery learning in the classroom ( e . g . , Lesh and Doerr 2000 ) . A recommendation often made in recent learning theory and research is to involve students , either individually or in groups , in actively working on challenging problems . This article aimed at the derivation of theoretically sound and empirically conﬁrmed assumption with regard the effectiveness of model - based learning on problem solving within educational settings , such as K - 12 STEM education . When we take the major ﬁelds of research on model - based learning into closer consideration , we ﬁnd a tension between strong theoretical assumptions that lead to precise conclusions and weaker assumptions that lead to less precise conclusions . Strong assumptions are helpful when the assumptions apply , but they often do not apply , which then invalidates the conclusions prescribed by the theory . Actually , due to the power of mental model theory related research provides evidence for several strong assumptions with regard to education in general , and to STEM education , in particular . First , model - based reasoning becomes gradually automatic with continuous training due to the fact that cognitive load does not impair model - based learning if students receive prior training on the task . Secondly , research in the area of reinforcement learning demonstrates strong age - related trends of model - based learning that must be taken into serious account . Actually , an age - related inverted U - curve of model - based learning can be derived and leads to the conclusion that adolescence might be the best phase of life to improve the capacity of model - based learning . This correlates with current programs of STEM education . However , students need help to develop powerful models in STEM . This is the quintessence of applied research on model - based learning , even though it provides weaker assumptions than basic research on mental models . Although weaker theoretical assumptions might be less helpful in creating speciﬁc instructional systems to foster model - based learning , they are more generally applicable and less likely to be invalidated . This holds true with regard to three domains of educa - tional research referred to as social learning from models , learning about models within the realm of expository and inquiry learning with models . Indeed , an abundance of studies demonstrates the effectiveness of social role models , of providing students with conceptual 956 N . M . Seel 123 and analogical models and with tools to support inquiry - oriented learning and problem solving . On the whole , applied research on model - based learning suggests the necessity of a careful design of technology - enhanced environments that can use the power of computer simulations and tools of visualization to foster modeling processes and outcomes . Albeit the quantity and high quality of recent educational research on model - based learning , the lack of a comprehensive and integrative theoretical framework leads only to weaker assumptions concerning the instructional and technological support to model - based learning . Thus , the development of an integrative theory of model - oriented instructions can be considered as a major challenge for educational psychology and instructional design . Compliance with ethical standards Conﬂict of interest The author declares that he has no conﬂict of interest . References Abebe , S . , & Davis , W . ( 2004 ) . Transcendence in the public schools : The teacher as moral model . Journal of College and Character . doi : 10 . 2202 / 1940 - 1639 . 1389 . Adams , W . K . , et al . ( 2008 ) . A study of educational simulations Part I—engagement and learning . Journal of Interactive Learning Research , 19 ( 3 ) , 397 – 419 . Allard - Poesi , F . ( 1998 ) . Representations and inﬂuence processes in groups : Towards a socio - cognitive perspective on cognition in organization . Scandinavian Journal of Management , 14 ( 4 ) , 395 – 420 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1978 ) . Arguments concerning representations for mental imagery . Psychological Review , 85 ( 4 ) , 249 – 277 . Anzai , Y . , & Yokoyama , T . ( 1984 ) . Internal models in physics problem solving . Cognition and Instruction , 1 , 397 – 450 . Appelbaum , L . G . , et al . ( 2014 ) . The dynamics of proactive and reactive cognitive control processes in the human brain . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 26 ( 5 ) , 1021 – 1038 . Azevedo , R . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Adaptive content and process scaffolding : A key to facilitating students’ self - regulated learning with hypermedia . Psychological Test and Assessment Modeling , 53 ( 1 ) , 106 – 140 . Bandura , A . ( 1977 ) . Social learning theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Bandura , A . , Ross , D . , & Ross , S . A . ( 1961 ) . Transmission of aggression through imitation of aggressive models . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 63 ( 3 ) , 575 – 582 . Barab , S . A . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Virtual solar system project : Building understanding through model building . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 37 ( 7 ) , 719 – 756 . Bayman , P . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1988 ) . Using conceptual models to teach BASIC computer programming . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 , 291 – 298 . Benbassat , J . ( 2014 ) . Role modeling in medical education : The importance of a reﬂective imitation . Aca - demic Medicine , 89 ( 4 ) , 550 – 554 . Berland , L . , & Reiser , B . ( 2009 ) . Making sense of argumentation and explanation . Science Education , 93 ( 1 ) , 26 – 55 . Betsch , T . , & Fiedler , K . ( 1999 ) . Understanding conjunction effects in probability judgment : The role of implicit mental models . European Journal of Social Psychology , 29 , 75 – 93 . Bjønness , B . , & Kolstø , S . D . ( 2015 ) . Scaffolding open inquiry : How a teacher provides students with structure and space . Nordic Studies in Science Education , 11 ( 3 ) , 223 – 237 . Boerger , M . A . , & Henley , T . B . ( 1999 ) . The use of analogy in giving instructions . The Psychological Record , 49 ( 2 ) , 193 – 209 . Bowen , B . , & Deluca , W . ( 2015 ) . Comparing traditional versus alternative sequencing of instruction when using simulation modeling . Journal of STEM Education , 16 ( 1 ) , 5 – 10 . Braver , T . S . ( 2012 ) . The variable nature of cognitive control : A dual mechanisms framework . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 16 , 106 – 113 . Breakwell , G . M . ( 2001 ) . Mental models and social representations of hazards : The signiﬁcance of identity processes . Journal of Risk Research , 4 , 341 – 351 . Brewer , W . F . ( 1987 ) . Schemas versus mental models in human memory . In P . Morris ( Ed . ) , Modelling cognition ( pp . 187 – 197 ) . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Brown , D . E . ( 1992 ) . Using examples and analogies to remediate misconceptions in physics : Factors inﬂuencing conceptual change . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 29 , 17 – 34 . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 957 123 Bruner , J . S . ( 1975 ) . From communication to language : A psychological perspective . Cognition , 3 , 255 – 287 . Bryce , C . M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Exploring models in the biology classroom . The American Biology Teacher , 78 ( 1 ) , 35 – 42 . Bu , L . , & Hohenwarter , M . ( 2015 ) . Modeling for dynamic mathematics . Toward technology - integrated aesthetic experiences in school mathematics . In X . Ge , D . Ifenthaler & J . M . Spector ( Eds . ) , Emerging technologies for STEAM education . Full steam ahead ( pp . 355 – 381 ) . Cham : Springer . Bucciarelli , M . , & Daniele , M . ( 2015 ) . Reasoning in moral conﬂicts . Thinking & Reasoning , 21 ( 3 ) , 265 – 294 . Buckley , B . C . ( 2000 ) . Interactive multimedia and model - based learning in biology . International Journal of Science Education , 22 ( 9 ) , 895 – 935 . Buckley , B . C . ( 2012a ) . Model - based learning . In N . M . Seel ( Ed . ) , Enclopedia of the sciences of learning ( Vol . 5 , pp . 2300 – 2303 ) . New York : Springer . Buckley , B . C . ( 2012b ) . Model - based teaching . In N . M . Seel ( Ed . ) , Enclopedia of the sciences of learning ( Vol . 5 , pp . 2312 – 2315 ) . New York : Springer . Buckley , B . C . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Model - based teaching and learning with BioLogica TM : What do they learn ? How do they learn ? How do we know ? Journal of Science Education and Technology , 13 ( 1 ) , 23 – 41 . Butcher , K . R . ( 2006 ) . Learning from text with diagrams : Promoting mental model development and inference generation . Journal of Educational Psychology , 98 , 182 – 197 . Campbell , T . , et al . ( 2015 ) . A review of modeling pedagogies : Pedagogical functions , discursive acts , and technology in modeling instruction . Eurasia Journal of Mathematics , Science & Technology Educa - tion , 11 ( 1 ) , 159 – 176 . Can˜as , J . J . , Bajo , M . T . , & Gonzalvo , P . ( 1994 ) . Mental models and computer programming . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 40 ( 5 ) , 795 – 811 . Chang , H . Y . , Quintana , C . , & Krajcik , J . S . ( 2010 ) . The impact of designing and evaluating molecular animations on how well middle school students understand the particulate nature of matter . Science Education , 94 ( 1 ) , 73 – 94 . Chang , H . Y . , Quintana , C . , & Krajcik , J . ( 2014 ) . Using drawing technology to assess students’ visual - izations of chemical reaction processes . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 23 ( 3 ) , 355 – 369 . Chappell , P . ( 2012 ) . A socio - cultural account of the role of imitation in instructed second language learning . Journal of Linguistics and Language Teaching , 3 ( 1 ) , 61 – 91 . Cheng , M . F . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Developing explanatory models of magnetic phenomena through model - based inquiry . Journal of Baltic Science Education , 13 ( 3 ) , 351 – 360 . Chiou , G . L . , & Anderson , O . R . ( 2010 ) . A study of undergraduate students understanding of heat con - duction based on mental model theory and an ontology - process analysis . Science Education , 94 ( 5 ) , 825 – 854 . Chiu , M . H . , & Lin , J . W . ( 2002 ) . Using multiple analogies for investigating fourth graders’ conceptual change in electricity . Chinese Journal of Research in Science Education , 10 , 109 – 134 . Clement , J . ( 1993 ) . Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students´ preconceptions in physics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 , 1241 – 1257 . Clement , J . ( 2000 ) . Model based learning as a key research area for science education . International Journal of Science Education , 22 ( 9 ) , 1041 – 1053 . Clement , J . J . , & Steinberg , M . S . ( 2002 ) . Step - wise evolution of mental models of electric circuits : A ‘‘learning - aloud’’ case study . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 11 ( 4 ) , 389 – 452 . Clement , J . ( 2008 ) . Creative model construction in scientists and students : The role of imagery , analogy , and mental simulation . Dordrecht , NL : Springer . Cook , M . ( 2011 ) . Teachers’ use of visual representations in the science classroom . Science Education International , 22 ( 3 ) , 175 – 184 . Cook , D . A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Comparative effectiveness of instructional design features in simulation - based education : Systematic review and meta - analysis . Medical Teacher , 35 , e867 – e898 . Corpuz , E . D . , & Rebello , N . S . ( 2011 ) . Investigating students’ mental models and knowledge construction of microscopic friction . II . Implications for curriculum design and development . Physical Review Special Topics – Physics Education Research . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 7 . 020103 . Craik , K . J . W . ( 1943 ) . The nature of explanation . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Crone , E . A . , & Dahl , R . E . ( 2012 ) . Understanding adolescence as a period of social - affective engagement and goal ﬂexibility . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 13 ( 9 ) , 636 – 650 . Crone , E . A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Neural mechanisms supporting ﬂexible performance adjustment during devel - opment . Cognitive , Affective , and Behavioral Neuroscience , 8 ( 2 ) , 165 – 177 . D’Angelo , C . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Review of computer - based simulations for STEM learning in K - 12 education . Menlo Park , CA : SRI International . 958 N . M . Seel 123 Darabi , A . A . , Nelson , D . W . , & Seel , N . M . ( 2009 ) . Progression of mental models throughout the phases of a computer - based instructional simulation : Supportive information , practice , and performance . Com - puters in Human Behavior , 25 ( 3 ) , 723 – 730 . Dass , K . , Head , M . L . , & Rushton , G . T . ( 2015 ) . Building an understanding of how model - based inquiry is implemented in the high school chemistry classroom . Journal of Chemical Education Research , 92 ( 8 ) , 1306 – 1314 . Davies , J . , Nersessian , N . J . , & Goel , A . K . ( 2005 ) . Visual models in analogical problem solving . Foun - dations of Science , 10 , 133 – 152 . Daw , N . D . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Model - based inﬂuences on humans’ choices and striatal prediction errors . Neuron , 69 , 1204 – 1215 . DeChurch , L . A . , & Mesmer - Magnus , J . R . ( 2010 ) . Measuring shared team mental models : A meta - analysis . Group Dynamics , 14 ( 1 ) , 1 – 14 . Decker , J . H . , et al . ( 2016 ) . From creatures of habit to goal - directed learners . Tracking the developmental emergence of model - based reinforcement learning . Psychological Science , 15 ( 2016 ) , 0956797616639301 . Dede , C . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Multisensory immersion as a modeling environment for learning complex scientiﬁc concepts . In W . Feurzeig & N . Roberts ( Eds . ) , Computer modeling and simulation in science education ( pp . 282 – 319 ) . New York : Springer . Doll , B . B . , Simon , D . A . , & Daw , N . D . ( 2012 ) . The ubiquity of model - based reinforcement learning . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 22 , 1075 – 1081 . Dolphin , G . , & Benoit , W . ( 2016 ) . Students’ mental model development during historically contextualized inquiry : How the ‘‘Tectonic Plate’’ metaphor impeded the process . International Journal of Science Education , 38 ( 2 ) , 276 – 297 . Domangue , T . J . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Effects of model - based and memory - based processing on speed and accuracy of grammar string generation . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 30 ( 5 ) , 1002 – 1011 . Dori , Y . J . , & Barak , M . ( 2001 ) . Virtual and physical molecular modeling : Fostering model perception and spatial understanding . Educational Technology & Society , 4 ( 1 ) , 61 – 74 . Economides , M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Model - based reasoning in humans becomes automatic with training . PLoS Computational Biolology , 11 ( 9 ) , e1004463 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1004463 . Edsall , R . , & Wentz , E . ( 2007 ) . Comparing strategies for presenting concepts in introductory undergraduate geography : Physical models vs . computer visualization . Journal of Geography in Higher Education , 31 ( 3 ) , 427 – 444 . Ehrle´n , K . ( 2008 ) . Children’s understanding of globes as a model of the earth : A problem of contextualizing . International Journal of Science Education , 30 ( 2 ) , 221 – 238 . Eppinger , B . , Walter , M . , Heekeren , H . R . , & Li , S . - C . ( 2013 ) . Of goals and habits : Age - related and individual differences in goal - directed decision - making . Frontiers in Neuroscience . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnins . 2013 . 00253 . Ermentrout , B . ( 2002 ) . Simulating , analyzing , and animating dynamical systems : A guide to Xppaut for researchers and students . Philadelphia , PA : SIAM . Evans , J . S . B . T . ( 1993 ) . The mental model theory of conditional reasoning : Critical reappraisal and revision . Cognition , 48 , 1 – 20 . Farrar , K . M . , Krcmar , M . , & Nowak , K . L . ( 2006 ) . Contextual features of violent video games , mental models , and aggression . Journal of Communication , 56 ( 2 ) , 387 – 405 . Feng , C . H . ( 2012 ) . Analyzing the effect of modeling - oriented inquiry model on 8th grade students’ ability to identify the elements of scientiﬁc inquiry . Secondary Education , 63 ( 1 ) , 38 – 60 . Fiore , S . M . , Cuevas , H . M . , & Oser , R . L . ( 2003 ) . A picture is worth a thousand connections : The facilitative effects of diagrams on mental model development and task performance . Computers in Human Behavior , 19 , 185 – 199 . Ford , B . , & Hall , G . G . ( 1970 ) . Model building—an educational philosophy for applied mathematics . International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology , 1 ( 1 ) , 77 – 83 . Forstmann , B . U . , & Wagenmakers , E . - J . ( Eds . ) . ( 2015 ) . An introduction to model - based cognitive neu - roscience . New York : Springer . Fretz , E . B . , et al . ( 2002 ) . An investigation of software scaffolds supporting modeling practices . Research in Science Education , 32 ( 4 ) , 567 – 589 . Freudenthal , H . ( Ed . ) . ( 1961 ) . The concept and the role of the model in mathematics and natural and social sciences . Dordrecht : Reidel . Frick , A . , Daum , M . M . , Wilson , M . , & Wilkening , F . ( 2009 ) . Effects of actions on children’s and adults’ mental imagery . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 104 , 34 – 51 . Frigg , R . , & Hartmann , S . ( 2006 ) . Scientiﬁc models . In S . Sarkar & J . Pfeifer ( Eds . ) , The philosophy of science . An encyclopedia ( Vol . 2 , pp . 740 – 749 ) . New York : Routledge . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 959 123 Furtak , E . M . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Experimental and quasi - experimental studies of inquiry - based science teaching : A meta - analysis . Review of Educational Research , 82 ( 3 ) , 300 – 329 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gilbert , N . ( 2008 ) . Agent - based models . Los Angeles , CA : Sage . Gilbert , J . K . , & Justi , R . ( 2016 ) . Modeling - based teaching in science education . Cham : Springer Nature . Gilbert , J . K . , Reiner , M . , & Nakhlel , M . ( Eds . ) . ( 2008 ) . Visualization : Theory and practice in science education . New York , NY : Springer . Gilbert , J . K . , & Rogers , W . A . ( 1999 ) . Age - related differences in the acquisition , utilization , and extension of a spatial mental model . Journal of Gerontology , 54B ( 4 ) , 246 – 255 . Gilbert , N . , & Troitzsch , K . ( 2005 ) . Simulation for the social scientist ( 2nd ed . ) . Maidenhead , UK : Open University Press . Gillan , C . M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Model - based learning protects against forming habits . Cognitive , Affective , and Behavioral Neuroscience , 15 ( 3 ) , 523 – 536 . Gla¨scher , J . , Daw , N . , Dayan , P . , & O’Doherty , J . P . ( 2010 ) . States versus rewards : Dissociable neural prediction error signals underlying model - based and model - free reinforcement learning . Neuron , 66 ( 4 ) , 585 – 595 . Glaser , R . ( 1990 ) . The reemergence of learning theory within instructional research . American Psychologist , 45 ( 1 ) , 29 – 39 . Glynn , S . M . ( 1997 ) . Drawing mental models . The Science Teacher , 64 ( 1 ) , 30 – 32 . Glynn , S . M . ( 2008 ) . Making science concepts meaningful to students : teaching with analogies . In S . Mikelskis - Seifert , U . Ringelband , & M . Bru¨ckmann ( Eds . ) , Four decades of research in science education : From curriculum development to quality improvement ( pp . 113 – 125 ) . Mu¨nster , Germany : Waxmann . Gobert , J . D . , & Buckley , B . C . ( 2000 ) . Introduction to model - based teaching and learning in science education . International Journal of Science Education , 22 ( 9 ) , 891 – 894 . Gobert , J . D . , & Pallant , A . ( 2004 ) . Fostering students’ epistemologies of models via authentic model - based tasks . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 13 ( 1 ) , 7 – 22 . Gobert , J . D . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Examining the relationship between students’ understanding of the nature of models and conceptual learning in biology , physics , and chemistry . International Journal of Science Education , 33 ( 5 ) , 653 – 684 . Gopnik , A . , Grifﬁths , T . L . , & Lucas , C . G . ( 2015 ) . When younger learners can be better ( or at least more open - minded ) than older ones . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 24 , 87 – 92 . Gould , H . , Tobochnik , J . , & Christian , W . ( 2007 ) . An introduction to computer simulation methods . Applications to physical systems ( 3rd ed . ) . Boston , MA : Addison - Wesley . Gray , S . H . ( 1990 ) . Using protocol analyses and drawings to study mental model construction during hypertext navigation . International Journal of Human Computer Interaction , 2 , 359 – 378 . Greca , I . M . , & Moreira , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Mental models , conceptual models , and modelling . International Journal of Science Education , 22 ( 1 ) , 1 – 11 . Greeno , J . G . ( 1989 ) . Situations , mental models , and generative knowledge . In D . Klahr & K . Kotovsky ( Eds . ) , Complex information processing ( pp . 285 – 318 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Grenier , R . S . , & Dudzinska - Przesmitzki , D . ( 2015 ) . A conceptual model for eliciting mental models using a composite methodology . Human Resource Development Review , 14 ( 2 ) , 163 – 184 . Gu , X . , & Blackmore , K . L . ( 2015 ) . A systematic review of agent - based modelling and simulation appli - cations in the higher education domain . Higher Education Research & Development , 34 ( 5 ) , 883 – 898 . Gubitzer , L . ( 2012 ) . The 5 - sector model of the economy . Vienna , Austria : University of Vienna . Guerra - Ramos , M . T . ( 2011 ) . Analogies as tools for meaning making in elementary science education : How do they work in classroom settings ? Eurasia Journal of Mathematics , Science & Technology Edu - cation , 7 ( 1 ) , 29 – 39 . Gustafsson , J . E . , & Peterson , M . ( 2012 ) . A computer simulation of the argument from disagreement . Synthesis , 184 , 405 – 487 . Haider , S . I . , Snead , D . R . , & Bari , M . F . ( 2016 ) . Medical students’ perceptions of clinical teachers as role model . PLoS ONE , 9 ( 11 ) , Article 3 : e0150478 . Hale - Hanes , C . ( 2015 ) . Promoting student development of models and scientiﬁc inquiry skills in acid – base chemistry : An important skill development in preparation for AP chemistry . Journal of Chemical Education , 92 ( 8 ) , 1320 – 1324 . Hannaﬁn , R . D . , & Scott , B . N . ( 2001 ) . Teaching and learning with dynamic geometry programs in student - centered learning environments . Computers in the Schools , 17 ( 1 ) , 121 – 141 . Harris , O . J . , & Hartman , S . J . ( 2002 ) . Organizational behavior . Binghamton , NY : Haworth Press . 960 N . M . Seel 123 Harris , C . J . , & Rooks , D . L . ( 2010 ) . Managing inquiry - based science : Challenges in enacting complex science instruction in elementary and middle school classrooms . Journal of Science Teacher Educa - tion , 21 , 227 – 240 . Hart , D . , & Fegley , S . ( 1994 ) . Social imitation and the emergence of a mental model of self . In S . T . Parker , R . W . Mitchell , & M . L . Boccia ( Eds . ) , Self - awareness in animals and humans : Developmental perspectives ( pp . 149 – 165 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Heidig , S . , & Clarebout , G . ( 2011 ) . Do pedagogical agents make a difference to student motivation and learning ? Educational Research Review , 6 ( 1 ) , 27 – 54 . Henderson , L . , & Tallman , J . ( 2006 ) . Stimulated recall and mental models . Lanham , ML : Scarecrow Press Inc . Henning , J . E . ( 2008 ) . The art of discussion - based teaching . Opening up conversation in the classroom . New York : Routledge . Herna´ndez , M . I . , Couso , D . , & Pinto´ , R . ( 2015 ) . Analyzing students’ learning progressions throughout a teaching sequence on acoustic properties of materials with a model - based inquiry approach . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 24 ( 2 – 3 ) , 356 – 377 . Hestenes , D . ( 1992 ) . Modeling games in the Newtonian world . American Journal of Physics , 60 ( 8 ) , 732 – 748 . Hmelo - Silver , C . E . , Duncan , R . G . , & Chinn , C . A . ( 2007 ) . Scaffolding and achievement in problem - based and inquiry learning : A response to Kirschner , Sweller , and Clark ( 2006 ) . Educational Psychologist , 42 ( 2 ) , 99 – 107 . Hogan , K . ( 1999 ) . Think aloud together : A test of an intervention to foster students’ collaborative scientiﬁc reasoning . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 36 ( 10 ) , 1085 – 1109 . Hogan , K . , Nastasi , B . K . , & Pressley , M . ( 2000 ) . Discourse patterns and collaborative scientiﬁc reasoning in peer and teacher - guided discussions . Cognition and Instruction , 17 ( 4 ) , 379 – 432 . Hogan , K . , & Pressley , M . ( 1997 ) . Scaffolding student learning : Instructional approaches and issues . Cambridge , MA : Brookline Books . Hokayem , H . , & Schwarz , C . ( 2014 ) . Engaging ﬁfth graders in scientiﬁc modeling to learn about evapo - ration and condensation . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 12 ( 1 ) , 49 – 72 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps . Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Ifenthaler , D . , Pirnay - Dummer , P . N . , & Spector , J . M . ( Eds . ) . ( 2008 ) . Understanding models for learning and instruction . Essays in honor of Norbert M . Seel . New York : Springer . Ifenthaler , D . , & Seel , N . M . ( 2011 ) . A longitudinal perspective on inductive reasoning tasks : Illuminating the probability of change . Learning and Instruction , 21 ( 4 ) , 538 – 549 . Ifenthaler , D . , & Seel , N . M . ( 2013 ) . Model - based reasoning . Computers & Education , 64 , 131 – 142 . Ingersoll , B . , & Schreibman , L . ( 2006 ) . Teaching reciprocal imitation skills to young children with autism using a naturalistic behavioral approach : Effects on language , pretend play , and joint attention . Journal of Autism and Development Disorders , 36 ( 4 ) , 487 – 505 . Jeong , H . , & Chi , M . T . H . ( 2007 ) . Knowledge convergence and collaborative learning . Instructional Science , 35 , 287 – 315 . Jin , H . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Promoting cognitive and social aspects of inquiry through classroom discourse . International Journal of Science Education , 38 ( 2 ) , 319 – 343 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1983 ) . Mental models . Towards a cognitive science of language , inference , and consciousness . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1989 ) . Mental models . In M . I . Posner ( Ed . ) , Foundations of cognitive science ( pp . 469 – 499 ) . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1995 ) . Mental models , deductive reasoning , and the brain . In M . S . Gazzaniga ( Ed . ) , The cognitive neurosciences ( pp . 999 – 1008 ) . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 2004 ) . The history of mental models . In K . Manktelow & M . C . Chung ( Eds . ) , Psychology of reasoning : Theoretical and historical perspectives ( pp . 179 – 212 ) . New York : Psy - chology Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 2006 ) . How we reason . New York : Oxford University Press . Jones , N . A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Mental models : An interdisciplinary synthesis of theory and methods . Ecology and Society , 16 ( 1 ) , 46 – 46 . Jones , R . M . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Adolescent - speciﬁc patterns of behavior and neural activity during social reinforcement learning . Cognitive , Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience , 14 ( 2 ) , 683 – 697 . Jonides , J . , Nee , D . E . , & Berman , M . G . ( 2006 ) . What has functional neuroimaging told us about the mind ? So many examples , so little space . Cortex , 42 , 414 – 427 . Kanno , T . , Furuta , K . , & Kitahara , Y . ( 2010 ) . A model of team cognition based on mutual beliefs . Theo - retical Issues in Ergonomics Science , 14 ( 1 ) , 38 – 52 . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 961 123 Keen , S . ( 1995 ) . Finance and economic breakdown : Modelling minsky’s ﬁnancial instability hypothesis . Journal of Post Keynesian Economics , 17 ( 4 ) , 607 – 635 . Keselman , A . ( 2003 ) . Supporting inquiry learning by promoting normative understanding of multivariable causality . Journal of Research in Science Teacing , 40 ( 9 ) , 898 – 921 . Kieras , D . E . , & Bovair , S . ( 1984 ) . The role of a mental model in learning to operate a device . Cognitive Science , 8 , 255 – 273 . Kirschner , P . A . , Sweller , J . , & Clark , R . E . ( 2006 ) . Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work : An analysis of the failure of constructivist , discovery , problem - based , experiential , and inquiry - based teaching . Educational Psychologist , 41 ( 2 ) , 75 – 86 . Knauff , M . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Reasoning , models , and images : Behavioral measures and cortical activity . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 4 , 559 – 573 . Koechlin , E . , Ody , C . , & Kouneiher , F . ( 2003 ) . The architecture of cognitive control in the human prefrontal cortex . Science , 302 ( 14 ) , 1181 – 1185 . Kontogeorgiou , A . M . , Bellou , J . , & Mikropoulos , T . A . ( 2008 ) . Being inside the quantum atom . Psy - chNology Journal , 6 ( 1 ) , 85 – 101 . Kopainsky , B . , & Alessi , S . M . ( 2015 ) . Effects of structural transparency in system dynamics simulators on performance and understanding . Systems , 3 , 152 – 176 . Kopainsky , B . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Effects of prior exploration as an instructional strategy for systems dynamics . Simulation Gaming , 46 ( 3 – 4 ) , 293 – 321 . Kra¨mer , N . , & Bente , G . ( 2010 ) . Personalizing e - Learning . The social effects of pedagogical agents . Ed - ucational Psychology Review , 22 , 71 – 87 . Kuhn , D . ( 2007 ) . Reasoning about multiple variables : Control of variables is not the only challenge . Science Education , 91 ( 5 ) , 710 – 726 . Kurland , D . M . , & Pea , R . D . ( 1985 ) . Children´s mental models of recursive logo programs . Journal of Educational Computing Research , 1 ( 2 ) , 235 – 243 . Landriscina , F . ( 2013 ) . Simulation and learning : A model - centered approach . New York : Springer . Lane , S . M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Facilitative interactions of model - and experience - based processes : Implications for type and ﬂexibility of representation . Memory & Cognition , 36 ( 1 ) , 157 – 169 . Larson , K . G . , Long , G . R . , & Briggs , M . W . ( 2012 ) . Periodic properties and inquiry : Student mental models observed during a periodic table puzzle activity . Chemical Education Research , 89 ( 12 ) , 1491 – 1498 . Lee , J . ( 2015 ) . Analysis of the reﬁnement of shared mental models in science - gifted students’ collaborative problem solving process . Journal of the Korean Association for Science Education , 35 ( 6 ) , 1049 – 1062 . Lee , J . , & Kim , J . B . ( 2013 ) . What is shared in collaborative problem solving process of scientiﬁc gifted students ? Journal of Gifted / Talented Education , 23 ( 6 ) , 1099 – 1115 . Lee , S . W . , Shimojo , S . , & O’Doherty , J . P . ( 2014 ) . Neural computations underlying arbitration between model - based and model - free learning . Neuron , 81 ( 3 ) , 687 – 699 . Lee , K . , et al . ( 2015 ) . MATLAB - based teaching modules in Biochemical engineering . Chemical Engi - neering Education , 49 ( 2 ) , 85 – 87 . Lesh , R . , & Doerr , H . M . ( 2000 ) . Symbolizing , communicating , and mathematizing : Key components of models and modeling . In P . Cobb , E . Yackel , & K . McClain ( Eds . ) , Symbolizing and communicating in mathematics classrooms . Perspectives on discourse , tools , and instructional design ( pp . 361 – 383 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Liebrand , W . B . G . , Nowak , A . , & Hegselmann , R . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . Computer modeling of social processes . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Lim , B . R . ( 2004 ) . Challenges and issues in designing inquiry on the web . British Journal of Educational Technology , 35 ( 5 ) , 627 – 643 . Lim , B . C . , & Klein , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Team mental models and team performance : A ﬁeld study of the effects of team mental model on similarity and accuracy . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 27 , 403 – 418 . Linn , M . C . ( 2000 ) . Designing the knowledge integration environment : The partnership inquiry process . International Journal of Science Education , 22 ( 8 ) , 781 – 796 . Mahon , B . Z . , & Cantlon , J . F . ( 2011 ) . The specialization of function : Cognitive and neural perspectives . Cognitive Neuropsychology , 28 , 147 – 155 . Maia , P . F . , & Justi , R . ( 2009 ) . Learning of chemical equilibrium through modelling - based teaching . International Journal of Science Education , 31 ( 5 ) , 603 – 630 . Markman , A . B . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge representation . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Mathieu , J . E . , et al . ( 2000 ) . The inﬂuence of shared mental models on team process and performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 85 ( 2 ) , 273 – 283 . Matteson , M . L . ( 2010 ) . The impact of group interaction on shared cognition : An analysis of small group communication . Advances in Library Administration and Organization , 29 , 37 – 106 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1989 ) . Models for understanding . Review of Educational Research , 59 ( 1 ) , 43 – 64 . 962 N . M . Seel 123 Maynard , M . T . , & Gilson , L . L . ( 2013 ) . The role of shared mental model development in understanding virtual team effectiveness . Group Organization Management , 39 ( 1 ) , 3 – 32 . McGloin , R . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Modeling outcomes of violent video game play : Applying mental models and model matching to explain the relationship between user differences , game characteristics , enjoyment , and aggressive intentions . Computers in Human Behavior , 62 , 442 – 451 . McGrath , D . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Student experiences of virtual reality : A case study in learning special relativity . American Journal of Physics , 78 ( 8 ) , 862 – 868 . McNeill , K . L . , & Krajcik , J . ( 2008 ) . Scientiﬁc explanations : Characterizing and evaluating the effects of teachers’ instructional practices on student learning . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 45 ( 1 ) , 53 – 78 . Merchant , Z . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Effectiveness of virtual reality - based instruction on students’ learning outcomes in K - 12 and higher education : A meta - analysis . Computers & Education , 70 , 29 – 40 . Milrad , M . , Spector , J . M . , & Davidsen , P . I . ( 2002 ) . Model facilitated learning . In S . Naidu ( Ed . ) , Learning and teaching with technology : Principles and practices ( pp . 13 – 27 ) . London : Kogan Page . Minsky , M . L . ( 1965 ) . Matter , mind and models . Proceedings of the International Federation of Information Processing Congress , 1 , 45 – 49 . Mulder , Y . , Bollen , L . , de Jong , T . , & Lazonder , A . W . ( 2016 ) . Scaffolding learning by modeling : The effects of partially worked out models . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 53 , 502 – 523 . Mulder , Y . G . , Lazonder , A . W . , & de Jong , T . ( 2011 ) . Comparing two types of model progression in an inquiry learning environment with modelling facilities . Learning and Instruction , 21 , 614 – 624 . Mulder , Y . G . , Lazonder , A . W . , & de Jong , T . ( 2014 ) . Using heuristic worked examples to promote inquiry - based learning . Learning and Instruction , 29 , 56 – 64 . Mulder , Y . G . , Lazonder , A . W . , & de Jong , T . ( 2015 ) . Simulation - based inquiry learning and computer modeling . Simulation Gaming , 46 ( 3 – 4 ) , 322 – 347 . National Research Council . ( 2011 ) . A framework for K – 12 science education : Practices , crosscutting concepts , and core ideas . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . Nielsen , M . , Simcock , G . , & Jenkins , L . ( 2008 ) . The effect of social engagement on 24 - month - olds’ imitation from live and televised models . Developmental Science , 11 ( 5 ) , 722 – 731 . Norman , D . A . ( 1983 ) . Some observations on mental models . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 7 – 14 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Orban de Xivry , J . J . , & Ethier , V . ( 2008 ) . Neural correlates of internal models . The Journal of Neuro - science , 28 ( 32 ) , 7931 – 7932 . Orgill , M . , & Bodner , G . ( 2004 ) . What research tells us about using analogies to teach chemistry . Chemistry Education , 5 ( 1 ) , 15 – 32 . Otto , A . R . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Working - memory capacity protects model - based learning from stress . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 110 ( 52 ) , 20941 – 20946 . Over , H . , & Carpenter , M . ( 2012 ) . Putting the social into social learning : Explaining both selectivity and ﬁdelity in children’s copying behavior . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 126 ( 2 ) , 182 – 192 . Park , S . K . ( 2016 ) . Exploring the argumentation pattern in modeling - based learning about apparent motion of Mars . Eurasia Journal of Mathematics , Science & Technology Education , 12 ( 1 ) , 87 – 107 . Passmore , C . M . , Stewart , J . , & Cartier , J . ( 2009 ) . Model - based inquiry and school science : Creating connections . School Science and Mathematics , 109 ( 7 ) , 394 – 402 . Passmore , C . M . , & Svoboda , J . ( 2012 ) . Exploring opportunities for argumentation in modelling classrooms . International Journal of Science Education , 34 ( 10 ) , 1535 – 1554 . Penner , D . E . , Giles , N . D . , Lehrer , R . , & Schauble , L . ( 1997 ) . Building functional models : Designing an elbow . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 34 ( 2 ) , 125 – 143 . Plummer , J . D . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Development of a learning progression for the formation of the solar system . International Journal of Science Education , 37 ( 9 ) , 1381 – 1401 . Poldrack , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 10 , 59 – 63 . Puntambekar , S . , & Hu¨bscher , R . ( 2005 ) . Tools for scaffolding students in a complex learning environment : What have we gained and what have we missed ? Educational Psychologist , 40 ( 1 ) , 1 – 12 . Radvansky , G . A . , Zacks , R . T . , & Hasher , K . ( 1996 ) . Fact retrieval in younger and older adults : The role of mental models . Psychology and Aging , 11 ( 2 ) , 258 – 271 . Rand , W . , & Rust , R . T . ( 2011 ) . Agent - based modeling in marketing : Guidelines for rigor . International Journal of Research in Marketing , 28 ( 3 ) , 181 – 193 . Rapp , D . N . ( 2005 ) . Mental models : Theoretical issues for visualizations in science education . In J . K . Gilbert ( Ed . ) , Visualization in science education ( pp . 43 – 60 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Rauh , R . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Preferred and alternative mental models in spatial reasoning . Spatial Cognition and Computation , 5 , 239 – 269 . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 963 123 Reeves , B . , & Nass , C . ( 1996 ) . The media equation : How people treat computers , televisions and New media like real people and places . New York : Cambridge University Press . Richland , L . E . , & McDonough , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Learning by analogy : Discriminating between potential analogs . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 35 , 28 – 43 . Richland , L . E . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Children’s development of analogical reasoning : Insights from scene analogy problems . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 – 271 . Riley , D . ( 1990 ) . Learning about systems by making models . Computers in Education , 13 ( 1 – 3 ) , 255 – 263 . Rosenshine , B . ( 2012 ) . Principles of instruction . Research - based strategies that all teachers should know . American Educator , 39 , 12 – 19 . Roskos - Ewoldsen , B . , Davies , J . , & Roskos - Ewoldsen , D . R . ( 2004 ) . Implications of the mental models approach for cultivation theory . Communications , 29 ( 3 ) , 345 – 363 . Rumelhart , D . E . , Smolensky , P . , McClelland , J . L . , & Hinton , G . E . ( 1986 ) . Schemata and sequential thought processes in PDP models . In J . L . McClelland , D . E . Rumelhart , & The PDP research group ( Eds . ) , Parallel distributed processing . Explorations in the microstructure of cognition . Psychological and biological models ( Vol 2 , pp . 7 – 57 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ryoo , K . L . , & Linn , M . C . ( 2013 ) . Designing guidance for interpreting dynamic visualizations : Generating versus reading explanations . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 48 ( 2 ) , 147 – 174 . Sanderse , W . ( 2013 ) . The meaning of role modeling in moral and character education . Journal of Moral Education , 42 ( 1 ) , 28 – 42 . Sandoval , W . , & Reiser , B . ( 2004 ) . Explanation - driven inquiry : Integrating conceptual and epistemic scaffolds for scientiﬁc inquiry . Science Education , 88 ( 3 ) , 345 – 372 . Sanger , M . J . , Brecheisen , D . M . , & Hynek , B . M . ( 2001 ) . Can computer animations affect college biology students’ conceptions about diffusion and osmosis ? The American Biology Teacher , 63 ( 2 ) , 104 – 109 . Santos , C . M . , Passos , A . M . , & Uitdewilligen , S . ( 2016 ) . When shared cognition leads to closed minds : Temporal mental models , team learning , adaptation and performance . European Management Journal , 34 ( 3 ) , 258 – 268 . Scalise , K . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Student learning in science simulations : Design features that promote learning gains . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 48 ( 9 ) , 1050 – 1078 . Schichl , H . ( 2003 ) . Models and the history of moedling . In H . Kallrath ( Ed . ) , Modeling languages in mathematical optimization ( pp . 25 – 36 ) . Boston , MA : Kluwer . Schroeder , N . L . , & Adesope , O . O . ( 2014 ) . A systematic review of pedagogical agents’ persona , moti - vation , and cognitive load implications for learners . Journal of Research on Technology in Education , 46 ( 3 ) , 229 – 251 . Schuitema , J . , ten Dam , G . , & Veugelers , W . ( 2008 ) . Teaching strateges for moral education : A review . Journal of Curriculum Studies , 40 ( 1 ) , 69 – 89 . Schwarz , C . V . , & Gwekwerere , Y . N . ( 2007 ) . Using a guided inquiry and modeling instructional framework ( EIMA ) to support preservice K - 9 science teaching . Science Education , 91 ( 1 ) , 158 – 186 . Schwarz , C . V . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Developing a learning progression for scientiﬁc modeling : Making scientiﬁc modeling accessible and meaningful for learners . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 46 ( 6 ) , 632 – 654 . Seel , N . M . ( 1991 ) . Weltwissen und mental Modelle . Go¨ttingen : Hogrefe [ World knowledge and mental models ] . Seel , N . M . ( 1995 ) . Mental models , knowledge transfer , and teaching strategies . Journal of Structural Learning and Intelligent Systems , 12 ( 3 ) , 197 – 213 . Seel , N . M . ( 1999 ) . Educational diagnosis of mental models : Assessment problems and technology - based solutions . Journal of Structural Learning and Intelligent Systems , 14 ( 2 ) , 153 – 185 . Seel , N . M . ( 2003 ) . Model - centered learning and instruction . Technology , Instruction , Cognition , and Learning , 1 ( 1 ) , 59 – 85 . Seel , N . M . ( 2014 ) . Model - based learning and performance . In J . M . Spector et al . ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research in educational communication and technology ( 4th ed . , pp . 465 – 484 ) . New York : Springer . Seel , N . M . , Al - Diban , S . , & Blumschein , P . ( 2000 ) . Mental models and instructional planning . In M . Spector & T . M . Anderson ( Eds . ) , Integrated and holistic perspectives on learning , instruction and technology : Understanding Complexity ( pp . 129 – 158 ) . Dordrecht , NL : Kluwer . Seel , N . M . , Darabi , A . A . , & Nelson , D . W . ( 2006 ) . A dynamic mental model approach to examine schema development in performing a complex troubleshooting task : Retention of mental models . Technology , Instruction , Cognition and Learning , 4 , 309 – 329 . Seel , N . M . , & Dinter , F . R . ( 1995 ) . Instruction and mental model progression : Learner - dependent effects of teaching strategies on knowledge acquisition and anlogical transfer . Educational Research and Evaluation , 1 ( 1 ) , 4 – 35 . 964 N . M . Seel 123 Seeliger , R . ( 1948 ) . Analogien und Modelle in der Physikdidaktik . Studium Generale , 1 ( 3 ) , 125 – 137 . [ Analogies and models in physics didactics ] . Sein , M . K . , & Bostrom , R . P . ( 1989 ) . Individual differences and conceptual models in training novice users . Human - Computer Interaction , 4 , 197 – 229 . Sharp , D . L . M . , et al . ( 1995 ) . Dynamic visual support for story comprehension and mental model building by young , at - risk children . Educational Technology Research and Development , 43 ( 4 ) , 25 – 42 . Sharp , M . E . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Dopamine selectively remediates ‘model - based’ reward learning : A computa - tional approach . Brain , 139 , 355 – 364 . Shih , Y . - F . , & Alessi , S . M . ( 1993 ) . Mental models and transfer of learning in computer programming . Journal of Research on Computing in Education , 26 ( 2 ) , 154 – 175 . Shirehjini , A . A . N . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Mental model development using collaborative 3D virtual environments . In N . Streitz & P . Markopoulos ( Eds . ) , Distributed , ambient and pervasive interactions ( pp . 279 – 290 ) . Cham : Springer . Skatova , A . , Chan , P . A . , & Daw , N . D . ( 2013 ) . Extraversion differentiates between model - based and model - free strategies in a reinforcement learning task . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2013 . 00525 . Sloman , S . A . ( 1996 ) . The empirical case for two systems of reasoning . Psychological Bulletin , 119 , 3 – 22 . Smetana , L . K . , & Bell , R . L . ( 2012 ) . Computer simulations to support science instruction and learning : A critical review of the literature . International Journal of Science Education , 34 ( 9 ) , 1337 – 1370 . Smith , C . , Snir , J . , & Grosslight , L . ( 1992 ) . Using conceptual models to facilitate conceptual change : The case of weight - density differentiation . Cognition and Instruction , 3 , 221 – 283 . Sokolowski , J . A . , & Banks , C . M . ( 2009 ) . Principles of modeling and simulation . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Spezzini , S . ( 2010 ) . Effects of visual analogies on learner outcomes : Bridging from the known to the unknown , International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning , 4 ( 2 ) , Article 11 . Stavy , R . ( 2006 ) . Using analogy to overcome misconceptions about conservation of matter . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 28 , 305 – 313 . Steinbuch , K . ( 1961 ) . Automat und Mensch . U ¨ ber menschliche und maschinelle Intelligenz . Berlin : Springer . Strevens , M . ( 2013 ) . No understanding without explanation . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science , 44 , 510 – 515 . Stull , A . T . , Barrett , T . , & Hegarty , M . ( 2013 ) . Usability of concrete and virtual models in chemistry instruction . Computers in Human Behavior , 29 ( 6 ) , 2546 – 2556 . Stull , A . T . , & Hegarty , M . ( 2016 ) . Model manipulation and learning : Fostering representational compe - tence with virtual and concrete models . Journal of Educational Psychology , 108 ( 4 ) , 509 – 527 . Stull , A . T . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Promoting representational competence with molecular models in organic chemistry . Journal of Chemical Education , 93 ( 6 ) , 994 – 1001 . Sun , D . , Looi , C . - K . , & Xie , W . ( 2014 ) . Collaborative inquiry with a web - based science learning envi - ronment : When teachers enact it differently . Educational Technology & Society , 17 ( 4 ) , 390 – 403 . Supasorn , S . ( 2015 ) . Grade 12 students’ conceptual understanding and mental models of galvanic cells before and after learning by using small - scale experiments in conjunction with a model kit . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 16 ( 2 ) , 393 – 407 . Swaak , J . , van Joolingen , W . R . , & de Jong , T . ( 1998 ) . Supporting simulation - based learning : the effects of model progression and assignments on deﬁnitional and intuitive knowledge . Learning and Instruction , 8 , 235 – 252 . Tapiero , I . ( 2007 ) . Situation models and levels of coherence . Toward a deﬁnition of comprehension . New York : Taylor & Francis . Tasker , R . , & Dalton , R . ( 2006 ) . Research into practice : Visualization of the molecular world using ani - mations . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 7 ( 2 ) , 141 – 159 . Thagard , P . ( 2010 ) . How brains make mental models . In L . Magnani et al . ( Eds . ) , Model - based reasoning in science and technology ( pp . 447 – 461 ) . Berlin : Springer . Thompson - Schill , S . L . , Ramscar , M . , & Chrysikou , E . G . ( 2009 ) . Cognition without control : When a little frontal lobe goes a long way . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 18 , 259 – 263 . Tien , L . T . , Rickey , D . , & Stacy , A . M . ( 1999 ) . The MORE cycle : Guiding students’ thinking in the laboratory . Journal of College Science Teaching , 18 ( 5 ) , 318 – 324 . Toulmin , S . ( 1958 ) . The uses of argument . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Trundle , K . C . , & Bell , R . L . ( 2010 ) . The use of a computer simulation to promote conceptual change : A quasi - experimental study . Computers & Education , 54 , 1078 – 1088 . Turchin , P . ( 2004 ) . Historical dynamics : Why states rise and fall . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Tversky , B . , Morrison , J . , & Betrancourt , M . ( 2002 ) . Animation : Can it facilitate ? International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 57 , 247 – 262 . Model - based learning : a synthesis of theory and research 965 123 Tversky , B . , et al . ( 1994 ) . Spatial mental models from descriptions . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 45 , 656 – 668 . Ugur , G . , et al . ( 2012 ) . The effects of analogy on students’ understanding of direct current circuits and attitudes towards physics lessons . European Journal of Educational Research , 1 ( 3 ) , 211 – 223 . Van Hook , S . , & Huziak - Clark , T . ( 2008 ) . Lift , squeeze , stretch , and twist : Research - based inquiry physics experiences ( RIPE ) of energy for kindergartners . Journal of Elementary Science Education , 20 ( 3 ) , 1 – 16 . Van Hook , S . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Developing an understanding of inquiry by teachers and graduate student scientists through a collaborative professional development program . Electronic Journal of Science Education , 13 ( 2 ) , 30 – 61 . van Joolingen , W . R . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Understanding elementary astronomy by making drawing - based models . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 24 ( 2 ) , 256 – 264 . van Zee , E . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Student and teacher questioning during conversations about science . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 38 ( 2 ) , 159 – 190 . Vendetti , M . S . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Analogical reasoning in the classroom : Insights from cognitive science . Mind , Brain , and Education , 9 ( 2 ) , 100 – 106 . Wartofsky , M . W . ( 1979 ) . Models . Representation and the scientiﬁc understanding . Dordrecht : Reidel . Weiss , W . , & D’Mello , C . ( 1997 ) . Fundamentals of model theory . Toronto : University of Toronto . Werhane , P . C . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Social constructivism , mental models , and problems of obedience . Journal of Business Ethics , 100 , 103 – 118 . West , M . ( 2011 ) . Developing high quality data models . Burlington , MA : Morgan Kaufman . White , B . , & Frederiksen , J . ( 1998 ) . Inquiry , modelling , and metacognition : Making science accessible to all students . Cognition and Instruction , 16 ( 1 ) , 3 – 118 . Wieman , C . , & Perkins , K . ( 2006 ) . A powerful tool for teaching science . Nature Physics , 2 , 290 – 292 . Wijnen , F . M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . The potential of learning from erroneous models : Comparing three types of model instruction . System Dynamics Review , 31 ( 4 ) , 250 – 270 . Wilkerson - Jerde , M . H . , Gravel , B . E . , & Macrander , C . A . ( 2015 ) . Exploring shifts in middle school learners’ modeling activity while generating drawings , animations , and computational simulations of molecular diffusion . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 24 ( 2 ) , 396 – 415 . Williams , E . G . , & Clement , J . J . ( 2014 ) . Identifying multiple levels of discussion - based teaching strategies for constructing scientiﬁc models . International Journal of Science Education , 37 ( 1 ) , 82 – 107 . Wilson , J . R . , & Rutherford , A . ( 1989 ) . Mental models : Theory and application in human factors . Human Factors , 31 , 617 – 634 . Wimsatt , W . C . ( 1987 ) . False models as means to truer theories . In M . Nitecki ( Ed . ) , Neutral models in biology ( pp . 23 – 55 ) . London : Oxford University Press . Windschitl , M . , Thompson , J . , & Braaten , M . ( 2008 ) . Beyond the scientiﬁc method : Model - based inquiry as a new paradigm of preference for school science investigations . Science Education , 92 , 941 – 967 . Wojnowski , B . S . , & Pea , C . H . ( 2014 ) . Models and approaches to STEM professional development . Arlington , VA : National Science Teachers Association . Wu , H . K . , Krajcik , J . S . , & Soloway , E . ( 2001 ) . Promoting understanding of chemical representations : Students’ use of a visualization tool in the classroom . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 38 ( 7 ) , 821 – 842 . Xavier , J . , Tilmont , E . , & Bonnot , O . ( 2013 ) . Children’s synchrony and rhythmicity in imitation of peers : Toward a developmental model of empathy . Journal of Physiology - Paris , 107 ( 4 ) , 291 – 297 . Zhang , T . , Kaber , D . , & Hsiang , S . ( 2008 ) . Characterisation of mental models in a virtual reality - based multitasking scenario using measures of situation awareness . Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Sci - ence , 11 ( 1 – 2 ) , 99 – 118 . Norbert M . Seel graduated from Saarland University in 1979 . He was chair and distinguished professor for research on learning and instruction as well as the head of the Department of Educational Science at the Albert - Ludwigs - University at Freiburg , Germany until September 2012 . From 1992 to 1998 he was Professor at the Technical University of Dresden where he also was the Dean of the School of Education . His research interests include model - based learning , inductive reasoning and complex problem solving , the investigation of exploratory learning within technology - enhanced environments , creativity and processes of decision making in instructional design . Dr . Seel has published or edited more than 20 books as well as more than 200 refereed journal articles and book chapters in the area of cognitive psychology , research on learning and instruction . He is the Editor of the Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning . 966 N . M . Seel 123