M . F . Costabile et al . ( Eds . ) : IS - EUD 2011 , LNCS 6654 , pp . 264 – 269 , 2011 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 Extending the Meta - design Theory : Engaging Participants as Active Contributors in Virtual Worlds Benjamin Koehne , David Redmiles , and Gerhard Fischer Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences , University of California at Irvine , 6210 Donald Bren Hall Irvine , CA 92697 - 3425 USA { bkoehne , redmiles } @ ics . uci . edu , gerhard @ colorado . edu Abstract . Meta - design has emerged as a theoretical framework by supporting open systems that allow end - users to become designers in dynamic use con - texts . Our research is grounded in the objectives that ( 1 ) the meta - design theory can inform the design of virtual worlds , and that , in return , ( 2 ) observations and insights from virtual worlds can broaden the meta - design theory . Our work is based on 80 hours participant observation and additional interviews . Keywords : Meta - design , virtual worlds , end - user design , human - centered de - sign , science of design , open evolvable systems , empowerment of the user . 1 Introduction In recent years , persistent virtual 3D - environments , in the following referred to as ‘virtual worlds ( VW ) ’ , have drawn increasing interest both from industry and acade - mia [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] . VWs provide persistent virtual environments in which users can interact by controlling a virtual avatar . The avatar can move in the VW and interact with other avatars and virtual artifacts . Two of the most successful and widely used applications of VWs are : (cid:131) massively - multiplayer online role - playing games ( MMORPGs ) , such as ‘Lord of the Rings Online’ ( LOTRO ) , where millions of players worldwide come together and spend considerable amounts of time in order to engage in collaborative tasks or simply to engage in social interactions ; and (cid:131) open - ended VWs , such as Second Life 1 and OpenSimulator 2 , where users engage in many endeavors paralleling and augmenting daily life and work , including advanced , simulated environments that support various research efforts ( e . g . Center for Computer Games & Virtual Worlds at UC Irvine 3 ) . 1 See : www . secondlife . com 2 See : www . opensimulator . org 3 See : http : / / cgvw . ics . uci . edu Extending the Meta - design Theory : Engaging Participants as Active Contributors 265 In this paper we re - examine and evolve the current theories of meta - design based on observations made within VWs . We present accounts of both a gaming - oriented and an open - ended VW system . We juxtapose our observations in the MMORPG ‘Lord of the Rings Online’ ( LOTRO ) and the open - ended environment of Second Life ( SL ) . A series of interviews with individual players of LOTRO and users of SL pro - vide individual viewpoints and contextualize the ethnographic investigation . 2 Virtual World Systems : Second Life and LOTRO SL represents an open - ended VW system that allows users to modify and extend the virtual environment with high flexibility and in great detail . Users build up virtual artifacts from simple building blocks and can customize appearance and behavior of these objects . SL does not prescribe a common goal for its users . Instead users ex - plore the possibilities of the environment on their own accord . LOTRO attracts users with a complex storyline and visually appealing graphics . Users of LOTRO can engage in various activities that ultimately lead to the develop - ment of virtual characters within the given regulations of the game framework . The creation of virtual artifacts in LOTRO is tied to the game logic and more constrained compared to open - ended VWs such as SL . We see a dual relationship between VWs and concepts of meta - design that further motivates our argument to consider VWs for the extension of meta - design theory in general . In this discussion we specifically focus on user participation . Based on exist - ing meta - design concepts , VWs can employ scaffolding processes that guide casual users . Similarly , the unique characteristics of popular VWs and the users they attract can inform the extension of user participation theory . Fig . 1 . Second Life ( left ) and LOTRO ( right ) VWs have great potential to affect meta - design theory by providing environments that enable casual users to , possibly unintentionally , engage in meta - design practice . 3 Methodology Our investigation of LOTRO and SL to re - examine and evolve the current theories of meta - design is focused on the following research objectives : 266 B . Koehne , D . Redmiles , and G . Fischer (cid:131) develop additional examples of meta - design for worlds that have no laws and boundaries ; (cid:131) support the empowerment of end - users that are not initially interested or mo - tivated to conduct design practice ; (cid:131) assess the duality between VWs and meta - design , i . e . : how does meta - design affects practices in VWs and vice versa ; and , (cid:131) analyze the support for meta - design in both unique environments , focusing on the benefits and shortcomings of the gaming - oriented and the open - ended environment under study . Our methodology draws from virtual ethnography [ 6 , 10 ] and from multi - sited eth - nography [ 9 ] , which allows us to supplement our findings with interviews with users outside of the VW context . We conducted 80 hours of participant observation in LOTRO and SL . We took part in various everyday activities in both VWs with other users . Additionally , we con - ducted 6 semi - structured interviews with players of LOTRO and two interviews with designers in SL . Each interview lasted between 40 and 60 minutes . The long - term participant observation allowed us to learn about individual activi - ties of the users in the VWs . The semi - structured interviews provided us with per - sonal perspectives and reflections . We recruited informants for the interviews through snowball - sampling in the player community of LOTRO and SL . The interviews fo - cused on themes of the VWs that we related to meta - design activities based on our previous participant observation . Additionally , we asked the participants about their individual personal backgrounds and their general motivations to participate in the VWs . Patterns and themes based on our observations were analyzed using open - coding techniques [ 8 ] . The meta - design concepts identified in the following chapter were used to filter and code the collected data . The data analysis focused on practices framed by meta - design in the VWs . We were specifically interested in the changing roles during different stages of participation . We structure our findings based on cen - tral concepts of meta - design originally formulated in [ 5 ] . 4 Discussion : Meta - design Concepts in SL and LOTRO SL and LOTRO represent two systems that implement elements of meta - design in quite different ways . Both systems can individually serve as systems for exemplifying various concepts of meta - design theory . A synthesis of the exemplified concepts al - lows for a more detailed analysis of VW system features that particularly affect casual end - user participation . Table 1 provides a comparison of the central meta - design concepts and the corresponding properties of the VW systems included in the analy - sis . An expanded discussion of these concepts is available in [ 7 ] . Extending the Meta - design Theory : Engaging Participants as Active Contributors 267 Table 1 . Meta - Design Concepts in Virtual Worlds Meta - Design Concept LOTRO Second Life convivial tools Adventure & leveling system prim design tools domain orientation goals from fixed set in the fantasy world context user - imagined goals , open - endedness open , evolvable systems limited customization unrestricted customization underdesigned systems fixed fantasy world context minimalist environment collaborative work practices high cooperation amongst players limited cooperation , specialization VWs , in particular MMORPGs , draw a large number of users . As our analysis has shown , users join the environments with very different aspirations . VWs can accom - modate a very diverse user base by providing a system of technological and social structures that is sufficiently flexible to provide individuals with discrete virtual spaces within the larger system . Current systems discussed in the context of meta - design mostly lack opportunities to unpack rich ecologies of participation . Our obser - vations in the VWs point to a collaboration practices as deciding factors to support different levels of participation in the game - and open - ended context . LOTRO makes casual gamers gradually aware of the functional and social proper - ties of the game . The scaffolding system in LOTRO is based on elements in the VW providing guidance and works in close connection with collaboration between the players . While SL represents an open environment with great freedom of creative interaction , LOTRO’s strength lies in the integration of collaborative community effects . VWs offer an opportunity to study the effects of collaboration on the way casual users move through ecologies of participation . Technical scaffolding systems alone are not sufficient . Instead , social community components need to make collaboration tools more accessible and attractive for casual users . Collaboration in VWs is closely tied to the social structure of the system . In LOTRO , collaboration is initially triggered by the functional structure of the game that creates the need for players to find collaborators for difficult adventures or to create powerful artifacts . Over time , the recurring need for collaborative activities creates social networks amongst players that , once initially established , are sustained for a longer time period . In this eco - system of social collaboration , the motivation to help others becomes detached from traditional reward systems . Respect and a good reputation become equally or more important than monetary rewards or other charac - ter improvements . These examples show that a useful extension of the meta - design framework would be a careful analysis of user roles on an individual level . Intrinsic motivations to en - gage in creative activities only come forward in large scale systems such as LOTRO or SL . 268 B . Koehne , D . Redmiles , and G . Fischer Users of VWs can dynamically switch between the roles of passive consumers and active contributors . While the degree of contributions differs between LOTRO and SL , it is common in both worlds that users are not locked into either the designer or the user role . The domain - oriented gaming environment creates opportunities for need - based at - tendance to creative practices . Players can also decide to completely neglect crafting activities . The open - ended environment of SL allows users to switch between ob - server and designer roles . However , the complexity imposed by the available design tools creates a higher entry barrier to become a designer . Meta - designers need to find a middle ground between complex and universal design tools as exemplified in SL and socially embedded creative activity as exemplified in LOTRO . Our results point to a priority for socio - technical contexts that allow users to develop their roles based on social interactions through collaborative activities with other users . More experi - enced users develop their own strategies while novice users require guidance to be gradually introduced to the system functionalities . There is not a perfect solution for this trade - off problem . However , our analysis of two distinct VWs leads us to suggest an extension of the seeding , evolutionary growth and reseeding model ( SER ) [ 4 ] that clearly focuses on support during transition phases between different stages of participation . In the VWs other users constantly provide seeds for design practice . The leveling system in LOTRO gradually prepares players with coordinated stages and sub - goals on their progression from novice players to experienced performers . Combined with the visibility of fine - grained design processes observed in SL , our findings suggest a combination of these two concepts . Designers and design artifacts undergo stages of evolutionary growth . Design products are re - introduced in the environments and serve users on different levels of participation as examples for novel design projects . Meta - design theory can benefit designers of VWs . The meta - design concepts dis - cussed in the qualitative investigation can guide game designers but also designers of open - ended systems . Possible design recommendations can be imagined by combin - ing the social community elements found in LOTRO and the accessible design tools in SL . Studying VWs can contribute to broadening the theory of meta - design . VWs inherit qualities that can inform an expansion of the theory by providing additional systems to exemplify meta - design concepts . The large numbers of casual users with diverse interests in our view represent the missing masses that meta - designers should focus on . Gaming - oriented VWs employ concepts that gradually empower end - users while keeping them motivated and engaged . Social structures create an environment that fosters cooperation amongst the players . Meta - designers look for tools to empower end - users to tailor systems towards their needs . Open - ended environments like SL provide these types of tools in virtual spaces . The tools do not discriminate between novice users and users with design experience in different domains . Studying tools that create an even , flat entry level for all users can inform concepts of meta - design tools in general . Based on our study , we have identified a rich duality between VWs and meta - design . Meta - design potentially provides VW designers with a useful analytic design for user participation and open systems . VWs extend meta - design theory by providing a class of new systems to exemplify meta - design concepts . Extending the Meta - design Theory : Engaging Participants as Active Contributors 269 Initially , it appears simple to dismiss LOTRO as a system for meta - design practices based on the regulations imposed on the users and the limited design oppor - tunities in the VW . However , our analysis has brought to light concepts that meta - designers are well - advised to take into account . 5 Conclusion and Future Work This work opens many avenues for future research . First , some open - ended VWs such as SL and , more particularly , the open source counterpart , OpenSimulator , provide means for extension through source code modification . Extending them to provide scaffolding that makes meta - design more explicit in the VWs that players or end users experience is one real possibility . Second , the potential that meta - design holds for empowering end users is an on - going exploration . The implications in altering the power between the roles of end users and designers are just being understood . Acknowledgments . This work was supported by the U . S . National Science Founda - tion under grant # 0808783 . We would like to thank our colleagues at UC Irvine and the University of Colorado at Boulder for their insightful comments . References 1 . Bainbridge , W . S . : The Scientific Research Potential of Virtual Worlds . Science 317 ( 5837 ) , 472 – 476 ( 2007 ) 2 . Costabile , M . F . , Fogli , D . , Mussio , P . , Piccinno , A . : A meta - design approach to end - user development . Paper Presented at the 2005 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human - Centric Computing ( 2005 ) 3 . Fischer , G . : End - User Development and Meta - design : Foundations for Cultures of Partici - pation . In : End - User Development , pp . 3 – 14 ( 2009 ) 4 . Fischer , G . , Grudin , J . , McCall , R . , Ostwald , J . , Redmiles , D . , Reeves , B . , Shipman , F . : Seeding , evolutionary growth and reseeding : The incremental development of collabora - tive design environments . In : Olson , G . M . , Malone , T . W . , Smith , J . B . ( eds . ) Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology , pp . 447 – 472 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Mahwah ( 2001 ) 5 . Fischer , G . , Scharff , E . : Meta - design : design for designers . In : Proceedings of the 3rd Con - ference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques . ACM , New York ( 2000 ) 6 . Hine , C . : Virtual ethnography . SAGE , London ( 2000 ) 7 . Koehne , B . , Redmiles , D . , Fischer , G . : Details on Extending the Meta - Design Theory : Re - sults from Participant Observation of Active Contributors in Virtual Worlds ( 2011 ) , http : / / www . isr . uci . edu / tech _ reports / UCI - ISR - 11 - 1 . pdf ( March 14 , 2011 ) 8 . Lofland , J . : Analyzing social settings : a guide to qualitative observation and analysis , 4th edn . Wadsworth / Thomson Learning , Belmont , CA ( 2006 ) 9 . Marcus , G . E . : Ethnography in / of the World System : The Emergence of Multi - Sited Eth - nography . Annual Review of Anthropology 24 , 95 – 117 ( 1995 ) 10 . Nardi , B . A . : My life as a night elf priest : an anthropological account of world of warcraft . The University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor ( 2010 )