The Role of Expectations in Human - Computer Interaction Joseph A . Bonito Judee K . Burgoon University of Arizona , USA University of Arizona , USA jbonito @ u . arizona . edu judee @ u . arizona . edu Bjorn Bengtsson Umea University , Sweden bjorn @ cs . umu . se ABSTRACT This paper describes a pilot stu & on the role of expectations in human - computer interaction on a decision - making task . Participants ( iV = 70 ) were randomly assigned to one of 5 difSerent computer partners or to a human partner . After completing the rankings for the Desert Survival Task , participants engaged in a dialog with their computer or human partners . Results revealed that interaction with human partners was more expected and more positively evaluated than interaction with computer agents . In addition , the addition of human - like qualities to computer interfaces did not increase expectedness or evaluations as predicted . Correlation analysis . for the ji’rve computer conditions demonstrated that expectations and evaluations do eflect influence and perceptions of the partner . Discussion focuses on ways to coordinate expectations , interface design , and task objectives . Keywords Interactivity , human - computer interaction , computer - mediated communication , expectations INTRODUCTION Virtual moments have become more common than human moments for many types of tasks and transactions [ 22 ] . A human moment is defmed as face - to - face interaction in which members focus intellectual and emotional attention on each other . A virtual moment includes the use of technology in the communication process in some degree . Examples of minimal virtual moments include telephone conversations and voice mail whereas human - computer interaction ( HCI ) is an example of maximum technological presence . Regardless of the degree of technological involvement , a common characteristic of all virtual moments is that they subtract elements of the human moment out of a transaction . Virtual moments often occur with participants displaced in both time and space , and often make it easier to carry on without full investment of emotional and intellectual resources . pcmlission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies arc Ilot made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . ‘1‘0 COW otllerwise . to republish , IO post on serwrs or to rtxiistribute to lists . requires prior spccilic permission and ! or a fee . GROUP 99 Phoenix Arizona Us . 4 Copyright ACM 1999 l - 581 13 - 065 - 1 / 99 / l l . . . $ S . OO Rapid advancements in computer and network technology have made it possible to imbue virtual moments with more human qualities . For example , whereas text used to be the only choice to conduct synchronous computer - mediated communication , participants may now speak to and view each other through their computers in real time . In the case of HCI , virtual agents are often more elaborate than simple , passive text interfaces . Human participants can expect to encounter virtual agents that “talk” ( e . g . , simple telephone menus ) ; possess human or animal - like qualities or characteristics , including , animated speech and attendant nonverbal characteristics ( e . g . , Microsoft Agent ) ; and understand speech and respond to it ( e . g . , virtual operators for long - distance telephone companies ) . In short , virtual agents can be designed to appear and act more or less human . Recent research has revealed that human - computer interaction may be perceived by participants on many of the same relational dimensions or aspects as relations between people . For example , Moon and Nass [ 31 ] noticed that human participants were less likely to blame the computer for incorrect decisions when humans perceived the computer to be similar to themselves . Moreover , participants were more likely to share credit with the computer for successful attempts at the task . Human participants may also think of computers as being part of a team . In a study of the relation between interdependence and teamwork during task - related HCI , Nass , Fogg , and Moon [ 33 ] found that participants in the interdependence condition were more likely to characterize their computer partner as a teammate , perceived the computer as more influential and similar , and characterized information from the computer as of higher quality . A central issue regarding interface design is the degree to which anthropomorphic features of virtual agents provide the encounter with characteristics of the human moment . In some cases , it is desirable that human participants in HCI experience levels of emotional and intellectual attention approaching those found in human moments . Such attention is dependent on the production and interpretation of several levels of information . Face to face interaction provides a wealth of verbal and nonverbal information with which participants , for example , form impressions of each other , assess the status of the relationship , determine each other’s credibility , and display involvement in the interaction . Much of this information is implicit and sent with little cognitive effort through a variety of channels ( e . g . , gaze , gestures , vocal inflection , and relevance of response ) . Moreover , this information is usually missing from virtual 229 encounters , making some of the assessments usually associated with interaction more difficult to gauge . Researchers are just beginning to address this issue , and there is growing evidence that relational factors in HCI depend in part on interface design . Kiesler , Sproull , and Waters [ 24 ] varied the “humanness” of the interface by adding or subtracting a talking face and synthesized speech , and compared them with human , face - to - face interaction . Results demonstrated that the interface with the talking face generated greater perception of the computer as a collaborative decision maker , as well as compelled involvement . Speech - only interfaces , however , did not have nearly the effect . Interestingly , humans were less cooperative with the more human - like interfaces , although this finding might be due to the rather unrealistic appearance of the computer agent . Recent research points to increased influence of computers regardless of interface design compared to humans , as well as a positive association between anthropomorphism of the interface with perceptions of feeling understood , utility , and receptivity as computer interfaces [ 3 , 8 ] . Thus , interface design has important consequences for how humans relate to computers , and the nature of the relationship affects outcomes , including decision making . Our focus in this paper is the role of expectations in HCI . Expectations are a kind of schemata that focuses interpretation processes on specific meanings and functions of communicative action [ 7 , 37 ] . Expectations themselves refer to the anticipated behavior of others : that which is typical , modal , or normative is expected . Expectations also have valences , or evaluations associated with them . Although normative behavior often has positive associates , . expected behavior may also be negative , as in the case of expecting a particular group member to make irrelevant task contributions . The value of expectations in HCI are twofold : First , they allow participants to evaluate the ability of self to contribute to the task relative to perceptions of how the computer will perform . In some cases , self may feel as though the computer is better able to provide task - related contributions , whereas in other situations self may feel more efficacious than the computer . In face - to - face interaction , especially in groups , participation and influence generally mirror distributions of expectations ; persons whose contributions are expected to be useful for completing the task participate more frequently and with greater influence than members whose contributions are not as valued [ 5 , 30 , 35 ] . One concern here is if participants confer expectation advantages - the degree to which a given member’s contributions are anticipated to be more useful than contributions by other members - on their computer partners . The second value of expectations in HCI is that they provide a basis for evaluation of behavior . Interpretation of a given act depends in part on what was expected at a particular point in interaction . Violations of expectations lead to reassessments of the behavior in question , with the nature of reassessment or reinterpretation subject to the valence of the communicator and the behavior . An additional concern of this paper is the degree to which types of interface design violate expectancies in HCI . THE ROLE OF EXPECTATIONS IN INTERACTION This section presents two complementary approaches to the role of expectations in interaction . The first is based on expectation states theory ( EST ) which is largely concerned with predicting interaction outcomes from initial distributions of expectations within task - oriented groups [ 19 , 35 , 36 ] . The second line of work on expectations concerns Burgoon and associates’ theorizing and research on expectancy violations ( e . g . , [ 7 , 10 , I I ] ) . The gist here is that assessments of behavior are dependent on the degree to which it is expected . Violations produce cognitive arousal which in mm leads to a deeper assessment of the behavior for its meaning or function and an intensification of response . Expectations States The main thrust of EST is that expectations lead persons to differentially evaluate the usefulness of contributions of both self and others to discussion . Expectations are based largely on diffuse status characteristics , such as , gender , age , and appearance , or on specific characteristics such as differences in various types of ability [ 25 ] . Status differences manifest themselves as a network of attributions regarding the ability of self and others to participate and to be influential in discussion . This network moderates behavior such that low - status persons are afforded fewer opportunities to speak than their high status counterparts , and comments from low - status persons are less influential than remarks from others . The “state organizing process” begins with differential distribution of relevant status characteristics . Relevance is determined by the nature of the task ; not all characteristics offer important distinctions among members ( although certain characteristics such as age and gender are thought to be salient in most tasks ) . Members with socially desirable or important task - related characteristics are afforded high expectations , whereas members with undesirable or relatively unimportant characteristics merit low expectations . Contributions from persons with high expectations are anticipated to be more useful than contributions from those given low expectations . The consequence of differential distributions of expectations results in differences in rates of participation , perceptions of leadership , deference , agreement , and evaluations of others [ 381 . 230 Expectations operate even in the absence of salient status characteristics . Members of homogeneous groups are differentiated by behavior interchange patterns ( BIP ) [ 19 , 20 , 21 ] . Briefly , a BIP consists of an initial action that is potentially influential on the task outcome . This initial action is met with either agreement or disagreement . In the case of the former , the initial action marks its producer as status - superior to the person who provided the agreement ; in the case of the latter , the person who supplied the disagreement is status - superior to the producer of the initial action . The cycle is predicted to be fairly consistent between pairs of members , resulting in a power and prestige order not unlike ones found in heterogeneous groups ( see [ 2 l ] ) . ’ Expectancy Violation Theory Whereas EST describes the state of power and prestige relationships in groups as well as the outcomes associated with networks of expectations , it is relatively silent on the process by which expectations figure into interpretation of behavior . Expectancy violation theory ( EVT ) is concerned with the degree to which expectations frame behavior , and the consequences of such framing on interaction and task outcomes . Expectations then provide interpretative schema against which messages or other behaviors are judged . As in EST , expectations within the EVT framework are characterized as anticipated behavior of self and other in interaction . Unlike EST , which views expectations as the outcome of distributions of status , EVT proposes three different information sources upon which expectations are formed [ 7 ] . First , characteristics of the communicator , including , social skills , language style , socio - demographic characteristics , and appearance , are all informative in terms of the behavior one can expect or anticipate in a given situation . Second , the nature of the relationship is an important determinant of expectations . Relationship factors include , similarity , attraction , liking , and power differentials . Finally , context ( e . g . , physical surroundings and the nature of the task or episode ) provides information regarding which behaviors are appropriate and relevant . Together , these three types of information activate particular expectations , deviations from which prompt heightened attention to social information and intensifies appraisals of the violation . An important issue for EVT is the way in which violations of expectations are interpreted and evaluated . Violations are characterized as either positively or negatively valenced . Positive violations are socially valued behaviors that exceed the quality of anticipated actions , whereas ’ One need not participate in a BIP in order to form expectations about self and other . If persons A and B are involved in the BIP , and C is a third member of the group who witnesses the transaction , C may well form an assessment of his or her ability to contribute relative to A and B . negative violations are relatively undesirable acts that fall short of expectations . Valence assigned to a given behavior is a function of the degree of positive or negative regard one has for the actor ( called communicator reward valence ) and the interpretation and evaluation assigned to the violation itself . For example , violations from well liked or similar interlocutors are 1ikeIy to be interpreted favorably and welcomed , thus qualifying as positively valenced , whereas the same violations from disliked or dissimilar persons will often be perceived negatively and function as negative violations [ 7 ] . Messages ( or other communicative behavior ) that violate expectations lead the recipient ( and often the sender ) to reevaluate or reinterpret the trajectory of the interaction , the goals of the participants , or the nature of the relationship . Reinterpretations of behavior , and the effects associated with them , are a function of valence . Positive violations may lead persons to reevaluate the relationship , the sender , or the behavior in desirable ways whereas negative violations often have the opposite effect . Regardless of who committed them , positive violations are posited to produce more effective interaction and be more influential than are acts that conform to expectations . Negative violations are posited to be more detrimental than expectancy confirmation . For example , a highly credible nonverbal demeanor presented by a party thought to have limited social capabilities may qualify as a positive violation because it has connotations of task competence and would be desirable in a task episode . This positive violation is theorized to make the partner more influential than if the behavior was already expected . RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES HCI may be characterized as both an expectation state and as a series of acts that have the potential to violate expectations both negatively and positively . In terms of expectation states , the issue concerns the degree to which humans confer an expectation advantage on computer agents . Previous research [ 3 , 8 ] has revealed that participants were more likely to be influenced by computer agents on average than by human partners . Scholars working with EST have argued that distributions of influence and participation reflect expectation advantages in groups [ 20 ] . Accordingly , our prediction concerning expectation advantages is that , on average , computer agents will be more positively evaluated than human partners . Hl : Interaction with computer agents is rated more positively than interaction with human partners . Much of the information on which expectations are formed is transferred implicitly and relies on ingrained processes for their production and interpretation [ 6 ] . The most basic of virtual agents , text , can transmit only a limited amount of information and at fairly constrained levels . For example , 231 there is no appearance ( other than the shape of the letters , and perhaps the configuration of the computer ) , no demographic or group information ( other than the fact that it is a computer ) , no real style , and very limited nonverbal behavior ( e . g . , text may be displayed in all capital letters to add emphasis ) . Regarding relational information , text - based agents are limited in the amount and kinds of information necessary to buiId relationships . In contrast , more advanced agents such as Microsoft Agent transfer more information at many levels . They can produce a limited set of facial expressions , add emphasis to speech by increasing volume or adding other paralinguistic information . Missing from the expectation equation is the degree to which initial expectations are violated by computer behavior . One would expect that working with a freely interacting computer would be inconsistent with the average user’s experience with computing , at least as of 1999 . Moreover , compared to interaction with human partners , collaboration with computer agents ought to be less conventional , hence less expected . The following hypothesis flows from this argument : H2 : Interaction with human partners is more expected than interaction with computer agents . Computer agents can be designed to appear more or less human , thereby imbuing the interaction with characteristics of the human moment . Anthropomorphic design leads to two complementary hypotheses regarding the degree and valence of expectancy violations . The first predicts that anthropomorphic features of the interface ( e . g . , speech and a moving face ) would produce expectations roughly consistent with interaction with human partners . Collaboration with such interfaces would provide more of the “feel” of face - to - face interaction , compared to the more usual text - only interfaces . It follows then that interaction with computers agents displaying anthropomorphic features should be more expected than interaction with agents whose interface is more traditional ( i . e . , text ) . H3a : There is a positive association between increased anthropomorphism and expectedness of interaction in computer interfaces . Recall that violations are valenced , with some evaluated positively and others producing negative assessments [ 7 ] . The second of the complementary hypotheses is predicated on the notion that human participants often evaluate HCI against previous encounters with computer agents rather than compare it to face - to - face interaction . This in turn suggests that anthropomorphic interfaces might produce positive expectancy violations rather than no sense of violation at all , since judgments are made relative to past HCI encounters with largely text interfaces . H3b : There is a positive association between increased anthropomorphism and evaluation of interaction in computer interfaces . Burgoon’s [ 7 ] work on expectancy violations has revealed that the effect of some violations is dependent on the valence of the communicator ( e . g . , personal space violations ) whereas others are not - - they have relatively universal effects ( e . g . , gaze aversion ) . Moreover , impression formation is associated with the valence of the communicator , with positively - valenced persons more likely to receive higher ratings on a variety of communicator assessment variables ( e . g . , [ 11 , 13 , 14 , 17 ] ) . At issue , then , is the relation between expectations , valence of violation , and communicator assessments for computer interfaces . We are interested in general trends across interfaces , for example , if a decrease in expectedness is associated with communicator assessments as well as assessments of the interaction , or if valence of the violation engenders higher evaluations of the computer interface and the interaction . The following research questions reflect these concerns : RQ 1 : What is the relation between the degree and valence of expectations and communicator assessments ? RQ2 : What is the relation between the degree and valence of expectations and interaction assessments ? Finally , previous work on expectancy violations has revealed that positive violations can be influential whereas negative violations usually are Iess effective [ 39 ] . The following hypothesis concerns the relation between influence and valence of violations for computer interfaces : H4 : Valence of violation is positively associated with and influence in human - computer interaction . METHOD Participants Participants ( N = 70 ) were male undergraduate students in the social sciences at Umea University ( vmea , Sweden ) who were solicited via posters on campus to engage in a study of alternative problem - solving methods . They were paid approximately $ 10 ( 100 Swedish crowns ) for their participation . Materials We used three main sets of materials in this study . The first was the experimental manipulation that consisted of varying the type of partner with which experimental participants would interact ( e . g . , computer vs . human ; text interface vs . synthesized speech ) . The second was the interaction task and the third was a series of survey instruments that asked 232 participants to rate their partners and the interaction after completing the task . Experimental manipulations . The experimental conditions varied the “humanness” of the interlocutors with whom participants were partnered . In the five computer conditions , which ranged from text - only to a human - like image with synthesized speech and matching lip synchronization , trained confederates controlled the computer output . In the two FtF conditions , the same human confederates presented the same scripted responses as in the HCI conditions but with two levels of contingency . They either adhered strictly to the script , producing a largely noncontingent form of interaction in which they did not respond to unplanned partner queries or comments , or they interacted “freely” ( i . e . , in a normal , contingent turn - taking fashion ) while still introducing the same information suppiied in the script . Full descriptions of each condition are presented in Bengtsson et al . ( 1999 ) . 2 Interaction task and procedures . We used the Desert Survival Problem ( DSP ) as the interaction task because it provides reasonable experimental control , allows for fairly normal or conventional interaction , and has a set of correct answers against which responses may be judged . The DSP asks participants to imagine that they are on an expedition in the Kuwaiti Desert when their jeep crashes far from base and killing the driver / leader . 3 Participants are then presented with a list of salvageable items and asked to rank them in terms of their importance for survival . The items are : a piece of blue canvas , a set of ground cloths , a gun , a box of matches , a set of jackets , a flashlight , a knife , a map , a magnetic compass , one bottle of water for each survivor , a book titled “Edible Plants of the Desert , ” and a rearview mirror . Survey insfrurnents . We used several survey instruments , including , Burgoon and Walther’s [ 16 ] measure of expectedness and desirability of communication , Moon and Nass’ [ 32 ] instrument for the assessment of communication format and task attraction , Burgoon and Hale’s [ 121 relational communication scale , Aron , Aron , and Smollan’s [ l ] perceived connectedness measure , Calm and Shulman’s [ 181 Feelings of Understanding / Misunderstanding Scale , measures of credibility adapted from several sources ( e . g . , [ 9 , 27 , 29 ] ) , and McCroskey and McCain’s [ 28 ] measure of interpersonal attraction . These measures are relevant here insofar as they help to explain the effect of expectancies and their violations on social judgments of partners and responsiveness to partner influences . Independent and Dependent Variables independent Variable . The independent variable was the degree anthropomorphism and social information present in the interface . Participants interacted with a human partner or a computer . Presumably , humans represent maximum anthropomorphism and availability of social information . Five different interfaces were used in the computer condition that varied in degree of social cues and human - like qualities : text - only ; text plus speech ( a synthesized voice that vocalized the text on the screen ) ; text , speech , and still image ( a picture of a computer - generated face ) ; text , voice , and lip - synched animation ( a computer image that mouthed the words and provided limited facial movement in synchrony with the speech ) ; and speech with animation ( no text ) . In addition , human partners ( experimental confederates ) were distinguished by verbal contingency ; some were allowed to deviate from their scripts to address contingencies raised by experimental subjects whereas other confederates were instructed not to do so . In all , the variation in the independent variable ranged I ? om a text computer interface to ( reasonably ) freely interacting human partners . 2 The text - only condition used separate windows in the screen for presenting the computer’s and the participant’s responses . In the conditions employing vocal cues , text - to - speech synthesis software was used . In the animation conditions , an animated face , moving its lips and facial skin synchronized with the speech , and occasionally flashing its eyelashes was presented . The text - to - speech and animation software used in this study were developed by Jonas Beskow and Magnus Lundeberg at KTH ( Royal Institute of Technology ) , Stockholm , Sweden , and is further described in [ 4 ] and [ 26 ] . The computer image was named “Holger . ” The same image was used in the still image condition . 3 The version of the DSP used in this study was slightly modified from the original . We assumed that our participants ( all Swedes ) would not know very much about the Mojave desert ( the site in the original version ) and that the Kuwaiti area was better known in general because of recent political turmoil and United Nations military intervention there . Dependent variables . The main dependent variables were expectedness of communication and evaluation of behavior , with alpha for each = . 71 , and . 86 , respectively . Other variables were grouped under assessment of interaction or assessment of partner . For the former , perceived involvement , receptivity , format utility , and similarity were used , with alpha reliabilities of . 71 , 64 , . 78 , and - 87 respectively . In addition , we measured perceived understanding and misunderstanding , with reliability estimates of . 80 and . 74 respectively . Finally , perceived connectedness was measured with a single - item , pictorial representation . Partner assessments included five dimensions of credibility : competence ( alpha = . 75 ) , character ( alpha = . Sl ) , dominance ( alpha = . S9 ) , sociability ( alpha = . 68 ) , and dynamism ( alpha = . 68 ) . In addition , we measured task attraction ( alpha = . 79 ) . 233 Finally , influence was a dependent variable and was measured in three ways : as decision quality , absolute influence , and relative influence . Subjects’ rankings of the salvaged items prior to interaction ( “pre - rankings” ) and following the interaction ( “post - rankings” ) were used to create these variables as follows . Decision qualitv was measured as the absolute discrepancy from the expert ranking on all twelve items , which was computed as the mean absolute distance between subject and partner rankings on each item . A small distance indicated high decision quality . Absolute influence was computed by calculating the absolute differences between ( a ) each subject’s pre - ranking and his partner’s pre - ranking and ( b ) each subject’s post - ranking and his partner’s post - ranking . Mean post - ranking differences were subtracted from mean pre - ranking differences to arrive at the absolute distance subjects moved toward the confederate’s position . A large distance indicated high absolute influence . Relative inffuence measured the proportion of movement relative to the original distance between the subject and the partner . It was computed as 1 - ( absolute pre - rank difference / absolute post - rank difference ) . As for absolute influence , a large distance indicated high relative influence . The reasoning behind calculating this second measure was that , for some conditions , subjects might happen to start out closer to their partner’s ranking than in others , due to chance . If the distance between rankings was small from the start there would be no possibility of a great shift towards the partner’s rankings , in absolute terms . Procedure Upon arrival , participants were told that the session would be recorded and then asked to complete a consent form . Participants were randomly assigned to one of the seven partner conditions ( text - only ; text and voice ; text , voice , and picture ; text , voice , and lip - synched animation ; voice and lip - synched animation ; scripted face - to - face interaction ; and unscripted face - to - face interaction ) , so that for each condition there were 10 subjects . In the face - to - face conditions , the partner was a male confederate . 4 Prior to the interaction , participants were presented with a description of the DSP . In addition , participants were told that a group of survival experts had developed a set of rankings , and that they would be evaiuated on the quality of their final rankings ( compared to the experts ) . Participant were told to convince their partners when they thought a ranking was incorrect . Participants in the computer condition were assured that the computer did not have access to the expert rankings . 4 This was due to the fact that the facial images and animations in the computer conditions were those of a male character . Participants were then presented with a list of the twelve items and asked to rank them . Subsequently , participants and their partners discussed each of the twelve items . In the five computer conditions , the interaction took place on a HP workstation placed on a table in the middle of the room . In the face - to - face conditions , a human confederate and experimental participant were seated on opposite sides of a small table . All sessions were videotaped with the camera not hidden from view . The confederates’ portion of the discussion was scripted using techniques developed by Nass and associates [ 34 ] . The contributions by the computer partner matched the ones used by the human confederates . In each case , the confederates or the computer first asked the experimental participant for his ranking of an item . The confederate or computer would then provide his or its ranking and would subsequently ask the participant to supply reasons for his ranking . Finally , the confederate or computer would list the reasons for his or its ranking for that item ; each of the reasons was drawn from the set of expert responses . This sequence was used for each of the twelve items . Discussion was concluded with the confederate or the computer asking the participant if he had any additional thoughts to offer . Participants were then instructed to rank each of the twelve items a second time and then completed the series of post - interaction survey instruments . Finally , participants were debriefed and paid for their participation . RESULTS The first three hypotheses were assessed with a one - way ANOVA with interaction condition as the independent variable ( alpha = . 05 for all analyses ) . In addition to the hypotheses , we performed more specific contrasts to examine differences within conceptually important grouping of interfaces . Contrast coefficients for are presented in Table 1 . The contrasts are based on the degree of anthropomorphism in each of the interfaces as based on the amount of social presence and social information each presents ( in ascending order ) : text - only ; text and voice ; text , voice , and image ; voice and animation ; text , voice , and animation ; and unscripted face - to - face . w Contrast 1 compares face - to - face ( FtF ) to the human - computer interaction ( HCI ) conditions . Contrasts 2 through 4 are a series of Helmet - t contrasts that collectively examine whether ordinal increases in the inter - activity property of modality richness make a difference . To further assess the relative impacts of anthropomorphism and inter - activity , we conducted an additional contrast . Contrast 5 compares the voice and animation condition to the text , voice , and animation condition . Arguably , the latter is less anthropomorphic than the former but also richer in available modalities . If the former condition produces better outcomes than the latter , it suggests that qualitative differences in anthropomorphism are at work . The sixth contrast compares interfaces with text and voice against 234 Table 3 Means and Standard Deviations for Expectedness by Richness Richness Mean SD text only 4 . 06 1 . 01 text + voice 4 . 14 1 . 09 text + voice - t - still 3 . 70 0 . 95 voice + animation 3 . 74 1 . 12 text + voice + animation 3 . 44 1 . 20 FtF scripted 3 . 42 0 . 82 those that lack this combination whereas the seventh and final contrast examines linear trend from the least to most anthropomorphic of the interfaces . Table 1 Contrast Coefficients for Hypotheses Testing Richness Con - text text / text / voice / text / FtF FtF trast only voice voice / ani - voice / script - un - still mation ani - ed script - 1 1 1 1 mation ed 1 1 0 - 5 2 - 2 - 2 - 2 3 3 0 0 3 - 1 - 1 2 0 0 0 0 4 - 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 1 - 1 0 0 6 - 3 2 2 - 3 2 0 0 7 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 0 0 Hypothesis One The first hypothesis states that computer agents have an expectation advantage over human partners . The variable used in this analysis was evaluation of communication . Only the fast contrast was nearly significant , with f ( 63 ) = - 1 . 94 , p < . 06 . However , the means run counter to the prediction : face - to - face interaction was rated more positively that the average of the HCI conditions . ( See Table 2 . ) Table 2 Means and Standard Deviations for Evaluation by Richness Richness Mean SD text only 4 . 22 1 . 28 text + voice 4 . 28 1 . 65 text + voice + still 3 . 78 0 . 97 voice + animation 3 . 94 1 . 26 text + voice + animation 4 . 56 1 . 38 FtF scripted 3 . 82 1 . 17 FtF unscripted 5 . 04 1 . 39 Hypothesis Two Hypothesis two is concerned with the differences in expectedness between computer interfaces and face - to - face interaction . Means are presented in Table 3 . Again , only the fast contrast was significant , with ~ ( 63 ) = 3 . 406 , p < . Ol . As expected , face - to - face interaction was more expected than the average of the HCI conditions . Hypotheses 3a and 3b The two statements under hypothesis three predict that increases in anthropomorphic features of the computer interfaces will lead to a corresponding increase in expectedness and evaluation of violations . Only contrast 7 was examined for each of the dependent measures . Neither of the contrasts was significant , although examination of the means for expectedness exhibits a decrease as computers appear more human . FtF unscripted 5 . 06 1 . 12 Research Question 1 The first research question is concerned with the relation between expectancies and communicator assessments . Correlations are presented in Table 4 ; only the data from the five HCI conditions were included in this analysis . Concerning expectedness , the more expected the interaction , the more the interface was perceived as having character , dynamic , and social . Moreover , interaction ease is positively correlated with expectedness . Regarding valence of violation , negatively valenced the interface was perceived , the higher the dominance rating . In addition , the more positive the violation , the higher the ratings for sociability and interaction ease . Table 4 Correlations for Expectedness and Evaluation by Communicator Assessments and Assessment of Interaction Competence Character Dominance Dynamism Sociability Interaction Ease Format : Utility Mutuality : Similarity Involvement Mutuality : Feeling Understood Decision Quality Absolute Influence Relative Influence Accuracy : Deviation from Correct Answers Accuracy : Total Correct Answers Expect - edness . 25 . 29 * - . 20 . 32 * * . 38 * * . 45 * * . 26 * . 33 * . 20 . 46 * * . 24 . 22 - . 26 * . 16 . 55 * * . 42 * * . 30 * * . 27 * . 16 . 54 * * - . 02 - . 37 * * . 02 . 22 - . 04 . 24 - . 08 - . 06 . 02 . 08 Note : N = 50 . * p < . 05 . * * p < . Ol Valence Research Question 2 Research question two highlights the relation between expectancies and interaction assessments for the five computer conditions . Of the four variables included in the analysis with expectedness and valence , only perceived involvement was not associated with either . In fact , format 235 utility , perceived mutuality , and feeling understood were all positively associated with expectedness of interaction and valence of interaction . This means that positive violations of expectancies led to the interaction being rated more positively on the three dimensions , and that the degree to which interaction was expected also engendered positive ratings of the interaction . Hypothesis 4 The relation between the influence variables and expectancies is the subject of the third research question . Only valence played a role here , with positively valenced violations leading to increased decision quality ( lower numbers on decision quality indicate higher quality ) . In addition , absolute and relative influence are marginally ( p < . lO ) and positively associated with valence : influence increases as expectancy violations become positive . DISCUSSION We began this paper with the premise that constructing computer interfaces with human - like features builds some of the human moment back into HCI . Although human moments may be characterized in many different ways , we choose to focus on expectations , under the assumption , built upon work in EST and EVT , that they are central to impression formation and influences processes in face - to - face interaction . Expectations are derived from a variety of sources , including cultural norms and history of interaction with particular individuals , but are also built up horn characteristics of individuals , such as , appearance and demeanor . We surmised that interfaces with human features would be more expected and evaluated more positively than more basic interfaces . Moreover , we anticipated that computers would be evaluated more positively than human partners because the latter are often thought to be better at some tasks than the former , but we also figured that interaction with human partners would be more expected than HCI . Finally , for all types of interfaces , we reckoned that expectedness and evaluation would be associated with a variety of impression formation variables and with influence processes . Our fmdings revealed that interaction with humans is more expected and more valued than interaction with computers . - Moreover , we did not find the anticipated linear relations between anthropomorphism design and both expectedness and evaluations . However , analysis of the correlations across all I - ICI showed that expectedness and evaluations were associated with several impression management variables , including , sociability , interaction ease , feeling understood , dominance , and perceived similarity . Finally , expectancy evaluations were positively associated with decision quality , and marginally associated with relative and absolute influence . The gist of our findings is that expectancies work as anticipated within HCI : in general , interfaces that are perceived as more expected and are evaluated more positively are associated with positive assessments of several communicator and interaction characteristics , and are more influential than interfaces that are rated less expected and receive lower evaluations . However , the way in which we manipulated anthropomorphic features of the interfaces did not produce anticipated differences in expectedness or evaluations . One explanation for the failure to associate human - like qualities of the interfaces with corresponding increases in expectancies is the “black sheep effect . ” Briefly , interaction with the more anthropomorphic interfaces might have been so unrealistic as to produce suspicion within the human partner . When interaction is so at odds with what is expected , actors become oriented to the source of the violation ( usually the interlocutor ) and responses - - both positive and negative - - become amplified relative to expected interaction . Burgoon and LePoire [ 15 ] , for example , showed that people were evaluated positively when interaction involvement was either consistent with or positively exceeded expectations , and persons whose involvement was inappropriate were evaluated negatively . If HCI agents are unexpected in a jarring or unpleasant sense , then interaction outcomes should be similarly unfavorable . The black sheep effect implies that violations are likely to be of a negative sort , which leads to the predictions that the more expected the behavior of the partner , the more favorable the outcomes should be . The trick then for designing interfaces to be persuasive depends in part on matching the computer’s features to the desired degree of expectedness and evaluation . It is clear that the interfaces used in this study have no clear expectation advantage over text - based interfaces , and are certainly less expected and more negatively evaluated than human partners . In terms of text interfaces , it is likely that they are more expected than some of the newer anthropomorphic types of interfaces merely because it was the prototype for both computer - mediated communication and HCI for some time . Much like other aspects of social interaction that have expectancies attached to them ( e . g . , gaze and social distance ) , text - based interfaces have been a fixture of mediated communication and is the standard against which others are judged . Notice that previous research using these data suggested that text - based interfaces are desirable if the purpose of the interface is to dispense information quickly and with little resistance [ 2 , 8 ] . Certainly , the type of task used here fits those requirements in some degree . But if the purpose of HCI is to build social relationships or to secure other kinds of responses and effects , for example , comforting and advice giving , then text - based interfaces are disadvantaged compared to computers with more human - like qualities . The gist is that interfaces ought to be designed according to the requirements of the of the task . In some cases , text is all 236 that is needed , and more sophisticated devices are required in others . Future research ought to focus on two issues : First , researchers must reliably establish the relation between features of the interface and expectations . Rapid technological advancements ought to allow researchers to implement theoretically important variations in interface design more realistically than done here , thus avoiding the black sheep effect . Given the depth and breadth of communication research in this area , the task is not simple since there are many ways of coordinating nonverbal behaviors with messages . Moreover , there are as many effects as there are combinations of behaviors . The choice depends on the process variables that are assumed to affect impression management and decision - making during interaction . The second area of future research is to further examine the relation between task , process , and effect . Our research focused only on decision - making tasks , and implies that other , more social tasks might benefit from more advanced interfaces . For example , Keller - man [ 23 ] described a device called JUDIS that distributed advice about meal planning . The system itself is based on adaptation to conversational regularities and part of its effect is the way in which it “learns” to interact with human partners . It is a text - based interface . One wonders if it a more elaborate interface would make the computer appear more credible or caring , and if it would in turn be more effective . Evidence presented here and in our previous research implies that such benefits may be realized by an interface with more human - like qualities . REFERENCES 1 . Aron , A . , Aron , E . N . , and Smollan , D . “Inclusion of other in the self scale and the structure of interpersonal closeness , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , vol . 63 , pp . 596 - 612 , 1992 . 2 . Bengtsson , B . , Burgoon , J . K . , Cederberg , C . , Bonito , J . A . , and Lundberg , M . “The impact of anthropomorphic interfaces on influence , understanding , and credibility . ” Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on Computer and Systems Sciences , Maui , HI . 1999 . 3 . Bengtsson , B . , Burgoon , J . K . , Cederberg , C . , Bonito , J . , and Lundeberg , M . “Virtual communication and the impact of anthropomorphic interfaces . ” Paper presented to the 2nd Swedish Symposium on Multimodal Communication , Lund , Sweden . 1998 . 4 . Beskow , J . “Rule - Based Audiovisual Speech . ” Unpublished masters thesis , Royal Institute of Technology , Stockholm , Sweden , 1995 . 5 . Bonito , J . A . and Hollingshead , A . B . “Participation in small groups , ” in Burleson , B . R . ( ed . ) Communication Yearbook 20 . Newbury Park , CA : Sage , 1997 , pp . 227 - 261 . 6 . Buck , R . “From DNA to MTV : The spontaneous communication of emotional messages , ” in Greene , J . 0 . ( ed . ) Message production : Advances in communication theory . Mawah , NJ : Erlbaum , 1997 , pp . 3 13 - 340 . 7 . Burgoon , J . K . “Cross - cultural and intercultural applications of expectancy violations theory , ” in Wiseman , R . L . ( ed . ) Intercultural communication theory . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage , 1995 , pp . 194 - 214 . 8 . Burgoon , J . K . , Bonito , J . A . , Bengsston , B . , Ramirez , A . , and Dunbar , N . “Testing the Interactivity Model : Communication Processes , Partner Assessments , and the Quality of Collaborative Work , ” Journal of Management and Information Systems , in press . 9 . Burgoon , J . K . , Johnson , M . L . , and Koch , P . T . “The nature and measurement of interpersonal dominance , ” Communication Monographs , vol . 65 , pp . 308335 , 1998 . 10 . Burgoon , J . K . and White , C . H . “Researching nonverbal message production : A view from interaction adaptation theory . , ” in Greene , J . 0 . ( ed . ) Message production : Advances in communication theory . Mawah , NJ : Erlbaum , 1997 , pp . 279 - 3 12 . Il . Burgoon , J . K . “A communication model of personal space violations : Explication and an initial test , ” Human Communication Research , vol . 4 , pp . 129 - 142 , 1978 . 12 . Burgoon , J . K . and Hale , J . L . “Validation and measurement of the fundamental themes of relational communication , ” Communication Monographs , vol . 54 , pp . 19 - 41 , 1987 . 13 . Burgoon , J . K . and Hale , J . L . “Nonverbal expectancy violations : Model elaboration and application to immediacy behaviors , ” Communication Monographs , vol . 55 , no . 1 , pp . 58 - 79 , 1988 . 14 . Burgoon , J . K . and Jones , S . B . “Toward a theory of personal space expectations and their violations , ” Human Communication Research , vol . 2 , no . 2 , pp . 13 I - 146 , 1976 . 15 . Burgoon , J . K . and LePoire , B . A . “Effects of communication expectancies , actual communication , and expectancy disconfirmation on evaluations of communicators and their communication behavior , ” Human Communication Research , vol . 20 , no . 1 , pp . 67 - 96 , 1993 . 16 . Burgoon , J . K . and Walther , J . B . “Nonverbal expectancies and the evaluative consequences of violations , ” Human Communication Research , vol . 17 , no . 2 , pp . 232 - 265 , 1990 . 17 . Burgoon , J . K . , Walther , J . B . , and Baesler , E . J . “Interpretations , evaluations , and consequences of interpersonal touch , ” Human Communication Research , vol . 19 , no . 2 , pp . 237 - 263 , 1992 . 18 . Cahn , D . D . and Shulman , G . M . “The perceived understanding instrument , ” Communication Research Reports , vol . 1 , pp . 122 - 125 , 1984 . 19 . Fisek , M . H . , Berger , J . , and Norman , R . Z . “Participation in hetero and homogeneous groups : A 237 theoretical integration , ” American Journal of Sociology , vol . 97 , pp . 114 - 142 , 1991 . 20 . Fisek , M . H . , Berger , J . , and Norman , R . Z . “Two issues in the assessment of the adequacy of formal sociological models of human behavior , ” Social Science Research , vol . 26 , pp . 153 - 169 , 1997 . 21 . Fisek , M . H . and Ofshe , R . “The process of status evolution , ” Sociometry , vol . 33 , pp . 327 - 335 , 1970 . 22 . Hallowell , E . M . “The human moment at work , ” Harvard Business Review , vol . 77 , pp . 58 - 64 , 1999 . 23 . Kellerman , K . “The conversational MOP : A model of patterned and pliable behavior , ” in Hewes , D . E . ( ed . ) The cognitive bases of interpersonal communication . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum , 1995 , pp . 181 - 224 . 24 . Kiesler , S . , Sproull , L . , and Waters , K . “A prisoner’s dilemma experiment on cooperation with people and human - like computers , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , vol . 70 , pp . 47 - 65 , 1996 . 25 . Knottnerus , J . D . “Social structure analysis and status generalization : The contributions and potential of expectation states theory , ” in Szmatka , J . , Skvoretz , J . , and Berger , J . ( eds . ) Status , network , and structure : Theory development in group processes . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 1997 , pp . 119 - 136 . 26 . Lundeberg , M . “Multi - Modal Speech Communication Development of a Test - Environment . ” Unpublished masters thesis , Royal Institute of Technology , Stockholm , Sweden , 1997 . 27 . McCroskey , J . C . , Hamilton , P . R . , and Weiner , A . M . “The effect of interaction behavior on source credibility , homophily , and interpersonal attraction , ” Human Communication Research , vol . 1 , pp . 42 - 52 , 1974 . 28 . McCroskey , J . C . and McCain , T . A . “The measurement of interpersonal attraction , ” Speech Monographs , vol . 4 1 , pp . 261 - 266 , 1974 . 29 . McCroskey , J . C . and Young , T . J . “Ethos and credibility : The construct and its measurement after three decades , ” Speech Monographs , vol . 4 1 , pp . 26 l - 266 , 1981 . 30 . Meeker , B . F . , “Performance evaluation , ” in Lawler , M . F . ( ea . ) Group processes : Sociology analyses . Chicago : Nelson - Hall , 1994 , pp . 95 - l 17 . 3 1 . Moon , Y . and Nass , C . “How “real” are computer personalities ? Psychological responses to personality types in human - computer interaction , ” Communication Research , vol . 23 , pp . 65 l - 674 , 1996 . 32 . Moon , Y . “How “Real” are computer personalities ? Psychological responses to personality types in human - computer interaction , ” Communication Research , vol . 23 , no . 6 , pp . 65 l - 674 , 1996 . 33 . Nass , C . , Fogg , B . J . , and Moon , Y . “Can computers be teammates ? , ” International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , pp . 669 - 678 , 1996 . 34 . Nass , C . , Steuer , J . , Henriksen , L . , and Dryer , C . “Machines , Social , and Ethopoeia : Performance Assessments of Computers Subsequent to Self - or Other - Evaluations , ” International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 40 pp . 543 - 559 , 1994 . 35 . Skvoretz , J . V . “Models of participation in status - differentiated groups , ” Social Psychology Quarterly , vol . 5 1 , pp . 43 - 57 , 1988 . 36 . Smith - Lovin , L . , Skvoretz , J . V . , and Hudson , C . G . “Status and participation in six - person groups : A test of Skvoretz’s comparative status model , ” Social Forces , vol . 64 , pp . 992 - 1005 , 1986 . 37 . Smith , S . W . “Perceptual processing of nonverbal - relational messages , ” in Hewes , D . E . ( ed . ) The cognitive bases of interpersonal communication . Hillsday , NJ : Erlbaum , 1995 , pp . 87 - l 12 . 38 . Webster , Jr . M . , Hysom , S . J . , and Fullmer , E . M . “Sexual orientation and occupation as status , ” in Skvoretz , J . and Szmatka , J . teds . ) Advances in group processes . Stamford , CT : JAI Press , 1998 , pp . l - 22 . 39 . Woodall , W . G . “Encoding specificity and nonverbal cue context : An expansion of episodic memory research , ” Communication Monographs , vol . 48 , no . 1 , pp . 39 - 53 , 1981 . 238