Pinteresce : Exploring Reminiscence for Implicit Digital Reciprocity of Older Adults Abstract Sustaining remote communication across generations is a continuing problem , due to the increasing popularity of online communication . Participation in online platforms is advantageous for seniors wishing to connect with younger generations , yet reciprocity on these platforms is a challenge for older adults . Barriers include the cognitive overload of existing mainstream interfaces and a lack of engaging content . In this paper we propose Pinteresce , a tool leveraging family - generated reminiscence prompts to encourage seniors’ participation in the online community , Pinterest . The system provides an intuitive interface for communicating across age groups to promote reciprocal engagement with online content . Author Keywords Older adults ; reminiscence ; reciprocity ; social media ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . Introduction Consider this scenario : Eleanor is a 73 year old resident of an assisted living community . She lives 3 , 000 miles and several time zones away from her son and daughter , which makes it difficult for Eleanor and her Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CSCW’15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2946 - 0 / 15 / 03 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2685553 . 2699017 Robin N . Brewer Northwestern University 2240 Campus Drive Evanston , IL 60201 rnbrewer @ u . northwestern . edu Jasmine Jones School of Information University of Michigan Ann Arbor , MI 48109 jazzij @ umich . edu Poster CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 243 children to communicate by phone . They used to exchange e - mails frequently but the conversations became too monotonous . She is quite lonely since moving to the assisted living community and spends most of her time in her room playing Solitaire on the computer . The doctors tell her she is showing signs of progressive dementia , and Eleanor ' s children are concerned about their mother . They would like to engage her in meaningful conversation while helping her to remember details about her life , but e - mail is no longer a rich enough solution . In this paper , we consider the needs of families such as Eleanor ' s who have challenges connecting online . We combine two bodies of work , the communicative concept of reciprocity and design for reminiscence , to address this issue . Prior work has shown that reciprocity is a problem in online communication for older adults , even when the desire to connect is present [ 10 ] . The primary mode of online communication used by older adults is email [ 12 ] ; however , studies have shown that older adults value more visual mediums [ 1 , 9 ] . One of the main values of photographs is their ability to evoke reminiscence [ 4 ] . Inspired by this work in reminiscence , we describe a new approach for facilitating intergenerational communication using reminiscence as a scaffolding feature to encourage reciprocity . We contribute 1 ) the design of a hybrid communication interface allowing seniors to interact with loved ones online through Pinterest , and 2 ) a prompt - based approach for intergenerational content sharing . Benefits of Reminiscence for Older Adults One of the challenges faced by seniors is increasing social isolation from family and friends as they age [ 7 ] . It is common for seniors to develop age - related cognitive impairments as they grow older . However , the negative effects of these conditions , such as depression , can be exacerbated by isolation and loneliness [ 12 ] . While cognitive decline has no known cure , a variety of therapies exist to meet social and emotional needs of older adults with cognitive impairments . Reminiscence therapy is one type of therapy that has been shown to be fun , make people feel less isolated , and allows them to foster and sustain relationships with members of their social networks [ 7 ] . Research has found that one way seniors overcome social isolation and attempt to maintain connections is through online communication with distant family and friends and using online communities [ 2 , 10 ] . Reciprocity as a Challenge While older adults self - report using online communication technologies [ 12 ] , studies have found that they frequently participate as lurkers , or content consumers , rather than as contributing members [ 1 ] . This lack of reciprocity prevents them from fully participating in potentially - engaging and beneficial social interactions . Seniors wish to contribute and engage online with their social contacts , but encounter barriers , such as overly complex interfaces hindering reciprocal communication [ 3 , 5 , 6 ] . Addressing Reciprocity with Reminiscence Prior research shows older adults value 1 ) keeping in touch and 2 ) the use of photographs [ 1 , 9 ] . We seek to leverage these complementary values to overcome the Figure 1 . Pinterest affords browsing through photos easily ( top ) and pinning them to a board . It also enables liking , and leaving comments about posts ( bottom ) . Poster CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 244 difficulties seniors face in engaging online with their loved ones . To address difficulties in reciprocity identified by prior research we develop a prototype with two key elements : 1 ) encouraging reciprocity with a focus on content creation mechanisms , and 2 ) providing an engaging experience using social reminiscence cues as conversation prompts . This work will also be beneficial for a broader set of users who wish to share their memories with friends and family members online in more reciprocal ways . Existing platforms such as Pensieve have used e - mail to trigger spontaneous reminiscence in individuals , and found that prompts easily evoked reminiscence with social connections [ 11 ] . While the value of reminiscence is generalizable to other populations , it is important to focus on design for seniors . Older adults have specialized interface needs , especially those experiencing cognitive decline . Thus new interfaces should be carefully designed to prevent fatigue and information overload [ 5 ] . We leverage an existing social media platform , Pinterest , as a dual - purpose tool for seniors . We provide an online environment for senior reminiscence and use these memories to trigger reciprocal digital interactions with family members and friends . Pinteresce : A Tool for Reminiscence - Motivated Social Interaction We choose Pinterest as a tool for reminiscence because it combines two key social and interface features to engage seniors : centrality of photographic media and prominence of social interaction [ 4 , 6 ] . Below we describe the system , which we call ‘ Pinteresce , ’ and how we plan to study its usage by older adults . Workflow Our workflow was inspired by Pensieve’s trigger - based reminiscence with younger adults where e - mails serve as reminders to contribute a memory [ 11 ] . With Pinteresce , family and friends are able to contribute topics for reminiscence by e - mail ( e . g . favorite place in the world , a memorable childhood experience ) . Each week the application chooses one of the submitted topics and creates a shared board with the topic as a prompt . Older adults will then receive the prompt via email , a medium they commonly use when online [ 12 ] , as well as pop - up reminders on their desktop . Each email or pop - up contains a link to a simplified version of that week’s shared Pinterest board ( Fig . 2 ) . Seniors then search from the existing Pinterest photo gallery for images related to the topic to add to their boards . All other users will be directed ( using similar e - mail prompts ) to the standard Pinterest interface containing the same shared board for the week’s posts . Users are then provided the option to leave comments and interact with one another’s posts as they normally would . Based on existing research , the Pinteresce system would provide a framework to provide an engaging form of reminiscence while encouraging reciprocity online . Simplicity Older adults value ease when trying to contact loved ones [ 9 , 10 ] . The simplified interface for seniors ( Fig . 2 ) provides access to only the primary features of Pinterest necessary for an interactive experience - adding photos to a board and commenting on photos . Figure 2 . A focused view of an image on an older adult ' s board ( top ) including the ability to comment on other’s pins ( bottom ) . Poster CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 245 The system focuses on the current week’s topic by showing one board at a time , starting with the most recent board . We also limit the simplified interface to only searching and pinning existing photos on Pinterest because procuring and uploading original content adds another layer of difficulty to participating online [ 8 ] . Also , only the top 25 results for each query on Pinterest will be shown as options to add to one’s board to prevent cognitive overload processing a seemingly unending stream of photos . Engagement In addition to a simplified interface , we use reminiscence prompts and photo - based interactions to accentuate the intrinsic motivators of seniors to engage in online activity . Pinteresce incorporates family - generated reminiscence prompts to help facilitate engagement with loved ones . Reciprocity Seniors desire to return the efforts to keep in contact that loved ones make online [ 9 ] . Pinteresce supports this desire by diminishing barriers due to complexity and information overload and facilitating social interactions . Conclusion and Future Work In this paper , we present the design of Pinteresce , a social media platform designed to support reciprocity in senior’s online interactions with family and friends . We provide a simplified interface and leverage family - generated reminiscence prompts to promote engagement with online content . In future work , we will evaluate the effectiveness of this design intervention in encouraging reciprocity between older adults and family and friends’ online social interactions . References 1 . Baecker , R . , Sellen , K . , Crosskey , S . , Boscart , V . , and Neves , B . Technologies to reduce social isolation and loneliness . ASSETS , ( 2014 ) . 2 . Cornejo , R . , Tentori , M . , and Favela , J . Enriching in - person encounters through social media : A study on family connectedness for the elderly . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 71 , 9 ( 2013 ) . 3 . Cornwell , E . Y . and Waite , L . J . Social disconnectedness , perceived isolation , and health among older adults . Journal of health and social behavior 50 , ( 2009 ) . 4 . Crete - Nishihata , M . , Baecker , R . , Massimi , M . , et al . Reconstructing the past : Personal memory technologies are not just personal and not just for memory . HCI 27 , ( 2012 ) , 92 – 123 . 5 . Dickinson , A . , Newell , A . F . , Smith , M . J . , and Hill , R . L . Introducing the Internet to the over - 60s : Developing an email system for older novice computer users . Interacting with Computers 17 , 6 ( 2005 ) , 621 – 642 . 6 . Hope , A . , Schwaba , T . , and Piper , A . M . Understanding Digital and Material Social Communications for Older Adults . CHI , ( 2014 ) . 7 . Lazar , A . , Thompson , H . , and Demiris , G . A systematic review of the use of technology for reminiscence therapy . Health education & behavior 41 , ( 2014 ) . 8 . Lehtinen , V . , Nasanen , J . , and Sarvas , R . “A little silly and empty - headed” : older adults’ understandings of social networking sites . BCS - HCI , British Computer Society ( 2009 ) , 45 – 54 . 9 . Lindley , S . E . , Harper , R . , and Sellen , A . Designing for Elders : Exploring the Complexity of Relationships in Later Life . BCS - HCi , ( 2008 ) , 77 – 86 . 10 . Lindley , S . E . , Harper , R . , and Sellen , A . Desiring to be in Touch in a Changing Communications Landscape : Attitudes of Older Adults . CHI , ( 2009 ) , 1693 – 1702 . 11 . Peesapati , S . and Schwanda , V . Pensieve : supporting everyday reminiscence . CHI , ( 2010 ) , 2027 – 2036 . 12 . Smith , A . Older Adults and Technology Use : Adoption is increasing but many seniors remain isolated from digital life . Pew Research Center , 2014 . Poster CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 246