Listener Responsiveness and the Coordination of Conversation Robert E . Kraut , Steven H . Lewis , and Lawrence W . Swezey Cornell University Listeners are often active in conversation , and the feedback they provide speakers can improve the communication . To examine how feedback influences conver - sation , we had 76 speaker subjects watch a movie and then summarize it to one or two listeners . The - listeners provided varying amounts of feedback to the speaker . When two listeners were present , one could influence the speaker through feedback and the other could only eavesdrop on the conversation . When speakers received more feedback , their narratives were more comprehensible ; that is , both listeners understood the movie better . In addition , feedback individuated com - munication ; that is , the listener who provided the feedback understood the movie better than the eavesdropper who listened to the same conversation . In part , feedback produced these effects by coordinating what the speaker said with what the listener needed to know . Listener feedback signaled listeners ' prior knowledge of the movie , and speakers talked most efficiently about those sections of the movie about which listeners had prior knowledge . Traditional research on communication has often proceeded as if the variables af - fecting it were static and nonemergent , in the sense that most variables do not change dur - ing the course of the conversation and that changes that do occur are produced by some - thing other than dynamic interaction be - tween the participants . For example , work on attitude change has studied static char - acteristics of the source , message , and recip - ient ( McGuire , 1969 ) . Work in nonverbal communication , with a few notable excep - tions ( e . g . , Goffman , 1971 ) , also typically fo - cuses on these characteristics by looking at personality differences ( e . g . , Rosenthal , Hall , Di Matteo , Rogers , & Archer , 1979 ) or char - acteristics of the message ( e . g . , Ekman & Friesen , 1978 ) . Traditional work in psycho - linguistics also concentrates on static aspects of the messages ' syntactic and semantic structure ( e . g . , Fodor , Bever , & Garret , 1974 ) . This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant BNS - 7907963 to Robert Kraut . An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association , Montreal , September 1980 . Requests for reprints should be sent to Robert Kraut , who is now at Bell Laboratories , LZ 3J 319 , 307 Mid - dletown Lincroft Road , Lincroft , New Jersey 07738 . Clearly , however , conversationalists co - ordinate much of what they have to say to each other on the spot . To achieve whatever goals they have in a conversation , whether they are exposition , persuasion , or impres - sion management , people generally want their partners to understand them . To follow Grice ' s ( 1975 ) maxims of clarity , lack of am - biguity , and conciseness , speakers have to assess how their speech is affecting their part - ner ' s knowledge or understanding . They may do this by adopting their partners ' perspec - tive , perhaps by noting and drawing impli - cations from their partners ' physical position ( e . g . , Clark & Marshall , 1981 ) or demo - graphic attributes ( e . g . , Krauss & Glucksberg , 1977 ) . They can then use these inferences either to form or , after the fact , to modify their speech to be responsive to the partners ' knowledge , beliefs , or understanding . In these processes , speakers make infer - ences from characteristics of their partners that were neither evolutionarily adapted nor individually intended for communication . Speakers can also use the explicit feedback that partners provide about their knowledge , beliefs , affective states , or understanding . This feedback can range from extended ex - position or questioning , in which the person Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1982 , Vol . 43 , No . 4 , 718 - 731 Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0022 - 3514 / 82 / 4304 - 0718S00 . 75 718 LISTENER FEEDBACK AND CONVERSATION 719 giving feedback accepts the speaking turn , to less extensive and semantically specified feedback , in which the person giving feed - back remains in the auditor role . This feed - back , known as back - channel feedback or listener responsiveness , is an especially in - teresting and important subsystem of con - versation to study because through it a lis - tener can regulate a speaker ' s speech as it is happening . Since participants in conversa - tion generally want to understand their part - ners in order to gain information or to make an appropriate reply , using back - channel feedback allows them to have immediate im - pact on the speech in ways that may increase their understanding . Listener responses or back - channel com - munications ( Yngve , 1970 ) are the small vi - sual and verbal comments an auditor makes while a speaker is talking , without taking over the speaking turn . They include clarifying questions , brief verbal responses such as " yeah , " " m - hmm " and the like , head nods , brief smiles , repetitions of the speaker ' s words , and brief sentence completions ( Duncan , 1974 ) . The boundary between them and ac - tual exchanges of a speaking turn is not sharp . To date , most research on listener re - sponses has been structural , studying where in the speech stream these responses fit ( e . g . , Dittmann , 1972 ; Rosenfeld , 1972 ) or how they influence the changing of the speaking turn ( Duncan , 1974 ) . Many writers have speculated that varia - tions of listener responses indicate to speak - ers the degree to which listeners are paying attention , understanding points being made , or agreeing with them ( e . g . , Rosenfeld , 1978 ; Yngve , 1970 ) , but research to date has been more suggestive than definitive . For example , Leathers ' s data ( 1979 ) suggest that judges of verbal and nonverbal feedback signals can reliably interpret them as messages about the responder ' s involvement , state of confusion , thoughtfulness , and affective reaction to what has previously been said . Kendon ( 1967 ) has shown that speakers look away from listeners as they start a cognitively difficult passage but return their gaze to the listeners toward the end of the passage , as if calling for their re - actions . Listeners tend to give back - channel responses at these points ( Dittmann & Llew - ellyn , 1968 ; Duncan , 1974 ) . Only a small amount of research has ex - amined whether feedback in conversation influences the quality of speech , as one would expect if one of its functions is to coordinate understanding between speaker and listener . When speakers are denied feedback they be - come upset and disrupted ( Rosenfeld , 1967 ) , their speech becomes less structured and co - herent ( Kent , Davis , & Shapiro , 1978 ) , and they communicate less accurately ( Feffer & Suchotliff , 1966 ; Leavitt & Mueller , 1951 ) . At least by some measures , their speech also becomes less efficient ( Krauss & Bricker , 1967 ; Krauss , Garlock , Bricker , & Mc - Mahon , 1977 ; Krauss & Weinheimer , 1964 , 1966 ) . Krauss and his colleagues have used a referential communication task in which speakers described difficult - to - name objects to listeners . When back - channel communi - cation to speakers was disrupted , speakers used more words to describe the objects suc - cessfully . Although most speakers started with lengthy descriptions that they abbrevi - ated over time , speakers lacking feedback did not abbreviate as much , presumably because they received no confirmation that their part - ners had understood their shorthand . In previous research ( Kraut & Lewis , in press ) , we have shown that feedback from listeners can regulate how speakers organize what they have to say . Speakers whose part - ners provided them with no feedback tended to develop their monologues in a linear fa - shion , without backtracking to paraphrase or to clarify their partners ' confusions . Speakers whose listeners did provide them with feed - back tended to wrap up a topic after they received a feedback signal , as if they inter - preted the signal to mean that their partners understood the point they were making . The present research attempts to examine whether listener responsiveness increases conversational effectiveness and investigates several processes by which this increase could occur . We studied the role of listener re - sponsiveness in conversational effectiveness by having speakers summarize the plot of a movie to one or two listeners . In this task , the speakers and the listeners had the same goal—to make sure the summary was clear and coordinated with what the listeners needed to know , so that the listeners could understand the movie . The task also pro - 720 R . KRAUT , S . LEWIS , AND L . SWEZEY vided a good blend of natural conversation with experimental control over topic . The summarizing task was more complex and natural than the referential communication task used by Krauss and his colleagues , yet more controlled and comparable across con - versations than the free conversations used by other researchers ( e . g . , Kent , Davis , & Shapiro , 1978 ; Kraut & Lewis , in press ) . As in previous research , we studied the role of listener responses by comparing the per - formance of speakers who received unre - stricted listener feedback with those who re - ceived less feedback . We reasoned that to the extent that speakers are monitoring their partners ' feedback to assess whether they un - derstand and agree with particular points , speakers should modify their speech to take into account the partners ' level of under - standing and objection . What the speakers say and what the partners need to know should be more coordinated in conversations in which the partners are providing adequate feedback . Summaries under these conditions should be better , in the sense that listeners should understand more about the movie . Feedback may provide speakers with two somewhat different types of information . First , it may provide information about the reaction of a generalized audience . If the feedback is obligatory—if any member of the language community would have provided substantially the same feedback at substan - tially the same places in the stream of speech—then feedback from any one listener provides information about how the lan - guage community as a whole understands a passage . In this case , feedback from any lis - tener should improve the speech for all lis - teners . Second , feedback may provide infor - mation about the reactions of a particular listener . If feedback is optional—if different listeners give different feedback at different times—then feedback provides the speaker with information about a particular listener ' s unique understanding , agreement , and needs . In this case , we would expect that the person giving the feedback will understand the speech better than another person overhearing the same conversation . To examine this possibility , in some con - ditions we had speakers summarize the movie to pairs of listeners . In each pair , one of the listeners ( the active listener ) gave feedback that could influence the speaker . The other listener ( the eavesdropper ) could not influ - ence the speaker , either because the eaves - dropper was instructed not to give feedback or because the feedback never reached the speaker . If feedback provides information about the generalized audience , both listen - ers should understand the movie better as the speaker gets more feedback from one of them . On the other hand , if the feedback provides information about a particular lis - tener ' s reaction , the active listener should understand the movie better than the eaves - dropper , especially when the active listener provides a large amount of feedback . Of course , feedback can serve both functions . We are assuming that feedback improves conversation by coordinating speaker and listener . A direct test of this assumption must show ( a ) that listeners actually signal what they know via feedback ( i . e . , that listener feedback changes with changes in listeners ' knowledge and understanding ) and ( b ) that speakers are sensitive to these signals ( i . e . , that their speech also changes with changes in listeners ' knowledge and understanding ) . To conduct this test , we selected a number of scenes from the movie that was to be sum - marized to listeners and manipulated listen - ers ' knowledge about the scenes before the summary . For some scenes , listeners saw pre - views that should have made them knowl - edgeable about the scenes . For some scenes , they saw excerpts from a different but related movie that should have confused them when the speaker described parallel scenes , For some scenes , they saw excerpts from neither movie . We measured the amount and type of feedback that listeners gave in response to descriptions of scenes for which they were differentially informed . We also measured the completeness , accuracy , and efficiency of the speakers ' descriptions of the scenes about which listeners were differentially informed . Although we made no specific predictions , we expected , for example , that speakers would give shorter descriptions of scenes that listeners knew about in advance and that lis - teners would ask more questions about scenes that confused them . LISTENER FEEDBACK AND CONVERSATION 721 Method Subjects and Task We recruited 213 participants from a population of university moviegoers and students . They were paid $ 2 . 50 per hour for their participation . Seventy - eight speaker subjects watched a monochrome videotape of the movie Bend of the River and returned from 1 to 21 days later to summarize the movie to listeners . The movie is an approximately 90 - minute Western in which an ex - outlaw , played by Jimmy Stewart , helps some pi - oneers get and retain supplies so that they can establish a settlement , Speakers watched the movie in small groups of 2 - 8 subjects . When they returned individually to the laboratory , they were given about 10 minutes to organize their recollections of the movie and then spent a few minutes in warm - up conversation with their lis - teners . Speakers and listeners were in separate rooms and all communication occurred over an audio link . Speakers ' summaries and all of the listeners ' comments and verbal or paralinguistic responses were recorded on separate tracks of a four - channel tape recorder . Speakers were instructed to provide a complete and accurate summary of the movie so that a listener could understand it and in turn summarize it . Subjects were told We will be primarily interested in how well you com - municate the summary and how well your partners understand it . Your task is to communicate a clear and concise summary of the movie you have just seen , without leaving out important elements of plot or characterization . Try to be complete , organized , and succinct . The accuracy and completeness of your sum - mary are important . Since you have only 10 minutes , as you summarize focus on those parts of the story and plot your partners seem most confused about . A large countdown timer showed the time remaining . To increase their motivation to summarize well , speak - ers competed for a $ 15 prize to be awarded to the speaker whose listeners understood the movie best . After the summary , the speaker and the listeners completed de - pendent measures about the movie and the conversa - tion . Independent Variables Amount of feedback . One of our major independent variables was the amount of feedback that speakers re - ceived from their partners during summarization . They received either unrestricted feedback , limited feedback , or no feedback at all . In the unrestricted - feedback con - dition , one of the two listeners was instructed to provide unrestricted feedback , to be responsive , to ask questions , and to interrupt freely in order to get as good an un - derstanding of the characters and the story as possible . They were told It is extremely important that you be as responsive to your partner as possible . Basically this should - be like a conversation with a friend who is describing a movie to you and another person over the telephone . So be as responsive as you would be in a normal con - versation . Let the speaker know that you are _ there , that you understand a point , or that you are confused , or that you think something is funny , and that you are listening . In the limited - feedback condition , listeners were given the same instructions to be responsive in order to un - derstand the movie but were also told to refrain from asking multiword questions or making long comments . That is , they were instructed to provide brief listener responses such as " m - hmm , " " I see , " " huh ? " " who ? " or " really ! " Subjects were told The only restriction we put on your behavior is that you don ' t interrupt your partner with extended com - ments or longer - than - one - word questions . So listen to what your partner is saying and respond so that he or she knows whether you are paying attention and what you understand . In the no - feedback condition , listeners received the same instructions as in the limited - feedback condition but their microphones were disconnected 30 seconds after the start of the summaries . Of the speakers , 19 received unrestricted feedback , 38 received limited feed - back , and 21 received no feedback . Listeners ' participation status . In the unrestricted - and limited - feedback conditions , two listeners partici - pated with each speaker . One provided feedback that could influence the speaker , whereas the other listener was an eavesdropper who could not influence the speaker . The eavesdropper ' s role was manipulated in different ways depending on the amount of feedback the speaker was getting . In the unrestricted - feedback con - dition , the active listener had the unrestricted - feedback instructions , and the eavesdropper was instructed to lis - ten to the speaker ' s summary and to provide no feedback at all . The eavesdropper ' s microphone was disconnected to block inadvertent feedback . In the limited - feedback condition , both listeners had identical instructions . However , the eavesdropper ' s microphone was discon - nected after 30 seconds of the summary . Thus , in each group with an active listener and an eavesdropper , the two listeners heard exactly the same description of the movie but only the active listener influenced the nar - rative . In the no - feedback cell , the speakers got no feed - back and , of course , the listeners could not influence them . About one third ( 17 / 59 ) of the eavesdroppers in the limited - feedback cell and the listeners in the no - feedback cell discovered that their microphones were discon - nected . This invariably occurred when they violated their limited - feedback instructions by asking questions or making long comments that required a contingent response from the speaker . However , discovery of the deception was uncorrelated with listeners ' comprehen - sion , and eliminating these subjects does not change the results ; Listeners ' prior knowledge . Before hearing a sum * raary , all listeners in the unrestricted - feedback and no - feedback conditions and half of the listeners in the lim - ited feedback condition saw previews designed to alter their knowledge and understanding of some of the scenes 722 R . KRAUT , S . LEWIS , AND L . SWEZEY AMOUNT OF FEEDBACKTO SPEAKER LIMITEDWITH PREVIEWS N = 19 NONEN = 21 ACTIVE EAVESDROPPER LISTENER PARTICIPATION STATUS Figure 1 . Experimental design and number of groups per condition . that would be described to them . By viewing previews , listeners knew about some scenes , were potentially con - fused about other scenes , and were ignorant about still others before they heard the summaries . This prior knowledge manipulation was balanced for scene con - tent . We preselected 17 scenes from Bend of the River be - cause they wefe potentially confusable with scenes from The Far Country , another Western with the same di - rector , star , and screenwriter . For example , in one movie the hero deliberately stops a lynching by surprising and shooting at the lynchers , whereas in the other movie he accidentally stops a public hanging by driving a herd of cattle through a town . Listeners saw previews for 8 or 9 of the 17 preselected scenes . Six or seven of the pre - views came from Bend of the River , two or three came from The Far Country and eight or nine of the prese - lected scenes were not shown . To control for scene con - tent , we used three versions of the previews , in which the same prior knowledge condition was represented by different scenes from the movie . Figure 1 shows the incomplete factorial design and the number of groups in each experimental condition . Dependent Variables Speakers ' summary quality . We transcribed the speakers ' summaries and then measured several char - acteristics that reflected their quality . From repeated viewings of the movie , we identified 107 elements of theme , plot , or characterization important to under - standing the movie . For convenience , we will call these idea units . For example , a scene in which Indians attack the wagon train contained the following idea units : [ Some Indians attacked ] [ but were defeated ] [ by Glen and Cole . ] [ In this fight Cole saved Glen ' s life ] [ and Laura was wounded . ] . Two coders then coded each speaker ' s summary for how completely and accurately the summary covered each idea unit . Coding 0 meant the idea unit was not mentioned , 1 meant it was men - tioned incompletely or inaccurately , and 2 meant it was mentioned completely and accurately . The correlation between coders ' judgments , averaged over speakers , was . 85 . They discussed and reconciled disagreements . In addition , we compiled detailed descriptions of the 17 scenes from Bend of the River that appeared on the preview videotapes and rated the quality of the speakers ' summaries of these scenes . These measures supplement the coding of idea units , because they also measure in - terrelationships among idea units comprising a scene . Two new coders rated the completeness of the scene description ( 0 = scene not mentioned or barely men - tioned ; 1 = description omitted some characters and ev - ents ; 2 = description mentioned all important characters and events ) . They also rated the accuracy of the descrip - tion on a 3 - point scale ( 0 = a major mistake or confusion [ e . g . , a confusion of the two main characters ] ; 1 = a minor error [ e . g . , a confusion about the weapon with which a character was injured ] ; 2 = no errors ) . Finally , as a measure of summary length , we counted the number of words in the speakers ' summaries . Listener comprehension . After hearing the speakers ' summaries , listeners completed several measures de - signed to assess their understanding of the summary and the movie on which it was based . These are direct mea - sures of listener comprehension and so are of interest in comparing participant listeners to eavesdropper lis - teners . In addition , they are indirect measures of the quality of the speakers ' summaries and are therefore of interest in comparing speakers who received different amounts of feedback . Immediately after hearing the speaker ' s summary , the listeners themselves summarized the movie . They were told to summarize the movie as accurately and com - pletely as possible in 5 minutes . Their tape - recorded summaries were judged by two independent coders for overall quality on a 6 - point scale , where 1 meant poorly organized , inaccurate , and incomplete and 6 meant well organized , complete , and accurate . Reliability between the two coders was r ( 133 ) = . 81 . The summaries were also judged for the completeness and accuracy of the 17 preview scenes . Listeners then answered a fact test composed of 30 multiple - choice questions about specific plot and char - acter details . They next rated the two main characters in the film on 30 evaluative adjectives . Speakers had also rated the main characters on these scales . We were interested in the similarity of their evaluations . For each speaker - lis - tener pair , we produced two indexes of similarity , one for the hero and one for the villain , by computing the Pearson correlation between their description of these characters . We also computed an overall comprehension measure by standardizing these six listener comprehension mea - sures and taking their mean . Listener responses . We also attempted a preliminary classification of the listener responses that listeners gave during the summaries . These were minimal responses , in which listeners gave one - word or paralinguistic re - sponses ( e . g . , " uh - huh , " " yeah " ) ; completions , in which they completed a speaker ' s word or phrase ( e . g . , Speaker : " and then the hero , uh . . . " Listener : " Glen . " Speaker : " Yeah , Glen . . . " ) ; new information , in which the lis - teners took over the speaking turn to supply new infor - mation ( e . g . , " That ' s probably where the cows come through the town . " ) ; paraphrases , in which listeners re - LISTENER FEEDBACK AND CONVERSATION 723 phrased the speaker ' s last point ; multiword responses where listeners ' comments did not provide any infor - mation about the movie itself ( e . g . , " Oh , I remember that . " ) ; one - word questions ( e . g . , " huh ? " , " what ? " ) ; and multiword questions in the form of a phrase or sentence ( e . g . , " Who [ sic ] did he shoot ? " ) . Two coders indepen - dently coded each intelligible listener comment or re - sponse and then resolved disagreements through dis - cussion . Assessments of the conversation . After the summa - ries , listeners judged the conversations in which they had participated for the speakers ' clarity of summary and for the speakers ' success ia explaining points the listeners did not understand . In addition , the speaker and the listeners assessed their satisfaction with the conversation , using a scale developed by Hecht ( 1978 ) . This scale was used as a covariate in some of the analyses that followed to determine the extent to which feedback per se , in - dependent of the participants ' satisfaction with a con - versation , changed the quality of the conversation . Results Effects of Feedback on Listener Comprehension One of our major concerns was the way in which the amount of feedback that speak - ers received during their summaries influ - enced the quality and listeners ' comprehen - sion of their summaries . Because of the ex - ploratory nature of our research , we adopted a complex incomplete factorial experimental design that confounded amount of feedback with listeners ' participant status ( i . e . , when speakers received no feedback , listeners could not possibly influence them ) . To deal with these complexities , we first analyzed the data using multiple regression , testing whether the amount of feedback ( unrestricted , limited with preview , limited without preview , none ) , participant status ( participant vs . eavesdrop - per ) , or their interaction affected the depen - dent measures ( SAS Institute ; General Linear Model ; Sum of Squares , Type 2 ) . Amount of feedback did not interact with listeners ' participation status in any of the analyses . A subsequent analysis tested the effect of amount of feedback as a linear contrast for active listeners ( unrestricted = 1 ; limited = - 1 ) and eavesdroppers ( unrestricted = 1 ; limited = 0 ; none = - 1 ) separately . In general , the results show that as speak - ers received more feedback from a partner , listeners understood their summaries better and were more influenced by them . This ef - fect occurred for both active listeners ' and eavesdroppers ' comprehension of the sum - maries . Tables 1 and 2 show the relevant data . For example , Tables 1 and 2 show that listeners correctly answered more questions on the fact test when they gave the speaker more feedback , F ( 3 , 127 ) = 2 . 94 , p < . 05 ; for active listeners , r ( 55 ) = . 20 , p = . 13 , for eav - esdroppers , r ( 74 ) = . 21 , p = . 06 . Listeners ' descriptions of the hero became more similar to the speakers ' descriptions ^ they gave the speaker more feedback , F ( 3 , 127 ) = 2 . 84 , p < . 05 ; for active listeners , r ( 55 ) = . 19 , p = . 15 , for eavesdroppers , r ( 76 ) = . 26 , p = . 02 . Lis - teners ' descriptions of the villain also fol - lowed the same pattern , F ( 3 , 127 ) = 3 . 34 , p = . 02 ; for active listeners , r ( 55 ) = . 21 , p = . 12 , for eavesdroppers , r ( 76 ) = . 20 , p = . 08 . Listeners ' summaries also showed better un - derstanding with more feedback : for overall quality of summaries , F ( 3 , 126 ) = 1 . 99 , p < . 12 ; for active listeners , r ( 55 ) = . 21 p = . 11 , for eavesdroppers , r ( 74 ) = . 17 , p = . 14 ; for completeness of summaries , F ( 3 , 126 ) = 2 . 13 , p = . 10 ; for active listeners , r ( 55 ) = . 17 , p = . 20 , for eavesdroppers , r ( 74 ) = . 18 , p = . ll . An alternative explanation : Effects of the length and quality of the speakers ' summa - ries . We believe that feedback allowed lis - teners to understand the summaries because it helped to coordinate the summaries with listeners ' needs . Some data support this in - terpretation . For example , listeners believed that speakers ' summaries were clearer when the speakers received more feedback , F ( 3 , 127 ) = 8 . 58 , p < . 0001 ; for active listeners , r ( 55 ) = . 24 , p = . 06 , for eavesdroppers , r ( 76 ) = . 17 , u = . 13 . However , an alternative explanation is that with more feedback , speakers simply talked more and provided more information about the movie ( cf . Matarazzo , 1964 ) . In - deed , with more feedback , speakers gave lon - ger summaries , r ( 76 ) = . 30 , p < . 007 , al - though they provided only a slightly greater number of idea units in them , r ( 76 ) = . 09 , p = . 44 . However , the effects of feedback on listeners ' comprehension were only slightly reduced when the length of the summaries and the number of idea units in them were Table 1 Effects of Feedback to a Speaker on Active Listeners ' Comprehension Dependent variables Condition UnrestrictedLimited / no preview Limited / preview Facttest 62 . 0 % 54 . 3 % 58 . 5 % Herosimi - larity . 731 . 633 . 655 Villainsimi - larity . 526 . 315 . 449 Summarycomplete - ness . 565 . 407 . 546 Summaryaccu - racy Feedback 1 . 58 1 . 51 1 . 58 Globalquality to speaker 3 . 18 2 . 39 2 . 97 Overallcompre - hension . 384 - 1 . 65 . 231 Judgedclarity Length 5 . 26 27 . 4 3 . 76 21 . 4 5 . 32 24 . 4 Correlation Amount of feedback PartialinglengthPartialingidea units Partialingsatisfaction . 20 . 19 . 21 . 10 . 19 . 21 . 19 . 10 . 21 . 16 . 22 * . 11 . 17 . 09 . 18 . 10 . 04 . 03 . 05 . 02 . 21 . 15 . 22 * . 09 . 26 * * . 21 . 27 * * . 12 . 24 * . 23 * . 18 . 25 * - . 01 fVi vsvri fit fc \ ~ \ J Vdl let ICo Idea Listeners ' jo units satisfaction L | 119 5 . 14 - H ca 119 3 . 62 54j 123 4 . 57 j» § r - . 03 . 40 * * * w ra N • < Note . The first three rows show the mean value of the dependent measures in the unrestricted - and limited - feedback conditions . The next four rows show their correlations with feedback to the speaker as an experimental variable , with unrestricted coded 1 and limited feedback coded — 1 . n = 57 . * / > < . 10 . * * p < . 05 . * * * p < . 02 . Table 2 Effects of Feedback to a Speaker on Eavesdroppers ' Comprehension Dependent variables Condition Facttest Herosimi - larity Villainsimi - larity Summarycomplete - ness Summaryaccu - racy Globalquality Overallcompre - hension Judgedclarity Length Covanates Idea Listeners ' units satisfaction 51 g Feedback to speaker S Unrestrictedlimited / no preview limited / preview No feedback 60 . 7 % 51 . 7 % 54 . 3 % 52 . 7 % . 716 . 679 . 633 . 527 . 585 . 435 . 315 . 435 . 471 . 374 . 407 . 353 1 . 66 1 . 51 1 . 511 . 42 2 . 71 2 . 37 2 . 392 . 19 . 303 - . 122 - . 165 - . 295 5 . 12 27 . 4 3 . 53 21 . 4 3 . 76 21 . 4 4 . 36 18 . 1 119 4 . 53 119 3 . 64 119 3 . 62 113 4 . 28 Correlation Amount of feedback PartialinglengthPartialingidea units Partialing satisfaction . 21 * . 17 . 20 * . 21 * . 26 * * * . 21 * . 26 * * * . 25 * * . 20 * . 14 . 19 * . 19 * . 18 . 08 . 18 . 17 . 24 * * . 17 . 24 * * . 24 * * . 17 . 12 . 16 . 16 . 31 * * * . 22 * . 30 * * * . 29 * * * . 17 . 34 * * * . 18 . 19 * . 14 . 09 . 06 3 w > fl M og w < i jO % a 0 z Note . The first four rows show the mean value of the dependent measures in the unrestricted - , limited - , and no - feedback conditions . The next four rows show their correlations with feedback to the speaker as an experimental variable , with unrestricted feedback coded 1 , limited feedback coded 0 , and no feedback coded — 1 . n = 78 . * p < . 10 . * * p < . 05 . * * * p < . 02 . - j K > 726 R . KRAUT , S . LEWIS , AND L . SWEZEY 12 o 00 Tf < N I m p l e t e n e ss s u m o • r E ' m oo I— > / • > vO vo | I ' rt ja ^ > •a - controlled through partial correlations . ( See Tables 1 and 2 . ) Effects of Participation Status Another of our major hypotheses was that if feedback individuated conversation ( that is , caused it to be tailored to the listener giv - ing feedback ) , active listeners would under - stand the summaries better than eavesdrop - pers , even though they would be listening to identical summaries . A test of this hypothesis compares the comprehension measures for active listeners and eavesdroppers ( dropping the no - feedback cell , in which there were no active listeners ) . Table 3 shows the relevant data . The data support the hypothesis . Active listeners ' summaries were better than eaves - droppers ' summaries . Coders judged them to be of higher quality , t ( 56 ) = 2 . 10 , p = . 04 . They were also more complete , t ( 56 ) - 2 . 52 , p = . 0l . In addition , active listeners had higher scores on their fact test , t ( 54 ) = 1 . 64 , p = . 11 , and judged the speakers ' summaries as clearer , t ( 56 ) = 2 . 00 , p = . 05 . Perhaps more surprising is the finding that variations in the quality of the speakers ' sum - maries influenced active listeners more than they influenced eavesdroppers . In general , when the speakers gave better summaries , the active listeners ' summaries were also better , but the eavesdroppers ' summaries were not . Table 4 shows the correlation of the number of idea units in the speakers ' summaries with various measures of listener comprehension for the matched active listeriers and eaves - droppers . For example , as speakers included more idea units in their summaries , the ac - tive listeners ' summaries were of higher qual - ity , r ( 55 ) = A6 , p = . 0003 , whereas the eaves - droppers ' were not , r ( 53 ) = . 06 , p > . 50 ; for the difference , t ( 53 ) = 2 . 46 , p = . 02 . This same pattern occurred for all but one of the measures of listeners ' comprehension and significantly so for the overall measure of lis - tener comprehension , for the accuracy and completeness of their summaries , and for their assessment of speakers ' clarity . Listener Satisfaction as an Alternative Explanation A critic might argue that feedback to a speaker increases the listeners ' comprehen - LISTENER FEEDBACK AND CONVERSATION 727 sion by increasing their involvement in the conversation . This criticism could account for active listeners ' greater comprehension compared to eavesdroppers and for the active listeners ' greater comprehension as they gave more feedback . It could not , however , ac - count for feedback effects on eavesdroppers ' comprehension , because they understood most when they contributed least feedback ( in the unrestricted - feedback condition ) . To test this listener satisfaction explana - tion , all listeners completed a conversational satisfaction scale as one of the dependent measures ( Hecht , 1978 ) . This scale measures participants ' satisfaction with and involve - ment in a conversation using items such as " I did not enjoy the conversation " and " I felt that during the conversation I was able to present myself as I wanted the other person to view me . " As one might expect , partici - pant listeners but not eavesdroppers were more satisfied with the conversations when speakers received more feedback , for active listeners , r ( 55 ) = . 40 , p = . 002 , for eaves - droppers , r ( 76 ) = . 06 , p > . 50 . If one controls for listener satisfaction through partial cor - relations , the effects of feedback on eaves - dropper comprehension remain essentially unchanged , and the effects on active listeners ' comprehension are reduced . ( See Tables 1 and 2 . ) Active listeners were marginally more sat - isfied with the conversations than were eaves - droppers ( M = 4 . 44 vs . 4 . 06 ) , t ( 54 ) = 1 . 81 , p = . 08 . Controlling for listener satisfaction through partial corrections does not change the conclusion that active listeners under - stood the summaries better than eavesdrop - pers . ( See Table 3 . ) Effects of Listeners ' Prior Knowledge Up to this point , we have argued that lis - tener feedback increases listeners ' compre - hension by tailoring speakers ' narratives to what listeners need to know . To demonstrate the point convincingly , we need to examine this tailoring process as well as the outcomes we have presented so far . Specifically , we need to show that listener responses reflect differences in a listener ' s knowledge or un - derstanding and that speakers are sensitive to these differences . We achieved this goal by manipulating listeners ' prior knowledge about parts of the movie and then examining how their knowledge influenced both their com - ments to speakers during summaries of these parts and the summaries themselves . Merely showing listeners previews , which were after all designed both to inform and to confuse them , did not influence the lis - teners ' comprehension , their feedback to the speakers , or the speakers ' summaries . That is , listeners in the two limited - feedback con - ditions ( with previews and with no previews ) did not differ . Speakers ' summaries to them also did not differ ( all Fs < 2 ) . Instead , the subtler manipulation of informing listeners Table 4 Effects of Quality of Speakers ' Summaries on Active Listeners ' and Eavesdroppers ' Comprehension Dependent variables Condition Facttest Herosimi - larity Villainsimi - larity Completenessof summary Accuracy of Global summary quality Overallcompre - Judged hension clarity Participant status ActivelistenerEavesdropper Participantstatus . 23 * , 05 . 15 . 01 - . 17 . 13 . 19 . 21 - . 01 . 32 * * * - . 05 Correlation . 30 * * . 25 - . 11 . 28 * * . 46 * * * . 06 . 32 * * * . 38 * * * . 08 . 28 * * . 32 * * * . 02 . 28 * * Note . Entries are correlations of the dependent variables with the number of idea units in speakers ' summaries . The bottom row shows whether the association is stronger for active listeners or eavesdroppers and is the correlation transformation of the single sample t test ( see Table 3 ) . n = 57 . * p < . 10 . * * p < . 05 . * * * / > < . 02 . 728 R . KRAUT , S . LEWIS , AND L . SWEZEY about some parts of the movie or leaving them ignorant influenced both their feedback to the speakers and the speakers ' summaries . We analyzed the number of listener re - sponses from each active listener who viewed previews , using an Amount of Feedback ( unrestricted vs . restricted ) X Scene Type ( old , new , or confusing ) analysis of variance , with scene type as a within - subjects factor . To fur - ther understand the influence of prior knowl - edge , we computed two orthogonal contrasts on scene type , comparing scenes for which listeners saw any preview ( old and confusing ) with those for which they saw no preview ( new ) and , among the previewed scenes , comparing old versus confusing previews . As one would expect , active listeners give more listener responses under unrestricted instructions than under restricted - feedback instructions . For example , active listeners in the unrestricted - feedback condition contrib - uted more new information to the conver - sations , F ( l , 35 ) = 5 . 36 , p < . 025 . They did not , however , provide more minimal listener responses , F ( l , 35 ) < 1 . These findings should be thought of as manipulation checks and will not be \ discussed further . The results for scene type show that lis - teners made more substantive comments when speakers were summarizing scenes for which the listeners had seen previews , whether the previews were old or confusing . Thus they asked more multiword questions , F ( l , 35 ) = 5 . 8 , p < . 025 , and added more new in - formation , F ( l , 35 ) = 4 . 3 , p < . 05 . In addi - tion , listeners provided somewhat more new information abdut old scenes than about scenes for which they had seen confusing previews , F ( l , 35 ) = 3 . 2 , p < . 10 . The inter - action of amount of feedback and scene type for the new information measure shows that the difference between previewed and non - previewed scenes occurred only in the un - restricted - feedback condition , F ( \ , 35 ) = 4 . 3 , p < . 05 . The amount of listeners ' foreknowledge had effects on characteristics of speakers ' summaries as well . In general , the results show that speakers spoke more efficiently about scenes for which listeners had seen a preview ; they provided more information in fewer words . Here the analysis was an Amount of Feedback ( unrestricted , re - stricted , or none ) X Scene Type ( old , new , or confusing ) analysis of variance . Speakers de - scribed scenes for which listeners had seen previews more completely , F ( \ , 54 ) = 8 . 7 , p < . 001 , and they used fewer words to de - scribe these scenes , F ( l , 54 ) = 4 . 7 , p < , 05 . The interaction of amount of feedback and scene type on the length measure shows that speakers summarized preview scenes most compactly when listeners gave unrestricted feedback , F ( 4 , 108 ) = 2 . 7 , p < . 05 . On the other hand , the accuracy of speakers ' sum - maries was unaffected by the amount of feed - back listeners provided or by their prior knowledge of the scenes . In summary , the data are evidence that speakers can use listener feedback to tailor what they say to what listeners need to know . Active listeners gave feedback that indicated how well informed they were about the topic at hand . Speakers modified what they had to say on the basis of this feedback . Discussion This research has experimentally demon - strated that feedback aids communication and has examined several of the mechanisms through which feedback has its effects . We have shown that communication is better ( that is , it benefits all listeners more ) the more feedback the communicator gets . In addi - tion , we have shown that feedback seems to individuate speech ; the person giving the feedback benefits more than another person who can overhear the same conversation but has no opportunity to influence it . Active lis - teners understand the communication better and are more influenced by variations in its quality . One mechanism through which feedback has an effect is to provide the speaker with information about what a listener already knows . This information gives the speaker the opportunity to modify his or her speech in response to listeners ' needs . We have dem - onstrated that listeners show what they know through their use of substantive questions and comments . In addition , speakers talked more efficiently on topics about which the listeners were knowledgeable , even though they were initially unaware of listeners ' prior knowledge . Thus , it appears that , along with other functions , feedback can regulate the informational density of speakers ' commu - LISTENER FEEDBACK AND CONVERSATION 729 nication ( cf . Thompson , Webster , Klumpp , & Bertsch , 1958 ) . As we stressed in the introduction , feed - back is only one of the mechanisms speakers use to modify what they have to say and to adapt it to particular audiences . Here we can fruitfully sketch the general way people or - ganize speech and adapt it to particular au - diences , in order to examine the role of feed - back in this overall process . We recognize our oversimplification in writing of speaker and audience as distinct roles and of message and feedback as distinct parts of a conversation . Surely , in most two - person conversations , each participant is si - multaneously speaker and audience . Except for the small verbal and nonverbal signals that seem adapted for sending through the back - channel without disrupting a partner ' s speech ( Yngve , 1970 ) , most speech from each partner is simultaneously an initiative or independent development of that person ' s own part of the conversation and a response to the other speaker . However , we will con - tinue to use the convention of distinct roles for ease of exposition . The first point to recognize is that people talk with social motives in mind : to exchange information , to give orders , to persuade , to impress , to change feelings , and the like . To achieve these ends with particular audiences , speakers plan their speech with the audience in mind . They make inferences about their audiences ' mental states that would be rele - vant to the achievement of their goals on the basis of their knowledge of the audiences and on the basis of many observable social stig - mata . For example , a canvasser for a civil rights organization might use different ap - proaches toward those he personally knows to be bigoted and those he knows are not bigoted or toward those who have a Southern accent and those who have a New England accent . Because speech is hierarchically organized , its planning can be accomplished at several levels . For example , in narrating a story plot , speakers can tailor the organization of the story they are telling , the structure of partic - ular sentences , and the selection of particular words for the sentence frames ( cf . Chafe , 1977 ) . Certainly , in narrating Alice in Won - derland either in a classroom to an English professor with a Freudian orientation or at home to a younger sister , a college freshman would make changes at all these levels . The planning at different levels occurs at different time intervals before actual speech produc - tion . Some parts , like the main points to be covered , may be planned relatively far in ad - vance , whereas other parts , like word choice , may be planned just before speech produc - tion . After they have spoken , people can use two mechanisms to evaluate what they have just said . First , they can listen to their own speech from the standpoint of what Mead ( 1934 ) has called the " generalized other " or from the standpoint of their particular audience . Through this self - monitoring , they can com - pare what they wanted to say with the inter - pretation a typical listener would make . In many ways , self - monitoring is similar to planning with different audiences in mind . Second , speakers can pay attention to and interpret explicit feedback from , their audi - ence . Because of the similarity between self - monitoring and preplanning speech , we be - lieve that self - monitoring is the basic adap - tive mechanism that explicit feedback merely supplements . On the basis of either adaptive mechanism , speakers can choose to continue with their preplanned speech or backtrack and modify what they were saying at one of their many stages of planning . We will now consider the case of explicit audience feedback in more detail . If audience feedback causes speakers to modify what they would have said , it can have one of two consequences . First , it may change speakers ' social goals for a conversational episode . For example , if listeners somehow signal to speakers that they are bored , the speakers may shift their conversational goal from tell - ing a clear story to entertaining the listeners or terminating conversation with them . If listeners begin asking difficult and hostile questions , the speakers may shift their goal from information transfer to impression management . On the other hand , feedback may cause speakers to modify what they were saying to better achieve their original goals . That is , the speakers may back up to the start of a convenient planning unit and modify what they have said or what they planned to say to make their speech clearer , more persua - sive , or more interesting . 730 R . KRAUT , S . LEWIS , AND L . SWEZEY Let us consider the circumstances in which we would expect speakers to be most influenced by or to make the most use of explicit , external feedback to tailor what they are saying - to their perceptions of their au - dience ' s informational needs . First and ob - viously , for feedback to influence the speaker , the listener must give adequate and compre - hensible feedback . When the listener is dead - pan , the speaker necessarily adopts different methods to determine whether his or her speech is comprehensible to the listener . For example , in a dark lecture hall , speakers ad - dressing a large audience may receive no feedback from them . In this case , commu - nication continues , in part because of the speakers ' self - evaluation . The speakers may also have previously practiced the speech before a more interactive audience . In the communication setting itself , the speakers may adopt several ploys to increase feedback ; for example , telling jokes to evoke laughter or explicitly asking if members of the audi - ence understood a point . Another condition for speakers ' effective use of feedback is that speakers must be mo - tivated to pay attention and respond to it . This should occur most often when speakers are trying to get their views across to a par - ticular listener in spontaneous rather than preplanned conversation . Speakers may ig - nore feedback if they believe it is unrepre - sentative of what a general audience would understand or if they are committed to their preplanned text . Thus , in talking informally to a small group of people , a speaker may discount the feedback from a vociferous head nodder if he or she thinks the head nodding is a personal trait that does not reflect the nodder ' s understanding or if he or she thinks the head nodder is much brighter than the others in the group . The speaker may also ignore the feedback if he or she has per - formed the same set piece with other groups . Even in cases where speakers receive ad - equate feedback to which they are motivated to respond , the feedback will individuate the speech more ( i . e . , suit it to the person pro - viding the feedback ) if several conditions are met . The more the speaker knows about the perspective and background knowledge of a listener , the more the speaker can take this knowledge into account in phrasing material in ways that the listener understands . Spe - cifically , speakers can refer to facts known to both themselves and the listener in a short - hand form that is likely to confuse an eaves - dropper . For example , they can rely on def - inite articles and pronouns more if they are assured that listeners know to what they are referring . Speakers can gain this knowledge either from relying on feedback from the lis - tener or from knowing the history and per - spective of the partner . Thus , a speaker can be assured that the sentence " He shouldn ' t have done it " has been understood if the lis - tener gives a slow , sympathetic headshake afterward or if the speaker knows from pre - vious conversation or history that the listener knows about the suicide of a mutual friend . In summary , the maxium individuating effect of feedback should come in sponta - neous conversation when ( a ) speakers are very familiar with their partners before the speech , ( b ) partners provide a lot of feedback , and ( c ) partners and the eavesdropper differ considerably in their initial knowledge . Given these conditions , in many ways it is surpris - ing that in the present study , listener respon - siveness and listener participation status had reliable effects on conversational outcome and process , because many features of the present research deviated from these ideal conditions . Feedback influenced conversa - tional process and outcome even in this con - strained setting , where the conversations were not spontaneous , the feedback was min - imal , the speakers and listeners shared no history , and the active listeners and eaves - droppers were similar . The influences are likely to be much stronger in more interac - tive , natural conversation . We have not meant to imply here that ex - plicit feedback from a partner is the only way that speakers can adapt what they have to say to their listeners ' informational needs , or that speakers invariably respond to feedback , or that feedback serves only to regulate the informational density of speech . We have argued that speakers have other mechanisms available . Even if feedback is a major mech - anism by which speakers shape their speech , speakers may fail to respond to many explicit feedback signals from their partners , either because explicit feedback conflicts with their self - evaluation or because they have not come to the end of a convenient planning unit . LISTENER FEEDBACK AND CONVERSATION 731 In addition to whatever functions feedback serves in regulating the semantic content of speakers ' speech , it has other conversational and interpersonal functions as well . By show - ing the listeners ' interest in the speakers ' speech , it demonstrates a continuing com - mitment on the listeners ' part to engage in the conversation . Bored looks and a lack of feedback cause at least socially sensitive speakers to stop talking . In addition to the information that feedback carries about the conversational process per se , feedback is often interpreted by participants in a con - versation to indicate the state of the rela - tionship between the two parties . Smiling and head nodding are signs of affiliation as well as of understanding and interest ( cf . Kraut & Johnston , 1979 ) . References Chafe , W . Creativity in verbalization and its implication for the nature of stored knowledge . In R . Freedle ( Ed . ) , Discourse production and comprehension . Hills - dale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1977 . Clark , H . , & Marshall , C . Definite reference and mutual knowledge . In A . Joshi , I . Sag , & B . Webber ( Eds . ) , Elements of discourse understanding . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1981 . Dittmann , A . The body movement - speech rhythm rel - ationship as a cue to speech encoding . In A . Seigman & B . Pope ( Eds . ) , Studies in dyadic communication . New York : Pergamon , 1972 . Dittmann , A . , & Llewellyn , L . Relationship between vocalizations and head nods as listener responses . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1968 , 9 , 79 - 84 . Duncan , S . On the structure of speaker - auditor inter - action during speaking turns . Language in Society , 1974 , 2 , 161 - 180 . Ekman , P . , & Friesen , W . The facial action coding sys - tem . Palo Alto , Calif . : Consulting Psychologists ' Press , 1978 . Feffer , M . , & Suchotliff , L . Decentering implications of social interactions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1966 , 4 , 415 - 422 . Fodor , J . , Sever , T . , & Garrett , M . The psychology of language : An introduction to psycholinguistics and generative grammar . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1974 . Goffman , E . Relations in public . New York : Harper & Row , 1971 Grice , H . Logic and conversation . In . P . Cole & J . Mor - gan ( Eds . ) , Syntax and semantics : Speech acts ( Vol . 3 ) . New York : Academic Press , 1975 . Hecht , M . The conceptualization and measurement of interpersonal communication satisfaction . Human Communication Research , 1978 , 4 , 253 - 264 . Kendon , A . Some functions of gaze - direction in social interaction . Acta Psychologica , 1967 , 26 , 22 - 63 . Kent , G . , Davis , J . , & Shapiro . D . Resources required in the construction and reconstruction of conversa - tions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1978 , 36 , 13 - 22 . Krauss , R . , & Bricker , P . Effects of transmission delay and access delay on the efficiency of communication . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 1967 , 41 , 286 - 292 . Krauss , R . , Garlock , C . , Bricker , P . , & McMahon , L . The role of audible and visible back - channel responses in interpersonal communication . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 1977 , 35 , 523 - 529 . Krauss , R . , & Glucksberg , S . Social and nonsocial speech . Scientific American , 1977 , 236 , 100 - 105 . Krauss , R . , & Weinheimer , S . Changes in the length of reference phrases as a function of social interaction : A preliminary study . Psychonomic Science , 1964 , 1 , 113 - 114 . Krauss , R . , & Weinheimer , S . Concurrent feedback , confirmation , and the encoding of referents in verbal interaction . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 1966 , 4 , 342 - 346 . Kraut , R . , & Johnston , R . Social and emotional mes - sages of smiling : An ethological approach . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1979 , 37 , 1539 - 1553 . Kraut , R . , & Lewis , S . Feedback and the coordination of conversation . In H . Sypher & J . Applegate ( Eds . ) , Cognition and Communication . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erl - baum , in press . Leathers , D . The information potential of the nonverbal and verbal components of feedback responses . The Southern Speech Communication Journal , 1979 , 44 , 331 - 354 . Leavitt , H . , & Mueller , R . Some effects of feedback on communication . Human Relations , 1951 , 4 , 401 - 410 . Matarazzo , J . Interviewer head - nodding and interviewee speech duration . Psychotherapy , 1964 , / , 54 - 63 . McGuire , W . The nature of attitudes and attitude change . In G . Lindzey & E . Aronson ( Eds . ) , Hand - book of social psychology ( 2nd ed . , Vol 3 ) . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley , 1969 . Mead , G . Mind , self , and society . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1934 . Rosenfeld , H . Nonverbal reciprocation of approval : An experimental analysis . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 1967 , . ? , 102 - 111 . Rosenfeld , H . The experimental analysis of interper - sonal influence processes . Journal of Communication , 1972 , 22 , 424 - 442 . Rosenfeld , H . Conversational control functions of non - verbal behavior . In A . Seigman and S . Feldstein ( Eds . ) . Nonverbal behavior and communication . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1978 . Rosenthal , R . , Hall , J . , Di Matteo , M . , Rogers , P . , and Archer , D . Sensitivity to nonverbal communication : The PONS test . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Press , 1979 . SAS Institute . SAS user ' s guide . Raleigh , N . C . : Author , 1979 . Thompson , P . , Webster , J . , Klumpp , R . , & Bertsch , W , Two voice - message storage schemas . Journal of Speech and Hearing Research , 1958 , / , 142 - 154 . Yngve , V . On getting a word in edgewise . In Papers from the sixth regional meeting , Chicago Linguistics Circle . Chicago : Chicago Linguistics Circle , 1970 . Received October 9 , 1981 •