Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 19 , 1561 – 1574 , April 2008 Arp2 / 3 Complex Is Important for Filopodia Formation , Growth Cone Motility , and Neuritogenesis in Neuronal Cells Farida Korobova and Tatyana Svitkina Department of Biology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 Submitted September 25 , 2007 ; Revised December 26 , 2007 ; Accepted January 24 , 2008 Monitoring Editor : Thomas Pollard A role of Arp2 / 3 complex in lamellipodia is well established , whereas its roles in ﬁlopodia formation remain obscure . We addressed this question in neuronal cells , in which motility is heavily based on ﬁlopodia , and we found that Arp2 / 3 complex is involved in generation of both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in growth cones , and in neuritogenesis , the processes thought to occur largely in Arp2 / 3 complex - independent manner . Depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex in primary neurons and neuroblastoma cells by small interfering RNA signiﬁcantly decreased the F - actin contents and inhibited lamellipodial protrusion and retrograde ﬂow in growth cones , but also initiation and dynamics of ﬁlopodia . Using electron microscopy , immunochemistry , and gene expression , we demonstrated the presence of the Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent dendritic network of actin ﬁlaments in growth cones , and we showed that individual actin ﬁlaments in ﬁlopodia originated at Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent branch points in lamellipodia , thus providing a mechanistic explana - tion of Arp2 / 3 complex functions during ﬁlopodia formation . Additionally , Arp2 / 3 complex depletion led to formation of multiple neurites , erratic pattern of neurite extension , and excessive formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . Consistent with this phenotype , RhoA activity was increased in Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells , indicating that besides nucleating actin ﬁlaments , Arp2 / 3 complex may inﬂuence cell motility by altering Rho GTPase signaling . INTRODUCTION Actin polymerization generates force to drive leading edge protrusion in motile cells . Two major protrusive organelles , lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , differ by their morphology , func - tion , cell type distribution , structure , and dynamics of the underlying actin cytoskeleton . Filopodia are characteristic for cells displaying exploratory behavior , especially for neu - ronal cells . They contain a bundle of long actin ﬁlaments undergoing continuous barbed end elongation at their tips ( Small et al . , 1978 ; Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ) . In contrast , lamellipodia dominate in fast moving cells , such as ﬁsh keratocytes , but they are not abundant in growth cones , where they are frequently called veils . Lamellipodia contain a network of branching ﬁlaments that undergo constant de novo nucleation ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ; Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ) . Accordingly , the important molecular players for ﬁlopodial protrusion include proteins protecting barbed ends from capping , such as Ena / vasodi - lator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) proteins ( Bear et al . , 2002 ; Lebrand et al . , 2004 ; Barzik et al . , 2005 ) and formins ( Peng et al . , 2003 ; Pellegrin and Mellor , 2005 ; Schirenbeck et al . , 2005 ) , and a bundling protein fascin ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ; Adams , 2004 ; Vignjevic et al . , 2006 ) , whereas lamellipodial protrusion requires Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent nucleation ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Biyasheva et al . , 2004 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ) followed by rapid capping ( Mejillano et al . , 2004 ) . Despite the signiﬁcant recent progress in understanding the molecular mechanisms of actin - based protrusion , the identity of actin ﬁlament nucleators responsible for forma - tion of ﬁlopodia remains unknown . We previously proposed that Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent nucleation provides a ﬁla - mentous resource to build ﬁlopodial bundles ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . Other data showing Arp2 / 3 complex at the bases of ﬁlopodia ( Lorenz et al . , 2004 ; Diez et al . , 2005 ) are also consistent with this scenario . Furthermore , lamellipodial protrusion could be shifted to ﬁlopodial protrusion by in - hibiting capping protein ( Mejillano et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting that lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia are dynamically interrelated and their ﬁlaments may be generated by common nuclea - tor ( s ) . An alternative model proposes that formins are solely responsible for nucleation of ﬁlopodial ﬁlaments , whereas Arp2 / 3 complex is specialized for lamellipodia and is not necessary for ﬁlopodia formation ( Millard et al . , 2004 ; Nicholson - Dykstra et al . , 2005 ; Faix and Rottner , 2006 ) . This idea has been inspired by the discovery of nucleating activity of formins ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ; Zigmond , 2004 ) and their involvement in ﬁlopodia formation ( Peng et al . , 2003 ; Pellegrin and Mellor , 2005 ; Schirenbeck et al . , 2005 ) , and supported by reports that Arp2 / 3 complex is functionally dispensable for ﬁlopodia formation ( Strasser et al . , 2004 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ) . Disagreement between these sets of data prompted us to apply a previously unexplored combination of functional , kinetic , and structural approaches to thor - oughly investigate a role of Arp2 / 3 complex in ﬁlopodia formation using neuronal cells as a model system . We report here that Arp2 / 3 complex functionally contributes to gen - This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 – 09 – 0964 ) on February 6 , 2008 . Address correspondence to : Tatyana M . Svitkina ( svitkina @ sas . upenn . edu ) . © 2008 by The American Society for Cell Biology 1561 http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2008 / 02 / 05 / E07 - 09 - 0964 . DC1 Supplemental Material can be found at : eration of ﬁlopodia and also seems to be involved in regu - lation of RhoA activity . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents Plasmids and Constructs . Human enhanced yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( EYFP ) - Arp3 and mouse pDsRed2 - cortactin were gifts of Shin - ichiro Kojima ( Northwestern University , Chicago , IL ) ; enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) - VASP was a gift of Frank Gertler ( Massachusetts Institute of Tech - nology , Cambridge , MA ) ; the constitutively active green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - Rac1V12 was a gift of Kozo Kaibuchi ( Nagoya University , Japan ) , and EYFP - actin was from Clontech ( Mountain View , CA ) . Transient transfection of cells with DNA constructs was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 ( In - vitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Antibodies . The following rabbit polyclonal antibodies were used : p16 - Arc subunit of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ) , nonmuscle myosin II from bovine spleen ( Verkhovsky et al . , 1987 ) ; spectrin ( Chemicon International , Temecula , CA ) ; Arp3 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) , and p34 - Arc subunit of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Upstate Biotechnology , Charlottesville , VA ) . The following mouse monoclonal antibodies were used : cortactin ( clone 411F ; Upstate Biotechnology ) , fascin ( clone 55K2 ; Chemicon International ) , and vinculin ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) . Secondary antibodies were from Invitrogen or Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ( West Grove , PA ) . Al - exaFluor 488 - , 594 - , and 647 - labeled phalloidins were from Invitrogen . All other reagents were from Sigma - Aldrich unless indicated otherwise . Cell Culture B35 rat neuroblastoma cells ( Otey et al . , 2003 ) and NG108 - 15 rat / mouse hybrid neuroblastoma cells were maintained in DMEM ( Invitrogen ) supple - mented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Invitrogen ) , 2 mM glutamine , 50 U / ml penicillin , and 50 (cid:1) g / ml streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) . For microscopy , cells were plated onto coverslips or glass - bottomed dishes coated sequentially with 1 mg / ml poly - l - lysine and 1 . 25 (cid:1) g / ml laminin . To induce differentia - tion , cells were ﬁrst cultured in a regular culture medium for 24 h after plating and then transferred to a differentiation medium consisting of DMEM with 0 . 1 mM dbcAMP and N2 supplement ( Invitrogen ) . Xenopus neural crest cells were prepared as described previously ( Chang et al . , 1999 ) and plated on glass coverslips precoated with 0 . 1 to 1 . 0 (cid:1) g / cm 2 concanavalin A . The cultures were kept at 20°C in a culture medium consist - ing of ( vol / vol ) 50 % Leibovitz L - 15 medium ( Invitrogen ) , 49 % Ringer’s solu - tion ( 115 mM NaCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 2 . 5 mM KCl , and 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 6 ) , 1 % fetal bovine serum ( Invitrogen ) , and 50 ng / ml neurotrophin - 3 . Experi - ments were performed 24 – 48 h after cell culture preparation ( Zakharenko and Popov , 2000 ) . Rat hippocampal neurons isolated as described previously ( Wilcox et al . , 1994 ) and grown on poly - l - lysine - coated ( 1 mg / ml ) coverslips in serum - free Neurobasal media ( Invitrogen ) with B27 supplement ( Invitrogen ) and with - out antibiotics were kindly provided by Marc Dichter or Rita Balice - Gordon ( University of Pennsylvania ) . Growth cones were analyzed after cultivation for 3 – 5 d in vitro . Immunoﬂuorescence For detection of F - actin in cells , staining with ﬂuorescently labeled phalloidin ( 0 . 033 (cid:1) M ) was performed after ﬁxation with 4 % paraformaldehyde and permeabilization with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . Immunostaining was usually performed after cell extraction for 5 min with 1 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer ( 100 mM PIPES - KOH , pH 6 . 9 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM EGTA ) optionally containing 4 % polyethelene glycol ( PEG ) ( mol . wt . 35 , 000 ) and 2 (cid:1) M phalloidin , followed by ﬁxation with 4 % paraformal - dehyde or 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde . Glutaraldehyde - ﬁxed samples were quenched with 2 mg / ml NaBH 4 . For p34 - Arc immunostaining , extracted unﬁxed cells were incubated with primary antibody in PEM buffer containing 5 (cid:1) M unlabeled phalloidin for 15 min , and then they were washed with PEM buffer , ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde , and stained with secondary antibody . For VASP staining , cells were extracted with a mixture containing 0 . 5 % parafor - maldehyde and 1 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer , and then they were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde and costained with phalloidin . Fascin staining was performed after methanol ﬁxation without extraction . Extracted and para - formaldehyde - ﬁxed samples were used for myosin II staining . For costain - ing of F - actin , labeled phalloidin was added to the secondary antibody solution . Microscopy Light microscopy was performed using an inverted microscope ( Eclipse TE2000 ; Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) equipped with Planapo 100 (cid:1) 1 . 3 or 20 (cid:1) 0 . 75 objectives and Cascade 512B charge - coupled device camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc , Trenton , NJ ) driven by MetaMorph imaging software ( Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA ) . For live cell imaging , cells were plated on glass - bottomed dishes coated with appropriate substrates and kept on the microscope stage at 35°C under a layer of mineral oil . No oil was applied to dishes imaged for correlative microscopy . For overnight movies , cells were transferred into bicarbonate - free DMEM . Samples for platinum replica electron microscopy ( EM ) and for correlative light and electron microscopy were processed essentially as described previ - ously ( Svitkina and Borisy , 2006 ) . Hippocampal neurons for EM were ex - tracted in a mixture of 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer for (cid:2) 5 min and postﬁxed with 2 % glutaraldehyde . Other cells were extracted as for immunoﬂuorescence but without addition of PEG . Immuno - electron microscopy with p16 - Arc and p34 - Arc antibodies was performed as described previously ( Svitkina and Borisy , 2006 ) . Primary p34 - Arc antibody was applied to unﬁxed cells as for immunoﬂuorescence , followed by ﬁxation with 2 % glutaraldehyde . Samples were analyzed using JEOL 1200EX ( JEOL , Tokyo , Japan ) transmission EM operated at 120 kV . For three - dimensional ( 3D ) images , stereo pairs were taken at (cid:3) / (cid:4) 6 – 20° angles by rotating a grid holder . Anaglyph images were produced by placing one image of the stereo pair into the red channel and another into the green and blue channels of the same RGB image by using Adobe Photoshop software ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . Red / cyan or red / green anaglyph glasses ( left eye is red ) should be used to view 3D images . RNA Interference ( RNAi ) Small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) duplexes against following target sequences were used : 5 (cid:5) - GAAAGGCGTGGATGACCTA - 3 (cid:5) ( rat Arp3 ) and 5 (cid:5) - AAG - GAACTTCAGGCACACGGA - 3 (cid:5) ( rat p34 - Arc subunit of Arp2 / 3 complex , a . k . a . ARPC2 ) were obtained from Dharmacon RNA Technologies ( Lafayette , CO ) ; control siRNA was obtained from QIAGEN ( Valencia , CA ) . siRNAs were labeled with cyanine ( Cy ) 3 or ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) by using a Silencer siRNA labeling kit ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) and used at 20 nM concentration . Transfection with siRNA was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) 24 h after plating for neuroblastoma cells and after 1 – 3 d in vitro for hippocampal neurons . Effects of siRNA were analyzed 2 – 3 d after transfection . Efﬁciency of siRNA transfection was (cid:2) 95 % of the cell population for B35 cells and (cid:2) 30 – 50 % for hippocampal neurons . For immunoblotting , B35 cell lysates were prepared 2 or 3 d after siRNA transfection . For rescue experiments , B35 cells were cotransfected with Arp3 siRNA and human pEYFP - Arp3 , and they were analyzed 2 d posttransfection as undifferentiated cells , or they were switched to differentiation conditions 24 h after transfection and analyzed 1 – 2 d later . For the overnight differentiation assay , cell cultures transfected with Cy3 - p34 - Arc or FITC - control siRNAs were mixed and plated into the same dish . Control and inhibited cells were distinguished by the color of the siRNA label . Western Blot Cells were washed with PBS at 4°C and lysed either in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10 % glycerol , and a protease inhibitor tablet ( Roche Diagnostics ) or in 1 % SDS solution in water . Protein concentration in lysates was determined using bicinchoninic acid reagent ( Pierce Chemical , Rockford , IL ) . SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( 10 % polyacrylamide ) , and immunoblotting were performed according to standard protocols . Spectrin was used as a loading control . Immunoblots were devel - oped using enhanced chemiﬂuorescence Western blotting kit ( GE Healthcare , Little Chalfont , Buckinghamshire , United Kingdom ) . Determination of RhoA Activity B35 cells growing in six - well plates were transfected with control or p34 - Arc siRNA , and they were allowed to grow to (cid:2) 60 % conﬂuence . After 24 h of transfection , cells were switched to differentiating conditions , and cell lysates were prepared 1 h later . After equalization of total protein concentrations , lysates were assayed using G - LISA Active RhoA Assay kit ( Cytoskeleton , Denver , CO ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . In this assay , active RhoA from lysates binds to Rhotekin RBD domain immobilized in the 96 - well plate and is subsequently detected by immunostaining with a primary RhoA antibody and an HRP - conjugated secondary antibody . The intensity of HRP reaction product is then determined by colorimetry at 490 - nm wavelength , and results are expressed in units of optical density . Image Analysis and Statistics All morphometric measurements were done using MetaMorph Imaging soft - ware ( Molecular Devices ) unless indicated otherwise , and they were repeated for at least two independent experiments . At least 10 cells were analyzed to get a value for each parameter . Data were analyzed using Excel ( Microsoft , Redmond , WA ) or SigmaPlot ( Systat Software , Point Richmond , CA ) software packages . Signiﬁcance was determined using a two - tailed t test . To determine changes in the F - actin contents in growth cones of B35 neuroblastoma , cells were extracted as described above , and then they were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde , stained with ﬂuorescently labeled phalloi - din , and imaged using the same acquisition settings . An average intensity of phalloidin ﬂuorescence after background subtraction was measured for re - F . Korobova and T . Svitkina Molecular Biology of the Cell 1562 gions of interest containing a 2 - (cid:1) m - wide area adjacent to the growth cone’s leading edge . To determine changes in Arp2 / 3 complex contents in hip - pocampal neurons after p34 - Arc siRNA treatment , cells were extracted and stained with p34 - Arc antibody and phalloidin as described above . An average intensity of phalloidin and p34 - Arc staining after background subtraction was determined for entire growth cone area . For quantiﬁcation purposes , lamellipodia in growth cones were deﬁned as regions of dense actin network adjacent to the leading edge and positioned between neighboring ﬁlopodial bundles . The width of lamellipodia was de - termined using Adobe Photoshop software by measuring the distance from the leading edge of the growth cone to the beginning of a signiﬁcantly sparser actin network along a line orthogonal to the leading edge . Actin ﬁlament branch frequency ( number of branches per unit area ) , and distribution of Arp2 / 3 complex immunogold labeling ( number of gold particles per unit area ) in lamellipodial regions of growth cones was determined using high - resolution EM images . Stereo images were used for quantiﬁcation of branches . Areas between neighboring ﬁlopodial bundles spanning a zone from the leading edge to up to 3 (cid:1) m inward were used for the analysis . Branches or gold particles in 0 . 2 - (cid:1) m - wide and 1 - (cid:1) m - long slices were scored , expressed as density per square micrometer , and plotted against the distance from the edge . Only clearly visible gold particles and Y - shaped actin ﬁlament conﬁgurations were scored . Parameters of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia dynamics were determined using phase - contrast or ﬂuorescence ( for YFP - actin – expressing cells ) time - lapse sequences acquired with 2 - to 3 - s intervals between frames at 100 (cid:1) magniﬁ - cation . Both approaches gave quantitatively similar results for each data set . Rates of lamellipodia protrusion and retrograde ﬂow were measured using kymographs generated along straight lines drawn perpendicular to the lead - ing edge . Slopes produced by advancing leading edges or by retrogradely moving lamellipodial features were used to calculate the rates . For quantiﬁ - cation of ﬁlopodia dynamics , a distance from a ﬁxed point within a ﬁlopo - dium to the ﬁlopodial tip was measured every 10 s while the ﬁlopodium existed and movie lasted . A ﬁlopodium was considered pausing if its length change was (cid:6) 2 pixels for at least two time intervals . Data are expressed as a fraction of time which ﬁlopodia spent protruding , retracting or pausing . The ﬁlopodia frequency was deﬁned as the number of ﬁlopodia per unit length of growth cone perimeter , and it was determined using still phase - contrast images . Only ﬁlopodia extending beyond the cell edge were counted . The length of the growth cone perimeter was determined using MetaMorph line function . The rate of ﬁlopodia initiation was determined by counting newly formed ﬁlopodia during the period of observation ( (cid:2) 4 – 5 min ) per 10 (cid:1) m of the growth cone perimeter per minute . Neurite extension during differentiation of B35 neuroblastoma cells was analyzed using cells plated on coverslips or glass - bottomed dishes 1 – 2 d after transfection with control or inhibitory siRNA and induced to differentiate 1 d later . Total number and length of neurites was determined using ﬁxed sam - ples on coverslips . A number of neurites in hippocampal neurons was deter - mined after 2 – 3 d in vitro and 24 h after transfection with control or inhibitory siRNA by using ﬁxed and phalloidin - stained samples . For dynamics of neu - rite extension , phase - contrast time - lapse sequences were acquired from the beginning of differentiation for 10 – 12 h with 5 - min time intervals using 20 (cid:1) objective . The length of each neurite was plotted against time . RESULTS Initiation of Filopodia in Neuronal Cells Signiﬁcant domination of ﬁlopodia over lamellipodia in neuronal growth cones suggests that ﬁlopodia in these cells may be formed not from lamellipodia , but from any site on the cell surface . We used time - lapse microscopy to deter - mine a pathway of ﬁlopodia initiation in four cell types of neuronal origin , two neuroblastoma cell lines ( rat B35 and rat / mouse hybrid NG108 ) and two primary neuronal cul - tures ( rat hippocampal and Xenopus neural crest neurons ) . Analysis of phase contrast ( Figure 1 , A – C ; and Supple - mental Video 1 ) and ﬂuorescence ( Figure 1 , D and E ) se - quences demonstrated that the majority of nascent ﬁlopodia arose from a lamellipodium - like protrusion in all tested neuronal cells . In growth cones , the common sites of ﬁlop - odia formation were interﬁlopodial veils . The ﬁlopodia ini - tiation at these sites began as a small phase - dense bulge ( Figure 1 , A – C ) similar to previously described “nubs” in chicken dorsal root ganglia neurons ( Steketee et al . , 2001 ) and to ﬁlopodial (cid:7) - precursors in B16F1 melanoma cells ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . Filopodia also emerged from neuronal shafts , usually close to growth cones . Although these sites seemed to lack lamellipodia , careful analysis of such events revealed that initiation of lateral ﬁlopodia also began as a lamellipodial structure , which then quickly produced ﬁlop - odia through intermediate formation of small bulges ( Figure 1 , A – C ; and Supplemental Video 2 ) . Dynamics of YFP - actin in B35 neuroblastoma cells also showed ﬁlopodia initiation from lamellipodia - like protrusions ( Figure 1 , D and E ) . Both protruding ﬁlopodia and internal ﬁlopodial bundles ( fre - quently called microspikes or ribs ) were formed by gradual condensation of actin ﬂuorescence with intermediate forma - tion of cone - shaped actin densities ( Figure 1D ) . Similarly , local actin densities served as precursors for formation of lateral ﬁlopodia on neuronal shafts ( Figure 1E ) , consistent with published data ( Loudon et al . , 2006 ) . Together , we have analyzed at least 10 cells for each cell type , and (cid:2) 90 % of ﬁlopodia in these cells were formed from lamellipodia . The remaining (cid:2) 10 % were ambiguous cases , in which we could not clearly determine how ﬁlopodia were formed . We had only one case across all four cell types where a ﬁlopodium formed from a phase - dense bulge that did not have a ﬂat - tened lamellipodia - like shape ( Figure 1C , arrow in the lower sequence ) . Thus , ﬁlopodia in neuronal cells were initiated in associ - ation with lamellipodia , similar to B16F1 melanoma cells ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) , despite a notable paucity of lamellipo - dia in neuronal cells . Structural Organization of Neuronal Growth Cones Lamellipodia - like “veils , ” which ﬁll the narrow spaces be - tween ﬁlopodia in growth cones look very similar to con - ventional lamellipodia ; however , branched ﬁlaments and Arp2 / 3 complex were not detected in growth cones of rat hippocampal neurons ( Strasser et al . , 2004 ) , but they were found in chicken dorsal root ganglion neurons ( Mongiu et al . , 2007 ) . To control for potential variability between differ - ent neuronal cells regarding organization and molecular composition of growth cones , we analyzed the distribution of lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial markers and the structural organization of growth cones and lateral protrusions in four different types of neuronal cells . Immunostaining of hippocampal neurons and neuroblas - toma cells revealed enrichment of Arp2 / 3 complex at the periphery of growth cones ( Figure 2 , A – C ) , and in lateral protrusions extending from neuronal shafts ( data not shown ) . Arp2 / 3 complex antibodies also stained the cell body , neurites , and central domains of growth cones , as reported previously ( Strasser et al . , 2004 ) , but the intensity and pattern of staining in these locations varied depending on cell type , antibody , and sample preparation protocol . Expression of YFP - Arp3 ( Figure 2D ) in B35 cells conﬁrmed the enrichment of this protein at the growth cone periphery . Another lamellipodial marker , cortactin ( Weaver et al . , 2003 ) , was also enriched at the growth cone periphery ( Sup - plemental Figure S1B ) . Time - lapse observations revealed that during ﬁlopodia initiation cortactin was present in the pre - existing interﬁlopodial veils and at the bases of emerg - ing bulges , which served as ﬁlopodial precursors , but they became excluded from emerged ﬁlopodia ( Supplemental Figure S1C ) . Similar to the previous reports ( Cohan et al . , 2001 ; Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) , the ﬁlopodial markers , fascin and VASP , were associated with ﬁlopodial bundles along the length ( fascin ) or at the tips ( VASP ) ; VASP also localized to the edge of veils ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) . Platinum replica EM was used to determine the structural organization of neuronal protrusions ( Figure 3 ) . As expected ( Bridgman and Dailey , 1989 ) , long bundled actin ﬁlaments comprising the core of a ﬁlopodium were abundant in growth cones in all four studied cell types . Bundles either Arp2 / 3 Complex in Neuronal Cells Vol . 19 , April 2008 1563 protruded beyond the growth cone margins as genuine ﬁlopodia , or they remained within a growth cone , as micro - spikes or ribs ( Figure 3A ) . Some ﬁlopodial bundles were relatively thick and long , and they extended rearward far into the central domain of the growth cone . Others were relatively thin and short and terminated within the periph - eral domain , where they splayed apart into thinner bundles and individual ﬁlaments . An important question was whether interﬁlopodial veils contain branched ﬁlaments , a signature of Arp2 / 3 complex - depended nucleation . We used stereo EM to better discrim - inate branches from ﬁlament overlaps ( Supplemental Figure S2 ) . This analysis showed that the peripheral actin network in growth cones of all four types of neuronal cells contained numerous branched ﬁlaments ( Figure 3 , B and D – F ) , espe - cially between major ﬁlopodial bundles . To conﬁrm that these branches are formed by Arp2 / 3 complex , we per - formed immunoEM with p34 - Arc antibody ( Supplemen - tal Figure S3E ) , and we showed localization of gold par - ticles at the branch points ( Figure 3C ) . Filopodial ( bundled ) and lamellipodial ( branched ) ﬁlaments did not form two distinct sets . On contrary , we observed some ﬁlaments originating at a branch point that merged into the bundle and other ﬁlaments that branched off a ﬁla - ment in the bundle . EM analysis of lateral protrusions revealed that bulge - like structures contained a dendritic network of actin ﬁlaments ( Supplemental Figure S2 , C and D ) , whereas lateral ﬁlopodia contained actin ﬁlament bundles . Gradual transitions between two types of orga - nizations were frequently observed . These results show that growth cone veils of all tested neuronal cell types contain dendritic networks and the la - mellipodial markers , Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin , just like conventional lamellipodia , and that individual actin ﬁla - ments in this network can merge into or arise from an actin bundle . Figure 1 . Filopodia initiation in neuronal cells . ( A – C ) Phase - contrast time - lapse sequences of rat hippocampal neuron ( A ) , differentiated B35 neuroblastoma cell ( B ) , and Xenopus neuron ( C ) . Large panels at left and right show the beginning and the end of the sequence , respectively . Montages in the middle show individual time frames for the boxed regions in the corresponding large panels ( B , all ; A and C , top ) or for other time - lapse sequences ( A and C , bottom ) . Arrows and arrowheads mark individual ﬁlopodia formed during the sequence . Filopodia initiation occurs from lamellipodia - like regions and is usually preceded by formation of a small bulge at the leading edge of a growth cone ( A – C , top ) , or at the tip of a secondary neurite ( C , bottom ) , or within a lateral protrusion ( A and B , bottom ) . ( D and E ) Dynamics of YFP - actin in a growth cone ( D ) and a lateral protrusion ( E ) of B35 cells . A corresponding phase contrast sequence is shown for D . Cone - shaped condensation of actin ﬂuorescence precedes ﬁlopodia formation ( arrows and arrowheads ) . Time in minutes : seconds . Bars , 5 (cid:1) m . F . Korobova and T . Svitkina Molecular Biology of the Cell 1564 Age - dependent Lamellipodia - to - Filopodia Progression in Neuronal Protrusions We performed EM of growth cones with known life histories to correlate the kinetics of ﬁlopodia initiation with the struc - tural organization of the underlying actin cytoskeleton . Be - cause the actin network predominantly assembles at the leading edge ( Wang , 1985 ; Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ) and then moves backward relative to the advancing edge without signiﬁcant reorganization except for some loss of ﬁlaments due to depolymerization ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1991 ; Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ) , the structure of the network allows one to deduce the recent history of the network assembly ( Katoh et al . , 1999 ; Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . This analysis demonstrated that protruding veils of dif - ferentiated B35 cells contained dense actin networks rich in branched ﬁlaments ( Supplemental Figure S3 , A – D ) , which conﬁrms the lamellipodial character of these pro - trusions . A similar observation was also recently reported by Mongiu et al . ( 2007 ) for chicken dorsal root ganglia neurons . EM analysis of ﬁlopodia with known histories showed that the structural organization of ﬁlopodia correlated with their age ( Figure 4 ) . Nascent ﬁlopodia , whether they were formed in the growth cone or at the neuronal shafts , were associated with the branched lamellipodial network at their roots . Two examples of recently formed ﬁlopodia are shown in Figure 4 , A – E . Branched ﬁlaments were especially numer - ous at the roots of the youngest ﬁlopodia , such as ﬁlopo - dium 1 in Figure 4 , which was not yet recognizable in the last live image ( Figure 4A ) , but was visible by EM ( Figure 4 , B and D ) . Apparently , it formed during a short interval between acquisition of the last live image and cell extrac - tion . In the slightly older ﬁlopodium 2 ( Figure 4 , A – E ) , which was formed a few seconds before extraction ( Figure 4A ) , the actin network in the root was relatively sparse , apparently due to actin depolymerization , but branched ﬁlaments could still be detected there ( Figure 4 , B , C , and E ) . The EM structure can be correlated not only with the last frame of the movie , but also with the previous frames . When the life history of ﬁlopodium 2 was projected onto respective EM images , the phase contrast bulge , a ﬁlopo - dium precursor that occurred at time 0 : 14 , corresponded to the ﬁlopodium root with branched ﬁlaments ( Figure 4B ) , suggesting that the branched network served as a precursor for the ﬁlopodium formation . Importantly , some ﬁlaments in the nascent ﬁlopodial bundles could be traced back to their origin at a branch point ( Figure 4C ) . In older ﬁlopodia , a fraction of ﬁlaments terminated with apparently free ( not engaged in branch formation ) “pointed” ( as predicted from their orientation relative to the cell edge ) ends ( data not shown ) . The origin of many other ﬁlaments was obscured . These results show that nascent ﬁlopodia are intimately associated with the lamellipodial network and contain ﬁla - ments originating at the branch points , while unbranched ﬁlaments are more apparent in older ﬁlopodia . Arp2 / 3 Complex Depletion by siRNA Impairs Lamellipodia and Filopodia in Growth Cones The functional contribution of Arp2 / 3 complex to growth cone dynamics and ﬁlopodia formation in B35 neuroblas - toma cells and primary rat hippocampal neurons was investigated using RNAi ( Figure 5 ) . Transfection with ﬂuorescently labeled siRNA directed against p34 - Arc or Arp3 subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex suppressed expres - sion of these proteins after 2 – 3 d of transfection by (cid:2) 50 % , as estimated by Western blotting for B35 cells ( Figure 5A ) and by immunostaining for hippocampal neurons ( Figure 5C ) . Immunoﬂuorescence images showed that Arp2 / 3 complex depletion was especially evident at the periphery of growth cones in siRNA - treated cells ( Figure 5 , F and H ) . Arp2 / 3 complex knockdown caused an approximately twofold decrease in the F - actin content in growth cones of both cell types ( Figure 5 , B , D , and E – H ) . Decreased amount of actin ﬁlaments in growth cones of Arp2 / 3 complex - de - pleted B35 cells , especially in their internal regions , was also clearly visible by electron microscopy ( Figure 6A , compare with Figure 3A ) . Arp2 / 3 depletion severely inhibited lamellipodia in both differentiated and nondifferentiated B35 cells and in hippocampal neurons . Thus , the rates of lamellipodia pro - trusion and retrograde ﬂow were signiﬁcantly decreased compared with cells treated with control siRNA ( Figure 5 , I – O ; Supplemental Figure S3 ; and Supplemental Videos 3 and 4 ) . Coexpression of human YFP - Arp3 resistant to rat - speciﬁc siRNA rescued the inhibition of the lamellipo - dial dynamics in Arp3 siRNA - treated B35 cells ( Figure 5 , K and N ; Supplemental Figure S3 ; and Supplemental Video 3 ) , demonstrating the speciﬁcity of the phenotype . Electron microscopy of Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells demonstrated that lamellipodia were narrower and con - tained a sparser actin network with fewer branches and decreased immunogold labeling by p16 - Arc antibody ( Figure 6 , A – C ) . Figure 2 . Arp2 / 3 complex in neuronal cells . ( A – C ) Localization of Arp2 / 3 complex ( red ) by immunostaining with p34 - Arc antibody ( A ) or p16 - Arc antibody ( B and C ) in hippocampal neurons after 4 d in culture ( A ) , or differentiated B35 ( B ) or NG - 108 neuroblastoma cells ( C ) . ( D ) Expression of YFP - Arp3 in differentiated B35 cells on a background of depletion of endogenous Arp3 . Actin ( green ) is stained by phalloidin ( A – D ) . Boxed regions for A – C are enlarged at right . Arp2 / 3 complex is present at the periphery of growth cones and variably in the central domains of growth cones and in neuro - nal shafts . Bars , 2 (cid:1) m ( A , B , and D ) or 5 (cid:1) m ( C ) . Arp2 / 3 Complex in Neuronal Cells Vol . 19 , April 2008 1565 Importantly , depletion of the Arp2 / 3 complex inhibited growth cone ﬁlopodia in differentiated B35 cells and hip - pocampal neurons ( Figure 5 , I – M ) , as judged from the sig - niﬁcantly reduced rates of ﬁlopodia initiation and decreased ﬁlopodia frequency along the growth cone perimeter ( Figure 5 , P and Q ) . Two siRNAs ( p34 - Arc and Arp3 ) produced comparable effects in B35 cells , but Arp3 siRNA seemed less potent and signiﬁcantly inhibited the initiation rate , whereas a decrease in the steady - state ﬁlopodia frequency was not statistically signiﬁcant . Inhibition of ﬁlopodia initiation by Arp3 siRNA could be rescued by coexpression of human YFP - Arp3 . Additionally , p34 - Arc siRNA treatment de - creased the dynamic behavior of ﬁlopodia in B35 cells , namely , ﬁlopodia spent more time pausing and less time protruding or retracting ( Figure 5R ) , whereas the velocity of ﬁlopodia protrusion during protrusive phases did not change . Filopodia in Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted B35 cells , like in control cells , contained VASP at their tips and fascin along the length of the bundles , but the intensity of staining was lower , apparently reﬂecting the decreased actin con - tents ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) . Because of incomplete inhibition of ﬁlopodia in siRNA - treated cells and partial Arp2 / 3 complex depletion , we in - vestigated how the remaining ﬁlopodia were formed . A very sparse actin network in growth cones of Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted B35 cells allowed us to follow many ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlaments back to their origin ( Figure 6 ) . Remarkably , many ﬁlopodial ﬁlaments originated as a branch on another ﬁla - ment ( Figure 6B ) , similar to normal ﬁlopodia ( Figure 4 , B – E ) . Branched actin ﬁlaments entering ﬁlopodial bundles were found in all analyzed ﬁlopodia ( 10 ﬁlopodia in 4 cells ) , suggesting that ﬁlopodial bundles in Arp2 / 3 complex - de - pleted cells might be formed preferentially at sites of re - maining activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Consistent with this idea , correlative EM of cells with known histories showed that nascent ﬁlopodia in Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells were associated with the dendritic network and their ﬁlopodial ﬁlaments originated at branch points ( Figure 6 , D – F ) . Together , these results indicate that Arp2 / 3 complex is functionally involved in generation of both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , because Arp2 / 3 complex depletion inhibits lamel - lipodial protrusion , as well as ﬁlopodia initiation and dy - namics . Incomplete inhibition of ﬁlopodia is likely related to partial knockdown of Arp2 / 3 complex , because the remain - ing ﬁlopodia were formed in association with the remaining dendritic network . Arp2 / 3 Complex Is Important for Neuronal Differentiation and Motility We next investigated whether Arp2 / 3 complex depletion changes neuritogenesis . We primarily used B35 neuro - Figure 3 . Structural organization of actin network in neuronal growth cones . EM of differentiated B35 cells ( A – C ) , differentiated NG - 108 cells ( D ) , Xenopus neurons ( E ) , or hip - pocampal neurons ( F ) . ( A ) Overview of a growth cone . ( B and D – F ) Periphery of growth cones contains branched actin ﬁla - ments . Boxed regions are enlarged in insets ( B ) or below main panels ( D – F ) ; branched ﬁlaments are highlighted in green . ( C ) Immu - nogold ( 18 nm ) staining of growth cones with p34 - Arc antibody . Arrows point to gold par - ticles located at branch points . Bars , 1 (cid:1) m ( A ) , 0 . 2 (cid:1) m ( B and D – F ) , or 0 . 1 (cid:1) m ( C ) . F . Korobova and T . Svitkina Molecular Biology of the Cell 1566 blastoma cells , because their differentiation can be in - duced at a desired time , when Arp2 / 3 complex is sufﬁ - ciently depleted . Undifferentiated B35 cells had certain features of differentiated neurons , such as abundant ﬁlopodial bundles in protrusions and neurite - like pro - cesses . However , these “neurites” were short and usually completely covered by lateral protrusions ( Figure 7A ) . Induction of differentiation in B35 cells led to extension of one to three dominant neurites , gradual loss of protrusive activity at the sides of neurites , and rounding of the cell body ( Figure 7B ) . Arp2 / 3 complex depletion changed the overall mor - phology of undifferentiated B35 cells and impaired neu - ritogenesis upon induction of differentiation . Undifferen - tiated Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells had ﬁbroblast - like morphology with large lamellas fringed by residual la - mellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( Figure 7C ) . In differentiating conditions , cells formed neurites , but instead of one to three thin and long conventional neurites they extended multiple relatively short and broad processes ( Figure 7 , F and G ) , whereas their bodies remained large and ﬂat instead of rounding up ( Figure 7 , D and E ) . Instead of small well - deﬁned growth cones , neurites of Arp2 / 3 com - plex - depleted B35 cells were usually associated with rel - atively large lamella , which might or might not be sepa - rated from the cell body by a quiescent neurite shaft . In the most severe cases , cells almost completely failed to form neurites and they remained associated with an ex - tensive lamella ( e . g . , cell 5 in Figure 7E , bottom ) . Similar to B35 cells , depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex by p34 - Arc or Arp3 siRNA in hippocampal neurons resulted in in - creased numbers of neurites per cell ( Figure 7H ) , although we could not detect a difference in the neurite length in primary neurons , possibly because of signiﬁcant exten - sion of neurites that might occur before the protein was knocked down . The time course of neurite extension in B35 cells after Arp2 / 3 complex depletion showed abnormal cycles of protrusion and retraction , whereas control neurites dis - played relatively smooth growth ( Figure 7I and Supple - mental Video 5 ) . During extension phases , however , the rate of neurite elongation was not signiﬁcantly different in control and Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells . Depletion of the Arp2 / 3 Complex Induces RhoA Activation in Cells Defective neuritogenesis in Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells , in particular , an erratic style of neurite extension , is hard to explain by the decreased dynamics of the growth cones . Figure 4 . Nascent ﬁlopodia contain branched ﬁlaments in their roots . Correlative EM of B35 cells . ( A ) Time - lapse sequence of a growth cone segment showsformationofnascentﬁlopodia ( arrows ) . Blackarrowmarksformationofasmallbulge ( 0 : 14 ) , whichthenformsaﬁlopodium ( 0 : 20 ) ; theﬁlopodium then becomes partially engulfed by an advancing lamellipodium ( 0 : 30 – 0 : 36 ) . White arrow marks a small protrusion adjacent to a mature ﬁlopodium ( 0 : 36 ) . ( B ) EM of the region shown in A overlaid with a cell contour ( yellow line ) from 0 : 14 frame , when the bulge ﬁrst occurred . Numbered arrows point to corresponding regions in A ( 0 : 36 ) ; they contain ﬁlopodial bundles . Encircled region is enlarged in C . ( C – E ) High magniﬁcations of nascent ﬁlopodia 1 and 2 show branched ﬁlaments in their roots ( C and D , highlighted in green ) . Note , that branched ﬁlaments in the root of ﬁlopodium 2 ( C ) correspond to the bulge region ( B ) , from which the ﬁlopodium emerged . Some actin ﬁlaments originated as branches enter the ﬁlopodial bundles . Time in minutes : seconds . Bars , 1 (cid:1) m ( A ) , 0 . 5 (cid:1) m ( B ) , or 0 . 2 (cid:1) m ( D and E ) . Arp2 / 3 Complex in Neuronal Cells Vol . 19 , April 2008 1567 Figure 5 . Arp2 / 3 complex knockdown inhibits lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in B35 neuroblastoma cells and rat hippocampal neurons . ( A ) Western blotting of undifferentiated B35 cells transfected with control , p34 - Arc or Arp3 siRNA . Spectrin is used as loading control . Expression F . Korobova and T . Svitkina Molecular Biology of the Cell 1568 Rather , it suggests additional changes , likely in adhesion and / or contraction . Stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions per - form major contractile and adhesive functions in many cell types . Therefore , we investigated the organization of stress ﬁbers in control and Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted B35 cells . Control differentiated B35 cells had a few slender F - actin bundles along the edges of neurites . Some shorter bundles were also present in the neurite interior and , in minor amounts , in the cell body ( Figures 7B and 8A ) . Immuno - staining with myosin II antibody revealed a characteristic punctate pattern along actin bundles ( Figure 8 , A and C ) , similar to that in ﬁbroblast stress ﬁbers ( Verkhovsky et al . , 1995 ) . In addition , bright myosin II puncta were scattered in the central domains of growth cones , where they occasion - ally colocalized with ﬁlopodial roots ( Figure 8C ) , as also reported previously ( Bridgman and Dailey , 1989 ; Medeiros et al . , 2006 ) . Relatively dim myosin II structures were also found in the cell body ( Figure 8A ) . In ﬁbroblasts , stress ﬁbers are usually associated with prominent focal adhe - sions , which can be visualized by a focal adhesion marker , vinculin . Vinculin immunostaining in differentiated B35 cells showed a mostly weak punctate distribution through - out the cell with only occasional enrichment at the tip of the bundles ( Figure 8 , E and G ) . Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted B35 cells , which were induced to differentiate for 1 – 2 d , displayed more actin ﬁlament bundles in neurites and the cell body compared with control cells ( Figure 8 , B and D ) . Long bundles were present not only at the edges of neurites but also in their interior . Cell bodies were ﬁlled with numerous nonoriented short bun - dles ( Figure 8B ) . Accordingly , myosin II staining was more pronounced in the cell body of knockdown cells compared with control cells ( Figure 8I , left ) . Conversely , the number and brightness of myosin II puncta in the central domains of growth cones were signiﬁcantly diminished or almost com - pletely disappeared after Arp2 / 3 complex depletion except for puncta associated with the actin bundles extending from the neurite ( Figure 8D ) . Quantiﬁcation showed that myosin II puncta were signiﬁcantly diminished in the central do - main of Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted growth cones ( Figure 8I , right ) . Expression of YFP - Arp3 reversed the excessive for - mation of myosin II - containing structures in neurites ( Sup - plemental Figure S1E ) . The vinculin staining revealed a sig - niﬁcant increase of focal adhesions in neurites of Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells ( Figure 8 , E – H and J ) . The observed changes in the neurite behavior and orga - nization of actin bundles after Arp2 / 3 complex depletion were reminiscent of a phenotype induced by activation of a small GTPase RhoA ( Govek et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , we tested whether activity of RhoA changed after Arp2 / 3 complex depletion . Lysates of differentiating control and siRNA - treated cells were assayed using G - LISA RhoA kit ( see Ma - terials and Methods ) . The results showed a signiﬁcant increase in RhoA activity in p34 - Arc siRNA - treated cells ( Figure 8K ) . Effects of Rac1V12 Expression on Arp2 / 3 Complex Knockdown Phenotype Activities of RhoA and Rac1 in cells frequently display negative relationship with each other ( Govek et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , Arp2 / 3 complex depletion might inhibit ﬁlopo - dia indirectly through inhibition of Rac1 associated with up - regulation of RhoA . To control for this possibility , we investigated a phenotype of p34 - Arc - depleted B35 cells after expression of a constitutively active Rac1 , GFP - Rac1V12 . Control B35 cells transfected with Rac1V12 and induced to differentiate had variable cell morphology , but all were se - verely impaired in neuritogenesis ( Figure 9 , A and B ) . The majority of cells failed to produce neurites , and their cell bodies were surrounded by protrusions , either by a smooth lamellipodium with no signs of ﬁlopodia , or by a mixture of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia ( Figure 9A ) . Some weakly ex - pressing cells displayed rudimentary neuritogenesis with multiple short processes tipped with lamellipodia and ﬁlop - odia ( Figure 9B ) . Quantiﬁcation of ﬁlopodia in the subset of cells expressing ﬁlopodia ( cells without ﬁlopodia were ex - cluded from quantiﬁcation ) showed that the ﬁlopodia fre - quency did not change , but the rate of ﬁlopodia initiation increased by (cid:2) 70 % after Rac1V12 expression ( Figure 9D ) . Cotransfection of p34 - Arc siRNA and Rac1V12 also largely prevented B35 cells from forming neurites in differ - entiating conditions , especially in highly Rac1V12 - express - ing cells , whereas low - expressing cells formed some rudi - mentary processes ( Figure 9C ) . Rac1V12 partially rescued ﬁlopodia formation in p34 - Arc – depleted cells . Thus , the ﬁlopodia frequency at the leading edge became indistin - guishable from that in control cells with or without Rac1V12 ( Figure 9D , left ) . However , the rate of ﬁlopodia initiation , although increased (cid:2) 10 - fold after Rac1V12 expression in p34 - Arc – depleted cells , remained approximately twofold lower than in control cells with or without Rac1V12 . These data suggest that the ﬁlopodia deﬁciency in Arp2 / 3 com - plex - depleted cells may in part be mediated by altered ac - tivities of Rho GTPases , and in part by a deﬁciency in actin nucleation . Figure 5 ( cont ) . levels of Arp2 / 3 complex subunits are decreased by (cid:2) 50 % . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of F - actin in growth cones of differen - tiated B35 cells transfected with control ( n (cid:8) 25 growth cones ) , p34 - Arc ( n (cid:8) 33 ) or Arp3 ( n (cid:8) 23 ) siRNA and stained with ﬂuores - cently labeled phalloidin ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . ( C and D ) Quantiﬁcation of p34 - Arc immunoﬂuorescence ( C ) or F - actin ( D ) in growth cones of hippocampal neurons transfected with control ( n (cid:8) 29 growth cones ) or p34 - Arc ( n (cid:8) 15 ) siRNA ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . ( E – H ) Staining of F - actin by phalloidin and Arp2 / 3 complex by p16 - Arc ( F ) or p34 - Arc ( H ) antibody in B35 cells ( E and F ) or hippocampal neurons ( G and H ) transfected with indicated siRNA . Both actin and Arp2 / 3 complex components are decreased at the growth cone periphery of knockdown cells ( compare phalloidin staining in E and F and in G and H ) . Images of control and knockdown cells were acquired and processed identically . ( I – M ) Growth cone dynamics in control ( I and L ) , p34 - Arc siRNA - treated ( J and M ) , and rescued ( cotransfected with Arp3 siRNA and human YFP - Arp3 , K ) differentiated B35 cells ( I – K ) and hippocampal neurons ( L and M ) . Lower panels show kymographs generated along color lines in top panels . Lamellipodia in control ( I and L ) and rescued ( K ) growth cones undergo repetitive cycles of protrusion and retraction , whereas siRNA - treated cells ( J and M ) have relatively quiescent leading edges . Rates of retrograde ﬂow are decreased in knockdown cells ( J and M ) compared with control ( I and L ) and rescued cells ( K ) . Examples of slopes used for quantiﬁcation are shown in kymographs by light blue lines . ( N and O ) Rates of lamellipodia protrusion ( left plots ) and retrograde ﬂow ( right plots ) in differentiated B35 cells ( N ) and hippocampal neurons ( O ) transfected as indicated . ( P and Q ) Filopodia frequency ( left plots ) and rates of ﬁlopodia initiation ( right plots ) in differentiated B35 cells ( P ) and hippocampal neurons ( Q ) transfected as indicated . Plots in N – Q are generated based on analysis of phase contrast movies . Top and bottom of a box indicate 75th and 25th quartiles ; whiskers indicate 10th and 90th percentiles ; dot is the mean ; line is the median . Differences between data sets connected by brackets ( N , P ) are statistically signiﬁcant ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . Asterisks ( O and Q ) indicate statistical signiﬁcance compared with control ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . n (cid:8) 21 – 49 events for N and O and 11 – 39 growth cones for P and Q ) . ( R ) Filopodia dynamics in control and p34 - Arc siRNA - treated dif - ferentiated B35 cells . Bar segments represent percentage of time spent by ﬁlopodia in protrusion , pause , or retraction phases , as indicated ( n (cid:8) 57 – 119 ﬁlopodia ) . Bars , 2 (cid:1) m ( E – H ) or 5 (cid:1) m ( I – M ) . Arp2 / 3 Complex in Neuronal Cells Vol . 19 , April 2008 1569 DISCUSSION Arp2 / 3 Complex in Filopodia Formation In this study , we found that Arp2 / 3 complex is present in neuronal growth cones and functionally contributes to pro - trusion of lamellipodia and initiation of ﬁlopodia . Existing discrepancies regarding the presence of Arp2 / 3 complex in neuronal growth cones ( Strasser et al . , 2004 ; Mongiu et al . , 2007 ) prompted us ﬁrst to investigate the Arp2 / 3 complex requirement for lamellipodial dynamics . Using EM , immunochemistry , and gene expression , we showed the presence of branched actin ﬁlaments and Arp2 / 3 complex at the growth cone periphery of four dif - ferent neuronal cells , consistent with ﬁndings in chicken dorsal root ganglion neurons and PC - 12 pheochromocytoma cells ( Mongiu et al . , 2007 ) and the presence of the members of the Arp2 / 3 complex - activating WAVE complex , WAVE1 and Sra1 , in growth cones of hippocampal neurons ( Kawano et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , using RNAi we demonstrated that Arp2 / 3 complex is important for protrusion of growth cone veils , similar to lamellipodia in other cell types ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ; see however , Di Nardo et al . , 2005 ) . Discrepancies between our data and those of Strasser et al . ( 2004 ) , who reported Arp2 / 3 complex - independent growth cone motility in hippocampal neurons , may potentially derive from an alternative functional ap - proach . Thus , Strasser et al . ( 2004 ) expressed the CA frag - ment of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( N - WASP ) , which is expected to sequester Arp2 / 3 complex , but the expression level might be insufﬁcient , as they used only moderately expressing cells ; or the CA construct might be inefﬁcient in this experimental system . In contrast , using a well established and controllable siRNA technique , we ob - served a clear and reproducible phenotype even after partial depletion of the Arp2 / 3 complex . The speciﬁcity of the phenotype was extensively controlled by using different cell types , different target sequences , nontargeting control siRNA , and rescue by a nontargeted gene . Importantly , depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex inhibited ﬁlop - odia , indicating the functional contribution of Arp2 / 3 com - plex to their generation . These observations , however , con - ﬂict with the reported absence of the ﬁlopodial phenotype in non - neuronal cells after inhibition of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ste - ffen et al . , 2006 ) . Because these authors evaluated ﬁlopodia in the presence of the constitutively active Cdc42 after deple - Figure 6 . EM of Arp2 / 3 complex knock - down growth cones of B35 cells . ( A ) Growth cone of p34 - Arc siRNA - treated differentiated cell shows sparse actin network in lamellipo - dia and few remaining ﬁlopodial bundles ( compare with Figure 3 ) . ( B ) Enlarged boxed region from A shows ﬁlopodia and lamellipo - dia in detail . Branched ﬁlaments ( green ) are seen in the sparse lamellipodial network . Many ﬁlopodial ﬁlaments originate from branch points . Boxed regions in B are further enlarged at bottom without highlighting . ( C ) Inhibition of lamellipodia in growth cones of differentiated p34 - Arc siRNA - treated cells , as revealed by quantiﬁcation of the lamellipo - dium width ( left ) , density of actin ﬁlament branches ( middle ) , or density of gold particles after immunostaining with p16 - Arc antibody ( right ) ( n (cid:8) 6 cells for each ) . Branch and im - munogold densities are plotted against the distance from the leading edge . ( D – F ) Correl - ative EM of nascent ﬁlopodia in p34 - Arc siRNA - treated differentiated B35 cells . ( D ) Time - lapse sequence of a growth cone shows formation of a small bulge at the end of the sequence ( arrow ) . ( E ) EM of the region corre - sponding to the boxed area in E . Arrow marks a ﬁlopodial bundle formed at the position of the bulge . ( F ) Enlarged boxed region in E . Branched ﬁlaments ( green ) are seen in the root of this thin nascent ﬁlopodium . Time in minutes : seconds . Bars , 2 (cid:1) m ( A and D ) , 0 . 5 (cid:1) m ( B and E ) , or 0 . 2 (cid:1) m ( F ) . F . Korobova and T . Svitkina Molecular Biology of the Cell 1570 tion of the WAVE complex , it is possible that N - WASP , another major Arp2 / 3 complex activator and a Cdc42 effec - tor , produced an alternative source of Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated ﬁlaments for ﬁlopodia initiation . Our study also provides a mechanistic explanation of Arp2 / 3 complex functions during ﬁlopodia formation ( Fig - ure 10 ) . Thus , correlative light and electron microscopy re - vealed that ﬁlopodia initiation in growth cones is associated with the dendritic network that is especially prominent in interﬁlopodial veils ( Figure 10 , A and B ) . During protrusion , this network is reorganized into bundles of long ﬁlaments ( Figure 10 , B – D ) . Activities of anti - capping proteins , such as Ena / VASP proteins ( Bear et al . , 2002 ; Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) and formins ( Zigmond et al . , 2003 ) , and cross - linkers , such as fascin ( Vignjevic et al . , 2006 ) , are likely responsible for this reorganization . Overall , this process is consistent with the convergent elongation mechanism , we previously proposed for ﬁlopodia formation in B16F1 melanoma cells ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . Lateral ﬁlopodia , which were reported to arise from actin patches of unknown structure ( Loudon et al . , 2006 ) , are formed by a similar mechanism . The constant presence of branched ﬁlaments at ﬁlopodial roots and their fusion with the ﬁlopodial bundles suggests that Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated nucleation supplies ﬁlaments for making Figure 7 . Neuritogenesis is impaired in Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted B35 cells and hippocampal neurons . ( A – D ) Phalloidin staining of control ( A and B ) and p34 - Arc - treated ( C and D ) undifferentiated ( A and C ) and differentiated ( B and D ) B35 cells . ( E ) Mixed population of B35 cells transfected with Cy3 - p34 - Arc or FITC - control siRNA were imaged immediately ( left column ) or 12 h ( right column ) after initiation of differentiation . Numbers mark the same cells at both time points . In the top row , all numbered cells contain control siRNA except cell 2 , which contains p34 - Arc siRNA , but dies during the movie . In the lower row , all numbered cells contain p34 - Arc siRNA . ( F and G ) Length ( F ) and number ( G ) of neurites 48 h after initiation of differentiation in B35 cells treated by control or inhibitory siRNA , as indicated . Asterisks indicate statistical signiﬁcance compared with control ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . n (cid:8) 152 – 242 neurites ( F ) and 63 – 74 cells ( G ) . ( H ) Number of neurites in hippocampal neurons 48 h after transfection with control or inhibitory siRNA , as indicated . Asterisks indicate statistical signiﬁcance compared with control ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ; n (cid:8) 56 – 60 ) . ( I ) Time course of neurite extension after initiation of differentiation ( t (cid:8) 0 ) in B35 cells treated with control ( left ) or p34 - Arc ( right ) siRNA . Each line represents an individual neurite . Dashed lines are curve ﬁtting to a logarithmic function of neurites shown in red in each plot ( r , r for plotted variables ; p , signiﬁcance ) . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m ( A – D ) or 5 (cid:1) m ( E ) . Arp2 / 3 Complex in Neuronal Cells Vol . 19 , April 2008 1571 ﬁlopodia . Although it is possible that some of these branches are formed not by Arp2 / 3 complex , but by another cross - linking protein , a parallel decrease in branched ﬁlaments and Arp2 / 3 complex labeling after siRNA treatment sug - gests that the majority of structurally observed branches were made by Arp2 / 3 complex . Branched ﬁlaments also constantly occur in the roots of ﬁlopodia remaining after Arp2 / 3 complex depletion , suggesting that remaining Arp2 / 3 complex forms preferred sites for ﬁlopodia initia - tion . If ﬁlopodia formation was mediated exclusively by formins , as proposed previously ( Faix and Rottner , 2006 ) , we would be able to see at least some ﬁlopodia not associ - ated with branched ﬁlaments after Arp2 / 3 complex deple - tion . It should be noted , however , that until complete inhi - bition of the Arp2 / 3 complex is achieved , it is not possible to determine whether the dendritic network creates highly fa - vorable conditions for ﬁlopodia formation or it is absolutely necessary for it . The functional contribution of Arp2 / 3 complex - depen - dent nucleation to ﬁlopodia formation does not contradict a role of formins in this process . On contrary , we found that some ﬁlopodial ﬁlaments display apparently free “pointed” ends as might be expected for formin - nucleated ﬁlaments . Although we cannot exclude the possibility that these linear ﬁlaments are produced by severing and / or debranching of Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated ﬁlaments or simply by rupture during sample preparation , it seems likely based on other studies ( Peng et al . , 2003 ; Pellegrin and Mellor , 2005 ; Schiren - beck et al . , 2005 ; Yang et al . , 2007 ) that at least some of these ﬁlaments are nucleated by a formin . The reorganization of the dendritic network into ﬁlopodia seemed more efﬁcient in neuronal cells , compared with B16 F1 cells ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . We previously proposed a two - step mode of signaling leading to ﬁlopodia formation , in which a ﬁrst step is responsible for dendritic nucleation and a second one for reorganization of the dendritic network Figure 8 . Arp2 / 3 complex depletion induces stress ﬁbers and activates RhoA . ( A – D ) Myosin II immunostaining ( red ) in control ( A and C ) and Arp3 siRNA - treated ( B and D ) cells . Actin is labeled by phalloidin ( green ) . Boxed regions in A and B are enlarged in C and D , respectively . Note increased formation of actin bundles in neu - rites and cell body ( arrows ) and decreased amount of myosin II puncta in growth cones ( arrowheads ) of knockdown cells . ( E – H ) Vinculin immunostaining ( red ) in control ( E and G ) and p34 - Arc siRNA - treated ( F and H ) cells . Actin is labeled by phalloidin ( green ) . Boxed regions in E and F are enlarged in G and H , respectively . Note increased formation of focal adhesions in p34 - Arc siRNA - treated cells ( arrows ) . ( I ) Quantiﬁcation of myosin II immunostain - ing showing percentage of cells with high contents of myosin II - containing bundles in the cell bodies ( left ) and percentage of growth cones with peripheral myosin II puncta ( right ) in B35 cells express - ing control and p34 - Arc siRNA . ( J ) Quantiﬁcation of vinculin im - munostaining showing percentage of neurites with focal contacts in B35 cells expressing control and p34 - Arc siRNA . ( K ) RhoA activity in control and p34 - Arc siRNA - treated cells . Asterisk indicates sta - tistical signiﬁcance ( p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ; n (cid:8) 4 ) . Bars , 5 (cid:1) m ( A and B ) or 10 (cid:1) m ( E and F ) . Figure 9 . Expression of GFP - Rac1V12 in B35 cells . ( A – C ) Phalloi - din staining ( top row ) of differentiated control ( A and B ) and p34 - Arc siRNA - treated ( C ) cells expressing GFP - Rac1V12 ( bottom row ) . GFP - Rac1V12 and phalloidin image sets are processed identically , so the brightness of ﬂuorescence reﬂects the level of Rac1V12 ex - pression or F - actin contents , respectively . Representative cell mor - phologies are shown . ( D ) Filopodia frequency ( left plot ) and rates of ﬁlopodia initiation ( right plot ) in cells transfected with indicated constructs . Values connected by brackets indicate statistical signif - icance ( p (cid:6) 0 . 01 ; n (cid:8) 8 – 19 cells for each ) . ( E ) Filopodia dynamics in cells transfected as indicated . Bar segments represent percentage of time spent by ﬁlopodia in protrusion , pause , or retraction phases , as indicated ( n (cid:8) 48 – 119 ﬁlopodia ) . Bar , 5 (cid:1) m ( A – C ) . F . Korobova and T . Svitkina Molecular Biology of the Cell 1572 into bundles ( Biyasheva et al . , 2004 ) . Our current data sug - gest that the relative activities of two proposed signaling modules may be shifted toward the second one in neuronal cells . This hypothesis may also explain the domination of ﬁlopodia over lamellipodia in neurons . Arp2 / 3 Complex in Neuronal Signaling Functions of Arp2 / 3 complex in growth cone dynamics are predicted to inﬂuence neuritogenesis , as we indeed ob - served . Inhibition of axonal outgrowth was also observed after knockdown of Sra - 1 or WAVE1 members of WAVE complex in hippocampal neurons ( Kawano et al . , 2005 ) . However , the interpretation of these results is not straight - forward , because we also detected increased RhoA activity after Arp2 / 3 complex depletion , which might explain the altered pattern of neurite extension analogous to that in - duced by constitutively active RhoA ( Gallo , 2006 ) . Although the mechanisms of Arp2 / 3 complex interaction with RhoA signaling remain unknown , this ﬁnding ﬁts well to an emerging theme that actin ﬁlament nucleators may also function in signaling through Rho GTPases and form feed - back loops . Thus , Arp2 / 3 complex was shown to bind and activate the Rac GEF Tiam1 ( Ten Klooster et al . , 2006 ) , and several formins act upstream of Rho GTPases ( Habas et al . , 2001 ; Koka et al . , 2003 ; Kitzing et al . , 2007 ) . Involvement of Arp2 / 3 complex in signaling through Rho GTPases may indicate that its role in ﬁlopodia formation is indirect and mediated , for example , by decreased Rac activ - ity . We addressed this concern by expressing Rac1V12 in siRNA - treated cells , and we found that it rescued ﬁlopodia formation , but only partially , suggesting that Arp2 / 3 com - plex may contribute to ﬁlopodia formation not only by nucleating actin ﬁlaments in lamellipodia but also by alter - ing activities of Rho GTPases . How active Rac1 stimulates ﬁlopodia in Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells is still an open question . One possibility is that Rac1 fully activates the remaining Arp2 / 3 complex through WAVE complex . Alter - natively , Rac1 may induce actin polymerization through other known or unknown actin nucleators . At present , we cannot distinguish between these nonexclusive possibilities . Rac1V12 expression also increased the rate of ﬁlopodia ini - tiation in control cells , consistent with an idea of lamellipo - dia - dependent ﬁlopodia formation . In conclusion , we showed here that Arp2 / 3 complex is a key component of actin - based protrusion in neuronal growth cones and that it is involved in generation of lamel - lipodia , and , importantly , ﬁlopodia . Besides its roles in con - structing the actin machinery for protrusion , Arp2 / 3 com - plex seems to play a role in signaling through Rho GTPases and thus inﬂuences neuritogenesis during neuronal differ - entiation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Drs . R . Balice - Gordon , M . Dichter , F . Gertler , H . Higgs , K . Kaibuchi , D . Kessler , S . Kojima , and C . Otey for generous gifts of reagents and cells ; P . Sterling for permission to use a JEOL 1200EX electron microscope ; S . Popov for help with Xenopus neural crest cell culture ; and S . Zigmond for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM - 70898 ( to T . S . ) . REFERENCES Adams , J . C . ( 2004 ) . Roles of fascin in cell adhesion and motility . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 590 – 596 . Barzik , M . , Kotova , T . I . , Higgs , H . N . , Hazelwood , L . , Hanein , D . , Gertler , F . B . , and Schafer , D . A . ( 2005 ) . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymer - ization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 28653 – 28662 . Bear , J . E . et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . Biyasheva , A . , Svitkina , T . , Kunda , P . , Baum , B . , and Borisy , G . ( 2004 ) . Cas - cade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation downstream of SCAR . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 837 – 848 . Borisy , G . G . , and Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 – 112 . Bridgman , P . C . , and Dailey , M . E . ( 1989 ) . The organization of myosin and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 95 – 109 . Chang , S . , Svitkina , T . M . , Borisy , G . G . , and Popov , S . V . ( 1999 ) . Speckle microscopic evaluation of microtubule transport in growing nerve processes . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 399 – 403 . Cohan , C . S . , Welnhofer , E . A . , Zhao , L . , Matsumura , F . , and Yamashiro , S . ( 2001 ) . Role of the actin bundling protein fascin in growth cone morphogen - esis : localization in ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 48 , 109 – 120 . Di Nardo , A . , Cicchetti , G . , Falet , H . , Hartwig , J . H . , Stossel , T . P . , and Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 2005 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex - deﬁcient mouse ﬁbroblasts are viable and have normal leading - edge actin structure and function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 16263 – 16268 . Figure 10 . Actin ﬁlament organization ( A ) and the mechanism of ﬁlopodia formation ( B – D ) in neuronal growth cones . ( A ) Actin ﬁlaments ( black lines ) at the periphery of growth cones are orga - nized into bundles of long ﬁlaments in ﬁlopodia and branching networks in lamellipodia ; these ﬁlaments do not form distinct sets , but lamellipodial ﬁlaments may branch off of the ﬁlopodial ﬁla - ments and / or merge into ﬁlopodial bundles . ( B ) New ﬁlopodia usually form from interﬁlopodial networks that are rich in Arp2 / 3 complex ( yellow hearts ) and branching actin ﬁlaments ( blue hearts ) . ( C ) Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated ﬁlaments elongate persistently with an assistance of anti - capping molecules ( purple rings ) and converge to form a bulge - like protrusion at the site of an incipient ﬁlopodium . ( D ) Continued elongation of barbed ends with a concomitant bundling by a cross - linker ( green crosses ) results in ﬁlopodia formation . Arp2 / 3 Complex in Neuronal Cells Vol . 19 , April 2008 1573 Diez , S . , Gerisch , G . , Anderson , K . , Muller - Taubenberger , A . , and Bretschneider , T . ( 2005 ) . Subsecond reorganization of the actin network in cell motility and chemotaxis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 7601 – 7606 . Faix , J . , and Rottner , K . ( 2006 ) . The making of ﬁlopodia . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 18 – 25 . Gallo , G . ( 2006 ) . RhoA - kinase coordinates F - actin organization and myosin II activity during semaphorin - 3A - induced axon retraction . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3413 – 3423 . Govek , E . E . , Newey , S . E . , and Van Aelst , L . ( 2005 ) . The role of the Rho GTPases in neuronal development . Genes Dev . 19 , 1 – 49 . Habas , R . , Kato , Y . , and He , X . ( 2001 ) . Wnt / Frizzled activation of Rho regu - lates vertebrate gastrulation and requires a novel Formin homology protein Daam1 . Cell 107 , 843 – 854 . Katoh , K . , Hammar , K . , Smith , P . J . , and Oldenbourg , R . ( 1999 ) . Birefringence imaging directly reveals architectural dynamics of ﬁlamentous actin in living growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 197 – 210 . Kawano , Y . , Yoshimura , T . , Tsuboi , D . , Kawabata , S . , Kaneko - Kawano , T . , Shirataki , H . , Takenawa , T . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2005 ) . CRMP - 2 is involved in kinesin - 1 - dependent transport of the Sra - 1 / WAVE1 complex and axon for - mation . Mol . Cell Biol . 25 , 9920 – 9935 . Kitzing , T . M . , Sahadevan , A . S . , Brandt , D . T . , Knieling , H . , Hannemann , S . , Fackler , O . T . , Grosshans , J . , and Grosse , R . ( 2007 ) . Positive feedback between Dia1 , LARG , and RhoA regulates cell morphology and invasion . Genes Dev . 21 , 1478 – 1483 . Koka , S . , Neudauer , C . L . , Li , X . , Lewis , R . E . , McCarthy , J . B . , and Westendorf , J . J . ( 2003 ) . The formin - homology - domain - containing protein FHOD1 en - hances cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1745 – 1755 . Kunda , P . , Craig , G . , Dominguez , V . , and Baum , B . ( 2003 ) . Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the forma - tion of actin - based protrusions . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1867 – 1875 . Lebrand , C . , Dent , E . W . , Strasser , G . A . , Lanier , L . M . , Krause , M . , Svitkina , T . M . , Borisy , G . G . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2004 ) . Critical role of Ena / VASP proteins for ﬁlopodia formation in neurons and in function downstream of netrin - 1 . Neuron 42 , 37 – 49 . Lorenz , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Wang , Y . , Singer , R . H . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2004 ) . Imaging sites of N - WASP activity in lamellipodia and invadopodia of carci - noma cells . Curr . Biol . 14 , 697 – 703 . Loudon , R . P . , Silver , L . D . , Yee , H . F . , Jr . , and Gallo , G . ( 2006 ) . RhoA - kinase and myosin II are required for the maintenance of growth cone polarity and guidance by nerve growth factor . J . Neurobiol . 66 , 847 – 867 . Mallavarapu , A . , and Mitchison , T . ( 1999 ) . Regulated actin cytoskeleton as - sembly at ﬁlopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1097 – 1106 . Medeiros , N . A . , Burnette , D . T . , and Forscher , P . ( 2006 ) . Myosin II functions in actin - bundle turnover in neuronal growth cones . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 215 – 226 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery ; pivotal role of the ﬁlament barbed end . Cell 118 , 363 – 373 . Millard , T . H . , Sharp , S . J . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Signalling to actin assembly via the WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) - family proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem . J . 380 , 1 – 17 . Mongiu , A . K . , Weitzke , E . L . , Chaga , O . Y . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2007 ) . Kinetic - structural analysis of neuronal growth cone veil motility . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1113 – 1125 . Nicholson - Dykstra , S . , Higgs , H . N . , and Harris , E . S . ( 2005 ) . Actin dynamics : growth from dendritic branches . Curr . Biol . 15 , R346 – R357 . Otey , C . A . , Boukhelifa , M . , and Maness , P . ( 2003 ) . B35 neuroblastoma cells : an easily transfected , cultured cell model of central nervous system neurons . Methods Cell Biol . 71 , 287 – 304 . Pellegrin , S . , and Mellor , H . ( 2005 ) . The Rho family GTPase Rif induces ﬁlopodia through mDia2 . Curr . Biol . 15 , 129 – 133 . Peng , J . , Wallar , B . J . , Flanders , A . , Swiatek , P . J . , and Alberts , A . S . ( 2003 ) . Disruption of the Diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr . Biol . 13 , 534 – 545 . Pruyne , D . , Evangelista , M . , Yang , C . , Bi , E . , Zigmond , S . , Bretscher , A . , and Boone , C . ( 2002 ) . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 , 612 – 615 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 – 1088 . Schirenbeck , A . , Bretschneider , T . , Arasada , R . , Schleicher , M . , and Faix , J . ( 2005 ) . The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is required for the formation and maintenance of ﬁlopodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 619 – 625 . Small , J . V . , Isenberg , G . , and Celis , J . E . ( 1978 ) . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature 272 , 638 – 639 . Steffen , A . , Faix , J . , Resch , G . P . , Linkner , J . , Wehland , J . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2581 – 2591 . Steketee , M . , Balazovich , K . , and Tosney , K . W . ( 2001 ) . Filopodial initiation and a novel ﬁlament - organizing center , the focal ring . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2378 – 2395 . Strasser , G . A . , Rahim , N . A . , VanderWaal , K . E . , Gertler , F . B . , and Lanier , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Arp2 / 3 is a negative regulator of growth cone translocation . Neuron 43 , 81 – 94 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depoly - merizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2006 ) . Correlative light and electron microscopy studies of cytoskeletal dynamics . In : Cell Biology : A Laboratory Handbook ; 3rd Edition , vol . 3 , ed . J . Celis , San Diego : Academic Press , 277 – 285 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 . Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1997 ) . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mecha - nism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 – 415 . Ten Klooster , J . P . , Evers , E . E . , Janssen , L . , Machesky , L . M . , Michiels , F . , Hordijk , P . , and Collard , J . G . ( 2006 ) . Interaction between Tiam1 and the Arp2 / 3 complex links activation of Rac to actin polymerization . Biochem . J . 397 , 39 – 45 . Theriot , J . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) . Actin microﬁlament dynamics in locomoting cells . Nature 352 , 126 – 131 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , Surgucheva , I . G . , Svitkina , T . M . , Tint , I . S . , and Gelfand , V . I . ( 1987 ) . Organization of stress ﬁbers in cultured ﬁbroblasts after extraction of actin with bovine brain gelsolin - like protein . Exp . Cell Res . 173 , 244 – 255 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1995 ) . Myosin II ﬁlament assemblies in the active lamella of ﬁbroblasts : their morphogenesis and role in the formation of actin ﬁlament bundles . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 989 – 1002 . Vignjevic , D . , Kojima , S . , Aratyn , Y . , Danciu , O . , Svitkina , T . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2006 ) . Role of fascin in ﬁlopodial protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 863 – 875 . Vignjevic , D . , Yarar , D . , Welch , M . D . , Peloquin , J . , Svitkina , T . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Formation of ﬁlopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 951 – 962 . Wang , Y . L . ( 1985 ) . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living ﬁbroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 597 – 602 . Watanabe , N . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2002 ) . Single - molecule speckle analysis of actin ﬁlament turnover in lamellipodia . Science 295 , 1083 – 1086 . Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 23 – 30 . Wilcox , K . S . , Buchhalter , J . , and Dichter , M . A . ( 1994 ) . Properties of inhibitory and excitatory synapses between hippocampal neurons in very low density cultures . Synapse . 18 , 128 – 151 . Yang , C . , Czech , L . , Gerboth , S . , Kojima , S . , Scita , G . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2007 ) . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol . 5 , e317 Zakharenko , S . , and Popov , S . ( 2000 ) . Plasma membrane recycling and ﬂow in growing neurites . Neuroscience 97 , 185 – 194 . Zigmond , S . H . ( 2004 ) . Formin - induced nucleation of actin ﬁlaments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 99 – 105 . Zigmond , S . H . , Evangelista , M . , Boone , C . , Yang , C . , Dar , A . C . , Sicheri , F . , Forkey , J . , and Pring , M . ( 2003 ) . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1820 – 1823 . F . Korobova and T . Svitkina Molecular Biology of the Cell 1574