J OURNAL OF V IROLOGY , Jan . 2005 , p . 1191 – 1206 Vol . 79 , No . 2 0022 - 538X / 05 / $ 08 . 00 (cid:1) 0 doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 79 . 2 . 1191 – 1206 . 2005 Copyright © 2005 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . Kaposi’s Sarcoma - Associated Herpesvirus Modulates Microtubule Dynamics via RhoA - GTP - Diaphanous 2 Signaling and Utilizes the Dynein Motors To Deliver Its DNA to the Nucleus Pramod P . Naranatt , Harinivas H . Krishnan , Marilyn S . Smith , and Bala Chandran * Department of Microbiology , Molecular Genetics and Immunology , The University of Kansas Medical Center , Kansas City , Kansas Received 6 February 2004 / Accepted 3 September 2004 Human herpesvirus 8 ( HHV - 8 ; also called Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus ) , which is implicated in the pathogenesis of Kaposi’s sarcoma ( KS ) and lymphoproliferative disorders , infects a variety of target cells both in vivo and in vitro . HHV - 8 binds to several in vitro target cells via cell surface heparan sulfate and utilizes the (cid:1) 3 (cid:2) 1 integrin as one of its entry receptors . Interactions with cell surface molecules induce the activation of host cell signaling cascades and cytoskeletal changes ( P . P . Naranatt , S . M . Akula , C . A . Zien , H . H . Krishnan , and B . Chandran , J . Virol . 77 : 1524 – 1539 , 2003 ) . However , the mechanism by which the HHV - 8 - induced signaling pathway facilitates the complex events associated with the internalization and nuclear trafﬁcking of internalized viral DNA is as yet undeﬁned . Here we examined the role of HHV - 8 - induced cytoskeletal dynamics in the infectious process and their interlinkage with signaling pathways . The depoly - merization of microtubules did not affect HHV - 8 binding and internalization , but it inhibited the nuclear delivery of viral DNA and infection . In contrast , the depolymerization of actin microﬁlaments did not have any effect on virus binding , entry , nuclear delivery , or infection . Early during infection , HHV - 8 induced the acetylation of microtubules and the activation of the RhoA and Rac1 GTPases . The inactivation of Rho GTPases by Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B signiﬁcantly reduced microtubular acetylation and the delivery of viral DNA to the nucleus . In contrast , the activation of Rho GTPases by Escherichia coli cytotoxic necrotizing factor signiﬁcantly augmented the nuclear delivery of viral DNA . Among the Rho GTPase - induced downstream effector molecules known to stabilize the microtubules , the activation of RhoA - GTP - dependent diaphanous 2 was observed , with no signiﬁcant activation in the Rac - and Cdc42 - dependent PAK1 / 2 and stathmin molecules . The nuclear delivery of viral DNA increased in cells expressing a constitutively active RhoA mutant and decreased in cells expressing a dominant - negative mutant of RhoA . HHV - 8 capsids colocalized with the microtubules , as observed by confocal microscopic examination , and the colocalization was abolished by the destabilization of microtubules with nocodazole and by the phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase inhibitor affecting the Rho GTPases . These results suggest that HHV - 8 induces Rho GTPases , and in doing so , modulates microtu - bules and promotes the trafﬁcking of viral capsids and the establishment of infection . This is the ﬁrst demonstration of virus - induced host cell signaling pathways in the modulation of microtubule dynamics and in the trafﬁcking of viral DNA to the infected cell nucleus . These results further support our hypothesis that HHV - 8 manipulates the host cell signaling pathway to create an appropriate intracellular environment that is conducive to the establishment of a successful infection . The gamma - 2 human herpesvirus 8 ( HHV - 8 ) , or Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpes virus ( KSHV ) , genome was ﬁrst identiﬁed in biopsies of KS , an AIDS - deﬁning neoplasm of human immunodeﬁciency virus ( HIV ) - infected patients ( 16 ) . Several lines of evidence point to a central role of HHV - 8 in the pathogenesis of KS and of two B - cell proliferative disor - ders , primary effusion lymphoma ( or body - cavity - based B - cell lymphomas [ BCBL ] ) and multicentric Castleman’s disease ( 58 ) . HHV - 8 DNA and transcripts have been identiﬁed in vivo in KS spindle and endothelial cells , keratinocytes , prostate epithelial cells , B cells , and macrophages ( 9 , 58 ) . In vitro , HHV - 8 has been shown to infect many types of human cells , such as B , epithelial , endothelial , and foreskin ﬁbroblast ( HFF ) cells and keratinocytes ( 11 , 57 , 66 ) . HHV - 8 can also infect animal cells , such as mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( 11 , 50 ) , owl monkey kidney cells , CV - 1 cells , and baby hamster kidney ( BHK - 21 ) cells ( 11 , 57 ) . HHV - 8 enters human ﬁbro - blast , B ( BJAB ) , and embryonic kidney ( 293 ) cells by endocy - tosis ( 3 , 6 , 36 ) , and this uptake is severely attenuated in cells that are pretreated with inhibitors affecting endosomal func - tions ( 6 , 36 ) . HHV - 8 utilizes the ubiquitous cell surface heparan sulfate ( HS ) to bind several in vitro target cells ( 3 ) , and this interac - tion is mediated by the virion envelope - associated glycopro - teins gB and gpK8 . 1A ( 4 , 67 ) . HHV - 8 gB also interacts with the host cell surface (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 integrin and utilizes the (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 inte - grin as one of its cellular receptors ( 5 ) . Using a KSHV ORF50 - dependent reporter 293 - T cell line , Inoue et al . ( 36 ) reported the inability of soluble (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 integrin and RGD peptides to block the infectivity of HHV - 8 . However , in their study the virus was centrifuged with cells in the presence of Polybrene , which may account for the apparent discrepancy . Polybrene is * Corresponding author . Mailing address : Department of Microbi - ology , Molecular Genetics and Immunology , Mail Stop 3029 , The University of Kansas Medical Center , 3901 Rainbow Blvd . , Kansas City , KS 66160 . Phone : ( 913 ) 588 - 7043 . Fax : ( 913 ) 588 - 7295 . E - mail : bchandra @ kumc . edu . 1191 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m a positively charged cation which can complex with the virus envelope and bypass the need for receptors . This property of Polybrene is the basis for its use to increase the infectivity of many viruses and to deliver nucleic acids for gene therapy . The nature of the other receptor ( s ) recognized by HHV - 8 and the glycoproteins involved need to be evaluated further . The precise mechanisms of HHV - 8 entry , transport of virus capsids in the cytoplasm , delivery of viral DNA to the nucleus , and initiation of infection have not been fully explored . To establish a successful infection , viruses must cross the plasma membrane and target their genome and accessory proteins to the correct organelle , where gene transcription , nucleic acid replication , and viral maturation can take place . After cell membrane penetration , viruses encounter the formidable bar - rier of the cytoplasm , which is packed with organelles , solutes , and a complex cytoskeletal network consisting of microtubules ( MTs ) , actin microﬁlaments ( MFs ) , and intermediate ﬁla - ments ( IFs ) , all of which restrict the free diffusion of macro - molecular complexes larger than 500 kDa or 50 nm ( 59 , 63 ) . Several viruses overcome these barriers by using the host cell macromolecule transport mechanism to move within the cell ( 14 ) . The movement of large cargo , including membrane or - ganelles , involves either the MF or MT network . Adenoviruses use the microtubules to reach the target cell nucleus , and the disassembly of viral capsids near the nuclear pores allows the viral DNA to enter the nucleus ( 25 , 61 , 62 , 64 , 69 ) . The MT network has also been shown to be utilized by herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV - 1 ) to transport its capsid ( 31 , 44 , 61 , 69 ) and by HIV type 1 ( HIV - 1 ) to transport its subviral particle con - taining the newly synthesized preinitiation complex cDNA ( 47 , 69 ) . An HHV - 8 – integrin interaction results in the activation of integrin - associated focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) and phospha - tidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI - 3K ) ( 50 ) . Two of the hallmarks of an integrin interaction with ligands are the reorganization and remodeling of the cytoskeleton , which are controlled by the Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 GTPases ( 13 ) . Immediately after infec - tion , HHV - 8 induces the rapid polymerization of actin in the target cells , leading to an increase in the F - actin content , an accumulation of stress ﬁbers , the formation of ﬁlopodial ex - tensions , and cellular rufﬂing ( 50 ) . These morphological changes are also induced by HHV - 8 gB and are inhibited by PI - 3K inhibitors ( 60 ) . These data suggest that HHV - 8 modu - lates the cytoskeletal network dynamics in a PI - 3K - and Rho GTPase - dependent manner ( 50 , 60 ) . To investigate the role of HHV - 8 - induced cytoskeletal dynamics in the infectious pro - cess , we analyzed the events promoting the nuclear trafﬁcking of internalized HHV - 8 . In this report , we demonstrate that MTs are vital for the trafﬁcking of viral DNA to the infected cell nucleus . Antibodies against the HHV - 8 capsid showed that the viral capsid colocalizes with the MTs near the vicinity of the nucleus , and the inhibition of MT polymerization and Rho GTPases abolished the migration of capsids in the cytoplasm . Our studies also show that HHV - 8 utilizes the MT - dependent dynein motor for the transport of its DNA towards the nucleus . These results demonstrate that HHV - 8 manipulates the host cell signaling pathways to promote the trafﬁcking of its capsid and to establish a successful infection . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and plasmids . Human ﬁbroblast cells ( HFF ; Clonetics , Walkersville , Md . ) , human dermal microvascular endothelial cells ( CC - 2543 ; Clonetics ) , hu - man embryonic kidney cells ( 293 ) , CV - 1 cells , HHV - 8 - carrying human B cells ( BCBL - 1 ) , recombinant green ﬂuorescent protein – HHV - 8 ( GFP – HHV - 8 – (cid:4) KSHV . 150 ) - carrying BCBL - 1 cells ( GFP – BCBL - 1 ) ( 66 ) , and BJAB cells ( HHV - 8 - and Epstein - Barr virus - negative human B cells ) were grown per stan - dard procedures established in the laboratory ( 3 – 6 , 50 ) . A Myc - tagged p50 / dynamitin construct ( 30 ) was a kind gift from Richard Vallee , Department of Pathology , Columbia University , New York , N . Y . Transfections of 293 and CV - 1 cells with 3 (cid:5) g of p50 / dynamitin were performed by the use of Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , Calif . ) as described previously ( 49 , 50 ) . Transfection and GTP - loading assay . 293 cells were transfected with the wild type ( wt ) and with dominant - negative ( T19N ) and constitutively active ( G14V ) mutants of RhoA plasmids obtained from the Guthrie cDNA resource center ( http : / / www . cdna . org ) . Plasmid DNA ( 2 . 5 (cid:5) g ) was used for transfections , and G418 selection was performed to establish stable cell lines carrying each mutant . Each cell line carrying either a wt or mutant Rho plasmid was ﬁrst characterized by a GTP - loading assay to conﬁrm its phenotype . Lysates of each cell line were made by using RIPA lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors and were nor - malized to contain equal protein concentrations before the addition of 5 (cid:5) l of GTP (cid:4) S ( Upstate Biotechnology , Charlottesville , Va . ) . The mixture was incu - bated at 30°C for 15 min with agitation ( GTP loading ) , and the reaction was terminated by the addition of MgCl 2 to a concentration of 50 (cid:5) M . The amounts of activated Rho ( Rho - GTP ) in the reaction mixtures were detected by afﬁnity precipitation ( 4°C for 45 min ) using rhotekin - GST beads . Bound RhoA proteins were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate – 12 % polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS – 12 % PAGE ) and immunoblotted with rabbit polyclonal antibodies against RhoA . These characterized cells were used to examine the role of Rho in HHV - 8 nuclear trafﬁcking . Virus . HHV - 8 was puriﬁed from BCBL cells according to previously described methods ( 3 , 48 , 50 ) , and the purity of the preparation was assessed by guidelines established in our laboratory ( 3 , 48 , 50 ) . HHV - 8 DNA was extracted from the virus , and the copy numbers were quantiﬁed by real - time DNA PCR using primers amplifying the HHV - 8 ORF73 gene ( 43 ) . Antibodies , toxins , and reagents . Polyclonal rabbit antibodies to Cdc42 , Rac1 , RhoA , and diaphanous 2 ( Dia2 ) and a monoclonal ( MAb ) antibody against the c - myc tag were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , Calif . A MAb against GFP was obtained from Covance Research Products , Berkeley , Calif . MAbs against (cid:3) - actin , (cid:2) - tubulin , and an acetylated form of (cid:2) - tubulin , tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate , and lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) were obtained from Sigma . Rabbit antibodies against human PAK - 1 ( total ) and phospho - PAK1 / 2 ( Ser 199 / 204 and Ser 192 / 197 ) were obtained from Cell Signaling Tech - nology , Beverly , Mass . Anti - rabbit and anti - mouse antibodies linked to horse - radish peroxidase , ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate , Alexa 488 , and Alexa 594 were purchased from KPL Inc . , Gaithersburg , Md . , or Molecular Probes , Eugene , Oreg . The cytoskeletal depolymerizing agents nocodazole , cytochalasin D ( cyto D ) , latrunculin A ( lat A ) , N - deacetyl - N - methylcolchicine ( Colcemid ) , and pac - litaxel ( Taxol ) were purchased from Sigma . Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B ( CdTxB ) and a MAb against lamin B were obtained from Calbiochem , La Jolla , Calif . Cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 ( CNF - 1 ) from Escherichia coli ( 2 ) was a kind gift from Gudula Schmidt , Universitat Freiburg , Freiburg , Germany . Rabbit poly - clonal antibodies detecting total stathmin and phosphorylated stathmin ( Ser 16 ) were kind gifts from Andre Sobel , INSERM U440 , Institut du Fer a Moulin , Paris , France ( 27 ) . GFP – HHV - 8 infection and HHV - 8 binding assay . The effects of inhibitors on HHV - 8 infection were measured by using GFP – HHV - 8 ( rKSHV . 152 ) per pre - viously described procedures ( 3 , 49 , 50 ) . [ 3 H ] thymidine - labeled HHV - 8 was used to assess the effects of various inhibitors on HHV - 8 binding according to previ - ously described procedures ( 3 ) . Real - time DNA and RT - PCR . Real - time DNA PCR and real - time reverse transcription - PCR ( RT - PCR ) were performed to quantify the internalized viral DNA and to monitor HHV - 8 ORF73 mRNA expression , respectively ( 43 ) . HHV - 8 DNA nuclear delivery assay . To monitor the delivery of HHV - 8 DNA to HFF cell nuclei , we prepared pure nuclear fractions by use of a Nuclei EZ isolation kit ( Sigma ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . Brieﬂy , cells infected with HHV - 8 were collected at different times postinfection ( p . i . ) , washed , treated with trypsin - EDTA ( 0 . 25 % trypsin and 5 mM EDTA ) to remove noninternalized virus , and lysed on ice for 5 min with a mild lysis buffer ( Sigma ) , and the nuclei were concentrated by centrifugation at 500 (cid:6) g for 5 min . Cytoskeletal components loosely bound to the nuclei were removed from the nuclear pellet by a repeat of the lysis and centrifugation procedures . The nuclei 1192 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m from one 25 - cm 2 ﬂask were resuspended in nucleus homogenization buffer ( 250 mM sucrose , 5 mM MgCl 2 (cid:1) 6H 2 O , 25 mM KCl , 20 mM Tricine - KOH , 7 . 8 ) , and 60 % iodixanol ( Optiprep ; Axis - Shield , Oslo , Norway ) was added to a ﬁnal con - centration of 25 % iodixanol . Four milliliters of this preparation was layered over a gradient of 4 ml of 30 % and 4 ml of 35 % iodixanol and then centrifuged at 10 , 000 (cid:6) g for 20 min in a JA 20 rotor ( Beckman ) . The pure nuclear band at the 30 - to - 35 % interface was removed , and HHV - 8 DNA was extracted by the use of DNeasy columns ( Qiagen ) . The purity of the nuclear preparations was assessed by immunoblots using anti - lamin B antibodies , and cytoskeletal contamination was assessed by the use of anti - (cid:3) - actin and anti - (cid:2) - tubulin antibodies . Western blot analysis . Total cell lysates ( 10 (cid:5) g ) were resolved in SDS - PAGE gels , transferred to nitrocellulose membranes , and immunoblotted with antibod - ies . Immunoreactive bands were then developed by enhanced chemilumines - cence reactions ( Perkin - Elmer ) and quantiﬁed by standard protocols ( 50 ) . Afﬁnity and coprecipitation assays . Afﬁnity precipitation reactions using the GST – Rho - binding domain ( RBD ) of rhotekin ( GST - RBD ) , which precipitated GTP - bound RhoA , and the GST – Rac - binding domain of PAK1 ( PBD ) , which precipitated GTP - bound Rac or Cdc42 , were done per the manufacturer’s rec - ommendations ( Cytoskeleton Inc . , Denver , Colo . ) to determine the amounts of activated cellular RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 after HHV - 8 infection . Brieﬂy , cells were treated with agonists for different time periods , washed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , and lysed in RIPA buffer ( 50 ) . The lysates were clariﬁed , normalized to equal amounts of total proteins , and incubated with glutathione beads containing bound GST - PBD or GST - RBD for 90 min at 4°C . Bound Rac1 and RhoA were resolved by SDS – 12 % PAGE and immunoblotted with rabbit polyclonal antibodies against Rac1 , Cdc42 , and RhoA . For analyses of the asso - ciation of Dia2 with RhoA , coafﬁnity precipitation was performed . Lysates were treated with GST - RBD beads to precipitate the activated GTP - bound RhoA . After being washed , the beads were boiled in 2 (cid:6) sample buffer , resolved by SDS – 7 . 5 % PAGE , and immunoblotted with rabbit anti - human Dia2 antibodies . Cytotoxicity assay . The cytotoxicities of various inhibitors were assessed by use of a lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) cytotoxicity assay kit ( Promega ) as described previously ( 50 ) . Confocal microscopic analysis of HHV - 8 trafﬁcking in the cytoplasm . Serum - starved HFF cells in chamber slides were preincubated with nocodazole or LY294002 before being infected with HHV - 8 at (cid:7) 50 copies per cell . At 1 h p . i . , the cells were washed , ﬁxed for 15 min with 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS at room temperature , permeabilized for 3 min with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and blocked for 30 min with 10 % normal goat serum ( Sigma ) in PBS . The cells were incubated with a 1 : 100 dilution of rabbit polyclonal immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) against the HHV - 8 capsid ORF65 protein ( 45 ) and with a 1 : 500 dilution of a mouse anti - (cid:2) - tubulin MAb for 1 h atroom temperature . After being washed with PBS , the cells were incubated with goat anti - rabbit IgG – Alexa 488 and goat anti - mouse – Alexa 594 ( 10 (cid:5) g / ml ) for 1 h atroom temperature , washed , and mounted with a slowly fading antifade reagent containing DAPI ( 4 (cid:8) , 6 (cid:8) - diamidino - 2 - phenylin - dole ) . The slides were examined with an LSM 510 confocal microscope and software version 2 . 8 ( Carl Zeiss ) , and double staining was analyzed by use of the 495 - and 590 - nm bands of laser lines from a water - cooled argon - krypton laser . The digital images were processed with the LSM Image browser and Adobe Photoshop 5 . 5 . RESULTS Depolymerization of microtubules , but not microﬁlaments , reduces infection by HHV - 8 . HHV - 8 enters target cells within minutes after infection ( 3 , 6 , 43 ) , which is accompanied by the formation of actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia , an indication of Rho GTPase induction and modulation of the cytoskeleton during the early stages of infection ( 50 ) . To in - vestigate the role of HHV - 8 - induced cytoskeletal dynamics in the infectious process , we ﬁrst analyzed the effect of depoly - merization of the MTs by nocodazole and depolymerization of the actin MFs by cyto D and lat A ( 26 ) on GFP – HHV - 8 infection . HFF cells that had been preincubated with nontoxic doses of nocodazole , cyto D , and lat A for 1 h at 37°C were infected with GFP – HHV - 8 for 2 h in the presence of inhibi - tors . Under these conditions , immunostaining revealed the complete depolymerization of MTs ( data not shown ) . The tar - get cells were washed to remove the inhibitors and unbound virus and then further incubated for 3 days before enumerating GFP - expressing cells indicative of HHV - 8 infection . Nocoda - zole inhibited GFP – HHV - 8 infection signiﬁcantly in a dose - dependent manner , with about 62 % (cid:9) 3 % and 73 % (cid:9) 4 % inhibition concentrations of 5 and 10 (cid:5) g / ml , respectively ( Fig . 1A ) . In contrast , cyto D and lat A did not alter the infection signiﬁcantly even at concentrations of 10 (cid:5) g / ml and 10 (cid:5) M , FIG . 1 . Intact microtubules ( MTs ) are required for target cell in - fection by HHV - 8 . ( A ) MT depolymerization inhibits GFP – HHV - 8 infectivity . HFF cell monolayers in eight - well chamber slides were incubated with Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) con - taining different nontoxic concentrations of MT - depolymerizing no - codazole ( Nocod ) or MF - depolymerizing cyto D or lat A at 37°C for 1 h before being infected with GFP – HHV - 8 . The cells were incubated with virus for 2 . 5 h at 37°C in the presence of inhibitors , washed , and incubated with growth medium for 3 days at 37°C . Green ﬂuorescent cells indicative of GFP – HHV - 8 entry and infection were counted . In control wells , approximately 300 GFP - expressing cells were detected per well . Each reaction was done in triplicate , and each bar represents the mean (cid:9) standard deviation ( SD ) for three experiments . ( B ) No - codazole inhibits HHV - 8 ORF73 mRNA expression . HFF cells or HFF cells preincubated with nontoxic doses of nocodazole , cyto D , or lat A were infected with GFP – HHV - 8 at a multiplicity of infection ( MOI ) of 5 DNA copies / cell for 2 . 5 h , washed , and incubated in fresh medium for 8 h . Total cellular RNAs were analyzed by real - time RT - PCRs using gene - speciﬁc Taqman probes to quantitate the HHV - 8 ORF73 mRNA . Known concentrations of gene - speciﬁc transcripts from an ORF73 clone were used as standards . All samples were used in separate real - time PCRs without RT to conﬁrm the absence of contaminating DNA . The relative copy numbers of the transcripts were calculated and normalized to GAPDH control reaction values . Data are presented as percentages of the inhibition of ORF73 mRNA copy numbers obtained when the cells were incubated with virus alone . Each reaction was done in duplicate , and each point represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . V OL . 79 , 2005 MICROTUBULES AND KSHV / HHV - 8 INFECTION 1193 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m respectively ( Fig . 1A ) , and these treatments were shown pre - viously to profoundly alter actin polymerization ( 29 ) . To further ascertain the speciﬁcity of GFP – HHV - 8 inhibi - tion by nocodazole , we quantiﬁed the relative copy numbers of HHV - 8 latency - associated ORF73 mRNA by real - time RT - PCR ( 43 ) and normalized these numbers to the numbers of glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate ( GAPDH ) copies in the same samples . Preincubation of the virus with 100 (cid:5) g of heparin / ml blocked (cid:10) 80 % of HHV - 8 ORF73 gene expression ( data not shown ) . Nocodazole reduced the ORF73 expression signiﬁ - cantly , with about 30 % (cid:9) 3 % and 45 % (cid:9) 7 % inhibition at concentrations of 5 and 10 (cid:5) g / ml , respectively ( Fig . 1B ) . The expression levels of cellular GAPDH gene expression were unaffected . In contrast , cyto D and lat A did not affect ORF73 expression ( Fig . 1B ) . These results suggested that HHV - 8 re - quires intact microtubules for efﬁcient infection of target cells . HHV - 8 infection modulates host cell microtubule dynamics . To determine whether HHV - 8 infection affects target cell MT dynamics , we next investigated the polymerization ( aggrega - tion ) of MTs at early times p . i . Serum - starved HFF cells were infected with HHV - 8 ( ﬁve copies per cell ) for various times , ﬁxed , permeabilized , and stained for MTs by the use of anti - tubulin antibodies . Serum - starved uninfected cells exhibited the classical pattern of ﬁnely - spread - out loose bundles of MTs radiating from the perinuclear nucleation center of MTs , the microtubular organizing center ( MTOC ) , towards the edges of the cell ( Fig . 2A , panel 1 ) . As early as 30 min p . i . , HHV - 8 induced the aggregation of MTs , leading to an increased thick - ening of MT bundles ( Fig . 2A , panel 2 ) . These HHV - 8 - in - duced changes were comparable to the effects observed in HFF cells 30 min after a treatment with 20 ng of LPA / ml ( data not shown ) . The HHV - 8 - induced thickening of MTs into bundles and the aggregation of MTs were sustained for at least 90 min p . i . ( Fig . 2A , panels 3 and 4 ) . By about 2 h p . i . , the MTs returned to the classical spread - out pattern ( Fig . 2A , panels 5 and 6 ) . These data demonstrate a transient reorganization of the MT network into bundles , replacing the normal MT cy - toskeletal morphology , and suggest that there is a modulation of microtubule dynamics early during infection by HHV - 8 . HHV - 8 infection modulates MTs and induces hyperacetyla - tion . Under physiological conditions , acetylation and deacety - lation act as powerful and dynamic means of controlling MT dynamics ( 55 ) . Cellular structures that cross - link MTs along their length or cap their ends are known to cause acetylation on MTs and their stabilization ( 55 ) . Since hyperacetylation is a quantitative indication of changes in MT stabilization , to con - ﬁrm the inﬂuence of HHV - 8 on MT dynamics , we next quan - tiﬁed the levels of MT acetylation by Western blot analysis . Uninfected cells contained a moderate level of acetylated MTs ( Fig . 2B , lane 1 ) . In contrast , MTs were heavily acetylated in the infected cells , with (cid:10) 2 . 5 - , 4 - , and 3 - fold increases in acet - ylation by 30 min , 1 h , and 2 h p . i . , respectively ( Fig . 2B , lanes 2 to 4 , and Fig . 2C ) , which returned to the basal level by 3 h p . i . ( Fig . 2B , lane 5 ) . The levels of total (cid:2) - tubulin remained unal - tered , thus demonstrating the speciﬁcity of acetylation ( Fig . 2B ) . The HHV - 8 - induced hyperacetylation was comparable to the induction by LPA , a known inducer ( Fig . 2B , lanes 6 to 8 ) . The observed acetylation was also conﬁrmed by determining the relative amounts of acetylated tubulin in HHV - 8 - infected cells by an immunoﬂuorescence assay ( data not shown ) . MT hyperacetylation further suggested that HHV - 8 profoundly in - ﬂuences the MT dynamics during the early stages of target cell infection . Microtubule depolymerizing agents reduce the transport of HHV - 8 DNA to the nucleus . Our earlier studies have shown that HHV - 8 internalization via endocytic vesicles in HFF and BJAB cells occurs as early as 5 min p . i . ( 3 , 6 ) . We also detected internalized viral DNA in target cells as early as 5 min p . i . whose levels increased rapidly during the ﬁrst 60 to 90 min of infection , reaching a plateau around 90 to 120 min p . i . ( 43 ) . Since the reduction in HHV - 8 infectivity and ORF73 gene expression in cells with depolymerized MTs ( Fig . 1A and B ) may have been due to interference in virus binding or inter - nalization or at postentry steps such as transport of the virus capsid to the cell nucleus and delivery of viral DNA to the nucleus , we next investigated the stage at which MTs play a role in HHV - 8 infection . As an initial step , we examined the kinetics of HHV - 8 DNA delivery into infected cell nuclei . HFF cells were infected with HHV - 8 for various times , and pure nuclear fractions were isolated by cell lysis and gradient puri - ﬁcation ( Fig . 3A ) . Nuclear fractions were positive for the nu - clear marker lamin B ( Fig . 3A , top panel , lane 2 ) . In contrast , the cytoskeletal marker detected by anti - (cid:2) - tubulin antibodies ( Fig . 3A , bottom panel , lane 2 ) or anti - (cid:3) - actin antibodies ( data not shown ) did not show any reactivity with the nuclear frac - tions . The saturation of enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) reactions by a maximum exposure for 20 min also failed to detect a positive reaction with (cid:2) - tubulin or (cid:3) - actin antibodies ( data not shown ) . These results demonstrated the absence of cytoskeletal contamination in our puriﬁed nuclear fractions . DNAs were extracted from the isolated nuclei , and 100 ng of total DNA was quantiﬁed by real - time DNA PCR with HHV - 8 ORF73 primers . Relatively rapid nuclear delivery of HHV - 8 DNA , detectable as early as 30 min p . i . , was observed , and the DNA copies continued to accumulate over time , reaching a plateau between 180 and 240 min p . i . ( Fig . 3B ) . HHV - 8 interacts with cell surface HS during the initial at - tachment stage of infection ( 3 ) . We next determined whether the inhibition of HHV - 8 infection in cells with depolymerized MTs was due to the inhibitors’ ability to block virus binding to the target cells . Similar to our previous ﬁndings ( 3 ) , heparin at a concentration of 10 (cid:5) g / ml inhibited (cid:10) 90 % of [ 3 H ] thymidine - labeled HHV - 8 binding to HFF cells ( Fig . 3C , open bars ) . In contrast , no effect was seen with nocodazole , Colcemid , cyto D , paclitaxel , and NH 4 Cl ( Fig . 3C , open bars ) . To determine whether the reduction in HHV - 8 infectivity and ORF73 gene expression in cells with depolymerized MTs was due to inter - ference at the virus internalization stage of infection , we pre - incubated cells with various drugs that disrupt MFs or MTs for 1 h , infected them with the virus for 2 h , washed them to remove unbound virus , and treated them with trypsin - EDTA to remove bound but noninternalized virus . The total DNAs were isolated , and relative copy numbers of HHV - 8 ORF73 were estimated by real - time DNA PCR . HHV - 8 internaliza - tion was inhibited (cid:7) 90 % by heparin , and no effect was seen with nocodazole , Colcemid , cyto D , paclitaxel , and NH 4 Cl ( Fig . 3C , closed bars ) . These results demonstrated that no - codazole and Colcemid inhibit at postattachment and postin - ternalization stages of infection . To determine whether the reduction in HHV - 8 infectivity 1194 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m and ORF73 gene expression by nocodazole and Colcemid was due to interference at postentry steps such as transport of the virus capsid to the cell nucleus and delivery of the viral DNA to the nucleus , we preincubated HFF cells with the MT - speciﬁc inhibitors nocodazole and Colcemid and the MF - speciﬁc in - hibitors cyto D and lat A fo r 1 h at37°C . These cells were infected with HHV - 8 at 37°C in the presence of inhibitor for 3 h , and infected cell nucleus - associated HHV - 8 DNA copy numbers were quantiﬁed . Our earlier studies demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in GFP – HHV - 8 infectivity and ORF73 mRNA expression when HFF cells were pretreated with NH 4 Cl , a lysosomotrophic agent that inhibits the acidiﬁcation of endosomal compartments ( 6 ) . HHV - 8 nuclear trafﬁcking was also reduced about 68 % (cid:9) 3 % with a 100 mM concentra - tion of NH 4 Cl ( Fig . 3D ) . Nocodazole and Colcemid incubation signiﬁcantly blocked viral DNA delivery to the nucleus in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 3D ) . In contrast , pretreatment with cyto D did not inhibit the nuclear delivery of HHV - 8 FIG . 2 . ( A ) HHV - 8 interaction with target cells induces MT polymerization . Serum - starved HFF cells were either mock treated with DMEM ( panel 1 ) or infected with 5 DNA copies of GFP – HHV - 8 / cell ( panels 2 to 6 ) . At different time points , the cells were washed , ﬁxed in 4 % formaldehyde , washed , and permeabilized in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 at room temperature . The cells were incubated for 30 min with 1 % bovine serum albumin and then with a mouse anti - (cid:2) - tubulin MAb ( diluted 1 : 500 in 1 % bovine serum albumin ) at room temperature for 45 min . These cells were washed , incubated with anti - mouse IgG – ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate for 30 min , washed , mounted in a slowly fading reagent containing DAPI , and visualized under a ﬂuorescence microscope . Narrow arrows indicate the microtubular organizing centers ( MTOC ) , and arrowheads indicate MT bundling . Magniﬁcation , (cid:6) 60 . ( B ) HHV - 8 - induced MT dynamics involve the hyperacetylation of tubulin . Serum - starved HFF cells were either mock infected or infected with 5 DNA copies of HHV - 8 / cell for the indicated times and then were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer . Ten micrograms of lysate was resolved by SDS – 10 % PAGE and immunoblotted with a MAb against acetylated tubulin ( top ) or total (cid:2) - tubulin ( bottom ) . Immunoreactive bands were developed by standard ECL reactions . ( C ) The band intensities in panel B were quantitated , and the acetylated tubulin in mock - infected HFF cells was considered a onefold induction for comparisons to infected cells . Each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . V OL . 79 , 2005 MICROTUBULES AND KSHV / HHV - 8 INFECTION 1195 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m DNA ( Fig . 3D ) . To conﬁrm that the lack of effect by cyto D was not due to the slow kinetics of MF depolymerization , we also treated HFF cells with 5 (cid:5) M lat A , which is known to have much more rapid kinetics of MF depolymerization than cyto D . The lat A inhibitor also did not signiﬁcantly affect the nuclear trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 DNA ( Fig . 3D ) . The treatment of cells with paclitaxel ( Taxol ) , the prototypic microtubule - stabi - lizing drug affecting the tubulin - microtubule equilibrium , did not affect nuclear transport ( Fig . 3D ) , thus indicating a re - quirement for the dynamic nature of the MTs in HHV - 8 DNA FIG . 3 . HHV - 8 - induced MT dynamics inﬂuence the nuclear delivery of HHV - 8 DNA . ( A ) Puriﬁcation of infected cell nuclei . Uninfected and HHV - 8 - infected HFF cells were washed with PBS , treated with trypsin - EDTA to remove noninternalized virus , washed , suspended in lysis buffer , and allowed to swell on ice for 5 min . Nuclei were pelleted at 500 (cid:6) g for 5 min , and the supernatant was collected as cytoplasmic fraction I . The nuclear pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer , and the extraction was repeated once to obtain cytoplasmic fraction II . The remaining nuclear pellet was resuspended in nuclear homogenization buffer and iodixanol ( Optiprep ) , layered over a gradient of 30 and 35 % Optiprep , and centrifuged at 10 , 000 (cid:6) g for 20 min . The nuclear fraction at the 30 to 35 % Optiprep interface was collected . Immunoblot reactions were performed to detect the total cell lysate ( lane 1 ) , cytoplasmic fractions I and II ( lanes 3 and 4 ) , and the puriﬁed nuclear fraction ( lane 2 ) by the use of monoclonal antibodies against lamin B and (cid:2) - tubulin . ( B ) Kinetics of HHV - 8 DNA delivery into infected cell nuclei . Nuclear fractions from HFF cells infected at 5 DNA copies / cell for the desired time points were isolated , and the total DNA was isolated , normalized to contain 100 ng / 5 (cid:5) l , and analyzed by real - time DNA PCR with HHV - 8 ORF73 primers . Copy standards and nontemplate controls were run in parallel . The relative viral DNA copy numbers were calculated from a standard graph generated by real - time PCRs of known concentrations of a cloned ORF73 gene . Each reaction was done in duplicate , and each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . ( C ) MT - depolymerizing agents do not affect HHV - 8 binding and internalization . HFF cells were either left untreated or preincubated with various drugs that disrupt MFs or MTs for 1 h before being incubated with [ 3 H ] thymidine - labeled , puriﬁed HHV - 8 virus for binding assays ( 5 , 000 cpm ) or with unlabeled HHV - 8 for internalization assays . As a control , the virus was preincubated with 10 (cid:5) g of heparin / ml fo r 1 h at37°C before being added to the cells . After incubation for 90 min at 4°C with the labeled virus , the cells were washed , lysed , precipitated with trichloroacetic acid , and counted . The cell - associated virus count per minute in the presence of each different treatment was calculated as the percentage of inhibition of virus binding . Each reaction was done in triplicate , and each bar represents the average (cid:9) SD for three experiments ( open bars ) . For the internalization assay , afte r 2 h ofincubation with unlabeled virus , the cells were washed twice with PBS to remove the unbound virus , treated with trypsin - EDTA for 5 min at 37°C to remove the bound but noninternalized virus , and washed , and total DNAs were isolated and HHV - 8 ORF73 copies were estimated by real - time DNA PCR . The C t values were used to plot a standard graph and to calculate the relative copy numbers of viral DNA in the samples . Data are presented as percentages of the inhibition of HHV - 8 DNA internalization obtained when the cells were incubated with virus alone . Each reaction was done in duplicate , and each bar represents the average (cid:9) SD for three experiments ( black bars ) . ( D ) Depolymerization of MTs reduces nuclear delivery of HHV - 8 DNA . HFF cells or HFF cells preincubated for 1 h with nontoxic doses of NH 4 Cl , nocodazole , Colcemid , paclitaxel , cyto D , and lat A were infected with 5 DNA copies of HHV - 8 / cell fo r 3 h in thepresence of inhibitors . The puriﬁcation of nuclear fractions and real - time DNA PCRs estimating the numbers of HHV - 8 ORF73 copies were done as described above for panels A to C . Data are presented as percentages of inhibition of HHV - 8 DNA associated with cell nuclei relative to that of cells incubated with virus alone . Each reaction was done in duplicate , and each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . 1196 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m transport . These studies suggested that the inhibition of HHV - 8 infectivity by nocodazole may be due to interference in the transport of the virus capsid and the delivery of viral DNA into the nuclei and that HHV - 8 - induced MT dynamics play a vital role in the nuclear trafﬁcking of viral DNA . These results also suggested that although HHV - 8 induced actin MF remod - eling ( 50 ) , the MFs may not play a signiﬁcant role in the infectious process , at least during the early phases of infection . HHV - 8 induces activation of RhoA and Rac1 GTPases in target cells . Even though many viruses are known to exploit the MTs and their associated motors for nuclear trafﬁcking ( 7 , 24 , 28 , 38 , 44 , 47 , 61 , 62 , 69 ) , the host signaling pathways exploited by these viruses to mediate this process and the mechanism of signal induction remain largely unknown . Recent studies have demonstrated potential links between RhoA , Rac1 , and Cdc42 GTPases and microtubule dynamics ( 12 , 22 , 37 , 40 , 53 , 68 ) . Since our studies have demonstrated the integrin - dependent activation of PI - 3K and Rho GTPase as well as cytoskeletal rearrangements in HHV - 8 - infected cells ( 50 ) , we next exam - ined the potential links between HHV - 8 - induced signaling pathways and the regulation of MT dynamics . As a ﬁrst step , we examined Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 activation during HHV - 8 infection by afﬁnity precipitation using GST - RBD or GST - PBD followed by Western blot analysis . Com - pared to the case for uninfected cells , the RhoA - GTP and Rac1 - GTP levels in infected cells were increased about 3 . 0 - to 5 . 0 - fold ( Fig . 4 ) , and no induction of Cdc42 was observed ( data not shown ) . Although peak levels of RhoA and Rac1 activation were observed at 5 min p . i . , the Rac1 - GTP activation was more sustained than the RhoA - GTP induction ( Fig . 4 ) . HHV - 8 in - duced robust RhoA - and Rac1 - GTP activities in infected cells which were comparable to induction by LPA ( Fig . 4A , lanes 7 and 8 ) or phorbol myristate acetate ( PMA ) ( Fig . 4B , lanes 6 to 8 ) . The total RhoA or Rac level in infected cells was un - changed ( Fig . 4A and B , bottom panels ) , thus demonstrating the speciﬁcity of GTP activation . These results further sup - ported our earlier morphological observation that Rho GTPases are activated by HHV - 8 early during infection ( 50 ) . HHV - 8 interacts with the (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 integrin via its gB protein , and virus binding studies suggested that (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 integrin is one of HHV - 8’s entry receptors ( 5 , 60 ) . In order to test the speciﬁcity of HHV - 8 - induced Rho GTPase activation , we preincubated HHV - 8 with different concentrations of soluble (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 or con - trol (cid:2) 5 (cid:3) 1 integrin before adding the virus to target cells for 5 min . As observed before ( Fig . 4 ) , HHV - 8 induced robust RhoA - and Rac1 - GTP activities in infected cells ( Fig . 5A and B , lanes 2 ) . A dose - dependent reduction in the HHV - 8 - in - duced RhoA - and Rac1 - GTP activities was observed when the virus was preincubated with (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 integrin ( Fig . 5A and B , lanes 3 and 4 , and Fig . 5C ) . No effect was seen with the (cid:2) 5 (cid:3) 1 integrin treatment ( Fig . 5A and B , lanes 5 , and Fig . 5C ) . Minimal Rho GTPase activation by HHV - 8 was observed in cells that were preincubated with CdTxB , a speciﬁc inhibitor of Rho GTPases ( Fig . 5A and B , lanes 6 ) . Modulation of Rho GTPases affects nuclear delivery of HHV - 8 DNA . The glucosyltransferase CdTxB targets different Rho GTPases and efﬁciently blocks the interaction of Rho GTPases with their effectors , thus resulting in functionally in - active GTPases ( 1 , 18 ) . In contrast , E . coli cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 ( CNF - 1 ) activates Rho GTPases through the deami - dation of a pivotal glutamine residue ( Glu 63 of Rho and Glu 61 of Cdc42 and Rac ) involved in GTP hydrolysis ( 2 ) . Upon deamidation , the intrinsic GAP - stimulated GTPase activity is blocked , thereby rendering the GTPase permanently active ( 2 ) . These toxins are very speciﬁc for Rho GTPases and have been used extensively to study the roles of Rho GTPases in target cell infections by different pathogens ( 2 , 40 ) . When used at (cid:11) 300 ng / ml , CdTxB was nontoxic and induced 100 % cell rounding without LDH release , whereas CNF - 1 did not induce FIG . 4 . HHV - 8 induces RhoA and Rac1 GTPases in target cells . ( A and B ) Kinetics of RhoA and Rac1 induction . Equal amounts of HFF cell lysates from mock - infected cells ( 5 min ) , cells infected with HHV - 8 at 5 DNA copies / cell ( 1 , 5 , 15 , 30 , or 60 min ) , or cells treated with 20 ng of LPA / ml or 100 ng of PMA / ml ( 5 and 10 min ) were used to capture the GTP - bound forms of Rho GTPases by afﬁnity precipi - tation with GST - RBD or GST - PBD beads . The proteins captured by beads were analyzed by SDS – 12 % PAGE and immunoblotted with anti - RhoA or anti - Rac1 antibodies ( top panels of A and B , respec - tively ) . The bottom panels of A and B show normalized cell lysates analyzed for total RhoA or Rac1 as a loading control . ( C ) Quantitation of HHV - 8 - induced RhoA and Rac1 GTPases . The bands from panels A and B were scanned , and their intensities assessed and quantiﬁed , with GTP - bound RhoA ( black bars ) and Rac1 ( open bars ) in mock - infected cells being considered onefold activation for comparisons to infected cells . Each point represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three exper - iments . Note that there are no data for Rac1 at 60 min with virus and for RhoA at 15 min with PMA , as these experiments were not done . V OL . 79 , 2005 MICROTUBULES AND KSHV / HHV - 8 INFECTION 1197 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m LDH release even when it was used at 10 (cid:5) g / ml ( data not shown ) . For an investigation of whether RhoA or Rac1 activation is required for the nuclear transport of HHV - 8 , HFF cells that had been preincubated with nontoxic doses of CdTxB or CNF - 1 were infected for 3 h , and the viral DNA was quantiﬁed by real - time DNA PCR . Dose - dependent decreases in the HHV - 8 DNA copy numbers associated with infected cell nu - clei were observed for the CdTxB pretreatment , with about 72 and 62 % inhibition at concentrations of 200 and 100 ng / ml , respectively ( Fig . 6A ) . In contrast , CNF - 1 increased the nu - clear trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 DNA substantially in a dose - depen - dent manner ( Fig . 6B ) , with as much as a 500 % increase at 20 ng / ml . These results suggest that there is an active involvement of HHV - 8 - induced Rho GTPases in the nuclear trafﬁcking of viral DNA during the initial stages of infection . HHV - 8 - induced Rho GTPases stabilize MTs by hyperacety - lation . Our results suggest that HHV - 8 entry activates Rho GTPases , the known modulators of MF and MT dynamics ( 13 , 20 , 52 ) . In contrast to the MF depolymerizing agents , MT depolymerizing agents substantially inhibited viral trafﬁcking in the cytoplasm and the delivery of viral DNA to the nucleus . To decipher the role of Rho GTPases in cytoskeletal dynamics , especially those of MTs during HHV - 8 infection , we preincu - bated cells with CdTxB before incubating them with HHV - 8 for 60 min . The cell lysates were tested for hyperacetylated MTs by Western blot analysis . Compared to the case for mock - treated HFF cells ( Fig . 7A , lane 1 ) , HHV - 8 induced a signif - icant level of (cid:2) - tubulin hyperacetylation ( Fig . 7A , lane 2 ) . The treatment with CdTxB reduced the tubulin hyperacetylation in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 7A , lanes 3 to 5 , and Fig . 7B ) , with about 49 , 71 , and 78 % reductions in acetylation at con - centrations of 100 , 200 , and 300 ng / ml , respectively ( Fig . 7B ) . These results suggested that HHV - 8 - induced Rho GTPases contribute to MT hyperacetylation and stabilization . FIG . 5 . Speciﬁcity of HHV - 8 - induced RhoA and Rac1 Rho GT - Pases . ( A and B ) Serum - starved HFF cells were either mock infected ( lanes 1 ) or infected with HHV - 8 at an MOI of 5 DNA copies / cell ( lanes 2 ) for 5 min . In parallel experiments , HHV - 8 was incubated with the indicated concentrations of soluble (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 or (cid:2) 5 (cid:3) 1 integrin for 90 min at 37°C before infecting the cells for 5 min ( lanes 2 to 4 ) . The cells were also preincubated with CdTxB to inhibit Rho GTPases for 90 min before being infected with the virus for 5 min in the presence of toxin B ( lanes 6 ) . For controls , cells were induced with LPA or PMA for 5 min ( lanes 7 ) . Equal amounts of cell lysates were analyzed for the induction of RhoA and Rac1 GTPases per the procedures described in the legend for Fig . 4A and B . ( C ) The bands in panels A and B were scanned , and their intensities were assessed and quantiﬁed . Data are presented as percentages of the inhibition of GTP - bound RhoA ( black bars ) and Rac1 ( open bars ) obtained when the cells were incubated with virus alone . Each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three exper - iments . FIG . 6 . Modulation of Rho GTPase inﬂuences nuclear delivery of HHV - 8 DNA . HFF cells or HFF cells incubated with different con - centrations of CdTxB for 90 min at 37°C ( A ) or CNF - 1 fo r 4 h at37°C ( B ) were infected with HHV - 8 at 5 DNA copies / cell for 3 h . The cells were washed to remove the unbound virus , treated with trypsin - EDTA to remove the bound but noninternalized virus , and analyzed by real - time DNA PCR to estimate the HHV - 8 DNA copy numbers associ - ated with the infected cell nuclei ( A and B ) per the methods described in the legend to Fig . 3 . Data are presented as percentages of HHV - 8 DNA associated with infected cell nuclei ( A and B ) relative to that in cells that were incubated with virus alone . Each reaction was done in duplicate , and each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experi - ments . 1198 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m HHV - 8 - induced RhoA GTPase activates diaphanous 2 , which is involved in MT dynamic modulation . Since the studies described above demonstrated the importance of HHV - 8 - in - duced Rho GTPases in the nuclear trafﬁcking of viral DNA and the regulation of MT dynamics , we next examined the contributing signaling pathways . Even though the Rho GTPases are believed to be essential for the regulation of MT dynamics , only recently have studies suggested that these may be mediated by the activation of several accessory molecules ( 27 , 33 , 37 , 53 ) . There is growing evidence that RhoA activates the diaphanous - related formin family molecules Dia1 and Dia2 ( 37 , 53 ) . Formins are one of the four major classes of poly - L - proline - containing proteins that form part of the signal transduction cascade that leads to rearrangement of the cy - toskeleton . Rac and Cdc42 activate PAK1 / 2 ( p21 - activated ki - nase ) , which in turn inactivates the MT destabilizer Op18 ( stathmin ) , thus promoting polymer growth ( 27 ) . Rac and Cdc42 have also been shown to interact with MTs through a common effector , IQ - GAP , which binds CLIP - 170 , an MT - associated protein that is recruited to the plus ends of poly - merizing MTs ( 33 ) . To determine whether HHV - 8 - induced RhoA activates Dia2 , we examined the coprecipitation of Dia2 with activated RhoA - GTP . Activated RhoA - GTP that was afﬁnity precipi - tated with GST - RBD beads was immunoblotted with antibod - ies against Dia2 , and phosphorylation - speciﬁc antibodies were used to demonstrate the Rac - and Cdc42 - dependent phosphor - ylation of PAK1 / 2 and stathmin . HHV - 8 infection increased the RhoA - dependent activation of Dia2 in a time - dependent manner ( Fig . 7C ) . The activation of Dia2 was seen as early as 1 min p . i . , continued to increase for the initial 10 min , reaching a plateau between 20 and 30 min ( Fig . 7C ) , and was sustained for about 60 min before reaching the baseline ( data not shown ) . In contrast , no signiﬁcant phosphorylation of Rac - and Cdc42 - dependent PAK1 / 2 was observed in infected cells ( Fig . 7D ) . The phosphorylation of Rac - and Cdc42 - dependent stath - FIG . 7 . Rho - GTPases regulate HHV - 8 - induced MT polymerization through RhoA and diaphanous 2 . ( A ) Inhibition of Rho GTPase blocks MT hyperacetylation . HFF cells incubated with different concentrations of CdTxB were infected with HHV - 8 at 5 DNA copies / cell for 60 min . Ten micrograms of lysate was resolved by SDS – 10 % PAGE and immunoblotted with a MAb against acetylated tubulin ( top ) or total (cid:2) - tubulin ( bottom ) . Immunoreactive bands were developed by standard ECL reactions . ( B ) The band intensities in panel A were quantitated , with the acetylated tubulin in mock - infected HFF cells being considered onefold activation for comparisons to infected cells . Data are presented as percentages of the inhibition of tubulin hyperacetylation when the cells were incubated with virus alone . Each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . ( C ) GTP - bound RhoA associates with diaphanous 2 upon HHV - 8 infection . Serum - starved uninfected HFF cells ( lane 1 ) or cells infected with HHV - 8 at an MOI of 5 DNA copies / cell for 1 , 5 , 10 , 20 , and 30 min ( lanes 2 to 6 ) were lysed with RIPA buffer , and activated GTP - bound RhoA was afﬁnity precipitated with GST - RBD beads . The beads were washed , boiled in 2 (cid:6) sample buffer , resolved by SDS – 7 . 5 % PAGE , and immunoblotted with an antibody detecting total Dia2 . Immunoreactive bands were developed by ECL reactions , and band intensities were scanned and quantiﬁed . Dia2 associated with RhoA in mock - infected HFF cells was considered onefold activation for comparisons to infected cells . Each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . ( D and E ) PAK and stathmin are not phosphorylated by HHV - 8 infection . Serum - starved uninfected HFF cells , cells infected with HHV - 8 for different time periods , or cells stimulated with basic ﬁbroblast growth factor were lysed with RIPA buffer , and equal amounts of protein were resolved by SDS – 10 % PAGE and immunoblotted with an antibody detecting phosphorylated PAK1 / 2 or total PAK ( D , upper and lower panels , respectively ) or phosphorylated stathmin or total stathmin ( E , upper and lower panels , respectively ) . V OL . 79 , 2005 MICROTUBULES AND KSHV / HHV - 8 INFECTION 1199 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m min was also not observed in infected cells ( Fig . 7E ) . The activation of Dia2 by RhoA has been shown to stimulate the formation of stable microtubules that are capped , and Dia promotes this capping by directly binding to microtubules ( 53 ) . Together , these results suggest that HHV - 8 - induced Rho GTPases probably control MT dynamics via the RhoA - GTP - dependent activation of diaphanous 2 and thus facilitate efﬁ - cient trafﬁcking of viral DNA to infected cell nuclei . To ascertain the speciﬁcity of RhoA GTPase effects during HHV - 8 infection , we established 293 cell lines expressing var - ious forms of RhoA mutants , characterized the cells , and in - fected them with HHV - 8 ( Fig . 8A ) . An examination of infected cell nucleus - associated HHV - 8 DNA demonstrated a 40 to 50 % increase in cells transfected with a constitutively active RhoA mutant compared to wild - type cells ( Fig . 8B ) . In con - trast , 293 cells expressing dominant - negative RhoA demon - strated a 32 to 35 % reduction in nucleus - associated viral DNA copies . These results clearly demonstrate the role of RhoA GTPase in the nuclear trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 . HHV - 8 capsids colocalize with microtubules , and MT depo - lymerizing nocodazole and a PI - 3K inhibitor reduce cytoplas - mic trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 . The signiﬁcant reduction in the nu - clear accumulation of HHV - 8 DNA by MT depolymerization and the modulation of MT dynamics by HHV - 8 - induced RhoA GTPase clearly demonstrated the important role of the MT network in HHV - 8 trafﬁcking in the infected cell . To conﬁrm the above biochemical observations morphologically , we exam - ined the infected cells by confocal microscopy . Untreated cells or cells that were preincubated with 10 (cid:5) g of the MT inhibitor nocodazole / ml or a 50 (cid:5) M concentration of the PI - 3K inhibitor LY294002 were infected with HHV - 8 at (cid:7) 50 copies / cell and examined after 1 h , a time point when a signiﬁcant amount of nuclear accumulation of HHV - 8 DNA was beginning to occur ( Fig . 3B ) . To visualize the incoming viral capsids , we used well - characterized rabbit antibodies against the HHV - 8 capsid protein ORF65 ( 45 ) . Anti - tubulin antibodies were used to vi - sualize the MT cytoskeleton . The confocal microscopic images were obtained sequentially with 1 - (cid:5) m - thick sections , and the representative sections shown in Fig . 9 are through the middle of the cell . In the absence of drug treatments , the ORF65 antibody reactivity demonstrated the accumulation of HHV - 8 capsids in the cy - toplasm and near the vicinity of infected cell nuclei . Some examples are shown in Fig . 9D to F . Similar results were obtained when the incubation was extended to 3 h , and these morphological observations correlated well with the results of the nuclear delivery assay ( Fig . 3B ) . When the anti - ORF65 reactivity was merged with MT staining , viral capsids were observed as ﬁne dots connected to the microtubules , and the majority of the capsids near the proximity of nuclei appeared to be colocalized with the MTs ( Fig . 9D to F ) . The speciﬁcity of these observations was shown by the absence of staining with preimmune IgG antibodies ( Fig . 9A to C ) . Disruption of the MT network by nocodazole signiﬁcantly distributed the MT network ( Fig . 9G to I ) . In these cells , the ORF65 antibody reactivity was observed only in the periphery and was barely detectable in the cytoplasm , and the perinuclear accumulation of viral capsids was signiﬁcantly decreased ( Fig . 9G to I ) . The effect of nocodazole was reversible since when the infected cells were analyzed 1 h after drug removal , the MTs had re - polymerized , accompanied by the reappearance of viral capsids near the nuclear rim ( data not shown ) . PI - 3K induction has been observed as an upstream event of Rho GTPase activation in the HHV - 8 - or HHV - 8 gB - induced signaling pathways ( 50 , 60 ) . The inhibition of PI - 3K by LY294002 blocked the HHV - 8 - induced Rho GTPases and the accompanying morphological changes and blocked the entry of the virus into the target cells ( 50 , 60 ) . The treatment with LY294002 also resulted in disruption of the MT network and , consequently , the absence of perinuclear accumulation of the HHV - 8 capsids ( Fig . 9J to L ) . The ability of PI - 3K inhibitors to block (cid:10) 80 % of HHV - 8 entry into target cells ( 60 ) , together with the involvement of PI - 3K in Rho GTPase activation in - volved in the formation of endocytic vesicles , their ﬁssion , the movement of vesicles in the cytoplasm , and the modulation of microtubule dynamics , suggests that the observed weak capsid signal in PI - 3K inhibitor - treated cells was probably not due to the nonspeciﬁc effect of the drugs but to a speciﬁc effect on PI - 3K and the associated signaling pathways preventing efﬁ - FIG . 8 . ( A ) Characterization of Rho mutants . 293 cell lines trans - fected with plasmids expressing different forms of RhoA ( wild type , G14V (cid:1) / (cid:1) , or T19N (cid:12) / (cid:12) ) were established and characterized by a GTP - loading assay ( top panel ) . As loading controls , lysates were resolved in parallel and Western blotted with (cid:3) - actin antibodies ( bottom panel ) . Lanes were loaded with duplicate samples . ( B ) Effect of Rho mutants on HHV - 8 nuclear delivery . 293 cell lines expressing Rho mutants were infected with HHV - 8 at 5 DNA copies / cell for 3 h . The cells were washed to remove the unbound virus and treated with trypsin - EDTA to remove the bound but noninternalized virus . Pure nuclear fractions were isolated and analyzed by real - time DNA PCR to estimate the HHV - 8 DNA copy numbers associated with the infected cell nuclei per the methods described in the legend to Fig . 3 . Data are presented as percentages of HHV - 8 DNA associated with the infected cell nuclei . Each reaction was done in duplicate , and each point represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . 1200 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m cient entry of the virus . Since nocodazole does not affect the endosomal pH but inhibits the microtubule - dependent trans - port of endosomal carrier vesicles to late endosomes ( 10 ) , MT depolymerization may affect the migration of HHV - 8 - contain - ing endocytic vesicles . In addition , since MTs may also play important roles in capsid movement after release from the endocytic vesicles , these results suggest that the HHV - 8 - in - duced polymerization of MTs plays important roles in the nuclear trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 . These data clearly demonstrate the importance of the HHV - 8 - induced signal cascade and the polymerization of MTs in the nuclear trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 . Dynein motor function is critical for transport of HHV - 8 DNA to the nucleus . Dyneins are large protein complexes that function as MT - based molecular motors generating the driving force towards the minus end of microtubules , with the inter - mediate and light chains presumably involved in dynein attach - ment to the appropriate cargo ( 41 ) . Many viruses sequester the dynein machinery of infected cells to move along the microtu - bules and gain access to the cell nucleus ( 24 , 47 , 62 , 69 ) . Since the requirement of intact MTs for the molecular trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 became apparent by the results described above , we examined the role of the dynein motor complex in this process . The cytoplasmic dynein complex associates with a second protein complex called dynactin that contains four molecules of dynamitin among other molecular components ( 41 ) . The overexpression of dynamitin disrupts the dynactin complex and the dynein motor function ( 30 ) . To determine the role of dynein motors in HHV - 8 nuclear trafﬁcking , we used a p50 / dynamitin plasmid expressing c - Myc - tagged p50 / dynamitin and enhanced GFP ( EGFP ) under the control of a cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) promoter ( 30 ) . 293 and CV - 1 cells were transfected with this plasmid , and about 60 to 70 % EGFP - expressing cells were observed under our transfection conditions . The expres - sion of dynamitin was further veriﬁed by IFA ( Fig . 10A ) and immunoblot analysis with antibodies detecting the c - Myc tag ( Fig . 10B ) . These transfected cells were infected with HHV - 8 for 3 h , and viral DNA copies associated with the infected cell nuclei were quantiﬁed by real - time DNA PCR . Compared to the case for cells carrying a control EGFP vector plasmid , a signiﬁcant reduction ( (cid:7) 50 % ) in the nuclear trafﬁcking of FIG . 9 . Confocal microscopic examination of HHV - 8 trafﬁcking in the cell cytoplasm . Untreated HFF cells ( A to F ) or HFF cells preincubated with 10 (cid:5) g of nocodazole / ml ( G to I ) or with 50 (cid:5) M LY294002 ( J to L ) were infected with HHV - 8 at (cid:7) 50 copies / cell for 1 h at37°C . The cells were washed , ﬁxed , and permeabilized before being doubly labeled with preimmune IgG antibodies ( A ) ( red ) , rabbit anti - HHV - 8 ORF65 IgG antibodies ( D , G , and J ) ( red ) , and a MAb against (cid:2) - tubulin ( B , E , H , and K ) ( green ) . Nuclei were stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Laser scanning confocal microscopic images were obtained sequentially at a 1 - (cid:5) m thickness , and representative sections shown are through the middle of the cell ( 10 (cid:5) m deep ) . Magniﬁcation , (cid:6) 40 . V OL . 79 , 2005 MICROTUBULES AND KSHV / HHV - 8 INFECTION 1201 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m HHV - 8 DNA was observed in 293 ( 293 / p50 ) and CV - 1 ( CV - 1 / p50 ) cells expressing p50 / dynamitin ( Fig . 10C ) . Similar amounts of virus binding and internalization were observed in p50 / dynamitin - expressing and control cells ( data not shown ) , thus suggesting that the reduction in nucleus - associated HHV - 8 DNA copy numbers was not due to reduced HHV - 8 binding or internalization . Sodium orthovanadate ( Na 3 VO 4 ) is a well - described inhibitor of dynein activity ( 32 , 41 ) . The pre - incubation of HFF cells with a nontoxic 100 (cid:5) M concentration of Na 3 VO 4 reduced the amount of infected cell nucleus - asso - ciated HHV - 8 DNA about 45 % ( Fig . 10C ) , and the reduction was about 68 % at a concentration of 200 (cid:5) M ( data not shown ) , thus validating the speciﬁcity of the above observations . To - gether , these results strongly demonstrate a role for dynein motors in the cytoplasmic trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 and in the delivery of viral DNA to the nucleus . DISCUSSION The eukaryotic cytoskeleton comprising MFs , IFs , and MTs performs a broad range of complex cellular activities , such as vesicle and particle movements , cell motility , cell shape deter - mination , and chromosome movement during mitosis ( 35 ) . Such involvement and its dynamic nature make the cytoskele - ton a good target for exploitation by viruses , and many viruses hijack the cytoskeleton to facilitate their movement in the cytoplasm to the nucleus or to the perinuclear virus factories ( 7 , 23 , 25 , 61 , 62 , 69 ) . For example , at early times after infec - tion , baculovirus ( Autographa californica ) induces the thick actin bundles to assist with transport of the viral genome into the nucleus ( 17 ) . Vaccinia virus induces actin polymerization directly behind the virus particle as a means of propelling the virus through the cell ( 23 ) . Simian virus 40 and polyomavirus require both MF and MT networks for transport to the in - fected cell nucleus ( 34 , 54 ) , and HIV - 1 and HSV - 1 associate with the cytoplasmic MT - dependent dynein complex and uti - lize the MT network for nuclear transport ( 28 , 47 ) . In the present study , we described extensive and thorough analyses of the mechanism of HHV - 8 virion transport to the nucleus . These studies are the ﬁrst report on the exploitation of the cytoskeleton by HHV - 8 during its entry into target cells as well as the ﬁrst report demonstrating the direct role of virus - in - duced host cell signal pathways in the cytoplasmic transport of viral capsids . The role of the cytoskeleton in the intracellular transport of viruses has been demonstrated by the physical association of viruses with the cytoskeleton and / or by the use of depolymer - izing agents that affect the trafﬁcking of viruses to the nucleus or perinuclear region . The uptake of adenovirus by target cells can be inhibited by a treatment with the MF - depolymerizing agent cyto D ( 51 , 61 , 62 , 69 ) . Although HHV - 8 - induced mor - phological changes such as the formation of actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia ( 50 , 60 ) are suggestive of a modu - lation of actin MFs , our studies suggest that HHV - 8 infection and trafﬁcking do not require intact MFs . In contrast , several lines of evidence , such as the physical association of HHV - 8 with the MT network and its abolition by nocodazole , the induction of hyperacetylation to stabilize the MTs , and the signiﬁcant reduction in HHV - 8 DNA associated with infected cell nuclei by MT depolymerization , clearly demonstrated the requirement of an intact MT network for transport of the HHV - 8 genome in the cytoplasm . HHV - 8 binding and uptake were not affected by MT - depolymerizing drugs , which is not surprising as these drugs do not affect the cell surface expres - sion of cellular proteins ( 42 , 46 , 61 , 69 ) . Nocodazole and Col - cemid disrupt the MT network by inhibiting the polymerization of tubulin monomers ( 21 , 42 , 61 , 69 ) , and these drugs have been widely used to study the association of viruses with mi - crotubules ( 15 , 34 , 61 , 69 ) . The presence of glu - tubulin , an MT depolymerization - resistant minor variant of (cid:2) - tubulin ( 53 ) , FIG . 10 . HHV - 8 utilizes the cytoplasmic dynein motors for trafﬁck - ing into the cell nucleus . ( A ) Expression of p50 / dynamitin in 293 cells . 293 cells were transfected for 8 h with a p50 / dynamitin plasmid ex - pressing a c - Myc – p50 fusion protein and an EGFP gene under the control of the CMV promoter . The expression of c - Myc and EGFP was monitored by IFA with MAbs against c - Myc and GFP . ( B ) Immuno - blot detection of p50 expression in cells transfected with different concentrations of a p50 / dynamitin – c - Myc - expressing plasmid by the use of anti - c - Myc antibodies . ( C ) Overexpression of dynamitin inhib - iting the dynein motor blocks infected cell nucleus - associated HHV - 8 DNA . 293 cells transfected with the pCMV plasmid ( 293 ) and the p50 – c - Myc plasmid ( 293 / p50 ) , CV - 1 cells transfected with the pCMV plasmid ( CV - 1 ) and the p50 – c - Myc plasmid ( CV - 1 / p50 ) , and HFF cells preincubated with 100 (cid:5) M Na 3 VO 4 or DMEM were infected with HHV - 8 for 3 h . The cells were washed to remove the unbound virus , treated with trypsin - EDTA to remove the bound but noninternalized virus , and subjected to estimates of the HHV - 8 DNA copy numbers associated with the infected cell nuclei by real - time DNA PCR as described in the legend to Fig . 3 . Each reaction was done in duplicate , and each bar represents the mean (cid:9) SD for three experiments . 1202 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m may be one of the reasons for the incomplete inhibition of HHV - 8 nuclear trafﬁcking by nocodazole and Colcemid . The MT network , which plays a critical role in the nuclear trafﬁcking of HHV - 8 , is a dynamic and polarized structure . Relatively stable minus ends are localized to the MTOC , which is typically located at the perinuclear position in cultured cells . Directional movement along MTs is mediated by motor pro - teins , which hydrolyze ATP to induce conformational changes in their structure . The dynamic , fast - growing , and fast - shrink - ing plus ends extend toward the cell periphery , and kinesin superfamily motors typically move toward the MT plus ends ( 24 , 46 , 47 , 62 – 65 ) . The dynein motors mediate minus - end - directed movement towards the nucleus , and adenoviruses and HSV - 1 utilize the dynein motors and MTs for the transport of capsids in the cytoplasm ( 28 ) . Similarly , HHV - 8 utilizes the dynein motors to facilitate movement , as shown by a reduction in HHV - 8 nuclear trafﬁcking by the overexpression of dyna - mitin , which inhibits dynein - dynactin complex formation , and by Na 3 VO4 . HSV - 1 VP22 induces the aggregation of MTs and interacts with the intermediate chain of cytoplasmic dynein via its UL34 protein ( 70 ) . Incoming nucleocapsids of pseudorabies virus , an alphaherpesvirus that is closely related to HSV - 1 , were also shown to be associated with MTs and to utilize them for movement to the nucleus ( 38 ) . This interaction is believed to be mediated by the PRV UL25 protein , a minor but essen - tial component of the capsid , which colocalizes with MTs and accumulates at the MTOC ( 38 ) . Whether HHV - 8 encodes a protein ( s ) that physically associates with the MT motor and aids in the movement of cargo along the MT network is not currently known and needs to be investigated . The utilization of the MT network by HHV - 8 is not a unique observation , as other viruses have been shown to require the MF or MT cytoskeleton . However , this is the ﬁrst demonstra - tion of a direct role for the signal cascade induced by a virus in cytoplasmic trafﬁcking . The complex signaling events associ - ated with internalization of the bound virus and trafﬁcking of the internalized capsid remain largely unknown . The well - stud - ied adenovirus ( Ad ) types 2 and 5 bind to a primary receptor , the coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor . Coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor - docked particles activate the integrin FIG . 11 . Model for cytoplasmic transport of HHV - 8 . After an interaction with cell surface heparan sulfate ( HS ) ( A ) , integrin (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 , and another unknown receptor ( s ) , HHV - 8 is taken into an endocytic vesicle ( C ) . The interaction of the virus - receptor complex triggers signaling ( D ) . Rho GTPases are some of the downstream mediators of the induced signaling pathways , which facilitate virus movement by inducing MT stabilization and regulating MT dynamics ( E ) . The endocytic vesicles with virus or released capsid / tegument complexes bind to dynein motor components ( F ) , are transported along the MTs to reach the MTOC ( G ) near the nuclear vicinity , and deliver the viral DNA into the nucleus . The question marks indicate the potential stages of HHV - 8 entry and infection at which the induced signaling events may have a role based on the known functions of these signaling events . V OL . 79 , 2005 MICROTUBULES AND KSHV / HHV - 8 INFECTION 1203 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m coreceptors , which triggers a variety of cell responses , includ - ing endocytosis and macropinocytosis ( 51 , 62 ) . A major ques - tion arising from Ad entry studies is whether integrins promote virus entry and infection via speciﬁc cell signaling events . Sim - ilar to our results with HHV - 8 , adenoviruses induce the ERK1 / 2 mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinases via the in - tegrin - dependent focal adhesion kinase ( pp125FAK ) ( 51 ) . FAK activation appears to play little role in integrin - mediated Ad endocytosis since the virus infected FAK null Du3 mouse ﬁbroblast cells with a similar efﬁciency as that for parental FAK (cid:1) / (cid:1) Du17 cells ( 51 ) . This is in contrast to HHV - 8 , whose infection efﬁciency is severely impaired in FAK null Du3 cells ( 50 ) . Adenovirus internalization was shown to be regulated by the PI - 3K and p130CAS proteins ( 51 ) . Pharmacologic inhibi - tors of PI - 3K but not of ERK MAP kinases inhibited Ad internalization and infection ( 51 ) . Similar to the results of our study , the entry of adenoviruses was also negatively regulated when Rho GTPases were inhibited or when dominant - negative mutants of Rac and Cdc42 were overexpressed ( 51 ) . The postentry trafﬁcking of adenovirus capsids activates the protein kinase A and p38 / MAPK pathways , and such activation ap - pears to enhance the minus - end - directed transport of adeno - virus on MTs ( 65 ) . However , how adenovirus - induced Rho GTPase and other signaling pathways aid in transport in the cytoplasm is not fully understood . The cytoskeletal MFs , MTs , and IFs are highly dynamic structures that cooperate in response to extracellular stimuli and allow the cell to modulate its shape , to migrate , and to divide . The Rho GTPases are tightly involved in the coordina - tion of these networks , and RhoA , Rac , and Cdc42 are best known for regulating the actin cytoskeleton ( 52 ) . However , only very recently have studies begun to dissect out the role of Rho GTPases and their effector molecules in the modulation of cytoskeletal elements . Emerging evidence clearly demon - strates the inﬂuence exerted by the Rho GTPases over the MTs and thus links the Rho GTPases to MT dynamics ( 22 , 37 ) . Moreover , studies also demonstrate that MTs themselves can inﬂuence Rho GTPases ( 27 , 33 , 68 ) . Growing MTs target Rho - dependent focal adhesions and regulate their turnover ( 39 ) . Active RhoA stabilizes a subset of MTs ( 22 , 53 ) , while acti - vated Rac binds tubulin ( 12 ) and is associated with the recov - ery of ﬁbroblasts from nocodazole treatment ( 68 ) . How HHV - 8 - induced signaling pathways contribute to the acetylation of MTs is not known at present . However , evidence such as the inhibition of HHV - 8 - induced hyperacetylation and the stabili - zation of MTs by the Rho GTPase inhibitor CdTxB , the sig - niﬁcant increase in HHV - 8 nuclear trafﬁcking by the Rho GTPase agonist CNF - 1 , and its signiﬁcant decrease by the antagonist CdTxB suggest that Rho GTPases have profound control over HHV - 8 - induced MT polymerization . Together with the activation of RhoA - dependent diaphanous 2 , one of the various signaling molecules associated with Rho GTPases and MT polymerization , these results demonstrate that HHV - 8 – integrin interaction - dependent signaling pathways induce MT polymerization and show evidence for the ﬁrst time for a virus infection that MT dynamics are controlled by Rho GTPases . Whether HHV - 8 - induced signaling pathways play a role in dynein motor movement is not known at present and needs to be explored . MTs and their motors are also known to have roles in en - docytic regulation ( 10 ) . Adenovirus capsid movement towards the nucleus is dependent both on endocytic trafﬁcking and on the MT network ( 65 ) . Since HHV - 8 enters HFF , 293 , and BJAB cells via endocytosis ( 6 , 36 ) and since microtubules are critical for the transport of endosomal carrier vesicles to late endosomes ( 8 , 10 , 19 ) , it is reasonable to assume that the role of MTs in HHV - 8 trafﬁcking may also be at the stage of transport from early to late endosomes ( 8 , 10 , 19 ) . In this regard , it is interesting that recent studies have uncovered a multitude of control points for Rho GTPases in the endocytic pathways and an intimate connection between these signaling proteins and intracellular trafﬁc ( 56 ) . The activated Rac , Rho , Cdc42 , and Rab5 GTPases act as molecular switches in various signal transduction pathways and are essential for the modu - lation of actin dynamics , the formation of endocytic vesicles , their ﬁssion , cytoskeletal transport , endosome movement , the fusion of endocytic vesicles , and recycling ( 56 ) . HHV - 8 and HHV - 8 gB interactions with integrin , the induc - tion of FAK – Src – PI - 3K , the upstream mediator of Rho GTPases , the activation of RhoA , and the associated diapha - nous 2 protein required for microtubular stabilization and for regulation of the movement of endocytic vesicles suggest that HHV - 8 manipulates signaling pathways , resulting in aid in the movement of its capsid or tegument in the cytoplasm . Our data demonstrate a link between HHV - 8 - induced signaling path - ways and MT network dynamics , which together with the dy - nein motor complex collectively facilitate the cytoplasmic transport of HHV - 8 ( Fig . 11 ) . Thus , our ﬁndings further sup - port our earlier suggestion ( 5 , 50 ) that besides providing a conduit for the entry of the viral genome into the interior of cells , the interactions of HHV - 8 with integrins and other host cell surface molecules and the accompanying preexisting host cell signaling cascades have an active role in virus entry , trans - port of the viral genome to the nucleus , and the establishment of a successful infection . The results presented here will lead to further exploration of the dynamic interactions of HHV - 8 with the various components of cytoskeletal and signaling pathways during entry and infection , which may lead to the development of novel strategies to block the establishment of target cell infection by HHV - 8 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was supported in part by Public Health Service grants CA 75911 and CA 099925 to B . C . and by a University of Kansas Medical Center Biomedical Research Training Program postdoctoral fellow - ship to P . P . N . We thank Ling Zeng for technical assistance . We thank Jeffrey Vieira ( Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center , Seattle , Wash . ) for kindly providing the GFP – HHV - 8 ( rKSHV . 152 ) - harboring BCBL - 1 cells . We thank Gudula Schmidt ( Universitat Freiburg ) for E . coli CNF - 1 , Andre Sobel ( Inserm , Paris , France ) for antibodies against stathmin and pSer16 - stathmin , Richard Vallee ( Columbia University ) for the p50 / dynamitin construct , and Elizabeth Petroske of the Con - focal Imaging Center at the University of Kansas Medical Center for confocal image acquisition . REFERENCES 1 . Aktories , K . , G . Schmidt , and I . Just . 2000 . Rho GTPases as targets of bacterial protein toxins . J . Biol . Chem . 381 : 421 – 426 . 2 . Aktories , K . , and G . Schmidt . 2003 . A new turn in Rho GTPase activation by Escherichia coli cytotoxic necrotizing factors . Trends Microbiol . 11 : 152 – 155 . 3 . Akula , S . M . , F . Z . Wang , J . Vieira , and B . Chandran . 2001 . Human her - pesvirus 8 interaction with target cells involves heparan sulfate . Virology 282 : 245 – 255 . 1204 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 4 . Akula , S . M . , N . P . Pramod , F . Z . Wang , and B . Chandran . 2001 . Human herpesvirus 8 envelope - associated glycoprotein B interacts with heparan sulfate - like moieties . Virology 284 : 235 – 249 . 5 . Akula , S . M . , N . P . Pramod , F . Z . Wang , and B . Chandran . 2002 . Integrin (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) 1 ( CD49c / 28 ) is a cellular receptor for Kaposi’s sarcoma associated herpesvirus ( KSHV / HHV - 8 ) entry into the target cells . Cell 108 : 407 – 419 . 6 . Akula , S . M . , P . P . Naranatt , N . S . Walia , F . Z . Wang , B . Fegley , and B . Chandran . 2003 . Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus ( human herpesvi - rus 8 ) infection of human ﬁbroblast cells occurs through endocytosis . J . Vi - rol . 77 : 7978 – 7990 . 7 . Alonso , C . , J . Miskin , B . Hernaez , P . Fernandez - Zapatero , L . Soto , C . Canto , I . Rodriguez - Crespo , L . Dixon , and J . M . Escribano . 2001 . African swine fever virus protein p54 interacts with the microtubular motor complex through direct binding to light - chain dynein . J . Virol . 75 : 9819 – 9827 . 8 . Aniento , F . , N . Emans , G . Grifﬁths , and J . Gruenberg . 1993 . Cytoplasmic dynein - dependent vesicular transport from early to late endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 1373 – 1387 . 9 . Antman , K . , and Y . Chang . 2000 . Kaposi’s sarcoma . N . Engl . J . Med . 342 : 1027 – 1038 . 10 . Apodaca , G . 2001 . Endocytic trafﬁc in polarized epithelial cells : role of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton . Trafﬁc 2 : 149 – 159 . 11 . Bechtel , J . T . , Y . Liang , J . Hvidding , and D . Ganem . 2003 . Host range of Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus in cultured cells . J . Virol . 77 : 6474 – 6481 . 12 . Best , A . , S . Ahmed , R . Kozma , and L . Lim . 1996 . The Ras - related GTPase Rac1 binds tubulin . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 3756 – 3762 . 13 . Bishop , A . , and A . Hall . 2000 . Rho GTPases and their effector proteins . Biochem . J . 348 : 241 – 255 . 14 . Campbell , E . M . , and T . J . Hope . 2003 . Role of the cytoskeleton in nuclear import . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 55 : 761 – 771 . 15 . Candurra , N . A . , M . J . Lago , L . Maskin , and E . B . Damonte . 1999 . Involve - ment of the cytoskeleton in Junin virus multiplication . J . Gen . Virol . 80 : 147 – 156 . 16 . Chang , Y . , E . Cesarman , M . S . Pessin , F . Lee , J . Culpepper , D . M . Knowles , and P . S . Moore . 1994 . Identiﬁcation of herpesvirus - like DNA sequences in AIDS - associated Kaposi’s sarcoma . Science 266 : 1865 – 1869 . 17 . Charlton , C . A . , and L . E . Volkman . 1993 . Penetration of Autographa cali - fornica nuclear polyhedrosis virus nucleocapsids into IPLB Sf 21 cells in - duces actin cable formation . Virology 197 : 245 – 254 . 18 . Chaves - Olarte , E . , P . Low , E . Freer , T . Norlin , M . Weidmann , C . von Eichel - Streiber , and M . Thelestam . 1999 . A novel cytotoxin from Clostridium dif - ﬁcile serogroup F is a functional hybrid between two other large clostridial cytotoxins . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 11046 – 11052 . 19 . Clague , M . J . , S . Urbe , F . Aniento , and J . Gruenberg . 1994 . Vacuolar ATPase activity is required for endosomal carrier vesicle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 21 – 24 . 20 . Clark , E . A . , and J . S . Brugge . 1995 . Integrins and signal transduction pathways : the road taken . Science 268 : 233 – 239 . 21 . Cleveland , D . W . , M . A . Lopata , P . Sherline , and M . W . Kirschner . 1981 . Unpolymerized tubulin modulates the level of tubulin mRNAs . Cell 25 : 537 – 546 . 22 . Cook , T . A . , T . Nagasaki , and G . G . Gundersen . 1998 . Rho guanosine triphosphatase mediates the selective stabilization of microtubules induced by lysophosphatidic acid . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 175 – 185 . 23 . Cudmore , S . , I . Reckmann , G . Grifﬁths , and M . Way . 1996 . Vaccinia virus : a model system for actin - membrane interactions . J . Cell Sci . 109 : 1739 – 1747 . 24 . Cullen , B . R . 2001 . Journey to the center of the cell . Cell 105 : 697 – 700 . 25 . Dales , S . , and Y . Chardonnet . 1973 . Early events in the interaction of ad - enoviruses with HeLa cells . IV . Association with microtubules and the nu - clear pore complex during vectorial movement of the inoculum . Virology 56 : 465 – 483 . 26 . Damiani , M . T . , and M . I . Colombo . 2003 . Microﬁlaments and microtubules regulate recycling from phagosomes . Exp . Cell Res . 289 : 152 – 161 . 27 . Daub , H . , K . Gevaert , J . Vandekerckhove , A . Sobel , and A . Hall . 2001 . Rac / Cdc42 and p65PAK regulate the microtubule - destabilizing protein stathmin through phosphorylation at serine 16 . J . Biol Chem . 276 : 1677 – 1680 . 28 . Dohner , K . , A . Wolfstein , U . Prank , C . Echeverri , D . Dujardin , R . Vallee , and B . Sodeik . 2002 . Function of dynein and dynactin in herpes simplex virus capsid transport . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 2795 – 2809 . 29 . Dramsi , S . , and P . Cossart . 1998 . Intracellular pathogens and the actin cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 : 137 – 166 . 30 . Echeverri , C . J . , B . M . Paschal , K . T . Vaughan , and R . B . Vallee . 1996 . Molecular characterization of the 50 - kD subunit of dynactin reveals function for the complex in chromosome alignment and spindle organization during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 617 – 633 . 31 . Elliott , G . , and P . O’Hare . 1998 . Herpes simplex virus type 1 tegument protein VP22 induces the stabilization and hyperacetylation of microtubules . J . Virol . 72 : 6448 – 6455 . 32 . Finley , B . B . , S . Ruschkowski , and S . Dedhar . 1991 . Cytoskeletal rearrange - ments accompanying Salmonella entry into epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 99 : 283 – 296 . 33 . Fukata , M . , T . Watanabe , J . Noritake , M . Nakagawa , M . Yamaga , S . Ku - roda , Y . Matsuura , A . Iwamatsu , F . Perez , and K . Kaibuchi . 2002 . Rac1 and Cdc42 capture microtubules through IQGAP1 and CLIP - 170 . Cell 109 : 873 – 885 . 34 . Gilbert , J . M . , I . G . Goldberg , and T . L . Benjamin . 2003 . Cell penetration and trafﬁcking of polyomavirus . J . Virol . 77 : 2615 – 2622 . 35 . Goodson , H . V . , C . Valetti , and T . E . Kreis . 1997 . Motors and membrane trafﬁc . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 18 – 28 . 36 . Inoue , N . , J . Winter , R . B . Lal , M . K . Offermann , and S . Koyano . 2003 . Characterization of entry mechanisms of human herpesvirus 8 by using an Rta - dependent reporter cell line . J . Virol . 77 : 8147 – 8152 . 37 . Ishizaki , T . , Y . Morishima , M . Okamoto , T . Furuyashiki , T . Kato , and S . Narumiya . 2001 . Coordination of microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton by the Rho effector mDia1 . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 8 – 14 . 38 . Kaelin , K . , S . Dezelee , M . J . Masse , F . Bras , and A . Flamand . 2000 . The UL25 protein of pseudorabies virus associates with capsids and localizes to the nucleus and to microtubules . J . Virol . 74 : 474 – 482 . 39 . Kaverina , I . , K . Rottner , and J . V . Small . 1998 . Targeting , capture , and stabilization of MTs at early focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 181 – 190 . 40 . Kazmierczak , B . I . , T . S . Jou , K . Mostov , and J . N . Engel . 2001 . Rho GTPase activity modulates Pseudomonas aeruginosa internalization by epithelial cells . Cell Microbiol . 3 : 85 – 98 . 41 . King , S . M . 2000 . The dynein microtubule motor . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1496 : 60 – 75 . 42 . Kizhatil , K . , and L . M . Albritton . 1997 . Requirements for different compo - nents of the host cell cytoskeleton distinguish ecotropic murine leukemia virus entry via endocytosis from entry via surface fusion . J . Virol . 71 : 7145 – 7156 . 43 . Krishnan , H . H . , P . P . Naranatt , M . S . Smith , L . Zeng , C . Bloomer , and B . Chandran . 2004 . Concurrent expression of latent and a limited number of lytic genes with immune modulation and anti - apoptotic functions by Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus early during infection of primary endothelial and ﬁbroblast cells and subsequent decline of lytic gene expression . J . Virol . 78 : 3601 – 3620 . 44 . Kristensson , K . , E . Lycke , M . Roytta , B . Svennerholm , and A . Vahlne . 1986 . Neuritic transport of herpes simplex virus in rat sensory neurons in vitro . Effects of substances interacting with microtubular function and axonal ﬂow [ nocodazole , taxol and erythro - 9 - 3 - ( 2 - hydroxynonyl ) adenine ] . J . Gen . Virol . 67 : 2023 – 2028 . 45 . Lo , P . , X . Yu , I . Atanasov , B . Chandran , and Z . H . Zhou . 2003 . Three - dimensional localization of pORF65 in Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpes - virus capsid . J . Virol . 77 : 4291 – 4297 . 46 . Mandelkow , E . , and E . M . Mandelkow . 1995 . Microtubules and microtubule - associated proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 : 72 – 81 . 47 . McDonald , D . , M . A . Vodicka , G . Lucero , T . M . Svitkina , G . G . Borisy , M . Emerman , and T . J . Hope . 2002 . Visualization of the intracellular behavior of HIV in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 159 : 441 – 452 . 48 . Naranatt , P . P . , H . H . Krishnan , S . R . Svojanovsky , C . Bloomer , S . Mathur , and B . Chandran . 2004 . Host gene induction and transcriptional reprogram - ming in Kaposi’s - sarcoma associated herpesvirus ( KSHV / HHV - 8 ) infected endothelial , ﬁbroblast and B cells : insights into modulation events early during infection . Cancer Res . 64 : 72 – 84 . 49 . Naranatt , P . P . , S . M . Akula , and B . Chandran . 2002 . Characterization of gamma 2 - human herpesvirus - 8 glycoproteins gH and gL . Arch . Virol . 147 : 1349 – 1370 . 50 . Naranatt , P . P . , S . M . Akula , C . A . Zien , H . H . Krishnan , and B . Chandran . 2003 . Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus induces the phosphatidylino - sitol 3 - kinase – PKC - zeta – MEK – ERK signaling pathway in target cells early during infection : implications for infectivity . J . Virol . 77 : 1524 – 1539 . 51 . Nemerow , G . R . 2000 . Cell receptors involved in adenovirus entry . Virology 274 : 1 – 4 . 52 . Nobes , C . D . , and A . Hall . 1995 . Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 : 53 – 62 . 53 . Palazzo , A . F . , T . A . Cook , A . S . Alberts , and G . G . Gundersen . 2001 . mDia mediates Rho - regulated formation and orientation of stable microtubules . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 723 – 729 . 54 . Pelkmans , L . , D . Puntener , and A . Helenius . 2002 . Local actin polymeriza - tion and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 : 535 – 539 . 55 . Piperno , G . , M . LeDizet , and X . J . Chang . 1987 . Microtubules containing acetylated alpha - tubulin in mammalian cells in culture . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 289 – 302 . 56 . Qualmann , B . , and H . Mellor . 2003 . Regulation of endocytic trafﬁc by Rho GTPases . Biochem . J . 371 : 233 – 241 . 57 . Renne , R . , D . Blackbourn , D . Whitby , J . Levy , and D . Ganem . 1998 . Limited transmission of Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus in cultured cells . J . Virol . 72 : 5182 – 5188 . 58 . Schulz , T . F . , Y . Chang , and P . S . Moore . 1998 . Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus ( human herpesvirus 8 ) , p . 87 – 134 . In D . J . McCance ( ed . ) , Human tumor viruses . American Society for Microbiology , Washington , D . C . 59 . Seksek , O . , J . Biwersi , and A . S . Verkman . 1997 . Translational diffusion of V OL . 79 , 2005 MICROTUBULES AND KSHV / HHV - 8 INFECTION 1205 on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m macromolecule - sized solutes in cytoplasm and nucleus . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 131 – 142 . 60 . Sharma - Walia , N . , P . P . Naranatt , H . H . Krishnan , L . Zeng , and B . Chan - dran . 2004 . Kaposi’s sarcoma associated herpesvirus envelope glycoprotein gB induces the integrin - dependent focal adhesion kinase - Src - PI - 3K - RhoGTPase signal pathways and cytoskeletal rearrangements . J . Virol . 78 : 4207 – 4223 . 61 . Sieczkarski , S . B . , and G . R . Whittaker . 2002 . Dissecting virus entry via endocytosis . J . Gen . Virol . 83 : 1535 – 1545 . 62 . Sodeik , B . 2000 . Mechanisms of viral transport in the cytoplasm . Trends Microbiol . 8 : 465 – 472 . 63 . Stidwell , R . P . , and U . F . Greber . 2000 . Intracellular virus trafﬁcking reveals physiological characteristics of cytoskeleton . News Physiol . Sci . 15 : 67 – 71 . 64 . Suomalainen , M . , M . Y . Nakano , S . Keller , K . Boucke , R . P . Stidwill , and U . F . Greber . 1999 . Microtubule - dependent plus - and minus end - directed motilities are competing processes for nuclear targeting of adenovirus . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 657 – 672 . 65 . Suomalainen , M . , M . Y . Nakano , K . Boucke , S . Keller , and U . F . Greber . 2001 . Adenovirus - activated PKA and p38 / MAPK pathways boost microtu - bule - mediated nuclear targeting of virus . EMBO J . 20 : 1310 – 1319 . 66 . Vieira , J . , P . O’Hearn , L . Kimball , B . Chandran , and L . Corey . 2001 . Acti - vation of Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus ( human herpesvirus 8 ) lytic replication by human cytomegalovirus . J . Virol . 75 : 1378 – 1386 . 67 . Wang , F . Z . , S . M . Akula , N . P . Pramod , L . Zeng , and B . Chandran . 2001 . Human herpesvirus 8 envelope glycoprotein K8 . 1A interaction with the target cells involves heparan sulfate . J . Virol . 75 : 7517 – 7527 . 68 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , R . A . Worthylake , B . P . Liu , K . Burridge , and E . D . Salmon . 1999 . Microtubule growth activates Rac1 to promote lamellipodial protrusion in ﬁbroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 45 – 50 . 69 . Whittaker , G . R . , M . Kann , and A . Helenius . 2000 . Viral entry into the nucleus . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 : 627 – 651 . 70 . Ye , G . J . , K . T . Vaughan , R . B . Vallee , and B . Roizman . 2000 . The herpes simplex virus 1 UL 34 protein interacts with a cytoplasmic dynein interme - diate chain and targets nuclear membrane . J . Virol . 74 : 1355 – 1363 . 1206 NARANATT ET AL . J . V IROL . on O c t obe r 14 , 2017 b y gue s t h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m