HCIL No . 99 - 14 ( May 1999 ) ; http : / / www . cs . umd . edu / hcil Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children Allison Druin Human - Computer Interaction Lab University of Maryland College Park , MD 20742 + 1 301 405 7406 allisond @ umiacs . umd . edu ABSTRACT In today’s homes and schools , children are emerging as frequent and experienced users of technology [ 3 , 14 ] . As this trend continues , it becomes increasingly important to ask if we are fulfilling the technology needs of our children . To answer this question , I have developed a research approach that enables young children to have a voice throughout the technology development process . In this paper , the techniques of cooperative inquiry will be described along with a theoretical framework that situates this work in the HCI literature . Two examples of technology resulting from this approach will be presented , along with a brief discussion on the design - centered learning of team researchers using cooperative inquiry . Keywords Children , design techniques , educational applications , cooperative design , participatory design , cooperative inquiry , intergenerational design team , KidPad , PETS . CHILDREN AS OUR RESEARCH PARTNERS Today’s technologies are becoming a critical part of our children’s daily lives [ 3 , 9 , 14 ] . From school learning experiences to after - school play , technology is changing the way children live and learn . In fact , children have been found to be an important new consumer group that must be satisfied as technology users [ 17 ] . In recent years , numerous methodologies have been developed that bring technology users into the development process . Users have been described as active partners [ 6 , 16 , 29 ] , inspectors or testers [ 24 , 25 ] , or research participants to be observed and / or interviewed [ 5 , 13 , 18 ] . Thanks to user input , technology can be shaped and changed in ways that may be meaningful and useful for future technology users . While user involvement is well understood as important to the technology research and development process , users that are children are less commonly involved than adults [ 9 , 10 ] . When children’s input is sought out , it is typically done so over short periods of time ( e . g . , a day , a few weeks , perhaps a few months ) . Children are most frequently asked to be technology testers in workshops or school settings [ e . g . , 20 , 26 ] . However , researchers have begun to see the limitations of what children can contribute in these situations [ 10 , 27 ] . During the past four years , my research has involved children as active research partners . Some people question whether children are capable of contributing throughout the research and development process [ 27 , 28 ] . I believe that children can and should be partners throughout a team research experience . Just as computer scientists or educators may be limited in their range of experience , so too are children . But each has their own expertise to contribute depending on what the team needs are during the research and development process . The intergenerational teams I have led have included members with diverse ages , disciplines , and experience [ 10 , 11 ] . Children have been an essential part of these teams , along with educators , computer scientists , and artists . Initially , the activities of our teams were structured to reflect methodologies that call for bringing adult users into the design process ( e . g . , cooperative design , participatory design , contextual inquiry ) . While these methodologies offered an excellent starting point for us , we quickly found that they needed to be adapted and changed to suit our teams that included children . Over the years , our interview procedures , note - taking practices , data analysis , and day - to - day team interactions evolved to become more inclusive of our child partners . This has lead to the development of cooperative inquiry , an approach to creating new technologies for children , with children . This paper will present a theoretical framework that situates cooperative inquiry in the HCI literature . In addition , the research techniques of cooperative inquiry will be discussed , and two examples will be given to CHI ' 99 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA , May 15 - 20 , 592 - 599 demonstrate this approach . This paper will conclude by describing another critical outcome of the cooperative inquiry process : design - centered learning . Self - reported learning in areas such as team collaboration and communication skills will be discussed . A THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK While cooperative inquiry is unique in many aspects due to child involvement , it is also grounded in HCI research and theories of cooperative design [ 16 ] , participatory design [ 29 ] , contextual inquiry [ 5 ] , activity theory [ 23 ] , and situated action [ 32 ] . Cooperative inquiry is an approach to research that includes three crucial aspects which reflect the HCI literature above : ( 1 ) a multidisciplinary partnership with children ; ( 2 ) field research that emphasizes understanding context , activities , and artifacts ; ( 3 ) iterative low - tech and high - tech prototyping . These three aspects form a framework for research and design with children . In the sections that follow , this framework will be discussed as it relates to other HCI research and theories . Multidisciplinary Research Partnership with Users Cooperative inquiry is based upon the belief that partnering with users is an important way to understand what is needed in developing new technologies . This belief can be seen in work done over the last 20 or more years in the cooperative design of Scandinavia [ 6 , 16 ] , the participatory design of the United States [ 15 , 21 , 29 ] , and the consensus participation of England [ 22 ] . As Greenbum and Kyng have explained [ 16 ] , “We see the need for users to become full partners in the cooperative system development process… . Full participation of ( users ) requires training and active cooperation , not just token representation” [ pp . ix - 1 ] . This partnership between users and researchers from different disciplines was exemplified in the Scandinavia cooperative design work beginning in the 1970s . It was during this time that employee influence through trade unions grew , and collaborations between workers , management , and researchers influenced how new technologies could be created for and used in the workplace . Cooperative design methods supported the development of new technologies for carpenters , typographers , bankers , manufacturers , and more [ 6 , 16 , 29 ] . This approach to design attempted to capture the complexity and somewhat “messy” real - life world of the workplace . It was found that many times there were not sequential tasks accomplished by one person , but many tasks done in parallel and in collaboration with others . Interestingly enough , this description could also easily refer to the complexity and “messiness” of a child’s world . In any case , this workplace design approach was not confined to the Scandinavian countries for long . Today researchers from around the world are applying these ideas and practices in their own work [ 1 , 2 ] . Field Research : context , activities , and artifacts Cooperative inquiry is also grounded in the traditions of field research . A great deal of information can quickly be understood about the needs of users from the activities and artifacts that are a part of a user’s context . Contextual design [ 5 , 18 ] , activity theory [ 23 ] and situated action [ 7 , 32 ] all discuss the importance of these crucial elements in researching and developing new technology . It is the methodology of contextual inquiry ( now a part of the contextual design process ) that our intergenerational design teams found most useful with children . With contextual inquiry , a team of researchers observe and analyze the users’ environment for patterns of activity , communication , artifacts , and cultural relationships . Diagrams and models are developed from field experiences that eventually may lead to the design of storyboards , prototypes and new technology [ 5 ] . It is from this type of research inquiry that the method “cooperative inquiry” gets its name . I have found that this process of capturing field data , is extremely important in working with children as research partners . Young children , particularly from ages 3 - 7 have a difficult time abstractly describing what their technology needs and wants may be . When discussions take place in the context of a child’s home , school , or public play space , it is much easier for the child to express his / her ideas [ 10 ] . Later in this paper this modified form of contextual inquiry with children will be described . Iterative Low - tech and High - tech Prototyping The third aspect of cooperative inquiry calls for intergenerational design teams to visualize their ideas through prototyping techniques . Again , since children may have a difficult time communicating to adults exactly what they are imagining , prototyping offers a concrete way to discuss ideas . The “low - tech prototyping” or “mock - ups” found in the cooperative design and participatory design literature [ 12 , 21 ] have been an inspiration for my work with children . By using paper , crayons , clay , string and more , low - tech prototyping gives equal footing to child and adult [ 10 , 21 ] . There is never a need to teach people how to prototype , since using basic art supplies comes naturally to the youngest and oldest design partners . This form of prototyping is inexpensive , yet quite effective in quickly brainstorming new ideas or directions [ 10 ] . It is from these low - tech prototypes that high - tech prototypes emerge . As team ideas evolve , continued iterations of prototypes are developed . In the section that follows further description of prototyping with children is described . COOPERATIVE INQUIRY : THE RESEARCH METHODS Based upon the previous theoretical framework , the cooperative inquiry approach to partnering with children has become a reality . The goal in developing cooperative inquiry was to find techniques that can support intergenerational design teams in understanding what children as technology users do now ; what they might do tomorrow ; and what they envision for their future . It is not easy for an adult to step into a child’s world , and likewise it is not easy for a child to step into an adult’s world . I have found no single technique that can give teams all the answers they are looking for , so a combination of techniques has been adapted or developed that form the methodology of cooperative inquiry . These techniques do not necessarily offer a magic formula for working with children , but rather a philosophy and approach to research that can be used to gather data , developing prototypes , and forging new research directions . At the University of Maryland , we use cooperative inquiry with an on - going intergenerational design team . I chose to establish this on - going partnership rather than work with many different children over short periods of time . In this way , children are not subjects for testing , but research partners who I have come to know and respect . Children and adults alike gather field data , initiate ideas , test , and develop new prototypes . Team members do what they are capable of , and learn from each other throughout the process . The current team includes two faculty members , two graduate students , two staff members and six children ( ages 7 - 11 years old ) . The disciplines of computer science , education , robotics , and art are represented . Members of the team meet two afternoons a week in our lab or out in the field . Over the summer we met for two intensive weeks , eight hours a day . At the time of this writing , the team has been together for almost a year and is expected to be together for almost two years . In the sections that follow , the three techniques that comprise cooperative inquiry will be explained . Contextual Inquiry The first technique adapted for use with children is contextual inquiry . This is based upon the work of Beyer and Holtzblatt [ 5 ] . What their work tells us is that researchers should collect data in the users own environment . However , in our case at the University of Maryland , the researchers are not just adults who gather data from a child’s world . Both adults and children observe , take notes , and interact with child users . Children are expected to be researchers along with their adult partners . This differentiates this form of contextual inquiry from that of others who work with users as informants but not necessarily as researchers [ 5 ] . At first , we attempted to have all team members take notes in the same way . This was too difficult for both children and adults . The adults in our team saw the need to gather data by writing detailed text descriptions . But the child researchers could just not accomplish this in a way that yielded meaningful results . On the other hand , the children wanted to combine drawings with small amounts of text to create cartoon - like flow charts ( see Figure 1 ) . The adult team members using this method felt too self - conscious about their drawings and were concerned that they would miss the details needed . Therefore , the team compromised and adults developed their own note - taking forms and the children developed theirs . For adults , note - taking occurred most effectively in pairs . One note - taker recorded the activities of the child ( ren ) being observed and the other note - taker recorded quotes of what was said . Both note - takers recorded the time so that the quotes and activities could be synchronized in later data analysis . Our team does not find video cameras to be successful in capturing data for contextual inquiry purposes . In my previous work at the University of New Mexico we also did not find video useful [ 10 ] . We found that when children saw a video camera in the room , they tended to “perform” or to “freeze” . In addition , even with small unobtrusive cameras , we found it difficult to capture data in small bedrooms and large public spaces . The sound captured in public spaces was difficult to understand . In addition , we found that the video images were incomplete in private spaces . It was difficult to know where to place cameras when it was unknown where children would sit , stand , or move in their own environment . During the note - taking experience , there were at least two note - takers and always one researcher who was an interactor . The interactor did not take notes but instead , was the person who initiated discussion and asked questions concerning the activity . We found that if there were no interactor , the children being observed would feel uncomfortable—as if they were “on stage . ” We also found that if the interactor took notes , the children being observed clearly felt uncomfortable and distracted . Instead , we found that the interactor should become a participant observer , talking naturally to children , free from note - pads , and becoming a part of the active experience . This is very different from contextual inquiry experiences with adults where note - taking is less of an issue . Figure 1 : Contextual inquiry notes by a 7 - year old child Interestingly enough , we found that child researchers had a difficult time being interactors . Children would tend to get involved in what was going on and forget that they were there to do research and should let the other child lead the action . On the other hand , adult researchers also had a difficult time being interactors . Traditional “power structures” or relationships between adults and children could easily emerge , where adults could tend to steer the child ( ren ) being observed as a parent or teacher might . One way we found that helps change these traditional power structures is to have adults wear informal clothing so that they look less like an authority figure , and more like a peer . The interactor should not to be confused with an interviewer . The interactor is not there to ask hours of questions that might force the child ( ren ) being observed to stop what is naturally being done . Instead , the interactor is there to ask questions that are directed to what is going on at the moment ( e . g . , How come you’re doing that ? Why do you like that ? What’s this ? ) . In this way , the interactor is annotating the activities with information for the note - takers to capture . After the field research experience , the team typically meets back at the lab to analyze the captured data . Our technique of visualizing the data gathered , again diverges from the techniques of Beyer and Holtzblatt [ 5 ] . We have found that children’s activities are often more exploratory than task - directed , especially when children are not told what to do by an adult parent or teacher [ 10 ] . We are most interested in capturing these exploratory experiences , for they tell us what children want to do as opposed to what adults expect of them . In our experience , the diagrams or models suggested by Beyer and Holtzblatt became extremely complex and difficult to understand when trying to capture the exploratory experiences of children . Therefore , we found it more effective to diagram these experiences based on Patterns of Activity and Roles the Child Played [ 10 ] . In Table 1 , a portion of the information gathered by an adult researcher is shown . This information is broken up into six columns : Time , Quotes , Activities , Activity Pattern , Roles , and Design Ideas . The Time column is used to synchronize quotes with activities . The Quotes column contains phrases and sentences said by the child ( ren ) during a session . The Activities column contains the observed actions of the child ( ren ) during a session . While the first three columns contain raw data from observations , the Activity Pattern column is developed by the researchers during data analysis and is based on repetitive patterns that emerge in the Quotes and Activities columns . The Roles column is also developed by the researchers , from the data in the Quotes and Activities columns . The Roles column describes “the who” children are when they are interacting with technology ( e . g . , searcher , storyteller , researcher , learner , etc . ) . Finally , the last column contains the Design Ideas . It is a culmination of all the information gathered or generated . This column is also the start of the brainstorming process . It offers new ideas for the development of technology that can be related directly to the observed data . When someone asks , “Where did that idea come from ? ” it is easy to refer back to the related data . Once these adult notes have been compiled for a session , the adult diagrams are compared with the child notes . The adult diagrams are highlighted in the places that the child researchers have recorded in their notes . In this way , RAW DATA : DATA ANALYSIS : Time Quotes Activities Activity Patterns Roles Design Ideas 39 : 20 “I want the playing one . ” Child clicks on the scared cat and tries to take out another one . It doesn’t work . Difficulty with mouse dragging . Look for alternative input devices or don’t use dragging with a mouse . 39 : 50 “Awww . The kitten was afraid . ” Child clicks on another basket with a cat . Tells stories about actions on screen . Storyteller Offer children storytelling opportunities with technology . 40 : 20 “Which one’s the playful one ? ” Child looks for a playful cat . Child knows what she likes . Searcher 41 : 00 “I don’t want to name my kitty . ” Child doesn’t name her cat when prompted to by the computer . Child knows what she likes . 41 : 30 “That’s to give milk . ” Child clicks on different icons to see what they do . Tests out what can be done . Explorer Make technology easy to explore . Table 1 : Portion of a contextual inquiry diagram created by adults child and adult perspectives are captured . It is interesting to note , that many times child researchers offered summaries of the data that enabled adult partners to see something they had originally missed . Participatory Design The second technique that comprises cooperative inquiry was adapted from participatory design . This is not to say that participatory design techniques must follow contextual inquiry . However , we did find that contextual inquiry enabled us to first explore numerous ideas through observation . Then , during our data visualization , we could focus on an area of interest to pursue in more depth with participatory design prototyping . For example , our contextual inquiry observations led to an understanding that children wanted to be storytellers with technology . This insight was taken into a participatory design session where low - tech materials were used to prototype storytelling technologies for the future . Later in this paper examples of the storytelling technologies that were ultimately developed will be discussed . In general , I have found that children ages 7 - 10 years old make the most effective prototyping partners [ 10 ] . These children are verbal and self - reflective enough to discuss what they are thinking . They can understand the abstract idea of designing something with low - tech protoyping tools that will be turned into future technologies . Children at this age , however , don’t seem to be too heavily burdened with pre - conceived notions of the way things “are supposed to be” , something we typically see in children older than 10 years [ 10 ] . It is interesting to note that low - tech prototyping is deceivingly simple . It seems that all that is needed are some art supplies , a few children and some adults . But what makes it a difficult process for many adults is relating to children as design partners . Many adults are not quite sure how much they should allow a child to lead and how much they should lead . For example , some adults prefer to sit back and let the children do all the work— they assume that since the art supplies are child - like then the design process is only for children . This is not true . Children and adults must work together . No partner should make all the design decisions , child or adult . In addition , the selection of low - tech protoyping tools is critical . Some researchers feel that it matters very little what materials are given , and that the ideas will emerge whatever the resources . Others feel that a standardized box of materials can be developed for all occasions [ Personal Communication , April 1998 ] . I disagree with both approaches . We have found that the materials need to be purchased with some care to reflect the area of research the team is exploring [ 10 ] . For example , the materials I had purchased for a particular session ended up being limited and frustrating to the design team . However the week before , when prototyping a different idea , these same materials ( e . g . , clay , string , paper , crayons ) were just fine . Whatever the case , the low - tech prototyping materials matter and the team dynamics are critical . This process takes time to understand and facilitate well . Low - tech prototyping is a much more effective design tool when done in concert with contextual inquiry . Based on design ideas that have emerged from contextual inquiry notes , protoyping can focus discussion and be a bridge for collaborative brainstorming activities . Technology Immersion Finally , the third technique of cooperative inquiry is what I have come to call technology immersion [ 8 ] . This process grew out of a need to see how children use large amounts of technology over a concentrated period of time . If children are only observed with the technology resources they currently have , then what children might do in the future with better circumstances could be missed [ 10 ] . Many children still have minimal access to technology in their homes or school . If time is not a limiting factor then access to the newest technologies can be . However , in the future we see these limitations changing . Therefore , by establishing today a technology - rich , time - intensive environment for children , the observation techniques of contextual inquiry can be used to capture many activity patterns that might otherwise be over - looked . With technology immersion , it is critical that children not only have access to technology in a concentrated way , but are also decision - makers about what they do in that environment . Children must be asked to make their own choices when using different kinds of technology . There must be enough technology options so that no child ever has to share a computer if he or she does not choose . There must also be enough time so that children can accomplish a task that is meaningful . Without these ingredients , it is difficult to understand children’s technology wants or needs . If adults are fully in control , then the activity patterns seen are those of adults , not children . I have initiated such technology immersion experiences in my own labs . In addition , I also had the opportunity to establish a technology immersion experience at ACM’s CHI 96 conference . This particular experience has come to be called CHIkids and is now an on - going part of the annual CHI conferences [ 8 ] . At CHIkids , children explore technology over five days , 10 hours a day , by being multimedia storytellers , software testers , newsroom reporters , and more . This technology immersion experience has come to be more than just another way to understand what children want in technology . It has come to be a way to bring children into the CHI conference as active participants and partners . In a sense , CHIkids can be said to be a very large intergenerational design team ( at CHI 98 we had over 65 child and 25 adult participants ) . But not every technology immersion experience needs to be on the scale of CHIkids . Our design team recently shared an experience between six children and six adults over 10 days , 8 hours a day . In those 10 days we came to understand more about children’s activity patterns and roles than in the last six months of our research combined . This is not to say that a technology immersion experience isn’t exhausting . It is . It may be the most difficult of the cooperative inquiry techniques , since it is so intense . In addition , during such an experience , tempers can flare , energy wears thin ; the space never seems to be big enough ; but all in all , it is an exciting experience to see what children can do with technology [ 8 ] . Technology immersion in combination with contextual inquiry and low - tech prototyping can be extremely effective in highlighting patterns and roles that are not obvious in short contextual inquiry sessions . We have found technology immersion experiences most useful after initial contextual inquiry and participatory design sessions have been done . COOPERATIVE INQUIRY IN PRACTICE Two projects over the past three years demonstrate our use of the cooperative inquiry process . When we began these projects , our methodology was still being developed , and what we did wasn’t even given a name . Over time , the common research practices became more obvious , and cooperative inquiry took form . In a sense , cooperative inquiry was as much a part of what our design teams developed , as the technology that was created . KidPad KidPad was our first example of using cooperative inquiry [ 10 , 11 ] . This technology , based upon Pad + + [ 4 ] , was first developed at the University of New Mexico and continues to be developed at the University of Maryland . KidPad is a zooming storytelling tool that enables children to collaboratively create stories ( see Figure 2 ) . The act of zooming from one story object to the next , makes visually explicit where children are going and where they have been . In traditional applications that don’t use zooming to navigate , different objects that are semantically related are linked visually by jumping from one object to the next ( e . g . , links on the web ) . Children have explained this as “…closing your eyes and when you open them you’re in a new place . Zooming lets you keep your eyes open” [ 10 ] . Figure 2 : “The Eye” , a story made in KidPad In one example shown above ( see Figure 2 ) , a group of three Native American children ( age 8 ) from New Mexico created a zooming story . It was about an eye “that could see what you looked like on the outside and on the inside , and even more on the inside . It could see your questions . ” In their story , the eye had special powers and could zoom in to see that the boy felt like a girl inside . The eye could zoom in even more and see the boy was asking why this was so . The story ended with the eye explaining to the boy , “You are both inside and outside . There is no reason to ask why” [ Research notes , October 1996 ] . To develop KidPad , a team of educators and computer scientists worked with over 40 children ( ages 8 - 10 ) in the New Mexico public schools . While we had not yet established an on - going intergenerational design team , the techniques of cooperative inquiry were used in formative studies . A version of contextual inquiry was used where only adults were observers , but the diagramming techniques previously described were used . Low - tech prototyping also contributed to our ideas , but was done only on special occasions for conference tutorials and industry workshops . At both CHI 96 and CHI 97 , KidPad was tested during the technology immersion experience of CHIkids . All of these early cooperative inquiry techniques led to the development of KidPad . Children told us in many ways that they wanted to be collaborative storytellers using technology . Our work continues today on a collaborative version of KidPad where two mice can be used simultaneously to create zooming stories [ 31 ] . For more details on the KidPad environment see [ 11 ] . PETS Another research project we have developed using cooperative inquiry techniques is PETS : a Personal Electronic Teller of Stories ( see Figure 3 ) . While this is also a storytelling technology , it is quite different from KidPad . The PETS environment makes use of physical robotic animal parts to enable children to build fanciful animals that can act out the stories they write . This project is being developed at the University of Maryland with our intergenerational team of researchers . We began our work on this project by conducting field research in the university’s robotics labs , using the contextual inquiry techniques previously described . Participatory design sessions with low - tech prototyping followed . From this , high - tech prototypes were begun . Over the summer , we had a technology immersion experience where we solidified our ideas and developed new directions for the future . For more details on the PETS research , see the CHI 99 video paper , in these conference proceedings . Figure 3 : PETS robotic storytelling animal DESIGN - CENTERED LEARNING Typically when people consider the outcome of a design process , it is the technology that is discussed . To me , this is important , but is not the only result of my work . I find what the team members can learn as a result of the research and development experience to be critical . There are many references to this learning as an outcome of the cooperative or participatory design process [ 12 , 15 , 22 ] . In addition , there are also educational researchers that refer to this kind of learning as a community of practice [ 19 ] . They describe this to be a community of people with different skills that learn as they work toward shared goals . This leaning experience has also been described by Shneiderman as Relate—Create—Donate , where students can have a meaningful learning experience with technology by using it to perform a service to the community [ 30 ] . I give the name design - centered learning to learning outcomes that can be related to the cooperative inquiry process . Design - centered learning occurs in both children and adults , novices and technology experts , technical and non - technical professionals . When diverse people partner together in the research and design process , design - centered learning can emerge . By surveying an intergenerational team over time , I have seen five areas of self - reported design - centered learning [ Research notes , August 1998 ] : ( 1 ) I learned about the design process All team members discussed understanding the technology design process in new ways . ( 2 ) I learned respect for my design partners Both adults and children discussed their mutual appreciation for the work that the other could accomplish . ( 3 ) I learned to communicate and collaborate in a team Children and adults discussed the difficulties and the rewards of learning team communication and collaboration skills . ( 4 ) I learned new technology skills and knowledge All team members mentioned technical skills they had come to learn ( e . g . , building robots , designing software ) . ( 5 ) I learned new content knowledge In the case of the team working on the PETS project , children and adults discussed learning more about animals . Table 2 : Self - reported design - centered learning These design - centered learning outcomes were summarized after children and adult team members were asked to write on Post - It Notes what they thought they might have learned from their team research experience . Each participant voluntarily wrote ideas . When all were done , the notes were stuck on a whiteboard to analyze by the team . This summary was completed after working together for six months ( Phase I of our research ) . A second study on Phase II will be performed using a variety of data collection methods after a year of team work . It is expected that this study will describe intergenerational team changes in communication , collaboration , and design - centered learning . SUMMARY In summary , cooperative inquiry has been developed to support intergenerational design teams in developing new technologies for children , with children . While this approach requires time , resources , and the desire to work with children , I have found it a thought - provoking and rewarding experience . Cooperative inquiry can lead to exciting results in the development of new technologies and design - centered learning . The cooperative inquiry methodology continues to evolve as we use the techniques over time . In addition , a new intergenerational team will be established shortly at the University of Maryland that will be compared to the existing team . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Over the years , this work could not have taken shape without the support , talents , and inspiration of numerous partners . Child partners in New Mexico include students at the Lowell and Hawthorne elementary schools . Child partners at the University of Maryland include Alex , Hanne , Isabella , Lauren , Rebecca and Thomas . Adult collaborators at the University of Maryland and New Mexico include Ben Bederson , Jim Hendler , Jaime Montemayor , Jason Stewart , Angela Boltman , Britt McAlister , Eric Fiterman , Aurelie Plaisant , Debbie Knotts , and Adrian Miura . And on - going inspiration and intellectual discussion had come by way of Ben Shneiderman , Catherine Plaisant , Anne Rose , Joseph JaJa , and Stan Bennett . Financial support has come from the Sony Corporation , the Intel Research Council , and DARPA’s H - CI Initiative ( # N66001 - 94 - C - 6039 ) . To all of you , my deepest thanks . REFERENCES 1 . Proceedings of PDC ' 90 : Participatory Design Conference ( 1990 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility . 2 . Proceedings of PDC ' 96 : Participatory Design Conference ( 1996 ) . Cambridge , MA : Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility . 3 . Report to the President on the use of technology to strengthen K - 12 education in the United States ( 1997 ) . President ' s Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology , Executive Office of the President of the United States , Washington , DC . 4 . Bederson , B . , Hollan , J . , Perlin , K . , Meyer , J . , Bacon , D . , & Furnas , G . ( 1996 ) . Pad + + : A zoomable graphical sketchpad for exploring alternate interface physics . Journal of Visual Languages and Computing , 7 , 3 - 31 . 5 . Beyer , H . , & Holtzblatt , K . ( 1998 ) . Contextual design : defining customer - centered systems . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . 6 . Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . , & Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) , ( 1987 ) . Computers and democracy : A Scandinavian challenge . Aldershot , UK : Alebury . 7 . B ˘ dker , S . ( 1991 ) . Through the interface : A human activity approach to user interface design . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 8 . Boltman , A . , Druin , A . , & Miura , A . ( 1998 ) . What children can tell us about technology : The CHIkids model of technology immersion . CHI 98 Tutorial , ACM Press . 9 . Druin , A . ( 1996 ) . A place called childhood . Interactions , 3 ( 1 ) , 17 - 22 . 10 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Boltman , A . , Miura , A . , Knotts - Callahan , D . , & Platt , M . ( 1999 ) . Children as our technology design partners . A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children ' s technology ( pp . 51 - 72 ) . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . 11 . Druin , A . , Stewart , J . , Proft , D . , Bederson , B . , & Hollan , J . ( 1997 ) . KidPad : A design collaboration between children , technologists , and educators . In Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 97 ) ACM Press , pp . 463 - 470 . 12 . Ehn , P . ( 1993 ) . Scandinavian design : On participation and skill . D . Schuler , & A . Namioka ( Eds . ) , Participatory design : Principles and practices ( pp . 41 - 77 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 13 . Erickson , K . , & Stull , D . ( 1998 ) . Doing team ethnography : Warnings and advise . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 14 . Fulton , K . ( 1997 ) . Learning in the digital age : Insights into the issues . Santa Monica , CA : Milken Exchange on Education Technology . 15 . Greenbaum , J . ( 1993 ) . A design of one ' s own : Toward participatory design in the United States . D . Schuler , & A . Namioka ( Eds . ) , Participatory design : Principles and practices ( pp . 27 - 37 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 16 . Greenbaum , J . , & Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) , ( 1991 ) . Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 17 . Heller , S . ( 1998 , August ) . The meaning of children in culture becomes a focal point for scholars . The Chronicle of Higher Education , pp . A14 - A16 . 18 . Holtzblatt , K . , & Jones , S . ( 1995 ) . R . M . Baecker , J . Grudin , W . A . S . Buxton , & S . Greenberg ( Eds . ) , Readings in Human - Computer Interaction : Toward the year 2000 ( 2nd ed . ) . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . 19 . Lave , J . ( 1992 ) . Cognition in practice . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 20 . Loh , B . , Radinsky , J . , Rusell , E . , Gomez , L . M . , Reiser , B . J . , & Edelson , D . C . ( 1998 ) . The progress portfolio : Designing reflective tools for a classroom context . In Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 98 ) ACM Press , pp . 627 - 634 . 21 . Muller , M . J . , Wildman , D . M . , & White , E . A . ( 1994 ) . Participatory design through games and other techniques . CHI 94 Tutorial , ACM Press . 22 . Mumford , E . , & Henshall , D . ( 1979 / 1983 ) . Designing participatively : A participative approach to computer systems design . UK : Manchester Business School . 23 . Nardi , B . ( Ed . ) , ( 1996 ) . Context and consciousness : Activity theory and Human - Computer Interaction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 24 . Nielsen , J . ( 1995 ) . Scenarios in discount usability engineering . J . Carroll ( Ed . ) , Scenario - based design : Envisioning work and technology in system development ( pp . 151 - 167 ) . New York : Wiley . 25 . Nielsen , J . , & Mack , R . L . ( 1994 ) . Usability inspection methods . New York : Wiley . 26 . Oosterholt , R . , Kusano , M . , & de Vries , G . ( 1996 ) . Interaction design and human factors support in the development of a personal communicator for children . In Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 96 ) ACM Press , pp . 450 - 457 . 27 . Scaife , M . , & Rogers , Y . ( 1999 ) . Kids as informants : Telling us what we didn ' t know or confirming what we knew already . A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children ' s technology ( pp . 27 - 50 ) . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . 28 . Scaife , M . , Rogers , Y . , Aldrich , F . , & Davies , M . ( 1997 ) . Designing for or designing with ? Informant design for interactive learning environments . In Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 97 ) ACM Press , pp . 343 - 350 . 29 . Schuler , D . , & Namioka , A . ( Eds . ) , ( 1993 ) . Participatory design : Principles and practices . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 30 . Shneiderman , B . ( 1998 ) . Relate - - Create - - Donate : A teaching / learning philosophy for cyber - generation . Computers and Education , pp . 1 - 15 . 31 . Stewart , J . , Raybourn , E . , Bederson , B . B . , & Druin , A . ( 1998 ) . When two hands are better than one : Enhancing collaboration using single display groupware . In Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 98 ) ACM Press , pp . 287 - 288 . 32 . Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) . Plans and situated actions . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .