a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0602005v2 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 9 F e b 2006 Filamin cross - linked semiﬂexible networks : Fragility under strain B . A . DiDonna Institute for Mathematics and its Applications , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , MN 55455 - 0436 , USA Alex J . Levine Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of California , Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA ( Dated : October 8 , 2018 ) The semiﬂexible F - actin network of the cytoskeleton is cross - linked by a variety of proteins in - cluding ﬁlamin , which contain Ig - domains that unfold under applied tension . We examine a simple semiﬂexible network model cross - linked by such unfolding linkers that captures the main mechan - ical features of F - actin networks cross - linked by ﬁlamin proteins and show that under suﬃciently high strain the network spontaneously self - organizes so that an appreciable fraction of the ﬁlamin cross - linkers are at the threshold of domain unfolding . We propose an explanation of this organiza - tion based on a mean - ﬁeld model and suggest a qualitative experimental signature of this type of network reorganization under applied strain that may be observable in intracellular microrheology experiments of Crocker et al . . PACS numbers : 87 . 16Ka , 82 . 35 . Rs , 62 . 20 . Dc The cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells is a cross - linked biopolymer network [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] . Its principal constituent is a stiﬀ protein aggregate ( F - actin ) that is cross - linked densely on the scale of its own thermal persistence length . Because of the combination of ﬁlament stiﬀness and dense cross - linking this semiﬂexible polymer gel diﬀers funda - mentally from the better understood ﬂexible polymer gels that are the products of modern synthetic chemistry . There has been considerable progress in understanding the complex relationship between the mechanical proper - ties of semiﬂexible networks and the mechanical proper - ties of their constituent ﬁlaments [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 ] . Since much of this work addresses highly simpliﬁed sys - tems , one may ask how well does the current understand - ing of semiﬂexible networks elucidate the rheology of the cytoskeleton , which is a highly heterogenous chemical system . Cytoskeletal ﬁlaments are polydisperse in length and have a greater distribution of mechanical properties ( due to e . g . ﬁlament bundling ) than the model semi - ﬂexible network systems studied . Furthermore these ﬁla - ments are cross - linked by a plethora of highly structured proteins that play an active role in generating internal stresses and in sensing externally imposed stress . One class of cross - linking proteins contain numerous repeat domains , such as titin [ 12 , 13 ] and ﬁlamin [ 14 , 15 ] that unfold reversibly at a critical pulling force . In order to begin to address the mechanical eﬀect of this chemical heterogeneity in the cytoskeleton , we inves - tigate networks cross - linked by ﬁlamin – like proteins con - taining multiple unfolding domains . We ﬁnd that , above a certain strain threshold , the population of cross - links at given tension grows rapidly up to the critical unfolding tension of the domains . Thus , the system appears to self - consistently adjust its mechanical properties so as to reach a highly fragile state in which a large fraction of its cross - linkers are poised at the unbinding transition of FIG . 1 : ( color online ) Model network showing the F - actin ﬁlaments in blue and the ﬁlamin cross - linking agents in red . their internal domains . The evolution of this high suscep - tibility state in which the system responds to small stress ﬂuctuations with anomalously large strain ﬂuctuations may contribute to the large nonthermal low - frequency in - tracellular strain ﬂuctuations as measured by Hoﬀman et el . [ 16 ] . The network may evolve into this high suscepti - bility state under the action of internal molecular motors ( e . g . myosin – not considered in our model ) so that small ﬂuctuations in motor protein activity leads to the coordi - nated unfolding of numerous ﬁlamin cross - linkers and the consequent large - scale cytoskeletal rearrangement event . We study via numerical simulation a random , statis - tically homogeneous , two - dimensional , isotropic ﬁlament network . These networks are formed in a manner iden - tical to that of Head et al . [ 8 ] . At ﬁlament intersections we add a cross - linker of zero rest length that exerts con - straint forces but no constraint torques . A model network 2 constructed by this procedure is shown in Fig . 1 . The ﬁl - ament sections between crosslinks are modeled as linear springs with ﬁxed elastic constant per unit length . The nonlinear behavior of semiﬂexible networks with freely rotating cross - links has been shown to be dominated by semiﬂexible ﬁlament stretching instead of bending [ 17 ] , so we neglect ﬁlament bending . We anticipate that the results derived here are essentially independent of net - work dimensionality since network connectivity , not the dimensionality of the space in which the network is em - bedded , should control the collective mechanical proper - ties of the system . At forces below the unfolding force , the force extension relation of the ﬁlamin cross - linkers is that of a worm - like chain [ 18 ] . When an Ig domain unfolds the contour length of the ﬁlamin increases , adding enough length to relax most of the tension at ﬁxed extension . For simplicity , we model the ﬁlamin as a simple spring with spring con - stant k f and we take the additional contour length gen - erated during any unfolding event ℓ f to be a constant . The critical unfolding force of a domain is k f ℓ f . We ne - glect the the rate - dependence of this unfolding force [ 19 ] . Though the physiological ﬁlament cross - linkers have a ﬁ - nite number of unfolding domains ( 24 ) , we will take our sawtooth force extension curve to have an inﬁnite number of branches . The network is sheared using Lees - Edwards boundary conditions . At the beginning of each strain step all nodes are moved aﬃnely , then the node positions are relaxed through a conjugate gradient routine to a point of local force equilibrium . Since the cross - linker force extension curve is a sawtooth , there are many possible equilibrium states of the network . In principal , the multiplicity of equilibrium states requires us to use strain steps result - ing in displacements smaller than the sawtooth length ℓ f so that equilibrium is achieved at the smallest ﬁlamin extension . To reduce computational overhead we use a two step equilibration procedure that ﬁnds a state close to desired one , but allows for large strain steps . In the ﬁrst equilibration step , we replace the sawtooth force law for all cross - linkers by the following force law : f = ( k f x | x | < ℓ f , k f ℓ f | x | ≥ ℓ f . ( 1 ) The combined network of linear elastic ﬁlaments and con - stant force cross - links is equilibrated . We then reimpose a sawtooth force law for the cross - linkers and equilibrate the network a second time . As the network relaxes dur - ing this ﬁnal equilibration step , the force on each ﬁlamin must be less than k f ℓ f , so the cross - links will stay on the same sawtooth branch . Since the rest of the network was originally equilibrated at the critical pulling force , the sawtooth force law could not have reached force equilib - rium on any earlier sawtooth branch assuming all ﬁlamin linkers act independently . In practice , collective relax - 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 ( ℓ / ℓ f ) modulo 1 n o r m a li ze d c o un t FIG . 2 : ( color online ) Distribution of normalized cross - linker lengths ℓ / ℓ f modulo 1 in equilibrated networks with , from shallowest to steepest slopes respectively , k f = 100 , 200 , 600 , 2000 , 4000 , and 10000 . ations of the network push individual cross - links onto diﬀerent sawtooth branches in this ﬁnal step . We found , however , that such coordinated relaxation events had a negligible quantitative eﬀect on the data . We present data for networks composed of monodis - perse ﬁlaments of length ℓ R = 0 . 2 ( all lengths are mea - sured in units of the length of the square simulation box ) at a ﬁlament density such that there are on average 30 cross - links per ﬁlament . For these values we ﬁnd negli - gible system - size eﬀects . The length of the ﬁlamin do - mains is given by ℓ f = 1 . 3 × 10 − 4 , or ℓ f / ℓ c = 0 . 02 . This ratio is about ten times smaller than the expected phys - iological value [ 20 , 21 ] . We choose the smaller value of ℓ f / ℓ c because it enhances the eﬀects we were measur - ing ; our initial studies at physiological values of ℓ f / ℓ c ﬁnd qualitatively similar results , but the onset of non - linear eﬀects occurred at higher strain values [ 23 ] . To ﬁx an energy scale we set the extensional modulus µ of the ﬁlaments to unity . The average spring constant for a ﬁlament segment can then be determined from the mean distance between cross - links : k R = 1 / h ℓ c i = 150 . The range of cross - linker spring constant values studied here is 10 1 < k f < 10 4 . Figure 2 shows the measured equilibrium distribu - tions of cross - link lengths , modulo the sawtooth length ℓ f , for a representative set of strained networks with ℓ f = 1 . 3 × 10 − 4 and several values of spring constant k f . For values of k f < 10 × h k R i the statistical weight for ﬁnding a cross - link extension ( modulo ℓ f ) is expo - nentially enhanced towards length ℓ f where the domains unbind . For values k f > 10 × h k R i the statistical weight for ﬁnding a cross - link extension ( modulo ℓ f ) grows faster than exponentially near length ℓ f . The enhancement of the number of such ﬁlamins poised at the unbinding tran - sition ( critical cross - linkers ) is one of principal results of our work . Apart from the noise ﬂoor , the shape of the 3 distribution appears to be strain independent . To understand the growth of the critical cross - linker population , we consider a mean - ﬁeld model for the be - havior of a single cross - link in an eﬀective elastic medium representing the rest of the network . The surrounding eﬀective medium is modeled as a single harmonic spring with spring constant k . Reﬂecting the network structure , the cross - linker is connected in series with the eﬀective network spring . We set the total strain on the two springs in series ( by ﬁxing their total length ) so that the cross - link has crossed at least one branch of the sawtooth func - tion . Upon the further application of extensional strain , the two springs in series will both linearly increase their extension until the ﬁlamin spring with spring constant k f reaches is maximum force k f ℓ f where it is poised at the top of its saw - tooth force - extension curve . Now consider an inﬁnitesimal increase in the total ex - tension that drives the unfolding of one more ﬁlamin do - main . Before the extension the two springs were in force balance so that k f ℓ f = kx where x represents the ex - tension of the medium spring . After the inﬁnitesimal extension , the system achieves force balance on the next branch of the saw - tooth ﬁlamin force - extension curve so that extension of the ﬁlamin spring is now increased by ℓ f − d while the extension of the medium spring is de - creased to x − ( ℓ f − d ) . Force balance requires that d , the distance between the current extension of the ﬁlamin spring and the edge of the next saw - tooth , is given by d ( k ) = kℓ f / ( k + k f ) . In other words , the combined sys - tem once equilibrated with the ﬁlamin spring at its max - imal force is now equilibrated with that ﬁlamin spring on its next saw - tooth branch at a smaller force . The strain in the surrounding medium has also decreased due to the extension of one more ﬁlamin domain . To maintain force balance , the ﬁlamin spring cannot relax its length more than ℓ f − d . Upon further exten - sion the ﬁlamin spring will only extend until another do - main unbinds . Thus in steady - state the ﬁlamin spring will evenly sample all extensions ( modulo ℓ f ) between ℓ f − d ( k ) and ℓ f . For a given value of the spring constant of the medium we expect that the extensions ( modulo ℓ f ) of the ﬁlamin cross - linkers x f to be uniformly distributed between the bounds given above so that this distribution can be written as P ( x f , k ) = 1 d ( k ) Θ ( x f − [ ℓ f − d ( k ) ] ) , ( 2 ) where Θ is a step - function . Diﬀerent cross - links in the network , however , will not have the same local environ - ments ; the values of k will be sampled from some statisti - cal distribution K ( k ) . Integrating over that distribution we write the probability of ﬁnding a given ﬁlamin length ( modulo ℓ f ) x f : P ( x f ) = Z ∞ k f ℓf − xf xf k + k f ℓ f k K ( k ) dk . ( 3 ) 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 k eff n o r m a li ze d c o un t FIG . 3 : Distribution of local eﬀective spring constants , sam - pled on small sets of highly stretched ﬁlamin cross - linkers with k f = 600 . The solid line is a ﬁt to Eq . 4 with k / ¯ k set to 7 . 3 . The step function ﬁxes the lower limit on the k - integral . We examine the distribution of the local spring con - stants in the random network and concentrate on the high - k tail of that distribution . One may imagine that the eﬀective spring constant representing the medium can be represented as a small number of chains of springs . Each chain of springs represents one path for force prop - agation through the random network ; it is made up of a large number of statistically independent springs con - nected in series . In order to ﬁnd an extremely large value of the eﬀective spring constant k it must be that for one of the force paths all of the constituent spring constants are large , since the compliance of the springs in series will be dominated by any single soft spring . We expect the probability of such a rare event to be Poisson distributed so that , in the high - k tail , the distribution K ( k ) takes the form K ( k ) ∼ H ( k ) e − k / ¯ k ( 4 ) where H is some regular function characterizing the small - k behavior of the distribution ( H ( x ) → const as x → ∞ ) and the constant ¯ k is undetermined . Combining Eqs . 3 , 4 we ﬁnd that P ( x f ) takes the form P ( x f ) ≃ ¯ k ℓ f exp (cid:18) k f ( x f − ℓ f ) ¯ kx f (cid:19) + k f ℓ f Γ (cid:18) 0 , k f ( ℓ f − x f ) ¯ kx f (cid:19) ( 5 ) as long as k f ℓ f − x f x f is large enough that K ( k ) within the integral in Eq . 3 can be replaced by its high - k asymptotic form . Eq . 5 shows the sought after exponential peak as x f −→ ℓ f . Using Eq . 5 we may determine the ratio k f / ¯ k using the slope of the numerically measured distribution of x f shown in Figure 2 . From ﬁtting the data for k f = 600 we 4 ﬁnd that k f / ¯ k = 7 . 3 . By numerically sampling the local mechanical response in many realizations of the network , we independently verify the principal physical insight in the above discussion : for small values of k f , K ( k ) appears to have an exponential tail in the stiﬀ spring limit . This data is presented in Fig . 3 for k f = 600 . The ﬁtted line demonstrates that the high k tail of this data is consitent with a value of k / ¯ k = 7 . 3 . The agreement between the two independently determined values of ¯ k supports our analysis . In upcoming work , we demonstrate that for higher k f the distribution function K ( k ) takes a diﬀerent form , but it is still related to the distribution function P ( x f ) via Eq . 3 [ 22 ] . This latter equation should apply for general distributions K ( k ) . We have found that the strained ﬁlamin cross - linked network develops into a highly fragile mechanical state in which a large fraction of the cross - linking ﬁlamins reach a critical state where they are poised at the brink of domain unfolding . The presence of ﬂuctuating internal stresses in the cytoskeleton produced by molecular motor activ - ity and / or equilibrium ﬂuctuations can act on this highly fragile state to produce large strain ﬂuctuations due to the correlated failure of numerous critical cross - linkers . Thus , the observation of the formation of this critical state under applied stress may explain a particular fea - ture of the observed low - frequency strain ﬂuctuations as observed by intracellular microrheology . We have presented a simple , mean - ﬁeld theory to ex - plain the evolution of this fragile state under applied strain . There are a number of extensions of this work that remain to be considered . Foremost among these is the exploration of the eﬀect of ﬁlamin - type cross - linkers in semiﬂexible gels where the ﬁlaments each have a ﬁ - nite bending modulus . In addition , the development of a complete model that includes the eﬀect of internally generated random stresses due to the action of molecu - lar motors will be an important step towards the direct calculation of the low - frequency dynamics of this biopoly - mer gel of fundamental biological importance . BD and AJL thank J . C . Crocker for providing unpub - lished data and for enjoyable discussions . BD also thanks David Morse for enlightening discussions . AJL was sup - ported in part by nsf - dmr0354113 . BD acknowledges the hospitality of the UCLA department of Chemistry and the California Nanoscience Institute where part of this work was done . BD also acknowledges partial support from nsf - dmr0354113 and the Institute for Mathematics and its Applications with funds provided by the National Science Foundation . [ 1 ] B . Alberts , D . Bray , J . Lewis , M . Raﬀ , K . Roberts , and J . D . Watson , Molecular Biology of the Cell , 3rd edition ( Garland , New York , 1994 ) ; P . A . Janmey Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 , 4 ( 1991 ) . [ 2 ] T . D . Pollard and J . A . Cooper , Ann . Rev . Biochem . 55 987 ( 1986 ) . [ 3 ] E . L . Elson Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biochem . 17 , 397 ( 1988 ) . [ 4 ] P . A . Janmey , S . Hvidt , J . Lamb , T . P . Stossel Nature 345 , 89 ( 1990 ) . [ 5 ] K . Kroy and E . Frey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 306 ( 1996 ) . [ 6 ] R . Satcher and C . Dewey , Biophys . J . 71 109 ( 1996 ) . [ 7 ] F . C . MacKintosh , J . K¨as and P . A . Janmey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 4425 ( 1995 ) . [ 8 ] D . A . Head , A . J . Levine and F . C . MacKintosh , Phys . Rev . Lett 91 , 108102 ( 2003 ) , D . A . Head , F . C . MacK - intosh and A . J . Levine , Phys . Rev . E 68 , 025101 ( R ) ( 2003 ) , D . A . Head , F . C . MacKintosh and A . J . Levine , Phys . Rev . E 68 , 061907 ( 2003 ) , Alex J . Levine , D . A . Head , and F . C . MacKintosh J . Phys . : Condens . Mat . 16 , S2079 ( 2004 ) , D . A . Head , A . J . Levine , and F . C . MacK - intosh Phys . Rev . E Accepted for publication ( 2005 ) . [ 9 ] J . Wilhelm and E . Frey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 108103 ( 2003 ) [ 10 ] B . A . DiDonna and T . C . Lubensky Phys . Rev . E Accepted for publication ( 2006 ) . [ 11 ] M . L . Gardel , J . H . Shin , F . C . MacKintosh , L . Mahade - van , P . Matsudaira , D . A . Weitz Scince 304 , 1301 ( 2004 ) . [ 12 ] S . Labeit and B . Kolmerer Science 270 , 236 ( 1995 ) . [ 13 ] M . Rief , M . Gautel , F . Oesterhelt , J . M . Fernandez , H . E . Gaub Science 276 , 1109 ( 1997 ) . [ 14 ] I . Schwaiger , A . Kardinal , M . Schleicher , A . A . Noegel , and M . Reif Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 81 ( 2004 ) . [ 15 ] D . J . Brockwell , G . S . Beddard , E . Paci , D . K . West , P . D . Olmsted D . A . Smith , and S . E . Radford Biophys . J . —bf 89 , 506 ( 2005 ) . [ 16 ] B . D . Hoﬀman , G . Massiera , and J . C . Crocker cond - mat / 0504051 ( 2005 ) . [ 17 ] P . R . Onck , T . Koeman , T . van Dillen , and E . van der Giessen cond - mat / 0502397 ( 2005 ) . [ 18 ] J . F . Marko and E . Siggia Macromol . 28 , 8759 ( 1995 ) . [ 19 ] E . Evans and K . Ritchie Biophys . J . 72 , 1541 ( 1997 ) . [ 20 ] E . Frey , K . Kroy and J . Wilhelm , in Dynamical Networks in Physics and Biology , ed . D . Beysens and G . Forgacs ( EDP Sciences , Springer , Berlin , 1998 ) . [ 21 ] Furuike , S . , T . Ito , and M . Yamazaki , Febs Letters 498 , 72 ( 2001 ) . [ 22 ] B . A . Didonna and A . J . Levine in progress ( 2006 ) . [ 23 ] Non - linear eﬀects may occur at vanishingly small stain in a prestressed network as found in the cytoskeleton . The eﬀects of prestress will be explored in future work [ 22 ] .