Cell Stem Cell Resource Gene Targeting of a Disease - Related Gene in Human Induced Pluripotent Stem and Embryonic Stem Cells Jizhong Zou , 1 Morgan L . Maeder , 6 Prashant Mali , 1 , 2 Shondra M . Pruett - Miller , 7 Stacey Thibodeau - Beganny , 6 Bin - Kuan Chou , 1 , 3 Guibin Chen , 1 Zhaohui Ye , 1 , 4 In - Hyun Park , 8 , 9 , 11 George Q . Daley , 8 , 9 , 11 Matthew H . Porteus , 7 , * J . Keith Joung , 6 , 10 , * and Linzhao Cheng 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , * 1 Stem Cell Program , Institute for Cell Engineering 2 Graduate Program in Biomedical Engineering 3 Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine 4 Graduate Program in Immunology 5 Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21205 , USA 6 Molecular Pathology Unit , Center for Cancer Research , and Center for Computational and Integrative Biology , Massachusetts General Hospital , Charlestown , MA 02129 , USA 7 Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 , USA 8 Division of Pediatric Hematology / Oncology , Children’s Hospital Boston , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 9 Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology 10 Department of Pathology Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 11 Harvard Stem Cell Institute , 42 Church Street , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA * Correspondence : matthew . porteus @ utsouthwestern . edu ( M . H . P . ) , jjoung @ partners . org ( J . K . J . ) , lcheng @ welch . jhu . edu ( L . C . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2009 . 05 . 023 SUMMARY We report here homologous recombination ( HR ) - mediated gene targeting of two different genes in human iPS cells ( hiPSCs ) and human ES cells ( hESCs ) . HR - mediated correction of a chromoso - mally integrated mutant GFP reporter gene reaches efﬁciencies of 0 . 14 % – 0 . 24 % in both cell types trans - fected by donor DNA with plasmids expressing zinc ﬁnger nucleases ( ZFNs ) . Engineered ZFNs that in - duce a sequence - speciﬁc double - strand break in the GFP gene enhanced HR - mediated correction by > 1400 - fold without detectable alterations in stem cell karyotypes or pluripotency . Efﬁcient HR - medi - ated insertional mutagenesis was also achieved at the endogenous PIG - A locus , with a > 200 - fold enhancement by ZFNs targeted to that gene . Clonal PIG - A null hESCs and iPSCs with normal karyotypes were readily obtained . The phenotypic and biological defects were rescued by PIG - A transgene expres - sion . Our study provides the ﬁrst demonstration of HR - mediated gene targeting in hiPSCs and shows the power of ZFNs for inducing speciﬁc genetic modiﬁcations in hiPSCs , as well as hESCs . INTRODUCTION Human embryonic stem cells ( hESCs ) derived from blastocyst - stage embryos can self - renew indeﬁnitely in culture while retain - ing their pluripotency ( Reubinoff et al . , 2000 ; Thomson et al . , 1998 ) . Recently , human somatic cells have been successfully reprogrammed into induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) that exhibit unique characteristics similar to hESCs ( Lowry et al . , 2008 ; Mali et al . , 2008 ; Park et al . , 2008 ; Takahashi et al . , 2007 ; Yu et al . , 2007 ) . Patient - speciﬁc iPSCs hold enormous promise for personalized cell replacement therapy , as well as for research of various human diseases . Full utilization of these human pluripotent stem cells ( hPSCs ) will require the develop - ment of efﬁcient methods for performing gene targeting , a sequence - speciﬁc and permanent genome modiﬁcation that exploits the cell’s ability to perform homologous recombination ( HR ) . Gene targeting by HR has played a critical role in genetic studies of various systems , including the generation of kno - ckout / knockin transgenic mouse models using mouse ESCs . The efﬁciency of HR - mediated gene targeting in hESCs , ho - wever , remains low even 10 years after its ﬁrst report ( Thomson et al . , 1998 ) , with only few successful studies published to date using the method that is routinely performed in mouse ESCs ( Costa et al . , 2007 ; Davis et al . , 2008 ; Di Domenico et al . , 2008 ; Irion et al . , 2007 ; Ruby and Zheng , 2009 ; Urbach et al . , 2004 ; Zwaka and Thomson , 2003 ) . Using standard plasmid - based systems , the current HR rate is < 10 (cid:2) 6 in karyotypically normal hESCs and other nontransformed mammalian cells . Moreover , to date , there has been no report on successful gene targeting in hiPSCs . One reason that gene targeting in hPSCs is more difﬁ - cult is because they grow poorly as single cells ( a practice required for selection of rare targeted clones ) , compared with mouse ESCs . Thus , strategies that increase the efﬁciency of gene targeting in hPSCs would improve both the therapeutic and experimental potential of these cells . Zinc ﬁnger nucleases ( ZFNs ) are engineered sequence - speciﬁc nucleases consisting of a customized array of zinc Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 97 ﬁngers engineered to bind to a speciﬁc DNA sequence and a nonspeciﬁc DNA endonuclease domain ( Durai et al . , 2005 ; Porteus and Carroll , 2005 ) . Each zinc ﬁnger domain recognizes 3 – 4 bp of DNA , and a three - ﬁnger ZFN recognizes a 9 – 10 bp DNA sequence . When two ZFNs bind their cognate target sequence in the proper orientation , the nuclease domain is able to dimerize and create a sequence - speciﬁc double - stranded break ( DSB ) . The ZFN - induced DSB can then be re - paired with high efﬁciency by either HR or error - prone nonho - mologous end - joining ( NHEJ ) , independent of a DNA template for repair . Therefore , ZFNs induce a site - speciﬁc insertion or deletion at the site of the break after NHEJ or a deﬁned genetic modiﬁcation near the site of the DSB by HR with an exogenous donor DNA fragment . ZFNs have been used to make site - speciﬁc genomic modiﬁcations with high efﬁciencies in a variety of cell lines and several small organisms ( Carroll , 2008 ) . A recent study showed that ZFNs can enhance gene targeting in human ES cells using integrase - defective lentiviral vectors ( IDLVs ) to deliver both ZFN expression cassettes and an HR donor DNA template ( Lombardo et al . , 2007 ) . Limitations of this study , such as lack of data by Southern blotting for conﬁrming the HR event and excluding random integration of the donor DNA , have been noted by the authors of a recent review ( Giudice and Trounson , 2008 ) . Another limitation of this work is that the two hESC lines used are prone to karyotypic abnormalities after prolonged culture ( Cowan et al . , 2004 ) . Such abnormalities likely contribute to their favorable growth characteristics in culture and can affect gene - targeting efﬁciencies . Whether ZFNs might induce chromosomal alterations and changes in growth param - eters of targeted hESCs has not been reported . Although the use of IDLVs reduces the rate of vector integration substantially , it does not eliminate such integration events ( Mali et al . , 2008 ; Nightingale et al . , 2006 ) . In this study , we used a virus - free system to perform ZFN - enhanced gene targeting at the endogenous PIG - A gene and at a defective , chromosomally integrated enhanced green ﬂuo - rescent protein ( EGFP ) reporter gene in both hESCs and human iPSCs ( hiPSCs ) . The PIG - A gene is required for the retention of dozens of glycosyl - phosphatidyl - inositol - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) on the cell surface and is mutated in hematopoietic stem cells from patients with the blood disorder paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria ( PNH ) . The defective , chromosomally integrated EGFP reporter gene that we used in our studies requires HR to reconstitute a full - length gene and thereby restore ﬂuorescence . We demonstrate that the transient ex - pression of sequence - speciﬁc ZFNs signiﬁcantly enhanced HR ( 2400 - fold increase ) in hESCs and that we were able to readily obtain PIG - A null hESCs by both HR and mutagenic NHEJ . Importantly , we also show that these ZFNs enhance gene targeting without detrimental effects on either cell karyo - types or pluripotency . Moreover , we also provide the ﬁrst demonstration that ZFNs can enhance gene targeting in two hiPSC lines by successfully performing targeted HR events at both the PIG - A locus and a chromosomally integrated EGFP reporter gene . The present study describes and validates publicly available ‘‘open - source’’ reagents and protocols that will enable researchers to use ZFNs to efﬁciently create or correct speciﬁc mutations at their genes of interest in hiPSCs and hESCs . RESULTS Using an EGFP Gene Reporter System to Optimize Gene Targeting in hESCs To enhance the efﬁciency of gene targeting in hESCs by nonviral vectors , we developed better methods for plasmid delivery and for selection of rare transgenic hES clones . First , we established an immortalized feeder cell line ( W3R ) that expresses Wnt3a to promote hESC growth and coexpresses three drug - resistant genes ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . The ability of W3R feeder cells that support hESCs and are resistant to neomycin , hygromycin B , and puromycin allowed us to efﬁciently select rare clones of transfected hESCs expressing oneofthreedrug - resistant genes : Neo R , Hygro R , or Puro R . Second , we optimized methods for delivering plasmid DNA into hESCs using the Amaxa’s improved electroporation method called nucleofection ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Using this strategy , hESCs can be transfected with > 50 % efﬁ - ciency , and stable ESCs can be generated at a rate of 10 (cid:2) 5 ( Cai et al . , 2007 ; Hohenstein et al . , 2008 ) . In this study , we used these optimized methods for plasmid delivery and selection to further improve gene targeting in hESCs . To assess the efﬁciency of HR - mediated gene targeting in hESCs , we established a mutated GFP gene - based reporter system , similar to one previously described and used in somatic human cells ( Porteus , 2006 ; Porteus and Baltimore , 2003 ) . In this improved version , the EGFP gene was used to achieve a brighter GFP signal as compared to the GFPmut1 gene ( Yang et al . , 1996 ) used in the previous studies . A 35 bp DNA fragment containing a stop codon was inserted into the EGFP sequence , 12 bp downstream of a site for which we had previously generated ZFN pairs ( Pruett - Miller et al . , 2008 ) . This mutated EGFP * cassette was inserted into a lentiviral vector that we designated EGIP * ( Figure 1A ) . This EGIP * vector enables the creation of a chromosomally integrated EGFP * target sequence by lentiviral transduction in a variety of cell types , including hESCs . We also constructed a donor template plasmid called tGFP , which contains a truncated EGFP DNA . HR between the transfected tGFP donor and the integrated EGFP * target results in the recon - stitution of a full - length EGFP gene without the insertion , and its gene expression restores GFP ﬂuorescence . In 293T cells that can be transfected very efﬁciently by either lipofection or nucle - ofection , GFP + correction rate was low ( (cid:3) 7 per 10 6 cells ) when cells were transfected by tGFP alone ( Figure S1A available on - line ) . Cotransfection of the same reporter 293T cells with tGFP and two plasmids expressing ZFNs targeting a site in the EGFP gene ( Pruett - Miller et al . , 2008 ) led to an increase in the level of GFP + cells to (cid:3) 3 % ( Figures S1B and S1C ) : a > 4000 - fold enhancement ( Figure S1A ) . The percentage of GFP + popu - lation remained stable over 2 weeks after transfection , indicating minimal cytotoxicity of ZFNs used in these experiments ( Figure S1D ) . We next used the EGFP * HR system in hESCs after stable inte - gration of the EGIP * reporter vector . Using conditions that we had previously established for nucleofection of hESCs ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) , we were able to achieve a transient transfection efﬁ - ciency of 50 % – 70 % for multiple hES lines , each bearing a stably integrated EGIP * reporter vector ( data not shown ) . Following transfection of the tGFP donor DNA ( Figure 1A ) , we measured EGFP gene correction in hESCs ( harboring the EGFP * reporter ) Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells 98 Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Figure 1 . Correction of a Mutant EGFP Reporter Gene by ZFN - Mediated Gene Targeting ( A ) Scheme of the EGFP gene correction strategy . An enhanced GFP gene was mutated ( EGFP * ) by the insertion of a 35 bp fragment containing a translational stopcodonanda HindIII sitepositioned12bpdownstreamoftheGFPZFNtargetsite . ThedefectiveEGFP ( * ) transgenewasdeliveredandintegratedintohuman cells by a lentiviral vector called EGIP * . For EGFP gene correction , a repair donor ( tGFP ) containing 5 0 truncated EGFP coding sequence was cotransfected with two plasmids expressing a pair of GFP - targeting ZFNs ( GFPZFN1 and GFPZFN2 ) . If HR - mediated repair occurs , expression of the wild - type EGFP gene will be restored . Arrows below the corrected EGFP gene represent primers used to detect the restored full - length EGFP gene . ( B ) Fluorescence microscopy of EGFP gene correction with ZFNs in H9 - EGIP * hESCs at day 7 postnucleofection . ( C ) FACSanalysisshowingthattheefﬁciencyofZFN - mediatedEGFPgenecorrectioninH9 - EGIP * isashighas0 . 24 % ( gatedonTRA - 1 - 60 + hESCs ) . Insetshows that no GFP + cells are detected in 10 6 cells collected in the absence of GFP - speciﬁc ZFNs . ( D ) Numbers of corrected GFP + cells ( per million of TRA - 1 - 60 + hESCs ) were monitored by FACS for 30 days . Three different ratios of donor : ZFNs were used at 5 : 2 , 5 : 10 , and 1 : 10 . A ratio ( w / w ) of 1 : 10 is equivalent to a molar ratio of 1 donor DNA for 6 . 1 molecules of each ZFN . ( E ) PCRampliﬁcationofwild - typeEGFPgeneusingprimersindicatedin ( A ) . H9 - EGIP * templatecontainsa HindIII site ; therefore , PCRproductcanbedigestedby Hind III ( sample 2 ) . After ZFN - mediated HR , GFP + cells were sorted and showed restoration of the wild - type EGFP gene without the Hind III site ( 1 and 3 ) . ( F ) H9 EGIP cells after ZFN - mediated HR show a normal karyotype ( 46 , XY ) . ( G ) H9 EGIP cells after ZFN - mediated HR maintain expression of pluripotency markers such as SSEA4 , TRA - 1 - 60 , NANOG , and OCT4 after expansion by long - term culture . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( H ) Immunostaining of embryoid body ( EB ) formed by H9 EGIP cells after ZFN - mediated HR . Day 14 EB shows ectoderm ( NESTIN ) , mesoderm ( DESMIN ) , endo - derm ( AFP ) , and trophectoderm ( TROMA - I ) markers . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( I ) Teratoma formation of H9 EGIP cells after ZFN - mediated HR . H & E staining indicates in vivo differentiation of ectodermal ( n , neuroepithelial ) , mesodermal ( b , bone ; c , cartilage ) , and endodermal ( g , glandular epithelial ) structures . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 99 Figure 2 . Generation of PIG - A Null Mutants by ZFN - Mediated NHEJ in H1 hESCs ( A ) Fourcombinations ofZFNpairstargeting the PIG - A geneweretestedfortheirabilities toinducemutagenicNHEJinH1 ( XY ) hESCsthatconstitutivelyexpress GFP ( GGFP ) . GGFP hESCs were ﬁrst transfected by nucleofection with one of the four ZFN combinations ( L1R1 , L1R2 , L2R1 , L2R2 ) and expanded . At 17 days after nucleofection , expanded cells were treated with 0 . 5 nM aerolysin and allowed to form colonies for 7 days ( Chen et al . , 2008 ) . The number of surviving colo - nies following aerolysin selection is shown . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells 100 Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . with or without cotransfection of the GFP - ZFN expression plas - mids . We observed that GFP + cells in the hESC population at a frequency of up to 0 . 24 % with ZFNs , compared to < 10 (cid:2) 6 without ZFNs , a > 2400 - fold increase in the efﬁciency of HR in hESCs ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . The level of GFP + cells among the undifferentiated ( TRA - 1 - 60 + ) hESC population remained stable for at least 1 month following transfection of ZFN expression plasmids ( Figure 1D ) . Correction of the EGFP * to the wild - type EGFP gene sequence was conﬁrmed by both restriction diges - tion mapping and direct DNA sequencing ( Figures 1E and S2 ) . Corrected GFP + hESCs that had been obtained by ZFN - medi - ated HR retained normal karyotype , morphology , and expres - sion of pluripotency markers even after long - term culture ( > 50 passages ) ( Figures 1F and 1G ) . Upon induction , they can also differentiate into three embryonic germ layers and trophoblast lineages via embryoid body ( EB ) formation in vitro ( Figure 1H ) . When injected into immunodeﬁcient mice , the corrected GFP + cells formed teratomas containing cells representing all three embryonic germ layers ( Figure 1I ) . These data indicate that our gene - targeting approach using transiently expressed ZFNs had no detectable adverse effects on the genome or pluripo - tency of hESCs . Engineering and Validation of ZFNs Targeted to the Endogenous PIG - A Gene in hESCs Because ZFNs can be engineered to recognize speciﬁc target DNA sequences , ZFN - enhanced gene targeting can potentially be used at any endogenous gene of interest . Therefore , we next wished to test whether ZFNs could enhance gene targeting of an actual endogenous human gene and focused our efforts on PIG - A , a gene that we had previously been unable to alter genet - ically using conventional gene - targeting methods . To create PIG - A - speciﬁc ZFNs , we used the oligomerized pool engi - neering ( OPEN ) platform recently developed ( Maeder et al . , 2008 ) and engineered four ZFN pairs for a site within the PIG - A - coding sequence . We chose to target such a sequence because we reasoned that mutation at that site would generate an inactive PIG - A protein . We validated the four OPEN ZFN pairs targeting the PIG - A gene using a modiﬁed version of the EGFP * gene - targeting system described above , which contained the PIG - A ZFN target site inserted into the EGFP * gene , an approach similar to what has been used in previous studies ( Porteus , 2006 ; Porteus and Baltimore , 2003 ; Urnov et al . , 2005 ) . We found that all four PIG - A ZFN pairs stimulated gene targeting by > 200 - fold in 293T cells , with the L1 / R2 pair showing the highest efﬁciency ( Figure S3 ) . We next tested these validated PIG - A ZFN pairs in hESCs by determining their ability to induce mutations in the endogenous PIG - A gene by mutagenic NHEJ repair of the ZFN - induced DSB . We used male ( XY ) hESCs such as H1 so that only one PIG - A gene ( on the X chromosome ) would need to be mutated to generate a phenotypic effect . Null mutants of PIG - A result in a loss of GPI - APs and , in turn , the resistance of targeted cells to aerolysin - mediated cell killing ( Chen et al . , 2008 ) . It is important to note that PIG - A and GPI - APs have been shown to be dispensable for the growth of undifferentiated hESCs in culture ( Chen et al . , 2008 ) . We utilized the aerolysin selection method to enumerate rare PIG - A null mutations and compared the activities of four PIG - A ZFN pairs in human H1 - derived GGFP ESCs . The best pair of ZFNs ( L1 / R2 ) identiﬁed in the 293T EGFP * reporter assay also generated the greatest number of PIG - A mutant clones , creating 28 aerolysin - resistant colonies per 6 3 10 6 cells selected ( Figure 2A ) . One aerolysin - resistant hESC clone ( called ‘‘GNAR’’ ) was chosen for further characterization . GNAR grew similarly to the parental cells from which it was derived , retained a normal karyo - type , and displayed morphology and markers unique to hESCs ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . DNA sequencing of the targeted region re - vealed deletion of 7 bp overlapping with the ZFN target sites , resulting in a frameshift mutation and a premature stop codon ( Figure 2D ) . The PIG - A mutation in GNAR cells abolished the cell - surface expression of GPI - APs , such as CD59 ( Figure 2E ) and alkaline phosphatase ( APase ) ( Figure 2F ) , as expected . The loss of GPI - APs in GNAR cells could be rescued by introduc - tion of a PIG - A transgene , conﬁrming that the defect in these cells is solely due to the lack of PIG - A expression ( Figure 2E ) . Similarly , the loss of biological functions by GNAR hESCs can be restored by the PIG - A transgene expression in three different functional assays in vitro and in vivo ( Figures 2G and 2I ) . Efﬁcient ZFN - Mediated Gene Targeting of the Endogenous PIG - A Gene in hESCs Using the validated PIG - A ZFN pair L1 / R2 , we sought to develop a more efﬁcient , precise , and generalizable method for gene tar - geting of the PIG - A gene without the need to use aerolysin selec - tion . Compared with NHEJ , HR is a more precise method to ( B ) One of the aerolysin - resistant colonies derived following expression of the L1 and R2 ZFN pairs was isolated and termed as GNAR . After expansion , GNAR cells display unique hESC morphology and markers such as TRA - 1 - 60 and NANOG . ( C ) GNAR cells exhibit a normal karyotype ( 46 , XY ) . ( D ) DNA sequence in PIG - A exon 6 in GNAR cells , compared with that from parental GGFP ( H1 ) hESCs . A 7 bp deletion ( blue ) inthe coding sequence was found , resulting in frameshift and a premature translational stop codon ( red ) . The PIG - A ZFN target sites are underlined . A sequencing chromatogram of GNAR cells is shown below the sequence alignment , with an arrow indicating the deletion site . ( E ) FACS analysis showing that GNAR cells have lost the expression of GPI - APs such as CD59 . This defect can be rescued by the introduction of exogenous PIG - A cDNA ( GNAR - PIGA ) . Dot plot was gated on GFP + hESCs . ( F ) GNAR cells show loss of GPI - APs such as alkaline phosphatase ( APase ) on the cell surface . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( G ) BMP4 - induced trophoblast lineagedifferentiation defectinGNARcells indicated by loss of hCG - a expression . BMP4 treatment wascarried outasdescribed previously ( Chen et al . , 2008 ) . ( H ) RateofteratomaformationofGNARESCswithorwithoutPIG - Atransgeneexpression . Zerooutofnineinjectionsshowedteratomaformationmonitoredupto 4 months . These defects can be largely rescued by exogenous PIG - A cDNA expression . ( I ) Differential sensitivities of GNAR and GNAR - PIG - A hESCs . GNAR cells lack complement inhibitory proteins such as CD59 and CD55 , whereas PIG - A cDNA expression restored these GPI - APs on the cell surface . Under lower pH ( pH = 6 . 4 ) that activates complement - mediated cell lysis , GNAR showed a signiﬁcantly increased cell death monitored by Annexin V staining , compared with the GNAR - PIG - A cells or ESCs under normal pH ( 7 . 4 , upper rows ) . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 101 Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells 102 Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . mutate as well as correct a gene in a predetermined fashion . Thus , to inactivate the PIG - A gene by HR - mediated mutagenic insertion , we constructed a donor vector ( called ‘‘PHD’’ ) in which a PGK - Hygro R expression cassette was placed between two PIG - A homology arms ( Figure 3A ) . Successful HR - mediated tar - geting will result in the insertion of the PGK - Hygro R cassette into the coding region in exon 6 of the PIG - A gene , thereby inactivat - ing the PIG - A gene ( Figure 3A ) . By contrast , random insertion of PHD into transcriptionally active regions of the genome will also result in the formation of Hygro R ES clones but will not disrupt the PIG - A gene . Thus , random insertions , unlike targeted insertions , will result in the continued cell - surface expression of GPI - APs . We transfected the PHD - targeting plasmid into H1 - derived GGFP hESCs in the presence or absence of vectors expressing the L1 / R2 ZFN pair to target the endogenous PIG - A locus . Different ratios of donor versus ZFN expression vector DNA were tested ( Figure 3B ) , and following transfection , cells were plated onto Hygro R W3R feeder cells and selected for 12 days . ES - like colonies emerged under each transfection condition , and the number of colonies was quantiﬁed . In the absence of ZFNs , we obtained 67 ± 11 Hygro R colonies per 10 6 input cells at transfection . The formation of Hygro R colonies could be due to either random integration or HR . With ZFNs , however , we ob - tained signiﬁcantly more Hygro R colonies , ranging from 220 ± 54 to 395 ± 105 per 10 6 input cells ( Figure 3B ) . After quantitation of Hygro R EScolonies , allofthecellswereanalyzedforthepresence or absence of GPI - APs such as CD59 . When ZFNs were absent , background levels of CD59 (cid:2) cells were detected ( 0 . 19 % ) , indi - cating that most , if not all , Hygro R colonies resulted from random insertion of the PHD donor into loci other than PIG - A . In contrast , when ZFNs were present , CD59 (cid:2) cells were present at a high frequency of up to 83 % ( Figures 3C and 3D ) . To conﬁrm the tar - geted insertion of PHD DNA into the PIG - A locus , we performed PCR analysis using a pair of speciﬁc primers that only amplify eitherthe5 0 or 3 0 junction ofthe predictedHR product ( Figure3E ) . Targeted insertion products were abundantly detected in Hygro R cells obtained when ZFNs were used , but not in Hygro R cells obtained when ZFNs were absent ( Figure 3E ) . To create knockout or knockin ESCs with a uniform genetic background , it is critical to isolate clonal cell lines following HR to ensure a homogenous population . With the improved HR efﬁ - ciency we observed with ZFNs , we tested whether we could readily obtain PIG - A knockout clones ( called ‘‘GPHR’’ ) . From 12 Hygro R hESC colonies , 6 clones ( 50 % ) were conﬁrmed to have undergone the predicted HR event at the PIG - A locus , as determined by PCR to detect the targeted insertion ( Figure 3F ) and by ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) to detect the loss of GPI - APs ( Figures 3G and S4A ) . Two out of six clones ( # 4 and # 7 ) showed loss of CD59 in nearly all of the cells ( Figure 3G ) , thereby validating their clonality . The clonality and the targeted insertion were further conﬁrmed by Southern blot ( Figure 3H ) . Furthermore , both of these clones showed normal karyotypes , undifferentiated hESC morphology , and expression of unique hESC markers ( Figures 3I , 3J , and S5 ) . As expected , the cell - surface expression of GPI - APs , such as APase , was absent in these GPHR clones ( Figure 3I ) . The altered phenotypes of these GPHR clones , such as GPI - AP deﬁciency , could also be rescued by PIG - A transgene expression ( Figure S4B ) , conﬁrming that the GPI - AP deﬁciency in GPHR cells was solely due to PIG - A gene knockout . Gene Targeting in the MP2 hiPSC Line with or without Using ZFNs To our knowledge , there has been no published report to date describing gene targeting by any method in hiPSCs . Therefore , we investigated whether HR - mediated gene targeting could be achieved in hiPSCs using the PIG - A and EGFP * systems with or without the aid of ZFNs . The ﬁrst of the two hiPSC lines that we used is MP2 , which has previously been shown to be pluripotent ( Mali et al . , 2008 ) . Using an optimized donor : ZFN ratio , we observed GFP + colonies emerge 5 days following transfection ofMP2iPSCsharboring themutatedEGFP * template ( Figure 4A ) . Gene correction efﬁciency reached 0 . 14 % when the GFP - speciﬁc ZFN expression vectors were used in transfection , as compared to < 0 . 0001 % when ZFN expression vectors were absentfromthetransfection ( Figure4B ) . Thesedatademonstrate Figure 3 . Knockout of the Endogenous PIG - A Gene in hESCs by ZFN - Mediated Homologous Recombination ( A ) Scheme of PIG - A gene knockout using ZFNstargetingthe coding sequence ( gray ) within exon 6 . TheDNA sequences of thetwo half ZFN sites ( blue lines ) are shown in Figure S10 . The HR donor ( PHD ) vector contains a PGK - Hygro R - poly ( A ) expression cassette ﬂanked by two arms of PIG - A homology sequences ( 2 kb left + 2 kb right ) . In the PHD vector , a frameshift mutation and stop codon ( red dot ) upstream of the PGK - Hygro R - poly ( A ) cassette were introduced to replace the spacersequencebetweenthetwoZFNsites . TwosetsofPCRprimers , indicatedabovetheanticipatedHRproduct ( GPHR ) , wereusedtoconﬁrmthejunctionsof targeted insertion . A DNA probe further downstream of the PIG - A locus and outside of the right arm of PHD was used for Southern blot analysis . ( B ) After nucleofection and drug selection , the number of Hygro R colonies per million input cells was calculated and compared among different ratios of do - nor : ZFNs . The ratio ( w / w ) of 1 : 5 is equivalent to 1 donor for 4 . 2 DNA molecules of each ZFN . Six experiments were performed with the ratio of 1 : 5 , and three experiments were performed for the remaining ratios . ( C ) Representative FACS analysis of CD59 , a GPI - AP , expressed in the Hygro R cell population after gene targeting . Dot plot was gated on GFP + hESCs . ( D ) Summary of CD59 (cid:2) population in the Hygro R cells from two experiments , as analyzed in ( C ) . ( E ) PCRanalysisofgenomicDNAconﬁrmsthattargetedintegration ( TI ) occurredinHygro R cellsonlywhenZFNswereusedandwhenGPI - AP - deﬁcientcellswere obtained . TIwasdetectedbyprimersetsspeciﬁcfor5 0 and3 0 integrationjunctionsasindicatedin ( A ) . Anarbitrarygenomicregion ( near PIG - A exon4 ) wasampli - ﬁed as a positive DNA control . ( F ) Twelve GPHR colonies were manually picked after Hygro R selection following ZFN - mediated PIG - A knockout in GGFP cells . Six out of 12 showed targeted integration ( TI ) . ( G ) Two of the 12 colonies , 4 and 7 , were shown to have nearly complete loss of CD59 . ( H ) Southernblotanalysisof genomic DNAafter Mfe I digestionconﬁrmedthat thesetwoclones ( 4and 7 ) containexpected targeted insertion at the PIG - A locus . Arrowindicatesalonger MfeI band ( 5 . 7kb , duetothePGK - Hygro R insertion ) insteadofa3 . 5kbbandinparentalGGFP ( seeFigure3A ) . G , GGFPparentalhESCs . ( I ) Stainingofoneofthetwoclones , 4 ( GPHRc4 ) . ThisclonelacksAPase , aGPI - AP , onthecellsurfacebutmaintainsundifferentiatedhESCmarkerssuchasTRA - 1 - 60 , OCT4 , and NANOG . Scale bar , 50 m m . Similar data with clone 7 are shown in Figure S5 . ( J ) GPHRc4 ( clone 4 ) cells exhibit a normal karyotype ( 46 , XY ) . Similar data with clone 7 are shown in Figure S5 . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 103 that the ZFNs stimulate gene correction by at least 1400 - fold in human MP2 iPSCs . Because the mutated EGFP * target is not present in every one of starting MP2 cells ( since they are already Puro R and full selection of the EGIP * integration by puromycin resistance is not feasible ) , the number is likely an underestimate ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . Next , we carried out ZFN - mediated gene targeting at the endogenous PIG - A gene in MP2 hiPSCs ( using the same strategy employed for ESCs ; see Figure 3 ) . We anticipated that the frequency with which we would obtain PIG - A - deﬁcient MP2 cells would be lower than what we achieved in the hESCs because MP2 iPSCs are female ( XX ) in origin and thus contain two copies of the PIG - A gene . It is unclear currently whether the inactivated X chromosome inherited from the parental IMR90 ﬁbroblasts remains inactivated or is activated in MP2 iPSCs after reprogramming . In the latter case , targeting both alleles of the PIG - A locus is required to generate a null pheno - type . Following transfection of MP2 iPSCs with PHD donor DNA with or without PIG - A - speciﬁc ZFN expression vectors , we observed Hygro R human ESC / iPSC - like colonies under both conditions . In four independent experiments , we found that , on average , 6 . 3 ± 0 . 7 % of Hygro R human cells are CD59 (cid:2) when the PIG - A ZFNs were used ( Figures 4C and 4D ) , compared with background levels ( < 0 . 05 % ) when PIG - A ZFNs were not used . The targeted integration of the PGK - Hygro R DNA cassette could also be easily detected in the ZFN - treated cells ( Figure 4E ) . Figure 4 . HR - Mediated Gene Targeting of EGFP and PIG - A Genes in Female Human MP2 iPSCs ( A ) Microscopy of corrected ( GFP + ) MP2 iPSCs harboring the EGIP * reporter , 5 days after nucleofection with GFP - speciﬁc ZFNs . ( B ) FACS analysis of EGFP gene correction in MP2 iPSCs with or without GFP - speciﬁc ZFNs . Dot plots were gated on TRA - 1 - 60 + cells . ( C ) PIG - A gene targeting inMP2iPSCs withor without PIG - A - speciﬁc ZFNswasperformedasdescribed inFigure 3Ausing the1 : 5 ratio ofdonor : ZFN DNA . After nucleofectionandhygromycinBselection , TRA - 1 - 60 + ( hiPS / hES ) cellswereanalyzedforthepresenceorabsenceofCD59 ( aGPI - AP ) . RepresentativeFACSdot plots are shown . ( D ) Summary of FACS analysis of CD59 (cid:2) MP2 iPSC populations after PIG - A gene targeting from four independent experiments . ( E ) PCR conﬁrms the targeted integration into the PIG - A locus in MP2 iPSCs . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells 104 Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . HR - Mediated Gene Targeting of the Endogenous PIG - A Gene to Generate GPI - AP - Deﬁcient iPSCs To better analyze and quantify HR - mediated PIG - A gene target - ing , we also performed experiments in a well - characterized male ( XY ) hiPSC line ( Park et al . , 2008 ) . The hFib2 - iPS5 cells were derived from dermal ﬁbroblasts of an adult male and were shown previously to have a normal karyotype and full pluripotency ( Park et al . , 2008 ) . Similar to hESCs in early passages , the newly estab - lished hFib2 - iPS5 cells are delicate to expand and transfect . We optimized conditions for efﬁcient transfection of these cells in the following ways . We initially followed the published method and passaged them as clumps after partial dissociation by colla - genase digestion ( Park et al . , 2008 ) . However , the method yielded poor transfection efﬁciencies using nucleofection or other trans - fection techniques ( data not shown ) . We found that trypsin or ac - cutase treatment generated smaller clumps and single cells that allowed us to achieve higher transient transfection efﬁciencies ( Figure S6 ) , but the survival rate was much lower . We found that treating with a ROCK inhibitor Y27632 before trypsin - mediated cell dissociation signiﬁcantly improved the colony - forming efﬁ - ciency of early passage hFib2 - iPS5 ( Figure S7 ) , likely due to enhancedsurvivalofsinglecells / smallclumpsasfoundforhESCs ( Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) . The addition of Y27632 during and after nucleofectionfurtherhelpedtheattachment / survivalofsinglecells or smaller clumps ( < 30 cells ) in culture after transfection . With these improvements , we transfected hFib2 - iPS5 cells with the PHD HR donor with or without the PIG - A ZFN expression vectors , as we did for hESCs . Signiﬁcantly more Hygro R iPS colonies were obtained if Y27632 was present ( Figure 5A ) . When the Hygro R iPSCs were analyzed for the loss of GPI - APs such as CD59 ( Figure5B ) , up to 83 % ofthe Hygro R iPSCswere CD59 (cid:2) ( average 45 % ± 20 % ; Figure 5C ) when ZFNs were used . In contrast , back - ground levels ( 0 . 22 % ± 0 . 04 % ) of CD59 (cid:2) cells were found when ZFNs were absent , even though these iPSCs were also Hygro R ( likely due to the PHD random integration ) . PCR analysis of har - vested Hygro R cells conﬁrmed targeted integration of the PHD DNAintothegenomeofhFib2 - iPS5cellswhenZFNswerepresent ( Figure 5D ) . Without ZFNs , the resulting Hygro R iPSCs were neither CD59 (cid:2) nor showing the targeted integration ( Figure 5D ) , suggesting that they indeed resulted from random integration of the PHD donor . Therefore , the PIG - A - speciﬁc ZFNs confer a > 200 - fold increase in the efﬁciency of PIG - A gene targeting , equiv - alent to that observed in hESCs ( Figure 3D ) . To molecularly characterize the targeting events , we randomly picked nine Hygro R iPSC colonies from treated cells after co - transfection of PHD and ZFN - expression plasmids . We success - fully expanded cells from eight colonies and analyzed them by PCR to detect the targeted insertion ( Figure 5E ) , by Southern blot to conﬁrm HR at the PIG - A locus ( Figure 5F ) , and by FACS analysis to conﬁrm the loss of GPI - APs due to a PIG - A null muta - tion ( FigureS6 ) . FiveoutoftheeighthFib2 - iPS5 PIG - A HR ( FPHR ) colonies ( 62 . 5 % ) that we analyzed had the targeted insertion at the PIG - A locus ( Figures 5E and 5F ) . Three of them ( colonies c1 , c6 , and c8 ) contained only the targeted PIG - A allele and homogenously lacked GPI - AP expression ( Figures 5F and S6 ) , suggesting a clonal origin for each picked colony . We found that the donor DNA is present only in the targeted locus in these three homogenous FPHR clones ( Figure S8A ) . By a more sensi - tive PCR - mediated method , we did not detect the presence of the ZFN DNA in the genome of the three clones ( Figure S8B ) . The homogenous iPSCs such as clone FPHR c1 lost the ex - pression of GPI - APs but retained undifferentiated iPSC / ESC morphology and the expression of pluripotency markers ( Fig - ure 5G ) . The differentiation potential of FPHRc1 iPSCs was similar to the PIG - A null human ESCs based on the in vitro assays described in Figure 2 ( data not shown ) . Two randomly selected iPS clones ( c1 and c6 ) retained a normal karyotype after HR - mediated gene targeting and expansion ( Figure 5H ) . In summary , successful correction of the mutated EGFP gene and mutation of the endogenous PIG - A gene by HR show that ZFNs can stimulate gene targeting in hiPSCs by at least several hundred - fold . This degree of stimulation is sufﬁcient to enable the isola - tion of clonal populations of iPSCs with the desired genetic modiﬁcation . DISCUSSION The importance of making a speciﬁc genetic modiﬁcation in hPSCs has been widely recognized ( Giudice and Trounson , 2008 ) . The creation or correction of a speciﬁc mutation by HR - mediated gene targeting ensures permanent genetic alterations , a capability that will be of great utility in stem cell research and for potential applications of hPSCs in therapeutic uses . In 2003 and 2004 , two landmark papers demonstrated the feasibility of gene targeting by HR in hESCs ( Urbach et al . , 2004 ; Zwaka and Thom - son , 2003 ) . Four more papers ( Costa et al . , 2007 ; Davis et al . , 2008 ; Di Domenico et al . , 2008 ; Irion et al . , 2007 ) in the past 2 years conﬁrmed HR - mediated gene targeting in hESCs using a plasmid - based delivery method . These studies collectively demonstrated that HR is feasible in hESCs but is technically challenging because of the low rate ( < 10 (cid:2) 6 ) using standard tar - geting strategies . These technical limitations have limited the broad use of targeting in hPSCs , and a general approach that increases the efﬁciency of targeting would increase the range of experimental and potentially therapeutic uses of these cells . One strategy to increase the rate of gene targeting in hPSCs is to use highly speciﬁc ZFNs . ZFN - induced DSBs at speciﬁc sequences have been used to stimulate targeting efﬁciencies in a wide range of cell types and organisms ( Carroll , 2008 ; Catho - men and Joung , 2008 ) and were recently shown to stimulate gene targeting in two hESC lines ( Lombardo et al . , 2007 ) . The strength and weakness of this pioneering paper that used ZFNs ( efﬁciently delivered by IDLV vectors ) to achieve gene tar - geting in multiple cell types , including hESCs , have been dis - cussed comprehensively ( Giudice and Trounson , 2008 ) . Another limitation of this study is that the two hESC lines used , HUES1 and HUES3 , are prone to have karyotypic abnormalities after prolonged culture ( Cowan et al . , 2004 ) . Moreover , an analysis of whether ZFNs might induce unwanted chromosomal rear - rangements and changes in growth parameters was absent ( Lombardo et al . , 2007 ) . In the present study , we have demon - strated that ( 1 ) ZFNs can be used to stimulate gene targeting in hPSCs , including iPSCs , without inducing karyotypic changes or changes in their pluripotent potential , ( 2 ) deﬁned phenotypic changes can be rationally created by the use of ZFN - mediated gene targeting , ( 3 ) clonal cell lines with targeted genetic modiﬁ - cations can be derived and expanded , and ( 4 ) nonviral methods Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 105 Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells 106 Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . of inducing gene targeting using ZFNs can be used in hPSCs . These results are discussed in more detail below . We used a virus - free DNA delivery system and successfully targeted two different genes in karyotypically normal hESCs and hiPSCs . Our studies were performed using novel ZFNs tar - geting a disease - related gene ( PIG - A ) as well as the previously described ZFNs targeting the EGFP gene ( Pruett - Miller et al . , 2008 ) . Using optimized ratios of donor DNA and ZFN - express - ing plasmid vectors , as well as an improved method of DNA delivery , our protocol allowed us to achieve high efﬁciencies ( stimulations of 200 - to 2000 - fold more than the rate without ZFNs ) of HR - mediated gene targeting in either creating a muta - tion in the endogenous PIG - A gene or correcting a chromoso - mally integrated mutant EGFP gene in both hESCs and iPSCs . Despite using homology arms ( a total of 2 kb ) that would be considered too short using standard targeting strategies ( Di Domenico et al . , 2008 ; Suzuki et al . , 2008 ) , we achieved a gene correction rate of 0 . 14 % – 0 . 24 % in hESCs and hiPSCs cotransfected with a pair of GFP - targeted ZFNs ( Figures 1 and 4 ) . Similarly , the gene - targeting efﬁciency at the endoge - nous PIG - A gene was also high when a pair of ZFNs was used together with a donor vector containing short ( and thus suboptimal ) homology arms ( a total of 4 kb ) . This approach should be applicable to any gene of interest for which a pair of highly active and speciﬁc ZFNs is generated and to other methods for more efﬁcient DNA delivery ( Lombardo et al . , 2007 ; Suzuki et al . , 2008 ) . We found that both hESCs and hiPSCs that had been targeted using ZFNs had no karyotypic abnormalities and did not exhibit any alteration in their pluripotent properties , even after extended expansion to accumulate sufﬁcient cells required for compre - hensive cellular and molecular analyses . In addition , phenotypic and biological defects of PIG - A null hESCs GNAR ( created by ZFN - mediated NHEJ ) and GPHR ( created by ZFN - mediated HR ) could be rescued by expression of a PIG - A transgene . Together , these data suggest that undesired genome alterations by a pair of high - quality and validated ZFNs are minimal . However , we note that acute ZFN - mediated cell toxicity could be observed when ZFNs were used at a higher concentration with the nucleofection ( Figure 3B ) or the Lipofectamine 2000 transfection methods ( data not shown ) . Long - term and off - target effects of ZFNs remain to be fully characterized . Although major alteration of genome due to off - target DSBs usually results in cell death and elimination of affected cells , minor changes such as small deletions and additions could be carried on in the surviving population . It has been difﬁcult to locate in the whole genome a small alteration induced by off - target DSBs . It is now possible to detect such abnormality by comparing parental and targeted cell lines using advanced technologies such as genome - wide , high - resolution SNP analysis and ideally whole - genome ( deep ) DNA sequencing . In addition to using ZFNs that possess high - quality zinc ﬁnger DNA - binding domains ( as was done in this report ) , two other strategies to reduce off - target effects of ZFNs have been described . The ﬁrst one uses modiﬁcations of the nuclease domain to minimize homodimerization of ZFNs , which may lead to cleavage at off - target sites ( Miller et al . , 2007 ; Pruett - Miller et al . , 2008 ; Szczepek et al . , 2007 ) . The second one uses small molecules to attenuate the extent and timing of ZFN expression ( Pruett - Miller et al . , 2009 ) . It will be interesting to determine the degree to which these strategies minimize the off - target effects and toxicity of ZFNs when they are utilized with ZFNs in hPSCs . The ability to expand a few desirable ES or iPS clones unlimitedly alleviates the need to achieve perfection in every single cell using ZFN - mediated HR . Gene targeting at the level of hiPSCs and hESCs with unlimited self - renewal capacity also allows for the full characterization of genomic integrity before the use of the selected iPS and ES clones that have undergone gene - targeting events . Taken together , the studies reported here demonstrate that high - quality ZFNs made by using the recently described OPEN plat - form can induce highly efﬁcient gene targeting in hESCs and iPSCs with minimal toxicity and karyotypic alterations . The OPEN method was developed by the Zinc Finger Consortium ( http : / / www . zincﬁngers . org ) and accounts for context - depen - dent DNA - binding activities of zinc ﬁngers . OPEN ZFNs have been previously used to modify three human genes ( Maeder et al . , 2008 ) , ﬁve zebraﬁsh genes ( Foley et al . , 2009 ) , and plant genes ( Maeder et al . , 2008 ; Townsend et al . , 2009 ) . The results of this report extend the number of endogenous human genes modiﬁed by OPEN ZFNs and demonstrate that OPEN ZFNs can be used in more than just somatic human cells . Importantly , the reagents and protocols that are needed to make ZFNs by the OPEN method are publicly available , and therefore , any inter - ested academic laboratory can use the approach to engineer Figure 5 . HR - Mediated PIG - A Gene Targeting in Male hiPSCs , Generating Clonal PIG - A Null iPSCs ( A ) PIG - A knockout was performed in hFib2 - iPS5 cells derived from adult ( male ) ﬁbroblasts , using the strategy shown in Figure 3A . A nucleofection protocol similar to that used for hESCs was carried out , except ROCK inhibitor ( Y27632 ) was added . Mean and SEM of Hygro R colonies per million of input cells from three independent experiments are presented . ( B ) FACS analysis of PIG - A knockout in hFib2 - iPS5 cells with or without ZFNs in the presence of ROCK inhibitor Y27632 . TRA - 1 - 60 + ( hiPS ) cells were gated and analyzed for the presence or absence of CD59 . Representative dot plots are shown here . ( C ) Comparisons of percentages of CD59 (cid:2) cells in Hygro R hFib2 - iPS5 cells after PIG - A gene targeting using various treatments , as described above . n = 3 . ( D ) PCR analysis conﬁrms that Hygro R hFib2 - iPS5 cells contain targeted integration after ZFN - mediated HR treatment . F , parental hFib2 - iPS5 cells . ( E ) PCR analysis shows targeted integration in ﬁve out of eight hFib2 - iPS5 colonies that we expanded and examined . ( F ) Southern blot analysis detects the presence of the targeted ( 5 . 7 kb ) and the wild - type ( 3 . 5 kb ) PIG - A alleles ( see a diagram in Figure 3A ) . The expected HR product ( thetargetedinsertion ) isfoundinthesameﬁvecoloniesthatarepositivebyPCRdetection ( E ) . Threeofthem ( c1 , c6 , andc8 ) appeartobehomogeneous PIG - A knockouthFib2 - iPS5 clones ( FPHR ) showing onlythetargeted allele ( 5 . 7kb ) . Two ( c2and c3 ) containboththetargeted andthewild - typealleles . Because thehFib2 - iPS5cells ( male , XY ) haveonlyone PIG - A alleleintheXchromosome , thisislikelyduetothefactthatthecolonypickedafterhygromycinselectionisnot from asingle clone and , instead , is from mixed cells . The remaining threeHygro R colonies result from off - target insertion , showing onlythe wild - type PIG - A allele astheparentalhFib2 - iPS5cells ( F ) . TheSouthernblotdataarehighlyconsistentwiththepatternofGPI - APexpressionintheeightanalyzedcolonies ( FigureS6B ) . ( G ) Staining of the FPHRc1 ( PIG - A knockout ) iPS clone shows loss of APase ( a GPI - AP ) on the cell surface , compared to the parental hFib2 - iPS5 cells , but main - tains the expression of pluripotency markers ( TRA - 1 - 60 , SSEA - 4 , OCT4 , and NANOG ) . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( H ) FPHRc1 ( left ) and FPHRc6 ( right ) clones retain a normal karyotype ( 46 , XY ) . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 107 customized ZFNs for their target gene of interest in a variety of cell types such as hPSCs . Our report provides the ﬁrst demonstration of hiPSCs modiﬁed by HR and demonstrates the feasibility and efﬁciency of an approach that can be used for creating or correcting speciﬁc mutations . Using the endogenous PIG - A gene and a chromoso - mally integrated GFP gene as targets , we demonstrated that our improved protocol of delivering gene - targeting donor and ZFN - expressing plasmids works efﬁciently for hiPSCs as well as hESCs . A major difference that we observed is that early passage iPSCs , especially those passaged by collagenase as cell clumps , survive poorly if they are harvested by trypsin as smaller cell clumps or single cells required by the nucleofection method . However , treating hiPSCs by adding a ROCK inhibitor Y27632 before trypsin - mediated cell dissociation and during the nucleofection signiﬁcantly improved the survival of trans - fected hiPSCs and the formation of Hygro R colonies ( Figure 5A ) . The overall HR efﬁciency measured by the PIG - A gene targeting in the newly established hiPSC lines is still lower than that in the well - adapted hESC lines such as the H1 / GGFP line . This is due , at least in part , to the poor colony - forming efﬁciency of hFib2 - iPS5 cells , which is > 8 - to 9 - fold lower than that of H1 / GGFP hESCs ( Figure S7 ) . Despite all of the current limitations in cell culture , resulting in a lower number of total Hygro R colonies per million of input hFib2 - iPS5 cells , we are still able to generate a cell population containing > 40 % PIG - A - deﬁcient cells after drug selection and to isolate true PIG - A knockout iPS clones from this XY iPSC line . Together with the data using a different hiPS line ( MP2 ) , we showed for the ﬁrst time that an endogenous gene can be efﬁciently targeted in hiPSCs , demonstrating the potential of using gene targeting in research and clinical applica - tions of disease - speciﬁc hiPSCs . Possible future uses of gene targeting in hiPSCs include ( 1 ) increasing the efﬁciency of creating conditional alleles using the Cre - Lox system ( Irion et al . , 2007 ) , ( 2 ) correcting disease - causing mutations in X - linked or autosomal genetic diseases , ( 3 ) using gene targeting to create better models of human disease in hiPSCs , ( 4 ) using serial gene targeting by HR to create precise biallelic modiﬁcations in auto - somal genes or X - linked genes in female cells , and ( 5 ) using HR to correct disease - causing mutations in patient - speciﬁc iPSCs and using the genetically corrected cells to cure a disease , as recently demonstrated in a mouse model ( Hanna et al . , 2007 ) . Previous studies have demonstrated that even genes that are not transcriptionally active in undifferentiated hESCs , such as MIXL1 , CCR5 , and FEZF2 , can be successfully targeted ( Davis et al . , 2008 ; Lombardo et al . , 2007 ; Ruby and Zheng , 2009 ) , as has been observed in numerous cases of mouse ESC studies . Enhancement of ZFNs on gene targeting of CCR5 has been previously demonstrated in the two hESC lines used ( Lombardo et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , with the aid of ZFNs that greatly enhance the HR efﬁciency in hESCs and hiPSCs , we are optimistic that we will also be able to achieve gene targeting in iPSCs that are not expressed in the undifferentiated state . The experimental systems that we described here , i . e . , the validated HR donor constructs and ZFNs for two genes ( EGFP and PIG - A ) with simply phenotypic readouts , will further help investigators to optimize gene targeting in hiPSCs and hESCs with or without a pair of ZFNs . Thus , our present study provides a solid founda - tion for researchers interested in the efﬁcient correcting or mutating of a speciﬁc endogenous gene in both hiPSCs and hESCs . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Culture of hESCs and hiPSCs HumanH1andH9ESClineswereobtainedfromWiCellResearchInstituteand cultured as previously described ( Chen et al . , 2008 ; Yu et al . , 2008 ) . GGFP derived from H1 ESCs with stable GFP expression by the lentiviral transduc - tion ( Dravid et al . , 2005 ) was used in PIG - A gene targeting . MP2 iPS and hFib2 - iPS5 cells were passaged by collagenase and cultured as previously described ( Mali et al . , 2008 ; Park et al . , 2008 ) . Engineering of PIG - A - Speciﬁc ZFNs ZFNs speciﬁc for a target site within the PIG - A coding sequence ( Figure S10 ) were engineered using the OPEN method as previously described ( Maeder et al . , 2008 ) . The top two of three zinc ﬁnger arrays for each half - site that exhibited the highest levels of transcriptional activation in the bacterial two - hybrid system were chosen for use as ZFNs . To construct ZFN expression vectorsformammaliancells , XbaI - BamHIfragmentsharboringtheengineered zinc ﬁnger arrays were cloned into XbaI - and BamHI - digested pST1374 and fused to the endonuclease domain in the vector ( Maeder et al . , 2008 ) . A pair of ZFNs targeting the GFP gene was previously described ( Pruett - Miller et al . , 2008 ) . The target site and amino acid sequences of these two GFP - speciﬁc ZFNs are also shown in Figure S9 . They are expressed from a similar expression vector . Requests for OPEN ZFN reagents and protocols should be directed to JKJ . EGFP Gene Correction in 293T Cells First , EGFP was mutated with either a 35 bp insertion ( Figure S2 ) or a 41 bp insertion containing PIG - A ZFN sites ( Figure S3 ) and inserted into a lentiviral vectorwithIRES - Puro R cassette ( Figure1A ) . Aftertransductionandpuromycin selection , surviving cells containing EGIP * ( termed 293T - EGIP * or 293T - EGIP * PIGA ) were used for EGFP gene targeting . The 2 . 5 3 10 5 293T - EGIP * or 293T - EGIP * PIGA cells were plated in one 12 - well coated with 0 . 1 % gelatin 1 day before lipofection . At the day of transfection , 1 m g of tGFP donor with various amountsofZFNsexpressionvectorswastransfectedusingstandardLipofect - amine 2000 protocol ( Invitrogen ) . GFP + cells started to show up at 2 . 5 days after transfection and were monitored by FACS and microscopy thereafter . EGFP Gene Correction in hESCs and hiPSCs H9hESCsweretransducedwithEGIP * ( 35bpinsertion ) lentivirusandselected with puromycin ( 1 m g / ml ) , and therefore , the starting population harbors EGIP * template . The 5 3 10 6 H9 - EGIP * cells grown on MEF feeder cells were har - vested at (cid:3) 80 % conﬂuence with brief trypsin digestion and pipetting . Then , the cells were resuspended in 100 m l Amaxa mouse ES nucleofection buffer with various ratios of tGFP donor : ZFNs ( e . g . , 1 : 10 = 1 m g : 10 m g ) and trans - fected using the Nucleofector II and preset programs such as A - 23 ( Amaxa ) . Cellswerereplated1 : 1ontoMEFsafterward , andGFP + cellsbegantoemerge 4 – 5 days later . For MP2 iPSCs that are already puromycin resistant , no puro - mycin selection was done , and therefore , only a portion of the starting popu - lation has the EGIP * template . The 3 3 10 6 mixed MP2 - EGIP * cells ( without puromycin - mediated transgene selection ) were used for EGFP gene correc - tion with the same nucleofection settings as for H9 - EGIP * cells . PIG - A Gene Targeting in hESCs and iPSCs GGFP hESCs , MP2 iPSCs , or hFib2 - iPS5 cells ( 3 – 5 3 10 6 ) were transfected with 4 m g of PIG - A - targeting donor ( PHD ) and various amounts of the L1 / R2 ZFN pair ( Figure S10 ) . Transfected cells were then replated onto W3R feeders ( Caietal . , 2007 ) andselectedwithconditionedmediumcontaininghygromycin ( 10 m g / ml ) for 12 days beginning from day 4 postnucleofection . In hFib2 - iPS5 cell gene - targeting experiments , 10 m M ROCK inhibitor Y27632 ( Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) was added for 1 hr prior to and 24 hr postnucleofection . Hygrom - ycin - resistant colonies were counted after selection , and single colonies were manually picked and expanded . More details are provided in the Supplemental Data . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells 108 Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . SUPPLEMENTAL DATA Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures and 10 ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / cell - stem - cell / supplemental / S1934 - 5909 ( 09 ) 00232 - X . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankSarahDoweyandtheJohnsHopkinsHospitalPrenatalCytogenetics Laboratory for professional karyotyping . We also thank three anonymous reviewers for suggestions that helped us in revision . This work is funded in part by the Stem Cell Research Foundation ( S2005 - 026 ) , Johns Hopkins Insti - tute for Cell Engineering , and the NIH grant R01 HL073781 to L . C . J . Z . is sup - ported by a Maryland Stem Cell Research Postdoctoral Fellowship Grant . J . K . J . ’s group is supported by the NIH ( R01GM069906 , R21RR024189 , and R21HL091808 ) , the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation , and the MGH Pathology Service . M . H . P . ’s lab is supported by the state of Texas , NIH RO1 HL079295 , and by a Career Development Award from the Burroughs - Well - come Fund . G . Q . D . is an Investigator of Howard Hughes Medical Institute . Received : February 25 , 2009 Revised : April 24 , 2009 Accepted : May 20 , 2009 Published online : June 18 , 2009 REFERENCES Cai , L . , Ye , Z . , Zhou , B . Y . , Mali , P . , Zhou , C . , and Cheng , L . ( 2007 ) . Promoting human embryonic stem cell renewal or differentiation by modulating Wnt signal and culture conditions . Cell Res . 17 , 62 – 72 . Carroll , D . ( 2008 ) . Progress and prospects : Zinc - ﬁnger nucleases as gene therapy agents . Gene Ther . 15 , 1463 – 1468 . Cathomen , T . , and Joung , J . K . ( 2008 ) . Zinc - ﬁnger nucleases : the next gener - ation emerges . Mol . Ther . 16 , 1200 – 1207 . Chen , G . , Ye , Z . , Yu , X . , Zou , J . , Mali , P . , Brodsky , R . A . , and Cheng , L . ( 2008 ) . Trophoblast differentiation defect in human embryonic stem cells lacking PIG - A and GPI - anchored cell - surface proteins . Cell Stem Cell 2 , 345 – 355 . Costa , M . , Dottori , M . , Sourris , K . , Jamshidi , P . , Hatzistavrou , T . , Davis , R . , Azzola , L . , Jackson , S . , Lim , S . M . , Pera , M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . A method for genetic modiﬁcation of human embryonic stem cells using electroporation . Nat . Pro - toc . 2 , 792 – 796 . Cowan , C . A . , Klimanskaya , I . , McMahon , J . , Atienza , J . , Witmyer , J . , Zucker , J . P . , Wang , S . , Morton , C . C . , McMahon , A . P . , Powers , D . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Deri - vation of embryonic stem - cell lines from human blastocysts . N . Engl . J . Med . 350 , 1353 – 1356 . Davis , R . P . , Ng , E . S . , Costa , M . , Mossman , A . K . , Sourris , K . , Elefanty , A . G . , and Stanley , E . G . ( 2008 ) . Targeting a GFP reporter gene to the MIXL1 locus of human embryonic stem cells identiﬁes human primitive streak - like cells and enables isolation of primitive hematopoietic precursors . Blood 111 , 1876 – 1884 . DiDomenico , A . I . , Christodoulou , I . , Pells , S . C . , McWhir , J . , andThomson , A . J . ( 2008 ) . Sequential genetic modiﬁcation of the hprt locus in human ESCs combining gene targeting and recombinase - mediated cassette exchange . Cloning Stem Cells 10 , 217 – 230 . Dravid , G . , Ye , Z . , Hammond , H . , Chen , G . , Pyle , A . , Donovan , P . , Yu , X . , and Cheng , L . ( 2005 ) . DeﬁningtheroleofWnt / beta - cateninsignalinginthesurvival , proliferation , and self - renewal of human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 23 , 1489 – 1501 . Durai , S . , Mani , M . , Kandavelou , K . , Wu , J . , Porteus , M . H . , and Chandrase - garan , S . ( 2005 ) . Zinc ﬁnger nucleases : custom - designed molecular scissors for genome engineering of plant and mammalian cells . Nucleic Acids Res . 33 , 5978 – 5990 . Foley , J . E . , Yeh , J . R . , Maeder , M . L . , Reyon , D . , Sander , J . D . , Peterson , R . T . , and Joung , J . K . ( 2009 ) . Rapid mutation of endogenous zebraﬁsh genes using zinc ﬁnger nucleases made by Oligomerized Pool ENgineering ( OPEN ) . PLoS ONE 4 , e4348 . Giudice , A . , and Trounson , A . ( 2008 ) . Genetic modiﬁcation of human embry - onic stem cells for derivation of target cells . Cell Stem Cell 2 , 422 – 433 . Hanna , J . , Wernig , M . , Markoulaki , S . , Sun , C . W . , Meissner , A . , Cassady , J . P . , Beard , C . , Brambrink , T . , Wu , L . C . , Townes , T . M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Treatment of sickle cell anemia mouse model with iPS cells generated from autologous skin . Science 318 , 1920 – 1923 . Hohenstein , K . A . , Pyle , A . D . , Chern , J . Y . , Lock , L . F . , andDonovan , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Nucleofection mediates high - efﬁciency stable gene knockdown and trans - gene expression in human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 26 , 1436 – 1443 . Irion , S . , Luche , H . , Gadue , P . , Fehling , H . J . , Kennedy , M . , and Keller , G . ( 2007 ) . Identiﬁcation and targeting of the ROSA26 locus in human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 1477 – 1482 . Lombardo , A . , Genovese , P . , Beausejour , C . M . , Colleoni , S . , Lee , Y . L . , Kim , K . A . , Ando , D . , Urnov , F . D . , Galli , C . , Gregory , P . D . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Gene editing in human stem cells using zinc ﬁnger nucleases and integrase - defective lenti - viral vector delivery . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 1298 – 1306 . Lowry , W . E . , Richter , L . , Yachechko , R . , Pyle , A . D . , Tchieu , J . , Sridharan , R . , Clark , A . T . , and Plath , K . ( 2008 ) . Generation of human induced pluripotent stemcellsfromdermalﬁbroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 2883 – 2888 . Maeder , M . L . , Thibodeau - Beganny , S . , Osiak , A . , Wright , D . A . , Anthony , R . M . , Eichtinger , M . , Jiang , T . , Foley , J . E . , Winfrey , R . J . , Townsend , J . A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Rapid ‘‘open - source’’engineering of customized zinc - ﬁngernucleases for highly efﬁcient gene modiﬁcation . Mol . Cell 31 , 294 – 301 . Mali , P . , Ye , Z . , Hammond , H . H . , Yu , X . , Lin , J . , Chen , G . , Zou , J . , and Cheng , L . ( 2008 ) . Improved efﬁciency and pace of generating induced pluripotent stem cells from human adult and fetal ﬁbroblasts . Stem Cells 26 , 1998 – 2005 . Miller , J . C . , Holmes , M . C . , Wang , J . , Guschin , D . Y . , Lee , Y . L . , Rupniewski , I . , Beausejour , C . M . , Waite , A . J . , Wang , N . S . , Kim , K . A . , et al . ( 2007 ) . An improved zinc - ﬁnger nuclease architecture for highly speciﬁc genome editing . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 778 – 785 . Nightingale , S . J . , Hollis , R . P . , Pepper , K . A . , Petersen , D . , Yu , X . J . , Yang , C . , Bahner , I . , andKohn , D . B . ( 2006 ) . Transientgeneexpressionbynonintegrating lentiviral vectors . Mol . Ther . 13 , 1121 – 1132 . Park , I . H . , Zhao , R . , West , J . A . , Yabuuchi , A . , Huo , H . , Ince , T . A . , Lerou , P . H . , Lensch , M . W . , and Daley , G . Q . ( 2008 ) . Reprogramming of human somatic cells to pluripotency with deﬁned factors . Nature 451 , 141 – 146 . Porteus , M . H . ( 2006 ) . Mammalian gene targeting with designed zinc ﬁnger nucleases . Mol . Ther . 13 , 438 – 446 . Porteus , M . H . , and Baltimore , D . ( 2003 ) . Chimeric nucleases stimulate gene targeting in human cells . Science 300 , 763 . Porteus , M . H . , and Carroll , D . ( 2005 ) . Gene targeting using zinc ﬁnger nucle - ases . Nat . Biotechnol . 23 , 967 – 973 . Pruett - Miller , S . M . , Connelly , J . P . , Maeder , M . L . , Joung , J . K . , and Porteus , M . H . ( 2008 ) . Comparison of zinc ﬁnger nucleases for use in gene targeting in mammalian cells . Mol . Ther . 16 , 707 – 717 . Pruett - Miller , S . M . , Reading , D . W . , Porter , S . N . , and Porteus , M . H . ( 2009 ) . Attenuation of zinc ﬁnger nuclease toxicity by small - molecule regulation of protein levels . PLoS Genet . 5 , e1000376 . Reubinoff , B . E . , Pera , M . F . , Fong , C . Y . , Trounson , A . , and Bongso , A . ( 2000 ) . Embryonic stem cell lines from human blastocysts : somatic differentiation in vitro . Nat . Biotechnol . 18 , 399 – 404 . Ruby , K . M . , and Zheng , B . ( 2009 ) . Gene targeting in an HUES line of human embryonic stem cells via electroporation . Stem Cells , in press . Published on - line March 29 , 2009 . 10 . 1002 / stem . 73 . Suzuki , K . , Mitsui , K . , Aizawa , E . , Hasegawa , K . , Kawase , E . , Yamagishi , T . , Shimizu , Y . , Suemori , H . , Nakatsuji , N . , and Mitani , K . ( 2008 ) . Highly efﬁcient transient gene expression and gene targeting in primate embryonic stem cells with helper - dependent adenoviral vectors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 13781 – 13786 . Szczepek , M . , Brondani , V . , Buchel , J . , Serrano , L . , Segal , D . J . , and Catho - men , T . ( 2007 ) . Structure - basedredesignofthedimerizationinterfacereduces the toxicity of zinc - ﬁnger nucleases . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 786 – 793 . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 109 Takahashi , K . , Tanabe , K . , Ohnuki , M . , Narita , M . , Ichisaka , T . , Tomoda , K . , andYamanaka , S . ( 2007 ) . Inductionofpluripotentstemcellsfromadulthuman ﬁbroblasts by deﬁned factors . Cell 131 , 861 – 872 . Thomson , J . A . , Itskovitz - Eldor , J . , Shapiro , S . S . , Waknitz , M . A . , Swiergiel , J . J . , Marshall , V . S . , and Jones , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts . Science 282 , 1145 – 1147 . Townsend , J . A . , Wright , D . A . , Winfrey , R . J . , Fu , F . , Maeder , M . L . , Joung , J . K . , and Voytas , D . F . ( 2009 ) . High - frequency modiﬁcation of plant genes using engineered zinc ﬁnger nucleases . Nature 459 , 442 – 445 . Urbach , A . , Schuldiner , M . , and Benvenisty , N . ( 2004 ) . Modeling for Lesch - Nyhan disease by gene targeting in human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 22 , 635 – 641 . Urnov , F . D . , Miller , J . C . , Lee , Y . L . , Beausejour , C . M . , Rock , J . M . , Augustus , S . , Jamieson , A . C . , Porteus , M . H . , Gregory , P . D . , andHolmes , M . C . ( 2005 ) . Highly efﬁcient endogenous human gene correction using designed zinc - ﬁnger nucleases . Nature 435 , 646 – 651 . Watanabe , K . , Ueno , M . , Kamiya , D . , Nishiyama , A . , Matsumura , M . , Wataya , T . , Takahashi , J . B . , Nishikawa , S . , Muguruma , K . , and Sasai , Y . ( 2007 ) . A ROCK inhibitor permits survival of dissociated human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Bio - technol . 25 , 681 – 686 . Yang , T . T . , Cheng , L . , andKain , S . R . ( 1996 ) . Optimizedcodonusageandchro - mophore mutations provide enhanced sensitivity with the green ﬂuorescent protein . Nucleic Acids Res . 24 , 4592 – 4593 . Yu , J . , Vodyanik , M . A . , Smuga - Otto , K . , Antosiewicz - Bourget , J . , Frane , J . L . , Tian , S . , Nie , J . , Jonsdottir , G . A . , Ruotti , V . , Stewart , R . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells . Science 318 , 1917 – 1920 . Yu , X . , Zou , J . , Ye , Z . , Hammond , H . , Chen , G . , Tokunaga , A . , Mali , P . , Li , Y . M . , Civin , C . , Gaiano , N . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Notch signaling activation in human embry - onic stem cells is required for embryonic , but not trophoblastic , lineage commitment . Cell Stem Cell 2 , 461 – 471 . Zwaka , T . P . , and Thomson , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Homologous recombination in human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 , 319 – 321 . Cell Stem Cell Gene Targeting in Human iPS and ES Cells 110 Cell Stem Cell 5 , 97 – 110 , July 2 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc .