Comparative membrane proteomics reveals diverse cell regulators concentrated at the nuclear envelope Li - Chun Cheng 1 , † , Xi Zhang 1 , † , Sabyasachi Baboo 1 , † , Julie A Nguyen 1 , Salvador Martinez - Bartolomé 1 , Esther Loose 1 , Jolene Diedrich 1 , John R Yates III 1 , * , Larry Gerace 1 , * * 1 Department of Molecular Medicine , Scripps Research , 10550 N Torrey Pines Rd , La Jolla CA , USA * Corresponding author . E - mail : jyates @ scripps . edu * * Corresponding author . E - mail : lgerace @ scripps . edu † These authors contributed equally to this work Running title : Comparative nuclear envelope proteomics Abstract The nuclear envelope ( NE ) is a subdomain of the ER with prominent roles in nuclear organization , largely mediated by its distinctive protein composition . We developed methods to reveal novel , low abundance transmembrane ( TM ) proteins concentrated at the NE relative to the peripheral ER . Using label - free proteomics that compared isolated NEs to cytoplasmic membranes , we first identified proteins with apparent NE enrichment . In subsequent authentication , ectopically expressed candidates were analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy to quantify their targeting to the NE in cultured cells . Ten proteins from a validation set were found to associate preferentially with the NE , including oxidoreductases , enzymes for lipid biosynthesis and regulators of cell growth and survival . We determined that one of the validated candidates , the palmitoyltransferase Zdhhc6 , modifies the NE oxidoreductase Tmx4 and thereby modulates its NE levels . This provides a functional rationale for the NE concentration of Zdhhc6 . Overall , our methodology has revealed a group of previously unrecognized proteins concentrated at the NE and additional candidates . Future analysis of these can potentially unveil new mechanistic pathways associated with the NE . Keywords : nuclear envelope , nuclear lamina , proteomics , transmembrane protein , palmitoyltransferase Introduction The nuclear envelope ( NE ) is a specialized sub - domain of the ER that forms the boundary of the nucleus and compartmentalizes chromosomes and associated metabolism ( Dultz & Ellenberg , 2007 ) . It is a double membrane sheet comprising the outer nuclear membrane ( ONM ) , the inner nuclear membrane ( INM ) and the nuclear pore membrane connecting these ( Obara et al , 2022 ) . The pore membrane is juxtaposed to nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) , transport channels spanning the NE that link the nucleus and cytoplasm ( Beck & Hurt , 2017 ; Knockenhauer & Schwartz , 2016 ; Lin & Hoelz , 2019 ) . NPCs are massive supramolecular assemblies ( ~ 100 MDa in higher eukaryotes ) containing multiple copies of ~ 30 different proteins termed nucleoporins ( or “Nups” ) . NPCs mediate nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of most macromolecules by facilitated mechanisms involving shuttling nuclear transport receptors that bind to their cargoes and specific Nups ( Wing et al , 2022 ) . NPCs also act as significant barriers to passive diffusion of molecules larger than ~ 20 - 40 kDa ( Beck & Hurt , 2017 ; Knockenhauer & Schwartz , 2016 ) . The ONM is contiguous with more peripheral ER and shares biochemical and functional properties with the latter , whereas the INM has nucleus - centered functions that are specified by its distinctive protein composition ( Dultz & Ellenberg , 2007 ; Pawar & Kutay , 2021 ) . In higher eukaryotes , the INM is lined by a polymeric meshwork of nuclear lamins , type V intermediate filament proteins ( Burke & Stewart , 2013 ; Gruenbaum & Foisner , 2015 ) . Three major lamin subtypes with discrete developmental expression profiles are found in vertebrates : lamins A / C , lamin B1 and lamin B2 . Moreover , all eukaryotic cells contain a set of transmembrane ( TM ) proteins concentrated at the INM and at the nuclear pore membrane ( Cheng et al , 2019 ; Pawar & Kutay , 2021 ; Schirmer et al , 2003 ) . Collectively , nuclear lamins and these TM proteins have critical roles in the nuclear structure and mechanics ( Cho et al , 2017 ; Maurer & Lammerding , 2019 ; Miroshnikova & Wickstrom , 2022 ) , chromosome organization and maintenance ( Hildebrand & Dekker , 2020 ; Kim et al , 2019 ) , and regulation of signaling and gene expression ( Choi & Worman , 2014 ; Gerace & Tapia , 2018 ) . At least 15 human diseases arise from mutations in lamins and TM proteins of the NE , underscoring their functional significance ( Shin & Worman , 2021 ; Wong & Stewart , 2020 ) . TM proteins of the INM become membrane - integrated in the peripheral ER during their synthesis . In higher eukaryotes , most of these proteins appear to accumulate at the NE by a diffusion - retention mechanism . This involves diffusive movement of the proteins in the lipid bilayer around NPCs , coupled with their binding to lamins , chromatin and / or other INM - associated components ( Katta et al , 2014 ; Ungricht & Kutay , 2015 ) . With this mechanism , exchange of TM proteins between ONM and INM is bidirectional and is limited by the size of their cytoplasmic domains ( Katta et al . , 2014 ; Ungricht & Kutay , 2015 ) . By contrast , in yeast TM proteins commonly are transported to the INM by receptor - dependent facilitated diffusion around the NPC ( King et al , 2006 ; Meinema et al , 2011 ) , a mechanism that also contributes to INM targeting of some proteins higher eukaryotes ( Mudumbi et al , 2020 ) . The extent to which specific TM proteins accumulate at the NE relative to the peripheral ER is not fixed , but rather , can depend on the cell type ( Malik et al , 2010 ) and its specific functional state ( Le et al , 2016 ) . Most TM proteins concentrated at the NE are known to have specific functions at the INM and / or the NPC ( Dultz & Ellenberg , 2007 ; Pawar & Kutay , 2021 ) . Predicated on this logic , identification of novel NE - enriched proteins provides a framework to deepen an understanding of NE functions . To define such proteins , a comparative or “subtractive” proteomics approach has been deployed ( Korfali et al , 2010 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ; Tang et al , 2020 ; Wilkie et al , 2011 ) , wherein isolated NEs are analyzed in tandem with purified microsomal membranes derived mainly from the peripheral ER , where most TM protein synthesis occurs . Proteins that are detected at higher levels in NEs than in microsomes by proteomics are candidate NE - concentrated proteins . However , this must be independently confirmed by immunolocalization and / or other methods . These and allied approaches have identified a cohort of TM proteins concentrated at the NE , most of which are relatively abundant , i . e . , present at more than ~ 50 - 100 , 000 copies per nucleus ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ; Pawar & Kutay , 2021 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ) . However , the identification of low abundance NE - enriched proteins by these methods has been confounded by several technical issues . First , proteomics datasets reveal that the NE fractions contain well - defined TM markers of cytoplasmic organelles other than the ER , including plasma membrane , Golgi and mitochondria , indicating their partial co - fractionation with NEs ( Korfali et al . , 2010 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ; Tang et al . , 2020 ; Wilkie et al . , 2011 ) . Since non - ER cytoplasmic membranes are highly under - represented in the isolated microsomes used for comparative filtering ( Korfali et al . , 2010 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ; Tang et al . , 2020 ; Wilkie et al . , 2011 ) , some uncharacterized proteins that preferentially appear in the NE fraction may actually derive from other cytoplasmic organelles . Second , validation of NE - targeting of candidates has relied on ectopic overexpression ( Korfali et al . , 2010 ; Malik et al . , 2010 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ; Tang et al . , 2020 ; Wilkie et al . , 2011 ) , often by transient transfection with chemical reagents . This can result in accumulation of ectopic proteins in non - physiological cellular aggregates that are often juxtanuclear ( Tapia & Gerace , 2016 ) , a pattern that can be confused with NE localization . Finally , in most cases quantitative evaluation of ectopic protein localization at the NE vs other cytoplasmic membranes was not rigorously implemented . To circumvent these limitations , we developed modified proteomics - based methods for identification of low abundance proteins concentrated at the NE . Using chemically extracted membranes to enrich for TM proteins and thereby increase proteomics depth , candidates were identified by comparing isolated NEs to composite cytoplasmic membrane fractions rather than ER - biased microsomes . Subsequently , candidates enriched in the NE fraction were tested for selective targeting to the NE by low - level ectopic expression in cultured cells and systematic quantification by immunofluorescence microscopy . We evaluated this method by analyzing a cohort of NE - enriched TM proteins that we uncovered in a newly implemented comparative proteomics filtering ( above ) , focusing on cell regulators not previously linked to the NE . We found that the majority of these candidates showed clear enrichment at the NE by immunofluorescence microscopy when expressed ectopically , confirming the NE association suggested by comparative proteomics . We initiated a functional analysis of one of the low - abundance NE - enriched proteins identified in our screen , the palmitoyltransferase Zdhhc6 ( Lakkaraju et al , 2012 ) . We determined that a major NE palmitoylation target of Zdhhc6 is the INM - localized oxidoreductase Tmx4 ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ) . Our analysis of palmitoylation - deficient mutants of Tmx4 suggested that Zdhhc6 modulates the NE concentration of Tmx4 , providing a functional rationale for the observed NE - enrichment of Zdhhc6 . Altogether , our methodology has revealed a cohort of previously unrecognized NE - enriched proteins and numerous additional candidates , many with interesting functional annotations not previously connected to the NE . This provides a robust framework for hypothesis development and testing to augment current functional understanding of the NE . Results Membrane Proteomics to Identify Candidate NE - concentrated Proteins We sought to develop improved procedures to predict and validate TM proteins concentrated at the NE based on comparative proteomics with isolated NEs ( Malik et al . , 2010 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ) . Since most well - characterized NE proteins are relatively abundant ( > 50 - 100 , 000 copies per nucleus ) , we wished in particular to uncover low abundance NE proteins . For this analysis we analyzed membrane fractions isolated from C3H10T1 / 2 murine mesenchymal stem cells ( designated “C3H” cells below ) , a model for human diseases linked to the NE ( Worman et al , 2010 ) . Since a major limitation of previous NE proteomics involved imprecise exclusion of proteins from cytoplasmic membranes that co - fractionated with the NE ( see Introduction ) ( Korfali et al . , 2010 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ; Tang et al . , 2020 ; Wilkie et al . , 2011 ) , we used membrane fractions comprising an ensemble of all cytoplasmic organelles , instead of ER - biased microsomal membranes , to filter out “background” ( Fig . 2 A ) . Starting with a cell homogenate obtained by hypotonic cell lysis ( sample 1 ) , we prepared a low - speed nuclear pellet ( sample 3 ) , which also contained a substantial amount of trapped peripheral ER ( ~ 50 % of the total calnexin ) and other cytoplasmic membranes . The postnuclear supernatant from this step ( sample 2 ) was fractionated by flotation on a sucrose step gradient to yield light cytoplasmic membrane ( LCM , sample 4 ) and heavy cytoplasmic membrane ( HCM , sample 5 ) fractions . In parallel , the resuspended nuclear pellet ( sample 3 ) was fractionated on a sucrose step gradient to yield a composite LCM / HCM fraction ( designated HCM2 , sample 6 ) and isolated nuclei ( sample 7 ) . The nuclear fraction then was used to isolate NEs ( sample 9 ) by nuclease digestion and high salt extraction ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ) . To increase the proteomics depth for detection of TM proteins , we evaluated methods for enriching TM proteins in the isolated membranes . We compared the effects of two chemical perturbants known to preferentially deplete peripheral membrane proteins and cytoskeletal elements from membranes ( Fig . 1 A ) , 6 M urea ( Foisner & Gerace , 1993 ; Steck & Yu , 1973 ) and 0 . 1 M Na 2 CO 3 pH 11 . 5 ( Fujiki et al , 1982 ) . Initially we used Western blotting to monitor marker proteins in the NE and LCM fractions treated with these conditions ( Fig . 1 B ) . In NEs extracted with 6 M urea ( “urea” ) , the peripheral membrane protein lamin A as well as the cytoskeletal proteins actin , vimentin and myosin were efficiently removed as compared to unextracted membranes , whereas the NE - enriched TM proteins LAP2 b and emerin ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ) were not detectably depleted . By contrast , treatment of NEs with 0 . 1 M Na 2 CO 3 ( “carbonate” ) did not discriminate between TM and non - TM proteins as efficiently , since emerin was partially extracted and lamin A was incompletely depleted . In LCMs , there was no detectable difference in the extraction resistance of marker TM proteins of mitochondria ( Tim23 ) and ER ( calnexin ) , or in the loss of actin ( Fig . 2 B ) with both chemical conditions . We further compared these two conditions by analyzing NE and LCM fractions by MudPIT ( mullti - dimensional protein identification technology ) ( Washburn et al , 2001 ) , involving label - free LC / MS / MS ( Table S1 ) . We used normalized spectral abundance factor ( NSAF ) values to semi - quantitatively represent relative protein abundance ( Zybailov et al , 2005 ) . For each protein , the NSAF ratios in chemically extracted vs unextracted membranes for the NE ( Fig . 1 C , left panel ) and LCM ( Fig . 1 C , right panel ) fractions described the enrichment obtained with each chemical condition , and enabled comparison of the two methods ( Tables S1 and S2 ) . In a graphical depiction of these results ( Fig . 1 C ) , proteins whose relative abundance increased with both chemical extraction conditions appeared in the upper right quadrant , and comprised mainly TM proteins . Conversely , proteins with diminished abundance in both conditions were in the lower left quadrant and comprised mostly non - TM proteins . Both extraction conditions enriched TM proteins with strong preference over non - TM proteins . In the NE fraction ( Fig . 1 C , left ) , somewhat more TM proteins showed enrichment by urea but not carbonate extraction ( lower right quadrant ) , as compared to enrichment by carbonate but not urea extraction ( upper left quadrant ) . Considering these results together with the Western blotting ( Fig . 1 B ) , extraction of membranes with 6 M urea seemed to be more optimal than 0 . 1 M Na 2 CO 3 for efficient recovery of TM proteins , and accordingly was deployed for subsequent analyses . Altogether we carried out proteomics of NE and LCM fractions from four independent membrane preparations , analyzing samples extracted with urea from all four preparations ( Table S1 ) . In addition , we examined HCM and HCM2 fractions that were extracted with urea for three of the four preparations . To estimate protein abundance in NEs relative to other membrane fractions , we deployed composite NSAF data to compute NE enrichment scores ( NE - ES ) ( Table S3 ) . One metric , termed NE - enrichment score 1 ( NE - ES1 ) , incorporated all comparable proteomics data that was available for the four preparations . This involved NE and LCM fractions that were extracted with urea or carbonate or were not extracted ( Table S3 ) . For each protein , NE - ES1 is the ratio of the summated NSAF values from the NE fractions of these samples , compared to summated NSAF values from the ( NE + LCM ) fractions . We also calculated a second , more stringent , NE - enrichment score 2 ( NE - ES2 ) for the three preparations extracted with urea , for which HCM and HCM2 data also was obtained . NE - ES2 is the ratio of summated NSAF values from the NE fractions , compared to the combined NSAF values for all fractions analyzed ( NE , LCM , HCM and HCM2 ) . We evaluated the NE - ES1 and NE - ES2 scoring methods by considering abundant and well - characterized TM proteins of the NE and ER ( Fig . 2 B , see annotations in Table S3 ) . For the NE markers , all proteins with the exception of Ndc1 had NE - ES1 values > 0 . 9 . Moreover , the NE - ES2 values for these proteins were only marginally lower than NE - ES1 , reflecting the minimal detection of these components in the HCM fractions . The lower NE - ES values for Ndc1 ( 0 . 75 , NE - ES1 ; 0 . 53 , NE - ES2 ) is most likely due to a substantial peripheral ER pool of this protein in C3H cells , as seen for emerin with certain cell types and conditions ( Berk et al , 2013 ; Le et al . , 2016 ) . A substantial number of the ER marker proteins had relatively high NE - ES1 values ( ~ 0 . 7 - 0 . 8 ) , particularly proteins reported to be enriched in sheet ER ( Ckap4 , Rrbp1 , Ssr1 / 4 , Ktn1 ) ( Obara et al . , 2022 ; Shibata et al , 2010 ) . However , the NE - ES2 values for these proteins were markedly lower , in most cases < 0 . 5 , due to the inclusion of HCM in the scoring calculation . These comparisons suggest that uncharacterized proteins with both NE - ES1 and NE - ES2 values > 0 . 8 are strong candidates for consideration as NE - concentrated species . The reliability of these metrics increases with the level of spectral detection for individual proteins , with more confident assessments involving detection across many or all of the fractionation experiments ( Table S1 ) . NE - ES1 incorporates more spectral data in this regard , although it is less stringent than NE - ES2 . It is important to note that NE enrichment scores are meaningful only for proteins containing a TM domain ( s ) . This is because many intranuclear proteins that are undetectable in isolated cytoplasmic membranes , including components of chromatin and ribonucleoprotein particles , co - fractionate with NEs to a minor extent and are not quantitatively extracted with urea or carbonate treatment . Because they are absent from cytoplasmic membranes , these contaminants have high NE enrichment scores even though they are not concentrated at the NE in situ . Validation of candidate NE - concentrated proteins by quantitative immunofluorescence microscopy We selected sixteen TM proteins identified from the proteomics screen , most with NE - ES1 and / or NE - ES2 scores > 0 . 9 , to further evaluate as potential NE - concentrated proteins . For this we used a cell - based targeting assay involving immunofluorescence localization ( Table 1 , Fig . 3 , Fig . S2 ) . Fourteen of these ( all except Tmem209 and Tmem214 ) were relatively low abundance based on their NSAF values , which were at least 5 - 10 - fold lower than values for the TM nucleoporin markers Pom121 and Ndc1 ( Fig . S1 and Table S1 ) . Two members of this group , Tmem209 ( Fujitomo et al , 2012 ; Malik et al . , 2010 ) and Tmem53 ( Korfali et al , 2011 ) , were previously suggested to be NE - concentrated , but the remainder have not been characterized . The proteins had a range of sizes and predicted TM segments ( Fig . S2 ) . Categorized by annotated functions , they included enzymes for lipid biosynthesis and modification , oxidoreductases , signaling regulators and components involved in protein folding and related activities ( Table 1 ) . We used a lentiviral vector and transient transduction conditions ( Tapia & Gerace , 2016 ) to achieve low - level expression of the epitope - tagged candidates in C3H cells , and deployed immunofluorescence microscopy to compare the subcellular localization of ectopic V5 - tagged constructs to endogenous calnexin , an abundant TM marker that is uniformly distributed throughout the NE / ER system ( Shibata et al . , 2010 ) ( Fig . 3 , see below ) . Low - level expression can be important for obtaining reliable NE targeting results , since some proteins that are endogenously concentrated at the NE are uniformly distributed throughout the NE / ER network or appear in large cytoplasmic inclusions with higher ectopic expression ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ) . These effects , in part , likely reflect saturation of a limited number of binding sites for the proteins at the NE ( Katta et al . , 2014 ; Pawar & Kutay , 2021 ) and “spillover” of excess protein to contiguous ER elements . For all 16 candidates analyzed , the ectopic constructs were localized to both the NE and peripheral ER , in a pattern broadly similar to calnexin ( Fig . 3 , top panel , Supplemental Fig . S4 ) . Although none of the constructs appeared in large aggregates with our conditions , Tmem9 and Ptdss2 did occur in smaller , heterogeneous cytoplasmic foci as well as in ER - like structures . Visual inspection of the immunofluorescence patterns ( Fig . 3 , top panel ) suggested that the majority of the candidates had a higher concentration at the NE than in the peripheral ER relative to calnexin . To analyze this quantitatively across populations of cells , we used a high information content method to calculate the relative concentration of ectopic constructs at the NE compared to the peripheral ER , designated the “NE / ER ratio” ( Fig . S3 ) . This method measured the fluorescence intensity of V5 - tagged constructs ( normalized to endogenous calnexin ) in two circumferential bands around the nuclear periphery , one containing the NE and a second , more external band containing peripheral ER elements . From this quantitative analysis , the majority of constructs ( 10 of the 16 proteins ) had an average NE / ER concentration ratios of at least 1 . 2 ( Fig . 3 , bottom panel ) , indicating that these proteins indeed were concentrated at the NE with our expression conditions . For some proteins , a substantially higher NE / ER ratio was observed with the epitope tag on the N - vs C - terminus ( notably Tmem53 and Gpat4 ) . This may be explained by diminished epitope accessibility for the NE pool of the ectopic protein , or by tag - related inhibition of accumulation at the NE . Conversely , epitope tag placement had no effect on the NE / ER ratio for other proteins examined ( Hsd11b1 , Zdhhc6 , Tmem161a ) . As a positive control , our quantification method yielded a NE / ER ratio of ~ 1 . 3 for Vrk2 , a previously described NE - concentrated protein ( Birendra et al , 2017 ; Cheng et al . , 2019 ) . By contrast , the peripheral ER marker Sec61 b appeared to be less concentrated at the NE than the adjacent ER ( NE / ER , ~ 0 . 8 ) as seen previously ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ) , as were some of the candidates tested ( Ogfod3 , Pigb ) . We compared the NE targeting of Zdhhc6 and Hsd11b1 seen in transiently transduced C3H cells ( Fig . 3 ) to that found in stably transduced C3H cells and in mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) ( Fig . S4 ) . We obtained similar targeting results with the different conditions , which all yielded NE / ER ratios of ~ 1 . 2 - 1 . 4 . The NE / ER ratio calculated by the above method generally underestimates the actual in situ NE concentration of the ectopic proteins . This is because the circumferential band used to define the NE reflects the average intensity of all structures in this region . Limited by the resolution of light microscopy , this zone likely contains peripheral ER elements juxtaposed to the ONM and / or parts of the tubular elements connecting these two structures ( Obara et al . , 2022 ) as well as the NE itself . Moreover , since all well - characterized NE proteins are concentrated at specific sub - structural regions of the NE ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ; Pawar & Kutay , 2021 ; Schirmer et al . , 2003 ) , the average NE concentration of specific proteins reported by this method would underrepresent their concentration at discrete NE subdomains ( e . g . , INM or NPC ) . Determination of the localization of the proteins described here with regard to NE substructure will require further analysis . However , the finely punctate labeling pattern on the nuclear surface seen for V5 - Tmem209 was conspicuously reminiscent of NPC labeling ( Fig . 3 , upper panel , Fig . S5 ) . Indeed , we observed strong co - localization of ectopic Tmem209 with the NPC - specific RL1 monoclonal antibody ( Snow et al , 1987 ) ( Fig . S5 ) . Since Tmem209 is conserved in higher eukaryotes ( PANTHER database ) and its abundance is similar to that of the TM nucleoporins Pom121 and Ndc1 ( Table S1 ) , it may be a previously unrecognized TM nucleoporin . In summary , the results from immunofluorescence localization of ectopically expressed constructs indicate that the majority of the candidates tested preferentially target to the NE relative to the peripheral ER with our conditions ( see Discussion ) . Together with the proteomics data of membrane fractions , the results indicate that these proteins represent previously unrecognized NE - concentrated proteins . Functional analysis of the palmitoyltransferase Zdhhc6 An underlying prediction of this study is that some functions of NE - concentrated proteins are likely to involve the nucleus . To address this question , we carried out an initial analysis of the palmitoyltransferase Zdhhc6 , one of the low abundance NE proteins identified here . Out of the seven palmitoyltransferases detected with more than 30 spectral counts in our analysis , Zdhhc6 was the only one with a high NE enrichment score . We determined that a pool of Zdhhc6 is localized to the INM in the vicinity of lamin B1 using the proximity ligation assay ( Supplemental Fig . S6 ) , indicating that it potentially could function at the INM . Even though we did not detect Zdhhc6 in LCM or HCM fractions by proteomics , a substantial peripheral ER pool of this protein seems likely ( see Discussion ) . This is because Zdhhc6 has been implicated in palmitoylation of multiple peripheral ER resident proteins including calnexin ( Lakkaraju et al . , 2012 ) , the IP3 receptor ( Fredericks et al , 2014 ) and the ubiquitin E3 ligase gp78 ( Fairbank et al , 2012 ) ( see Discussion ) . To identify potential NE palmitoylation targets of Zdhhc6 , we depleted Zdhhc6 from C3H cells with shRNA and metabolically labeled the cells with the palmitic acid analog 17ODYA . ( Fig . 4 A , Fig . S7 ) . After cell lysis , 17ODYA - containing proteins were tagged with biotin using click chemistry ( Gao & Hannoush , 2018 ) , modified proteins were captured on streptavidin beads , and samples were analyzed by tandem mass tag ( TMT ) proteomics to quantitatively compare protein bound to streptavidin beads with the different conditions ( Table S4 ) . Palmitoylated proteins were revealed by their selective or increased detection in samples incubated with 17ODYA as compared to palmitic acid . Moreover , palmitoylated proteins that were dependent on Zdhhc6 were reduced in the Zdhhc6 knockdown relative to control cells . This analysis detected five INM proteins whose capture levels were consistently reduced with Zdhhc6 knockdown ( Fig . 4 B , Table S4 ) . We directly confirmed the palmitoylation of two of these proteins ( lamin A and Tmx4 ) , using Western blot analysis to detect biotinylated , 17ODYA - labeled proteins ( Fig . 4 C ) . Further , we found that the modification level of Tmx4 was reduced by over 50 % in cells with knockdown of Zdhhc6 by siRNA ( Fig . 4 , D and E , Supplemental Fig . S7 ) . No significant changes in 17ODYA labeling of lamin A were seen with our conditions , suggesting that lamin A palmitoylation was not limited by the reduced level of Zdhhc6 obtained with transient knockdown by siRNA , in contrast to the effects obtained with stable depletion by shRNA ( Fig . S7 and Table S4 ) . Together , our results indicate that Tmx4 is a palmitoylation target of Zdhhc6 . Protein palmitoylation has widely reported effects on protein localization and stability ( Lakkaraju et al . , 2012 ; Linder & Deschenes , 2007 ; Lynes et al , 2012 ) . To evaluate whether palmitoylation similarly influences Tmx4 , we first mapped Tmx4 palmitoylation sites . Calnexin , which is best characterized target of Zdhhc6 , is modified on two cysteine residues positioned on the cytoplasmic side of the ER membrane , immediately adjacent to its TM segment ( Dallavilla et al , 2016 ; Lakkaraju et al . , 2012 ) . Mouse Tmx4 contains two similarly positioned cysteine residues on residue 209 and 211 , although only the Cys209 equivalent is conserved in human TMX4 ( Fig . 5 A ) . We made mutated versions of mouse Tmx4 in which either one or both of the conserved cysteine residues were mutated to alanine to block potential palmitoylation . Analysis of these constructs in cells labeled with 17ODYA revealed that most modification was lost with the C209A mutant , and that modification was virtually undetectable with the C209A / C211A mutant ( Fig . 5 B ) . This suggests that the conserved C209 on Tmx4 is the main site of palmitoylation and that C211 is modified to a lower extent . Regarding the functions of Tmx4 palmitoylation , we found that levels of the C209A , C211A and C209A / C211A palmitoylation - deficient mutants were significantly increased in single - integration cell populations as compared to the WT protein ( Fig . 5 C ) . Moreover , the NE / ER concentration ratio was significantly increased for the C209A / C211A mutant as compared to wild - type Tmx4 ( Fig . 5 D ) . Together , these results suggest that palmitoylation both reduces the cellular levels of Tmx4 and diminishes its relative concentration at the NE . This points to palmitoylation as a means of controlling the levels of Tmx4 at the INM by two complementary mechanisms , and strongly suggests that Zdhhc6 has nucleus - related functions at the NE . Discussion To promote an understanding of NE functions , we have refined methods to identify low abundance TM proteins that are concentrated at the NE . The core of our approach involved the use of label - free proteomics to analyze membrane fractions that were chemically extracted to enrich for TM proteins . By comparing isolated NEs to membrane fractions containing cytoplasmic organelles that partially co - fractionate with NEs , we identified proteins with selectively high NE abundance . To validate these candidates , proteins with high NE enrichment scores were ectopically expressed in cultured cells to quantify targeting to the NE from their site of synthesis in the peripheral ER by immunofluorescence microscopy . The proteomics screen revealed numerous candidates with high NE enrichment scores ( > 0 . 8 ) that were not previously connected to NE functions . Selecting a diverse sample set of mostly low abundance candidates for validation , we found that 10 of the 16 proteins examined targeted preferentially to the NE by immunofluorescence microscopy . Extrapolating from these results , it is likely that a substantial number of additional low abundance proteins with high NE enrichment scores also are enriched at the NE in situ . A priori , most of the NE - concentrated proteins we identified are likely to be concentrated at the INM and / or nuclear pore membrane , rather than the ONM ( see Introduction ) . Six of the candidates with high NE enrichment scores did not substantially concentrate at the NE in the ectopic targeting assay . It is possible that ( some of ) these were false positives that received high scores due to disproportionally low detection in the LCM and HCM fractions by MudPIT proteomics . Alternatively , they might indeed be NE - concentrated in C3H cells , but eluded detection due to several limitations intrinsic to the ectopic targeting assay . First , epitope accessibility might impair protein detection and / or targeting to the NE . This is exemplified by the considerably stronger NE concentration measured for the C - terminally tagged versions of Tmem53 and Gpat4 than the N - terminal versions . Second , ectopically overexpressed proteins might be undetectable above the levels that populate the peripheral ER if their NE accumulation is specified by a relatively low number and / or affinity of binding sites . Finally , the accumulation of certain proteins at the NE might require coordinated expression with other NE binding partners ( e . g . , other members of a multimeric complex ) that is not reproduced with the ectopic conditions . Interestingly , two proteins with high NE enrichment scores that did not show NE concentration with our expression conditions , Tmem9 and Tmem214 , were reported to interact with multiple NE proteins in stringent affinity capture - mass spectrometry screens with cultured cells ( Hein et al , 2015 ; Huttlin et al , 2021 ) . This is consistent with a NE association for these proteins that was not detected by our methods . Whereas our proteomics and ectopic targeting methods identified proteins that are relatively concentrated at the NE vs the peripheral ER , a precise determination of their copy numbers in the two compartments in situ remains a formidable challenge . Genomic tagging of proteins ( Cho et al , 2022 ) or use of specific antibodies in principle could address this issue , but both methods are currently limited by sensitivity for detection of low abundance proteins . Since the NE contains less than 5 - 10 % of the surface area of the peripheral ER in most mammalian cells ( Obara et al . , 2022 ; Shibata et al . , 2010 ) , many NE - concentrated proteins may have a greater copy number in the peripheral ER than in the NE , despite their selective concentration at the NE . Viewed from this perspective , at least many of these proteins are likely to act in the peripheral ER , in addition to having NE - related functions ( see below ) . The protein set that we validated with the NE targeting assay spans multiple functional categories , including lipid biosynthesis , redox regulation and signaling control . Whereas the peripheral ER is a well - established site for lipid biosynthesis ( Jacquemyn et al , 2017 ) , the INM can be an important site for promoting synthesis of phosphatidylcholine and triglycerides under some conditions ( Ohsaki et al , 2016 ; Romanauska & Kohler , 2018 ) . Our findings that some phosphoglyceride synthesis isozymes are concentrated at the NE ( Chpt1 , Ptdss2 , Gpat4 ) expands this current insight . Enrichment of Chpt1 at the INM is consistent with the finding that Pcy1a , the enzyme that synthesized CDP - choline and is rate - limiting for phosphatidylcholine synthesis , translocates from the nucleoplasm to the NE under conditions of phosphatidylcholine deficit ( Cornell & Ridgway , 2015 ; Haider et al , 2018 ) . Conceivably , the relative NE concentration of Chpt1 increases under similar conditions . Moreover , our observed NE concentration of Gpat4 , the enzyme that catalyzes attachment of the first fatty acyl chain to glycerolphosphate ( Jacquemyn et al . , 2017 ) , suggests that other downstream steps in phosphoglyceride biosynthesis may partly occur at the INM , in addition to the reactions catalyzed by Chpt1 and Ptdss2 . Although the functional significance of lipid biosynthesis at the INM remains speculative , it can afford an mechanism to enhance coordination between the transcription of lipid biosynthetic genes and the end - products of their action ( Jacquemyn et al . , 2017 ) . Our detection of signaling regulators concentrated at the NE , including Tmbim6 and Tmem53 , suggests a broader role for the NE in regulation of signaling than previously appreciated ( Tapia & Gerace , 2016 ) . Tmbim6 is a Bax - interactor that inhibits apoptosis in multiple cells models ( Lebeaupin et al , 2020 ) , and Tmem53 regulates cell cycle progression via several pathways ( Korfali et al . , 2011 ) . Unraveling the mechanistic basis for these effects now can be considered in the context of the NE environment . We previously found that the oxidoreductase Tmx4 is concentrated at the INM ( Cheng et al . , 2019 ) , where it potentially could regulate the LINC complex and / or associated TorsinA , redox - sensitive proteins involved in connecting the nucleus to the cytoplasmic cytoskeleton ( Cain et al , 2018 ; Lu et al , 2008 ; Zhu et al , 2010 ) . Indeed , the oxidoreductase function of Tmx4 was recently implicated in disassembly of the LINC complex under pharmacological stress to induce NE autophagy ( Kucinska , 2022 ) . Our identification of Vkorc1l1 as an additional NE - concentrated oxidoreductase may expand this functional network since Vkorc1 , a protein with a high NE enrichment score that is closely related to Vkorc1l1 , interacts in a redox reaction with Tmx4 ( Schulman et al , 2010 ) . In a separate functional context , the NE enrichment of Hsd11b1 , which reductively activates glucocorticoids and other steroids ( Swarbrick et al , 2021 ) , suggests a potential nuclear control system for positive regulation of steroid hormone action . Such a system also might include Steryl - sulfatase ( Sts ) , another protein from our screen with high NE enrichment scores . We focused on Zdhhc6 to investigate whether a low abundance protein concentrated at the NE could have nucleus - targeted functions . Our data indicated that several INM proteins including lamin A and the Tmx4 are its palmitoylation targets . Focusing on Tmx4 , we identified the major sites of Tmx4 palmitoylation by Zdhhc6 , and found that palmitoylation - deficient mutants were significantly increased in both steady state levels and in their NE / ER concentration ratio . Accordingly , palmitoylation of Tmx4 may attenuate Zdhhc6 functions at the INM both by decreasing its overall levels ( most likely by increased proteosomal turnover ( Dallavilla et al . , 2016 ) ) and by decreasing its INM concentration relative to the peripheral ER . This work strongly suggests a NE - selective function for Zdhhc6 . Zdhhc6 itself is regulated by palmitoylation ( Abrami et al , 2017 ) , underscoring the potential regulatory complexity of this system . In conclusion , the approaches we have outlined here , utilizing proteomic analysis of isolated membrane fractions and quantitative ectopic targeting assays , provide a template for confident identification of NE - concentrated proteins . Our findings have identified new NE - concentrated proteins that represent multiple functional categories , and have revealed a substantial number of additional candidates that remain to be directly evaluated . This information can provide a valuable framework for generating and testing new hypotheses on NE functions that heretofore have not been addressed . Materials and Methods Cell Culture C3H / 10T1 / 2 ( C3H ) cells ( ATCC # CCL - 225 ) and 293T cells ( ATCC # CRL - 3216 ) were acquired from the American Type Culture Collection and used at low passage number after freezing expanded stocks . Mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) were generated from C57BL / 6 mice by immortalization with the SV40 T antigen . MEFs , C3H and 293T cells were maintained in high glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Gibco ) , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin / glutamine cocktail ( Gibco ) , and 1 % minimum essential medium non - essential amino acids ( NEAA ) ( Gibco ) . All cells were maintained at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 . Subcellular Fractionation and Membrane Extraction For subcellular fractionation , C3H cells were seeded in 500 cm 2 plates and allowed to reach 90 % confluency . Plates were rinsed three times with ice - cold PBS , and then three times with ice - cold homogenization buffer ( HB ) ( 10 mM HEPES pH 7 . 8 , 10 mM KCl , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM PMSF , and 1 μg / ml each of pepstatin , leupeptin , and chymostatin ) . After these washes , cells were incubated in HB for 15 min on ice . Cells then were scraped off plates and were further disrupted by dounce homogenization with 18 - 20 strokes to achieve > 95 % cell disruption . The whole cell homogenate was layered on top of 2 ml shelf of 0 . 8 M sucrose in HB and centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C in a JS5 . 2 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) to yield a low speed nuclear pellet and a postnuclear supernatant , the latter comprising the zone above the sucrose shelf . The low speed nuclear pellet was resuspended in 1 . 8 M sucrose in HB using a cannulus , and the postnuclear supernatant was adjusted to a final concentration of 1 . 8 M sucrose in HB . The resuspended low speed nuclear pellet and the postnuclear supernatant were each layered in separate ultra - clear 13 . 2 ml nitrocellulose centrifuge tubes on top of a 1 ml layer of 2 . 0 M sucrose in HB . For the nucleus gradient , HB was layered over the loading zone to fill the nitrocellulose tube . For the postnuclear supernatant gradient , 1 ml of 1 . 4 M sucrose in HB was layered on top of the loading zone , followed by HB to fill the tube . The gradients then were centrifuged at 35 , 000 rpm ( 210 , 000g ) for 1 h at 4°C with no brake in an SW41Ti rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) . Two samples were collected from the nucleus gradient : a fraction comprising the HB / 1 . 8 M sucrose interface , termed “heavy cytoplasmic membranes 2” ( HCM2 ) , and the pellet at the bottom of the 2 . 0 M sucrose layer , which comprised the purified nuclei fraction . The latter was collected by resuspension in HB and dounce homogenization with 2 strokes to disperse aggregates . For the postnuclear supernatant gradient , the HB / 1 . 4 M sucrose interphase was collected and saved as “light cytoplasmic membranes” ( LCM ) and the 1 . 4 M sucrose / 1 . 8 M sucrose interface was collected and saved as “heavy cytoplasmic membranes” ( HCM ) . To prepare NEs , resuspended purified nuclei were incubated with 1 mM CaCl 2 and 100 ku / ml micrococcal nuclease ( New England Biolabs ) in HB for 37°C for 15 min . Digested nuclei were then placed on ice and NaCl was added to a final concentration of 500 mM . The sample then was layered on top of 1 ml shelf of 0 . 8 M sucrose in HB and centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C in a JS5 . 2 rotor . A sample comprising the region above the 0 . 8 M sucrose layer was collected and saved as “nuclear contents” . The pellet was collected with resuspension in HB and saved as the NE fraction . Chemical extraction of isolated membrane fractions involved four separate cell / membrane preparations . Isolated membrane fractions were dounce homogenized briefly and the protein concentration of each fraction was adjusted 0 . 5 mg / ml based on the Pierce BCA assay ( ThermoFisher ) . To carry out the chemical extractions , 200 µ l of each membrane fraction was added to 1 . 8 ml of the following solutions : deionized water ( PreW , pre - wash ) , 100 mM sodium carbonate pH 11 . 5 ( Cw , carbonate wash ) , or 8 M urea in 25 mM NaCl , 20 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 8 ( Uw , urea wash ) . For the Cw , samples were incubated for 30 min at 4°C . For the Uw , samples were incubated 30 min at room temperature . Samples were centrifuged for 1 h at 75 , 000 rpm ( 239 , 000 g ) at 4°C with a TLA100 . 3 fixed angle rotor . Pellets were gently rinsed with ice - cold deionized water and then processed for proteomics . Two membrane preparations were divided and used for parallel carbonate and urea extractions , and an additional two membrane preparations were used for urea extraction only . MudPIT Proteomics and NE Enrichment Scoring MudPIT proteomics ( Wolters et al , 2001 ) was carried out on NE and LCM fractions obtained from all four of the membrane preparations , and on HCM and HCM2 fractions obtained from three of these preparations . 30 µg protein from each subcellular fraction , estimated by the BCA protein assay , was suspended in 4 M urea , 0 . 2 % RapiGest SF ( Waters Corporation ) and 100 mM NH 4 HCO 3 pH 8 . 0 . Proteins were reduced with Tris ( 2 - carboxyethyl ) phosphine hydrochloride ( TCEP ) and alkylated with 2 - Chloroacetamide . Next , proteins were digested with 0 . 5 µg Lys - C ( Wako ) for 4 h at 37°C , and then for 12 h at 37°C in 2 M urea , 0 . 2 % RapiGest SF , 100 mM NH 4 HCO 3 pH 8 . 0 , 1 mM CaCl 2 with 1 µg trypsin ( Promega ) . Digested proteins were acidified with TFA to pH < 2 and RapiGest SF was precipitated out . Each fraction was loaded on individual MudPIT micro - columns ( 2 . 5 cm SCX : 5 µm diameter , 125 Å pores ; and 2 . 5 cm C18 Aqua : 5 µm diameter , 125 Å pores ; Phenomenex ) , and resolved across an analytical column ( 15 cm C18 Aqua : 5 µm diameter , 125 Å pores ) ( Phenomenex ) . Analysis was performed using an Agilent 1200 HPLC pump and a Thermo LTQ - Orbitrap Velos Pro using an in - house built electrospray stage . MudPIT experiments were performed with steps of 0 % , 10 % , 20 % , 30 % , 50 % , 70 % , 80 % , 90 % , 100 % buffer C and 90 / 10 % buffer C / B ( Wolters et al . , 2001 ) , being run for 5 min at the beginning of each gradient of buffer B . Electrospray was performed directly from the analytical column by applying the ESI voltage at a tee ( 150 mm ID ) ( Upchurch Scientific ) ( Wolters et al . , 2001 ) . Electrospray directly from the LC column was done at 2 . 5 kV with an inlet capillary temperature of 325 o C . Data - dependent acquisition of tandem mass spectra were performed with the following settings : MS / MS on the 20 most intense ions per precursor scan ; 1 microscan ; reject unassigned charge state and charge state 1 ; dynamic exclusion repeat count , 1 ; repeat duration , 30 sec ; exclusion list size 500 ; and exclusion duration , 90 sec . Protein and peptide identification was done with the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 ( Integrated Proteomics Applications , Inc . http : / / www . integratedproteomics . com / ) . Tandem mass spectra were extracted ( monoisotopic peaks ) from raw files using RawConverter ( He et al , 2015 ) and were searched against the UniProt SwissProt Mus musculus database ( release 2018 _ 01 ) with reversed sequences using ProLuCID ( Peng et al , 2003 ; Xu et al , 2015 ) . The search space included all fully - tryptic and half - tryptic peptide candidates with static modification of 57 . 02146 on cysteines . Peptide candidates were filtered using DTASelect ( Cociorva et al , 2007 ) at 1 % protein level False Discovery Rate , ( parameters : - p 1 - y 1 - - trypstat - - pfp 0 . 01 - - extra - - pI - DM 10 - - DB - - dm - in - t 0 - - brief – quiet ) ( McDonald et al , 2004 ; Tabb et al , 2002 ) . The NSAF values for each protein in the various membrane fractions analyzed were used to calculate NE enrichment scores . NE enrichment score 1 ( NE - ES1 ) utilized data from NE and LCM fractions obtained for all 4 membrane preparations and for both urea and carbonate extraction conditions . It involved the following equation , where e = experimental run and p = protein ID : 𝑁𝐸 − 𝐸𝑆1 & = ∑ 𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 , - . & . ∑ ( 𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 , - . & + 𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 123 . & ) . NE enrichment score 2 ( NE - ES2 ) utilized the additional data for HCM and HCM2 fractions that was obtained from three of these preparations according to the following : 𝑁𝐸 − 𝐸𝑆2 & = ∑ 𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 , - . & . ∑ 6𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 , - . & + 𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 123 . & + 𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 723 . & + 𝑁𝑆𝐴𝐹 7238 . & 9 . Isolation of Palmitoylated Proteins by Metabolic Labeling C3H cell populations were stably transduced with a lentiviral vector that produced either a ) shRNA targeting Zdhhc6 ( “shZdhhc6” ) , b ) a control shRNA sequence not found in the mouse genome ( “shCtrl” ) or c ) a second control shRNA targeting GFP ( “shGFP” ) . Cells were used for metabolic labeling within 5 passages after lentiviral transduction / puromycin selection . Two biological replicates of the three cell populations were each analyzed with two LC / MS3 technical repeats . For each replicate , 5 x 10 5 cells per 10 - cm dish were seeded one day prior to metabolic labeling . On the day of labeling , cells were rinsed with PBS and 10 ml of growth medium containing 50 µ M 17 - Octadecynoic Acid ( 17ODYA ) or 50 µ M phosphatidic acid was added . After 24 h , cells were harvested by trypsinization and pelleting , and were washed twice with cold PBS . Cells then were resuspended in non - denaturing lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 , 300 mM NaCl , 2 mM EDTA , 1 % NP - 40 , supplemented with 10 µ M Palmostatin B ( Merck # 17851 ) and Halt phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails ( ThermoFisher # 78440 ) ) and were sonicated on ice for 2 cycles of 10 seconds with a Sonic Dismembrator 60 ( ThermoFisher ) . The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 4 o C for 15 min at 20 , 000 g . The clarified lysate then was precipitated with methanol - chloroform ( 4 : 1 ) to remove free 17ODYA , and 1 mg of protein from each sample was click - labeled with Biotin - PEG3 - azide ( Cayman ) ( 0 . 58 mM Biotin - PEG3 - azide , 1 . 15 mM TCEP , 1 . 15 mM CuSO 4 , 1X Tris ( ( 1 - benzyl - 4 - triazolyl ) methyl ) amine solution in 1 : 4 DMSO / butanol ) by incubating for 1 h at room temperature . Free biotin - PEG3 - azide was removed by methanol - chloroform precipitation and the protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea supplemented with 2 % SDS in PBS . Protein samples were reduced for 20 min with 5 mM TCEP and then were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark . Samples then were diluted 10 - fold with PBS and were incubated with 100 µ l of a 50 % streptavidin - Sepharose ( Cytiva ) bead slurry for 1 . 5 h at room temperature , washed four times with 2 M urea in PBS containing 0 . 2 % SDS pH 7 , four times with 2 M urea in PBS pH 7 , and finally washed once with 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide ( TEAB ) . Protein - bound streptavidin - Sepharose beads were then stored at - 80 o C until further processing . TMT Sample Preparation , Data Acquisition and Analysis Frozen streptavidin - Sepharose beads were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB , 8 M urea , reduced with 5 mM TCEP and alkylated with 10 mM 2 - chloroacetamide . The bead suspension was diluted to 2 M urea , supplemented with 1 mM CaCl 2 and digested with 2 µ g trypsin ( Promega ) for 15 h at 37ᵒC . Beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 20 , 000 g for 5 min , and 150 µ g of protein was removed from the supernatant . After pooling 1 / 10 th of each sample to create a reference , each sample was labeled with 11 - plex TMT ( ThermoFisher ) at 3 : 1 ( TMT : protein ) ratio in 30 % acetonitrile , according to the manufacturer’s recommendation . After labeling , the samples were pooled and acetonitrile was removed using vacuum centrifugation . The mixture of TMT - labeled peptides was acidified and fractionated using a high pH reversed - phase peptide fractionation kit ( ThermoFisher ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation . The fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 5 % acetonitrile , 0 . 1 % formic acid . TMT - labeled peptides were analyzed using an EASY - nLC 1200 UPLC coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer ( ThermoFisher ) . LC buffer A ( 0 . 1 % formic acid , 5 % acetonitrile in H 2 O ) and buffer B ( 0 . 1 % formic acid , 80 % acetonitrile in H 2 O ) was used for all analyses . Peptides were loaded on a C18 column packed with Waters BEH 1 . 7 μm beads ( 100 μm x 25 cm , tip diameter 5 μm ) , and separated across 180 min : 1 - 40 % B over 140 min , 40 - 90 % B over 30 min and 90 % B for 10 min , using a flow rate of 400 nL / min . Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into MS via nESI at ionization voltage 2 . 8 kV and source temperature 275 °C . Peptide spectra were acquired using the data - dependent acquisition ( DDA ) synchronous precursor selection ( SPS ) - MS3 method . Briefly , MS scans were done in the Orbitrap ( 120k resolution , automatic gain control AGC target 4e5 , max injection time 50 ms , m / z 400 - 1500 ) , the most intense precursor ions at charge state 2 - 7 were then isolated by the quadrupole and CID MS / MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap in Turbo scan mode ( isolation width 1 . 6 Th , CID collision energy 35 % , activation Q 0 . 25 , AGC target 1e4 , maximum injection time 100 ms , dynamic exclusion duration 10 s ) , and finally 10 notches of MS / MS ions were simultaneously isolated by the orbitrap for SPS HCD MS3 fragmentation and measured in the Orbitrap ( 60k resolution , isolation width 2 Th , HCD collision energy 65 % , m / z 120 - 500 , maximum injection time 120 ms , AGC target 1e5 , activation Q 0 . 25 ) . Protein and peptide identification was done with the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 ( Integrated Proteomics Applications , Inc . http : / / www . integratedproteomics . com / ) . Tandem mass spectra were extracted ( monoisotopic peaks ) from raw files using RawConverter ( He et al . , 2015 ) and were searched against a UniProt SwissProt Mus musculus database ( # UP000000589 ) , including streptavidin ( UniProt # P22629 ) , with reversed sequences and standard contaminants , using ProLuCID ( Peng et al . , 2003 ; Xu et al . , 2015 ) . The search space included all fully - tryptic and half - tryptic peptide candidates with static modification of 57 . 02146 Da on cysteines and 229 . 1629 Da on lysines and N - termini . Peptide candidates were filtered using DTASelect ( Cociorva et al . , 2007 ) at 1 % spectrum level false discovery rate , ( parameters : - p 2 - y 1 - - trypstat - - fp 0 . 01 - - extra - - pI - DM 10 - - DB - - dm - in - t 1 - - brief – quiet ) ( McDonald et al . , 2004 ; Tabb et al . , 2002 ) . Molecular Cloning To construct lentiviral vectors expressing V5 - tagged versions of our proteins of interest , the following cDNA clones were purchased from Origene : pCMV6 - Chpt1 ( RefSeq NM _ 144807 ) , pCMV6 - Pigx , ( NM _ 024464 ) and pCMV6 - Dnajc16 ( NM _ 172338 ) . The remaining genes were cloned from a cDNA library constructed from the C3H cells . Genes of interest were amplified by PCR using Q5 High - Fidelity DNA Polymerase ( New England Biolabs # M0491L ) . All genes were inserted into either pLV - Ef1a - V5 - LIC - IRES - PURO ( Addgene # 120247 ) or pLV - Ef1a - LIC - V5 - IRES - PURO ( Addgene # 120248 ) . pLV - EF1a - IRES - Puro LIC - compatible vectors were digested with SrfI ( New England Biolabs ) . PCR fragments and SrfI - digested vector were combined with NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix ( New England Biolabs # E2621 ) in a 2 : 1 ratio of insert to vector . The DNA and DNA Assembly Master Mix were incubated at 50°C for 20 min and then NEB Stable Competent Cells ( New England Biolabs ) were transformed with the product . Cells were incubated at 30°C for 24 h , and resulting colonies were picked for clone validation . All cDNA clones were confirmed by complete DNA sequencing of the ORF in both 5’ - 3’ and 3’ - 5 directions . All clones for lentiviral vectors expressing the proteins described in this study are available from Addgene . Lentiviral transduction of cells To produce lentiviruses , 293T cells at 60 - 80 % confluency were shifted to DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , 1 % glutamine , and 1 % NEAA without antibiotics 30 min prior to transfection . Cells were transfected with pRSV - REV ( gift from Didier Trono , Addgene plasmid # 12253 ) , pMDL - RRE ( gift from Didier Trono , Addgene plasmid # 12251 ) , pCMV - VSVg ( gift from Bob Weinberg , Addgene plasmid # 8454 ) , and a pLV - EF1a - gene - of - interest vector ( pLV - EF1a - GOI ) using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) . Viral supernatant was harvested 48 h after transfection and filtered through a 0 . 45 µ m polyethersulfone membrane filter ( GE Healthcare Whatman ) . Western blotting of the viral supernatants with anti - V5 antibodies ( below ) was used to assess expression of the encoded V5 - tagged constructs . For stable lentiviral transduction of C3H cells and MEFs , cells were diluted to 5 x 10 4 cells / ml in DMEM with 10 % FBS , 1 % glutamine , and 1 % NEAA without antibiotics , and polybrene ( EMD Millipore ) was added to a final concentration of 10 mg / ml . Cells were transduced with different viral loads ( ranging from 1 to 500 µ l of viral supernatant per 1 ml of cells ) to obtain cell populations with a range of multiplicities of infection . After 3 days , cells were treated with puromycin ( Invitrogen ) to select for cells that had integrated viral DNA . C3H cells and MEFs were treated with 5 µ g / ml and 1 µ g / ml puromycin , respectively , for up to 1 week . Cell populations with < 30 % cell survival under puromycin treatment , reflecting mostly single - integration events , were further expanded and grown for Western blotting and immunofluorescence . Transient lentiviral transduction of C3H cells involved the methods described above , except cells were analyzed 48 h after treatment with virus without puromycin selection . Depletion of Zdhhc6 by RNAi Analysis of the palmitoylation targets of Zdhhc6 by proteomics utilized C3H cell populations that were stably transduced with lentiviral vectors producing shRNA , using the methods described above . Cells with depletion of Zdhhc6 were transduced with sh - Zdhhc6 ( Dharmacon # RMM3981 - 201743749 ) . Control cells were transduced with sh - eGFP ( Dharmacon # RHS4459 ) and non - targeting control shRNA ( Dharmacon # RHS6848 ) ( see Fig . 4 ) . Levels of Zdhhc6 mRNA in the stable populations were determined by qRT - PCR as described ( Cheng et al , 2022 ) . Subsequent experiments with Zdhhc6 depletion involved the use of C3H populations that had been stably transduced with various V5 - tagged Tmx4 lentiviral constructs . Zdhhc6 depletion in these cells was achieved with ON - TARGETplus siRNA SmartPool oligonucleotides , one targeting Zdhhc6 ( Horizon Discovery # L - 059510 - 01 - 0005 ) and a second comprising a non - targeting control pool siRNA ( Horizon Discovery # : D - 001810 - 10 - 05 ) . For this procedure , siRNAs were dissolved in 60 mM KCl , 6 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 2 mM MgCl 2 and added to serum - free DMEM to a concentration of 50 nM . This solution was then diluted to a final concentration of 25 nM siRNA with a 1 : 4 mixture of Dharmafect - 1 ( DF - 1 ) reagent ( Horizon Discovery # T - 2001 - 03 ) and DMEM , respectively , and was incubated at room temperature in the dark for 20 min . Using C3H populations grown to a density of 5 x10 5 cells per 10 - cm plate , the siRNA - DF - 1 mixture was added drop - wise to cells to a final concentration of 5 nM and distributed evenly with gentle rocking . After growth for 24 h , the medium was replaced with DMEM supplemented with serum and antibiotics . At 48 h post - transfection , cells were analyzed by Western blotting and qRT - PCR ( Cheng et al . , 2022 ) . Antibodies The following primary antibodies / reagents were used for Western blotting : rabbit anti - calnexin ( Sigma # C4731 ) , rabbit anti - lamin A ( affinity purified , made in - house to residues 391 - 428 of human lamin A ) , rabbit anti - LAP2 b ( made in - house to residues 1 - 194 of rat LAP2 b ) , mouse anti - Tim23 ( BD Transduction Laboratories # 611222 ) , streptavidin - HRP ( Thermo Fisher S911 ) , mouse anti - actin ( clone C4 , gift from Dr . Velia Fowler ) , mouse anti - myosin heavy chain ( clone 3J14 , US Biological # M9850 - 15B ) , mouse anti - vimentin ( clone RV202 , Abcam # ab8978 - 1 ) . The secondary antibodies used for Western blot detection were : sheep anti - mouse HRP ( GE Healthcare # NA931 ) , donkey anti - rabbit HRP ( GE Healthcare # NA934V ) . The following primary antibodies were used for immunofluorescence staining : mouse anti - V5 ( Invitrogen # 46 - 0705 ) , rabbit anti - V5 ( ThermoFisher # PA1 - 993 ) , rabbit anti - calnexin ( Abcam # ab22595 ) , guinea pig anti - lamin A / C ( made in - house to gel - purified rat liver lamin A ) , mouse monoclonal IgM RL1 ( recognizing FG repeat nucleoporins ( Snow et al . , 1987 ) ) , mouse anti - nesprin - 1 ( 8C3 , gift from Dr . Glenn E . Morris , RJAH Orthopaedic Hospital , UK ) , mouse anti - nesprin - 1 ( 7A12 , Millipore # MABT843 ) , rabbit anti - nesprin - 2 ( ThermoFisher , Invitrogen # 46 - 0705 ) , rabbit anti - nesprin - 3 ( United States Biological Corporation ) , rabbit anti - myosin heavy chain ( Abcam # 124205 ) . DAPI ( Sigma ) was used to stain DNA . Western blotting For Western blotting , cells were resuspended in 2X Laemmli buffer ( 4 % SDS , 10 % 2 - mercaptoethanol , 20 % glycerol , 0 . 004 % bromophenol blue , and 0 . 125 M Tris - HCl pH 6 . 8 ) and boiled for 5 min . Samples were run on a Novex Tris - Glycine gel ( Life Technologies ) using FASTRun Buffer ( Fisher Scientific ) . Samples were then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane ( Life Technologies ) . Membranes were rinsed twice with Tris - buffered saline ( TBS ) with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 ( Tw ) and then blocked with 5 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) in TBS / Tw . Membranes were incubated with primary antibody diluted in 0 . 5 % BSA in TBS / Tw overnight at 4°C . Membranes were then washed 6 times with TBS / Tw and incubated with HRP conjugated secondary antibodies in TBS / Tw for 1 h at room temperature . Signals were then developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence kit ( Thermo Fisher ) for 5 min before exposure to film . Immunofluorescence Staining For immunofluorescence staining , cells were plated on sterile glass coverslips the day before analysis . 24 h after plating , cells were rinsed with PBS containing calcium and magnesium and fixed using 2 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) ( Electron Microscopy Sciences # 15710 ) in PBS for 20 min . Samples were rinsed three times with PBS and blocked for 15 min using PBS with 5 % goat serum ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) and 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ( Tx ) ( Fisher Scientific ) . Samples were then incubated with primary antibody diluted in PBS with 1 % goat serum and 0 . 1 % Tx overnight at 4°C . After washing with PBS / 0 . 1 % Tx four times , samples were incubated with Alexa Fluor conjugated secondary antibody diluted in PBS / 0 . 1 % Tx at room temperature for one h . Samples were finally washed twice with PBS / 0 . 1 % Tx , incubated with DAPI at room temperature for 10 min , and then washed twice with PBS and mounted on glass slides using Aqua - Poly Mount ( Polysciences ) . The proximity ligation assay was carried out as described previously ( Cheng et al . , 2022 ) , using C3H cells that had been stably transduced with a lentiviral vector expressing Myc - lamin B1 . Light Microscopy and Quantification Confocal images were acquired on a Zeiss 780 or a Zeiss 880 Airyscan laser - scanning confocal microscope with a 63X PlanApo 1 . 4 NA objective . Contrast adjustment of the representative images was performed with ZEN software ( Zeiss ) . 10 or more images from each stably or transiently transduced cell population of the lowest expression levels were randomly chosen and the NE / ER ratio was quantified . Lamin A staining was used to outline the nucleus and the area of NE and ER were defined by - 0 . 5 to 0 µ m ( NE ) and + 0 . 5 to + 1 µ m ( ER ) relative to the lamin A - defined nuclear edge using the “ Enlarge ” function in ImageJ ( NIH ) . Total fluorescent intensities of V5 staining in both areas were measured and normalized to the calnexin staining of the same area . The ratio of NE / ER was then calculated by dividing the normalized V5 signals in the NE to the normalized V5 in the ER . The co - localization analysis was performed with the “ Coloc2 ” function in ImageJ . Where necessary , raw images was processed using the rolling - ball “ background subtraction ” function in ImageJ . Control and test images were processed with identical parameters . Representative images were prepared with automatic Airyscan processing in ZEN . Data Availability The proteomics datasets have been deposited in the public proteomics repository MassIVE ( Mass Spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment ) , part of the ProteomeXchange consortium ( Vizcaino et al , 2014 ) , with the identifier MSV000091154 and is available through the following link : https : / / massive . ucsd . edu / ProteoSAFe / private - dataset . jsp ? task = 417b3a6d8c4e4809b247dfcbb728de32 . Acknowledgements The authors thank Dr . Scott Henderson for advice on confocal microscopy , Titus Jung for assistance with proteomics data management and Gerace and Yates lab members for helpful discussions . Disclosure and competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . Funding information The project was supported by NIH grants U01DA040707 to LG and P41 GM103533 to JY . Author contributions L . G . conceptualization ; L - C . C . , S . B . , and X . Z . data curation ; L - C . C . and S . M - B . formal analysis ; L - C . C . , X . Z . , J . N . , S . B . , and J . D . investigation ; L - C . C . methodology ; L . G . project administration ; E . L . , J . N . , and J . Y . resources ; L - C . C . and L . G . supervision ; L - C . C . and L . G . visualization ; L . G . writing - original draft ; L . G writing - review & editing ; L . G . and J . Y . funding acquisition Abbreviations The abbreviations used are : NE , nuclear envelope ; TM , transmembrane ; ONM , outer nuclear membrane ; INM , inner nuclear membrane ; NPC , nuclear pore complex ; MEF , mouse embryonic fibroblast ; DMEM , Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; NEAA , nonessential amino acids ; HB , homogenization buffer ; LCM , light cytoplasmic membranes ; HCM , heavy cytoplasmic membranes ; MudPIT , multidimensional protein identification technology ; 17ODYA , 17 - Octadecynoic Acid ; TMT , tandem mass tag ; NSAF , normalized spectral abundance factor ; NE - ES , nuclear envelope enrichment score References Abrami L , Dallavilla T , Sandoz PA , Demir M , Kunz B , Savoglidis G , Hatzimanikatis V , van der Goot FG ( 2017 ) Identification and dynamics of the human ZDHHC16 - ZDHHC6 palmitoylation cascade . Elife 6 Beck M , Hurt E ( 2017 ) The nuclear pore complex : understanding its function through structural insight . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18 : 73 - 89 Berk JM , Tifft KE , Wilson KL ( 2013 ) The nuclear envelope LEM - domain protein emerin . Nucleus 4 : 298 - 314 Birendra K , May DG , Benson BV , Kim DI , Shivega WG , Ali MH , Faustino RS , Campos AR , Roux KJ ( 2017 ) VRK2A is an A - type lamin - dependent nuclear envelope kinase that phosphorylates BAF . Mol Biol Cell 28 : 2241 - 2250 Burke B , Stewart CL ( 2013 ) The nuclear lamins : flexibility in function . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 13 - 24 Cain NE , Jahed Z , Schoenhofen A , Valdez VA , Elkin B , Hao H , Harris NJ , Herrera LA , Woolums BM , Mofrad MRK et al ( 2018 ) Conserved SUN - KASH Interfaces Mediate LINC Complex - Dependent Nuclear Movement and Positioning . Curr Biol 28 : 3086 - 3097 e3084 Cheng LC , Baboo S , Lindsay C , Brusman L , Martinez - Bartolome S , Tapia O , Zhang X , Yates JR , 3rd , Gerace L ( 2019 ) Identification of new transmembrane proteins concentrated at the nuclear envelope using organellar proteomics of mesenchymal cells . Nucleus 10 : 126 - 143 Cheng LC , Zhang X , Abhinav K , Nguyen JA , Baboo S , Martinez - Bartolome S , Branon TC , Ting AY , Loose E , Yates III et al ( 2022 ) Shared and Distinctive Neighborhoods of Emerin and Lamin B Receptor Revealed by Proximity Labeling and Quantitative Proteomics . Journal of Proteome Research 21 : 2197 - 2210 Cho NH , Cheveralls KC , Brunner AD , Kim K , Michaelis AC , Raghavan P , Kobayashi H , Savy L , Li JY , Canaj H et al ( 2022 ) OpenCell : Endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organization . Science 375 : 1143 - + Cho S , Irianto J , Discher DE ( 2017 ) Mechanosensing by the nucleus : From pathways to scaling relationships . J Cell Biol 216 : 305 - 315 Choi JC , Worman HJ ( 2014 ) Nuclear envelope regulation of signaling cascades . Adv Exp Med Biol 773 : 187 - 206 Cociorva D , D LT , Yates JR ( 2007 ) Validation of tandem mass spectrometry database search results using DTASelect . Curr Protoc Bioinformatics Chapter 13 : Unit 13 14 Cornell RB , Ridgway ND ( 2015 ) CTP : phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase : Function , regulation , and structure of an amphitropic enzyme required for membrane biogenesis . Prog Lipid Res 59 : 147 - 171 Dallavilla T , Abrami L , Sandoz PA , Savoglidis G , Hatzimanikatis V , van der Goot FG ( 2016 ) Model - Driven Understanding of Palmitoylation Dynamics : Regulated Acylation of the Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperone Calnexin . PLoS Comput Biol 12 : e1004774 Dultz E , Ellenberg J ( 2007 ) Nuclear envelope . Curr Biol 17 : R154 - 156 Fairbank M , Huang K , El - Husseini A , Nabi IR ( 2012 ) RING finger palmitoylation of the endoplasmic reticulum Gp78 E3 ubiquitin ligase . Febs Lett 586 : 2488 - 2493 Foisner R , Gerace L ( 1993 ) Integral membrane proteins of the nuclear envelope interact with lamins and chromosomes , and binding is modulated by mitotic phosphorylation . Cell 73 : 1267 - 1279 Fredericks GJ , Hoffmann FW , Rose AH , Osterheld HJ , Hess FM , Mercier F , Hoffmann PR ( 2014 ) Stable expression and function of the inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate receptor requires palmitoylation by a DHHC6 / selenoprotein K complex . P Natl Acad Sci USA 111 : 16478 - 16483 Fujiki Y , Hubbard AL , Fowler S , Lazarow PB ( 1982 ) Isolation of Intracellular Membranes by Means of Sodium - Carbonate Treatment - Application to Endoplasmic - Reticulum . Journal of Cell Biology 93 : 97 - 102 Fujitomo T , Daigo Y , Matsuda K , Ueda K , Nakamura Y ( 2012 ) Critical function for nuclear envelope protein TMEM209 in human pulmonary carcinogenesis . Cancer Res 72 : 4110 - 4118 Gao X , Hannoush RN ( 2018 ) A Decade of Click Chemistry in Protein Palmitoylation : Impact on Discovery and New Biology . Cell Chem Biol 25 : 236 - 246 Gerace L , Tapia O ( 2018 ) Messages from the voices within : regulation of signaling by proteins of the nuclear lamina . Curr Opin Cell Biol 52 : 14 - 21 Gruenbaum Y , Foisner R ( 2015 ) Lamins : nuclear intermediate filament proteins with fundamental functions in nuclear mechanics and genome regulation . Annu Rev Biochem 84 : 131 - 164 Haider A , Wei YC , Lim K , Barbosa AD , Liu CH , Weber U , Mlodzik M , Oras K , Collier S , Hussain MM et al ( 2018 ) PCYT1A Regulates Phosphatidylcholine Homeostasis from the Inner Nuclear Membrane in Response to Membrane Stored Curvature Elastic Stress . Dev Cell 45 : 481 - + He L , Diedrich J , Chu YY , Yates JR , 3rd ( 2015 ) Extracting Accurate Precursor Information for Tandem Mass Spectra by RawConverter . Anal Chem 87 : 11361 - 11367 Hein MY , Hubner NC , Poser I , Cox J , Nagaraj N , Toyoda Y , Gak IA , Weisswange I , Mansfeld J , Buchholz F et al ( 2015 ) A human interactome in three quantitative dimensions organized by stoichiometries and abundances . Cell 163 : 712 - 723 Hildebrand EM , Dekker J ( 2020 ) Mechanisms and Functions of Chromosome Compartmentalization . Trends Biochem Sci 45 : 385 - 396 Huttlin EL , Bruckner RJ , Navarrete - Perea J , Cannon JR , Baltier K , Gebreab F , Gygi MP , Thornock A , Zarraga G , Tam S et al ( 2021 ) Dual proteome - scale networks reveal cell - specific remodeling of the human interactome . Cell 184 : 3022 - 3040 e3028 Jacquemyn J , Cascalho A , Goodchild RE ( 2017 ) The ins and outs of endoplasmic reticulum - controlled lipid biosynthesis . Embo Rep 18 : 1905 - 1921 Katta SS , Smoyer CJ , Jaspersen SL ( 2014 ) Destination : inner nuclear membrane . Trends Cell Biol 24 : 221 - 229 Kim Y , Zheng X , Zheng Y ( 2019 ) Role of lamins in 3D genome organization and global gene expression . Nucleus 10 : 33 - 41 King MC , Lusk CP , Blobel G ( 2006 ) Karyopherin - mediated import of integral inner nuclear membrane proteins . Nature 442 : 1003 - 1007 Knockenhauer KE , Schwartz TU ( 2016 ) The Nuclear Pore Complex as a Flexible and Dynamic Gate . Cell 164 : 1162 - 1171 Korfali N , Srsen V , Waterfall M , Batrakou DG , Pekovic V , Hutchison CJ , Schirmer EC ( 2011 ) A Flow Cytometry - Based Screen of Nuclear Envelope Transmembrane Proteins Identifies NET4 / Tmem53 as Involved in Stress - Dependent Cell Cycle Withdrawal . Plos One 6 Korfali N , Wilkie GS , Swanson SK , Srsen V , Batrakou DG , Fairley EAL , Malik P , Zuleger N , Goncharevich A , Heras JDL et al ( 2010 ) The Leukocyte Nuclear Envelope Proteome Varies with Cell Activation and Contains Novel Transmembrane Proteins That Affect Genome Architecture . Mol Cell Proteomics 9 : 2571 - 2585 Kucinska MKF , J . ; Galli , C . ; Morone , D . ; Raimondi , A . ; Solda , T . ; Forster , F . ; Molinari , M . ( 2022 ) SEC62 and TMX4 control asymmetric autophagy of the nuclear envelope upon LINC complex disassembly . BioRxiv doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 10 . 05 . 510950 Lakkaraju AKK , Abrami L , Lemmin T , Blaskovic S , Kunz B , Kihara A , Dal Peraro M , van der Goot FG ( 2012 ) Palmitoylated calnexin is a key component of the ribosome - translocon complex . Embo J 31 : 1823 - 1835 Le HQ , Ghatak S , Yeung CY , Tellkamp F , Gunschmann C , Dieterich C , Yeroslaviz A , Habermann B , Pombo A , Niessen CM et al ( 2016 ) Mechanical regulation of transcription controls Polycomb - mediated gene silencing during lineage commitment . Nat Cell Biol 18 : 864 - 875 Lebeaupin C , Blanc M , Vallee D , Keller H , Bailly - Maitre B ( 2020 ) BAX inhibitor - 1 : between stress and survival . FEBS J 287 : 1722 - 1736 Lin DH , Hoelz A ( 2019 ) The Structure of the Nuclear Pore Complex ( An Update ) . Annu Rev Biochem 88 : 725 - 783 Linder ME , Deschenes RJ ( 2007 ) Palmitoylation : policing protein stability and traffic . Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio 8 : 74 - 84 Lu WS , Gotzmann J , Sironi L , Jaeger VM , Schneider M , Luke Y , Uhlen M , Szigyarto CAK , Brachner A , Ellenberg J et al ( 2008 ) Sun1 forms immobile macromolecular assemblies at the nuclear envelope . Bba - Mol Cell Res 1783 : 2415 - 2426 Lynes EM , Bui M , Yap MC , Benson MD , Schneider B , Ellgaard L , Berthiaume LG , Simmen T ( 2012 ) Palmitoylated TMX and calnexin target to the mitochondria - associated membrane . Embo J 31 : 457 - 470 Malik P , Korfali N , Srsen V , Lazou V , Batrakou DG , Zuleger N , Kavanagh DM , Wilkie GS , Goldberg MW , Schirmer EC ( 2010 ) Cell - specific and lamin - dependent targeting of novel transmembrane proteins in the nuclear envelope . Cell Mol Life Sci 67 : 1353 - 1369 Maurer M , Lammerding J ( 2019 ) The Driving Force : Nuclear Mechanotransduction in Cellular Function , Fate , and Disease . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 21 : 443 - 468 McDonald WH , Tabb DL , Sadygov RG , MacCoss MJ , Venable J , Graumann J , Johnson JR , Cociorva D , Yates JR , 3rd ( 2004 ) MS1 , MS2 , and SQT - three unified , compact , and easily parsed file formats for the storage of shotgun proteomic spectra and identifications . Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 18 : 2162 - 2168 Meinema AC , Laba JK , Hapsari RA , Otten R , Mulder FA , Kralt A , van den Bogaart G , Lusk CP , Poolman B , Veenhoff LM ( 2011 ) Long unfolded linkers facilitate membrane protein import through the nuclear pore complex . Science 333 : 90 - 93 Miroshnikova YA , Wickstrom SA ( 2022 ) Mechanical Forces in Nuclear Organization . Csh Perspect Biol 14 Mudumbi KC , Czapiewski R , Ruba A , Junod SL , Li Y , Luo W , Ngo C , Ospina V , Schirmer EC , Yang W ( 2020 ) Nucleoplasmic signals promote directed transmembrane protein import simultaneously via multiple channels of nuclear pores . Nat Commun 11 : 2184 Obara CJ , Moore AS , Lippincott - Schwartz J ( 2022 ) Structural Diversity within the Endoplasmic Reticulum - From the Microscale to the Nanoscale . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol Ohsaki Y , Kawai T , Yoshikawa Y , Cheng J , Jokitalo E , Fujimoto T ( 2016 ) PML isoform II plays a critical role in nuclear lipid droplet formation . Journal of Cell Biology 212 : 29 - 38 Pawar S , Kutay U ( 2021 ) The Diverse Cellular Functions of Inner Nuclear Membrane Proteins . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 13 Peng J , Elias JE , Thoreen CC , Licklider LJ , Gygi SP ( 2003 ) Evaluation of multidimensional chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry ( LC / LC - MS / MS ) for large - scale protein analysis : the yeast proteome . J Proteome Res 2 : 43 - 50 Romanauska A , Kohler A ( 2018 ) The Inner Nuclear Membrane Is a Metabolically Active Territory that Generates Nuclear Lipid Droplets . Cell 174 : 700 - + Schirmer EC , Florens L , Guan T , Yates JR , 3rd , Gerace L ( 2003 ) Nuclear membrane proteins with potential disease links found by subtractive proteomics . Science 301 : 1380 - 1382 Schulman S , Wang B , Li WK , Rapoport TA ( 2010 ) Vitamin K epoxide reductase prefers ER membrane - anchored thioredoxin - like redox partners . P Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 15027 - 15032 Shibata Y , Shemesh T , Prinz WA , Palazzo AF , Kozlov MM , Rapoport TA ( 2010 ) Mechanisms determining the morphology of the peripheral ER . Cell 143 : 774 - 788 Shin JY , Worman HJ ( 2021 ) Molecular Pathology of Laminopathies . Annu Rev Pathol Snow CM , Senior A , Gerace L ( 1987 ) Monoclonal antibodies identify a group of nuclear pore complex glycoproteins . J Cell Biol 104 : 1143 - 1156 Steck TL , Yu J ( 1973 ) Selective solubilization of proteins from red blood cell membranes by protein perturbants . J Supramol Struct 1 : 220 - 232 Swarbrick M , Zhou H , Seibel M ( 2021 ) Local and systemic effects of glucocorticoids on metabolism : new lessons from animal models . Eur J Endocrinol 185 : R113 - R129 Tabb DL , McDonald WH , Yates JR , 3rd ( 2002 ) DTASelect and Contrast : tools for assembling and comparing protein identifications from shotgun proteomics . J Proteome Res 1 : 21 - 26 Tang Y , Huang A , Gu Y ( 2020 ) Global profiling of plant nuclear membrane proteome in Arabidopsis . Nat Plants 6 : 838 - 847 Tapia O , Gerace L ( 2016 ) Analysis of Nuclear Lamina Proteins in Myoblast Differentiation by Functional Complementation . Methods Mol Biol 1411 : 177 - 194 Ungricht R , Kutay U ( 2015 ) Establishment of NE asymmetry - targeting of membrane proteins to the inner nuclear membrane . Curr Opin Cell Biol 34 : 135 - 141 Vizcaino JA , Deutsch EW , Wang R , Csordas A , Reisinger F , Rios D , Dianes JA , Sun Z , Farrah T , Bandeira N et al ( 2014 ) ProteomeXchange provides globally coordinated proteomics data submission and dissemination . Nat Biotechnol 32 : 223 - 226 Washburn MP , Wolters D , Yates JR ( 2001 ) Large - scale analysis of the yeast proteome by multidimensional protein identification technology . Nat Biotechnol 19 : 242 - 247 Wilkie GS , Korfali N , Swanson SK , Malik P , Srsen V , Batrakou DG , Heras JD , Zuleger N , Kerr ARW , Florens L et al ( 2011 ) Several Novel Nuclear Envelope Transmembrane Proteins Identified in Skeletal Muscle Have Cytoskeletal Associations . Mol Cell Proteomics 10 Wing CE , Fung HYJ , Chook YM ( 2022 ) Karyopherin - mediated nucleocytoplasmic transport . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 23 : 307 - 328 Wolters DA , Washburn MP , Yates JR , 3rd ( 2001 ) An automated multidimensional protein identification technology for shotgun proteomics . Anal Chem 73 : 5683 - 5690 Wong X , Stewart CL ( 2020 ) The Laminopathies and the Insights They Provide into the Structural and Functional Organization of the Nucleus . Annu Rev Genom Hum G 21 : 263 - 288 Worman HJ , Ostlund C , Wang Y ( 2010 ) Diseases of the nuclear envelope . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 : a000760 Xu T , Park SK , Venable JD , Wohlschlegel JA , Diedrich JK , Cociorva D , Lu B , Liao L , Hewel J , Han X et al ( 2015 ) ProLuCID : An improved SEQUEST - like algorithm with enhanced sensitivity and specificity . J Proteomics 129 : 16 - 24 Zhu L , Millen L , Mendoza JL , Thomas PJ ( 2010 ) A unique redox - sensing sensor II motif in TorsinA plays a critical role in nucleotide and partner binding . J Biol Chem 285 : 37271 - 37280 Zybailov B , Coleman MK , Florens L , Washburn MP ( 2005 ) Correlation of relative abundance ratios derived from peptide ion chromatograms and spectrum counting for quantitative proteomic analysis using stable isotope labeling . Anal Chem 77 : 6218 - 6224 Figure Legends Fig . 1 . Evaluation of chemical extraction conditions for TM protein enrichment . A , Schematic diagram depicting the preferential solubilization of proteins lacking TM segments from membranes that is achieved with 6 M urea or 0 . 1 M Na 2 CO 3 . B , Western blot analysis of SDS gels to evaluate the presence of marker proteins ( labeled on left of gels ) in NE and LCM fractions . The experiment compared membranes without chemical extraction ( PreW ) to membranes following treatment with urea ( Uw ) or carbonate ( Cw ) . C , Graphs comparing NSAF values of non - TM ( brown symbols ) and TM proteins ( blue symbols ) in NE and CML fractions in urea - treated ( Uw ) or carbonated - treated ( Cw ) membranes , as compared to their abundance without extraction ( PreW ) . UniProtKB designations were used to define TM proteins . In the analyses in B ) and C ) , NE and LCM membrane fractions from a particular preparation were divided into three aliquots ; one was used for PreW analysis , one for Uw and one for Cw . Fig . 2 . Isolation and evaluation of membrane fractions used for comparative proteomics . A , Schematic diagram depicting isolation of membrane fractions . The whole cell homogenate from C3H cells ( 1 ) was layered over a cushion containing 0 . 8 M sucrose and centrifuged at low speed to yield a post - nuclear supernatant ( 2 ) and a low speed pellet ( 3 ) . Top : Sample ( 2 ) was adjusted to 1 . 8 M sucrose and introduced into a discontinuous sucrose gradient , above a layer containing 2 . 0 M sucrose , and below a layer with 1 . 4 M sucrose . The latter was overlaid with a zone of homogenization buffer ( HB ) . Centrifugation at high speed resulted in appearance of a large opaque zone at the HB / 1 . 4 M sucrose interface ( LCM ) and a smaller opaque zone at the 1 . 4 M sucrose / 1 . 8 M sucrose interface ( HCM ) . Very little material was seen at the 1 . 8 M sucrose / 2 . 0 M sucrose interface . The LCM and HCM fractions were harvested for subsequent analysis . Middle : Sample ( 3 ) was resuspended in buffer containing 1 . 8 M sucrose , and introduced into a discontinuous gradient above a layer containing 2 . 0 M sucrose and below a layer containing HB . Centrifugation at high speed yielded a pellet of isolated nuclei ( 7 ) , and an opaque zone at the HB / 1 . 8 M sucrose interface ( 6 ) , which was harvested and designated HCM2 . Bottom : Sample ( 7 ) was resuspended in HB , digested with micrococcal nuclease , adjusted to 0 . 5 M NaCl , and centrifuged at low speed over a cushion containing 0 . 8 M sucrose . The pellet from this step ( 9 ) comprised the NE fraction . B , Evaluation of NE - enrichment scores ( NE - ES ) in the NE fraction for marker TM proteins of the NE and ER . Values compare less stringent ( NE - ES1 ) and more stringent ( NE - ES2 ) calculation methods , as described in the text . Left panel , NE markers ; right panel , ER markers . Ckap4 , Rrbp1 , Ssr1 / 4 and Ktn1 are enriched in sheet ER , whereas Atl3 and Rtn4 are more concentrated in tubular ER ( see text ) . Fig . 3 . Immunofluorescence localization of candidate NE - enriched proteins by ectopic targeting assay . Proteins listed in Table 1 were tagged with a V5 epitope and transiently expressed in C3H cells using a lentiviral vector ( see Fig . S2 ) . Top panel : Montage of immunofluorescence images of representative cells expressing the indicated constructs , co - stained with antibodies that recognize the V5 epitope and endogenous calnexin . A merged image is shown in the third panel of each set . Bars , 10 µ m . Bottom panel : Box and whisker plot depicting NE / ER concentration ratio for each construct , as determined by quantification of immunofluorescence images of at least 10 cells for each construct using the method depicted in Fig . S3 . The NE / ER concentration of the control ER protein , V5 - Sec61b , and of the previously identified NE - concentrated protein Vrk2 were determined in parallel . Fig . 4 . Identification of proteins palmitoylated by Zdhhc6 using metabolic labeling . A , Strategy used to identify proteins whose palmitoylation is dependent on Zdhhc6 . C3H cells were stably transduced with an shRNA vector targeting Zdhhc6 , or with either of two separate control shRNA vectors . Cells were incubated with either 17ODYA or palmitic acid for 24 hours , lysed and labeled by click chemistry to attach biotin to the alkyne group of 17ODYA . After complete solubilization with SDS , samples were incubated with streptavidin beads , which were washed and processed for on - bead digestion with trypsin . Eluted peptides were then labeled with TMT11 reagents and analyzed by LC / MS3 . Two independent cell samples were prepared , and the TMT11 samples were analyzed in duplicate MS runs . B , List of NE proteins detected in all four repeats that showed a reduction in the level of bound protein with knockdown of Zdhhc6 , indicating palmitoylation involving Zdhhc6 . C , Confirmation of Tmx4 and lamin A palmitoylation . C3H cells that were stably transduced with vectors expressing Tmx4 - V5 or V5 - lamin A were incubated with 17ODYA ( 17A ) or palmitic acid ( PA ) for 24 h , processed for click labeling with a biotin tag as in ( A ) , and analyzed by SDS PAGE followed by blot detection using streptavidin - HRP / a - HRP or a - V5 antibodies as indicated . D , Palmitoylation of Tmx4 and lamin A with Zdhhc6 depletion . C3H cells stably expressing Tmx4 - V5 or V5 - lamin A were treated with siRNA targeting Zdhhc6 or control siRNA . Cells then were incubated with 17ODYA or palmitic acid for 24 h , and processed with click labeling and analysis as in ( C ) . E , Quantification of changes in palmitoylation of Tmx4 and lamin A with knockdown of Zdhhc6 by siRNA , based on 2 repeats of the experiment shown in ( D ) . Error bars represent SEM . * p < . 05 ( t test ) . Fig . 5 . Sites of Tmx4 palmitoylation and palmitoylation effects on protein levels and localization . A , Sequence of human and mouse Tmx4 near potential palmitoylation sites . Yellow shading indicates the C - terminal end of the transmembrane domain , with the cytoplasmically oriented segment to the right . B , Palmitoylation in C3H cells stably transduced with V5 - tagged versions of wild type ( WT ) Tmx4 or with the Tmx4 point mutants indicated . Cells were labeled for 24 h with either 17ODYA ( 17O ) or palmitic acid ( PA ) , processed by click labeling with a biotin tag and isolation on streptavidin - Sepharose , and finally analyzed by SDS PAGE with blot detection using streptavidin - HRP / a - HRP or a - V5 antibodies as indicated . Results similar to those shown were obtained in three experiments . C , Quantification of the level of V5 - tagged Tmx4 constructs in stably transduced C3H populations with single - copy lentiviral integrations of the various constructs , using SDS PAGE and Western blotting with a - V5 antibodies . D , Quantification of the NE / ER concentration of various Tmx4 constructs in stably transduced C3H cell populations with single copy lentiviral integration . C , D , Error bars represent SEM . * p < . 05 ( t test ) . Supplemental Figure Legends Fig . S1 . Estimation of the relative abundance of proteins analyzed in this study by NSAF values . Graph represents composite data from all four cell fractionation experiments . Error bars indicate SEM . Fig . S2 . Schematic diagram depicting the sizes , transmembrane segments and epitope tag placement of proteins analyzed in this study . The work also analyzed versions of Tmem53 , Gpat4 , Zdhhc6 , Hsd11b1 , Ogfod3 and Tmem161a with an N - terminal V5 epitope tag ( not shown ) , in addition to the diagrammed constructs with a C - terminal tag . Error bars represent SEM . Fig . S3 . Scheme for quantification of the NE / ER concentration ratio of ectopically expressed proteins from immunofluorescent images . A , Left : Immunofluorescent labeling of cells to detect lamin A / C is used to create a region of interest ( ROI ) , which is used to define 0 . 5 µ m circumferential zones around the nuclear periphery containing the NE and peripheral ER for immunofluorescence quantification as depicted . Right : The NE / ER ratio of ectopic V5 - tagged constructs is based on the V5 fluorescence intensity normalized to calnexin intensity in the corresponding zone . B , Top two panels show immunofluorescence labeling of endogenous calnexin and Tmx4 - V5 ( an INM marker ) in the same cell , using the demarcation method in ( A ) . The bottom two panels show localization of ectopic Sec61 b ( a sheet ER marker ) and Itprip ( an ONM marker ) with respect to zones defined as in ( A ) . C , Box and whisker plot showing quantification of the NE / ER concentration ratio for ectopic Sec61 b and Tmx4 as in ( A ) . Fig . S4 . Comparison of NE / ER concentration ratio of Zdhhc6 and Hsd11b1 in different expression conditions and cell types . A , Micrographs showing a field of C3H cells labeled for immunofluorescence microscopy to detect transiently expressed Zdhhc6 - V5 ( at 48 hours after lentivirus infection ) vs endogenous calnexin . B , Box and whisker plot depicting quantification of NE / ER ratio of Zdhhc6 ( left graph ) or Hsd11b1 ( right graph ) in transiently transduced cells , or in different stably transduced cell populations . The first four entries in each graph were taken from Fig . 3 , bottom panel . The remaining entries are values calculated from different stably transduced C3H or MEF populations , as indicated . Note that V5 - Zdhhc6 MEF population # 1 was created with a several - fold higher titer of virus that MEF population # 2 , and likely contains cells with multiple lentiviral integrations . Fig . S5 . Comparison of the localization of ectopic Tmem209 and NPCs . Immunofluorescence micrographs of two MEFs analyzed 48 h after transient transduction with V5 - Tmem209 . Shown are Airyscan confocal images of the co - staining detecting the RL1 monoclonal antibody that recognizes FG repeat nucleoporins ( RL1 ) and ectopic Tmem209 ( V5 ) . The merged images are in the rightmost panels . Pearson’s correlation coefficient comparing the RL1 and V5 images ( r ) is indicated for each cell , and reflect strong correlation . Bar = 5 µ m . Fig . S6 . Localization of a pool of Zdhhc6 to the INM using the proximity ligation assay ( PLA ) . Detection involved C3H cells stably transduced with Myc - tagged lamin B1 and transiently expressed Zdhhc6 - V5 or Lemd2 - V5 ( a control INM protein ) . PLA signal , left panels ; merge of PLA signal with DNA staining , right panels . Bar , 10 µ m . Fig . S7 . Depletion efficiency of Zdhhc6 mRNA in cells transduced with shRNA or transfected with siRNA . A , Levels of Zdhhc6 mRNA , as determined by qRT - PCR , in C3H cells stably transduced with an shRNA vector targeting Zdhhc6 . Shown is analysis of cell samples “a” and “b” used for metabolic labeling with 17ODYA and quantification of palmitoylation changes with Zdhhc6 depletion ( Supplemental Table S4 and Fig . 4B ) . B , Levels of Zdhhc6 mRNA , as determined by qRT - PCR , in various C3H cell populations transiently transfected with an siRNA pool targeting Zdhhc6 ( siZ ) or with a control siRNA pool ( siC ) . The cell populations analyzed , as indicated , were WT C3H cells , or C3H cells that were stably transduced with vectors expressing V5 - lamin A or Tmx4 - V5 . Table 1 Proteins analyzed by immunofluorescence targeting assay . Figure 1 LAP2β Vimentin Lamin A Actin Myosin Emerin Calnexin Vimentin Lamin A Actin Myosin Tim23 P r e W Uw Cw P r e W Uw Cw NE LCM Chemical extraction A B TM proteins non - TM proteins Isolated NE or CM C - 10 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 - 10 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 l og2 ( N SA F Cw / P r e W ) log2 ( NSAF Uw / PreW ) NE - 10 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 - 10 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 l og2 ( N SA F Cw / P r e W ) log2 ( NSAF Uw / PreW ) LCM non - TM TM Figure 2 B A ( 1 ) Whole cell homogenate 0 . 8M sucrose Low - speed spin ( 2 ) Post - nuclear supernatant ( 3 ) Low speed pellet HB 1 . 4M sucrose 1 . 8M sucrose 2 . 0M sucrose HB 1 . 8M sucrose 2 . 0M sucrose High - speed spin MNase digestion high salt treatment Low - speed spin ( 8 ) Nuclear contents ( 9 ) Nuclear envelope ( NE ) ( 7 ) Nuclei ( 5 ) Heavy cytoplasmic membrane ( HCM ) ( 4 ) Light cytoplasmic membrane ( LCM ) ( 6 ) Heavy cytoplasmic membrane2 ( HCM2 ) 1 0 NE - ES1 NE - ES2 NE - ES1 NE - ES2 E R m a r k e r s N E m a r k e r s 0 . 8M sucrose V 5 - S e c 61b V 5 - V r k 2 V 5 - T m e m 53 T m e m 53 - V 5 P t d ss 2 - V 5 V 5 - C d i p t V 5 - G p a t 4 G pa t 4 - V 5 Z dhh c 6 - V 5 V 5 - Z dh h c 6 V 5 - H s d1 1b1 H s d11b1 - V 5 V 5 - V k o r c 1 l 1 V 5 - O g f od3 O g f od3 - V 5 P i gb - V 5 T m e m 161a - V 5 V 5 - T m e m 1 61a T m b i m 6 - V 5 T m e m 9 - V 5 V 5 - T m e m 214 V 5 - T m e m 209 V 5 - C h p t 1 D na j c 16 - V 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 N E / E R r a t i o T m e m 53 - V 5 V5 Calnexin V5 Cnx P t d ss 2 - V 5 T m e m 9 - V 5 G pa t 4 - V 5 H s d11b1 - V 5 T m b i m 6 - V 5 V5 Calnexin V5 Cnx V 5 - V k o r c 1 l 1 T m e m 161a - V 5 D na j c 16 - V 5 V 5 - T m e m 209 V 5 - C hp t 1 Figure 3 V 5 - Z dhh c 6 A B N o r m a li z ed R e c o v e r y Figure 4 Strep capture TMT labeling LC / MS3 sh - Zdhhc6 or sh - control ( ) biotin cell lysis click labeling + 17 - ODYA or + palmitic acid 24 h A B D 55 130 100 70 250 35 25 15 no s i RN A s i C t r l s i Z dhh c 6 s i C t r l s i Z dhh c 6 V 5 - L m na T m x 4 - V 5 a - V5 Strep - HRP Target Relative recovery si - Zdhhc6 / si - Control Lamin B receptor 0 . 56 + / - 0 . 13 Tmx4 0 . 64 + / - 0 . 10 Lamin A 0 . 69 + / - 0 . 07 Lamin B1 0 . 71 + / - 0 . 10 Lap2 b 0 . 75 + / - 0 . 09 C 250 130 100 70 55 35 25 15 PA PA 17 O 17 O PA PA 17 O 17 O Strep - HRP a - V5 T m x 4 - V 5 T m x 4 - V 5 V 5 - l a m i n A V 5 - l a m i n A E 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 s i C t r l s i Z dhh c 6 V5 - Lmna 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 s i C t r l s i Z dhh c 6 Tmx4 - V5 * ns Figure 5 A C D B a - V5 55 - 35 - 100 - 70 - 55 - 35 - Strep - HRP PA PA PA PA 17 O 17 O 17 O 17 O W T C 211 A C 209 A C 209 A / C 211 A N E / E R R a t i o 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 4 . 0 W T C 209 A C 211 A C 209 A / C 211 A * TMX4 _ human Tmx4 _ mouse LVVISECFYVPLPRLVVISECFCVPLPR * * * * * * * * * * * * * C209 C211 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 4 . 0 W T C 2 0 9 A C 2 1 1 A C 2 0 9 A / C 2 1 1 A N o r m a li z ed Le v e l s * * p = 0 . 06 Supplemental Figure S1 0 0 . 002 0 . 004 0 . 006 0 . 008 0 . 01 0 . 012 0 . 014 0 . 016 0 . 018 T m po E m d 0 0 . 0002 0 . 0004 0 . 0006 0 . 0008 0 . 001 0 . 0012 0 . 0014 0 . 0016 0 . 0018 V k o r c 1 l 1 P i g x S t s V k o r c 1 P i gb H s d11b1 O g f od3 C d i p t P t d ss 2 A gpa t 2 G pa t 4 C hp t 1 D na j c 16 T m e m 230 Z dhh c 6 T m e m 214 E v a1b T m e m 9b T m e m 9 T m e m 53 T m b i m 6 T m e m 161a C a r d19 T m e m 209 S m pd4 M f s d10 V r k 2 T m x 4 It p r i p A r l 6 i p6 A v e r age N SA F Supplemental Figure S1 0 0 . 002 0 . 004 0 . 006 0 . 008 0 . 01 0 . 012 0 . 014 0 . 016 0 . 018 T m po E m d 0 0 . 0002 0 . 0004 0 . 0006 0 . 0008 0 . 001 0 . 0012 0 . 0014 0 . 0016 0 . 0018 V k o r c 1 l 1 P i g x S t s V k o r c 1 P i gb H s d11b1 O g f od3 C d i p t P t d ss 2 A gpa t 2 G pa t 4 C hp t 1 D na j c 16 T m e m 230 Z dhh c 6 T m e m 214 E v a1b T m e m 9b T m e m 9 T m e m 53 T m b i m 6 T m e m 161a C a r d19 T m e m 209 S m pd4 M f s d10 V r k 2 T m x 4 It p r i p A r l 6 i p6 A v e r age N SA F Supplemental Figure S2 - Transmembrane domain - Intramembrane domain - V5 - tag - Signal sequence V5 - Cdipt Tmem53 - V5 Gpat4 - V5 Ptdss2 - V5 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 Amino acid position Zdhhc6 - V5 Hsd11b1 - V5 Vkorc1l1 - V5 Ogfod3 - V5 Pigb - V5 Tmbim6 - V5 Tmem9 - V5 Tmem209 - V5 Dnajc16 - V5 Tmem161a - V5 V5 - Chpt1 V5 - Tmem214 Supplemental Figure S3 A B + 1 µ m + 0 . 5 µ m - 0 . 5 µ m Create ROI , Lamin A / C staining - 0 . 5 µ m to 0 µ m = NE zone + 0 . 5 to + 1 µ m = ER zone 0 µ m NE / ER ratio = V5 normalized to calnexin signal in NE zone V5 normalized to calnexin signal in ER zone ER NE NE ER Tmx4 - V5 ( INM ) Itprip - V5 ( ONM ) V5 - Sec61b ( sheet ER ) Calnexin C Supplemental Figure S4 B A V5 Calnexin V5 - Zdhhc6 Supplemental Figure S5 r = 0 . 72 r = 0 . 75 RL1 V5 RL1 V5 Supplemental Figure S6 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % s h Z _ 17 O _ a s h Z _ 17 O _ b s h Z _ 17 O _ c s h Z _ 17 O _ d Z dhh c 6 m RN A Supplemental Figure S7 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % 120 % 140 % C3H Lmna _ siC Lmna _ siZ Tmx4 _ siC Tmx4 _ siZ Primer 1 Primer 2 A B