The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing Thomas P . Kenworthy a , * , Alain Verbeke b , c a Management & Marketing Department , School of Business , University of Dayton , 300 College Park , Dayton , OH 45469 , USA b Strategy and Global Management , Haskayne School of Business , University of Calgary , Calgary , Alberta , T2N 1N4 , Canada c Université Libre de Bruxelles Campus du Solbosch Avenue F . D . Roosevelt 42 B - 1050 Brussels , Belgium A R T I C L E I N F O Article history : Received 14 May 2014 Accepted 24 March 2015 Available online Associate editor : Sabina Siebert Keywords : Strategic management Theory borrowing Agency theory Institutional theory Transaction cost economics A B S T R A C T In many business schools , the ﬁeld of strategic management has been elevated to the same status as more traditional subject areas such as ﬁnance , marketing and organizational behaviour . However , the ﬁeld is rather unclearly delineated at present , as a result of the heavy usage of borrowed theories , a phenom - enon we discuss in this article . For strategic management to become a legitimate subject area , truly at par with the more conventional ﬁelds taught in business schools , we recommend much stronger selec - tivity when borrowing theories from other areas of scholarly inquiry than management , as the foundation of empirical work . We propose a new model consisting of seven quality tests to assess whether proper selectivity is being applied when ‘importing’ concepts from other ﬁelds than management . Our perspec - tive has major implications for both future , evidence - based strategic management research and for the ﬁeld’s key stakeholders such as strategy teachers , practitioners and policy makers – who rely on re - search outputs from strategy scholars . © 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Introduction Modern management research is struggling to combine effec - tively academic rigour and practitioner relevance . Chia ( 2014 , p . 684 ) has argued that a shift is necessary towards common sense schol - arship so as to serve well the two above goals . Along the same lines , Hernes ( 2014 , p . 852 ) has suggested that scholars must cut loose the shackles of misplaced scientiﬁc ideals and should instead focus on , “…the localized , embedded , ﬂuid and contingent nature of man - agerial work . ” In the present article , we propose an actionable approach that should improve both the rigour and relevance of a particular or - ganization and management subﬁeld , namely that of strategic management ( SM ) , whereby we focus on the development and usage of appropriate theory to guide research efforts . It has been sug - gested that : “There is nothing so practical as a good theory” ( Lewin , 1951 , p . 169 ) . Van de Ven ( 1989 , p . 486 ) extended this perspective as follows : “Good theory is practical precisely because it advances knowledge in a scientiﬁc discipline , guides research towards crucial questions , and enlightens the profession of management . ” However , developing theory that is helpful to management is not necessarily easy to achieve , and this is for at least two reasons . First , what actually constitutes rigorous and relevant SM theory is de - batable , but presumably it must have some type of predictive and explanatory capacity that would support a broad area of practice . A theory’s predictive and explanatory power should hold across a range of empirical phenomena in this area of practice , but such generalizability may be diﬃcult to establish . Indeed , knowledge cre - ation efforts in SM seldom lead to generally accepted , cumulative knowledge development , in contrast to what occurs in the hard sci - ences . Controlled experiments , accurately simulating / replicating situational contexts from practice are often diﬃcult – if not impossible – to achieve , especially when addressing ‘wicked’ man - agement issues in the SM sphere ( see below ) . Second , irrespective of a high level of generalizability and cumulative knowledge de - velopment , SM theory can inform practice , but the transfer of concepts and predictive templates from an academic setting to a managerial environment is not necessarily easy to achieve . SM schol - ars may develop substantial insights on real world , managerial phenomena , but few are the equivalent of , e . g . , medical experts , who combine academic research and clinical practice , whereby issues arising in the latter area of work translate directly into identifying critical questions and formulating testable hypotheses in the former . In addition , few SM research outputs are read and used systemat - ically by strategy practitioners . Only a fraction of SM research thus combines a strong predictive and explanatory capacity , and use - fulness as perceived by practitioners , because of the absence of systematized back - and - forth between research and practice . The scientiﬁc discipline of SM addresses the establishment and pursuit of a ﬁrm’s long - term goals , as well as the ways in which * Correspondingauthor . Management & MarketingDepartment , Schoolof Business , University of Dayton , 300 College Park , Dayton , OH 45469 , USA . Tel . : + 937 229 3754 ; fax : + 617 229 3788 . E - mail address : kenworthy @ udayton . edu ( T . P . Kenworthy ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 0263 - 2373 / © 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect European Management Journal journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / emj business leaders or managers respond to – and shape – environ - mental forces , and orchestrate internal resources . Here , SM theorizing can be important , to the extent that it allows for better prediction and explanation of SM choices in clearly speciﬁed situational con - texts . As a result , the SM practice becomes more ‘intellectualized’ : it can be understood not only by being actually engaged in it ( ‘learn - ing by doing’ ) , but also through the mediating and framing force of conceptual ideas ( Kiechel , 2010 ) . SM theorizing can be important not only for purposes of im - mediate applicability in management practice , but also for business school teaching because it transcends all functional areas of man - agement , and addresses directly the ﬁrm’s long term survival , proﬁtability and growth . However , as noted above , in addition to the need for some level of predictive and explanatory power , and for generalizability , effective interaction between scientiﬁc re - search and clinical practice in SM is a major challenge , especially because of the ‘wickedness’ of many SM problems , characterized by discontinuous change , high technical and social complexity , man - agement biases and conﬂicts among multiple stakeholders that are diﬃcult to resolve ( McMillan & Overall , 2015 ) . Given the above context , we address one speciﬁc question in the present article that we consider critical to supporting the dual ob - jectives of rigour and relevance : should SM scholars engaged in empirical research , restrict themselves to testing ( and possibly ex - tending ) ﬁeld - speciﬁc theories , or is there value in borrowing theories from other ﬁelds of academic inquiry , as the basis of hypothesis for - mulation and testing ? Recently , Oswick , Fleming , and Hanlon ( 2011 ) assessed whether theory borrowing is commonplace in the broader organization and management theory ( OMT ) research . They deﬁned theory borrowing as , “…the importation of coherent and fully formed ideas that explain a phenomenon ( or phenomena ) into OMT from outside the discipline” ( p . 319 ) . Oswick et al . ( 2011 ) found that ap - proximately two - thirds of OMT research is driven by theories borrowed from other disciplines . The research revealed theory bor - rowing from relatively closely related ﬁelds such as sociology , psychology and economics , but also from less proximate ﬁelds such as biology , education , engineering , history , law , linguistics , math - ematics , philosophy , and politics . Oswick et al . ( 2011 , p . 328 ) voiced serious concerns about the observed imbalance between ﬁeld - speciﬁc and borrowed theories . One key concern was that the ‘original nuance’ of borrowed theories , well understood when used in their base ﬁeld , was in danger of being sacriﬁced when applied in an OMT context . Other scholars have echoed such concerns . For example , Suddaby , Hardy , and Nguyen Huy ( 2011 , p . 237 ) argue that OMT : “…has somewhat awkwardly imported theories , research ques - tions , and methods from foreign disciplines without fully adapting them to the new context . Rather than treating organizations as a subject of inquiry in their own right , management theorists appear to have treated organizations merely as new empirical sites to test , prove , and tweak old theories . ” In the OMT ﬁeld , the heavy borrowing practice has come at the expense of indigenous theory development . Here , Markóczy and Deeds ( 2009 , p . 1079 ) insist that OMT : “…needs to build theories based on our unique position and un - derstanding of management and organizational phenomena rather than co - opting the theories of economics , psychology or sociology or even of ﬁnance , accounting and marketing . ” However , the potential beneﬁts of theory borrowing have also been acknowledged : “…organization theory is always empowered primarily by methods and perspectives from the wider social sciences . Pre - dominantly , it is informed by theories and methods from anthropology , economics , psychology , and ( especially ) sociolo - gy . Thus , for many scholars , notions such as indigenous theorizing in organization theory are anathema to the everyday reality of research practice . ” ( Hassard , Wolfram Cox , & Rowlinson , 2013 , p . 310 ) . What may therefore ultimately be more important than ‘purity’ in indigenous development is that SM scholars would follow an ap - propriate selection process when contemplating the borrowing of theories , and would refrain from borrowing those theories that do not meet a set of straightforward selection criteria ( Ferraro , Pfeffer , & Sutton , 2005 ) . The early years of SM research 1 , with SM being a scholarly sub - ﬁeld of OMT , were characterized by a small number of research outlets publishing predominantly case - based analysis ( Hoskisson , Hitt , Wan , & Yiu , 1999 ) . Today , the SM discipline claims several dedi - cated journals ( Azar & Brock , 2008 ) , and a host of other outlets regularly publish SM research ( e . g . , Academy of Management Journal – AMJ , Academy of Management Review – AMR , Administrative Science Quarterly – ASQ , Journal of Management – JoM , and Journal of Man - agement Studies – JMS ) . The cumulative output of these research efforts has elicited a variety of comments about the scientiﬁc status and progress of the discipline . Some researchers have reported sig - niﬁcant progress ( e . g . Hoskisson et al . , 1999 ) , whereas others have voiced substantive concerns ( e . g . , Ghoshal , 2005 ; Jarzabkowski & Whittington , 2008 ) . As noted above , our main focus in the present paper is the extent to which the most frequently tested theories in SM research are in - digenous , as opposed to borrowed from other ﬁelds . 2 A theory can be deﬁned as : “…a collection of assertions , both verbal and symbolic , that iden - tiﬁes what variables are important for what reasons , speciﬁcally how they are interrelated and why , and identiﬁes the condi - tions under which they should be related or not related . ” ( Campbell , 1990 , p . 65 ) As we will demonstrate below , our investigation revealed sub - stantial theory borrowing in SM prompting the development of a screening model to permit proper selectivity in such borrowing . We hope that the model ( and possible future extensions thereof ) will serve the SM ﬁeld in terms of improving both the rigour and rel - evance of its empirical work . First , the model allows for an ongoing ‘open door policy’ to good theory from other ﬁelds ( Hassard et al . , 2013 ) . Second , it provides a reasoned defence to protect the indig - enous body of rigorous and relevant SM theories against invasion by theories from other ﬁelds that bring no value added at best and negative value added at worst to the SM ﬁeld ( Markóczy & Deeds , 2009 ; Suddaby et al . , 2011 ) . Explicit theory - driven research in strategic management In order to examine the nature and extent of theory usage in SM , we chose to limit our scope with respect to time period and content . With respect to time period , we began our analysis in 1980 for two reasons . First , SM arguably became a legitimate academic disci - pline around 1980 ( Azar & Brock , 2008 ) . Second , the long , but manageable time frame allowed us to capture various trends and mitigate the inﬂuence of journal editorial policies on the ﬁndings . With regard to content , we limited our analysis to articles pub - lished in seven ( out of a set of ﬁfteen ) dedicated SM journals ( Azar 1 Nag , Hambrick , and Chen ( 2007 ) provide insight into how the SM ﬁeld may be deﬁned . 2 Thisquestionhasalsobeenraisedinotherﬁelds , suchasretailing ( Brown & Dant , 2009 ) and purchasing and supply chain management ( Chicksand , Watson , Walker , Radnor , & Johnston , 2012 ) . ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 2 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ & Brock , 2008 ) in order to avoid problems associated with identi - fying relevant articles in more broadly - focused , management journals . The following seven dedicated SM journals – the highest ranked ones ( Azar & Brock , 2008 ) were included for review : Stra - tegic Management Journal ( SMJ , 1980 – 2009 ) ; Journal of Economics & Management Strategy ( JEMS , 1992 – 2009 ) ; Technology Analysis & Strategic Management ( TASM , 1989 – 2009 ) ; Long Range Planning ( LRP , 1980 – 2009 ) ; Strategic Organization ( SO , 2003 – 2009 ) ; Business Strat - egy & the Environment ( BSE , 1992 – 2009 ) ; and Journal of Business Strategies ( JBS , 1984 – 2009 ) . Identifying articles that made explicit use of theory involved three key criteria . The ﬁrst criterion was that the article had to be em - pirical in nature – utilizing a research method involving observation and / or experimentation , rather than simulation or pure conceptu - alization . The second criterion was that the article had to include at least one predictive hypothesis prior to a discussion of research method ( s ) . For the most part , research hypotheses were readily iden - tiﬁed , often set apart and labelled as , for example , ‘H1’ . In some cases , the research hypotheses were formulated more implicitly , as part of the main text . Such articles were only included in our study if the related text clariﬁed the predictive nature of the statement in question . The third criterion involved the explicit mentioning of a theory used in the article . The task of identifying theories ( at times , more than one theory per article ) was relatively easy and unam - biguous for the most part . We did not attempt to assess whether hypotheses were correctly derived from the theories utilized , nor the extent to which the hypotheses were supported , since such concerns had supposedly been addressed during the reviewing process . Finally , each theory that was mentioned explicitly was catego - rized in terms of its origins . In keeping with Oswick et al . ( 2011 , p . 321 ) , our assessment , “of whether or not a given theory is bor - rowed is determined by whether or not the main proponent ( s ) is ( are ) either located within the [ SM ] academic community or outside of it” ( OMT replaced by SM ) . The total number of peer - reviewed ar - ticles for the seven SM journals was 5317 . The total number of empirical articles was 2612 , as shown in Table 1 . The density of ‘theory - driven’ pieces as a percentage of the total number of empirical articles was 19 . 4 % , as shown at the bottom of the ‘Total’ column of Table 1 . In other words , approximately one in ﬁve empirical articles tested at least one theory - driven hypothe - sis . The ﬁrst theory - driven empirical articles in each journal appeared in the following years : SMJ – 1980 ; JEMS – 1992 ; TASM – 1998 ; LRP – 1989 ; SO – 2003 ; BSE – 1999 ; and JBS – 1990 . The growth in ex - plicit theory usage in SM journals is shown in Fig . 1 below . Theory - driven empirical studies are presented as percentages of the total number of empirical articles over time . Over a thirty - year time period , theory - driven empirical research in the SM discipline has grown from close to zero to nearly 25 % of all empirical work . In the above set of theory - driven articles , researchers associ - ated their tested hypotheses in an explicit fashion with speciﬁc theories . On the basis of the theories named by the researchers them - selves , we compiled the list of 194 theories in Table 2 . These 194 theories do not necessarily represent an exhaustive list of theo - ries used in the SM discipline . It is possible that other theories may have been explicitly used in SM articles published elsewhere , e . g . , in non - discipline - speciﬁc management and economics journals . We also acknowledge that substantial overlap may exist among the several theories named , and that ‘clusters’ of theories could be com - posed , based inter alia on commonality in behavioural assumptions , key drivers of strategic decisions , variables affecting performance , and so on . Importantly , the intensity of theory usage displays a highly skewed distribution . In the seven journals we investigated , only ten theories were tested more than ten times , and are therefore also most likely to ﬁnd their way to strategy practitioners and to busi - ness school teaching . These theories are discussed in the following section 3 . 3 In addition to those ten theories , another 184 theories were tested : 138 theo - ries were tested only once ; 21 theories twice ; 15 theories three times ; 2 theories four times ; 3 theories ﬁve times ; 1 theory seven times ; one theory 8 times ; 2 theo - ries nine times ; 1 theory ten times . Table 1 Article counts by journal . Journals SMJ JEMS TASM LRP SO BSE JBS Total Total articles 1643 495 604 1703 130 464 278 5317 Total empirical articles 1242 145 256 490 65 254 160 2612 Total theory - driven articles 382 27 11 13 25 23 27 508 Theory driven density 30 . 8 % 18 . 6 % 4 . 3 % 2 . 7 % 38 . 5 % 9 . 1 % 16 . 9 % 19 . 4 % 0 . 00 % 5 . 00 % 10 . 00 % 15 . 00 % 20 . 00 % 25 . 00 % 30 . 00 % 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 P e r c e n t a g e Year Growth of Theory - driven Empirical Ar(cid:2)cles Fig . 1 . Growth of theory use in empirical research . ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 3 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ The top ten theories : domestic versus borrowed theories The most frequently used theories , each of which was tested ex - plicitly at least ten times in the theory - driven SM literature , are shown in Fig . 2 . Five of the top ten theories , which account for 202 instances of explicit theory testing originated at least partly from within the dis - cipline of management , with some of the key substantive contributions to contemporary theory originating from within the SM ﬁeld itself . These ﬁve theories can be considered ‘indigenous’ Table 2 Theories used in empirical research in strategic management journals ( alphabetical order ) . Absorptive capacity theory Life - cycle theory Signalling theory Active investor hypothesis Locus of control theory Situational theory Agency theory Long - purse theory of predation Social capital theory Asymmetric theory Loose coupling theory Social choice theory Asymmetric theory of joint ventures Management control theory Social exchange theory Attraction – selection – attrition framework Managerial discretion theory Social information processing theory Attribution theory Managerial entrenchment hypothesis / Managerial hegemony theory / Managerial opportunism theory Social movements theory Barriers to entry theory Managerial succession theory Social network theory Bases of social power Managerial welfare hypothesis Stages model of internationalization Behavioural agency theory Market orientation theory Stages of growth theory Behavioural decision theory Mental accounting framework Stakeholder identiﬁcation and salience Behavioural theory of the ﬁrm Merger contingency theory Stakeholder theory Belief systems theory Mobility barriers theory Stewardship theory Career concern hypothesis Modern portfolio theory Strategic balance theory Cartel theory Modernization theory Strategic behaviour theory Centre of gravity theory Modular systems theory Strategic choice and environmental determinism framework Cluster theory Motivating language theory Strategic choice theory Collective action theory Multiple point competition model Strategic factor market theory Commitment theory Mutual forbearance hypothesis ( theory ) Strategic issue diagnosis model Competing values framework Myopic institutions theory Strategic network perspective Conﬁguration theory Natural capital theory Strategic positioning framework Congruence model of organizational behaviour Natural resource based view Structural equivalence theory Conservative model of innovation Network theory Structural holes theory Contestable markets theory Niche development theory Structural Inertia theory Contextual interaction theory Niche formation theory Structure - conduct - performance theory Contingency theory Niche width theory Symmetric Learning theory Control theory Optimal contracting theory Technological lock - in theory Cooperative game theory of the ﬁrm Option - pricing model of wage determination Technology adoption model Corporate portfolio theory Organizational imprinting theory Theory of competitive behaviour Cultural dimensions theory Organizational learning theory Theory of competitive rationality Cultural familiarity theory Organizational types theory Theory of complex organization Decision usefulness theory of accounting Path dependence theory Theory of Core competencies Density - dependent theory of organizational evolution Pecking order theory Theory of heterogeneity Digestibility theory of joint ventures Performance - feedback model Theory of hypercompetition Dual core model of organizational innovation Personal construct theory Theory of interﬁrm performance differences Dynamic capabilities perspective Political – economical theory Theory of internal labour markets Dynamic Multi - dimensional Performance framework Population ecology theory Theory of multipoint competition Economic theory of complementarities Power dependence theory Theory of network incentives Eﬃcient market theory Price discrimination theory Theory of optimal money burning Embeddedness perspective Procedural justice theory Theory of planned behaviour Environmental scanning theory Property rights theory of the ﬁrm Theory of private beneﬁts Equity theory Prosocial behaviour theory Theory of product diversity Ethical decision making theory Prospect theory Theory of reasoned action Evolutionary theory Psychological contract theory Theory of reasoned risk taking Expectancy Theory Real options theory Theory of recombinant invention External signals theory of regulation Reference group theory Theory of relative standing Five forces model Regulatory inﬂuence theory Theory of retail market structure Free cash ﬂow hypothesis Relational exchange theory Theory of strategic groups Full range leadership perspective Relational view Theory of strategic information systems planning Galbraith and Nathanson’s organization diversiﬁcation theory Relative absorptive capacity theory Theory of the equilibrium structure of a competitive industry with multiproduct ﬁrms Game theory Renegotiation theory of predation Theory of the market for corporate control Gender socialization theory Reputation theory of predation Theory of the multinational corporation Generic strategies theory Resource based view Theory of total quality management Goal theory Resource based view of diversiﬁcation Theory of weak ties Human capital theory Resource dependence theory Theory of yardstick competition Information integration theory Resource partitioning model Token status theory Information processing theory Resource - based theory of market structure and organizational form Tournament theory Neo - institutional theory Risk theory Transaction cost economics Intergroup theory Ritual scapegoating theory Transformational leadership theory Internalization theory Role - motivation theory of managerial effectiveness Uncertainty reduction theory International structural stages model Routine based perspective Upper echelon theory Jungian theory of psychological type Selection hypothesis Value - added hypothesis Knowledge - based theory of the ﬁrm Shareholder interest hypothesis Value - based planning theory Legitimacy theory Shareholder wealth - maximization hypothesis Vicious circle theory Life course theory Signal detection theory ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 4 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ theories , even if some foundational elements may have been de - veloped in another discipline : transaction cost economics ( e . g . , in the realm of studying diversiﬁcation , selecting governance modes , and transferring knowledge ) , the resource based view , upper echelon theory , contingency theory and stakeholder theory . As regards trans - action cost economics , it could ( correctly ) be argued that this theory was ﬁrst created in the economics discipline ( Coase , 1937 ; Williamson , 1975 ) rather than in management , but a number of SM thinkers of the past ﬁfty years have provided intellectual value added that has signiﬁcantly extended the theory in substantive terms , whether directly or indirectly . These scholars include , inter alia , Alfred Chandler ( e . g . , Chandler , 1962 ) , Jean - François Hennart ( e . g . , Hennart , 1988 ) , Alan Rugman ( e . g . , Rugman & Verbeke , 2003 ) , Harbir Singh ( e . g . , Dyer & Singh , 1998 ) , David Teece ( e . g . , Teece , 1986 ) , Alain Verbeke ( e . g . , Nordberg & Verbeke , 1999 ) , and so on . Following Williamson ( 1991 ) , a number of scholars have even argued that adopting a transaction cost economizing logic can amount to strat - egy optimization ( see , e . g . , Nickerson & Zenger , 2004 ; Verbeke & Kenworthy , 2008 ) . The economics discipline accounted for two theories in the top ten : agency theory and signalling theory . These two theories rep - resent 89 instances of explicit theory testing . The sociology discipline accounted for three of the ten theories : institutional theory , re - source dependence theory and social capital theory . It should be noted that the second and third theories also have roots in the po - litical science discipline . These three theories account for 53 instances of explicit theory testing . Overall , the theories originating at least partly from within the SM discipline account for 59 % of explicit theory usage amongst the top ten theories , with economics and so - ciology representing 41 % . In other words , amongst the top ten explicitly - used theories , the ratio of indigenous theory to bor - rowed theory usage instances is 1 . 42 ( 202 to 142 ) . In addition to identifying the frequency of testing the most com - monly named theories , it is also useful to explore the disciplinary origins of all 194 theories included in Table 2 , irrespective of fre - quency of use ; see Table 3 . Here , the testing of indigenous theories , i . e . , theories derived directly from SM research , represents only 37 % of total explicit theory testing . The ﬁelds of economics , psycholo - gy and sociology represent approximately 27 % , 14 % and 13 % of used theories , respectively . The share of indigenous theory use , representing 59 % of testing among the top ten most frequently used theories , and approximately 37 % of all theories tested at least once , suggests signiﬁcant success for a young discipline . Nevertheless , the observed indigenous - to - borrowed theory testing ratios also suggest a signiﬁcant reliance on the latter . Borrowed theories can be of great value to young ﬁelds that seek legitimacy ( Merton , 1973 ) . Such theories allow a nascent discipline to ‘project’ itself as scientiﬁc ( Hambrick , 2007 ) , but there are two reasons why this may be sub - optimal . First , as Markóczy and Deeds ( 2009 , p . 1079 ) suggest , bor - rowed theories do not emerge from the ﬁeld’s ( in this case SM’s ) : “…unique position and understanding of management and orga - nizational phenomena . ” Such theories were not designed to explain and predict SM phenomena . Second , a key consideration when bor - rowing theory is the degree of corroboration for the theory . The ill - advised borrowing of rational choice theories by the political science discipline serves as a cautionary tale . Green and Shapiro ( 1994 , pp . 5 – 6 ) reported that within political science : “…the stature of ra - tional choice scholarship does not rest on a readily identiﬁable set of empirical successes” and , “…the case has yet to be made that these models have advanced our understanding of how politics works in the real world . ” Renowned management scholar Jeffrey Pfeffer ( 1995 , p . 683 ) reﬂected on Green and Shapiro’s account and asked : “Is what happened in political science being replayed in organization science ? ” In the next section , we develop a conceptual model that 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Stakeholder theory Signalling theory Social capital theory Contingency theory Resource dependence theory Upper echelon theory ( Neo ) institutional theory Agency theory Transaction cost economics Resource based view Number of Times Used Th e o r y Most Frequently Used Theories Fig . 2 . Most frequently used theories in strategic management journals . Table 3 Disciplinary origins of explicitly tested theories . Field Total theories % of total Strategic management 72 37 . 11 Economics 52 26 . 80 Psychology 27 13 . 92 Sociology 25 12 . 89 Biology 3 1 . 55 Marketing 3 1 . 55 Communication 2 1 . 03 Finance 2 1 . 03 Information systems 2 1 . 03 Accounting 1 0 . 52 Cybernetics 1 0 . 52 Innovation 1 0 . 52 International business 1 0 . 52 Law 1 0 . 52 Public policy 1 0 . 52 ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 5 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ allows for critical reﬂection on the proper usage of indigenous theory versus borrowed theory in SM research . Balancing indigenous and borrowed theory usage Authors in various scholarly disciplines have expressed con - cerns regarding theory borrowing , a practice that may make sense in the early days of a scientiﬁc ﬁeld , but perhaps less so in a later stage . As a scientiﬁc ﬁeld matures , it should increasingly develop , and rely upon , its own theories that are informed by insights gen - erated from within the ﬁeld 4 . Such theories describe , explain , predict , and offer ‘what ought to be’ with respect to phenomena distinct to a scientiﬁc ﬁeld . Hence , priority should be largely given to indig - enous rather than borrowed theory . In order to ensure that appropriate theories are tested suﬃ - ciently , SM journal editors may want to decide upon the share of journal space they wish to devote to borrowed - theory testing . Even more importantly , they must decide when borrowed - theory testing is appropriate , using a valid and coherent set of ‘quality tests’ . Here , we propose a model for selecting which theories from outside the broad ﬁeld of management can reasonably be considered ‘good can - didates’ for ‘importation’ into the SM ﬁeld . The model displayed in Table 4 below provides seven quality tests to determine when to make use of borrowed theory . It incorpo - rates theory borrowing criteria and responses to concerns from a number of scholars across the social sciences ( Amundson , 1998 ; Aigen , 2005 ; Floyd , 2009 ; Ilgen & Klein , 1989 ; Johnson Lutjens & Tiffany , 1994 ; Murray & Evers , 1989 ; Malmi and Granlund , 2009 ; Oswick et al . , 2011 ; Truex et al . , 2006 ; Whetten , 2009 ) . Scholars working in different scientiﬁc disciplines have come up with over - lapping quality tests , which suggests that the criteria to adopt when considering theory borrowing are not unique to any one discipline . The ﬁrst set of 3 quality tests in the above model focuses on the value added that the borrowed theory brings to its own base dis - cipline . The ﬁrst test , predictive power , is critical . If a theory cannot be tested because it does not offer clear predictions , then it lacks value beyond perhaps describing a set of empirical phenomena . An example of weak predictive power , in this case related to social capital theory , is provided by Nobel Laureate Robert Solow ( 1995 , p . 38 , brackets added ) , who rejects the theory of social capital : “ [ W ] ithout the possibility of distinguishing more from less [ social capital ] , causal analysis becomes impressionism . ” Solow’s statement means that if the independent variable in social capital theory cannot be accurately measured , then the theory’s predictive power is very limited . A poor predictive theory in its own base discipline is an even poorer candidate for borrowing by another discipline . Explanatory power , the second test , may well be as important as the theory’s predictive power ( Popper , 1963 ) . Explanatory power addresses the sense - making ability of a theory . A theory with strong explanatory power offers scholars the opportunity to make sense of data from many studies . This typically implies a strong generalizability of the theory’s predictive power , as well as accu - racy of its predictions , across a range of empirical phenomena . If a theory is found to explain poorly key phenomena in its base dis - cipline , its usefulness in another discipline should be assessed with scepticism . Gerald Salancik ( 1995 , p . 349 ) provides an example of an explanatory power problem , in this case with social network theory : “…it requires explaining how the interactions support the network and the network supports the interactions for organiza - tional and individual purposes . ” Here , Salancik indicates that social network theory does not , in his view , provide a suﬃcient explana - tion for the relationships among critical variables . The third test , absence of competing theories , prompts a re - searcher to identify alternative theories addressing exactly the same key issues , whether or not they have arisen in the same base dis - cipline . According to Blaug ( 1976 , p . 833 ) , competing theories can account for “…the same evidence by a different but equally pow - erful theoretical framework . ” Blaug ( 1976 ) describes the example of strong rivals for human capital theory , namely the theory of con - sumer behaviour and screening theory , which appear to explain as much variance in the phenomena studied as human capital theory . Here , a human capital theory ‘borrower’ should carefully employ provisos when explaining cause and effect relationships , since al - ternative explanations to the ones provided by the borrowed theory appear to be just as powerful , even in its own base discipline . If a theory passes the 3 quality tests above , a set of ‘necessary’ conditions is fulﬁlled to provide value added in other disciplines . However , an additional set of ‘suﬃcient’ conditions must also be met . Here , the fourth quality test is that the key issues addressed by borrowed theory should have a clear and intuitively plausible commonality with phenomena in the borrower ﬁeld . The ‘issues match’ means inter alia that at least some key variables ( reﬂecting dependent , independent and / or control variables ) driving the pre - dictive and explanatory power of the borrowed theory , should be prominent in both ﬁelds . The ﬁfth quality test assesses whether borrowed theory con - cepts are truly relevant to – and consistent with – concepts in the importing ﬁeld . This quality test focuses on whether borrowing con - cepts from another discipline can be considered a ‘creative act’ , 4 Thisdoesnotprecludetheuseof theoriesfromotherﬁelds , assumingthatadapt - ingthemtoSMdoesnotcompromisetheoriginalintegrityof theories ( Suddabyetal . , 2011 ) . Table 4 Seven tests to assess the quality of theory borrowing . Borrowed theory’s contributions to its own base discipline Predictive power • Does the borrowed theory consistently demonstrate statistically signiﬁcant , predictive power in its base discipline ? • Does the borrowed theory have practical predictive signiﬁcance in its base discipline ? Explanatory power • Does the borrowed theory possess substantial explanatory power in its base discipline ( that is , how much of the discipline’s phenomena can it explain ) ? Absence of strong competing theories • Are there strong rival theories ( providing alternative explanations ) in the base discipline ? Borrowed theory’s contributions to the borrower discipline Issues match • Are the key phenomena and problems studied reasonably similar in the borrowed theory discipline and the borrower discipline ? • Are the key issues central to the borrowed theory also salient within the borrower discipline ? Consistency in concepts • Are the key concepts used in the borrowed theory consistent with – and meaningful in – the borrower discipline ? Consistency in assumptions • Are the key underlying assumptions in the borrowed theory consistent with the underlying assumptions in the borrower discipline ? Knowledge ﬁt • Is there extant evidence in the borrower discipline to support ( or refute ) the key propositions of the borrowed theory ? • Is there extant evidence in the borrower discipline to support ( or refute ) the peripheral propositions and logical inferences of the borrowed theory ? • Is there extant theoretical support for the salience of the borrowed theory within the borrower discipline ? ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 6 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ meaning that the imported concepts are not only novel but also useful ( Mayer , 1999 ) , and thus represent more than merely an ‘orig - inal act’ whereby borrowing novel concepts would actually not be useful . The sixth quality test for a borrower discipline is to compare the underlying assumptions in the borrowed theory , with the generally - agreed - upon assumptions in the borrower discipline . As Amundson ( 1998 ) suggests , applying this test may not be easy , because a bor - rowed theory’s underlying assumptions may be viewed as self - evident in the base discipline , and may therefore not be clearly and fully communicated in any of the canonical literature describing the theory . However , Amundson ( 1998 , p . 354 , brackets added ) views this quality test as critical , since : “The examination of underlying assumptions for ﬁt will be a long , slow , iterative process , but will ultimately lead to greater in - sights and improved research skills . Because this is an important long term issue , [ borrower ﬁeld ] researchers simply should do as well as they can at this , learning along the way from inevi - table mistakes and errors . ” Finally , the seventh quality test involves the in - depth search for extant scholarly work in the borrower discipline that addresses the ‘legitimacy’ of the borrowed theory . More speciﬁcally , if prior pub - lished evidence strongly rejects the key propositions or predictions of the borrowed theory , whether explicitly or implicitly , there should be little reason to pursue this theory further . For purposes of illustration , we will now apply the above model , consisting of 7 quality tests , to two theories borrowed from other ﬁelds of scientiﬁc inquiry and applied regularly by SM scholars . These two theories , namely agency theory and institutional theory , also feature prominently in many inﬂuential SM textbooks taught in busi - ness schools . Here , we highlight concerns raised in scholarly analysis about these borrowed theories . We present the two dimensions of the quality - testing model , namely the strength of the borrowed theory in its base discipline ( quality tests 1 – 3 ) and the applicabil - ity of the theory in the borrower discipline ( quality tests 4 – 7 ) , see Tables 5 and 6 . The references in these tables mainly consist of popular review and critique articles , spanning a number of decades , which means that the challenges identiﬁed are not new . We do not intend to be exhaustive in terms of criticism voiced , but we simply wish to illustrate how the proposed quality tests could be applied . Table 5 above illustrates that several scholars have voiced con - cerns regarding the quality of both agency and institutional theory , as used in their own base discipline and when applied in another one . The following two sections brieﬂy discuss the main concerns . Quality testing of borrowed theory in base discipline Agency theory ( AT ) AT purports to describe and prevent / solve conﬂicts between prin - cipals ( e . g . , shareholders ) and their agents ( e . g . , managers ) . AT’s predictive power ( quality test 1 ) in the context of compensation has been called into question by economists Jensen and Murphy ( 1990 , p . 243 ) : ‘Our task is made diﬃcult by the fact that the theory offers few sharp predictions regarding the form of the contract other than predicting that wages generally increase with observed output . ’ These scholars ﬁnd that their empirical results are : “…inconsistent with the implications of formal agency models of optimal contracting . The empirical relation between the pay of top - level executives and ﬁrm performance , while positive and statistically signiﬁcant , is small for an occupation in which in - centive pay is expected to play an important role . ” ( Jensen & Murphy , 1990 . p . 227 ) A number of economists have also challenged AT’s explanatory power 5 ( quality test 2 ) . A substantive concern is the extent to which the theory accurately characterizes human behaviour . A fundamen - tal assumption of AT is the strong - form , self - interest - seeking nature of human beings . This strong form , self - interest - seeking assump - tion is conducive to mathematical modelling . However , the validity of the assumption , as well as the generalizability of inferences derived from using the assumption in theory - testing applications , has been questioned by , among others , Becker ( 1976 ) and Sen ( 1987 ) . On this issue , Akerlof ( 1983 , p . 54 ) states : “…this assumption is made for reasons of convenience , not because economists empirically assume that all persons act only out of selﬁshness . ” However , Sen ( 1987 , p . 16 , brackets in original ) adds in this context : “To try to use the demands of rationality in going to battle on behalf of the 5 AT’spredictiveandexplanatorypowershavealsobeencriticallyassessedbyman - agement scholar Sumantra Ghoshal ( 2005 ) . Table 5 Strength of the borrowed theory in the base discipline . Theory Review studies Quality test 1 : Predictive power Quality test 2 : Explanatory power Quality test 3 : Competing theories Agency theory Jensen and Murphy ( 1990 ) Weakness Becker ( 1976 ) Weakness Akerlof ( 1983 ) Weakness Arrow ( 1985 ) Weakness Sen ( 1987 ) Weakness Kotowitz ( 1987 ) Weakness Doucouliagos ( 1994 ) Weakness Salanie ( 1997 ) Weakness Donaldson and Davis ( 1990 ) Weakness Cornforth ( 2003 ) Weakness Van Essen et al . ( 2012 ) Weakness ( Neo - ) institutional theory Perrow ( 1985 ) Weakness Perrow ( 1986 ) Weakness Powell ( 1991 ) Weakness Fligstein ( 1991 ) Weakness Tolbert and Zucker ( 1994 ) Weakness Tolbert and Zucker ( 1996 ) Weakness Selznick ( 1996 ) Weakness Barley and Tolbert ( 1997 ) Weakness Hirsch and Lounsbury ( 1997 ) Weakness Lewin et al . ( 2004 ) Weakness Donaldson ( 2006 ) Weakness ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 7 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ standard behavioural assumption of economic theory ( to wit , actual self - interest maximization ) is like leading a cavalry charge on a lame donkey . ” A related substantive concern is the extent to which the theory accurately characterizes human relations . Arrow ( 1985 , pp . 48 – 9 ) argues that AT does not perform well in this respect : “…the theory tends to lead to very complex fee functions . It turns out to be diﬃcult to establish even what would appear to be common - sense properties of monotonicity and the like . We do not ﬁnd such complex relations in reality…In some cases , where principal - agent theory seems clearly applicable , real - world prac - tice is very different from the model…Even in situations where compensation systems seem closer in form to the theoretical , there are signiﬁcant differences . ” Along similar lines , Kotowitz ( 1987 , p . 550 ) has argued that : “The nature of the reward schedule is sensitive to the nature of the information available , the residual uncertainty and the degree of risk aversion of the agent and principal . This observation is troubling because incentive contracts observed in reality are gen - erally simple and uniform across a variety of agents and information sets . ” Quality test 3 , on the absence of competing theories to study the same phenomena ( whether from inside or outside the base disci - pline ) also appears relevant , as suggested by Table 5 . For example , stewardship theory , from the ﬁeld of management , is a direct com - petitor of AT . Donaldson and Davis ( 1990 , p . 51 ) argue that this theory “…holds that there is no inherent , general problem of executive mo - tivation… performance variations arise from whether the structural situation in which the executive is located facilitates effective action by the executive . ” The director primacy model , from the ﬁeld of law , is a second competitor . According to Lan and Heracleous ( 2010 , p . 298 ) this model considers the board of directors as : “…a central , independent decision maker for the ﬁrm . It mediates competing in - terests among the various groups that bear residual risk and have residual claims over the ﬁrm , and it allocates team surpluses . ” Man - agerial power theory , which has its roots in law and economics ( Berle & Means , 1932 ) , can also be considered a competing theory . Van Essen , Otten , and Carberry ( 2012 , p . 2 ) state that : “At the core of this framework is a direct challenge to the common assumption within agency theory of optimal contracting , that is , that boards engage in arm’s - length transactions with execu - tives over compensation arrangements and that such transactions help mitigate agency problems by creating compensation prac - tices that more closely align the interests of executives and shareholders . ” Any inﬂuential theory will likely have its critics , but in the case of agency theory , the point is that even sophisticated students of the empirical phenomena purportedly addressed by agency theory have great doubts about this theory’s predictive and explanatory capacity , and several alternative lenses have been identiﬁed through which to frame the same empirical phenomena . ( Neo - ) institutional theory ( NIT ) NIT purportedly addresses the processes through which social behaviour and interactions ( among individuals , organizations and even countries ) become determined by social structures , which include elements as varied as , e . g . , cultural beliefs , societal and in - dustry norms , and routines such as managerial practices viewed as legitimate . Initially , the theory focused on processes of organiza - tional isomorphism , with organizations in an institutional ﬁeld becoming increasingly similar , but NIT does account to some extent for heterogeneity and processes of institutional transformation . In terms of quality test 1 , NIT does not appear to suffer much substantive criticism , suggesting that the theory does offer real - world predictive capacity . In the realm of quality test 2 , a number of sociologists have chal - lenged NIT’s explanatory power 6 . For example , Powell ( 1991 , p . 183 ) has argued that NIT does not suﬃciently explain how and why some organizations resist external institutionalization inﬂuences . There is also still a relative lack of organizational agency , which has been discussed by a number of other prominent sociologists . Perrow ( 1986 ) has expressed concern over the over - socialized nature of NIT – organizations are often cast as passive participants that can only respond to institutional expectations . Fligstein ( 1991 ) offers similar criticism , via an historical analysis of the structural transforma - tion of American industry , in which he includes power considerations at the organizational level ( i . e . he grants a causal role to the cog - nitions held by various actors ) . In fairness to the ﬁeld , substantial recent scholarly contributions have tried to remediate this deﬁ - ciency , e . g . , in terms of attributing a greater role to organizational agency through ‘institutional work’ ( Lawrence , Suddaby , & Leca , 2009 ) . As regards quality test 3 on the presence of strong competing theories , it appears there are at least a few contenders . Population ecology theory , from the ﬁelds of biology , sociology and manage - ment , is a direct competitor of NIT . According to Lewin , Weigelt , and Emery ( 2004 , p . 146 ) , “population ecology sees organizations as un - likely to change because of forces of structural inertia . ” Contingency theory , from the ﬁeld of management , is a second rival theory . Ac - cording to Donaldson ( 2006 , p . 19 ) contingency theory , “…holds that the most effective organizational structural design is where the struc - ture ﬁts the contingencies . ” The above , cursory description tentatively suggests that NIT might be a better contender in terms of its potential value added as a bor - rowed theory in the SM ﬁeld than agency theory , but even it were found to satisfy fully the ﬁrst 3 quality tests above , this still does not imply that the theory is readily applicable for borrowing by another ﬁeld . For illustrative purposes , we examine the applicabil - ity in the strategy ﬁeld of AT and NIT ( Table 6 ) . We again identify a number of weaknesses in both AT and NIT when applying quality tests 4 – 7 , with institutional theory also doing better on these quality tests . Quality testing of borrowed theory when applied in borrower discipline Agency theory The applicability of AT to SM research is debatable from the per - spective of each quality test in the model : ‘issues match’ , consistency in concepts , consistency in assumptions and knowledge ﬁt . Ghoshal ( 2005 ) has focused on the issues match ( quality test 4 ) by arguing that the issues central to AT are hardly salient in the management ﬁeld . Ghoshal ( 2005 , p . 81 ) likens AT to a walking stick that is waiting to be replaced by one that offers more sense - making ability . With respect to consistency among concepts ( quality test 5 ) , Donaldson ( 1995 ) has questioned the degree to which imported AT concepts are meaningful . Donaldson ( 1995 , p . 168 ) has cautioned the ﬁeld of management against adopting a narrow view on the drivers of human behaviour and has argued that management schol - ars should be : “…prepared to acknowledge positive rather than just negative functions for managers . ” Various scholars have challenged the notion that AT assump - tions would match up with those commonly adopted in management research ( quality test 6 ) . For example , Davis , Schoorman , and 6 NIT’s predictive and explanatory powers have been called into question by a number of scholars who are not neo - institutional scientists , namely economists and management scholars ( e . g . , Chakravarti , 2012 ; Davis , 2010 ; Kraatz & Zajac , 1996 ) . ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 8 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ Donaldson ( 1997 , pp . 23 – 4 ) suggest that it is wrong to assume agent motivation is the sole driver of performance : “There are many reasons other than poor motivation for agents’ failing to deliver high performance for their principals ( e . g . , low ability , lack of knowl - edge , and poor information ) . ” Lubatkin , Lane , and Schulze ( 2001 ) suggest that AT suffers from an under - socialized view of man and hence , its assumptions do not match well with the more socially complex view of organizations held by management scholars . Fontrodona and Sison ( 2006 , p . 40 ) go even further with their crit - icism of AT in arguing that “…the assumptions of agency theory to date have been inimical to this concept of the ﬁrm…we have ana - lyzed these assumptions and identiﬁed their ﬂaws . ” The degree of knowledge ﬁt between AT and management schol - arship ( quality test 7 ) has also been discussed by a number of scholars . Daily , Dalton , and Cannella ( 2003 , p . 375 ) compiled evi - dence indicating that AT does not hold up to empirical scrutiny and that “…results suggest that alternative theories and models are needed to effectively uncover the promise and potential of corpo - rate governance . ” As noted above , in the context of ‘issues matching’ , Ghoshal ( 2005 ) strongly questioned the existing theoretical support for the salience of AT in management . In this context of knowl - edge ﬁt , Bruce , Buck , and Main ( 2005 , p . 1503 ) raised concerns regarding the managerial relevance of AT : “Different countries’ patterns of corporate governance in general , and executive pay in particular , cannot be explained by conven - tional principal - agent theory alone . Either this must be stretched to embrace the notion of executives who suspend short - term op - portunism , or else stewardship theory ( or something similar ) must be used , where appropriate . ” ( Neo - ) institutional theory The applicability of NIT theory is far from perfect either in terms of the same four quality tests in the model . With respect to the matching of issues ( quality test 4 ) , Barley and Tolbert ( 1997 , p . 93 ) doubt whether the main problems studied in sociology and man - agement are reasonably consistent , largely because the models used by NIT scholars are underdeveloped in terms of their capacity to explain the real - world processes of creating , changing and repro - ducing institutions . As regards consistency between concepts ( quality test 5 ) , Hirsch and Lounsbury ( 1997 ) expressed apprehension about NIT’s contri - butions and cautioned against irrelevance because of insuﬃcient attention devoted to the problems of change and managerial action . Along similar lines , Kostova , Roth , and Dacin ( 2008 , p . 997 ) contend that NIT holds little value in international strategic management research , when multinational corporations ( MNC ] are involved : “…characteristics of MNCs limit the applicability of neo - institutionalism to these organizations . Although subject to institutional forces , MNCs have a very different institutional story that better ﬁts the conditions of equivocality , ambiguity , and complexity . ” The extent to which the assumptions in NIT are consistent with those in the ﬁeld of management ( quality test 6 ) has been widely debated . For example , NIT assumes the persistence and homoge - neity of institutions . However , Dacin , Goodstein , and Scott ( 2002 , p . 45 ) ﬁnd that : “… institutions change over time , are not uniformly taken - for granted , have effects that are particularistic , and are chal - lenged as well as hotly contested . Thus , we acknowledge that although institutions serve both to powerfully drive change and to shape the nature of change across levels and contexts , they also themselves change in character and potency over time . ” NIT also assumes a subjective / relativistic perspective , but Bresser and Millonig ( 2003 , p . 221 ) argue that such perspective conﬂicts with the functionalist lens used by SM scholars . The ﬁnal test included in the model ( quality test 7 ) , addresses knowledge ﬁt . Donaldson ( 1995 , p . 127 ) expresses concern over the theoretical support for NIT in management , e . g . , because empiri - cal research in management does not support NIT’s focus on the importance of myths and symbols . Hambrick , Finkelstein , Cho , and Jackson ( 2005 , p . 343 ) voice speciﬁc concerns about the salience and generalizability of isomorphism . Based on a historical analysis of American industries during the 20th century , the authors ﬁnd that a managerially relevant theory must acknowledge and incorpo - rate in its primary iteration that isomorphic pressures sometimes weaken , thereby fostering heterogeneity among organizations . Again , NIT appears to fare better than agency theory in the sense that pressures for homogeneity appear to be consistent with at least some empirical observations in the management sphere . However , NIT still exhibits an incomplete understanding of the ﬁrm - level quest for heterogeneity and uniqueness , and the related relative inten - sity of pressures for homogeneity versus heterogeneity over time , and the impact thereof on managerial behaviour ( see , e . g . , Verbeke & Tung , 2013 ) . Business ﬁrms typically do not exist to serve the exi - gencies of legitimacy , but to achieve survival , proﬁtability and growth through creating value . Conclusions The historical roots and the evolution of the SM discipline have been widely studied . The present paper contributes to this body of Table 6 The applicability of borrowed theory in the adopting discipline . Theory Review studies Quality test 4 : Issue match Quality test 5 : Consistent concepts Quality test 6 : Assumptions match Quality test 7 : Knowledge ﬁt Agency theory Ghoshal ( 2005 ) Weakness Donaldson ( 1995 ) Weakness Davis et al . ( 1997 ) Weakness Lubatkin et al . ( 2001 ) Weakness Fontrodona and Sison ( 2006 ) Weakness Daily et al . ( 2003 ) Weakness Ghoshal ( 2005 ) Weakness Bruce et al . ( 2005 ) Weakness ( Neo - ) institutional theory Barley and Tolbert ( 1997 ) Weakness Hirsch and Lounsbury ( 1997 ) Weakness Kostova et al . ( 2008 ) Weakness Dacin et al . ( 2002 ) Weakness Bresser and Millonig ( 2003 ) Weakness Donaldson ( 1995 ) Weakness Hambrick et al . ( 2005 ) Weakness ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 9 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ knowledge by reporting on several key trends regarding SM theory development and usage . First , explicit theory testing now ac - counts for approximately 20 % of empirical research in the top seven SM journals . The growth in theory testing , which is at least partly attributable to shifts in journal editorial policy , supports the view that the discipline is moving towards a maturity stage . Second , SM scholars are incorporating theoretical perspectives from a wide variety of scientiﬁc ﬁelds in their research . Five of the top ten most used theories and almost two thirds of all theories tested in empirical work have been borrowed from outside of the SM discipline , in the sense that all of the key conceptual innova - tions and contributors can be found in ﬁelds other than SM . SM journals thus systematically publish a large volume of empirical work based mainly on borrowed theories , which are then applied only once or twice , thereby precluding the creation of suﬃcient critical mass to assess whether such borrowing brings substantive value added to the ﬁeld . The unfortunate tendency of some manage - ment journal editors to focus on ‘originality’ , without applying a battery of quality tests as proposed in the present paper in order to assess whether the importation of borrowed concepts makes any sense , does not bode well for the future . The ﬁndings with respect to borrowed theory usage in SM are comparable with those in the broader OMT area ( Oswick et al . , 2011 ) . But the observed , clear overreliance on theory borrowing is not rec - ommended , because it comes at the expense of homegrown SM theories , informed from the outset by SM phenomena . Oswick et al . ( 2011 ) propose a practice of analogical correspondence and con - ceptual blending as a way forward . Others , such as Alvesson and Sandberg ( 2013 ) and Boxenbaum and Rouleau ( 2011 ) , suggest that borrowed theory be used as a critical dialogue - partner or means of intellectual bricolage , respectively . Our own intellectual contribution , a screening model for assess - ing borrowed theory candidates , is intended as a precursor to the above conceptual and methodological practices . Adopting our screen - ing model gives a tool to SM researchers to examine carefully any candidate theory prior to borrowing it , in terms of three quality tests related to its empirical status in its own ﬁeld , i . e . , its explanatory and predictive power , and the absence of credible rival theories . Even if a candidate for theory borrowing were found to be a powerful contributor in its own discipline , its potential usefulness in SM must still be determined , in terms of an additional four quality tests : issues match ; consistency in concepts ; consistency in assumptions and knowledge ﬁt . If a theory were still viewed as viable at this point , SM researchers might want to consider the conceptual and meth - odological practices suggested by Oswick et al . ( 2011 ) , Alvesson and Sandberg ( 2013 ) and Boxenbaum and Rouleau ( 2011 ) . We hope that the ﬁndings presented here , as well as the sug - gested screening model , will improve the theory borrowing practices of SM researchers when conducting empirical studies . Proper se - lectivity in theory borrowing should dramatically improve the managerial relevance and applicability of the resulting empirical out - comes in the SM ﬁeld . Ultimately , the bulk of SM theorizing and empirical work should be derived directly from observing and study - ing SM phenomena , not from borrowing concepts derived from the study of phenomena unrelated to SM practice . Imagine if empiri - cal studies of early human child development were based largely on theories derived from in - depth analysis of geriatric monkeys . This is unfortunately the present state of the SM ﬁeld in the realm of theory borrowing . One gigantic step forward in the SM ﬁeld would be to gain some consensus about the range of acceptable micro - foundations or drivers of human behaviour to be adopted in SM studies , and which tran - scend all seven quality tests for theory borrowing . A broad consensus appears to exist on at least one such micro - foundation , namely that of bounded rationality ( BRat ) , though there are several variations on the precise meaning of this behavioural driver . BRat refers to purposive decision - making and action in a context of imperfect in - formation and limited information processing capacity ( Gigerenzer & Selten , 2002 ) . The importance of BRat as a behavioural driver is not just its plausibility vis - à - vis the practice of management , but the fact that it has been measured and used in numerous empiri - cal studies with substantial explanatory and predictive power . Reﬂecting on the micro - foundations adopted explicitly or implic - itly in ‘candidates’ for theory borrowing , and assessing these foundations’ consistency with some notion of BRat , would provide not only a partial answer to a number of quality tests , but would likely also create a valuable bridge for facilitating subsequent knowl - edge transfer to – and application in – real world managerial settings . Can a second micro - foundation be identiﬁed that would , similar to BRat , transcend all seven quality tests for theory borrowing , and facilitate ultimate usability in managerial settings ? Neither varia - tions of unbounded self - interest seeking , nor variations of trust would appear appropriate candidates . The former do not respect the simple observation that most organizational functioning , and especially strategy formation , appears to serve organizational goals , with self - interest seeking being a constraint , not the heart or soul of purposive action by the organization ( Verbeke , 2003 ) . The latter do not recognize that trust , and the vulnerabilities created because of it , can easily be detrimental to organizations , and negatively affect their chances of survival , proﬁtability and growth , which are crit - ical especially in strategy formation ( Verbeke & Greidanus , 2009 ) . The concept of bounded reliability ( BRel ) would appear more prom - ising , meaning that ‘scarcity of mind’ would be complemented by ‘scarcity of making good on open ended promises’ , much of it trig - gered by benevolent preference reversal , an often observed phenomenon in managerial practice ( Kano & Verbeke , 2014 ; Verbeke & Kenworthy , 2008 ) . By focusing especially on the need for plausible micro - foundations when applying the seven quality tests proposed in the present paper , a promising pathway is opened for theory borrowing that will ul - timately serve managerial relevance , and therefore the ﬁeld’s key stakeholders such as strategy teachers , practitioners and policy makers . References Aigen , K . ( 2005 ) Music - Centered Music Therapy . Barcelona , Gilsum , NH . Akerlof , G . ( 1983 ) Loyalty ﬁlters . The American Economic Review 73 ( 1 ) , 54 – 63 . Alvesson , M . , & Sandberg , J . ( 2013 ) Constructing Research Questions : Doing Interesting Research . SAGE Publications , London . Amundson , S . D . ( 1998 ) Relationships between theory - driven empirical research in operations management and other disciplines . Journal of Operations Management 16 ( 4 ) , 341 – 359 . Arrow , K . ( 1985 ) The economics of agency . In J . Pratt & R . Zeckhauser ( Eds . ) , Principal and Agents : The Structure of Business ( pp . 37 – 51 ) . Harvard Business School Press , Boston . Azar , O . H . , & Brock , D . M . ( 2008 ) A citation - based ranking of strategic management journals . Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 17 ( 3 ) , 781 – 802 . Barley , S . R . , & Tolbert , P . S . ( 1997 ) Institutionalization and structuration : Studying the links between action and institution . Organization Studies 18 ( 1 ) , 93 – 118 . Becker , G . S . ( 1976 ) Altruism , egoism , andgeneticﬁtness : Economicsandsociobiology . Journal of Economic Literature 14 ( 3 ) , 817 – 826 . Berle , A . A . , & Means , G . C . ( 1932 ) The Modern Corporation and Private Property . Macmillan , New York . Blaug , M . ( 1976 ) The empirical status of human capital theory : A slightly jaundiced view . Journal of Economic Literature 14 ( 3 ) , 827 – 855 . Boxenbaum , E . , & Rouleau , L . ( 2011 ) Newknowledgeproductsasbricolage : Metaphors and scripts in organizational theory . Academy of Management Review 36 ( 2 ) , 272 – 296 . Bresser , R . K . F . , & Millonig , K . ( 2003 ) Institutional capital : Competitive advantage inlightof thenewinstitutionalisminorganizationtheory . SchmalenbachBusiness Review 55 ( 3 ) , 220 – 241 . Brown , J . R . , & Dant , R . P . ( 2009 ) The theoretical domains of retailing research : A retrospective . Journal of Retailing 85 ( 2 ) , 113 – 128 . Bruce , A . , Buck , T . , & Main , B . ( 2005 ) Topexecutiveremuneration : AviewfromEurope . Journal of Management Studies 42 ( 7 ) , 1493 – 1506 . Campbell , J . P . ( 1990 ) The role of theory in industrial and organizational psychology . In M . D . Dunnette & L . M . Hough ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology 1 ( 2nd ed . , pp . 39 – 74 ) . Consulting Psychologists Press , Palo Alto , CA . ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 10 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ Chakravarti , A . ( 2012 ) Institutions , Economic Performance and the Visible Hand : Theory and Evidence . Edward Elgar , Cheltenham . Chandler , A . D . ( 1962 ) Strategy and Structure : Chapters in the History of American Industrial Enterprise . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Chia , R . ( 2014 ) Reﬂections on the distinctiveness of European management scholarship . European Management Journal 32 ( 5 ) , 683 – 688 . Chicksand , D . , Watson , G . , Walker , H . , Radnor , Z . , & Johnston , R . ( 2012 ) Theoretical perspectives in purchasing and supply chain management : An analysis of the literature . Supply Chain Management : An International Journal 17 ( 4 ) , 454 – 472 . Coase , R . H . ( 1937 ) The nature of the ﬁrm . Economica 4 ( 16 ) , 386 – 405 . Cornforth , C . ( 2003 ) The changing context of governance – Emerging issues and paradoxes . In C . Cornforth ( Ed . ) , The Governance of Public and Non - Proﬁt Organizations : What Do Boards Do ? ( pp . 1 – 20 ) . Routledge , London . Dacin , M . T . , Goodstein , J . , & Scott , W . R . ( 2002 ) Institutional theory and institutional change : Introduction to the special research forum . The Academy of Management Journal 45 ( 1 ) , 43 – 56 . Daily , C . , Dalton , D . , & Cannella , A . , Jr . ( 2003 ) Corporate governance : Decades of dialogue & data . Academy of Management Review 28 ( 3 ) , 371 – 382 . Davis , G . F . ( 2010 ) Do theories of organizations progress ? Organizational Research Methods 13 ( 4 ) , 690 – 709 . Davis , J . H . , Schoorman , F . D . , & Donaldson , L . ( 1997 ) Toward a stewardship theory of management . Academy of Management Review 22 ( 1 ) , 20 – 47 . Donaldson , J . , & Davis , P . ( 1990 ) Businessethics ? Yes , Butwhatcanitdoforthebottom line ? Management Decision 28 ( 6 ) , 29 – 33 . Donaldson , L . ( 1995 ) American Anti - Management Theories of Organization : A Critique of Paradigm Proliferation . Cambridge University Press , New York . Donaldson , L . ( 2006 ) The contingency theory of organizational design : challenges and opportunities . In M . Burton , B . Eriksen , D . D . Hakonsson , & C . C . Snow ( Eds . ) , OrganizationDesign : TheEvolvingState - of - the - Art ( pp . 19 – 40 ) . Springer , NewYork . Doucouliagos , C . ( 1994 ) A note on the evolution of homo economicus . Journal of Economic Issues 28 ( 3 ) , 877 – 883 . Dyer , J . , & Singh , H . ( 1998 ) The relational view : Cooperative strategies and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage . Academy of Management Review 23 ( 4 ) , 660 – 679 . Ferraro , F . , Pfeffer , J . , & Sutton , R . I . ( 2005 ) Economics language and assumptions : How theories can become self - fulﬁlling . Academy of Management Review 30 ( 1 ) , 8 – 24 . Fligstein , N . ( 1991 ) The structural transformation of American industry : an institutional account of the causes of diversiﬁcation in the largest ﬁrms , 1919 – 1979 . In W . W . Powell & P . J . DiMaggio ( Eds . ) , The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis ( pp . 311 – 336 ) . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Floyd , S . W . ( 2009 ) ‘Borrowing’ theory : What does this mean and when does it make sense in management scholarship ? Journal of Management Studies 46 ( 6 ) , 1057 – 1058 . Fontrodona , J . , & Sison , A . J . G . ( 2006 ) The nature of the ﬁrm , agency theory and shareholder theory : A critique from philosophical anthropology . Journal of Business Ethics 66 ( 1 ) , 33 – 42 . Ghoshal , S . ( 2005 ) Bad management theories are destroying good management practices . Academy of Management Learning and Education 4 ( 1 ) , 75 – 91 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Selten , R . ( Eds . ) , ( 2002 ) Bounded Rationality : The Adaptive Toolbox . MIT Press , New Haven , CT . Green , D . P . , & Shapiro , I . ( 1994 ) Pathologies of Rational Choice Theory : A Critique of Applications in Political Science . Yale University Press , Cambridge , MA . Hambrick , D . ( 2007 ) The ﬁeld of management’s devotion to theory : Too much of a good thing ? Academy of Management Journal 50 ( 6 ) , 1346 – 1352 . Hambrick , D . C . , Finkelstein , S . , Cho , T . S . , & Jackson , E . M . ( 2005 ) Isomorphism in reverse : Institutionaltheoryasanexplanationforrecentincreasesinintraindustry heterogeneity and managerial discretion . Research in Organizational Behavior 26 , 307 – 350 . Hassard , J . , Wolfram Cox , J . , & Rowlinson , M . ( 2013 ) Dialogue : Where are the old theories of organization ? Prospects for retrospection in organization theory . Academy of Management Review 38 ( 2 ) , 309 – 313 . Hennart , J . F . ( 1988 ) A transaction costs theory of equity joint ventures . Strategic Management Journal 9 ( 4 ) , 361 – 374 . Hernes , T . ( 2014 ) Insearchof asoulof relevanceforEuropeanmanagementresearch . European Management Journal 32 ( 6 ) , 852 – 857 . Hirsch , P . M . , & Lounsbury , M . ( 1997 ) Ending the family quarrel : Towards a reconciliation of “old” and “new” institutionalism . American Behavioral Scientist 40 ( 4 ) , 406 – 418 . Hoskisson , R . E . , Hitt , M . A . , Wan , W . P . , & Yiu , D . ( 1999 ) Theory and research in strategic management : Swings of a pendulum . Journal of Management 25 ( 3 ) , 417 – 456 . Ilgen , D . R . , & Klein , H . J . ( 1989 ) Organizational behavior . Annual Review of Psychology 40 , 327 – 351 . Jarzabkowski , P . , & Whittington , R . ( 2008 ) Directionsforatroubleddiscipline : Strategy research , teaching and practice . Journal of Management Inquiry 17 ( 4 ) , 266 – 268 . Jensen , M . C . , & Murphy , K . J . ( 1990 ) Performancepayandtopmanagementincentives . Journal of Political Economy 98 ( 2 ) , 225 – 264 . Johnson Lutjens , L . R . , & Tiffany , C . R . ( 1994 ) Evaluating planned change theories . Nursing Management 25 ( 3 ) , 54 – 57 . Kano , L . , & Verbeke , A . ( 2014 ) . Uncovering Alfred Chandler’s hidden contribution to strategic management theory : The multiple facets of bounded reliability . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Strategic Management Society , Copenhagen , Denmark . Kiechel , W . ( 2010 ) The Lords of Strategy : The Secret Intellectual History of the New Corporate World . Harvard Business Press , Boston . Kostova , T . , Roth , K . , & Dacin , T . ( 2008 ) Institutional theory in the study of multinational corporations : A critique and new directions . Academy of Management Review 33 ( 4 ) , 994 – 1006 . Kotowitz , Y . ( 1987 ) Moral hazard . In J . Eatwell , M . Milgate , & P . Newman ( Eds . ) , The New Palgrave : A Dictionary of Economics ( pp . 549 – 551 ) . Macmillan , London . Kraatz , M . S . , & Zajac , E . J . ( 1996 ) Exploring the limits of new institutionalism : The causes and consequences of illegitimate organizational change . American Sociological Review 61 ( 5 ) , 812 – 836 . Lan , L . L . , & Heracleous , L . ( 2010 ) Rethinking agency theory : The view from law . Academy of Management Review 35 ( 2 ) , 294 – 314 . Lawrence , T . B . , Suddaby , R . , & Leca , B . ( Eds . ) , ( 2009 ) Institutional Work : Actors and Agency in Institutional Studies of Organizations . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Lewin , A . Y . , Weigelt , C . B . , & Emery , J . D . ( 2004 ) Adaptation and selection in strategy and change : perspectives on strategic change in organizations . In M . S . Poole & A . H . Van de Ven ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Organizational Change and Innovation ( pp . 108 – 160 ) . Oxford University Press , New York . Lewin , K . ( 1951 ) D . Cartwright ( Ed . ) , Field Theory in Social Science : Selected Theoretical Papers . Harper & Row , New York . Lubatkin , M . H . , Lane , P . J . , & Schulze , W . S . ( 2001 ) A strategic management model of agency relationships in ﬁrm governance . In M . A . Hitt , R . E . Freeman , & J . S . Harrison ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Strategic Management ( pp . 229 – 258 ) . Blackwell , Oxford . Malmi , T . , & Granlund , M . ( 2009 ) In search of management accounting theory . European Accounting Review 18 ( 3 ) , 597 – 620 . Markóczy , L . , & Deeds , D . L . ( 2009 ) Theory building at the intersection : Recipe for impact or road to nowhere ? Journal of Management Studies 46 ( 6 ) , 1076 – 1088 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) Fifty years of creativity research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 449 – 460 ) . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . McMillan , C . , & Overall , J . ( 2015 ) Wicked problems and the misalignment of strategic management design . Journal of Business Strategy forthcoming . Merton , R . K . ( 1973 ) Social conﬂict over styles of sociological work . In R . K . Merton ( Ed . ) , The Sociology of Science : The Theoretical and Empirical Investigations ( pp . 47 – 69 ) . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Murray , J . B . , & Evers , D . J . ( 1989 ) Theoryborrowingandreﬂectivityininterdisciplinary ﬁelds . Advances in Consumer Research 16 ( 1 ) , 647 – 652 . Nag , R . , Hambrick , D . C . , & Chen , M . - J . ( 2007 ) What is strategic management , really ? Inductive derivation of a consensus deﬁnition of the ﬁeld . Strategic Management Journal 28 ( 9 ) , 935 – 955 . Nickerson , J . , & Zenger , T . ( 2004 ) A knowledge - based theory of the ﬁrm : The problem - solving perspective . Organization Science 15 ( 6 ) , 617 – 632 . Nordberg , M . , & Verbeke , A . ( 1999 ) The Strategic Management of High Technology Contracts . Pergamon , New York . Oswick , C . , Fleming , P . , & Hanlon , G . ( 2011 ) From borrowing to blending : Rethinking the processes of organizational theory building . Academy of Management Review 36 ( 2 ) , 318 – 337 . Perrow , C . ( 1985 ) Reviewessay : Overboardwithmythandsymbols . AmericanJournal of Sociology 91 ( 1 ) , 151 – 155 . Perrow , C . ( 1986 ) Complex Organizations : A Critical Essay . Random House , New York . Pfeffer , J . ( 1995 ) Mortality , reproducibility , and the persistence of styles of theory . Organization Science 6 ( 6 ) , 681 – 686 . Popper , K . ( 1963 ) Conjectures and Refutations . Harper , New York . Powell , W . W . ( 1991 ) Expanding the scope of institutional analysis . In W . W . Powell & P . J . DiMaggio ( Eds . ) , The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis ( pp . 183 – 203 ) . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Rugman , A . M . , & Verbeke , A . ( 2003 ) Extending the theory of the multinational enterprise : Internalization and strategic management perspectives . Journal of International Business Studies 34 ( 2 ) , 125 – 137 . Salancik , G . R . ( 1995 ) Wanted : A good network theory of organization . Administrative Science Quarterly 40 ( 2 ) , 345 – 349 . Salanie , B . ( 1997 ) The Economics of Contracts , a Primer . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Selznick , P . ( 1996 ) Institutionalism ‘old’ and ‘new . Administrative Science Quarterly 41 ( 2 ) , 270 – 277 . Sen , A . K . ( 1987 ) On Ethics and Economics . Blackwell , Oxford . Solow , R . M . ( 1995 ) But verify . The New Republic 213 ( September ) , 36 – 39 . Suddaby , R . , Hardy , C . , & Nguyen Huy , Q . ( 2011 ) Where are the new theories of organization ? Academy of Management Review 36 ( 2 ) , 236 – 246 . Teece , D . J . ( 1986 ) Transaction cost economics and the multinational enterprise : An assessment . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 7 ( 1 ) , 21 – 45 . Tolbert , P . , & Zucker , L . ( 1994 ) Institutional analyses of organizations : Legitimate but not institutionalized . ISSR Working Papers in the Social Sciences 6 ( 5 ) , 1 – 46 . Tolbert , P . , & Zucker , L . ( 1996 ) The institutionalization of institutional theory . In S . Clegg , C . Hardy , & W . Nord ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Organization Studies ( pp . 175 – 190 ) . Sage Publications , London . Truex , D . , Holmström , J . , & Keil , M . ( 2006 ) Theorizingininformationsystemsresearch : A reﬂexive analysis of the adaptation of theory in information systems research . Journal of the Association for Information Systems 7 ( 12 ) , 797 – 821 . Van de Ven , A . H . ( 1989 ) Nothing is quite so practical as a good theory . Academy of Management Review 14 ( 4 ) , 486 – 489 . VanEssen , M . , Otten , J . A . , & Carberry , E . J . ( 2012 ) Assessingmanagerialpowertheory : A meta - analytic approach to understanding the determinants of CEO compensation . Journal of Management 38 ( 3 ) , 396 – 423 . Verbeke , A . ( 2003 ) Theevolutionaryviewof theMNEandthefutureof internalization theory . Journal of International Business Studies 34 ( 6 ) , 498 – 504 . ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 11 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■ Verbeke , A . , & Greidanus , N . S . ( 2009 ) The end of the opportunism vs trust debate : Bounded reliability as a new envelope concept in research on MNE governance . Journal of International Business Studies 40 ( 9 ) , 1471 – 1495 . Verbeke , A . , & Kenworthy , T . P . ( 2008 ) Multidivisionalversusmetanationalgovernance of the multinational enterprise . Journal of International Business Studies 39 ( 2 ) , 940 – 956 . Verbeke , A . , & Tung , V . ( 2013 ) The future of stakeholder management theory : A temporal perspective . Journal of Business Ethics 112 ( 3 ) , 529 – 543 . Whetten , D . A . ( 2009 ) An examination of the interface between context and theory applied to the study of Chinese organizations . Management and Organization Review 5 ( 1 ) , 29 – 55 . Williamson , O . E . ( 1975 ) Markets and Hierarchies : Analysis and Antitrust Implications . Free Press , New York . Williamson , O . E . ( 1991 ) Comparative economic organization : The analysis of discrete structural alternatives . Administrative Science Quarterly 36 ( 2 ) , 269 – 296 . ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Thomas P . Kenworthy , Alain Verbeke , The future of strategic management research : Assessing the quality of theory borrowing , European Man - agement Journal ( 2015 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2015 . 03 . 007 12 T . P . Kenworthy , A . Verbeke / European Management Journal ■■ ( 2015 ) ■■ – ■■