1 Full reference : Ranjan , A . & Gabora , L . ( 2012 ) . Creative ideas for actualizing student potential . In ( H . Snyder , M . Gregerson , & J . Kaufman , Eds . ) Teaching creatively ( pp . 119 - 132 ) . Berlin : Springer . Creative Ideas for Actualizing Student Potential Apara Ranjan Liane Gabora University of British Columbia 2 Abstract Human creativity is a multifaceted phenomenon with cognitive , attitudinal , intrapersonal interpersonal , practical , socio - cultural , economic , and environmental aspects ( Plucker & Runco , 1999 ) . It can be challenging to incorporate creativity in classrooms ( Kampylis , 2008 ) . Teachers tend to inhibit creativity by focusing on correct responses , reproduction of knowledge , and obedience and passivity in class ( Alencar , 2002 ) . Right answers , after all , tend to be easier to evaluate than creative ones . Teaching in such a way as to discourage creative answers and approaches may lead to higher scores on standardized tests ( with all the sociological , marketplace , and political consequences that entails ) . Teachers claim to value creativity , but to hold negative attitudes toward , and show little tolerance of , attributes associated with creativity , such as risk taking , impulsivity , and independence ( Beghetto , 2006 ; Fasko , 2001 ; Runco , 2003 ; Westby & Dawson , 1995 ) . The majority of teachers express the fear that encouraging creativity in the classroom could lead to chaos ( Aljughaiman & Mowrer - Reynolds , 2005 ; Beghetto , 2007 ; Westby & Dawson , 1995 ) . When teachers do make efforts to encourage creativity , it is often the case that neither teacher nor students knows what the expectations are . Moreover , students fear that they will be critically judged if they produce something in which they have invested at a personal level . Despite the potentially threatening aspects of encouraging creative classrooms , we believe that no other investment in education could be more important and potentially rewarding . Both the words student and the word creativity often go hand - in - hand with the word potential , i . e . , student potential and creative potential . The phrase creative potential is generally used to refer to how likely a given individual is to manifest creative works in the future , as assessed by their scores on various creativity tests . The concept of potentiality and its relationship to actuality and context has been studied in depth by physicists . In this chapter we will explore how the physical conception of potentiality can shed light on the notion of potential as it applies in the classroom , and in particular , on how we conceive of and actualize students’ creative potential . We then discuss methods that will help optimize the creative potential of students in less threatening ways . 3 Human creativity is a multifaceted phenomenon with cognitive , attitudinal , intrapersonal interpersonal , practical , socio - cultural , economic , and environmental aspects ( Plucker & Runco , 1999 ) . It can be challenging to incorporate creativity in classrooms ( Kampylis , 2008 ) . Teachers tend to inhibit creativity by focusing on correct responses , reproduction of knowledge , and obedience and passivity in class ( Alencar , 2002 ) . Right answers , after all , tend to be easier to evaluate than creative ones . Teaching in such a way as to discourage creative answers and approaches may lead to higher scores on standardized tests ( with all the sociological , marketplace , and political consequences that entails ) . Teachers claim to value creativity , but to hold negative attitudes toward , and show little tolerance of , attributes associated with creativity , such as risk taking , impulsivity , and independence ( Beghetto , 2006 ; Fasko , 2001 ; Runco , 2003 ; Westby & Dawson , 1995 ) . The majority of teachers express the fear that encouraging creativity in the classroom could lead to chaos ( Aljughaiman & Mowrer - Reynolds , 2005 ; Beghetto , 2007 ; Westby & Dawson , 1995 ) . When teachers do make efforts to encourage creativity , it is often the case that neither teacher nor students knows what the expectations are . Moreover , students fear that they will be critically judged if they produce something in which they have invested at a personal level . Despite the potentially threatening aspects of encouraging creative classrooms , we believe that no other investment in education could be more important and potentially rewarding . Both the words student and the word creativity often go hand - in - hand with the word potential , i . e . , student potential and creative potential . The phrase creative potential is generally used to refer to how likely a given individual is to manifest creative works in the future , as assessed by their scores on various creativity tests . The concept of potentiality and its relationship to actuality and context has been studied in depth by physicists . In this chapter we will explore how the physical conception of potentiality can shed light on the notion of potential as it applies in the classroom , and in particular , on how we conceive of and actualize students’ creative potential . We then discuss methods that will help optimize the creative potential of students in less threatening ways . Potentiality Physicists refer to an entity that is in a full state of potentiality as its ground state . The concept is very useful and applicable to entities that could unfold different ways or manifest themselves differently under different contexts or in different environments or situations . In physics , this is the state an entity is in when it is not being measured , because the process of performing the measurement often affects the state of the entity . The basic notion of ground state has been applied in cognitive psychology , specifically to the study of concepts . Concepts , such as DOG or BEAUTY , are very chameleon - like things , in that they are 4 highly affected by context . Normally , for example , we would think that ' surrounded by water ' is a defining feature of the concept ISLAND , but if you use the phrase KITCHEN ISLAND , then hopefully you are not referring to something that is surrounded by water ! The concept ISLAND thus can instantly shift to a state in which even a seemingly defining property of islands is not present or expected . The ground state of a concept is the state it is in when you are not thinking about it at all , and thus it is not affected by any context ( Gabora & Aerts , 2002 ; Aerts & Gabora , 2005 ) . A minute ago you were not thinking about a giraffe , and thus your concept GIRAFFE could be said to have been in its ground state . Now you are thinking about giraffes , but it is in the context of reading this book , and so the concept is unavoidably coloured by the context of encountering it while reading this book . When concepts interact with contexts there is always the possibility of new emergent properties that could not be predicted in a straightforward logical way from knowledge of the concept or the context . We believe that this notion of potentiality applies to the student . Each student can be viewed as a wellspring of potentiality , and the teacher ' s responsibility is to help this potentiality to actualize or take shape in the context of the classroom environment . This potentiality - driven perspective on teaching leads to a different way of teaching . When teachers interact with students there is always the possibility of new emergent outcomes that could not be predicted in a straightforward logical way from knowledge of the teacher , the student , or the lesson plan . The thoughts and ideas of the student , as he or she interacts with a particular lesson and approach to teaching it , can potentially follow new , creative trajectories of which the teacher cannot conceive . Issues We begin by discussing some basic issues surrounding incorporating creativity in the classroom . In order to optimize students’ potential in classrooms we need to realize what factors might hinder in actualizing the creative potential of the student in a classroom setting . Expectations The term ‘creativity’ is often used without explanation or establishing clear expectations ( Kampylis , 2008 ) . When ideas about creativity are unstated , a teacher’s ability to actualize student potential , both positively and negatively , can be affected ( Beghetto , 2006 ; Runco , Johnson , & Bear , 1993 ) . Teachers may benefit from input from psychological research on creativity as they seek to 5 encourage creativity in their classes and establish clear expectations while doing so . Outputs are generally deemed creative if they are original , meaningful , useful or task appropriate , and potentially , possess aesthetic qualities as well ( Barron , 1955 ; Sternberg , Kaufman , & Pretz , 2002 ) . Specifying what kinds of creative outcomes are hoped for , or possible , can help teachers avoid dead - ends , and bewilderment on the part of students . Moreover , creative processes yield not only tangible external outputs , but internal transformative outcomes , including not just enhanced understanding of the creative domain , but enhanced understanding and acceptance more generally , confidence , sense of identity , and personal meaning . Flexibility One simple way of encouraging creativity in the classroom is to conceive of the students not as receptacles for knowledge but as entities that are biologically predisposed to ( amongst other things ) to assimilate knowledge , frame it in their own terms , and later , do something with it . As humans we not only want to acquire facts ; they want facts that fill in gaps , that prompt a cascade of new understandings that result in more coherent or insightful web of understandings . This can turn learning into a fun and memorable experience . Teachers can help foster this by flexibly adapting their lesson plans to the interests and perspectives of the particular individuals in the classroom , and to spontaneous events that take place in the classroom , or current affairs in the news . Another simple way of encouraging creativity in the classroom is to give students choice . For example , instead of providing an essay topic , one can invite students to choose a topic related to a general subject . Or , one can offer a selection of possible tasks , to be completed in any order , with the option of focusing exclusively on the task that captures greatest interest . Approaches such as these invite opportunities for students to discover where their unique interests and talents lie . For example , for an assignment in a Psychology of Creativity class , students were given a choice between working on a project or an essay . The instructions were as follows : Details Concerning Presentation , Essay , or Project Choose and prepare either ( 1 ) a presentation , ( 2 ) an essay , or ( 3 ) a project . To help you choose and research a topic , check out ‘Creativity Resources on the Web’ and ‘Downloadable Papers on Creativity’ under ‘Student Resources’ on Vista . Please type assignments double - spaced , 12 - point font , and use APA ( American Psychological Association ) format for references ( examples available under ‘Student Resources’ on WEB - CT ) . Assignments MUST be grammatically correct , 6 and will be assessed for content , accuracy , clarity , originality , and strength of arguments . Essays and projects are due last class before start of class . Presentations are done individually or with a partner . Possible topics are listed on WEB - CT or you may choose a chapter of the textbook that we are not covering in class , or your own topic so long as it is relevant to creativity . All students in the group should arrange to discuss plans with me two weeks prior to the week of their presentation , and must be approved by me the week prior . Creative presentations are encouraged . Have fun with it , and make it fun for the class ! ( If you do a presentation , you are not obliged to turn anything written except the one sentence summary and the one page outline , but if it is in powerpoint please email me the . ppt file . ) An essay can be ( 1 ) a critical evaluation of at least two papers on a topic related to creativity that discusses the merits of different techniques , perspectives , or approaches . The papers can be obtained from the resources made available on Vista , or they can be articles in a peer - reviewed journal that you find using PSYC - info or Google Scholar . Or the essay can be ( 2 ) an explanation of how something learned in class applies to or sheds light on your own creative activities . It should be approximately 2000 words ( approximately eight pages ) not including references . A project can be anything you want so long as it shows in a nontrivial way that you learned something about creativity in this class . Important : it is not adequate that the project simply is creative ( e . g . a set of paintings or poems or a scrapbook ) . It has to demonstrate principles of the psychology of creativity . If you have any uncertainties , come talk to the TA or the Professor early in the semester about possible paper and project ideas . This assignment is always given on the first day of class , and the final essay or project is due on the last day of class . More detailed instructions are provided in the second class of the semester . These more detailed instructions are provided in Appendix A . During that second class , a list of possible essay and project topics is provided , alongside a list of websites devoted to a multitude of creativity - related topics . Some students who have taken the course in previous years have left behind rather impressive projects that they allow us to show to students as examples of how a project can be tackled . Assignments such as these are open - ended , and some students may feel lost at first . However , if a student has difficulty coming up with an essay or project topic , he or she can be encouraged to discuss it with the professor during office hours . In our experience all students eventually find a topic that engages them . Another way to help students respond to the open - ended nature of the assignment is to distribute it in sections . For example , the assignment we used in our class was staggered into three phases . Assignments with this kind of inherent ambiguity encourage students to relate to distant concepts and look at things from new perspectives . Studies on conceptual combinations show that dissimilar concepts lead to more creative interpretations ( Wilkenfeld & Ward , 2001 ) , suggesting that ambiguous tasks , which might yield more opportunities to connect dissimilar concepts and might produce more creative results . Such an approach encourages bisociation , in which previously unrelated levels of experience or frames of references are suddenly connected ( Kostler , 1964 ) . Thus , this approach plays a 7 major role in creative thinking . Similarly , when students are allowed to choose a topic , they may forge connections between what they are learning and activities that they find personally meaningful . Time - Related Factors Creating an environment that is conducive to playing , experimenting , trying new things , and thinking things out creatively from new and unusual perspectives , is not readily compatible with a highly structured schedule and strict sets of expectations and goals . Thinking out a creative idea can take time . There are strong neurobiological ( Gabora , 2010 ) , experimental ( Gabora , 2010 ; Gabora , O’Connor & Ranjan , in press ; Gabora & Saab , 2011 ) , and theoretical ( Gabora , 2005 ) reasons to believe that the generation stage of creative thinking may be divergent not in that it moves in multiple directions or generates multiple possibilities , but in the sense that it produces a raw idea that is vague or unfocused , and that requires further processing to become viable . Similarly , the exploration stage of creative thinking may be convergent , not in the ordinary sense in which an idea is selected from amongst alternatives , but in the sense that a vague idea is considered from different perspectives until it comes into newly defined focus . In other words , the terms divergent and convergent may be applicable to creative thought in the sense of going from well - defined to ill - defined , and back again . Moreover , it is widely believed that creativity involves shifting back and forth along a spectrum between divergent or associative and convergent or analytic modes of thought , depending on the nature of the problem or task , and the stage one is at of solving or completing it ( evidence reviewed in Gabora , 2010 ; see also Gabora & Ranjan , in press ) . A half - baked idea might result when two or more items encoded in overlapping distributions of neural cell assemblies interfere with each other and get evoked simultaneously . This interference has been referred to as creative interference because it can lead to creative ideation ( Gabora , 2010 ) . When an idea emerges through creative interference , the contributing items are not searched or selected amongst each other because together they form a single structure . This structure can be said to be in a state of potentiality because its ill - defined elements could take on different values depending on how the idea unfolds . This unfolding involves disentangling the relevant features from the irrelevant features by observing how the idea looks from sequentially considered perspectives . In other words , one observes 8 how it interacts with various contexts , either internally generated ( think it through ) or externally generated ( try it out ) . The implications of this from an educational standpoint is that to allow ‘half - baked’ ideas to actualize in to a final creative product that they can feel happy with and proud of , students need sufficient time ( Goleman , Kaufman & Ray , 1992 ) . People do not perform well on creative thinking tasks in time - pressured situations . An added benefit of providing sufficient time for creative thinking is that by encouraging students to put more of themselves into the projects they undertake , they often become more intrinsically motivated to complete them ( Deci & Ryan , 1985 ; Deci , 1975 ; Deci , 1981 ; Amabile , 1983 , 1988 , 1990 ) . A practical way for providing students with opportunities for their ideas to mature and their creative potential to be realized is to give them projects that involve multiple steps or phases , and stagger feedback across these multiple phases . This lets students incubate an idea , or ‘sleep on it . ’ For example , one effective means we have found for doing this involves breaking the project or essay assignment mentioned above into three phases . The instructions for completing the first phase are as follows : ASSIGNMENT 1 ( due Sept . 27 , 2011 ) State whether you will be doing an essay , project , or presentation . Give the title of it , one sentence describing it , and one scholarly journal reference that you will use to research it . It should be grammatically correct and free of spelling errors . You must include at a minimum one reference to a recent ( year 2000 or later ) scholarly journal article in APA style . Submit it through dropbox ( do not include an attachment ) . EXAMPLE OF HOW TO DO ASSIGNMENT 1 : PSYO 317 Assignment 1 Due : September 10 , 2011 Jane Sunbeam Student Number 1111111 ESSAY Title : Neanderthal Creativity Sentence : This essay will discuss evidence for artistic playfulness and artistic artifacts that have been found in Neanderthal settlements , and it will address the question of to whether creative abilities and artistic once thought to be uniquely human can be attributed to the Neanderthals . 9 Reference : Fitch , W . T . ( 2006 ) . The biology and evolution of music : A comparative perspective . Cognition , 100 , 173 - 215 . Creativity thrives in situations that involve a combination of freedom and constraint . We find that , for relatively unstructured tasks such as this one , providing one or more examples is a useful way to ensure that students know what is expected and have a sense of how to turn abstract instructions into something concrete . The instructions for completing the second phase are as follows : ASSIGNMENT 2 One Page Summary of Presentation , Essay , or Project Due Nov . 10 , 2011 The goal of this assignment is to show that you are making progress with your essay or project , and to show that you are able to coherently explain how it relates to the psychology of creativity . This assignment should include everything assignment 1 included but instead of one sentence about your essay or project it should include a full page of double spaced text in full sentences ( not point form ) . The text should introduce the topic and summarize what approach you will take or what you plan to do in your project or essay . It should be grammatically correct and free of spelling errors . You must include at a minimum the one reference you had for your first assignment ; it does not hurt to have added a few more references . As with Assignment 1 , the reference ( s ) must be in APA style . The third phase of the assignment is to write the final essay or create the final project . Note that throughout the process students are encouraged to sense the potential of what they have done to develop into something more . The sense that it holds potential , as well as its capacity to actualize in different ways depending on how one thinks it through , was communicated to the students by giving feedback at each phase of the assignment . Creative Teaching Methods We now discuss a few of the methods that are useful for teaching creatively and helping to actualize the creative potential of the students . Humor Humor helps to create a fun and interesting learning environment which not only helps in gaining the attention of the students but also fosters creative thinking . Humor helps break down communication and learning barriers between teachers and students ( Berk , 1998 ) . Students tend to rehearse and remember class material more if it is presented with humor . This humor helps to retain their attention . Humor also helps to increase comprehension and cognitive retention mainly due to its reduction of stress and anxiety ( Hill , 1988 ) . Classroom humor can obviously take the form of jokes , but there are other subtle and effective ways of incorporating humor in classroom . It can take the form of quotations or cartoons in lectures , or 10 humorous definitions . For example , the following was used at the end of the class on psychological disorders : If you get the joke below you’ve understood this material… Welcome to the Psychological Clinic ! If you have an obsessive - compulsive disorder , please press 1 , as many times as you like . If you are co - dependent , please ask someone to press 2 for you . If you have multiple personality disorder , please press 3 , 4 , 5 , and 6 . If you are paranoid or delusional , we know who you are and what you want . Just stay on the line so we can trace the call . If you are schizophrenic , listen carefully and a little voice will tell you which number to press . If you are depressed , it doesn ' t really matter which number you press . Probably no one will answer anyway . Humorous material used at the beginning of the class encourages students to come on time and creates a positive , receptive atmosphere that is conducive to learning ( Berk , 1998 ) . Interactive Classrooms The second technique is to incorporate activities that bring the lesson to life . Incorporating group discussions and group activities are commonly used methods of increasing class participation . Note however that group activities are not always conducive to creative thinking , and that people are not necessarily aware of this , as they tend to over - rate ideas produced by a group ( Baumeister & Bushman , 2010 ) . Groupwork followed by solitary brainstorming and communicating via networked computers can reduce the chance of blocking anyone from speaking , while making it easier to ignore irrelevant input from others when one is “on a roll” on one’s own . We have realized that it is beneficial to make students work on a project intially by themselves and then put the students in groups at a later stage in the project . This provides them a chance to originally come up with an idea and then hone the idea to actualize its potential and transform it into a final product with the help of group discussions and feedback given by others . Personalizing the Learning Experience Another technique is to relate material to the students‘ experience . Encouraging students to share their personal experiences in regard to the topic being discussed helps them personalize the discussion . Also , we can design assignments in such a way that they give students a chance to relate with them in a personal way . This way of designing of assignments may enhance students‘ intrinsic motivation to learn . For example , after a lesson on developmental life stages , we gave a bonus assignment to the students along with other regular assignments . We asked them to work on a lifespan scrapbook which described the stages of development with examples . This scrapbook either had to describe their lifespan , or the lifespan of someone they knew . Metaphor The fourth technique is the use of metaphors in teaching . Using metaphors helps in building relations between what the students already know and the new concept being learnt ( Glynn & Takahashi , 1998 ) . This method also makes it easier for the students to remember the complex concepts . The enacting of metaphors can prime the existing knowledge ( Williams & Bargh , 2008 ) . It has been shown 11 that physical movements ( backward , forward ) appear to cue memories for past events or thoughts about future events ( Miles , Nind , & Macrae , 2010 ) . This research indicates that appropriate use of metaphors and their enactment in the class can help students to make stronger associtions with the learned material . The use of animations to explain ideas and making students act out certain ideas helps them to remember them better . For example , while teaching a class on the various different “talk - therapy” approaches to treating mental disorders , we have tried inviting the students to find a partner and have one person act as the therapist and the other act as the client , and try out each of the therapies . This approach has proven useful for helping students remember the material better and become personally engaged in the topic . Some advocates of performance based teaching suggest that the teachers are the stage directors , with the students as the actors ( Smith , 1979 ) . Conclusion Creativity has mostly been looked at as a means to an end in education ( i . e . , improving teaching skills , problem solving , and enhancing motivation ) . Education systems fear embracing creativity as it threatens the long established relationship between teacher and student and the way classrooms function . There are several challenges in bridging the gap between those involved in education and the creativity researchers . This chapter focused on ways to bridge the gap between creativity research and education methods and proposed ways to optimize student’s creative potential . The physical conception of potentiality can shed light on the notion of potential as it applies in the classroom . It is essential to focus on the creative process rather than just on the creative product when we want to foster creativity in students . 12 References Alencar , E . M . L . S . d . ( 2002 ) . Mastering creativity for education in the 21st century . In Proceedings of the 13th biennial world conference of the world council for gifted and talented children . Istanbul , Turkey . Aljughaiman , A , & Mowrer - Reynolds , E . ( 2005 ) . Teachers ' conceptions of creativity and creative students . Journal of Creative Behavior , 39 , 17 - 34 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1983 ) . The social psychology of creativity : a componential conceptualization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 ( 2 ) , 357 - 376 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1988 ) . A model of creativity and innovation in organizations . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds ) . Research in Organizational Behavior . ( pp . 123 - 167 ) Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Amabile , T . M . ( 1990 ) . Within you , without you . The social psychology of creativity and beyond . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds ) . Theories of creativity ( pp . 61 - 91 ) . Newbury Park , CA . Sage . Amabile , T . M . , & Hennessey , B . A . ( 1992 ) . The motivation for creativity in children . In T . Pittman & A . Boggiano ( Eds . ) , Achievement and motivation : A social developmental perspective ( pp . 54 - 74 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Barron , F . ( 1955 ) . The disposition toward originality . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 51 , 478 - 485 . Baumeister , R . F . , & Bushman , B . J . ( 2010 ) . Social Psychology and Human Nature . New York , NY : Wadsworth , Cengage Learning . Beghetto , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Does creativity have a place in classroom discussions ? Prospective teachers’ response preferences . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 2 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . Beghetto , R . A . ( 2007 ) . Ideational code - switching : Walking the talk about supporting student creativity in the classroom . Roeper Review , 29 , 265 – 270 . Berk , R . A . ( 1998 ) . Professors are from mars , students are from snickers . Madison , WI : Mendota Press Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , & Mermigis , L . ( 1995 ) . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . M . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 27 - 52 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Deci , E . L . ( 1975 ) . Intrinsic Motivation . New York , NY : Plenum Press . Deci , E . L . ( 1981 ) . The psychology of self - determination . Lexington , MA : Heaths . Deci , E . L . , & Ryan , R . M . ( 1985 ) . Intrinsic motivation and self - determination in human behavior . New York , NY : Plenum . Fasko , D . ( 2001 ) . Education and creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 13 , 317 – 327 . Gabora , L . , & Ranjan , A . ( in press . ) How insight emerges in distributed , content - addressable memory . In A . Bristol , O . Vartanian , & J . Kaufman ( Eds . ) The Neuroscience of Creativity . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . 13 Gabora , L . , & Saab , A . ( 2011 ) . Creative interference and states of potentiality in analogy problem solving . Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 3506 - 3511 ) . July 20 - 23 , 2011 , Boston , MA . Gabora , L . ( 2010 ) . Revenge of the ' neurds ' : Characterizing creative thought in terms of the structure and dynamics of human memory . Creativity Research Journal , 22 ( 1 ) , 1 - 13 . Gabora , L . ( 2005 ) . Creative thought as a non - Darwinian evolutionary process . Journal of Creative Behavior , 39 ( 4 ) , 262 - 283 . Goleman D . , Kaufman P . , and Ray M . ( 1992 ) The creative spirit . New York , NY : Penguin . Glynn , S . M . , & Takahashi , T . ( 1998 ) . Learning from analogy - enhanced science text . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 35 , 1129 - 1149 . Hill , D . J . ( 1988 ) . Humor in the classroom : A handbook for teachers and other entertainers . Springfield , IL : Charles C . Thomas . Kampylis , P . ( 2008 ) . Aposaphinizontas ton oro dimioyrgikotita sta plaisia tis protis vathmidas tis ekpaideysis ( bringing out the meaning of creativity in the framework of primary education ) . Music in the first grade , 5 , 70 – 79 . Koestler , A . ( 1964 ) . The Art of Creation . New York , NY : Macmillan . Miles , L . K . , Nind , L . K . , & Macrae , C . N . ( 2010 ) Moving through time . Psychological Science , 21 , 222 - 223 Mumford , M . D . ( 2003 ) . Where have we been , where are we going ? Taking stock in creativity research . Creativity Research Journal , 15 , 107 – 120 . Plucker , J . A . , Beghetto , R . A . , & Dow , G . T . ( 2004 ) . Why isn’t creativity more important to educational psychologists ? Potentials , pitfalls , and future directions in creativity research . Educational Psychologist , 39 ( 2 ) , 83 – 96 . Plucker , J . A . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Enhancement of creativity . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( pp . 669 - 675 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Runco , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Education for creative potential . Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research , 47 ( 3 ) , 317 – 324 . Runco , M . A . , Johnson , D . J . , & Bear , P . K . ( 1993 ) . Parents’ and teachers’ implicit theories on children’s creativity . Child Study Journal , 23 , 91 – 113 . Saarilahti , M . , Cramond , B . , & Sieppi , H . ( 1999 ) . Is creativity nurtured in Finnish classrooms ? Childhood Education , 75 ( 6 ) , 326 – 331 Smith , R . A . ( 1979 ) . Is teaching really a performing art ? Contemporary Education , 51 ( 1 ) , 31 – 35 . Sternberg , R . J . , Kaufman , J . C . , & Pretz , J . E . ( 2002 ) . The creativity conundrum . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Torrance , E . P . ( 1987 ) . Can we teach children to think creatively ? In S . G . Isaksen ( Ed . ) , Frontiers of creativity research . Buffalo , NY : Bearly Limited . Wilkenfeld , M . J . , & Ward , T . B . ( 2001 ) . Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Cognition , 45 , 21 - 38 . 14 Westby , E . L . , & Dawson , V . L . ( 1995 ) . Creativity : Asset of burden in the classroom ? Creativity Research Journal , 8 ( 1 ) , 1 – 11 . Williams , L . E . , & Bargh , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Experiencing physical warmth promotes interpersonal warmth . Science , 322 , 606 - 607 . 15 APPENDIX A PSYO 317 ‘Psychology of Creativity’ REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ESSAYS AND PROJECTS Note : It is important that you talk to me in person about your topic well before the submission date if there is anything that is not clear . STYLE AND FORMAT • Must be submitted on the due date : in hardcopy and also in electronic format by vista dropbox or by vista email ( I will let you know ) • Do not call your electronic file ‘Creativity . doc’ . Electronic form must be labeled in the following format : Last name _ first name _ PSYO317PPE • Title page with title and your name and name of class • All written documents should be double - spaced ; do not justify right - hand margins • Suggested length : 2000 words ( = about 10 pages including cover page and references page ) or the equivalent • Must be free of spelling and grammatical errors • Should not be worded in an awkward manner ; read it over out loud to yourself before submitting to make sure • References listed at end in APA format ; there must be at least a few scholarly references ( e . g . academic journal articles ) CONTENT • Regarding your choice of topic : it is best to choose something you are passionate about . But if you choose a topic that most people would consider to be only minimally creative ( such as , say , hockey ) you may have a challenge ahead of you explaining why you think it’s creative . If you genuinely believe that most people just haven’t yet appreciated the creative element of your chosen topic , and you think you can argue this convincingly , then go for it . But if the reality is that you’re just trying to find a way of getting marks for a course while writing about your favourite topic , that will show through . • Must contain original work . ( Be aware that there are computer programs that professors can run an essay through to see if it matches anything on the internet . ) • Links to YouTube videos are not original work and will not count as part of your submission , but you can include them if they are useful to illustrate a point . • Must have references to scholarly material including not just books but journal articles . ( References to non - academic items are not sufficient although you may add some if they are relevant . ) • Cite direct source of literature ; do not cite someone who discussed the study but the person who did the study • If you stick to referencing papers we covered in class you will not get a top mark ; additional research is required using PsycInfo or Google Scholar 16 ESSAYS • Essays will be assessed for primarily for content , accuracy , clarity , and strength of arguments . Originality , insight , and effort invested are also taken into account . • Should have introduction that gets reader’s attention and states clearly the central idea or focus of the essay • Body of essay should develop the idea showing clearly a depth of understanding gained by reading articles related in some way to the psychology of creativity • Should have a concluding paragraph • Even if your essay is a critical evaluation of a topic discussed in one particular paper , it should be clear that you are using knowledge acquired through reading other papers to bear on the evaluation . Similarly , even if you discuss your own creative process , your essay should demonstrate familiarity with the scholarly literature on this creative domain and how it sheds light on your creative process PROJECTS • I am extremely open to ( even enthusiastic about ! ) something creative or even outright weird , so long as it isn’t just creative but also demonstrates an understanding of the psychology of creativity . ( e . g . A scrapbook of your trip to Maui will not get a good mark . ) • Integrate the creative output with what you’ve learned about the creative process through not just the class but also independent scholarly research for this project • The application of scholarly theories about creativity to particular creative works takes time . Don’t worry if you don’t see them right away . The best thing you can do is read lots of articles over the course of the semester , and the connections will slowly start to dawn on you . If you put all your effort into the creative project and leave the scholarly part until the last minute , any connections you try to make between creativity theory and the creative work will probably feel forced . • Must have all parts submitted at the same time , and attached together or in a container so that they cannot be separated . • If it’s a movie , edit out stuff that is not interesting ( like asking someone on the street what creativity is and having that person say they don’t know ) , and don’t film yourself reading class notes • Don’t make statements such as “this is clearly creative” . ( Such statements often follow discussion of things that are not particularly creative . ) Explain why it is creative and what theories it exemplifies or principles it demonstrates in a way that is not gratuitous but genuine . • Important : Projects that consist of fragmentary components can come across as scattered ; they must at the very least include a synthesis , which explains how they relate to each other , and to the psychology of creativity . A collection of scattered quotes or statements can indicate a fragmented understanding of the topic . Ideally your project should show that you have delved deep into your topic , both in terms of researching it and in terms of synthesizing the research and mulling it over , and arrived at a nuanced understanding of the topic . You should show how research on creativity pertains to you or a particular creative individual or creative task .