Measuring Creativity of Information System Ideas : An Exploratory Investigation Beata M . Lobert - Long Island University , C . W . Post Campus Dorothy G . Dologite - City University of New York , Baruch College Abstract This study targets an important gap in Information Systems ( IS ) literature , by advancing the research to develop a creativity metric for IS proposal evaluation . Recently , IS researchers have been exploring characteristics of the creative IS person , the creative IS process , the creative IS product and the creative IS environment . This paper examines the concept of a creative IS product , following on the work of Couger ana‘ Dengate ( 1992 ) . Preliminary results of an exploratory study are reported . The study was undertaken to determine the principal factors that contribute to the perception of creativity in new systems . This paper describes in detail the IS product proposals investigated in the study , the judges , the procedures used and the instrument developed to measure creativity of IS project proposals . Introduction The geo - political trends of the 1990’s that brought about the birth of the free market economy in Eastem Europe and the emergence of the European Economic Community have expanded the global market . Rapid technological advances in computing and communications technologies are shrinking the globe and speeding the rate of social and economic change . With these developments come immense pressures as well as opportunities and challenges for IS departments in organizations . In the 1990’s , the IS practitioners have to be concemed with creativity . The concerns are three - fold : . technology is evolving almost on a daily basis most simple systems have already been developed many information systems are old , not meeting and we continually look for new ways to utilize resources . and implemented , and the challenging ones are still ahead [ 71 . the existing demands , and soon will become obsolete [ 35 ] . . . 1060 - 3425 / 94 $ 3 . 00 0 1994 IEEE Computer professionals will benefit from focusing on and tapping into creativity in their daily activities . Creativity has the potential to enable them to : . reengineer obsolete systems and business innovate by introducing successful new software , improve old products by improving their quality , utilize existing products in new ways . processes . systems and services . cost effectiveness , durability and robustness . . . . More and more IS executives function as innovators and promoters of creativity within their organizations [ 25 ] . In the 1990’s , they re - engineer the business processes through innovative use of information technology . IS leaders face the challenge of creating and sustaining intemal IS environments that facilitate creativity and remove inefficient , ineffective business practices . An instrument to evaluate IS project ideas for their creativity could be used to stimulate creativity and to teach IS professionals about the necessary dimension of their IS proposals . This paper begins with a brief presentation of the research background . Theoretical background Creativity is an illusive and difficult to define concept . A creative solution must satisfy one of the following conditions : a the product must have novelty or value . the thinking is unconventional , requiring modification , rejection , or synthesis of previous ideas the thinking requires motivation , persistence and high intensity over a period of time the initial problem is vague or illdefiied , so problem formulation is part of the solution [ 27 ] . According to Rhodes ( 1961 ) , the literature on creativity can be analyzed using four different parameters : person , process , product and environment . This paper focuses on the creative IS product . . . 392 proceedings of the Twentyseventh Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 1994 Creative product The reason for studying creative products has been well established in literature [ e . g . , 1 , 291 . A number of researchers have attempted to define the criteria for a creative product . Jackson and Messick ( 1965 ) propose that for a product to be considered creative it must necessarily satisfy the following conditions : 0 the product must be unusual and appropriate in it should transcend the conventional constraints , 0 it should have the property of creative the context of norms , producing surprise and satisfaction . producing new forms , rather than improving on the old ones ; be stimulating . " condensation , " where the apparent simplicity and complexity of the solution are unified . " a product . . . will be judged as creative to the extent that : ( a ) it is . . . a novel and appropriate , useful , correct , or valuable response to the task at hand , and ( b ) the task is heuristic rather than algorithmic , i . e . , the task does not have a clear and readily identifiable path to a solution . " or " a product is creative to the extent that appropriate observers independently agree it is creative . Appropriate observers are those familiar with the domain in which the product was created . " 0 According to Amabile ( 1983 , pp . 31 - 33 ) : Measurement of product ' s creativity Creativity is measured by means of a test or a judging process . Most creativity researchers focus on assessing the creativity of a person and employ creativity assessment tests toward that end . Few researchers have attempted to examine the concept of product ' s creativity . Most research studies measuring the creativity of a product use the subjective judgements of experts in the domain [ 13 , 19 , 22 , 26 , 34 ] . Working with the assumptions that experts in any domain , using their own definition of creativity , will be able to consistently assess it , Amabile ( 1983 , pp . 31 - 33 ) proposes a reliable , subjective methodology for assessing the creativity of a product in a broad range of domains and tasks within domains . The methodology is based on the subjective , consensual judgement of experts in the field . First , judges are asked to assess creativity at a global level , and then they assess several other characteristics of the product . The creativity assessment is statistically verified to be reliable , i . e . , consistent among all the judges , and then broken down into component parts to determine which objective characteristics of the product , for example , originality or elegance , predict the judgement of creativity . Amabile argues , that if the creativity evaluation is consistent among experts in the domain , therefore it is also valid . A few previous studies have used subjective methods of assessing creativity that are similar to Amabile ' s consensual assessment technique [ 34 , 19 ] . Amabile ' s methodology has also been used in several recent studies on creativity in information systems [ 11 , 151 . There has been , however , a strong need for establishing a set of agreed - upon criteria - precise standards of judgement - that could allow the measurement of a product ' s creativity in any domain . Besemer and Treffinger , in their 1981 article , reviewed more than 90 publications on the topic and identified over 125 creativity criteria proposed in literature . In the years since , Besemer and O ' Quinn have developed and refined the theory and a model for studying the attributes of creative products [ 4 , 5 ] . The model , called the Creative Product Analysis Mahix ( CPAM ) , " proposes three conceptual dimensions to be considered in analyzing a product ' s creativity : novelty ( newness of process , materials , techniques and design ) workableness of the product ) - the degree to which the product fulfills the needs of the problem situation , attributes of the finished product ) " - the degree to which the product combines unlike elements into a refined , developed , coherent whole . In its current form , the model tests 11 criteria or attributes of a product in the three dimensions , as demonstrated in Figure 1 . The CPAM model has been operationalized by the Creative Product Semantic Scale ( CPSS ) instrument . The CPSS has been statistically verified and used in a number of studies [ 4 , 5 ] . The instrument , in its short form , is a 22 - item , seven - point , bipolar semantic scale ( see Figure 2 ) . The developers suggest using the instrument as a development tool , to improve a product in a process of development , or to screen product ideas . Since creativity is a multifaceted concept , instead of generating a grand total creativity score for the product , three totals are calculated for each of the creative product dimensions : novelty , resolutions , and elaboration and synthesis . Novelty score is derived by totalling the score for items 4 , 5 , 10 , 12 , 18 , and 20 . Resolution is calculated 0 resolution ( functionality , usefulness , and 0 elaboration and synthesis ( the stylistic 393 DIMENSION Novelty Resolution Elaboration & Synthesis CRITERIA Germinal original surprising Logical Useful Valuable Complex Elegant Well - Crafted Understand - able organic CPSS ITEMS : 5 , 18 4 , lO 12 , 20 2 , 17 8 , ll 6 , 14 13 , 22 7 , 15 9 , 16 1 , 21 3 , 19 Figure 1 . The Creativity Dimensions and Associated Items on the Creative Product Semantic Scale ( CPSS ) Form . from scores in questions 2 , 6 , 8 , 11 , 14 , 17 . The Elaboration and Synthesis score is based on questions 1 , 3 , 7 , 9 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 19 , 21 and 22 . Rules for scoring , e . g . , crude 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 6 - 7 wellcrafted organized 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 disorganized and interpreting the results are provided . Often , at that time , the strongest points of the product or idea surface , as the evaluated product scores high in particular dimension ( s ) . Based on the low scores , ways of improving the product are suggested . Creative IS products and measurement of IS product creativity Only recently has there been an increased emphasis in IS research to investigate the role of creativity in IS problem solving [ 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 3 1 , 331 . To this day , there exists no acceptable set of criteria as to what constitutes a creative product in the information systems domain . Knowing what attributes of a product make it creative would allow IS practitioners to develop more durable and responsive systems [ 113 . In the domain of new system development , there exists a high degree of creative opportunity to produce a creative artifact , however , up to now , the only way to evaluate the result of the creative effort , i . e . , the proposed system , would necessitate using the subjective judgement of experts in the field . This has been the approach utilized in the research studies concerned with creativity evaluation of IS products [ 1 1 , 13 , 21 ] . In a ground breaking paper , Couger and Dengate ( 1992 ) discussed different examples of IS areas where there are high creative opportunities and where the creative results can be measured . The authors also directly dealt with the topic of defining the attributes of a creative product in IS . They measured the creativity of several existing IS software products . Their study addressed the issue of software creativity by applying two widely accepted creativity criteria : novelty and utility . To assist with the evaluation process , two sets of guidelines for three levels ( low , medium and high ) of novelty and utility scores were established . Novelty and utility were evaluated in terms of more detailed subcriteria , tailored to the IS field . In their study , utility was evaluated , based on well - established criteria in the software quality literature , in terms of cost reduction , return on investment , market penerration , customer loyalty , efficiency , the number of new functions computerized , quality and reliability of application . Novelty was evaluated on the basis of how the technology was utilized , if new technology was used , if a new task was computerized , if a new algorithm or an original approach was derived for computerization . The developed guidelines were then provided to expert judges who evaluated six , fully developed and market - tested software packages , by applying the subjective judgement methodology . More often , the approach to creativity evaluation in the IS domain is less structured , and poses only one simple question to the expert judges : " On a scale of 1 to X , what creativity score would you assign to this product ? " [ e . g . , 131 . The reasons for the assigned score remain with the judges . Therefore , we never find out what particular feature of the product contributed to the perception of creativity . At an early stage of systems development , when there are still many ideas considered and the focus for the system must be narrowed down fairly quickly , it would be beneficial to consider all the ideas and evaluate them in terms of their creativity , the ever more important dimension of the total quality . Applying the Couger and Dengate criteria for software creativity may be inappropriate in the system domain . It may be difficult to translate the utility criteria from fully developed and market tested software packages to underdeveloped system ideas . Therefore , the need for development of a memc or an instrument for evaluating creativity of an underdeveloped IS product remains . CPSS - Creative Product Semantic Scale How to Use the CPSS . . . Carefully consider the product . Look at the scales printed in the box on your CPSS Form . Think about the product at hand . For each scale , select and circle an appropriate point between each of the alternatives . While not belaboring your selection , give careful thought to how each word relates to the product idea . Circle the point on each scale that shows both direction and proximity in meaning to the word that better describes the product . Don ' t be concerned if the words do not seem to be complete opposites . Some pairs are but some are related in other ways . If you find that the product will be equally like one term and equally like the other , select a point near the middle of the continuum . 1 . crude 2 . appropriate 3 . clear 4 . unique 5 . revolutionary 6 . inessential 7 . coarse 8 . operable 9 . arranged 10 . usual 11 . workable 12 . astounding 13 . plain 14 . unnecessary 15 . attractive 16 . organized 17 . makes sense 18 . pioneering 19 . mystifylng 20 . astonishing 21 . meticulous 22 . complex Figure 2 . Edited CPSS Form . The study This study has been undertaken in an effort to : show the feasibility of evaluating information system ideas , in terms of creativity , at an early stage of system development . determine the principal attributes , a set of agreed - upon criteria or standards of judgement , that contribute to the perception of creativity in Information Systems products . Using Couger ' s ( 1989 ) approach of studying the uses of creativity in other fields and transporting the approaches over to IS , this study utilized a modified version of a validated instrument used to measure product creativity in any domain , the Creative Product Semantic Scale . Rather than focusing on evaluation of existing systems , as it has been done by Couger and Dengate ( 1992 ) , this study attempted to demonstrate that the instrument can be used in a proactive way , for screening and learning purposes , so that poorly developed system ideas can be reworked before they ever reach the developmental stage . As a part of a larger research project , proposals for a new module of an existing information system were generated by 16 teams of System Analysis and Design students at a large urban university . Their proposals were evaluated for creativity by three experienced MIS faculty members , using a modified version of the short CPSS form . A detailed description of the study follows . The IS product It should be noted that the phrase " IS product " is used in this study in a general sense , that includes the information system project proposal . Using " wishful thinking , " teams of students from Systems Analysis and 395 taught undergraduate and / or graduate sections of the Systems Analysis and Design course for a number of years . The judges were familiar with the problem presented to the students , with the college computer systems currently used , and they could easily apply their expertise in the evaluation process . The judges made their assessment independently and without any coaching . They were instructed to rate the ideas relative to one another , on the dimensions in question . The list of dimensions and the evaluation scale is presented in Figure 4 . Since the meaning of inter - judge consistency can be questioned in studies where the experimenters present judges with a definition of creativity [ 2 , p . 381 , the judges were first instructed to use their own notion of what is considered creative . The procedures Prior to evaluating the actual proposals , the judges were presented with a “practice example . ” It gave the judges the opportunity to familiarize themselves with the written instructions , to use the rating procedures , to ask for clarifications , and to suggest modifications to the format and the content of the instrument . In this phase , one version of the evaluation instrument was rejected and several modifications to the new form were suggested . For the actual evaluation , all the proposals were randomly ordered and distributed to the three judges , who evaluated the project ideas using a randomly ordered list of evaluation criteria from the modified CPSS form . After the evaluations were performed , the judges were asked to comment on the features and / or characteristics that a highly creative system needs to possess and on the strengths and weaknesses of the proposals that they reviewed . The judges repeatedly defined the creative IS using similar adjectives : unusual , original , novel , exciting , offering a new way of doing things , creating a synergy between different subsystems , worth the investment . Their biggest complaints about the IS proposals reviewed concerned the facts that there were too many proposals generated , creating a fatigue effect in the judges , and that too many proposals incorporated similar ideas . The evaluation instrument The CPSS form used in this study is a revised version of the CPSS product development tool . The CPSS form in its original form was used by Howe ( 1990 ) in a project to evaluate creativity of computer - aided design projects . In this research , CPSS in its original form was deemed inappropriate , as some of the items could not have been meaningfullyqplied to the domain of the study . Therefore , the revised form was developed . The revised form is designed to assist IS professionals in evaluating information system project proposals in their initial investigation stage . In the future , it can also be used as a tool for clarifying the idea about a system under development . The modified version of the instrument required the judges to assess the information system proposals in three different categories : the presented pioject idea , the implications of the system from the technical pint of view and from the organizational point of view . Based on the expert judges’ initial feedback on the instrument , it became clear that these distinctions had to be clearly made in order to make the evaluation feasible . The original creativity dimensions , as defined in Besemer and O’Quinn ( 1986 ) : novelty , resolution and elaboration and synthesis were preserved , but were transparent to the evaluators . Additional changes were made in the content of the instrument : Overall assessment of the proposed system creativity was solicited , following Amabile ( 1983 ) . The overall assessment was used to explore its correlation with the total - scale score . Four items were deleted from the original short CPSS form : item 14 : mnecesmy / necessary item 9 : arranged / dimanged item 13 : plain / omate item 19 : mystifyinglunderstandable . Items 9 and 13 were deemed inappropriate for the domain of evaluation . Item 14 was hard to differentiate from item 6 : essenWinessential ( also of the resolution subscale ) . Item 19 was hard to differentiate from item 3 : clearbnbiguous ( also of the elaboration and synthesis subscale ) . Two new items were introduced to the modified CPSS form : Useful / useless was added to the resolution subscale . Inexpensive / costly was added to the resolution subscale . These additions were made on suggestions from the expert judges . The suggestions were considered reasonable in view of the fact that usefulness and value are the dimensions of the resolution subscale . Two items were repeated in two separate sections of the instrument - in the organizational and technical evaluations : item 7 : astounding / common Figure 5 presents a cross reference of different creativity dimensions with evaluation perspectives of the items on the revised CPSS form . item 22 : complex / simple Design class & generated 16 IS product ideas . They prepared an abbreviated version of the initial investigation report , i . e . , a brief proposal for a module of a system . The one page proposal addressed the objective and benefits of the proposed system as well as the anticipated hardware and software necessary . For an example of a proposal see Figure 3 . The student information systems task presented to the subjects concerned improving student services . It was open - ended to permit flexibility and novelty in a response . It did not depend on special skills , however , it required some knowledge in the domain of Computer Information Systems . The student - related task was selected to generate a fair amount of enthusiasm among the subjects , who complained about the current system related services at the university . The proposals were generated during short , 70 - 90 minutes , sessions . The students were not prepared about the nature of the task . They were instructed during the session U , engage in an initial investigation phase of the System Development Life Cycle and to develop a brief proposal for an innovative student information system for the college that they had attended for at least 2 - 4 years . They were told to think of the problems that they experienced and to come up with creative information system solutions . Subjects were told to be innovative and creative in their proposed solutions , in order to establish a high baseline of creativity in the study . Seventy five undergraduate junior or senior level students worked on the proposals in groups . The students were either majoring or minoring in Computer Information Systems and were enrolled in or had completed a Systems Analysis and Design course . The students volunteered to participate in the study and did not receive any extra credit for participation . Since task motivation has been found to have an effect on an individual ' s effort to find a good solution , a high level of motivation was desirable . Extrinsic motivation for the task was enhanced through the introduction of a contest . The best performing group received a $ 250 cash prize . To stimulate a high level of intrinsic motivation , students were encouraged to participate in the project in order to get an opportunity to work with the new computer technology , a group support system environment , that was utilized in this study . The judges The expert judges selected for evaluation of creativity were three MIS faculty members , male , from a large urban university . As suggested by Baker ( 1978 ) , they were not preselected on any dimension other than familiarity with the domain . All of them had industry experience and A PROPOSAL FOR A STUDENT INFORMATION SYSTEM MODULE NAME : DESCRIIPTION : Join Our Best Students ( J . O . B . S . ) A centralized database system operated by the college ; will act as the middleman between graduating studentdalumri looking for jobs ( temporary and permanent ) and companies who are interested in recruiting fresh gradelexperienced people . Electronic information and resumes for interested studentdalumni are stored into database which are retrieved upon requests from companies . Both parties , the companies and students have to pay membership fees . The system will : - Provide on - lime help for student ' s searching for a job , sample resumes that landed a job , references to reference books , opinions on the company , info on benefits a company might have to offer , list the most wanted technical skills - Include alumni information for career placement or advisement - Show available regional and out - of - town employment opportunities , salary ranges for various positions - Networking nationwide , with other university job banks and related technical organizations - Allow downloading of info to different companies and computerized adding of resumes " Em - Students will benefit by getting jobs that best suit their needs - School will benefit by showing high statistics of employment - Local and national companies will get the B . E . S . T - Studentdalumni interested in jobs will have more access to the business world and have more opportunities - Companies will have a betterflarger choice of selection for its staff HARDWARE : - System works on LAN that can be accessed by interested companies who get access designation from Placement Office - Remote access through home computer terminals to career ofice database and dial - in access capability for all interested companies - Terminals should be set up at a set location in the Career Ofice for entry of resume info and extraction of Company Data . - Printers should be added to get hard copies - Modems to the outside world - Allow fax directly into mainframe of resumes and specific job requests - Provide scanners at career office that will scan resumedimportant document $ company - required student projects into the systemdservers . - Custom - made software that includes DBMS and can blend tiwpcxhmp graphic files and different text files as well as pictures into the database - In - house systems for developing different inquiry , updates and deletes - Report writing software - Resume writing aid software and resume scan software - Word processor to create cover letters ( with a variety of fonts ) - Communications software for access from outside soums . - Fax software - for sending and receiving faxes SOFTWARE : Figure 3 . An Example of a Student Proposal . 397 The project idea presented is : ICW crude . . t t . t t well - crafbed IAI appropriate . . . . . . . N O umque . . . . . . . ICE coarse . . . . . . . IUU usual . . . . . . . unusual IAU attractive . . . . . . . unattractive IOD organized . . . . . . . disorganized IAC astomshlng . . . . . . . commonplace IMS meticulous . . e . . t t sloppy From the technical point of view , the proposed system , if implemented , will be : TCS complex . I . * . . * . sunple Twu workable . . . . . . . unworkable TMS sensible . . . . . . . senseless ICA clear . . . . . . . TPU pioneer @ g . . . . . . . unprogressive TAC astoundmg . . . . . . . common ORA revolution . * . t . . t O W useful . . . . . . . useless OIC inexpensive . . . . . . . costly 001 operable 9 . 9 . 9 . . inoperable OAC astaundlng . . . . . . . common ocs complex . . . . . . . simple 9cu creative . . . . . . . uncreative From the organizational point of view , the proposed system , if implemented , will be : : : : : : El OIE inessentz . * . . t t . Overall , the proposed system is : Figure 4 . The Revised CPSS Form Used in the Study . I PERSPECTIVE CREATIVITY I DIMENSIONv 1 NOVELTY unique unusual astonishing RESOLUTION SYNTHESIS & ELABORATION I1 H meticulous ORGANIZATIONAL TECHNICAL revolutionary astounding astounding pioneering I I operable workable inexpensive sensible useful complex complex Figure 5 . The Creativity Dimensions and Evaluation Criteria in the Creativity Assessment Questionnaire . 398 Statistical Analysis JUDGE CORRELATION 1 , 8464 2 . 885 1 3 . 3552 At this time , only some simple statistical analysis has been done on the collected data . First , the agreement among the judges was tested for the relative level of creativity present in all the projects . Two creativity assessment scores were obtained from each judge : an overall assessment and a detailed assessment , where creativity was evaluated with twenty two items . First , by computing the Kendall’s coefficient of concordance on the overall assessment of creativity , ( W = . 5759 ; p = . O001 ) , it was possible to reject the null hypothesis that the judges’ ratings were unrelated to each other [ 32 ] . Second , each proposal’s scores were summed , averaged and the Kendall’s coefficient of concordance was calculated on the average , itemized assessment of creativity ( W = . 375 , p = . 0143 ) . It revealed that the judges were applying essentially the Same standards in the detailed creativity evaluation of the proposals . It was therefore concluded that , overall , there was good consensus among the judges . The judges’ creativity scores were explored using Kendall’s W to see if there were particular dimensions of consistent agreement and consistent disagreement across the judges . Figure 6 shows that the judges closely agreed on the evaluation of the proposals’ technical merits and their novelty , but disagreed on the resolution dimension . The correlation between the total score , ( excluding the overall creativity score ) with the overall creativity score , per judge ( see Figure 7 ) was also explored . For two of the judges , the total correlation was quite high - above . 8 , with a standardized item alpha coefficient of over . 9 , while for one of the judges the correlation was low , . 3552 , with standardized item alpha coefficient of . 5242 . This study looked at how each of the creativity dimensions correlated with the overall creativity score , per judge ( see Figure 8 ) . For two of the judges , novelty correlated highest with the overall creativity score , while for the third judge , resolution dimension correlated highest with the creativity perception . This study also analyzed how each of the evaluation perspectives correlated with the creative score ( see Figure 9 ) . Again , for two of the judges , the project idea correlated the highest , while for the third judge , it was the technical perspective that correlated closest . At this point in the study , the results are inconclusive as to how experts decide what exact dimensions of the IS project proposal contribute to the perception of creativity . It was observed , that the expert judges used somewhat different criteria , but with the modified version of the CPSS form they were able to reach an agreement . Since the sample size of the expert judges was so small , we are unable to reach any statistically valid conclusions . More STANDARDIZED ITEM a . 9168 . 9390 . 5242 CREATIVITY DIMENSION / EVALUATION PERSPECTIVE : W P NOVELTY 11 . 4296 I . 001 RESOLUTION 11 . 1129 I . 1642 ELABORATION AND SYNTHESIS ORGANIZATIONAL PERSPECTIVE TECHNICAL PERSPECTIVE . 3024 I . 0079 7 . 35 14 PROJECT IDEA . 3538 I . 0035 11 PERSPECTIVE Figure 6 . The Level of Agreement in the Judges’ Scores Across the Various Creativity Dimensions and Evaluation Perspectives . data needs to be collected from many more experts , using the questionnaire developed , in order to resolve the relevant questions posed in this study . Figure 7 . The Correlation Between Total Score and Overall Creativity Assessment , per Judge . 399 RESOLUTION ELABORATION & DIMENSION , SYNTHESIS Figure 8 . Correlation Among the Overall Creativity Assessment and Creativity Dimensions , per judge . Figure 9 . Correlation Among the Overall Creativity Assessment and Different Evaluation Perspectives , per judge . Conclusions As creativity concerns in IS departments and organizations are becoming increasingly important in the 19903 , this research hopes to contribute timely information . The fundamental concerns of this study were : to show the feasibility of evaluating information system ideas , in terms of creativity , at an early stage of the system development . A creativity measuring instrument for IS project proposals could be used e . g . , for training purposes , to teach IS students and IS professionals to distinguish between creative and less creative IS ideas , and to strive to develop creative products . to determine the principal attributes , a set of criteria or standards of judgement , that contribute to fostering of creativity in Information Systems projects . At this point in the study , it was only possible to show the feasibility of evaluating creativity of IS projects at a very early stage of system development . It was also possible to show that the total score from the revised CPSS form correlated highly with the overall creativity assessment for each judge . An interesting finding In the process of the study , an interesting observation was made . It became clear that although students were generating many innovative system ideas while developing the proposals , they hardly ever incorporated those ideas into their final projects . In spite of their awareness of the fact that the judges in the contest would evaluate each system idea for its creativity and innovation , students often chose ideas which were less creative but which solved a problem that was particularly upsetting to them . Therefore , it became apparent that there exists a need to educate the IS students about what constitutes a creative / innovative information system . This necessity has been previously noted by Olfam and Bostrom ( 1992 ) , in an article on innovating teaching materials and methods in Systems Analysis and Design . Limitations Several factors need to be considered when evaluating the results of this study . As is the case with most laboratory experiments , this study suffers from the problem of non - generalizability of results ( external 400 validity ) . While the proposals were not professional and the individuals who created them were not professionals , the students did possess the minimum skill level and the domain knowledge to generate what can be considered a valid IS project proposal , at least from the end - user point of view . By utilizing a task that was relevant to the subjects , the students approached the task seriously . Their self - reported level of involvement and motivation was high . Unlike many experimental studies , this research incorporated a high degree of realism , i . e . , a high degree of correspondence between natural events and the events in the lab . The laboratory settings were selected in such a way as to maximize the impression of a " real world setting that could be expected in a similar situation . Using a detailed script , all the instructions and introductions were presented verbally , rather than handed out on a piece of paper , in order to mimic a real world meeting . The sample of judges used in this study was fairly small and repmented a homogeneous type of experts - academicians . In the future , the evaluations should be done with a larger number of experts of diverse background - public and private sector practitioners , so the total set of responses can be representative of the " population " of the expert IS judges . As the reliability and the validity of the creativity assessment is limited by time and place variables , the criteria for creativity in any domain change over time and differ across cultures . Therefore , it is possible that factors which determine creativity of an information system today will change in the future . Also , it may be difficult to apply Amabile ' s ( 1983 ) consensual methodology to product ideas that are at the frontiers of the IS domain . The revolutionary nature of the ideas can make it difficult for the judges , even when they are experts in the domain , to agree on the level of creativity that is evident . One possible solution to this problem may involve the use of a panel of experts rather than a group of expert judges , performing the evaluations independently . Future research This study shows the feasibility of a creativity test for an information system project proposal . It is a step forward toward developing a systematic study of creativity in IS products . Future research must incorporate survey research with a greater number of judges on a fewer number of proposals . One possibility is to select 4 - 5 proposals and ask a greater number of IS practitioners , with various IS backgrounds in the public and the private domain , to evaluate the proposals . That in turn will facilitate : establishing the reliability of the instrument determining the factors that contribute to creativity in information systems . It should also be analyzed how different dimensions contribute to a perception of creativity , whether there is a minimum necessary score that needs to be achieved in some / all dimension ( s ) in order for an IS product to be creative . References Amabile , T . ( 1979 ) . " Effects of External Evaluation on Artistic Creativity . " Journal of Personulity and Social Psychology . 27 , pp . 221 - 233 . Amabile , T . ( 1983 ) . The Social Psychology of Creativity . Springer - Verlag , New York . Baker , M . ( 1978 ) . " Teacher Creativity and its Relationship to the Recognition of Student Creativity . " Creative Child and Adult Quarterly . 3 , pp . 106 - 1 15 . Besemer , S . P . and O ' Quinn , K . ( 1986 ) . " Analyzing Creative Products : Refinement and Test of a Judging Instrument . " The Journal of Creative Behaviour . 202 , pp . 115 - 125 . Besemer , S . P . and O ' Quinn , K . ( 1987 ) . " Creative Product Analysis : Testing a Model by Developing a Judging Instrument . " Isaksen , S . G . ( ed . ) Frontiers of Creativity Research : Beyond the Basics . Bearly Limited , Buffalo , NY , pp . 367 - 389 . Besemer , S . P . and Treffinger , D . J . " Analysis of Creative Products : Review and Synthesis . " The Journal of Credive Behavior . pp . 158 - 178 . ( 1981 ) . Couger , J . D . ( 1989 ) . " How to Enable System Designers to be More Creative . " CRCI Report 89 - 2 , Center for Research on Creativity and Innovation . University of Colorado at Colorado Springs , CO . Couger , J . D . ( 199Oa ) . " Creativity in IS . " Computerworld . 24 , October 29 , 1990 , pp . 123 - 124 . Couger , J . D . ( 199Ob ) . " Ensuring Creative Approaches in Information System Design . " Managerial and Decision Economics . 115 , pp . 281 - 295 . Gouger , J . D . ( 1991 ) . " Using B0ttom - u ~ Approach to Creativity Improvement in IS Development . " Journal of Systems Management . 42 , pp . 23 - 27 . Couger . J . D . and Dengate . G . ( 1992 ) . " Measurement of Creativity of IS . Products . " Proceedings of the 25th Annual HICSS , pp . 288 - 298 . Unpublished Master ' s Thesis . Fitchburg State College , Fitchburg . MA . 1241 Jackson , P . and Messick . S . ( 1965 ) . ' The Person , the Product , and the Response : Conceptual Problems in the Assessment of Creativity . " Journal of Personalig . 33 , pp . 309 - 329 . Couger , J . D . , Higgins . L . F . and McIntyre , S . C . ( 1990 ) . " Differ entia t i n g In no v at i o n , Entrepreneurship , Intraprenuship , Copyright and Patenting for I . S . Products / Processes . " Proceedings of the 23th Annual HICSS . pp . 370 - 379 . Cr e at iv i ty , McLean . E . R . and Smits . S . J . ( 1993 ) . " The US Leader as " Innovator . " Proceedings of the 26th Annual HICSS , pp . 352 - 358 . 1131 Dologite , D . G . , Mockler , R . J . and Ragusa , J . M . ( 1993 ) . " Knowledge - Based Systems : An Exploratory Study of New Developers . " Proceedings of the 26th Annual HICSS , pp . 342 - 351 . Massetti , B . , Abraham , T . . Boone , L . W . and Lyons , P . ( 1992 ) . ' The Effects of Computer - Based Creativity Support System on Creative Performance . " Proceedings of the Decision Science Institute Conference . pp . 798 - 800 . Duncan , N . and Paradice , - D . ( 1992 ) . " Creativity in GDSS : An Integration of Creativity , Group Dynamics , and Problem Solving Theory . " Proceedings of the 25th Annual HICSS , pp . 277 - 287 . Newell . A . and Shaw , J . ( 1972 ) . ' The Process of Creative Thinking . " Human Problem Solving . Newell , A . and Simon , HA . ( eds . ) . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Elm , J . and Mead , M . ( 1990 ) . " Can Software Influence Creativity ? " IMormation System Research . 1 : 1 , pp . 1 - 22 . Olfam . L . and Bostrom , R . P . ( 1992 ) . " Innovative Teaching Materials and Methods in Systems Analysis and Design . " Data Base , pp . 7 - 12 . Pearlman , C . ( 1983 ) . " A Theoretical Model of Creativity . " Education . 102 , pp . 294 - 305 . Fellers , J . W . and Bostrom , R . P . ( 1993 ) . " Application of Group Support Systems to Promote Creativity in Information Systems Organizations . " Proceedings of the 26th Annual HICSS . p ~ . 332 - 341 . Freedman , D . H . ( 1987 ) . " Cultivating IS Creativity . " Iqfosystem . 34 , July 1987 , pp . 24 - 27 . Rhodes , M . ( 1961 ) . " An Analysis of Creativity . " Phi Delta Kappa . ( 42 ) , pp . 305 - 310 . Galletta , D . F . . Sampler , J . L . and Teng . J . T . ( 1992 ) . " Strategies for Integrating Creativity Principles into the System Development Process . " Proceedings of the 25th Annual HICSS . pp . 268 - 275 . Sampler , J . L . and Galletta , D . F . ( 1991 ) . " Individual and Organizational Changes Necessary for the Application of Creativity Techniques in the Development of Information System . " Proceedings of the 24th Annual HICSS , p ~ . 404 - 411 . Getzels . J . and Csikszentmihalyi M . ( 1976 ) . The Creative Vision : A Longitudinal Study of Problem - Finding in Art . Wiley . New York . Siegel , S . and Castellan , N . J . . Jr . ( 1988 ) . Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences . McGraw - Hill , NY . Gogan , J . L . and Cash , J . I . ( 1992 ) . " lT Based Innovation . " Proceedings of the 25th Annual HICSS , pp . 257 - 267 . Snow , T . A . and Couger , J . D . ( 1991 ) . " Creativity Improvement Intervention in a System Development Work Unit . " Proceedings of the 24th Annual HICSS , pp . 412 - 418 . Higgins , L . F . , Couger . J . D . , McIntyre , S . C . ( 1990 ) . " Creative Marketing Approaches to Development of Marketing Information System . ' ' Proceedings of the 23th Annual HICSS , pp . 398 - 404 . Sobel , R . S . and Rothenberg , A . ( 1980 ) . " Artistic Creation as Stimulated by Superimposed Versus Separated Visual Images . " J o d of Personulify and Social Psychology . 39 , pp . 953 - 961 . 1341 [ 221 1231 Hocevar . D . ( 1981 ) . " Measurement of Creativity : Review and Critique . " Journal of Personality Assessment . 45 , pp . 450 - 464 . 1351 Turban , E . ( 1993 ) . " Business Information System Re - engineering . " Decision Line . W . 3 . p . 7 . Howe , R . ( 1990 ) . " A Preliminary Study of the Effects of Computer Graphic Technology on the Creative Dimension of the Products and Graphic Design , " 402