S TATE O F TH E A R T RE V I E W The mast cell and allergic diseases : role in pathogenesis and implications for therapy J . M . Brown , T . M . Wilson and D . D . Metcalfe Laboratory of Allergic Diseases , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD , USA Clinical and Experimental Allergy Correspondence : Jared M . Brown , Ph . D . , Laboratory of Allergic Diseases , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , National Institutes of Health , Building 10 , Room 11C209 , 10 Center Drive , MSC 1881 , Bethesda , MD 20892 - 1881 , USA . E - mail : jmbrown @ niaid . nih . gov Summary Mast cells have long been recognized for their role in the genesis of allergic inﬂammation ; and more recently for their participation in innate and acquired immune responses . Mast cells reside within tissues including the skin and mucosal membranes , which interface with the external environment ; as well as being found within vascularized tissues next to nerves , blood vessels and glandular structures . Mast cells have the capability of reacting both within minutes and over hours to speciﬁc stimuli , with local and systemic effects . Mast cells express the high afﬁnity IgE receptor ( Fc e RI ) and upon aggregation of Fc e RI by allergen - speciﬁc IgE , mast cells release and generate biologically active preformed and newly synthesized mediators which are involved in many aspects of allergic inﬂammation . While mast cells have been well documented to be essential for acute allergic reactions , more recently the importance of mast cells in reacting through pattern recognition receptors in innate immune responses has become recognized . Moreover , as our molecular understanding of the mast cell has evolved , novel targets for modulation have been identiﬁed with promising therapeutic potential . Introduction Mast cells arise from pluripotential stem cells , mature in tissue , and have the ability to generate inﬂammation fol - lowing exposure to a variety of receptor - mediated signals initiated by both innate and acquired immune response mechanisms . Mast cells are easily identiﬁed by the pre - sence of prominent granules within their cytoplasm . These mast cells are heterogeneous in morphology and staining characteristics ( Fig . 1 ) . Tissue mast cells can be activated in wound healing , ﬁbrosis , cardiovascular disease and auto - immunity in addition to allergic inﬂammation . Mast cell development and differentiation Human mast cells arise from CD34 1 pluripotent stem cells in the bone marrow , circulate in the blood as precursors , then home to tissues where they mature under the inﬂuence of stem cell factor ( SCF ) and local cytokines and other factors . SCF is produced mainly , but not exclusively , by stromal cells . SCF is released as a soluble mediator , but is also expressed on the cell surface of stromal cells [ 1 ] . Kit ( CD117 ) , expressed on haematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells , is the tyrosine kinase transmembrane receptor for SCF that is involved in differentiation of both myeloid and lymphoid lineages . While Kit is down - regulated on other bone marrow - derived cells during their differentiation , Kit remains highly expressed on mast cells and is critical for many mast cell functions such as survival , differentiation , chemotaxis , and enhancement of signaling events during mast cell activation [ 2 , 3 ] . The importance of Kit is demonstrated by the mast cell deﬁciency observed in mouse strains with Kit mutations and deletions ( W / W v and B6 . Cg - Kit W - sh ) . Further , the removal of SCF results in mast cell apoptosis [ 4 – 6 ] . In addition to SCF , mast cell growth and differentiation are inﬂuenced by several other cytokines , including IL - 3 , IL - 4 , IL - 6 , IL - 9 , IL - 10 and nerve growth factor ( NGF ) , and in the gastrointestinal mucosa , PGE 2 . Mast cells are long lived and are reported to proliferate in association with IgE - dependent activation and in the presence of IL - 4 [ 7 ] . A secondary increase in mast cell numbers is associated with many inﬂammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis , scleroderma , with certain infectious diseases and in association with clonal disorders and chronic disease states such as lymphoma , leukaemia , osteoporosis , chronic liver disease and chronic renal disease . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2222 . 2007 . 02886 . x Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 , 4 – 18 (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Mast cell activation and mediator release Upon activation of mast cells via crosslinking of the high afﬁnity IgE receptor ( Fc e RI ) or non - IgE - mediated activa - tion through complement receptors or toll - like receptor ( TLR ) activation , mast cells can release a variable spectrum of pro - inﬂammatory mediators . These include preformed mediators such as histamine , serotonin and proteases ; newly synthesized mediators including leukotrienes and prostaglandins ; and cytokines and chemokines ( Table 1 ) . In addition to IgE - mediated activation , human mast cells exposed to IFN - g can be activated following IgG - mediated aggregation of Fc g RI to release similar mediators [ 8 – 10 ] . Additional IgE - independent mast cell triggers have been described . These include SCF , complement factors ( C3a and C5a ) , neuropeptides ( substance P ) , adenosine , TLR and scavenger receptors [ 11 , 12 ] . The level and pattern of mediator release is inﬂuenced by cytokines , growth factors and microenvironmental conditions . For example , IL - 4 enhances Fc e RI - mediated reactions from human mast cells [ 13 ] . In addition to enhancing activation of mast cells , several modulatory cytokines produced by regulatory T cells such as IL - 10 and TGF - b can decrease Fc e RI - mediated reactions [ 14 , 15 ] . Role of mast cells in inﬂammation Mast cell activation and mediator release can indepen - dently , as well as in concert with other immune cells , Fig . 1 . Images of mast cells . ( a ) Murine bone marrow - derived mast cells stained with Wright – Geimsa . ( b ) Human CD34 1 - derived mast cells stained with toluidine blue . ( c ) Toluidine blue stained mast cells in skin of C57Bl / 6 mice . ( d ) Tryptase stained mast cell aggregrate in the bone marrow of a mastocytosis patient . ( e ) HuMC stained with phalloidin for F - actin following treatment with 5 - HT . ( f ) Phagocytosed ﬂourescent Escherichia coli particles in BMMC . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 Mast cells in allergic disease 5 induce much of the pathology observed in allergic in - ﬂammatory conditions . Mast cell mediators such as histamine , leukotrienes and prostaglandins contribute to eosinophil recruitment , increase vascular permeability and smooth muscle contraction . Proteases can activate ﬁbroblasts thereby promoting collagen deposition and ﬁbrosis [ 16 ] . Mast cell - derived cytokines have numerous effects on other cells of the immune system as well as endothelial cells . For example , mast cell - derived cytokines can cause B cells to class switch to synthesize IgE , induce basophil histamine release , recruit neutrophils and eosinophils , and promote the development of T cells into a T helper 2 ( Th2 ) phenotype [ 17 – 19 ] . Mast cell products may both induce an immediate reaction and contribute to a late - phase reaction . The im - mediate phase reaction occurs within minutes of Fc e RI crosslinking and its consequences are referred to as an immediate hypersensitivity reaction . Pre - formed granule - associated and newly generated mediators released during this phase include histamine , proteases and lipid - derived mediators ( Table 1 ) . Late - phase reactions peak 6 – 12 h following antigen challenge and are associated with cytokine and chemokine production and release in part from eosinophils , neutrophils and basophils that have entered the inﬂammatory site following the immediate reaction ( Fig . 2 ) . Mast cells are also involved in chronic allergic inﬂammation where symptoms relapse and remit over time , of which asthma is a classical example . The mast cell in allergic diseases Asthma Asthma is complex inﬂammatory disorder associated with alterations in airway smooth muscle reactivity and remodelling , excessive production of mucus , increased collagen deposition , hyper - responsiveness with broncho - constriction and the cellular inﬁltration of lymphocytes , eosinophils and neutrophils . In many instances , asthma has an allergic component characterized by allergic sensi - tivity to allergens and increased serum levels of antigen - speciﬁc IgE and total IgE . The role of the mast cell in asthma is of renewed interest due to reports that mast cell numbers are increased within the airway smooth muscle bundles of asthmatic patients [ 20 – 25 ] . This has led to a re - evaluation of the mast cell as a crucial effector cell in the pathogenesis of asthma , especially asthma with an allergic basis . Mast cells numbers , but not T cells or eosinophils , are increased within the airway smooth muscle ( ASM ) of asthmatic patients [ 20 , 21 , 24 , 25 ] . The location of mast cells within the ASM is believed to facilitate hyper - Table 1 . Major mast cell - derived mediators Class Mediators Physiological effects Preformed mediators Histamine , serotonin , heparin , neutral proteases ( tryptase and chymase , carboxypeptidase , cathepsin G ) , major basic protein , acid hydrolases , peroxidase , phospholipases Vasodilation Vasoconstriction Angiogenesis Mitogenesis Pain Protein processing / degradation Lipid / proteoglycan hydrolysis Arachidonic acid generation Tissue damage Inﬂammation Lipid mediators LTB 4 , LTC 4 , PGE 2 , PGD 2 , PAF Leucocyte chemotaxis Vasoconstriction Bronchoconstriction Platelet activation Vasodilation Cytokines TNF - a , TGF - b , IFN - a , IFN - b , IFN - g , IL - 1 a , IL - 1 b , IL - 3 , IL - 4 , IL - 5 , IL - 6 , IL - 8 , IL - 9 , IL - 10 , IL - 11 , IL - 12 , IL - 13 , IL - 15 , IL - 16 , IL - 18 , IL - 25 , SCF , MIF Inﬂammation Leucocyte migration / proliferation Chemokines CXCL8 , CCL3 , CCL2 , CCL7 , CCL13 , CCL5 , CCL11 , CCL19 Chemoattraction and tissue inﬁltration of leucocytes Growth factors CSF , GM - CSF , bFGF , VEGF , NGF , LIF Growth of various cell types Vasodilation Neovascularization Angiogenesis SCF , stem cell factor ; GM - CSF , granulocyte macrophage - colony stimulating factor ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor ; bFGF , basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ; NGF , nerve growth factor . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 6 J . M . Brown et al responsiveness through localized mediator release and / or direct cell - to - cell contact . ASM cells can recruit and retain mast cells through the release of chemokines and growth factors for receptors expressed on human lung mast cells . Human lung mast cells express CXCR3 and ASM cells produce the CXCR3 ligands CXCL9 , CXCL10 and CXCL11 , thereby possibly contributing to mast cell recruitment [ 26 , 27 ] . ASM cells also produce SCF , which itself induces mast cell recruitment , differentiation and survival [ 28 ] . Recently , an additional chemokine , fraktalkine ( CX 3 CL1 ) , which is increased in asthmatic lung , has been shown to be produced by ASM cells , thereby possibly contributing to mast cell recruitment [ 25 ] . Recently , human ASM cells have been reported to express CCR7 , while mast cells located within airways of asthmatic patients highly express the ligand for CCR7 , CCL19 [ 29 ] . Importantly , mast cell - derived CCL19 is reported to induce ASM cell migration and wound repair [ 29 ] . Human lung mast cells have also been shown to adhere to ASM cells , while T cells and eosinophils do not adhere under the same conditions [ 24 ] . ASM cells express adhe - sion molecules that may thus aid in recruitment , retention and cross - talk of mast cells . Of recent interest is the role of tumor suppressor in lung cancer - 1 ( TSLC - 1 ) ( now know as SCFFraktalkineCXCL9CXCL10CXCL11 Mast cell Recuitment , adhesion , and survival Airwayhyperresponsivenessand remodeling IL - 4 , IL - 13 TNF α , TGF β PGD , LTC HistamineTryptases Leucocyte recruitment , adhesion , and activation Acute and Chronic Inflammation CytokinesChemokinesLeukotrienesProstaglandinsTryptase Proliferation Tissue remodeling Growth factors ( VEGF , bFGF ) histaminetryptase metalloproteinasesLeukotrienesProstaglandinsAmphiregullin IgE production Fc ε RI activation IL - 4 IL - 13 Airway smooth muscle Leucocyte B cell Mucus production Epithelium Mast cell Th2 cell APC Fig . 2 . Role of mast cells and mast cell products in mediating effects on airway smooth muscle , leucocytes and epithelium . In asthmatics , airway smooth muscle cells can lead to recruitment , adhesion and survival of mast cells by production of stem cell factor ( SCF ) and fraktalkine as examples . Mast cells contribute to airway hyper - responsiveness and remodelling through production of lipid mediators , cytokines , histamine and tryptase , which inﬂuence airway smooth muscle cells . Additionally , activated mast cells and their products have effects on proliferation and remodelling of epithelium . Production of growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ( bFGF ) , as well as proteases , histamine , metalloproteinases , and lipid mediators , all have effects on the epithelium , including the promotion of excess mucus production . Mast cell - derived mediators produced following Fc e RI crosslinking with allergen lead to leucocyte recruitment , adhesion , and activation . Mast cell - derived IL - 4 , IL - 9 and IL - 13 lead to T helper 2 ( Th2 ) differentiation , which promotes production of allergen - speciﬁc IgE by B cells . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 Mast cells in allergic disease 7 cell adhesion molecule - 1 [ CADM - 1 ] ) in mediating the adherence of mast cells to ASM . Inhibition of CADM1 can partially reduce adhesion of human lung mast cells to ASM cells [ 30 ] . In addition , vascular CADM - 1 ( VCAM - 1 ) and intracellular adhesion molecule ( ICAM ) are expressed on ASM and may be involved in retention of mast cells [ 31 ] . Many mast cell mediators such as histamine , tryptase , IL - 4 , IL - 13 , PGD 2 and LTC 4 , will induce contraction of ASM cells . For example , tryptase causes bronchial hyper - responsiveness in dogs and in isolated human bronchi stimulates cytokine production from ASM [ 32 – 34 ] . The complement anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a are also elevated in bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid of patients with allergic asthma following allergen challenge [ 35 ] . A recent study demonstrated that ASM cells enhance C3a - mediated mast cell degranulation through an SCF - independent mechanism [ 36 ] . Mechanisms involved are not completely understood and similar effects have not been reported on human lung mast cells , but presumably involve C3a activation and release of mast cell products that enhance ASM contraction [ 37 ] . In line with this observation , degranulated mast cells are found in the ASM of asthmatic patients and there may be a correlation between the number of degranulated mast cells and the severity of asthma as a greater number of degranulated mast cells are found in fatal cases of asthma [ 21 , 38 ] . In addition to preformed mediators , the release of cytokines by mast cells is an important mechanism in the activation of ASM . Mast cells found within the ASM of asthmatics express IL - 4 and IL - 13 , both of which have been studied extensively as major mediators in asthma by acting through IL - 4 receptor a [ 39 , 40 ] . Mast cells also inﬁltrate the bronchial epithelium in asthmatics [ 41 – 43 ] . Inﬁltration of the bronchi potentially allows the mast cell increased access to allergens . This would facilitate the inﬂammatory response through anti - gen presentation , Th2 differentiation and IgE production . Increased mucus production is a common feature of asthma , and mediators released from mast cells stimulate mucus gland secretion [ 44 ] . In fact , the number of mast cells located near mucosal glands correlates with the degree of mucus production [ 38 , 45 ] . Further , an increase in mast cells as identiﬁed by tryptase staining occurs near mucosal gland stroma in non - fatal asthma , while an increase in degranulated mast cells near mucosal glands is observed in fatal and non - fatal asthma [ 45 ] . Of recent interest is the role of amphiregulin that is produced by mast cells following Fc e RI aggregation which leads to an increase in mucin gene expression in epithelial cells [ 46 , 47 ] . SCF and CD117 ( Kit ) signiﬁcantly increases in the epithelium and subepithelium of the bronchi in asthmatic patients providing more suggestive evidence that mast cells contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma [ 48 , 49 ] . In addition , SCF deﬁcient mice have decreased allergen - induced airway hyper - responsiveness and eosinophil in - ﬁltration as compared with wild - type mice [ 50 ] . Further evidence for the importance of SCF and mast cells in asthma is provided by the consequences of intratracheal instillation of SCF in mice . This results in airway hyper - responsiveness only in wild - type mice , but not in mast cell - deﬁcient mice [ 50 ] . In addition to the effects mast cells directly exert on the pathogenesis of asthma , they also have the ability to contribute to the initiation of Th2 responses by the production of IL - 4 and IL - 13 [ 18 ] . Recently , thymic stromal lymphopoietin ( TSLP ) , released by epithelial cells in response to physical injury and / or inﬂammatory cytokines , has been reported as a possible initiator of asthmatic responses through the potent stimulation of mast cells , to produce high levels of Th2 cytokines [ 51 ] . Mast cells are also known to present antigen , further providing a mechanism supporting Th2 differentiation and T cell activation [ 52 – 55 ] . In addition to the role of Th2 - differentiated T cells , CD4 1 CD25 1 regulatory T cells are being intensively studied in the regulation of asth - matic responses [ 56 ] . Of future interest will be to deter - mine the ability of mast cells to alter CD4 1 CD25 1 regulatory T cell responses in asthma , because a recent report has demonstrated that mast cells are essential intermediaries in regulatory T cell tolerance [ 57 ] . An additional mast cell - activation pathway that may be important in the pathogenesis of asthma is via monomeric IgE . It has been reported that monomeric IgE , in the absence of allergen , can induce Ca 2 1 ﬂux , degranulation , arachidonic acid metabolism , chemokine and cytokine production as well as increased cell survival [ 58 – 60 ] . These observations may become important as a correla - tion between serum levels of IgE , bronchial hyper - responsiveness and asthma has been reported [ 61 , 62 ] . In addition to the data on the role of mast cells in human asthma , many studies have attempted to elucidate the role of mast cells in asthma through the use of murine models . A variety of responses and pathways have been described in murine models of asthma with varying results . Murine models of AHR have been described that are both mast cell dependent and independent . For example , sensitized and challenged mast cell - deﬁcient mice in one study have been reported to fully develop a Th2 response , airway inﬂammation and AHR that is similar to wild - type mice [ 63 ] . In contrast , another mouse model of chronic asthma in mast cell - deﬁcient mice has reported that AHR and inﬂammation is more mild in the absence of mast cells following sensitization and repeated allergen expo - sure compared with wild - type mice [ 64 ] . Supporting this latter ﬁnding , Fc e RI - deﬁcient mice failed to develop allergic inﬂammation , IL - 13 production and AHR follow - ing sensitization and allergen challenge [ 65 ] . Further , allergic inﬂammation , IL - 13 and AHR was restored in (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 8 J . M . Brown et al these mice by reconstitution of Fc e RI bearing cells [ 65 ] . However , the role of mast cell - derived IL - 13 in mediating AHR is controversial , as reconstitution of Fc e RI cells not able to express IL - 13 could also restore inﬂammation and AHR in these mice [ 65 ] . The importance of murine models of asthma has been in deﬁning mechanisms and the role of mast cells in asthma . Mast cells contribute to murine AHR by production of inﬂammatory mediators that can directly induce AHR , or by production of chemokines that recruit other inﬂamma - tory cells including eosinophils and effector T cells . The variable role of mast cells in these murine models of allergic asthma may in part be attributed to the mode of sensitization that can determine T cell vs . mast cell - dependent AHR responses ( i . e . the use of alum can drive a mast cell - independent response ) [ 64 ] . While murine air - way hyper - responsiveness is not asthma , murine models have had a large impact on deﬁning the immunological mechanisms and understanding of asthma . Thus , mast cells in asthmatics release a variety of mediators which may induce and / or sustain chronic inﬂammation , alter ASM reactivity , increase mucus pro - duction and lead to Th2 polarization . In addition to mediator release , mast cells are also being recognized for their ability by direct cell - to - cell contact to alter ASM , mucus production and T cell activation . Allergic rhinitis Allergic rhinitis ( AR ) is the most common allergic disease in the United States . It affects up to an estimated 40 % of children and 25 % of adults . The pathophysiology of AR shares many similarities to allergic asthma and the two diseases are often considered manifestations of ‘one air - way , one disease’ [ 66 ] . Mast cells constitutively reside in the nasal mucosa and do not normally venture into the superﬁcial airway epithelium . Mast cells within the subepithelium phenoty - pically are both tryptase ( MC T ) positive and tryptase / chymase ( MC TC ) positive . With allergen exposure , mast cell migration to , and proliferation within , the epithelium occurs [ 67 ] . However , these epithelial mast cells predomi - nantly express only tryptase ( MC T ) and are selectively increased in AR [ 68 – 70 ] . Although SCF is a strong mast cell chemoattractant and elevated in the nasal lavage ﬂuid of seasonal AR , relatively low levels of SCF are present in the nasal epithelium as compared with the lamina propria . CCL5 may instead have a more prominant role in this epithelial migration . CCL5 is found in signiﬁcantly greater levels in the epithelial compartment and appears in vitro to be a more potent chemoattractant for human mast cells than SCF or CCL11 [ 71 ] . A low SCF environment is known to decrease mast cell chymase expression , which may explain the selective accumulation of MC T in the nasal epithelium of AR [ 72 ] . Mast cell degranulation is evidenced by elevated tryp - tase , histamine , LTB 4 , LTC 4 and PGD 2 levels in the nasal lavage ﬂuid of individuals with AR following nasal aller - gen provocation [ 73 – 76 ] . These mediators contribute to the sneezing , pruritus , rhinorrhea and nasal congestion characteristic of the early - phase symptoms of AR . Hista - mine is a principal mediator inducing vasodilation , in - creased vascular permeability and increased glandular secretion . In addition , histamine acts on the sensory nerve endings of the trigeminal nerve to cause sneezing . A strong Th2 cytokine expression proﬁle ( TNF - a , IL - 4 , IL - 5 , IL - 6 and IL - 13 ) follows mast cell activation and is believed central to the late - phase reaction . Mast cells induce eosinophilic inﬁltration through the release of platelet activating factor ( PAF ) and LTB 4 ; and the up - regulation VCAM - 1 expression on endothelial cells . Eosi - nophil survival is promoted through mast cell release of granulocyte macrophage - colony stimulating factor ( GM - CSF ) and IL - 5 . Additionally , histamine up - regulates CCL5 and GM - CSF , while IL - 4 , IL - 13 and TNF - a up - regulate CCL11 and CCL17 , further contributing to the late - phase eosinophilic / T cell inﬁltration . Clinically , this is displayed as an increase in nasal mucosal thickening with decreased nasal airway resistance [ 71 , 77 ] . Of direct relevance is the pathophysiology behind the nasal hyper - responsiveness found in AR . There is evi - dence that this hyper - responsiveness is the result of exaggerated neural reactivity , with NGF being involved [ 78 – 80 ] . Baseline levels of NGF in the nasal lavage ﬂuids from individuals with AR are abnormally elevated and may be ampliﬁed through nasal allergen provocation [ 79 ] . NGF is produced not only by neurons and nerve - associated cells , but also by selected immune cells , including mast cells [ 81 – 83 ] . In addition , in vitro studies have demonstrated the ability of NGF to increase expres - sion of Fc e RI and Kit on mast cells cultured from human umbilical cord blood , suggesting NGF may be an addi - tional growth factor that impacts on human mast cell development [ 84 ] . Atopic dermatitis Mast cells are increased in a variety of chronic inﬂamma - tory skin disorders , including atopic dermatitis ( AD ) [ 85 ] . Biopsies of AD lesions demonstrate an increase in mast cell numbers as compared with uninvolved sites [ 86 ] . The precise contribution of this mast cell presence to the pathophysiology of AD is not , however , understood . Mast cells reside in the papillary dermis and undergo migration through the basal lamina into the epidermis of AD lesions . Within the epidermis , mast cells may inﬂuence keratino - cyte activation and stimulation of endothelial growth with neoangiogenesis [ 87 ] . Although histamine has an established role in other atopic diseases , the effect of histamine in AD is (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 Mast cells in allergic disease 9 questionable , given that levels are not increased compared with control subjects . Moreover , antihistamines provide minimal clinical efﬁcacy in AD . Tryptase and activation of proteinase - activated receptor - 2 ( PAR - 2 ) may contri - bute to the pruritus seen in AD , as tryptase is reported to be increased up to fourfold in AD patients and PAR - 2 expression is markedly enhanced on primary afferent nerve ﬁbers in skin biopsies from patients with AD [ 88 ] . Chymase may play a role in eliciting and maintaining chronic inﬂammation in AD by weakening the skin barrier , in turn allowing an enhanced permeability to allergens and microbes [ 89 ] . An association between a promoter polymorphism ( rs1800875 ) of the mast cell chymase gene ( CMA - 1 ) and AD has been reported [ 90 ] . Signiﬁcantly elevated levels of total IgE are found in about 80 % of patients with AD . Beyond traditional signal - ing through the Fc e RI receptor on mast cells , a novel IgE - independent mast cell activation pathway has been proposed for AD involving CD30 . Mast cells were shown to be the predominant CD30 ligand - positive cell in AD lesions and activation through CD30 induced a de novo synthesis and secretion of CXCL8 , CCL3 and CCL4 , via the extracellular - signal regulated kinase ( ERK ) / ( Mitogen - activated protein kinase ) MAPK pathway [ 91 ] . As in AR , mast cell – nerve interactions may also play a role in promoting inﬂammation in AD . Contacts between mast cells and nerves are increased in both lesional and non - lesional samples of AD when compared with normal controls [ 92 ] . Inﬂammation appears to be mediated by neuropeptides such as substance P , calcitonin gene - related peptide , vasoactive intestinal peptide and NGF [ 84 , 93 – 95 ] . Anaphylaxis Anaphylaxis is an acute , severe , systemic reaction to a foreign stimulus that is often thought to be associated with mast cell activation . The strongest evidence of a role for mast cells in anaphylaxis comes from assessments of serum tryptase levels during anaphylaxis [ 96 , 97 ] . Serum levels of tryptase , which predominantly arise from mast cell degranulation , peaks 1 – 2 h following the onset of IgE - mediated anaphylaxis [ 98 ] . Classical IgE - dependent anaphylaxis occurs upon exposure to speciﬁc antigens including venoms , latex , and pharmaceutical agents . In addition to IgE - mediated mast cell activation , anaphy - laxis may be elicited by certain agents or stimuli that activate mast cells independent of IgE . IgG and comple - ment receptors expressed on mast cells may contribute to these IgE - independent events [ 3 , 8 , 9 , 99 ] . Although anaphylaxis is considered a systemic event , the presence and activation of mast cells in speciﬁc organs may play a critical role in the severity . Within the heart , mast cells are located between myocardial ﬁbers , around blood vessels and in the arterial intima . Activation of these critically positioned mast cells may directly con - tribute to cardiopulmonary failure . Cardiac mast cells in vitro release many of the classic mast cell mediators of anaphylaxis including PAF [ 100 , 101 ] . PAF is thought to be a critical factor in the development of anaphylactic shock through its ability to induce hypotension and cardiac dysfunction [ 102 ] . PAF - induced anaphylactic shock in mice appears directly dependent on phosphoino - sitide - 3 kinase ( PI3K ) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( eNOS ) - derived nitric oxide ( NO ) which func - tions as a potent vasodilator [ 103 ] . The overall number of mast cells may also be relevant in anaphylaxis . It is known that individuals with recurrent anaphylaxis tend to have more dermal mast cells than those without anaphylaxis . Mastocytosis , a disease char - acterized by the pathologic accumulation of mast cells in tissues , is often associated with spontaneous episodes of hypotension and has served as a unique disease model . Activating mutations in the tyrosine kinase Kit , such as D816V , are strongly associated with mastocytosis [ 104 ] . Identiﬁcation of this mutation suggests that additional yet unidentiﬁed genetic polymorphisms or mutations may potentially account for an increase in mast cell numbers , which may predispose individuals to recurrent anaphylaxis . Another historically interesting area of research has been the possible activation of mast cells by high doses of g - radiation as could be encountered in the environment under some circumstances . Early data suggested that mast cells might contribute to the acute radiation syndrome that occurs immediately following high - dose exposure to g - radiation possibly by the release of histamine [ 105 – 107 ] . However , a recent report has demonstrated that mast cells are highly resistant to the effects of g - irradia - tion and do not degranulate in response to g - irradiation alone and surprisingly retain their ability to respond to Fc e RI - mediated signals as well as TLR - mediated signals [ 108 ] . Despite convincing evidence for mast cell - dependent anaphylaxis , it is important to note that there are instances of anaphylaxis not associated with tryptase elevation [ 97 ] . This observation challenges the accuracy of the conclusion that mast cells are central to all forms of anaphylaxis . Indeed , mast cell - deﬁcient mice have shown to be prone to fatal IgE - dependent anaphylaxis [ 109 ] . Subsequent mouse models suggest that an alternative pathway may proceed primarily through the IgG , Fc g RIII , macrophage and PAF pathways [ 110 ] . Certainly , further investigation is required to delineate the pathophysiology of these anaphylactic events . Allergic eye disease Ocular allergy occurs in 4 50 % of the allergic population [ 111 , 112 ] . The location of mast cells in close proximity to (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 10 J . M . Brown et al the external environment in the mucosa of the eye allows for exposure of these cells to allergen , thereby facilitating crosslinking of membrane - bound IgE , which leads to degranulation and release of inﬂammatory mediators . Although there are several types of ocular allergy , seaso - nal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis represent the majority of allergy cases [ 113 ] . In normal individuals , mast cells are abundant in the conjunctival stroma with an estimated 50 million cells residing at this environmental interface [ 114 ] . In sympto - matic allergic patients , an increase in mast cells with evidence of degranulation is seen in conjunctival biopsies [ 115 ] . In addition to the increase in mast cells within the conjunctiva , the number of mast cells expressing IL - 4 message is increased threefold in seasonal allergic con - junctivitis [ 116 ] . Further , use of a mast cell stabilizer ( nedocromil sodium ) reduces the amount of histamine and PGD 2 by more than 70 % after challenge , thereby supporting a major role for mast cells in allergic con - junctivitis [ 117 ] . In addition to common mast cell mediators such as histamine and cytokines , chemokines released from activated mast cells mediate late - phase reactions by recruitment of additional inﬂammatory cells . Mast cells residing within the conjunctiva express CCR3 and the use of a CCR3 antagonist in a mouse model of allergic conjuctivitis ablated both the early and late - phase reac - tions [ 118 ] . In this model , the CCR3 antagonist lead to mast cell stabilization and inhibition of immediate hyper - sensitivity , but also impaired neutrophil and eosinophil inﬂux during the late - phase response [ 118 ] . Mast cell therapeutics Mast cell therapeutics may be broadly classiﬁed into those directed at cell membrane targets ( membrane receptors ) , to intracellular targets ( cell signaling , gene expression ) or to extracellular targets ( released mediators ) ( Table 2 ) ( Fig . 3 ) . Often treatment selection is tailored to include one or more of these agents depending on the individual patient and the speciﬁc allergic disease . Cell membrane targets Chromones are believed to target and ‘stabilize’ the mast cell membrane , but their precise mechanism of action is not understood . In vitro studies with activated mast cells suggest that chromones disrupt the Ca 2 1 inﬂux , chloride ion transport , and exocytotic processes required for proper degranulation [ 119 , 120 ] . Ca 2 1 mobilization is also re - quired for arachidonic acid synthesis and the subsequent production of lipid mediators [ 121 , 122 ] . Unfortunately , chromones are generally regarded as weak mast cell ‘stabilizers’ and display rapid tachyphylaxis resulting in their poor clinical efﬁcacy . Both short and long acting agonists of the b 2 adrenergic receptor have shown effective in vitro inhibition of histamine and cysteinyl - leukotriene release by mast cells [ 123 , 124 ] . This inhibitory effect is mediated by a sus - tained increase in cAMP [ 125 ] . Although inhaled albuterol inhibits the increase in plasma histamine induced by allergen exposure in asthmatic patients [ 126 , 127 ] , sub - stantial in vivo evidence for the modulation of mast cells by b 2 agonists is limited . The humanized monoclonal antibody , omalizumab , is directed to the receptor binding domain of circulating IgE and blocks its attachment to Fc e RI on inﬂammatory cells . This indirectly results in the down - regulation of Fc e RI expression on the cell membrane [ 128 ] . Subsequently , higher concentrations of allergens are required to induce skin prick test reactivity [ 129 ] . It is hypothesized that Fc e RI numbers in some instances decrease to such low levels that despite antigen excess , adequate receptor crosslinking is unachievable [ 119 ] . Additional mast cell membrane targets under investiga - tion include chemokine receptors , particularly CCR3 . Although regarded as a principal mediator of eosinophil chemotaxis , CCR3 antagonists have demonstrated the ability to provide mast cell stabilization and to inhibit both the early and late - phase of allergic inﬂammation in the mouse conjunctiva [ 118 , 130 , 131 ] . CCR3 antagonists are at various stages of development [ 132 ] . Ion channels are essential for many cellular processes including mast cell function and also represent attractive targets . Recently , it has been shown that Ca 2 1 inﬂux through Ca 2 1 release - activated Ca 2 1 channels activate cytosolic phospholipase A 2 , leukotriene C 4 secretion and expression of c - fos through ERK - dependent and - inde - pendent pathways in mast cells [ 133 ] . Opening of the Ca 2 1 activated K 1 channel , KCa3 . 1 , on mast cells enhances mediator release while blockade attenuates degranulation [ 134 , 135 ] . Although the role of KCa3 . 1 in mast cell degranulation is modest , it’s function in human lung mast cell migration appears critical [ 136 ] . Modulation of these ion channels may have a role in the treatment of allergy as adenosine was recently shown to close KCa3 . 1 in human lung mast cells and inhibit their migration via the adeno - sine A2A receptor [ 137 ] . CD63 is a tetraspanin present on the surface of mast cells that interacts with b 1 integrins and modulates adhesion . Anti - CD63 monoclonal antibodies have shown the ability to decrease Fc e RI - induced degranulation via impairment of the Gab2 – PI3K pathway , suggesting a potential therapeutic application [ 138 ] . Intracellular targets Glucocorticoids ( GCs ) exert global modulating effects on the immune system and are effective in the treatment of allergic diseases . Upon engagement of GC receptors in the (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 Mast cells in allergic disease 11 cytoplasm of inﬂammatory cells , GC trafﬁc to the nucleus and regulate gene expression . Although mononuclear cell cytokine production is a main target , antigen - induced expression of IL - 4 , IL - 5 , IL - 6 , IL - 13 , TNF - a and GM - CSF by mast cells is also inhibited [ 139 – 143 ] . In addition , tissue SCF production required for the survival of local mast cells is down - regulated [ 144 , 145 ] . Beyond cytokine modulation , recent evidence indicates that GC inhibit mast cell degranulation through suppression of inter - mediate signaling processes . Up - regulation of inhibitory factors such as Src - like adaptor protein ( SLAP ) , down - stream of tyrosine kinase - 1 ( Dok - 1 ) and MAPK phospha - tase - 1 ( MKP - 1 ) are reported [ 146 , 147 ] . GC - mediated down - regulation of IgE - dependent Fc e RI expression in mast cells has also been demonstrated [ 148 ] . As our understanding of mast cell signaling has evolved , potential new intracellular targets have been identiﬁed . A Syk tyrosine kinase inhibitor , R112 , which disrupts mast cell IgE – Fc e RI signaling has displayed promising results in recent clinical trials and may repre - sent a new class of allergy therapeutics [ 149 , 150 ] . MAPKs are also well - recognized mediators of mast cell activation , survival , differentiation and cytokine production . Clinical development of small molecule inhibitors of the p38 MAPK are presently ongoing [ 151 – 153 ] . Phosphodiester - ase 4 ( PDE4 ) is the major cyclic - AMP metabolizing enzyme in immune and inﬂammatory cells , including mast cells . Multiple PDE4 inhibitors are under clinical evaluation for the treatment of asthma , AD and AR [ 154 ] . Extracellular targets Cysteinyl leukotrienes ( CysLTs ) are potent lipid mediators produced by activated mast cells via the 5 - lipoxygenase ( 5 - LO ) pathway . Utilizing Cys - LT receptors , these media - tors exert a diverse range of inﬂammatory effects includ - ing bronchoconstriction , smooth muscle proliferation , airway remodelling , ﬁbrosis , and effector cell recruitment and activation [ 155 ] . Two known Cys - LT receptors , CysLT1 and CysLT2 , have been characterized on a number of inﬂammatory cells , including mast cells [ 156 , 157 ] . 5 - LO inhibitors and CysLT1 receptor antagonists are Table 2 . Mast cell and mast cell product - directed therapeutics (cid:1) Mast cell target Therapeutic class Mechanism of action Stage of development Cell membrane Chromones Potential disruption of Ca 2 1 inﬂux , chloride ion transport and exocytic processes Clinical use b 2 agonists Increase cytosolic cAMP levels through binding of b 2 receptors Clinical use Omalizumab Monoclonal antibody to free IgE resulting in decreased Fc e RI membrane expression Clinical use CCR3 antagonists Block chemotaxis and degranulation Clinical trials Ca 2 1 and K 1 channel antagonists Disruption of ion inﬂux with attenuation of degrangulation and chemotaxis Pre - clinical Anti - CD63 antibody Monoclonal antibody to CD63 which interferes with cellular adhesion to b 1 integrins and blocks Fc e RI - induced degranulation via impairment of Gab2 - PI3k pathway Pre - clinical Intracellular Glucocorticoids Regulate transcription of numerous inﬂammatory genes Clinical use Syk kinase inhibitors Block IgE – Fc e RI - mediated downstream signaling ( phosphorylation ) Clinical trials MAPK inhibitors Block phosphorylation of multiple intracellular proteins ( including transcription factors ) that are involved in cellular proliferation , differentiation , survival and chronic inﬂammation Clinical trials PDE4 inhibitors Block hydrolysis of cAMP to 5 0 AMP Clinical trials Extracellular 5 - LO inhibitor Blocks the conversion of arachidonic acid to LTA 4 which subsequently prevents CysLT formation Clinical use Tryptase inhibitors Block the protease activity of tryptase Pre - clinical CysLTR1 antagonists Block the binding to and effects of CysLT on target cells Clinical use H 1 – 4 receptor antagonists Block the binding to and effects of histamine on target cells H 1 / H 2 : Clinical use H 3 : Clinical trials H 4 : Pre - clinical PAR - 2 antagonists Block PAR - 2 receptor signaling following activation by proteases ( e . g . , tryptase ) Pre - clinical DP and CRTH - 2 receptor antagonists Block the binding to and effects of PGD 2 on target cells Pre - clinical (cid:1) Representative strategies in each target class are presented . MAPK , mitogen - activated protein kinases ; PI3K , phosphoinositide - 3 kinase ; PDE , phosphodiesterase ; 5 - LO , 5 - lipoxygenase ; PAR - 2 , proteinase - activated receptor 2 ; CRTH - 2 , chemoattractant receptor homologue on T helper type 2 cells ; DP , D prostanoid . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 12 J . M . Brown et al currently available for clinical use . The CysLT2 receptor may represent a promising new therapeutic target and future antagonists are anticipated . Histamine released by activated mast cells induces vasodilation , vascular permeability , and smooth muscle contraction in tissues via histamine receptors . To date four types of histamine receptors have been identiﬁed and antagonists , speciﬁcally to the H 1 receptor , are central to the management of allergy . Blocking of H 1 receptors results in decreased levels of nuclear factor - k B , a tran - scription factor important in the regulation of inﬂamma - tory cytokines and adhesion protein expression [ 158 ] . The migration , accumulation and activation of inﬂammatory cells such as eosinophils , neutrophils and basophils are also down - regulated . Recent ﬁndings support a pro - inﬂammatory role for the histamine activated H 4 receptor and antagonists are currently in development [ 159 ] . Tryptase is the most abundant protease stored in the human mast cell . Upon degranulation , tryptase cleaves and in turn activates PARs found on numerous cells . PAR - 2 activation speciﬁcally induces airway inﬂamma - tion and tissue remodelling in asthma [ 160 ] . Indeed , PAR - 2 deﬁcient mice demonstrated reduced airway in - ﬂammation following antigen challenge [ 161 ] . These characteristics make both tryptase and PAR - 2 apparent targets for pharmacological intervention . While multiple tryptase inhibitors are in preclinical development , PAR - 2 antagonists are currently unavailable [ 162 , 163 ] . PGD 2 is the major cyclooxygenase metabolite produced by mast cells . PGD 2 is also the natural ligand for both the D prostanoid ( DP ) receptor and chemoattractant receptor homologue on T helper type 2 cells ( CRTH - 2 ) . Several DP receptor antagonists have been identiﬁed with one reach - ing phase IIa clinical trials for the treatment of asthma . Fig . 3 . This ﬁgure depicts potential sites for therapeutic mast cell modulation . These sites may be broadly grouped into cell membrane , intracellular or extracellular targets . Cell membrane inhibitors include omalizumab ( down - regulation of Fc e RI ) , cromones , b 2 agonists , CCR3 inhibitors , anti - CD63 blocking antibodies , KCa3 . 1 K 1 channel and Ca 2 1 release - activated Ca 2 1 ( CRAC ) channel blockers . Glucocorticoids , phosphodiesterase ( PDE ) inhibitors and tyrosine kinase inhibitors exert their inhibitory effects within the cell , targeting either cell signaling or gene expression . Extracellular targets include mast cell mediators or their receptors released following activation . These therapeutics include tryptase inhibitors , proteinase - activated receptor 2 ( PAR - 2 ) antagonists , 5 - lipoxygenase inhibitors , CysLTR1 inhibitors , and D prostanoid ( DP ) / chemoattractant receptor homologue on T helper type 2 cells ( CRTH ) antagonists or histamine receptor blockers . Also see Table 2 . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 Mast cells in allergic disease 13 Despite promising preclinical data , no statistically signiﬁ - cant clinical beneﬁt was observed and further develop - ment has been terminated ( www . shionogi . co . jp / ir _ en / news / detail / e _ 061027 . pdf ) [ 164 ] . CRTH - 2 has recently received much attention for its proinﬂammatory role in allergic disorders , prompting an intense pursuit of CRTH - 2 antagonists [ 165 ] . Although numerous antagonists have been reported in the literature , results from animal model studies have yet to appear [ 166 , 167 ] . Conclusions The mast cell clearly has a central role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases , and more recently has been shown to be involved in innate immunity in response to bacterial and parasitic infections [ 168 ] . As our understanding of the various roles of mast cells in disease pathogenesis evolves , novel therapeutic targets will continue to be identiﬁed . It is beyond the scope of this review to address all the therapeutic approaches that are currently in development . It is anticipated that advances in gene therapy , vaccines and drug delivery will provide additional therapeutics to modulate mast cell function [ 169 ] . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the intramural research program of the NIH and NIAID . References 1 Anderson DM , Lyman SD , Baird A et al . Molecular cloning of mast cell growth factor , a hematopoietin that is active in both membrane bound and soluble forms . Cell 1990 ; 63 : 235 – 43 . 2 Akin C , Metcalfe DD . The biology of Kit in disease and the application of pharmacogenetics . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004 ; 114 : 13 – 9 ; quiz 20 . 3 Gilﬁllan AM , Tkaczyk C . Integrated signalling pathways for mast - cell activation . Nat Rev Immunol 2006 ; 6 : 218 – 30 . 4 Grimbaldeston MA , Chen CC , Piliponsky AM , Tsai M , Tam SY , Galli SJ . Mast cell - deﬁcient W - sash c - kit mutant Kit W - sh / W - sh mice as a model for investigating mast cell biology in vivo . Am J Pathol 2005 ; 167 : 835 – 48 . 5 Kitamura Y , Go S , Hatanaka K . Decrease of mast cells in W / Wv mice and their increase by bone marrow transplantation . Blood 1978 ; 52 : 447 – 52 . 6 Mekori YA , Oh CK , Metcalfe DD . The role of c - Kit and its ligand , stem cell factor , in mast cell apoptosis . Int Arch Allergy Immunol 1995 ; 107 : 136 – 8 . 7 Padawer J . Mast cells : extended lifespan and lack of granule turnover under normal in vivo conditions . Exp Mol Pathol 1974 ; 20 : 269 – 80 . 8 Tkaczyk C , Okayama Y , Woolhiser MR , Hagaman DD , Gilﬁllan AM , Metcalfe DD . Activation of human mast cells through the high afﬁnity IgG receptor . Mol Immunol 2002 ; 38 : 1289 – 93 . 9 Woolhiser MR , Brockow K , Metcalfe DD . Activation of human mast cells by aggregated IgG through FcgammaRI : additive effects of C3a . Clin Immunol 2004 ; 110 : 172 – 80 . 10 Woolhiser MR , Okayama Y , Gilﬁllan AM , Metcalfe DD . IgG - dependent activation of human mast cells following up - regula - tion of FcgammaRI by IFN - gamma . Eur J Immunol 2001 ; 31 : 3298 – 307 . 11 Brown JM , Swindle EJ , Kushnir - Sukhov NM , Holian A , Metcalfe DD . Silica - directed mast cell activation is enhanced by scaven - ger receptors . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2007 ; 36 : 43 – 52 . 12 Dawicki W , Marshall JS . New and emerging roles for mast cells in host defence . Curr Opin Immunol . 2006 ; 19 : 31 – 8 . 13 Bischoff SC , Sellge G , Lorentz A , Sebald W , Raab R , Manns MP . IL - 4 enhances proliferation and mediator release in mature human mast cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 8080 – 5 . 14 Gebhardt T , Lorentz A , Detmer F et al . Growth , phenotype , and function of human intestinal mast cells are tightly regulated by transforming growth factor beta1 . Gut 2005 ; 54 : 928 – 34 . 15 Royer B , Varadaradjalou S , Saas P , Guillosson JJ , Kantelip JP , Arock M . Inhibition of IgE - induced activation of human mast cells by IL - 10 . Clin Exp Allergy 2001 ; 31 : 694 – 704 . 16 Levi - Schaffer F , Piliponsky AM . Tryptase , a novel link between allergic inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis . Trends Immunol 2003 ; 24 : 158 – 61 . 17 Gauchat JF , Henchoz S , Mazzei G et al . Induction of human IgE synthesis in B cells by mast cells and basophils . Nature 1993 ; 365 : 340 – 3 . 18 Huels C , Germann T , Goedert S et al . Co - activation of naive CD4 1 T cells and bone marrow - derived mast cells results in the development of Th2 cells . Int Immunol 1995 ; 7 : 525 – 32 . 19 Pawankar R , Okuda M , Yssel H , Okumura K , Ra C . Nasal mast cells in perennial allergic rhinitics exhibit increased expression of the Fc epsilonRI , CD40L , IL - 4 , and IL - 13 , and can induce IgE synthesis in B cells . J Clin Invest 1997 ; 99 : 1492 – 9 . 20 Amin K , Janson C , Boman G , Venge P . The extracellular deposition of mast cell products is increased in hypertrophic airways smooth muscles in allergic asthma but not in non - allergic asthma . Allergy 2005 ; 60 : 1241 – 7 . 21 Begueret H , Berger P , Vernejoux JM , Dubuisson L , Marthan R , Tunon - de - Lara JM . Inﬂammation of bronchial smooth muscle in allergic asthma . Thorax 2007 ; 62 : 8 – 15 . 22 Berger P , Girodet PO , Begueret H et al . Tryptase - stimulated human airway smooth muscle cells induce cytokine synthesis and mast cell chemotaxis . Faseb J 2003 ; 17 : 2139 – 41 . 23 Brightling CE , Bradding P . The re - emergence of the mast cell as a pivotal cell in asthma pathogenesis . Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2005 ; 5 : 130 – 5 . 24 Brightling CE , Bradding P , Symon FA , Holgate ST , Wardlaw AJ , Pavord ID . Mast - cell inﬁltration of airway smooth muscle in asthma . N Engl J Med 2002 ; 346 : 1699 – 705 . 25 El - Shazly A , Berger P , Girodet PO et al . Fraktalkine produced by airway smooth muscle cells contributes to mast cell recruitment in asthma . J Immunol 2006 ; 176 : 1860 – 8 . 26 Brightling CE , Ammit AJ , Kaur D et al . The CXCL10 / CXCR3 axis mediates human lung mast cell migration to asthmatic airway smooth muscle . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005 ; 171 : 1103 – 8 . 27 Brightling CE , Kaur D , Berger P , Morgan AJ , Wardlaw AJ , Bradding P . Differential expression of CCR3 and CXCR3 by (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 14 J . M . Brown et al human lung and bone marrow - derived mast cells : implications for tissue mast cell migration . J Leukoc Biol 2005 ; 77 : 759 – 66 . 28 Bradding P , Walls AF , Holgate ST . The role of the mast cell in the pathophysiology of asthma . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006 ; 117 : 1277 – 84 . 29 Kaur D , Saunders R , Berger P et al . Airway Smooth Muscle and Mast Cell - derived CCL19 Mediate Airway Smooth Muscle Migration in Asthma . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006 ; 174 : 1179 – 88 . 30 Yang W , Kaur D , Okayama Y et al . Human lung mast cells adhere to human airway smooth muscle , in part , via tumor suppressor in lung cancer - 1 . J Immunol 2006 ; 176 : 1238 – 43 . 31 Page S , Ammit AJ , Black JL , Armour CL . Human mast cell and airway smooth muscle cell interactions : implications for asth - ma . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2001 ; 281 : L1313 – 23 . 32 Berger P , Compton SJ , Molimard M et al . Mast cell tryptase as a mediator of hyperresponsiveness in human isolated bronchi . Clin Exp Allergy 1999 ; 29 : 804 – 12 . 33 Berger P , N’Guyen C , Buckley M , Scotto - Gomez E , Marthan R , Tunon - de - Lara JM . Passive sensitization of human airways induces mast cell degranulation and release of tryptase . Allergy 2002 ; 57 : 592 – 9 . 34 Sekizawa K , Caughey GH , Lazarus SC , Gold WM , Nadel JA . Mast cell tryptase causes airway smooth muscle hyperrespon - siveness in dogs . J Clin Invest 1989 ; 83 : 175 – 9 . 35 Krug N , Tschernig T , Erpenbeck VJ , Hohlfeld JM , Kohl J . Complement factors C3a and C5a are increased in bronchoalveo - lar lavage ﬂuid after segmental allergen provocation in subjects with asthma . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 ; 164 : 1841 – 3 . 36 Thangam EB , Venkatesha RT , Zaidi AK et al . Airway smooth muscle cells enhance C3a - induced mast cell degranulation following cell - cell contact . FASEB J 2005 ; 19 : 798 – 800 . 37 Ali H , Panettieri RA , Jr . Anaphylatoxin C3a receptors in asthma . Respir Res 2005 ; 6 : 19 . 38 Carroll NG , Mutavdzic S , James AL . Distribution and degranu - lation of airway mast cells in normal and asthmatic subjects . Eur Respir J 2002 ; 19 : 879 – 85 . 39 Brightling CE , Symon FA , Holgate ST , Wardlaw AJ , Pavord ID , Bradding P . Interleukin - 4 and - 13 expression is co - localized to mast cells within the airway smooth muscle in asthma . Clin Exp Allergy 2003 ; 33 : 1711 – 6 . 40 Wills - Karp M . Interleukin - 13 in asthma pathogenesis . Immunol Rev 2004 ; 202 : 175 – 90 . 41 Bradding P , Roberts JA , Britten KM et al . Interleukin - 4 , - 5 , and - 6 and tumor necrosis factor - alpha in normal and asth - matic airways : evidence for the human mast cell as a source of these cytokines . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1994 ; 10 : 471 – 80 . 42 Laitinen LA , Laitinen A , Haahtela T . Airway mucosal inﬂam - mation even in patients with newly diagnosed asthma . Am Rev Respir Dis 1993 ; 147 : 697 – 704 . 43 Pesci A , Foresi A , Bertorelli G , Chetta A , Olivieri D . Histochem - ical characteristics and degranulation of mast cells in epithe - lium and lamina propria of bronchial biopsies from asthmatic and normal subjects . Am Rev Respir Dis 1993 ; 147 : 684 – 9 . 44 Bradding P . The role of the mast cell in asthma : a reassessment . Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2003 ; 3 : 45 – 50 . 45 Carroll NG , Mutavdzic S , James AL . Increased mast cells and neutrophils in submucosal mucous glands and mucus plugging in patients with asthma . Thorax 2002 ; 57 : 677 – 82 . 46 Okumura S , Sagara H , Fukuda T , Saito H , Okayama Y . Fcepsi - lonRI - mediated amphiregulin production by human mast cells increases mucin gene expression in epithelial cells . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005 ; 115 : 272 – 9 . 47 Wang SW , Oh CK , Cho SH et al . Amphiregulin expression in human mast cells and its effect on the primary human lung ﬁbroblasts . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005 ; 115 : 287 – 94 . 48 Al - Muhsen SZ , Shablovsky G , Olivenstein R , Mazer B , Hamid Q . The expression of stem cell factor and c - kit receptor in human asthmatic airways . Clin Exp Allergy 2004 ; 34 : 911 – 6 . 49 Da Silva CA , Blay F , Israel - Biet D et al . Effect of glucocorticoids on stem cell factor expression in human asthmatic bronchi . Clin Exp Allergy 2006 ; 36 : 317 – 24 . 50 Campbell E , Hogaboam C , Lincoln P , Lukacs NW . Stem cell factor - induced airway hyperreactivity in allergic and normal mice . Am J Pathol 1999 ; 154 : 1259 – 65 . 51 Allakhverdi Z , Comeau MR , Jessup HK et al . Thymic stromal lymphopoietin is released by human epithelial cells in response to microbes , trauma , or inﬂammation and potently activates mast cells . J Exp Med 2007 ; 204 : 253 – 8 . 52 Fox CC , Jewell SD , Whitacre CC . Rat peritoneal mast cells present antigen to a PPD - speciﬁc T cell line . Cell Immunol 1994 ; 158 : 253 – 64 . 53 Frandji P , Mourad W , Tkaczyk C et al . IL - 4 mRNA transcription is induced in mouse bone marrow - derived mast cells through an MHC class II - dependent signaling pathway . Eur J Immunol 1998 ; 28 : 844 – 5 . 54 Frandji P , Tkaczyk C , Oskeritzian C , David B , Desaymard C , Mecheri S . Exogenous and endogenous antigens are differen - tially presented by mast cells to CD4 1 T lymphocytes . Eur J Immunol 1996 ; 26 : 2517 – 28 . 55 Nakae S , Suto H , Iikura M et al . Mast cells enhance T cell activation : importance of mast cell costimulatory molecules and secreted TNF . J Immunol 2006 ; 176 : 2238 – 4 . 56 Seroogy CM , Gern JE . The role of T regulatory cells in asthma . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005 ; 116 : 996 – 9 . 57 Lu LF , Lind EF , Gondek DC et al . Mast cells are essential intermediaries in regulatory T - cell tolerance . Nature 2006 ; 442 : 997 – 1002 . 58 Kalesnikoff J , Huber M , Lam V et al . Monomeric IgE stimulates signaling pathways in mast cells that lead to cytokine produc - tion and cell survival . Immunity 2001 ; 14 : 801 – 1 . 59 Cruse G , Kaur D , Yang W , Duffy SM , Brightling CE , Bradding P . Activation of human lung mast cells by monomeric immuno - globulin E . Eur Respir J 2005 ; 25 : 858 – 63 . 60 Matsuda K , Piliponsky AM , Iikura M et al . Monomeric IgE enhances human mast cell chemokine production : IL - 4 aug - ments and dexamethasone suppresses the response . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005 ; 116 : 1357 – 63 . 61 Burrows B , Martinez FD , Halonen M , Barbee RA , Cline MG . Association of asthma with serum IgE levels and skin - test reactivity to allergens . N Engl J Med 1989 ; 320 : 271 – 7 . 62 Sears MR , Burrows B , Flannery EM , Herbison GP , Hewitt CJ , Holdaway MD . Relation between airway responsiveness and serum IgE in children with asthma and in apparently normal children . N Engl J Med 1991 ; 325 : 1067 – 71 . 63 Takeda K , Hamelmann E , Joetham A et al . Development of eosinophilic airway inﬂammation and airway hyperresponsive - ness in mast cell - deﬁcient mice . J Exp Med 1997 ; 186 : 449 – 54 . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 Mast cells in allergic disease 15 64 Williams CM , Galli SJ . Mast cells can amplify airway reactivity and features of chronic inﬂammation in an asthma model in mice . J Exp Med 2000 ; 192 : 455 – 62 . 65 Taube C , Wei X , Swasey CH et al . Mast cells , Fc epsilon RI , and IL - 13 are required for development of airway hyperresponsive - ness after aerosolized allergen exposure in the absence of adjuvant . J Immunol 2004 ; 172 : 6398 – 406 . 66 Gelfand EW . Inﬂammatory mediators in allergic rhinitis . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004 ; 114 : S135 – 138 . 67 Kawabori S , Kanai N , Tosho T . Proliferative activity of mast cells in allergic nasal mucosa . Clin Exp Allergy 1995 ; 25 : 173 – 8 . 68 Enerback L , Pipkorn U , Granerus G . Intraepithelial migration of nasal mucosal mast cells in hay fever . Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol 1986 ; 80 : 44 – 51 . 69 Irani AA , Schechter NM , Craig SS , DeBlois G , Schwartz LB . Two types of human mast cells that have distinct neutral protease compositions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986 ; 83 : 4464 – 8 . 70 Pawankar R , Ra C . Heterogeneity of mast cells and T cells in the nasal mucosa . J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996 ; 98 : S248 – 62 . 71 Sait˚ao H , Okayama Y . Mast cells in allergic diseases . New York : Karger , Basel , 2005 . 72 Ahn K , Takai S , Pawankar R et al . Regulation of chymase production in human mast cell progenitors . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000 ; 106 : 321 – 8 . 73 Creticos PS , Peters SP , Adkinson NF , Jr et al . Peptide leukotriene release after antigen challenge in patients sensitive to ragweed . N Engl J Med 1984 ; 310 : 1626 – 30 . 74 Freeland HS , Pipkorn U , Schleimer RP et al . Leukotriene B4 as a mediator of early and late reactions to antigen in humans : the effect of systemic glucocorticoid treatment in vivo . J Allergy Clin Immunol 1989 ; 83 : 634 – 42 . 75 Proud D , Bailey GS , Naclerio RM et al . Tryptase and histamine as markers to evaluate mast cell activation during the responses to nasal challenge with allergen , cold , dry air , and hyperosmo - lar solutions . J Allergy Clin Immunol 1992 ; 89 : 1098 – 110 . 76 Shaw RJ , Fitzharris P , Cromwell O , Wardlaw AJ , Kay AB . Allergen - induced release of sulphidopeptide leukotrienes ( SRS - A ) and LTB4 in allergic rhinitis . Allergy 1985 ; 40 : 1 – 6 . 77 Baraniuk JN . Pathogenesis of allergic rhinitis . J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997 ; 99 : S763 – 72 . 78 Sanico AM , Koliatsos VE , Stanisz AM , Bienenstock J , Togias A . Neural hyperresponsiveness and nerve growth factor in allergic rhinitis . Int Arch Allergy Immunol 1999 ; 118 : 154 – 8 . 79 Sanico AM , Stanisz AM , Gleeson TD et al . Nerve growth factor expression and release in allergic inﬂammatory disease of the upper airways . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000 ; 161 : 1631 – 5 . 80 Wu X , Myers AC , Goldstone AC , Togias A , Sanico AM . Localiza - tion of nerve growth factor and its receptors in the human nasal mucosa . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006 ; 118 : 428 – 33 . 81 Leon A , Buriani A , Dal Toso R et al . Mast cells synthesize , store , and release nerve growth factor . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994 ; 91 : 3739 – 43 . 82 Nilsson G , Forsberg - Nilsson K , Xiang Z , Hallbook F , Nilsson K , Metcalfe DD . Human mast cells express functional TrkA and are a source of nerve growth factor . Eur J Immunol 1997 ; 27 : 2295 – 301 . 83 Xiang Z , Nilsson G . IgE receptor - mediated release of nerve growth factor by mast cells . Clin Exp Allergy 2000 ; 30 : 1379 – 86 . 84 Welker P , Grabbe J , Gibbs B , Zuberbier T , Henz BM . Nerve growth factor - beta induces mast - cell marker expression during in vitro culture of human umbilical cord blood cells . Immunol - ogy 2000 ; 99 : 418 – 26 . 85 Damsgaard TE , Olesen AB , Sorensen FB , Thestrup - Pedersen K , Schiotz PO . Mast cells and atopic dermatitis . Stereological quantiﬁcation of mast cells in atopic dermatitis and normal human skin . Arch Dermatol Res 1997 ; 289 : 256 – 60 . 86 Jarvikallio A , Naukkarinen A , Harvima IT , Aalto ML , Horsman - heimo M . Quantitative analysis of tryptase - and chymase - containing mast cells in atopic dermatitis and nummular eczema . Br J Dermatol 1997 ; 136 : 871 – 7 . 87 Groneberg DA , Bester C , Grutzkau A et al . Mast cells and vasculature in atopic dermatitis – potential stimulus of neoan - giogenesis . Allergy 2005 ; 60 : 90 – 7 . 88 Steinhoff M , Neisius U , Ikoma A et al . Proteinase - activated receptor - 2 mediates itch : a novel pathway for pruritus in human skin . J Neurosci 2003 ; 23 : 6176 – 80 . 89 Badertscher K , Bronnimann M , Karlen S , Braathen LR , Yawalkar N . Mast cell chymase is increased in chronic atopic der - matitis but not in psoriasis . Arch Dermatol Res 2005 ; 296 : 503 – 6 . 90 Weidinger S , Rummler L , Klopp N et al . Association study of mast cell chymase polymorphisms with atopy . Allergy 2005 ; 60 : 1256 – 61 . 91 Fischer M , Harvima IT , Carvalho RF et al . Mast cell CD30 ligand is upregulated in cutaneous inﬂammation and mediates degra - nulation - independent chemokine secretion . J Clin Invest 2006 ; 116 : 2748 – 56 . 92 Jarvikallio A , Harvima IT , Naukkarinen A . Mast cells , nerves and neuropeptides in atopic dermatitis and nummular eczema . Arch Dermatol Res 2003 ; 295 : 2 – 7 . 93 Ansel JC , Kaynard AH , Armstrong CA , Olerud J , Bunnett N , Payan D . Skin - nervous system interactions . J Invest Dermatol 1996 ; 106 : 198 – 204 . 94 Groneberg DA , Serowka F , Peckenschneider N et al . Gene expression and regulation of nerve growth factor in atopic dermatitis mast cells and the human mast cell line - 1 . J Neuroimmunol 2005 ; 161 : 87 – 92 . 95 Groneberg DA , Welker P , Fischer TC et al . Down - regulation of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide receptor expression in atopic dermatitis . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003 ; 111 : 1099 – 105 . 96 Caughey GH . Tryptase genetics and anaphylaxis . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006 ; 117 : 1411 – 4 . 97 Schwartz LB . Effector cells of anaphylaxis : mast cells and basophils . Novartis Found Symp 2004 ; 257 : 65 – 74 ; discussion 74 – 69 , 98 – 100 , 276 – 85 . 98 Schwartz LB , Yunginger JW , Miller J , Bokhari R , Dull D . Time course of appearance and disappearance of human mast cell tryptase in the circulation after anaphylaxis . J Clin Invest 1989 ; 83 : 1551 – 5 . 99 Okayama Y , Kirshenbaum AS , Metcalfe DD . Expression of a functional high - afﬁnity IgG receptor , Fc gamma RI , on human mast cells : up - regulation by IFN - gamma . J Immunol 2000 ; 164 : 4332 – 9 . 100 Genovese A , Stellato C , Patella V et al . Contrast media are incomplete secretagogues acting on human basophils and mast cells isolated from heart and lung , but not skin tissue . Int J Clin Lab Res 1996 ; 26 : 192 – 8 . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 16 J . M . Brown et al 101 Marone G , Bova M , Detoraki A , Onorati AM , Rossi FW , Spadaro G . The human heart as a shock organ in anaphylaxis . Novartis Found Symp 2004 ; 257 : 133 – 49 ; discussion 149 – 160 , 276 – 185 . 102 Montrucchio G , Alloatti G , Camussi G . Role of platelet - activat - ing factor in cardiovascular pathophysiology . Physiol Rev 2000 ; 80 : 1669 – 9 . 103 Cauwels A , Janssen B , Buys E , Sips P , Brouckaert P . Anaphylac - tic shock depends on PI3K and eNOS - derived NO . J Clin Invest 2006 ; 116 : 2244 – 51 . 104 Nagata H , Worobec AS , Oh CK et al . Identiﬁcation of a point mutation in the catalytic domain of the protooncogene c - kit in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients who have mastocytosis with an associated hematologic disorder . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 : 10560 – 4 . 105 Donlon MA . Role of mast cell mediators in radiation injury and protection . Pharmacol Ther 1988 ; 39 : 373 – 7 . 106 Donlon MA , Walden TL , Jr . Release of biological mediators in response to acute radiation injury . Fund Appl Toxicol 1988 ; 11 : 572 – 3 . 107 Warren S , Bowers JZ . The acute radiation syndrome in man . Ann Intern Med 1950 ; 32 : 207 – 16 . 108 Soule BP , Brown JM , Kushnir - Sukhov NM , Simone NL , Mitchell JB , Metcalfe DD . Effects of g - Radiation on Fc e RI and Toll - Like Receptor Mediated Mast Cell Activation . The Journal of Im - munology 2007 ; 179 ( 5 ) : 3276 – 86 . 109 Choi IH , Shin YM , Park JS et al . Immunoglobulin E - dependent active fatal anaphylaxis in mast cell - deﬁcient mice . J Exp Med 1998 ; 188 : 1587 – 92 . 110 Strait RT , Morris SC , Yang M , Qu XW , Finkelman FD . Pathways of anaphylaxis in the mouse . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002 ; 109 : 658 – 68 . 111 Abelson MB . Allergic diseases of the eye . Philadelphia : W . B . Saunders Co , 2001 . 112 Friedlaender MH . Current concepts in ocular allergy . Ann Allergy 1991 ; 67 : 5 – 10 , 13 . 113 Ono SJ , Abelson MB . Allergic conjunctivitis : update on patho - physiology and prospects for future treatment . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005 ; 115 : 118 – 22 . 114 Allansmith MR . Immunology of the external ocular tissues . J Am Optom Assoc 1990 ; 61 : S16 – 22 . 115 Macleod JD , Anderson DF , Baddeley SM , Holgate ST , McGill JI , Roche WR . Immunolocalization of cytokines to mast cells in normal and allergic conjunctiva . Clin Exp Allergy 1997 ; 27 : 1328 – 34 . 116 Church MK , McGill JI . Human ocular mast cells . Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2002 ; 2 : 419 – 22 . 117 Ahluwalia P , Anderson DF , Wilson SJ , McGill JI , Church MK . Nedocromil sodium and levocabastine reduce the symptoms of conjunctival allergen challenge by different mechanisms . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001 ; 108 : 449 – 54 . 118 Nakamura T , Ohbayashi M , Toda M , Hall DA , Horgan CM , Ono SJ . A speciﬁc CCR3 chemokine receptor antagonist inhibits both early and late phase allergic inﬂammation in the con - junctiva . Immunol Res 2005 ; 33 : 213 – 21 . 119 Chang TW , Shiung YY . Anti - IgE as a mast cell - stabilizing therapeutic agent . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006 ; 117 : 1203 – 12 ; quiz 1213 . 120 Cook EB , Stahl JL , Barney NP , Graziano FM . Mechanisms of antihistamines and mast cell stabilizers in ocular allergic inﬂammation . Curr Drug Targets Inﬂamm Allergy 2002 ; 1 : 167 – 80 . 121 Clark JD , Lin LL , Kriz RW et al . A novel arachidonic acid - selective cytosolic PLA2 contains a Ca ( 2 1 ) - dependent translo - cation domain with homology to PKC and GAP . Cell 1991 ; 65 : 1043 – 51 . 122 Nabe T , Yamamoto M , Suga M , Kohno S . Intratracheal dosing with disodium cromoglycate inhibits late asthmatic response by attenuating eicosanoid production in guinea pigs . Eur J Phar - macol 2004 ; 497 : 97 – 104 . 123 Chong LK , Cooper E , Vardey CJ , Peachell PT . Salmeterol inhibition of mediator release from human lung mast cells by beta - adrenoceptor - dependent and independent mechanisms . Br J Pharmacol 1998 ; 123 : 1009 – 15 . 124 Nials AT , Ball DI , Butchers PR et al . Formoterol on airway smooth muscle and human lung mast cells : a comparison with salbutamol and salmeterol . Eur J Pharmacol 1994 ; 251 : 127 – 35 . 125 Weston MC , Peachell PT . Regulation of human mast cell and basophil function by cAMP . Gen Pharmacol 1998 ; 31 : 715 – 9 . 126 Barnes PJ . Effect of beta - agonists on inﬂammatory cells . J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999 ; 104 : S10 – 7 . 127 Howarth PH , Durham SR , Lee TH , Kay AB , Church MK , Holgate ST . Inﬂuence of albuterol , cromolyn sodium and ipratropium bromide on the airway and circulating mediator responses to allergen bronchial provocation in asthma . Am Rev Respir Dis 1985 ; 132 : 986 – 92 . 128 Beck LA , Marcotte GV , MacGlashan D , Togias A , Saini S . Omalizumab - induced reductions in mast cell Fce psilon RI expression and function . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004 ; 114 : 527 – 30 . 129 MacGlashan D . Loss of receptors and IgE in vivo during treatment with anti - IgE antibody . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004 ; 114 : 1472 – 4 . 130 Elsner J , Escher SE , Forssmann U . Chemokine receptor antago - nists : a novel therapeutic approach in allergic diseases . Allergy 2004 ; 59 : 1243 – 58 . 131 Price KS , Friend DS , Mellor EA , De Jesus N , Watts GF , Boyce JA . CC chemokine receptor 3 mobilizes to the surface of human mast cells and potentiates immunoglobulin E - dependent gen - eration of interleukin 13 . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2003 ; 28 : 420 – 7 . 132 De Lucca GV . Recent developments in CCR3 antagonists . Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel 2006 ; 9 : 516 – 24 . 133 Chang WC , Nelson C , Parekh AB . Ca2 1 inﬂux through CRAC channels activates cytosolic phospholipase A2 , leukotriene C4 secretion , and expression of c - fos through ERK - dependent and - independent pathways in mast cells . FASEB J 2006 ; 20 : 2381 – 3 . 134 Duffy SM , Lawley WJ , Conley EC , Bradding P . Resting and activation - dependent ion channels in human mast cells . J Immunol 2001 ; 167 : 4261 – 70 . 135 Mark Duffy S , Berger P , Cruse G , Yang W , Bolton SJ , Bradding P . The K 1 channel iKCA1 potentiates Ca 2 1 inﬂux and degranula - tion in human lung mast cells . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004 ; 114 : 66 – 72 . 136 Cruse G , Duffy SM , Brightling CE , Bradding P . Functional KCa3 . 1 K 1 channels are required for human lung mast cell migration . Thorax 2006 ; 61 : 880 – 5 . 137 Duffy SM , Cruse G , Brightling CE , Bradding P . Adenosine closes the K 1 channel KCa3 . 1 in human lung mast cells and inhibits (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 Mast cells in allergic disease 17 their migration via the adenosine A2A receptor . Eur J Immunol 2007 ; 37 : 1653 – 62 . 138 Kraft S , Fleming T , Billingsley JM et al . Anti - CD63 antibodies suppress IgE - dependent allergic reactions in vitro and in vivo . J Exp Med 2005 ; 201 : 385 – 96 . 139 Daeron M , Sterk AR , Hirata F , Ishizaka T . Biochemical analysis of glucocorticoid - induced inhibition of IgE - mediated histamine release from mouse mast cells . J Immunol 1982 ; 129 : 1212 – 8 . 140 Fushimi T , Okayama H , Shimura S , Saitoh H , Shirato K . Dexamethasone suppresses gene expression and production of IL - 13 by human mast cell line and lung mast cells . J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998 ; 102 : 134 – 42 . 141 Koranteng RD , Swindle EJ , Davis BJ et al . Differential regula - tion of mast cell cytokines by both dexamethasone and the p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) inhibitor SB203580 . Clin Exp Immunol 2004 ; 137 : 81 – 7 . 142 Robin JL , Seldin DC , Austen KF , Lewis RA . Regulation of mediator release from mouse bone marrow - derived mast cells by glucocorticoids . J Immunol 1985 ; 135 : 2719 – 26 . 143 Saitoh H , Shimura S , Fushimi T , Okayama H , Shirato K . Detection of surfactant protein - A gene transcript in the cells from pleural effusion for the diagnosis of lung adenocarcino - ma . Am J Med 1997 ; 103 : 400 – 4 . 144 Da Silva CA , Kassel O , Mathieu E , Massard G , Gasser B , Frossard N . Inhibition by glucocorticoids of the interleukin - 1beta - enhanced expression of the mast cell growth factor SCF . Br J Pharmacol 2002 ; 135 : 1634 – 40 . 145 Finotto S , Mekori YA , Metcalfe DD . Glucocorticoids decrease tissue mast cell number by reducing the production of the c - kit ligand , stem cell factor , by resident cells : in vitro and in vivo evidence in murine systems . J Clin Invest 1997 ; 99 : 1721 – 8 . 146 Hiragun T , Peng Z , Beaven MA . Dexamethasone up - regulates the inhibitory adaptor protein Dok - 1 and suppresses down - stream activation of the mitogen - activated protein kinase path - way in antigen - stimulated RBL - 2H3 mast cells . Mol Pharmacol 2005 ; 67 : 598 – 603 . 147 Hiragun T , Peng Z , Beaven MA . Cutting edge : dexamethasone negatively regulates Syk in mast cells by up - regulating SRC - like adaptor protein . J Immunol 2006 ; 177 : 2047 – 50 . 148 Smith SJ , Piliponsky AM , Rosenhead F , Elchalal U , Nagler A , Levi - Schaffer F . Dexamethasone inhibits maturation , cytokine production and Fc epsilon RI expression of human cord blood - derived mast cells . Clin Exp Allergy 2002 ; 32 : 906 – 13 . 149 Guyer BJ , Shimamoto SR , Bradhurst AL , Grossbard EB , Dreskin SC , Nelson HS . Mast cell inhibitor R112 is well tolerated and affects prostaglandin D2 but not other mediators , symptoms , or nasal volumes in a nasal challenge model of allergic rhinitis . Allergy Asthma Proc 2006 ; 27 : 208 – 13 . 150 Meltzer EO , Berkowitz RB , Grossbard EB . An intranasal Syk - kinase inhibitor ( R112 ) improves the symptoms of seasonal allergic rhinitis in a park environment . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005 ; 115 : 791 – 6 . 151 Adcock IM , Chung KF , Caramori G , Ito K . Kinase inhibitors and airway inﬂammation . Eur J Pharmacol 2006 ; 533 : 118 – 32 . 152 Dominguez C , Powers DA , Tamayo N . p38 MAP kinase inhibi - tors : many are made , but few are chosen . Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel 2005 ; 8 : 421 – 30 . 153 Duan W , Wong WS . Targeting mitogen - activated protein kinases for asthma . Curr Drug Targets 2006 ; 7 : 691 – 8 . 154 Houslay MD , Schafer P , Zhang KY . Keynote review : phospho - diesterase - 4 as a therapeutic target . Drug Discov Today 2005 ; 10 : 1503 – 19 . 155 Kanaoka Y , Boyce JA . Cysteinyl leukotrienes and their recep - tors : cellular distribution and function in immune and inﬂam - matory responses . J Immunol 2004 ; 173 : 1503 – 10 . 156 Mellor EA , Frank N , Soler D et al . Expression of the type 2 receptor for cysteinyl leukotrienes ( CysLT2R ) by human mast cells : functional distinction from CysLT1R . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 : 11589 – 93 . 157 Mellor EA , Maekawa A , Austen KF , Boyce JA . Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 is also a pyrimidinergic receptor and is expressed by human mast cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 ; 98 : 7964 – 9 . 158 Bakker RA , Schoonus SB , Smit MJ , Timmerman H , Leurs R . Histamine H ( 1 ) - receptor activation of nuclear factor - kappa B : roles for G beta gamma - and G alpha ( q / 11 ) - subunits in con - stitutive and agonist - mediated signaling . Mol Pharmacol 2001 ; 60 : 1133 – 42 . 159 Hofstra CL , Desai PJ , Thurmond RL , Fung - Leung WP . Histamine H4 receptor mediates chemotaxis and calcium mobilization of mast cells . J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003 ; 305 : 1212 – 21 . 160 Sommerhoff CP . Mast cell tryptases and airway remodeling . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 ; 164 : S52 – 58 . 161 Schmidlin F , Amadesi S , Dabbagh K et al . Protease - activated receptor 2 mediates eosinophil inﬁltration and hyperreactivity in allergic inﬂammation of the airway . J Immunol 2002 ; 169 : 5315 – 21 . 162 Barry GD , Le GT , Fairlie DP . Agonists and antagonists of protease activated receptors ( PARs ) . Curr Med Chem 2006 ; 13 : 243 – 65 . 163 Cairns JA . Inhibitors of mast cell tryptase beta as therapeutics for the treatment of asthma and inﬂammatory disorders . Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2005 ; 18 : 55 – 66 . 164 Arimura A , Yasui K , Kishino J et al . Prevention of allergic inﬂammation by a novel prostaglandin receptor antagonist , S - 5751 . J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2001 ; 298 : 411 – 9 . 165 Kostenis E , Ulven T . Emerging roles of DP and CRTH2 in allergic inﬂammation . Trends Mol Med 2006 ; 12 : 148 – 5 . 166 Ly TW , Bacon KB . Small - molecule CRTH2 antagonists for the treatment of allergic inﬂammation : an overview . Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2005 ; 14 : 769 – 73 . 167 Ulven T , Kostenis E . Targeting the prostaglandin D2 receptors DP and CRTH2 for treatment of inﬂammation . Curr Top Med Chem 2006 ; 6 : 1427 – 44 . 168 Marshall JS . Mast - cell responses to pathogens . Nat Rev Immu - nol 2004 ; 4 : 787 – 99 . 169 Haitchi HM , Holgate ST . New strategies in the treatment and prevention of allergic diseases . Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2004 ; 13 : 107 – 24 . (cid:1) c 2007 The Authors Journal compilation (cid:1) c 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Clinical and Experimental Allergy , 38 : 4 – 18 18 J . M . Brown et al