1 Managing Effective Communication in Knitwear Design Claudia Eckert Department of Design and Innovation The Open University Milton Keynes , UK 1 Introduction Successful communication between different team members is a vital factor for the success of any collaborative work . Often communication fails and the efficiency of the design process and the quality of the product suffer . The strength of a design team often lies in its diversity , but diversity can also made teamwork problematic . Every person has a particular personality and works in a different way ; each brings different expertise and experience to the task . Design management must ensure that the diversity of a design team is its strength rather its downfall . This paper presents an analysis of the communication difficulties in the knitwear industry , where a number of problems faced by multidisciplinary design teams in many industries can be seen in particularly sharp relief . It proposes management strategies to alleviate some of these difficulties . Knitwear design is the creation of a technically complex product according to aesthetic considerations – the relationship between the appearance of a knitted structure and its structural characteristics is subtle and complex . While being an important industry in its own right , the knitwear industry shares important characteristics with both other aesthetic design industries and engineering design . Knitwear design is shared primarily between the designers , who design the visual and tactile appearance of a garment based on fashion trends and customer requirements , and the knitwear technicians 1 , who are responsible for programming knitting machines to realise these design ideas . The designers undertake the conceptual design of the garment , which as in other industries is usually skeletal , vague and tentative . In developing the knitting machine programs the technicians work out the detailed design . The shape technicians 2 construct the cutting pattern for the shape of the garment and assemble the sample garments . ( In some smaller companies this job is done by the designers . ) The knitwear design team is small compared with those designing complex engineering products , but is typical in different team members have different responsibilities , interests and expertise but their collaboration is essential for the success of the product . In knitwear design significant inefficiencies in the process can be directly attributed to communication problems . This paper points out the multiplicity and interconnectedness of the factors contributing to communication problems in design . Some of these are difficulties in communicating early 1 Normally referred to as “technicians” . The term is changed to highlight the similarities with the shape technicians . 2 Normally referred to as “pattern cutters” or “make up people” . Both terms are ambiguous , as pattern cutter also is used for the person who cuts garment pieces in production ; and make up person also refers to somebody who only assembles the garment in production . 2 conceptual designs to be found in any field without precise and complete notations . Knitted structures are inherently extremely difficult to communicate , so knitwear designers face task - specific difficulties . Visual appearance and technical realisation are indivisible . An expression of a design without a technical realisation is ambiguous , but working out how the fabric could be created is beyond the designers’ expertise and would upset the division of labour . Designers and technicians think about designs in different terms , in which different aspects of the designs are important . Moreover , they are very different people cognitively and culturally . The culture of the knitwear industry hardly recognises these communication difficulties and does little to counteract them . Sections 5 and 6 explain the various factors contributing to communication problems , and discuss potential changes to the working culture that could remedy them . Practitioners rarely attribute their difficulties in the design process to a communication problem , rather than a technical problem . When asked why technicians don’t produce what is specified , no designer has given a coherent explanation of the problem in general terms ; they referred to the difficulties with particular designs . As the problem is not recognised by the participants of the design process , it is not addressed in the academic literature on problems in team working . Most research so far has been based on experiments with groups of people working together on one task , where misinterpretations can be discussed ( see for example Ullman et al , 1997 ; Goldschmidt , 1995 ; Kvan et al , 1997 ) ; or on interviews where the participants explain their own views ( for example Bushby , 1998 ) . Other observational studies have concentrated on other issues ( for example Sonnenwald , 1996 , concentrates on roles in design teams ) . 2 The Study This research draws on observations in thirteen British , nine German and three Italian knitwear companies , made over a period of four years . The interactions ranged from one - hour interviews with designers and technicians , to observations of design activities lasting up to one week . The methodology combined ethnographic methods developed in the social sciences ( see Agar , 1980 ) with knowledge acquisition techniques from artificial intelligence ( see Tunnicliff and Scrivener , 1991 ) , in a model - driven approach to analysing the design process ( Stacey and Eckert , 1998 ) . The study covered a wide range of companies , from suppliers to bottom of the market mail order companies to some of the world’s most prestigious knitwear companies . The study placed emphasis on evaluating assertions from interviews and conclusions from observations by talking to different people in the same companies about the same issues , as well as examining the same issues in competitor companies . The author has also worked on acquiring some of the knowledge , skills and perceptions of the designers and technicians herself , by taking pattern cutting and design classes at De Montfort University , Leicester , attending knitting machine programming courses at Universal GmbH , and by designing garments . 3 3 Knitwear Design The analysis of the causes of failures of communication in the industrial knitwear design process presented in this paper forms one part of a detailed analysis of the structure of the process ( Eckert , 1997 ) , which was intended to guide the development of intelligent support systems for knitwear design ( Eckert and Stacey , 1995 ; Eckert et al , 1998 , in press ) . In this section we outline how the interaction between knitwear designers and knitwear technicians fits into the whole of the design process . In knitwear the shapes of the garment pieces are designed at the same time as the fabric . The pieces are either knitted in shape ( ‘fully fashioned knitwear’ ) , or cut out from rectangular sheets of fabric ( ‘cut - and - sew knitwear’ ) ; and assembled into complete garments in the end . Knitwear design thus combines the scope of fashion design , which is concerned with the shape of garments , and textile design , which creates fabric with woven or printed patterns . The interplay between shape and fabric is the major source of complexity and difficulty in knitwear design . 3 . 1 The Knitwear Industry The textile industry is one of the world’s major industries and the knitwear industry is a substantial part within it . Western knitwear companies are under constant pressure from competition in the Far East . ( In the late 1990s British retailers have put their suppliers under intense pressure to manufacture abroad to reduce costs . ) Like all textile products , knitwear must be designed and produced under tight time pressures . The beginning of a new season in shops sets an unmoveable deadline . Due to the requirements of production and the retail chains’ need to select co - ordinated collections , the design process for a season begins one and a half to two years before garments reach the shops . 3 . 2 Overview of the Knitwear Design Process The designers begin working on a new season with what they call ‘research’ : investigating the coming fashion trends and selecting yarns from which all the garments in a season are made . They then plan the types of garments they intend to create for the season . Most designers begin what they think of as designing by designing fabric swatches 3 , though many will already think in terms of complete garments . Swatches are later combined into the designs of garments , supplemented by swatches developed for particular garments . Designers create specifications ( see section 4 . 1 ) for each of the designs they want to see turned into sample garments , in the form of technical sketches . A technical sketch ( see Figure 5 ) is the conceptual design of a garment describing its shape and appearance . 3 Swatches are little samples of possible fabrics for garments , with new motifs and stitch structures . 4 Start DesignDesign SamplingSampling Modification Discard Production Acceptance Modification Discard Acceptance ResearchResearch yes no no no no yes yes yes yes Figure 1 . Basic Stages of the Knitwear Design Process The technicians then take over the development . The knitwear technicians program the knitting machine and knit the garment pieces . This involves doing a lot of detail design in the course of interpreting the technical sketch in structural terms ; the technicians often deviate significantly from the designers’ intentions . The shape technicians create cutting patterns for the shape , and make up the complete sample garments 4 . The knitwear technicians have often already been in involved in creating fabric samples to select new yarns and knitting idea swatches for fabrics . Designers evaluate the sample and , time permitting , specify changes to them ( see Figure 2 ) . The finished sample garments are selected internally and often also by external buyers . Only once a decision has been made to produce a design will it be graded ( reproduced in different sizes ) , and adapted for production when necessary . The knitwear design process is in essence a linear process . Designers and technicians work independently . 4 Prototypes 5 Technicians Continue Process modify accept yes no yes no Designers Rejection Acceptance ModificationSuggested Time run out START Specification Impossibilityexplained SolutionSuggestions Realisation Impossibility demonstrated AbandonDesign Figure 2 . Modes of Feedback between Designers and Technicians 3 . 3 The Intertwining of Design and Technical Realisation Technical and aesthetic design can never be completely separated in knitwear , even though the work culture imposes a sharp separation through the division of labour between designers and knitwear technicians . A detailed analysis of the influence of the technical properties of knitwear on design is far beyond the scope of this paper . The complexity that knitted structures can have can be seen from textbooks on knitwear technology , for example Spencer ( 1989 ) . In this paper we are only concerned with why the technical properties of knitted fabric make communicating conceptual designs of garments problematic . The capabilities of each individual machine limit the space of possible designs ; only people who work regularly with a machine know what it can and cannot do . What is possible also depends on the type of yarn ; for instance mohair is relatively weak and will break if knitted into an elaborate cable , while attempting the same cable in strong but unstretchable cotton will break the needles on the knitting machine . Figure 3 Lace Wave Pattern 6 For many stitch structures the relationship between structure and appearance is hard to predict ( see for example the lace patterns in Figure 3 ) . The relationship between different stitch structures can be problematic , for example a when a very stretchable patterns is combined with a tight pattern like a cable . The decorative pattern needs to be placed onto the shape , even though both are designed separately . It is hard to predict for a designer how hard it is knit a pattern by looking at it ( see Figure 4 ) . ( i ) ( ii ) ( iii ) Figure 4 . Technical Realisation of Cables Technically Routine : ( i ) Standard Arran Pattern ; ( ii ) Difficult Technical Problem : Three Groups of Stitches Crossed ; ( iii ) Technically Impossible Problem : Cables with Shadows 3 . 4 Computer Support for Knitwear Design Industrial knitting machines are among the world’s most complex and expensive machine tools , with around 100 000 parts . Knitting machines are controlled by programs for knitting garments that are developed on highly sophisticated CAD systems produced by the knitting machine manufacturers . Despite marketing claims to the contrary , these CAD systems are mainly built for the knitwear technicians to program the knitting machines , rather than as design tools for designers . Using these systems requires considerable understanding of the technicalities of knitwear design . Modern CAD systems can generate simulations of knitted structures , but only when the program for knitting a garment or a piece of fabric is fully complete . Simulations provide faster feedback than fabric swatches , but the initial communication problem remains . Designers complain that computer simulation does not give the feel of the fabric , and they can visualise the fabric themselves , but praise it for communication and marketing purposes . 3 . 5 The Efficiency of the Process Practitioners do not normally comment on the efficiency of the process as such , unless they speak about improvements that they have achieved . However the design process appears to be inefficient by the following indicators : 7 • Ratio of Design Ideas to Samples : Ideas are cheap . Each designer produces hundreds or even thousands of design ideas in each season , which they visualise mentally as garments . Only about 50 to 100 designs are specified as technical sketches and about a third of these are produced as sample garments . Of the 20 to 40 sample garments , the retail chain buys fewer then 10 . • Technical feasibility of designs : Almost all technicians complain about the designers’ lack of technical knowledge . Only about 30 % of all the designs specified as technical sketches can be turned into sample garments than can be manufactured at the specified price point . • Time pressure during sampling : All participants in the knitwear design process complain about having to work overtime before presentation deadlines . They often have to settle for sub - optimal design or technical realisation because iterative improvement is infeasible . 4 The Communication Bottleneck The communication between designers and technicians is a major contributing factor to the inefficiency of the design process , because designers and technicians cannot specify their designs unambiguously , in a culture that does little to counteract communication difficulties ( section 5 ) . Figure 5 Industrial Example of a Knitwear Specification 8 4 . 1 Specification of a Design A garment is officially specified in a technical sketch . A particular design only enters the system once this is issued . As Figure 5 illustrates , a technical sketch includes a brief verbal description of the garment , in this case “ladies A - line Tunic” , which is the most reliable part of the specification . It also includes a set of measurements . Designers guess the measurements based on previous garments . They are often an inaccurate description of the designers’ idea . The measurements are often incomplete , because the designers do not know a measurement or leave it out deliberately as an attempt ( not always successful ) to initiate a dialog with the technicians . The measurements are also mutually dependent , for example sleeve length and sleeve width ; and can therefore be inconsistent . In many companies technical sketches are produced in batches and handed over to technicians without further explanation , relying on earlier unrecorded discussions to give the technician a context for each design . 4 . 2 Interpretation of Specification Technicians need to interpret these specifications to create samples or swatches . They trust the short verbal description and interpret technical sketches accordingly . Their interpretation is influenced by the designs that they have produced in the past , which for them are the standard exemplars of categories . With the discrepancy between the seasons that the designers and technicians are working on ( see section 6 . 1 ) , the frames of reference of designers and technicians can be three or four seasons apart . A complete sample garment is produced from the technical sketch . This sample is the only feedback designers get on their designs . They cannot tell whether their garment designs fail to come out as they had envisioned them because of inadequacies in their specifications , or because something else has gone wrong . Therefore they have little chance to improve the quality of the their specifications . Comments on the samples are also the only feedback that the technicians get . As designers and technicians get to know each other over years they will of course get better at understanding each other . Lack of feedback has also been identified by Bushby ( 1998 ) as a serious problem in engineering design . 4 . 3 Mutual Distrust as an Effect of the Communication Bottleneck Designers and technicians are often dissatisfied with each other . Designers are frustrated that their specifications are ignored , while technicians feel that cannot get designers to give them the information that they need . Many designers complain that if they specify a new structure , the technician’s initial reaction is “that can not be done” . Later the technician comes back with an entirely satisfactory solution ( which may be a significant modification of the designer’s original request ) . Technicians complain that they often have to waste time to prove to a designer that a certain design can not be produced , when this is entirely obvious to them from the beginning . 9 Technicians do not trust the designers’ specifications , because they know from experience that the designers often define impossible designs . Several technicians have quoted 30 % as the ratio of designs that are technically possible in a given yarn on a given machine at a given price point . With some justification technicians attribute the fact that designers specify impossible designs to their lack of technical aptitude and knowledge . 5 Inherent Reasons for the Communication Breakdown The difficulties in communication between designers and technicians arise from a number of different factors . Only a complete understanding of all aspects of the problem can inform the design of appropriate computer support tools and strategies . Communication of knitwear designs is intrinsically difficult - harder than in other textile domains . Designers and technicians have different mental representations and thinking styles . At the same time the pressures of fashion and the length of the sampling process mean that the designers and technicians in a company are working on garments for different seasons . The organisation and physical arrangement of many companies aggravates the communication problems . In many social contexts good personal relations can counterbalance communication difficulties between workers with different interests and expertise , but knitwear designers and technicians are very different people who usually have little social contact outside work . 5 . 1 Effort and Commitment in Communicating Conceptual Designs In most design domains an accurate description requires a large investment of effort in working out details , and so a high degree of commitment to a design ( Cross , 1989 ) . Knitwear designers typically produce very large numbers of designs , without putting a great deal of effort into any one . The limited investment of effort in describing each design restricts the ability of the technicians to interpret the designers’ intentions once the design is handed over A detailed and accurate specification of a design requires committing a significant chunk of the designer’s time to a specific design . By investing this time into a specific design , designers have to change focus away from conceptual design : in the case of knitwear designers , thinking about their requirements , their sources of inspiration , and the demands of fashion . 5 . 2 Descriptions of Knitted Structures Sketches are always imprecise and often ambiguous or self - contradictory , and leave scope for interpretation in details . Knitwear designers often use sketches to specify aspects of a design that would otherwise be difficult to describe for example the angle of a raglan sleeve . The rest of the sketch of the garment is often just a placeholder providing the context for the particular aspects that are unusual or important . However , the technicians do not know which part of the sketch contains the important information , and so should be taken seriously and studied carefully . 10 Model house designs are built from cardboard , model car designs are made in reusable clay , but it is not possible to create a mock up of a knitted garment in another material to communicate the design without creating knitted fabric . Only a swatch can communicate an intended design accurately and give information about how to create it . As the fabric simulations provided by the CAD systems require complete knitting machine instructions ( see section 3 . 4 ) , they cannot be used to communicate design ideas . Knitwear design does not have a notation that is both easy to use and complete . Designers therefore point to swatches or garments to specify what they want , and describe modification to them verbally . The technicians have to reengineer the fabric , which is not a trivial process . This is much more difficult when they have been provided with a photograph instead . Designers use sketches and drawings , which show proportions and emergent properties , but require interpretation of details . Most CAD systems ( see section 3 . 4 ) use colour codes for different types of stitches , which require technical understanding and learning time to use , while camouflaging the original colours and making certain parts of designs unduly salient . The only complete and accurate notation is the so - called loop description , which describes the operations of the knitting machine ; it is very clumsy and does not show the appearance of the fabric . Therefore designers often make up their own notations , which only make sense in a given context and describe what they want verbally with reference to other designs . ( The use of these different means of expression and their expressive power is described more fully in Eckert , 1997 , in preparation ) . Figure 6 Colour Coded Structure Figure 7 Loop Description ( Cable Pattern on the Right ) of Part of a Cable Pattern ( Shima Seiki , 1996 ) ( Universal , 1996 ) 5 . 3 Cognitive Factors The problem of communicating a mental image of a design to someone else is comparable to trying to explain a picture over the telephone . It is possible to recognise a picture from a description , but unlikely that a complex picture can be recreated from a verbal account no matter how detailed . But this is exactly what needs to happen in the design process : the mental model that the designer has of a garment needs to be translated into a garment by someone else . As a designer has phrased it : “the technicians need to knit what the designers think” . Because of the difficulties of externalising a design ( see section 5 . 2 ) many designers explore options at the conceptual design stage by generating and evaluating mental images , often without any sketching . They see the emergent visuospatial properties of the design . The designers have to force themselves to think about the structural properties required to achieve the desired effect . They see a design primarily as an overall concept within the context of fashion , which expresses a pre - decided mood . Designers do not think in abstractions ; they 11 think in terms of complete garments or swatches from the time they start looking at yarn and forecasting material . Technicians , who have equally good visualisation skills , think about and describe knitwear in terms of the structure of the pattern , as combinations of stitch types , or combinations of machine operations . For example the author has observed a technician changing a cable pattern from Figure 8 ( a ) to Figure 8 ( b ) , which has a similar structure but looks very different . Figure 8 . Different Appearance of Cable Patterns with Similar Structural Properties ( Taken from Burda , 1975 ) 5 . 4 Ways to Overcome the Specification Problems If designers could specify designs completely and unambiguously , the need for interpretation would vanish . In the early design process it is necessary that specifications can be created quickly and fluently to avoid forcing the designer to commit too early to an idea , thus restricting their creativity . Eckert et al . ( 1998 , in press ) argue that the problem can be overcome by an intelligent design support system , which takes the designers’ customary incomplete and inconsistent specifications and turns them into complete and consistent design specification that can be edited . Figure 9 gives an overview of such a system . 12 Intelligent Completion of Values Mathematical Model incomplete inconsistent inaccurate Specification consistent complete accurate Designers current visual feedback Technicians CAD System proposed Figure 9 Using a Mathematical Model within an Intelligent CAD System to Overcome the Communication Problems involved in Garment Shape Design The designers can recognise good specification when they see them , even when they could not create them themselves . Their visualisation ability enables designers to evaluate automatically generated designs . Eckert et al ( in preparation ) explains in detail the way in which automatic design fits into the work practices and cognitive abilities of designers . 6 Cultural Reasons for Communication Breakdown At present the organisation and management of the knitwear design process , and the working culture of the industry , exacerbate rather than counteract the idea specification problems that are inherent in knitwear design . Some reasons for this are practical ; others are deeply embedded in modern design culture . 6 . 1 View of Creativity In both universities and industry the view is held by some people that excessive technical knowledge restricts the designers’ creativity . There is some justification for this view , as technically experienced designers tend to design to the ability of the machines , rather than push them to their limits by demanding novel designs . With increasing expertise designers learn successful design components which they include in new designs as a way of working quickly under time pressure . However there is no evidence that their creativity as such is restricted , rather that designers have found ways to design feasible designs fast . Many people in positions of influence believe further that artistic creativity is opposed to problem solving ability , and that training in problem solving disciplines harms creativity . To 13 overcome these prejudices it is necessarily to look at creativity in other fields , and recognise that engineers , mathematicians and scientists can be just as creative as designers ( Boden , 1990 ) . These are fields have an understanding that training people in the problem solving skills of their domain can enhance creativity . A wider view of creativity would also increase the respect of designers for the skills of technicians . ( See Eckert and Stacey , 1994 , for a fuller discussion of attitudes to creativity in the knitwear industry . ) 6 . 2 Record Keeping The only record of the design process is a technical sketch , such as that shown in Figure 5 . Most designers initially produce sketches for their designs , which they tend not to keep ; and do not show to the technicians . If designers and technicians discuss designs , it happens in unrecorded conversations in informal situations . Designers and technicians often communicate by describing changes to old designs , but knitwear companies don’t keep many records of previous designs . Some companies keep all finished sample garments , others only sold garments or selected designs . The technical specifications are kept for one or two years and are then thrown out . New designers have to put significant effort into learning the house style . This is highly problematic as many designers don’t stay in a job for more than three years , because they are afraid of burning out and can often only advance their careers through changing jobs . The lack of design records has also been identified by Scaife et al . ( 1994 ) as a major problem in other parts of the textile industry , which has resulted in the development of computer systems for recording designs . Designers in all companies with good company archives comment on how much they make use of them . Commercial CAD systems for the tailoring industry , such as Gerber ( 1996 ) systematically record old designs and make them available to designers as starting points for new designs . At present the obstacle to recording does not lie in the technology , but in the organisational structure of most companies . 6 . 3 Overlap of Seasons - Different Frames of Reference Designers Technician Production Shops Design N + 3 Research N + 3 Sampling N + 1 Design N + 2 Design N + 2 Production N + 1 Shop N Figure 10 Overlap of Seasons 14 When the designers begin their research for a new season the technicians are busy sampling the previous season . Production is two seasons behind the designers’ research . As designers and technicians are working on different seasons , they work in different fashion contexts . When problems arise where designers and technicians require the others’ input they are working with different frames of reference and interpret assertions accordingly . Designers spend more time troubleshooting the previous season than researching the new season , but not in an organised manner . Both groups require each other’s support at times when it is not convenient to the other group . This leads to inefficiency and frustration . Designers and technicians will always be out of sync with each other . However a design process that is more efficient overall is likely to be shorter , so that the discrepancy between the designers’ and technicians’ frames of reference is less . Better record keeping will also reduce the need for interaction and help designers to get back into the mental context of a design . 6 . 4 No overlapping expertise Designers don’t receive much technical training in the construction of knitted structures or programming CAD systems during knitwear design courses at college . Many designers are trained in fashion or textile design and are not taught knitwear in depth . In industry only very few designers are trained to program power machines , rather than just how to enter colour designs . Designers acquire technical knowledge piecemeal through practical experience of seeing how their designs are realised . This knowledge is not systematically passed on to younger colleagues . Many technicians have commented to the author that they would like their designers to have greater technical knowledge ; they think that better technical training for designers would be the single thing that would improve the design process the most . Technicians do most of the detailed design of knitted garments when they are translating the designers’ rough specifications into fabric or shapes . Technicians don’t have design training . They rarely have an interest in fashion and don’t follow design developments . Designers who have attended programming courses claim that they have benefited enormously , because these courses give them a feel for the problems that technicians are likely to encounter , even if the courses are not sufficient for them to program complex garments without a lot a practice . It might be possible to train knitwear designers to program knitting machines , but this would upset the division of labour and increase to workload of the designers so much that they could not concentrate sufficiently on design and research . Given technicians an understanding of fashion is a significantly harder problem , because the typical technician is not interested in fashion . However in the few companies where technicians are taken along to fashion shows or shopping expeditions , they have picked up a lot of the context for new designs by looking at the same things as their designers ( though maybe not for the same reasons ) . A more radical approach would be to recruit technicians from the pool of people with both technical ability and artistic and cultural interests , who are normally drawn into other fields like mathematics of computer science . However this would require raising the status and profile of the job . 15 6 . 5 Getting Hold of Each Other In many companies the offices of the designers and technicians are quite a long way apart . When designers and technicians are moved close together designers notice it as a relief . Designers and technicians often have to wait a long time until they can catch up with each other when they need critical input . Designers are often away from their offices , whereas technicians are tied up with machinery . Bushby ( 1998 ) has also identified this as a major contributing factor to the lack of feedback in engineering domains . Some companies have restructured their organisation and physical layout to place designers and sample technicians in one department in close proximity to each other . E - mail and access the Internet is beginning to have an impact on the textile industry . Perry and Sanderson ( 1998 ) review recent research on computer supported collaborative work , and argue that effective support for collaboration needs to facilitate informal communication and enable designers to exchange a variety of different information - carrying artefacts such as sketches and schematic diagrams . 6 . 6 Different social groups Three main participants share the knitwear design process : the designers , the fabric technicians and shape technicians . They are very different people in most respects , who do not naturally interact . Designers are young university or polytechnic educated women with artistic aspirations in a job that is not highly paid . Almost all technicians are men , who see themselves as working class and have little interest in fashion or other artistic occupations . They are typically recruited from knitting machine operators , and have no education beyond secondary school , even though the job is as challenging as other types of computer programming . They are better paid than designers , which contributes to their generally much higher job satisfaction . Technicians are hard to replace and stay for a long time in the same company . Designers and technicians rarely socialise . They do not discuss problems in casual chat and generally do not know each other well enough to understand how the other group thinks . Eckert and Stacey ( 1994 ) present a more detailed analysis of the gender and other differences between designers and technicians , and their differences in aptitude and access to computer technology . There are exceptions to this pattern , including companies where designers and technicians socialise . Since that paper was written , we have encountered a young female knitwear technician , who said she did not suffer from sex discrimination . Recruiting different people as knitwear technicians , such as women with degrees in mathematics or computer science , would not only ease the gap in expertise ( see section 6 . 4 ) , but also narrow the social gap between designers and technicians . 6 . 7 Power struggles between the designers and the technicians Most companies declare that they are committed to realising the designers’ garments as closely as possible , because the design ultimately sells the garments . However they rarely give the 16 designer formal power over the design process . It is difficult to find skilled technicians , because few people able to program highly complex CAD systems are to be found operating knitting machines on the shop floor . Colleges and universities produce a surplus of designers , and designers find it difficult to get a job . Companies don’t have problems recruiting skilled designers , but sometimes find it difficult to find designers with management skills . This difference in job security gives the technicians power over the designers who know that if they antagonise the technicians , they are likely to leave and not the technicians . Recruiting technicians from the shop floor limits the choice of able people ; however programming a knitting machine is not any harder then using other CAD or drafting systems , and changing the recruitment strategies would help significantly . 6 . 8 Skill Profile of Design Managers With few exceptions managers in the knitwear industry are neither designers nor technicians , but have a background in sales or business studies or no relevant training at all . They cannot assess technical arguments and often only have a partial understanding of fashion . Therefore they cannot mediate between designers and technicians . Companies increasingly try to recruit design managers who have a background in design , but find this extremely difficult . Industry at present offers little staff development training for designers . A new generation of managers could arise from junior designers . If outsiders are hired into the industry it is imperative that they receive basic training in the domain , so that manager don’t – as happens frequently at present – patronise designers and technicians do camouflage their own insecurities . Some companies in Germany employ specific people as intermediaries between technicians and designers either on a design manager level or a CAD system operator level ; and have been successful with this approach . 7 Conclusion In knitwear design , aesthetic design is inseparable from technical realisation ( see section 3 . 2 ) . Neither designers nor technicians understand both aspects of design , which limits what they can imagine as well as what they can do ( see section 6 . 4 ) . The full potential of the medium can therefore rarely be explored . We have observed that difficulties in communication between designers and technicians are jointly caused by a variety of different factors , and have a number of significant influences on the design process . The communication problems in the knitwear industry arise because designers produce incomplete , inaccurate and inconsistent specifications , which require interpretation by a technician . The process is asynchronous so a shared meaning usually cannot be negotiated by extensive direct discussion . At present the interpretation of the specification by the technician is an integral part of the creation of a sample . Therefore designers cannot unpack the feedback they get ( in the form of completed sample garments ) to distinguish the mistakes in their specifications from the subsequent actions of the technicians . As more and more sampling is 17 moved offshore these problems will increase unless a clearer way to specify knitted garments can be found . Computer systems can help to specify designs clearly ( see sections 3 . 4 and 5 . 4 ) . The culture of the knitwear industry aggravates the communication problem , because designers and technicians do not share the same frame of reference for their work and have very little overlapping expertise . Face - to - face interaction is difficult , because designers and technicians work in different locations ; and rarely socialise . Otherwise the author considers the cultural and organisational problems to be secondary to the specification problems . Some fundamental management measures can be taken to alleviate the communication problems : • Send designers to training courses ; • Include technicians in the fashion research process ; • Recruit different technicians who are mathematical or technical graduates with an interest in fashion ; • Recruit or train managers with fashion and technical knowledge , or train designers in business and management ; • Record previous designs and make them accessible ; • Put designers and technicians in the same location . We argue elsewhere ( Eckert and Demaid , 1997 ) that a radical reorganisation of the design process in the knitwear industry according to the principles of concurrent engineering would be beneficial . The subjective nature of artistic design limits the applicability of the concurrent engineering paradigm . However the concurrent engineering approach to knowledge management , which promotes openness , sharing of information and pro - activeness by all the participants in the design process can only enhance the effectiveness of the knitwear design process . Acknowledgements Claudia Eckert’s research has been supported by SERC ACME grant GR / J 40331 for the knitwear project at the University of Loughborough Department of Computer Studies ; by ESRC grant L12730100173 for the MIND project at the Open University Computing Department ; and by Open University Research Development Fund grant 717 at the Open University Department of Design and Innovation . The author is deeply indebted to her PhD supervisors , Prof . Nigel Cross and Dr . Jeff Johnson of the Department of Design and Innovation at The Open University , and Dr . Helmut Bez at the Loughborough University Department of Computer Studies . This paper has greatly benefited from conversations and comments on previous drafts by Dr Martin Stacey of the Department of Computer and Information Sciences , De Montfort University , Milton Keynes . References Agar , M . ( 1980 ) . The Professional Stranger : An Informal Introduction to Ethnography , Academic Press , London UK . Boden , M . A . ( 1990 ) . The Creative Mind , Abacus , 1990 18 Burda ( 1975 ) . Freude am Stricken , Verlag Aenne Burda GmbH & Co . , Offenburg , West Germany , p . 74 . Bushby , J . S . ( 1998 ) The Neglect of Feedback in Engineering Design Organisation , Design Studies , 19 , pp . 103 - 117 . Cross , N . G . ( 1989 ) . Engineering Design Methods , John Wiley , Chichester , UK . Eckert , C . M . ( 1997 ) . Intelligent Support for Knitwear Design , PhD Thesis , Department of Design and Innovation , The Open University , Milton Keynes , UK . Eckert , C . M . ( in preparation ) . The Communication Bottleneck in Knitwear Design : Analysis and Computing Solutions . Submitted for publication . Eckert , C . M . , Cross , N . G . and Johnson , J . H . ( 1998 ) . Intelligent Support for Communication Difficulties in Conceptual Design . Proceedings of Computer Aided Conceptual Design ’98 , Springer - Verlag , Windermere , UK , pp . 267 - 284 . Eckert , C . M . , Cross , N . G and Johnson , J . H . ( in press ) . Overcoming the Communication Bottleneck through Automatic Design , Design Studies , 21 . Eckert , C . M . and Demaid , A . ( 1997 ) . Concurrent Design , Proceedings of the 78 th World Conference of the Textile Institute , The Textile Institute , Thessaloniki , Greece . Eckert , C . M . , Kelly , I . , and Stacey , M . K . ( in preparation ) . AI EDAM or ICED . Eckert , C . M . and Stacey , M . K . ( 1994 ) CAD systems and the division of labour in knitwear design , in Adam , A . , Emms , J . , Green , E . and Owen , J . ( eds . ) Woman , Work and Computerisation : Breaking Old Boundaries - Building New Forms , North - Holland , Amsterdam , Holland , pp . 409 - 422 . Eckert , C . M . and Stacey , M . K . ( 1995 ) ‘An Architecture for an Intelligent Support of Knitwear Design’ in Sharpe , J . E . E . ( ed . ) AI System Support for Conceptual Design , Springer - Verlag , Berlin , Germany , pp . 71 - 92 . Gerber ( 1996 ) . Design and Merchandising , Sales Brochure , Gerber Garment Technology , Inc , Tolland , CT . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1995 ) . The designer as a team of one , Design Studies , 16 , pp . 189 – 209 . Kvan , T . , West , R . and Vera , A . ( 1997 ) Tools and Channels of Communication : dealing with the Effects of Computer Mediation on Design Communication , http : / / www . arch . su . edu / kcdc / conferences / VC97 / papers / west . html Perry , M . and Sunderson , D , ( 1998 ) Coordinating Joint Design Work : the role of communication and artefacts , Design Studies , 19 , pp . 273 - 288 . Scaife , M . , Curtis , E . , and Hill , C . ( 1994 ) . Interdisciplinary collaboration : a case study of software development for fashion designers , Interacting with Computers , 6 , pp . 395 - 410 . 19 Shima Seiki ( 1996 ) . Total Knitting System , Sales Brochure , Shima Seiki Europe , Milton Keynes , UK . Sonnenwald , D . ( 1996 ) , Communication roles that support collaboration during the design process , Design Studies , 17 , pp . 277 - 301 Spencer , D . ( 1989 ) . Knitting Technology , Butterworth - Heinemann , Oxford , UK . Stacey , M . K . and Eckert , C . M . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge Level Ethnography for Design Process Analysis , AID’98 Workshop on Research Methods for Artificial Intelligence in Design Research , Lisbon . Tunnicliff , A . and Scrivener , S . ( 1991 ) . Knowledge Elicitation for Design , Design Studies , 12 , pp . 73 - 80 . Ullman , D . , Herling , D . and D’Ambrosio , B . ( 1997 ) . What to Do Next : Using Problem Status to Determine the Course of Action , Research in Engineering Design , 9 , pp . 214 - 227 . Universal ( 1996 ) . Pattern Presentation Unit , Sales Brochure , Universal Maschinenfabrik , Westhausen , Germany