Available online at www . sciencedirect . com Biophysical approaches to protein - induced membrane deformations in trafﬁcking Pierre Sens 1 , Ludger Johannes 2 and Patricia Bassereau 3 Membrane trafﬁc requires membrane deformation to generate vesicles and tubules . Strong evidence suggests that assembly of curvature - active proteins can drive such membrane shape changes . Well - documented pathways often involve protein scaffolds , in particular coats ( clathrin or COP ) . However , membrane curvature should , in principle , be inﬂuenced by any protein binding asymmetrically on a membrane ; large membrane morphological changes could result from their aggregation . In the case of Shiga toxin or viral matrix proteins , tubules and buds appear to result from the cargo - driven formation of protein – lipid nanodomains , showing that collective protein behaviour is crucial in the process . We argue here that a combination of in vitro experiments on giant unilamellar vesicles and theoretical modelling based on statistical physics is ideally suited to tackle these collective effects . Address 1 Laboratoire Gulliver , ESPCI , CNRS - UMR 7083 , 10 rue Vauquelin , 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France 2 Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , Laboratoire Traﬁc , Signalisation et Ciblage Intracellulaires , UMR144 Curie / CNRS , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France 3 Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , Laboratoire Physico - Chimie Curie , UMR168 Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie / CNRS / Institut Curie , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France Corresponding author : Bassereau , Patricia ( patricia . bassereau @ curie . fr ) Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 This review comes from a themed issue on Membranes and organelles Edited by Grac¸a Raposo and Harald Stenmark Available online 6th June 2008 0955 - 0674 / $ – see front matter # 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2008 . 04 . 004 Introduction Membrane deformation is essential in intracellular traf - ﬁcking . When macromolecules are internalized in a cell , transported from one cell compartment to another or secreted from cells , they often have to bind to a mem - brane . These molecules concentrate in membrane patches that grow into buds or tubules and eventually detach by scission [ 1 ] . This budding event is frequently driven by the formation of complex 2D protein assem - blies termed ‘coats’ , such as clathrin , caveolae , COPI and COPII . These coats are found on several compartments , such as the plasma membrane , endosomes , trans - Golgi network , cis - Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum . Cargo is also thought to inﬂuence the formation of protein scaf - folds such as clathrin [ 2 , 3 (cid:2) ] . However , protein coats may not always be required for cargo internalization . At the plasma membrane , several examples of uptake processes have been described that are entirely clathrin and caveo - lae - independent [ 4 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] . These modes of endocytosis are frequently used by viruses , toxins or bacteria [ 5 , 6 ] , and also contribute to the uptake of cellular factors such as GPI - anchored proteins [ 4 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] . We have recently reported that the binding of Shiga toxin , a bacterial toxin protein , to its cellular glycolipid receptor induces membrane deformation without needing contributions from other cell machinery [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] . These results strongly suggest that cargo alone can sometimes trigger its own internalization by inﬂuencing membrane curvature . We will show other examples in this review of cargo - induced deformation . As the underlying mechanisms are very generic and may be involved in many aspects of cell trafﬁc , it is crucial to propose a physical description of this phenomenon . In recognition of its ubiquity , large efforts are underway to decipher the mechanisms leading to membrane defor - mation and budding . Most biological models of protein - induced membrane deformation focus on the molecular level and ask whether proteins of known structures can induce the deformation of membranes of given compo - sitions . This approach overlooks a crucial aspect of protein - induced budding : cooperativity between protein molecules drives the formation of dense clusters and can generate strong membrane curvatures . In this review , we argue that a physical approach combined with exper - iments using model membranes [ 8 ] can address these issues in a manner that is complementary to classical cell biology , and we describe the generic mechanisms under - lying the process of cargo - induced membrane defor - mation . Protein - induced membrane deformations : biomimetic systems Physical parameters such as membrane tension or lateral membraneheterogeneityareexpectedtoinﬂuenceprotein assemblies on cell membranes . These parameters , which are probably regulated in cells [ 9 , 10 ] , can be controlled in biomimetic membrane systems . Reconstituting budding processes using liposomes with size , lipid composition and tension similar to cellular conditions is a very attractive approach to explore the mechanisms of protein - induced deformation . For this , giant unilamellar liposomes ( also Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 www . sciencedirect . com called giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) ) are good candi - dates ( for an overview , see reference [ 11 ] ) . Their typical size of a few microns to 100 m m matches the range of organelle and cell dimensions . For three decades , physi - cists have used these model membranes to measure mech - anical membrane properties , study global shape changes under diverse experimental conditions and test theoretical physical models . Stimulated by the raft hypothesis [ 12 ] , GUVs containing lipid mixtures have been used to inves - tigate domain formation . The complexity of GUV mem - branes in terms of lipid and protein composition has increased over the past years : asymmetric bilayers can be produced [ 13 ] , and functional membrane proteins can be reconstituted [ 14 , 15 ] . GUVs have been used to study the mechanics of Shiga - toxin - induced membrane invaginations . This protein toxin can be efﬁciently internalized into cells in the absence of functional clathrin or caveolae [ 16 , 17 ] . Shiga toxin speciﬁcally binds to its cellular receptor – the glyco - sphingolipid globotriaosyl ceramide ( Gb3 ) – on the plasma membrane . The interaction of the puriﬁed re - ceptor - binding B - subunit of the toxin ( termed STxB ) with GUVs containing Gb3 leads to the formation of tubular invaginations [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] ( Figure 1a ) . These defor - mations mimic the invaginations observed in vivo when scission is inhibited by different means : energy depletion , inhibition of the scission factor dynamin or inhibition of actin polymerization [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] ( Figure 1b ) . The GUV exper - iments demonstrated that binding of STxB to its glyco - lipid receptor was sufﬁcient to locally produce negative membrane curvature ( Figure 1d ) . Shiga toxin appears to be able to induce the ﬁrst step of its uptake into cells in a process that can be described as a cargo - induced mem - brane invagination reaction . The budding of enveloped viruses is another interesting case where membrane deformation can be reproduced Biophysical approaches to protein - induced membrane deformations in trafficking Sens , Johannes and Bassereau 477 Figure 1 Membrane deformations of GUVs and cells induced by proteins binding to their lipid ligand reconstituted in GUVs or in cell membranes . Proteins are in the bulk solution outside of the GUVs or of the cell . ( a ) B - subunit of the Shiga toxin ( labelled in red ) interacting with GUVs containing 5 % Gb3 ( from reference [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] ) . ( b ) Formation of tubules in ATP - depleted HeLa cell incubated with STxB ( red ) . The tubular structures do not co - localize with transferin receptors ( green ) , classical markers for clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( from reference [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] ) . ( c ) Matrix proteins of VSV interacting with GUVs containing 10 % negatively charged lipids ( DOPS labelled in green ) ( from reference [ 19 (cid:2) ] ) . ( d ) Definition of the membrane curvature sign . The red objects represent curvactants . Bars , 5 m m . Images : courtesy of Berland and Ro¨mer . www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 with GUVs . Matrix proteins ( M proteins ) are involved in the ﬁnal budding steps where the virus acquires its membrane envelope . M proteins from vesicular stoma - titis virus ( VSV ) have a positively charged N - terminal part and interact electrostatically with anionic lipids [ 18 ] . The incubation of VSV - M proteins with GUVs containing negatively charged lipids produces invagina - tions [ 19 (cid:2) ] ( Figure 1c ) . Noticeably , membrane curvature induced by VSV - M is negative both in vivo and in vitro . However , these invaginations are 1 order of magnitude longer than virus particles , which are 180 nm long , and their diameters are also larger ( a few microns instead of 75 nm for the virus bud ) . These differences most prob - ably are a result of constraints that in vivo are imposed by the concomitant presence of nucleocapsids . Invagi - nations on GUVs have also been reported for M proteins from Newcastle disease virus [ 20 (cid:2) ] . In this case , mem - brane deformation also occurred in the absence of charged lipids , although charged lipids enhanced the spontaneous detachment of buds . The M protein examples again show that protein – lipid interactions can induce membrane deformations with negative cur - vature . Interestingly , when Shiga toxin or M proteins adsorb on membranes , they rapidly cluster and form protein domains . Aggregation on membranes is also observed with non - biological compounds , such as colloids [ 21 , 22 ] or polymers [ 23 ] . Several theoretical explanations have been proposed to account for this membrane - mediated clustering phenomenon ( see next Section ‘Protein aggregation and membrane deformation’ ) . This aggre - gation step appears crucial for subsequent function . Indeed , if proteins were to remain homogeneously distributed on membranes , they could only induce global shape changes as a consequence of asymmetric curvature modulation of the external membrane leaﬂet [ 24 ] . Such an effect has been illustrated by the action of enzymes modifying selectively homogeneously distrib - uted lipids in the exoplasmic leaﬂet of GUV membranes [ 25 ] . In cells , global deformations would not be expected to contribute to membrane trafﬁcking . Indeed , such a process would require large numbers of proteins ( proportional to the cell size ) and would probably be prevented by regulatory mechanisms [ 9 ] . On the contrary , protein - dense domains can produce local deformations and require a lower number of proteins ( proportional to the domain size ) . For instance , it was found that enzymatic lipid modiﬁcation within segregated domains [ 26 ] leads to localized deformations which can sometimes grow into buds and detach from the membrane . In the following section , we will discuss possible mech - anisms that can account for the formation of membrane deformations , with a special focus on cargo - induced inva - ginations . Modelling protein - induced membrane deformation A complete picture of large - scale protein - induced mem - brane deformation needs to address at least three levels of physical description ( Figure 2 ) . At the molecular scale ( 1 – 10 nm ) , the properties of the lipids and the proteins and their interactions are crucial to understand how proteins can inﬂuence membrane composition and shape [ 27 – 30 ] . At the scale of a protein aggregate ( 0 . 1 – 1 m m ) , molecular interactions can be translated into physical couplings in terms of stresses or deformations . The optimal membrane shape can then be derived from the mechanical energy of deformation . At the scale of many aggregates ( more than 1 m m—the whole cell ) , thermodynamics can be used to compute the kinetics of protein aggregation and the evolution of membrane morphology . The two larger scales do not crucially depend on molecular details , and obey general physical principles . Membrane phase separation and protein aggregation For membranes composed of a mixture of lipids , lowering the temperature can cause spontaneous phase separation [ 31 ] . Phase separation typically proceeds by the random 478 Membranes and organelles Figure 2 Levels of description of protein - induced deformations . ( a ) Membrane – protein interactions at the molecular level ( (cid:3) 10 nm ) couple to membrane deformation . ( b ) Invaginated protein clusters ( with a curvature (cid:3) 1 / 100 nm ) are characterized by their energy of deformation , and their growth is controlled by protein diffusion . ( c ) At larger scales ( (cid:3) 10 m m ) , thermodynamics controls cluster growth and membrane invagination . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 www . sciencedirect . com nucleation of small membrane domains that grow by attracting more material of a given lipid phase . An energy barrier must be overcome to form a domain ( Figure 3 ) and this nucleation energy determines the probability of domain formation from random ﬂuctuations of the mem - brane composition . The typical energy scale for phase separation is the thermal energy k B T where T is the temperature in Kelvin and k B is the Boltzmann constant ( k B T (cid:3) 2 . 5 kJ / mol at physiological temperature ) . The con - centration of a given membrane component required for phase separation increases exponentially with the energy barrier , expressed in units of thermal energy . For com - parison , the energy of ATP hydrolysis is of the order of 20 k B T . By favouring particular lipid compositions or ordering [ 19 (cid:2) , 32 , 33 ] , proteins can lower the domain nucleation energy and trigger the formation of lipid domains in otherwise homogenous membranes . The resulting domains are enriched in protein , as if proteins experience an effective , membrane - meditated , attraction . Protein aggregation and membrane deformation Protein - free lipid domains are generally ﬂat and can reach large sizes ( several micrometers , of the order of the system size ) [ 34 ] . They sometimes show a slight curva - ture due to interfacial effects . Indeed , the domain’s inter - face with the surrounding membrane costs an energy ( the line tension , Figure 3 ) , which is a signiﬁcant part of the domain nucleation energy . Domain deformation can reduce the length of the domain interface and the result - ing interfacial energy . In pure lipids , this effect is gener - ally quite small and produces much smaller curvature than is observed for cellular transport intermediates ( 1 / 5 m m versus 1 / 100 nm ) [ 35 , 36 , 37 (cid:2)(cid:2) , 38 ] . Protein - induced phase separation is not necessarily coupled to membrane deformation . The addition of Shiga toxin triggers phase separation even when the membrane cannot undergo large - scale deformations ( e . g . high tension , see below ) . When the membrane can be deformed , STxB aggregates into highly curved tubular domains , indicating a preference for high mem - brane curvature . In principle , asymmetrical binding of the protein to the membrane can explain this preferred or spontaneous curvature [ 28 , 29 ] . The spontaneous curva - ture is based on principles of symmetry and is not restricted to biomolecules . Polymers [ 35 , 39 ] or colloids [ 21 ] may also act as ‘curvactants’ , deforming synthetic membranes into a variety of complex shapes . This phenomenon is qualitatively well understood . If one protein forces a given membrane curvature , it attracts more proteins that favour a similar curvature [ 40 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] . This potentially long - ranged membrane - mediated interaction Biophysical approaches to protein - induced membrane deformations in trafficking Sens , Johannes and Bassereau 479 Figure 3 Energy budget . ( a ) The energy of a protein aggregate involves an interfacial energy ( line tension ) , and if the aggregate is curved , a bending energy and the energy of surface tension . ( b ) The energy budget of a spherical aggregate for typical values of the physical parameters . Energy values are given for L = 100 nm . For a spherical bud , the bending energy is independent of bud size . ( c ) The growth of protein aggregates is formally analogous to the diffusion in an energy landscape . The nucleation energy barrier controls the initial stage of protein segregation . Membrane tension controls the shape of the aggregate and influences its growth . Under high tension , protein clusters adopt a flat shape and grow to large lateral sizes . www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 between proteins might be an important factor in promot - ing the formation of protein domains [ 21 , 41 – 43 ] . Proteins - induced membrane invagination may show iso - tropic or anisotropic curvature ( spherical or tubular shapes ) . The protein structure itself may lead to aniso - tropic spontaneous curvature . However , the optimal domain shape is not easily inferred from protein struc - ture and is inﬂuenced by many factors . Proteins may create chiral order in the membrane ( an ordering with - out mirror symmetry ) , which is frustrated in ﬂat mem - branes and optimized in curved membranes , thus leading to membrane invagination or tubulation [ 44 (cid:2) ] . Indeed , cargo - induced membrane tubules are often corkscrewed [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] , which is a likely signature of chiral effects . Cargo - induced budding probably results from a combination of these three effects ( line tension , spontaneous curvature and chirality ) and maybe contri - butions from other mechanisms . Structural modiﬁcation of the proteins or alteration of the membrane compo - sition will provide important insights into the molecular mechanisms responsible for membrane deformation [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] . Quantitative analysis of the stresses involved in membrane deformation is another promising approach , and this goal can be achieved by varying the membrane tension . Membrane tension Membrane tension increases the energy requiredfordefor - mation and must affect membrane budding [ 37 (cid:2)(cid:2) , 42 ] . One can imagine two different responses to high membrane tension . If the driving force for protein aggregation mostly originates from the deformation of the membrane ( spon - taneous curvature effect [ 41 ] ) , protein aggregation will be inhibitedbyhigh tension [ 42 ] . If , as seemstobethecase for Shiga [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] , other driving forces ( line tension ) bring the proteins together , high tension will prevent membrane deformation and constrain the protein aggregates to form ﬂat clusters even if the proteins prefer a curved ( i . e . tubular ) shape [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] ( Figure 3 ) . The effect of membrane tension on the shape of membrane domains is well docu - mented theoretically [ 36 , 37 (cid:2)(cid:2) , 42 , 44 (cid:2) ] , and membrane ten - sion can be controlled in model membrane systems . Measuring the level of membrane tension needed to inﬂuence protein aggregation is a useful tool to probe the strength of the coupling between protein and mem - brane shape [ 42 ] . Conclusions and perspectives Model membrane based reconstitution of protein - induced membrane deformations appears to be a very promising strategy that is complementary to in vivo cell biology approaches , to understand the underlying mech - anisms . As demonstrated by recent studies of cargo - induced membrane deformation , this approach allows the minimal requirements for membrane deformations to be identiﬁed and physical models can then be proposed . A range of biomimetic systems has been developed . In addition to submicron - size liposomes on which protein binding and deformation cannot be followed simultaneously , new procedures using membrane sheets with a negligible tension have recently been developed to detect mem - brane deformation induced by cytosolic proteins [ 45 , 46 ] . However , these geometries are quite different from those found in cells . GUVs have a great potential : their dimen - sions are cell - like and the kinetics of protein association and membrane deformation can be followed as in living cells . Physical parameters and membrane composition can be controlled and tuned , thus allowing a direct comparison with physical models . In the future , different types of protein assemblies ( in particular . coat assemblies ) producing deformations can be investigated . Further - more , mechanical studies can be performed on GUVs , and mechanical characterization of the protein assemblies can contribute to a better description of the aggregation process . Membrane curvature seems to be a crucial issue for protein binding ( for instance , see references [ 27 , 47 ] ) . The diameter of membrane nanotubes pulled from GUVs can be precisely controlled [ 48 ] in the relevant range ( 10 to a few 100 nm ) , and have a length ( typically 10 m m ) perfectly suited for optical detection . In the coming years , they should provide a useful model of membrane geo - metry . In addition , the actin cytoskeleton , whose role has been well established in different endocytosis events [ 49 ] , should be added to these model systems in the near future . With these experimental tools at hand , different classes of protein assemblies will be identiﬁed on the basis of complete physical characterizations at a meso - scopic scale . Eventually , the link between the molecular structure of the proteins and lipids and the membrane deformation that they induce will be clariﬁed . At the conceptual level , the most immediate challenge is to understand the kinetics of protein aggregation . Upon adsorption onto a membrane in vitro , some proteins drive the formation of thin and long tubules that resemble in vivo membrane carriers [ 7 (cid:2)(cid:2) ] , whereas others aggregate into big lumps with no obvious structure [ 19 (cid:2) , 20 (cid:2) ] . Un - derstanding the difference between these two paths , which probably involves kinetics , will be a crucial step in the description of protein - induced membrane defor - mation . Acknowledgements We sincerely thank our collaborators Winfried Ro¨mer , Ludwig Berland , Je´roˆme Solon and Yves Gaudin , who have been deeply involved in some of the work that was discussed here . We thank G Toombes and A Roux for careful reading of the manuscript and interesting comments . Our groups are supported by the Human Frontier Science Program Organization and by the Curie Institute . 480 Membranes and organelles Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 www . sciencedirect . com References and recommended reading Paper of particular interest , published within the annual period of review , have been highlighted as : (cid:2) of special interest (cid:2)(cid:2) of outstanding interest 1 . Bonifacino JS , Glick BS : The mechanisms of vesicle budding and fusion . Cell 2004 , 116 : 153 - 166 . 2 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T : Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 2004 , 118 : 591 - 605 . 3 . (cid:2) Puthenveedu MA , von Zastrow M : Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell 2006 , 127 : 113 - 124 . Different subsetsofclathrin - coated - pits ( CCPs ) withdifferent cargo types are identiﬁed at the cell surface . Interestingly , dynamics of clathrin - coated pit endocytosis can be directly regulated by a cargo , as shown for G - protein - coupled receptors – arrestin complexes . An interesting kinetic mechanism coupling segregation of cargo into CCP subsets and cargo - dependent control of CCP dynamics is proposed for reducing competition between endocytic cargos . 4 . (cid:2)(cid:2) Mayor S , Pagano RE : Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 , 8 : 603 - 612 . Many different clathrin - independent endocytosis pathways have now been identiﬁed . This review classiﬁes these pathways according to their dependence on dynamin and to the implied molecular machinery . It also presents the most recent views on the corresponding mechanisms . 5 . Marjomaki V , Schaible UE : Microbial strategies to exploit host cells . Meeting on spatial and temporal dynamics of the endomembrane system . EMBO Rep 2005 , 6 : 408 - 412 . 6 . Pelkmans L : Viruses as probes for systems analysis of cellular signalling , cytoskeleton reorganization and endocytosis . Curr Opin Microbiol 2005 , 8 : 331 - 337 . 7 . (cid:2)(cid:2) Ro¨mer W , Berland L , Chambon V , Gaus K , Windschiegl B , Tenza D , Aly M , Fraisier V , Florent J - C , Perrais D et al . : Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells . Nature 2007 , 450 : 670 - 675 . The B - subunit of Shiga toxin ( STxB ) induces narrow tubular invaginations in ﬁbroblasts ; tubule occurrence increases on energy depletion and inhibition of dynamin or actin functions . STxB induces similar tubules in GUVs containing its glycolipid receptor ( Gb3 ) . Membrane deformation canbeinhibitedbymembranetension . Atheoreticalmodelisproposed to account for this cargo - induced budding phenomenon : the high afﬁnity of STxB for Gb3 leads to the dynamic formation of STxB – Gb3 cluster domains and to a compression of the external membrane leaﬂet that imposes a negative curvature on the membrane . 8 . Chan YHM , Boxer SG : Model membrane systems and their applications . Curr Opin Chem Biol 2007 , 11 : 581 - 587 . 9 . Morris CE , Homann U : Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J Membr Biol 2001 , 179 : 79 - 102 . 10 . Turner MS , Sens P , Socci ND : Nonequilibrium raftlike membrane domains under continuous recycling . Phys Rev Lett 2005 , 95 : 168301 . 11 . Luisi PL , Walde P ( Eds ) : Giant Vesicles . Chichester : John Wiley & Sons , Inc . ; 2000 . 12 . Bagatolli LA : To see or not to see : lateral organization of biological membranes and ﬂuorescence microscopy . Biochim Biophys Acta 2006 , 1758 : 1541 - 1556 . 13 . Pautot S , Frisken BJ , Weitz DA : Engineering asymmetric vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 , 100 : 10718 - 10721 . 14 . Girard P , Pe´cre´aux J , Falson P , Rigaud J - L , Bassereau P : A new method for the reconstitution of large concentrations of transmembrane proteins into giant unilamellar vesicles . Biophys J 2004 , 87 : 419 - 429 . 15 . Doeven MK , Folgering JH , Krasnikov V , Geertsma ER , van den Bogaart G , Poolman B : Distribution , lateral mobility and function of membrane proteins incorporated into giant unilamellar vesicles . Biophys J 2005 , 88 : 1134 - 1142 . 16 . Saint - Pol A , Yelamos B , Amessou M , Mills IG , Dugast M , Tenza D , Schu P , Antony C , McMahon HT , Lamaze C et al . : Clathrin adaptor epsinR is required for retrograde sorting on early endosomal membranes . Dev Cell 2004 , 6 : 525 - 538 . 17 . Lauvrak SU , Torgersen ML , Sandvig K : Efﬁcient endosome - to - Golgi transport of Shiga toxin is dependent on dynamin and clathrin . J Cell Sci 2004 , 117 : 2321 - 2331 . 18 . Baudin F , Petit I , Weissenhorn W , Ruigrok RW : In vitro dissection of the membrane and RNP binding activities of inﬂuenza virus M1 protein . Virology 2001 , 281 : 102 - 108 . 19 . (cid:2) Solon J , Gareil O , Bassereau P , Gaudin Y : Membrane deformation induced by matrix protein of vesicular stomatitis virus in a minimal system . J Gen Virol 2005 , 86 : 3357 - 3363 . The interaction of matrix ( M ) proteins of vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) with GUVs containing negatively charged lipids induces ﬁrst a clustering of charged lipids co - localized with the proteins . This domain formation is followed by the formation of membrane invaginations showing that this protein is sufﬁcient to impose the correct budding curvature onto the membrane . Electrostatic interactions between the basic N - terminal part ofthe protein and the anionic lipids play a major role in membrane binding and deformation . 20 . (cid:2) Shnyrova AV , Ayllon J , Mikhalyov II , Villar E , Zimmerberg J , Frolov VA : Vesicle formation by self - assembly of membrane - bound matrix proteins into a ﬂuidlike budding domain . J Cell Biol 2007 , 179 : 627 - 633 . Membrane budding has been reconstituted in vitro using matrix protein of Newcastle disease virus and model membranes . Interestingly , following the formation of protein - dense domains and membrane invaginations , bud detachment is obtained in the absence of any ﬁssion machinery . 21 . Koltover I , Ra¨dler J , Saﬁnya C : Membrane mediated attraction and ordered aggregation of colloidal particles bound to giant phospholipid vesicles . Phys Rev Lett 1999 , 82 : 1991 - 1994 . 22 . Aranda - Espinoza H , Chen Y , Dan N , Lubensky TC , Nelson P , Ramos L , Weitz DA : Electrostatic repulsion of positively charged vesicles and negatively charged objects . Science 1999 , 285 : 394 - 397 . 23 . Szleifer I , Gerasimov OV , Thompson DH : Spontaneous liposome formation induced by grafted poly ( ethylene oxide ) layers : theoretical prediction and experimental veriﬁcation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 , 95 : 1032 - 1037 . 24 . Do¨bereiner H - G : Properties of giant vesicles . Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci 2000 , 5 : 256 - 263 . 25 . Lopez - Montero I , Velez M , Devaux PF : Surface tension induced by sphingomyelin to ceramide conversion in lipid membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta 2007 , 1768 : 553 - 561 . 26 . Staneva G , Angelova MI , Koumanov K : Phospholipase A2 promotes raft budding and ﬁssion from giant liposomes . Chem Phys Lipids 2004 , 129 : 53 - 62 . 27 . Antonny B : Membrane deformation by protein coats . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2006 , 18 : 386 - 394 . 28 . Farsad K , De Camilli P : Mechanisms of membrane deformation . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2003 , 15 : 372 - 381 . 29 . McMahon HT , Gallop JL : Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 2005 , 438 : 590 - 596 . 30 . Sens P , Safran SA : Inclusions induced phase separation in mixed lipid ﬁlm . Eur Phys J E 2000 , 1 : 237 - 248 . 31 . McConnell HM , Vrljic M : Liquid – liquid immiscibility in membranes . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2003 , 32 : 469 - 492 . 32 . Hammond AT , Heberle FA , Baumgart T , Holowka D , Baird B , Feigenson GW : Crosslinking a lipid raft component triggers liquid ordered - liquid disordered phase separation in model plasma membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 , 102 : 6320 - 6325 . 33 . Yim H , Kent MS , Sasaki DY , Polizzotti BD , Kiick KL , Majewski J , Satija S : Rearrangement of lipid ordered phases upon protein adsorption due to multiple site binding . Phys Rev Lett 2006 , 96 : 198101 . 34 . Baumgart T , Hess ST , Webb WW : Imaging coexisting ﬂuid domains in biomembrane models coupling curvature and line tension . Nature 2003 , 425 : 821 - 824 . Biophysical approaches to protein - induced membrane deformations in trafficking Sens , Johannes and Bassereau 481 www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 35 . Lipowsky R : Domains and rafts in membranes—hidden dimensions of self organization . J Biol Phys 2002 , 28 : 195 - 210 . 36 . Harden JL , MacKintosh FC , Olmsted PD : Budding and domain shape transformations in mixed lipid ﬁlms and bilayer membranes . Phys Rev E 2005 , 72 : 011903 . 37 . (cid:2)(cid:2) Sens P , Turner MS : Budded membrane microdomains as tension regulators . Phys Rev E 2006 , 73 : 031918 . A membrane domain spontaneously deforms , either because it has a preferred curvature , or because a line tension drives the closure of the domain’s interface . This paper discusses the role of membrane tension in dictating the domain shapes . It is shown that membrane tension opposes domain deformation and that the transition from a fully invaginated ( spherical ) domain toa nearlyﬂat domainisﬁrst order . Asa consequence , a collection of mechano - sensitive membrane domains can effectively regulate the membrane tension upon changes of external perturbation , to a value at which ﬂat and invaginated domains coexist . 38 . Tian A , Johnson C , Wang W , Baumgart T : Line tension at ﬂuid membrane domain boundaries measured by micropipette aspiration . Phys Rev Lett 2007 , 98 : 208102 - 208104 . 39 . Tsafrir I , Sagi D , Arzi T , Guedeau - Boudeville M - A , Frette V , Kandel D , Stavans J : Pearling instabilities of membrane tubes with anchored polymers . Phys Rev Lett 2001 , 86 : 1138 - 1141 . 40 . (cid:2)(cid:2) Leibler S : Curvature instability in membranes . J Phys 1986 , 47 : 507 - 516 . This paper remains a major work in the modelling of deformation induced by membrane inclusions . On the basis of generic theoretical physics arguments it is shown that proteins with a preferred curvature can spontaneously aggregate on a ﬂexible membrane . Curvature is stabilized in region of high protein density , and curvature instability ( vanishing membrane bending rigidity ) can develop for high coupling strengths between protein density and membrane curvature . 41 . Goulian M : Inclusions in membranes . Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci 1996 , 1 : 358 - 361 . 42 . Sens P , Turner MS : Theoretical model for the formation of caveolae and similar membrane invaginations . Biophys J 2004 , 86 : 2049 - 2057 . 43 . Reynwar BJ , Illya G , Harmandaris VA , Muller MM , Kremer K , Deserno M : Aggregation and vesiculation of membrane proteins by curvature - mediated interactions . Nature 2007 , 447 : 461 - 464 . 44 . (cid:2) Sarasij RC , Mayor S , Rao M : Chirality - induced budding : a raft - mediated mechanism for endocytosis and morphology of caveolae ? J Biophys 2007 , 92 : 3140 - 3158 . A general theoretical framework presents the role of molecular chirality and tilt on bud formation . When chiral molecules are present in a membrane patch , this patch deforms to relax mechanical constraints according a ‘chirality - induced budding’ mechanism . A phase diagram is proposed , showing different bud shapes , spherical or elongated as a function of chiral strength and membrane rigidity . Applications to mem - brane trafﬁcking are proposed , in particular for caveolae formation . 45 . RouxAl , Uyhazi K , FrostA , DeCamilli P : GTP - dependenttwisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 2006 , 441 : 528 - 531 . 46 . Itoh T , Erdmann KS , Roux A , Habermann B , Werner H , De Camilli P : Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev Cell 2005 , 9 : 791 . 47 . Ramachandran R , Schmid SL : Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dynamin’s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane . EMBO J 2008 , 27 : 27 - 37 . 48 . Cuvelier D , Chiaruttini N , Bassereau P , Nassoy P : Pulling long tubes from ﬁrmly adhered vesicles . Europhys Lett 2005 , 71 : 1015 - 1021 . 49 . PerraisD , MerriﬁeldCJ : Dynamicsofendocyticvesiclecreation . Dev Cell 2005 , 9 : 581 - 592 . 482 Membranes and organelles Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 www . sciencedirect . com