ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 353 Creativity and Learning in a Case - Based Explainer Roger C . Schank and David B . Leake Artificial Intelligence Project , Yale University , P . O . Box 2158 , Yale Station , New Haven , CT 06520 , U . S . A . ABSTRACT Explanation - based learning ( EBL ) is a very powerful method for category formation . Since EBL algorithms depend on having good explanations , it is crucial to have effective ways to build explanations , especially in complex real - world situations where complete causal information is not available . When people encounter new situations , they often explain them by remembering old explanations , and adapting them to fit . We believe that this case - based approach to explanation holds promise for use in AI systems , both for routine explanation and to creatively explain situations quite unlike what the system has encountered before . Building new explanations from old ones relies on having explanations available in memory . We describe explanation patterns ( XPs ) , knowledge structures that package the reasoning underlying explanations . Using the SWALE system as a base , we discuss the retrieval and modification process , and the criteria used when deciding which explanation to accept . We also discuss issues in learning XPs : what generalization strategies are appropriate for real - world explanations , and which indexing strategies are appropriate for XPs . SWALE ' s explanations allow it to understand nonstandard stories , and the XPs it learns increase its efficiency in dealing with similar anomalies in the future . 1 . Introduction We cannot hope to anticipate every circumstance that a program might encounter . Even if we could , and we built in all the appropriate responses , the changing world would soon make that frozen knowledge base obsolete . Thus learning is essential in programs that deal with the real world . Explanation - based learning ( EBL ) offers considerable advantages over tradi - tional inductive methods , and has been the subject of much research ( for a discussion of the explanation - based approach , see Mitchell et al . 21 or DeJong and Mooney 4 ) . But although EBL systems depend on having good explanations available , the problem of building the explanations to use has received surprisingly little attention . Most EBL programs construct explana - tions from scratch , chaining together basic causal rules . However , this ap - proach is extremely inefficient for explaining complicated situations where Artificial Intelligence 40 ( 1989 ) 353 - 385 0004 - 3702 / 89 / $ 3 . 50 © 1989 , Elsevier Science Publishers B . V . ( North - Holland ) 354 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE many rules might be relevant . Some responses to this problem have been suggested ( for example , using inductive generalizations to focus on the features to consider ( Lebowitz 19 ) , or allowing a program to accept externally provided hints that can help it build explanations otherwise beyond its capabilities 4 ) . But for situations where these aids are not available , an efficient way to construct explanations is still vital . When people deal with new situations , they seldom reason from first principles . Instead , they start from their memories of experiences in similar situations . Those memories can then be adapted to suggest strategies for dealing with the situation at hand . The case - based approach to planning and problem solving has been advocated by a number of researchers ( for example , Schank 25 , Carbonell 2 , Hammond 10 , Kolodner , Simpson and Sycara 16 ) . We believe that a case - based approach is also a promising way to address the problem of building explanations . Just as people use experience to do planning and problem solving , they often use remindings of old experiences as the starting point for explanation . Although remindings of old explanations are sometimes applicable in a straightforward way , they may also be hard to apply . When a person is reminded of a seemingly inapplicable episode , and someone else shows how it suggests a good explanation , we may be impressed by his creativity . For programs to do the learning needed to keep abreast of a complex and changing world , they must have the capability for this kind of creativity : programs will need to revise old explanations to explain events that are not very similar to those they ' ve encountered before , even when the explanations they try to apply don ' t seem to fit . To profit from these creative explanations in the future , systems will also need to remember the explanations they generate , and to index them so that they will be accessible for straightforward or creative application in the future . The following sections describe an approach to case - based explanation which was developed by the authors , Chris Riesbeck , Alex Kass and Chris Owens during work on the SWALE project ( Schank 27 , Leake and Owens 17 , Schank and Leake 30 , Kass 12 ) . SWALE is a story understander that detects anomalies in the stories it reads , explains them by retrieving and revising old explanations , and installs the new explanations in memory for future use . While work on SWALE is still in progress , the system has already developed a range of novel explanations . Because revision of old cases to fit new situations is creative , case - based explanation offers not only an efficient way to build explanations , but also a framework for investigating creativity as an algorithmic process . 2 . Overview Case - based explanation considers explanation as a memory process . We are strongly influenced by previous Yale work on memory organization and the CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 355 role of failure - driven reminding in learning , and we begin with a sketch of some of that work . We then consider the representation of explanations in memory . The need for a knowledge structure flexible enough to support the adaptation process prompts us to define explanation patterns ( XPs ) 27 , which capture the network of beliefs that underlie explanations . Given this structure , an ex - plainer can directly apply the parts of the old explanation that fit the new case , and can identify and repair the parts of the explanation that do not apply . In this way , many of the results of the original explanation effort can be reused . We then describe an algorithm for case - based explanation . Our description is in context of understanding stories with novel elements , and learning new XPs by explaining them . We show that our approach generates a range of interest - ing explanations . Taking our model as starting point , we argue that creativity is primarily a matter of search and adaptation , and we discuss how our process could be extended to build a more creative system . Two appendices of concrete information follow : a description of the types of beliefs and inference rules represented in the SWALE system , and annotated output from a SWALE run . 3 . Previous Work on Learning at the Yale AI Lab Our work on case - based explanation has arisen from a progression of work on memory organization , the integration of events into memory , and the way that information in memory is indexed for retrieval . This perspective strongly influences our view of explanation as a memory - based process . 3 . 1 . Learning and dynamic memory Establishing the coherence of a story is vital to understanding it . But blindly chaining together inferences to build connections can result in a combinatorial explosion of possibilities ( Rieger 22 ) . One way that people avoid this is by using their knowledge of standard event sequences to guide understanding . Our initial work on the knowledge structures in memory introduced scripts ( Schank and Abelson 28 ) . A script is a stereotyped sequence of events within a particular context , such as the standard events involved in having a meal at a restaurant ( wait for a table , sit down , order , etc . ) . Scripts facilitate routine understanding : in familiar situations , people rely on scripts to direct inference of likely events . People must be able to refine knowledge structures as the world changes , but our formulation of scripts presented an impediment to some types of learning . Each script is completely independent of the others ; distinct scripts share no structure . Consequently , learning done in the context of one script has no effect on the others . This conflicts with what we know about how people learn : if someone tries unsuccessfully to use a credit card to pay for a doctor ' s visit , 356 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE he ' ll anticipate that a dentist would refuse it also , even though the scripts for doctor visits and dentist visits are different . Dynamic memory theory ( Schank 24 ) responds to the need for knowledge structures that allow cross - contextual learning . It postulates knowledge struc - tures called memory organization packets ( MOPs ) . Like scripts , MOPs charac - terize event sequences ; unlike scripts , they allow a sequence to be composed of a number of lower - level components which can be shared by a number of MOPs . The basic components , called scenes , describe events which take place in a single location , with a single purpose , and in a single time interval . For example , the act of paying for an office visit to a professional ( such as a doctor or dentist ) is circumscribed in this way . This PAY scene tends to be standard regardless of the profession involved . Although M - doctor - visit and M - dentist - visit are distinct MOPs , they share a single PAY scene . Because the scene is shared , the learning that people do in our credit card example would also occur in a computer program with a MOP - based memory . Dynamic memory theory led to two computer experiments . CYRUS ( Kolod - ner 15 ) models the organization of episodic memory , integrating new epi - sodes into its previous knowledge , and using a range of retrieval strategies to generate indices for retrieving information . IPP ( Lebowitz 18 ) uses an induc - tive approach to learn new MOPs on the basis of newspaper stories . 3 . 2 . Learning new MOPs IPP read newspaper stories about terrorist attacks , using MOPs to provide expectations during the story understanding process . It made inductive generalizations about what it read , and installed them in memory as new MOPs that could guide understanding of later stories . For example , from reading newspaper stories about Italy when the Red Brigades were active , IPP formed the generalization that the usual victims of kidnapping in Italy were businessmen . 3 . 2 . 1 . Problems with the inductive approach Inductive learning has been used in many AI learning systems ( for an overview of some of the methods used , see Dietterich and Michalski 5 or Mitchell 20 ) . However , because inductive learners have no criterion for importance of features except for their frequency of occurrence , they often make faulty generalizations when they deal with limited sets of data . Some of the conclu - sions they draw are very unlikely to be considered by people : for example , when IPP read about two bombings in India , each of which resulted in two deaths , IPP generalized that bombings in India always kill two people . One response to problems dealing with limited data is to restrict a program to considering features that have been preselected as being important . How - ever , this evades the important question of selecting from the many features that are presented by any real - world tasks . In addition , preselecting features CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 357 would only work in circumscribed domains , since which features are important varies enormously from situation to situation . If a car breaks down , the time of the breakdown is probably insignificant . But the time of a 2 : 00AM car accident might be very important , if 2 : 00AM is the time when bars close . What determines relevant features is the causal structure of the situation . Explanation - based generalization allows important features to be selected dynamically , and allows learning systems , like people , to generalize on the basis of single episodes . A discussion of problems of inductive category formation and the need for explanation - based methods appears in 29 , and also in EBL work such as 21 . 3 . 3 . Failure - driven learning While the construction of new generalizations is important , it is also important to be able to recognize and learn from situations where old generalizations fail to apply . IPP built new knowledge structures on the basis of generalizations , and used them to organize episodes in memory . Thus IPP could recognize a story as commonplace , and could also notice novel aspects of a story . For example , consider the following story from the New York Times : An Arabic speaking gunman shot his way into the Iraqi Embassy here Paris yesterday morning , held hostages through most of the day before surrendering to French policemen , and then was shot by Iraqi security officials as he was led away by French officers . The beginning of the story is a fairly routine incident of terrorism , but it is startling that the Iraqi officials shot the gunman after he ' d surrendered . IPP could recognize from experience that the shooting was exceptional . However , it had no way to account for the deviation from expectations . When people encounter difficulties , they are often reminded of past prob - lems ; thinking about them can help point to the explanation . In a dynamic memory , processing failures are stored under the knowledge structures in which they were encountered . When a subsequent failure is encountered within the same MOP , these cases are accessible . ALFRED ( Riesbeck 23 ) presents a model of how failure - driven reminding contributes to incremental learning . In order to understand articles in the domain of economics , the system uses rules that reflect everyday knowledge . If one of these rules of thumb fails , an exception episode describing the failure and the recovery procedure is indexed under the faulty rule . When the next failure of the rule is encountered , the original failure is remembered . The previous case provides information to aid in revision of the problematic rule : if it is possible to group the failure episodes into a single class , the rule can be modified to deal correctly with that class . For example , in one run of the program , ALFRED was given two arguments concerning whether the government should control credit cards as an anti - 358 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE inflationary measure . The first advocated control , since credit cards account for $ 55 billion of the credit in the American economy . ALFRED accepted this argument , using the everyday knowledge that $ 55 billion is probably a signifi - cant amount . A subsequent argument said that credit cards accounted for a negligible portion of the $ 1 . 23 trillion total credit in the economy . Using this additional information on the relative size of the credit , ALFRED accepted that its old conclusion was wrong . The program was then given the input that adding a 10 ~ per gallon gasoline tax would decrease consumption by 100 , 000 gallons a day . This conflicted with the system ' s expectation , again based on everyday knowledge of amounts , that the effect of a small tax should not be so large . This reminded the program of its failure judging the size of credit with respect to the total size of the economy . In fact , the explanation of the problem in this instance is quite similar : since gas consumption is over 6 million gallons a day , the change produced by the tax is actually quite small . Comparison of the reminding to the current failure could suggest the explanation that sizes are relative , and suggest the new rule that we shouldn ' t form conclusions about them until we have points of comparison . 3 . 4 . Using causal structure to select relevant indices ALFRED is reminded only when an expectation fails , and only of situations where the failure was attributed to the rule that failed in the original episode . In order to profit fully from experiences , we should be able to be reminded of old cases in a wide range of circumstances . To do this a case should be indexed in such a way that it will be retrieved whenever it is likely to be relevant to current processing . If the explanation for a failure episode is available at the time of storage , the episode can be indexed to make it available in causally similar situations , in order to warn of likely problems before they occur . Likewise , plans can be indexed in terms of the goals that were active in the original situation , so that remindings will suggest solutions to current problems . This sort of case - based learning is investigated in CHEF ( Hammond 10 ) . CHEF is a case - based planner that devises recipes in the cooking domain . Instead of basing its planning on a rule library , it relies on its experience : new plans are based on memories of past plans . When a plan fails , or it encounters problems it has previously solved , it is reminded of similar past situations . It then uses them as the basis for dealing with the current situation , and installs the new case in memory for future use . ( The use of remindings of past failures to resolve difficulties is also investigated in 31 , 32 . ) CHEF ' s learning system uses causal knowledge to focus on important features when integrating plans into memory : when a plan is successful , it is indexed in terms of goals it satisfies and the problems it avoids ; when it fails , it is indexed under features that predict the type of failure encountered . Such indexing CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 359 allows CHEF to anticipate and avoid problems by being reminded of past failures and of plans it has used to deal with them . Although CHEF uses past cases in its planning , it starts from scratch when it initially explains a plan failure . The following sections show how experience can facilitate explanation . 4 . Explanations in Memory If we ask someone why a team lost a game , he won ' t have to reason from first principles . There are many standard answers for why a team lost , and his answer will probably be one of them , such as : - They were overconfident and didn ' t train hard enough . - They were tired from a previous tough game . - Key players were injured . - They couldn ' t take the pressure . - The opponents wanted revenge . As MOPs are fossilized plans , explanation patterns ( XPs ) are fossilized explanations . The explanations they package may come from personal ex - perience , or they may capture culturally shared knowledge . For example , proverbs like too many cooks spoil the broth and pouring oil on the fire is not the way to prevent it offer explanations of undesirable outcomes . 4 . 1 . The structure of XPs XPs need to include information to support direct application to anomalies , and to have a sufficiently rich internal structure to allow them to be adapted to new situations . In order for an explainer to recognize when an XP applies directly to a given anomaly , each XP must have a component representing the anomaly it explains . In order for an explainer to preserve and apply the useable portions of a near - miss explanation , XPs must include an explicit representation of the beliefs and belief inter - relationships underlying the packaged explanation . XPs should also package simple criteria for when the XP is likely to hold . This allows an explainer to avoid re - analyzing each step in the belief support chain when deciding if an XP applies . Also useful are criteria for whether an XP is likely to be useful , even if it doesn ' t apply directly - - that information aids when selecting an XP to try from a set of partially applicable XPs . The knowledge in an XP can be helpful during planning as well as when recovering from failures . For example , the explanation of an unexpected event may be useful as a trace of a means to bring it about ; the explanation of an unusual action may suggest a new way to satisfy particular goals . This planning knowledge is often summarized in a proverb or rule of thumb associated with the XP . Finally , XPs organize in memory the episodes they have been used to explain . 360 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE Thus the parts of XPs include : ( 1 ) a representation of the anomaly that the pattern explains , ( 2 ) a set of states of the world under which the pattern is likely to be a valid explanation , ( 3 ) a set of states of the world under which the pattern is likely to be useful , even if it isn ' t immediately applicable , ( 4 ) a pattern of beliefs , with the relationships between them , that show why the event being explained might have been expected , ( 5 ) a proverb or rule of thumb that summarizes the situation for use in planning , ( 6 ) a set of prior episodes that have been explained by the pattern . For example , a classic XP is : killed for the insurance money . This pattern can be used to explain a premature death . When someone who is heavily insured dies , especially under suspicious circumstances , people sometimes wonder about whether he was killed for his life insurance . The associated XP follows : Killed for the insurance money ( 1 ) An anomaly which the pattern explains : untimely death . ( 2 ) A set of states of the world under which the pattern is likely to be a valid explanation : the combination of either untimely death or death heavily insured with relatives didn ' t love him or beneficiary is suspicious character . ( 3 ) A set of states of the world under which the pattern is likely to be useful , even if it isn ' t immediately applicable : deceased was rich ; relatives didn ' t love him ; beneficiary is suspicious character . ( 4 ) A pattern of beliefs , with the relationships between them , that show why the event being explained might have been expected : - beneficiary dislikes policy - holder , - dislike makes beneficiary want to harm policy - hoMer , - beneficiary has goal to get a lot of money , - inheriting is a plan for getting inheritance , - insurance means that inheritance will include a lot of money , - inheriting requires that the policy - holder dies , - beneficiary kills the insured to harm him and to get money . ( 5 ) A proverb or rule of thumb that summarizes the situation for use in planning : a good way to get rich and get rid of someone you don ' t like at the same time . ( 6 ) A set of prior episodes that have been explained by the pattern : deaths seen in movies , mafia killings . Killed for the insurance money is a culturally shared pattern . We learn such patterns from those around us , and have them as a common basis for building explanations . Such an XP is like the restaurant script in that we consider it as a CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 361 possibility without examining closely the underlying beliefs . Another type of explanation pattern is the idiosyncratic pattern . On the basis of their individual experiences and values , people build up a library of explanations . Idiosyncratic patterns may package an incoherent or irrational explanation , yet people use them to guide their behavior . A real - life example follows : This generation should fight a war because past ones did : When I was collecting voters for an anti - war candidate , one of the people I contacted began to argue with me about the war . He said that the reason that I was against the war was that I was a coward and was just trying to avoid fighting in it . I argued my point of view but he just ended up saying : I fought in World War II when I was your age and now it is your turn to fight in your war . This example reiterates that the summary need not be a rational conclusion from the conditions , nor is there any reason that the XP has to have the correct explanation of the situation . Yet even when patterns are idiosyncratic and ill - formed , they may be useful to the people who devised them : this is clear from people ' s reliance on them . 5 . An Algorithm for Case - Based Explanation Our model of understanding is the integration of new facts into the knowledge in memory . If an input conflicts with memory , an explanation must be generated to show why previous knowledge or expectations failed to apply , and to generate correct expectations . We propose the following understanding / explanation cycle : Step 1 . Anomaly detection . Attempt to fit a new fact into memory . - If successful , processing of the fact is complete . - Otherwise , an anomaly has been detected . The anomaly is characterized according to a classification of anomaly types . Step 2 . XP search . Using the failure type as an index , try to retrieve an XP that responds to the anomaly type . If none are retrieved , generate other indices to retrieve potential XPs . Step 3 . XP accepting . Attempt to apply the XPs . - If successful , and the XP could be accepted without revision , memory is updated with the beliefs in the XP . Processing of the fact is complete . - If a revised explanation was accepted , update memory with the beliefs it involves , and skip to Step 5 ( XP integration ) . Otherwise , characterize the problems of the inapplicable XPs . Step 4 . XP tweaking . On the basis of the anomaly characterization gener - ated in Step 3 ( XP accepting ) , select strategies for revising the XP to repair the problem . New XPs that are generated are sent back to Step 3 to be evaluated . 362 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE Step 5 . XP integration . If a new XP is accepted , store it in memory , making appropriate generalizations . This cycle is implemented in preliminary form in the SWALE system , which has three modules : the main program ( by Leake ) handling anomaly detection , XP accepting , and XP integration , and modules handling XP search ( by Owens ) and XP tweaking ( by Kass ) . The following sections will discuss the issues involved in each of these processes , and the ways we address them . As a continuing example , we will show the role of each phase of the process as SWALE built explanations for a story that surprised many people when it originally happened . In 1984 , Swale was the best 3 - year - old racehorse , and he was winning all the most important races . A few days after a major victory he was found dead in his stall . The shocked racing community tried to figure out why . Many hypotheses appeared , but the actual cause was never discovered . The SWALE system detects the anomaly in Swale ' s premature death , and builds explanations of the death by tweaking remindings of XPs for other episodes of death . It picks the best of these candidate explanations , and adds it to its XP library for future use . 5 . 1 . Anomaly detection When SWALE reads a story , it tries to connect the input to its existing knowledge ; a fact is anomalous if it cannot be integrated into memory . Part of our effort is developing a small number of anomaly classes for categorizing the problems found . The description of an anomaly in terms of this categorization can then be used as an index into explanations relevant to that anomaly class . On the basis of a list of more than 170 anomalies and explanations collected at Yale ( Kass and Leake 13 ) , and on the basis of the types of tests required to detect and repair different types of problems , we have grouped anomalies into a small number of classes ( currently , 14 types ) . When SWALE detects an anomaly , it categorizes it according to these types . The anomaly classes include : - Role - filler of wrong category . Example : A horse jogging , since joggers are usually human . - Premature event . Example : A premature death . - Planning problems . Example : A plan to drug a horse to improve his performance before a big race , since the horse would be tested and disqualified . - Novel causal connection . Example : A suggestion that the market crash was caused by sunspots . SWALE detects anomalies when new facts cannot be reconciled with its model of the world . To reconcile facts with its model , the system tries to integrate CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 363 them into memory in terms of previous expectations , known patterns , and prior knowledge of specific facts ; anomalies are failures of the understanding process . Whether a fact is acceptable or problematic is determined by the following questions , which guide SWALE as it attempts to understand an input fact : Is the input fact already in memory ? If the fact is already known to the system , no more integration needs to be done . Does the input satisfy an active expectation ? Routine understanding in SWALE is done with a MOP application process modeled on 3 . Input facts are checked to see whether they satisfy the expectations provided by active MOPs . If so , they are stored in memory , organized by the accepting MOPs 15 , 18 , 24 . Installing a fact in a MOP activates expectations for future actions . For example , the fact that Swale races at Belmont places Swale in the racing phase of the MOP M - racehorse - life , and generates the expectation that he will race for a few years , live at the stud farm for a few years , and then die . When an input only partially matches an expectation , the conflicts are detected as anomalous . For example , when SWALE installs the event of Swale ' s death in Swale ' s M - racehorse - life , the time of the death ( during the racing phase of Swale ' s life ) conflicts with the expectations from M - racehorse - life that the death of a racehorse normally happens a few years after the end of its racing career . By checking the temporal separation of events as it integrates new facts into a MOP , the program detects premature event , delayed event , and premature termination of event sequence . If the fact was not expected , can an accepting knowledge structure be in - stantiated , or can the input fact be accepted in terms of other known patterns ? When an input fact is irrelevant to its active expectations , SWALE attempts to instantiate a new MOP to accept it . For example , when the system begins to process the story of Swale , it accepts the new fact that Swale was a racehorse by instantiating the MOP M - racehorse - life for him . SWALE also tries to account for facts in terms of standard plans , and by using patterns associated with role themes 28 . For example , if SWALE is given the input that someone is a jogger , and then is given input about a specific instance of that person jogging , it uses the jogger ' s role theme to account for the specific instance . Trying to accept a fact in terms of plans and goals can lead to detection of planning problems . Do other circumstances make the fact more likely ? Even if a fact cannot be accounted for by an existing knowledge structure , 364 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE circumstances may make it plausible . SWALE ' s MOPs include information about factors that make occurrence of the MOPs more likely . For example , its MOP M - hoart - attack includes the information that a predisposing circumstance is for the actor to be high - strung . For all new facts , another question is considered : Are the fact ' s role - fillers reasonable ? Each input fact is checked for whether its role - fillers are reasonable . As - sociated with each MOP in memory is information on the normative role - fillers ( e . g . , the filler of the dinor role in M - restaurant is usually human , though not necessarily : a recent newspaper story described a restaurant for dogs ) . One of the wild explanations the system generates is that Swale might have eaten something poisonous at a restaurant . The system rejects the explanation both because horses normally don ' t eat in restaurants , and because restaurant food is normally wholesome . This check detects the anomaly class role - filler of wrong category . 5 . 2 . XP search A number of studies have shown that people often fail to retrieve relevant analogies ( e . g . Gick and Holyoak 8 , 9 and Gentner and Landers 7 ) . If relevant experiences are not retrieved efficiently , much of the advantage of case - based reasoning is nullified . Consequently , a key question in case - based or analogical reasoning is how to select indices for storing and retrieving cases from memory . If a case - based system can usually retrieve the appropriate cases from its memory of cases , even as the number of cases grows , increases in the size of its knowledge base will make its processing more efficient : a system with a large library of cases is more likely to have similar experiences to draw on . 5 . 2 . 1 . Using the anomaly characterization as an index For an explainer , a natural choice of index is a characterization of the anomaly that needs to be resolved . In straightforward cases , an XP will be indexed directly under the observed anomaly . If we learn of the murder of someone heavily insured , we easily retrieve the pattern killed for the insurance money . SWALE ' S first approach to retrieval of XPs is to try to retrieve an XP that explained a similar problem . XPs are organized both by the anomaly class they involve , and by the role - fillers for slots of the anomaly ; for a given anomaly type , the XPs dealing with anomalies whose fillers are closest in the abstraction hierarchy to the new problem are retrieved first . For example , given an instance of premature death of a beagle , the program would first retrieve any XPs for premature deaths of beagles , than of dogs in general , and then of other animals . ( SWALE ' S abstraction information is actually a net rather than a tree ; CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 365 any node may have multiple abstractions . The search for XPs of events with the closest - possible fillers is done breadth - first up this abstraction net . ) When SWALE tries to explain Swale ' s death , the system first retrieves its XPs of premature death in animals . For example , animals are sometimes accidental - ly run over . However , this XP does not apply to Swale , since he would have been carefully supervised . 5 . 2 . 2 . Unusual feature search If no XP that deals with the anomaly is available , other strategies must be used to retrieve XPs . Although the causal structure of the episode is not yet available , it is possible to select features likely to be relevant . One heuristic people often use when explaining is coordination of anomalies 26 : if a situation has two anomalous features , a useful strategy for explaining them is to try to connect them . For example , if we see an unknown person in a nearby office , and then hear that a computer disappeared from the building , we may connect them by conjecturing that the person we saw was a thief . The basic principle of coordination of anomalies underlies another search strategy used by SWALE . When an anomaly occurs and the system cannot retrieve an explanation for the anomaly , it examines other unusual features of the situation , and sees if any XPs indexed under them can account for the anomaly . The system determines features to check by comparing features of objects in the anomaly with normative expectations for their abstractions . For example , Swale is compared against normative expectations for star racehorses ( compared to that class he has no unusual features that index XPs ) , and then to racehorses in general ( compared to which class he is in exceptionally good physical condition ) . Using the indices of death and outstanding physical condition , the system retrieves a possible explanation : the explanation of the death of Jim Fixx , who died because exertion over - taxed a hereditary heart defect . 5 . 2 . 3 . Search for folkloric explanations When people have no experience to fall back on , they sometimes try to explain by using proverbs , even though they must work to select an appropriate one and to figure out how it applies to the specific case at hand . One index for retrieving proverbs is the class of event they explain . For example , for an anomalous death , we might retrieve dead men tell no tales . While this does not apply immediately to the death of an animal , it might be possible to revise it to apply . Dead men tell no tales involves killing to keep from being incriminated . This might explain the death of a racehorse who had been stolen , and was killed to destroy the evidence when the people who stole him thought police were closing in . When SWALE exhausts its library of experiences , it attempts to retrieve proverbs that account for events of the type that was anomalous . 366 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE 5 . 3 . XP accepting Once an XP has been retrieved , the anomaly explained by the XP is matched with the anomaly to be explained , binding variables of the XP . In some cases this instantiated XP will apply immediately . In the above example of the team ' s loss , any of the explanations might apply without modification . The XP accepting phase must determine whether the explanation is acceptable and identify any problems that need repair . Since the system may generate a number of explanations , none of which is completely certain , it also must weigh the relative merits of competing explanations . Evaluation cannot be done in the abstract : it must be influenced by what the explainer knows and needs to learn . Thus an explanation should be judged on the basis of three criteria : whether it answers the explainer ' s underlying question , whether it substantiates its answer , and whether its answer gives the explainer the supplementary information needed to respond in accordance with the explainer ' s active goals . 5 . 3 . 1 . Relevance of an explanation An explanation is relevant if it addresses the underlying question that prompts the explanation attempt . Many EBL systems explain situations that cannot be accounted for by existing schemas . For them , the underlying question is what caused this event to occur ? Another class of situations needing explanation , which has received less attention , is those where an active expectation is contradicted . To explain the mistaken expectation , an explainer must answer why did my expectation go wrong ? As an example of the difference between these questions , and of the reason that addressing expectation failures is important , suppose we expect a restaur - ant to be good because a restaurant guide recommended it . If we have a bad meal there , an explanation of the event of the bad meal might be that the chef is incompetent . EBL systems could generalize this to learn that restaurants with incompetent chefs serve bad meals . However , we could also learn from explaining why we predicted incorrectly . Since our prediction was based on the review , a relevant explanation might show why we shouldn ' t have trusted the guide . If we found that the guide always gives favorable reviews to places that advertise in it , we would know to avoid similar problems by discounting its praise of advertisers . In general , a system confronting an expectation failure must try to explain both why the surprising event happened , and why it shouldn ' t have formed the expectation . What constitutes a relevant explanation of an event is well understood : it is simply a causal chain leading to the event . Since SWALE explains expectation failures , it needs explanations that address them as well . An explanation of an expectation failure must show a flaw in the reasoning that led to the expecta - tion . For example , an explanation that is relevant to the expectation failure CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 367 underlying a premature event is one that shows why normal temporal delays were superceded : either by catalyst ( e . g . , bread might have risen quickly because a room was unusually warm ) , or by an independent cause that brought the event about earlier than expected ( e . g . , someone died prematurely because he was hit by a car ) . SWALE has procedures , indexed by anomaly types , to check whether an XP ' s belief support chain gives a reason that the original expectation does not apply . 5 . 3 . 2 . Judging believability SWALE judges believability of an XP ' s hypotheses by integrating them into its model of the world , and seeing if they generate anomalies . Thus this phase of evaluation is simply trying to understand the facts of the explanation in light of its other knowledge . To check the believability of an XP ' s causal links , SWALE first tries to retrieve the rule used from the system ' s rule library . If the rule is known to the system , templates for its antecedent and consequent are matched with the belief nodes linked in the XP , and any restrictions on role - fillers of the rule are checked . If the rule is unknown , the XP is returned to the tweaker for elaboration of the connection . 5 . 3 . 3 . Evaluating detail Even if an explanation is believable , it is unsatisfying unless it is adequately detailed . The level of detail needed depends on the explainer ' s goals . For example , when a car owner has car trouble , all he needs to know is whether the problem is transient ( such as getting a bad tank of gas ) or needs to be repaired . A mechanic requires a more detailed explanation , since he must trace the problem to a faulty part or a needed adjustment . As a first step towards evaluating detail in terms of explainer needs , SWALE has a library that associates role themes 28 with tests for the detail that theme - driven actors need in different situations . For each theme , the informa - tion has two parts : ( 1 ) A list of types of anomalies whose resolution is important to the theme . For example , two types of anomalies important to a veterinarian are animals ' physical changes ( e . g . , weight loss ) and behavioral changes ( such as loss of appetite ) , since they might be signs of a health problem . A detective would investigate anomalies such as premature deaths and violent acts . ( 2 ) For each relevant anomaly , a test to judge whether the explanation provides enough information for a theme - driven actor to respond . For example , a detective would need to trace the cause of a premature death until he found whether it was due to natural causes or foul play . The program applies this knowledge to judge the elaboration of explana - tions . Its criteria need to be expanded so that in addition to standard 368 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE theme - based requirements , requirements for detail could be dynamically de - termined on the basis of active goals and plans of the system . SWALE now has only simple criteria for comparing explanations . Relevant explanations are divided into three classes of believability : confirmed ( all assumptions verified or accounted for by expectations ) , assumed ( some hypoth - eses couldn ' t be verified , but there are no problems reconciling memory with the hypotheses ) , and unacceptable ( problems have been found ) . Out of the most believable explanations , the system tries to elaborate those with insuffici - ent detail , and the evaluator finally accepts any resultant explanation that is relevant , believable and adequately detailed . If no explanation is acceptable , the explanation and a description of its problems are passed to the tweaking phase of the process , which attempts to repair the problems . 5 . 4 . XP tweaking The goal of the tweaking process is to make it possible to use an XP in a wide range of circumstances . Even when a new situation shares few features with the one explained by an XP , the XP can give a starting point for generating hypotheses . 5 . 4 . 1 . Applying explanations to new situations For any analogical reasoning , a key issue is how to map old knowledge to a situation . Work on analogy has presented a number of approaches . Gentner ' s structure - mapping theory 6 assumes that specific objects from a source domain have been previously identified with objects in a target domain , and gives criteria for exporting some relationships from the source domain to the target domain . The relationships chosen to map are those that have high systematicity ( i . e . , that belong to coherent sets of mutually consistent relationships ) . For example , in the analogy " the hydrogen atom is like the solar system , " the relationship more - massive - than is preserved , because it is related to other relations such as distance and attractive - force , while the relationship hotter - than is not . However , as Holyoak 11 points out ; it is possible to imagine many relationships that hotter - than is related to , so syntactic criteria alone are not sufficient to determine which relationships to preserve . Also , Gentner ' s ap - proach implies that for a given source domain , the same relationship with a target should always be favored , regardless of the circumstances . This conflicts with our experience : the aspects of an analog that people notice depend on context . Holyoak 11 suggests that pragmatic context , such as goals of a problem solver , focuses analogical mapping . When a previously solved problem is applied to a new situation , the first step is to generate an abstraction of the old problem ' s statement that is sufficiently general to apply to the new case . This CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 369 mapping of goals , constraints and operators is extended to include an abstrac - tion of the old solution , which is then mapped to the new problem . SWALE ' S mapping between cases is also determined by the problem the system needs to resolve , but is formed directly . SWALE retrieves an XP that explains a similar anomaly , and matches the old anomaly with the one to be explained . This match establishes the correspondence between the two cases ; on the basis of the variable bindings it determines , SWALE instantiates the old XP . Whenever transfer of a previous case is attempted , the mapping may break down : the mapped case may need to be adapted to deal with aspects that have no direct analog in the source case . For example , someone who knows how to drive a car with automatic transmission will not be able to use a manual transmission without adding shifting gears to the driving procedure . Because SWALE maps XPs without any further abstraction of their structure , the ability to repair such problems is especially important . To do such repairs , the system maintains a set of revision rules . The flavor of this approach is similar to that of Carbonell 1 , who transforms a solution applicable to an old problem into one for a new problem ; SWALE ' s tweaking strategies are similar to Carbonell ' s analogy transformation operators . 5 . 4 . 2 . SWALE ' s tweaking algorithm Tweaking strategies are procedures for revising or repairing parts of XPs that are inapplicable to the situation being explained . The types of revisions suggested by SWALE ' s strategies range from quite abstract to highly specific . Some strategies call for operations such as splicing in new steps to provide support for unsupported links ; these may require considerable search to be applied . Others give a highly constrained way of patching a specific problem . Which tweaking strategies are applied to a problem depends on the problem characterization generated by the XP accepting process . SWALE ' S method of selecting tweaks is similar to that used in CHEF 10 to repair plan failures : CHEF ' s goal failure configurations are used as indices for retrieving plan repair strategies ; SWALE ' s anomaly types are used as indices into its library of repair strategies . The basic tweaking cycle is : Step 1 . Index from a failure description to a tweaking strategy . Step 2 . If strategy is found , attempt to apply it . Step 3 . If no tweak applies to the problem , abandon the belief that caused the failure . 5 . 4 . 3 . Examples of SWALE ' s tweaking strategies SWALE uses tweaking strategies at varying levels of specificity . If a failure description gives a very general characterization of a problem , the tweaks indexed under that description can only give general repair suggestions . For 370 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE examl : , , , to repair the problem novel causal connection , which occurs when an XP linking two facts does not substantiate the connection between them , SWALE uses the strategy : Find connecting XP If the causal connection between beliefs in an XP cannot be substantiated , splice in the reasoning of another XP that substantiates the connection . However , for tweaking to be efficient , it is important whenever possible to constrain the alternatives considered . Our approach to repairing role - filler of wrong category , when the role being filled is actor of an action , shows the types of restrictions that are useful . For an action with a problematic actor , the system attempts two types of tweaks . The first tries to retain the actor , but substitute another action for the problematic one . If possible , it uses informa - tion about the actor to guide selection of a substitute action that is likely for him . The second type of strategy retains the basic action , and tries to use characteristics of that action to suggest likely substitute actors . 5 . 4 . 4 . Strategies for substituting an alternative action Substitute alternate theme If an XP depends on an actor having a particular role theme 28 , but the actor in the current situation doesn ' t have that theme , try to substitute a role theme of the current actor that has causally equivalent effects . For example , the XP for Jim Fixx ' s death depends on Jim Fixx ' s jogger role theme to support the belief that Fixx was running , but that theme does not apply to Swale since Swale is not human . Using substitute alternate theme , SWALE examines the themes of Swale to see if any support the belief that he was running . Since Swale ' s horse - racing theme is a support , the tweaker generates the explanation that Swale ' s racing caused him to run , which caused exertion , which over - taxed a heart defect and caused his death . Substitute related action When an action doesn ' t apply , it may be possible to obtain the desired effects by substituting a similar action that is applicable . For example , when someone visiting New York is late for a meeting , we might remember that he was late once before because he took the wrong subway train . If we remember that there is a subway strike , we might use substitute related action to generate the hypothesis that this time he got on the wrong bus . To hypothesize related actions , the system uses its abstraction hierarchy : it selects abstractions of the problem action that fit the causal structure , and looks at their specifications to find other possibilities . Thus although one abstraction of subway could be " dangerous place , " the system would not attempt to splice dangerous places into the explanation , but would consider other modes of transportation . CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 371 5 . 4 . 5 . A strategy for substituting an alternative actor Tweaks to substitute an alternative actor have not been implemented , but an example of such a tweak is : Substitute an actor who could benefit When the hypothesized actor is unlikely , consider actors with goals satisfied by the action . For example , if we investigated the explanation that Swale ' s owners killed him to collect his insurance , we would rule it out because Swale was under - insured . But this might make us look at who might have had reasons to kill him , suggesting possibilities like killed by a competitor ' s owner . SWALE currently has a small set of tweaking strategies . When a problem is encountered , all applicable ones are tried , and the resultant set of new XPs is evaluated . However , we anticipate that there will be many more strategies ; heuristics will be needed to guide more selective retrieval . 5 . 5 . XP integration Once SWALE has accepted a new XP , the XP is integrated into its library of explanations . This allows it to efficiently explain similar anomalies in the future . In order to integrate the XP into memory , SWALE performs two tasks : generalization of the new XP , and indexing it in memory . 5 . 5 . 1 . Generalization The traditional assumption in systems using explanation - based methods is that they have access to perfect causal knowledge of their domains . Given this assumption , it is reasonable for them to generalize their explanations to the greatest extent licensed by their rules . However , knowledge of situations in the real world is usually approximate , and too many factors are involved in events to explain them completely . Consequently , people rarely make explanations that are deductively valid . In response to the incompleteness of domain theories for real - world events , the only generalization SWALE always does is variabilizing of the belief support chain of an XP . Further generalization is only done to the extent necessary to accommodate examples the system has seen . When the system has retrieved an explanation that doesn ' t fit , but successfully tweaked it to apply , the system compares the two . For segments of the belief support chains that do not match , the system tries to produce the most conservative generalization that subsumes the original explanations . ( Generalization based on the comparison of two explanations ' causal structure is also suggested by Kedar - Cabelli 14 . ) For example , when the system accepts that Swale ' s death was caused by exertion caused by running in races , combined with a heart defect , it compares the new XP to the explanation of Jim Fixx ' s death that it tweaked to generate the Swale explanation . Both explanations share the same structure , except that 372 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE Swale ' s death was supported by the role theme of running in horse races , and Jim Fixx ' s death by the role theme of jogging . The system uses its abstraction net to look for a shared abstraction of horse racing and jogging that could substitute for an initial segment of nodes in the belief support chain . It finds that having a role theme of physical exertion supports the basic chain , and it generalizes the two explanations to form the generalized explanation perform - ing physical exertion raised the actor ' s exertion level , which over - taxed a heart defect , causing a heart attack , which led to death . Once the generalized explanation of Swale ' s death has been installed in memory , a new class of anomalies can be explained efficiently by retrieving and directly applying the XP . For example , even though the form of a plow horse ' s exertion is different from that of Swale and Jim Fixx , the generalized XP could be retrieved to explain his premature death . The new XP is also available for tweaking to fit more distantly related situations . 5 . 5 . 2 . Indexing Initial work on explanation - based methods focused on using explanations for generalization 21 . A wider view is suggested by DeJong and Mooney 4 , who propose that explanation is important not just for generalization , but for specialization of concepts . We believe that EBL includes another important task : the selection of indices for storing cases or generalizations in memory . For real - world situations , the problem of applying old cases to new events is best approached by concentrating on indexing an episode so that it will be retrieved in relevant cases , rather than doing all generalization when the episode is stored . ( Our perspective is similar to that of Hammond 10 , who argues that a case - based planner does not generalize the plan itself , but instead generalizes the indices under which the plan is stored . ) When a new case cannot be accounted for by an existing XP , the retrieved cases can be modified to fit the situation , and generalization can then be done to form a new XP that explains both cases . In addition to avoiding overgeneralization when causal knowledge is uncer - tain , modifying cases when necessary gives more flexibility : old cases can contribute to dealing with situations that may not be subsumed by any obvious generalization of the explanation . For this approach to be effective , we need to index cases so that similar cases will be retrieved first , but apparently dissimilar cases will be available when there are no direct solutions . While surface features have a large effect on people ' s retrieval of analogies 7 , we believe that indexing with deeper features , such as causal factors , is very important 24 . SWALE uses two classes of features to index XPs : - The anomaly categorization . As was discussed in the section on XP search , the XPs that explain a particular type of anomaly are organized first by the anomaly type , and then hierarchically on the basis of their primary role - fillers . CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 373 For example , XPs considered for premature death of a racehorse would first be premature deaths of racehorses , then of horses , and then of animals . - Causal preconditions of the situation . The system uses the explanation to identify features that are causally relevant , and indexes new XPs under the event type and the causally relevant features . For example , the generalized XP for Swale ' s death is indexed under death + exertion . We believe that the following types of features are also important , even though they are not directly implicated in the explanation . While we have not implemented indexing of new XPs under these types of features , they are used to index XPs in SWALE ' S initial XP library : - Features participating in anomalous aspects of the situation described by the XP . One reason that Jim Fixx ' s early death was anomalous was that he was in excellent physical condition . The Jim Fixx XP is indexed under the combina - tion death + good physical condition . - Membership in stereotyped groups . Death of a rock star , for example , might remind us of the deaths of Jimi Hendrix or Janis Joplin . In SWALE , the explanation of Janis Joplin ' s death from a drug overdose is indexed under death + star performer . 6 . Creative Explanation Creativity is sometimes thought of as an almost mystical process , where a creative act produces something out of nothing . However , there is a fundamen - tal flaw in any attempt to consider creativity as something that transcends our knowledge . No human discovery occurs in a vacuum : If we really accepted that creative acts must build something out of nothing , we would be hard - pressed to argue that human creativity exists . It seems obvious that to come up with new ideas , we must start with old ideas . Creativity comes from retrieving knowledge that is not routinely applied to a situation , and using it in a new way . Thus the key issues of explanation by XPs , search and adaptation , are also the key issues for creativity . Creativity is not an all - or - nothing thing : there is a spectrum of creativity , going from minor revisions of old knowledge all the way to a totally new world view . Application of XPs can take place at any point along the spectrum of creativity , from the completely noncreative application of a perfectly appropri - ate XP , to the very novel use of an inappropriate XP that must be totally revised to be useable . This section presents some of the explanations that SWALE generates along that spectrum , and considers what is necessary to extend such a system ' s creativity . 6 . 1 . The range of explanations generated by SWALE In order to give an idea of the range of explanations that a system using our approach can generate , below are some remindings that the SWALE system has , 374 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE and a few of the explanations it generates from them . Some are reasonable explanations ; others are quite fanciful or can be ruled out on the basis of other knowledge . However , they show that a memory - based explanation system , even if it has a limited range of XPs and of retrieval and tweaking strategies , can come up with a variety of interesting explanations . Reminding . Thinking of other deaths of those in peak physical condition causes the system to be reminded of the death of the runner Jim Fixx , who died when his running over - taxed a hereditary heart defect . Explanation . Swale might have had a heart defect that caused his racing to prompt a heart attack . Reminding . Thinking about other deaths of young stars , the system is reminded of Janis Joplin ' s death from a drug overdose . Explanation 1 . The pressure of being a superstar was too much for Swale , and he turned to drugs to escape . He died of an overdose . Explanation 2 . Swale might have been given performance - enhancing drugs by a trainer , and died of an accidental overdose . Reminding . Thinking of folkloric causes of death causes the system to recall the old wives ' tale too much sex will kill you . Explanation 1 . Although racehorses are prohibited from sex during their racing careers , Swale might have died of a heart attack from the excitement of just thinking about life on the stud farm . Explanation 2 . Swale might have committed suicide because he became depressed when thinking about sex . Explanation 3 . Swale might have died in an accident when he was distracted by thinking about sex . 6 . 2 . Requirements for creative explanation The above examples show that interesting explanations arise when we try to use an XP that doesn ' t quite apply . In order to obtain creative explanations , an explainer might try to intentionally misapply XPs . Interesting ideas can arise from using old explanations to deal with situations where those explanations were never intended to be used . While using an XP that doesn ' t apply gives a fresh perspective on a situation , the idea of building a system to intentionally misapply XPs raises many issues : Which XPs do you retrieve ? Which tweaks should be applied ? How long should the tweaking process be continued ? As our research progresses , we hope to be able to answer these questions . However , we can now suggest some of the things that are needed to build creative case - based explainers : We need heuristics for the intentional reminding of explanation patterns XP retrieval is the process of formulating questions to memory : we character - ize an anomalous situation in terms of a set of indices , and ask what XPs in memory explain similar situations . When no answer is available , we must CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 375 reformulate the question into one that we can answer 15 , 27 . When no solution is directly available , people often fall back on asking standard questions that give background information . Answers to explanation questions like what physical causes underlie this event ? , what special circumstances made the event happen now ? , what motivates the actor of this surprising action ? , how did the victim enable this bad event ? , or what groups might the actor be trying to serve ? , may suggest relevant factors that can be used as indices for XP retrieval . Though the XPs accessed in this way might not be directly applicable , it may be possible to adapt them . A creative system needs a set of explanation questions for gathering information , rules for selecting which questions to apply in a given situation , and rules for transforming them to fit . We need tweaking strategies that can do significant revisions Tweaking must also be able to make significant revisions . Rather than requir - ing tweaks to always maintain causal structure , we should allow them to make broad changes . Their revisions will not always be successful , but failures produce new possibilities for still more revision . We need heuristics for knowing when to keep alive seemingly useless hypotheses In addition to choosing between explanations generated by the system , the evaluation process also has a more direct part in the creative process . We cannot tweak a candidate explanation indefinitely ; the evaluator must decide whether a hypothesis is worth pursuing . This estimation will always be im - perfect , but the better it is , the more resources the system will be able to devote to fruitful revision of XPs . One heuristic would be to continue tweaking an explanation as long as each tweak generates a better explanation . But the decision whether to continue tweaking should also depend on the availability of competing candidate XPs , and on an estimate of how important the final explanation is to goals of the system ( since that affects how many resources should be expended explaining ) . We need a system with a rich memory of explanations Finally , a creative case - based explainer must have access to a wide range of explanation patterns . There are two ways that people or machines might learn new XPs : by being taught them directly ( as children are given explanation patterns by parents , teachers , or friends ) , or by learning new ones through creative misapplication . One step towards making a computer creative would be to collect an extensive list of XPs that it could use as the starting point for adaptation . Many interesting explanations might be constructed starting with a collection of culturally shared XPs , such as proverbs . 7 . Conclusion Machine learning will be successful when computers are able to learn interest - ing things . Because of the importance of explanation - based learning , construct - ing interesting explanations is important . 376 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE We have argued for a case - based approach to building explanations : that just as people use experience to explain , so should computers . For this approach to be successful , systems will need an extensive library of explained episodes , in a form that is flexible enough to permit revision . We have defined the explana - tion pattern knowledge structure to package the information needed to support revision . Case - based explanation requires heuristics for retrieving and revising XPs to deal with new situations , and we have sketched the algorithms SWALE uses to generate new XPs . In order for a system to improve future performance on the basis of experience , learning the XPs it generates is also important . While we believe that XPs must be indexed under a wide range of features , our current implementation of SWALE indexes them under two main types of indices . One is a categorization of the anomaly being explained : XPs can be used most efficiently when they are retrieved for anomalies similar to those they were built to explain . The other major class of indices is causally relevant features ; we suggest that explanation - based indexing is an important type of explanation - based learning . SWALE deals with incomplete and uncertain knowledge , which is unavoidable in real - world domains . Consequently , our generalization strategies for XPs are very conservative . We believe that the flexibility necessary to deal with a range of events should be maintained by indexing cases under a wide range of indices and modifying the case to fit once it is retrieved , rather than by trying to generalize as much as possible when it is generated . The SWALE project shows that a memory - based explanation system , even if it has a limited range of XPs and of retrieval and tweaking strategies , can come up with interesting explanations . We have sketched issues that will have to be confronted to attack creative explanation more thoroughly : the key problems of creative explanation are the problems of retrieving and tweaking existing explanations . Each is a major problem in its own right , but they are problems on which we can make progress . Appendix A . SWALE ' S Representation of Beliefs and Belief Supports Input to SWALE , and the beliefs and links in XPs , are represented in terms of a limited number of belief types . In the current implementation of the system , the following classes of facts are represented : - Action description . The fact that an action occurred . For example , that Swale raced at Belmont . - Theme description . The fact that an actor frequently performs a certain class of action . ( This is part of the information in role themes 28 . ) For example , a jogger tends to go jogging frequently . - Value description . That fact that a given attribute of an object has a given value . For example , that Swale ' s color was brown . CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 377 - Packaging description . The fact that an object or event fills a role in a MOP . For example , that Swale filled the role of actor in the MOP representing racehorse - life . - Goal description . The fact that an actor holds a certain goal . For example , the fact that Swale ' s owner had the goal for Swale to win races . In the belief support structure of an XP , assertions of the above types are linked by nodes representing the inferences by which acceptance of one fact would support acceptance of another . As described above , the rules used by the system are not deductive rules ; a reasonable belief support chain cannot be considered a proof that an inference is true . Because the correctness of a rule ' s conclusion depends on many factors , people sometimes require a number of independent supports before they believe an event occurred . In killed for the insurance money , either the beneficiary wanting to hurt the policy - holder or wanting to inherit money is support for the belief that he killed the policy - holder . Even though we wouldn ' t normally believe that either one alone resulted in a murder , the two together are fairly convincing evidence . The types of rules used by the program include : - Physical causation . Effects accounted for by physical or biological laws . For example , that running raises exertion level . - Social causation . Effects we expect because of custom or social patterns . For example , that a Frenchman will like wine . - Economic causation . Effects that we expect because of economic princi - ples . For example , that a decrease in supply will cause prices to increase . - MOP sequence . That in a given context , certain events tend to follow others . For example , that in a fast - food restaurant , customers pay immediately after ordering . - Specification . That an object or event belonging to a certain category can be inferred to belong to a more specific subcategory if it has certain features . For example , that a successful rock performer belongs to the category of rock star ( which carries with it default assumptions about his life style , etc . ) . - Preservation goal activation . That a threat to a desired state prompts a goal to neutralize the threat . For example , that working in a high pressure environment causes people to want to decrease stress . Appendix B . Output from SWALE The annotated output below demonstrates our case - based explanation process for a few of the explanations the system generates . ( The trace generated by the program is more complete ; some output has been deleted . ) B . 1 . Detecting that Swale ' s death is premature The following output is generated by the program as it instantiates the MOP 378 R . c . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE racehorse - life to accept input about Swale ' s Belmont victory . On the basis of its representation of racehorse - life , the program generates the expectation that he will go to the stud farm in a few years , and die a few years later . When the program is given the input that he died a week after the race , it detects that his death is premature . Input . The fact Swale won the Belmont Stakes , represented as : HORSE - RACE ACTOR : SWALE LOCATION : BELMONT TIME : TIME - TOK - 1 OUTCOME : WIN Output from processing : Integrating SWALE ' s HORSE - RACE into memory . Trying to link SWALE ' s HORSE - RACE to SWALE ' s active MOPs . The fact SWALE ' s HORSE - RACE will be stored as the HORSE - RACE scene in SWALE ' s RACEHORSE - LIFE . Input . The fact Swale died a week later , represented as : DEATH ACTOR : SWALE TIME : TIME - TOK - 2 ( TIME - TOK - 2 represents a time a few weeks after TIME - TOK - 1 above . ) Output from processing : Integrating SWALE ' s DEATH into memory . Trying to link SWALE ' s DEATH to SWALE ' s active MOPs . The fact SWALE ' s DEATH will be stored as the SWALE ' s DEATH scene in SWALE ' s RACEHORSE - LIFE . Temporal anomaly detected : SWALE ' S DEATH occurs abnormally early in RACEHORSE - LIFE . B . 2 . Explaining an anomaly by tweaking existing XPs To resolve the anomaly , the system first tries to retrieve XPs indexed under similar anomalies . None of the XPs it retrieves are applicable , so the program CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 379 tries to retrieve XPs indexed under other features . To retrieve XPs indexed by unusual features of Swale , the search module climbs the abstraction hierarchy , starting with the node representing Swale , and attempts to retrieve XPs indexed under any features of his that are unusual with respect to the given category . The following output traces the search process : Asking explorer to find possible explanation . Considering SWALE ' s DEATH as an instance of a generalized DEATH . SWALE ' s NAME is SWALE , while a generalized SUCCESSFUL - RACEHORSE ' s NAME is UNKNOWN . Nothing found connecting ( NAME SWALE ) with DEATH . A generalized SUCCESSFUL - RACEHORSE ' s HEALTH is HIGH , while a generalized RACEHORSE ' s HEALTH is UNKNOWN . Nothing found connecting ( HEALTH HIGH ) with DEATH . A generalized SUCCESSFUL - RACEHORSE ' s PHYSICAL - CONDITION is HIGH , while a generalized RACEHORSE ' s PHYSICAL - CONDITION is UNKNOWN . Found JIM - FIXX - XP - 263 indexed under DEATH with index : ( PHYSICAL - CONDITION HIGH ) . The Jim Fixx XP ( that his jogging role theme caused him to run , which caused exertion that combined with a heart defect to cause a heart attack ) is retrieved , and the XP is evaluated . In the following output , the program detects that Swale is not a suitable role - filler for the ACTOR role in jogging , since the actor is normally a human . The program then uses the tweaking strategy substitute alternate theme to find another support for the belief that Swale was running . Checking # { EXPLANATION 183 FIXX - XP } . Found problem : XP - FAILURE TYPE : INAPPLICABLE - THEME ROLE : ACTOR PROBLEM - DESCRIPTION : TYPE - MISMATCH DESIRED - ATFRIBUTE : # { TYPE - NODE 140 HUMAN } BELIEF - LABEL : JOG Attempting to tweak XP titled FlXX - XP . Searching for appropriate modification strategies . . . One strategy retrieved . 380 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE Attempting to apply a modification strategy : " Substitute a theme that is associated with the actor " to XP : FlXX - XP . The belief labeled JOG is a support in the following way ( s ) : It supports the belief RUN via support type MOP - SCENE . Asking memory for other life - themes for SWALE . Associated themes : SWALE often has the ACTOR role in the HORSE - RACE theme . SWALE often has the ACTOR role in the EAT - OATS theme . Seeing whether any of these themes can substitute . . . Swale ' s horse - racing theme is successfully substituted for the jogging theme in the XP . The system then checks whether Swale ' s other known theme , eating oats , could provide support for RUN . That tweak fails . The explanation that Swale had a heart defect , and died when exertion of horse racing over - taxed his heart , is evaluated . The explanation does not conflict with the system ' s beliefs , but the premise that Swale had a heart defect cannot be substantiated . The explanation # { EXPLANATION 187 FIXX - XP - 1 } may be OK , but requires some assumptions . Since the explanation cannot be confirmed , the program seeks alternative explanations . No more XPs are indexed under unusual features of Swale , so the program looks for folkloric XPs . Looking for folktoric explanations of DEATH . . . The explorer has returned # { EXPLANATION 189 TOO - MUCH - SEX } . The explanation retrieved is the old wives ' tale too much sex will kill you . The program ' s representation of the MOP for a racehorse ' s life includes that he is prevented from breeding during his racing days , and then is sent to the stud farm to be bred . Thus the old wives ' tale might have applied later in his career , but doesn ' t apply during his racing days . When an XP hypothesizes that an event took place , but that event could not have happened early enough to contribute to the explanation , one of SWALE ' S tweaking strategies is substitute anticipation : see if effects of anticipation of the event could have been similar to those of the hypothesized event itself . ( This rule is reasonable in a number of domains . For example , if the rise in a company ' s stock is explained by the XP new product introduction makes stock rise , but the introduction actually didn ' t take place before the rise , people ' s anticipation of the new product is a possible explanation . ) CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 381 The problem , and the attempt to repair it by tweaking , are reflected in the following output : Checking # { EXPLANATION 189 TOO - MUCH - SEX } . Due to being a SUCCESSFUL - RACEHORSE , SWALE might be prevented from SEX . Misorder found : SWALE hasn ' t yet reached SWALE ' s STUD - FARM . Found problem : XP - FAILURE TYPE : INAPPLICABLE - THEME ROLE : ACTOR PROBLEM - DESCRIPTION : MOP - SCHEDULING - FAULT POSITIONING - PROBLEM : ACTION - TOO - EARLY MOP - NAME : RACEHORSE - LIFE LAST - SUCCESSFULLY - PROCESSED - SCENE : 4 MATCHING - SCENE : 3 BELIEF - LABEL : SEX Attempting to tweak XP titled TOO - MUCH - SEX . Searching for appropriate modification strategies . . . 2 strategies retrieved . Will try each in turn . Attempting to apply a modification strategy : " Try substituting anticipating action for action itself " to XP : TOO - MUCH - SEX . This tweak generates the explanation that Swale ' s death was caused by thinking of future sex . The other tweaking strategy tried , substitute a theme that is associated with the actor for the XP ' s theme of sex , fails to yield possible causes of death . The XP death caused by thinking of sex is then evaluated . The connection between thinking of sex and death is not substantiated : Checking # { EXPLANATION 190 TOO - MUCH - SEX - I } . Explanation has unconvincing support . Attempting to tweak XP titled TOO - MUCH - SEX - 1 . Searching for appropriate modification strategies . . . One strategy retrieved . Attempting to apply a modification strategy : 382 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE " Splice in another explanation pattern to explain a connection " to XP : TOO - MUCH - SEX - 1 . To construct a link , the program chains forward one step from sex to its effects , and tries to retrieve XPs linking them to death . One effect of thinking of sex is depression ( if you ' re thinking about problems in your love life ) : Looking for an XP to connect : ? X ? ' s VERY - LOW EMOTIONAL - STATE . . . with . . . ? X ? ' s DEATH Found an XP to connect ? X ? ' s VERY - LOW EMOTIONAL - STATE to ? X ? ' s DEATH : XP is # { XP 194 DISTRAUGHT - SUICIDE } The resultant XP is that Swale was depressed because of thinking about sex , and he committed suicide . From distraction and excitement , two other possible effects of thinking of sex , the program generates the explanations that Swale might have died from an accident caused by his being distracted , or that he might have died from a heart attack caused by excitement . The three new XPs are then evaluated . Although none of the new XPs can be confirmed , the attempt to retrieve more potential XPs is unsuccessful , so the program selects the best of the candidate XPs . All of the XPs are judged relevant to Swale ' s death , since each suggests a new factor intervening to cause death before old age . When the system judges believability , death from suicide is ruled out ( suicide is motivated by anticipat - ing good effects from death , while the program assumes that animals are only aware of the effects of events they have already experienced ) . Accidental death is ruled out because racehorses are carefully supervised . Death from being excited and having a heart attack is possible . But since Swale ' s becoming excited is an unsubstantiated hypothesis , while his running can be confirmed on the basis of his racing role theme , the explanation heart attack caused by running and a heart defect is preferred . Finally , detail must be evaluated . In the output below , the program evaluates detail with respect to the detective ' s role theme : Checking sufficiency of explanation for detective ' s rote theme . Anomaly is a negative health change , so adequate detail is important to detective . Checking whether the explanation traces SWALE ' s DEAD HEALTH to natural causes , to an accident , or to a crime and suspect . Explanation hypothesizes ORGAN - FAILURE as a natural cause : CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 383 HEART - 1078 ' s M - HEART - AI - I ' ACK . It also shows a physical - result chain between this cause and SWALE ' s DEAD HEALTH . Consequently , level of detail is acceptable . Conclusion : the explanation is ACCEPTABLE . After the explanation is accepted , the old and new XPs are generalized : Looking at possible generalization of original and tweaked XPs . Looking for a generalization of JOG and HORSE - RACE which will support the same causal chains . The theme of actor in PHYSICAL - EXERTION accounts for all necessary facts . Installing generalized XP . Indexing the XP under the anomaly class it explains . Installing a class of specializations of DEATH explainable by FIXX - XP - I . Adding to memory the facts implicit in # { EXPLANATION 187 FIXX - XP - 1 } . B . 3 . Using the new XP Since the new XP has been installed in memory , SWALE can retrieve it and apply it without modification to another story in which it detects a similar anomaly . The following output was generated in processing the story of a racehorse named Last Chance Louie , who died a few weeks after the Kentucky Derby . When the anomaly of Louie ' s premature death is detected , three XPs of similar anomalies are retrieved from the program ' s XP library . Death from exertion combined with heart defect is indexed under premature death of an actor with a role theme of exertion , while death by being run over explains the premature death of an animal , and death from illness explains the death of any living thing . Since the exertion theme gives a more specific characterization of a racehorse than animal or living thing , the first XP SWALE tries is death from exertion combined with heart defect . This XP applies without revision . Temporal anomaly detected : LAST - CHANCE - LOUIE ' S DEATH occurs abnormally early in RACEHORSE - LIFE Trying to pull up XPs indexed by the anomaly . Seeing if one of these XPs is relevant : FIXX - XP - 1 384 R . C . SCHANK AND D . B . LEAKE XP - EARLY - DEATH - FROM - RUN - OVER XP - EARLY - DEATH - FROM - ILLNESS Checking # { EXPLANATION 209 FlXX - XP - 1 } . The XP is accepted . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We would like to thank Chris Riesbeck and Alex Kass for helpful comments on a draft of this paper . This work is supported in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research , under grant 85 - 0343 , and by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency , monitored by the Office of Naval Research under contract N00014 - 82 - K - 0149 . REFERENCES 1 . Carbonell , J . G . , Learning by analogy : Formulating and generalizing plans from past ex - perience , in : R . S . Michalski , J . G . CarboneU and T . M . Mitchell ( Eds . ) , Machine Learning : An Artificial Intelligence Approach ( Tioga , Palo Alto , CA , 1983 ) . 2 . Carbonell , J . G . , Derivational analogy : A theory of reconstructive problem solving and expertise acquisition , in : R . S . Michalski , J . G . Carbonell and T . M . Mitchell ( Eds . ) , Machine Learning : An Artificial Intelligence Approach 2 ( Morgan Kaufmann , Los Altos , CA , 1986 ) 371 - 392 . 3 . Cullingford , R . , Script application : Computer understanding of newspaper stories , Ph . D . Thesis , Tech . Rept . 116 , Yale University , New Haven , CT ( 1978 ) . 4 . DeJong , J . and Mooney , R . , Explanation - based learning : An alternative view , Mach . Learn - ing 1 ( 1986 ) 145 - 176 . 5 . Dietterich , T . and Michalski , R . , A comparative review of selected methods for learning from examples , in : R . S . Michalski , J . G . Carbonell and T . M . Mitchell ( Eds . ) , Machine Learning : An Artificial Intelligence Approach ( Tioga , Paio Alto , CA , 1983 ) 41 - 81 . 6 . Gentner , D . , Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy , Cognitive Psychol . 7 ( 1983 ) 155 - 170 . 7 . Gentner , D . and Landers , R . , Analogical reminding : A good match is hard to find , in : Proceedings IEEE 1985 International Conference on Systems , Man and Cybernetics ( 1985 ) 607ff . 8 . Gick , M . L . and Holyoak , K . J . , Analogical problem solving , Cognitive Psychol . 12 ( 1980 ) 306 - 355 . 9 . Gick , M . L . and Holyoak , K . J . , Schema induction and analogical transfer , Cognitive Psychol . 15 ( 1983 ) 1 - 38 . 10 . Hammond , K . J . , Case - based planning : An integrated theory of planning , learning and memory , Ph . D . Thesis , Tech . Rept . 488 , Yale University , New Haven , CT ( 1986 ) . 11 . Holyoak , K . J . , The pragmatics of analogical transfer , in : G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The Psychology of Learning and Motivation ( Academic Press , Orlando , FL , 1985 ) . 12 . Kass , A . , Modifying explanations to understand stories , in : Proceedings Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , Amherst , MA ( 1986 ) . 13 . Kass , A . and Leake , D . B . , Types of explanations , Tech . Rept . 523 , Yale University , Department of Computer Science , New Haven , CT ( 1987 ) . 14 . Kedar - Cabelli , S . T . , Purpose - directed analogy , in : Proceedings Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , Irvine , CA ( 1985 ) . 15 . Koiodner , J . L . , Retrieval and organizational strategies in conceptual memory : A computer model , Ph . D . Thesis , Tech . Rept . 187 , Yale University , New Haven , CT ( 1980 ) . CASE - BASED EXPLANATION 385 16 . Kolodner , J . , Simpson , R . and Sycara , K . , A process model of case - based reasoning in problem solving , in : A . Joshi ( Ed . ) , Proceedings IJCA1 - 85 , Los Angeles , CA ( 1985 ) 284 - 290 . 17 . Leake , D . B . and Owens , C . , Organizing memory for explanation , in : Proceedings Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , Amherst , MA ( 1986 ) . 18 . Lebowitz , M . , Generalization and memory in an integrated understanding system , Ph . D . Thesis , Tech . Rept . 186 , Yale University , New Haven , CT ( 1980 ) . 19 . Lebowitz , M . , Integrated learning : Controlling explanation , Cognitive Sci . 10 ( 1986 ) 219 - 240 . 20 . Mitchell , T . M . , Generalization as search , Artificial Intelligence 18 ( 1982 ) 203 - 226 . 21 . Mitchell , T . M . , Keller , R . M . and Kedar - Cabelli , S . T . , Explanation - based generalization : A unifying view , Mach , Learning 1 ( 1986 ) 47 - 80 . 22 . Rieger , C . , Conceptual memory and inference , in : R . C . Schank ( Ed . ) , Conceptual Information Processing ( North - Holland , Amsterdam , 1975 ) . 23 . Riesbeck , C . K . , Failure - driven reminding for incremental learning , in : Proceedings IJCAI - 81 , Vancouver , BC ( 1981 ) 115 - 120 . 24 . Schank , R . C . , Dynamic Memory : A Theory of Learning in Computers and People ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1982 ) . 25 . Schank , R . C . , The current state of AI : One man ' s opinion , AI Mag . 4 ( 1 ) ( 1983 ) 3 - 8 . 26 . Schank , R . C . , Explanation : A first pass , Tech . Rept . 330 , Yale University , Department of Computer Science , New Haven , CT ( 1984 ) . 27 . Schank , R . C . , Explanation Patterns : Understanding Mechanically and Creatively ( Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1986 ) . 28 . Schank , R . C . and Abelson , R . , Scripts , Plans , Goals and Understanding ( Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1977 ) . 29 . Schank , R . C . , Collins , G . and Hunter , L . , Transcending inductive category formation in learning , Behav . Brain Sci . 9 ( 4 ) ( 1986 ) . 30 . Schank , R . C . and Leake , D . B . , Computer understanding and creativity , in : H . - J . Kugler ( Ed . ) , Information Processing 86 ( Elsevier Science Publishers B . V . ( North - Holland ) , Am - sterdam , 1986 ) 335 - 341 . 31 . Simpson , R . L . , A computer model of case - based reasoning in problem - solving : An investiga - tion in the domain of dispute mediation , Ph . D . Thesis , School of Information and Computer Science , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA ( 1985 ) . 32 . Sycara , E . P . , Resolving adversarial conflicts : An approach integrating case - based and analytic methods , Ph . D . Thesis , School of Information and Computer Science , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA ( 1987 ) .