Figure S1 Figure S1 . Endocytosis controls for Dynasore treatment . A ) Representative images of transferrin uptake ( left panels ) and cholera toxin B subunit uptake ( right panels ) with DMSO ( as control ) or Dynasore . B ) Quantification of inhibition of transferrin and cholera toxin B subunit uptake by Dynasore treatment . Dynasore inhibited transferrin uptake by 60 % and inhibited cholera toxin uptake by 52 % . n = 60 cells per treatment . Figure S2 Figure S2 . Imaging of clathrin - dsRed and EGFR - GFP in cells with no EGF stimulation . Scale bars are 10 µm . Figure S3 Figure S3 . Controls for α - adaptin and caveolin1 siRNA . A ) Western blot analysis of α - adaptin and caveolin1 knock - down in siRNA treated cells . B ) Representative images and quantification of transferrin uptake and cholera toxin B subunit uptake inhibition in siRNA treated cells . Inhibition of transferrin uptake in α - adaptin siRNA treated cells ( 45 % ) and inhibition of cholera toxin B subunit uptake in caveolin1 siRNA treated cells ( 50 % ) . n = 3 for knockdown analysis , n = 60 cells per treatment for transferring and cholera toxin uptake assays . Figure S4 Figure S4 . Colocalisation analysis of focal adhesion markers in migrating cells . Representative image showing a high degree of colocalisation between paxillin - mRFP and GFP - β3 - integrin . Figure S5 Figure S5 . Lack of colocalisation between endocytosis markers and focal adhesions . A ) Representative images of paxillin - mRFP and clathrin - GFP in migrating cells . Scale bars are 10 µm . Kymograph to show lack of colocalisation between paxillin - mRFP labelled focal adhesions and clathrin - GFP over time . A 10 µm line was drawn across two disassembling focal adhesions and a kymograph across this region demonstrated no colocalisation of clathrin during focal adhesion disassembly . B ) Representative image showing a lack of colocalisation between caveolin1 - mRFP and GFP - β3 - integrin . Scale bars are 10 µm . Arrows show direction of migration .