www . nature . com / nature Vol 435 | Issue no . 7045 | 23 June 2005 1003 In praise of soft science ‘Hard’ scientists should stop looking down their noses at social scientists , and instead share methods that could help them address pressing societal problems . I t is the conventional wisdom in the biological and physical sci - ences , and within research agencies , that the social sciences are , well , ‘soft’ , and lacking in methodological rigour . That’s why it is arresting that the US National Science Foundation’s prestigious Alan T . Waterman award for young scientists has gone this year to Dalton Conley , a sociologist at New York University ( see page 1024 ) . Conley specializes in the detailed study of economic outcomes among underprivileged groups , and says he avoids research on atti - tudes because they can’t be measured accurately . Research agencies in the United States and elsewhere need to support more social sci - entists like him , because their work can potentially make a valuable contribution to the study of important societal problems . Take , for example , climate change and biodiversity loss , two global environmental problems for which human behaviour is a significant driver . Research on these issues tends to focus on the physical nature of the phenomena in question . Study of whatever underlies the behaviour itself is too often regarded as ‘soft’ science and dismissed as second - rate . Or consider the relationship between biomedical research and public health . The United States has constructed a well - funded and carefully calibrated system to research and develop the best pharmaceuticals and medical equipment that modern science can provide . But what good is that if patients don’t take their drugs correctly , or pharmacists routinely misread a doctor’s handwriting ? A 1999 US Institute of Medicine study found that medical errors — human errors — kill as many as 98 , 000 people every year , more than the number who die from traffic accidents , breast cancer or HIV / AIDS . Shouldn’t psychology and sociology be better harnessed to address this problem ? Even when social science is confident in its assertions , it often feels that it gets no respect from the outside world . Writing in the current issue of the American Sociological Association magazine Contexts , for example , Harold Wilensky , a political scientist at the University of California , Berkeley , says that social scientists have identified specific , practical solutions for problems such as crime prevention and access to health care . But their advice is largely ignored by US policy - makers , Wilensky argues , adding that governments in north - ern Europe and Japan have a better track record of implementing social scientists’ findings . It can be argued , of course , that social scientists have brought much of this upon themselves . A lot of their work is politically contentious by its very nature , and the spread of what can be loosely termed ‘relativism’ has reduced their clout . With so many gifted amateurs working their territory , social scientists have a tougher time asserting the unique nature of their expertise than do astro - physicists , for example . Few of us know much about the dynamics of the cosmos , but we all know plenty about human nature — or at least we think we do . So the onus falls on the social scientists themselves to hone their methods and ensure that they are ready to stand up to external scrutiny . The National Science Foundation has recognized the need to strengthen methodology in the social sciences . Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 , it has also , to its credit , devoted con - siderable effort to increasing the resources available to its directorate of social , behavioural and economic sciences . On the campuses , meanwhile , ‘hard’ scientists need to get over their disdain for their ‘soft’ colleagues . The study of society can’t just be left to poets and politicians . As the almost boundless complexity of physical and biological systems becomes increasingly apparent , along with the pressing need to better understand patterns of human behaviour , now is as good at time as any for a rapprochement between the two wings of the scientific academy . ■ Not - so - deep impact Research assessment rests too heavily on the inflated status of the impact factor . E very year at the end of June , scientific publishers’ eyes turn to Philadelphia , where the Institute for Scientific Information ( ISI ) releases a snippet of data that they crave : the impact factor of each journal . In due course , bureaucrats in research agencies will roll the impact figures into their performance indicators , and those sci - entists who worry about such things will quietly note which journal’s number wins them the most brownie points . Attempts to quantify the quality of science are always fraught with difficulty , and the journal impact factors are among the few numbers to persist . The result is an overemphasis of what is really a limited metric . To obtain the latest impact factors , which were released last week , the ISI number - crunchers added the total number of citations from all the monitored journals during 2004 to items in the journal of interest that were published in 2002 and 2003 . They then divided that total by the number of ‘citable items’ — loosely , papers and review articles — that were published in the journal during those same two years . The impact factor is taken by some administrators as a measure of the typical citation rate for the journal . But for many journals , it isn’t ‘typical’ at all . Nature ’s latest impact factor is 32 . 2 , an increase on last year and a high number that we’re proud of , but it’s one that merits a closer look . For example , we have analysed the citations of individual papers 23 . 6 Editorial 1003 - 4 MH 21 / 6 / 05 2 : 47 PM Page 1003 Nature PublishingGroup © 2005