Short - Term E - Cigarette Exposure Increases the Risk of Thrombogenesis and Enhances Platelet Function in Mice Hanan Qasim , BPharm ; * Zubair A . Karim , PhD ; * Juan C . Silva - Espinoza , MS ; Fadi T . Khasawneh , PhD ; Jos (cid:1) e O . Rivera , PharmD ; Cameron C . Ellis , BS ; Stephanie L . Bauer , BS ; Igor C . Almeida , PhD ; Fatima Z . Alshbool , PharmD , PhD Background - — Cardiovascular disease is the main cause of death in the United States , with smoking being the primary preventable cause of premature death , and thrombosis being the main mechanism of cardiovascular mortality in smokers . Due to the perception that electronic / e - cigarettes are “ safer / less harmful ” than conventional cigarettes , their usage — among a variety of ages — has increased tremendously during the past decade . Notably , there are limited studies regarding the negative effects of e - cigarettes on the cardiovascular system , which is also the subject of signi ﬁ cant debate . Methods and Results - — We employed a passive e - Vape TM vapor inhalation system and developed an in vivo whole - body e - cigarette mouse exposure protocol that mimics real - life human exposure scenarios / conditions and investigated the effects of e - cigarettes and clean air on platelet function and thrombogenesis . Our results show that platelets from e - cigarette – exposed mice are hyperactive , with enhanced aggregation , dense and a granule secretion , activation of the a IIb b 3 integrin , phosphatidylserine expression , and Akt and ERK activation , when compared with clean air – exposed platelets . E - cigarette – exposed platelets were also found to be resistant to inhibition by prostacyclin , relative to clean air . Furthermore , the e - cigarette – exposed mice exhibited a shortened thrombosis occlusion and bleeding times . Conclusions - — Taken together , our data demonstrate for the ﬁ rst time that e - cigarettes alter physiological hemostasis and increase the risk of thrombogenic events . This is attributable , at least in part , to the hyperactive state of platelets . Thus , the negative health consequences of e - cigarette exposure should not be underestimated and warrant further investigation . ( J Am Heart Assoc . 2018 ; 7 : e009264 . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 . ) Key Words : cardiovascular disease (cid:129) e - cigarettes (cid:129) electronic nicotine delivery systems (cid:129) e - vaping (cid:129) platelet (cid:129) thrombosis C ardiovascular disease ( CVD ) is the single largest cause of death in the United States , with smoking being respon - sible for 1 of every 3 deaths linked to CVD . 1 Thus , over the past few years , the introduction of electronic cigarettes ( e - cigarettes ) , also called electronic nicotine delivery systems , was considered rather transformational , with a wide variety of individuals of all ages switching to them and / or commencing on their use . Indeed , it is alarming that the highest increase in e - cigarette usage is among youth , which could be attributable to their curiosity , the appealing nature of e - liquids , and the aggressive advertisement . 2 , 3 The increased popularity of e - cigarettes can also be attributed to the belief that they are less harmful compared with traditional tobacco smoking . Because e - cigarettes were thought / claimed to generate less noxious materials / toxicants , 4 – 6 ultimately at the time , they were embraced as a safer alternative to tobacco smoke . Nonetheless , the negative consequences of e - cigarettes , including their impact on the cardiovascular system , 7 remain a subject of debate , especially in light of the fact they are not emission - free devices . To this end , e - cigarettes in fact share some of the toxicant pro ﬁ le of conventional cigarette smoking and may expose users to similar health risks . 8 – 10 In terms of their impact on the cardiovascular system , thus far there have been a limited number of studies examining the effects of e - cigarettes on the development of CVD . Further - more , some of these studies were contradictory , with some reporting no cardiovascular harm , 11 , 12 whereas others found e - cigarettes to be harmful . 13 , 14 In support of the latter notion , several studies have shown that e - cigarettes are associated with an increase in blood pressure , aortic stiffness , endothe - lial dysfunction , and oxidative stress . 6 , 13 – 15 Interestingly , a From the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , School of Pharmacy ( H . Q . , Z . A . K . , J . C . S . - E . , F . T . K . , J . O . R . , F . Z . A . ) , and Border Biomedical Research Center , Department of Biological Sciences , College of Science ( C . C . E . , S . L . B . , I . C . A . ) , University of Texas El Paso , TX . * Ms Qasim and Dr Karim contributed equally to this work . Correspondence to : Fatima Z . Alshbool , PharmD , PhD , Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , School of Pharmacy , University of Texas El Paso , 1101 N . Campbell St . El Paso , TX 79902 . E - mail : fzalshbool @ utep . edu Received March 23 , 2018 ; accepted June 8 , 2018 . ª 2018 The Authors . Published on behalf of the American Heart Association , Inc . , by Wiley . This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - NoDerivs License , which permits use and distribution in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited , the use is non - commercial and no modi ﬁ cations or adaptations are made . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 1 ORIGINAL RESEARCH recent study reported that e - cigarette – induced impairment of cardiovascular function in mice was similar to that triggered by conventional smoking , in which a comparable increase in aortic stiffness was observed . 14 To our knowledge , studies on the effects of e - cigarettes on the genesis of thrombosis - dependent cardiovascular disor - ders have been limited to only 1 thus far . To this end , albeit associated with limitation , this study reported that exposure of platelets to e - cigarette extracts in vitro enhanced platelet activation 16 ( eg , aggregation and adhesion ) . Consequently , ﬁ ndings from this study suggested that e - cigarettes may potentially increase the risk of thrombosis . 16 However , this study neither mimicked real - life conditions ( eg , employed e - cigarette extracts ) nor used an in vivo whole - body exposure model to investigate the effects of e - cigarettes on platelets . It is noteworthy that thrombosis is the main mechanism of cardiovascular mortality in smokers 17 ; smoking causes a prothrombotic state through altering ﬁ brinolytic and throm - botic factors 17 , 18 ; smokers ’ isolated platelets exhibited increased aggregation 19 , 20 ; and exposure to cigarette smoke alters the dynamics of clot formation , making them more resistant to thrombolysis as compared with clots of non - smokers . 21 – 23 However , whether e - cigarettes exert similar effects is yet to be determined and warrants investigation . Based on the aforementioned considerations , the current study investigated the mechanistic impact of e - cigarettes on platelet function and thrombogenesis in mice by employing a novel whole - body / in vivo model that resembles real - life e - cigarette exposure scenarios . Our ﬁ ndings revealed that short - term e - cigarette exposure causes a hyperactive state of platelets , which are also resistant to inhibition by prostacyclin , and that it elevates the risk of thrombosis , and enhances hemostasis . On the other hand , leukocyte activation was found to be no different between e - cigarettes and clean air . Collectively , these data do support the notion that e - cigarette exposure is detrimental to cardiovascular health and is an important player in thrombosis - related disease states . Methods and Materials Reagents and Materials Absolute Zero e - liquid ( 18 mg nicotine , 30 % propylene glycol , 70 % vegetable glycerin with a menthol ﬂ avor ) was obtained from The Vapor Chef ( Bristol , PA ) . ADP , prostacyclin / prostaglandin I 2 ( PGI 2 ) , cotinine methanol solution , and cotinine - D3 standard were purchased from Sigma Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . U46619 was purchased from Abcam ( St . Louis , MO ) . Fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - conjugated anti - P - selectin and FITC - conjugated Annexin V were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology , Inc ( Danvers , MA ) . The JON / A antibody was obtained from Emfret analytics ( W € urzburg , Germany ) . The phycoerythrin - conjugated anti - CD69 and FITC - conjugated anti - CD45 were obtained from BD Biosciences ( San Jose , CA ) . Stir bars and other disposables were purchased from Chrono - Log Corporation ( Havertown , PA ) . Kinetex 1 . 7 l m EVO C18 100 A - LC Column 100 9 2 . 1 mm , Security Guard ULTRA holder for UHPLC Columns 2 . 1 to 6 . 4 mm , and SecurityGuard ULTRA cartridges for EVO - C18 - UHPLC were purchased from Phenomenex Inc ( Torrance , CA ) . Other reagents were of analytical grade . Animals C57BL / 6 10J ( 10 - week - old male ) mice ( referred to hereafter as C57BL / 6 ) were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory ( Bar Harbor , ME ) , and were housed in groups of 1 to 4 at 24 ° C , under 12 / 12 light / dark cycles , with access to water and food ad libitum . All animal experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC ) of the University of Texas at El Paso . Methods The data , analytic methods , and study materials will be made available to other researchers for purposes of reproducing the results or replicating the procedure . Because there are no speci ﬁ c study materials per se , requests for data , the vaping protocol , and / or liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry methodology will be honored on a case - by - case basis . E - Cigarette Exposure Protocol C57BL / 6 mice were exposed over 2 sessions to a total of 200 puffs per day , and the exposure lasted for 5 days / 1 week . A 15 - minute break between the 2 exposure sessions was given so that the animals could access fresh air , food , and water . The puff duration was 3 seconds , puff interval 1 minute , and the puff volume was 50 mL , all of which mimics real - life exposure scenarios . 24 – 33 As for the controls or control mice , Clinical Perspective What Is New ? (cid:129) This is the ﬁ rst study to demonstrate that , in an animal model , whole body exposure to e - cigarettes enhances platelet activation and increases the risk of thrombogenesis . What Are the Clinical Implications ? (cid:129) Based on our observations , we expect that clinicians will help in educating the public and their patients regarding the potentially negative cardiovascular health effects of e - cigarettes and the evidence that they may not be as safe as currently perceived . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 2 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H they were matched in terms of age and sex ( ie , 10 - week - old males ) , and were exposed to clean air . The clean air group was not given food and water during the exposure times . Experiments were performed 1 hour after the last exposure session . Aerosol ( e - vape ) was generated using a 4 - chamber bench - top passive e - Vape TM vapor inhalation system , for mice , from the La Jolla Alcohol Research Inc ( La Jolla , CA ) . As for the e - cigarette device utilized for the inhalation system , we used the SMOK TFV4 Mini Tanks , and the settings were 5 V for voltage , 0 . 4 ohm for resistance , and 1 L / min for ﬂ ow rate , all of which resemble common e - cigarette devices . 34 , 35 The e - liquid selected for our experiments was one of the top sellers , 36 namely , the Vapor Chief ( 18 mg / mL nicotine content ) . It contains propylene glycol / vegetable glycerin at a 30 / 70 ratio , with a menthol ﬂ avor . Liquid Chromatography – Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Cotinine The plasma concentrations of cotinine , the major metabolite of nicotine was determined using liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry , as described before , 37 with some modi ﬁ cations . Cotinine was extracted from 20 l L of plasma from animals exposed or not to e - cigarette smoke by the addition of 160 l L acetonitrile ( 1 : 8 , v / v ) . Prior to organic extraction , plasma samples were spiked with deuterated cotinine - d 3 ( 20 ng / mL , internal standard ) . Pre - cipitated proteins in the samples were removed after homogenization for 1 minute in a Vortex - Genie 2 ( Scienti ﬁ c Industries , Inc ) , followed by centrifugation ( 25 minutes , 15 100 g , at 4 ° C ) , using a 4515D Eppendorf microcentrifuge . Five microliters of the resulting supernatant , containing nicotine and cotinine ( and other metabolites ) , was analyzed by liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry . Metabolites were separated and analyzed by reversed - phase chromatography using a Phenomenex ( Kinetex 1 . 7 l m , EVO C18 , 100 (cid:3) A , 100 9 2 . 1 mm ) column equipped with an addi - tional guard column ( SecurityGuard ULTRA cartridge , EVO C18 ) , in a Dionex UHPLC Ultimate 3000 RS ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) coupled to a TSQ Endura Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer ( TSQ Endura MS ) ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) . Metabolite separation was achieved in a gradient of solvent A ( H 2 O , 0 . 1 % formic acid ) and solvent B ( acetonitrile : methanol , 3 : 1 , v / v ) with a constant ﬂ ow rate of 0 . 5 mL / min . The column was equilibrated with 10 % solvent B and was maintained for 0 . 5 minute after starting the run . The elution consisted of a 2 - minute gradient up to 90 % solvent B , which was held for additional 2 . 5 minutes . The total duration of the reversed - phase chromatography was 5 min - utes . After each sample run , a blank injection ( 90 % solvent B ) was used for reequilibration of the column with 90 % solvent B , starting the blank injection for 0 . 5 minutes , then a sharp decrease to 10 % solvent B over 0 . 5 minutes . The starting conditions of 10 % solvent B was then maintained for 2 minutes , for a total runtime of 3 minutes . All solvents used above were liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry grade from Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c . Quanti ﬁ cation of cotinine was achieved by highly sensitive and speci ﬁ c single - reaction monitoring approach , using product - ions m / z 80 . 45 and 146 . 20 , for cotinine and cotinine - d 3 , respectively . The TSQ Endura MS was equipped with a heated electro - spray ionization source and set to the following parameters : positive ion voltage of 5700 V ; sheath , auxiliary , and sweep gas of 10 , 7 , and 5 arbitrary units , respectively ; and ion - transfer tube and vaporizer temperature of 350 ° C and 300 ° C , respectively . Tail Bleeding Time Assay C57BL / 6 mice were exposed as discussed above , and the tail bleeding assay was performed as we described before . 38 – 40 Brie ﬂ y , mice were anesthetized and placed on a 37 ° C homeothermic blanket , before the tail was transected 5 mm from the tip using a sterile scalpel . After transection , the tail was immediately immersed in saline ( 37 ° C constant temperature ) , and the time to bleeding cessation was measured . Bleeding stoppage was not considered complete until bleeding had stopped for 1 minute . For statistical analysis purposes , if bleeding did not stop in 15 minutes , the experiment was halted to limit blood loss from the mice , and 15 minutes was considered the cutoff bleeding time . In Vivo Ferric Chloride Carotid Artery Injury – Induced Thrombosis Model C57BL / 6 mice were exposed as discussed above , and the assay was performed as we described before . 38 – 40 Brie ﬂ y , mice were anesthetized with Avertin ( 2 . 5 % ) , and the left carotid artery was exposed and cleaned with normal saline ( 37 ° C ) , before baseline carotid artery blood ﬂ ow was measured with Transonic Micro - Flowprobe ( Transonic Sys - tems Inc , Ithaca , NY ) . After stabilizing blood ﬂ ow , 7 . 5 % ferric chloride was applied to a ﬁ lter paper disc ( 1 - mm diameter ) that was immediately placed on top of the artery for 3 minutes . Blood ﬂ ow was continuously moni - tored for 20 minutes or until blood ﬂ ow reached stable occlusion ( no blood ﬂ ow for 2 minutes ) . Data were recorded , and time to vessel occlusion was calculated as the difference in time between stable occlusion and removal of the ﬁ lter paper ( with ferric chloride ) . An occlusion time of 20 minutes was considered as the cutoff time for statistical analysis . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 3 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H Platelet Count Platelet count was performed on whole blood obtained from the exposed mice , using a HEMAVET (cid:2) 950FS Multi - species Hematology System from Erba (cid:2) Diagnostics ( Miami Lakes , FL ) . Murine Platelet - Rich Plasma Preparation Clean air – or e - cigarette – exposed mice were anesthetized , and blood was collected from the heart . Coagulation was inhibited by 0 . 38 % sodium citrate solution ( Fisher Scien - ti ﬁ c , Hampton , NH ) . Blood was centrifuged ( 237 g for 15 minutes ) at room temperature , and the platelet - rich plasma was then collected . Platelets were counted with the HEMAVET (cid:2) 950FS Multi - species Hematology System , and their count adjusted to 7 9 10 7 platelets / mL before each experiment . Washed Platelet Preparation Washed platelets were prepared as described previously . 38 , 41 , 42 Mouse blood was collected as discussed above and mixed with phosphate - buffered saline , pH 7 . 4 , and was incubated with PGI 2 ( 10 ng / mL ; 5 minutes ) , followed by centrifugation at 237 g for 10 minutes at room temperature . Platelet - rich plasma was recovered , and platelets were pelleted at 483 9 g for 10 minutes at room temperature . The pellets were resuspended in HEPES / Tyrode buffer ( 20 mmol / L HEPES / KOH , pH 6 . 5 , 128 mmol / L NaCl , 2 . 8 mmol / L KCl , 1 mmol / L MgCl 2 , 0 . 4 mmol / L NaH 2 PO 4 , 12 mmol / L NaHCO 3 , 5 mmol / L D - glucose ) supplemented with 1 mmol / L EGTA , 0 . 37 U / mL apyrase , and 10 ng / mL PGI 2 . Platelets were then washed and resuspended in HEPES / Tyrodes ( pH 7 . 4 ) without EGTA , apyrase , or PGI 2 . Platelets were counted using the HEMAVET (cid:2) 950FS Multi - species Hematology System and adjusted to the indicated concentrations . In Vitro Platelet Aggregation Platelet - rich plasma from clean air – or e - cigarette – exposed mice was activated with ADP ( 0 . 5 – 2 . 5 l mol / L ) and U46619 ( 2 l mol / L ) . Platelet aggregation was measured by the turbidometric method using model 700 aggregometer ( Chrono - Log Corporation ) . We also performed these aggrega - tion experiments with ADP ( 2 . 5 l mol / L ) and U46619 ( 2 l mol / L ) in the presence ( 3 minutes incubation ) or absence of 5 nmol / L prostacyclin ( PGI 2 ) . Each experiment was repeated at least 3 times with blood pooled from at least 3 different groups ( ie , at least 5 mice each ) that were exposed to either e - cigarettes or clean air . ATP Release Platelet - rich plasma was prepared as described above ( 250 l L ; 7 9 10 7 / mL ) before being placed into siliconized cuvettes and stirred for 5 minutes at 37 ° C . The luciferase substrate / luciferase mixture ( 12 . 5 l L , Chrono - Log ) was then added , followed by the addition of the agonists ADP ( 2 . 5 l mol / L ) and U46619 ( 2 l mol / L ) . Flow Cytometric Analysis Flow cytometric analysis was performed as we described previously . 38 Brie ﬂ y , washed platelets ( 2 9 10 7 / mL ) from clean air – or e - cigarette – exposed mice were stimulated with ADP ( 10 l mol / L ) and U46619 ( 5 l mol / L ) for 5 minutes . Platelets were then ﬁ xed with 2 % formaldehyde for 30 minutes at room temperature and incubated with FITC - conjugated CD62P ( P - selectin ) , Annexin V or phycoerythrin - conjugated rat anti - mouse integrin a IIb b 3 ( active form ) JON / A antibodies at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark . The platelet ( 10 5 platelets / 100 l L ) ﬂ uorescent intensities were measured using a BD Accuri C6 ﬂ ow cytometer ( BD Biosciences , Franklin Lakes , NJ ) . Results were analyzed using CFlow Plus ( BD Biosciences ) . Each experiment was repeated at least 3 times with blood pooled from at least 3 different groups ( at least 5 mice each ) that were exposed to either clean air or e - cigarettes . Leukocyte Activation The activation state of leukocytes was examined using ﬂ ow cytometry , as described before . 43 , 44 Brie ﬂ y , whole blood from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice ( unstimulated sam - ples ) was incubated with either FITC - conjugated anti - CD45 or phycoerythrin - conjugated anti - CD69 for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark . The reaction was stopped by adding BD FACS TM lysing solution ( 1 : 10 in phosphate - buffered saline ) , and the samples were kept at room temperature for 15 minutes in the dark . Next , the samples were washed with 1X phosphate - buffered saline , before being ﬁ xed with 1 % formaldehyde for 15 minutes . Samples were transferred to FACS tubes , and ﬂ uorescent intensities were measured using a BD Accuri C6 ﬂ ow cytometer and analyzed using CFlow Plus ( BD Biosciences ) . Immunoblotting Immunoblot was carried out as described before . 42 Brie ﬂ y , clean air – or e - cigarette – exposed washed platelets were stimulated with ADP ( 2 . 5 l mol / L ) or U46619 ( 5 l mol / L ) for 3 minutes followed by lysis with 1X sample buffer . Next , proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacry - lamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to Immobilon - P DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 4 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H PVDF membranes ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . Membranes were then probed with the primary antibodies ( ERK , pERK , Akt , and pAkt ) and visualized with horseradish peroxidase – labeled antirabbit or antimouse immunoglobulin G as required . The antibody binding was detected using enhanced chemilumi - nescence substrate ( Thermo Scienti ﬁ c , Rockford , IL ) . Images were obtained with ChemiDoc MP Imaging System ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) , and quanti ﬁ ed with Image Lab software Version 4 . 1 ( Bio - Rad ) . Statistical Analysis All experiments were performed at least 3 times with blood pooled from 3 groups of at least 5 mice each time , as applicable . Data analysis was performed using GraphPad PRISM statistical software ( San Diego , CA ) and presented as mean (cid:1) standard error of mean . The Mann - Whitney test ( non - parametric test ) was used for the evaluation of differences in mean occlusion and bleeding times , whereas the t test and / or 1 - way ANOVA with Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons test as post hoc were used for the analysis of the ﬂ ow cytometry data , as applicable ( per number of groups ) . Notably , no differences were observed with regard to signi ﬁ cance when these data were analyzed using the Mann - Whitney test / ANOVA , in comparison to the t test . Signi ﬁ cance was accepted at P < 0 . 05 , unless stated otherwise . Results E - Cigarette Exposure Systematically Delivers Nicotine , in Mice Cotinine is the major metabolite of nicotine , and serves as a marker of systematic nicotine “ delivery . ” 45 Therefore , in order to con ﬁ rm that our e - cigarette whole - body exposure did result in the systemic delivery of nicotine , plasma cotinine levels were measured using liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry . Our results revealed that there were signi ﬁ cant levels of cotinine in the mice exposed to e - cigarettes , whereas it was not detectable in the clean air control mice . Importantly , the measured mean plasma levels ( ie , average of 53 . 97 (cid:1) 3 . 61 ng / mL ; Figure 1 ) were in fact comparable to those observed in humans and other animal e - cigarette exposure models , that is , 30 to 250 ng / mL . 46 – 48 E - Cigarette Exposure Alters Physiological Hemostasis and Thrombosis Development Although cigarette smoking has been shown to produce effects in vivo , for example , to increase the risk of various disease states , including those involving thrombogenesis , 49 , 50 whether e - cigarette exposure produces similar effects or not remains to be determined . Thus , we ﬁ rst evaluated the effect of e - cigarette exposure on the hemostasis response by conducting the tail bleeding time assay in live , anesthetized mice . Indeed , it was found that the time needed for cessation of bleeding was signi ﬁ cantly shortened in the e - cigarette – exposed mice ( average of 52 (cid:1) 18 seconds ; Figure 2A ) , compared with those exposed to clean air ( average of 585 (cid:1) 15 seconds ; Figure 2A ) , suggesting a prothrombotic state . On this basis , we hypothesized that e - cigarette – exposed mice would be more prone to thrombosis . Conse - quently , we next sought to examine the impact of e - cigarettes on thrombogenesis using the ferric chloride carotid artery injury – induced thrombosis model . Our data showed that the e - cigarette – exposed mice had a shortened occlusion time ( average of 248 (cid:1) 69 seconds ; Figure 2B ) , compared with the clean air controls ( average of 612 (cid:1) 67 seconds ; Figure 2B ) . Together , these ﬁ ndings demonstrated for the ﬁ rst time that e - cigarettes do indeed impact ( enhance ) physiological hemostasis and increase the risk of thrombogenic events . E - Cigarette Exposure Does Not Affect Platelet Count Platelets play an integral role in maintaining hemostasis , and changes in their counts have been linked to mortality and CVD development . 24 Furthermore , while the effect of “ smoke ” on platelet count remains controversial , with studies showing it to be increased 51 or unaffected , 52 , 53 we sought to examine whether e - cigarettes would produce any effects under our experimental conditions . Our data revealed no difference in platelet count between clean air – and e - cigarette – exposed mice , that is , 526 (cid:1) 64 versus 571 (cid:1) 96 ( thousand / µ L ; P = 0 . 323 ) , respectively , at least under the present experimen - tal conditions . Thus , these data eliminate abnormal platelet count as a contributing factor to the observed phenotype . E - Cigarette Exposure Enhances Agonist - Induced Platelet Activation / Aggregation While our data revealed that e - cigarette exposure modulates hemostasis and thrombus formation , whether it has any impact on platelet function is yet to be investigated . To this end , it was recently shown that treatment with e - cigarette extracts enhances platelet activation 16 ; whether such effects would manifest under whole - body e - cigarette exposure experimental settings is unknown . Thus , we next sought to investigate the effects of e - cigarette exposure on G - protein – coupled receptor agonist – induced platelet aggregation . It was observed that platelets from e - cigarette – exposed mice exhib - ited higher aggregation , in comparison with the clean air – exposed controls , in response to several agonists , that is , ADP and U46619 ( Figure 3A and 3B ) . These data suggest that DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 5 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H e - cigarette – exposed platelets are hyperactive , which is con - sistent with the shortened bleeding and occlusion times observed in these mice . E - Cigarette Exposure Enhances Agonist - Induced Platelet Secretion Given the important role of agonist - induced exocytosis ( granules release ) in amplifying the initial platelet activation events , 54 , 55 we examined the impact of e - cigarettes on dense ( ATP ) and a granule ( P - selectin ) secretion / release . In accor - dance with our aggregation data , ATP secretion induced by agonists ( ADP and U46619 ; Figure 4A and 4B ) , was enhanced in platelets obtained from e - cigarette – exposed mice relative to the clean air controls . Similarly , platelets from mice exposed to e - cigarettes had signi ﬁ cantly higher agonist ( ADP and U46619 ) - triggered expression of P - selectin on their surface ( Figure 4C and 4D ; the percentage of P - selectin – positive cells induced by ADP was 61 . 17 (cid:1) 5 . 54 [ e - cigarettes ] versus 33 . 33 (cid:1) 3 . 93 [ clean air ] ; P = 0 . 0014 ; whereas that induced by U46619 was 60 . 33 (cid:1) 4 . 63 [ e - cigarettes ] versus 33 . 33 (cid:1) 3 . 28 [ clean air ] ; P = 0 . 0089 ) , compared with controls . These ﬁ ndings indicate that whole - body exposure to e - cigarettes upregulates both dense and a granule secretion , supporting the notion that these platelets are indeed hyper - active . E - cigarette Exposure Enhances Agonist - Induced Integrin a IIb b 3 Activation In the next set of experiments , we investigated whether the increased aggregation response observed in the Figure 1 . E - cigarette exposure results in systemic delivery of nicotine measured as the marker cotinine . Plasma from clean air or e - cigarette – exposed mice was subjected to liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry , as described in the “ Methods ” section , and the levels of cotinine were determined . Brie ﬂ y , plasma samples were spiked with 20 ng / mL cotinine - d 3 ( internal standard ) before organic solvent extraction of nicotine and its major metabolite , cotinine . Metabolites were separated by reversed - phase chromatography / reversed - phase chromatography and detected and quanti ﬁ ed by liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry ( positive - ion mode ) using selected reaction monitoring . Peaks corresponding to major product ions for cotinine - d 3 ( m / z 146 . 20 ) and cotinine ( m / z 80 . 45 ) were integrated for quanti ﬁ cation as indicated . Chromatograms are representative of biological duplicates and technical triplicates . Measurements were performed on several individual animals from at least 3 different exposures . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 6 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H e - cigarette – exposed mice is accompanied by a commensu - rate elevation in integrin GPIIb - IIIa ( a IIb b 3 ) activation ; which is required for platelet aggregation . 56 We observed that the activation of the a IIb b 3 integrin is enhanced in e - cigarette – exposed platelets , compared with the clean air exposure , in response to ADP and U46619 ( Figure 5A and 5B ; the percentage of a IIb b 3 - positive cells induced by ADP was 76 . 33 (cid:1) 2 . 35 [ e - cigarettes ] versus 49 (cid:1) 3 . 46 [ clean air ] ; P = 0 . 0028 ; whereas that induced by U46619 was 85 . 67 (cid:1) 2 . 33 [ e - cigarettes ] versus 59 . 33 (cid:1) 3 . 18 [ clean air ] ; P = 0 . 0023 ) . These data are in support / consistent with the enhanced aggregation ( and secretion ) response in the e - cigarette – exposed platelets . E - Cigarette Exposure Enhances Agonist - Induced Phosphatidylserine Expression Phosphatidylserine ( PS ) exposure on the surface of acti - vated platelets is known to be essential for the assembly of coagulation factor complexes , 57 and its appearance on the cell surface is associated with several physiologic and pathologic phenomena . 58 , 59 Hence , we determined whether e - cigarette exposure modulates the surface levels of phosphatidylserine . Similar to integrin activation , ago - nist ( ADP and U46619 ) - induced phosphatidylserine expres - sion was higher in the e - cigarette – exposed platelets compared with those from the clean air mice ( Figure 6A and 6B ) . In summary , our data thus far show that platelets from e - cigarette – exposed mice exhibit enhanced platelet function , namely , aggregation , secretion , integrin activation , and phos - phatidylserine exposure , compared with those from the clean air – exposed mice . E - Cigarette Exposure Enhances Agonist - Induced Akt and ERK Phosphorylation It was previously shown that phosphorylation of Akt and / or ERK plays a critical role in platelet function , 60 – 62 and supports thrombus formation . 63 , 64 Thus , we examined whether e - cigarettes exert any effect on these 2 markers of platelet activation . Indeed , our results revealed that ADP - , and U46619 - induced Akt and ERK phosphorylation is enhanced in e - cigarette - exposed platelets , relative to clean air ( Figure 7A and 7B , respectively ; densitometric analyses are shown in Figure 7C through 7F ) . These data provide biochemical evidence that Akt and ERK activation con - tributes to the e - cigarette – induced hyperactive platelet phenotype , in addition to the functional and “ disease ” data demonstrating that e - cigarettes do modulate platelet function . E - Cigarette Exposure Renders Platelets Resistant to Prostacyclin Inhibition It is well known that exposure to traditional tobacco makes platelets more resistant to inhibition by the endothelial cells ’ PGI 2 . Therefore , we sought to determine whether e - cigarettes would produce similar effects . Indeed , we observed that PGI 2 ( 5 nmol / L ) was not as effective in inhibiting ADP - or U46619 - induced aggregation in platelets from e - cigarette – exposed mice , in comparison to those from clean air – exposed mice ( Figure 8A and 8B ) . These data indicate that e - cigarette – exposed platelets are more resistant to inhibition by PGI 2 than are those exposed to clean air . Figure 2 . E - cigarette exposure shortens the tail bleeding time and the time for occlusion . A , E - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were subjected to the tail bleeding time assay , as described in the “ Methods ” section . Each point represents the tail bleeding time of a single animal ( clean air , n = 5 ; and e - cigarette , n = 5 ; * * P < 0 . 01 ) . B , E - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were subjected to the ferric chloride – induced thrombosis model , as described in the “ Methods ” section , and the time for occlusion was measured . Each point represents the occlusion time of a single animal ( clean air , n = 8 ; and e - cigarette , n = 8 ; * * P < 0 . 01 ) . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 7 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H E - Cigarette Exposure Does Not Affect Leukocyte Activation While traditional tobacco is known to potentiate leukocyte activation , 43 , 44 it remains to be determined if e - cigarettes produce such effects . Interestingly , our results revealed no difference in leukocyte activation between e - cigarettes and the clean air exposures ( Figure 9A and 9B ) ; under the present experimental conditions . Discussion Cigarette smoking is the primary preventable cause of premature death in the United States , 65 accounting for more than 18 % of annual deaths . 66 Consequently , and due ( at least in part ) to the perception of e - cigarettes ’ “ higher safety pro ﬁ le , ” their use has increased drastically in the past decade . 9 , 67 – 71 Importantly , these devices do emit considerable levels of toxicants , some of which are shared / overlap with tobacco smoking ; and thus their harm should not be underestimated . 6 , 72 Therefore , in contrast to the well - known deleterious effects of tobacco smoking , and despite the exponential increase in e - cigarette research , their safety pro ﬁ le has not been fully studied in the context of thrombotic disease . This is due in part to serious methodological problems / limitations in the human studies , including study groups ( eg , former smokers ’ versus nonsmokers ) ; use of different e - cigarette devices and e - liquids ; and ( until recently ) lack of validated whole - body exposure ( animal ) models , in which the aforementioned variables can be controlled to resemble real - life exposure conditions . Based on these considerations , we utilized an in vivo whole - body exposure model and established / designed an exposure protocol that resembles real - life scenarios . Thus , key markers to be noted of this system are ( 1 ) the cotinine levels found in the plasma of our e - cigarette – exposed mice ( average of 53 . 97 ng / mL ) overlaps with those observed in established human and animal e - cigarette exposure models 46 – 48 but undetectable in clean air samples , ( 2 ) which were obtained / observed using a device and an e - liquid mixture that are widely used by humans 34 – 36 , 73 and ( 3 ) under real - life puf ﬁ ng topography experimental conditions . 24 – 33 Notably , our whole - body exposure system , much like active and passive e - cigarette exposure , 47 , 74 did increase cotinine ( plasma ) levels supporting the systematic delivery of nicotine , and further undermining the claim that e - cigarettes are emission - free devices ; this ﬁ nding also casts doubt regarding the notion that e - cigarette are a safer / safe alternative to tobacco . Further support for the validity and the clinical applicability of our animal model derives from literature documenting that mouse studies do “ map ” very well to humans in the context of tobacco exposure . 14 , 75 , 76 In fact , given the challenges in human studies and the dif ﬁ culty in drawing conclusions due to the variability in the device and e - liquid products , users ’ experience , and concomitant exposure to other forms of tobacco , the current model gives us great ﬂ exibility in mimicking many aspects of human exposure . After “ validating ” our model , we ﬁ rst sought to investigate the impact of e - cigarettes on thrombogenesis , as it is the major cause of tobacco - induced CVD , 38 including thrombosis - based diseases . 17 , 77 – 83 Our ﬁ ndings revealed , for the ﬁ rst time , a drastic reduction in the time for carotid artery occlusion , indicating a prothrombotic phenotype , even after only a week of whole - body exposure to e - cigarettes . These data should cast serious doubt concerning the presumed Figure 3 . E - cigarette exposure enhances platelet aggregation . Platelets from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were stimulated with 0 . 5 l mol / L and 2 . 5 l mol / L ADP ( A ) , or 2 l mol / L U46619 ( B ) , and their aggregation response was monitored using an aggregometer . Each experiment was repeated 3 times , with blood pooled from at least 5 to 6 mice each time . E - Cig indicates E - Cigarettes . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 8 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H safety of e - cigarettes , and could be attributed , at least in part , to the high “ sensitivity ” of the cardiovascular system , and the nonlinear dose - response relationship for toxicity . 84 , 85 Thus , even exposure to low levels of harmful constituents “ as claimed ” with e - cigarettes has the potential to induce pronounced effects . 86 This notion is consistent with ﬁ ndings that switching to e - cigarettes did not signi ﬁ cantly reduce the risk of acute myocardial infarction or stroke . 87 Consistent with the observed prothrombotic phenotype , evidence exists showing that acute exposure to e - cigarettes in humans , even after 30 minutes of exposure , signi ﬁ cantly increased arterial stiffness , 13 which is a marker for increased thrombosis - dependent CVD . 88 In addition , an analysis of the National Health Interview Survey database in 2014 revealed that use of e - cigarettes increases the odds of myocardial infarction by 42 % . 89 Furthermore , a case of acute myocardial infarction in a young man was recently reported after only 1 month of e - cigarette use . 90 Separate studies showed that e - cigarettes also induce myocardial DNA damage , 91 arterial stiffness 14 and stroke 92 in mice . While the current data indicate that short - term exposure to e - cigarettes is associated with cardiovascular harm , one can speculate that longer use / exposure to e - cigarette would have even more detrimental effects ; this will be the scope of future investigations . As for the hemostasis response in the e - cigarette – exposed mice , our data showed they possessed a signi ﬁ cantly shortened tail bleeding time . This ﬁ nding is not surprising given the “ thrombosis ” phenotype we observed and is supported by previous studies by us and others , in which exposure to tobacco and its constituents was found to reduce the tail bleeding time . 38 , 93 Of note , our data revealed that e - cigarettes do not modulate / reduce platelet count , at least under short - term exposure conditions . This is consistent with our hemostasis Figure 4 . E - cigarette exposure enhances platelet secretion . Platelets from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were incubated with luciferase luciferin ( 12 . 5 l L ) , before being stimulated with 2 . 5 l mol / L ADP ( A ) or 2 l mol / L U46619 ( B ) . ATP release ( for dense granules ) was detected as luminescence , and measured by a lumi aggregometer . Platelets from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were washed , before stimulation with 10 l mol / L ADP ( C ) or 5 l mol / L U46619 ( D ) . Platelets were incubated with ﬂ uorescein isothiocyanate – conjugated CD62P antibody ( for a granules ) , and the ﬂ uorescent intensities were measured by ﬂ ow cytometry . Average mean ﬂ uorescence intensities shown ( * P < 0 . 05 ; * * P < 0 . 01 ; * * * P < 0 . 001 ; * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ; NS , nonsigni ﬁ cant ) . Each experiment was repeated 3 times , with blood pooled from at least 5 to 6 mice each time . CA indicates clean air ; E - Cig , E - Cigarettes . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 9 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H ﬁ ndings , as a ( signi ﬁ cant ) decrease in platelet count would be expected to result in a bleeding diathesis , and not the shortened bleeding time we observed . As for the effects of traditional tobacco , studies are controversial , with some showing the platelet counts to be increased 51 or unaffected . 52 , 53 These differences could be attributed , in part , to the different exposure conditions and study populations / subjects . In light of the enhanced thrombosis risk and altered hemostasis in the e - cigarette – exposed mice , we next sought to investigate the mechanism by which these effects may manifest . Thus , we examined the e - cigarette platelet func - tion / activation phenotype . Our results demonstrated that agonist - induced platelet aggregation , secretion ( dense and a granules ) , and integrin and phosphatidylserine expression were enhanced as a result of e - cigarette exposure . These ﬁ ndings support the notion that e - cigarettes result in a state of platelet hyperactivity , which underlies , at least in part , the prothrombotic phenotype in the exposed mice . Additionally , these data are consistent with those seen in the e - cigarette vapor extract – exposed human platelet 16 studies , in which several functional responses were enhanced ( eg , aggrega - tion ) . Moreover , our data revealed that the e - cigarette – exposed platelets are less sensitive to inhibition by PGI 2 , in comparison to those from clean air ; which may have also contributed to the thrombosis phenotype in these mice . Importantly , these results are also “ similar ” to those observed with traditional tobacco smoke , which heightens platelet activation ( eg , aggregation ) 17 , 94 and renders platelets less sensitive to PGI 2 . 95 On the other hand , we observed no difference in the activation state of leukocytes between e - cigarettes and clean air . This ﬁ nding suggests that leuko - cytes do not contribute to the observed e - cigarette pheno - type ; at least under the present experimental conditions . Given that traditional tobacco is known to enhance leukocyte activation , 43 , 44 it is possible that longer e - cigarette exposures , and / or increasing the number of puffs or amount of nicotine concentration would have produced an effect . These issues will be the subject of future studies . To further delineate the mechanism behind e - cigarette – induced thrombogenesis and hyperactive platelets , we investigated the activation state / levels of biochemical markers of platelet function . Our Figure 5 . E - cigarette exposure enhances integrin activation . Platelets from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were washed , before stimulation with 10 l mol / L ADP ( A ) or 5 l mol / L U46619 ( B ) . Platelets were incubated with ﬂ uorescein isothio - cyanate – conjugated JON / A antibody , and the ﬂ uorescent inten - sities were measured by ﬂ ow cytometry . Average mean ﬂ uorescence intensities shown ( * P < 0 . 05 ; * * P < 0 . 01 ; NS , non - signi ﬁ cant ) . Each experiment was repeated 3 times , with blood pooled from at least 5 to 6 mice each time . CA indicates clean air ; E - Cig , E - Cigarettes . Figure 6 . E - cigarette exposure enhances phosphatidylserine expression . Platelets from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice werewashed , beforestimulationwith10 l mol / LADP ( A ) or5 l mol / L U46619 ( B ) . Platelets were incubated with ﬂ uorescein isothio - cyanate – conjugated Annexin V antibody , and the ﬂ uorescent inten - sities were measured by ﬂ ow cytometry . Average mean ﬂ uorescence intensities shown ( * P < 0 . 05 ; * * P < 0 . 01 ; * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ; NS , non - signi ﬁ cant ) . Eachexperimentwasrepeated3times , withbloodpooled from at least 5 to 6 mice each time . CA indicates clean air ; E - Cig , E - Cigarettes . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 10 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H ﬁ ndings showed an increase in the levels of phosphorylated Akt and ERK in the e - cigarette – exposed mice . These ﬁ ndings suggest that the G 12 / 1396 and G i97 signaling pathways are involved , respectively , and provide biochemical evidence of the hyperactive state of platelets . These data are also consistent with previous studies in which both the Akt 98 and ERK 99 , 100 pathways were upregulated by nicotine . As for the constituents that e - cigarettes emit and that could be responsible for the observed platelet hyperactive state , they are presently unknown and under investigation . To this end , e - cigarettes are now known to be a source of a large number of toxicants , such as nicotine , cotinine , aldehydes ( eg , acrolein ) , and particulate matter . 101 – 104 It is noteworthy that exposure to some of these toxicants , albeit from traditional tobacco smoking and other sources , was found to be associated with an enhanced platelet activation phenotype . 6 Furthermore , while the effects of nicotine on platelet activa - tion / aggregation are still controversial , 16 , 105 – 108 particulate matter 109 , 110 and acrolein 93 were indeed found to enhance platelet function . In conclusion , our studies using a validated animal exposure model constitute the ﬁ rst investigation of the impact of short - Figure 7 . E - cigarette exposure enhances Akt and ERK activation ( phosphorylation ) . Platelets from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were prepared , count adjusted to 1 9 10 ⁹ , stimulated with 2 . 5 l mol / L ADP ( A ) or 5 l mol / L U46619 ( B ) for 3 minutes , and proteins were lysed using 1X sample buffer . Proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis before being subjected to immunoblotting with anti - Akt , anti - pAkt , anti - ERK , and anti - pERK antibodies . Data were quanti ﬁ ed using densitometric analysis with ImageJ , and presented as bar graphs for pAkt and total Akt ( C and E ) , and for pERK and total ERK ( D and F ) . Data are mean (cid:1) standard error of mean of 3 independent experiments ( * P < 0 . 05 ; * * P < 0 . 01 ; * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ; NS , nonsigni ﬁ cant ) . E - Cig indicates E - Cigarette . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 11 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H term whole - body e - cigarette exposure on platelet function and document for the ﬁ rst time that e - cigarettes do increase the risk of thrombosis . Moreover , our data support the notion that the elevated thrombotic risk is due , in part , to platelet hyperactivity , as well as decreased sensitivity to the physiological inhibitor PGI 2 . Importantly , these ﬁ ndings are not only expected to increase awareness of the negative health consequences of the increasingly popular e - cigarettes but also undermine the assumption regarding their “ high safety ” pro ﬁ le . Our results should also shape policy development for evidence - based tobacco control ( including e - cigarettes ) and guide the Food and Drug Administration revisions to the legislation that would extend their regulations to e - cigarettes , as well as highlight the need for prevention of exposure to this form of tobacco . Finally , whether e - cigarettes are a safer substitute for tobacco needs further investigation and will be the subject of future studies . Acknowledgments We are thankful to the Biomolecule Analysis Core Facility , Border Biomedical Research Center of the University of Texas at El Paso ( BBRC / UTEP ) , supported by a grant ( 2G12MD007592 ) from the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities ( NIMHD ) , for the access to the liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry instrumentusedinthisstudy . Wearealsogratefultoourundergraduate students , JulienEsquivelandDanteLozano , andourresearchassistant , Keziah R . Hernandez , for their help . Sources of Funding This research was supported , in part , by startup funds provided by the School of Pharmacy , the University of Texas at El Paso ( to Alshbool ) . Figure 8 . E - cigarette exposure renders platelets resistant to inhibition by prostacyclin ( PGI 2 ) . Platelets from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice were incubated without or with PGI 2 ( 5 nmol / L ) for 3 minutes before being stimulated with 2 . 5 l mol / L ADP ( A ) or 2 l mol / L U46619 ( B ) , and their aggregation response was monitored using an aggregometer . The difference in aggregation between platelets exposed to clean air and e - cigarettes in the absence or presence of PGI 2 was calculated and plotted as a “ percentage inhibition by PGI 2 . ” Each experiment was repeated 3 times , with blood pooled from at least 5 to 6 mice each time ( * P < 0 . 05 ; * * * P < 0 . 001 ) . Figure 9 . E - cigarette exposure does not affect leukocyte acti - vation . Blood was collected from e - cigarette – and clean air – exposed mice and incubated with ( A ) phycoerythrin - conjugated anti - CD69 or ( B ) ﬂ uorescein isothiocyanate – conjugated anti - CD45 . The ﬂ uorescent intensities were measured by ﬂ ow cytometry . Average mean ﬂ uorescence intensities shown ( NS , nonsigni ﬁ cant ) . Each experiment was repeated 3 times , with blood pooled from at least 5 to 6 mice each time . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 12 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H Disclosures None . References 1 . How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease : The Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking - Attributable Disease : A Report of the Surgeon General . Atlanta , GA : Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( US ) ; 2010 . 2 . General ARotS . E - cigarette use among youth and young adults . 2016 . 3 . cdc e - cigs and youth 2016 ( 002 ) . Pdf . 4 . Brandon TH , Goniewicz ML , Hanna NH , Hatsukami DK , Herbst RS , Hobin JA , Ostroff JS , Shields PG , Toll BA , Tyne CA , Viswanath K , Warren GW . Electronic nicotine delivery systems : a policy statement from the American Association for Cancer Research and the American Society of Clinical Oncology . J Clin Oncol . 2015 ; 33 : 952 – 963 . 5 . Patel D , Davis KC , Cox S , Brad ﬁ eld B , King BA , Shafer P , Caraballo R , Bunnell R . Reasons for current e - cigarette use among U . S . adults . Prev Med . 2016 ; 93 : 14 – 20 . 6 . Qasim H , Karim ZA , Rivera JO , Khasawneh FT , Alshbool FZ . Impact of electronic cigarettes on the cardiovascular system . J Am Heart Assoc . 2017 ; 6 : e006353 . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 117 . 006353 . 7 . Knura M , Dragon J , Labuzek K , Okopien B . [ The impact of electronic cigarettes usage on the endothelial function and the progression of atherosclerosis ] . Pol Merkur Lekarski . 2018 ; 44 : 26 – 30 . 8 . Glantz SA , Bareham DW . E - cigarettes : use , effects on smoking , risks , and policy implications . Annu Rev Public Health . 2018 ; 39 : 215 – 235 . 9 . Grana R , Benowitz N , Glantz SA . E - cigarettes : a scienti ﬁ c review . Circulation . 2014 ; 129 : 1972 – 1986 . 10 . Margham J , McAdam K , Forster M , Liu C , Wright C , Mariner D , Proctor C . Chemical composition of aerosol from an e - cigarette : a quantitative comparison with cigarette smoke . Chem Res Toxicol . 2016 ; 29 : 1662 – 1678 . 11 . Szoltysek - Boldys I , Sobczak A , Zielinska - Danch W , Barton A , Koszowski B , Kosmider L . In ﬂ uence of inhaled nicotine source on arterial stiffness . Przegl Lek . 2014 ; 71 : 572 – 575 . 12 . Farsalinos KE , Tsiapras D , Kyrzopoulos S , Savvopoulou M , Voudris V . Acute effects of using an electronic nicotine - delivery device ( electronic cigarette ) on myocardial function : comparison with the effects of regular cigarettes . BMC Cardiovasc Disord . 2014 ; 14 : 78 . 13 . Lundb € ack M , Antoniewicz L , Brynedal A , Bosson J . Acute effects of active e - cigarette inhalation on arterial stiffness . Eur Respir J . 2017 . Available at : http : / / erj . ersjournals . com / content / 50 / suppl _ 61 / OA1979 . Accessed July 4 , 2018 . 14 . Olfert IM , DeVallance E , Hoskinson H , Branyan KW , Clayton S , Pitzer CR , Sullivan DP , Breit MJ , Wu ZX , Klinkhachorn P , Mandler WK , Erdreich BH , Ducatman BS , Bryner RW , Dasgupta P , Chantler PD . Chronic exposure to electronic cigarette ( e - cig ) results in impaired cardiovascular function in mice . J Appl Physiol ( 1985 ) . 2018 ; 124 : 573 – 582 . 15 . Schweitzer KS , Chen SX , Law S , Van Demark M , Poirier C , Justice MJ , Hubbard WC , Kim ES , Lai X , Wang M , Kranz WD , Carroll CJ , Ray BD , Bittman R , Goodpaster J , Petrache I . Endothelial disruptive proin ﬂ ammatory effects of nicotine and e - cigarette vapor exposures . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol . 2015 ; 309 : L175 – L187 . 16 . Hom S , Chen L , Wang T , Ghebrehiwet B , Yin W , Rubenstein DA . Platelet activation , adhesion , in ﬂ ammation , and aggregation potential are altered in the presence of electronic cigarette extracts of variable nicotine concentra - tions . Platelets . 2016 ; 27 : 694 – 702 . 17 . Barua RS , Ambrose JA . Mechanisms of coronary thrombosis in cigarette smoke exposure . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2013 ; 33 : 1460 – 1467 . 18 . Salahuddin S , Prabhakaran D , Roy A . Pathophysiological mechanisms of tobacco - related CVD . Glob Heart . 2012 ; 7 : 113 – 120 . 19 . Ambrose JA , Barua RS . The pathophysiology of cigarette smoking and cardiovascular disease : an update . J Am Coll Cardiol . 2004 ; 43 : 1731 – 1737 . 20 . Fusegawa Y , Goto S , Handa S , Kawada T , Ando Y . Platelet spontaneous aggregation in platelet - rich plasma is increased in habitual smokers . Thromb Res . 1999 ; 93 : 271 – 278 . 21 . Barua RS , Sy F , Srikanth S , Huang G , Javed U , Buhari C , Margosan D , Ambrose JA . Effects of cigarette smoke exposure on clot dynamics and ﬁ brin structure : an ex vivo investigation . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2010 ; 30 : 75 – 79 . 22 . Barua RS , Sy F , Srikanth S , Huang G , Javed U , Buhari C , Margosan D , Aftab W , Ambrose JA . Acute cigarette smoke exposure reduces clot lysis — association between altered ﬁ brin architecture and the response to t - PA . Thromb Res . 2010 ; 126 : 426 – 430 . 23 . Rubenstein D , Jesty J , Bluestein D . Differences between mainstream and sidestream cigarette smoke extracts and nicotine in the activation of platelets under static and ﬂ ow conditions . Circulation . 2004 ; 109 : 78 – 83 . 24 . Robinson RJ , Hensel EC , Morabito PN , Roundtree KA . Electronic cigarette topography in the natural environment . PLoS One . 2015 ; 10 : e0129296 . 25 . Lauterstein DE , Tijerina PB , Corbett K , Akgol Oksuz B , Shen SS , Gordon T , Klein CB , Zelikoff JT . Frontal cortex transcriptome analysis of mice exposed to electronic cigarettes during early life stages . Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2016 ; 13 : 417 . 26 . Farsalinos KE , Romagna G , Tsiapras D , Kyrzopoulos S , Voudris V . Evaluation of electronic cigarette use ( vaping ) topography and estimation of liquid consumption : implications for research protocol standards de ﬁ nition and for public health authorities ’ regulation . Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2013 ; 10 : 2500 – 2514 . 27 . Behar RZ , Hua M , Talbot P . Puf ﬁ ng topography and nicotine intake of electronic cigarette users . PLoS One . 2015 ; 10 : e0117222 . 28 . Flora JW , Wilkinson CT , Wilkinson JW , Lipowicz PJ , Skapars JA , Anderson A , Miller JH . Method for the determination of carbonyl compounds in e - cigarette aerosols . J Chromatogr Sci . 2017 ; 55 : 142 – 148 . 29 . Etter JF , Bullen C . Electronic cigarette : users pro ﬁ le , utilization , satisfaction and perceived ef ﬁ cacy . Addiction . 2011 ; 106 : 2017 – 2028 . 30 . Cunningham A , Slayford S , Vas C , Gee J , Costigan S , Prasad K . Development , validation and application of a device to measure e - cigarette users ’ puf ﬁ ng topography . Sci Rep . 2016 ; 6 : 35071 . 31 . Evans SE , Hoffman AC . Electronic cigarettes : abuse liability , topography and subjective effects . Tob Control . 2014 ; 23 ( suppl 2 ) : ii23 – ii29 . 32 . Robinson RJ , Hensel EC , Roundtree KA , Difrancesco AG , Nonnemaker JM , Lee YO . Week long topography study of young adults using electronic cigarettes in their natural environment . PLoS One . 2016 ; 11 : e0164038 . 33 . Lee YO , Nonnemaker JM , Brad ﬁ eld B , Hensel EC , Robinson RJ . Examining daily electronic cigarette puff topography among established and non - established cigarette smokers in their natural environment . Nicotine Tob Res . 2017 . Available at : https : / / academic . oup . com / ntr / advance - article - abstrac t / doi / 10 . 1093 / ntr / ntx222 / 4344908 ? redirectedFrom = fulltext . Accessed July 4 , 2018 . 34 . Barrington - Trimis JL , Gibson LA , Halpern - Felsher B , Harrell MB , Kong G , Krishnan - Sarin S , Leventhal AM , Loukas A , McConnell R , Weaver SR . Type of e - cigarette device used among adolescents and young adults : ﬁ ndings from a pooled analysis of eight studies of 2166 vapers . Nicotine Tob Res . 2018 ; 20 : 271 – 274 . 35 . Brown CJ , Cheng JM . Electronic cigarettes : product characterisation and design considerations . Tob Control . 2014 ; 23 : ii4 – ii10 . 36 . Chen Z , Zeng DD . Mining online e - liquid reviews for opinion polarities about e - liquid features . BMC Public Health . 2017 ; 17 : 633 . 37 . Kaisar MA , Kallem RR , Sajja RK , Sifat AE , Cucullo L . A convenient UHPLC - MS / MS method for routine monitoring of plasma and brain levels of nicotine and cotinine as a tool to validate newly developed preclinical smoking model in mouse . BMC Neurosci . 2017 ; 18 : 71 . 38 . Karim ZA , Alshbool FZ , Vemana HP , Adhami N , Dhall S , Espinosa EV , Martins - Green M , Khasawneh FT . Third - hand smoke : impact on hemostasis and thrombogenesis . J Cardiovasc Pharmacol . 2015 ; 66 : 177 – 182 . 39 . Hensch NR , Karim ZA , Pineda J , Mercado N , Alshbool FZ , Khasawneh FT . P2y12 antibody inhibits platelet activity and protects against thrombogen - esis . Biochem Biophys Res Commun . 2017 ; 493 : 1069 – 1074 . 40 . Alshbool FZ , Karim ZA , Vemana HP , Conlon C , Lin OA , Khasawneh FT . The regulator of G - protein signaling 18 regulates platelet aggregation , hemostasis and thrombosis . Biochem Biophys Res Commun . 2015 ; 462 : 378 – 382 . 41 . Hensch NR , Karim ZA , Druey KM , Tansey MG , Khasawneh FT . RGS10 negatively regulates platelet activation and thrombogenesis . PLoS One . 2016 ; 11 : e0165984 . 42 . Karim ZA , Alshbool FZ , Vemana HP , Conlon C , Druey KM , Khasawneh FT . CXCL12 regulates platelet activation via the regulator of G - protein signaling 16 . Biochim Biophys Acta . 2016 ; 1863 : 314 – 321 . 43 . Scott DA , Palmer RM . The in ﬂ uence of tobacco smoking on adhesion molecule pro ﬁ les . Tob Induc Dis . 2002 ; 1 : 7 – 25 . 44 . Whitehead TP , Robinson D , Allaway SL , Hale AC . The effects of cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption on blood haemoglobin , erythrocytes and leucocytes : a dose related study on male subjects . Clin Lab Haematol . 1995 ; 17 : 131 – 138 . 45 . Velez de Mendizabal N , Jones DR , Jahn A , Bies RR , Brown JW . Nicotine and cotinine exposure from electronic cigarettes : a population approach . Clin Pharmacokinet . 2015 ; 54 : 615 – 626 . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 13 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H 46 . McGrath - Morrow SA , Hayashi M , Aherrera A , Lopez A , Malinina A , Collaco JM , Neptune E , Klein JD , Winickoff JP , Breysse P , Lazarus P , Chen G . The effects of electronic cigarette emissions on systemic cotinine levels , weight and postnatal lung growth in neonatal mice . PLoS One . 2015 ; 10 : e0118344 . 47 . Flouris AD , Chorti MS , Poulianiti KP , Jamurtas AZ , Kostikas K , Tzatzarakis MN , Wallace Hayes A , Tsatsakis AM , Koutedakis Y . Acute impact of active and passive electronic cigarette smoking on serum cotinine and lung function . Inhal Toxicol . 2013 ; 25 : 91 – 101 . 48 . Etter JF . A longitudinal study of cotinine in long - term daily users of e - cigarettes . Drug Alcohol Depend . 2016 ; 160 : 218 – 221 . 49 . Severinsen MT , Kristensen SR , Johnsen SP , Dethlefsen C , Tjonneland A , Overvad K . Smoking and venous thromboembolism : a Danish follow - up study . J Thromb Haemost . 2009 ; 7 : 1297 – 1303 . 50 . Levine PH . An acute effect of cigarette smoking on platelet function . A possible link between smoking and arterial thrombosis . Circulation . 1973 ; 48 : 619 – 623 . 51 . Gitte RN . Effect of cigarette smoking on plasma ﬁ brinogen and platelet count . Asian Journal of Medical Sciences . 2012 ; 2 : 181 – 184 . 52 . Suwansaksri J , Wiwanitkit V , Soogarun S . Effect of smoking on platelet count and platelet parameters : an observation . Clin Appl Thromb Hemost . 2004 ; 10 : 287 – 288 . 53 . Davis JW , Shelton L , Watanabe IS , Arnold J . Passive smoking affects endothelium and platelets . Arch Intern Med . 1989 ; 149 : 386 – 389 . 54 . Dawood BB , Wilde J , Watson SP . Reference curves for aggregation and ATP secretion to aid diagnosis of platelet - based bleeding disorders : effect of inhibitionofADPandthromboxaneA ( 2 ) pathways . Platelets . 2007 ; 18 : 329 – 345 . 55 . Storrie B , Whiteheart SW . Editorial : platelet secretion . Platelets . 2017 ; 28 : 107 . 56 . Bennett JS . Structure and function of the platelet integrin a IIB b 3 . J Clin Invest . 2005 ; 115 : 3363 – 3369 . 57 . SchoenwaelderSM , Yuan Y , JosefssonEC , White MJ , YaoY , MasonKD , O ’ Reilly LA , HenleyKJ , OnoA , HsiaoS , WillcoxA , RobertsAW , HuangDC , SalemHH , Kile BT , Jackson SP . Two distinct pathways regulate platelet phosphatidylserine exposure and procoagulant function . Blood . 2009 ; 114 : 663 – 666 . 58 . Zwaal RF , Schroit AJ . Pathophysiologic implications of membrane phospho - lipid asymmetry in blood cells . Blood . 1997 ; 89 : 1121 – 1132 . 59 . Kuypers FA . Phospholipid asymmetry in health and disease . Curr Opin Hematol . 1998 ; 5 : 122 – 131 . 60 . Senis YA , Sangrar W , Zirngibl RA , Craig AWB , Lee DH , Greer PA . Fps / Fes and Fer non - receptor protein - tyrosine kinases regulate collagen - and ADP - induced platelet aggregation . J Thromb Haemost . 2003 ; 1 : 1062 – 1070 . 61 . Stojanovic A , Marjanovic JA , Brovkovych VM , Peng X , Hay N , Skidgel RA , Du X . A phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - AKT - nitric oxide - cGMP signaling pathway in stimulating platelet secretion and aggregation . J Biol Chem . 2006 ; 281 : 16333 – 16339 . 62 . Kwon HW , Shin JH , Lee DH , Park HJ . Inhibitory effects of cytosolic Ca ( 2 + ) concentration by ginsenoside RO are dependent on phosphorylation of IP3RI and dephosphorylation of ERK in human platelets . Evid Based Complement Alternat Med . 2015 ; 2015 : 764906 . 63 . Woulfe D , Jiang H , Morgans A , Monks R , Birnbaum M , Brass LF . Defects in secretion , aggregation , and thrombus formation in platelets from mice lacking AKT2 . J Clin Invest . 2004 ; 113 : 441 – 450 . 64 . Garcia A , Quinton TM , Dorsam RT , Kunapuli SP . Src family kinase - mediated and Erk - mediated thromboxane A2 generation are essential for VWF / GPIb - induced ﬁ brinogen receptor activation in human platelets . Blood . 2005 ; 106 : 3410 – 3414 . 65 . Kaisar MA , Prasad S , Liles T , Cucullo L . A decade of e - cigarettes : limited research & unresolved safety concerns . Toxicology . 2016 ; 365 : 67 – 75 . 66 . Warren GW , Alberg AJ , Kraft AS , Cummings KM . The 2014 surgeon general ’ s report : “ The health consequences of smoking — 50 years of progress ” : a paradigm shift in cancer care . Cancer . 2014 ; 120 : 1914 – 1916 . 67 . Pepper JK , Brewer NT . Electronic nicotine delivery system ( electronic cigarette ) awareness , use , reactions and beliefs : a systematic review . Tob Control . 2014 ; 23 : 375 – 384 . 68 . King BA , Alam S , Promoff G , Arrazola R , Dube SR . Awareness and ever - use of electronic cigarettes among U . S . adults , 2010 – 2011 . Nicotine Tob Res . 2013 ; 15 : 1623 – 1627 . 69 . Centers for Disease C , Prevention . Notes from the ﬁ eld : electronic cigarette use among middle and high school students — United States , 2011 – 2012 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2013 ; 62 : 729 – 730 . 70 . Regan AK , Promoff G , Dube SR , Arrazola R . Electronic nicotine delivery systems : adult use and awareness of the “ e - cigarette ” in the USA . Tob Control . 2013 ; 22 : 19 – 23 . 71 . Breit M , Hoskinson H , Pitzer C , Wu Z , Bryner R , Olfert IM . Effects of electronic cigarette vapor on body mass , food intake , and body composition . FASEB J . 2017 ; 31 : 1037 . 72 . Zhang G , Wang Z , Zhang K , Hou R , Xing C , Yu Q , Liu E . Safety assessment of electronic cigarettes and their relationship with cardiovascular disease . Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2018 ; 15 : E75 . 73 . Zhu S - H , Sun JY , Bonnevie E , Cummins SE , Gamst A , Yin L , Lee M . Four hundred and sixty brands of e - cigarettes and counting : implications for product regulation . Tob Control . 2014 ; 23 : iii3 – iii9 . 74 . Xu X , Su Y , Fan ZH . Cotinine concentration in serum correlates with tobacco smoke – induced emphysema in mice . Sci Rep . 2014 ; 4 : 3864 . 75 . Churg A , Wright JL . Animal models of cigarette smoke – induced chronic obstructive lung disease . Contrib Microbiol . 2007 ; 14 : 113 – 125 . 76 . Morissette MC , Lamontagne M , Berube JC , Gaschler G , Williams A , Yauk C , Couture C , Laviolette M , Hogg JC , Timens W , Halappanavar S , Stamp ﬂ i MR , Bosse Y . Impact of cigarette smoke on the human and mouse lungs : a gene - expression comparison study . PLoS One . 2014 ; 9 : e92498 . 77 . Barua RS , Ambrose JA , Srivastava S , DeVoe MC , Eales - Reynolds L - J . Reactive oxygen species are involved in smoking - induced dysfunction of nitric oxide biosynthesis and upregulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase : an in vitro demonstration in human coronary artery endothelial cells . Circulation . 2003 ; 107 : 2342 – 2347 . 78 . Zhang S , Day I , Ye S . Nicotine induced changes in gene expression by human coronary artery endothelial cells . Atherosclerosis . 2001 ; 154 : 277 – 283 . 79 . Gkaliagkousi E , Ritter J , Ferro A . Platelet - derived nitric oxide signaling and regulation . Circ Res . 2007 ; 101 : 654 – 662 . 80 . Shah PK . Plaque disruption and thrombosis : potential role of in ﬂ ammation and infection . Cardiol Rev . 2000 ; 8 : 31 – 39 . 81 . Matetzky S , Tani S , Kangavari S , Dimayuga P , Yano J , Xu H , Chyu KY , Fishbein MC , Shah PK , Cercek B . Smoking increases tissue factor expression in atherosclerotic plaques : implications for plaque thrombogenicity . Circulation . 2000 ; 102 : 602 – 604 . 82 . Sambola A , Osende J , Hathcock J , Degen M , Nemerson Y , Fuster V , Crandall J , Badimon JJ . Role of risk factors in the modulation of tissue factor activity and blood thrombogenicity . Circulation . 2003 ; 107 : 973 – 977 . 83 . Tapson VF . The role of smoking in coagulation and thromboembolism in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . Proc Am Thorac Soc . 2005 ; 2 : 71 – 77 . 84 . Smith CJ , Fischer TH , Sears SB . Environmental tobacco smoke , cardiovas - cular disease , and the nonlinear dose - response hypothesis . Toxicol Sci . 2000 ; 54 : 462 – 472 . 85 . The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke : A Report of the Surgeon General . Atlanta , GA : Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( US ) ; 2006 . 86 . Bhatnagar A . Cardiovascular perspective of the promises and perils of e - cigarettes . Circ Res . 2016 ; 118 : 1872 – 1875 . 87 . Pieri L , Chellini E , Gorini G . [ Smoking fewer cigarettes per day may determine a signi ﬁ cant risk reduction in developing smoking attributable diseases ? Is there a risk reduction for e - cigarette users ? ] . Epidemiol Prev . 2014 ; 38 : 390 – 393 . 88 . Anderson TJ . Arterial stiffness or endothelial dysfunction as a surrogate marker of vascular risk . Can J Cardiol . 2006 ; 22 ( suppl B ) : 72B – 80B . 89 . Temesgen N , Pena I , Tayeb T , Alzahrani T . A cross sectional study reveals an association between electronic cigarette use and myocardial infarction . J Hosp Med . 2017 ; 12 : ( suppl 2 ) : 100 . 90 . Kivrak T , Sunbul M , Durmus E , Dervisova R , Sari I , Yesildag O . Acute myocardial infarction due to liquid nicotine in a young man . Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis . 2014 ; 8 : 32 – 34 . 91 . Lee HW , Park SH , Weng MW , Wang HT , Huang WC , Lepor H , Wu XR , Chen LC , Tang MS . E - cigarette smoke damages DNA and reduces repair activity in mouse lung , heart , and bladder as well as in human lung and bladder cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2018 ; 115 : E1560 – E1569 . 92 . Kaisar MA , Villalba H , Prasad S , Liles T , Sifat AE , Sajja RK , Abbruscato TJ , Cucullo L . Offsetting the impact of smoking and e - cigarette vaping on the cerebrovascular system and stroke injury : is metformin a viable counter - measure ? Redox Biol . 2017 ; 13 : 353 – 362 . 93 . Sithu SD , Srivastava S , Siddiqui MA , Vladykovskaya E , Riggs DW , Conklin DJ , Haberzettl P , O ’ Toole TE , Bhatnagar A , D ’ Souza SE . Exposure to acrolein by inhalation causes platelet activation . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol . 2010 ; 248 : 100 – 110 . 94 . Barnoya J , Glantz SA . Cardiovascular effects of secondhand smoke : nearly as large as smoking . Circulation . 2005 ; 111 : 2684 – 2698 . 95 . Sinzinger H , Kefalides A . Passive smoking severely decreases platelet sensitivity to antiaggregatory prostaglandins . Lancet . 1982 ; 2 : 392 – 393 . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 14 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H 96 . Jin J , Mao Y , Thomas D , Kim S , Daniel JL , Kunapuli SP . RhoA downstream of G ( q ) and G ( 12 / 13 ) pathways regulates protease - activated receptor - mediated dense granule release in platelets . Biochem Pharmacol . 2009 ; 77 : 835 – 844 . 97 . Kim S , Jin J , Kunapuli SP . Akt activation in platelets depends on Gi signaling pathways . J Biol Chem . 2004 ; 279 : 4186 – 4195 . 98 . West KA , Brognard J , Clark AS , Linnoila IR , Yang X , Swain SM , Harris C , Belinsky S , Dennis PA . Rapid Akt activation by nicotine and a tobacco carcinogen modulates the phenotype of normal human airway epithelial cells . J Clin Invest . 2003 ; 111 : 81 – 90 . 99 . Dajas - Bailador FA , Soliakov L , Wonnacott S . Nicotine activates the extracel - lular signal - regulated kinase 1 / 2 via the a 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and protein kinase A , in SH - SY5Y cells and hippocampal neurones . J Neurochem . 2002 ; 80 : 520 – 530 . 100 . Brunzell DH , Russell DS , Picciotto MR . In vivo nicotine treatment regulates mesocorticolimbic CREB and ERK signaling in C57BL / 6J mice . J Neurochem . 2003 ; 84 : 1431 – 1441 . 101 . Cheng T . Chemical evaluation of electronic cigarettes . Tob Control . 2014 ; 23 : ii11 – ii17 . 102 . Schober W , Szendrei K , Matzen W , Osiander - Fuchs H , Heitmann D , Schettgen T , Jorres RA , Fromme H . Use of electronic cigarettes ( e - cigarettes ) impairs indoor air quality and increases FeNO levels of e - cigarette consumers . Int J Hyg Environ Health . 2014 ; 217 : 628 – 637 . 103 . Williams M , Villarreal A , Bozhilov K , Lin S , Talbot P . Metal and silicate particles including nanoparticles are present in electronic cigarette car - tomizer ﬂ uid and aerosol . PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 : e57987 . 104 . Fernandez E , Ballbe M , Sureda X , Fu M , Salto E , Martinez - Sanchez JM . Particulate matter from electronic cigarettes and conventional cigarettes : a systematic review and observational study . Curr Environ Health Rep . 2015 ; 2 : 423 – 429 . 105 . Hioki H , Aoki N , Kawano K , Homori M , Hasumura Y , Yasumura T , Maki A , Yoshino H , Yanagisawa A , Ishikawa K . Acute effects of cigarette smoking on platelet - dependent thrombin generation . Eur Heart J . 2001 ; 22 : 56 – 61 . 106 . Fahim MA , Nemmar A , Singh S , Hassan MY . Antioxidants alleviate nicotine - induced platelet aggregation in cerebral arterioles of mice in vivo . Physiol Res . 2011 ; 60 : 695 – 700 . 107 . Girdhar G , Xu S , Bluestein D , Jesty J . Reduced - nicotine cigarettes increase platelet activation in smokers in vivo : a dilemma in harm reduction . Nicotine Tob Res . 2008 ; 10 : 1737 – 1744 . 108 . Ljungberg LU , Persson K , Eriksson AC , Green H , Whiss PA . Effects of nicotine , its metabolites and tobacco extracts on human platelet function in vitro . Toxicol In Vitro . 2013 ; 27 : 932 – 938 . 109 . Wilson DW , Aung HH , Lame MW , Plummer L , Pinkerton KE , Ham W , Kleeman M , Norris JW , Tablin F . Exposure of mice to concentrated ambient particulate matter results in platelet and systemic cytokine activation . Inhal Toxicol . 2010 ; 22 : 267 – 276 . 110 . Mutlu GM , Green D , Bellmeyer A , Baker CM , Burgess Z , Rajamannan N , Christman JW , Foiles N , Kamp DW , Ghio AJ , Chandel NS , Dean DA , Sznajder JI , Budinger GR . Ambient particulate matter accelerates coagulation via an IL - 6 - dependent pathway . J Clin Invest . 2007 ; 117 : 2952 – 2961 . DOI : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 118 . 009264 Journal of the American Heart Association 15 E - Cigarettes and Thrombotic Disease Qasim et al O R I G I N A L R E S EA R C H