UNIT 10 . 22 Traction Force Microscopy in 3 - Dimensional Extracellular Matrix Networks M . C´ondor , 1 J . Steinwachs , 2 C . Mark , 2 J . M . Garc´ıa - Aznar , 1 and B . Fabry 2 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Zaragoza , Zaragoza , Spain 2 Department of Physics , University of Erlangen - Nuremberg , Erlangen , Germany Cell migration through a three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) matrix depends strongly on the ability of cells to generate traction forces . To overcome the steric hindrance of the matrix , cells need to generate sufﬁciently high traction forces but also need to distribute these forces spatially in a migration - promoting way . This unit describes a protocol to measure spatial maps of cell traction forces in 3 - D biopolymer networks such as collagen , ﬁbrin , or Matrigel . Traction forces are computed from the relationship between measured force - induced matrix deformations surrounding the cell and the known mechanical properties of the matrix . The method does not rely on knowledge of the cell surface coordinates and takes nonlinear mechanical properties of the matrix into account . C (cid:2) 2017 by John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Keywords : biopolymer networks (cid:2) ﬁnite elements (cid:2) traction force microscopy (cid:2) unconstrained force reconstruction (cid:2) 3 - D cell traction forces How to cite this article : C´ondor , M . , Steinwachs , J . , Mark , C . , Garc´ıa - Aznar , J . M . , & Fabry , B . ( 2017 ) . Traction force microscopy in 3 - dimensional extracellular matrix networks . Current Protocols in Cell Biology , 75 , 10 . 22 . 1 – 10 . 22 . 20 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cpcb . 24 INTRODUCTION This unit describes a method for measuring cell traction forces in physiologically rel - evant three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) biopolymer networks with highly nonlinear mechanical properties , such as reconstituted collagen gels . Most cells that are able to adhere , spread , and migrate onto a 2 - D extracellular matrix ( ECM ) can also adhere , change shape , and migrate when embedded in a biopolymer network of suitable adhesiveness , stiffness , and network porosity . In contrast to a 2 - D matrix , however , a 3 - D matrix imposes a steric hindrance against shape changes and movements of the cell . To overcome this steric hindrance , the cell needs to generate forces . Studying these forces is therefore important for a mechanistic understanding of many physiological and pathophysiological cell func - tions in health and disease that involve cell adhesion , shape changes , and migration , such as tissue formation during embryogenesis , tumor cell invasion in tissue , or the homing of immune cells . Furthermore , quantifying these forces is important for understanding the function of muscle cells and other highly contractile cells , such as ﬁbroblasts or blood platelets . The concept of traction force microscopy ( TFM ) was ﬁrst developed for 2 - D cell cul - ture conditions ( Butler , Tolic - Norrelykke , Fabry , & Fredberg , 2002 ; Sabass , Gardel , Waterman , & Schwarz , 2008 ) whereby cells are grown on natural or synthetic optically transparent hydrogels , such as polyacrylamide - bisacrylamide hydrogels , in which ﬂu - orescent beads are embedded . The displacement ﬁeld of the hydrogel caused by cell Current Protocols in Cell Biology 10 . 22 . 1 – 10 . 22 . 20 , June 2017 Published online June 2017 in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / cpcb . 24 Copyright C (cid:2) 2017 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 1 Supplement 75 tractions is quantiﬁed by tracking the positions of the embedded beads before and after the cell tractions are relaxed with a drug cocktail containing trypsin and / or high concen - trations of actin - disrupting drugs such as cytochalasin D . Once the matrix displacements are known , the matrix strain ﬁeld can be computed . Given the known mechanical prop - erties of the matrix , an inverse algorithm is then used to compute the stress ﬁeld within the hydrogel ( Butler et al . , 2002 ; Franck , Maskarinec , Tirrell , & Ravichandran , 2011 ; Palacio et al . , 2013 ) . Besides knowledge of the matrix mechanical properties , most al - gorithms are constrained in the sense that they allow the reconstructed forces to appear only at predeﬁned locations , e . g . , at focal adhesion sites ( Sabass et al . , 2008 ) or at the cell surface ( Dembo & Wang , 1999 ; Legant et al . , 2010 ) . The concept of TFM can also be extended to 3 - D measurements ( Legant et al . , 2010 ) . Previous TFM methods have relied on a linear stress - strain response of the matrix and assume afﬁne matrix deformations , meaning that a uniform macroscopic stress gives rise to a uniform microscopic strain . However , the mechanical response of some biopolymer networks is more complex . For example , collagen gels stiffen under shear stress and col - lapse with an abnormal apparent Poisson’s ratio greater than 1 when stretched ( Arevalo , Urbach , & Blair , 2010 ; Licup et al . , 2015 ; Steinwachs et al . , 2016 ; Vader , Kabla , Weitz , & Mahadevan , 2009 ) . The method described here takes into account the nonlinearity as well as the non - afﬁne behavior of collagen gels or other biopolymer networks . Moreover , the method is unconstrained and therefore solves the inverse problem of computing the tractions from the matrix displacements without knowledge of the cell geometry ( al - though the user can also constrain the reconstructed forces for cases where the precise 3 - D coordinates of the cell surface are known ) . To quantify the traction force – induced deformations of the biopolymer network , the network ﬁbers are imaged using an upright reﬂection confocal reﬂection microscope with a dip - in water - immersion objective . Alternatively , the network deformations can be imaged with confocal or conventional ﬂuorescence microscopy using matrix - embedded ﬂuorescent beads that serve as ﬁducial markers . One image stack or a series of time - lapse image stacks are recorded before cell traction forces are relaxed with cytochalasin D . A second image stack is recorded 30 min after cytochalasin D addition . This second image stack represents the undeformed , force - free conﬁguration of the matrix . The displacement ﬁeld of the matrix ﬁbers between the deformed and the undeformed image stack is obtained by 3 - D particle image velocimetry . The matrix volume is subdivided into a mesh of small ﬁnite elements of tetrahedral shape . For each tetrahedron , the constitutive equation that describes the relationship between the forces at the four nodes of the tetrahedron and the stresses and deformations of the four faces are computed numerically . An iterative method is then used to modify the nodal forces of all ﬁnite elements until the measured and calculated matrix displacements match . In addition to the cell forces , this method also allows the user to compute the principal matrix stress as well as the principal matrix stiffness . The unit comprises four basic protocols . Basic Protocol 1 explains the preparation of type I collagen gels with different collagen concentrations , as well as the cell seeding procedure . Basic Protocol 2 describes the technique for performing confocal reﬂection microscopy of the collagen ﬁbers for obtaining the displacement ﬁeld of the collagen gel . Basic Protocol 3 is a guide to the force - reconstruction software . In the following , this software is referred to as SAENO ( semi - afﬁne elastic network optimizer ) . Basic Protocol 4 explains how the nonlinear material parameters of the 3 - D hydrogel are measured . The source code of the algorithm can be downloaded free of charge under the MIT li - cense on the collaborative coding platform GitHub ( https : / / github . com / Tschaul / SAENO ) . Moreover , a compiled version of the software and a tutorial are provided as 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 2 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplementary Software ( Steinwachs et al . , 2016 ) , together with a sample data set ( http : / / lpmt . biomed . uni - erlangen . de / 3DTractions / SampleData . rar ) . BASICPROTOCOL 1 PREPARATION OF TYPE I COLLAGEN GELS WITH CELLS This section describes how to embed cells in a collagen type I hydrogel with a ﬁnal concentration of 2 . 4 mg / ml . The protocol for producing collagen gels as described here was developed in the 1990s by J¨urgen Behrens ( University Clinics Erlangen , Germany , unpub . observ . ) . He found that a combination of rat and bovine collagen produces gels that are stiffer compared to gels polymerized from pure calf skin or rat tail collagen : Young’s moduli of mixed gels are between 45 Pa ( for 0 . 3 mg / ml gels ) and 550 Pa ( for 2 . 4 mg / ml gels ) , compared to pure calf skin collagen gels [ 1 to 13 Pa for concentrations ranging from 0 . 5 to 1 . 5 mg / ml ( Yang & Kaufman , 2009 ) ] or pure rat - tail collagen gels [ 5 to 60 Pa for concentrations ranging from 1 to 4 mg / ml ( Miron - Mendoza , Seemann , & Grinnell , 2010 ) ] . This protocol can be adapted to prepare collagen hydrogels of different concentrations by diluting the base solution before polymerization . The optimal cell seeding concentration is 15 , 000 cells per ml of collagen gel , to ensure sufﬁcient free space between neighboring cells . To prevent the uncontrolled polymerization of the collagen hydrogels , it is crucial to maintain all reagents , pipet tips , and Petri dishes at a temperature of 4 ° C during prepa - ration . NOTE : All solutions and equipment coming into contact with cells must be sterile . Materials T - 75 ( 75 - cm 2 ) ﬂask with cells of interest at 60 % to 75 % conﬂuence Complete cell culture medium , 37 ° C ( depending the cell line ) : e . g . , low - glucose DMEM ( 1g / liter D - glucose ) with 10 % FBS and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin 2 mg / ml , rat tail collagen ( Collagen R ; Matrix Bioscience ) 4 mg / ml bovine skin collagen ( Collagen G ; Matrix Bioscience ) 0 . 27 M NaHCO 3 : Dissolve 2 . 3 g NaHCO 3 ( Merck KGaA ) in 100 ml distilled H 2 O ( store up to 1 year at 4 º C ) 10 × DMEM medium ( Biochrom ) 1 M NaOH : Dissolve 4 g NaOH ( Sigma ) in 100 ml distilled H 2 O ( store up to 1 year at 4 º C ) Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline without Ca or Mg ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , cat . no . 14190169 ) 50 - ml conical polypropylene centrifuge tubes 35 - mm Petri dishes Aluminum or copper plate to support Petri dishes in ice bucket ( (cid:2) 15 × 10 cm , see Fig . 10 . 22 . 1 ) 37 ° C incubator , 95 % relative humidity and 5 % CO 2 Cell culture tabletop centrifuge Tissue culture phase - contrast microscope Additional reagents and equipment for cell culture ( UNIT 1 . 1 ; Phelan & May , 2015 ) Prepare cell suspension 1 . Prepare cells according to usual procedures for cell culture ( UNIT 1 . 1 ; Phelan & May , 2015 ) . Trypsinize , count , and disperse cells in complete cell culture medium ( all techniques described in Phelan & May , 2015 ) at a concentration of 10 6 cells per ml ( we will need 30 µ l per Petri dish ) . Place a microcentrifuge tube with cells on wet ice . ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 3 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 Figure 10 . 22 . 1 The reagents and the aluminum plate in an ice bucket . Preparing 3 - D collagen gels and cell seeding 2 . Cool all reagents and a 50 - ml conical polypropylene centrifuge tube for at least for 5 min on wet ice . Place as many 35 - mm Petri dishes as needed onto a cooled aluminum or copper plate ( which provides better mechanical stability than simply placing the Petri dish onto the ice , see Fig . 10 . 22 . 1 ) . IMPORTANT NOTE : The following volumes and measures refer to the amounts needed for two Petri dishes containing 2 ml of collagen with a concentration of 2 . 4 mg / ml . Step 5 explains how to adjust the solution for other collagen concentrations . 3 . Pipet 1600 µ l of 2 mg / ml rat tail collagen and 1600 µ l of 4 mg / ml bovine skin collagen in a 50 - ml conical polypropylene centrifuge tube ( previously placed on wet ice ) . Mix the collagen solution slowly and gently without introducing air bubbles . It is recommended not to withdraw the tip of the pipet from the solution during the mixing process . Always keep the tube with the collagen solution on ice . 4 . Add 400 µ l of 0 . 36 M NaHCO 3 and 400 µ l of 10 × DMEM medium . Gently mix the solution . 5 . For ﬁnal collagen concentrations of less than 2 . 4 mg / ml , dilute the solution with a mixture of 1 part ( v / v ) 0 . 36 M NaHCO 3 , 1 part 10 × DMEM , and 8 parts distilled water . 6 . Adjust the solution to pH 10 by adding 60 µ l of 1 M NaOH . It is possible that the amount of NaOH needs to be adjusted depending on the stock solution’s pH . Hence , it is recommended to use pH test paper or a pH meter to measure the pH of the ﬁnal solution . If less than 60 µ l NaOH is needed , make up the difference with distilled H 2 O ; if more is needed , prepare a higher NaOH concentration . 7 . Pipet 60 µ l of a 15 , 000 cell / ml cell suspension into the collagen solution , and gently mix . Addition of NaOH and cell suspension will slightly reduce the collagen concentration of the ﬁnal mixture ( 2 . 31 mg / ml in the case of 60 µ l NaOH and 60 µ l cell suspension ) . 8 . Pipet 2 ml of the cell - collagen solution into a 35 - mm Petri dish to obtain a collagen thickness of approximately 2 mm . Sufﬁcient thickness of the collagen sample is crucial for the 3 - D cell traction force reconstruction , as it is important to ﬁnd cells at a distance of at least 300 µ m from the bottom or top surface of the collagen gel . 9 . To initiate polymerization , quickly transfer the Petri dish with the cell - collagen solution to an incubator at 37 ° C with 95 % relative humidity and 5 % CO 2 for 1 hr . 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 4 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology It is advisable not to open the incubator during the polymerization time , to ensure constant temperature and humidity conditions for the sample . It is also possible to polymerize the collagen gel at different temperatures or with different temperature - time proﬁles , but this will inevitably alter the pore size and mechanical properties of the polymerized gel . Polymerizing the gels at lower temperatures leads to wider pores and a higher bulk stiffness ( Yang & Kaufman , 2009 ) . 10 . Gently pipet 2 ml of 37 º C complete cell culture medium onto the polymerized collagen gel . It is important to pipet the cell culture medium at 37 ° C , taking care not to damage the gel surface or detach the gel . For all following steps , it is also crucial to handle the sample gently and carefully to avoid damage to the collagen gel . 11 . Incubate overnight . Incubation time depends on the cell type and the time needed to establish cell polarity and migration through 3 - D collagen matrix . BASICPROTOCOL 2 CONFOCAL REFLECTION MICROSCOPY OF 3 - D COLLAGEN GELS This protocol describes how to conﬁgure the confocal microscope hardware and software for the acquisition of the two image stacks around selected cells . The ﬁrst image stack , subsequently referred to as stack - 1 , corresponds to the deformed conﬁguration of the matrix . The second image stack , subsequently referred to as stack - 2 , is recorded after cell traction forces have been ablated with a drug cocktail . Thus , stack - 2 corresponds to the force - free undeformed state of the matrix . Voxel dimensions are 0 . 72 µ m horizontally in the x and y direction , and also 0 . 72 µ m vertically in the z direction . The individual ﬁbers of the biopolymer network matrix around the cell are imaged in confocal reﬂection mode , which collects the back - scattered light from the ﬁbers . No ﬂuorescence staining of the matrix is needed in this imaging mode , and since the back - scattered light intensities are large even for small excitation laser intensities , a fast scanning speed without line or frame averaging can be selected . With typically 512 z stacks and 512 × 512 pixels in the x - y plane , the acquisition time for one complete image stack is on the order of 4 to 5 min . If more than one cell is analyzed for each Petri dish , or if time - lapse image stacks are recorded , the use of an environmental enclosure or microscope incubation chamber is recommended to keep the cells at 37 ° C , 5 % CO 2 , and 95 % relative humidity . NOTE : For prolonged investigation times , all solutions and equipment coming into con - tact with cells should be sterile . If an environmental enclosure or microscope incubation chamber is used , it is advisable to turn on the temperature control system the day before the experiment to minimize stage drift . Materials EthanolCellswithin collagen gel in 35 - mm Petri dishes ( Basic Protocol 1 ) 1 mM cytochalasin D : dissolve 50 mg cytochalasin D ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in 100 ml dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ; Sigma ) ; store up to 2 years at – 20 º C Complete cell culture medium , 37 ° C ( depending the cell line ) : e . g . , low - glucose DMEM ( 1g / liter D - glucose ) with 10 % FBS and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin Upright confocal microscope ( Leica TCS SP1 ) Lens paper Argon laser 488 nm or other laser Microscope environmental chamber or microscope stage incubator ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 5 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 20 × dip - in water - immersion objective with a high numerical aperture ( NA ) Injection needles ( optional ) Mount samples for imaging 1 . At a time point 1 hr prior to the measurements and when the temperature inside the microscope incubation chamber has reached a steady state , turn on the CO 2 system as well as the microscope following the manufacturer’s instructions . The sample should not be introduced into the microscope incubator chamber until the correct level of 5 % CO 2 and temperature of 37 ° C is reached . 2 . Turn on the lasers for the measurements . For confocal reﬂection mode , a laser power of 1 . 5 mW ( typically 3 % of the maximum argon laser power at 488 nm ) is sufﬁcient . Wait at least 30 min before starting the image acquisition to reach a stable laser output . 3 . Sterilize the dip - in objective lens with ethanol using lens paper . 4 . Carefully place the sample onto the stage plate . Allow the sample to equilibrate to the microscope chamber temperature for 10 to 15 min . 5 . Remove the Petri dish lid , dip in the microscope objective , and focus onto a cell . The objective should be immersed in the cell culture medium at all times but must not touch the collagen gel surface , to prevent damage to the collagen gel . Set up acquisition and scanning parameters for the reﬂection mode If the scanner settings are modiﬁed , the parameters of the algorithm ( described in Basic Protocol 3 ) must be changed accordingly . 6 . Adjust the laser power level of the required laser line . For reﬂection images of the collagen ﬁbers , it is sufﬁcient to use 3 % ( 1 . 5 mW ) of the total power of the 488 laser line . 7 . Select the appropriate optical zoom / magniﬁcation for an x - y pixel size of 720 nm . 8 . Select a pinhole diameter of 0 . 75 Airy units or less . The optimum pinhole diameter depends on the magniﬁcation factor and the numerical aperture of the objective . It is important to deﬁne a proper pinhole size , as it determines the thickness of the optical sections and therefore the z - resolution . 9 . Select the xyz scan mode and scan frequency to optimize for short scan time and high signal - to - noise ratio . 10 . Select an image resolution of 512 × 512 pixels , corresponding to a total imaged area of 370 µ m × 370 µ m . Set up the z - stack 11 . Select a stable and reproducible z - focus mode ( e . g . , objective piezo or stepper motor , but not a z - Galvo microscope stage ) . Verify the reproducibility of the z - focus of your microscope by repeatedly taking z - stacks of a calibration slide , e . g . , consisting of ﬂuorescent beads embedded in a polyacrylamide hydrogel . 12 . Select a z - stack distance ( step size ) equal to or as close as possible to the x - y pixel dimensions of 720 nm , and a total number of (cid:2) 512 z - stacks , so that the total z - travel is equal to the x - y ﬁeld of view . 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 6 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Figure 10 . 22 . 2 ( A ) Bright - ﬁeld image of a MDA - MD - 231 breast carcinoma cell migrating within the collagen gel . Confocal reﬂection images of the collagen ﬁbers : ( B ) before and ( C ) after cell relaxation . Select the cells to be analyzed 13 . Use bright - ﬁeld illumination to locate the cells to be analyzed ( Fig . 10 . 22 . 2A ) . The cell should be at least 300 µ m away from the top or bottom gel surface or from neighboring cells . It is advisable to check that the hydrogel in the region of interest around the cell does not show any irregularities . 14 . Store the xyz center coordinates of all cells to be analyzed . To avoid very long image acquisition times , it is advisable not to select more than 10 cells per experiment , as the image acquisition takes around 5 min per cell for the conﬁguration deﬁned above . Acquire the ﬁrst ( pre - relaxation ) z - stack 15 . Acquire the ﬁrst z - stack ( stack - 1 ) of the collagen ﬁbers for each selected cell . This ﬁrst z - stack corresponds to the deformed state of matrix prior to force relaxation ( Fig . 10 . 22 . 2B ) . Force relaxation 16 . Dilute 10 µ l of 1 mM cytochalasin D in 500 µ l of complete cell culture medium and add to the cell culture dish ( ﬁnal concentration will be 1 . 96 µ M ) . It is important to pipet the solution without touching the sample or moving the dish . It is advisable to add the solution using an injection needle to prevent movement of the sample . 17 . Wait 30 min to ensure that the cell is completely relaxed . Acquire the second ( force - free ) z - stack 18 . Scan the sample in live mode to check that the cells are in the same positions . If the sample was moved by more than approximately 50 µ m , the measurement cannot be used . 19 . Acquire the second z - stack ( stack - 2 ) of the collagen gel for each selected cell ( Fig . 10 . 22 . 2C ) . 20 . Export the two z - stacks ( stack - 1 and stack - 2 ) in uncompressed TIF format . Each image needs to be saved with a ﬁlename that includes the cell or position number , the z - plane , and the selected laser channel , e . g . , Pos001 _ z001 _ ch00 . tif . The image ﬁles of the stacks should match a common wildcard - based ﬁle ﬁlter ( e . g . , * _ ch00 . tif ) ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 7 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 in which the * character is a wildcard that stands for any possible string . This ﬁle ﬁlter will be used later ( in Basic Protocol 3 ) by the force - reconstruction software to recognize the confocal reﬂection images . Images from different time points should be stored in separate folders , e . g . , stack _ alive and stack _ relaxed , or they can be simply named stack _ 1 and stack _ 2 . BASIC PROTOCOL 3 UNCONSTRAINED 3 - D FORCE RECONSTRUCTION This protocol describes how to run the unconstrained 3 - D force reconstruction algorithm using the SAENO software . The input data for the algorithm are the two image stacks ( stack - 1 and stack - 2 ) as well as four parameters that describe the material properties of the collagen network . These four parameters are deﬁned in a conﬁguration ﬁle , as described below in more detail ( see also Table 10 . 22 . 1 and Basic Protocol 4 ) . The software ﬁrst calculates the displacement ﬁeld of the collagen network between stack - 1 and stack - 2 . To do so , both image stacks are aligned to remove stage drift and z - focus drift . The alignment algorithm is based on rigid registration . Once the images are aligned , the program computes the matrix displacement ﬁeld with particle image velocimetry . Next , the software performs an unconstrained force reconstruction algorithm to calculate the cell traction forces . Materials A compiled version of the SAENO software ( https : / / github . com / Tschaul / SAENO ) Matlab software V . R2012b or newer ( older versions of Matlab may not work with SAENO ) PC with Windows operating system Select the path and data ﬁles to be analyzed Supplementary information on the method , as well as a tutorial and source data ﬁles , are available in the online version of Steinwachs et al . ( 2016 ) . 1 . Open Matlab . 2 . Add the path where SAENO is saved ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 3 ) . To do this , in the HOME tab ( a ) , click on Set Path ( b ) . Then , click Add with Subfolders ( c ) and select the SAENO _ matlab directory where the compiled ﬁles are located ( d ) . 3 . Inside a parent data folder , place the two image stacks ( stack _ 1 and stack _ 2 ) of each cell into different folders ( e . g . , cell007 _ alive and cell007 _ relaxed ) . The two folder names belonging to the same cell must be the same except for an arbitrary sufﬁx , e . g . , _ alive or _ relaxed . Make sure that there is no ﬁle in these two folders other than the image ﬁles belonging to the same image stack , and that the folder names and the image ﬁle names do not contain white spaces ; otherwise the program will not recognize them properly . The parent data folder structure should look as shown in Figure 10 . 22 . 4 . In the case of time - lapse measurement ( multiple stacks per cell ) , the parent data folder structure should look as shown in Figure 10 . 22 . 5 . Specify the material parameters 4 . Specify the four parameters that describe the material properties of the matrix in the config . txt ﬁle . A default config . txt ﬁle can be found in the SAENO _ matlab directory that can also be edited , but local copies of this con - fig . txt ﬁle can be copied and stored at arbitrary locations . Open the ﬁle with a text editor ( e . g . , Notepad + + ) and modify the values for K 0 , d 0 , L s , and d s ( lines 6 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 8 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Table 10 . 22 . 1 Table of parameters Name Value in the example conﬁg ﬁle Description / meaning MODE Regularization Do a unconstrained force reconstruction BEAMS 300 Number of ﬁbers per tetrahedron K _ 0 2000 Bulk modulus of the material in Pascal D _ 0 0 . 00032 Buckling coefﬁcient of the ﬁbers L _ S 0 . 0075 Onset of strain stiffening of the ﬁbers D _ S 0 . 0333 Strain stiffening coefﬁcient of the ﬁbers DRIFTCORRECTION 1 Set to 1 to perform a drift correction . Set to 0 otherwise . DRIFT _ STEP 2 . 0e - 06 Initial step width for the drift correction algorithm ( in units of meters ) . Larger values speed up the drift correction but increase the risk that drifted stacks cannot be aligned . DRIFT _ RANGE 30 . 3e - 06 Maximum search range ( in units of meter ) over which the drift correction is performed ALLIGNSTACKS 1 Set to 1 to perform a z - dependent drift correction ( stack alignment ) . Set to 0 otherwise FIBERPATTERNMATCHING 1 Set to 1 to run the module extractDeformations . Set to 0 to run the module loadDeformations . SUBPIXEL 0 . 0005 Convergence criterion for the uncertainty of the ﬁber pattern matching , in units of voxels VB _ MINMATCH 0 . 7 Only sections of the ﬁber matrix are considered for force reconstructions when the image cross - correlation of matching ﬁbers is larger than the value speciﬁed . Higher values exclude poorly matched sections . VB _ SX 12 Size of cross - correlated sections in x direction , in units of voxels . VB _ SY 12 Size of cross - correlated sections in x direction , in units of voxels . VB _ SZ 12 Size of cross - correlated sections in z direction , in units of voxels . BOXMESH 1 Set to 1 to build a mesh . Set to 0 otherwise . BM _ GRAIN 7 . 5e - 06 Grid constant of the regular cubic ﬁnite element mesh , in units of meters BM _ N 54 Number of nodes in every dimension ( x , y , and z ) continued ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 9 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 Table 10 . 22 . 1 Table of parameters , continued Name Value in the example conﬁg ﬁle Description / meaning BM _ MULOUT 1 . 2 Stretch factor . The outer ( beyond a length speciﬁed under BM _ RIN ) are nodes stretched away from the center by this factor . The size of the volume over which forces arereconstructed is ( BM _ GRAIN × BM _ N × BM _ MULOUT ) ˆ3 BM _ RIN 160e - 06 Only nodes that are farther away from the center than this value are stretched ( in units of meters ) ALPHA 3 . 0e - 09 Regularization parameter in units of square Newtons per square meter REG _ ITERATIONS 50 Maximal number of iterations REG _ CONV _ CRIT 0 . 01 The algorithm stops if the relative standard deviation of the residuum in the last 6 iterations falls below this value REG _ SOLVER _ STEP 0 . 33 Step width parameter of the regularization . A higher value leads to a faster but less robust convergence of the algorithm . For a more linear material ( like Matrigel ) , you can increase this parameter up to a value of 1 . 0 . FR _ RMAX 100e - 06 Only forces that lie within this range ( in units of meters ) from the force epicenter are considered for the analysis of the cellular forces to 9 ) . How these parameters can be obtained is described in Basic Protocol 4 . The other parameters in the config . txt ﬁle should only be changed by expert users . For more information on how to adjust the different parameters in the config . txt ﬁle , see Table 10 . 22 . 1 as well as the GitHub documentation ( https : / / github . com / Tschaul / SAENO / wiki / Introduction ) . Run SAENO _ setup 5 . Run the program SAENO _ setup in the Matlab command window , as shown in Fig . 10 . 22 . 6A . This program opens the SAENO _ setup window and allows the user to deﬁne the different parameters of the calculation . 6 . The ﬁrst line shows by default the path of the SAENO . exe program ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 6B ) . If no path or an incorrect path is displayed , select the correct path where the SAENO . exe program is located . 7 . On the second line , specify the number of processes to run at the same time ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 6B ) . For instance , for a PC with four CPU cores , this value should be set to 4 . This means that the traction force calculation of four cells will be performed in parallel . If the computer has more than four CPU cores , this number may be increased to run more processes at the same time , but consider that at least 1 GB of free RAM is needed for each process . 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 10 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Figure 10 . 22 . 3 Adding the SAENO _ matlab directory to the Matlab path . Figure 10 . 22 . 4 Structure of parent data folder . ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 11 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 Figure 10 . 22 . 5 Structure of parent data folder in case of time - lapse measurements . Figure 10 . 22 . 6 Running SAENO _ setup in Matlab command window ( A ) to open the setup window ( B ) . Figure 10 . 22 . 7 Running SAENO _ batchfrecon in the Matlab command window . 8 . On the third line , specify the priority of the traction forces reconstruction program ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 6B ) . If the ‘ / low’ option is selected , the reconstruction runs in the background so that other processes of the computer are not markedly slowed down . If the ‘ / high’ option is selected , the reconstruction has priority over other applications , which in turn will be markedly slowed down . Run SAENO _ batchfrecon 9 . Run the program SAENO _ batchfrecon in the Matlab command window , as shown in Fig . 10 . 22 . 7 . This program opens the SAENO _ batchfrecon window 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 12 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Figure 10 . 22 . 8 The batch processing window . ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) and allows for parallel batch processing of multiple cells or time - lapse image stacks of the same cell . The number of cells or time points that can be simultaneously analyzed corresponds to the number of processes selected in step 7 . 10 . Click on Select Directory ( ‘e’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) to select the parent directory deﬁned in step 3 that contains the data ﬁles . All subfolders in the parent directory will be processed . Check in the processes box ( ‘j’ ) that the number of processes coincide with the number of processes selected in the setup window ( Fig . 10 . 22 . 6B ) . It is possible now to re - adjust the number of processes that will be launched in parallel . For the best performance , this number should match the number of cores of your CPU , as explained in step 7 . If the parent directory contains more cells than the number of processes selected , SAENO will process the remaining cells once it has ﬁnished computing the ﬁrst ones . 11 . Click on Choose Conﬁg File ( ‘f’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) and select the config . txt ﬁle in which the calculation parameters are deﬁned . 12 . Click on Specify File Filter ( ‘g’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) to specify the laser channel and ﬁle format of the individual ﬁles to be analyzed ( e . g . , * _ ch00 . tif ; see Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) . Do not forget to type * _ ch00 . tif in this example , where the character * is a so - called wildcard that stands for any string of characters . 13 . Click on Set VOXELSIZEX / Y ( ‘h’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) and Set VOXELSIZEZ ( ‘i’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) to set the voxel size in the x , y , and z directions . This value must be in units of meters , i . e . , for a size of 0 . 72 µ m , type 0 . 72e - 06 . 14 . Click on Run ( ‘k’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) to start the batch processing ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) . A number of command windows will open up automatically , depending to the number of parallel processes speciﬁed in step 7 . No further action from the user is needed at this stage . Do not close the command windows until all cells have been analyzed . ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 13 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 Figure 10 . 22 . 9 Running SAENO _ 3dplot in the Matlab command window . Figure 10 . 22 . 10 The 3 - D plot window . 15 . After all command windows have completed their tasks , you can click on Generate Excel Sheets ( ‘l’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 8 ) to collect all of the information ( e . g . , total con - tractility , force polarity , matrix stiffening , etc . ) in a resultsall . xls ﬁle in your parent data directory . If the data set contains only one cell , data collection from multiple cells makes no sense and does not work . In this case , you can ﬁnd the same information in the results . txt ﬁle in the results directory of the cell , which was automatically created during the calculation . Generating 3 - D plots of the cell deformation and force ﬁeld 16 . From the Matlab command window , start the program SAENO _ 3dplot , as shown in Fig . 10 . 22 . 9 . This program opens the SAENO _ 3dplot window ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) and plots the deformation and force ﬁeld that was computed with the SAENO software . 17 . Click on Load Cell or Batch ( ‘m’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) to load the data from one cell or multiple cells for plotting ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . To that end , select the parent directory where the data and the results are located . The loading process can take a while depending on the number of cells to load . It is advisable to select the autodraw option in order to automatically redraw all results after parameter adjustments . If the autodraw option has not been selected , remember to click the Redraw button ( ‘o’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) to refresh the results . 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 14 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology 18 . In the right panel of the plot window , it is possible to change the plotting options . Wait until all data are loaded before changing the plotting options . Click on the drop - down menu to select the data to plot ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . The data available for plotting are : the measured displacements , the ﬁtted displacements , the traction forces , and the displacement noise . Plotting will take some time as a considerable amount of data needs to be loaded . The raw displacements are those calculated with the ﬁber pattern – matching algorithm . The ﬁtted displacements and the traction forces are computed by the force - reconstruction algorithm . The displacement noise is the difference between the ﬁtted and the raw dis - placements . 19 . The Viewrange option modiﬁes the size of the volume to be displayed ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . This parameter is speciﬁed in units of meters . The edge length of the displayed cubic volume is two times the Viewrange parameter . 20 . The Max Value ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) controls the upper limit of the color bar . This parameter is speciﬁed in units of meters for the displacements and the noise , and in units of squared Newtons per cubic meter in the case of the force density . If a value of zero is entered , the maximum value of the scale will be adjusted automatically . 21 . The Azimuth and Elevation options modify the horizontal and vertical viewing angle ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . 22 . The Quiver Count option sets the number of generated arrows ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . 23 . The Smoothen option controls the smoothing of the data ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . A value of 0 means that no smoothing is applied . For a value of 1 , the data points are averaged over a cubic volume with the size of 3 × 3 × 3 times the grid constant ( which is 7 . 5 µ m by default ; see Table 10 . 22 . 1 ) . 24 . The Draw Moments option plots the axis of maximum contractility ( see Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . The axis is shown as a white line ( 50 µ m length ) in the plot . Export the generated 3 - D plots 25 . Before exporting the plots , switch between different cells and timepoints to check that the selected plot options work for all cells and timepoints . To switch between cells , click and move the slider ( ‘p’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) located at the bottom part of the plot window . Switching between cells will take some time , as the new data need to be loaded . 26 . After selecting another cell to plot , click on Redraw ( ‘o’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) to refresh the results . 27 . To export plots of the same type , e . g . , the Raw _ displacements , for all cells in the parent directory , click on Export All ( ‘q’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . To export only the current plot , click on Export ( ‘r’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 10 ) . 28 . After clicking Export or Export All , a window is opened for selecting the di - rectory and specifying a ﬁlename for the plot ( s ) . It is advisable to specify a name that contains the type of data to export and the ﬁle extension ( e . g . , Raw _ displacements . png ) . The names of the generated ﬁles will automati - cally contain the cell and the time point plus the name deﬁned by the user ( e . g . , Raw _ displacements _ cell001 _ t000 . png ) . An example of the results ob - tained with SAENO _ 3dplot is shown in Fig . 10 . 22 . 11 . It is necessary for the user to specify the ﬁle extensions , e . g . , . png , . jpg , or . tif , and the plot ( s ) will be automatically saved in the corresponding image format . If no ﬁle extension is speciﬁed , the plot ( s ) will be saved in the non - image . rpt report format . ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 15 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 Figure 10 . 22 . 11 ( A ) Measured displacements , ( B ) calculated displacements , and ( C ) traction forces in a collagen matrix around an invasive MDA - MB - 231 breast carcinoma cell . Colors and line length indicate the magnitude of the matrix displacements and the traction forces . BASIC PROTOCOL 4 MACRORHEOLOGY OF COLLAGEN TYPE I HYDROGELS To calculate the traction forces from the matrix displacements , it is necessary to know the mechanical properties of the matrix . Note that visco - elastic or plastic matrix properties are neglected in the traction reconstruction method described here . Therefore , it is assumed that the matrix is perfectly elastic and that the matrix conﬁguration , after cell forces have been pharmacologically relaxed , is the same as the matrix conﬁguration before the cell has moved to its current position and has applied any forces to the matrix . Even so , the mechanics of ﬁbrous biopolymer networks such as collagen gels cannot be described by a single elastic modulus . Rather , collagen gels and some other biopolymer networks stiffen exponentially when strained beyond a linear range , and soften exponentially under compression . This behavior can be described with four parameters : a linear elastic stiffness K 0 , a strain range L S at which the matrix starts to stiffen , a strain scale D S describing the exponential stiffening under stretch , and a strain scale D 0 describing the exponential softening under compression . To measure these four parameters , two different macrorheological experiments need to be performed . In the ﬁrst experiment , the stress versus strain relationship of the matrix for simple shear deformation is measured in a cone - plate rheometer . In a second experiment , the vertical contraction ( collapse ) of the matrix under horizontal uniaxial stretch is measured . For more information about these experiments , see supplementary notes in Steinwachs et al . ( 2016 ) . To estimate the four material parameters K 0 , d 0 , L s , and d s , the data from the macrorhe - ological measurements ( stress versus strain and vertical contraction versus horizontal stretch ) are compared to the calculated response based on an initial guess of the four parameters . These four parameters are then iteratively ( manually ) changed until the mis - match between the experimentally obtained data and the values predicted by the model is minimized . Below we describe how the model predictions are calculated and compared with data from two different rheological experiments that must be performed by the user . It is beyond the scope of this protocol to describe these rheological experiments in detail . The source code algorithm can be downloaded free of charge under the MIT li - cense on the collaborative coding platform GitHub ( https : / / github . com / Tschaul / SAENO / tree / master / macrorheology ) . Moreover , a Matlab program and a sample data set of two collagen rheology experiments are provided . Materials A compiled version of the analysis software CurledBeamsFit The Matlab program PlotFitandData Matlab software V . R2012b or newer 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 16 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology An open - source GCC compiler for Windows , for example MinGW32 Computer with Windows operating system Download and install the software This protocol works properly as long as the downloaded folder names are not modiﬁed . If the folder or ﬁle names need to be changed , they must not contain white spaces . 1 . Download the Macrorheology folder from https : / / github . com / Tschaul / SAENO / tree / master / macrorheology onto your computer’s hard drive ( C : drive ) . The Macrorheology folder also can be saved at a different location , but ensure that the path does not contain white spaces . 2 . Open a command window at the location of your Macrorheology folder ( e . g . , C : \ Macrorheology ) . A convenient way to do so is to navigate with your ﬁle explorer to the C : drive , press down and hold the Shift key , right click the folder C : \ Macrorheology , and then click " open command window here . " After that , a new command window will appear , as shown in Fig . 10 . 22 . 12 . 3 . To view the contents of the Macrorheology folder , type dir and press Enter . A list of ﬁles and folders will be displayed . Check that the CurledBeamsFit ﬁle appears in the list . If it is not listed , repeat step 1 . Simulation of the matrix responses to shear deformations and uniaxial stretch Make sure that a GCC compiler for Windows has been installed previously on your com - puter . If not , install an open - source GCC compiler for Windows , for example , MinGW32 . 4 . Run the CurledBeamsFit . exe program as shown in Fig . 10 . 22 . 13 . This pro - gram estimates the stress - strain relationship of the matrix for a pure shear defor - mation , and the vertical contraction in response to a uniaxial stretch , given the four matrix mechanical parameters K 0 , d 0 , L s , and d s . These four parameters are passed to the CurledBeamsFit . exe program from the command line , as shown in Fig . 10 . 22 . 13 . It is necessary to separate these four parameters by whitespaces , and to pass them in the following order : linear stiffness K 0 , buckling coefﬁcient d 0 , linear strain range L s , and strain stiffening coefﬁcient d s . 5 . After all calculations are completed ( typically after 2 to 3 min ) , two different ﬁles are generated in the Macrorheology folder . The computational predictions cor - responding to the shear - rheometer experiment are contained in the rheosim . dat ﬁle , and those corresponding to the stretcher experiment are contained in the stretchersim . dat ﬁle . Figure 10 . 22 . 12 New command window at C : \ Macrorheology . Figure 10 . 22 . 13 Run CurledBeamsFit in the command window . ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 17 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 Figure 10 . 22 . 14 ( A ) Material stress as a function of the engineering shear strain predicted by the semi - afﬁne model ( blue ) , and the corresponding data measured with a cone - plate rheometer ( red ) . ( B ) Vertical contraction as a function of the horizontal stretch predicted by the semi - afﬁne model ( blue ) , and the corresponding data measured in a uniaxial stretch experiment ( red ) . The experimental data correspond to the response of a 1 . 2 mg / ml collagen gel ( provided as an example in the downloaded ﬁles ) , and the simulated responses , are obtained with the material parameters shown in Figure 10 . 22 . 13 . Comparing the model predictions with experimental data / ﬁtting the material model The two ﬁles generated by the CurledBeamsFit . exe program containing the estimated shear and uniaxial stretch responses are now compared with the experimental data stored in two separate ﬁles located in the sub - folder C : \ Macrorheology \ data _ exp \ . The experimental data ﬁle rheodata . dat contains the data from the shear - rheometer experiments , and the ﬁle stretcher - data . dat contains the data from the uniaxial stretcher experiments . The simulated and experimentally measured data are now compared by plotting stress versus strain and vertical compaction versus horizontal stretch responses using the Matlab program PlotFitandData . m . The user may manually optimize the four material parameters until the simulated and experimentally measured data coincide reasonably well . 6 . Open Matlab version 2012b or later . Earlier versions of Matlab may not work properly . 7 . Select the path where the program PlotFitandData is saved ( e . g . , C : \ Macrorheology \ matlab ) . To do this , in the HOME tab ( ‘a’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 3 ) , click on Set Path ( ‘b’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 3 ) . Then , click on Add with Subfolders ( ‘c’ in Fig . 10 . 22 . 3 ) and select the directory where the ﬁles are located . The directory where the compiled ﬁles are located is called Macrorheology . 8 . Place the experimental data results in two different ﬁles in the folder named data _ exp , which is a subfolder of the Macrorheology folder . The experi - mental data that correspond to the shear - rheometer experiment must be contained in a ﬁle named rheodata . dat and the results that correspond to the stretcher experiment must be contained in a ﬁle named stretcherdata . dat . The rheodata . dat ﬁle contains two columns of ASCII - formatted space - separated text . The ﬁrst column contains the stress in Pa , and the second column the corresponding engineering ( or Cauchy ) strain . The stretcherdata . dat ﬁle also contains two columns of ASCII - formatted space - separated text . The ﬁrst column contains the vertical contraction ( height of the collagen layer during stretch , divided by the height at zero stretch ) , and the second column contains the horizontal stretch ( length of the collagen layer during stretch , divided by the unstretched length ) . 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 18 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology 9 . Run the program PlotFitandData in the Matlab command window , as explained in step 5 of Basic Protocol 3 . The program plots the simulated data ( blue lines ) and the experimental data ( red lines ) . An example is shown in Figure 10 . 22 . 14 . 10 . If the experimental curves are not properly matched by the simulated data , repeat steps 4 to 9 with different material parameters , until both curves match . The most important parameter is the linear stiffness K 0 . For a collagen type I hydro - gel , a suitable initial guess for K 0 is around 5000 Pa for a collagen concentration of 2 . 4 mg / ml and around 1000 Pa for a collagen concentration of 1 . 2 mg / ml . For more information about how the other parameters inﬂuence the macrorheological behavior , see supplementary notes in Steinwachs et al . ( 2016 ) . COMMENTARY Background Information Adjusting the conﬁguration ﬁle The conﬁguration ﬁle ( in the SAENO _ matlab folder downloaded from the GitHub platform ) for ﬁne - tuning the force reconstruc - tion algorithm is summarized in Table 10 . 22 . 1 . The material parameters K 0 , d 0 , L s and d s given in the example below are for a collagen gel of 1 . 2 mg / ml and need to be adjusted by the user depending on the 3 - D matrix material properties . These material properties need to be measured as outlined in Basic Protocol 4 . More information about op - timizing the other parameters can be found in the documentation on the GitHub platform ( https : / / github . com / Tschaul / SAENO ) . Critical Parameters and Troubleshooting The most critical parameter in Basic Proto - col 1 is the polymerization temperature . When gels are polymerized at lower temperatures , the pore size and bulk stiffness both increase ( Yang & Kaufman , 2009 ) . Similarly important is the exact temperature proﬁle with which the ice - cold unpolymerized collagen mixture is warmed to initiate the polymerization process . This temperature proﬁle depends on the vol - ume and shape of the culture dish , but also on how quickly the dish is transferred , e . g . , to the cell culture incubator . A consistent , smooth , and well - rehearsed handling of all steps in - volved is therefore important . Another important factor is the consistency of the collagen source from the commercial supplier . It is advisable to test the pore size and branching structure of the collagen gel for each new collagen batch using confocal reﬂection microscopy and visually compare the images with those obtained from previous batches . If deviations are clearly visible and persist , the problem is often attributable to the new col - lagen batch . Most commercial suppliers ship small test samples on request . The most critical parameter in Basic Pro - tocol 2 is the quality of the collagen im - ages and the absence of mechanical drift and noise . Drift and noise can be evaluated with a self - prepared calibration slide containing ﬂuorescent beads embedded in a 3 - D stiff hydrogel matrix such as polyacrylamide , or simply a glutaraldehyde - ﬁxed collagen gel . The displacement ﬁeld from two subsequently recorded image stacks of the calibration slide should be below 200 nm ( rms ) . Larger dis - placements are a sign either of excessive me - chanical noise ( place the microscope on a vibration isolation table ) , photon shot noise ( increase the laser intensity ) , mechanical stage drift ( ensure better temperature control or tem - perature equilibration of the microscope ) , or poor mechanical reproducibility of the z - focus ( this may be an intrinsic problem of the mi - croscope ) . If confocal reﬂection images are obtained not with a water - immersion objec - tive but with a water objective through a glass slide , Newton rings can severely degrade the image quality . Newton rings can be reduced or avoided by choosing different laser wave - lengths and by staying more than 300 µ m away from the bottom or the top of the collagen gel surface . If the problem persists , it is better to mix 1 µ m carboxylated ﬂuorescent beads with the collagen matrix prior to polymeriza - tion and determine the displacement ﬁeld ei - ther with confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy or simply with a standard motorized epiﬂuores - cence microscope . Time Considerations Basic Protocol 1 : It takes around 30 min to prepare collagen gels and to seed cells , and 1 hr for cell - collagen solution polymerization . Af - ter that , incubation overnight is required unless the process of cell spreading in the collagen gel is of interest . The incubation time needed ExtracellularMatrix 10 . 22 . 19 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 75 for the cells to establish cell polarity and to start migration depends on the cell line being studied . Basic Protocol 2 : The time needed for the acquisition process depends on the number of cells selected for imaging . With the set - tings described above , it takes around 5 min to record an image stack for one cell . The time re - quired to relax the cells with the cytochalasin D in the 3 - D collagen gels is approximately 30 min , corresponding to the time necessary to wait between the two stacks ( stack - 1 and stack - 2 ) . Basic Protocol 3 : The computation time of the algorithm strongly depends on the grid constant of the ﬁnite element mesh deﬁned by the user in the conﬁguration ﬁle . For the default grid constant of 7 . 5 μ m , the total com - putation time for four cells ( or four time points of the same cell ) on an Intel i5 processor with four cores is (cid:2) 1 hr . Basic Protocol 4 : The time for comput - ing the stress - strain relationship depends on the dimensions of the material model and the grid constant , but is typically around several minutes . Acknowledgements The project was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) , the Euro - pean Research Council through project ( ERC - 2012 - StG 306571 JMGA ) , the Gov - ernment of Aragon ( C126 / 2015 MC ) , and the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst ( DAAD - 57214227 MC ) . We thank Mat´e Biro for proofreading and helpful comments . Literature Cited Arevalo , R . C . , Urbach , J . S . , & Blair , D . L . ( 2010 ) . Size - dependent rheology of type - i collagen net - works . Biophysical Journal , 99 , L65 – L67 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 08 . 008 . Butler , J . P . , Tolic - Norrelykke , I . M . , Fabry , B . , & Fredberg , J . J . ( 2002 ) . Traction ﬁelds , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings . American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology , 282 , C595 – C605 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00270 . 2001 . Dembo , M . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 1999 ) . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during lo - comotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophysical Journal , 76 , 2307 – 2316 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 99 ) 77386 - 8 . Franck , C . , Maskarinec , S . A . , Tirrell , D . A . , & Ravichandran , G . ( 2011 ) . Three - dimensional traction force microscopy : A new tool for quan - tifying cell - matrix interactions . PLoS One , 6 , e17833 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0017833 . Legant , W . R . , Miller , J . S . , Blakely , B . L . , Cohen , D . M . , Genin , G . M . , & Chen , C . S . ( 2010 ) . Measurement of mechanical trac - tions exerted by cells in three - dimensional matrices . Nature Methods , 7 , 969 – U113 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1531 . Licup , A . J . , Munster , S . , Sharma , A . , Shein - man , M . , Jawerth , L . M . , Fabry , B . , . . . MacK - intosh , F . C . ( 2015 ) . Stress controls the me - chanics of collagen networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 112 , 9573 – 9578 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1504258112 . Miron - Mendoza , M . , Seemann , J . , & Grin - nell , F . ( 2010 ) . The differential regulation of cell motile activity through matrix stiffness and porosity in three dimensional collagen matrices . Biomaterials , 31 , 6425 – 6435 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2010 . 04 . 064 . Palacio , J . , Jorge - Penas , A . , Munoz - Barrutia , A . , Ortiz - de - Solorzano , C . , de Juan - Pardo , E . , & Garcia - Aznar , J . M . ( 2013 ) . Nu - merical estimation of 3D mechanical forces exerted by cells on non - linear materials . Journal of Biomechanics , 46 , 50 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbiomech . 2012 . 10 . 009 . Phelan , K . , & May , K . M . ( 2015 ) . Basic techniques in mammalian cell tissue culture . Current Pro - tocols in Cell Biology , 66 , 1 . 1 . 1 - 1 . 1 . 22 . doi : 10 . 1002 / 0471143030 . cb0101s66 . Sabass , B . , Gardel , M . L . , Waterman , C . M . , & Schwarz , U . S . ( 2008 ) . High resolution traction force microscopy based on experi - mental and computational advances . Biophys - ical Journal , 94 , 207 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1529 / bio - physj . 107 . 113670 . Steinwachs , J . , Metzner , C . , Skodzek , K . , Lang , N . , Thievessen , I . , Mark , C . , . . . Fabry , B . ( 2016 ) . Three - dimensional force microscopy of cells in biopolymernetworks . NatureMethods , 13 , 171 – 176 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3685 . Vader , D . , Kabla , A . , Weitz , D . , & Mahadevan , L . ( 2009 ) . Strain - induced alignment in colla - gen gels . Plos One , 4 , e5902 . doi : 10 . 1371 / jour - nal . pone . 0005902 . Yang , Y . L . , & Kaufman , L . J . ( 2009 ) . Rheol - ogy and confocal reﬂectance microscopy as probes of mechanical properties and structure during collagen and collagen / hyaluronan self - assembly . Biophysical Journal , 96 , 1566 – 1585 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2008 . 10 . 063 . Internet Resources https : / / github . com / Tschaul / SAENO The source code of the algorithm SAENO can be downloaded free of charge from the col - laborative coding platform GitHub at the above URL . A compiled version of the soft - ware and a tutorial are provided as Sup - plementary Software , together with a sam - pledataset ( http : / / lpmt . biomed . uni - erlangen . de / 3DTractions / SampleData . rar ) . https : / / github . com / Tschaul / Macrorheology The macrorheology software and a sample data set of two collagen rheology experiments can be downloaded from the GitHub platform at the above URL . 3 - D Traction Force Microscopy 10 . 22 . 20 Supplement 75 Current Protocols in Cell Biology