Article Basal Cell - Extracellular Matrix Adhesion Regulates Force Transmission during Tissue Morphogenesis Graphical Abstract Highlights d Focal adhesion - like structures form on the basal surface of amnioserosa ( AS ) cells d Disruptions to cell - ECM adhesion affect cell deformation and impede dorsal closure d The amount of basal adhesion is inversely correlated with apical force transmission d Integrin - dependent mechanical coupling exists between AS cells and their substrate Authors Katharine Goodwin , Stephanie J . Ellis , Emily Lostchuck , Teresa Zulueta - Coarasa , Rodrigo Fernandez - Gonzalez , Guy Tanentzapf Correspondence tanentz @ mail . ubc . ca In Brief Goodwin , Ellis et al . identify integrin - containing focal adhesion - like structures on the basal amnioserosa surface that act as tethers , anchoring the apical cell surface to the substrate . These basal adhesions are required for dorsal closure , where they modulate apical surface force transmission and may resist large - scale cell displacements during tissue contraction . Goodwin et al . , 2016 , Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 December 5 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2016 . 11 . 003 Developmental Cell Article Basal Cell - Extracellular Matrix Adhesion Regulates Force Transmission during Tissue Morphogenesis Katharine Goodwin , 1 , 5 Stephanie J . Ellis , 1 , 5 Emily Lostchuck , 1 Teresa Zulueta - Coarasa , 2 Rodrigo Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2 , 3 , 4 and Guy Tanentzapf 1 , 6 , * 1 Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences , University of British Columbia , Life Sciences Centre , 2350 Health Science Mall , Vancouver , BC V6T 1Z3 , Canada 2 Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering , University of Toronto , Toronto , ON M5S 3G9 , Canada 3 Department of Cell and Systems Biology , University of Toronto , Toronto , ON M5S 3G5 , Canada 4 Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program , The Hospital for Sick Children , Toronto , ON M5S 1X8 , Canada 5 Co - ﬁrst author 6 Lead Contact * Correspondence : tanentz @ mail . ubc . ca http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2016 . 11 . 003 SUMMARY Tissue morphogenesis requires force - generating mechanisms to organize cells into complex struc - tures . Although many such mechanisms have been characterized , we know little about how forces are integrated across developing tissues . We provide evidence that integrin - mediated cell - extracellular matrix ( ECM ) adhesion modulates the transmission of apically generated tension during dorsal closure ( DC ) in Drosophila . Integrin - containing adhesive structures resembling focal adhesions were identi - ﬁed on the basal surface of the amnioserosa ( AS ) , an extraembryonic epithelium essential for DC . Genetic modulation of integrin - mediated adhesion results in defective DC . Quantitative image analysis and laser ablation experiments reveal that basal cell - ECM adhesions provide resistance to apical cell displacements and force transmission between neighboring cells in the AS . Finally , we provide evi - dence for integrin - dependent force transmission to the AS substrate . Overall , we ﬁnd that integrins regu - late force transmission within and between cells , thereby playing an essential role in transmitting ten - sion in developing tissues . INTRODUCTION During morphogenesis , cells undergo complex rearrangements to generate tissues and organs ( Lecuit et al . , 2011 ) . Forces generated through the actin cytoskeleton and transmitted through cell - cell adhesion receptors govern the changes in cell shape and position that drive morphogenetic events . Interac - tions between cells and their extracellular environment , medi - ated by cell to extracellular matrix ( ECM ) adhesions , also play an important role in establishing appropriate tissue mechanics during development ( Dray et al . , 2013 ; Julich et al . , 2015 ; Puech et al . , 2005 ) . Integrin heterodimers are the main family of cell - ECM adhe - sion receptors in metazoans . They are composed of an a and a b subunit and connect to the actin cytoskeleton through an intracellular adhesion complex comprising many adapter and signaling proteins that modulate integrin receptor function ( Bul - gakova et al . , 2012 ; Wolfenson et al . , 2013 ) . Understanding of integrin biology has largely been obtained from study of focal ad - hesions ( FAs ) , prominent integrin - mediated adhesion structures observed in 2D cell culture . These studies have demonstrated that integrins can be regulated not only by biochemical signals but also by extracellular and / or intracellular mechanical cues ( Engler et al . , 2009 ; Wolfenson et al . , 2013 ) . In FAs , integrins are key regulatory hubs for both sensing and responding to changes in the mechanical properties of the cellular microenvi - ronment ; this function impinges greatly on cell behavior . Trans - lating the insights generated from the study of FAs in 2D culture into 3D models has proved to be contentious because FAs do not form as readily in 3D , and by some accounts do not form at all ( Fraley et al . , 2010 ; Kubow and Horwitz , 2011 ) . Therefore , identiﬁcation of contexts in intact living organisms in which FAs form and affect cell behavior is of great interest for corroborating and building upon mechanisms delineated in cell culture . Studies of morphogenetic movements that occur during Drosophila development have provided many insights into the role of mechanical forces in shaping developing tissues , as well as elucidation of the molecular mechanisms that underlie tissue biomechanics . One such process , dorsal closure ( DC ) , is a well - studied integrin - dependent morphogenetic event that oc - curs midway through ﬂy embryogenesis to create a continuous epidermal sheet over the dorsal surface of the embryo ( Figures 1A and 1B ) . An extraembryonic epithelium called the amnioser - osa ( AS ) contracts and ingresses , allowing the lateral epidermis from opposing sides of the embryo to migrate toward the dorsal midline . Integrin adhesion complexes form in both tissues , and are thought to carry out a variety of functions . In particular , integ - rins mediate attachment between the AS and the underlying yolk cell through adhesion to a layer of laminin - rich ECM ; disruption of laminin phenocopies loss of integrin function , suggesting that integrin - dependent cell - ECM adhesion is required for this process ( Narasimha and Brown , 2004 ) . However , the speciﬁc role of integrins in the regulation of tissue biomechanics during Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 611 Figure 1 . Focal Adhesion - like Structures in the Amnioserosa during DC ( A and B ) Dorsal view ( A ) and transverse cross - section ( B ) schematics of embryos undergoing DC . Arrows in ( A ) indicate direction of forces generated by AS , epidermis , and actin cable . ( C ) Zoomed - inviewofregionwithinblackboxin ( B ) . Cell - celladhesionsattheapicalpartofthecellandcell - ECMadhesionsonthebasalsurfacearebothcoupled to cortical F - actin networks . ( legend continued on next page ) 612 Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 DC has not been addressed . Since integrins are known to trans - duce traction forces that are generated by actomyosin networks in spreading and migrating cells ( Gardel et al . , 2008 ; Hu et al . , 2007 ) , it is possible that they may play a similar role in force trans - mission during DC . The role of mechanical forces driving DC is well established ( Gorﬁnkiel et al . , 2011 ) . Forces originating within the AS alone are sufﬁcient to drive tissue closure ( Wells et al . , 2014 ) . AS con - tractile forces are generated through cell death and extrusion ( Toyama et al . , 2008 ) , which reduces AS surface area , as well as by apical ratcheting , generated by coordinated pulses of medial actomyosin networks . Ratcheting drives apical oscilla - tions and constriction of individual AS cells and generates ten - sion in the apical plane of the tissue ( Blanchard et al . , 2010 ; Da - vid et al . , 2010 ; Solon et al . , 2009 ) . Mechanical forces generated in the leading - edge epidermis also contribute to closure ( Gorﬁn - kiel et al . , 2011 ) . A contractile actin cable assembles at the lead - ing edge of the epidermis and forms a purse - string - like structure that generates tension to help contract the hole ( Homsy et al . , 2006 ; Hutson et al . , 2003 ; Kiehart et al . , 2000 ) . Cells in the lead - ing - edge epidermis also elongate to provide a counteractive pulling force away from the dorsal midline ( Gorﬁnkiel et al . , 2011 ) . Later in closure , projections formed at the leading edge participate in zippering , a process hypothesized to provide addi - tional pulling forces for closure ( Blanchard et al . , 2010 ; Hutson et al . , 2003 ) . The essential requirement for forces contributed from the AS versus the leading edge remains a somewhat contentious issue ; it is likely an optimized balance of forces orig - inating from both tissues that leads to efﬁcient DC . However , in neither tissue has the question of how forces are transmitted and coordinated between cells been addressed . Cell - ECM ad - hesions have been shown to regulate the balance between force transmission across cells and to the substrate in culture models ( Ng et al . , 2014 ) . Given the precise spatiotemporal patterning of forces required for DC and the known requirement for integrins in the AS , we hypothesized that integrins may act in a similar ca - pacity during DC to facilitate controlled propagation of forces generated across the apical plane of the tissue between neigh - boring cells . Here , by focusing on subcellular regulation of integrins in the AS , and through a combination of quantitative live imaging , ge - netics , and biophysical approaches , we identify adhesive struc - tures and describe a role for cell - ECM adhesion in regulating local cell displacements in the AS . We ﬁnd that perturbation of integrin function leads to changes in force transmission across the apical plane of cells . Furthermore , we provide evidence for integrin - dependent mechanical coupling between the AS and its substrate . Based on our results , we propose that the apical pole of AS cells is tethered to the substrate via apical - basal me - chanical coupling and cell - ECM adhesions ; thus , apically gener - ated forces that drive cell oscillations are subject to passive resistance from basal adhesions to the ECM ( Figures 1C and 1C 0 ) . Finally , we provide evidence that tethering at cell - ECM ad - hesions may resist large - scale cell displacements during tissue contraction in DC . Our ﬁndings highlight the importance of integ - rin - mediated coordination of mechanical forces during collective cell behaviors that drive tissue morphogenesis . RESULTS Focal Adhesion - like Structures Are Present in the AS during DC Although integrins localize to both the lateral and basal domains of AS cells , the main defect observed in integrin null embryos is loss of adhesion between the basal AS and the underlying ECM that overlays the yolk ( Narasimha and Brown , 2004 ) . In ﬁxed tissue , integrins are broadly localized on the basal membrane ( Narasimha and Brown , 2004 ) . However , live imaging using ﬂuorescently tagged transgenes revealed that integrins localize to dot - like adhesive structures on the basal surface of AS cells ( Figure 1D ; Movies S1 and S2 ) . These adhesive structures share many features with FAs , including composition , dynamics , and response to mechanical perturbations ; thus we named them focal adhesion - like structures ( FALS ) . Although FALS were visible in ﬁxed tissue , they were ﬁxation sensitive and more easily visualized through live imaging of the AS cells’ basal domain . Similar to FAs , integrin and its cytoplasmic linker protein talin colocalized at FALS ( Figures 1D and 1E ) . Moreover , using ﬂuo - rescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) analysis and particle tracking of TalinGFP as a marker for FALS , we found FALS to be both dynamic and mobile ( Figures 1F and 1G ; Movie S2 ) . To characterize the motion of FALS , we computed their mean squared displacement ( MSD ) , which reﬂects the average distance each FALS travels over a given time interval . We found that FALS MSDs increase linearly with time , demonstrating that FALS undergo random movement ( Figure 1H ) . Furthermore , FALS localized and tracked with F - actin ( Figures 1I and 1J ; Movie S2 ) . Lastly , like FAs , FALS were mechanosensitive : they responded to extrinsically applied forces as well as to cell - intrinsic changes in contractility . Extrinsic force due to com - pressing the embryos led to larger , more stable adhesions ( Figures 1K – 1M ) . Intrinsic force was modulated by altering acto - myosin contractility through expression of constitutively active or dominant negative Rho1 transgenes , which respectively increased or decreased the area and density of FALS ( Figures 1N – 1P ) . ( C 0 ) Schematic of force transmission model in the AS . Active tension is generated apically and transmitted to neighboring cells via cell - cell adhesions , and to the substrate via apical - basal mechanical coupling and cell - ECM adhesion ( ‘‘tethers’’ ) . ( D and E ) Integrin ( green ) and talin ( red ) colocalize in FALS ( n = 68 FALS ) . Sqh - talin colocalization was used as a negative control . ( F ) FRAP was used to assess FALS turnover ( n > 30 ) . ( G and H ) Tracking and MSD curve of FALS labeled with TalinGFP , shown as trajectories ( pink ) with overlay of cell contours ( gray ) . ( I and J ) FALS colocalize and track with F - actin in ﬁxed tissue ( I ) and in real time ( J ) . Arrowhead in ( J ) indicates a FALS moving with F - actin . ( K – M ) FALS are mechanosensitive and become more stable ( K ) and larger ( M ) in response to compression ( n = 322 – 904 FALS ) . ( N – P ) FALS area and density change in response to altered actomyosin contractility by disruption of Rho1 activity ( n = 6 – 12 embryos , 667 – 2127 FALS ) . Arrowheads indicate FALS . * * * p < 0 . 0001 , * p < 0 . 05 based on two - sample t test . Scale bars represent 5 m m . Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 613 A number of mutant backgrounds have been described to either increase or decrease integrin - mediated adhesion . We tested whether FALS were altered in these mutant backgrounds . A null mutation in myospheroid / b PS - integrin ( mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) ; Roote and Zusman , 1995 ) was used to eliminate both maternal and zygotic contributions of integrin ; as b PS is the only b subunit expressed in the AS , this is sufﬁcient to completely abrogate cell - ECM adhesion during DC . FALS were not detected in integrin null em - bryos ( Figure 2A ) . To increase integrin - mediated adhesion , we used embryos in which endogenous talin was replaced with a mutated version that is defective in autoinhibition . We previously showed that this mutation , Talin ( E1777A ) , promotes increased assembly of integrin - mediated adhesions in multiple embryonic tissues ( Ellis et al . , 2013 ) . As an alternative means to increase cell - ECM adhesion , we expressed a constitutively active version of the small guanosine triphosphatase Rap1 ( Rap1 - CA ) specif - ically in the AS using the c381 driver ; expression of Rap1 - CA also gives rise to increased cell - ECM adhesion ( Ellis et al . , 2013 ) . Consistent with the known effects of Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA , FALS exhibited greater area and density compared with controls ( Figures 2A – 2C ) . Tracking FALS revealed lower speed , and ﬁtting MSD plots ( as in Figure 1H ) revealed less overall movement , evidenced by a lower effective diffusion con - stant in both Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA embryos ( Figures 2D and 2E ) . Overall , when cell - ECM adhesion is increased , FALS morphology and dynamics are altered . Figure 2 . DC Defects Are Associated with Disruptions to FALS ( A ) Sample images of FALS in wild - type ( WT ) , mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) , Talin ( E1777A ) , and Rap1 - CA mutants labeled with TalinGFP . Arrowheads indicate FALS . Scale bar represents 5 m m . ( B and C ) Mean FALS area ( B ) and density ( C ) in Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA embryos with wild - type rescue and wild - type controls , respectively . ( D and E ) FALS speed ( D ) and effective diffusion constant ( E ) as measured by slope of MSD in Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA embryos with respec - tive controls ( n = 3 – 8 embryos , 97 – 1 , 182 FALS ) . ( F – H ) Mean closure rate of AS area over time during DC in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) ( F ) , Talin ( E1777A ) ( G ) , and Rap1 - CA ( H ) embryos and controls ( n = 5 – 9 ) . * p < 0 . 05 based on two - sample t test . See also Figure S4 . Previous work demonstrated that DC was disrupted to varying degrees in all three genetic backgrounds studied ( Ellis et al . , 2013 ; Narasimha and Brown , 2004 ) . We performed quantitative image analysis of movies of DC in integrin null embryos as well as Talin ( E1777A ) em - bryos . We found that closure rates were slower in both mutant backgrounds ( Fig - ures 2F and 2G ; Movies S1 and S3 ) . Since DC involves not only the AS but also the epidermis , we sought to ascribe tissue speciﬁcity to the delayed closure pheno - type we observed by testing the effect of increasing adhesion in either the epidermis or the AS alone . Our analysis revealed that expression of Rap1 - CA restricted to the AS was sufﬁcient to induce a delay in closure ( Figure 2H and Movie S4 ) . Conversely , in embryos with Rap1 - CA driven in only the epidermis using the e22c driver , the mean closure rate was the same as in controls ( control , 0 . 011 ± 0 . 002 ; Rap1 - CA , 0 . 011 ± 0 . 001 ; p = 0 . 9 ) , allowing us to conclude that increased cell - ECM adhesion in the epidermis is not sufﬁcient to delay closure , and that it is likely the speciﬁc effect of changes in integ - rin - mediated adhesion in the AS that underlies the observed delays in DC . Cell - ECM Adhesion Modulates Cell Behavior in the AS As FAs are well known to play an important role in transducing cell - generated forces in culture models ( Gardel et al . , 2010 ; Schwarz and Gardel , 2012 ) , we reasoned that changes in FALS morphology and dynamics could affect cell behavior and the generation of contractile forces in the AS , thereby inﬂuencing the outcome of DC . Since AS contractile forces are generated by cell extrusion as well as by cell area oscillations , we hypothe - sized that modulating cell - ECM adhesion would impinge on these processes and lead to delayed closure . Examination of cell extrusion revealed little to no difference when cell - ECM adhesion was altered ( Figure S1A ) . Quantiﬁcation of apical cell oscillatory behavior revealed that modulating cell - ECM adhesion resulted in no signiﬁcant differences in cell oscillation amplitude 614 Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 or period ( Figures S1B and S1C ) with the exception of Rap1 - CA , which exhibited a modest decrease in oscillation amplitude . During oscillation cycles , a given AS cell will contract and pull on its neighbors , and in turn be subject to the pulling of surround - ing contracting cells . Consequently , AS cells are constantly sub - ject to multidirectional strain . A measureable result of this strain is the displacement of the centroid , or geometric center , of the apical surface of the cell ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . Cell deformation due to autonomous contraction is relatively uniform and thus does not result in signiﬁcant centroid displacement ; however , strain caused by disordered contraction of neighboring cells will result in randomly oriented centroid displacement . In line with this , we ﬁnd that plotting the MSD of the apical centroid over time revealed a pattern characteristic of random motion ( Figure 3C ) . To determine whether cell - ECM adhesion could modulate cell centroid displacement , we quantiﬁed apical centroid movement in each genetic background during the ‘‘early phase’’ of closure ( beginning after the end of germband retraction and before the onset of AS contraction ; see Blanchard et al . , 2010 ) . In integrin null embryos , apical centroid displace - ment , in terms of both instantaneous speed and range of motion , was signiﬁcantly increased compared with controls ( Figures 3D – 3F ; Movie S5 ) . In comparison , Talin ( E1777A ) - and Rap1 - CA - expressing embryos exhibited signiﬁcantly reduced apical centroid mobility ( Figures 3G – 3L and Movie S5 ) . These data show that apical centroid displacements due to contraction of neighboring cells are inversely correlated with the amount of cell - ECM adhesion . Since modulating basal adhesion to the ECM results in altered apical centroid movement ( Figure 3 ) , we hypothesized that api - cal and basal parts of the cell must be mechanically coupled , and that FALS , acting as tethers to the ECM , could provide resis - tance to apical deformation ( Figure 1C 0 ) . Such mechanical coupling may be provided by actin networks in AS cells , which extend along the entire cell cortex ( Figure S2A ) , and thus could theoretically support force transmission between the apical and basal domains . We sought to determine whether apically generated forces are indeed transmitted basally by examining differences in the behavior of the apical and basal poles of AS cells . We analyzed cell area oscillations and centroid movements computed using cell contours at the apical and basal planes of each cell in embryos expressing Venus - GAP43 , a marker for the entire cell membrane . The amplitude of area oscillations was reduced at the basal pole compared with the apical pole of the cell ( Figure S2B ) , and oscillations were strongly correlated between the two parts of the cell ( Figure S2D ) . These data sug - gest that apical deformations are transmitted , but attenuated , basally . Measuring centroid movement revealed similar speeds at apical and basal poles of cell ( Figure S2C ) but a reduced correlation between apical and basal centroid movement Figure 3 . AS Cell Displacement Correlates Inversely with Cell - ECM Adhesion ( A ) Wild - type AS cells labeled with DE - cadherin - GFP with average cell movement represented as centroid trajectories ( pink ) . Scale bar represents 5 m m . ( B ) Sequential overlay of cell outlines and centroid trajectory of sample wild - type cell . ( C ) MSD plot of cell in ( B ) including ﬁt . ( D , G , and J ) Temporal overlay of cell contours with centroid trajectories in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) mutants and mys + / (cid:2) controls ( D ) , Talin ( E1777A ) and wild - type rescue controls ( G ) , and Rap1 - CA and wild - type controls ( J ) . ( E , H , and K ) Mean instantaneous centroid speed . ( F , I , and L ) Mean range of cell movement measured as the average area described by the cell trajectory ( n = 3 – 6 embryos , n = 21 – 66 cells ) . * * * p < 0 . 0001 , * p < 0 . 05 based on two - sample t test . See also Figure S2 . Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 615 ( Figure S2E ) , suggesting that apical movement is transmitted to the basal part of the cell either non - instantaneously or with less than perfect efﬁciency . To further examine the relationship between apical displacements and cell - ECM adhesion , we compared FALS movement with cell centroid movement and found that , similar to apical and basal cell centroid movement ( Figure S2E ) , FALS and cell centroid movement exhibited a weak but positive correlation ( Figures S2F and S2G ) . These ﬁnd - ings suggest the existence of mechanical coupling between the apical and basal poles of AS cells , since apical deformations and movements are reﬂected by the basal portion of the cell . However , these displacements are attenuated basally , lending support to the notion that basal adhesions could provide resistance to apically generated forces transmitted to the bottom of the cell . Links between FALS Dynamics and Apical Cell Displacement Suggest a Role for FALS in Resisting Apical Deformation We further investigated the links between cell displacement and FALS by examining local variations in FALS morphology , FALS movement , and apical cell membrane movement in wild - type embryos . We compared trajectories of FALS labeled with TalinGFP with the displacement of apical membrane segments labeled with DE - cadherin - mTomato ( Figures 4A and 4E ) . FALS exhibited an area - dependent correlation with the local move - ment of cell membranes : smaller FALS showed greater correla - tion while larger FALS showed less correlation , as evidenced by a taller peak at time lag = 0 in the cross - correlation function for smaller FALS ( Figures 4A – 4C ) . While there was a great deal of variability across all tracked FALS , we observed a negative trend when comparing FALS area with the time lags of maximum cor - relation ( Figure 4D ) . Overall , FALS with greater area tend to lag behind apical membrane movement , resulting in less correlation . These data suggest that the movement of FALS is coupled to the movement of the local apical membrane and that larger FALS resist apically driven movement , while smaller FALS follow more readily . Since our analyses suggested that FALS dynamics are coupled to apical membrane movement , we reasoned that resis - tance provided by cell - ECM adhesions in FALS could control the extent of apical membrane displacement . To test this hypothe - sis , we compared the speed of apical membrane movement with the average area of FALS in the immediate vicinity , and found a negative correlation ( Figures 4E and 4F ) . Apical mem - brane segments in the presence of larger FALS tended to move with lower speed , while those surrounded by smaller FALS moved faster . Taken together , these ﬁndings suggest that apical displacements can induce movement of FALS on the basal surface of the cell and , in turn , FALS can resist and thus attenuate apical displacements . Furthermore , this pro - posed role for FALS is supported by the observed differences in cell displacements induced by genetically modulating cell - ECM adhesion and FALS morphology ( Figure 3 ) . Our analyses in both the wild - type and in genetic backgrounds with altered cell - ECM adhesion support the model that the apical surface of the cell is tethered to the ECM via FALS ( Figure 1C 0 ) , allowing cell - ECM adhesions to provide resistance to apical deformations . Cell - ECM Adhesion Modulates Force Transmission in the AS We next sought to determine whether modulating cell - ECM adhesion could affect the generation and transmission of tension across the apical surface of AS cells . The apical - medial actomy - osin activity , which drives cell deformations , is responsible for generating tension across the apical plane of the tissue . Based on our observation that modulating cell - ECM adhesion alters cell centroid displacements , we hypothesized that modulating FALS morphology could inﬂuence tissue - level forces or biome - chanical properties in the AS . Laser ablation of apical cell membranes is a commonly used tool to probe stresses experienced across cell membranes and local biomechanical properties . Using this approach , we measured the recoil velocity of adjacent cell - cell junctions to infer tension across apical cell membranes . This experiment is best explained using an analogy of an elastic band : an elastic band subject to more pulling force will recoil with greater velocity when cut , while one subject to less force will recoil more slowly . Therefore , if local mechanical properties are constant across samples , recoil velocity can be used to infer the amount of pulling force or tension applied across cell membranes . Alternatively , differential responses to ablation can reveal differences in local resistance to recoil . Importantly , if resistance to recoil varies between samples , differences in tension cannot be inferred . Laser ablation experiments revealed higher recoil velocity in in - tegrin mutants ( Figure 5A and Movie S6 ) . Conversely , in Rap1 - CA and Talin ( E1777A ) embryos , recoil velocity was reduced compared with controls ( Figures 5B and 5C ; Movie S6 ) . Overall , apical junction recoil following laser ablation correlates inversely with the amount of cell - ECM adhesion , suggesting that cell - ECM adhesion regulates either tension across apical cell membranes or local biomechanical properties . Transmission of cell - generated forces is critical for the buildup of tension across sheets of migrating cells ( Tambe et al . , 2011 ; Trepat et al . , 2009 ) . In the AS , cells are mechanically coupled to each other via cell - cell adhesions , allowing cell - generated forces to be transmitted between neighbors across the apical plane of the tissue . Cell - ECM adhesion regulates force transmis - sion across cells in culture models ; the presence of cell - ECM ad - hesions causes forces exerted at cell - cell junctions to be trans - mitted to the substrate instead of across the cell ( Ng et al . , 2014 ) . In addition , downregulating cell - ECM adhesion prevents this redirection , allowing these forces to be transmitted directly across cells to opposing cell - cell junctions ( Ng et al . , 2014 ) . We therefore hypothesized that modulating cell - ECM adhesion could affect cell - to - cell force transmission in the AS , and tested this by examining the response of neighboring cells to laser abla - tion . If forces are efﬁciently transmitted , the effects of ablating a membrane segment should be detectable at a greater dis - tance ; this would manifest as higher second neighbor recoil ve - locity and less decay of recoil effects with increasing distance . Conversely , if force is poorly transmitted , we would expect lower second neighbor recoil velocity and more decay of recoil effects . To estimate the efﬁciency of force transmission between AS cells , we tracked the recoil of second neighbor junctions after ablation ; to control for the baseline movement due to cell oscil - lations , we also tracked ‘‘background’’ movement of junctions at least three membrane segments away from the cut . In mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) 616 Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 embryos , second neighbor recoil velocity was higher than in controls and greater than background ( Figures 5D and 5E ) . We plotted the extent of junction displacement as a function of orig - inal distance from the cut and performed an exponential ﬁt to measure the decay rate , giving us an estimate of spatial decay of recoil effects . This analysis revealed less decay in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) mu - tants , suggesting that there is more efﬁcient force transmission between cells when cell - ECM adhesion is decreased ( Figures 5H , 5H 0 , and 5K ) . In Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA embryos , we saw the opposite effect . Second neighbor recoil velocity was signiﬁcantly smaller than in controls and indistinguishable from background ( Figures 5F and 5G ) , and the extent of junction displacement decayed more quickly with increasing distance from the cut ( Figures 5I , 5J 0 , 5K 0 , and 5K 00 ) . We also compared the extent of displacement for ﬁrst and second neighbor junc - tions with background junction movement , and found that ﬁrst neighbor displacement was greater than background in all geno - types , and that second neighbor displacement in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) mu - tants and all controls was greater than background ( Figures S3A – S3C ) , conﬁrming that the data in Figure 5 are a result of ablation and not an artifact of cell oscillations . For Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA there was no difference in the extent of Figure 4 . FALS Displacements Exhibit Area - Dependent Correlation with Local Cell Membrane Movement and May Resist Apical Displace - ment of AS Cells ( A ) Sampleimagesfromtime - lapsemoviesoftwoembryosat0 , 15 , and30s , andoverlayofcelloutlinesandFALStrajectories . Pinkarrowheadsindicatetracked FALS ; blue arrowheads indicate closest point on cell membrane . ( B and C ) Average cross - correlation function ( B ) and distribution of correlation coefﬁcients ( C ) for FALS and local membrane movement in smaller ( area < 0 . 23 m m 2 , n = 20 ) and larger ( area > 0 . 23 m m 2 , n = 29 ) FALS . ( D ) Time lag versus FALS area for each tracked FALS ( n = 7 embryos , n = 49 FALS ) . ( E ) Sample images from embryos expressing DE - cadherin - mTomato and TalinGFP , zoomed - in views of region in white box , and overlay of membrane outlines showing local apical membrane movement . Pink arrowheads indicate FALS . ( F ) Membrane speed versus mean area of nearby FALS for each cell ( n = 6 embryos , n = 25 cells ) . Slopes and R 2 values are indicated on relevant plots . * p < 0 . 05 based on two - sample t test . Scale bars represent 5 m m . See also Figure S3 . Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 617 Figure 5 . Cell - ECM Adhesion Regulates Recoil after Laser Ablation and Force Transmission in the AS ( A – C ) AS cell membranes before and after laser ablation and mean instantaneous recoil velocity of cell junctions after ablation in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) and mys + / (cid:2) control ( A ) , Talin ( E1777A ) andwild - typerescuecontrol ( B ) , andRap1 - CAandwild - typecontrol ( C ) embryos ( n = 12 – 26cuts ) . Arrowheadsindicatetrackedjunctions ; redlines indicate cut . ( D ) Example image of AS before cut showing cut location ( red line ) and ﬁrst neighbor , second neighbor , and background junctions . ( E – G ) Mean recoil velocity of second neighbors ( nbr ) and background ( Bkgd ) junctions in controls and mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) ( E ) , Talin ( E1777A ) ( F ) , and Rap1 - CA ( G ) . ( legend continued on next page ) 618 Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 displacement between second neighbors and background , as would be expected if recoil effects are poorly transmitted when cell - ECM adhesion is increased . Overall , recoil effects following laser ablation are well propagated when cell - ECM adhesion is decreased but dissipated when cell - ECM adhesion is increased , suggesting that cell - ECM adhesion affects force transmission between cells across the apical plane of the AS . We next examined possible mechanisms by which changes to basal adhesion could induce changes to apical behaviors and response to recoil . Recoil velocity after ablation is a function not only of tension but also of resistance to recoil . After ablation , the distance between the junctions on either side of the cut in - creases and then reaches a plateau . Fitting this recoil proﬁle to an established viscoelastic model allowed us to infer relaxation time ( the ratio of tissue stiffness to viscosity ) and thus to deter - mine whether modulating cell - ECM adhesion could alter passive resistance to recoil ( Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ; Fischer et al . , 2014 ; Ma et al . , 2009 ) . This approach treats cell edges as a spring and a dashpot ( a damper that resists motion ) in par - allel ; the response of this element to ablation is governed by the tensile force , the stiffness of the spring , and the viscosity of the dashpot . In all genotypes cell membrane relaxation time was unchanged , suggesting that viscoelastic properties of AS cells in each genotype are unaltered ( Figures S3D – S3I ) . The viscoelastic model we employed is typically used to repre - sent the mechanical properties of the apical surface of the cell , and therefore may not accurately represent the effects of basal adhesion on apical recoil . Similarly to the effects of FALS on cell displacement outlined above ( Figure 4 ) , we hypothesized that tethering to the ECM at FALS provides passive resistance to recoil of apical junctions ( Figure 1C 0 ) . If a sheet of cells is teth - ered to a ﬁxed external substrate , forces within the apical plane could theoretically be redirected out - of - plane to this surface . Increased tethering would result in dissipation of in - plane or api - cal effects , while less tethering would favor transmission of forces across the apical plane of the network . To determine whether cell - ECM adhesion and FALS could act as tethers to resist recoil , we examined the movement of FALS after laser ablation in wild - type embryos expressing TalinGFP . FALS ex - hibited recoil after ablation similarly to cell junctions ( Figures 6A and 6B ) , but had much lower recoil velocity and achieved less maximum displacement ( Figures 6B , 6C , and 6E ) . This result indicates that release of tension at the apical part of the cell also affects the basal part of the cell . Given that apical deformations were linked to basal deformations and FALS movement ( Fig - ure 4 ) , these data provide further evidence for mechanical coupling between apical and basal poles . Furthermore , as the response of FALS is attenuated when compared with the response of cell vertices , FALS may provide resistance to recoil of cell junctions . If this is true , larger FALS would provide increased resistance to junction recoil while smaller FALS would provide less resis - tance . To address this , we examined the variations in recoil behavior of cell junctions and the mean area of FALS in the vicinity of the cut in each wild - type embryo . We found a nega - tive correlation between FALS area and both cell junction recoil velocity and maximum displacement , suggesting that FALS morphology is linked to the extent of recoil after ablation ( Fig - ures 6A , 6D , and 6F ) . These data support our model in which cell - ECM adhesions can act as tethers , resisting apically generated behaviors by redirecting forces basally to the ECM ( Figure 1C 0 ) . Furthermore , the effects of genetically increasing cell - ECM adhesion on tissue response to ablation can be explained by differences in FALS morphology ; AS cells in Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA embryos , which exhibited larger FALS , are subject to increased tethering , resulting in reduced junction recoil after ablation and reduced force transmission between neighboring cells . Since FALS can provide passive resistance to recoil , we cannot draw any conclusions about the effect of cell - ECM adhesion on the exact magnitude of tension across AS cells . However , our ﬁndings provide insight into the role of basal adhesion on transmission of cell - generated forces to neighboring cells and the ECM . Cell - ECM Adhesion - Dependent Coupling of Cell - Substrate Movement If the apical part of the cell is indeed mechanically tethered to their substrate via FALS , we can make two predictions : ﬁrstly , that apical deformations should be accompanied by substrate deformations , and secondly , that this cell - substrate mechanical coupling should require cell - ECM adhesion . To test these pre - dictions , we developed a method to visualize and measure sub - strate deformations in vivo . Cell culture models have employed traction force microscopy ( TFM ) to measure cell - substrate forces . In TFM , cells are plated on gels coated with ECM ligands embedded with ﬂuorescent beads ; during stretching or migra - tion , cells deform the gel and thus displace beads ( Munevar et al . , 2001 ) . Based on bead displacements and the gel’s physical properties , traction ﬁelds can be reconstructed . In the case of AS cells , the substrate is the ECM lining the yolk cell membrane ( Narasimha and Brown , 2004 ) . We visualized the substrate using ﬂuorescently tagged Basigin ( Bsg - GFP ) , a trans - membrane protein highly enriched in the yolk cell membrane ( Reed et al . , 2004 ; Figures 7A – 7C 0 and Movie S7 ) and tracked its movement using particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) ( Figures 7D and 7E ) . Using this method we can infer the direction of force , but not the magnitude , as we do not know the yolk membrane’s physical properties . This analysis revealed a positive correlation between cell and Bsg - GFP movement in wild - type embryos , demonstrating the existence of mechanical cell - substrate coupling in the AS and conﬁrming our ﬁrst prediction ( Figure 7F ) . Furthermore , this cor - relation was speciﬁc to individual cells and the region of sub - strate beneath them ; negative controls obtained by random pair - ings of cell and Bsg - GFP movement from the same embryo revealed no detectable correlation ( Figure 7F , ‘‘Control n . c . ’’ ) . ( H – J ) Extent of displacement of all junctions as a function of distance from the cut ﬁt to an exponential for mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) ( H , H 0 ) , Talin ( E1777A ) ( I , I 0 ) , and Rap1 - CA ( J , J 0 ) mutants and respective controls . Spatial decay rate ( k ) and R 2 values indicated on relevant plots . ( K – K 00 ) Mean spatial decay rate in mys ( K ) , Talin ( E1777A ) ( K 0 ) , Rap1 - CA ( K 00 ) and controls . * * * p < 0 . 0001 , * p < 0 . 05 based on two - sample t test . Scale bars represent 5 m m . Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 619 We applied this technique to mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) embryos and found that with decreased cell - ECM adhesion , movement coupling be - tween cell and substrate is eliminated , conﬁrming our second prediction ( Figures 7F and 7G ; Movie S7 ) . The loss of mechanical coupling could be a result of the separation between the AS and the yolk that has been described in integrin mutants ( Narasimha and Brown , 2004 ) . However , we found that the speed of Bsg - GFP movement was similar in mutants and controls ( Figure 7H ) , suggesting that AS cells lacking integrin can still deform the yolk membrane , but that this deformation is not coupled to cell behavior . It appears that in the absence of FALS , AS cells are unable to redirect apically generated forces to their substrate , allowing forces to be more efﬁciently transmitted across the apical plane of cells . We conclude that the apical part of the cell is indeed mechanically coupled to the substrate , and that FALS are a necessary component of this tethering . Tissue - Level Distribution of FALS and Patterns of Cell Displacement during DC Finally , we explored the tissue - level consequences of cell - ECM adhesion - mediated tethering by examining large - scale patterns of cell displacement during the ﬁrst 40 min of closure . To quantify the movement of many cells over longer time scales , we tracked cell nuclei in embryos expressing nls - RFP ; additionally we divided our analysis regionally into inner cells ( which should un - dergo little to no displacement ) and outer cells ( which should un - dergo larger displacements as the tissue contracts ; Figures 8A and 8B ) . Indeed , tracking cell nuclei revealed that inner cell movement was anisotropic and exhibited little net displacement , whereas outer cell movement was more polarized and showed more net displacement ( Figures 8C and 8D ) . We next sought to determine whether regional differences in cell - ECM adhesion correlated with the observed patterns of movement . We found that FALS density is lower in outer cells compared with inner cells ( Figure 8E ) , suggesting that outer cells may be subject to less basal tethering than inner cells . In line with this , we ﬁnd that recoil of apical junctions after laser ablation is higher in the outer cells of the AS compared with the inner cells ( Figure 8F ) ; however , these differences in recoil may also be a consequence of regional differences in actomyosin contractility or of forces ex - erted by the leading - edge epidermis . Nevertheless , these data suggest that a reduction in FALS - mediated resistance to cell movement may facilitate displacement of cells toward the dorsal midline during DC . To test this , we examined large - scale cell Figure 6 . FALS Exhibit Attenuated Response to Ablation and May Provide Resistance to Apical Junction Recoil ( A ) Sample imagesfrom twoembryos beforelaser ablation and at3and 30safterablation , and trajectories ofcelljunctions andFALS for60safterlaser ablation . Red lines indicate cut ; blue arrowheads indicate junctions ; pink arrowheads indicate a subset of tracked FALS . Scale bars represent 5 m m . ( B ) Mean cell junction and FALS displacement over time after ablation ( n = 18 cuts , n = 126 FALS ) . ( C ) Mean recoil velocity of cell junctions and FALS . ( D ) Junction recoil versus mean FALS area in each embryo . ( E ) Mean maximum displacement of cell junctions and FALS . ( F ) Junction maximum displacement versus mean FALS area for each cut ( n = 18 cuts ) . Slopes and R 2 values indicated on relevant plots . * * * p < 0 . 0001 based on two - sample t test . 620 Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 displacements in embryos with altered cell - ECM adhesion . In the early stages of tissue contraction in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) embryos , cell displacement is increased in both inner and outer cell popula - tions ( Figure 8G ) . In contrast , increasing cell - ECM adhesion with Talin ( E1777A ) or Rap1 - CA resulted in a reduction of outer cell displacement ( Figures 8H and 8I ) . Overall , we ﬁnd that the amount of cell - ECM adhesion is inversely correlated with the extent of cell displacement . Based on these data , we propose that increased basal tethering at FALS can resist cell displace - ment and thus hinder tissue closure . Figure 7 . Cell - Substrate Movement Correlation Requires Cell - ECM Adhesion ( A – C 0 ) SampleimagesoftheASinanembryoexpressingBsg - GFPandDE - Cadherin - mTomato . Maximum - intensityprojectionimagestakenfromthedorsalside of the embryo are shown ( A – C ) alongside transverse side views reconstructed from z stacks ( A 0 – C 0 ) . AP , anteroposterior ; DV , dorsoventral . Scale bar represents 5 m m . ( D ) Sample cell outline at t = 0 and t = 10 s with arrows representing vector ﬁeld determined by Bsg - GFP PIV . ( E ) Normalized cell centroid ML displacement and mean ML displacement of all Bsg - GFP PIV vectors within the cell . ( F ) Average cross - correlation function of cell - substrate movement in mys + / (cid:2) controls and mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) embryos , including negative controls for each . ( G ) Distribution of correlation coefﬁcients in control and mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) embryos ( n = 6 – 10 embryos , n = 49 – 50 cells ) . * p < 0 . 05 based on Kolmogorov - Smirnov test . ( H ) Mean substrate speed in controls and mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) embryos ( n = 6 – 10 embryos , n = 49 – 50 cells ) . n . s . indicates not signiﬁcant based on two - sample t test . Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 621 DISCUSSION Our work uncovers an essential role for integrin - dependent cell - ECM adhesion in the coordination of forces during tissue morphogenesis . We signiﬁcantly enhance our understanding of how integrin function in the AS contributes to DC . Speciﬁcally , we demonstrate that deviations in either direction from wild - type levels of cell - ECM adhesion are sufﬁcient to disrupt DC . Through identiﬁcation of FALS and characterization of their morphology and behavior , we gain subcellular insights into how cell - ECM adhesions regulate displacement of AS cells . Furthermore , we provide evidence that FALS morphology dic - tates tissue response to ablation , implicating cell - ECM adhesion in the efﬁciency of apical force transmission across AS cells . Genetic perturbation of cell - ECM adhesion leads to altered force transmission and , consequently , tissue response to ablation and cell displacement are misregulated . Finally , we provide evidence for integrin - dependent force transmission to the ECM by demon - strating that cell - substrate coupling is lost in the absence of FALS . Therefore , we conclude that cell - ECM adhesion plays a critical role in modulating the transmission of cell - generated forces between neighboring cells and to the substrate . Our study identiﬁes FALS , integrin - dependent adhesive struc - tures that in many ways resemble FAs . In particular , like FAs , FALS are force responsive . We have previously demonstrated that integrins play a conserved role in force sensing in Drosophila ( Pines et al . , 2012 ) . Since the AS is a morphogenetically active epithelial tissue , FALS represent a particularly attractive system in which to study FAs in the context of an intact , developing or - ganism . Links between FAs and cell behavior are well studied in cell culture models . In the AS , cells exhibit non - directional mobility as a result of neighboring cell deformation , and the extent to which they move is negatively correlated with the amount of cell - ECM adhesion . However , the motion we observe Figure 8 . Global Patterns of Cell Movement in the AS ( A and B ) Sample image of an embryo expressing nls - RFP undergoing DC with inner and outer cells indicated ( A ) , and legend for inner and outer cells and coordinate system ( B ) . AP , anteroposterior ; ML , mediolateral . ( CandD ) PolarityandMLdisplacementofinner ( C ) andouter ( D ) cellsover20 - minintervalsduringtheﬁrst40minofAScontraction . Rosediagramsindicateangle relative to ML axis . ( E ) Density of FALS in inner and outer regions of the AS . ( F ) Recoil velocity after laser ablation in the inner and outer regions of the AS . ( G – I ) Inner and outer cell displacement over the ﬁrst 20 min of AS contraction in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) embryos and mys + / (cid:2) controls ( G ) , Talin ( E1777A ) and wild - type rescue controls ( H ) , and Rap1 - CA and wild - type controls ( I ) . * * * p < 0 . 0001 , * p < 0 . 05 based on two - sample t test . 622 Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 is distinct from crawling cell behaviors that are used to generate directed cell migration in cell culture . Our analysis of cell - sub - strate mechanical coupling shows that substrate movement is positively correlated with cell movement , suggesting that the substrate is deformed in the same direction as cell movement . This is the opposite of what is observed in crawling cells , where cells pull themselves over the substrate , deforming the substrate in the opposite direction to cell movement ( Munevar et al . , 2001 ) . Our data support the hypothesis that cell - ECM adhesion plays a key role in transmitting tension between AS cells , since tissue response to laser - induced release of tension was perturbed when cell - ECM adhesion was modulated . This ﬁnding is in agreement with recent work which showed that clusters of cells in culture exhibit greater correlation between cell - cell forces in opposing cell junctions and , therefore , more force transmission across cells when integrin - mediated adhesion is downregulated ( Ng et al . , 2014 ) . Cell culture models have also been used to examine the relationship between traction exerted at cell - ECM adhesions and tension experienced at cell - cell adhesions ( Mar - uthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . In cell pairs the ratio between traction and tension has been shown to be constant , and thus changes to traction result in changes to tension . However , as the number of cell contacts increases , this ratio changes : traction exerted by cells adhering to multiple other cells decreases , while tension at cell - cell interfaces is enhanced ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . How the relationship between forces exerted by cells on the ECM and tension experienced across cell membranes changes in the context of a tissue remains unclear . Here , we examined the effects of changing cell - ECM adhesion on stresses experienced at cell - cell contacts within a simple epithelium . While we are unable to measure the magnitude of tension across cells or of traction exerted by cells within an intact , living embryo , we ﬁnd that changes to cell - ECM adhesion ( and thus potentially to traction forces ) result in differential responses to laser ablation at the level of cell - cell contacts . These ﬁndings suggest that in the context of a living tissue , there may be a strong relationship between the traction exerted by cells and the tension experi - enced across their junctions , as observed in cell culture models ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . By tracking the movement of FALS during cell oscillations and laser ablation experiments , we provide evidence that cell - ECM adhesion can resist apically generated forces . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁnd that wild - type variations in FALS morphology can predict dif - ferences in apical behaviors : in the presence of larger FALS , cell membranes exhibit less displacement during oscillations and less recoil during laser ablation experiments . These data provide strong evidence for two main conclusions : ﬁrstly , that the apical and basal parts of the cell are mechanically coupled , and sec - ondly , that FALS act as tethers to the ECM to resist apically generated forces . We propose that this mechanical coupling is achieved through the actin cytoskeleton , given that both cell - cell and cell - ECM adhesion associated with F - actin , and that F - actin is present along the entire cortex of AS cells . However , it is also possible that other cytoskeletal components play a role . For example , microtubules mediate ﬂattening and elonga - tion of AS cells in early embryogenesis ( Pope and Harris , 2008 ) , and in Caenorhabditis elegans , morphogenesis of adja - cent tissues is mechanically coupled via hemidesmosomes and intermediate ﬁlaments ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . Apical - basal mechanical coupling in AS cells could be achieved through the combined efforts of different cytoskeletal networks ; future studies will be needed to characterize the entity that mediates this mechanical coupling . If cell - ECM adhesions provide tethering to the ECM , then AS cells would exert forces on their substrate , leading to deforma - tion . We visualized this by developing a tool inspired by TFM to measure deformations of the underlying yolk cell membrane ( Ng et al . , 2014 ; Plotnikov et al . , 2014 ) . We found that the move - ments of AS cells and the yolk membrane are correlated , sug - gesting that cells are mechanically coupled to the underlying substrate . Furthermore , this correlation is lost in the absence of integrins , as predicted by downregulating cell - ECM adhesion in multicellular clusters ( Ng et al . , 2014 ) . These ﬁndings conﬁrm that cell - generated forces pull and deform the underlying sub - strate in vivo , and that tethers connected to the ECM through FALS are required for mechanical coupling between cells and the substrate . Overall , these ﬁndings suggest that a balance of cell - cell and cell - ECM force transmission previously described in cell culture may play a role in the generation of tension across AS cells ( Ng et al . , 2014 ) . Based on our results , we propose a model whereby integrins act as tethers to the ECM and resist apically generated forces , thereby mediating force transmission between neighboring cells and to the substrate ( Figure 1C 0 ) . As a result , cell - ECM adhesion controls displacement and mechanics of AS cells , which may have consequences for tissue contraction and closure . DC re - quires precise timing and coordination of many different cell be - haviors ; disrupting any one of these can lead to closure defects ( Blanchard et al . , 2010 ; Toyama et al . , 2008 ) . By examining large - scale cell movements in the AS , we ﬁnd that cell displace - ment toward the dorsal midline during the slow phase of contrac - tion is increased in mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) mutants . Previous studies of mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) mutants revealed that in the slow phase of closure , inner cells of the AS contract more rapidly than in the wild - type ( Gorﬁnkiel et al . , 2009 ) . We speculate that this increased rate of contraction could be due to a loss of basal tethering ; this would also lead to increased cell displacement toward the midline . Evidently this increased rate of contraction is not maintained , as mys (cid:2) / (cid:2) em - bryosexperiencedelayedorfailedclosure ; defectslaterinclosure likely arise fromloss of adhesion between tissuelayers , leading to tears between the AS and the epidermis ( Gorﬁnkiel et al . , 2009 ) . When cell - ECM adhesion is increased , more tethering results in a downregulation of cell - cell force transmission , which could hinder contraction of the AS and lead to delayed or failed DC . In line with this , we ﬁnd that cell displacement toward the dorsal midline is reduced in Talin ( E1777A ) and Rap1 - CA embryos . Animal morphogenesis and particularly DC are dependent upon the cellular mechanisms that generate biomechanical forces and , subsequently , on the proper translation of these forces into changes in tissue architecture . This study provides insight into how forces are transmitted within and between cells . We propose that cell - ECM adhesion must be ﬁne - tuned to allow for proper force transmission , which could play a role in establishing optimal levels of tension across the AS during tissue contraction . Given the ubiquitous presence of cell - ECM adhesions in epithelia , the ability of integrins to modulate force transmission may represent a fundamental , conserved feature of animal development . Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 623 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Fly Stocks and Genetics A detailed description of all ﬂy strains and crosses used in this study is included in Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Live Imaging and Fluorescence Recovery after Photobleaching Embryos were dechorionated in 50 % bleach for (cid:3) 4 min and staged according to the criteria of Ellis et al . ( 2013 ) . Embryos were then aligned and glued to a 1 - mm coverslip using heptane glue , dorsal side down . Coverslips were mounted in halocarbon oil ( Sigma ) either directly on glass slides or with a coverslip bridge to prevent compression of the embryos , when desired . Images were collected using an Olympus FV1000 inverted confocal micro - scope or a Zeiss Axiovert 200M spinning - disk confocal microscope . To mea - sureclosuretimeortracknuclei , wecollected 25 – 301 . 0 - m mconfocalsections at 2 - min intervals for 8 hr . For movies of cell behavior , 15 – 20 1 - m m confocal sections were collected at 20 - s intervals for 20 min . For FALS - tracking , four to eight 0 . 5 - m m confocal sections were collected at 10 - s intervals for 10 min . For movies of cell - substrate interactions , eight to ten 1 - m m confocal sections were collected at 10 - s intervals for 10 min . Animations were assembled and processed using ImageJ . FRAP was performed as described previously ( Pines et al . , 2012 ) , with the following modiﬁcations : photobleaching was obtained using the 405 laser at 100 % power for 0 . 1 s . Images were acquired every 2 s for 60 s . Embryo Fixation and Immunoﬂuorescence Embryos were ﬁxed in 8 % paraformaldehyde ( rather than the standard 4 % ) to better preserve FALS structure . A methanol - free protocol was also used to allowfortheuseofphalloidintolabelactinﬁlamentsandpreserveGFPﬂuores - cence . Details of the antibodies used are included in Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures . z stacks were assembled from 0 . 1 - to 0 . 6 - m m slices and were displayed as maximum - intensity projections . Image Analysis of FALS and Cell Behavior We developed automatic image segmentation and analysis tools in MATLAB to measure FALS area and intensity . FALS were tracked either manually in ImageJ or using a custom - developed set of algorithms in MATLAB . Relative movement of FALS and cells was measured by either comparing with cell centroid movement or with local membrane movement . To compare FALS movement with local membrane movement , we identiﬁed segments of cell membrane within a 6 - m m radius of each tracked FALS . Displacement and speed were computed based on the movement of these segments . In both cases , we computed the cross - correlation of cell and FALS movement using the MATLAB function crosscorr . The analysis was done in 180 - s - long blocks along the time course of each movie . To measure AS area over time , wemanually traced AS outlines at10 - min in - tervalsusingImageJandprocessedtheminMATLAB . Cellextrusionmeasure - ments were made manually at 10 - min intervals throughout DC . To track large - scale cell displacements , we developed semi - automatic tracking routines in MATLAB to track cells for the ﬁrst 40 min of tissue contraction . The analysis was divided into inner cells ( at least four cells away from the epidermis ) and outercells ( nomorethanthreecellsaway ) . Celloscillationsandcentroidmove - ment were assessed using SIESTA and the approach of Fernandez - Gonzalez and Zallen ( 2011 ) . See also Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Laser Ablation and Recoil Analysis Laser ablation experiments were carried out using a Revolution XD spinning - disk confocal microscope equipped with an iXon Ultra 897 camera ( Andor ) and a 60 3 oil - immersion lens ( Olympus , numerical aperture 1 . 35 ) . Ablation was induced using a pulsed Micropoint N2 laser ( Andor ) tuned to 365 nm . z Stacks were acquired every 3 s for up to 60 s following ablation . Cuts were performed at the onset of the slow phase of DC . See Blanchard et al . ( 2010 ) for a description of the phases of DC . See also Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Cell - Substrate Movement Correlation To measure substrate movement , we implemented PIV using custom - written MATLAB scripts based on the approach described by Levayer and Lecuit ( 2013 ) to track the movement of Bsg - GFP intensity . Images were divided into 16 3 16 - pixel windows overlapping by 50 % . We then computed the 2D cross - correlation of each window in subsequent frames to determine the directionandmagnitudeofintensitymovement . Cellmovementwasmeasured as described above using the DE - Cad - mTomato channel . Substrate move - ment was then deﬁned as the sum of all vectors within a given cell . To control for overall substrate movement , we computed the mean displacement of the entire visible ﬁeld of Bsg - GFP and subtracted this from each vector within a cell and from the cell’s displacement . Cross - correlation of cell and substrate movement was computed using the MATLAB function crosscorr in 150 - s - long blocks along the time course of each movie . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , three ﬁgures , and seven movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2016 . 11 . 003 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization , K . G . , S . J . E . , and G . T . ; Investigation , K . G . , S . J . E . , and E . L . ; Software and Formal Analysis , K . G . , T . Z . - C . , and R . F . - G . ; Visualization , K . G . ; Writing , K . G . , S . J . E . , and G . T . ; Supervision and Funding Acquisition , G . T . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was supported by a CIHR Operating Grant to G . T . ( MOP - 285391 ) and an NSERC Discovery Grant to R . F . G . ( 418438 - 13 ) . S . J . E . was the holder of an NSERC Canada Graduate Scholarship . T . Z . C . was supported by an On - tario Trillium Scholarship . We thank Nicole Gorﬁnkiel , Nick Harden , Vanessa Auld , and the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center for ﬂy lines . Received : March 10 , 2015 Revised : July 21 , 2016 Accepted : November 7 , 2016 Published : December 5 , 2016 REFERENCES Blanchard , G . B . , Murugesu , S . , Adams , R . J . , Martinez - Arias , A . , and Gorﬁnkiel , N . ( 2010 ) . Cytoskeletal dynamics and supracellular organisation ofcellshapeﬂuctuationsduringdorsalclosure . Development 137 , 2743 – 2752 . Bulgakova , N . A . , Klapholz , B . , and Brown , N . H . ( 2012 ) . Cell adhesion in Drosophila : versatilityofcadherinandintegrincomplexesduringdevelopment . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 24 , 702 – 712 . David , D . J . , Tishkina , A . , and Harris , T . J . ( 2010 ) . The PAR complex regulates pulsed actomyosin contractions during amnioserosa apical constriction in Drosophila . Development 137 , 1645 – 1655 . Dray , N . , Lawton , A . , Nandi , A . , Julich , D . , Emonet , T . , and Holley , S . A . ( 2013 ) . Cell - ﬁbronectin interactions propel vertebrate trunk elongation via tissue mechanics . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1335 – 1341 . Ellis , S . J . , Goult , B . T . , Fairchild , M . J . , Harris , N . J . , Long , J . , Lobo , P . , Czerniecki , S . , Van Petegem , F . , Schock , F . , Peifer , M . , and Tanentzapf , G . ( 2013 ) . Talin autoinhibition is required for morphogenesis . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1825 – 1833 . Engler , A . J . , Humbert , P . O . , Wehrle - Haller , B . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2009 ) . Multiscale modeling of form and function . Science 324 , 208 – 212 . Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , and Zallen , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Oscillatory behaviors and hierarchical assembly of contractile structures in intercalating cells . Phys . Biol . 8 , 045005 . Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , Simoes Sde , M . , Roper , J . C . , Eaton , S . , and Zallen , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Myosin II dynamics are regulated by tension in intercalating cells . Dev . Cell 17 , 736 – 743 . Fischer , S . C . , Blanchard , G . B . , Duque , J . , Adams , R . J . , Arias , A . M . , Guest , S . D . , and Gorﬁnkiel , N . ( 2014 ) . Contractile and mechanical properties of epithelia with perturbed actomyosin dynamics . PLoS One 9 , e95695 . 624 Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 Fraley , S . I . , Feng , Y . , Krishnamurthy , R . , Kim , D . H . , Celedon , A . , Longmore , G . D . , and Wirtz , D . ( 2010 ) . A distinctive role for focal adhesion proteins in three - dimensional cell motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 598 – 604 . Gardel , M . L . , Sabass , B . , Ji , L . , Danuser , G . , Schwarz , U . S . , and Waterman , C . M . ( 2008 ) . Traction stress in focal adhesions correlates biphasically with actin retrograde ﬂow speed . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 999 – 1005 . Gardel , M . L . , Schneider , I . C . , Aratyn - Schaus , Y . , and Waterman , C . M . ( 2010 ) . Mechanicalintegrationofactinandadhesiondynamicsincellmigration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 , 315 – 333 . Gorﬁnkiel , N . , Blanchard , G . B . , Adams , R . J . , and Martinez Arias , A . ( 2009 ) . Mechanical control of global cell behaviour during dorsal closure in Drosophila . Development 136 , 1889 – 1898 . Gorﬁnkiel , N . , Schamberg , S . , and Blanchard , G . B . ( 2011 ) . Integrative approaches to morphogenesis : lessons from dorsal closure . Genesis 49 , 522 – 533 . Homsy , J . G . , Jasper , H . , Peralta , X . G . , Wu , H . , Kiehart , D . P . , and Bohmann , D . ( 2006 ) . JNK signaling coordinates integrin and actin functions during Drosophila embryogenesis . Dev . Dyn . 235 , 427 – 434 . Hu , K . , Ji , L . , Applegate , K . T . , Danuser , G . , andWaterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2007 ) . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science 315 , 111 – 115 . Hutson , M . S . , Tokutake , Y . , Chang , M . S . , Bloor , J . W . , Venakides , S . , Kiehart , D . P . , and Edwards , G . S . ( 2003 ) . Forces for morphogenesis investigated with laser microsurgery and quantitative modeling . Science 300 , 145 – 149 . Julich , D . , Cobb , G . , Melo , A . M . , McMillen , P . , Lawton , A . K . , Mochrie , S . G . , Rhoades , E . , andHolley , S . A . ( 2015 ) . Cross - scaleintegrinregulationorganizes ECM and tissue topology . Dev . Cell 34 , 33 – 44 . Kiehart , D . P . , Galbraith , C . G . , Edwards , K . A . , Rickoll , W . L . , and Montague , R . A . ( 2000 ) . Multiple forces contribute to cell sheet morphogenesis for dorsal closure in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 471 – 490 . Kubow , K . E . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2011 ) . Reducing background ﬂuorescence reveals adhesions in 3D matrices . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 3 – 5 , author reply 5 – 7 . Lecuit , T . , Lenne , P . F . , and Munro , E . ( 2011 ) . Force generation , transmission , and integration during cell and tissue morphogenesis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 27 , 157 – 184 . Levayer , R . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2013 ) . Oscillation and polarity of E - cadherin asym - metries control actomyosin ﬂow patterns during morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 26 , 162 – 175 . Ma , X . , Lynch , H . E . , Scully , P . C . , and Hutson , M . S . ( 2009 ) . Probing embryonic tissue mechanics with laser hole drilling . Phys . Biol . 6 , 036004 . Maruthamuthu , V . , Sabass , B . , Schwarz , U . S . , and Gardel , M . L . ( 2011 ) . Cell - ECM traction force modulates endogenous tension at cell - cell contacts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 4708 – 4713 . Munevar , S . , Wang , Y . , and Dembo , M . ( 2001 ) . Traction force microscopy of migrating normal and H - ras transformed 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . 80 , 1744 – 1757 . Narasimha , M . , andBrown , N . H . ( 2004 ) . Novel functions forintegrinsinepithe - lial morphogenesis . Curr . Biol . 14 , 381 – 385 . Ng , M . R . , Besser , A . , Brugge , J . S . , and Danuser , G . ( 2014 ) . Mapping the dynamics of force transduction at cell - cell junctions of epithelial clusters . Elife 3 , e03282 . Pines , M . , Das , R . , Ellis , S . J . , Morin , A . , Czerniecki , S . , Yuan , L . , Klose , M . , Coombs , D . , and Tanentzapf , G . ( 2012 ) . Mechanical force regulates integrin turnover in Drosophila in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 935 – 943 . Plotnikov , S . V . , Sabass , B . , Schwarz , U . S . , and Waterman , C . M . ( 2014 ) . High - resolution traction force microscopy . Methods Cell Biol . 123 , 367 – 394 . Pope , K . L . , and Harris , T . J . ( 2008 ) . Control of cell ﬂattening and junctional remodeling during squamous epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila . Development 135 , 2227 – 2238 . Puech , P . H . , Taubenberger , A . , Ulrich , F . , Krieg , M . , Muller , D . J . , and Heisenberg , C . P . ( 2005 ) . Measuring cell adhesion forces of primary gastrulat - ing cells from zebraﬁsh using atomic force microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4199 – 4206 . Reed , B . H . , Wilk , R . , Schock , F . , and Lipshitz , H . D . ( 2004 ) . Integrin - dependent apposition of Drosophila extraembryonic membranes promotes morphogen - esis and prevents anoikis . Curr . Biol . 14 , 372 – 380 . Roote , C . E . , and Zusman , S . ( 1995 ) . Functions for PS integrins in tissue adhesion , migration , and shape changes during early embryonic development in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 169 , 322 – 336 . Schwarz , U . S . , and Gardel , M . L . ( 2012 ) . United we stand : integrating the actin cytoskeletonandcell - matrixadhesions incellular mechanotransduction . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 3051 – 3060 . Solon , J . , Kaya - Copur , A . , Colombelli , J . , and Brunner , D . ( 2009 ) . Pulsed forces timed by a ratchet - like mechanism drive directed tissue movement during dorsal closure . Cell . 137 , 1331 – 1342 . Tambe , D . T . , Hardin , C . C . , Angelini , T . E . , Rajendran , K . , Park , C . Y . , Serra - Picamal , X . , Zhou , E . H . , Zaman , M . H . , Butler , J . P . , Weitz , D . A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Collective cell guidance by cooperative intercellular forces . Nat . Mater . 10 , 469 – 475 . Toyama , Y . , Peralta , X . G . , Wells , A . R . , Kiehart , D . P . , andEdwards , G . S . ( 2008 ) . Apoptotic force and tissue dynamics during Drosophila embryogenesis . Science 321 , 1683 – 1686 . Trepat , X . , Wasserman , M . R . , Angelini , T . E . , Millet , E . , Weitz , D . A . , Butler , J . P . , and Fredberg , J . J . ( 2009 ) . Physical forces during collective cell migration . Nat . Phys . 5 , 426 – 430 . Wells , A . R . , Zou , R . S . , Tulu , U . S . , Sokolow , A . C . , Crawford , J . M . , Edwards , G . S . , and Kiehart , D . P . ( 2014 ) . Complete canthi removal reveals that forces from the amnioserosa alone are sufﬁcient to drive dorsal closure in Drosophila . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 3552 – 3568 . Wolfenson , H . , Lavelin , I . , and Geiger , B . ( 2013 ) . Dynamic regulation of the structure and functions of integrin adhesions . Dev . Cell 24 , 447 – 458 . Zhang , H . , Landmann , F . , Zahreddine , H . , Rodriguez , D . , Koch , M . , and Labouesse , M . ( 2011 ) . A tension - induced mechanotransduction pathway promotes epithelial morphogenesis . Nature 471 , 99 – 103 . Developmental Cell 39 , 611 – 625 , December 5 , 2016 625