The Japanese Society for Hygiene NII - Electronic Library Service The JapaneseSociety forHygiene [ Environmenta1 Health and Preventive Medieine 1O , 255 - 259 , September 200S ] Cbmmentary Controlof Severe AcuteRespiratorySyndrome in Singapore Kwai Peng CHANi iDepartment ofPathologn Singapore General Hbspital , Singapore Abstract A Seyere Acute Respiratory Syndreme ( SARS ) outbreak oecurred in Singapore from February to May 20e3 . A high vigilance for the disease , frequent and regular temperature monitoring , early case identification and isolation of patients , as well as tracing and home quarantine of contacts , played major roles in controlling the outbreak . Hospitals were dedicated to the screening and treatment of SARS patients . Within and between hospitals , movement by healthcare workers , patients and visitors were restricted , as was the number of hospital visitors . Staff education and audits of infection control practices also featured prominently . Tb prevent cross - border transmission , incoming travellers from SARS affected areas had to complete health declaration cards . TheM as well as all outgoing travellers from Singapore , were monitored for feven In the meantime , the public was urged to refrain from travelling to SARS affected regions . Centainment elements targeting the community included school closure , public education on good hygiene and readi ] y accessible public information . In response to a laboratory acquired SARS infection , laberatories were audited , and directives issued on the mandatory use of biesafety leyel 3 laboratories for SARS virus culture , and compliance of laboratory workers to biosafety guidelines . Key words : outbreak control , SARS , patient isolation , quarantme , contact tracmg Introduction The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome ( SARS ) outbreak in Singapore began in late FebruaTy 2003 with the return of a traveller from Hong Kong . Her stay at a hotel there had coin - cided with that ofa SARS - infected medical doctor from Guang - dong . China ( 1 ) , On 31 May 2003 , Singapore was rernoved from the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) list ofcountries with local transmission of SARS . This paper describes the measures taken to control the epidemic . An outline of the outbTeak is given here to lend perspective to these measures . Summary of e " tbreak During the outbreak , 238 people were infected . of whom 33 ( 13 . 9 % ) died ( 2 ) , The disease was primarily transmitted in Received Feb . 23 , 2005fAccepted May 25 , 2005 Reprint requests to : Dr Kwai Peng CHAN Department of Pathology , Singapore General Hospital , Singapore 169608 TEL : + 65 - 6321 - 4940 , FAX : + 6S - 6323 - 4972 E - mail : gptekp @ sgh . com , sg Outram Road , hospitals ; in a report on 206 probable SARS cases , 40 . 8 % were health care workers ( HCWs ) , 39 . 8 % were family members , fuends or visitors to hospitals , and 12 . 2 % were hospital in - patients ( 3 ) . As shown in Fig . 1 , most ofthe infections occurred in 3 hospitals , fanned by 5 " super spreaders " who are defined as patients who infected 1O or more other people ( 1 ) . The first super spreader was the 22 year - old returned traveller from Hong Kong who was admitted to Tan Tbck Seng Hospital ( TTSH ) , where she infected 24 persons ( 1 , 3 ) . Among these was a 27 year - old nurse who had attended her . Before be - ing isolated , the nurse was admitted to an open ward for 3 days , infecting 25 persons . One of these was a 53 year - old patient with diabetes and ischaemic heart disease , in whom SARS was not suspected because of her many medical complications ( 3 ) . Consequently , N95 masks were not used by her health care - givers and 27 SARS - infected persons were eventually traced to he = Another patient with diabetes and chronic renal disease , on discharge from TTSH , was admitted to an open ward in Singapore General Hospital ( SGH ) on March 24 for gastro - intestinal bleeding and urinary tract infection . Like the 53 year - old patient in TTSH , his medical problems resulted in atypical SARS symptoms . His SARS infection was unrecog - nised in spite of his caregivers ' deliberating on his possibly 2SS NII - Electronic The Japanese Society for Hygiene NII - Electronic Library Service The JapaneseSociety for Hygiene Enyiron . Health Prey . Med . Control of SARS in Singapore = ca - - = oen = = z 4 1 s 2 3 Fig . 1 IYansmission of SARS infection by 5 super spreaders in 3 major hospits ] s . M Super spreader 1 , a 22 year - old traveller , was admitted to TTSH . I21 Super spreader 2 , a27 year - old nurse , was infected by super spreader 1 . pt Super spreader 3 , a 53 year - old patient , was infected by super spreader 2 . ] Super spreader 4 was infected during hospitalisation in TTSH for chronic medical problems . He was not recegnised as a SARS case and afi ter discharge , was admitted to another hospital , SGH , where he started ari outbreak . a Super spreader S visited his brother , super spreader 4 , in SGH and was subsequently admitted to NUH where he started a cluster ofSARS cases . D , Infected case ; TTSH , lhn lbck Seng Hospital ; SGH , Singapere General Hospital ; NUH , National University Hospita1 . Table1 Measures taken to control SARS in Singapore Health Institutions Checkpoints Coirununity L2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . 9 . 10 . 11 . 12 . Disseminationofinformation Early case identification NotificationofSARSContacttracing Iselationofpatients Dedicated SARS hospita ] Restrictedpeoplemovement Resuictedno . ofyisitors Infectioncontrol lbmperaturecheck Homequarantine Modifiedhospita1processes L2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . Early detection of imported cases Preventionofexportationofcases Completion of declaration forms Issuarice ofhealth advisory eards Tbrnperaturecheck Referral to dedicated SARS hospita1 Traveladvisory 1 . Publiceducation 2 . Issuance ofthermometers to households 3 . Dedicated SARS arnbulances 4 . Contracttracing 5 . Home quarantine 6 . Closure ofschools and ehild centres 7 . Suspension of sports aetivities and compeLi - tionsg . Tbrnperature check in schools and at place of work9 . Public recognition for good hygienic prac - tices in public buildings having SARS . He spread the infection to 37 HCWs , patients and visitors . This started an outbreak in SGH that resulted in 60 cases . His brother who had visited him in SGH was subsequently admined on 8 Apri1 to an open ward of National University Hospital ( NUH ) for suspected cardiac failure from acute myocardial infarction . He was there fbr less than a day before being transferred to the intensive care unit , He was then moved to TTSH when his SARS contact history became known , by which time he had started a cluster of 1 5 cases in NUH . ControlMeasures The control measures taken to contain SARS in Singapore can be broadly grouped into those in health institutions , at checkpoints , and in the cornmunity . A summary of these mea - sures is listed in fable 1 . Due to the health care associatcd nature of the disease , the majority of control measures applied to the health sector , These were implemented and modified progressively as the outbreak unfolded . 256 NII - Electronic The Japanese Society for Hygiene NII - Electronic Library Service TheJapaneseSociety for Hygiene Environ . Health Prev , Med . a , Containing spread in health institutions i . Dissemination ofinformation As the numbeT of atypical pneumonia cases increased in Singapore , and as similar cases in China , Hong Kong and Vietnam were reported , the Ministry of Health ( MOH ) began issuing medical alerts and updated information to all medical practitioners through email and short messaging serviees , urging vigilance for the disease . This mode of disseminating information was maintained throughout the outbreak and the medical community was kept abreast ofcases , and policies and guidelines on patient management . ii . Early case identification One of the pillars of control was early identification of cases , and the SARS case definitions from WHO were used . Besides medica ] practitioners being alert fbr cases , the public was also urged to seek imrnediate medical attention if symp - toms compatible with SARS developed , if symptoms onset within 2 weeks ofhistory oftravel to SARS aenicted areas , or if there was close contact with persons with SARS . Rapid laboratory confirmation of infection was a priority to differentiate SARS from non - SARS patients for isolation , contact tracing and epidemiological investigations . Personnel from diagnostic and research laboratories met regularly to pool knowledge and resources in an effort to cope with the escalated demands fbr laboratory testing for a novel virus . iii . Manclatory notification ofSARS In mid - March , imrnediate notification of suspected and probable SARS to MOH was made mandatory under the Infec - tious Disease Act for tracing contacts and ring - fencing the sourceofinfection . iv . Contacttracing Contact tracing was a crucial factor in the containment strategy . It limited the spread of infection through identifying exposed individuals . Those who were ill were referred immedi - ately for medical assessment , while those who were asymp - tomatic were monitored and quarantined . Speed in tracing contacts of SARS patients was of the essence and this was efTected through teams set up at MOH and hospitals . v . Isolation ofsuspected infectious patients Besides contact tracing , another crucial component was patient isolation . All patients were screened at triage points that were specially set up at hospitals and clinics to separate febrile from afebrile patients . Where existing facilities did not permit such segregation , improvisations were made . fents , for exam - ple , that were fu11y equipped with laboratories , X - ray facilities and pharmacies , were established outside polyclinics ( 4 ) . Patients fitting the SARS ease definition were given masks to wear and were isolated immediately , in a separate room if available , from other patients . They were then transported to TTSH , using a 24 - hour dedicated ambulance serviee specifi - cally set up for this purpose . In all hospitals , suspected and probable SARS patients were nursed in isolation rooms . Later , other febrile patients 257 Control of SARS in Singapore were also kept isolated until a diagnosis was made . In mid - Apri1 , after the SGH cluster ofSARS cases was triggered by the patient with atypical presentation , existing inpatients in SGH who developed fever or respiratory symptoms , as well as those on steroids and other immunosuppressive therapy , were isolated as well . As a precautionary measure , patients from SGH were discharged only 3 days after the subsidence of fever . vi , Dedicated SARS hospital To eonfine SARS to one hospital and prevent spread to and in others , TTSH was designated a SARS hospital . Besicles direct admissions of suspected cases , it a ] so received HCWs and patients from other hospitals who became infected with SARS . Resources were freed up in TTSH for treating probable and suspected SARS patients by scaling down specialist out - patient clinic activities , cancelling elective surgery , and divert - ing new non - SARS patients to other health institutions . A dedicated team of HCWs , who would not perfbrm outpatient or non - SARS inpatient tasks , was assigned to manage SARS patients . Tb further minimise exposure of other hospital staff to SARS , areas in TTSH where SARS patients were managed were cordoned off vii . Restriction ofmovement Movement of HCWs and patients within and between hospitals was restricted and movement logs ofthese people and visitors were maintained to facilitate contact tracing should the need arise . yiii . Restriction ofnumber ofvisitors As it became clear that SARS was mainly linked to hospi - tals , the number ofvisitors was limited to 2 per patient . Visitors were screened for fever and their contact particulars , recent trayel history and relationship to the patients recorded for potential contact and epidemiological tracing . They were pro - vided with surgical masks to wear and advised to avoid contact with other patients and their belongings . With the recognition of a SARS cluster in SGH , the hospita1 further restricted visitors to 1 per patient per day from 18 Apri1 . By 29 April , when data showed that about 38 % of SARS cases were visitors to hospitals , all public hospitals implemented a " no visitor rule " for patients ( 5 ) . The exception to this was departments treating children or providing obstetric care where 1 visitor per patient was perrnitted . The rule was also relaxed on a case by case basis for seriously ill patients . ix , InfectionControl Strict infection control measures were implemented to reduce risk of transmission to health care staff in all areas where there was a possibility of exposure to patients with SARS . Staff workers were required to wear personal protective equipment which included N95 masks ( i . e . masks that are 95 % efficient in filtering particles of O . 3 pm size and above ) , g ] oves anct gowns . Hand washing or decontamination with alcohol - based hand rubs after eaeh patient centact was emphasized . Staff education was another element of control . It was compulsory for HCWs to attend teaehing sessions on infection NII - Electronic The Japanese Society for Hygiene NII - Electronic Library Service TheJapaneseSociety for Hygiene Environ . Health Prev . Med . Control ofSARS in Singapore control for SARS ( 6 ) . MOH staffconducted audits ofhospitals , and of general practitioner and traditional Chinese medicine clinics for compliance with infection control measures . x . Temperature monitoring At the same time , the health status of all HCWs was actively monitored through temperature checks , initially twice , then thrice daily with the first check before starting work for early detection and isolation of afTected staff Staff workers with feyer were not allowed to work but were kept under surveillance either as hospha1 inpatients or at home via tele - phonecommunication . xi , Home quarantine From 17 Apri1 , patients with chronic conditions such as diabetes , chronic lung disease , or cardiac , renal or hepatic failure , were quarantined at home for 10days after hospita1 discharge . They were required to rnonitor their temperature twice a day and daily telephone surveillance of their well - being was maintained , Ifunwell , they were recalled to the hospital for evaluation ( 7 ) . A 1O - day home quarantine was similarly imposed on HCWs , patients and visitors exposed to SARS patients ( 6 ) . xii . Modification ofhospita1 work processes SGH adopted a modular team system of doctors and nurses so that a reserve team of HCWs would be available should the active team be exposed to SARS . Another measure adopted was the suspension ofelective services to reduce non - critical atten - dance at the hospital ( 6 ) , b . Preventing importation and exportation The focus at land , sea and air checkpoints was early detection of imported cases , Incoming travellers from SARS - affected areas , and lateg on all incoming flights , were required to cemplete health declaration forms . Iliey were given health advisory cards bearing a hotline number to call should SARS symptoms develop . Their temperature was screened and nurses stationed at the checkpoints would refer febrile and visibly unwell passengers to TTSH for assessment ( 8 ) , All outgoing travellers from Singapore were similarly monitored for fever to prevent exportation of SARS . Meanwhile , the public was urged to heed the travel advi - sory from WHO and refrain from travelling to SARS affected areas . c . Adinimisingcommunityspread i , Early detection Early detection of cases was facilitated through educating the public and general practitioners on SARS via the mass media and government websites . Each family was issued with a thermometer for rnonitoring body temperature twice daily and urged to seek irnniediate medical attention ifunwell . ii . Dedicated SARS transport SARS patients and those suspected to have SARS were conveyed to TTSH in dedicated ambulances , which were ayail - able by calling a hotline number . Other means of public and private transportation were not allowed , iii . Contact tracing Centacts of cases were actively sought . Those who were sick were referred to TTSH while all other contacts exposed te SARS patients were quarantined . iv . Home quarantine Additional powers were invoked under the Infectious Disease Act to quarantine all asymptomatic contacts at home for 10days to minimise their interaction with other people . Those quarantined were checked daily by telephone and would be referred immediately to TTSH if symptoms of SARS appeared . Logistical problems , such as the provision of food and other necessities , had to be overcome . As a deterrent to defying the quarantine order , quarantine breakers , if caught , were liable to fines or imprisonment or both . v . Measures in schoels All schools from play groups to junior colleges , childcare centers , as well as tuition and recreational classes were closcd from 27 March for 3 weeks . ln addition , sports activities and competitions were suspended or cancelled , to prevent the congregation of big groups of children , During the closure , schools were cleaned and ventilated , wnen schools re - opened , pupils and visitors had to declare if they had visited other SARS affectedregions , The Ministry of Education prepared and distributed infor - mation packages to students to encourage the practice ofgood personal hygiene . A thermometer was issued to each pupil for daily temperature monitoring and parents were tasked with the responsibility ofnot sending their sick children to school , vi . Other environmenta1 measures Markets and food centres were cleaned and temperature checks of sta1lholders and assistants were imposed , Recogni - tion , in the form ofcertificates , was given to shopping centers and hotels that practised good hygiene . Public education messages were canied by the mass media to promote the practice ofrespiratory etiquette and frequent hand washing , and to discourage spitting in cornmon areas . Laboratory acquired SARS As country after country was pronounced SARS - free by WHO , there was concern that SARS might re - emerge from a laboratory accident and it did in Singapore . On 3 September 2003 , a graduate student , who had been working in a research laboratory where work on SARS - associated coronavirus ( SARS - CoV ) was conducted , was admitted to SGH for a febrile illness . SARS was suspected and later confirmed by the Virology Laboratory ( 9 ) . This incident did not result in second - ary transmission and another outbreak , but deserves mention for the additional control measures instituted in the laboratories . Investigations revealed that the student was infected while working with a West Nile virus sarnple that had been contami - nated with SARS - CoV There were deficiencies in the practice ofbiosafety in the laboratory and lapses in containing SARS . 258 NII - Electronic The Japanese Society for Hygiene NII - Electronic Library Service TheJapaneseSociety for Hygiene Environ . Health Prev . Med , Centrol ofSARS in Singapore The incident triggered audits of other laboratories handling SARS - CoV Ensuing recommendations included mandatory use of biosafety level 3 laboratories for SARS virus isolation , compliance of laboratory workers to biosafety guidelines , restriction ofdiagnostic testing and research on SARS to desig - nated laboratoTies , the maintenance of an inventory of SARS samples and viral strains by these laboratories , and immediate reporting oflaboratory incidents . National control of the impor - tation ofany SARS material will be instituted . SGH experience has shown that in an outbreak situation where the causative agent is new and little is known about the disease , a fever cluster , albeit linked to an index patient with atypical presentation , should be treated as a manifestation of the outbreak until proven otherwise , and all contacts quarantined immediately ( 4 ) . In both TTSH and SGH , had all exposed persons been identified and quarantined quickly , the outbreak might have been contained sooner . Conclusion Areas for improyement Could the outbreak have been managed better ? Gaps existed . One of these was the sub - optimal use of information technology to manage the vast quantity ofdata generated in the course of contact tracing , laboratory investigations , quarantin - ing exercise and epidemiological tracking . There was also a failure to efficiently transmit instructions for timely and coordi - nated action among and within hospitals . In the initial phase of the outbreak in TTSH , the lack of visitor records was an impedirnent to identification of all contacts ( 3 ) . This was later rectified in all health facilities . The Controlling the SARS outbreak was a profound learning experience for Singapore . Dealing with a new virus and disease , we were dependent on the collective information and experi - ence ofother countries that were similarly afflicted . We had to responcl rapidly to new and unexpected developments , some - times with improvised methods . The outbreak in Singapore was controlled with the con - certed effbrt of everyone in the eountry . The darkness is put behind us , perhaps only for a while . We have to remain vigilant for the disease and we hope that the lessons learnt at such cost will prepare us in the event of a Te - emergence . References ( 1 ) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Severe acute respiratory syndromeeSingapore , 2003 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2003 ; 52 : 4e5 - 411 . ( 2 ) http : lfwww . moh . gov . sgtcorptsars / newsfupdate - details . jsp ? id = 8S19712 , Accessed7 Sep 2004 , ( 3 ) Gopalaknshna G Choo E Leo YS , fey BK , Lim YTL Khan AS , et al . SARS transmission and hospital containment , Emerg Infect Dis . 2004 ; 1O : 395 - 400 , ( 4 ) http : flwww . moh . gov . sgXcorp / sars / newslupdate . details . jsp ? id = 9863182 . Accessed 7 Sep 2e04 . ( 5 ) http : f / www , moh . gov . sgXcorptsarsfnewsfupdate - details . jsp ? id = : 9863187 . Accessed 7 Sep 2004 . ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Chow KYI Lee CE , Ling ML , Mok DKH , Yap SG Outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in a tertiary hospita ] in Singapere , linked to an index patient with atypical presenta - tion : epiderniolegical study . BMJ . 2004 ; 328 : 195 - 200 . http : / fwww . moh . gov . sg / eorptsarsfnewslupdate . detailsjsp ? id = : 98632eO . Accessed 7 Sep 2004 . http : lfwww . moh , gov . sgfcorptsarsfnewslupdate - detailsjsp ? id = 9863208 . Accessed 7 Sep 2004 . Lim PL , Asok K , Gopalakrishna q Chan KE Wong CW , Ng LC , et al . Brief report : laboratory - acquired severe acute respiratorysyndrome , NEnglJMed . 2004 ; 350 : 1740 - 1745 . 259 NII - Electronic