Exemplar Based Experience Transfer Paridhi Maheshwari Adobe Research Bangalore , India parimahe @ adobe . com Nitish Bansal Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee , India nitishbansal2297 @ gmail . com Surya Dwivedi Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur , India surya2191997 @ gmail . com Rohan Kumar Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur , India rohank @ iitk . ac . in Pranav Manerikar Ohio State University Columbus , OH , USA maneriker . 1 @ buckeyemail . osu . edu Balaji Vasan Srinivasan Adobe Research Bangalore , India balsrini @ adobe . com ABSTRACT Banners are present in several forms and a person might be in - spired by one or more of these . However , designing banners is a non - trivial task , especially for novices . Starting from a blank canvas can often be overwhelming , and exploring alternatives is time - consuming . In this paper , we propose an automatic approach to transfer a novice user’s content into an example banner . Our algorithm begins with extracting the template of the example ban - ner via a semantic segmentation approach . This is followed by an energy - based optimization framework to combine multiple design elements and arrive at an optimal layout . A crowd - sourced experi - ment comparing our automatic results against banners designed by creative professionals indicates the viability of the proposed work . CCS CONCEPTS • Applied computing → Graphics recognition and interpre - tation ; • Human - centered computing → HCI design and evalu - ation methods ; KEYWORDS style transfer , single page graphic design , banner design , design automation ACM Reference Format : Paridhi Maheshwari , Nitish Bansal , Surya Dwivedi , Rohan Kumar , Pranav Manerikar , and Balaji Vasan Srinivasan . 2019 . Exemplar Based Experience Transfer . In 24th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’19 ) , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 8 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301275 . 3302300 1 INTRODUCTION In the digital era , there exists a plethora of designs and banners in the form of flyers , advertisements , hoardings etc . These banners have become important means of visual communication to mass audiences . Designing and refining banners requires conveying the Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA © 2019 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6272 - 6 / 19 / 03 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301275 . 3302300 content in a succinct and visually pleasing manner . This is a non - trivial task even for experienced designers and creating banners from scratch is a time - consuming process . The traditional approach is to leverage existing designs as building blocks to develop new ones . Therefore , creative professionals often use curated example galleries that serve as inspirations for designing alternatives [ 7 , 13 ] . Given the ubiquitous nature of such designs , a novice user might be inspired by the designs of banners they interact with and would want to use them with their own content . However , this becomes a tedious task if the corresponding template is unavailable . Even if the template is available , transforming them based on his content while simultaneously satisfying aesthetic intent requires professional skills that involve an understanding of the factors that contribute to banner aesthetics . In the absence of appropriate automation tools , such processes are quite challenging for novices . 1 In this paper , we propose a two - fold technique to automate the transfer of user’s content into the design ( s ) of exemplar banner ( s ) . The proposed algorithm extracts the design template by performing a semantic segmentation of the input banner image . These segments are then used to identify the underlying design elements ( such as the image / text / shape placeholder locations , size , etc . ) using a region - based clustering approach yielding an editable template where the user can insert his content to achieve the experience transfer . The final step of our algorithm is to identify the salient aspects of a banner from a set of sample corpus and utilize them to fine tune the layout for better overall aesthetics via an energy - based optimization . 2 RELATED WORK One line of work that is relevant to our problem deals with ex - tracting templates from images . Betramelli et al . [ 4 ] is aimed at extracting templates of interfaces from its screenshots using an RNN - based architecture . However , their approach was restricted to simpler interfaces with lesser degrees of freedom and obtains only approximate estimates of the elements’ locations . To be able to produce an editable template , accurate locations of all design elements of the banner is required . Closely related to template extraction are works on segmenta - tion and object detection . Semantic segmentation is the task of classifying each pixel of an image into various types / categories . Long et al . [ 20 ] proposed Fully Convolutional Neural Networks ( FCNN ) for semantic segmentation and showed that convolutional 1 Work done when authors were at Adobe Research 673 IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA P . Maheshwari et al . networks trained end - to - end exceed the state - of - the - art in seman - tic segmentation . Semantic segmentation , however , is limited to identifying the semantics of the image at a pixel level and does not directly yield templates requiring additional processing to extract design element information from the identified segments . Object detection algorithms , on the other hand , directly yield bounding boxes and can be useful in finding the locations of the detected design elements . Notable works in object detection include Regions with CNN features [ 12 ] , its variants like Fast R - CNN [ 10 ] , Faster R - CNN [ 26 ] , Mask R - CNN [ 12 ] and R2CNN [ 16 ] . Mask R - CNN [ 12 ] first identifies the semantic regions of various objects followed by identifying the bounding boxes ( masks ) corresponding to these regions . Due to the recent successes of the Mask R - CNN and FCNN frameworks as strong baselines in segmentation and detection tasks , we explore both these frameworks for extracting the templates of banners . Another line of related works involve optimization of layouts . A growing body of recent work focuses on automating this process in the context of website and documents . Bricolage [ 17 ] automates the website creation process by transforming the content of one webpage into the style and layout of another . This is achieved by cre - ating correspondences between the Document Object Model ( DOM ) elements of two webpages . Such a technique cannot be employed for banners due to the absence of a DOM tree structure . In interface designing , Gajos et al . [ 9 ] specify the positions and categories of widgets and use a margin - based approach to set weights of the ob - jective functions to learn model parameters . Swearngin et al . [ 27 ] introduce Rewire , a system that automatically reconstructs vector representations from screenshots of interfaces and leverages them to provide assistance to designers in creating new designs . Their reconstruction process involves low - level image processing based on UI - specific techniques and can not be generalized . Todi et al . [ 28 ] propose a layout restructuring of websites to make it more familiar to users and aid navigation . Adaptive layouts for documents have used grid - based templates for individual elements [ 14 ] , probabilis - tic models for document composition [ 8 ] and genetic algorithm framework to personalize documents [ 25 ] . However , they deal with simple documents primarily involving text that support a linear read - order and easily conform to templates . Banners , however , are less structured and composed of free - form placement of text and image elements . Such semantic and structural differences between banners and the experience synthesized in these explorations make these approaches not trivially extendable for banner re - purposing . The sub - field of layout problem most similar to our problem is the optimization of single - page graphic designs . Early works in this domain was automatic designing of magazine covers by analyzing visual saliency of photographs to position text [ 15 ] . A common approach in layout structuring is to define measures of aesthetic requirements and optimize layouts to minimize these measures . Various energy functions to quantify alignment of docu - ments [ 2 , 3 ] , visual weight and balance of layouts [ 19 ] , aesthetics of interfaces [ 22 ] and heuristics like balance and uniformity of doc - uments [ 11 ] have been put forth . Vollick et al . [ 29 ] proposed an energy - based approach to model layouts of labels in technical dia - grams . Non - linear inverse optimization [ 18 ] have been commonly explored to learn model parameters from training data . Label lay - out , however , is a relatively simpler problem where text elements are distributed around a background image . Zhang et al . [ 32 ] pro - posed techniques to automatically generate banners of different sizes adhering to learned style parameters . But they primarily work on reflowing the banner content into different sizes and do not deal with optimization for news content . Along these lines , Donovan et al . [ 24 ] introduced an energy - based model derived from design principles to synthesize different versions of single - page graphic designs and have extended their method to a user - interactive mode [ 23 ] . We deploy the energy - based framework of [ 24 ] for defining energy functions in the context of banners and optimizing elements from multiple banners into a single layout . 3 EXEMPLAR BASED EXPERIENCE TRANSFER Our proposed algorithm of transferring a user’s target experience into an exemplar banner consists of two key steps . The underlying design elements ( text boxes , shapes and images ) are first extracted from the banner images to build an editable template where the user can add his own content . For this , we explore two alternate configurations . The first configuration is based on an initial semantic segmentation of the banner image into salient regions via a fully convolutional neural network ( FCNN ) [ 20 ] followed by utilizing the segmentation to extract key design elements . Our alternative configuration employs the Mask R - CNN [ 12 ] framework to extract the key elements in the input banner . Similar to FCNN , Mask R - CNN starts with a Region Proposal Network that segments the different regions in the input . In addition to identifying the class of each region , the Mask R - CNN also identifies the bounding boxes for the identified region , thus yielding the design elements directly . Both these configurations facilitate the extraction of the underlying template of the banner image and enable replication of an exemplar banner with different content . Once the template is extracted , it is possible to insert the user content into the template by matching the type of content ( image to image fields , and so on ) . However , since the content is different , it might result in misalignment and overflows thus affecting the overall aesthetics of the banners . To address this , the second step of our algorithm tunes the content - filled - elements to produce a banner that satisfies various aesthetic goals . We formulate this as an optimization problem where a set of energy functions are intro - duced to quantify the aesthetics of a template . The energy functions are smoothed and a weighted sum is used towards defining the overall ‘goodness’ of a banner . The weights of the energy functions are learned via a non - linear optimization [ 18 ] based on the corpus of exemplar banners . The energy function thus learned is used in a simulated annealing setup to optimize the new layout of the banner with replaced content . Figure 3 shows the complete schematic of the sequence of steps in the proposed framework . 4 TEMPLATE EXTRACTION Given an image of the banner , template extraction identifies the design elements of the banner along with their positional details that can be used to transfer the user’s content into the banner . We explore two state - of - the - art frameworks in image segmentation ( Fully Convolutional Neural Networks ) and object detection ( Mask R - CNN ) for identifying the elements of the input banners . 674 Exemplar Based Experience Transfer IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA Input Banner Semantic Segmentation Template Extraction User Content in Layout Energy based Optimization of Layout Energy Weights learned from data Figure 1 : Schematic of the proposed approach 4 . 1 Fully Convolutional Neural Network ( FCNN ) Unlike a fully - connected network , FCNN is capable of retaining spatial information and can easily extend to inputs of arbitrary sizes . FCNN layers are of the form , y ij = f ks (cid:0) { x s i + δ i , s j + δ j } 0 ≤ δ i , δ j ≤ k (cid:1) Where x is the input to the corresponding layer and y is the output of the layer , k is the kernel size and s is the stride / subsampling factor . f ks determines the type of the layer . f ks could be matrix multiplication for convolution , or average pooling and spatial max for max pooling , or an element - wise nonlinear function for activa - tion , depending on the type of the layer . The end - to - end network is optimized to minimize the pixel - wise cross - entropy loss between the input banner and the corresponding output annotation . To accurately represent the design elements , the extracted tem - plate should specify the rectangular bounding box for each of the elements . Since the output of FCNN does not directly yield this , the semantic segmentation output is processed to extract the bounding boxes for each identified element . Moreover , the layout of banners may have overlapping elements ( for example , text on top of shape ) while semantic segmentation assigns a single label to each pixel . We , therefore , devise a mechanism based on connected components to process the segmentation output and extract the exact position , size and other meta details of the underlying design elements . From every segmented pixel , we deploy a Depth - First Search ( DFS ) around its neighbourhood to identify a bounding box for the corresponding design element encompassing the current pixel . Since the bounding box search does not limit the selection of a pixel in multiple elements , this allows for overlapping elements to be identified . Bounding boxes less than a threshold ( in size ) were rejected to control the noise in semantic segmentation . The algorithm outputs a set of elements in the banner along with the respective bounding boxes and location , yielding the final template with the required layout information . Algorithm 1 summarizes the sequence of steps to extract the template from the semantically segmented banners . 4 . 2 Mask Region - based Convolutional Neural Network The Mask Region - based Convolutional Neural Network ( Mask R - CNN ) [ 12 ] extends from Faster Region - based Convolutional Neural Network [ 26 ] and adds an additional branch for predicting segmen - tation ‘masks’ on every region of interest ( RoI ) , along with classify - ing the region . The mask layer is based on a Fully Convolutional Algorithm 1 Design Element Extract Input I = Image output of semantic segmentation Initialize L = ∅ while there is an unvisited pixel do Run DFS from the unvisited pixel N to find a connected com - ponent C Maintain the 4 points of C closest to the 4 corners of I in Box while running DFS L . append ( Box ) Filter L based on region size return L Neural Network applied to each RoI , predicting the segmentation mask in a pixel - to - pixel manner . Thus , Mask R - CNN yields the bounding boxes for every identified segment and unlike FCNN , ad - ditional processing is not required to extract these boxes . To allow for overlapping elements , we followed [ 12 ] to independently clas - sify the masks for each identified regions . Further , Mask R - CNN also decouples the mask - identification from the region classification , resulting in smoother masks ( and hence bounding boxes ) . 4 . 3 Evaluating Template Extraction In order to train our frameworks , we used a dataset of ∼ 140k banner images that range over a wide variety of topics and styles created by non - expert users of a design software . Every banner has an associated manifest file that includes information about the design elements in the banner , their position and orientation in the banner , and other meta - data like font type and font size for text descriptions and colour for shapes . Although there are various components in a banner , we specifically focus on modelling the layout , i . e , the positions and scales of different design elements . To train the FCNN and Mask R - CNN models , we process the manifest files and generate pixel - wise ground truth annotations for the banners by marking various regions of the banners . The dataset is divided in train ( 80 % ) , validation ( 10 % ) and test ( 10 % ) sets . Figure 2 : Sample banner from our dataset and its manifest file Table 1 shows the performance of the various frameworks on our dataset . The FCNN based model outperforms the other settings in overall segmentation . However , since the plain FCNN model only computes the pixel - wise segmentation , it cannot be directly used as an editable template . For template extraction , it can be seen that the FCNN segmentation followed by the region - based 675 IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA P . Maheshwari et al . Figure 3 : Example depicting the layout extraction framework ( a ) Input image ( b ) Semantic segmentation output ( c ) Design element extraction ( d ) Ground truth annotation ( e ) Transformation with user content clustering via DFS outperforms the Mask R - CNN setting in terms of F1 scores although the accuracy scores are comparable between the two settings . This is perhaps due to the superior ability of FCNN in identifying the regions than the Mask R - CNN cascading to the template extraction . Accuracy F1 Score FCNN 0 . 83 0 . 61 FCNN + Template Extraction 0 . 80 0 . 58 Mask R - CNN 0 . 79 0 . 50 Table 1 : Results of template extraction Fig 3 shows the output from various stages in our template ex - traction and how an experience can be synthesized by transferring new content into the exemplar banners . While we have not consid - ered extracting the font style here , existing work like [ 30 ] can easily be incorporated into our framework to recognize and transfer font styles from sample banners . 5 ENERGY - BASED OPTIMIZATION While the element extraction yields the underlying templates for input banners , adding user’s content in these template can off - set the underlying design . This calls for a way to fine - tune the content - transferred banner . We extend the energy - based optimiza - tion framework of [ 24 ] for fine tuning the layouts . The framework optimizes a non - linear energy function that encapsulates various aspects of design via simulated annealing . We extended various energy functions from [ 24 ] for our purpose and learn their combi - nation via a non - linear hyperparameter optimization [ 5 ] based on the samples in our corpus . 5 . 1 Energy Functions Peter et al . [ 24 ] define a set of energy functions to measure the goodness of a layout on various dimensions . We adapt different components of these energy functions E i for our problem . The com - posite energy function’s hyperparameters θ comprises of [ w , α ] . w are the weights given to different energy functions in the weighted sum that yields the final energy . Each component energy function is smoothed via a sigmoid function S ( · ; α ) to map it to a value between 0 and 1 . The parameter α is used to smoothen the sigmoid function and determine how the changes in energy should be mapped be - tween 0 and 1 . A smaller value of α makes the sigmoid function smoother , whereas a larger value takes it closer to a step function . Fig . 4 shows the mapping for different α values . The overall energy of a layout is given by a weighted sum of individual energies , E ( X ; θ ) = (cid:213) i w i E i ( X ; α i ) . The hyperparameters w , α are learned via a non - linear optimization as described in the next sub - section . Here , we outline the different terms that constitute our energy . 10 5 0 5 10 0 . 2 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 α = 0 . 5 α = 1 . 0 α = 3 . 0 α = 5 . 0 α = 10 . 0 Figure 4 : Sigmoid function mapping for different α Correct alignment is an important aspect that portrays an or - ganized representation , which in turn adds to the aesthetic value . We considered Left , Right , X - center , Y - center and Bottom alignments , which are depicted in Figure 5 . The design elements of typical ban - ners can be grouped such that the elements within a group are aligned together . The alignment energy term measures the fraction of element pairs that can be bracketed together under the same alignment type , E aaliдn = − S (cid:32) 1 n 2 (cid:213) i ∈ ( all ) (cid:16) (cid:213) j ∈ ( all ) I aij (cid:17) ; α aaliдn (cid:33) where n denotes the total number of elements , I aij indicates if ele - ments i and j are aligned by type a . The group energy encourages aligned element pairs to be clus - tered together under a common type of alignment . This promotes symmetry in the banner and is visually appealing . E aдroup = − S (cid:32) 1 nm (cid:213) д (cid:213) i ∈ ( all ) I iд ; α aдroup (cid:33) 676 Exemplar Based Experience Transfer IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA Left Alignment Right Alignment X - center Alignment Y - center Alignment Bottom Alignment Figure 5 : Types of alignments considered where n and m are the number of elements and alignment groups respectively and I iд indicates if element i belongs to alignment group д . Minor misalignment between two elements is visually discom - forting as well as distracting . To accommodate for this , we use a misalignment energy term that heavily penalizes element pairs that are slightly off from alignment . E amisaliдn = 1 3 n 2 (cid:213) a (cid:213) i ∈ ( all ) (cid:213) j ∈ ( all ) I aij C ( d aij ) Here , d aij is a measure of the misalignment , i . e , minimum distance to align the elements and C ( · ) is the cost function . We used C ( d ) = 5arctan (cid:0) d 0 . 015 (cid:1) heavily penalizing even minor misalignments . A good layout finds a good mix of whitespace and limited spread [ 31 ] . To account for these in our energy functions , we encourage whitespace via a negative fraction of the total pixels that are occupied , given by , E whitespace = − S (cid:32)(cid:205) p I p wh ; α whitespace (cid:33) where I p is an indicator of whether a pixel p has any element or not and ( w , h ) are the width and height of the image respectively . While whitespaces are good , too much white space can be vi - sually displeasing . We , therefore , penalize the spread via another energy component given by , E spread = S (cid:32) 1 n 2 (cid:213) i ∈ ( all ) min j ∈ ( all ) D ij ; α spread (cid:33) where D aij is the euclidean distance between elements i and j . Our final energy component penalizes overlap between elements and is given by the sum of overlapping pixel area across all combi - nation of elements . E a overlap = S (cid:32)(cid:205) p A p wh ; α overlap (cid:33) where A p is an indicator of any overlap at pixel p and ( w , h ) are the width and height of the image respectively . 5 . 2 Layout Learning The objective of defining the energy functions is to measure various aspects of the layouts . While the proposed energy functions are not exhaustive , it measures various visual aspects of the banner . Due to the non - linearity of the energy function , the parameters θ = [ w , α ] can neither be estimated easily nor can be set empiri - cally . We , therefore , use a non - linear hyper - parameter optimization framework based on randomized search [ 5 ] to learn the appropri - ate θ from our training corpus of designs . These parameters are updated iteratively based on a non - linear inverse optimization [ 18 ] framework . It is assumed that X T is optimal for some unknown θ and in order to estimate this parameter θ , we minimize the energy difference between the example layouts X T and the optimal layout for an unknown θ . This is given by the energy function , G ( θ ) = E ( X T ; θ ) - min X E ( X ; θ ) Since the optimization is non - linear , we follow an alternating min - imization approach where θ and X T are updated iteratively . At each iteration , the previous θ is used to determine the optimized layout ( using the method described in the next subsection ) followed by determining the new θ that minimizes the G ( θ ) . The final θ is obtained by repeating this over several iterations and is used for energy computation in subsequent layout optimization . 5 . 3 Layout Optimization Given a set of design elements X and the learned weights θ , the task is to arrange these elements in a layout with the least total energy . For this multi - variable problem involving highly coupled constraints , we use a simulated annealing approach [ 1 , 21 ] since our search space is discrete . Though there are many optimization algorithms , including hill climbing , gradient descent , etc . , the ad - vantage of simulated annealing is that it avoids getting stuck in local minima / maxima even with complex optimization functions . Zhang et al . [ 32 ] noted that initialization in such inverse opti - mizations play a key role and bad initialization can seriously impact the optimization . Therefore , the layout is first initialized based on tree - of - parzen - estimator [ 6 ] based optimization and its energy is computed . This gives a good initialization for faster convergence and is better than a random initialization . The algorithm then pro - ceeds to explore various proposals and a move is considered to be a good one if the energy decreases from the current layout to the pro - posed layout . All good transitions are accepted and bad transitions are accepted with some probability . The process is repeated across several iterations to reach the layout with optimal energy . In the initial iterations , the probability of accepting higher energy layouts is more , thus avoiding local minima . This threshold is annealed ( or decreased ) as the optimization progresses so that only changes that lower the energy are preferred . The following proposals were executed to adjust the elements and decrease various components of the energy function : • Alignment : This proposal picks up two design elements ran - domly and aligns them on one of the alignment axes . • Overlapping Elements : It picks up two elements and checks whether these elements have a common area and ensures that they are separated . 677 IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA P . Maheshwari et al . • Update Height / Width : This proposal alters the height / width of a randomly chosen design element . • Update Single Element Position : This proposal randomly picks up any design element and shifts its position by a certain distance in both x and y directions . • Swap Elements : This proposal randomly swaps the location of two elements . 5 . 4 Evaluating the layout optimization Figures 6d , 6e and 6f show some sample banners from our algorithm . It can be seen that the proposed algorithm produces reasonable layouts . However , the text on top of images are not visually pleasing , since we do not consider image saliency in our energy computation - e . g . the font colour in Fig . 6d , the text overlap in Fig . 6f . While this can be addressed via our framework , defining an appropriate energy metric for saliency and corresponding proposals are a subject of further research . To formally evaluate the proposed framework , we create a large number of machine - generated banners . We begin with identifying banners with the same number of design elements in our dataset . Retaining the content of the original banner , we optimize the other banners to arrive at different layout combinations resulting in differ - ent variants of the input banner . We deployed a human experiment to compare the goodness of the optimized banners against human - generated banners . Every user is presented with a random banner image - either machine - generatedordesigner - generated . Theannotatorsareasked to rate the alignment , overlap , spread and overall aesthetics of the banners on a 5 − point Likert scale with the items Very poor , Poor , Neutral , Good and Very good . To maintain the quality of the annota - tions , workers are restricted to those with 95 % acceptance over a minimum of 200 annotations . Every annotator rated a single image and are asked to describe the banner in order to further filter out arbitrary annotations . This crowd - sourced experiment is performed on 30 machine - generated and 30 designer banners . Each banner is evaluated by 5 ¢ different AMT workers and every successful annotation is awarded 5 . The ratings are summarized in Table 2 . Sample designer and machine - generated banners from our survey are shown in Figure 6 . Aspect Alignment Overlap Spread Overall Designer 3 . 705 4 . 093 3 . 899 4 . 046 Machine 3 . 854 3 . 806 3 . 806 3 . 733 Table 2 : Average user ratings on a scale of 1 - 5 It is evident from Table 2 that banners generated from our algo - rithm , which received a mean rating of 3 . 73 , perform comparable to designer banners with a mean rating of 4 . 05 . There are considerable variations in the assessment of specific visual qualities like align - ment and overlap . The alignment score improved from designer banners to our banners whereas overlap between elements was found to be higher for machine - generated banners . The reason for this is that alignment is primarily an objective metric which depends only on the locations and sizes of the design elements , and not the content . Overlap , on the other hand , is a more subjective metric that is not independent of the content . For example , con - sider the text boxes of figures 6a and 6f , both of which are placed on top of images , thereby resulting in complete overlap . But the overlap in 6a is not displeasing because it is situated over the image background . In 6f however , the text interacts with the image fore - ground and causes uneasiness . As mentioned before , our current framework is content agnostic and taking the image saliency into account requires defining an appropriate energy metric and propos - als to optimize the metric and is a subject of further research . These comparative annotations indicate that the proposed method can help in providing compelling starting points for a novice designer . 6 CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK In this paper , we have studied the problem of transferring the user’s content into a sample banner . Our algorithm uses a semantic seg - mentation based framework to first extract the underlying template . Once the user - content is entered into the layouts , we have energy - based optimization to fine - tune the layouts with the user content . While we have outlined our algorithm to take a single banner into account , our algorithm can also be extended to optimize the design elements from multiple banners . Fig 7 . shows an example where elements from 2 distinct banner images were combined and optimized using our algorithm - however , we manually selected the elements from individual banners . Automatically identifying the right subset of elements from each of the banners to be combined into an aesthetic banner is part of future research . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Maneesh Agrawala and Chris Stolte . 2001 . Rendering effective route maps : improving usability through generalization . In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques . ACM , 241 – 249 . [ 2 ] Helen Y Balinsky , Jonathan R Howes , and Anthony J Wiley . 2009a . Aesthetically - driven layout engine . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM symposium on Document engineering . ACM , 119 – 122 . [ 3 ] Helen Y Balinsky , Anthony J Wiley , and Matthew C Roberts . 2009b . Aesthetic measure of alignment and regularity . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM symposium on Document engineering . ACM , 56 – 65 . [ 4 ] Tony Beltramelli . 2018 . pix2code : Generating code from a graphical user inter - face screenshot . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems . ACM , 3 . [ 5 ] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio . 2012 . Random search for hyper - parameter optimization . Journal of Machine Learning Research 13 , Feb ( 2012 ) , 281 – 305 . [ 6 ] James S Bergstra , Rémi Bardenet , Yoshua Bengio , and Balázs Kégl . 2011 . Al - gorithms for hyper - parameter optimization . In Advances in neural information processing systems . 2546 – 2554 . [ 7 ] Bill Buxton . 2010 . Sketching user experiences : getting the design right and the right design . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 8 ] Niranjan Damera - Venkata , José Bento , and Eamonn O’Brien - Strain . 2011 . Proba - bilistic document model for automated document composition . In Proceedings of the 11th ACM symposium on Document engineering . ACM , 3 – 12 . [ 9 ] Krzysztof Gajos and Daniel S Weld . 2005 . Preference elicitation for interface optimization . In Proceedings of the 18th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . ACM , 173 – 182 . [ 10 ] Ross Girshick . 2015 . Fast r - cnn . In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision . 1440 – 1448 . [ 11 ] Steven J Harrington , J Fernando Naveda , Rhys Price Jones , Paul Roetling , and Nishant Thakkar . 2004 . Aesthetic measures for automated document layout . In Proceedingsofthe2004ACMsymposiumonDocumentengineering . ACM , 109 – 111 . [ 12 ] Kaiming He , Georgia Gkioxari , Piotr Dollár , and Ross Girshick . 2017 . Mask r - cnn . In Computer Vision ( ICCV ) , 2017 IEEE International Conference on . IEEE , 2980 – 2988 . [ 13 ] Scarlett R Herring , Chia - Chen Chang , Jesse Krantzler , and Brian P Bailey . 2009 . Getting inspired ! : understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 87 – 96 . [ 14 ] Charles Jacobs , Wilmot Li , Evan Schrier , David Bargeron , and David Salesin . 2003 . Adaptive grid - based document layout . ACM transactions on graphics ( TOG ) 678 Exemplar Based Experience Transfer IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) Figure 6 : Examples of banners from user survey . ( a - c ) Banners created by designers . ( d - f ) Banners generated from our algorithm ( a ) First input image ( b ) Second input image ( c ) Combined layout with user content Figure 7 : Example depicting the multiple banner combination 22 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 838 – 847 . [ 15 ] Ali Jahanian , Jerry Liu , Daniel R Tretter , Qian Lin , Niranjan Damera - Venkata , Eamonn O’Brien - Strain , Seungyon Lee , Jian Fan , and Jan P Allebach . 2012 . Auto - matic design of magazine covers . In Imaging and Printing in a Web 2 . 0 World III , Vol . 8302 . International Society for Optics and Photonics , 83020N . [ 16 ] Yingying Jiang , Xiangyu Zhu , Xiaobing Wang , Shuli Yang , Wei Li , Hua Wang , Pei Fu , and Zhenbo Luo . 2017 . R2CNN : rotational region CNN for orientation robust scene text detection . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1706 . 09579 ( 2017 ) . [ 17 ] Ranjitha Kumar , Jerry O Talton , Salman Ahmad , and Scott R Klemmer . 2011 . Bricolage : example - basedretargetingforwebdesign . In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHI 679 IUI ’19 , March 17 – 20 , 2019 , Marina del Rey , CA , USA P . Maheshwari et al . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2197 – 2206 . [ 18 ] C Karen Liu , Aaron Hertzmann , and Zoran Popović . 2005 . Learning physics - based motion style with nonlinear inverse optimization . In ACM Transactions on Graphics ( TOG ) , Vol . 24 . ACM , 1071 – 1081 . [ 19 ] Simon Lok , Steven Feiner , and Gary Ngai . 2004 . Evaluation of visual balance for automated layout . In Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces . ACM , 101 – 108 . [ 20 ] Jonathan Long , Evan Shelhamer , and Trevor Darrell . 2015 . Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation . In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 3431 – 3440 . [ 21 ] Zbigniew Michalewicz and David B Fogel . 2013 . How to solve it : modern heuristics . Springer Science & Business Media . [ 22 ] David Chek Ling Ngo , Lian Seng Teo , and John G Byrne . 2002 . Evaluating interface esthetics . Knowledge and Information Systems 4 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 46 – 79 . [ 23 ] Peter O’Donovan , Aseem Agarwala , and Aaron Hertzmann . 2015 . Designscape : Design with interactive layout suggestions . In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1221 – 1224 . [ 24 ] Peter O’Donovan , Aseem Agarwala , and Aaron Hertzmann . 2014 . Learning layouts for single - pagegraphic designs . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 20 , 8 ( 2014 ) , 1200 – 1213 . [ 25 ] Lisa Purvis , Steven Harrington , Barry O’Sullivan , and Eugene C Freuder . 2003 . Creating personalized documents : an optimization approach . In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM symposium on Document engineering . ACM , 68 – 77 . [ 26 ] Shaoqing Ren , Kaiming He , Ross Girshick , and Jian Sun . 2015 . Faster r - cnn : Towards real - time object detection with region proposal networks . In Advances in neural information processing systems . 91 – 99 . [ 27 ] Amanda Swearngin , Mira Dontcheva , Wilmot Li , Joel Brandt , Morgan Dixon , and Andrew J Ko . 2018 . Rewire : Interface Design Assistance from Examples . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 504 . [ 28 ] Kashyap Todi , Jussi Jokinen , Kris Luyten , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2018 . Familiari - sation : Restructuring Layouts with Visual Learning Models . In 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM , 547 – 558 . [ 29 ] Ian Vollick , Daniel Vogel , Maneesh Agrawala , and Aaron Hertzmann . 2007 . Spec - ifying label layout style by example . In Proceedings of the 20th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . ACM , 221 – 230 . [ 30 ] Zhangyang Wang , Jianchao Yang , Hailin Jin , Eli Shechtman , Aseem Agarwala , Jonathan Brandt , and Thomas S Huang . 2015 . Deepfont : Identify your font from an image . In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international conference on Multimedia . ACM , 451 – 459 . [ 31 ] AlexWWhite . 2011 . Theelementsofgraphicdesign : space , unity , pagearchitecture , and type . Skyhorse Publishing , Inc . [ 32 ] Yunke Zhang , Kangkang Hu , Peiran Ren , Changyuan Yang , Weiwei Xu , and Xian - Sheng Hua . 2017 . Layout Style Modeling for Automating Banner Design . In Proceedings of the on Thematic Workshops of ACM Multimedia 2017 . ACM , 451 – 459 . 680