Abstract This paper demonstrates DISA , a higher - level writ - ing assistant system , which analyzes the information structure of abstracts , and retrieves the knowledge according to the research goals from the related work . By incorporating the latest neural - network technologies including linguistically - informed neu - ral - network and autoencoder , we construct an intel - ligent system which extends the scope of computer - aided writing . 1 Introduction Most academic writing assistant systems aim to help users write better articles in terms of word usage and grammatical correctness [ Chen et al . , 2012 ; Dai et al . , 2014 ; Liu et al . , 2016 ] . This paper presents a writing assistant system that pro - vides writing advice at a higher level . Rather than spelling checking and grammatical error diagnosis , our system , DISA 1 ( deep information structure analysis ) , analyzes the in - formation structure of a given article , and retrieves the useful knowledge in the related work for references . In scientific writing , each sentence takes a different role to convey different information to readers [ Swales , 1990 ] . Basic types of information structure such as Background , Purpose , Method , Results , and Conclusion are frequently used . With - out a proper arrangement of information structure , a paper might be pointless even if it is flawless in terms of grammat - ical correctness . Previous studies on information structure identification are applied to document summarization [ Teufel , 2010 ; Contrac - tor et al . , 2012 ] and reading assistance [ Guo et al . , 2014 ] . In this work , we apply the structure information identification to writing assistance and show its effectiveness in knowledge retrieval . The overview of DISA is illustrated in Figure 1 . A web - based interface is provided for users to submit an abstract . The preprocessor first segments the abstract into sentences , and performs tokenization , part - of - speech tagging , and de - pendency parsing . Then , linguistic features like surface fea - tures and syntactic features are extracted for information structure identification . In the structure identification , the role of each sentence in the submitted abstract is labelled , and 1 http : / / nlg18 . csie . ntu . edu . tw / disa the research goals in the abstract can be found by locating the sentences which are labeled as Purpose . According to the re - search goals , our related work retrieval module ranks the most related passages from a collection of pre - analyzed EECS papers . In addition to the related works , feasible ap - proaches to the research problem are also suggested . At the same time , the arrangement of the information structure in the abstract is also analyzed and compared to the norm . Neural network - based approaches are investigated for in - formation structure identification and knowledge retrieval . A linguistically - informed neural network model is adopted for information structure identification . For related word ranking and knowledge extraction , a GRU - based autoencoder is trained to model the similarity between sentences at the se - mantic level . Our final retrieval model is a hybrid of autoen - coder and traditional information retrieval models . From the collection of pre - analyzed EECS papers , the retrieval model suggests the related works and the methods that are most re - lated to the research goals in the submitted abstract . The contributions of this work are three - fold . 1 ) We demonstrate a novel writing assistant system for higher level writing advising . 2 ) A new application of information struc - ture identification is introduced to extend the scope of writing assistant systems . 3 ) Latest neural - network technologies are explored for performance improvement . 2 Resources In the initial stage of the DISA project , we focus on the EECS area . NTHU Academic Writing Database 2 , which contains 210 , 771 sentences from 4 , 380 EECS papers , is adopted as the Figure 1 : Flowchart of the DISA system . 2 http : / / writcent . nthu . edu . tw / writcent DISA : A Scientific Writing Advisor with Deep Information Structure Analysis ( Demonstration ) Hen - Hsen Huang and Hsin - Hsi Chen National Taiwan University , Taipei , Taiwan hhhuang @ nlg . csie . ntu . edu . tw ; hhchen @ ntu . edu . tw Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 17 ) 5229 Category # Description Background 471 Description of the research issues ; Contrast between the work and related work Purpose 592 Research goals Method 1 , 121 Description of data ; Description of the experiments ; Description of the data analysis Results 1 , 025 Experimental findings ; Discussion of results Conclusion 185 Summary of the work ; Future work Table 1 : Information structures annotated in the NTHU dataset . research material . In this dataset , 3 , 394 sentences from 597 abstracts are annotated with the information structure labels in five categories by linguistic experts . Table 1 summarizes the categories . We train the information structure model with the labeled sentences , and train the autoencoder with all sen - tences in the dataset . 3 Information Structure Identification Information structure identification is a task of sentence clas - sification . In previous works , the computational models for information structure identification are mostly based on the feature - based learning approach . Various linguistic features and learning strategies are explored [ Guo et al . 2011 ; Seaghdha and Teufel , 2014 ] . Linguistically informed neural - network models [ Ebert et al . , 2015 ] , which are trained with the raw text and handcrafted linguistic features , benefit from taking both the raw data and the human - inspired information into account . We incorporate a linguistically informed model for information structure identification into DISA . The linguistic features suggested by Guo et al . [ 2013 ] are extracted , including sentence location , n - gram , part - of - speech tag , and dependency relation . The Stanford CoreNLP server is integrated for basic language processing [ Manning et al . , 2014 ] . Moreover , the Viterbi al - gorithm is performed on the top of the neural network for se - quential modeling . For example , the sentences of Result are more likely to succeed the sentences of Method . We train the model on the NTHU dataset . The 10 - fold cross validation shows the model achieves a macro - average f - score of 75 . 04 % in five - way classification . The abstracts with extremely poor structure arrangement may mislead the sequential model . For such cases , the se - quential modeling can be disabled , and each sentence will be independently labeled . 4 Integrated System Based on the outcome of information structure identification , two kinds of writing advices are made by the DISA system . 4 . 1 Advice on Structure Arrangement The distributions of information structure in the dataset are calculated as the norm . Instead of the sentence frequency of each category provided in Table 1 , we count the ratio of each category of information structure appearing in abstracts ( i . e . , document frequency ) . The document frequencies of Back - ground , Purpose , Method , Results , and Conclusion are 33 . 17 % , 93 . 63 % , 70 . 85 % , 80 . 07 % , and 23 . 28 % , respectively . The statistics shows that an abstract without a statement of Purpose or Results may be problematic . Once the information structure of a submitted abstract is identified , the distribution of information structure in the ab - stract will be compared to the norm by using Euclidean dis - tance . For an abstract with an abnormal structure arrangement , our system will generate an advice . For example , DISA will remind the user to add a sentence of Purpose in an abstract lacking of Purpose . 4 . 2 Knowledge Retrieval The traditional information retrieval model represents the data by using the “bag - of - words” scheme , where the word order information is disregarded . By contrast , the sequential autoencoder , which projects each piece of data into a dense vector space , can better utilize the information in the sequen - tial data like sentences [ Dai and Le , 2015 ] . In this work , we train a GRU [ Cho et al . , 2014 ] autoen - coder that represents a sentence as a 50 - dimensional vector . With additional features including TF - IDF weights , each sen - tence in the database is encoded as a vector . The sentences in the submitted abstract are also encoded to vectors in the same vector space , and then the distance between a user - submitted sentence and a sentence in the database can be measured us - ing cosine similarity . Based on the type of information struc - tures , the related Methods for the Purpose in the submitted abstract , the related Backgrounds for the Purpose in the sub - mitted abstract , and the Purposes similar to the one in the sub - mitted abstract are retrieved . From the retrieved sentences , we further apply the topic model for result filtering at the concept level . The LDA [ Blei et al . , 2003 ] model is learned to cluster the abstracts from the NTHU dataset into topics like “data mining” , “signal pro - cessing” , and “photonics” . The DISA system infers the topic of the user - submitted abstract by using the LDA model , and truncates the retrieval results which are not on the same topic . 5 Conclusion We present an innovative computer - aided writing system aiming at providing advice at the structure and the knowledge levels . Rather than aiding users to compose right sentences , our system assists users to create good research work . As a novel system in its initial stage , the information struc - ture detector is trained on a moderate - sized EECS dataset , and the capability of knowledge retrieval is also limited by the size and the diversity of the backend database . In the fu - ture , more scientific articles from the public domain will be incrementally imported to the database . User study will be conducted to measure the performance of our system in the real world . Acknowledgements This research was partially supported by Ministry of Science and Technology , Taiwan , under grants MOST - 104 - 2221 - E - 002 - 061 - MY3 and MOST - 105 - 2221 - E - 002 - 154 - MY3 . We thank the Writing Center at National Tsing Hua University for providing us the NTHU Academic Writing Database . Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 17 ) 5230 References [ Blei et al . , 2003 ] David M . Blei , Andrew Y . Ng , and Michael I . Jordan . Latent Dirichlet Allocation . Journal of Machine Learning Research 3 : 993 - 1022 , 2003 . [ Chen et al . , 2012 ] Mei - Hua Chen , Shih - Ting Huang , Hung - Ting Hsieh , Ting - Hui Kao , Jason S . Chang . FLOW : A First - Language - Oriented Writing Assistant System . In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Associa - tion for Computational Linguistics ( ACL 2012 ) : System Demonstrations , pages 157 – 162 , Jeju , Republic of Korea , 2012 . [ Cho et al . , 2014 ] Kyunghyun Cho , Bart van Merrienboer , Dzmitry Bahdanau , and Yoshua Bengio . On the proper - ties of neural machine translation : Encoder - decoder ap - proaches . arXiv preprint , arXiv : 1409 . 1259 , 2014 . [ Contractor et al . , 2012 ] Danish Contractor , Yufan Guo , and Anna Korhonen . Using Argumentative Zones for Extrac - tive Summarization of Scientific Articles . In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING 2012 ) : Technical Papers , pages 663 – 678 , Mumbai , India , 2012 . [ Dai et al . , 2014 ] Xianjun Dai , Yuanchao Liu , Xiaolong Wang , and Bingquan Liu . WINGS : Writing with Intelli - gent Guidance and Suggestions . In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL 2014 ) : System Demonstrations , pages 25 – 30 , Baltimore , Maryland USA , 2014 . [ Ebert et al . , 2015 ] Sebastian Ebert , Ngoc Thang Vu , and Hinrich Schütze . A Linguistically Informed Convolu - tional Neural Network . In Proceedings of the 6th Work - shop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity , Sen - timent and Social Media Analysis ( WASSA 2015 ) , pages 109 – 114 , Lisboa , Portugal , 2015 . [ Guo et al . , 2011 ] Yufan Guo , Anna Korhonen , and Thierry Poibeau . A Weakly - supervised Approach to Argumenta - tive Zoning of Scientific Documents . In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2011 ) , pages 273 – 283 , Edinburgh , Scotland , UK , 2011 . [ Guo et al . , 2013 ] Yufan Guo , Roi Reichart , and Anna Korho - nen . Improved Information Structure Analysis of Scien - tific Documents Through Discourse and Lexical Con - straints . In Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2013 , pages 928 – 937 , Atlanta , Georgia , 2013 . [ Guo et al . , 2014 ] Yufan Guo , Diarmuid O Seaghdha , Ilona Silins , Lin Sun , Johan Hogberg , Ulla Stenius , and Anna Korhonen . CRAB 2 . 0 : A text mining tool for supporting literature review in chemical cancer risk assessment . In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING 2014 ) : System Demonstrations , pages 76 – 80 , Dublin , Ireland , 2014 . [ Liu et al . , 2016 ] Yuanchao Liu , Xin Wang , Ming Liu , Xiao - long Wang . Write - righter : An Academic Writing Assis - tant System . In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Con - ference on Artificial Intelligence ( AAAI 2016 ) , pages 4373 - 4374 , 2016 . [ Manning et al . , 2014 ] Christopher D Manning , Mihai Surdeanu , John Bauer , Jenny Finkel , Steven J . Bethard , and David McClosky . The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit . In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL 2014 ) : System Demonstrations , pages 55 - 60 , Baltimore , Maryland USA , 2014 . [ Seaghdha and Teufel , 2014 ] Diarmuid O Seaghdha and Simone Teufel . Unsupervised learning of rhetorical struc - ture with un - topic models . In Proceedings of the 25th In - ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING 2014 ) : Technical Papers , pages 2 – 13 , Dublin , Ireland , 2014 . [ Swales , 1990 ] John M . Swales . Genre analysis : English in academic and research settings . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1990 . [ Teufel , 2010 ] Simone Teufel . 2010 . The Structure of Scien - tific Articles : Applications to Citation Indexing and Sum - marization . CSLI Publications , Stanford , CA , 2010 . Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 17 ) 5231