INTRODUCTION A typical feature of most mammalian cell types is the activation of an anion current dur - ing cell swelling ( for more detailed reviews , see refs . 1 – 3 ) . Because under physiological condi - tions , this current is mostly carried by chloride anions , it is generally referred to as I Cl , swell . This current has a typical biophysical ﬁngerprint : ( 1 ) Anion - selective current with a type I Eisenman permeability sequence ( NO 3 – > I – > Br – > Cl – > F – > gluconate ) . This is indicative of an anion - bind - ing site with weak ﬁeld strength whereby per - meation is dominated by the dehydration energy . ( 2 ) Activation is voltage independent , but the current slowly inactivates at positive potentials ( ≥ 60 mV ) . Furthermore , recovery from inactivation is faster at negative potentials . ( 3 ) Mild outward rectiﬁcation of both whole - cell and single - channel currents , implying an intrin - sic rectifying behavior . ( 4 ) Single - channel con - ductance of ± 40 pS at positive potentials and of ± 10 pS at negative potential in calf pulmonary artery endothelial cells . These properties allow Cellular Function and Control of Volume - Regulated Anion Channels Jan Eggermont , * Dominique Trouet , Iris Carton , and Bernd Nilius Laboratory of Physiology , Catholic University of Leuven , Campus Gasthuisberg , B - 3000 Leuven , Belgium Abstract Restoration of cell volume after cell swelling in mammalian cells is achieved by the loss of solutes ( K + , Cl – , and organic osmolytes ) and the subsequent osmotically driven efﬂux of water . This process is generally known as regulatory volume decrease ( RVD ) . One pathway for the swelling induced loss of Cl – ( and also organic osmolytes ) during RVD is the volume - regulated anion channel ( VRAC ) . In this review , we discuss the physiological role and cellular control of VRAC . We will ﬁrst highlight evidence that VRAC is more than a volume regulator and that it participates in other fundamental cellular processes such as cell proliferation and apoptosis . The second part concentrates on the Rho / Rho kinase / myosin phosphorylation cascade and on com - partmentalization in caveolae as modulators of the signal transduction cascade that controls VRAC gating in vascular endothelial cells . Index Entries : Chloride channel ; cell volume ; RhoA ; caveola ; tyrosine kinase . * Author to whom all correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed . E - mail : Jan . Eggermont @ med . kuleuven . ac . be R EVIEW A RTICLE © Copyright 2001 by Humana Press Inc . All rights of any nature whatsoever reserved . 1085 - 9195 / 01 / 35 / 263 – 274 / $ 13 . 00 Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics 263 Volume 35 , 2001 to differentiate volume - regulated anion channel ( VRAC ) from chloride channel - 2 ( ClC - 2 ) , which can also be activated by cell swelling , but which is characterized by at Cl – > I – permeability , slow activation upon hyperpolarization , and inward rectiﬁcation ( 4 , 5 ) . In spite of the typical biophysical finger - print , there is much confusion about the chan - nel ( s ) responsible for I Cl , swell ( for a critical discussion , see refs . 1 and 6 – 9 ) . First , the chan - nel is known under several names , each of which reﬂects or stresses a particular feature : VRAC ( volume - regulated anion channel , which will be used throughout this review ) ( 1 ) , VSOAC ( volume - sensitive organic osmolyte anion channel , reﬂecting the permeability for neutral osmolytes such as taurine , sorbitol , etc . ) ( 10 ) , VSOAC ( volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying anion channel , reflecting the out - ward rectification ) ( 11 ) , VSOR - ClC ( volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying Cl – channel ) ( 9 ) , or VSCC ( volume - sensitive chloride channel ) ( 12 ) . Because of the current ignorance about the molecular identity of the channel ( see below ) , one cannot discriminate unequivocally whether all these different names point to one and the same channel protein or , alternatively , whether they correspond to different , cell - type - depen - dent channel isoforms . As long as this issue has not been settled , we prefer to use the term vol - ume - regulated anion channel ( VRAC ) , as this reﬂects two very crucial properties of the chan - nel ( i . e . , activation during cell swelling and anion permeability ) . A second bone of con - tention is the search for the molecular identity of this channel . Typically , a newly proposed molecule generates initially much enthusiasm , but subsequent reports mitigate this enthusi - asm or even completely refute the initial hypothesis . This cycle has repeated itself at least three times with P - glycoprotein , p I Cln , and ClC - 3 ( for a discussion , see refs . 1 and 6 – 9 ) . With respect to ClC - 3 , the jury is , to some extent , still out . Transient expression studies in combination with mutagenesis and immuno - logical blockade are compatible with ClC - 3 being a subunit of VRAC ( 13 – 15 ) , but other groups were not able to reproduce I Cl , swell cur - rents after transient transfection of ClC - 3 ( 16 – 18 ) . Furthermore , hypotonic stimulation of hepatocytes and pancreatic acinar cells obtained from ClC - 3 - deﬁcient mice still elicited I Cl , swell currents with the typical biophysical properties ( outward rectiﬁcation , inactivation at positive potentials ) as described above ( 19 ) . Thus , in spite of nearly a decade of intense research , the molecular identity of VRAC remains unknown . This is clearly a situation in which traditional methods of channel cloning have failed and which may beneﬁt from alter - native approaches such as the use of model organisms or a clever search of the recently released eukaryotic genomes . Hopefully , the molecular identiﬁcation will eventually solve the current controversy about nomenclature and molecular identity and , in particular , reveal whether or not the phenotypically iden - tical ( or highly similar ) swelling - induced cur - rents in different cell types are the result of multiple molecular species that may or may not belong to the same gene family . In this review , we will focus on the cellular function and control of VRAC . Although VRAC is traditionally regarded as a channel important for cell volume homeostasis , there is substantial evidence that this channel is also implicated in mechanotransduction , cell prolif - eration , and apoptosis . This has important implications for the activation mechanisms that control gating of VRAC . IN SEARCH OF A PHYSIOLOGICAL ROLE FOR VRAC Cell Volume Regulation The most straightforward function attributed to VRAC is cell volume regulation : cell swelling opens VRAC , Cl – ions leave the cell together with K + ions , ( via other channels ) resulting in a H 2 O efﬂux driven by osmosis and restoration of the initial cell volume . This process has been named regulatory volume decrease ( RVD ) . Because pharmacological inhibition of VRAC also tempers RVD , it is generally assumed that 264 Eggermont et al . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 VRAC contributes to the RVD process in differ - ent cell lines ( 20 , 21 ) . Although these in vitro observations clearly identify VRAC as a chan - nel important for RVD , it is far from clear whether RVD is the only or even the most important physiological function of VRAC . Indeed , activation of VRAC in vitro is typically evoked by imposing cells to an acute osmotic shock , either by perfusion with a hypotonic extracellular solution or by dialyzing the cell with a hypertonic pipet solution . However , such abrupt and large osmotic stresses are sel - dom encountered in vivo , except for the kidney and may be the gastrointestinal tract . It is there - fore tempting to speculate that the ubiquitous expression pattern of VRAC reﬂects other func - tions , not necessarily related to cell volume homeostasis . Interestingly , several recent reports have linked VRAC ( or VRAC - like chan - nels ) to different cellular functions . Regulation of Vascular Tone There are indications that VRAC plays a role in endothelial mechanotransduction . Vascular endothelial cells are exposed to various physical forces ( transmural pressure , tangential shear stress ) that trigger or modify endothelial responses such as NO production that contribute to the vascular tone ( 22 ) . Interestingly , exposing endothelial cells to shear stress activates a mem - brane current with biophysical and pharmaco - logical properties similar , if not identical , to I Cl , swell , thereby opening the possibility that VRAC is an endothelial mechanosensor ( 23 , 24 ) . This raises two questions . First , how is VRAC activated by shear stress and do the swelling and shear stress activation pathways coincide ? Second , what is the physiological purpose of shear stress activation ? With respect to the latter question , it has been suggested that VRAC acti - vation is an auxiliary process that increases the shear - stress - induced Ca 2 + transient . Indeed , opening of Cl – channels clamps the membrane potential around the Cl – equilibrium potential , thereby providing a stable inwardly directed dri - ving force for Ca 2 + entry through shear - stress - activated Ca 2 + entry channels ( 25 ) . The volume - regulated anion channel is also an important determinant of endothelial mem - brane potential , with basal VRAC activity exert - ing a depolarizing inﬂuence and VRAC blockade resulting in hyperpolarization ( 26 ) . A direct consequence of this electrogenic contribu - tion is that in vessel walls with electrically cou - pled endothelium and smooth muscle , VRAC activity also affects smooth - muscle membrane potential and , hence , vascular tone . Indeed , Doughty et al . showed that inhibition of VRAC ( either pharmacologically or by hypertonic solution ) potentiated the vasorelaxation induced by increased extracelluar K + ( 27 ) . Moreover , modulation of vessel tone by VRAC blockade required the presence of an intact endothelial layer and of functional gap junc - tions , indicating that the VRAC blockade origi - nated in the endothelium and was transmitted via gap junctions ( 27 ) . Finally , it has been pro - posed that the pressure - induced myogenic tone ( so - called Bayliss effect ) is the result of pressure - induced activation of VRAC channels in the smooth - muscle plasma membrane , leading to smooth - muscle depolarization ( 28 , 29 ) . An inter - esting corollary of these vasular effects is that VRAC channels are potential pharmacological targets for vascular - tone - modifying drugs . Cell Proliferation There are also experimental observations that link VRAC to the cell cycle and cell prolifera - tion . First , structurally nonrelated blockers of VRAC ( 5 - nitro - 2 - ( 3 - phenylpropylamino ) ben - zoic acid [ NPPB ] , quinine , mibefradil , and antie - strogens such as tamoxifen and clomiphen ) slow down the proliferation rate of endothelial cells ( 30 , 31 ) , neuroblastoma cells ( 32 ) , cervical cancer cells ( 33 ) , or hepatocytes ( 34 ) . Staging of cell cycle by FACS analysis of tamoxifen - or NPPB - treated cervical cancer cells led Shen et al . to conclude that pharmacological blockade of VRAC arrested cells in the G0 / G1 phase ( 33 ) . Second , I Cl , swell activity varies with cell cycle stage . For example , activation of I Cl , swell by hypotonic cell swelling was markedly impaired in cervical cancer cells that were arrested in Function and Control of VRAC 265 Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 G0 / G1 by aphidicolin ( 33 ) . Furthermore , release of the aphidicolin block and progression through S and G2 / M was accompanied by an increase in I Cl , swell activity . Similar observations were made by Wondergem et al . , who reported that “rounded , dividing hepatocytes with a high mitotic index” either had large swelling - acti - vated I Cl , swell currents or displayed sponta - neously active I Cl , swell whereas I Cl , swell was absent from “ﬂattened , nondividing” hepato - cytes ( 34 ) . Finally , in mouse ﬁbroblasts , I Cl , swell activity was lowest in serum - starved G0 - arrested cells and in newly divided daughter cells , implying again a progressive increase in I Cl , swell when cells pass through the cell cycle ( 35 ) . Although these observations clearly impli - cate VRAC in the control of cell proliferation , two important questions remain . First , what regulates VRAC activity during the cell cycle ? One possibility is that the regulation of VRAC is intimately linked to the cell cycle clock via one or more of the CDK / cyclin complexes that cycli - cally activate and inactivate during the cell cycle . For example , VRAC ( or a critical regula - tor ) could be a target for one of the CDKs . Alternatively , alterations in VRAC activity may merely reﬂect the progressive increase in cell volume throughout the cell cycle . Second , how does VRAC control cell cycle progression ? In principle , alterations in VRAC activity may affect membrane potential and / or cell volume if there is concomitant loss of K + ions via - cell - cycle - dependent K + channels ( 32 ) . Irrespective of the outcome of these questions , one poten - tially spin - off of the antiproliferative effect of VRAC blockers could be their application as inhibitors of angiogenesis . Manolopoulos et al . have indeed shown that VRAC blockers not only slow down endothelial cell growth but also inhibit angiogenesis , which could be therapeuti - cally exploited to combat tumor - induced neo - vascularization ( 36 ) . Apoptosis One of the hallmarks of apotosis or pro - grammed cell death is a progressive , normo - tonic cell shrinkage also called apoptotic volume decrease ( AVD ) . Similar to RVD , AVD requires the efﬂux of intracellular solutes ( K + , Cl – , etc . ) , which leads to osmotic water efﬂux . It is therefore not surprising that VRAC has been implicated in the apoptotic process as a Cl – efﬂux pathway ( for review , see refs . 37 – 39 ) . Several observations lend weight to this hypoth - esis . First , in Jurkat T - lymphocytes , the pro - apoptotic ligand CD95 also activates an outwardly rectifying Cl – channel ( ORCC ) , which bears many similarities with VRAC ( 40 ) . Moreover , pharmacological inhibition of ORCC antagonizes apoptosis , implying that ORCC activity is required for programmed cell death . Second , Maeno et al . showed that AVD precedes the classical biochemical and morphological apoptotic events ( cytochrome - c release , caspase activation , DNA laddering , cell fragmentation ) and , importantly , that VRAC blockers not only prevent AVD but also the subsequent apoptotic events ( 41 ) . Third , in Xenopus oocytes , proapop - totic stimuli such as N , N - dimethyl - D - ery - throsphingosine ( DMS ) or D - sphingosine ( DS ) also activate the endogenous VRAC ( 42 ) . Again , although these observations establish a phe - nomenological link between VRAC and apopto - sis , they also raise additional questions . First , how is VRAC regulated during apoptosis ? The data of Maeno et al . indicate that VRAC activa - tion is an early event that occurs independently of caspase activation ( 41 ) . Correspondingly , in Jurkat T - lymphocytes , CD95 - mediated activa - tion of ORCC is mediated by p561ck , a member of the Src family kinases ( 40 ) . Second , which mechanism ( s ) links VRAC to the downstream apoptotic events such as caspase activation ? One can think of many plausible scenarios , but one interesting possibility is that the efﬂux of Cl – ions facilitates for reasons of electroneutrality the efﬂux of K + ions , which is a necessary , early event , because , intracellular K + inhibits caspase activation ( 39 , 43 ) . GATING OF VRAC : TRIGGERS VS MODULATORS In this section , we will focus on the activation pathway that controls opening and closing of 266 Eggermont et al . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 VRAC . This section will primarily focus on the swelling - induced activation pathway in vascu - lar endothelial cells , which we have been study - ing for the past years , but , as a precautionary notion , it should be mentioned that not all aspects of this discussion will necessarily apply to VRAC activation in other cell types . For example , whereas protein phosphorylation is a prerequisite for VRAC activation in CPAE cells ( 44 ) , nonhydrolyzable ATP analogs can sustain VRAC activation in C6 glioma cells ( 10 ) and in N1E115 neuroblastoma cells ( 45 ) , indicating that at least in these cell types , ATP hydrolysis , and consequently phosphorylation , is not required for VRAC activation . Similarly , in CPAE cells , tyrosine phosphorylation seems to be the regulating step ( 44 ) , but in cardiac myocytes , VRAC seems to be negatively regu - lated by PKC ( 14 ) . Currently , it is not clear whether these different observations have bio - logical relevance ( e . g . , expression of different channel isoforms , alternative cell - speciﬁc acti - vation pathways ) or whether they are the result of methodological or experimental conditions . Swelling - Induced Activation in Endothelial Cells The classical procedure to activate VRAC under patch - clamp conditions is to impose an osmotic gradient across the plasma membrane , either by perfusing the cell with a hypotonic solution ( 46 ) or by breaking into the cell with a hypertonic pipette solution ( 47 , 48 ) . In either case , the osmotic gradient causes the inﬂux of H 2 O and , consequently , cell swelling , which in most conditions is followed by the progressive development of I Cl , swell . A fundamental ques - tion therefore is , which signals arise in a swollen cell so that VRAC channels are acti - vated ? Based on our work with vascular endothelial cells , we currently favor a multi - component activation model consisting of a triggering pathway and modulatory elements . The triggering pathway is activated by the process of cell swelling and transmits the acti - vating signal to the channel complex . The mod - ulatory elements are not necessarily activated by cell swelling , but they determine the sensi - tivity and / or the efficacy of the triggering pathway . T RIGGERING P ATHWAY : I ONIC - S TRENGTH - D EPENDENT T YROSINE P HOSPHORYLATION ? The primary intracellular trigger for channel activation should fulﬁll two criteria : ( 1 ) It must change during cell swelling and ( 2 ) it must cause VRAC activation , either directly or indi - rectly via intermediary intracellular messengers or proteins . The obvious candidate for such a intracellular trigger seems to be cell volume . However , by simultaneously measuring cell volume and membrane currents in CPAE cells , we have been able to show that VRAC activa - tion can be uncoupled from changes in cell vol - ume ( 49 , 50 ) . In a patch - clamped CPAE cell ( whole - cell conﬁguration ) , the cell volume kept increasing as long as the hypotonic stimulus was applied , whereas I Cl , swell reached a plateau value that was not caused by saturation of the available channels ( 49 ) . Furthermore , when the hypotonic stimulus was reduced , the cell vol - ume still increased , but VRAC decreased . Breaking into the cell with an isotonic , low - ionic - strength pipet solution activated VRAC in spite of a decrease in cell volume . Finally , apply - ing negative suction to the pipet caused cell shrinkage , but it did not preclude activation of VRAC by a hypotonic stimulus . If not cell volume or membrane stretch , what then could be the primary trigger ? In the above - mentioned experiments , there was always a close correlation between VRAC activation and predicted changes in intracellular ionic strength : dialysis with a low - ionic - strength pipet solution activated VRAC irrespective of the cell volume and vice versa . The primary trigger role of ionic strength has been directly proven with cell - attached single - channel mea - surements in permeabilized endothelial cells : dialyzing the permeabilized cell with a solution of decreased ionic - strength activated VRAC , whereas an increase in ionic strength reversibly diminished VRAC activity ( 51 ) . How does ionic strength affect channel ga - ting ? Pharmacological studies indicate that reduced ionic strength triggers one or more Function and Control of VRAC 267 Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 tyrosine phosphorylation events required for channel opening ( 44 ) . First , the swelling - induced activation of VRAC can be inhibited by inhibitors of PTK , but potentiated by inhibitors of PTP ( 44 ) . Interestingly , PTP inhibitors cannot activate VRAC under isotonic conditions , indi - cating that the PTK activity is the limiting factor in resting cells and has to be turned on during cell swelling . Second , PTK inhibitors also pre - vent the direct activation of VRAC by reduced ionic strength ( 50 ) . This has led us to propose the following activation pathway for VRAC in CPAE cells : Perfusion with an extracellular hypotonic solution results in inﬂux of water ( cell swelling ) and , consequently , a decrease in intracellular ionic strength , which then shifts the balance in a not yet identified tyrosine kinase / phosphatase system toward phospho - rylation of either the VRAC channel or a regu - latory protein . Interestingly , changes in intracellular ionic strength may play a more widespread role in osmoregulatory processes , because in Escherichia coli , an increase in intra - cellular ionic strength resulting from osmotic upshock is proposed to activate the putative turgor sensor KdpD , a membrane - bound histi - dine kinase ( 52 ) . In addition to CPAE cells , evidence for PTK - dependent activation has also been obtained in cardiac myocytes ( 53 ) , in human T - lympho - cytes ( 54 ) , and in human intestinal 407 cells ( 55 ) . However , in other cell types , VRAC may be gated by PKC phosphorylation ( either acti - vating or inhibiting ) ( 56 – 58 ) or even indepen - dently of phosphorylation ( 10 , 45 ) . The molecular explanation of these differences ( e . g . , different VRAC isoforms with different activation pathways ) remains to be explored . What is the identity of the implicated PTKs and PTPs ? In human T - cells , p56lck , a lympho - cyte - speciﬁc member of the Src family kinases , is required for swelling - dependent VRAC acti - vation ( 54 ) , but it remains to be shown whether Src family kinases play a similar role in other cell types among which are endothelial cells . We have directly tested whether c - Src partici - pates in the swelling - dependent activation of VRAC in CPAE cells . Transient expression of c - Src exerted an inhibitory effect on VRAC , pro - vided that c - Src contained a dual acylation sig - nal that targets the c - Src protein to caveolin - 1 - containing lipid rafts ( see the sub - section discussing caveolae and lipid rafts ) ( 59 ) . Remarkably , the inhibition was still observed with kinase - dead c - Src mutants , but it was lost when the Src homology domains 2 and 3 ( SH2 and SH3 ) were deleted . These experiments indicate that a crucial step in the VRAC activation can be blocked by SH2 - and / or SH3 - mediated protein – protein interac - tions , but they do not shed light on the molec - ular identity of the interacting partners . M ODULATION BY THE R HO / R HO K INASE / M YOSIN P HOSPHORYLATION C ASCADE The Rho / Rho kinase / myosin phosphoryla - tion pathway exerts an important modulatory effect on activation of VRAC , most likely via its effect on F - actin stress fibers . Rho GTPases ( A / B / C isoforms ) are GTP - regulated molecu - lar switches that control the formation of stress fibers in noncontractile cell types ( 60 ) . Activation of Rho requires dissociation from a cytosolic binding partner RhoGDI ( guanosine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor ) and exchange of GDP for GTP , which is catalyzed by Rho GEFs ( guanosine nucleotide exchange factors ) ( 61 , 62 ) . It has recently been shown that stimulation of some G - protein - coupled recep - tors ( e . g . , thrombin receptor , LPA receptor ) increases Rho activity ( 63 – 65 ) . Once activated , Rho exerts its effects via multiple downstream effectors ( 61 ) , among which is Rho kinase , a serine / threonine protein kinase that induces myosin light - chain phosphorylation by inhibit - ing myosin light - chain phosphatase ( 61 , 66 ) . In vascular endothelial cells , pharmacologi - cal or toxicological inhibition of the Rho / Rho kinase / myosin light - chain phosphorylation pathway ( probed by selective inhibition of Rho by C . limosum C3 exoenzyme , of Rho kinase by the Y - 27632 compound or of myosin light - chain kinase by the ML - 9 compound or the AV25 peptide ) reduces the swelling - dependent activation of VRAC ( 67 , 68 ) . Conversely , selec - 268 Eggermont et al . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 tive inhibition of myosin light - chain phos - phatase by an inhibitory peptide potentiated swelling - induced activation of VRAC , although it could not activate VRAC under isotonic con - ditions ( 68 ) . Finally , thrombin , which activates RhoA and increases myosin light - chain phos - phorylation in endothelial cells ( 63 ) , exerted a potentiating effect on VRAC , although it could not activate VRAC under isotonic conditions ( 69 ) . These observations clearly establish the need for a functional Rho / Rho kinase / myosin light - chain phosphorylation pathway , which is the driving force for the formation of F - actin stress fibers in noncontractile cells ( 70 ) . An important question is whether activation of the Rho / Rho kinase / myosin phosphorylation cas - cade is sufﬁcient to activate VRAC . We have addressed this question by transfecting CPAE cells with constitutively active isoforms of G α 13 ( a heterotrimeric protein that activates RhoA ) , RhoA , or Rho kinase . Activation of the Rho pathway ( as shown by the increased numbers of stress in transfected cells ) did not result in spontaneous activation of VRAC under iso - tonic conditions nor did it affect the activation properties during cell swelling ( 71 ) . Thus , the inability of the constitutively active Rho path - way to activate VRAC suggests that the pri - mary trigger for channel activation during hypotonic cell swelling is not transmitted via the Rho pathway . We therefore propose that the Rho / Rho kinase / myosin phosphorylation pathway exerts a modulatory inﬂuence on VRAC activa - tion ( e . g . by organizing F - actin ﬁlaments into a three - dimensional network of stress fibers , which not only determine the mechanical properties of the cell but can also form a scaf - fold upon which regulatory and signaling pro - teins assemble ) ( 72 ) . If so , the requirement for a functional Rho / Rho kinase / myosin phospho - rylation pathway could reﬂect the stress - ﬁber - dependent formation of a VRAC signal transduction complex . Alternatively , because cell swelling invariably involves a deformation of the cellular architecture , stress ﬁbers can act as sensors of such an architectural stress , thereby generating a signal that modulates VRAC activation . Irrespective of its precise role , it is noteworthy that an intact Rho / Rho kinase pathway is also required for other mechanosensitive responses in vascular endothelium , such as activation of ERK kinase by mechanical stress or the swelling - induced ATP release ( 73 ) . M ODULATION BY C AVEOLIN AND C AVEOLAE / L IPID R AFTS Several lines of evidence indicate that the VRAC cascade ( or a key element of it ) is com - partimentalized to caveolae , flask - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane formed by the association of caveolin proteins with cholesterol - and sphingolipid - enriched mem - brane domains . First , activation of VRAC was severely or even completely impaired in cave - olin - 1 - deﬁcient cells such as Caco - 2 , MCF - 7 , and T47D ( 74 ) . Caveolin - 1 is the principal structural protein of nonmuscle caveolae and is required for the formation of caveolae ( for a review , see refs . 75 and 76 ) . The crucial role of caveolin - 1 in VRAC activation was conﬁrmed by the restoration of VRAC activation in Caco - 2 cells transiently transfected with caveolin - 1 . Second , expression of a dominant - negative mutant of caveolin - 1 in CPAE ( which contain endogenous caveolin - 1 ) signiﬁcantly downreg - ulated the swelling - induced activation of VRAC in caveolin - 1 ( 77 ) . In biochemical exper - iments , the dominant - negative caveolin - 1 mutant was shown to reduce the association of endogenous caveolin - 1 with detergent - resis - tant membrane domains ( lipid rafts ) . Taken together , these observations suggest that the disruption of caveolin - 1 - containing lipid rafts resulted in a deﬁcient VRAC activation . Third , the inhibitory effect of c - Src kinase on VRAC activation strongly depended on the presence of a dual acylation signal ( by the introduction of a Ser 3 Cys mutation in wild - type c - Src ) which targets c - Src to detergent - resistant lipid rafts ( 59 ) . Taken together , these data suggest that the VRAC activation pathway is compart - mentalized to caveolin - 1 - containing lipid rafts . This would ﬁt with the function of caveolae as signal transduction centers . Indeed , caveolae Function and Control of VRAC 269 Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 are enriched in many proteins involved in cel - lular signaling ( heterotrimeric G - proteins , small GTPases , growth factor receptors , nonre - ceptor tyrosine kinases , endothelial NO syn - thase , etc . ) , and for some of these pathways , a direct interaction between caveolin - 1 and the signaling protein has been demonstrated ( 78 ) . Often this interaction involves the caveolin scaffolding domain , a 20 - amino acid region that interacts with aromatic amino acids in the target protein and results in a suppression of the transduction cascade ( 76 ) . Triggering of the transduction cascade by speciﬁc stimuli inter - rupts the inhibitory interaction , thereby allow - ing full activation of the pathway . In this respect , caveolin - 1 acts as a molecular brake , which helps to ensure a high signal - to - noise ratio . Whether caveolin - 1 plays a similar role in the VRAC activation cascade by clamping an essential component in the inactive conﬁgura - tion remains to be shown . Alternatively , it is possible that cavolin - 1 plays a less direct role in VRAC activation ( e . g . , by promoting the cor - rect sorting of the VRAC system [ or a key com - ponent of it ] to lipid rafts ) . In this scenario , caveolin - 1 would be required for the correct assembly of the VRAC transduction system , but it would not play a role in the actual trans - duction cascade . Such a scenario is compatible with observations that caveolin - 1 is involved in the apical sorting process in polarized epithe - lial cells ( 79 ) . S WELLING - I NDUCED A CTIVATION : C ONCLUSION Swelling - induced activation of VRAC in vascular endothelial cells is a complex process . Opening of the channel is triggered by a decrease in intracellular ionic strength , which then leads to tyrosine phosphorylation of either the channel or a regulatory protein . However , the efﬁciency with which the trigger - ing signal is transmitted depends on the func - tional integrity of the Rho / Rho kinase / myosin phosphorylation system and on the compart - mentalization of the activation cascade to cave - olae / lipid rafts . Such a modular activation system has several functional implications : ( 1 ) The final VRAC activity is an integrated response , taking into account not only the degree of cell swelling and decrease in ionic strength but also the functional status of cellu - lar architectural elements such as F - actin stress ﬁbres and caveolae ; ( 2 ) it opens the possibility for activation of VRAC under isotonic condi - tions ( i . e . , without a decrease in intracellular ionic strength ) —for example , by stimuli that act on the above - described triggering pathway downstream from the ionic - strength sensitive step ( see next subsection ) . Activation Under Isotonic Conditions As discussed earlier , many observations sug - gest that , apart from cell volume regulation , VRAC participates in other cellular functions such as mechanotransduction , cell cycle , and apoptosis . This implies that isotonic stimuli ( i . e . , stimuli different from cell swelling induced by an osmotic gradient ) can activate VRAC . The precise signal transduction pathway under these isotonic conditions remains poorly uncharacterized . One possibility is that the mechanosensitive , apoptotic , and cell cycle pathways converge on the PTK / PTP step , which is distal from the swelling / ionic - strength - sensitive step . This seems to be the case in lymphocytes , where activation of VRAC / ORCC during cell swelling and apoptosis requires p561ck tyrosine kinase . Furthermore , mechanical stimulation of endothelial cells results in the rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of plasma membrane proteins located in caveolae ( 80 ) , but it remains to be shown whether this represents a key signaling step for activation of VRAC by ﬂuid shear stress ( 23 , 24 ) . Experimental procedures to activate VRAC in the absence of cell swelling include intracel - lular application of GTP γ S via the patch pipet ( 44 , 46 , 81 ) or intracellular perfusion with a low - ionic - strength pipet solution ( 49 , 50 , 82 ) . Activation of VRAC by GTP γ S is transient and is abrogated in CPAE cells pretreated with C . limosum C3 exoenzyme , indicating that the GTP γ S pathway requires functional RhoA ( 67 ) . It remains to be shown how the GTP γ S pathway 270 Eggermont et al . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 interconnects with the swelling - induced activa - tion pathway and , equally important , whether the GTP γ S pathway is physiologically relevant for isotonic activation of VRAC . The transient nature of VRAC activation in spite of the con - tinuous presence of GTP γ S in the pipet solution indicates that the GTP γ S pathway is not sufﬁ - cient for sustained VRAC activation . Activation by low ionic strength is probably only relevant for the swelling - induced activation pathway , but not for activation of VRAC in the context of mechanotransduction , cell proliferation , or apoptosis . To conclude , the isotonic activation pathways remain largely unexplored . CONCLUSIONS Traditionally , VRAC has been viewed as an anion channel important for cell volume regula - tion . As a result , most studies on VRAC signal transduction have hitherto focused on the swelling - induced activation pathway . However , recent observations indicate that VRAC is more than a mere guardian of the cell volume . Indeed , VRAC activity seems to be crucial for cell cycle progression and apoptotic cell death and VRAC may participate in the mechanosensitive response of vascular endothelial cells . This implies the existence of activation pathways that are not triggered by an anisotonic cell swelling , but that are under the control of growth stimuli , apoptotic stimuli , and / or mechanical stress . It will be interesting to ﬁnd out how these “iso - tonic” activation pathways interconnect with the “classical” swelling - induced pathway . One big obstacle , however , to solve these pertinent ques - tions is the ongoing uncertainty about the mole - cular identity of VRAC . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank D . Hermans and J . Prenen for their high - quality work over the past years . Research in the authors’ lab is supported by grants of Interuniversitaire Attractiepolen ( IUAP P4 / 23 ) , Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek - Vlaanderen ( FWO G . 0214 . 99 ) , Geconcerteerde Onderzoeksactie ( GOA 99 / 07 ) , and the “Jean en Alphone Forton” Foundation . REFERENCES 1 . Nilius , B . , Eggermont , J . , Voets , T . , Buyse , G . , Manolopoulos , V . , and Droogmans , G . ( 1997 ) Properties of volume - regulated anion channels in mammalian cells . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 68 , 69 – 119 . 2 . Okada , Y . ( 1997 ) Volume expansion sensing out - ward rectiﬁer Cl – channel : fresh start to the mol - ecular identity and volume sensor . Am . J . Physiol . 273 , C755 – C789 . 3 . Strange , K . , Emma , F . and Jackson , P . S . ( 1996 ) Cellular and molecular physiology of volume - sensitive anion channels . Am . J . Physiol . 270 , C711 – C730 . 4 . Grunder , S . , Thiemann , A . , Pusch , M . and Jentsch , T . J . ( 1992 ) Regions involved in the opening of CIC - 2 chloride channel by voltage and cell volume . Nature 360 , 759 – 762 . 5 . Thiemann , A . , Grunder , S . , Pusch , M . and Jentsch , T . J . ( 1992 ) A chloride channel widely expressed in epithelial and non - epithelial cells . Nature 356 , 57 – 60 . 6 . Strange , K . ( 1998 ) Molecular identity of the out - wardly rectifying , swelling - activated anion chan - nel : time to re - evaluate pI Cln . J . Gen . Physiol . 111 , 617 – 622 . 7 . Clapham , D . E . ( 1998 ) The list of potential vol - ume - sensitive chloride currents continues to swell ( and shrink ) . J . Gen . Physiol . 111 , 623 – 624 . 8 . Clapham , D . ( 2001 ) How to lose your hip - pocampus by working on chloride channels . Neuron 29 , 1 – 3 . 9 . Okada , Y . , Oiki , S . , Hazama , A . and Morishima , S . ( 1998 ) Criteria for the molecular identiﬁca - tion of the volume - sensitive outwardly rectify - ing Cl – channel . J . Gen . Physiol . 112 , 365 – 367 . 10 . Jackson , P . S . , Morrison , R . and Strange , K . ( 1994 ) The volume - sensitive organic osmolyte - anion channel VSOAC is regulated by nonhydrolytic ATP binding . Am . J . Physiol . 267 , C1203 – C1209 . 11 . Duan , D . and Hume , J . R . ( 2000 ) NO and the regulation of VSOACs . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 528 , 2 . 12 . Chou , C . Y . , Shen , M . R . and Wu , S . N . ( 1995 ) Volume - sensitive chloride channels associated with human cervical carcinogenesis . Cancer Res . 55 , 6077 – 6083 . Function and Control of VRAC 271 Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 13 . Duan , D . , Winter , C . , Cowley , S . , Hume , J . R . and Horowitz , B . ( 1997 ) Molecular identiﬁca - tion of a volume regulated chloride channel . Nature 390 , 417 – 421 . 14 . Duan , D . , Cowley , S . , Horowitz , B . and Hume , J . R . ( 1999 ) A serine residue in CIC - 3 links phos - phorylation – dephosphorylation to chloride channel regulation by cell volume . J . Gen . Physiol . 113 , 57 – 70 . 15 . Duan , D . , Zhong , J . , Hermoso , M . , Satterwhite , C . M . , Rossow , C . F . , Hatton , W . J . , et al . ( 2001 ) Functional inhibition of native volume - sensi - tive outwardly rectifying anion channels in muscle cells and Xenopus oocytes by anti - CIC - 3 antibody . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 531 , 437 – 444 . 16 . Li , X . H . , Shimada , K . , Showalter , L . A . and Weinman , S . A . ( 2000 ) Biophysical properties of CIC - 3 differentiate it from swelling - activated chloride channels in Chinese hamster ovary - K1 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 35 , 994 – 35 , 998 . 17 . Weylandt , K . - H . , Valverde , M . A . , Nobles , M . , Raguz , S . , Amey , J . S . , Diaz , M . , et al . ( 2001 ) Human ClC - 3 is not the swelling - activated chloride channel involved in cell volume regu - lation . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 17 , 461 – 17 , 467 . 18 . Friedrich , T . , Breiderhoff , T . and Jentsch , T . J . ( 1999 ) Mutational analysis demonstrates that ClC - 4 and ClC - 5 directly mediate plasma mem - brane currents . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 896 – 902 . 19 . Stobrawa , S . M . , Breiderhoff , T . , Takamori , S . , Engel , D . , Schweizer , M . , Zdebik , et al . ( 2001 ) Disruption of ClC - 3 , a chloride channel expressed on synaptic vesicles , leads to a loss of the hippocampus . Neuron 29 , 185 – 196 . 20 . Bond , T . D . , Ambikapathy , S . , Mohammad , S . and Valverde , M . A . ( 1998 ) Osmosensitive Cl – currents and their relevance to regulatory vol - ume decrease in human intestinal T84 cells : out - wardly vs . inwardly rectifying currents . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 511 , 45 – 54 . 21 . Nilius , B . , Sehrer , J . , Desmet , P . , Vandriessche , W . and Droogmans , G . ( 1995 ) Volume regula - tion in a toad epithelial cell line : role of coacti - vation of K + and Cl – chennels . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 487 , 367 – 378 . 22 . Davies , P . F . ( 1995 ) Flow - mediated endothelial mechanotransduction . Physiol . Rev . 75 , 519 – 560 . 23 . Nakao , M . , Ono , K . , Fujisawa , S . and Iijima , T . ( 1999 ) Mechanical stress - induced Ca 2 + entry and Cl – current in cultured human aortic endothelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . 276 , C238 – 249 . 24 . Barakat , A . I . , Leaver , E . V . , Pappone , P . A . and Davies , P . F . ( 1999 ) A ﬂow - activated chloride - selective membrane current in vascular endothelial cells . Circ . Res . 85 , 820 – 828 . 25 . Nilius , B . , Viana , F . and Droogmans , G . ( 1997 ) Ion channels in vascular endothelium . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 59 , 145 – 170 . 26 . Voets , T . , Droogmans , G . , and Nilius , B . ( 1996 ) Membrane currents and the resting membrane potential in cultured bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 497 , 95 – 107 . 27 . Doughty , J . M . , Boyle , J . P . and Langton , P . D . ( 2001 ) Blockade of chloride channels reveals relaxations of rat small mesenteric arteries to raised potassium . Br . J . Pharmacol . 132 , 293 – 301 . 28 . Nelson , M . , Conway , M . , Knot , H . and Brayden , J . ( 1997 ) Chloride channel blockers inhibit myo - genic tone in rat cerebral arteries . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 502 , 259 – 264 . 29 . Nelson , M . T . ( 1998 ) Bayliss , myogenic tone and volume - regulated chloride channels in arterial smooth muscle . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 507 , 629 . 30 . Maertens , C . , Droogmans , G . , Chakraborty , P . and Nilius , B . ( 2001 ) Inhibition of volume - regu - lated anion channels in cultured endothelial cells by the anti - oestrogens clomiphene and nafoxidine . Br . J . Pharmacol . 132 , 135 – 142 . 31 . Voets , T . , Szücs , G . , Droogmans , G . and Nilius , B . ( 1995 ) Blockers of volume - activated Cl – cur - rents inhibit endothelial cell proliferation . Pﬂügers Arch . Eur . J . Physiol . 431 , 132 – 134 . 32 . Rouzaire - Dubois , B . and Dubois , J . M . ( 1998 ) K + channel block - induced mammalian neuroblas - toma cell swelling : a possible mechanism to inﬂu - ence proliferation . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 510 , 93 – 102 . 33 . Shen , M . , Droogmans , G . , Eggermont , J . , Voets , T . , Ellory , J . C . and Nilius , B . ( 2000 ) Differential expression of volume - regulated anion channels during cell cycle progression of human cervical cancer cells . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 529 , 385 – 394 . 34 . Wondergem , R . , Gong , W . , Monen , S . H . , Dooley , S . N . , Gonce , J . L . , Conner , T . D . , et al . ( 2001 ) Blocking swelling - activated chloride cur - rent inhibits mouse liver cell proliferation . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 532 , 661 – 672 . 35 . Doroshenko , P . , Sabanov , V . and Doroshenko , N . ( 2001 ) Cell cycle - related changes in regula - tory volume decrease and volume - sensitive chloride conductance in mouse ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell . Physiol . 187 , 65 – 72 . 36 . Manolopoulos , V . G . , Liekens , S . , Koolwijk , P . , Voets , T . , Peters , E . , Droogmans , G . , et al . ( 2000 ) Inhibition of angiogenesis by blockers of vol - ume - regulated anion channels . Gen . Pharmacol . 34 , 107 – 116 . 272 Eggermont et al . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 37 . Lang , F . , Lepple Wienhues , A . , Paulmichl , M . , Szabo , I . , Siemen , D . and Gulbins , E . ( 1998 ) Ion channels , cell volume , and apoptotic cell death . Cell . Physiol . Biochem . 8 , 285 – 292 . 38 . Okada , Y . , Maeno , E . , Shimizu , T . , Dezaki , K . , Wang , J . and Morishima , S . ( 2001 ) Receptor - mediated control of regulatory volume decrease ( RVD ) and apoptotic volume decrease ( AVD ) . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 532 , 3 – 16 . 39 . Yu , S . P . and Choi , D . W . ( 2000 ) Ions , cell vol - ume , and apoptosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9360 – 9362 . 40 . Szabo , I . , LeppleWienhues , A . , Kaba , K . N . , Zoratti , M . , Gulbins , E . and Lang , F . ( 1998 ) Tyrosine kinase - dependent activation of a chlo - ride channel in CD95 - induced apoptosis in T lymphocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6169 – 6174 . 41 . Maeno , E . , Ishizaki , Y . , Kanaseki , T . , Hazama , A . and Okada , Y . ( 2000 ) Normotonic cell shrinkage because of disordered volume regulation is an early prerequisite to apoptosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9487 – 9492 . 42 . Souktani , R . , Berdeaux , A . , Ghaleh , B . , Giudicelli , J . F . , Guize , L . , Le Heuzey , et al . ( 2000 ) Induction of apoptosis using sphin - golipids activates a chloride current in Xenopus laevis oocytes . Am . J . Physiol . 279 , C158 – C165 . 43 . Hughes , F . M . , Jr . , Bortner , C . D . , Purdy , G . D . and Cidlowski , J . A . ( 1997 ) Intracellular K + sup - presses the activation of apoptosis in lympho - cytes . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 30 , 567 – 30 , 576 . 44 . Voets , T . , Manolopoulos , V . , Eggermont , J . , Ellory , C . , Droogmans , G . and Nilius , B . ( 1998 ) Regulation of a swelling - activated chloride cur - rent in bovine endothelium by protein tyrosine phosphorylation and G proteins . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 506 , 341 – 352 . 45 . Bond , T . , Basavappa , S . , Christensen , M . and Strange , K . ( 1999 ) ATP dependence of the I - C1 , I - swell channel varies with rate of cell swelling— evidence for two modes of channel activation . J . Gen . Physiol . 113 , 441 – 456 . 46 . Nilius , B . , Oike , M . , Zahradnik , I . and Droogmans , G . ( 1994 ) Activation of a C1 - cur - rent by hypotonic volume increase in human endothelial cells . J . Gen . Physiol . 103 , 787 – 805 . 47 . Lewis , R . S . , Ross , P . E . and Cahalan , M . D . ( 1993 ) Chloride channels activated by osmotic stress in T lymphocytes . J . Gen . Physiol . 101 , 801 – 826 . 48 . Doroshenko , P . and Neher , E . ( 1992 ) Volume - sensitive chloride conductance in bovine chro - mafﬁn cell membrane . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 449 , 197 – 218 . 49 . Voets , T . , Droogmans , G . , Raskin , G . , Eggermont , J . and Nilius , B . ( 1999 ) Reduced intracellular ionic strength as the initial trigger for activation of endothelial volume - regulated anion channels . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 5298 – 5303 . 50 . Nilius , B . , Prenen , J . , Voets , T . , Eggermont , J . and Droogmans , G . ( 1998 ) Activation of vol - ume - regulated chloride currents by reduction of intracellular ionic strength in bovine endothelial cells . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 506 , 353 – 361 . 51 . Sabirov , R . Z . , Prenen , J . , Tomita , T . , Droogmans , G . and Nilius , B . ( 2000 ) Reduction of ionic strength activates single volume - regulated anion channels ( VRAC ) in endothelial cells . Pﬂügers Arch . Eur . J . Physiol . 439 , 315 – 320 . 52 . Jung , K . , Veen , M . and Altendorf , K . ( 2000 ) K + and ionic strength directly influence the autophosphorylation activity of the putative turgor sensor KdpD of Escherichia coli . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 40 , 142 – 40 , 147 . 53 . Sorota , S . ( 1995 ) Tyrosine protein kinase inhibitors prevent activation of cardiac swelling - induced chloride current . Pflügers Arch . Eur . J . Physiol . 431 , 178 – 185 . 54 . Lepple - Wienhues , A . , Szabo , I . , Laun , T . , Kaba , N . K . , Gulbins , E . and Lang , F . ( 1998 ) The tyro - sine kinase p56 ( lck ) mediates activation of swelling - induced chloride channels in lympho - cytes . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 281 – 286 . 55 . Tilly , B . C . , van den Berghe , N . , Tertoolen , L . G . , Edixhoven , M . J . and de Jonge , H . R . ( 1993 ) Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in osmoregulation of ionic conductances . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 19 , 919 – 19 , 922 . 56 . Du , X . Y . and Sorota , S . ( 1999 ) Protein kinase C stimulates swelling - induced chloride current in canine atrial cells . Pﬂugers Arch Eur . J . Physiol . 437 , 227 – 234 . 57 . Duan , D . , Fermini , B . and Nattel , S . ( 1995 ) Alpha - adrenergic control of volume - regulated Cl – currents in rabbit atrial myocytes—charac - terization of a novel ionic regulatory mecha - nism . Circ . Res . 77 , 379 – 393 . 58 . Chou , C . Y . , Shen , M . R . , Hsu , K . S . , Huang , H . Y . and Lin , H . C . ( 1998 ) Involvement of PKC - alpha in regulatory volume decrease responses and activation of volume - sensitive chloride channels in human cervical cancer HT - 3 cells . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 512 , 435 – 448 . 59 . Trouet , D . , Carton , I . , Hermans , D . , Droogmans , G . , Nilius , B . and Eggermont , J . ( 2001 ) The inhi - Function and Control of VRAC 273 Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001 bition of volume - regulated anion channels by c - Src tyrosine kinase targeted to caveolae is medi - ated by the Src homology domains . Am . J . Physiol . 281 , C248 – C256 . 60 . Somlyo , A . P . and Somlyo , A . V . ( 2000 ) Signal transduction by G - proteins , Rho - kinase and protein phosphatase to smooth muscle and non - muscle myosin II . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 522 , 177 – 185 . 61 . Bishop , A . L . and Hall , A . ( 2000 ) Rho GTPases and their effector proteins . Biochem . J . 348 , 241 – 255 . 62 . Mackay , D . J . G . and Hall , A . ( 1998 ) Rho GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20 , 685 – 20 , 688 . 63 . Essler , M . , Amano , M . , Kruse , H . J . , Kaibuchi , K . , Weber , P . C . and Aepfelbacher , M . ( 1998 ) Thrombin inactivates myosin light chain phos - phatase via rho and its target rho kinase in human endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 21 , 867 – 21 , 874 . 64 . van Nieuw Amerongen , G . P . , van Delft , S . , Vermeer , M . A . , Collard , J . G . and van Hinsbergh , V . W . ( 2000 ) Activation of RhoA by thrombin in endothelial hyperpermeability : role of Rho kinase and protein tyrosine kinases . Circ . Res . 87 , 335 – 340 . 65 . Gohla , A . , Harhammer , R . and Schultz , G . ( 1998 ) The G - protein G13 but not G12 mediates signaling from lysophosphatidic acid receptor via epidermal growth factor receptor to Rho . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 4653 – 4659 . 66 . Watanabe , N . , Kato , T . , Fujita , A . , Ishizaki , T . and Narumiya , S . ( 1999 ) Cooperation between mDial and ROCK in Rho - induced actin reor - ganisation . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 136 – 143 . 67 . Nilius , B . , Voets , T . , Prenen , J . , Barth , H . , Aktories , K . , Kaibuchi , K . , et al . ( 1999 ) Role of Rho and Rho kinase in the activation of volume - regulated anion channels in bovine endothelial cells . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 516 , 67 – 74 . 68 . Nilius , B . , Prenen , J . , Walsh , M . P . , Carton , I . , Bollen , M . , Droogmans , G . , et al . ( 2000 ) Myosin light chain phosphorylation - dependent modu - lation of volume - regulated anion channels in macrovascular endothelium . FEBS Lett . 466 , 346 – 350 . 69 . Manolopoulos , G . V . , Prenen , J . , Droogmans , G . and Nilius , B . ( 1997 ) Thrombin potentiates vol - ume activated chloride currents in pulmonary artery endothelial cells . Pflügers Arch . Eur . J . Physiol . 433 , 845 – 847 . 70 . Kaibuchi , K . , Kuroda , S . and Amano , M . ( 1999 ) Regulation of the cytoskeleton and cell adhe - sion by the Rho family GTPases in mammalian cells . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 68 , 459 – 486 . 71 . Eggermont , J . , Carton , I . , Trouet , D . , Hermans , D . , Droogmans , G . and Nilius , B . ( 2001 ) The RhoA signaling pathway exerts a permissive , not a causative effect on the activation of the volume - regulated anion channel ( VRAC ) in macrovascu - lar endothelial cells . FASEB J . 15 , A845 . 72 . Janmey , P . A . ( 1998 ) The cytoskeleton and cell signaling : component localization and mechan - ical coupling . Physiol . Rev . 78 , 763 – 781 . 73 . Koyama , T . , Oike , M . and Ito , Y . ( 2001 ) Involvement of Rho - kinase and tyrosine kinase in hypotonic stress - induced ATP release in bovine aortic endothelial cells . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 532 , 759 – 769 . 74 . Trouet , D . , Nilius , B . , Jacobs , A . , Remacle , C . , Droogmans , G . and Eggermont , J . ( 1999 ) Caveolin - 1 modulates the activity of the vol - ume - regulated chloride channel . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 520 , 113 – 119 . 75 . Anderson . ( 1993 ) Potocytosis of small molecules and ions by caveolae . Trends Cell Biol . 3 , 69 – 72 . 76 . Okamoto , T . , Schlegel , A . , Scherer , P . E . and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) Caveolins , a family of scaf - folding proteins for organizing “preassembled signaling complexes” at the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 5419 – 5422 . 77 . Trouet , D . , Hermans , D . , Droogmans , G . , Nilius , B . and Eggermont , J . ( 2001 ) Inhibition of vol - ume - regulated anion channels by dominant - negative caveolin - 1 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 284 , 461 – 465 . 78 . Smart , E . J . , Graf , G . A . , McNiven , M . A . , Sessa , W . C . , Engelman , J . A . , Scherer , et al . ( 1999 ) Caveolins , liquid - ordered domains , and signal transduction . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7289 – 7304 . 79 . Scheiffele , P . , Verkade , P . , Fra , A . M . , Virta , H . , Simons , K . and Ikonen , E . ( 1998 ) Caveolin - 1 and - 2 in the exocytic pathway of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 795 – 806 . 80 . Rizzo , V . , Sung , A . , Oh , P . and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) Rapid mechanotransduction in situ at the luminal cell surface of vascular endothelium and its caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 26 , 323 – 26 , 329 . 81 . Doroshenko , P . ( 1991 ) Second messengers medi - ating activation of chloride current by intracel - lular GTP gamma S in bovine chromafﬁn cells . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 436 , 725 – 738 . 82 . Cannon , C . L . , Basavappa , S . and Strange , K . ( 1998 ) Intracellular ionic strength regulates the volume sensitivity of a swelling - activated anion channel . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , C416 – C422 . 274 Eggermont et al . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 35 , 2001