Computing At School – 10 Years On Simon Humphreys Computing At School simon . humphreys @ computingatschool . org . uk ABSTRACT Computing At School ( CAS ) was formed about ten years ago . Mean - while CAS has become a lively community supporting computing teachers’ continuous professional development . In this talk , I will pick up from where Simon Peyton Jones left when he spoke at WiPSCE in 2015 . I will sketch some challenges for both CAS and our research community . CCS CONCEPTS • Social and professional topics → K - 12 education ; KEYWORDS Computing education , Computing At School , teachers , professional development ACM Reference Format : SimonHumphreys . 2017 . ComputingAtSchool – 10YearsOn . In Proceedings of WiPSCE ’17 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 page . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3137065 . 3144572 1 FORMATION OF THE CAS COMMUNITY Over ten years ago a number of teachers and academics , myself included , were concerned that our school system was letting our young people down . At a time when our digital world was growing exponentially we were hearing of falling admissions to universities , many thousands of vacancies left unfilled and students were not opting for post - 16 Computing examinations . “Programme or be programmed” Douglas Rushkoff opined a few years later and on our horizon in England was a review of the National Curriculum . Here was our opportunity to make the case for computer science as a foundation subject in schools for all pupils . The Computing At School ( CAS ) community was formed . Empowered by the support of industry and academics many teachers , including myself , found a voice and a cause to bring about a significant change to the curriculum opportunities for our young people in computer science , opportunities that were more relevant to their digital world and future career prospects . 2 TEN YEARS ON Ten years on the CAS community has grown to over 28 , 000 regis - tered members , we have over 240 local hubs where teachers meet to share best practice and other resources for their classrooms , we’ve Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage . Copyrightsforthird - partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . WiPSCE ’17 , November 8 – 10 , 2017 , Nijmegen , Netherlands © 2017 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5428 - 8 / 17 / 11 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3137065 . 3144572 established an innovative model for teacher professional develop - ment , with the support of The British Computer Society and the Department for Education ( the Network of Excellence ( NoE ) ) which now has 10 regional centres , over 1800 schools and in excess of 500 CAS Master Teachers to support their colleagues through local , face to face CPD . From April 2016 to March 2017 the NoE provided 46710 teacher - hours of CPD and support to 14445 teachers in 5475 schools across the country . The CAS forum supports the face to face activity with a fo - rum to discuss classroom practice and computing , a resource ex - change / repository and a place to publish events / meetings . Unsur - prisingly the resource collection is the most visited area of the site with over 4000 member contributed resources which is the the most popular section of our site . Most members arrive to download material they need for both the classroom and their own profes - sional development needs . Nearly 90 CPD events were run by CAS members , mostly volunteers , in October alone ! Consequently CAS has become part of the teacher’s context , it is where they go for help knowing they can trust the quality of both the resources and the training they receive from other members of the community . 3 CHALLENGES Here at the WiPSCE workshop the work of CAS has been high - lighted several times , most recently in the 2015 keynote by CAS chair Prof . Simon Peyton Jones in 2015 . His presentation is available on the WiPSCE 2015 website . My purpose will be to pick up from this point and sketch out the landscape since then to highlight some of the challenges we still face as we establish computer science as a foundational subject discipline , like maths and natural science , that every child should learn from primary school onwards and then to support the teachers charged with delivering the curriculum . The fact that this is now part of our National Curriculum is , of course , good news and one to celebrate but we are only part way through the second of our challenges , namely to support and train the teach - ers . This is a theme being repeated across many jurisdictions , not least in Europe , but further afield too and it is hoped that lessons we are learning may be shared by others to help bring about the goal we all seek for the benefit of our young people . Is there a challenge here for our research community ? For sure ! When I was teaching music ( that’s another story ) I was able to present to the parents a document produced by one of our major energy suppliers listing the ten qualities they looked for in future employees and how music graduates satisfied 80 % of them . What we do have for our computer science graduates ? How far does computer programming aid literacy skills , encourage collabora - tion , develop resilience and enable creativity ? And , where such research exists , or is ongoing , how can we bridge the gap between researchers and teachers and encourage an active two - way dia - logue ? 3