Nanobeam Mechanics : Elasticity , Strength , and Toughness of Nanorods and Nanotubes Eric W . Wong , * Paul E . Sheehan , * Charles M . Lieber † The Young’s modulus , strength , and toughness of nanostructures are important to proposed applications ranging from nanocomposites to probe microscopy , yet there is little direct knowledge of these key mechanical properties . Atomic force microscopy was used to determine the mechanical properties of individual , structurally isolated silicon carbide ( SiC ) nanorods ( NRs ) and multiwall carbon nanotubes ( MWNTs ) that were pinned at one end to molybdenum disulfide surfaces . The bending force was measured versus displacement along the unpinned lengths . The MWNTs were about two times as stiff as the SiC NRs . Continued bending of the SiC NRs ultimately led to fracture , whereas the MWNTs exhibited an interesting elastic buckling process . The strengths of the SiC NRs were substantially greater than those found previously for larger SiC structures , and they approach theoretical values . Because of buckling , the ultimate strengths of the stiffer MWNTs were less than those of the SiC NRs , although the MWNTs represent a uniquely tough , energy - absorbing material . T he mechanical properties of small , rod - like materials are of considerable interest . For example , small whiskers can have strengths considerably greater than those observed in corresponding macroscopic single crystals ( 1 – 3 ) , an effect that is at - tributed to a reduction in the number of defects per unit length ( compared with larger structures ) that lead to mechanical failure . Systematic increases in strength with decreasing whisker diameters in the 100 - to 1 - (cid:109) m regime clearly support this idea ( 4 , 5 ) . It is also true that the maxi - mum strengths of the best whisker mate - rials , such as SiC , still fall below the the - oretically predicted values ( 4 , 6 , 7 ) . It is thus reasonable to consider whether NRs and nanotubes will exhibit greater strengths than previously observed in mi - crometer - diameter whiskers and , further - more , whether these nanoscale materials will exhibit new phenomena . For example , recent simulations and transmission elec - tron microscope ( TEM ) observations have indicated that carbon nanotubes elastical - ly buckle ( versus fracture or plastically deform ) when bent to large angles ( 8 – 13 ) . Until recently , the lack of nanowhis - kers and mechanical measurement tech - niques applicable to these materials has precluded addressing the key issues given above . The development of synthetic methods for preparing carbon nanotubes ( 11 , 14 , 15 ) , carbide NRs ( 16 ) , and oxide NRs ( 17 ) has now provided a wide range of nanoscale whisker materials . Carbon nanotubes and SiC NRs ( 16 ) are particu - larly interesting because micrometer - sized carbon fibers and SiC whiskers are widely used to strengthen composite materials . However , the rational design of new com - posites requires a clear understanding of the stiffness , strength , and toughness of these nanosized tubes and rods . Previous mechanical studies of whiskers have been performed by mounting the two ends of a single whisker in an apparatus that bends or pulls the whisker with a controllable force . This approach has worked well for whis - kers with diameters (cid:36) 10 (cid:109) m but has been much less reliable for whiskers with smaller diameters ( 6 , 18 ) . The difficulties in mount - ing even micrometer - diameter materials sug - gest that new approaches are needed to probe the mechanics of NRs and nanotubes . One recent method ( 19 , 20 ) has measured the amplitude of thermally excited vibrations in a TEM . Analysis of the temperature depen - dence of the vibration amplitude gives an estimate of the Young’s modulus ( E ) , a measure of stiffness . This technique is lim - ited in several important ways . First , the thermally excited vibrations must be nei - ther too large nor too small for reliable TEM detection , thus restricting the size ( diameter and length ) of samples . Second , this approach cannot evaluate the strength and toughness of NRs and nanotubes , even though these properties are critical to ap - plications . Here , we report a method that enables the direct determination of the bending force as a function of displace - ment . This technique can be used to clearly elucidate the mechanics of whiskerlike ma - terials in the nanometer - through microme - ter - sized regime and , as shown below , pro - vides an unambiguous measure of the stiff - ness , strength , and toughness of SiC NRs and carbon nanotubes . To determine directly the force versus displacement ( F - d ) characteristics of a rod requires that two connections be made to it . One of these may be fixed , but the other connection must permit measure - ment of F and d . Making two connections on such a small scale is inherently diffi - cult ; however , in recent studies of the electrical conductivity of carbon nano - tubes , we devised a flexible method that uses conventional lithography to pin one end of the nanostructure and an atomic force microscope ( AFM ) to locate and probe the regions protruding from the stat - ic contact ( 21 ) . Here , we used this same basic approach . First , NRs or nanotubes were dispersed randomly on a flat surface and then pinned to this substrate by dep - osition of a regular array of square pads . The AFM was used to directly measure lateral F - d characteristics at varying dis - tances from the pinning point ( Fig . 1 ) . Single - crystal MoS 2 was used as the sub - strate in these experiments , because it has a low coefficient of friction and may be cleaved to produce large , atomically flat surfaces ( 22 ) . We pinned NRs and nano - tubes to this flat surface by depositing pads of a rigid oxide , SiO , through a shadow mask ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . The AFM was then used to locate and characterize the dimen - sions of protruding rods or tubes ( 21 ) . A representative image of a pinned , 35 . 3 - nm - diameter SiC NR ( Fig . 1C ) shows that the model structure ( Fig . 1A ) is readily achieved experimentally . Lateral F - d curves were recorded at dif - ferent positions along the length of the nanobeam ( that is , the NR or nanotube ) ( Fig . 1D ) . Before contact , a small , (cid:35) 1 - nN lateral ( friction ) force was observed as the tip was scanned perpendicular to the axis of the nanobeam . After contact , the mea - sured lateral force increased linearly as the nanobeam was elastically displaced from its equilibrium position ; the AFM tip re - mained on the MoS 2 surface during this deflection process . It is possible at large displacements to fracture or plastically de - form a nanobeam and thereby determine its strength . Alternatively , the tip can move over the deflected structure when the applied normal load is small ( 23 ) , and , thus , it is possible to deform the beam controllably without damage . In this way , we measured F - d curves repeatedly at many points along a nanobeam . The F - d data acquired in this way were used to determine the E of a nanobeam . For our experimental geometry ( Fig . 1E ) , the general response of a beam to a force P applied at a distance a ( along the x axis ) from the fixed pinning point ( x (cid:53) 0 ) is given by ( 24 ) E . W . Wong and P . E . Sheehan , Department of Chemis - try , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA . C . M . Lieber , Department of Chemistry and Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA . * Both authors contributed equally to this work . † To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : cml @ cmliris . harvard . edu R EPORTS www . sciencemag . org (cid:122) SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 277 (cid:122) 26 SEPTEMBER 1997 1971 EI d 4 y dx 4 (cid:53) (cid:50) f (cid:49) P (cid:100)(cid:126) x (cid:50) a (cid:33) ( 1 ) where I is the moment of inertia of the beam and f is a beam - surface friction force opposing P . This equation can be integrated and rearranged to express the applied force in terms of the Young’s modulus and dis - placement y ( 25 ) : P (cid:126) x , y (cid:33) (cid:53) 3 EI y x 3 (cid:49) f 8 (cid:83) x (cid:50) 4 L (cid:50) 6 L 2 x (cid:68) ( 2 ) where L is the length of the exposed nano - beam . The friction force f is quite small in these experiments , and its contribution can be eliminated entirely by analysis of the nanobeam force constant , k ( x ) (cid:53) dP / dy : k (cid:126) x (cid:33) (cid:53) 3 (cid:112) r 4 4 x 3 E ( 3 ) where (cid:112) r 4 / 4 is I for a solid cylinder of radius r . Because we determine k ( x ) for many val - ues of x in these experiments , it is possible to obtain a reliable measure of E without knowledge of the exact point where a nano - beam is pinned ( 26 ) . The mechanical properties of large ( (cid:36) 1 (cid:109) m ) SiC structures have been extensively studied and thus can serve as a useful refer - ence point for our nanoscale measurements . In particular , it is expected that the E val - ues of the NRs should be comparable with the values determined previously in larger structures , because elastic deformations are determined by the chemical bonding ( 27 ) . A typical plot of the F - d data recorded on an 23 . 0 - nm - diameter SiC NR is presented as an image ( Fig . 2A ) . The scans were recorded rastering the sample from right to left ; a total of (cid:59) 300 individual scans were recorded at different distances along the NR , although only 29 are shown for clarity . These data illustrate several important points . First , the initial location at which the lateral F begins to increase in each horizontal scan is about the same . This result indicates that the NR returns to the same equilibrium position after being re - leased by the tip . We can therefore con - clude that ( i ) the NR deflection is elastic , ( ii ) the NR - surface friction force is small compared with the NR restoring force , and ( iii ) the portion of the NR under the pin - ning pad does not move ( 28 ) . Second , the lateral force recorded in each of the indi - vidual scans increases linearly once the tip makes contact with the NR ; that is , P (cid:53) ky . Third , the slopes of the F - d scans , k , de - crease for scan lines recorded at increasingly large distances from the NR pinning point at the top of Fig . 2A . These two latter points agree qualitatively with the behavior outlined in Eqs . 2 and 3 . We can calculate E from any single F - d curve using Eq . 3 , although we used the full set of curves acquired as a function of posi - tion because they provide a more robust determination . A typical plot of k ( x ) versus x from these data ( Fig . 2B ) shows that k ( x ) decreases nonlinearly with x and that this decrease is well fit to the 1 / x 3 dependence ( coefficients of correlation (cid:36) 0 . 96 in all data sets ) predicted by Eq . 3 . Fitting the data in Fig . 2B yielded an E of 610 GPa . In comparison , the E obtained from data re - corded on a 21 . 5 - nm - diameter SiC NR was 660 GPa . These results agree well with the 600 - GPa value predicted theoretically for [ 111 ] - oriented SiC ( 29 ) and the average values obtained previously for micrometer - diameter whiskers ( 6 ) . Similar measurements were made on mul - tiwall carbon nanotubes ( MWNTs ) prepared by arc discharge ( 11 , 14 ) . The straight nano - tubes produced by this method have a rela - tively low density of defects and contain well - ordered concentric graphene shells . A typical image of the F - d data recorded on a 32 . 9 - nm - diameter MWNT is shown in Fig . 3A . These F - d data exhibit features similar to those described above for the SiC NRs . In particular , there was a linear increase in F with d after the tip contacted the nanotube , and the slope of this linear region decreased for data recorded at increasing distance from the pinning point ( 30 ) . The value of E de - termined from fits to Eq . 3 ( Fig . 3B ) was 1 . 26 TPa ( 31 ) . Similar results were obtained from the analysis of F - d data acquired on six dif - A D E B C Tip Lateral force y x f a L P Fig . 1 . Overview of the ap - proach used to probe me - chanical properties of NRs and nanotubes . ( A ) SiC NRs or carbon nanotubes were ul - trasonically dispersed in etha - nol or toluene , respectively , deposited on a cleaved MoS 2 substrate , and then pinned by deposition of a grid of square SiO pads . ( B ) Optical micro - graph of a sample showing the SiO pads ( white ) and the MoS 2 substrate ( blue ) . The pads are (cid:59) 40 nm thick and spaced 12 . 7 (cid:109) m apart . The white bar is 8 (cid:109) m . ( C ) An AFM image of a 35 . 3 - nm - diameter SiC NR protruding from a SiO pad . The edge of the SiO pad is located at the left side of the image . The scale bar is 500 nm . ( D ) Schematic of beam bending with an AFM tip . The tip ( blue triangle ) moves in the direction of the arrow , and the lateral force is indicated by the red trace at the bottom . In the left panel , before the tip contacts the beam , the lateral force remains constant and equal to the friction force . The middle panel shows the tip bending the beam with a corresponding linear increase in the lateral force with deflection . The right panel shows the system after the tip has passed over the beam ( 23 ) . The lateral force drops to its initial value ( left ) , and the beam snaps back to its undeflected , equilibrium position . ( E ) Schematic of a pinned beam with a free end . The beam of length L is subjected to a point load P at x (cid:53) a and to a distributed friction force f . 500 250 0 250 0 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 0 500 nm 128 n N A B 1 . 2 1 . 0 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 Distance ( nm ) Fo r ce c on s t a n t ( N / m ) Fig . 2 . ( A ) Surface plot showing the F - d response of a 23 . 0 - nm - diameter SiC NR recorded with a normal load of 7 . 7 nN . For clarity , the image is tilted 30° and shows only 29 of the (cid:59) 300 evenly spaced F - d traces that constitute the original im - age . The NR is pinned by a SiO pad at the top of the image . The decrease in maximum NR d ob - served at the bottom of the image ( at large x ) is due to the inward bending of SiC that enables the tip to slide around rather than over the NR . The data were acquired in water to minimize the NR - MoS 2 friction force with the use of a Nanoscope III multimode scanning force microscope ( Digital In - struments ) . ( B ) Dependence of the force constant k ( x ) on position x along the axis of the same NR . The red line is a fit to Eq . 3 and shows the 1 / x 3 dependence of k . SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 277 (cid:122) 26 SEPTEMBER 1997 (cid:122) www . sciencemag . org 1972 ferent MWNTs with diameters from 26 to 76 nm : The average E value from these exper - iments was 1 . 28 (cid:54) 0 . 59 TPa with no depen - dence on tube diameter . The MWNT E value was about two times that of our SiC NRs and similar to the in - plane modulus of graphite , 1 . 06 TPa ( 32 ) ; the in - plane mod - ulus of graphite is the largest of any known bulk material . These measured values of E may be com - pared with a recent experimental study ( 19 ) and theoretical estimates for carbon nano - tubes ( 8 , 10 , 33 – 36 ) . The E values of MWNTs have been estimated from the analysis of thermally excited vibrations measured in a TEM ( 19 ) . The average value determined in this study , 1 . 8 TPa , is some - what greater than our 1 . 28 - TPa average , although the large uncertainty in this pre - vious measurement , (cid:54) 1 . 4 TPa , makes these two independent determinations statistical - ly indistinguishable . Our experimental re - sults are also consistent with several theo - retical estimates that indicate that E should be comparable with the 1 . 06 - TPa in - plane modulus of graphite ( 33 , 35 , 36 ) . However , other computational work has suggested a substantially larger E for single - wall nano - tubes ( SWNTs ) ( 8 , 10 , 34 ) . We believe that this difference is due to the choice of wall thickness used to calculate E and not to the small tube diameters investigated in these latter studies . Hence , it will be inter - esting to experimentally probe the diameter dependence of E in SWNTs as these mate - rials become available . In addition , our nanotube F - d data ex - hibit new features that have important im - plications for applications . Specifically , MWNTs can be elastically deflected to a much greater extent than SiC NRs ( Fig . 3 ) , and the F - d curves deviate substantially from the single linear slope predicted for simple beam bending ( Fig . 4 ) . The initial linear slope in F - d plots decreased abruptly when the nanotubes were deflected by rel - atively large amounts . From all of our mea - surements , we found that this abrupt de - crease occurs at a deflection angle of about 10° for x (cid:39) 1 (cid:109) m ( 37 ) . A comparison of two curves recorded 2 . 7 nm apart along a nano - tube axis ( Fig . 4A ) shows nearly identical F - d behavior and thus strongly suggests that the abrupt change in slope corresponds to an elastic process ; that is , energy is not dissipated in bond breaking or rearrange - ment . Notably , this behavior deviates from that reported in previous mechanical de - flection studies of whiskers ( 4 , 5 , 38 ) and that found for our SiC NRs . This behavior does , however , agree qualitatively with re - cent simulations suggesting that single - and double - wall nanotubes buckle elastically to yield a structure reminiscent of that formed when a macroscopic rubber tube is bent and kinked ( 8 , 9 ) . We believe that the discontinuities in our F - d curves on MWNTs correspond to the elastic buckling found in simulations ( 37 ) . Strong evidence for this conclusion was obtained in direct bending experiments in which high - friction substrates were used to trap nanotubes in highly deflected con - figurations ( Fig . 5A ) . Importantly , these images exhibit a beadlike structure ( not seen in the straight tubes ) that is consistent with the expected height increases at the buckling points . In addition , buckled nano - tubes have been observed in TEM images ( 9 , 12 ) and have been found to result from support - induced strain ( 13 ) . Although buckling provides a reason - able explanation for the discontinuity in our F - d data , a detailed comparison of the changes in force and strain energy at the buckling point with simulations shows im - portant differences ( 8 ) . The simulation pre - dicts that there is about a 30 % drop in the force after buckling and that further dis - 600 400 200 0 200 300 400 500 0 600 nm 400 200 0 128 n N A B 2 . 5 2 . 0 1 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 5 Distance ( nm ) Fo r ce c on s t a n t ( N / m ) Fig . 3 . ( A ) Surface plot showing the F - d response of a 32 . 9 - nm - diameter MWNT recorded with a normalloadof16 . 4nN . Theimageistilted30°and displays only 30 of the (cid:59) 300 F - d traces in the original image for clarity . The nanotube is pinned by a SiO pad beyond the top of the image . The data were recorded in water to minimize the nano - tube - MoS 2 friction force . ( B ) Dependence of force constant on position x along the axis of the same nanotube . The carbon nanotubes used in these studies were purified by oxidation to 5 % of the initial sample . 0 50 100 100 100 80 60 40 20 0 80 60 40 20 0 150 200 250 300 350 Displacement ( nm ) S t r a i n e n e r g y ( ke V ) L a t e r a l f o r ce ( ke V ) A B Fig . 4 . ( A ) Two consecutive lateral force traces for a 32 . 9 - nm - diameter MWNT . The dashed curve was recorded at a distance 2 . 7 nm down the nanotube from the solid curve ; the solid curve was recorded 813 nm from the pinning point . In both traces , the lateral force increases linearly up to the point marked with an inverted black triangle ; after this point , there is a small drop in restoring force followed by an increase with continued displace - ment . The large decrease in force at the ends of these traces corresponds to the point at which the tipmovesover thenanotube . ( B ) Thestrainenergy corresponding to the solid trace in ( A ) ( solid black curve ) . The solid red curve was obtained from a quadratic fit to the region before the buckling point ( inverted black triangle ) . After the buckling point , the experimental strain energy increases more slowly than expected for a harmonic system . A B Fig . 5 . ( A ) Images ( 0 . 9 (cid:109) m by 0 . 9 (cid:109) m ) of a 4 . 4 - nm - diameter MWNT before and after bending on an oxidized silicon substrate . The left image shows the nanotube , which was pinned by a SiO pad at the left side , in its equilibrium position . The nanotube was then bent by scanning with the tip in contact with the surface . The right image shows bumps along the nanotube that correspond to positions at which buckling occurs . Both images were recorded in tapping mode to minimize the applied lateral forces . ( B ) Images ( 1 . 25 (cid:109) m by 1 . 25 (cid:109) m ) of a 21 . 5 - nm - diameter SiC NR before and after bending on a MoS 2 substrate . The left image shows the NR , which was pinned by a SiO pad at the left side , in its equilibrium position . Application of a high lateral load resulted in the fracture of the NR . The right image of the fractured NR shows that the NR broke at the pinning site ( x (cid:53) 0 ) . R EPORTS www . sciencemag . org (cid:122) SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 277 (cid:122) 26 SEPTEMBER 1997 1973 placement occurs at nearly constant force . Correspondingly , the strain energy shows a crossover from quadratic ( harmonic ) to lin - ear dependence after buckling . Our measure - ments exhibit only a small drop in force after buckling and an increasing , albeit smaller , F - d result for continued deflection . Integra - tion of the force data shows that the strain energy deviates substantially from the qua - dratic dependence after the assigned buck - ling point , although the dependence is non - linear ( Fig . 4B ) . There are several possible explanations for the differences between our experiments and simulations . First , the present experiments were carried out on MWNTs , whereas the simulated strain ener - gy and F - d results were for small ( that is , 1 - nm diameter by 8 - nm length ) SWNTs . It is possible that adjacent tubes in multiwall samples exhibit some relative slippage or buckle ( or both ) at slightly differing strains during bending and thus broaden the discon - tinuity compared with SWNTs . Second , it is possible that the potential used in simula - tions is not sufficient to describe the behav - ior at large deformations well . Because this discrepancy has important implications for applications such as composites , we believe that it will be important to resolve through further experiments on SWNTs ( 15 ) and analyses of simulations . The large E values determined for MWNTs and SiC NRs make these materials obvious candidates for the reinforcing ele - ment in ceramic , metal , and polymer matrix composites . Although many other factors must be considered in making a useful com - posite ( 39 ) , at least the strength and tough - ness of the nanotubes and NRs should be quantified , because they place limits on the potential composite properties . Strength and toughness refer to the maximum force per unit area and the elastic energy stored or absorbed by a material before failure , respectively . To the best of our knowledge , these critical prop - erties have not been measured previously for carbon nanotubes or carbide NRs . The bend - ing strength for SiC NRs is determined from the maximum strain ( at the pinning site ) just before fracture ( Fig . 5B ) , and for the MWNTs the bending strength is defined as the strain determined at the initial buckling point . The buckling point is taken as a measure of the bend strength , because the stiffness drops sub - stantially at this point and would likely lead to failure in a rigid composite ( 40 ) . The maximum bending strength deter - mined for MWNTs examined in this study was 28 . 5 GPa ; however , the average value was considerably smaller : 14 . 2 (cid:54) 8 . 0 GPa . In contrast , the largest SiC NR strength ob - served , 53 . 4 GPa , is substantially larger than the nanotubes values and approaches the predicted maximum of 0 . 1 E ( 7 ) . This strength value is also two times the best previously observed value in micrometer - di - ameter whiskers ( 6 ) . The greatest strengths were found for NRs that fractured at the pinning site where the strain was greatest ( Fig . 5B ) , whereas lower values were found for SiC NRs that fractured some distance from the pinning site . These observations clearly suggest that defects can limit the strengths of the NRs ; however , when the rods are free of major defects , theoretical strengths are obtainable . Indeed , in the bending mode , defect - free SiC NRs now ap - pear to be the strongest material known . We believe that by using this measurement tech - nique as a critical test , it should be possible to optimize synthetic conditions ( 16 ) to pro - duce near defect - free SiC NR samples that exhibit maximum strength values . These strength results indicate that SiC NRs , despite their smaller E values , should be a better reinforcing material in some composite structures than carbon nano - tubes . In particular , we suggest that the SiC NRs should be seriously considered for pro - ducing very high strength ceramic compos - ites in which the SiC NRs are randomly dispersed in the ceramic matrix ( 40 ) . A similarly structured ceramic composite fab - ricated with nanotubes may have inferior properties because of the large reduction in nanotube stiffness after buckling . Carbon nanotubes should , however , be considered for other types of mechanical applications . In particular , the elastic buckling exhibited by carbon nanotubes makes them exceedingly tough materials . We quantified the toughness or energy - absorbing capability of the MWNTs by integrating the measured F - d curves ( Fig . 4 ) . A lower bound ( that is , to the point where the AFM tip passes over the tube ) on the stored strain energy for 30 - nm - diameter nanotubes is 100 keV . This lower bound is on the order of 5 to 10 times the strain energy stored in comparable diame - ter SiC NRs before fracture . Hence , the ability of carbon nanotubes to elastically sustain loads at large deflection angles en - ables them to store or absorb considerable energy . One obvious application of this unique energy - absorbing capability of car - bon nanotubes would be in armor , al - though a suitable matrix must be chosen to exploit these properties in a macroscop - ic article . Clearly , carbon nanotubes and carbide NRs are materials with great po - tential in mechanical applications . REFERENCES AND NOTES _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1 . C . Herring and J . K . Galt , Phys . Rev . 85 , 1060 ( 1952 ) . 2 . W . W . Webb and W . D . Forgeng , Acta Metall . 6 , 462 ( 1958 ) . 3 . A . P . Levitt , in Whisker Technology , A . P . Levitt , Ed . ( Wiley - Interscience , New York , 1970 ) , pp . 1 – 13 . 4 . R . L . Mehan and J . A . Herzog , in ibid . , pp . 157 – 196 . 5 . C . C . Evans , Whiskers ( Mills and Boon , London , 1972 ) , pp . 46 – 65 . 6 . J . J . Petrovic , J . V . Milewski , D . L . Rohr , F . D . Gac , J . Mater . Sci . 20 , 1167 ( 1985 ) ; J . J . Petrovic and R . C . Hoover , ibid . 22 , 517 ( 1987 ) . 7 . N . H . Macmillan , ibid . 7 , 239 ( 1972 ) . 8 . B . I . Yakobson , C . J . Brabec , J . Bernholc , Phys . Rev . Lett . 76 , 2511 ( 1996 ) . 9 . S . Iijima , C . Brabec , A . Maiti , J . Bernholc , J . Chem . Phys . 104 , 2089 ( 1996 ) . 10 . C . F . Cornwell and L . T . Wille , Solid State Commun . 101 , 555 ( 1997 ) . 11 . T . W . Ebbesen and P . M . Ajayan , Nature 358 , 220 ( 1992 ) . 12 . J . F . Despres , E . Daguerre , K . Lafdi , Carbon 33 , 87 ( 1995 ) . 13 . S . Subramoney , R . S . Ruoff , R . Laduca , S . Awadalla , K . Parvin , in Proceedings of the Symposium on Re - cent Advances in the Chemistry and Physics of Fullerenes and Related Materials , Electrochemical Society , Reno , NV , 16 to 21 May 1995 , R . S . Ruoff and K . M . Kadish , Eds . ( Electrochemical Society , Pennington , NJ , 1995 ) , pp . 557 – 562 . 14 . D . T . Colbert et al . , Science 266 , 1218 ( 1994 ) . 15 . T . Guo , P . Nikolaev , A . Thess , D . T . Colbert , R . E . Smalley , Chem . Phys . Lett . 243 , 49 ( 1995 ) ; A . Thess et al . , Science 273 , 483 ( 1996 ) . 16 . H . Dai , E . W . Wong , Y . Z . Lu , S . Fan , C . M . Lieber , Nature 375 , 769 ( 1995 ) . 17 . P . YangandC . M . Lieber , Science 273 , 1836 ( 1996 ) . 18 . R . H . Kelsey , in ( 3 ) , pp . 135 – 156 . 19 . M . M . J . Treacy , T . W . Ebbesen , J . M . Gibson , Na - ture 381 , 678 ( 1996 ) . 20 . N . Osakabe , K . Harada , M . I . Lutwyche , H . Kasai , A . Tonomura , Appl . Phys . Lett . 70 , 940 ( 1997 ) . 21 . H . Dai , E . W . Wong , C . M . Lieber , Science 272 , 523 ( 1996 ) . 22 . P . E . Sheehan and C . M . Lieber , Nanotechnology 7 , 236 ( 1996 ) . 23 . The lateral load causes the nanobeam to exert an upward force on the cantilever - tip assembly . When this upward force exceeds the applied normal load , the tip passes over the nanobeam . The applied nor - mal load can be varied in our experiments to control the degree to which the nanobeams are deflected . 24 . F . P . Beer and E . R . Johnston Jr . , Mechanics of Materials ( McGraw - Hill , New York , 1992 ) , p . 486 . 25 . The boundary conditions are y ( x (cid:53) 0 ) (cid:53) y (cid:57) ( x (cid:53) 0 ) (cid:53) 0 and y (cid:48) ( x (cid:53) L ) (cid:53) y (cid:57)(cid:48) ( x (cid:53) L ) (cid:53) 0 , where x (cid:53) L corresponds to the end of the beam . Furthermore , the force P is only applied at the point a . 26 . Linearizedplotsofthedata , k (cid:50) 1 / 3 versus x , haveaslope of [ 4 / ( 3 (cid:112) r 4 E ) ] and intercept of [ 4 / ( 3 (cid:112) r 4 E ) ] 1 / 3 (cid:68) , where (cid:68) corresponds to deviation in the pinning point from the edge of the SiO pad . The corrections to the pinning point from this analysis are up to 50 nm . 27 . It is assumed that bulk SiC dominates the measured E valuesinthe10 - to30 - nm - diameterNRsprobedin our studies . This assumption may break down for NRs that oxidize to SiO x at the surface because the oxide has a smaller modulus than SiC ; the near - surfaceregionoftherodsmakesalargecontributiontomeasuredresultsbecause I (cid:125) r 4 . 28 . The observed deformation ( Fig . 2A ) corresponds to the NR bending and not to the motion of the pinned portion of the NR under the SiO pad . First , if the NR was rigid and the measured displacement occurred under the SiO pad , then the deformation could not be elastic ( as observed ) because bonds would be broken at the SiO - MoS 2 , SiO - NR , and NR - MoS 2 interfaces ( resulting in energy dissipation ) . Second , motionoftheNRunderneaththethinSiOpinningfilm would change the topography of the pad . Our AFM measurements show no evidence of this . 29 . W . R . L . Lambrecht , B . Segall , M . Methfessel , M . van Schilfgaarde , Phys . Rev . B 44 , 3685 ( 1991 ) . 30 . The location at which the lateral force begins to in - creaselinearlywithdisplacementdiffersinsomeofthehorizontalscansofFig . 3 . Comparison of F - d data recorded for forward and reverse scans indicates stronglythatthesedeviationsareduetoasmallcom - ponent of friction at the nanotube - MoS 2 interface . SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 277 (cid:122) 26 SEPTEMBER 1997 (cid:122) www . sciencemag . org 1974 31 . The MWNT E values were calculated with the as - sumption that the nanotubes are solid cylinders . TEM imaging of our MWNTs showed that they have hollow cores with diameters (cid:35) 2 nm . Because the moment of inertia scales as r 4 , this assumption produces only a very small error on the order of 0 . 01 % . 32 . O . L . Blakslee , D . G . Proctor , E . J . Seldin , G . B . Spence , T . Weng , J . Appl . Phys . 41 , 3373 ( 1970 ) . 33 . D . H . Robertson , D . W . Brenner , J . W . Mintmire , Phys . Rev . B 45 , 12592 ( 1992 ) . 34 . G . Overney , W . Zhong , D . Tomanek , Z . Phys . D 27 , 93 ( 1993 ) . 35 . R . S . Ruoff and D . C . Lorentz , Carbon 33 , 925 ( 1995 ) . 36 . J . P . Lu , Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 , 1297 ( 1997 ) . 37 . The discontinuity in F - d is not due to a discontinuity in the topography . First , high - resolution images demonstrate that the MoS 2 substrate is atomically flat in the region where the force discontinuity is observed . Furthermore , the topographic signal , which was recorded at the same time as F , is con - stant across the region of force discontinuity . 38 . Mechanical deformation of metal whiskers ultimately leads to a decrease in the initial linear ( elastic ) F - d behavior . This decrease is , however , due to plastic deformations ( 4 ) . 39 . D . Hull and T . W . Clyne , An Introduction to Compos - ite Materials ( Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge , 1996 ) . 40 . The bending strength is relevant to composites formed with randomly oriented nanotubes or NRs . In a composite made with oriented nanotubes or NRs , the tensile and compressive strengths should also be considered . The tensile and bending strengths are comparable for SiC whiskers ( 6 , 7 ) and are also expected to be similar for SiC NRs . The tensile strength of a carbon nanotube is , however , expected to be substantially larger than the nanotube bending strength and the strength of SiC NRs . 41 . We thank J . W . Hutchinson and F . Spaepen for helpful discussions and S . Shepard for assistance with SiO deposition . C . M . L . acknowledges partial support of this work by the NSF Division of Materi - als Research and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research . 13 June 1997 ; accepted 19 August 1997 Enhancement of Protein Crystal Nucleation by Critical Density Fluctuations Pieter Rein ten Wolde and Daan Frenkel * Numerical simulations of homogeneous crystal nucleation with a model for globular proteins with short - range attractive interactions showed that the presence of a meta - stable fluid - fluid critical point drastically changes the pathway for the formation of a crystal nucleus . Close to this critical point , the free - energy barrier for crystal nucleation is strongly reduced and hence , the crystal nucleation rate increases by many orders of magnitude . Because the location of the metastable critical point can be controlled by changing the composition of the solvent , the present work suggests a systematic ap - proach to promote protein crystallization . A s a result of rapid developments in bio - technology , there has been an explosive growth in the number of proteins that can be isolated . However , the determination of the three - dimensional structures of proteins by x - ray crystallography remains a time - consuming process . One bottleneck is the difficulty of growing protein crystals good enough for analysis . In his book on this subject , McPherson wrote , “The problem of crystallization is less approachable from a classical analytical standpoint , contains a substantial component of trial and error , and draws more from the collective experi - ence of the past century . . . . It is much like prospecting for gold” ( 1 , p . 6 ) . The experi - ments clearly indicate that the success of protein crystallization depends sensitively on the physical conditions of the initial solution ( 1 , 2 ) . It is therefore crucial to understand the physical factors that deter - mine whether a given solution is likely to produce good crystals . Studies have shown that not just the strength but also the range of the interac - tions between protein molecules is crucial for crystal nucleation . In 1994 , George and Wilson ( 3 ) demonstrated that the success of crystallization appears to correlate with the value of B 2 , the second osmotic virial coef - ficient of the protein solution . The second virial coefficient describes the lowest order correction to the van’t Hoff law for the osmotic pressure (cid:80) : (cid:80) / (cid:114) k B T (cid:53) 1 (cid:49) B 2 (cid:114) (cid:49) ( terms of order (cid:114) 2 ) ( 1 ) where (cid:114) is the number density of the dis - solved molecules , k B is Boltzmann’s con - stant , and T is the absolute temperature . For macromolecules , B 2 can be determined from static light - scattering experiments ( 4 ) . Its value depends on the effective interac - tion between a pair of macromolecules in solution ( 5 ) . George and Wilson measured B 2 for a number of proteins in various solvents . They found that for those solvent condi - tions that are known to promote crystalli - zation , B 2 was restricted to a narrow range of small negative values . For large positive values of B 2 , crystallization did not occur at all , whereas for large negative values of B 2 , protein aggregation rather than crystalliza - tion took place . Rosenbaum , Zamora , and Zukoski ( 6 , 7 ) established a link between the work of George and Wilson and earlier studies of the phase behavior of spherical , uncharged colloids ( 8 – 11 ) . Since the theoretical work of Gast , Russel , and Hall ( 8 ) , it has been known that the range of attraction between spherical colloids has a drastic effect on the appearance of the phase diagram . If the range of attraction is long in comparison with the diameter of the colloids , the phase diagram of the colloidal suspension resem - bles that of an atomic substance , such as argon . Depending on the temperature and density of the suspension , the colloids can occur in three phases ( Fig . 1A ) : a dilute colloidal fluid ( analogous to the vapor phase ) , a dense colloidal fluid ( analogous to the liquid phase ) , and a colloidal crystal phase . However , when the range of the attraction is reduced , the fluid - fluid critical point moves toward the triple point , where the solid coexists with the dilute and dense fluid phases . If the range of attraction is made even shorter ( less than 25 % of the colloid diameter ) , two stable phases remain , one fluid and one solid ( Fig . 1B ) . However , the fluid - fluid coexistence curve survives in the metastable regime below the fluid - solid coexistence curve ( Fig . 1B ) . This is indeed found in experiments ( 11 , 12 ) and simula - tions ( 10 ) . This observation is relevant for solutions of globular proteins , because they often have short - range attractive interac - tions . A series of studies ( 13 – 15 ) showed that the phase diagram of a variety of pro - teins is of the kind shown in Fig . 1B . More - over , the range of the effective interactions between proteins can be changed by the addition of nonadsorbing polymer ( such as polyethylene glycol ) ( 11 , 16 ) or by chang - ing the pH or salt concentration of the solvent ( 1 , 2 ) . Rosenbaum , Zamora , and Zukoski ( 6 , 7 ) observed that the conditions under which a large number of globular proteins can be made to crystallize map onto a narrow temperature range , or more precisely , a narrow range in the value of the osmotic second virial coefficient of the computed fluid - solid coexistence curve of colloids with short - range attraction ( 10 ) . Several authors had already noted that a similar crystallization window exists for colloidal suspensions ( 17 ) . Here our aim was to use simulation to gain insight into the physi - cal mechanism responsible for the en - FOM Institute for Atomic and Molecular Physics , Kruis - laan 407 , 1098 SJ Amsterdam , Netherlands . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . R EPORTS www . sciencemag . org (cid:122) SCIENCE (cid:122) VOL . 277 (cid:122) 26 SEPTEMBER 1997 1975