LUND UNIVERSITY PO Box 117 221 00 Lund + 46 46 - 222 00 00 How designers work - making sense of authentic cognitive activities Gedenryd , Henrik 1998 Link to publication Citation for published version ( APA ) : Gedenryd , H . ( 1998 ) . How designers work - making sense of authentic cognitive activities . Cognitive Science . General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research . • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . H o w d e s i g ne r s w o r k How designers work Henrik Gedenryd Table of contents Copyright © Henrik Gedenryd 1998 . All rights reserved . Printed in Sweden by Jabe O¡set AB , Lund , 1988 . For fur - ther information , corrections , and updates , see the author’s web page at http : / / lucs . fil . lu . se / people / henrik . gedenryd ISBN 91 - 628 - 3210 - 7 — iSRN LUHFDA / HFKo - 1007 - SE ISSN 1101 - 8453 — Lund University Cognitive Studies 75 Acknowledgements vi 0 Introduction 1 0 1 The masterplan 19 1 2 The failure of design methods 60 2 3 Design and cognition as inquiry 71 3 4 The cognitive roles of action and world 104 4 5 Interactive cognition 118 5 6 Making the world a part of cognition 150 6 7 Intermission 201 7 Bibliography 222 Acknowledgements I would like to express my gratitude to the Knut and Alice Wallen - berg foundation for the grant that ﬁnanced my visit to theUniversity of California , San Diego , in 1995 – 1996 . I alsowish to thank the Cog - nitive Science department , and especially Edwin Hutchins who was my host there . I shared an oªce with Brian Hazlehurst , and our dis - cussions gave me invaluable insights into for example anthropology , which I didn’t realize at the time . ¿e academic environment at Kognitionsforskning in Lund has been an exceptionally creative one , and it is of a very high interna - tional standard . I would like to thank everyone who has taken part in making it so , and in our seminars , with countless discussions of theo - retical terms , explanations , and other topics . Designkollegiet , the Swedish interest group in design research has also beenvery valuable for me , and I hope it will liveon in the future . I would like to dedicate this book to the memory of Donald Schön . ¿e extent of his inﬂuence on my work will become apparent on the following pages . Credits for cited pictures and opening quotations For some cited ﬁgures and opening quotes I have collected the refer - ence information here instead of inside the book : Cover image , from Dreyfuss 1955 ; page ii from Tegetho¡ , Dyckes & Mies van der Rohe 1985 , reduced to 80 % of original size to ﬁt page . Opening quotation in chapter 1 , attributed to BeatriceWard by Spiekermann & Ginger 1993 . Flowcharts in ﬁgure 1 . 1 are from Jones 1970 , pp . 76 , 78 ; ﬁgure 1 . 16 is from ibid . , p . 50 . Figures 1 . 4 and 3 . 2 from Dix et al . 1993 , pp . 149 , 158 . Figure 3 . 1 and sketches for Quist and Petra episode in chap - ters3 and4 are from Schön1983 , pp . 82 – 87 . Tetris ﬁgures 5 . 1 and 5 . 2 adapted from Kirsh & Maglio 1992 . Sketches in ﬁgures 6 . 1 – 6 . 3 cited from Arntson1993 , pp . 9 , 6 , 7 . Drill prototypes in ﬁgure6 . 4 are from Heskett1980 , p . 168 ; elevator diagram in6 . 5 from Guindon 1990b , p . 286 . All copyrights are those of the original owners . 0 . Introduction 0 . 1 Making sense of design as a cognitive activity Design During recent years , the scientiﬁc interest in design processes has grown rapidly . ¿e working processes of designers have been well documented in a number of domains : alongside the classical design domain , architecture , there are also for example industrial design and graphicdesign , whichtodayareestablishedandrecognizeddesigndis - ciplines . In addition , such ﬁelds as interaction design and informa - tion design are emerging and trying to establish their own identities . From the studies of these various domains , the knowledge of au - thentic design processes is increasing . ¿ere is also an elementary un - derstanding of why they work . However , this is still mostly a list of miscellaneous studies and their assorted insights ; the work remains to ﬁnd how each of the existing pieces can be put in relation to each other , as parts of a bigger picture . At the same time , there already exists a“received”theoretical per - spective on design . Known as design methodology , it is based on logic , rationality , abstraction , and rigorous principles . It portrays , or rather prescribes , design as an orderly , stringent procedure which systemati - cally collects information , establishes objectives , and computes the design solution , following the principles of logical deduction and mathematical optimization techniques ( cf . Alexander 1964 , Asimow 1962 , Jones 1970 , Simon 1981 ) . ¿is view is still very much alive ( as is evident in e . g . Dasgupta 1989 ) , and there is good reason to believe that this won’t change for a long time . However , discontent with this approach is widespread and quite old , even though no substantive replacement has yet been proposed . Experience from design practice and from studies of authentic de - sign processes has consistently been that not only don’t designers work as design methodology says they should , it is also a well estab - lished fact that to do design in the prescribed manner just doesn’t work ( Alexander 1971 , Broadbent 1973 , Lawson 1980 , etc . ) . Cognition ¿ere is a similar situation in cognitive science . ¿e conventional the - 1 already produced . By combining these building blocks , one can gain leverage in building a single , joint explanation for both domains . From should to making sense It seems that the shared gap has come out of a similar line of devel - opment in bothdisciplines : ¿e“ideal”approach found certain kinds of solution formally elegant and powerful , therefore assuming that this was how things“had to be” . And these a priori assumptions were made so conﬁdently that there was hardly a need to ask if they work - ed , much less to test whether they did—and if they didn’t at ﬁrst , then they surely would if only given some reﬁnement . But some have found it increasingly hard to ignore the disparity between promises and what has so far been delivered . ¿ey have also recognized the procedures that people actually use , and the merits of theseproceduresinparticular . ¿erehasthereforebeenashiftfrom laying down how things ought to be , toward an increasing estima - tion of authentic practice , and an interest in making sense of the so - phistication that is inherent in the mundane . And this is where the gap resides , in the vacuum between the ex - isting , ideal theories , and the desire to make sense of authentic de - sign activities and cognitive processes . In each ﬁeld there are the be - ginnings of this ; so far , the design side has come a little further along the way , but also there , the work of ﬁlling the gap between should and making sense is still very much in progress . To ﬁll this gap that exists in both ﬁelds is the purpose of this book . Hence , the need for theory is still great , to explain and make sense of design as a cognitive process , but also to “give designers reason” for what they do , so that practice is no longer looked down on as im - perfect and irrational , but is acknowledged for its merits . If so , prac - tice may perhaps take advantage of an improved understanding of its underlying principles . Case in point : The renaissance of sketching A good illustration of these developments is the devaluation and subsequent revaluation of sketching . ‡en design research began , it was practicallybeyond discussion that what was then known as“de - sign - by - drawing” was inadequate as a means for modern - day de - signers . ¿is inadequacy was even considered the primary reason for developing new procedures of designing , which led to the birth of what would become design research : ories are highly sophisticated , most stringent in their form , and writ - ten in the language of computer science , mathematics , and formal logic . ¿ey were developed to explain the most advanced of intellec ctive reasoning , and so forth . And also in this area , there is a growing body of work on making sense of authentic cognitive activities beyond psychological experi - ments and computer simulations . ¿ese activities are often of an eve - ryday nature and so may appear mundane . Nevertheless , for those who look closely enough , they hold great sophistication underneath the surface , and they perform their functions very well . However , as also these authentic activities call for explanations that are substan - tially di¡erent from what the prevailing theories can provide , they too remain to be properly accounted for . At the same time , the conventional , proposed cognitive mecha - nismsarebecomingincreasinglyquestioned , astheirlimitedachieve - ments have not been able to match the great claims that have been made on their behalf . ¿erefore the apparently mundane activities are increasingly being revaluated , as they in spite of their plain looks manage to perform the functions which the sophisticated models have failed on . The gap between the ideal and the actual ¿ere are in both ﬁelds a received theoretical perspective , based on idealized views of rational behavior ; chapter 1 serves to show how very closely related the two perspectives are . But the received theo - ries areincreasinglybeingcalledintoquestionin both ﬁelds ( cf . chap - ter2 ) . At the same time , there is an accumulating mass of evidence on designprocessesandcognitiveperformanceunderauthenticcircum - stances . However , there is still an absence of a real theoretical alter - native that can account for this growing body of knowledge . ¿e problem is in both ﬁelds a discrepancy between the received , theoretical views of how things ought to work , and how they have turned out to work in reality—a gap between the ideal and the actu - al which needs to be ﬁlled with a new explanation , a theory of hu - man performance in these authentic activities . ¿e aim of this book is to present such an explanation ( chapters 3 to 6 ) . ¿e promise of this topic lies in the many commonalities between the two ﬁelds , which hold the promise of a synergy . Not only in the gap that they share , but also in the building blocks that each ﬁeld has 3 2 I n tr o d u c t i o n portant since the infallible theories have repeatedly proven incapa - ble of what has been claimed of them . In contrast , people’s outward - ly simple means have repeatedly shown to work where the “ideal” methods have failed . ¿ey have often proven to be superior , if only understood on their own proper terms , not by some other inappro - priate standard . Exactly this has been the case with sketching . In design , another very good example is Guindon’s account of so - called“opportunistic”design practices : from having previously been regarded as failures and deviations from correct behavior ( e . g . Adel - son & Soloway 1985 ) , to being superior to the prescribed structured methods ( 1990a , etc . ) . Furthermore , there is a large number of high - ly useful design techniques that have been revalued in the same way , and of which sketching is only one . So - called “low - ﬁdelity” proto - types ( Rettig 1994 ) are one case in point ; I will address a number of these techniques in chapter 6 . In other domains , probably the most important case is the reas - sessment of spoken language and conversation , which have long been viewed as a corrupted form of proper , written language ; reiﬁed in the Chomskian competence vs . performance distinction . ¿e epito - meisperhapsthedemonstrationbyScheglo¡ , Je¡erson & Sacks ( 1977 ) of how“errors”in spoken language are better understood as“repair” than as signs of cognitive limitations , and thereby as an e¡ective as - pect of normal , equally e¡ective conversation patterns , rather than as a poor derivative of written language . Outside language , for example Hutchins ( 1980 ) has showed that the reasoning in Trobriand land negotiation is quite sensible even thoughitdoesnotfollowWesternprinciples ; laterhedidthesamere - garding Micronesian navigation techniques , which had previously been deemed as useless and based on native superstition and folklore ( 1983 , 1995 ) . A quotation reﬂecting the earlier view , and Hutchins’ comment on it , reﬂect the two attitudes : Polynesians and Micronesians accomplished their voyages , not thanks to , but in spite of their navigational methods . We must admire them for their daring , their enterprise and their ﬁrst rate seamanship . ( Åkerblom 1968 , p . 156 ) Hutchins comments : I hope this chapter succeeds in laying such notions as Åkerblom’s to rest . In fact , it seems more likely to me that we who have stud - ¿e writings of design theorists imply that the traditional meth - od of design - by - drawing is too simple for the growing com - plexity of the man - made world . ¿is belief is widely held and may not require any further justiﬁcation . ( Jones 1970 , p . 27 ) At this point , no distinction was made betweenworking sketches and the ﬁnal , carefully performed production drawings . Eventually there would be the occasional reference to the nature of sketching , such as those by Rittel ( 1972 ) and Graves ( 1977 ) , although it was probably Schön ( 1983 , 1987 , 1988 , 1992 , Schön & Wiggins 1992 ) who started the revaluation in earnest , leading to the wide interest in sketching today ( e . g . Goel 1995 , Herbert 1993 , Lawson 1980 / 1997 ) . ¿e developments that have since taken place are reﬂected in the editionsof Lawson’s HowDesigners¿ink : ¿eoriginaledition is from 1980 ; thesecondfrom1992hasanewchapterondesigningwithcom - puters ; in 1997 , the third edition added a chapter on sketching with paper and pencil ! ¿is is of course quite ironic , but it should also be seen in relation to the backlash that has occurred regarding computer - aided design , which like the new methods is still advocated as being indisputably superior to earlier procedures . ‡en the limitations of computer tools became apparent , this contributed to the reappreciation of sket - ching . But the 180 degree reversal on sketching since the axiomatic rejection of “design - by - drawing”has also come from the turn away from the new design methods . ¿e sophistication of paper and pencil becamenoticedonlywhenthecomputeraidsandnewmethodsprov - ed to lack the capacity that these decidedly low - tech tools had ( cf . Black 1990 ) . ¿ese developments are a prototypical example of sci - ence driven by ideals , and its shift into the sense - making approach . And central as it is , several aspects of sketching will be treated in de - tail in this book , from chapter 3 and forward . A general trend toward making sense I perceive a general scientiﬁc trend in this kind of revaluation and in what I will call making sense of authentic human activities ; a trend which has been slowly emerging for some time now , in diverse areas and fairly independently . Its shared aim is to understand these activ - ities better : the performance by which people accomplish them , and the human abilities that enable them to do so . Especially , to under - stand why they are performed as they are , which is particularly im - 5 4 I n tr o d u c t i o n ¿e traditional accounts have been based on an idealized norm for what cognitive performance should look like , heavily inﬂuenced by the intellectual ideal of high intelligence and abstract reasoning . In contrast , the sense - making accounts seem to unanimously paint a picturewhere such intelligence and abstract thinking playa quite dif - ferent role . Instead , cognitive performance seems to rely on faculties that look quite mundane and primitive when seen through intellec - tual eyeglasses . Here it should be kept in mind , however , that also those feats thought to require and display abstract reasoning have been found to exhibit practical and purportedly primitive patterns . From ideal to intellectual to intramental ¿e“ideal”mind - set , and the view of cognition as basically intellec - tual , madeuptheveryessencefromwhichcognitivesciencewasborn . ¿e precursors were located in formal logic and proof theory ( e . g . the work of Turing ) , bounded rationality ( Simon 1947 ) , and so on . ¿is early work was also intimately connected with the theoretical foundationsof computerscience ( e . g . Chomsky1957 ) . ‡enthemind was studied empirically , the chosen tasks were considered indicative of high intelligence , such as chess , logical deduction , mathematical problem solving , or tasks resembling IQ tests . An account straight from the horse’s mouth can be found in the historical addendum in Newell & Simon ( 1972 ) . ¿is strong bias naturally meant that theories also came to focus on the same kind of cerebral tasks . ¿us , in this view , intellectual tasks and abilities—abstract thinking—were regarded as the prototypical kind of cognitive activity , i . e . which theory took as its ﬁrst priority to explain . Accordingly , more mundane everyday activities , and the components of action and interaction with the world that they in - volve , were considered of secondary importance to cognition ( and to cognitivetheory ) . ¿erationalewasthatoncethemorediªcultprob - lems could be handled , then the simpler ones would easily follow—a sensible conjecture at the time . From this focus , the inﬂuence of cerebral abilities on the theories that were developed became very strong , whereas cognitive abilities involving non - mental functions were strongly underrepresented . I will refer to these as theories of intra - mental cognition . With this I in - dicate the view of cognition as a process that is contained entirely within the mind , and which is performed by the mind alone , cogni - tion being strictly isolated and separated from action , perception , ied Paciﬁc navigation have accomplished what understanding we have , not thanks to , but in spite of our own cultural belief sys - tems . ( Hutchins 1983 , p . 224 ) Elsewhere , Lave ( 1988 ) demonstrated the logic and rationality in everyday problem solving , in spite of its violating the principles of logic and rationality . Norman ( e . g . 1988 ) made sense of people’s ac - tions in several incidents in aviation and automation , e . g . the ¿ree Mile Island incident , attributing blame to ﬂawed instrumentation , rather than to“human error”as is the standard procedure . ¿ese are but a few examples of making sense , giving people good reason for doing what they do , when they don’t do what science and engineering have dictated . After a century ( at least ) of measuring people by the standards of formal logic , mathematics , engineering , statistics , and so forth , we are slowly beginning to measure them on their own terms . Doing so includes the task of understanding what these terms are . If this approach rests on any assumption , then it is to grant people that they do make sense ; the researcher’s task is then to construe what this sense is that they make , not taking a certain ap - proach for granted , whether it is because it has some desirable for - mal properties , or because no one considered any other option . Perhaps the interpretation of foreign cultures was ﬁrst to come up against this problem of ﬁnding the adequate standard of measure , or yardstick as I shall call it ; only later would it be realized that the hu - man being is not a member of the culture of formalistic , rigorous and stringent logical principles , and should not be measured within this cultural framework , but that we must ﬁrst identify its own prin - ciples . It is probably no accident that the sense - making approach was pioneered by people from anthropology and related ﬁelds who enter - ed into linguistics and cognitive science , as in the above examples . 0 . 2 Two views of cognition : Intellectual or practical ? As well as there being as there is a trend toward making sense of hu - man activity , there is also a trend in how the sense - making turns out to portray human performance . In common - sense terms , this can be described as a transition from a view of cognition as basically intellec - tual , to one where it is instead conceived of as practical by nature . ¿is trend can also be observed in models of design activity . ¿e theoret - ical argument of this book can be said to revolve around the transi - tion from an intellectual to a practical mode of cognitive explanation . 7 6 I n tr o d u c t i o n and not make the same mistakes again . ¿is is also necessary if we are ever to move beyond general criticism and vague claims that “one must also take social and cultural factors into account” , etc . For ex - ample , itisquitewidelyrecognizedthatInformationProcessing¿e - ory ( Newell & Simon 1972 ) has proven inadequate as a fundamental theory of cognition . However , the standard diagnosis is that its prob - lems are located in the computer model of mind and the symbolic view of cognition . As will become evident , much of this book re - volves around the question of exactly what caused the problems and rendered these theories deﬁcient . As I will argue in detail , although these features are problematic , they are not the crucial defects . ¿e heart of my diagnosis , which I will present in chapters 1 – 3 , is that intramentality is the culprit . Even among those who reject infor - mation processing theory , the view of cognition as pure thinking , which I consider to be the central problem , remains widely unchal - lenged in the belief that symbols and so on are the real problem . I believe this is much because the intramentalcharacter hasn’t been explicitly stated or advocated to the same extent . In comparison , Newell & Simon expressly described their theory as symbolic and computational , and these aspects have also been discussed by many others . ¿e bottom line is that if only the usual suspects are charged and discharged , then the real culprit remains at large , continuing to cause the same trouble as before . Accordingly , when I refer to “traditional” cognitive theories , or “conventional” cognitive science , etc . , it is by the criterion of intra - mentality that I deﬁne these terms . ¿is is a small but crucial shift from the current view where the deﬁning characteristics of “traditional” cognitive science are held to be precisely the computer model of mind , symbols , and information processing theory . My shift in refer - ence is of course based on the point that intramentality is the prob - lem , and not these factors . From practical to interactive In contrast to the intellectual perspective , there is an alternative ap - proach where cognition is seen as fundamentally practical by nature . Accordingly , in this view practical activity is considered more fun - damental to cognition , and so , the theory gives a higher priority to explaining practical activities and abilities . and every aspect of the surrounding world , be it material , social or cultural . Inthisview , thestudyof cognitionisoftendeﬁnedasthestu - dyof mental processes , and the two are thus considered equivalent . In summary , there is a natural link from the ideal view of cogni - tion , via the emphasis on intellectual activities , to the view of cogni - tion as intramental . ¿is position will be treated in detail in chapter1 . Problems with the intramental view ¿e intramental focus would not have been a problem if only the re - sultingtheoriescouldalsobemadetoaccountforothertypesof activ - ity . However , whereas theyhave been able to account for intramental abilities and processes in a simple and natural manner , explanations of non - cerebral activities have been signiﬁcantly more belabored and less convincing . ¿eexact reasons for the failure of intramental theories to account forfactorsoutsidethemindremaintobefullyunderstood , butitseems ( although this is still widely contested ) that the focus on the isolated mind has resulted in a skewed conception of the tasks that werestud - ied ( related to the issue of ecological validity ) , which in turn came to give the theories deeplyseated peculiarities that prevented such a sat - isfactory extension ( cf . Hutchins 1995 ) . ¿e most striking example of a not - so - convincing explanation is how the cognitive role of the physical world has been accounted for , by treating the world as an extension of long - term memory , while at the same time considering long - term memory as a part of the envi - ronment ( Newell & Simon 1972 , Simon 1981 ) . But however bizarre this explanation appears , there seems to be no better alternative , giv - en the foundational assumptions of these theories . Even more inter - esting is that the proponents of this view see no problem with this explanatory approach . In fact , this remains the oªcial explanation to this day ( seee . g . Goel1995 , Larkin1989 , Larkin & Simon1986 , New - ell , Rosenbloom & Laird 1989 , Vera & Simon 1993 ) . Historically , cognitivesciencebeganwiththeoriesof purethought and intellectual activity , to which interaction with the environment was added later , e . g . in Newell & Simon’s ( 1972 ) theory of problem solving , and the model of planning in the work of Miller , Galanter & Pribram ( 1960 ) , but for which no proof of concept has ever been provided . I believe the question of what caused this failure to be an important one , which must be settled before we can put these theo - ries and their hidden assumptions behind us , so as to make progress 9 8 I n tr o d u c t i o n ary forms , which is otherwise virtually unheard of in evolutionary biology . ¿e practical view can cut the“uniquely human”stu¡ into smal - ler chunks , seven or so , and distribute parts of theexplanatory burden from genes and intramental faculties onto material and immaterial human culture , yielding these abilities in co - evolution with species - inherent genetic progress . ¿e result is an account that is much easi - er to swallow , not only in evolutionary terms , but also in terms of how cognition could attain the human capacities . The practical view of cognition In a scientiﬁc context , the di¡erence between these positions main - ly concerns what theoretical explanations should look like . In the in - tellectual view , theory should be based on the explanation of think - ing and abstract skills of the kind mentioned above , whereas in the practical view , cognitive theory is built around practical skills and authentic activities . ¿ese serve as the basis for explaining intellec - tual abilities as well , which are also seen as essentially practical , al - beit reﬁned , skills which remain dependent on action and the physi - cal world for their operation ( think pen and paper—also cf . e . g . Agre & Chapman 1987 , Hutchins 1995 ) . Also , they are at least partly of cultural origin , and to some extent acquired rather than innate . Hence , here it is instead intellectual abilities that are considered as “specialty cognition” and that are explained in terms of practical skills , instead of the other way around . ¿is is what it means for either kind to be considered fundamental . Redeﬁning cognition A major share of this book is devoted to presenting a cognitive the - ory based on this point of view ; I can here merely give a hint of what it will look like , and I will do this in terms of a contrast with con - ventional , intramental theory . Speaking in general terms , the theory amounts to not deﬁning cognition as narrowly as just thinking . As a result of the historical emphasis on a narrow view , we have come to a point where today many ﬁnd it hard to imagine how cognition could include something other than strictly mental activities , and what this would then signify ; this is an issue that I will also discuss in later chapters . Some philosophical precedents ¿e contrast between the intellectual and practical positions is re - ﬂected in a number of prominent historical debates of 20th - century science and philosophy , the issues of which will at least implicitly re - appear in what follows . Early among these , beside the pragmatists , are the respective views of Husserl ( 1900 / 1970 ) , who based his work on the phenomenologyof mathematics , and Heidegger ( 1927 / 1962 ) , who countered him by arguing that non - reﬂective being is the fun - damental mode of existence , and abstract thinking and reﬂection be - ing the result of a disturbance , causing you to be“thrown”out of the basic mode of just doing ( also cf . Dreyfus 1991 ) . Later there would be the contrasting views of knowledge as lin - guistic / propositional and explicit vs . knowledge as tacit / implicit and based in practical activity ( Dewey 1925 , 1933 , Polanyi 1958 , Schön 1983 ) . ¿ese arealsoreferred to as knowingthat vs . knowinghow ; which are clearly the intellectual and practical views of knowledge , respec - tively . ¿e antagonists personiﬁed in the early and late Wittgenstein should also be mentioned . Again , this list is byno means exhaustive . As part of the turn toward the practical dimension there is of course a revaluation of non - intellectual activities as being“worthy” of sci - entiﬁc attention ; cf . the discussion of “making sense”above . The evolutionary perspective Besidetheabilitytoexplaincognitionbetter , thechoiceofgivingthe - oretical priorityto non - intellectualcognitiveabilities is often motiv - atedwith evolutionaryarguments : the skills that are uniquelyhuman have developed from the more fundamental capacities that we share with other species . A second tenet is that these“lower”capacities are more powerful , and play a more important role , than intuition tells us , even in those tasks that we instinctively tend to consider simply as“thinking” . ¿is goes counter to the intellectualist take on evolution , which holds that humans , unlike lower species , have a monolithic mental moduledeﬁnedintheirgenes , whichgivesusalltheintramentalabil - ities that make humans special : language , propositional attitudes , problem solving , and so on ( cf . Anderson 1983 , Donald 1991 ) . ¿e problem with this view is of course that it places a magniﬁcent bur - den on evolution , in requiring this mammoth structure to have ap - peared out of nowhere in humans , with no intermediate evolution - 11 10 I n tr o d u c t i o n The extended ontology of cognition ¿e extended view can be described along two dimensions : one ex - tends cognition to involve other entities than the mind , the other spans a wider set of activities than merely intramental processes . ¿e ﬁrst , material dimension is the more tangible one . Here I will claim that not only the mind but also action and the physical world have rolesincognition . Schematically , interactionrealizesthelinkbetween mind and environment in the cognitive process . ¿e two views of cognition can be represented diagrammatically : The activity dimension However , this extended“ontology”of cognition is not as signiﬁcant asthelesstangibledimensionof activity . ¿emostconsequentialstate - ment of this book is that cognition shouldn’t be regarded as thinking ( a mental process ) , but as an activity of inquiry ( derived from , but not a faithful replica of , Dewey’s theory of inquiry , e . g . 1929 , 1938 , 1949 , also cf . Schön1983 , 1987 ) . ¿e most important idea is that there are various activities that are not intramental but which nevertheless have a partially or predominantly cognitive function—or more cor - rectly , that most activities have such a cognitive function , as well as having the physical e¡ects which we normally associate with action . In such activities , action and physical materials are necessary parts , which make these activities possible rather than being the crucial elements in themselves . To make a crude analogy , what makes a pock - et calculator more powerful for arithmetic than a pencil is not that it is based on silicon rather than graphite , or that you press plastic but - tons instead of moving a piece of wood ; these are merely the means which realize the function of the calculator . It is this function which is more advanced ( for arithmetic ) . Conversely , it is not graphite that makes pencils superior to computer - aided design for the conceptual stages of design work . Viewing cognition in terms of function , not ontology Above all , I advocate that cognition should be deﬁned in terms of function rather than ontology or physical location . In precedence to the extended view in the ﬁgure above , cognition should be regarded as the adaptive abilities with which it equips us , rather than as the things that go on in our heads . ¿is also implies that the entities that are part of cognitive expla - nations will vary with the speciﬁc functions that we are explaining . For example , I will be concerned with functions in which the expla - nations need to include single individuals , more or less , and their ac - tivities and working materials , whereas others may study functions that involve , say , multiple actors and artifacts working in concert , as Hutchins has done ( 1990 , 1995 ) . Conceiving of cognition in terms of function rather than ontology means a theoretical shift from real - ism to instrumentalism that in my view has been long overdue ( but which should not be confused with the kind of functionalism that has been popular in cognitive psychology , cf . Clancey 1997 ) . How - ever , this is much harder to represent in a diagram than the three en - tities of mind , world , and action . ¿e main fallacy is committed when the unit of analysis chosen entails that cognitive functions are wrongly attributed to the mind instead of other entities ( cf . Hutchins 1995 , chapter 9 ) . ¿is will give us a theory which mistakenly equips us with superﬂuous modules because their genuine location isn’t eligible for cognitive explana - tions . ¿is is done for example when something is placed in long - term memory because the environment cannot be made part of the cognitive system . ¿is will yield a view of cognition and the mind which is fundamentally mistaken . ¿e aim is thus not to eliminate the mind from cognitive explanations , but also among other things to yield a better model also of the mind and its function . Such a model is however beyond the scope of this book . ¿e contrast between the two perspectives and their respective theories makes up the axis around which this book revolves . My ar - gument will concern , on the one hand , the problematic aspects of the 13 I n tr o d u c t i o n 12 cognition mind Figure 0 . 1 Simpliﬁed schemas of the traditional , sharply delimited view of cognition as an intramental process , and the wider and less distinctly circumscribed view of cognition adopted here . world action mind ples cause the same failures to occur whenever these theories are put to work for their intended purposes . In the rather brief chapter 2 , the purpose is ﬁrstly to establish the general and complete failure of design methodology . Since this has been thoroughly documented by design theorists , I only make this point brieﬂy , with reference to their original works . ¿e second pur - pose is to show that this failure can be traced down to the original geometricalproofsandthedomainof formallogicingeneral . ¿isal - so goes to show that the failure can be traced to the underlying mod - el of rational action . As the exposition and critique of this model in chapter 1 is rather thorough , much of chapter 2 consists in demon - strating that the principles of the underlying model of rationality in - deed are the reasons for its problems . 3 . Design and cognition as inquiry After that , chapter 3 goes on to analyze actual design work , and in - troduces the fundamentals of my alternative theory in order to cap - ture and explain this . It begins with the contrast between on the one hand the“ideal”view of the problem ( or requirements speciﬁcation ) being given already before design begins , and on the other hand that in actual design projects , the task of problem deﬁnition amounts to the largest , most diªcult , and most important part of the design task . My alternative draws on the pragmatist view of knowledge , and in particular the theory of inquiry , originating in the work of Dew - ey ( e . g . 1929 , 1938 , 1949 ) and then updated and made known in re - lation to design by Schön ( e . g . 1983 , 1987 ) . ¿e core idea is that in - quiry is an aggregate process with several component functions , one of which is action . Hence , in this view cognition consists in inquiry , including all these component functions . It thereby amounts to a composite , physical and concrete activity ; this in contrast to the view of cognition as pure thinking , as in the conventional model presen - ted in chapter 1 . At the end of chapter 3 , I put the separation of the conventional viewincontrasttothecompoundnatureof inquiry , showingthatde - sign ( andcognitioningeneral ) cannotconsistinpurethinking , ascon - ventional theory requires . ¿is is why the rational model of action , and the descendant theories of e . g . cognition and design , all fail : ab - stract thought alone cannot perform the cognitive task required of a designer . ¿e main introduction in this chapter is the elements of the theory of inquiry ; in particular , I introduce the notion of a se - 15 I n tr o d u c t i o n conventional view , and an e¡ort to make clear the roots of its prob - lems ; and on the other hand , my alternative account , which addres - ses these problems . Here , design provides cognitive science with a rich , authentic do - main on which to build such a cognitive theory ; correspondingly , the cognitive perspective can with such a theory provide design re - search with an explanation of authentic design processes . ¿is is the synergy which I have tried to engender on the following pages . 0 . 3 Outline of chapters ¿e general organizing principle of the book is to move from the existing , ideal - oriented theories successively toward my alternative model and then into its ﬁner points . I ﬁrst present the conventional theories and dissect them to expose the anatomyof their defects . ¿is is done in chapter 1 ; the failures are introduced in chapter 2 , and the discussion of the conventional theories is concluded at the end of chapter 3 . However , before that I begin building my alternative ex - planation in chapter 3 , with the rest of the book going deeper into these issues in chapters 4 to 6 , with a brief last chapter that looks back in conclusion at the overall argument , and addresses the wider im - plications of this . 1 . The masterplan ¿e main topic of the ﬁrst chapter is a“dissection”and critique of the existing , conventional theories , mainly of cognitive science but also of design research , the result of which lays the foundation for my al - ternative that is to follow . In chapter ch1 I present the conventional theories in order to disclose their tacit keyprinciples , but also to show that they are in fact the same principles in the theories of both cogni - tion and design . As I demonstrate there , these theories and a number of others of the“ideal”lineage are all based on the same underlying model of ideal rationality and ideally rational action . Chapter 1 serv - es to make this model explicit , and to expose its constituting princi - ples and inherent problems . 2 . The general failure of design methods ¿is analysis then provides the basis for showing that these theories fail , in chapter 2 , and then why they fail , in the last part of chapter 3 . ¿e upshot is that the failure of the“ideal”theories is inherent in the underlying model from chapter 1 ; and that the problematic princi - 14 the ability to employ action for cognitive purposes , where this corres - ponds to the inquiring or cognitive function of action . 6 . Making the world a part of cognition Chapter 6 turns from interactive cognition in itself to the role of the world in this scheme ; in doing so , I introduce the notion of a second , inquiring function also of physical materials ( i . e . the world ) . Here I analyze a number of well documented and widely used design tech - niques that heretofore lack a proper explanation , for instance of why theyaresouseful ; particularlysosincetheygocountertoexistingthe - ories . Although the techniques are quite diverse on the surface ( e . g . prototypes , scenarios , simulation , storyboards , participatorydesign ) , chapter 6 will demonstrate that they can all be explained as serving to make the world a part of cognition . Along with this argument , I also analyze what aspects and properties of the world they re - create , and what their contribution to cognition is , and in particular , the relation between their properties and cognitive contribution . ¿is then ser - ves as a closer examination of just what the cognitive role of theworld consists in . 7 . Intermission In the concluding chapter , I elaborate on the theoretical implica - tions of the techniques from chapter 6 : ¿ey even go beyond simply using the world in cognition , since they all go to a certain length to create working materials that can be given cognitive roles . ¿is means that designers go to some length to even avoid having to work intra - mentally , as the usual theories claim they should do . ¿is is quite a strong argument against cognition being funda - mentally intramental , and thus in support of my extended view of cognition ( and design ) as inquiry . I thereby brieﬂy address some po - tential counterarguments from the intramental camp . Hence , I conc - lude the book by returning to the bigger issues and the debate on whether cognition is fundamentally intellectual or practical . It will however hardly be the last word in this matter . 17 I n tr o d u c t i o n cond , “inquiring” or cognitive purpose of action , which will then make up a key element of the theory , and a central concept in the rest of the book . 4 . The cognitive roles of action and world ¿e remaining chapters are concerned with developing my alterna - tive theory and the concepts introduced in chapter 3 . ¿e underly - ing idea in these chapters is of a cognition which comes to include both action and world , with their having cognitive functions and be - ing parts of the cognitive process . Here , sketching is taken as a pro - totypical physical design activity that is to be explained in this way . ¿e chapter also addresses the question what the roles of these two are ; how they can have cognitive roles , even , as this extended view of cognition is somewhat counterintuitive . ¿e explanation I present for the cognitive role of action and world I have tentatively given the name interactive cognition . ¿e strategy for this presentation is similar to that of chapter 1 : beginning on the sur - face with the most basic and general issues and then going succes - sively deeper into the ﬁner details . ¿is begins in chapter 4 with a ﬁrst sketch of what the theory means through an analogy with writ - ten and spoken language , where these correspond respectively to in - tramental and interactive cognition . 5 . Interactive cognition Chapter 5 then goes on to the particulars of the theory . It is framed as an explanation of why design activity follows an interactive struc - ture . ¿is is because it brings important advantages over working as in - tramental theory says ; since in a sense , interactive cognition works better than an intramental kind would . As in the rest of the book , the theoreticalmotivationismadeongeneralcognitivegrounds , andisnot restricted to the domain of design . ¿is why - argument is presented as four steps , where each repre - sents a certain type of advantage brought by involving ( inter ) action in the cognitive process ; also these steps go from general to succes - sively more narrow and particular . Each consecutive step is made possible by the previous ones , and brings the advantages to a new lev - el ; For instance , the ﬁrst step concerns the advantages brought by ad - dressing the actual world instead of dealing with a mental represen - tation—a surrogate—of the world ; and the second step adds to that 16 1 . The masterplan No , Watson , this was not done by accident , but by design . 1 . 1 Design methods ‡en the scientiﬁc study of design emerged after World War II , it began as an e¡ort toward developing new procedures for designing . In the face of the increasingly complex tasks that designers were en - countering , the pioneers of the ﬁeld saw a need for improved ways of designing , as they thought the existing procedures were inadequate ( Alexander 1964 , 1971 , Cross 1984 , Jones 1970 , Rittel 1972 ) . ¿ere - fore , the early work almost exclusively sought to develop such new procedures , or design methods ; and so , the ﬁeld was appropriately cal - led design methodology— the study of such methods . It was also known as “the design methods movement” ( Cross 1984 ) . A design method is a normative scheme that speciﬁes in detail a certain working procedure , the activities to perform , and also a spe - ciﬁc order in which the activities should be carried out . It is usually very precise , and the designer is to follow it meticulously . It also cov - ers the design process from beginning to end . But the easiest way of describing design methods is through the boxes - and - arrows diagrams that always come with them ( ﬁgure1 . 1 ) . ¿e boxes and arrows are always there ; it is the labels on the boxes and the connections between them that distinguish one method from another ( Jones 1970 , p . 61 ) : Perhaps the most characteristic feature of the literature on de - sign methods is the prevalence of block diagrams , matrices and networks of many kinds that resemble , to varying degrees , the diagrams and calculations that computer programmers use . In the history of design methodology , there are two original works that tend to stand out from the rest . ¿ey are Alexander’s Notes on the Synthesis of Form ( 1964 ) and Design Methods by Jones ( 1970 ) . Together they epitomize the movement , for a number of reasons . First , they were both rather early and very inﬂuential . Earlier versions of the central ideas in both these books were presented at the ﬁrst confer - ence on design methods in 1962 ( Alexander 1963 , Jones 1963 , Jones 19 Figure 1 . 1 Examples of “block diagrams” from Jones 1970 . ods , and their resemblances , see e . g . Jones 1970 , p . 24 , Lawson 1980 , pp . 23 – 29 . ) To attempt a comprehensive survey here would thus also be a futile endeavor . Rather , I will stick to a few prototypical models , and instead con - centrate on the common patterns . ¿is is a more viable route , since as much variation as there is on the surface , there is also an Aristotel - ian essence that the methods share , because theydi¡er in their details rather than in fundamental concepts . To make this essence explicit , I will characterize it in terms of four fundamental principles , which are of particular interest from a cognitive point of view : 1 . separation : ¿e separation of the design process into distinct phases , with each individual activity being performed in iso - lation from the others . 2 . logical order : ¿e speciﬁcation of an explicit order in which to perform these di¡erent activities . 3 . planning : ¿e pre - speciﬁcation of an order in which to per - form the activities within a phase . 4 . product – process symmetry : ¿e plan being organized so as to make the structure of the design process reﬂect the structure of the sub - components of the resulting design product . ¿ese principles do not appear in any design methodologist’s lexi - con , but they make up the heart of design methods thinking , and give the various methods their family resemblance . Separation Out of the four principles , each consecutive one is an elaboration of those before it , drawing out their consequences and ﬁlling in their details . From this it follows that they are ordered , from the ﬁrst be - ing the most general and most fundamental one , to successively be - coming more explicit and detailed . Although it may seem abstract and inconspicuous , separation is the most important principle , from which the remaining three follow as consequences . ¿e most impor - tant separation is to divide the design process into three major phas - es : analyzing the problem , synthesizing a solution , and evaluating the outcome ( Jones 1970 , p . 63 ) : One of the simplest and most common observations about de - signing , and one upon which many writers agree , is that it in - 21 M a s t e r p l a n & ¿ornley 1963 ) . Secondly , even though these two texts and other pioneering work in the ﬁeld have been fundamentally revaluated since , not least by these two authors themselves , these two works stand out in retrospect as the best exemplars and strongest represen - tativesof thedesignmethodsera . Althoughtheideasinthemmayhave come of age , and other works have long since faded into history , these two have been able to hold their own also as texts , because of the clar - ity with which they express the central ideas of their original con - text . ¿irdly , because of their scope and depth , and because of the general coherence of the ﬁeld , these two works together are suªci - ent to cover the central ideas of design methodology . Jones’ book is also very much a compilation of other early work on design meth - ods , ending with a catalogue of various design techniques that had been developed . An additional work also deserves to be mentioned here . ¿e edit - ed volume Developments in Design Methodology ( Cross 1984 ) manages to collect many of the most important papers from the ﬁrst twenty years of the ﬁeld , with good introductions to each section . It is there - fore an invaluable source . ¿e two previous monographs together with this compilation of classic papers leave little more to wish for as a comprehensive overview of the ﬁeld . Four unifying principles ¿e number of design methods ( and accompanying diagrams ) that have been published is immense . Probably no two authors have ever agreed on a method , so at least as many methods have been presen - ted as there have been authors . But as people change their minds , the number is probably higher . ¿erefore , if you begin to review the ﬁeld and the various methods , you quickly become bewildered by the plethora of variants , the di¡erent labels on the various boxes , and the directions of the arrows . But when you examine a large enough number of variants , pat - terns begin to form : certain features are due to the speciﬁc content of a domain ; architecture is di¡erent from information design , and so the methods di¡er . In many cases , di¡erent labels disguise the same ideas ; and di¡erent authors emphasize di¡erent aspect of design , so the methods focus on di¡erent aspects of the design process . Other variationcomesfromwhetheramethodisanentirelytheoretical con - struction , or if it has actually been confronted with real design pro - jects , and so forth . ( Regarding comparisons between different meth - 20 make sense . ¿is applies to all other separations that are made : the or - dering among the activities is a logical consequence of the purpose that each serves . It is therefore the logical order . Taken together , the ﬁrst two principles , separation and logical or - der , generate a basic three - stage model of design ; cf . ﬁgures1 . 2 & 1 . 4 . Planning ‡ereas the logical order concerns the relation between di¡erent phases , the third principle aims to lay down the organization of the design activities in even greater detail , to include the activity within a phase . Because of the size and complexity of design problems , each of the three major phases is quite complex . Without an internal or - der , each phase would be a large , unstructured activity , left by the methodologist for the eventual designer to decide . Planning consists in setting up a strategy , a plan , for how a particular activity should be performed . ¿e prototypical case is when a plan is set up as the ﬁnal part of the analysis , and the course of action in the synthesis is there - by laid down before this activity begins . Product – process symmetry ¿e fourth principle concerns the decomposition scheme used in the plan ; the particular strategy that organizes activity inside the synthe - sis phase . ¿ere is not automatically any logical ordering within the phases . ¿erefore , a decomposition strategy needs to be chosen . ¿is strategy could be ad hoc , but typically design methods try to do bet - ter than that . ¿ere is however one strategy that is particularly obvious . ¿is is the idea of using the division of the product into subcomponents for the decomposition of the activity as well : As also the design solution is bound to be complex , it too ought to be broken down into man - ageable parts . Hence , part of the analysis typically consists in ﬁnding such a suitable solution decomposition , usually a hierarchical one . And when you have this decomposition , it is not far - fetched to use it to structure the synthesis activity as well . In e¡ect , the synthesis phase 23 M a s t e r p l a n analysis synthesis evaluation cludes the three essential stages of analysis , synthesis and evalu - ation . ¿ese can be described in simple words as “breaking the problem into pieces” , “putting the pieces together in a newway” and “testing to discover the consequences of putting the new ar - rangement into practice” . In this chapter , it is the separation of analysis and synthesis that is the most important one . It is the foundation of all design methods , and may well be the most consequential idea of design methodology as a whole . As Jones also indicates , this division was also widely accepted by design methodologists as a basic model of the design process ( cf . Cross 1984 ) . Design methods assign such a trivial role to evaluation that it becomes of marginal interest . As Jones here describes evalu - ation , for example , it seems to be called in only when the real job has already been completed . Design methods normally make additional separations . In parti - cular , the three major stages are often divided further into several smaller sub - activities . ¿e principle of separation says that di¡erent functions of the de - sign process are performed as separate activities . With respect to ana - lysis and synthesis , one can say that design activity must serve two functions : understandingtheproblemandproducingasolution . Sep - aration then means that each of these two functions is worked on in a separate phase of problem solving . It is for instance easy to imagine a situation where both of these aspects are worked on together . Logical order ¿e second principle concerns the imposition of an order among the activities of a design method . Perhaps the distinction between the di¡erent activities that a design method is made up of may seem ob - vious , and the prescribed ordering among the activities may seem moresigniﬁcant . However , eventhoughitmightappearso , thework - ing order is a necessity that follows directly from separation , where - as it is not obvious that they should be kept separated : If you do sep - arate analysis from synthesis , then you must perform the analysis before the synthesis , as you have to have to understand the problem before you produce the solution . ¿e same goes for evaluation , it re - quires that you have something to evaluate , and so must follow syn - thesis . And conversely , if you do not separate the process into dis - tinct phases then there is nothing to order , so an ordering doesn’t 22 Figure 1 . 2 The basic three - stage design method schema . However , even with the timelines one problem remains : Di¡erent stage models can only be compared approximately , since the inter - nal boundaries between their stages are inherently vague . For exam - ple , is requirements deﬁnition part of the analysis ? Both yes and no are correct answers—mainly because they cannot be held apart in practice . In fact , the greatest weakness of stage models is the princi - ple of separation , as I will argue in chapter 3 . It is because such sharp divisions cannot be maintained that the separation of activities breaks down in practice . And for the same reason , one cannot strict - ly say what goes where within a model , and thus what it corresponds to in another model . For example , analysis in one model sometimes includes the “understand problem” phase of another , while it does not in a third one . ¿erefore some relations in the timeline diagrams will seem inconsistent . 1 . 2 The origin of design methods ‡y do the design methods look like this ? ‡ere do they come from ? ‡at is the origin of these methods , the origin of the pattern that is reﬂected in the four principles ? Compared to the motives be - hind the rise of the design methods movement , the authors of the ﬁeld have been much less clear about the background of the meth - ods themselves . Rittel ( 1972 ) mentions“the ways in which the large - scale NASA and military - type technological problems had been ap - proached” as a major source of inspiration , and also elsewhere there is the occasional reference to general systems theory and operations research . But this does not lead to the answer we are looking for . Alexander gives some minor , indirect clues when asked about the origins of his ( 1964 ) method ( Alexander 1971 ) : As you know , I studied mathematics for a long time . ‡at I learn - ed , among other things , was that if you want to specify some - thing precisely , the only way to specify it and be sure that you 25 gets a hierarchical organization that mirrors the hierarchical structu - re of the ﬁnal product . Hence the process and product are structu - red in the same way ; the decompositon principle consists in a pro - duct – process symmetry . ¿is lies particularly close at hand since the symmetry results in a natural one - to - one mapping between di¡er - ent parts of the synthesis and of the design product . All four principles taken together yield a resulting schema that is morecomplexthanthebasicthree - stageversion . Asthelasttwo prin - ciples are elaborations of the ﬁrst and second , the complex schema can be regarded as an “elaborated” version of the basic one . Examples of the elaborated version are the classical “waterfall” model ( Boehm 1975 , cf . ﬁgure 1 . 3 ) from software engineering ( also cf . Adelson & Soloway 1988 , Je¡ries et al . 1981 , Parnas & Clements 1986 ) , and Alexander’s ( 1964 ) method , which centers on a technique for determining a suitable problem decomposition . ¿ese are known as “structured design methods” : analysis creates the decomposition structure of the artifact , and which the synthesis is to follow as a “structured decomposition” . Together , the basic and elaborated ver - sions capture the central features of most design methods . To make relations between di¡erent design methods stand out more clearly , such as between these basic and elaborated versions , I will hereafter use a “timeline” format which does not obscure these relations , as does the clutter in diagrams of the boxes - and - arrows kind ( see figure 1 . 4 ) . 24 Figure 1 . 3 The waterfall model of software engineering . requirementsspeciﬁcation architecturaldesign detailed design coding and unit testing integration and testing operation and maintenance Figure 1 . 4 Timelines of the basic and elaborated design methods . analysis synthesis evaluation requirements determine successive deﬁnition decompostion reﬁnement evaluation Heath 1921 , see also Polya 1945 and Hintikka & Remes 1974 . ) In the seventh book of his Collectio , Pappus describes what he calls the ana - lyomenos , which has been variously translated as “the Treasure of Analysis” , “the art of solving problems” and “heuristics” . ¿e former is the conventional translation , the latter two are from Polya . Pappus’textdescribesamethodof analysisandsynthesis , tobeused for producing geometrical proofs such as those found in Euclid’s Elements . ¿e crucial elements of mathematical proofs and problem - solving procedures that are presented there stand essentially unalter - ed to this day . But what is more , the text also contains all the central ideas of design methods ; in fact , these amount to the same four prin - ciples as those introduced above . ¿e links between design methods , mathematical proofs , and Pappus’ original account are remarkably strong , given the vast span of time between them . I will here include an extensive quotation of the original text for two reasons : first , be - cause it has a central place in the argument that follows , and second - ly to give enough material to show that the points are valid here even though they have been moved far from the original and very old context ( ¿e translation is taken from Hintikka & Remes 1974 , pp . 8 – 9 , my italics , and I will depart from the convention and leave out the original text in Greek ) : ¿e so - called Treasury of Analysis is , in short , a special body of doctrines furnished for the use of those who , after going through the usual elements , wish to obtain the power of solving theoretical problems , which are set to them , and for this purpose only is it useful . It is the work of three men , Euclid the author of the Elements , Apollonius of Perga , and Aristaeus the Elder , and proceeds by the method of analysis and synthesis . Analysis traces a path backward from the goal ( “what is sought” ) un - til you reach the starting point . In geometry this is something given or something already known , e . g . an axiom or an existing proof : Nowanalysis is theway from what is sought—as if itwere admit - ted—through its concomitants in order to something admitted in synthesis . For in analysis we suppose that which is sought to be already done , and we inquire from what it results , and again what is the antecedent of the latter , until we on our backward way light upon something already known and being ﬁrst in or - der . And we call such a method analysis , as being a solution backwards . 27 M a s t e r p l a n aren’t kidding yourself is to specify a clearly deﬁned step - by - step process which anyone can carry out , for constructing the thing you are trying to specify . In short , if you really understand what a ﬁne piece of architecture is—really , thoroughly under - stand it—you will be able to specify a step - by - step process which will always lead to the creation of such a thing . … So for me , the deﬁnition of a process , or a method , was just a way of being precise , a way of being sure I wasn’t just waºing . ¿e step - by - step processes in mathematics that Alexander is refer - ring to are formalized methods for mathematical proofs . It is how - ever Parnas & Clements ( 1986 ) who give the most explicit clues—if not any lead to the source in itself : Ideally , we would like to derive our programs from a statement of requirements in the same sense that theorems are derived from axioms in a published proof . ( p . 251 ) Parnas & Clements do not make a big point out of this , or indicate any speciﬁc relation to mathematical proofs ; these seem to have serv - ed more as a source of inspiration to design methodologists , because of their desire to have the same kind of solid foundations for their design choices as mathematicians have in their proofs . Neither did Alexander explicitly model his method after any speciﬁc mathema - tical procedure . His background in the ﬁeld would rather have pro - vided the “tools” to realize his method . Hence , the origins of design methods are not well documented . Still , no introductory chapter with any pretensions should be with - out a reference to the ancient Greeks , and this is where the oppor - tunity arises . Some shallow digging into the origins of logic and mathematical proofs shows a historical inﬂuence on design methods that is quite old , but nevertheless still clearly present in design meth - odology today : contemporary design methods have their roots in the pattern of classical Euclidean geometry proofs . ‡at is more , it is somewhat surprising how many quite di¡erent roads in this chap - ter will be found to all lead back to this same Rome in the end . Pappus Or to be more correct , back to Alexandria , as the text in question was written by the Greek mathematician Pappus of Alexandria , pro - bably around AD 300 . ( ¿e original reference is the Latin translation in Hultsch 1876 – 77 vol . II , pp . 634 – 636 , ﬁrst English translation in 26 are present in Pappus’ account , albeit more indirectly . ¿is is because geometrical proofs are so very much simpler than design problems ; as stated above , these two principles mainly aim to handle the com - plexity within a phase , a matter which is not as pressing in geome - try . For this reason , Pappus provides only a very basic decomposition principle . ¿e central idea of planning is that of letting the work of the syn - thesis phase be determined in advance during analysis . As indicated above , this structure may follow di¡erent principles . ¿e Pappan ap - proach to this is that the proof consists of the path taken in the ana - lysis , only in the reverse order . ¿e proof is then the plan , as this re - verse order is also what the synthesis is to follow . ¿eproduct – processsymmetryisalsopresent , althoughthistooin averysimpleform . ¿eproductof ageometricalproof problemisthe proof itself : thesequenceof stepsfromwhatisgiventowhatissought , which constitutes the demonstration . And in this case both phases , analysis and synthesis , have the structure of the the proof . ¿ere is ample evidence that the method of analysis and synthesis was known even long before Pappus ( Hintikka & Remes 1974 , pp . 7 , 85 , 100 ) . First , Pappus here refers to them as originating in Euclid and others . Secondly , there are other writers who refer to what appears to be the same things . Generally , the methods are held to have been known by Aristotle at least , and possibly invented by Plato ; in these cases , we are back some 700 years earlier , in the fourth century BC . Pappus is accredited with giving the ﬁrst comprehensive description of this as a method ; like a methodologist describing a method already used by “practitioners” , and for others to follow . ¿is thereby comes very close to design methodology . Polya A much more recent commentary on Pappus is found in Polya’s How To Solve It ( 1945 ) , which devotes one section to a detailed account of 29 M a s t e r p l a n Figure 1 . 5 The relation between analysis , synthesis , and the proof . Compare with ﬁgure 1 . 8 . axioms theorem analysis proof synthesis Synthesis goes in the opposite direction from the start through the steps which were found in the analysis , and ends at the goal : Insynthesis , ontheotherhand , wesupposethatwhichwasreach - ed last in analysis to be already done , and arranging in their nat - ural order as consequents the former antecedents and linking themonewithanother , weintheendarriveattheconstructionof the thing sought . And this we call synthesis . Pappus distinguishes between two kinds of analysis , one for con - structing a proof ( “theoretical analysis” ) , and one for ordinary prob - lem solving , i . e . ﬁnding and calculating a solution to a stated prob - lem ( “problematical analysis” ) . In the ﬁrst kind , the proof is the reverse of the analysis : In the theoretical kind we suppose the thing sought as being true , and then we pass through its concomitants in order , as though they were true and existent by hypothesis , to something admit - ted ; then , if that which is admitted be true , the thing sought is true , too , and the proof will be the reverse of analysis . … In the second kind , the steps necessary to reach ( “synthesize” ) the solution consist of the steps of the analysis taken backward . In the problematical kind we suppose the desired thing to be known , and then we pass through its concomitants in order , as though they were true , up to something admitted . If the thing admitted is possible or can be done , that is , if it is what the mathe - maticians call given , the desired thing will also be possible . ¿e proof will again be the reverse of analysis . ¿is concludes Pappus’ original text . Pappus in relation to design methods and the four principles In relation to design methods , the ﬁrst thing to note about Pappus’ description is of course that he describes a process consisting of two parts having the same functions as in design : analyzing the problem and synthesizing a solution . ¿e division of these two functions into separate phases is also there , as is their relative order . It is also clear that this order is appropriately regarded as natural or logical , as it is em - bodied naturally in what the two processes’ functions are . Also the principles of planning and product – process symmetry 28 He also describes the order between analysis and synthesis as “nat - ural” . Elsewhere gives further comment : “it is generaly useless to carry out details without having seen the big connection , or having made a sort of plan . … It is foolish to answer a question you do not understand . ” ( p . 6 ) ¿e extent of Pappus’ inﬂuence on Polya is the most striking in other parts of the book , where Pappus is not mentioned . For exam - ple , the idea of heuristics is central to Polya , but this concept too is usually attributed to Pappus . But more importantly , the inﬂuence is also quite clear in the parts that could be considered as the core of Polya’s own contribution . ¿e best example is in the very opening of the book , where he presents his general problem - solving schema , consisting of four parts ( pp . xvi – xvii ) : · Understanding the problem · Devising a plan Find the connection between the data and the unknown . You should obtain eventually a plan of the solution . · Carrying out the plan · Looking back ¿is is Polya’s overarching schema ; it is a “method” of problem sol - ving in every sense of the word . It is a mathematicalequivalent to de - sign methods . Furthermore , it is plain to see that this is an extended version of Pappus’ original two - part scheme . A ﬁnal stage of evalu - ation has been added for pedagogical purposes , and the analysis – synthesisschemahasbeenreﬁnedwithPolya’sclariﬁcationregarding planning : ¿e analysis has been elaborated into understanding the problem and devising a plan , and synthesis is called“carrying out the plan” ( ﬁgure 1 . 6 overleaf ) . With these ideas being so similar , is it likely that the design meth - odologists knew about these things ; was there a link ? Yes , it seems so . Although neither Alexander nor Jones gives any indication in that direction , thereisgoodreasontobelievethat bothwereatleastfamil - iar with Polya’s work . Given this suspicion , stemming from the un - mistakable similarities between their methods and Polya’s , one ﬁnds thatAlexander ( 1964 ) citeslaterworksbyPolya , andalso ( Miller , Gal - anter & Pribram 1960 ) where Polya’s method is presented in some detail . Jones’ link is more indirect ; however , the structure of ( Jones 1970 ) issosimilartoPolya ( 1945 ) thatitcouldhavebeennamed“How 31 M a s t e r p l a n Pappus’method , includingexamples , furtherexplanation , anddraw - ing out certain consequences . Polya can also be regarded as a meth - odologist of mathematical problem solving , and he has served as the historical link from Pappus to modern - day methodology . First , he gives a “non - mathematical illustration” ( p . 145 ) : A primitive man wishes to cross a creek , but he cannot do so in the usual way because the water has risen overnight . ¿us , the crossing becomes the object of a problem ; “crossing the creek” is the x of this primitive problem . ¿e man may recall that he has crossed some other creek by walking along a fallen tree . He looks around for a suitable fallen tree… He cannot ﬁnd any suit - able tree but there are plenty of trees standing along the creek : he wishes that one of them would fall . Could he make a tree fall across the creek ? ¿is example makes a very good illustration of Pappus’ method : the analysis makes a chain , from crossing the creek to walking on a fal - len tree , to ﬁnding a suitable tree , to felling a tree on the bank of the river , etc . ¿e synthesis carries out what the analysis has thought out , in the reverse order . Polya elaborates : This succession of ideas should be called analysis if we accept Pappus’ terminology . … ‡at will be the synthesis ? Translation of ideas into actions . ¿e ﬁnishing act of the synthesis is walking along a tree across the creek . The same objects ﬁll the analysis and the synthesis ; they exer - cise the mind of the man in the analysis and his muscles in the synthesis ; ¿e analysis consists in thoughts , the synthesis in acts . ¿ere is another di¡erence ; the order is reversed . Walking across the creek is the ﬁrst desire from which the analysis starts and it is the last act with which the synthesis ends . … Analysis comes naturally ﬁrst , synthesis afterwards . Analysis is invention , synthesis execution ; analysis is devising a plan , synthe - sis carrying through the plan . ( pp . 145 – 146 ) Most important here is how Polya explicitly spells out the relation of planning to analysis & synthesis , which was only left implicit by Pap - pus . Polya himself writes that this passage “hints a little more dis - tinctly than the original at the natural connection between analysis and synthesis” . ¿e ﬁnal quoted sentence spells it out : analysis is making a plan , and synthesis is executing it . 30 ture , only in opposite orders . Furthermore , they adhere to the prin - ciple of product – process symmetry : their tree structure is the same as the solution structure . ¿is is a more powerful organizational prin - ciple than the strictly linear one that Pappus used , yet it can be re - garded as refining rather than replacing the original . Descartes developed his method with the objective of using it in his own e¡ort to establish a systematic and absolutely certain foun - dation for science and all knowledge in general ; the method would serve as the basis and rationale for this system . ¿e aim of [ the method ] should be that of so guiding our men - tal powers that they are made capable of passing sound and true judgments on all that presents itself to us . ( Rule I ) It was in this system that “cogito ergo sum” was made into the most certain and fundamental fact of all , and from which all other facts were to be systematically deduced . As a system of this kind would be somewhat more complex than a geometrical proof , it called for a more powerful organizing scheme than Pappus had needed ; this was presumably the reason why he de - veloped the principle of hierarchical decomposition , something that hadn’t been called for in geometry . Descartes’ deﬁnition of method Descartes clearly stated mathematics as the source of inspiration ( Rule II ) . Although admitting familiarity with the work of Pappus and other“ancient geometers” , and stating that they had used a meth - od of analysis , he claimed that they had hidden it from others : We have suªcient evidence that the ancient geometers made use of a certain “analysis” which they applied in the resolution of all 33 M a s t e r p l a n Figure 1 . 7 Descartes’ hierarchical decomposition principle arranges the elements into a tree , whereas Pappus’ version simply forms a lin - ear chain ( cf . ﬁgure 1 . 5 ) . analysis synthesis To Design It” : besides being based on the analysis – synthesis – eval - uation pattern , both texts contain a catalog of heuristic techniques . Descartes Even though both of the principles of planning and product – pro - cess symmetry can indirectly be found already in Pappus , there is one point on which present - day design methods di¡er from the Greek original , and this is the technique of hierarchical decomposition . Its invention should probably be attributed to René Descartes , as part of the method he developed , a derivation of the Pappan origi - nal . ¿is method was presented in his Rules for the Direction of the Mind and Discourse on Method ( 1628 , 1637 ) : We shall comply with it exactly , if we resolve involved and ob - scure data step by step into those which are simpler , and then starting from the intuition of those which are simplest , endeavour to as - cend to the knowledge of all the others doing so by correspond - ing steps [ taken in reverse order ] . ( Rules , rule V , my italics ) Loosely , hierarchical decomposition consists in the strategy of div - ide and conquer ; in making a complex matter manageable by break - ing it down into successively smaller parts , which taken together form a tree - structure of the problem . ¿is is where the concepts of “top down” and “bottom up” come from . Here , analysis is the pro - cess which breaks the problem down into parts and creates the hier - archy , and synthesis iswhere the pieces are reassembledwith the same structure to make up the solution ( ﬁgure 1 . 7 ) . Like these chains , the hierarchical analysis and synthesis processes are also symmetrical to each other : they follow the same tree struc - 32 Figure 1 . 6 Polya’s problem solving schema as an elaboration of Pap - pus’ version . Here the proof and the plan are marked as entities pas - sed on between the ﬁrst and second halfs in both models . understandproblem form plan carry out plan look back plan analysis synthesis proof rationality . It is his method that “contains the primary rudiments of human reason” , that can determine what is agreeable to reason , etc . Still today , arguably , the received viewof rationality and reason is de - rived from method as well as logic ; this holds for scientiﬁc theory as much as for lay views of rationality . Good thinking is thinking that follows a method ; a particular procedure . ¿e best description of the relation between rationality and de - sign methods , and methods in general , is given byParnas & Clements : A perfectly rational person is one who always has a good reason for what he does . Each step taken can be shown to be the best way to get to a well deﬁned goal . Most of us like to think of ourselves as rational professionals . However , to many observers , the usual process of designing software appears quite irrational . Program - mers start without a clear statement of desired behavior and im - plementation constraints . ¿ey make a long sequence of design decisions with no clear statement of why they do things the way they do . ¿eir rationale is rarely explained . Many of us are not satisﬁed with such a design process . ¿at is why there is research in software design , programming meth - ods , structuredprogramming , andrelatedtopics . Ideally , wewould like to derive our programs from a statement of requirements in the same sense that theorems are derived from axioms in a published proof . All of the methodologies that can be considered “top down” are the re - sult of our desire to have a rational systematic way of designing software . ( 1986 , p . 251 , my italics ) ¿e search for design methods is motivated by the desire for a ration - al design process , and the authors deﬁne rationality as “having good reason” ; this is a good common - sense deﬁnition of rationality , hav - ing good reason for what you do , although the circularity is evident . Here is also a rare mention of proofs as the ideal for design meth - ods . ¿is also points to logic , another important part of this picture . With method as the model for rational thinking , logic may be deﬁn - ed as method for thinking , and what is the discipline of logic if not the methodology of thinking and reasoning ? With this in mind , and withthestateof utter reﬁnement that modern formal logichas reach - ed , it is not hard to see why Parnas & Clements regard formal proofs as the model for rational design methods . And the history of logic follows a path that is similar to those of method and rationality , all the way back to Pappus and geometry . 35 M a s t e r p l a n their problems , although , as we ﬁnd , they grudged to their suc - cessors knowledge of this method . … Certain vestiges of this true mathematics I seem to ﬁnd in Pappus and Diophantus… ¿ese writers , I am inclined to believe , by a certain baneful craftiness kept the secrets of this mathematics to themselves . ( Rule IV ) ¿ey had withheld this knowledge , he claimed , so as not to take the luster o¡ their own mathematical achievements—it would have made them look trivial , as nothing could be simpler than using this meth - od ( ibid . ) . He could therefore claim the method he was describing to be of his own invention . Judging from the philosophical literature on the topic , he seems to have had some success in this . Descartes is also remembered for being the ﬁrst to reason about methods ; about their function , advantages , and so forth . Descartes also gave a deﬁnition of method : …Now by method I intend to signify rules which are certain and easy and such that whosoever will observe them accurately will never assume what is false as true , or uselessly waste his mental e¡orts , but gradually and steadily advancing in knowledge will attain to a true understanding of all those things which lie with - in his powers . ( IV ) Method , rationality , and logic Another point to recognize is his claim for the method to be of use far beyond his initial aim , and not to be restricted to any speciﬁc ﬁeld . He claimed it to be general - purpose , to be used in all domains with the same results , as a means for attaining “universal Wisdom” : For this discipline claims to contain the primary rudiments of human reason , and to extend to the eliciting of truths in every ﬁeld whatsoever . ( IV ) In making this claim , Descartes connects method with rationality . ¿e generally recognized concept of rationality is itself inherently circular . It is deﬁned as the“state of reasonableness” , and “rational’ is deﬁned as “of the reason” , from ratio which means reason , that is , the same thing . Consequently , rational thinking thus means “thinking that is of the mind” . ¿e concept of rationality hence says nothing about just what reason consists of , what is reasonable , and so on , sowe need to add a theory that says what reason consists of , that deter - mines what is agreeable to reason , and so forth . ‡at Descartes does is to propose that method is the foundation of 34 basic notions that it is hard to envisage how they might be di¡erent . An alternative conception that is not based on the classical model of rationality is hard to even imagine—remember how the deﬁnitions of what reasoning and rationality is are largely made in its terms , in both lay and scientiﬁc language . The folk model of cognition ¿e most basic of all conceptions of the mind and its workings is the distinctionmadebetween perception , thinking , and action . ¿isisagood example of a notion that is hard to rethink or disregard : How could it be di¡erent ; how might it not be this way ? Perception refers to the functioning of the ﬁve senses ; howcould these and action not be sep - aratefromthinking ? Hence , thisblessedtrinityissaidtobeverydeep - ly rooted in “folk psychology” ; a term that cognitive scientists use for the body of everyday , non - scientiﬁc psychological conceptions held by every one of us , independent of schooling . An additional aspect of this trinity is its being arranged in a linear order from perception to thinking to action , based on an imagined “ﬂow” from input to output : Information enters through the senses andviaperceptiongoesintothemind . ¿en , adecisionismadewhich transforms this information via the motor system into action , and this is regarded as“output” . Taken together , this yields a folk psycho - logical three - stage model of perception , cognition , and action ( cf . ﬁgure 1 . 9 ) . A second core theme of folk psychology , only slightlyless fundamen - tal than the previous one , is the intention – plan – action triad ( cf . ﬁgure 1 . 10 ) . Behind it lies the intuition that thought controls our actions and behavior in general ( springing from “free will” , or the like ) . It is essentiallyacausalexplanationof actionandhowactioncomesabout , what controls it , etc . It consists of a three - part chain where the in - tention plays the role as cause , which via the mechanism of planning determines action . ¿is is typically regarded as a folk - psychological “theory” of action , or rather of the relation of thought to action : a 37 M a s t e r p l a n ¿is can also be seen in the format of modern formal proofs . ¿e principal di¡erence from the “classical pattern” described by Pappus is that the steps of the proof are only given once . From having in Pap - pus’ days been presented ﬁrst in a conceived order of discovery , then followed by the proof per se ; today the ﬁrst sequence is omitted , and only the proof proper is given . Hence , this “modern pattern” is equal to the second half of the classical pattern . As a consequence , a proof today begins with the axioms and from them goes through the steps that end with the proven theorem . And as this is also the format used in mathematical proofs today , this modern format has taken over the role that the classical format ( as described by Pappus ) was once invented for , in mathematical proofs . Hence , modern formal logic is also directly connected to the an - cient geometry proofs . With respect to its application in mathema - tics , this seems not inappropriate at all ; more so , however , when log - ic is held as some kind of model for human thinking , which is not so uncommon . ¿e domains of rationality , method , and logic are therefore tied to each other , both through their common historical origins and via principles and ideas that they share still today : ¿erefore ( formal ) logic , as the scientiﬁc study of rational thinking , may be seen as the purest form of methodology ; and the principles of logic as the ideal for all other methods to aspire to , in design or otherwise . 1 . 3 Folk conceptions of thinking With these ties in mind , it should come as no surprise that traces of the model of rationality can be found also in theories of cognition . More surprising , perhaps , is that the inﬂuence has been monumen - tal , and continues to be so . But if we only looked for this inﬂuence in scientiﬁc approaches to cognition , even in the widest possible sense , then some of the most important aspects of its inﬂuence would elude us . ¿e deﬁning characteristics of this pattern can be found already in conceptions of the mental realm that lie well outside the domain of science . Oureverydayconceptionsof mindaresoentrenched in these 36 Figure 1 . 8 The structure of a modern proof . Cf . ﬁgure 1 . 5 . axioms theorem perception thinking action Figure 1 . 9 The folk - psychological schema of the linear relation be - tween perception , thinking , and action . theory since it has the characteristics of a scientiﬁc theory ; psycho - logical since it is held to explain how people conceive of thinking , action and the relation between the two ; and “folk” because of its simplicity and thereby poor standard as a theory . ¿e primary element in this explanatory schema is planning , since that is the mechanism that performs the translation from thought to action . It takes an intention as input , specifying what the individual wants to happen , and derives from it a plan that speciﬁes a set of op - erations to perform . ¿e plan is then passed on to the motor system which executes it , i . e . carries out the speciﬁed operations , and there - by brings about the intended outcome . As the origin of the inten - tion is non - essential to the relation between thought and action , it can be left out of this schema . ¿ere is a distinct relation between the two presented schemas and the concepts therein . ¿e ﬁrst schema describes cognitive function - ing on the highest and most general level of description . ¿e second one is more speciﬁc , it concerns the relation between thinking and action , and treats a part of the general schema in greater detail . ¿is elaboration consists firstly in introducing plans as the construct that connects thinking to action , and secondly in specifying thinking , the central part of the ﬁrst schema , in greater detail : In order to rea - lize the connection between thinking and action , a part of thinking must produce the plan that is passed on to action . ¿e function do - ing this is of course planning , and it requires an intention as input . As the origin of the intention is non - essential to the relation be - tween thought and action , it can be left out . Hence , the second sche - ma is a reﬁnement of the ﬁrst ( ﬁgure 1 . 11 ) . Connection to Pappus How is this folk schema of cognition related to Pappus’ method of analysis and synthesis ? ¿is is made clear in Polya’s elaboration on Pappus , especiallyintheprimitive - manexample , whichtransfersPap - pus’ schema to a non - mathematical domain . Polya’s point is that an - alysis corresponds to thinking , and synthesis to action . Figure 1 . 10 The folk - psychological intention – plan – action schema . First , the chain of steps that makes up analysis , going from the goal backward , is the train of thought that the man goes through in ﬁgur - ing out how to cross the river : ¿e man might remember himself having crossed another river by walking on a fallen tree . He therefore looks around for a suit - able fallen tree . …He doesn’t ﬁnd one but there are plentyof trees standing on the shore . He wishes one of them to fall . Could he himself make one fall across the river ? … ¿is succession of ideas should be called analysis if we accept Pappus’ terminology . Secondly , synthesis consists in physically carrying out what think - ing has conceived during analysis : ‡at will be the synthesis ? Translation of ideas into actions . ¿e ﬁnishing act of the synthesis is walking along a tree across the creek . ( Polya 1945 , p . 145 ) ‡en Polya also relates them to planning and combines them into a whole , therelationbetweenthecognitiveschemasandPappus’meth - od becomes quite clear : ¿e same objects ﬁll the analysis and the synthesis ; they exercise the mind of the man in the analysis and his muscles in the syn - thesis… Analysis comes naturally ﬁrst , synthesis afterwards . An - alysis is invention , synthesis execution ; Analysis is devising a plan , synthesis carrying through the plan . ( pp . 145 – 146 ) Here , it is quite appropriate to equate the intention with the “goal” or “the thing sought” , i . e . the theorem to be proven . Planning con - sists of analysis , which takes the intention as its starting point . Simi - larly , the intention is realized when the ﬁnal step of the synthesis is performed . ¿e result is a one - to - one match with Pappus’ method , 39 M a s t e r p l a n 38 intention plan action perception thinking action Figure 1 . 11 Timeline renditions of the folk psychological of percep - tion – thinking – action and intention – plan – action , also showing how the second is an elaboration of the ﬁrst . planning plan execution plan intention between both the basic and elaborated versions , where the latter in both domains are yielded by adding planning ( ﬁgure 1 . 12 ) . ¿is folk schemaof cognitionembodiestheideaof intramentalcognition . ¿is view , which is entirely consistent with our intuitions , hinges on the separation of action and thinking , among other things . Aristotleand the origin of folk psychology So folk psychology follows very closely the ancient model of mathe - matical rationality . Or is it the other way around ? Is this model bas - ed on everyday conceptions ? ¿ere is a passage by Aristotle on de - liberation ( bouleusis ) or “planning” compared to analysis , where he derives the equivalent of the intention – plan – action schema from the method of geometrical analysis ( cf . Hintikka & Remes1974 , pp . 85f ) ; it supplies us with evidence that contemporary folk psychology too is based on the ancient Greek method of analysis . First it should be established that this account of “deliberation” really is concerned with planning , and not careful thinking in gene - ral as the term signiﬁes today . Aristotle states that an individual’s de - liberation is concerned only with what she can do , what her own e¡orts can achieve . ¿at is , with action ( Aristotle , Nichomachean Eth - ics III : 3 , my italics ) : But we do not deliberate even about all human a¡airs ; for in - stance , no Spartan deliberates about the best constitution for the Scythians . For none of these things can be brought about by our own ef - forts . … We deliberate about things that are in our power and can be done ; and these are in fact what is left . For nature , necessity , and chance are thought to be causes , and also reason and everything that de - pends on man . Now every class of men deliberates about the things that can be done by their own e¡orts . And in the case of exact and self - contained sciences there is no deliberation , e . g . about the letters of the alphabet ( for we have no doubt how they should be written ) ; but the things that are brought about by our own e¡orts , but not always in the same way , are the things about which we deliberate , e . g . questions of medical treatment or of money - making . Hence , deliberation is concerned with things we can make happen , but for which it is not obvious how to attain them ; deliberation ser - ves to ﬁgure out how to do this . It is therefore planning of action that Aristotle is discussing here . Further , he states that ends , i . e . goals , purposes , aims , are not at is - sue in deliberation but are regarded as given . ¿at is , the agent’s in - tentions are not at stake , only how to attain them . ¿is closely mat - ches the view of planning as the mapping from intention to action : We deliberate not about ends but about means . For a doctor does not deliberate whether he shall heal , nor an orator whether he shall persuade , nor a statesman whether he shall produce law and or - der , nor does any one else deliberate about his end . ¿ey assume the end and consider how and by what means it is to be attained ; and if it seems to be produced by several means they consider by which it is most easily and best produced , while if it is achieved by one only they consider how it will be achieved by this and by what means this will be achieved , till they come to the ﬁrst cause , which in the order of discovery is last . For the person who deliberates seems to in - vestigate and analyse in the way described as though he were analysing a geometrical construction ( not all investigation appears to be delib - eration—for instance mathematical investigations—but all de - liberation is investigation ) , and what is last in the order of analysis seems to be ﬁrst in the order of becoming . Aristotle here provides conclusive evidence that his account of plan - ning is directly based on the pattern of geometrical proofs . He even explicitlynames geometrical analysis as the archetype for it , but even regardless of this mention the evidence is unequivocal : ¿ere is the assuming of the sought end , and then considering how it is reached ; then there is the repetition of this “till they come to the ﬁrst cause” , 41 M a s t e r p l a n 40 Figure 1 . 12 Comparisons between the basic and elaborated versions of folk psychology and Pappus’ ( Polya’s ) method . analysis synthesis understandproblem form plan carry out plan look back plan perception planning plan execution plan intention thinking action de·sign n . … 7 . A plan ; a project . 8 A . A reasoned purpose ; an intent . B . Deliberate intention . Here one somewhat unexpectedly ﬁnds evidence of the everyday viewof designactivity , givenintheverydeﬁnitionof design . ¿egiv - en meanings include plan and intention , which both are part of the intention – plan – actionschema . ¿esefolkconceptionsareclearlyex - pressed in the deﬁnition of the verb : de·sign v . 1 A . To conceive or fashion in the mind ; invent : design a good excuse for not attending the conference . B . To formulate a plan for ; devise : designed a marketing strategy for the new product . 2 . Toplanoutinsystematic , usuallygraphicform : de - sign a building ; design a computer program . 3 . To create or contrive for a particular purpose or e¡ect : a game designed to appeal to all ages . 4 . To have as a goal or purpose ; intend . 5 . To create or execute in an artistic or highly skilled manner . ¿e present topic is accurately captured by the sense listed as sec - ond—the illustrations are those of the dictionary—and sense number 5 is a variant thereof . ¿e senses of the verb that remain capture the folk psychological view of design—“folk design theory” if you will : 1 A states that design is an act of the mind ; 1 B ( and 2 ) refers to plan - ning , and number four mentions intent . Hence two items in the in - tention – plan – action triad are mentioned . ‡en this connection is stated in the standard deﬁnitions , it strongly backs up a deeply root - ed connection between the meanings of plan , intention , and design . ¿e logic behind this becomes clear if these folk psychological terms are seen in relation to Pappus’ schema ( ﬁgure 1 . 13 below ) . Here , action is the ﬁnal step , whereas intention and plan both be - long to the domain of thinking . Hence , in this view , design corres - ponds to transforming the goal into a plan for the implementation ; a blueprint for how the product is to be executed . In other words , de - signcorrespondstoplanning , ormoreroundly , tothinking . Byexten - sion , the design – implementation dichotomy corresponds to those of planning – execution , thought – action , and analysis – synthesis ; a de - ceptively natural ﬁt that surely has a large share in the appeal of this view . Note that this separation of design and implementation cor - responds to the original division in Renaissance architecture . Points 3 and 4 in the deﬁnition bear witness to the role of the in - tention in this scheme . At ﬁrst sight they seem indistinguishable ; 43 M a s t e r p l a n which in turn is done in the reverse order in the “becoming” where the actions are carried out . Note that deliberation is compared to an - alysis only ; not synthesis . Also , from the manner in which the ﬁnal clause describes “becoming” , it can only be understood as though action is held to follow planning in the same manner that synthesis follows analysis ( not only in the temporal sense ) . A closer analysis of the connection between Pappus’ and Aristot - le’s accounts is made in Hintikka & Remes ( 1974 , chs . 1 & 8 ) , show - ing also extensive terminological similarities . However , they still hold that Pappus did not directly draw on the work by Aristotle . The everyday meaning of “design” With this in hand , one can analyze the conventional , everyday mean - ing of the term “design” itself . It is used both as noun and verb , where the verb , as in the process of design , is what the present book is con - cerned with . Keeping in mind that etymology is always a precarious venture , “design” comes from the Latin designare , to designate , which here means to specify , as in pointing out what to do . ¿e modern sense of design is held to have originated in the Renaissance , when archi - tect and builder functions came to be two separate functions . ¿e ar - chitect would no longer always be present on site during building and therefore had to specify what to build , which previously hadn’t been necessary ( Herbert 1993 ) . Similarly , the noun “design” comes from signum , which is not so much in the modern sense of the root “sign” ( as in symbol , mark ; semantics , semiotics , etc . ) as is sometimes claimed . It rather has the meaning of something that you follow , in the sense of the speciﬁca - tions passed on from architect to builder . Around the sixteenth century , there emerged in most of the Eu - ropean languages the term “design” or its equivalent . ¿e emer - gence of the word coincided with the need to describe the oc - cupation of designing . … Above all , the term indicated that designing was to be separated from doing . ( Cooley 1988 , p . 197 , quoted in Bødker et al . 1991 ) In addition to this standard meaning of the noun , there are some pe - culiar senses which give indications toward the folk conception of how designing is done ( deﬁnitions and etymology taken from the American Heritage Dictionary , synonyms from Roget , my italics ) : 42 To have in mind as a goal or purpose : intend , aim , contemplate , design , envisage , envision , foresee , plan … To form a plan / strategy for : design , plan , think out , prepare , out - line , scheme , lay plans… ‡at one intends to do or achieve : purpose , aim , design , goal , intent , intention , meaning , plan … So design and implementation eventuallycame to be assigned to sep - arate parts of an individual’s faculties , thought and action . In thevery beginning , both design and building were done by one person , re - quiring her full physical and mental capacities . ‡en design came to be considered as an activity of its own , it referred to one out of two responsibilities divided among two people , each of which still re - quired one individual’s full capacity . In the folk sense it is implicitly assumed that one’s thinking alone is suªcient for designing . ¿is is the same e¡ect that the Greek sche - ma has had on our received conceptions of cognitive abilities in gen - eral : one’s intellectual capacity is held by the mind alone , and intelli - gent performance is done strictly by thinking , such as in reasoning , problem solving , and so forth . As the folk sense of design refers to the act of speciﬁcation , which isonlyoneaspectof awholedesignprocess , Iwilluse specify toreferto that particular aspect , in a theory - neutral manner . In relation to this , the topic of this book could be design as in the whole process of design . How “folk” is folk psychology ? ¿e passage from Aristotle shows that what today is considered as the folk - psychological model of action was in fact once upon a time deriveddirectly from the method of geometrical analysis . In the same manner , “folk design theory” seems far too reﬁned and consistent to be a reﬂection of mere intuitions . ¿is casts some doubts on the view of folk psychologyas a direct reﬂection of everyone’s “intuitive”con - ceptions , which is customary in cognitive science . ¿is view is problematic by itself . Folk psychology is commonly thought of as a “folk” theory of psychology , as opposed to scientiﬁc psychologicaltheory . ¿atis , peopleareheldtohave“theories” ; there are other examples , such as the“theoriesof mind” thought to be held by infants as well as primates , or “naive physics” . However , it is ques - tionablewhetherpeople’sconceptionsof thesematterscanberegard - ed as theories , and one may wonder whether scientists are not too 45 M a s t e r p l a n however , the ﬁrst refers to creating for a certain purpose ; the second to havingas purpose . In other words , having an aim vs . turning it into to a plan for its implementation . Folk psychology holds goals and purposes to always have an explicit mental entity , the intention , that directly corresponds to it . ¿e intention is the cause that alone is re - sponsible for starting the process of design , as well as determining its direction . ¿e relation between intention , plan and design is veriﬁed by the deﬁnitions of the other two terms ; even though be - ing synonymous is not the same thing as being identical , this shows that all three terms are given their meaning in relation to the same intention - to - action schema : in·tend v . tr . 1 . To have in mind ; plan . 2 A . To design for a speciﬁc purpose . B . To have in mind for a particular use . 3 . To signify or mean . intr . To have a design or purpose in mind . plan v . 1 . To formulate a scheme or program for the accomplish - ment , enactment , or attainment of . 2 . To have as a speciﬁc aim or purpose ; intend . 3 . To draw or make a graphic representa - tion of . ‡atismore , intention , plananddesignareallthreeconsistentlylist - ed as synonyms , even , and this in the relevant senses : 44 design v . production ( speciﬁcation ) ( implementation ) design n . product objective Figure1 . 13 The folk - psychological notion of design , cf . theintention – plan – action schema ( middle ) and Pappus’ / Polya’s method ( bottom ) . understandproblem form plan carry out plan look back plan result planning plan execution plan result intention tives from everyday conceptions , selectively chosen and subjected to scientiﬁc method to yield what resembles a coherent , plausible the - ory . Hence , the “folk” models of thought and action , of design , and so on that we have seen here , have therefore had plenty of opportu - nities for inﬂuence from modern science or ancient writings . In oth - er words , in the good two thousand years that have passed , there has been plenty of time for the original Greek ideas to inﬁltrate con - temporary semi - formalized accounts of these not so mundane top - ics . And given the de facto ties of these subjects with science and aca - demia , it is not as unlikely that they retain a strong inﬂuence on even the most reﬁned modern theories of design , problem solving , cog - nition , etc . 1 . 4 Cognitive planning theory Plans and planning have gradually emerged as central concepts : Pol - ya shows that the plan is what holds analysis and synthesis together , he holds analysis to consist in producing a plan , and the proof to be the same thing as the plan ; Aristotle took geometrical analysis as the paradigm for planning in human thought ; folk design theory holds design to correspond the planning stage in the folk model of cogni - tion , and the “design” is regarded as a plan for building the product ; the plan is regarded as the construct that connects thought to action ; the third principle concerns planning , etc . ‡ydoes planning keep recurring in this way ? ¿e reason why it turns out to be so central is that it is the mechanism by which think - ing determines action . In the received , “folk” model of cognition , rationalactionisanextensiontothemodelforrationalthought . ¿ere is a model of rational thought , based on geometrical analysis , math - ematical proofs , etc . Acting rationally means having good reasons for your actions ; it is simply explained as a direct extension of rational thought : ﬁrst you think rationally , then you act out your decision . ¿is also follows the intuition that our minds control our actions . In this scheme , planning is the construct that realizes this connec - tion : as the last part of thinking , it produces a plan , which is passed on to be executed by the motor system . Hence , planningtheoryandtheintention – plan – actionschemaare in fact the received theory of ( rational ) action . It is based on the fol - lowing principles : Given , to begin with , is the rationalityof thought ; add to this the separation of thought and action , and that thought 47 M a s t e r p l a n self - indulgent when they attribute these tools of their own profes - sional trade to whomever they study . As “folk” conceptions typical - ly are neither consistent and coherent , nor well integrated and com - plete , the question is whether calling them theories is not going too far . It is my belief that when scientists assemble people’s conceptions and from them formulate a “folk theory” , a coherent whole , they are in doing so attributing to these people a consistency , completeness , and so forth which only has come to exist as a product of the scien - tists’ own research e¡ort . ¿e coherence required for this to be a theory is then something their own labor has had to produce , it is not a property of the material from which they built it . ¿erefore , what is called folk psychology is not so very “folk” , but rather a semi - scientiﬁc theory that is based on or derived from lay conceptions , although far from being a pure reﬂection of them . ¿ese intuitions are in themselves not at all as articulate , coherent , or con - sistent as this product , the “folk”theory . I believe the same is true for dictionarydeﬁnitions . ‡atpersononthestreetwouldyouexpectto give a coherent and complete , eight items long deﬁnition of the noun “design” ? Dictionary editors , however , typically do have scientiﬁc training . ‡at is more , these lay conceptions are often described as “intui - tions” , and the intuitions which the scientist used were typically her own . How representative can we consider these to be ? How untaint - ed by their professional experience and education ? No ordinary folks would consider scientists to be ordinary folks . It often seems the veil of folk psychology is used to cover the fact that the ideas sci - entists are describing or defending are in fact their own intuitions , a fact which they do not quite owe up to ( e . g . Fodor 1975 ) . Also , science and everyday life are not perfectly isolated domains . ¿ey continually inﬂuence each other through the culture they share . For instance , Freudian theory has had a tremendous impact on popular culture ( an impact which remains strong , while its weight in science continues to fade ) . More contemporary are the informa - tion and computer metaphors , the impacts of which are beginning to follow the same pattern . Similar patterns are easy to imagine , going at least as far back as into antiquity as in the examples we have just seen , and the passing of ages tends to render them invisible . All in all , folk psychology is arguably not so “folk” as is sometimes thought . More likely , models of this kind are highly reﬁned deriva - 46 theory of shopping lists . ‡at is interesting is that those explicitly concerned with planning research mainly seem to have taken the consequence of this critique , and have abandoned the received view to create a new ﬁeld called “reactive planning” . ¿is remains to hap - pen outside these circles . Design as planning In a paper that is arguably a classic , Je¡ries et al . ( 1981 ) proposed a theory of design as planning , directly based on cognitive planning theory . ¿e authors themselves however do not regard this as a plan - ning theory of design as such , just as a cognitive theory . ¿is also goes to show just how fundamental the concept of planning is to cogni - tive science . ¿is paper is also signiﬁcant for another reason : the main method for studying design empirically is to collect protocols of designers thinking aloud while working on a design problem . ¿is is also pro - bably the ﬁrst protocol study of design . It is also the ﬁrst of three protocol studies of software design , the other two of which will be treated in the following chapters . ¿e paper ties together work from three disciplines : ¿e ﬁrst is de - sign methodology , especially the part concerned with software de - sign . ¿esecondis“automaticprogramming” , i . e . attemptsatdesign - by - computer , a branch of AI , and the third is cognitive research on “models of planning and design” ( as notably the authors themselves call it ) . ¿e last two represent the classical AI – cognitive psychology connection in cognitive science . How compatible all three disciplin - es are is shown by how smoothly their contributions are combined . Already in the ﬁrst paragraph , the description of the nature of de - sign is entirely permeated with concepts from planning theory : ¿e task of design involves a complex set of processes . Starting from a global statement of a problem , a designer must develop a precise plan for a solution that will be realized in some concrete way ( e . g . , as a building or as a computer program ) . Here as often elsewhere , what is taken for granted in the paper is par - ticularly evident in the very opening statements . Even when the au - thors here give their introductorydescription of what design is , they do so in terms of planning theory . ¿is is not an analogy ; it is not de - sign as planning—design is planning . Design consists in developing 49 M a s t e r p l a n precedes and determines action . Planning and the plan are required to connect the two that are separated . From this it follows that planning is not a freely elected theoreti - cal choice from a number of available alternatives . With thought and action being separated , which is done already in the basic perception – thinking – action schema , and free will or thought determining ac - tion , there is little option but ﬁrst to place thought prior to action , secondlytointroduceanentityneededtoconnecttheseparatedparts , and thirdly to require the ﬁrst separated part to produce this entity ( i . e . to introduce a planning process into thinking ) . In this way , planning theory comes to represent this relation in principle between thought and action , it becomes the concrete man - ifestation of this abstract principle . ¿is is also why planning keeps coming up in so many di¡erent contexts . ‡at is more , since the planning concept has been directly and completelyadopted bycognitive science , it has also become a corner - stone of the standard scientiﬁc theories , directly reifying the intui - tive notion of thought or freewill determining our actions . Planning theory has thereby become the standard scientiﬁc theory of action . ¿e ﬁrst work to explicitly propose planning as the mechanism connecting intramental thought and action in cognitive theory was Plans and the Structure of Behavior ( Miller et al . 1960 ) . ¿eir chapter on planning in problem solving also draws directly on the work of Pol - ya ( 1945 ) , with even a hint of its ancient origins . Hence , in this case the link from Pappus’ method of analysis via Polya to cognitive plan - ning theory was much more direct and explicit than via folk psy - chology only . ¿is is certainly why there has been such a great controversy over planning in cognitive science ( e . g . Agre & Chapman 1990 , Brooks 1990 , 1991a , 1991b , Suchman 1987 ) : this has not been a dispute over people’s grocery shopping lists , or how they go about deciding how to spend their summer holidays . ¿e row over planning has concern - ed the essential nature of human action ; needless to say a fundamen - tal issue also for cognitive science . ‡at is more , such a great part of the work that has been done in this discipline hinges on this particu - lar theory of action . If it doesn’t hold , the work based on it stands under serious question . For this reason , planning is not a harmless , isolated little sub - aspect of interest only to a “planning communi - ty”of researchers , and the enormous heat that has been generated by this debate is understandable . ¿is would not have happened over a 48 with which Newell & Simon begun their research was to construct a computerprogramcapableof provingtheoremsinformallogic . Both their choice of problem domain as logical proofs , and of computer implementation as their method , are clearly visible in the resulting theories , even though these are formulated in general terms . ¿eirﬁrstworkwasonaprogramknownastheLogic¿eorist ( LT ) , which later was superseded by the General Problem Solver ( GPS ) . ¿e task of LT was to ﬁnd a proof for a given theorem in formal logic , given the axioms to be used for the proof . For a program to be able to do this , everything needed ﬁrst had to be encoded appropriately and given to it . Besides axioms and theorem , also the available rules of logic , their proper application , and how they are combined into deductive sequences , had to be encoded into the program in an ap - propriate form . ¿en , using various methods , the program was to assemble valid combinations of steps into a sequence leading from axioms to proof . In order to turn this from a computer program into a theory , the various aspects of the programwere expressed in mathematical form . ¿e process was characterized as a search among the available rules , and their possible applications and combinations . ¿is given infor - mation that had been fed into the computer was collected in what was called a “search space” , to match the analogy of the program’s function as a search . ¿is space is a mathematical abstraction with no immediate counterpart in the computer program , but embracing various parts of it . According to historical sources , Newell & Simon drewdirectlyon the work by Polya ( 1945 ) in their initial work on LT , and followed his directions closely in developing their ﬁrst algorithms . ¿e most di - rect indication of this connection lies in that LT worked strictly back - ward from theorem to axioms in its search for proofs ( Newell & Si - mon 1972 ) . Additionally , given their oft mentioned concern with heuristics , they could hardly have missed Polya since it is his name that is most often associated with the study of heuristics in modern times . ¿e one missing piece of evidence is that they themselves seem not to acknowledge this connection . ( Still it would be unfair to imply that they were attempting to do a Descartes in this matter and deny the origins . ) But using Polya’s recognized work on techniques for mathematical problem solving would of course be awise thing to do , in attempting to develop a computer program with this ability . ‡en they extended their work to other tasks than logic , when the 51 M a s t e r p l a n a plan for the implementation , by translating the given goal into a speciﬁcation of what should be done : Software design is the process of translating a set of task require - ments ( functional speciﬁcations ) into a structured description of a computer program that will perform the task . ¿is deﬁnition completely parallels how the dictionary above deﬁn - ed design in terms of folk psychology and planning ( cf . ﬁgure 1 . 13 ) . ¿e resulting design consists of a decomposition of the product into modules ; the plan for the implementation process follows this de - composition structure : One can think of the original goal - oriented speciﬁcations as deﬁning the properties that the solution must have . ¿e design identiﬁesthemodulesthatcansatisfytheseproperties . Howthese modules are to be implemented is a programming task , which follows the design task . 1 . 5 Problem solving theory Problem Solving ¿eory ( PST ) and Information Processing ¿eory ( IPT ) are quite closely related ; roughly , the latter is a generalized version in which the former has been made into a universal , domain - independent theory of cognition . Both theories originated in the work of Newell & Simon . ¿e main presentation of these theories is considered to be their book Human Problem Solving , which was pub - lished in 1972 . ¿is was a good ﬁfteen years after their research had begun , so this book must be considered as a mature presentation of their work , even though it may seem old today , or limited in its em - pirical material . ¿e book , and the theory of problem solving , are based on the study of three problem solving tasks : logic , chess , and cryptarithmetic ( i . e . substitute digits for the letters in DONALD + GERALD = ROBERT ) . And although problem solving is the speciﬁc scope of the book , it is also considered to be the major scientiﬁc work on information processing theoryas awhole . ¿is if anything is a tes - tament to the relation between these theories , and to the status assig - ned to problem solving as an activity that is representative of human cognitive performance altogether . ¿at is , to the relation between problem solving and cognition as a whole , as it is perceived by cog - nitive scientists . ¿ese theories bear strong evidence of their origins . ¿e problem 50 tween the planning method in problem - solving theory and Polya’s “creating a plan” . So these may be seen as three di¡erent “decompo - sition strategies” , cf . Descartes’ hierarchical principle . The inﬂuence of folk psychology on current cognitive theory But the most important point in this is that these are three variants of the analysis stage in Pappus ( counting in strict backward move - ment ) . ¿eyare surely not equally powerful , but neither of them goes beyond analysis , which corresponds to thought in the folk - psycho - logical schema , nor do they deviate from the rest of the schema on any point—the division into perception , thought , and action is pre - served , as is planning as the mechanism connection thinking and ac - tion . And since the goal is considered as given , also the intention is left as is . ¿ey di¡er in the inner workings of the thinking box in the middle , but the rest is left intact as it has been in folk psychology all along and still is ; they are di¡erent theories of thought , and of how thinking produces the plan for action ( figure 1 . 14 ) . And this is what is striking about the current state of cognitive theory : while vast amounts of work have been spent on the details of theinnerworkingsof themind , thefolkschemaof cognitionhasbeen adopted by scientiﬁc theory on all other points , and stands unaltered even today . ¿is holds for both planning theory and problem - solv - ing / information - processing theory . ¿e fundamental organization of the cognitive system has thereby been preserved more or less un - changed from Aristotle’s treatise on planning . ¿at is also why this section , even though serving to present cognitive theory , is dominat - 53 M a s t e r p l a n Logic ¿eorist became the General Problem Solver and they formu - lated a universal theory of problem solving , the previous concepts were simply generalized : ¿e initially given axioms and theorem became start and goal states , deﬁned by the problem in question ; the basic “search” view was transfered to problem solving , now taking place in a “problem space” . ¿e rules of logic were replaced by the rules of the particular problem , and so on . Hence , the basic pattern from logical deduction was preserved and became the backbone of the theory of problem solving . At this point Newell & Simon were aiming toward greater psy - chological realism , and started to collect their own think - aloud pro - tocols of actual subjects working on the problems , with the purpose of replicating such protocols in their programs . With this aim , and from the analysis of these protocols , they developed a new heuristic method called “means – ends analysis” , to emulate in GPS what their subjects were doing ( 1972 ) . Means – ends analysis allows for working alternatinglyforwardandbackward , anditisthereforeamorepower - ful method than working strictly backward ( or forward ) . In con - junctionwiththis , theyalsodevelopedaheuristiccalledthe“planning method” . It consists in developing a simpliﬁed solution that abstracts from the speciﬁcs of the problem , and thereby can establish a general solution strategy , which then works as a plan that is used for the “im - plementation” of a solution that does deal with the details . ¿e ﬁrst thing to note about these various “heuristic methods” is that they all correspond to the analysis part of Pappus’ original sche - ma . ¿e original backward - working method of the Logic ¿eorist even exactly corresponds to Pappus’ method of analysis for a proof problem : both start at the theorem to be proven , and move back - ward until they reach the axioms , and at this point the resulting steps are delivered as the proof . ¿e only di¡erence is that LT requires that alsotheaxiomsbegiveninadvance . Means – endsanalysisreplacesthat strategy with a generalized and more powerful method for ﬁnding the proof , but it only changes the method for ﬁnding it—the internal workings of the analysis stage—the givens are the same , axioms and theorem , and the result is the same , the proof . ¿e same holds also for the planning method ; it changes only the method of analysis while preserving everything else . ‡at is more , this method of analysis is identical to top - down decomposition in cognitive planning theory : it organizes the analysis phase in the same way that planning theory does . ¿ere are also great similarities be - 52 problem space solution perception thinking action Figure 1 . 14 Problem - solving theory and planning theory as variants of the“thinking” step in the folk - psychological schema . planning plan intention problem solving because it is the best theory that cognitive science has to o¡er , with respect to the topics I will be discussing . ¿at is to say , I have not chos - en it as a bad example . Even though my argument will to a large ex - tent be based on the ﬂaws and problems with this theory , this should not be seen as much as a criticism against Newell & Simon . As scien - tists they are among the very best . And problem - solving theory is not a bad theory ( it is wrong , however ) . In studying their work , even though I have not been on their side , I have come to regard them highly for what they did . For example , they did consider and work out the issues of how their theory would connect to action and the outside world , to an extent that no one else has done ( Newell & Si - mon 1972 , Simon 1981 ) . ¿eir theory is also coherent , and regarding these issues , they would not easily lend themselves to making ad hoc extensions that were not compatible with other parts of the theory , as is too often done . Hence , thecritiqueof problem solving theory shouldnot beseen so much as a critique directed toward Newell and Simon , but rather toward the rest of cognitive science , which in the good 25 years since has hardly even come up with anything signiﬁcantly di¡erent . ¿e only real alternative that might be considered here , for example , is mental models theory ( Johnson - Laird 1983 ) . In all , it seems cogni - tive science has ever sincebeen little more than footnotes to Newell and Simon . 1 . 6 Summary : A common model of rational action IntheintroductionIstatedthatthischapterwouldestablishaconnec - tion between design methodology and cognitive theory . ¿ese are two disciplines that seem quite unrelated at ﬁrst sight . Here I have shown the link to be a shared underlying pattern that is a general mod - el of rationality and rational action . ¿is model has been the foundation for such apparently diverse domains as classical design methods and structured development techniques in software engineering ; with respect to cognition , folk psychology , cognitive planning theory , problem - solving theory , and information - processing theory ; and lastly , to proof theory and formal logic , and the philosophical no - tions of method and rationality . Althoughtheyvaryintheirdetails , forvariousreasons , thesewide - ly di¡erent domains all are founded on this underlying pattern . ¿is pattern is what the four deﬁning principles are meant to make visi - ble , and they should be seen as my attempt to make this model of ra - 55 M a s t e r p l a n ed by the presentation of the pre - scientiﬁc , folk conceptions of cog - nition : ¿ese notions are where the majority of the concepts origi - nate that are relevant for these theories . ¿e continuous , unbroken line of development from folk psychology to modern - day cognitive science is especiallyclear in thecase of planning and planning theory . From this it is clear that today’s cognitive theories also preserve the intramental view of cognition . One might say that these theories disagree over the intramental details , while they all preserve the ba - sic patterns from folk psychology that are derived from Pappus , Ari - stotle , and so forth . ‡en connectionism was up and coming , it was widely hoped that it would replace traditional information - proces - sing theory , or what was then seen as the symbolic theories . It was seen as a question of symbolic vs . connectionist theory . It has since become clear that this replacement would not happen ; the connec - tionists never really took on the higher - level issues . ( Although Ru - melhart et al . 1986 hinted at how this might be done . ) Instead they took the route of the natural sciences , down into the biology , even the chemistry . ¿at is why information processing theory and the work of Newell & Simon still stands as the best alternative ; more or less unchallenged , even . ¿e reason why I will use “intramental” to refer to the traditional theories is also to a large extent just this : ¿e fact that these are sym - bolic or information - processing theories , etc . , is beside the point . ‡at is signiﬁcant is that they retain the view of cognition as intra - mental—a fact that connectionism hardly challenges , for example . ¿is is the aspect of traditional theory that I will point out as the problem in what follows . I am presenting PST here for several reasons . One is that it is the most inﬂuential theory of cognitive science . It was very early , pre - 1960 even , and it has served as the basis for very inﬂuential , more re - cent theories : SOAR ( Newell 1990 ) as well as GOMS ( Card , Moran & Newell 1983 ) . An additional but related reason is that PST deﬁnitely is the most developed cognitive theory when it comes to design spe - ciﬁcally . ¿is was explicitly named by Newell & Simon ( 1972 ) as a suitable domain for taking the theory to more realistic , more com - plex problems . ¿is they have also done , in particular Simon , who has shown an interest in design ( e . g . 1973 , 1981 ) . It has also been done by a number of others ( e . g . Akin 1986 , Goel 1995 ) . But the main reason for discussing problem - solving theory here is that I will use it as the basis for my critique . I have made this choice 54 tional action visible and explicit , and to articulate its essential under - lying ideas . Byplacingthevarioustimelinediagramsbesideeachother , youget a Rosetta stone of rational action models , as in ﬁgure 1 . 15 . ¿ere , the models can be compared and their corresponding elements can be read out directly . For example , the analysis – synthesis dichotomy lies behind those of thought – action , planning – plan execution , and de - sign – implementation . ¿ese pairs make up the stem of the family tree , as it were . ( ¿e original Rosetta stonewas found in the Nile del - ta , not far from Alexandria . ) An intramental model of rationality ¿is underlying model of rationality and rational action , which is based on ancient geometryproofs , stands as an archetype of good and desirable thinking , and it is the paradigm after which all the descen - dants have been modeled . ¿e four principles capture the nature and essence of this archetype , showing that it is essentially an intramental model of cognition and action : ¿e central idea is of rational action as an extension of rational thinking , and the elements of this idea is expres - sed in the four principles . Taking the rationality of thought as a pre - mise , they make the following points , each in turn : 0 . ¿e rationality of thought . 1 . separation : ¿e separation of thought and action . 2 . logical order : ¿ought preceding and determining action . 3 . planning : Plans ( and the intention - to - action schema ) as the mechanism whereby thought pre - determines action 4 . product – process symmetry : ¿e idea that the structure of a product of action directly reﬂects structure of the process which pro - duced it , and thereby also of the underlying plan . In particular , the ﬁnal point implies that since this structure was in - herent also in the plan , it thereby had to be known before the start of the process which produced it . As seen in the lower part of the Rosetta stone , the basic computer architectureof input – processing – outputalsofollowstheancientpat - tern , with “processing” corresponding to analysis and thinking . ¿is connection is likewise evident when Jones compares the designer to 57 M a s t e r p l a n 56 analysis synthesis evaluation analysis synthesis perception thinking action perception planning plan execution requirements determine successive deﬁnition decompostion reﬁnement evaluation understandproblem form plan carry out plan look back understandproblem solve problem carry out solution design v . production ( speciﬁcation ) ( implementation ) plan result result design n . product intention objective proof theorem input processing output solution problem space plan Figure 1 . 15 The Rosetta stone of rational action models . The models belong to three categories : design methodology , logic / problem solv - ing , and folk psychology . The ﬁnal line is the basic pattern of comput - er architectures . a computer—here also note the labels on the boxes inside the head in ﬁgure 1 . 16 ( 1970 , p . 50 ) : ¿e picture of the rational , or systematic , designer is very much that of a human computer , a person who operates only on the information that is fed to him , and who follows through a planned sequence of analytical , synthetic , and evaluative steps and cycles until he recognizes the best of all possible solutions . ¿is assumption is , of course , valid in the case of computer op - timization of the variables within a known design situation , but it also underlies such systematic design methods as morphology and systems engineering which are intended for the human “computer” to use in solving unfamiliar design problems . Here , Jones at once ties together the basic three - stage design sche - ma , the input – processing – output schema , and thinking / problem solving . Jones alsomentions “cycles”—notably in relation to comput - ers—or iteration as is today’s term ; a ubiquitous feature of contem - porary design methods ; also notice the backward arrow from evalu - ation to analysis in the “ﬂowchart” inside the head . ¿e reader may have wondered why I have left this prominent aspect out of my ana - lysis of design methods ; a brief answer is that this is an ad hoc exten - sion that goes quite counter to the principles of the underlying model of rationality , in e¡ect proving it wrong ; also cf . chapter 3 . 58 Figure 1 . 16 Original caption : “Designer as computer” . 2 . The failure of design methods 2 . 1 The general failure of design methods Having said this much about design methods , there is but one thing to add : ¿ey don’t work , and they don’t work at all . In spite of all the good motives—the need for potent and up - to - date design proced - ures , the noble cause of being rational , and so on—the failure of these methods is a very solid and widely recognized fact , as is the thoroughness of this failure . A number of circumstances bear testimony to this . One is that it was the original advocates of these methods who documented the failure , andwhothenabandonedthemaltogether . ¿isisauniquecir - cumstance ; usually , it takes critics from the outside to bring a failure into the light , and this is typically met with a frenetic defense from theoriginalproponentswhorarelychangesides , eitherrefusingtosee or accept the failure . Here , the pioneers allowed themselves to re - cognize the failure of their own ideas and inventions , and to public - ly state this as a fact . A second circumstance is how exceptionally soon this reversal came . Alexander’sclassicaldescriptionof hismethodwaspublishedin 1964 . In 1966 hewrote an essayexplaining why it didn’t work . ‡en he was interviewed about the state of the ﬁeld in 1971 , he dismissed design methods completely : And there is so little in what is called “design methods” that has anything useful to say about how to design buildings that I nev - er even read the literature any more . … I think I just have to be consistent here . I would say forget it , forget the whole thing . Period . Until those people who talk aboutdesignmethodsareactuallyengagedintheproblemof cre - ating buildings and actuallytrying to createbuildings , Iwouldn’t give a penny for their e¡orts . Also Jones ( 1970 ) acknowledged the problems with these methods , and the lack of success stories . ¿is he did already in the original edi - tion ; even in the same paragraph as where he stated the need for these methods : 59 mental problems can also be traced all the way back to Pappus . ¿e problems that are present already in his original account have since been carriedover intoall methods that descend from it , including the mostmodernones . Iwill herebeginbybrieﬂyexamining these prob - lems in the original context of geometry proofs . The structure of the genuine process ¿e di¡erence between analysis and synthesis does not stand out as clearly in a proof as it does in a conventional mathematical problem , the other of the two kinds of use that Pappus describes . In solving a problem , analysis consists in ﬁguring out what calculatons are need - ed for reaching the answer , and synthesis of actually carrying out these calculations . As a consequence , no calculations are to be made during the analysis ; this phase serves only to determine which ones should be performed ( cf . Polya ) . ¿is division is however not made in practice , as anyone can tell from their own experience : ‡en working on a mathematical prob - lem , you do not refrain from attempting to calculate the answer as you are trying to ﬁnd the solution . Usually , you do quite the oppo - site : you carry out various tentative calculations in order to ﬁgure out how to reach the solution . You do this for several reasons : For instance , to see what you can get from what is given ; you can then use this for further calculations . Or , when you have an idea for a solution , or for a part of it , to evalu - ate what you have and to see where it leads . Many of these calcula - tions are dead ends ; still , one or two may give you the critical insights . ‡y would you not make these interim calculations ? ¿ere is no good reason not to , so people do make them . ¿erefore , there is no phase of pure analysis , as this activity is in - termingled with synthesis ; nor is analysis alone suªcient to produce a solution . Asaconsequence , whenyouhaveﬁguredouthowtosolvetheprob - lem , then this is hardly followed by a bona ﬁde synthesis phase . At that point you have already performed most or all of the necessary calcu - lations , in particular when testing to see whether you indeed have reached the correct solution . ¿us , there is hardly such thing as a syn - thesis phase that a ) is performed after the solution has been found , b ) is separate from an analysis phase , c ) that follows after analysis , or d ) that even exists at all . But the work that does remain when you have reached the solu - 61 F a il u r e However , it is not obvious that the new methods that are review - ed in this book are any better . ¿ere is not much evidence that they have been used with success , even by their inventors … ¿e usual diª - culty is that of losing control of the design situation once one is committed to a systematic procedure which seems to ﬁt the problem less and less as designing proceeds . ( p . 27 , my italics ) Later , Jones too would reject them completely ( cf . later editions of Jones 1970 ) . ¿e lack of successful applications mentioned here is a third aggravating circumstancewhichwas also generally recognized ; Rittel was another pioneer who acknowledged this absence : Q : ‡at kinds of problems has design methodology successfully attacked ? …If you are asking for examples from architectural design I wouldn’t know of any building that has been done discern - ibly better than buildings done in the conventional way . …I would say that the corporations or other planning insti - tutions who seriously tried to accomplish something with the [ design ] methods have been disappointed , and that there is a considerable “hangover” from these methods . ( Rittel 1972 ) Also Alexander and Broadbent made similar comments : In short , my feeling about methodology is that there are certain mundane problems which it has solved—and I mean really in - credibly mundane . ( Alexander 1971 ) Yet asked to catalogue its achievements , in terms of buildings built , cities designed , and so on , most of its advocates ﬁnd them - selves in diªculties . ( Broadbent 1979 , p . 41 ) Even the attempts to use the methods have been exceptionally rare . According to Lawson ( 1980 ) , there has beenonlyonedocumented at - tempt to use Alexander’s method ( Hanson 1969 ) . Since this failure is very well documented , I will not belabor the argument here ; the existing critiques are quite suªcient . ( Beyond the sources that have been cited here , see also e . g . Broadbent 1973 , Lawson 1980 , and several papers in Cross 1984 ) . 2 . 2 The classical mistake ‡en it comes to understanding why the methods failed , the funda - 60 of his method , were inserted by Hintikka & Remes . In particular , note how the steps of the analysis are repeated backward in the syn - thesis ( cf . ﬁgure 1 . 5 ) : Hintikka’s annotations : Pappus’ original text : 1 . ENUNCIATION 1 a . that which is given Let ABG be a circle with the centre E . Let BG be a diameter , and AD a tangent… Let a straight line JM , parallel to BG , be described through J . 1 b . the thing sought ¿at EK = EL . 2 . ANALYSIS MP = PJ . … A , N , E , D are on a circle . ¿e angles DAE and END are both right angles . 3 . SYNTHESIS Because the angles DAE and END are both right angles , A , N , E , D are on a circle . … Hence MP = PJ . … hence KE = EL . Q . E . D . : ¿e structure of a geometrical proof is identical to the analy - sis – synthesispatterndescribedbyPappus . Hence , itisthewrittenpre - sentation of such a proof that his method describes . ( Parenthetically , the many variations on design methods here ﬁnd their counterpart in geometry . ¿e schema used by Hintikka & Re - mes divides each of the three steps into two parts , of which I have included only 1 A and 1 B here ; ¿e traditional Greek schema contain - ed six parts : enunciation , setting out , speciﬁcation , construction , proof , and conclusion ( ibid . , p . 6 ) . Like the various design methods , Pappus’ sche - ma and these two are variations on one and the same theme . ) How come this mistake ? Put di¡erently , the fundamental oversight in Pappus’ method is that 63 F a il u r e tion , especially if you are to present it to someone else , is to go back to the pieces of writing on your paper , extract the parts that go into the solution , and write them down in the logical order . ¿is is how you obtain the straight path from what is given to the solution , the sequence of steps that corresponds to a proof , and that according to Pappus is followed during analysis as well as synthesis , without re - dundant parts and dead ends . In actuality , this path is never followed ; not during any part of the process . Hence it is a mistake to see this as plan following , or to think of the proof as a plan . It cannot even be known until at theveryend of the process , when you also have the answer . Only then can you ex - tract this path , and it still requires e¡ort to obtain it : you have to look back at what you have done , go through your scribbles , and then as - semble the pieces into a tidy , linear sequence . Instead there is just one process , where the functions of analysis and synthesis are two aspects of the same activity , not two di¡erent activities , stagesorprocesses . ¿estructureof thisjointprocessisany - thing but a clean progression from desired result to given facts , nei - therbackwardnorforward . ¿isprocesswillbynecessityfollowmany routes that turn out to be dead ends , and others that are not used in the ﬁnal proof . ( All these things given that the proof sought or prob - lem to be solved is not trivial ; in this case the problem is so simple that it is possible to go “straight” to the correct solution . ) Pappus’ method describes the product , not the process So Pappus’method can neither be used to solve problems as he claims , nor can it be a reﬂection of how Euclid or other geometers actually worked . Since this mistake seems so obvious , then why was it made , and where did it come from ? ¿e basic mistake that Pappus made was to conﬂate the structures of the resulting proof , and that of the process that produced it . Most likely , this was because the method was established not from observing the actual work behind the proof , but only the result of this work—that is , the proof itself . ¿is can be seen by comparing Pappus’ method with the structure of the geometrical proofs . ¿e example in the ﬁgure is one of Pap - pus’own proofs , taken from Hintikka & Remes ( 1974 , pp . 22f ) . ¿eir account consists of Pappus’ full original text with annotations ; for brevity I have included only what is relevant to the present argu - ment . Pappus’ original text is in italics , and the numbered headings in small caps ( 2 . ANALYSIS , etc . ) , which correspond to the elements 62 ly in disciplines such as software engineering , engineering design , and artiﬁcial intelligence ( cf . Adelson & Soloway 1985 , Dasgupta 1989 , Je¡ries et al . 1981 , Parnas & Clements 1986 , Swartout & Balzer 1982 ) . ¿is is probably due to the direct and indirect links between these disciplines and formal logic . For example , a computer scientist is much more likely to have been trained in formal logic than is an architect . ¿e most concise evidence of the modern pattern is the quotation from Parnas & Clements given earlier : Ideally , we would like to derive our programs from a statement of re - quirements in the same sense that theorems are derived from axioms in a published proof . All of the methodologies that can be considered “top down” are the result of our desire to have a rational syste - matic way of designing software . ( 1986 , my italics ) Elsewhere they also write : “Each step taken can be shown to be the bestwaytogettoawelldeﬁnedgoal . ”¿isclearlyreferstoformallog - ic , whereeachstepinadeductivechainhasbeenformallyproventobe correct . ¿e authors also endorse a design method that follows this same pattern . ¿e main features of the modern version of rationality are ﬁrstly , that the distinction between analysis and synthesis has disappeared , as two phases going in opposite direction ; secondly , that the process itself also starts with the axioms , and consists in deriving the theo - rem from them . ¿ese changes mirror the changes in the format of modern proofs . As a result of adapting this “modernized” pattern , the design pro - cess is taken to be a progression where the design is derived from the requirements , as though the theorem were derived from the axioms , and not the other way around . Also , the requirements speciﬁcation is here held equal to the axioms ( cf . the Parnas & Clements quote ) , whenitactuallycorrespondstotheproventheorem , sincetherequire - ments specify what is “sought” . ¿is quite serious mix - up is prob - ably due to the fact that in design methods you are to begin with the requirements , and that the modern proof schema begins with the ax - ioms—hence , requirements and axioms are mistakenly equated with each other . ¿e problem with this pattern is of course that it is an even great - er distortion of the genuine process . In spite of all the weaknesses of the older schema , Pappus did make the important observation that 65 F a il u r e the structure of the product and the structure of the process behind it are held to be the same . It is evident that actual problem solving does not , and cannot , follow Pappus’ schema . It deserves to be said , though , that Pappus does make certain im - portant observations . Still , there are some fundamental oversights . ¿ese have caused serious problems , in particular because they have been carried over into other domains , in those later models that draw upon Pappus original account ; it would however be wrong to hold him responsible for this . With this clear discrepancy between what Pappus writes and whatreallyhappens , oneislefttowonderhowsuchanoversightcould be made : How could the structures of process and proof be conﬂat - ed ? Or was it ever realized that onewas mistaken for the other ? Espe - cially since the di¡erence is so very clear , and that many others have made the same mistake later . For example , Hintikka & Remes ( ibid . ) donotdetectthemistake , butevenwritethefollowingintheﬁrstsen - tence in the opening chapter : Analysis is a method Greek geometers used in looking for proofs of theorems ( theoretical analysis ) and for constructions to solve problems ( problematical analysis ) . ( p . 1 , my italics ) ¿is is in a book where one chapter aims to examine whether Pap - pus really followed the method in producing his own proofs . And as seen earlier , Polya ( 1945 ) adopted Pappus’ scheme in its entirety as a central piece in his own recommendations , in a book which is ex - pressly meant to provide concrete help and practical advice on prob - lem solving . 2 . 3 The modern mistake But the mistake , where the structures of product and process are con - ﬂated , is not an isolated instance . ¿e same mistake has been repeated in modern times , although in a new , updated form . ¿is shows that it cannot be written o¡ to the primitive state of Greek science , or as a singular incident . As stated in section 1 . 2 , proofs do not look the same way today , due to advances in modern formal logic . ¿e steps are no longer pre - sented both backward and forward ; now there is just one sequence going in only one direction , forward from axioms to the proven the - orem ( also cf . ﬁgure 1 . 8 ) . ¿e marks of this pattern in models of rationality are found main - 64 to fail in both respects : Because it is a misrepresentation of what ex - pert practitioners really do , the detailed procedure also fails to serve as an aid for others . Hence , the normative and the descriptive are here one and the same . 2 . 4 The problem is in the intramental model of rationality ¿e underlying pattern of rational action that is shown in the Roset - ta stone ( ﬁgure 1 . 15 ) also substantiates the claim that the problems with the mentioned cognitive models do not originate in the com - puter metaphor of mind , but in this intramental model of rational - ity . ‡ile the standard account in cognitive science used to be that man has been made in the image of the computer , it has recently be - come increasingly clear ( prominently by Hutchins 1995 ) that the converse is the true : ¿e computer was made in the image of the hu - man ( if not the human mind ) . It is thus the computer model of mind that has inherited the pro - perties of the intramental schema , and so it is a mistake to attribute the problems of the classical cognitive theories to the computer mod - el of mind ; these have just exposed the problems they inherited from the intramental model of cognition , going back to Pappus , Euclid , and Aristotle . To avoid these problems , it is not enough to abandon information processing theory , but to completely avoid the intra - mental view of cognition , computerized or not . ¿ere is also good reason to believe that this underlying model is fundamentally wrong . Firstly , it is obviously odd that it is modeled after the structure of ancient Greek geometry proofs—the bare thought is highly improbable , but the evidence is quite ﬁrm . But an even better reason is that the brief look at how these proofs themselves are produced shows that it is seriously wrong even about them—as was shown above , being based on a quite fundamental , open mistake , a confusion of product and process . Had the original model of mathematicalproblemsolvingbeengood , thenitmayquite possibly have been a good start for a theory of action and cognition in general . For the remainder of this book , the most important connection between design methodology and cognitive science is this failure , since it is located in the model of rational action ; on a cognitive level , that is . ¿ereby this failure becomes of general interest ; design be - 67 F a il u r e you begin byhaving something youwant to solve or prove , andwork backward from there , rather than forward ; it is also signiﬁcant that you usuallydon’t know initially just what axioms or other proofsyou will make use of . ( ¿e two points are also related . ) Even so , from the presentation format of modern proofs , the impression you get is that this is the procedure behind them . ( ¿ere are modernapproacheslike proof trees and natural deduction , but which have had a rather re - stricted impact . ) Still , even though the case here is so open and shut , it is not di¡er - ent in essence from the distortions of Pappus’ original pattern . It is the same conﬂation of product and process—only the e¡ects now being moreexaggerated . Inbothcases , theformof thepresentationisbased on the knowledge of how to present the proof convincingly ; how to make it look rational , regardless of how it was discovered . Today , the presentation format has been even further developed , now being even more dissimilar to the process behind it . ¿erefore , it is now even more obvious that this is not how it was really done . ( But evidently not obvious enough . ) Hence , taking this as an ac - count of the process results in a distortion of the same kind , though to a higher degree . Normative model = descriptive expert model ¿e misrepresentations in these methods are of two kinds : On the one hand , they do not work as prescriptions—people don’t use them because they don’t work for their advertised purpose ; those who ac - tually tried them failed to reach the stated results . On the other hand , they are also inadequate as descriptions—if you study how practi - tioners really work , you will ﬁnd what they really do to be some - thing quite di¡erent . For all the methods in this chapter , the failures are of both kinds . At ﬁrst thought the descriptive and normative dimensions would seem not to be related , but in fact they are , for a reason which seems to applygenerally : In Pappus’case , even though his method is a“how to” , he states that it is the method of three authorities ( Euclid , Apol - lonius of Perga , and Aristaeus the Elder ) . Hence , his method is an ac - count of how the experts work , to the e¡ect that you should do the same ; this is also a rather forceful argument . ¿erefore , the method is a description of how skilled practitioners do work , and its principal function is as a prescription of how others ought to do their work . ¿is is also how it is possible for the method 66 comes a domain where the underlying model of rationality has been put to use , under highly authentic circumstances , and failed . ¿eremainingchapterswillfollowthispath , lookingatdesignpro - cesses in order to locate and explain this cognitive failure , but more importantly , to also present a better model of design , and of sensible reasoning and action – the one that Euclid by a certain baneful crafti - ness kept to himself . 68 3 . Design and cognition as inquiry 3 . 1 The nature of design In this chapter I will begin to present my alternative theory of de - sign activity . As will become evident , it draws on the analysis by Schön ( e . g . 1983 , 1987 ) , which in turn owes a great deal to Dewey’s theory of inquiry ( 1938 , 1949 ) , both of which will be discussed later in this chapter . ¿e view of design as problem solving has been criticized many times ( e . g . Holt 1985 ) , often on the grounds that design does not ful - ﬁll the conditions of problem solving theory ( e . g . Rittel 1973 ) . Take the earliest stages of the design process as an example . On the one hand , there is the conventional view of this as problem solving by pure analysis , based on the view of the design problem as being giv - en . On the other hand , there are the conditions of actual designing , where design problems are anything but given , so that the designer must also do “problem setting” ( Schön 1983 coined this term as a contrast to problem solving ) , which more or less amounts to pro - ducing also the problem itself . ¿e need for problem setting leads to the impossibility of separat - ing problem deﬁnition from problem solving , which in turn provid - es the basis for the argument that in genuine cases , design cannot be separated into stages . ¿e full argument constitutes the theory of in - quiry . At the end of the chapter I contrast the resulting characteriza - tion with the stage models from chapter 1 , showing how it can ex - plain why these fail under genuine circumstances . The design problem as given In the conventional view , the design problem is considered as given . Most oftenly this is not stated explicitly , but is left as an unspoken as - sumption , as if presupposing that the problem exists before design begins ( as a speciﬁcation of what the problem consists in ) . Note how e . g . “starting from a global statement of a problem” implies that the problem is given when design begins ( from Je¡ries et al . 1981 ) : ¿e task of design involves a complex set of processes . Starting from a global statement of a problem , a designer must develop a pre - 69 ments analysis cannot be isolated into an early , separate stage of the design process , the following two are among them : 1 . In most cases the people who commission the building of a software system do not know exactly what they want and are unable to tell us all that they know . 2 . … Many of the details only become known to us as we pro - gress in the implementation . ( p . 251 ) Here they hint at some of the main points in this chapter . I will however begin to analyze the two contrasting views of constraints . 3 . 2 Constraints are practical In the traditional view , constraints are parts of the problem deﬁni - tion , each imposing one restriction on what counts as an acceptable solution , or one requirement in terms of requirements speciﬁcations , which conversely can be seen as consisting of a list of constraints on the solution . It follows that constraints are regarded as given to the designer , as part of the requirements speciﬁcation , before design be - gins . Moreover , that they make the designer’s task harder by placing restrictions on her available options . In reality however , not all constraints originate strictly in the re - quirements speciﬁcation . Such is the case for legally imposed restric - tions , such as building regulations . ¿ese still fit the traditional view in that they are laid down long before the architect begins her work , and deﬁnitely in that they make her job more diªcult : Design legislation today may cover anything from the safety of electrical goods to the honesty of advertising or the energy con - sumption of buildings . …¿e architect today must satisfy the ﬁre oªcer , the building inspector and the town planner and in addi - tion , depending on the nature of the particular project , the hous - ing corporation , health inspectors , Home Oªce inspectors , the water authority , electricity authority , the Post Oªce , factory inspectors and so the list goes on . ( Lawson 1980 , pp . 67 – 68 ) Constraints can be both helpful and ﬂexible Within the design literature there are abundant examples of ways in which constraints are not the ﬁxed restrictions given in advance that standard accounts portray them as . For example , the customary in - cise plan for a solution that will be realized in some concreteway ( e . g . , as a building or as a computer program ) . … Software design is the process of translating a set of task require - ments ( functional speciﬁcations ) into a structured description of a computer program that will perform the task . … One can think of the original goal - oriented speciﬁcations as deﬁning the properties that the solution must have . ¿e design identiﬁes the modules that can satisfy these properties . How these modul - es are to be implemented is a programming task , which follows the design task . Newell & Simon ( 1972 ) however clearly state the problem as given : To have a problem implies ( at least ) that certain information is given to the problem solver : information about what is desired , under what conditions , by means of what tools and operations , starting with what initial information , and with access to what resources . ( p . 73 , my italics ) ¿ey do so , however , because the enumerated elements are exactly those that must be encoded into their model in advance , in order to make it work at all . As before , design methodologists are closer to reality ( Parnas & Clements 1986 , p . 253 , my italics ) : ‡o writes the requirements document ? Ideally , the require - ments document would be written by the users or their repre - sentatives . In fact , users are rarely equipped to write such a document . Instead the software developers must produce a draft document and get it reviewed and , eventually , approved by the user repre - sentatives . … Determining the detailed requirements may well be the most diªcult part of the software design process because there are usu - ally no well - organized sources of information . Hence , ideally problem solving theory would be correct , but in real - ity , producing the problem is work that the designer must do . And it is not a minor issue ; it is on the contrary the most diªcult part of the work . Note that this part is completely absent from the convention - al models , since they consider the problem as given . ¿is is obvious - ly a large oversight that cannot be resolved by making minor adjust - ments to these models . Parnas & Clements also list a number of reasons why require - 71 70 I n q u i r y particular constraint . ¿is helps him to draw upon personal know - ledge to structure his design problem , rather than as a constraint that will only make his task more complicated . Still , having a distributed control system could just as well have been a requirement from a client . ¿is example also shows that con - straints often may be seen as belonging to the solution , as much as being part of the problem ; once again , being helpful rather than problematic , quite contrary to the traditional view . Accordingly , con - straints do not necessarily make the designer’s job harder . Guindon sees them as being mainly very helpful ( 1990b , p . 290 ) : …inferred and added requirements mainly serve two purposes : ( 1 ) they lessen the incompleteness and ambiguity inherent in the speciﬁcation of the requirements ; and ( 2 ) they decrease the range of possible design solutions by acting as simplifying as - sumptions . In particular , these inferences contribute to problem structuring . Moreover they e¡ectively guide the search of a sol - ution by pruning a large set of possibilities . ¿e standard view also claims that constraints“decrease the range of possible design solutions” , but that this instead restrains the designer instead of helping her . The source of control principle ¿e standard view of constraints can be summarized thus : Con - straints are restrictions on an acceptable solution that are speciﬁed in the instructions given to the designer . ¿eyare non - optional ( but in - deed required ) and thus beyond the designer’s control . It thereby seems that the notion of constraints is full of contradictions : Is a con - straint helpful or a hindrance , is it ﬁxed or optional , is it provided in advance or added during design , and is it given to the designer , in the problem deﬁnition , or imposed by the designer , entirely at her own discretion ? First of all , note that these questions make little sense within the frame of reference of problem solving theory . To such a formal mod - el , the origin or history of its elements ( such as a constraint ) is of no value in reaching a solution , neither can the theory capture such as - pects . And an element cannot be good or bad , only its abstract form matters . In constructing a logical proof or solving a laboratory prob - lem , it provides no help to know who established the facts or rules , or when this was done . completeness of requirements speciﬁcations means that constraints typically aren’t given , as mandated by design methodology . Guindon ( 1990b ) gives a number of examples out of her protocols where the designer adds requirements that are not given in the instructions . Shearguesthattheincompletenatureof speciﬁcationsmakesrequire - ments elaboration an important task , because the constraints that the designer adds herself are often essential to a good solution : By simulating a Lift scenario , the designer realizes that a user may press a ﬂoor button to go in one direction , but once inside the lift , may press a lift button to go in another direction . ¿is test case was not mentioned in the problem statement , yet it is critical for the design of a good control algorithm . ( p . 288 ) In the traditional view , where constraints impose restrictions , it is hard to see how adding constraints can be so helpful . But because speciﬁcations encountered in practice typically are incomplete , ad - ding constraints is crucial to yielding requirements that capture the desired functionality : “¿e ill - structuredness of problems in the ear - ly stages of design will require structuring—inferences of new goals and evaluation criteria . ” ( ibid . , p . 297 ) An even greater anomaly is that designers frequently impose con - straints that are neither necessary nor objectively valid . ¿ey often apply them for practical ( but still very good ) reasons , and not from a strict necessity that is inherent in the problem . In one case , one of Guindon’s subjects says : You would rather not have a single point of failure because if it goes down all the elevators go down . So , I’ll start o¡ thinking about a distributed control system… ( p . 289 ) Guindon comments , ¿e designer recognizes from past knowledge with similar sys - tems that ‘no single point of failure’ would be a highly desirable requirement . However , other designers might have considered low cost or high speed to be more desirable than no single point of failure . ( p . 289 ) In this case , the designer’s professional experience suggests a distrib - uted control solution , and as becomes evident later on , he also al - ready knows how to implement it . Being able to apply a technique he is familiar with is probably a major reason for him to impose this 73 72 I n q u i r y dle ground , being somewhat ﬂexible . A client is guaranteed to have a number of wishes and demands on the product she is paying for . Still , if the designer ﬁnds that a requirement or a combination of them necessarily leads to a bad solution , she has the option of nego - tiating this requirement with the client . In particular , a user - impos - ed demand will have to be compromised if it conﬂicts with a more rigid constraint such as a legal norm . If the client agrees to drop a certain harmful prerequisite , this will probablyeven lead to a more desirable outcome for herself : If she sees theconﬂict , shecanreassessherneeds andﬁndawayoutthatwilllead to a better result than would a blind compliance with the given re - quirements . After all , much of the purpose of the design process is to cometoabetterunderstandingof initially vagueandunclearrequire - ments . ¿is understanding should be brought back to the client so that she can use it to reappraise her own needs . ¿us , in all , client - controlled constraints are negotiable and rather ﬂexible , and this circumstance should be used to best advantage . In striving for a good end , negotiating constraints is among the best of the available means . Designer - imposed constraints are completely ﬂexible On the ﬂexible end of the scale are the constraints that the designer is completely in control of because she formulates them herself . ¿is is the kind of constraint discussed in Guindon’s example above . ‡en her designer made a distributed control system into a major priority , this constraint was not chosen out of necessity or because the client or a law dictated it . Constraints of this kind are completely adaptable ; the designer can take a totally pragmatic attitude toward them . She can select them out of her own preferences , and intro - duce or scrap them as she revalues their usefulness . Hence , a constraint that is rigid and beyond the designer’s control can be very problematic and can truly restrict her range of action . But it may also free her from a range of design decisions , and in that case its rigidity is not a problem . ¿at is also the reason why con - strains become so powerful under the designer’s own command . A well chosen constraint can be very helpful even though not strictly necessary . By reducing too wide a range of options , it can create structure where the requirements speciﬁcation is lacking . Because of their reductive function , constraints are often seen as simplifying ¿e ﬁrst step in resolving the apparent contradictions is to ack - nowledge that in real cases , unlike in theoretical analyses , all of these questions are relevant , and we therefore need to adopt a perspective that will allow us to account for them . ¿e origin of a constraint is a point in case . In practice it does matter , because it determines how rigid or ﬂexible the constraint is . ¿is I would like to call the source of control principle : the further away from the designer the source of a constraint is located , the less control of it does the designer have , and the less ﬂexible is the constraint ( cf . Lawson 1980 ) . Legislated constraints are completely rigid One end of this ﬂexibility scale is represented by the legislator : …no designer would want deliberately to construct a dangerous building . However , often regulations have to be applied in situ - ations which were not predicted when they were framed… they must be satisﬁed without question , and cannot be weighed against other factors and considerations . ( ibid . , pp . 67 – 68 ) ¿is kind of constraint imposed by laws and regulations ( concern - ing ﬁre safety , electricity , plumbing , etc . ) are absolute and beyond the designer’s inﬂuence . ¿e legislation has usually been laid down long before the design process begins , and in an institutional con - text very remote from the designer’s oªce . ¿erefore , the designer cannot negotiate a problematic legal constraint if it causes problems . Such a situation is not uncommon , since rule systems such as build - ing regulations must be very generally held and cover a wide range of cases ( ibid . ) . Neither are they coordinated with other regulations . It would be impossible to anticipate all possible future situations that may arise , or all the ways in which a norm may come to interact with other regulations . For this reason , the problem arises from such a con - straint having been laid down in a context completely detached from the setting in which it will be applied . For the designer , there is no other option than to comply with such a norm , the source of which she has no access to . If a conﬂict arises , other requirements will have to be compromised instead . ¿ey are then compromised in a nego - tiation of conﬂicting constraints , not because they are less impor - tant , but because they can at all be negotiated . Client - imposed constraints are somewhat ﬂexible Requirements that are imposed by clients and users represent a mid - 75 74 I n q u i r y sis—implying that no work is required before that—then they must in e¡ect have an independent existence , prior to design or any other activity producing the requirements , etc . And this is even more clear in problem solving theory , where everything is encoded in the prob - lem space before the whole process starts , it is all but stated that the constraints thereby are given , among other things , to the solver . ¿e philosophical consequences that lie implicit in the standard view of constraints make it a so - called realist position . ¿is term re - fers to their being“real” , i . e . existing independentlyof someone hav - ing to“create”them ; Dewey ( e . g . 1949 , Appendix III ) used the term “ontological” instead of real , since the very idea of ontology rests on aseparation between the knower and the known ( the objectof know - ledge ) . Iwillalsousehisterm , asitismoreprecisethanis“real” : for in - stance , as he argued , idealism ( a vastly di¡erent position ) shares the same premise , “that what is known is antecedent to thementalact of observation and inquiry” ( 1929 , p . 23 ) . ( Note however that this use of “ontological”is non - standard , as he pointed to aspects of the con - cept that are not among those that are usually considered . ) Constraints as instruments ¿e alternative mode of explanation which the source of control principle adheres to is pragmatism , and it takes a fundamentally di¡er - ent starting point . In this view , a constraint is an instrument : that is , it is created for a purpose ; by someone ; and as a means to an end . And as an instrument it is actively formed to serve its purpose , by the per - son applying it toward this purpose . As a consequence of this view , constraints are not ﬁxed or static ; they develop through the process which adapts them to their func - tion . Also , they are not considered given , whatever that may exactly mean , or assumed to have an independent existence , instead they have to be created by someone , and this requires e¡ort . And they are not objective , but neither are they arbitrary , because they have a pur - pose . ¿e source of control principle directly embodies the principles of pragmatism , even though Lawson ( 1980 ) who ﬁrst described it made no such connection . ¿e function of constraints as instruments is easiest to see when they are under the designer’s control ; then , she can freely elect and discard them , or change them . In this way , she can ﬂexiblycreate a requirements speciﬁcation that will serve its pur - assumptions ( e . g . Guindon 1990b ) , and under the designer’s control this is true because they can do no harm . The source of control principle resolves the contradictions ¿e source of control principle can be rephrased as follows : the less the source of control over a constraint is involved in the design pro - cess , themorerigidistheconstraint . ¿isisjustaclariﬁcationof Law - son’s principle , where “further away from the designer” is replaced with “less involved in the design process” . Although constraints are useful , there is no advantage perse in their being absolutely rigid and non - negotiable . A ﬂexible constraint gives the designer the option to renegotiate it if complying with it does not lead to a good result . Such renegotiation is what it means to involve the source of control in the design process . ¿is is the solution to the apparent contradictions above . ¿e source of the contradictions lay in seeing constraints as ﬁxed and as parts of the requirements speciﬁcation ( or in problem solving terms , as deﬁned by the problem statement ) . For example , a constraint may work as if it were given and beyond the designer’s inﬂuence—but that is just the special case where the source of control precludes a constraint from being negotiated . So , these are the answers to the above questions : Is a constraint ﬁxed or optional ? ¿at depends on how much the source of control is involved in the design process . Is it pro - vided in advance or added during design ? ¿at also depends on the source of control . Is it given in the problem or imposed by the designer ? It is never strictly “given” , as in the traditional view . Di¡erent sources of con - trol can make it anything from completely rigid as if it were given ( but only as if ) , to designer - elected and thus entirely ﬂexible . Is it helpful or a hindrance ? In general a constraint is useful , by reducing complexity and adding structure . But if the e¡ect is misdirected and the control of a bad constraint is also beyond the limits of negotia - tion , then it may become a hindrance . 3 . 3 Pragmatism & the theory of inquiry ¿e two perspectives on constraints that I have contrasted belong to two di¡erent modes of scientiﬁc explanation . ¿eories that adhere to the traditional perspective typically have nothing to say about the origins of constraints , but this in e¡ect implies that this origin has to be unproblematic—that they have to be“given” . ¿is is the case for example when it is said that design begins with requirements analy - 77 76 I n q u i r y knowing is thereby primarily an activity , and this is reﬂected in “knowing” being principally a verb ; knowing is an entity only in a derived sense , and this is reﬂected in “knowing” also being a verb used as a noun , and not a noun per se . “Knowledge”is a noun , point - ing out a thing stored in the mind . The theory of inquiry One major element in Dewey’s contribution is his theory of inquiry ( 1938 , 1949 ) . ¿epragmatistviewof knowledgewasoriginallyasome - what abstract position , meant as an alternative to the equally ab - stract point of view in which knowledge consists of semi - linguistic , logicalpropositionsthatexpressontologicaltruths . Itwasafairlygen - eral statement of knowledge being grounded in practical activity and use ; although it would gradually become a more articulated posi - tion . Since pragmatism stated that knowing is grounded in use , an ar - ticulated position would also have to specify what “use” consists in . Dewey’s theory of inquiry is such an articulation of the use and ac - tivity that knowing is part of . In comparison , the previous view of knowledge was of a set of log - ical propositions about the physical world . ¿at view of knowledge was also accompanied by a theory of cognition of sorts ; of the pro - cesses in which that kind of knowledge is used , and put to use . ¿is role was played by the ( Fregean ) theory of formal logic and deduc - tion , i . e . the view of cognition as formal , abstract reasoning based on symbols , propositions and so on . Since the prototypical kind of knowledge was mathematical , also the way in which such knowledge is used , i . e . in deduction , proofs and formal logic , became the paradigm for reasoning , and even the fundamental model of cognition in general . Compare this with Pap - pus’ method being the model of mathematical reasoning and logic , as discussed in chapter 1 , and it is plain to see why his method could have such thorough inﬂuence on cognitive theory . By analogy , the theory of inquiry is the corresponding pragmatist theory of cognition . ¿e notion of “inquiry” itself refers to those adaptive and practical , concrete activities where knowing is put to use . Cognition is held to consist in the entire activity of inquiry , not merelyin a process of pure , abstract thinking . Also , all cognition con - sists in inquiry ; it is the basic structure of cognition . ( ¿e best deﬁ - nitions are given in Dewey & Bentley 1949 . ) My use of the concept will only include the parts of Dewey’s theory which are relevant for pose , that is , to yield a good design solution . ¿is is what we saw in the case of the“distributed control system”constraint above . From the same principle , it becomes clear why rigid constraints are problematic , and why this rigidity arises when they are not un - derthedesigner’sinﬂuence : whenthecontroloveraconstraintisgone , thenegotiabilitygoeswithit , sowhenitcannotbemadetoﬁtitspur - pose , then its role as an instrument is lost as well . ¿e remoteness / control dimension can then reconcile all the seemingly contradict - ory properties , and explain the widely di¡erent kinds of constraint , by regarding them as instruments . Compared to this , the traditional realist view can account for very little about how constraints work under authentic circumstances . Pragmatism as such I have compared realism and pragmatism as two theoretical perspec - tives on constraints and the problem itself . In its essence , pragmatism is a theory of knowledge , or in the term preferred by pragmatists , knowing . Pragmatism was originally the position that the meaning of a con - cept lies in its practical ( i . e . pragmatic ) consequences , and was found - ed by Peirce and James ( e . g . Peirce 1931 , James 1907 ) . As it matured , it grew into a comprehensive , fundamental reorientation in the view of knowledge . Many of the most important developments were due to the work of Dewey ( e . g . 1903 , 1929 , 1938 , 1949 ) . My treatment will accordingly be based on his work . ‡ereas previous theories of knowledge had been based on pure - ly philosophical issues , pragmatism eventually became a comprehen - sive theory based on practical matters of knowledge . ¿e previous“ontological”view regarded knowledge as reﬂecting eternal universal facts and truths , with mathematical knowledge as prototypical . To pragmatism , knowledge has the purpose of serving an individual by giving her practical and adaptive advantages ; this perspective was greatly inﬂuenced by Darwin’s theory . Here the empirical sciences also replaced mathematics as the model and con - text for scientiﬁc knowledge ; the developments of relativity theory and non - Euclidean geometries became important cases in point ( Dewey 1929 , 1938 , 1949 ) . Pragmatism prefers the term“knowing”to knowledge . It is a label not for a thing but a capacity , something that manifests itself in anin - dividual’s actions and which is not assumed an existence beyond that : 79 78 I n q u i r y chapter : chiefly , these are the inquiring or cognitive function of ac - tion , the dual use / test purpose of action , and the developing dimen - sion of inquiry . 3 . 4 Problem setting I will now move on to how the problem is treated in design , and to look at a classic example of problem setting , which is Schön’s own ex - ample , made famous from several of his writings ( 1983ch . 3 , also e . g . 1987 , 1992 ) . It describes a dialogue where an architectural student , Petra , reviews her work on a design project with her project super - visor , Quist . ¿e review takes place at an early stage of her work . ¿e design review begins with Petra describing her work so far , and the problems she is having . A basic precept of architecture is that a building should be sensitive to the site it is located in , and that the physical , three - dimensional form therefore should ﬁt into its sur - roundings and the location . Petra describes how she has taken this as her starting point , by trying to ﬁt her design to a prominent land con - touronthesite . ¿isisalsowhereshehasrunintoproblems ; shehasn’t been able to ﬁt the building into the slope . ¿is issue has brought her work to a halt , and now she feels that she is seriously stuck : Petra : I am having problems getting past the diagrammatic phase —I’ve written down the problems on this list . I’ve tried to butt the shape of the building into the con - toursof thelandthere—buttheshapedoesn’tﬁtintotheslope . [ She has a three - dimensional model which she is referring to ] I chose the site because it would relate to the ﬁeld there but the approach is here . So I decided the gym must be here—so I have the layout like this . [ She shows a rough layout , see ﬁgure 3 . 1 . ] Quist : ‡at other big problems ? P : I had six of these classroom units , but they were too small in scale to do much with . So I changed them to this much more signiﬁcant layout [ the L shapes ] . It relates one to two , three to four , and ﬁve to six grades , which is more what I wanted to do educationally anyway . … Later , as Petra’s problem description becomes clearer to Quist , he enters into her description with comments , and the present purposes , and it is by no means intended to be complete . However , on the points that I do include , my account goes well be - yond Dewey’s original version . As witnessed in the book title Logic : the theory of inquiry ( 1938 ) , Dewey also intended his theory as an alternative to formal logic , both as a model of scientiﬁc inquiry and of cognition in general . One must remember , though , that pragmatism and inquiry do not simply make up a set of new and di¡erent answers to the same ques - tions that the traditional theories of knowledge are concerned with . For example , pragmatism is concerned with the use and function of knowing , which is all but irrelevant to the ontological view ; accord - ingly , ontology is not a concern for pragmatism . ¿e instrumental view of knowing , as always being a means to - ward an end , is the innermost essence of pragmatism . Constraints , as discussed above , are one instance of this view . ‡at it means to “treat knowing as an instrument” can be divided into two dimen - sions , one“logical”andoneconcerningprocess . ¿e“logical”dimen - sion concerns the attitude that is taken toward knowing , as having a function or purpose ( versus having an independent existence and a preexisting and ﬁxed meaning , apart from purpose and speciﬁc con - text of use ) . ¿e process dimension concerns how knowing is“treat - ed” in the most concrete sense : Firstly , how and when it is used for its purpose , the activities it is part of , and the speciﬁc actions that are taken there ; And secondly , since it is not given , how it is created and adapted to its purpose . ¿ese processual aspects are what the theory of inquiry covers , and that I , instead of giving an account of Dew - ey’s theory here , will introduce “as we go” in the remainder of this 80 I n q u i r y Figure 3 . 1 Petra’s original layout . Kind Admin Classrooms GYM – Audit it turns into a dialogue that revolves around the drawings in front of them : P : ¿is is the road coming in here , and I ﬁgured the turning circle would be somewhere here— Q : Now this would allow you one private orientation from here and it would generate geometry in this direction . It would be a parallel… P : Yes , I’d thought of twenty feet… Q : You should begin with a disci - pline , even if it is arbitrary , be - cause the site is so screwy—you can always break it open later . In this last statement , Quist begins toworkout his diagnosis and rem - edy for Petra’s stuckness . Schön’s analysis ( based on the events that follow later in the protocol ) , gives the following rationale for what Quist does ( 1983 , p . 85 ) : ¿e main problem , in Quist’s view , is not of ﬁtting the shape of the building to the slope ; the site is too “screwy” for that . In - stead , coherence must be given to the site in he form of a geo - metry—a“discipline”—that can be imposed on it . ¿e reason for Petra’s problems is that the site in question is not suit - able for adapting the building to it , which is otherwise a basic prin - ciple in architecture . ¿is is in Quist’s view why she got stuck . In - stead , Quist suggests an entirely di¡erent approach . Just because the site is “screwy” , the designer should bring with her a certain struc - tural principle to the site , as part of her design solution . He thereby doesn’t say how to solve Petra’s problem—how to ﬁt the building in - to the slope—instead he proposes to change her problem into a di¡er - ent one . ¿is is what is known as “reframing” , or in Schön’s words , “problem setting” . The coupling of problem setting and problem solving Here , Quist has just demonstrated an instrumental attitude toward the problem itself . ‡en he sees how Petra is stuck , he immediately 83 82 I n q u i r y changes the way she has set her problem . He thereby treats the fram - ing of the problem as an instrument to adapt to the purpose at hand , here , to yield a good design solution . In the instrumental view , also the problem itself has a purpose . ¿e problem statement serves to specify the function of the design solution . Hence , when the problem is not regarded as something giv - en , it is also no longer a hindrance making life diªcult for the de - signer . Instead , it serves to spell out the purpose of the eventual de - sign . And the activityof problem setting becomes an inquiryinto this purpose , in order to understand what it is . ¿us also the task of prob - lem setting makes a contribution to the designer’s understanding . ¿is is seen more clearly in terms such as“requirements analysis” and“requirements speciﬁcation” , whichcorrespond to“understand - ing the problem”in problem solving terminology . From these terms it is more obvious that this is where the function of the design is de - termined . Perhaps these terms are more informative because this role is more evident in design , where this activity hasn’t been reduc - ed to understanding a given problem by reading a piece of paper . Solving is also use & implicit test of the problem - setting ‡en the protocol continues , Quist demonstrates the practical work that is required for successful problem setting . After having placed a transparent sheet of paper over Petra’s sketches , he starts to draw over them : Q : Now in this direction , that being the gully and that the hill , that could then be the bridge , which might generate an upper lev - el which could drop down two ways . Here , Quistimmediatelystartstoworkouttheim - plications of the new problem - setting that he has just suggested , which states that the function of the building’s“external geometry”is to impose an order on the slope . He assigns this role to Petra’s line of L - shaped buildings , placing them on the slope of the hill . If there is enough geometrical form inherent in this arrangement , then it will create the desired order on an otherwise “screwy”site . ¿us , when Quist starts to work out a solution , this also serves as a test of the problem - setting he has just proposed : If he can create the suggestedupper level by Quist ( priv . orientation ) Q : ¿e kindergarten might go over here—which might indicate that the administration over here—just sort of like what you have here—then this works slightly with the contours—then you might carry the gallery level through and look down into here— which is nice . ( my italics ) ¿e comment that the solution “works slightly with the contours” refers back to his original problem - setting , stating that the solution has been brought far enough along for him to deem it as workable and “nice”—if not an unqualiﬁed success , which it is still too early to judge anyhow . He had set out to ﬁt the layout of the building to the screwy site , and he has now found this to work somewhat , and it thus seems a viable approach . The inseparable use / test dimension of inquiry ¿e rationale for Quist’s actions here is given by an essential element of all inquiry , which is that action has not one but two kinds of pur - pose or e¡ect , in that it works as both use and testing at the same time . ‡en action makes use of some piece of knowing , it is at the same time a test of that knowing . In the present case , by working on a solution Quist has been applying his problem - setting to its pur - pose , which is to yield a good solution . ¿e solution he has worked on , and the act of working out this solution , have therefore also served to test whether his problem - setting works . ¿is dual purpose of action deviates from the ordinary , common sense view where action is associated with only one function , which is to produce a certain result . I will refer to this ordinary function as the ﬁrst , productive purpose of action . As the other purpose serves the inquiry itself , I will refer to that as the second , inquiring or cognitive purpose . Use & test , and the dual purposes , are not separate components that mix and together become part of an inquiry . Rather , they are di¡erent types of e¡ect of the same single action or activity , facets which become visible by taking di¡erent perspectives or points of view . Either perspective may be applied to any action , and also on any level , including activities on a larger scale . ¿is also applies throughout the present episode of Quist draw - ing , from reframing Petra’s problem to concluding that it works . From the use angle , the act of drawing serves to develop a solution , with the usual purpose of moving toward a ﬁnal design . But from the test point of view , it can also be seen as an extensive evaluation order that it calls for , then this shows that he has set the problem pro - perly . At least to a certain extent , as there are many other factors that the ﬁnal design will have to satisfy . On the other hand , if he like Pet - ra fails to produce a satisfactory solution , then he should probably change the framing again . However , Quist does not perform any explicit test ; instead , it is the act of working on a solution that also serves as an implicit test of the problem being solved . Hence , also the outcome of the test is im - plicit . In particular , success consists in the absence of failure , show - ing that the problem enables him to make progress : Q : We get a total di¡erential potential here from one end of the classroom to the far end of the other . ¿ere is 15 feet max , right ? —so we could have as much as 5 - foot intervals , which for a kid is maximum height , right ? ¿e section through here could be one of nooks in here and the di¡erentiation be - tween the unit and this would be at two levels . ¿us , when Quist here moves swiftly from issue to issue , one idea generating another , then this easy progress should be seen as eviden - ce of a problem well set—no news is good news . If there were prob - lems , then we would see them in his work not moving so smoothly , but instead becoming erratic and staggering , bumping into obsta - cles and not moving forward . Instead , each “right ? ” works as one link in a chain of possibilities . As Schön showed , from Quist’s comments we have implicit evi - dence that he is attending to the feedback from his actions and the emerging sketch ; of whether they tell him that the solution ( and thereby the problem ) is good or bad . After a few more moves , he ack - nowledges more explicitly that his drawing has served as a test : 85 84 I n q u i r y nooks 15’ 5’ 5’ di¡erent solutions and new angles , but nothing works ; eventually you run out of ideas and ﬁnd yourself stuck . In this manner , a failed test consists in not being able to move forward , but there is no overt signal of failure . In fact , it was such a situation that developed when Petra got stuck , and which she described to Quist . She had tried to ﬁt the building to the site but without success , and she couldn’t “get past”this prob - lem—she had even concluded that her own problem - setting was un - doable , as ﬁtting building to slope was impossible ; however , she ob - viously didn’t realize this : P : I am having problems getting past the diagrammatic phase— I’ve written down the problems on this list . I’ve tried to butt the shape of the building into the con - tours of the land there—but the shapedoesn’t ﬁt into the slope . Petra acts as a realist However , Petra’s own account does not imply a failure ; it is evident that she has not seen her own actions as a test , neither when this oc - curred , nor in her after - the - fact description to Quist . But Petra’s view is in no way in error , as there are no overt ( onto - logical ) grounds for the “action as test” interpretation , neither with respect to the outcome of the test , whether it be a success or a fail - ure , nor even of there being a test in the ﬁrst place ( since the test is implicit ) . ¿ere is no objective circumstance that she has missed or left out . Still , her view has consequences that cannot be denied , since her problems are due to her not seeing the test dimension : ¿ereby , she doesn’t listen to the feedback from her own actions , which would havetoldherthatherframingwasproblematic . Neitherdoessheview the negative outcome as a failed test , only as a failed solution ; and so the only remedy she sees is to change the solution . ‡en she restricts her e¡orts to trying new solutions , she has thereby locked onto one par - ticular problem framing , as though it were the correct one , or the on - ly one possible . Hence she doesn’t see the problem as being testable and thereby potentially better or worse , and as her own creation that is only one among many , and that she is free to change . She instead treats the problem as though it were given , and doesn’t question its validity or utility ; to Petra it is the problem , not her problem . of Quist’s problem - setting . ¿is is what Schön ( 1983 ) refers to when he describes this passage as Quist performing a frame experiment . And each action that in the ordinary view serves to develop the solution ﬁts the test interpretation equally well , serving the inquiry into the problem - setting . ¿e two perspectives are thereby entirely comple - mentary and symmetrical , neither being subordinate to the other . Even though Quist’s drawing episode thus serves both purposes , the productive outcome is of secondary importance in the greater context of his helping Petra ; after all , Quist’s job is not to produce Petra’s solution , but to get her on her way again ; the frame experi - ment serves to ascertain that his suggested remedy will be e¡ective . ¿e production of a solution thereby primarily serves the frame ex - periment , that is , the result may well be scrapped and still have fulﬁlled its purpose completely . Even the problem solving may be said to have a primarily inquiring purpose . ¿is goes to show that the inquiring purpose of action isn’t necessarily subordinate to the productive purpose , but potentially even the reverse . Still , because of the very tight coupling between test and use , it is necessary to put the problem - setting to use in order to test it . For this reason , problem solving cannot be separated from problem setting , to be performed as separate activities , in separate phases of the de - sign process . ¿is is the single most important consequence for the present argument , as it shows why the separation made by Pappus , and carried on into contemporary theory , is simply impossible . It also shows that it is impossible even in principle , not merely for practical reasons or because of accidental circumstances . ¿e more general version of this argument is that all knowing must be tested by being put to use ; this , in turn , so as to be adapted toitspurpose . Hencedevelopingunderstanding , i . e . “learning” , can - not be separated from using that understanding for some purpose . 3 . 5 It’s good to be a pragmatist Because actions are acts of knowing , they test whether that knowing is able to serve its purpose or not , by either succeeding or failing . Hence , action has a second , inquiring purpose , and because the test is implicit , a positive outcome merely consists in the absence of failure . ¿us , there is no distinct evidence of success , nor even of a test having taken place at all . But what about a test that fails ? In fact , nor in this case is there any explicit evidence . Instead , the action simply doesn’t work : It either yields a di¡erent result or none at all ; you try 87 86 I n q u i r y Good designers are pragmatists , novices are realists Earlier I compared the realist and pragmatist views of constraints , then as two approaches to scientiﬁc explanation . ‡at we have seen here is these attitudes being taken by the designers , not by scientist observers , and not merely as ideology , but in their concrete actions . But also Petra’s description of her problems is a realist’s account of her situation , very similar to the ontological view of constraints seen earlier , neither of which is very informative : the whole pragmatist dimension is missing from her analysis , which therefore captures very little of what had happened . It merely states that she had re - peatedly failed to come up with a solution to her problem . Above all , it gives no clues to her available options for action , for how to re - solve the situation and move on . Hence , the two contrasting attitudes make the whole di¡erence between frustration and progress : Quist literally makes his problem solvable , whereas Petra ﬁnds herself stuck . ¿e bottom line is that Quist who is the “expert” is acting as a pragmatist , whereas Petra , the“novice” , acts as a realist . And as we have seen , this accounts for a great deal of his superior performance . ¿e choice of either position is not merely a matter of ideology , but has important consequences . For pragmatists , very practical consequences . ¿is expert – novice di¡erence is further supported by Lawson : Students of design often devote too much of their time to un - important parts of the problem . It is easy for the inexperienced to generate almost impossible practical problems by slavishly fol - lowing ill - conceived formal ideas which remain unquestioned but could quite easily be modiﬁed . One of the major roles of de - sign tutors is to move their students around from one part of the problem to another and the job of the design student is to learn to do it for himself . ( 1980 , p . 81 ) Here , students “generating impossible problems which remain un - questioned” is precisely the failure to act pragmatically , and “move the student around”was exactly what Quist did to help Petra . Law - son also makes the same point regarding constraints : when students impose their own constraints , they do not realize that these indeed are of their own making and not something given or“found” : It is obvious that these designer - generated constraints are com - paratively ﬂexible . If they cause too many diªculties , or just She thereby also doesn’t see that her solutions are shaped by her framing , which reﬂects her understanding of what a solution must achieve , and which thereby also drives her solutions in a certain di - rection . She doesn’t see the shortcomings of her attempted solutions as opportunities to understand better what a solution should do , i . e . to frame the problem better . ¿e bottom line here is that there is an unmistakable pattern in Petra’s behavior : she consistently demonstrates the stance of a realist , and this is what causes her to get stuck . By not seeing her solving al - so as a test , she doesn’t recognize the second , inquiring purpose of action . She thereby misses the signals that indicate a problem with her framing . And by neither seeing , nor using the option to change her problem - setting , she treats it as if it were given , instead of regard - ing it as an instrument and making use of it in what she is doing . It was her inability to see that she had set her problem badly , and fail - ing to change it , that caused her to get stuck . ¿ese are all character - istics of the realist point of view , which had some very real , negative e¡ects on her work . Quist acts as a pragmatist Quist , however , consistently acts as a pragmatist . He acknowledges Petra’s solutions as being directed by her problem - setting , and there - by sees that the deﬁcit lies not in the failed solutions themselves , but in her problematic framing : In a sense , all solutions were doomed to fail from how she had set her problem , as the impossible task of ﬁtting the school to a screwy slope . Here , a critical element is Quist’s ability to recognize the condition of being stuck ; i . e . that further at - tempts at a solution are wasted , and to therefore switch from solving to setting the problem . Quist also regards the problem - setting not as given , but as being created and shaped so as to serve its purpose , and as being useful when this is done right—but also that this requires that it be made useful . He also seems to know that he must test his framing to ﬁnd out whether it works , by trying to solve it and thereby apply it to its purpose . ¿us , he thoroughly acts as a pragmatist : he treats the prob - lem setting not as given but as an instrument that you shape to make it serve its purpose . He also recognizes the inquiring function of Petra’s and his own actions , and subjects his framing to an inquiry , and so on . Above all , this makes him successful where Petra got stuck . 89 88 I n q u i r y where the problem is evaluated and modiﬁed if necessary , so as to adapt it to its purpose . Petra does however recognize the need for making the solution useful , and she performs the necessary actions of an inquiry : her in - itial idea was to line up the individual classroom units in a diagonal row . She developed this idea on paper , and responded to the feed - back received by forming a line of three L - units that added the miss - ing qualities . By doing this , and by moving on to further issues as each problem is addressed , a solution will come to develop . Eventually , when the individual actions can be seen as parts of a greater whole , then they cluster into patterns where the knowing is incrementally adapted to its purpose through the individual actions , even including the false starts and having to back up from dead ends . ¿is is the developing di - mension of inquiry . So whereas Petra does perform all the necessary steps of an in - quiry in order to develop the solution , she fails to do the same with the problem . She appears not to see the need for doing the work of producing a good problem - setting , and that this is her own respon - sibility . Quist recognizes precisely this need for making the problem sol - vable : problem setting is not only the act of proposing a new fram - ing , but the whole process whereby you test it and reﬁne it , so as to make it useful . Petra also proposes a problem - setting , but she fails to subject it to inquiry as Quist does : he begins to work out a solution to test the problem - setting , but also to understand the problem bet - ter , to make his framing useful . He also states that his initial framing is merely tentative : “you should begin with a discipline , even if it is arbitrary , … you can al - ways break it open later” . ¿e initial form or quality is not critical . Since the inquiry is to ensure that the framing will eventually be useful , it can even be“arbitrary”at ﬁrst , as long as it is enough to get the inquiry going . ¿e point of view of this as an inquiry thereby shifts the emphasis from the initial proposal , whose importance is played down consi - derably , to the eventual outcome ; the product of inquiry . The interplay between problem and solution But because of the use – test duality , there is a reciprocal relation be - tween developing the problem and solution , so that working on ei - simply do not work out the designer is free to modify or scrap them altogether . Design students often fail to recognize this simple fact but instead continue to pit their wits endlessly and fruitlessly against insuperable problems which are largely of their own making . One of the most important skills a designer must acquire is the ability critically to evaluate his own self - im - posed constraints… ( pp . 70 – 71 ) Lawson regards the pragmatist stance as“one of the most important skills” to learn in becoming a proﬁcient designer , one who knows how to put her instruments to work . Hence , in this view design edu - cation consists in turning realist students into pragmatist designers . Expert – novice theories and cognitive science ¿e expert – novice dichotomy has been very popular in cognitive science ( e . g . Chi , Glaser & Farr1988 , Ericsson & Smith1991 ) . An ear - ly theory of expert – novice di¡erences was that of Newell & Simon . In accordance with their theory of problem solving , they proposed that the leg up that experts have is superior general problem solving strategies , namely those embodied in the authors’ theory of problem solving ; means – ends analysis and so forth . However , it turned out that the very opposite was the case ( Holyoak 1991 ) : experts have do - main - speciﬁc skills that give them their advantages . Novices , on the other hand , when they have nothing else to go on , fall back on these most general techniques , means – ends analysis and so forth , as their last resorts in lack of other alternatives . And these techniques turned out to be the weakest of all problem solving strategies ( ibid . ) . ‡at we have seen here is a similar case . ¿e performance during laboratory problem solving ( with a ﬁxed , indeed given problem - set - ting , etc . ) reﬂects how novices work on design problems , and yields clearly inferior results for them . Expert performance under realistic conditions is quite di¡erent from what is observed during labora - tory studies . 3 . 6 The developing dimension of inquiry One might say , taking a step back , that Petra’s failure in a broader view is that she fails to see the need for making her problem - setting useful . She seems to think that once she has found a problem— the problem it seems—then that’s it . Instead , problem setting is a process 91 90 I n q u i r y ed than of the problem . ¿is goes completely counter to the con - ventional view , but it makes sense in the way that he describes it . He couldn’t make use of a programmer because it would require that problem setting could be separated from solving ; not only between di¡erent phases , but between di¡erent people , even . It would have required that stage models worked as intended . Instead he needed to develop a solution to understand what he wanted ; spreadsheets enabled him to do this , and that was why he liked them . And when he describes his work on the spreadsheets as a “prop” for himself , he is referring directly to the second , inquiring function of this work , in that it also serves as a prop for his own thinking ( about the problem ) , i . e . the inquiry , “as much as a way of getting the outcome” . ¿is last phrase is also a clear reference to the ﬁrst , ordinary purpose of his work , that of producing the spread - sheet model itself . ¿e way in which these spreadsheets are used par - allels Quist’s use of sketching to articulate his problem - setting , on point by point . Lastly , he describes the dialectical structure of this work , which seamlessly shifts back and forth between problem and solution . It is clear that understanding the problem helps in solving it , but here the reverse is also obvious : a solution is not the end of the process , but only a false ending , as new solutions repeatedly serve to make him discover new aspects of the problem . ¿us both develop in parallel , each as a“prop”for the other . In the study we found that spreadsheet users are very aware of the fact that their initial problem formulations are likely to be fuzzy , incomplete and badly structured . ¿ey like spreadsheet software because it helps them to work through these diªcul - ties . ( ibid . , p . 11 ) Similarly , in a study of architects , as reported by Lawson ( 1980 ) , East - man ( 1970 ) showed“howthedesignersexploredtheproblemthrough a series of attempts to create solutions” , and found “no meaningful division”between analysis and synthesis , but rather“a simultaneous learning about the nature of the problem and the range of possible solutions” . ¿e designers“discovered much more about the problem as they critically evaluated their own solutions” ( ibid . ) . ¿is is a well - known phenomenon in design work . In the second example , another accountant describes how she de - velopedspreadsheetsforanexecutiveinherﬁrm , andhowthespread - ther also serves to develop your understanding of the other , and vice versa . ¿erefore problem and solution are intimately connected and develop in parallel . ¿is is why actual design work does not separate these two aspects from each other : on the one hand , it has proven impossible to separate them ; but on the other hand , dealing with them together yields important advantages . ¿is can be illustrated by a study done by Nardi and others ( 1991 , 1993 ) , of an activity located in the border zone between design and small - scale problem solving , the activity of developing computer spreadsheet models . ¿e ﬁrst example is of an accountant who learn - ed to develop such models himself , instead of having the company’s programmers do it for him , as had been originally intended . ¿e main reason why he did so lies in the close coupling between prob - lem setting and problem solving . He found it impossible to describe to a programmer just what it was that he wanted . Instead , when he built the models himself , he could use the spreadsheets to develop his own understanding of what he wanted by working on the prob - lem . ¿at is , he wasn’t able to formulate a problem statement with - out working on a solution to it—while doing so in contrast helped him considerably ( 1993 , p . 13 ) : Jeremy : We had to have rather large complex spreadsheets [ for the business plans ] where you had lots of variables . And I found it easier to develop that myself than to go to somebody and say here’s what I want , here’s what I want , here’s what I want . And that’s what really got me going on [ spreadsheets ] … Interviewer : ‡y was it easier for you to do this yourself than to specify it for a programmer ? J : I think it was easier because I felt that I was learning as I went , as I was developing the spreadsheets , I was learning about all the vari - ables that I needed to think about . It was [ as ] much a prop for my - self as [ a way of ] … getting the outcome … And there were a lot of false endings , I should say , not false starts . I’d get to the end and think , “I’m done , ”and I’d look at it and I’d say , “No , I’m not , because I’ve forgotten about one thing or the other . ” First of all , the accountant states that he did not have a clear picture of what the problem was , even to himself , and much less one that he could give to the programmer . It seems paradoxical , but in the be - ginning he appeared to have a clearer picture of the solution he want - 93 92 I n q u i r y youcannotgatherinformationmeaningfullyunlessyouhaveun - derstood the problem but that you cannot understand the prob - lem without information about it… Here , the sequence of activities is stated as the basic failure , but as I have shown in chapter1 , it is not primarily the imposed order among the activities that is the culprit , as has been previously thought , but rather the separation between them , and from which also the order - ing follows . ¿is also includes Rittel’s second point , the impossibili - ty of keeping problem and solution apart , either logically or as sepa - rate processes . As Swartoutand Balzer state , this separation is a fundamental ele - ment of the rational models of action ( as seen in the Rosetta stone , ﬁgure 1 . 15 , speciﬁcation and implementation correspond to analysis and synthesis ) : For several years we and others have been carefully pointing out how important it is to separate speciﬁcation from implementa - tion . In this view , one ﬁrst completely speciﬁes a system in a for - mal language at a high level of abstraction in an implementa - tion - free manner . ¿en , as a separate phase , the implementation issues are considered and a program realizing the speciﬁcation is produced . … all current software methodologies have adopted a com - mon model that separates speciﬁcation from implementation . … Unfortunately , this model is overly naive , and does not match reality . Speciﬁcation and implementation are , in fact , intimately intertwined … ( 1982 , p . 438 , my italics ) Again , theclashbetweentheidealviewof howthingsoughttobeand how theyactuallyare . Also Guindon has documented a studyof soft - ware engineers in a series of papers ( 1987 , 1988 , 1989 , 1990 a , b , 1992 ) , showing in detail that the design process does not follow the pattern of “structured design methods”such as the waterfall model , but that it instead follows an “opportunistic” pattern that deviates from the norm . But she also showed that this was not a “failure” to use these methods , butinsteadthatthereisgoodreasonnottodoso ( esp . 1990a , also cf . Hayes - Roth & Hayes - Roth 1979 ) . 4 phases vs . 4 aspects of inquiry ¿e full schema of the rational models of action contain three major phases besides analysis : understanding the problem , synthesis / action , and evaluation . ¿e theory of inquiry also contains three basic as - sheets worked as props for her boss . Her story seems to be taken right out of a“Dilbert”cartoon : Oh , this [ spreadsheet ] is what I gave to the CFO at ﬁrst just com - paring Q2 [ Quarter 2 ] year - to - date budget to Q2 year - to - date actuals . And he said , “Well , for the board meeting I want [ some other things ] . ” Every time you do this he wants it di¡erently . So I can’t anticipate it . I just give him what I think [ he wants ] and then he says , “Ah , no , well , I want to have projected Q3 and pro - jected Q4 , and then total projected , and then the whole year’s plan on there . ” ( Nardi & Zarmer 1993 , p . 14 ) By merely seeing the model , the chief ﬁnancial oªcer can better de - scribe what he wants . Again , the early versions mainly serve to in - quire into what he wants ; hard work on these is probably wasted ( “Every timeyoudo this he wants it di¡erently” ) . ¿eyshould mere - ly set in motion the process which will ensure the ﬁnal quality . Pro - gress is incremental , with new problems and solutions alternating as the successive frames in a comic strip , the untiring accountant walk - ing to the chief’s oªce and back again . It is also evident that the task of problem setting spans the whole process , the CFO not knowing what he wants till it is on his desk . ¿is example also demonstrates what the accountant in the previous example gained , by doing both parts of the work himself . 3 . 7 No pure analysis We can now return to the question of why design methods don’t work . ¿e answer supplied by the theory of inquiry is that there can be no pure analysis : the duty that has been assigned to the analysis phase cannot be performed by analysis alone ; it needs to be perform - ed together with the other activities of the design process : under - standing the problem , working on solutions , and evaluating your work . Compare this with the following answer to the question of what was learned from the failure of design methods ( Rittel 1972 ) : …that the design process is not considered to be a sequence of ac - tivities that are pretty well deﬁned and that are carried through one after the other like “understand the problem , collect infor - mation , analyze information , synthesize , decide” , and so on ; and another being the insight that you cannot understand the prob - lem without having a concept of the solution in mind ; and that 95 94 I n q u i r y pects : the two elements of the use – test pair , and the dimension of developing knowing . Note the close parallels between the elements of each model : between use and action , test and evaluation , and be - tween developing knowing and understanding the problem . ¿etwointhelastpairbothaddresstheneedfor“learning” , rough - ly , what you need to know to solve the problem—although they take entirely di¡erent approaches to how this is done . ¿e other two pairs are also parallel in their function , along with analysis / thinking . ( In case there is any doubt , e . g . problem solving theory explicitly states that problem solving is performed by this part alone , see Newell & Simon 1972 , Simon 1981 . ) ‡ile design methods place them after each other and in separate phases , according to the theory of inquiry they are inseparable . ¿ey are not even distinct parts but only di¡er - ent points of view that can be taken ; potentially even of the same , single action . Hence , the claim that there can be no pure analysis means that if theanalysisisseparatedfrom either of thethreeotherfunctions , itcan - not do the work assigned to it ; the theory of inquiry also explains why this is impossible , for each of the three “auxiliary” functions . ¿e main point with the discussion of problem setting was that the problem cannot be determined or ﬁxated before the process of solving it begins , but instead that understanding and deﬁning the problem amounts to a major part of the whole problem solving task . And Nardi’s examples , among others , showed that separating the two is undoable . ¿e result of this is that setting and solving proceed in parallel , intimately intertwined and throughout the whole process , so that problem statement and solution are completed at the same time . ¿e simultaneous use and testing of your developing knowing , which is essential to working on problem and solution , complete the picture by showing how also action / synthesis and evaluation are in - separable from the other two components . Hence all the four ele - ments of inquiry are tied together in a very fundamental manner . ¿is is also corroborated by Parnas , who stated that both speciﬁca - tion and modular decomposition ( i . e . analysis ) rely on an imple - mentation process having already been done ( Parnas 1985 , quoted in Budde et al . 1992 , my italics ) : There is , however , no method available for ensuring that a spe - ciﬁcation is complete and correct . Only if a similar system has al - ready been built can a further system be consistently speciﬁed in advance with any amount of certainty . …¿e decomposition of the overall system into modules is a simple matter in cases where the design decisions arising during implementation of these modules are known . ¿is can only be the case , though , if a similar implementation process has already been successfully carried out . ¿at is , the prescribed procedures only work if you already have the answer , because you have already done the work once before . Iteration Someone might in defense of phase models refer to iteration as a well documented phenomenon ( e . g . Carroll , ¿omas & Malhotra 1979 , Malhotra et al . 1980 , ¿omas & Carroll 1979 ) . Adding iteration to a model means that you allow for the included phases to be repeated ; this is represented by adding backward arrows to a box diagram ( cf . ﬁgure 3 . 2 , and also ﬁgure 1 . 16 ) . However , on closer consideration , this supports the position I advocate . ¿e reason is that iteration is a prototypical ad hoc extension , that is , an ill - considered added feature that handles a certain condition , but which in doing so goes against the original idea , and is therefore incompatible with it—thereby , in reality it constitutes no solution at all . By allowing for iteration , a stage model comes to saying that you 97 96 I n q u i r y requirementsspeciﬁcation architecturaldesign detailed design coding and unit testing integration and testing operation and maintenance Figure 3 . 2 The waterfall model with iteration added . can do anything , in any order , as many or as few times as you like . By allowing for everything , it no longer says anything about their or - der . But if you do that , you have given up what was the purpose of these models in the ﬁrst place : to specify what things to do , when to do them , and in what order , so as to guide the designer . ¿e only sub - stance that remains is a list of the activities that are included . And if a design method is such a list only , then you arrive at what I have stated—that design consists of several component functions that cannot be held apart , and that display no general ordering prin - ciple among them . Hence , the idea of iteration goes to say that the original idea of separated and ordered activities does not hold . In se - vere cases , an ad hoc extension can even divest the basic model of its original purpose , and this is what iteration does . The cognitive roles of the 3“auxiliary”activities As a result , the roles assigned to the three “auxiliary” activities— evaluation , action / synthesis , and understanding—di¡er sharply be - tween the stage models and inquiry theory . In the stage models , these are all downgraded to mechanical , empty , and meaningless ac - tivities , with the result that all the important work is pushed back inside the analysis . ¿e most obvious example is the ﬁnal evaluation stage , which can make no contribution at all to the design , as it is performed only when the design has already been completed . At most , evaluation is held valuable for future designs , which may draw on the experiences gained from the evaluation . Just such a role is also given to evaluation in problem solving by Polya ( 1945 ) . In inquiry theory , in contrast , evaluation has a quite crucial role , leveraging each successive attempt by enabling it to draw on the ex - perience from previous trials ; experience which evaluation generat - es by drawing out consequences and lessons learned from these at - tempts . It can have this role , as it is performed concurrently with the other functions . ¿e role is directly reﬂected in the notion of forma - tive evaluation , i . e . of the kind that serves the formative stages of de - sign ; such practice has increasingly been lifted forward as an invalu - able but undervalued design technique ( e . g . Carroll 1997 , Hix & Hartson 1993 ) . Similarly , action / synthesis is an entirely mechanical phase which can have no secondary , inquiring function , since it via the plan is completelypredetermined bythe analysis / planning phase . And since it is done only after the analysis has been completed , it cannot have any inquiring function . And ﬁnally , understanding the problem is reduced to reading a given problem statement ; compare with the previous statements of this as the hardest , most important and most diªcult work of real design . ¿is is also why phase models require that all information be given ; pure perception or “input” is not capable of generating all this required information by itself ; that takes inquiry —however , if itwere given , reading alone might suªce . Compare with the Parnas quote ( p . ) stating that a complete speciﬁcation is impossible to produce with less than having previously made a full implementation . The need for intramental magic Having trivialized these three other functions , the separated models push back all the important work into the analysis part ; the intra - mental “black box” thereby seems to require magical powers when the whole task of design is assigned to it alone ; hence , the air of mys - tery surrounding the concept of “creativity” . In the inquiry model , the other three functions can make important contributions , and the burden on the mental part , and the need for magic , diminish ac - cordingly . It seems far less puzzling that an architect can come up with an elegant , creative solution by diligently working at his draw - ing board , if she were held to do this just by having a creative idea , or sitting down to“think out”the same thing . ¿ere is a saying that genius is 1 % inspiration and 99 % transpira - tion . If this is compared to the work of inquiry , the ninety - nine per - cent of non - intramental transpiration seem much less a waste of time on false leads , than an essential partof the work involved ; the remain - ing percent then appears less wizardly . In fact , ¿omas Alva Edison , who is accredited with this saying , apparently made hundreds of discarded “solution attempts” before building the one that would become the light bulb . We all know that we use less than ten percent of our brains’ capacity ; still , to claim that the non - mental parts stand for 99 % of our cognitive capacity would be to go just slightly too far . Cognition is inquiry , not intramental thinking In summary , the roles of the three other components of inquiry are the main reason why the separated models are so weak ; they fail be - cause the unit doing the cognition has been deprived of the impor - tant services to cognition that these other functions provide . Without 98 99 98 I n q u i r y these contributions , an isolated , intramental , “pure”analysis is made powerless . Hence , not merely analysis produces the proof / plan / solution by itself , as the rational action models state , but all the four components of inquiry together are required for doing this ; whether it concerns geometrical proofs , design , or other problem solving . And this is my general point about cognition , too : it does not consist of “pure thinking” , but of inquiry , including all the four aspects I have enu - merated here . And now , having so far devoted an unproportionate amount of attention to the mental aspect , the rest of the book will be devoted to the cognitive roles of the other , shall we say , 98 % ? 100 4 . The cognitive roles of action and world ¿inking is one of the most notoriously intractable parts of psy - chology since the thought process is not easily observed . … ¿e designer , however , has never resembled Rodin’s “¿inker” who sits in solitary meditation , but has in contrast always external - ized his thoughts , not only as an end - product in the form of a design , but as an integral part of the process itself in the form of drawings and sketches . ( Lawson 1980 , p . 96 ) 4 . 1 Introduction ¿e topic of this book can be formulated as a question : ‡y do de - signers work the way they do , when the traditional theories of cog - nition and design say that designers should be doing something quite di¡erent ? ¿is chapter and the next bring the question down to the level of actual action , looking at what happens moment by moment , when the designer is sitting there working on her design , with pencil , clay , balsa wood , or whatever , in hand . On this level , the question becomes : ‡ydo designers work out their designs physical - ly , in the world , when the cognitive theories we have say that design shouldbedoneinthehead ? ¿estartingpointhereisthatconvention - al wisdom in cognitive science holds mental simulation , planning , etc . to bevastly superior tophysically working on a problem , because it allows you to make predictions , test alternatives , and so forth . So why do designers not do what cognitive scientists say they should ? ¿e answer I present in this chapter says that cognition is not an activity going on inside the mind , but an interactive process between mind and world . I present a theory that I tentatively call interactive cognition which is an e¡ort to explain why designers do what they do , on this “action” level . My main point is to show that an interactive cognitionhasimportantadvantagesoverfollowingintramentalprin - ciples , being both simpler and more e¡ective at the same time . Sketching A prototypical design activity to explain in this way is sketching : It takes place in a simple setting and with only very simple tools ; with the designer sitting at her desk with paper and pencil . As it turns out , 101 Q : You should begin with a discipline , even if it is arbitrary , be - cause the site is so screwy—you can always break it open later . After having done this , Quist starts to develop a solution to the prob - lem he has set . He does so by starting to sketch over Petra’s drawings to work out the consequences of his framing , at the same time de - scribing to Petra what he is doing : Q : Now in this direction , that being the gully and that the hill , that could then be the bridge , which might generate an upper level which could drop down two ways . We get a total di¡erential potential here from one end of classroom to far end of the other . ¿ere is 15 feet max , right ? —so we could have as much as5 - foot intervals , which for a kid is maximum height , right ? ¿e sec - tion through here could be one of nooks in here and the di¡erentiation between the unit and this would be at two levels . Now you would give preference to that as a precinct which opens out into here and into here and then , of course , we’d have a wall—on the inside there could be a wall or steps to relate in downward . Well , that either happens here or here , and you’ll have to investigate which way it should or can go . If it happens this way , the gallery is northwards—but I think the gallery might be a kind of garden—a sort of soft back area to these . ¿e kindergarten might go over here—which might indicate that the administration over here—just sort of like what you have here—then this works slightly with the contours—then you might carry the gallery level through and look down into here—which is nice . Let the land generate some sub - ideas here , which could be very nice . Maybe the cafeteria needn’t be such a formal function— maybe it could come into here to get summer sun here and winter here . ( Also cf . the ﬁgures in chapter 3 ; unfortunately only redrawn ver - sions of the ﬁgures are provided with Schön’s texts . ) ‡en Quist 103 R o l e s there is little need for more sophisticated technology , because there is little emphasis on the resulting sketch as such—sketching should not be mistaken for the process that produces the ﬁnal drawings , the detailed and carefully produced drawings that will be the ﬁnal result of the designer’s work . ¿e aesthetic impression of sketches is there - fore often far from the sophistication and elegance of the drawings we usually associate with design ; in this respect the one on the title page ( p . ii ) is unrepresentatively beautiful ( also see ﬁgures 6 . 1 – 6 . 3 , & Black 1990 ) . Robbins 1994 contains drawings of the latter kind . Instead , sketching is the process by which the designer works on her problem , and as such it serves several purposes . She sketches to understand her design problem and what it requires of her , to ex - plore its particular circumstances and problems that must be tackled , to experiment with di¡erent approaches to a solution , and to even - tually work out her ﬁnal design , among other purposes . ¿erefore , the emphasis is on the process of sketching in itself rather than on the product , and for the process paper and pencil are highly suitable , and in their own respect quite sophisticated tools . Beside sketching , there is a whole ecology of design techniques ; this topic is covered in chapter 6 . Still , sketching with pen and paper is widely regarded as a characteristic design activity , often even as the very essence of what design is about ( e . g . Schön 1983 , 1987 ) . This is partly because it is so ubiquitous and typical of design in its various forms ; architecture , industrial and graphic design , and so on , and partly since it is representative also of the other techniques : Archi - tects use models of building sites and buildings , as for example Petra had done in Schön’s protocol which I will discuss again below . Pro - totypes of the developing product are ubiquitous among industrial designers . ¿e various techniques exist because their di¡erences make them variously suitable for di¡erent types of task : ‡ile paper and pen are useful for designing ﬂoor plans , other media express tac - tile and three - dimensional qualities better , for example . Quist’s demonstration of sketching To illustrate what designers’ sketching is like , I will return to the episode with Quist and Petra from chapter 3 ( Schön 1983 ) , where I analyzed the inquiring structure of Quist’s actions . Petra had set her problem as trying to ﬁt the school building into the slope of the hill , but hadn’t been able to solve it . Quist instead reframed the problem as imposing a geometry of his own , to bring “discipline” to the site : 102 precinct s u m m e r w i n t e r gallery whole inquiry , which serves the function that we usually call reason - ing . ¿is is the means by which Quist develops a solution , and a func - tion that we generally regard as cognitive . ¿is function does not be - come less cognitive by involving other elements than pure thought . ‡en he comments that his solution “works slightly with the contours” , he is referring back to his original problem - setting . In Schön’s words , he has been conducting a drawing experiment , and this comment shows that he is at least partly satisﬁed with the out - come of his experiment . Quist also instructs Petra to use drawing experiments in the same manner . He tells her to “investigate which way it should or can go” . He says that she “might carry the gallery level through” , implying that she will have to try it to ﬁnd out . The aspects to make sense of In summary , there are a number of points about sketching that we need to make sense of . One main question is why designers work in this way ; my answer is that it provides deﬁnitive advantages over the intramental style . ¿is translates into some more speciﬁc questions : · ‡at does sketching do that you can’t do intramentally ? · ‡at are the advantages ; how can there be advantages ? · How do activitiesand materials contribute to cognition ? · How can they contribute ; how can they have a cognitive function ? ‡at does it mean that they contribute ? A second problem concerns the structure of sketching activity , and why it looks like it does : · How can sketching have the highly integrated role that it seems to have in the cognitive process of developing a solution ? · How can you explain that there seems to be one single pro - cess , sketching , going on ; not two , sketching and thinking ? · ‡at are the functions of the stepwise dialectical and moving – seeing – moving structures ? · ‡at are the functions of drawing experiments and “investigations” ? 105 R o l e s here arranges the L - units on a line down along the slope , he deter - mines the locations of these units in a manner that is typical of sket - ching . According to an intramental account , he would conceive their placement ﬁrst , and then afterward make a sketch to document his decision . But the protocol does not bear this out . Instead of fol - lowing such a distinct and simple pattern—ﬁrst thinking and then drawing—Quist’s actions make up a more intricate structure . Schön ( ibid . ) called this pattern moving – seeing – moving . From Quist’s descriptions of what he draws , we can see that his solution develops as he is drawing . ‡en he starts to draw , he makes a ﬁrst “move” , im - posing the geometry of the three “L” : s on the slope . In this case , the move originates in his framing . ¿is move then allows him to “see” or visually appreciate the consequences of his move on paper , and henceof hisreframing . ¿enthisappreciationinformsthenextmove , and so on . In this way he continues to work out his ideas by sketch - ing , step by step , where each step suggests what the next step might be . ¿e cycles of seeing and moving repeat , they are incremental by nature—hence the term moving – seeing – moving . ¿e way in which Quist verbally connects his descriptions of what he is doing also shows that his own process of drawing makes him think and have new ideas : Expressions like that could then be… , which might generate… , and which might indicate that… attest to his step - wise reasoning - by - drawing . He also says ¿ere is15 feet max , right ? — so we could… , and so on . ¿ese connecting phrases indicate that he is sketching to work out a solution , not merely to record his progress . ‡at he draws is then clearly not just the “output” of something he has already conceived in his mind ; his words are not an after - the - fact report of something he has already thought out . ¿e increments instead indicate that his reasoning takes place as he is drawing . He is using the drawing and the seeing as the basis for his next move , using visual feedback instead of trying to visualize each step in his mind’s eye , and he uses physical drawing of concrete solutions instead of abstract reasoning about requirements and constraints . ¿e protocol thereby gives no grounds for making a clear distinc - tion between thinking and drawing . ¿e intricate pattern of Quist’s activity gives little justiﬁcation for treating them as separate activi - ties , but rather as two aspects of one single activity . ¿inking and sketching go on in parallel and mutually enable one another to move forward . Drawing enables thinking to proceed and vice versa . It is the entire physical activity of sketching , not merely thinking but the 104 a model already exists ; it then falls on myself to provide a correspon - ding model of interaction / conversation . In an argument similar to the present one , Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs ( 1986 ) pointed out that the writing - based model doesn’t apply to ordinary spoken language , since it works as if the recipient weren’t even there . ¿us , it assumes that also co - present conversation works as if it were writing , where no reader is available . ¿e authors there - fore called this the “literary model” of language production . ¿e same thing can be said about intramental theories of cogni - tion : ¿ey make the same assumptions about cognition : it works as though the world weren’t there , even when it is : For the crucial activities , at least of human problem solving of any complexity , … take place centrally . ¿is is true even when the desired object and the required activity are physical . ( Newell & Simon 1972 , p . 72 , my italics ) Here I will be making an argument similar to that of Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs : Cognition does not work according to the “liter - ary”model if it doesn’t have to , just as conversation does not . For the sake of comparison , consider what a person has to do to communicate : Her problem is to make sure that her message will make sense to the addressee . ¿e problem for a writer is that her eventual addressee will be at a remote time and place when she reads the message . Because the writer is separated from her addressee in this manner , she can neither ﬁnd out , nor ensure whether the text will indeed be understood when it is read . Often , the writer does not even know who the eventual reader will be . ¿erefore she must try to make a prediction of who her au - dience will be , and adapt her message to that prediction instead . Moreover , even if she does know who her eventual reader is , she still cannot predict very accurately what will make sense to her and what will not . So the writer can neither ﬁnd out nor know for sure that her text will have its desired e¡ect . For a speaker the situation is entirely di¡erent , because the listener is present with her right then and there , as she is producing her mes - sage . ¿ereby she can communicate the same message in a complete - ly di¡erent manner . First of all , the speaker can get feedback direct - ly from her addressee . ¿ereby she can ﬁnd out whether what she says makes sense or not . ¿us , she can also know for sure that her mes - 107 R o l e s As it happens , these features of the working process contain the seeds for answering the above questions . 4 . 2 Conversation vs . writing Before going into the theory in full detail , I want to present a prelim - inary idea of what interactive cognition is , and how it can have im - portantadvantagesoverintramentalcognition . Iwilldosobymaking an analogy with twoways inwhich people use language : spoken con - versation , and written communication via an intermediating text . In this analogy , interactive cognition corresponds to ordinary , everydayconversation , where both speaker and recipient are co - pre - sent when the communication takes place—this corresponds to an interactive cognition ( speaker ) having access to the world ( “recipi - ent” ) . ¿eintramentalmodelcorrespondstowriting . ¿ere , thewrit - er ( intramental cognition ) typically produces her message without having the eventual reader ( world ) co - present with her at the time of writing . ( And symmetrically , the person writing is not available to the reader when she eventually gets the message . ) ¿is reﬂects that in the intramental model , cognition operates as if it were com - pletely isolated and remote from the world and thus its object of concern , even in those cases when it is readily available and close at hand , physically speaking . ¿ere are two reasons why I use this analogy here , and will keep returning to it in what follows : ¿e ﬁrst is that ordinary language use is a domain that everyone can relate to , regardless of whether they are familiar with linguistics or not . ¿e second is that conversa - tion is practically the only domain where interaction has been stud - ied , so that there is some scientiﬁc work that I can draw upon . How - ever , as this is merely an analogy , I have taken care to avoid the aspects of conversation that have no correspondence in interactive cognition , e . g . the other party having a cognitive capacity indepen - dent of the speaker , and her ability to take an active role in the inter - action . As it happens , the traditional model of speech production is based on the model rational action from chapter 1 , which is intramental in itself . ¿us , speech in this view consists in output , controlled by a plan , which is derived from an intention . Hence , no feedback or in - ﬂuence from the recipient goes into speech production . ¿is shows the connection between writing and intramental cognition , where 106 she doesn’t stop at passively listening to whatever feedback the list - ener will give her ; there is also a second purpose with her speech . Beside the obvious function of saying what she wants to say , she can also use her speech to actively inquire into her listener’s understanding . She can actively make the listener give her the feedback she wants . ¿is way she can determine much more precisely and directly whether her message works the way she wants it to , getting precise - ly the information she needs , instead of being content with what - ever response the listener gives her . Asking questions is the most ob - vious way of doing this , but as we will see there are other ways that are much more sophisticated . In written communication , the di¡erent activities are clearly grouped into separate phases , happening at di¡erent points in time : ﬁrst writing , then reading . Conversation however does not consist of such phases , where ﬁrst the speaker’s questions explore the ad - dressee’s background knowledge , then followed ﬁrst by the listener’s answers , and then the speaker giving the necessary background in - formation that the addressee lacks , before ﬁnally delivering the mes - sage itself . Conversation is not divided into such large separate chunks , with di¡erent roles for the participants in each of them , for instance with regard to who speaks and who listens . ¿e power of everyday , informal conversation lies precisely in that it isn’t restric - ted by the separation that makes writing problematic . ¿e ability to alternate back and forth is what makes the compensatory measures of writing literally redundant in conversation . And the more often the speaker gets feedback , the less must she be concerned with get - ting her speech right the ﬁrst time , since she will know right away if there is a problem . And if the listener can interrupt at any time , then less time will be wasted on talk that doesn’t make sense to her . ¿erefore , in conversation the participants’ roles are much more democratically assigned than in written communication , with fre - quent chances for each party to take the ﬂoor throughout the con - versation , and with shifts between speakers occurring frequently ( Sacks , Scheglo¡ & Je¡erson 1974 ) . In conversation , parties tend to speak in small , brief contributions , and the ﬂoor alternates between speakers frequently in an intricate yet smoothly coordinated web of contributions from several participants ( ibid . ) . Finally , there is no need for a speaker to anticipate and try to pre - vent any trouble that an addressee might have , since she can give im - mediate feedback if it happens , and the speaker can then make the 109 R o l e s sage works as it should , and so she doesn’t need to make any predic - tions as the writer does . On the one hand , the conditions for written communication here are analogous to the basic structure of intramental cognition : In - stead of operating directly on the world , it uses a representation as a stand - in . ¿e representation is a substitute like the writer’s estimate of her reader , and for the same reason it adds a layer of uncertainty . On the other hand , just like a speaker , an interactive cognition in - stead uses feedback from the source by interacting directly with the world . ¿ereby it attains higher certainty with less work . Intramental cognition can of course use such direct feedback , too ; that is , without having to make predictions and estimates . But to do so requires the same capabilities as interactive cognition uses , in addition to the representational system—which then just adds ex - tra e¡ort without any gain . It becomes a superﬂuous intermediate step , standing between individual and world . Hence it is a literary model of cognition : It treats the environment as if it were not di - rectly available even when it is , just as the literary model of speech works as if the listener were not there even when she is . I would like to stress that the relevant distinction is not between written and spoken language per se , but whether or not the speak - er / writer has the recipient directly available to her . ¿ere are situa - tions where speakers are remote from their addressees , and others where writers do have their audience with them . Still , the prototyp - ical circumstances for speaking and writing capture the relevant dis - tinction in an intuitive fashion . In addition to making predictions , a writer must deal with her uncertainty by making compensations in the message . Typically , this compensation amounts to making background information and context explicit in the written text . ¿is will make her text longer , typically a great deal longer than it strictly would have to be . ¿is may be understandable if we consider that the writer cannot after the fact make up for misunderstandings or problems that occur dur - ing reading . Such problems will have to be averted in advance , in the text itself , but still without guarantees of success . In the literary model of cognition , these compensations corre - spond to the elaborate plans and action sequences that an intramen - tal cognition must prepare , since it has to provide for all eventuali - ties that may occur—and then some more , to be on the safe side . Because a speaker has her listener available right in front of her , 108 teractive’ actions will not have to be carefully crafted from the be - ginning , since they can swiftly adapt to feedback . Soinsummary , theeªciencyof conversationtranslatesintoprom - ising prospects for a similarly organized , interactive cognition . It would enable an individual to act with more precision and greater success , while at the same time using considerably less e¡ort , and do - ing so in fewer words . Without having seen that this is possible , and does happen in the case of conversation vs . writing , it would seem impossible for interactive cognition to improve quality and decrease e¡ort at the same time compared to the traditional , intramental , mode of operation . ¿e advantages of interaction in the properties of conversation translate into the corresponding cognitive organization that I will call interactive cognition . In order to work out the details of this scheme , we ﬁrst need to look at the concept of interaction as such . 4 . 3 Preliminaries : The meaning of ‘interactive’ According to a dictionary , interaction means “mutual or reciprocal action or inﬂuence” . Interactive cognition is meant to indicate that mind , action , and world mutually determine an individual’s doings , in interaction . Cognition , of course , e¡ects changes upon the world . In conventional cognitive theory , it is the mind alone that deter - mines what an individual does , in a simple causal relation . In inter - active cognition , the cognizing individual on the one hand , and the world on the other , reciprocally inﬂuence each other . In other words , mind and world interactively determine each other , and in particu - lar they interactively determine cognitive performance . ¿e essence of interaction is that both ( or all ) participants give and take ; speak and listen ; act and perceive . ¿is mutual inﬂuence is what breaks up simple causal schemes . A second point is that the traf - ﬁc back and forth comes in a frequent exchange of small and con - centrated , e¡ective pieces , rather than as a few monolithic chunks . It corresponds in part to the point about the use of less code and less background information in conversation . ‡en feedback allows speakers to reduce redundancy , it follows naturally that more , smal - ler exchanges lead to less ‘dead weight’ . To put it di¡erently , the fre - quent exchanges make the interacting parts more closely adapted to each other . Another important point is that both parties make crucial contrib - utions to the conversation , and in some sense on an equal level , so 111 R o l e s necessary adjustments accordingly . Instead of starting by providing a great amount of background , a speaker can therefore be radically concise and to the point , backing up and becoming elaborate only if and when she has to , and even then no more than necessary . For ex - ample , in the following passage from a casual dinner conversation , a very terse question only requires a small elaboration to be under - stood properly ( Tannen 1984 ) : A : Do you read ? ( 1 . 0 ) B : Do I read ? ( 0 . 5 ) A : Do you read books ? ¿e result of the interactive relation between participants in conver - sation is that communication becomes much more eªcient . ¿ere is no need for supplanting each phrase with an introductory lecture , since it is straightforward and simple to determine what needs to be said . A speaker can ﬁnd out whether she is making herself under - stood , and also make sure and be certain that she does , neither of which a writer can . And all of this with fewer words than a writer would need . For these reasons , conversation can achieve a higher quality than can writing , all the while doing less work , using fewer words , and in shorter time . ¿e comparison I have presented here implies that having cogni - tion connect directly with the world , without intermediary repre - sentations of it , leads to greater certainty . In addition to that , it also suggests that action can have a second purpose beside the usual one of producing the desired result , just like talk in conversation : Ma - nipulating the environment will give cognition richer and more rel - evant feedback . ¿is makes a successful outcome not only more like - ly , but also easier to reach . Further , the separation of intramental cognition from input / per - ception and output / actionwould in interactivecognitionbe replaced by ﬁne - grained , intertwined interaction . In this way , the activitycan evolve in close coordination with the world , obviating redundancy and making it lean and adapted to the speciﬁc circumstances . Sepa - rated , “literary” cognition , not being able to get any feedback , must instead produce the elaborate , redundant , better - safe - than - sorry action schemes that are necessary to provide for all eventualities . ‘In - 110 what is going on . In realistic cases , cognition , action , and the world interact with each other in intricate ways that cannot be made to ﬁt into conventional explanations , because they sacriﬁce too much de - tail in achieving their simplicity , leaving out too many aspects of what they are supposed to explain . As a consequence , intramental cognition is a simple theory that can explain simple things , but to explain realistic cognitive phe - nomena we need a theory where the world itself is included in the ex - planation . One reason why intramental theory can be simpler is that it needs to make no references to the world . ¿ereby , for example , both action and perception can be left out of its explanations of cog - nitive phenomena . In - the - world explanations , on the other hand , are not restricted to entities in the mind only . ¿e world is not replaced by a problem space including onlycarefullychosen aspects of theworld , and where these selected aspects have also been carefully coded so that a simple search algorithm will reach the right solution . Instead , the interactive explanation includes such aspects of the world as artifacts and their properties . ¿ereby it can explain more complex phenomena , but it also requires the theory to explain how the head and the world can work together . It is a theory of how the mind interacts with the world and the things therein , and how indiv - idual and world jointly determine cognitive activity . Interaction is the best way of using the resources of both mind and world to their fullest , just as conversation can draw upon the re - sources of both speaker and listener , unlike writing . ¿e di¡erence is that the writer cannot involve the reader , while the ‘literary’ mod - el of cognition has chosen to leave out the world , as it has been held as an advantage to keep the world separate from cognition : Perception and motor behavior are assumed to take place in ad - ditional processing systems o¡ stage . Input arrives in working [ memory ] , which thus acts as a bu¡er between the unpredictable stream of environmental events and the cognitive system . ( Newell , Rosenbloom & Laird 1989 , p . 117 , my italics ) 113 R o l e s that neither party is above or in control of the other . For example , this would be the case in conversation if there were a clear and rigid question – answer structure , where the speaker controls the direction of discourse , and the listener’s contributions were subordinate to and regulated by the speaker’s actions . But there is also a derived , second sense of interaction , the one used for example when experimental psychologists speak of “inter - action e¡ects” . With this , they mean that they have not been able to isolate a single , simple cause for a certain e¡ect , but multiple ones that also inﬂuence or interact with each other , so that it is impossible to establish a simple causal relation . In this case , interaction means approximately “a complex rela - tion” . ¿is is the extended sense of interactive cognition , saying that the relation between cognition , action , and the world is not as sim - ple as traditional theories have it . ¿is relation cannot be reduced into a simple causal one , from cognition to action to the world . A linear relation is deﬁnitely too simplistic , but also a circular model is too restrictive . In interaction , transitions may come from anywhere and go anywhere , at any point . ‡at really happens is determined by the contents and circumstances of each case , not by some general organizational scheme . ¿is complex relation also means that cognition and action can - not be reduced to two distinct phenomena . In my use , action retains more of its everyday sense , like “activity” , or doing something , ra - ther than mechanical motor behavior . So at the core of interactive cognition is a process where cogni - tion and action , or knowing and doing , are closely tied together , so as to realize the tight interaction between mind and world . ¿e re - sulting process is so tightly integrated that it cannot be broken down into well - deﬁned components with simple relations between them . Terms like “doing” and “knowing” can only emphasize and con - trast particular aspects of this integrated whole , they do not corre - spond to distinct sub - elements . Including action and world in cognitive explanations Traditional cognitive theory is simple and therefore can explain sim - ple things like experimental tasks and well - deﬁned problems , but when more complicated cognitive domains are considered , typically more realistic tasks such as design , then a more complex relation be - tween cognition and action ( and so forth ) is required for explaining 112 5 . Interactive cognition ¿e theory to be presented in this chapter consists of four steps . ¿ey concern the advantages of interactive cognition over intramental theory . Each step can be seen as a layer which is made possible by the layers before it , capitalizing on them to successively add further ad - vantages of the interactive mode : · Firstly , the advantages of dealing directly with the world in - stead of a surrogate for it , as the conventional theories do . · Secondly , the advantages added byaction and interaction with the world . · ¿irdly , aﬁne - grainedstructureof interactionthatmaximizes the beneﬁts of involving world and action . · Fourthly , a set of “shortcuts”made possible bydrawing on the speciﬁc conditions of a situation rather than the general infor - mation a surrogate can only provide . Step 1 : The rediscovery of the world ¿e ﬁrst step is to give back to cognition the access to the external world that cognitive science revoked very early . Because it has since then been claimed that blocking out the world was done with good reason , I will also have to motivate why such access is useful . I will therefore argue why and how the world itself can be more useful to cognition than a copy of it . I apologize in advance that the points I will be making here will appear self - evident to many readers . None - theless , they have to be stated since they go counter to the conven - tional positions of cognitive science . ¿e programmaticway in which traditional theory has not “forgotten” , or “neglected” , but explicitly kept the world out of cognitive theories , is reﬂected in the quotation in chapter 4 about the need to place a bu¡er around cognition to protect it from the “unpredictable environment” . ¿e existence of mental representations is often motivated by their ability to work as substitutes or stand - ins , as mental models and in mental simulations . Mental models are attributed with capacities si - milar to computer simulations , enabling them to imitate a physical system or process by embodying laws , equations and principles that 115 117 I n t e r a c t i v e describe the workings of that system ( Gentner & Stevens 1983 , John - son - Laird 1983 ) : If the organism carries a “small - scale model” of external reality and of its own possible actions within its head , it is able to try out various alternatives , conclude which is the best of them , re - act to future situations before they arise , utilize the knowledge of past events in dealing with the present and future , and in eve - ry way to react in a much fuller , safer , and more competent manner to the emergencies which face it . ( Craik 1943 ) ¿is has been the original oªcial motivation for having cognition operate on a mental representation of the world , instead of directly on the world itself . In particular , this is held to enable cognition to replicate and simulate events in the environment that go beyond the here and now of its immediate surroundings . Still , the usefulness , and use , of mental models has not been re - stricted to events that are not directly available to the individual . ¿e classical cognitive science approach tovisual perception , to men - tion but one example , has always had the objective of producing a viewer - independent , complete three - dimensional model of the vi - sible environment ( Johnson - Laird 1989 , Marr 1982 ) . ¿e reason for this is straightforward : Intramental theories require mental represen - tations to work ; their using them is not a matter of preference . For example , problem solving requires that the environment be enco - ded in a problem space , to be able to deal with it at all . So we have two approaches to keeping cognition informed about andinsynchwiththeworldaroundit : byrunninganintramentalsim - ulation that shadows the events in the environment , as the traditio - nal viewdoes for one reason or another , and bychecking theworld in itself on a regular basis , not using any intermediate at all , which is what the interactive view proposes . ‡at is the di¡erence between the two ? If I claim that checking with the original is simpler and bet - ter , intuition is inclined to agree . But since the opposite has been claimed sovigorously , the di¡erence must be examined more closely . Consider , forthesakeof comparison , twodi¡erentmethodsinship navigation for determining the position of one’s own ship , where this is done by simulation and measurement , respectively . One is known as dead reckoning . It is based on inferring the position of the ship by taking a known position and adding to it the ship’s move - ment from that point . In principle this is an easy and computational - 116 ly elegant way of determining position , based on simple mathema - tics . ¿e movement may be computed from the speed and course of the ship and the elapsed time . In reality , however , a ship is a¡ected by external factors that make dead reckoning very diªcult : wind , sea current , and so forth . ¿ese could be measured and taken into account , of course , but in practice it cannot be done with suªcient accuracy . And there are other sour - ces of error , e . g . in determining the ship’s own course and speed . ¿e other method , position ﬁxing , uses references to elements out - side the ship to determine its position . ¿is method has been docu - mented at length by Hutchins ( cf . Hutchins1995 ) . In the speciﬁc case he describes , the bearings toward three landmarks are determined and plotted as lines on a map , and the ship’s position is where the three lines cross and make a ( hopefully ) small triangle . ¿is method is repeated at an interval of usually three minutes . ¿e speciﬁc ships that Hutchins describes are helicopter carriers of the so - called “amphibious ﬂeet” ( 1995 , pp . 7 – 9 , 21 ) . Ships of this kind are navigated by position ﬁxing , not dead reckoning , at least when the ship is near hazards ( within 8 kilometers ) and therefore must be closely coordinated with its surroundings . ¿is in spite of all the technical instruments and sophisticated navigation technol - ogy available , and even though all the scientiﬁc knowledge accumu - lated to this day could be used for constructing a model for dead reckoning the ship’s movements and position . ‡y is dead reckoning not accurate enough , and clearly inferior to position ﬁxing ? ¿e purpose of determining the ship’s position is to locate it relative to its surroundings , in particular to potential hazards and towhere it ought to be or go . ¿e reason whydead reck - oning is worse than position ﬁxing is that it is done by simulation based on a model or representation of the actual situation . ¿e prob - lem with simulations and models is that the world doesn’t allow itself to be replicated accurately enough . It is simply too complex to be modeled with any precision . ‡en textbooks use the laws of physics to model physical events , this is always done for idealized situations , where many greatly simplifying assumptions are made . Real meas - urements don’t give the calculated results . Even in “real” physics such simplifying assumptions are made to an extent that may sur - prise the uninitiated . Hence , computations yield errors , and these deviations from the real thing accumulate with each successive step in the simulation . also be prepared speech . ¿e risk of drifting further and further o¡ the dead - reckoned course would still remain , however . Philosophically , dead reckoning goes back to logical deduction from premises , whereas checking with the world is what one might call the pragmatic technique . In fact , some claim that “dead” is de - rived from “deduced” reckoning . Philosophy has always been con - cerned with how to reason properly . From syllogisms to formal log - ic , the aim has been to establish rules for making valid arguments and conclusions . ¿is is theessenceof the concept of rationality : the ideal , perfect way of reasoning ; ideal thinking if you wish . Philosophers have always wanted to establish how you know what is right ; how you know when you are right . ¿is is part of what Dewey called “the quest for certainty” ( 1929 ) . So how do you know what is right ? For practical purposes , you can simply check with the world to ﬁnd out if you are right , if that is what you want . But philosophers are almost by deﬁnition not in - terested in practical matters , but are instead usually concerned with matters that cannot be settled by looking at the world . Metaphysics , Plato’s world of ideas , ontology ( ‡at really exists ? ) , epistemology ( How can we know ? ‡at is knowledge ? ‡at is the relation be - tween knowledge and the world ? ) , ‡at is truth ? All of these are topics where the world can give us no answers . Other means are re - quired , such as the principle of reductio ad absurdum : Everything that is contradictory and “logically impossible” must be false ; something must be true if the opposite leads to a contradiction . In typical phil - osophical matters , principles like these are the only way of ﬁnding out , andthemotherof allsuchprinciplesislogicaldeduction : If some - thing is certain , then other certainties can be deduced from it , step by step , each being perfectly logical , literally . So logic makes perfect sense in the immaterial domains that phi - losophy is concerned with . ¿e problem came when other sciences applied the same means toworldlyends . In cognitive science , it could be made to work for idealized domains like games and puzzles . ¿ese are also cases whereyou cannot check with theworld to ﬁnd out what is correct ; you have to know the immaterial rules ( cf . Zhang 1992 , 1994 ) that are speciﬁed by a human and very similar to the rules of logical deduction . But when applied to real cases , the problem of deduction or dead reckoning becomes a problem of constructing a model—a simula - tion—of the situation . ¿is is why no dead reckoning model is exact 119 I n t e r a c t i v e ¿us the error aggravates rapidly , since each new estimate is based on the previous one , which already was wrong , and so on . So even a good model will begin to drift after a few steps ; this is why weather forecasts only work a few days ahead , and become less certain for each day forward . In position ﬁxing this does not happen . First of all , the data come from the real thing , not a model that is approxi - mate at best . ¿is alone makes the ﬁx much more dependable . More - over , the deviation doesn’t accumulate since each ﬁx is determined separately and is not based on the previous ones . So ship navigation has a bridgeful of sophisticated technology and the accumulated results of science sinceEuclid to back it up . Still dead reckoning is not accurate enough . ¿e same thing holds for cogni - tion . Intramentalcognitiondead - reckonstheenvironment , whilein - teractive cognition goes straight to the source , without bu¡ers or models in between . And like position ﬁxes using landmarks , and like a speaker who has her listener available in front of her , her informa - tion about the world is not based on an estimate of what the world ought to be like . ¿e reason why I bring this up is that navigation by dead reckon - ing faces the same problems as the classical view of how actions are selected , by planning that is . A classical mental plan consists of a se - quence of steps , each associated with an action . Each time a step is taken , the world changes from the physical action associated with it , as well as for other reasons . Because actions are not performed as they are selected , they must be selected on the basis of a mental sim - ulation which dead - reckons the state of the world at that point . ¿is method was used in the robot Shakey in the 60’s , and with exactly these negative consequences , where the constant issue of try - ing to keep an internal representation in synch with the environ - ment became a major problem , as discussed more recently in e . g . Suchman ( 1987 ) and Dennett ( 1991 ) . ¿is is the consequence of determining actions on the basis of a mental simulation , and this is how classical intramental planning has to be done . Because when the speciﬁcation of action is separated from the execution of that action , then the consequences and the context of the future action must be simulated . For example , if a communicated message is prepared in advance , as usually happens with written text , this could be done by “plan - ning” , by simulating the addressee’s thinking after each sentence , to seeif andhowshewillunderstandit . Itdoesn’thavetobetext , itcould 118 as she speaks , why should she be content with passively using her perception for input , and use speech only to output her message ? ¿en she would have to do with whatever feedback the listener was kind enough to give her . ¿e second step in the interactive model concerns employing action for a cognitive purpose , analogous to the use of speech in conversation . ¿e speaker producing the message corresponds to the ﬁrst or productive purpose of action , from chap - ter 3—she can sign on speech to also induce feedback and to direct what kind of feedback she gets and when—this corresponds to the second , cognitive , or inquiring purpose . It is a cognitive purpose since it contributes to performing the cognitive task ; its e¡ect achieves what a mental simulation would . If she gives speech this second purpose , then the feedback she gets will be richer , more to the point , and much more useful to her in design - ing her message . ‡en Kirsh & Maglio studied subjects playing the video game Tetris , they found that their subjects made moves—physical ac - tions—that could only be explained as serving this second purpose ( 1992 , 1994 ) . In Tetris , bricks in di¡erent shapes fall down onto the playing ﬁeld , and the objective of the game is to build the growing pile on the ground so that it does not ﬁll the playing ﬁeld all the way up , which will end the game ( cf . ﬁgure 5 . 1 ) . ¿e way to do this is to ﬁll the assembling horizontal rows completely ; such a full row will disappear , and this is how the player is to keep the pile low . Bricks fall down one at a time , and the player can move the falling brick left and 121 I n t e r a c t i v e or even good enough , and thus why logical deduction in immaterial domains does not transfer well to material ones—deduction works well in theory but not under authentic conditions . And if even the best model isn’t good enough , then imagine how a model of a de - sign problem that is very much under development would perform . Instead real action must be grounded in feedback . ¿is is what the three - minute ﬁx cycle does . It is in this way analogous to moving – seeing – moving ( sailing – ﬁxing – sailing ) . By relying on feedback , all that remains background becomes harmless ; every action is evalua - ted from its actual e¡ects , not estimates . ¿is is why designers , like Quist above , draw so that theycan use their seeing to judge their own ideas , instead of trying to imagine what the consequence of a move is . ¿ey frequently see unintended consequences of their moves , and often these are desirable ( Schön 1983 ) . By appreciating the conse - quences of each step , an action sequence develops bit by bit as each step is performed , not in advance , and continual feedback from the world is used to stay on course . ¿is is the pragmatic manner , which is synonymous with inquiry . ¿e pragmatic manner is a very simple way to ﬁnd out . Logical deduction , dead reckoning , and so on are techniques that enable you to ﬁgure things out when the basic , simple way of ﬁnding out by checking is not available , as in metaphysics and so on , just as a writer has to compensate for not having her addressee in front of her . ¿e rational ideal has made the mistake of regarding deduction from premises as the fundamental procedure for ﬁnding things out , not a compensatory technique for circumstances beyond the ordinary . It is thus like a literary model , in having been applied also to situations where the special , limiting conditions that motivate it do not apply . Step 2 : Manipulating the world — doing for the sake of knowing ¿e problems with a pure analysis phase have already been discus - sed , but the conversation analogy can give an additional angle on this issue : ‡en the reader isn’t there at the time of writing , the writer deﬁnitely can’t ask a question and expect any answer . So ana - lyzing the problem before writing the text seems rational ; under these circumstances even the division into separate phases seems to make sense : ﬁrst think , then write ; ﬁrst analyze the recipient , then design the outline , then write the text . But when a speaker has her listener available right then and there 120 Figure 5 . 1 Is theTetris brick lined up correctly ? Finding out , and then ensuring that it is , by first moving it three steps to the wall and then three steps back . ? ing” . As he also noted , this is a phenomenon that we can ﬁnd every - where in ordinary everyday activities , if we only look for them : ¿e rudimentary prototype of experimental doing for the sake of knowing is found in ordinary procedures . ‡en we are try - ing to make out the nature of a confused and unfamiliar object , we perform various acts with a view to establishing a new rela - tionship to it , such as will bring to light qualities which will aid in understanding it . We turn it over , bring it into a better light , rattle and shake it , thump , push and press it , and so on . ¿e ob - ject as it is experienced prior to the introduction of these chan - ges baºes us ; the intent of these acts is to make changes which will elicit some previously unperceived qualities , and by varying conditions of perception shake loose some property which as it stands blinds or misleads us . ( Dewey 1929 , p . 87 ) It is also through action that our pragmatic knowing is used and put to a test , and it is in this way that we can see whether it serves its pur - pose or not . Exploration Inquiring action can be divided into two kinds : exploration and ex - perimentation . I will begin with exploration . ¿e quotation from Dewey captures its everyday meaning : “to make changes which will elicit some previously unperceived qualities , and by varying condi - tions of perception shake loose some property which as it stands blinds or misleads us” . ¿is is why active manipulation betters pure analysis . If you are trying to understand an object , aspects that are not immediately apparent come out if you manipulate it ; instead of just passively watching the object , you act upon it to see what hap - pens , such as by rotating a falling Tetris brick to see its obscured parts . Exploration is a fundamental and very common aspect of in - quiry , regardless of domain : 123 right and also rotate it , so as to ﬁll the bottom pile evenly without leaving holes . Kirsh & Maglio were able to demonstrate that players make certain moves that actually bring the pieces away from their goal position . ¿at is , these moves deﬁnitely do not serve the pro - ductive purpose of action , which is to reach the goal of placing the brick ; they are even counterproductive in this sense . Instead these moves have a demonstrably cognitive purpose : … certain cognitive and perceptual problems are more quickly , easily , and reliably solved by performing actions in the world ra - ther than by performing computational actions in the head alone . We have found that some translations [ i . e . left and right ] and ro - tations are best understood as using the world to improve cognition . ( Kirsh & Maglio 1992 , my italics ) ¿eir ﬁrst example of such actions is when the player was to ﬁll a gap say three steps from the wall . Instead of relying on a mental visual - ization to determine whether the falling brick is lined up correctly , players moved the brick to the wall—that is , away from where it will go—and then moved it back by pressing the proper key one , two , three times . In this way the player could ensure that the brick was over the right position , three steps from the wall ( also ﬁgure 5 . 1 ) . In a second example , players rotated pieces that were not yet com - pletely visible , to determine what kind of brick was coming . ¿is en - ables them to decide earlier where it should go ( ﬁgure 5 . 2 ) . ¿is ac - tion cannot have a productive purpose since it is made before the player has decided where to put it . Players also rotated pieces more often the more ambiguous they were ( ibid . ) . Kirsh & Maglio also showed that rotating a piece on the screen is much faster than rotat - ing it mentally , and that it is likely that pieces indeed are rotated so as to see where they would ﬁt . ¿ese are two examples of actions that have cognitive purposes , that is , where the individual interacts with theworld to perform cog - nitive functions which traditionally have been attributed to purely intramental processes—in particular mental simulation and predic - tion . ¿ey follow the pattern of a speaker who evokes responses from her listener , and thereby uses speech as a kind of action that serves a cognitive purpose , and that makes intramental cognition both su - perﬂuous and inferior . Dewey elegantly described this as “doing for the sake of know - 122 Figure 5 . 2 By rotating a falling brick that is not yet completely visi - ble , you uncover hidden parts to faster determine its full shape . in her case in the design of an elevator control system ( e . g . 1990b ) . All of her subjects simulated scenarios of how the elevators would be used . Firstly , these served to help them understand the require - ments and the problem domain , and thereby to infer requirements and to generate solutions . Secondly , they used simulations to explo - re the solutions they were developing , to ﬁnd inconsistencies , in - completeness , or bugs . In other words , to understand the solutions they had developed themselves . Still , both kinds concerned the same setting , only with or without having the design in place . Both kinds of simulation occurred throughout the design process ( ibid . ) . I’m going to imagine one elevator and a few scenarios . Say there’s a request from ﬂoor 2 to 4 . If there is a lift going to 2 on its way up , then stop the lift at 2 , open the doors , … If there is a lift going down from 5 to 1 , the lift does not stop at 2 … ‡at if you press up at the ﬂoor , but once in the lift , you press a down button . … So there’s deﬁnitively the need for a queue of lift re - quests for each lift , separate from the ﬂoor requests . … Maybe the ﬂoor requests could be handled by a completely separate sys - tem from the lift requests . ( p . 287 ) In this protocol excerpt , the designer imagines a couple of scena - rios . By simulating the consequences of certain actions she works out what happens step by step , and this eventually leads her to dis - cover a situation that was not immediately apparent : By simulating a Lift scenario , the designer realizes that a user may press a ﬂoor button to go in one direction , but once inside the lift , may press a lift button to go in another direction . ¿is test case was not mentioned in the problem statement , yet it is critical for the design of a good control algorithm . ( p . 288 ) ¿us this single scenario developed her understanding of the design problem by singly generating a test case , a requirement , and a solu - tion , at the same time . In another example the designer explicitly links her simulations to the need for understanding a certain aspect of the problem , namely scheduling ( p . 286 ) : I’m not sure I understand about scheduling . I’ll draw two eleva - tors with a few ﬂoors . … For each lift , I have , say , four buttons that are illuminated or not . And for each lift I also have to know the ﬂoor and the direction . Say Lift 1 is at ﬂoor 4 and there are 125 I n t e r a c t i v e ¿is is much of what an infant does when he explores the world around him , what an artist does when he juxtaposes colors to see what e¡ect they make , and what a newcomer does when he wanders around a strange neighborhood . It is also what a scien - tist does when he ﬁrst encounters and probes a strange substance to see how it will respond . ( Schön 1983 , p . 145 ) ‡en design speciﬁcations are in themselves very incomplete and leave much unsaid , so that just a pure analysis of them would be in - suªcient , that would correspond to a speaker who merely takes and uses whatever information the listener will give her . But to elabo - rate the given requirements , and go beyond what is obvious or ex - plicit in them , designers do just like speakers—they use exploration toevokewhatthespeciﬁcationsdonotmention , andtomakeoutwhat consequences follow from them . Guindon et al . have provided a de - tailed account of exploratory practice in software design : “ [ Subject ] P8 explicitly acknowledges the need for exploring the problem en - vironment to achieve a good understanding of the requirements be - fore seeking a solution . ” ( Guindon , Krasner & Curtis 1987 , p . 69 ) Adelson & Soloway ( 1985 ) noted that an experienced designer working in an otherwise familiar domain used exploration when he cametoanunfamiliarpartof theproblem . AlsoGuindonshowedthat exploration is associated with understanding unfamiliar material . A good understanding allows for systematic work since it gives the de - signer a map to follow , while little experience requires her to explore without a sense of direction : [ Subject P6 ] clearly has better design schemas [ i . e . understan - ding ] for the communication sub - problem than for the sched - uling problem . He successively reﬁnes his solution for the com - municationsub - problemwhileheperformsmuchmoreexplora - tory design for the scheduling problem . By exploratory design , we mean design with many mental simulations of the problem environment and mental simulations of tentative solutions un - guided by a plan . ( Guindon et al . 1987 , p . 68 ) ¿e authors state that the designer’s main method of exploration is through simulation of the eventual context that the artifact will enter into . Simulation is prototypical as a physical design activity where the actions involved have an essentially cognitive , inquiring pur - pose . Guindon has described the use of simulations in great detail , 124 this drawing experiment he tests his idea and is able to make some - thing good out of it ; it generates possibilities rather than problems . ¿e experiment thereby “conﬁrms” his framing in some sense . As Quist then goes on to advise Petra on how to proceed , he in - structs her to experiment to ﬁnd her way , in the same way that he just did ( Schön 1983 ) : Q : Well , thateitherhappenshereorhere , andyou’llhavetoinves - tigate which way it should or can go . ¿at is , she should make experiments to test her ideas . A little later , he is also explicit about what designers’ experimentation consists in—working out your ideas using paper and pencil , trying them out by drawing : Q : Now the calibration of this becomes important . You just have to draw and draw and try out di¡erent grids . Here Quist stresses the cognitive , i . e . non - productive , purpose of drawing . He emphasizes the process of drawing , not the product . She should “draw and draw” , and “try out” . ¿is is drawing as an in - vestigation ; as an inquiry . Another episode , even though Schön uses it for a di¡erent pur - pose , gives an even clearer illustration of how central experimen - tation is to design , and of how closely related it is to sketching . Here , Northover is the coach and Judith is the student presenting her problem ( 1987 , pp . 127 – 132 ) : Judith : I haven’t decided yet whether it’s going to be sited right here or right here—I have the feeling it’s going to be here and I’m going to make it level . Northover : Do you have this to a larger scale somewhere ? ‡en Judith describes her design , Northover asks for a scale draw - ing . He needs to see her placements to be able to judge them . Mak - ing such scale drawings is seen as an essential drawing experiment ( ibid . , p . 127 ) . ¿e reason is that the relation between building and site is very important , as previously discussed . By drawing the build - ing to scale , in its location and on a site plan , the designer can exam - ine this relation in detail and work out a proper placement . Above , for example , Quist expresses this importance when he asked Petra if 127 I n t e r a c t i v e requests to go down to ﬂoors 3 and 2 . … ¿e ﬂoors don’t move , the lifts move . It strikes me that I haven’t considered enough this idea of having lifts between ﬂoors . I’m going to handle that . Here , to understand the issue better , the designer creates a scenario that involves scheduling , and simulates what would happen . She elaborates one particular case to see what the system should do . In this way she discovers a test case for evaluating solutions , plus an ad - ditional requirement . ¿ese simulations enable the designers to explore their problems and thus go beyond the limited information that is directly available to them . In this way they develop their understanding by tinkering with what she has , not merely analyzing the given speciﬁcations . Exploration is then a typical case of how action can have an express - ly cognitive function . Experimentation Experimentation is more powerful than exploration . In fact , explor - ation can be seen as a limited version of experimentation that lacks certain elements of the “full” process . By making experiments you physically test your ideas in the world , instead of trying to ﬁgure out in your head what will happen . If exploratory speech is when a speaker probes the other party by asking her questions , then experimentation in conversation is when a speaker is not just asking questions but actively tries to make her point , and uses the feedback she gets to ﬁnd out whether her speech is working or not . She has some notion of what she wants to say and how to say it , and by actually saying it she conducts an experiment and can evaluate the outcome , that is , the listener’s response . She can use the response she gets ( the “consequences” of her talk ) to see whether her idea works . In design , experimentation is the main method for testing and working out ideas . Quist’s sketching episode can be regarded as an experiment that he makes to work out his proposal and to test the consequences that come with it . After stating his framing he starts to draw to see where it leads and whether it will work . A string of moves draw out the possibilities contained in his idea , and he speaks and draws simultaneously : “…that could then be the bridge , which might generate an upper level… we could have as much as 5 - foot in - tervals… ¿e section through here could be one of nooks” . ¿rough 126 these ramps do work , that access—if so , this ramp will cut o¡ the views to and from the library . Here Northover tells her that the drawings that she thought unnec - essary are crucial—she has to “discipline” herself to do them , be - cause they are drawing experiments that she must make , to test whether her ramp will work or not . Drawing is thewaydesigners test their conceptions , to see in detail what they lead to , and to develop them from mere ideas to reliable concepts that have been tried and conﬁrmed . Judith does not see this function in drawings . She “decid - es where it’s going to be sited” , she “has the feeling it’s going to be here” and she “is going to make it level” . I bring up this particular dialogue because it is as if Judith holds the conventional cognitive view of drawing , since she doesn’t draw to work out the consequences of her ideas and decisions ; she draws only to document her choices for others to see them . ¿e use of draw - ing as experimentation is what the conventional view has over - looked . It has regarded drawings as a medium for recording the end product of design , or at the most as an extension of long - term mem - ory ( Akin1986 , Goel1995 , Newell & Simon1972 ) . Inthisviewdraw - ing is not regarded as experimentation but as output or storage , an epiphenomenon of pure thought . Drawing adds nothing to a prob - lem - solving process that is purely intramental . Judith simply has no idea what Northover means by drawing , conceived as a process of trying out design moves and discov - ering their consequences and implications . … it is clear that she sees drawing not as thought - experimenting but as a way of pre - senting ideas ( Schön 1987 , p . 130 ) Again the conventional cognitive theories can be said to correspond to novices’ beliefs and working styles , and the poorer results that this leads to , whereas the techniques of seasoned designers reﬂect the in - teractive approach . ‡y are experiments ( and simulation ) in the physical world su - perior to models and simulations in the head ? ¿e reason is that you want to ﬁnd out both what you can ﬁgure outand what you can’t ﬁg - ure out , i . e . what you cannot simulate mentally . ¿at is , you want to know also about the e¡ects of your actions that you cannot predict or foresee . Dewey’s original purpose with his theory of inquiry was to ex - plain the role of experimentation in science . It was the method of 129 I n t e r a c t i v e the drawing she has made is to scale , and she answered yes . But Ju - dith answers : J : Not right now , no . But it works as far as southern orientation —being far enough from here so I don’t get drainage prob - lems , being near enough to this ﬂat area so I can set up play - grounds . … N : So you don’t have it on a site plan at all ! J : No , that didn’t seem necessary… ‡en Judith answers that she doesn’t have a scale drawing , North - over expresses his astonishment over not only that she doesn’t have one , but also since it implies that she hasn’t even made one . She “feels” that this was not necessary , but to him it is crucial , since it means that she hasn’t made the experiment of drawing the site plan to scale , which he sees as essential for evaluating her idea : Northover seems to be saying , “You are not designing at all . You are simply having ‘ideas’ and putting them down on paper . ¿e moves you make have consequences that are testable , but you must draw to scale and in section in order to test them . ¿e whole process of designing is lost to you because you will not do these things . ” ( ibid . , p . 130 ) Judith continues by describing “a ramp which spirals up” . North - over then asks for a ﬂoor plan . Again , she says that she thought it was not necessary . She proposes to put “art and cafeteria” on the main level , and she asks him what he thinks . He answers , “¿at is possi - ble , I guess” , and asks about level changes and circulation . Judith ex - presses her wish : “Most people will use the ramp” . Again , the same clash over drawing to work out ideas : Northover neither approves of nor rejects her proposal—because without hav - ing the idea and its implications worked out on a drawing , he simply cannot evaluate it . ‡en he says , “¿at is possible , I guess” , he is real - ly saying , “It might well be a good idea , again it might not ; it is just that I cannot tell whether it is without having the idea worked out for me . With anything less I can only guess . ” He then goes on to give her some constructive advice : N : I think you have got to really discipline yourself to draw it up to scale and draw a section through it—let’s just assume that 128 Step 3 : Fine - grained interactive structure ; economy and efﬁciency Having concluded that checking with the world has advantages over intramental cognition , and that manipulating the world brings even further advantages , it is a logical extension that these means should be used in the best possible way . ¿at is to say , if checking with the world is good , then check often and make use of the information you get as much and as often as possible . And if manipulating the world improves your knowing even further , then you ought to use this technique to its full potential , too . ¿e result would be ﬁne - grained pieces of activity , a continuous attention to feedback that replaces complex pre - planned actions , and simpler and smaller ac - tions that both generate feedback and attend to and adjust to it . ‡y is this better ? Remember dead reckoning : it starts from a known position , but the shortcomings of prediction yield an acc - umulating error that makes the computed position deviate more and more from the actual position . Position ﬁxing instead reestab - lishes accuracy each time a ﬁx is made . So the more often you make ﬁxes , the more often can you make the proper adjustments to your course , and the less will your measured position drift away from the actual one . ¿is leads to an organization of cognition that is radically di¡er - ent from when cognition is strictly separated from everything else , as happens in traditional theories . ¿e di¡erence in strategyis clear in the following brief example . Here , one person is trying to help an - other locate a building on a map ( Brennan1990 , cited inClark1996 ) : no to your right , no over by the quad , right there yah right there ¿ere are a number of interesting points in this brief and deceptive - ly simple example . First of all , it shows that in normal face - to - face conversation you can get feedback on whether what you say works as it should , and that this leads to higher certainty , allowing the speaker to say “yah right there” . ¿is example also shows the predicted ﬁne - grained pieces of act - ivity . Instead of a precise description in a complex sentence with embedded clauses and elaborate structure , which would be charac - teristic of written language , there are several short and very simple segments , which is typical of ordinary conversation . ¿e segments also display a high sensitivity toward feedback . Because the speaker continuously attends to visual feedback , she can formulate each seg - 131 I n t e r a c t i v e experimentationthathadmadephysicistscapableof theirmonumen - tal advances ever since the Enlightenment . It was also the ancient Greeks’ resorting to mere speculation that had made their progress in the natural sciences so marginal , especially in relation to their con - tributions in immaterial domains—philosophy and so forth—by the use of the same method . Indeed , thought experiments were the single method used in Aristotelian physics . ( Or is it the other way round—that philosophy hasn’t improved much since those days be - cause of its reliance on such procedures ? ) In some sense , the non - pragmatist theories of knowledge and scientiﬁc reasoning thus re - main at the stage of Aristotelian physics . ¿is shows the limitations of simulation in the head—for that is what a thought experiment is—compared to interactive experimen - tation in the world . If an idea is tested on a mental model , then the test reveals only those consequences of the idea that are accounted for by the model , i . e . the aspects that you have incorporated into it . ¿e remainder is left out . ¿is is why thought experiments never disconﬁrmed the Aristotelian idea that heavier objects fall faster than lighter ones . An experiment in the world can reveal to you both unanticipated consequences of your idea , and also limitations to your model , since surprising consequences indicate shortcomings in the model . Neither of these could come out of testing ideas in a purely intramental way . ¿is is just as position ﬁxing does not depend on the navigator’s understanding of winds , currents , and so on , and thereby is the su - perior navigational method . Dead reckoning , on the other hand , is only as good as the best available model of these physical phenom - ena , which obviously isn’t good enough yet , and quite probably never will be . And however much it is improved , all the fuss in - volved can only aspire to eventually become as good as the method of simply looking out to see where you are . Here , I am not trying to say that we are bad at mental models and mental simulation—but that these limitations give cognition good reason for not being intramental ; for not using mental models and simulation in the ﬁrst place . ¿is holds for my argument in general : my purpose is to give cognition reason for not being intramental at all , not to show that it is intramental albeit badly so . 130 ﬁrst have to refer by name to something that is easily found , then specify each next step from there , with name and direction , plus for example the number of streets to go past , and so on . ¿e need for all this redundancy would lead to a complex expression that is both much longer and much harder to design—all of this made necessary by having separated the speciﬁcation of the action from its perfor - mance . ¿e same advantage of conversation over writing has been dem - onstrated for deﬁnite references ( Clark 1992 , Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs 1986 , Krauss & Weinheimer 1964 , 1966 ) . Over repeated trials , speakers use feedback to make references shorter , as in the following example ( Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs 1986 ) : 1 . All right , the next one looks like a person who’s ice skating , except they’re sticking two arms out in front . 2 . Um , the next one’s the person ice skating that has two arms ? 3 . ¿e fourth one is the person ice skating , with two arms . 4 . ¿e next one’s the ice skater . 5 . ¿e fourth one’s the ice skater . 6 . ¿e ice skater . If the “grains” of talk are sentences as in this example , then clearly speech becomes ﬁne - grained compared to the writing - like senten - ce 1 : ¿e long reference with several parts in di¡erent kinds of rela - tions to each other—part – whole , ( i . e . person – arms ) , activity / func - tion ( skating ) , location ( in front of ) and so on—is replaced by short and simple ones , both in structure and in syntax . Also note how the speaker uses rising intonation in line 1 as a question - like prompt for feedback , at the point where she presum - ably would begin to try to make the initial reference more econom - ical . Krauss & Weinheimer ( 1966 ) showed that speakers made their references shorter only when they received feedback : “By monitor - ing the listener’s responses to his encoding , the speaker was able to decrease the number of words needed to code a given ﬁgure with - out running a great risk of being overly cryptic and confusing to the listener . ” ( p . 344 ) ¿at is , to be more concise without running a risk of not being explicit and elaborate enough . ¿e authors also examined feedback of two di¡erent kinds . ‡en feedback was given concurrently ( “mmm” , “aha” and so on ) there 133 I n t e r a c t i v e ment on the basis of what the addressee is doing . ¿us , the speech co - evolves in parallel with the addressee’s activity . ¿ereby it is pos - sible to make out what happened just from what the speaker said . ¿e speaker can achieve this high sensitivity because ﬁne - grained action has local control . ‡en action is speciﬁed in a large chunk be - fore it is performed in an equally large chunk , there is no way to make use of feedback . Fine - grained segments , on the other hand , enable local control since they are speciﬁed not in advance but as they are performed . ¿ereby there is a way for feedback to enter into the process . Conversation is known to have local control ( Sacks et al . 1974 ) . Among di¡erent kinds of spoken language , conversation is on the most - ﬂexible end of the scale , it is completely locally managed , and comes in segments much like those of the present example . Between each segment there is a slot , or what Sacks et al . call a “transition - rel - evance place” , where others may give feedback or take the ﬂoor , or the current speaker may continue and thereby make a multiple - seg - ment turn , as the speaker did in this example . ¿e size , content , and speaker allocation of each turn are thereby managed locally . By this single and sole control mechanism , turns at talk are as - signed to participants locally , i . e . one turn at a time . More organized scenarios such as debates may instead for instance assign equal shares and ordered turns to speakers in advance . Local management is done in interaction between participants . A speaker may or may not stop voluntarily at a transition point , and others may attempt to initiate a turn at such a point , or they may remain silent , thus encouraging the speaker to continue . For these reasons a locally controlled system is maximally ﬂexible and adaptive to circumstances ( ibid . ) . With ﬁne - grainedness and local control , action is speciﬁed—or designed , as Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs ( 1986 ) call it—as it is being carried out , so it can be altered on the basis of what actually happens . In the example , when the speaker “designs” her instructions she can take advantage of what the addressee is doing right then—where she ﬁrst puts her ﬁnger , just how much too far in some direction she moves it , the exact moment when it passes over the right spot , and so on . ¿ereby there is no need for the redundancy that would be neces - sary for a description that is designed in a separate phase , prior to be - ing performed . If the speaker couldn’t get feedback , she would have to use an expression that does not depend on how the addressee will use it to locate the spot on the map . Typically , such a phase would 132 ing , its objective instead becomes to conduct an inquiry that pro - duces a good outcome intheend , not at once . ¿is gives action a di¡er - entrolewhichisnotonlyproductive . ¿epurposeof actionisnolong - er just to give the right result , especially not right away . Instead action is speciﬁed to also serve its inquiring purpose , as doing for the sake of knowing . It should manipulate the world to evoke feedback , and serve to test the knowing behind it . So cognitive e¡ort should not mainly be spent on ﬁguring out one large and complex action that produces the right result on the ﬁrst attempt , but on performing an incremental sequence of simpler actions that concludes in a good re - sult ; the result will in this way be ﬁrmly grounded through the ex - perimental nature of this procedure . As a consequence , individual actions become approximations in - stead of perfect , once - and - for - all actions , because they are not spe - ciﬁed so as to produce the desired result each on its own . Not approx - imation in the mathematical sense , but in the sense of being rough and unﬁnished while moving inquiry forward , because their inquir - ing e¡ects enable upcoming actions to work better . ¿ereby the in - dividual actions shouldn’t be judged as being correct or wrong , but as parts of a larger sequence that leads to a successful result . ¿at is , individual actions should be evaluated for how they work as parts of an inquiry , not from whether they produce the desired result at once . For example , “no to the right” , shouldn’t be classiﬁed as insufﬁcient - lyspeciﬁed , orasa“correction”of anearlierimperfectinstruction , but as a concise and thereby eªcient part of an incremental sequence . ¿is sequence succeeds rapidlyandwith little energy , by using an in - teractive strategy that depends on entities in the external world for its success . In the example that I have been using , the “external entities” are the addressee , her actions , and the objects that she manipulates by these actions . ¿is approximating model makes one particularly important pre - diction : that the action that makes up the ﬁrst attempt at something should be very di¡erent from how monolithic pre - speciﬁcation would have it . ¿ere , the ﬁrst action should be the only one neces - sary . It should be precise , well - conceived , and have only a produc - tive purpose , that is , only serve to bring about the desired result . Here , in contrast , the productive e¡ect of the ﬁrst action can be mi - nimal . Instead , the initial objective should be to get an inquiry o¡ the ground . It should be a “starter” , exactly what it does is not all - important , not too much cognitive e¡ort should be spent on it . Get - 135 I n t e r a c t i v e was a much greater di¡erence than when the addressee gave feed - back only after the reference had been completed . ¿is supports the argument that when you can get feedback , then the more ﬁne - grained interaction is , the better it works . Incremental , approximating sequence In Brennan’s ( 1990 ) direction - giving example , the segments of talk are formulated on the basis of what is going on at the time when they are spoken . ‡at is said in one segment has e¡ects in the world , and following segments make use of these e¡ects . For example , if the previous segments had not made the addressee move in the right direction , thesegments“nooverbythequad”and“rightthere”would not have worked . In other words , these segments make use of their particular context . So the speciﬁcation of each segment is based on what happens in the world at the same time—speech and action co - evolve in parallel—and the inquiring e¡ects of the spoken segments maketheworldaparticularlyvaluableresourcewhenthespeaker for - mulates the segments that follow . As the example shows , changing to a ﬁner grain means that not only action , but also the speciﬁcation of action is broken up into a se - quence of smaller pieces . Instead of being planned separately and in advance , speciﬁcation is done concurrently and together with per - formance , in a sequence of steps distributed over the whole course of action . ¿e speciﬁcation of each step builds on the outcome of previous steps , in an incremental fashion . ¿is fundamental change in procedure means that the method of speciﬁcation becomes experimental ; it becomes an inquiry . In the example from Brennan , the segments of speech serve as experiments : the speaker tries an instruction that might work , it has certain e¡ects on the addressee ( she moves the pointer ) . ¿e speaker can then eval - uate the outcome of this “experimental” instruction and adapt the following segments accordingly . ¿is experimental procedure gives a role in inquiry to action , as doing for the sake of knowing . ¿e ﬁne - grained , incremental form of her speech is necessary for giving her spoken actions this second , inquiring role . ¿e traditional theories of action only consider its productive e¡ects . ¿e consequence is that according to this theory , actions are only speciﬁed so as to produce the desired result ; to have a complete productive e¡ect so that they “get it right” . ¿eir productive e¡ects are their only e¡ects . If speciﬁcation is incremental , as I am propos - 134 an inquiring function at the same time . ¿is productive function is typical of experiments in practice , whereas it is usually absent in sci - ence ( Schön 1983 , pp . 147f ) . A designer , unlike a scientist , under - stands a situation and changes it at the same time , she is conducting a productive inquiry . ¿e direction - giving example above is a demonstration of the ad - vantage of inquiry and experimentation over intramental speciﬁca - tion . All the segments have a productive function : the speaker has an initial idea about how to direct the other , and each of these short in - structions serves to produce that result . But each segment is also an experiment ( cf . Schön 1983 ) : ¿e speaker’s idea of what to do is her “hypothesis” . Each segment of speech puts an aspect of her idea into e¡ect by making the addressee move her ﬁnger ( or hold it still in the ﬁnal case ) , and so it tests her hypothesis as a scientiﬁc experiment would . It thereby spells out the consequences of the “hypothesis” , and you can judge whether the hypothesis works or not . Moreover , it also shows how it works and how it does not work ; each segment— each one a small experiment—lets the speaker develop and adapt her idea further , as the experiment advances her understanding of her situation . Here we can see how speciﬁcation and performance proceed to - gether and in parallel : At no point does speciﬁcation advance far ahead of production . At each step , speciﬁcation builds on the out - come of the previous step , in an incremental fashion . ¿e ﬁrst seg - ment adjusts for direction , in the second one the speaker decides to point out the quad , probably from the addressee’s ﬁnger move - ments , and then the test that is implicit in “no by the quad” shows that she has succeeded ; “yah right there” . ¿is also shows the advantage of experiment over exploration . It is hard to imagine how the speaker could use exploration—“‡ere do you think it is ? ” or “‡at places do you know ? ”—it seems con - trived and hardly very eªcient . Questions ( and exploration ) are too vague , they do not test any speciﬁc idea about a solution . Neither do they have any productive e¡ect . Because actions are also implicit tests of the idea behind them , a designer doesn’t have to be explicitly concerned with experimen - tation ; with making tests or evaluating their outcome . Instead , she can rely on the breakdown mechanism ( this concept originated with Heidegger 1927 / 1962 ) . For this reason , as long as things go well , as long as there is no trouble , she can simply keep on doing what she 137 I n t e r a c t i v e ting the outcome right , the productive purpose , would become more important further on when the inquiring purpose is fulﬁlled . It has then worked out how to produce the desired result . ¿e previous example of direction - giving seems to bear this out . No segment appears to be the result of deep thought—their com - mon purpose rather seems to be to make the other party do the work of ﬁnding the right spot ! ¿at is , to ﬁrst get her to start searching , and then merely give her a push in the right direction when needed . ¿e ﬁrst segment , “no to your right” , at ﬁrst sight does not even look like a starting segment , but on closer consideration it makes perfect sense as such if only the addressee has her ﬁnger on the map , or other - wise appears to focus on a particular part of it . So if we only accept it as a ﬁrst segment , then no doubt the thought behind it was mini - mal . Instead it ﬁts perfectly into the description of a starter ; its ob - vious motive is to make the addressee begin moving her ﬁnger . It is hardly an imperfectly constructed exhaustive description that is re - paired afterward . Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs ( 1986 ) also found what I call starters , as well as other inquiring techniques , to be characteristic of collabora - tive talk : Of the eight kinds of techniques for making references that they discuss , six have an inquiring function : “in three examples [ speakers ] deliberately drew the addresses into the process ; and in three they began by knowingly issuing a questionable or inadequate noun phrase” ( p . 113 ) . ¿e inquiring function is clearly present in these cases , sometimes even dominating—the authors themselves conclude that they “do no more than initiate the process” ( p . 122 ) . For example , speakers used try markers ( rising intonation ) to bring in the other party , compare with sentence number2 listed above . ¿ese serve as attempts to start an interactive approximating process . ¿ey also spoke noun phrases in multiple segments , each inviting aªrma - tion and whose continuation depends on the response ( ibid . ) . Step 4 : Pragmatism enables speciﬁcity and shortcuts Shortcuts in inquiring function In exploration , the inquiring function is explicit—exploration is do - ing only for the sake of knowing . In conversation , this corresponds to a plain question . In experimentation the inquiring function is in - stead usually implicit , as part of an action that also has a productive function . In other words , such an action has both a productive and 136 Shortcuts in productive function Because each attempt also works as an implicit test , speakers can go beyond the ﬁrst level of laziness , which is to avoid working hard on specifying attempts , and reach a second level . ¿is is what I will call optimism for want of a less intentionalistic term . Again consider these minimalist lines from a casual dinner conversation ( Tannen 1984 ) : A : Do you read ? ( 1 . 0 ) B : Do I read ? ( 0 . 5 ) A : Do you read books ? Even with this highly condensed speech , we may safely conclude that A is trying to ask B whether he reads ﬁction books in his spare time . By starting with an exceptionally brief “Do you read ? ” , A is acting like an optimistic high jumper who chooses to enter into a competition at a very high level . If she can make the jump , she will have saved a great deal of e¡ort by skipping all the jumps on lower levels that less optimistic competitors must spend e¡ort on clearing . But if the optimistic high jumper doesn’t clear her entry level , she will end up last on the scoreboard , registered as not having cleared any level at all . For an optimistic speaker , on the other hand , the sit - uation looks much more promising : In Tannen’s example , A ’s ﬁrst optimistic attempt fails , but in the second one she can back down to a lower level and be more elaborate . And as we see , this time it works , even though the second attempt still must be regarded as being very optimistic , as it remains very terse . But also B must be considered very optimistic . “Do I read ? ” does not reveal much about how B fails to understand what A said , and B doesn’t try to make A ’s repair easier , by for example o¡ering a inter - pretation ( such as “Do you mean… ? ” ) . Still , A manages to repair this problem at once . ¿e advantage of optimism becomes clear if you consider the problem of adapting a message to the addressee’s background know - ledge , and of being explicit enough while not being redundant . As discussed earlier , a writer who is separated from her audience must provide ample context so that they will understand her , by adding re - dundancy to her core message . By being optimistic , a speaker skips a maximum amount of redundancy . But her optimistic attempt also 139 I n t e r a c t i v e does and focus on that without worrying about what might happen , and so forth . Breakdown only occurs when something goes wrong , only then does the designer become aware of the test . ¿is principle is also at work in conversation , where a speaker or - dinarily does not explicitly test whether the audience is understan - ding what she says . Instead she simply speaks , giving opportunities for feedback , and its absence works to conﬁrm that the audience is fol - lowing her . In our direction - giving example for instance , the spaces between segments serve as such opportunities for indicating trouble that are not taken . Were this not the case , the addressee having trou - ble following the directions would signal this . In this way , what a speaker says implicitly tests whether it is un - derstandable , and the absence of feedback works as an implicit conﬁrmation that the addressee is understanding what is said . She does not even notice any implicit tests , constantly thinking , “Since they’re not protesting , what I’m saying must make sense to them . Good , then I can continue” . Instead , of course , she is busy enough speaking . For this reason , experimentation can be largely transparent even though it very e¡ectively tests every action and reveals any problem - atic consequences . It is completely transparent as long as no troubles arise . ¿is enables experimentation to be quite effortless : testing an idea can simply consist of attempting to carry it out . If this succeeds , then you have also conducted an implicit experiment that proves the idea to work , but you have at the same time produced the very result you wanted ; experimental veriﬁcation comes at no extra charge . And you experience your own activity as only being concerned with producing the result . Perhaps the inquiring function of action has been overlooked precisely because tests are implicit in this way . We do not experience or intuitively see our own actions as tests , even though we experi - ence breakdowns and adjust to them , which shows that actions do work as implicit tests . We do not recognize their inquiring function , only their e¡ect on the world . ¿is would then also be the reason why traditional theory of action similarly only considers its produc - tive e¡ects . ¿e consequence is that according to such theory , actions are only speciﬁed ( planned ) so as to produce the desired result ; to have a complete productive e¡ect so that they “get it right” . 138 So in this case , A seems to be aware of her problem in advance , but she doesn’t spend more e¡ort on conceiving her ﬁrst attempt . On the contrary , a second look at this example even suggests that in the event of trouble , speakers in e¡ect spend less e¡ort on getting the ﬁrst attempt right . ¿is would then mean that they instead empha - size the starter’s inquiring function , to invite the addressee to con - tribute to the interactive process . In other words , it seems as if speak - ers try to exploit the advantages of the interactive procedure to their fullest when they need it most , and that they therefore emphasize the inquiring and interactive aspects of conversation when they sense trouble . ¿is tendency is even more pronounced in the following excerpt ( Je¡erson 1973 , p . 59 ) : A : I heard you were at the beach yesterday . ‡at’s her name , oh you know , the tall redhead that lives across the street from Larry ? ¿e one who drove him to work the day his car | was – B : | Oh Gina ! A : Yeah Gina . She said she saw you at the beach yesterday . Here , both “‡at’s her name” and “oh you know” are minimally informative , so in a sense A appears to be maximally optimistic . It is as if she believes that B can tell who she is thinking of from the con - text alone . With “oh you know” , she even repeats her appeal for help before trying herself . In whichever way a listener interprets what A says , her words serve to start an interactive procedure if not much else . So it seems that she prefers this interactive procedure to pre - speciﬁcation . So actions are approximate : they are not speciﬁed to be complete and perfect . ¿ey are also optimistic : they are speciﬁed with little cognitive e¡ort and make shortcuts . Instead , the emphasis in action is on the span of the whole procedure , rather than its start . ‡at about the end of an approximating sequence ? ‡en does it reach its conclusion ? Also the end of an incremental sequence comes without much commotion . Generally speaking , it ends when it has reached its practical purpose . However , the end comes quietly because there is no explicit evaluation of success , just as tests are not explicit , nei - ther their evaluations . Instead , following the same principle , success is the absence of breakdown . If you try to perform an action and you succeed , then you are ﬁnished—automatically and implicitly , with - 141 I n t e r a c t i v e works as an implicit test , and as an experiment with the addressee’s understanding : If there is a problem , the addressee has several kinds of response available to indicate the problem source in her feedback ( Scheglo¡ , Je¡erson & Sacks 1977 ) . In this way an optimistic attempt is a powerful way to induce precise feedback which will become helpful if a second attempt is necessary . In the light of Garﬁnkel’s ( 1967 ) demonstration that exhaustive descriptions of ﬁnite length cannot be made , optimism seems to be a particularly valuable way to determine a proper amount of context . So , someone might object , it appears that optimism supports the concept of starters and incremental approximation . But couldn’t it be that these techniques are used only when they are warranted , and that standard , exhaustive pre - speciﬁcation still is the standard pro - cedure , although speakers avoid using it when they can ? No , be - cause when a speaker appears to sense that her speciﬁcation will be problematic , she doesn’t spend more e¡ort on specifying the ﬁrst at - tempt . Instead she does the opposite , and makes the inquiring and incremental nature of speech explicit by marking her attempt as ten - tative , and by also encouraging the other party to collaborate ( taken from Sacks & Scheglo¡ 1979 ) : A : …well I was the only one other then then the uhm tch Fords ? , uh Mrs . Holmes Ford ? You know uh | the the cellist ? B : | Oh yes . She’s she’s the cellist A : Yes . Well she and her husband were there . ( ¿e bracket denotes both speakers talking simultaneously . ) ¿is ex - ample demonstrates almost every phenomenon mentioned so far in steps 3 and 4 : A ’s hesitation ( “then then the um tch” ) displays her trouble and marks her attempt as problematic . It is followed by her starter , Fords ? ¿is is clearly an optimistic attempt in the present sense , and it also has a rising intonation as a try marker requesting ex - plicitconﬁrmation . ( ¿isreversestheroleof absentfeedback . Itcom - es to mean continuing trouble . ) In the absence of feedback , A makes two more approximating attempts . Both use the same pattern as the ﬁrstattempt : hesitation - marker – attempt – try - marker : “uhMrs . Hol - mes Ford ? ” and “You know uh the the cellist ? ” Here , “Mrs . Holmes Ford” is a second attempt and a more explicit version of “Fords” , which shows that this is an optimistic sequence . 140 a : I heard you were at the beach yesterday . What’s her name , oh you know , the tall redhead that lives across the street from Larry ? The one who drove him to work the day his car Ø was – b : º Oh Gina ! a : Yeah Gina . She said she saw you at the beach yesterday . a : …well I was the only one other then then the uhm tch Fords ? uh Mrs . Holmes Ford ? You know uh Ø the the cellist ? b : º Oh yes . She’s she’s the cellist a : Yes . Well she and her husband were there . Breakdown only occurs because further progress is impossible ; ac - tions that are good enough , even though still sub - optimal , pass without notice . So actions are viably speciﬁed even though there is no evaluation criterion ; or more correctly because there is no eval - uation . ¿is is just as there is no selection mechanism in evolution either—evolution is only the non - survival of the non - ﬁt . Making the world “cooperate” ‡enaprocessisinteractive , thenitisalmostbydeﬁnitiondetermin - ed by all interacting forces . In Brennan’s direction - giving example , even though the addressee doesn’t say anything , if we want to ex - plain why the speaker says what she does , it is clear that this depends to a great extent on factors apart from herself . ‡en she tells the ad - dressee , “no over by the quad” , or “right there ya right there” , these statements are appropriate because of external events happening at the same time . Because of the incremental nature of approximating sequences such as this one , the meaning of an utterance depends on external events , which in turn have been brought about by previous utterances . In this case , “right there” relates to a particular ﬁnger movement , which itself was the e¡ect of “no to the left” and “no over by the quad” , etc . Similarly , on the ﬁrst “right there” the ﬁnger presumably stops , which makes the repetition “ya right there” ap - propriate . Hence , the unfolding actions of each party are highly dependent on the actions of the other party , which in turn depend on your own previous actions . Each individual’s actions , here her utterances , can - not have been determined only by her own mental processes , as traditional cognitive explanations would have it . ¿at is to say , we cannot explain why the speaker said exactly this without including elements outside herself in the explanation . An exhaustive descrip - tion produced in the manner of the literary model , on the other hand , would not have involved external factors in this way . So this interactive manner of specifying the location to the addressee gives these elements a role in determining what is actually said . As a result , the “passive” external world is promoted to an impor - tant role in this process . It must thereby be recognized as having a fundamental and systematic inﬂuence on the direction of the pro - cess , an inﬂuence of the same order as that of the actor herself . ¿ereby the process is determined interactively by individual and world together . However , saying that the world is a part of cognitive 143 I n t e r a c t i v e out concluding so , or testing whether you are . ¿e end of one action or action sequence is particularly implicit and invisible when it is immediately followed by another action , and this is the normal case under realistic circumstances . As a result , actions are speciﬁed viably , not correctly or perfectly . ¿rough attempts , more or less optimistic ones , and trouble that spurs further attempts , speciﬁcation proceeds until it works . ¿at is , until there is no more obstruction , so that nothing remains to be done . It stops because there is nothing more to do , not because an explicit evaluation function has been satisﬁed ( or satisﬁced ) . ¿ere are several points were we can ﬁnd the viability principle at work . ¿ere is the phenomenon from conversation that you do not point out or repair a speaker’s mistake if it doesn’t present any prob - lem ; if you can ﬁgure out what she meant , or if it is not very impor - tant to the purpose at hand , then you simply do not object ( Scheg - lo¡ et al . 1977 , p . 380 ) . If it ain’t broke , don’t ﬁx it . Schober and Clark ( 1989 ) also found that speakers and addressees in cooperation settle on referential expressions that are not “cor - rect” or objective , or even intelligible to a third person . Instead , they “exploit adventitious commonalities” and settle for the ﬁrst per - spective that makes sense to both . ¿at is , they select the ﬁrst viable candidate expression . If a third person cannot make sense of it , then she is , as they put it , out of luck . ¿e resulting references are specific and local to them , not “objective” universal descriptions . If that had been the case , an outsider would have no trouble understanding it . All shortcuts are made possible by viability principle I have adopted the term viability from von Glasersfeld ( 1982 ) . It is the same explanatory principle as in evolutionary theory and the princi - ple of natural selection . Natural selection is not the survival of the ﬁttest , it is the non - survival of the non - ﬁt . In the same way , only the non - ﬁt actions are improved on . It is not the correct and most ﬁt actions that are prepared and then performed . With this I want to stress that the individual actions in incremental sequences do not ap - proximate a correct action increasingly well , in the same way as evo - lution does not proceed toward the ideal creature . Instead , as Bateson ( 1967 ) has stated , this kind of explanation is negative , because it is not the production of the e¡ective , but the elimination of the ine¡ective . ¿e principle of implicit tests and breakdown , which I introduced above , is of the same , negative kind . 142 with the world it is referring to . Separation instead would require a written description to be independent of circumstances . It would have to be self - contained , because it couldn’t involve elements that might not be present . Steps 3 and 4 in relation to sketching Insteps3and4Ihavemainlybasedthepresentationonexamplesfrom conversation . It can in one way be regarded as a closer cognitive an - alysis of Schön’s ( 1983 ) concept of “design as conversation” with the working materials , which is reﬂected in the dialectical structure of sketching . And it is this dialectical and highly interactive structure of sketching that the analyses in steps 3 and 4 concern . Step 3 demonstrates the value of the moving – seeing – moving structureof sketching , whosepatternadheresverycloselytotheﬁne - grained , interactive structure that is described there . Sketching is made up of very small and simple incremental steps , whichyield local control and high sensitivity to feedback . ¿is , in turn , makes sketch - ing into a highly ﬂuid and eªcient process , which supports the open - ended and conceptual nature of the design work which sketching is typically used for . ¿e concepts from step 4 , in particular optimism , improve on this by enabling the designer to move forward and test ideas very rapidly . By merely starting to work on a solution by sketching , she can make substantialshortcuts , andthereisnoneedtothinkﬁrst , andthendraw the solution . She can just start to work out her ideas , and simply back up and be more careful or elaborate if it turns out she has been too optimistic . Moreover , the incremental approximating sequence elaborates on the developing dimension from chapter 3 . ¿is is the structurewhich results when you cannot separate the speciﬁcation of an action from its performance . Instead both of these processes run in parallel throughout the process . ¿e concept of starter serves to point out that in such a process , the qualityof the ﬁrst solution attempts should mainly be regarded as starting the process , which will eventually lead to a satisfactory solution . In this chapter , I have begun to answer some of the questions that wereposedinchapter4 , withamodelwhereactivityandworkingma - terials are true parts of the cognitive process in itself , forexample . As seen in the following quotation , even though the importance of 145 I n t e r a c t i v e processes appears very alien , both to the cognitive scientist and the nonprofessional . Still , there has been a similar situation in the study of conversa - tion . Both intuitively and scientiﬁcally , speech production has tradi - tionally been thought of as one party , the speaker , producing output and the recipient merely receiving speech—the “literary” model of speech production , based upon how written language is produced . However , studies of talk have shown that speaking in conversation is a fundamentally interactive and collaborative process , i . e . where what is said is determined jointly by speaker and addressee in close cooperation ( for example Clark & Wilkes - Gibbs 1986 , Goodwin 1979 , Sacks et al . 1974 , Scheglo¡ et al . 1977 ) . And this is of course what I have been taking advantage of in comparing interaction to conversation , and intramental cognition towriting . Byanalogy , trad - itionalcognitivetheoryisbasedona“literarymodelof action” , where actions are the output of the ﬁnal step ; the literary model of speech production is a direct application to language production of the in - tention - to - action schema , and the rational modelof action as awhole ( compare with chapter 1 ) . Pulling the world into the cognitive process is what makes the in - teractive and incremental strategy so e¡ective . ¿e brief directions ( “by the quad” , etc . ) accomplish their purpose single - handedly , al - most lazily , by oºoading e¡ort onto outside factors , doing with minimal e¡ort and deliberation what would have required signi - ﬁcant energy for traditional models to achieve . ¿e small , simple segments of speech have an e¡ect in the world , and it is these e¡ects that allow the speaker to use much less e¡ort in achieving her end . ¿is is partly due to the transfer of work from one party to another , but also partly because , to an outside observer , this strategy decreas - es the total amount of work done by all involved parties , by eliminat - ing the redundancy that is necessary to compensate for separation , as detailed above . Hence , it works more e¡ectively not only for the speaker , but also as a whole . ¿e brief , deictic “to the right” , “by the quad” , and “right there” that are spoken would not work in the literary model . ¿ey are so brief because they can just “point” at circumstances in the situation that are available . In e¡ect , these brief expressions specify the loca - tion jointly with the situation ; they determine it in interaction with each other . ¿e simultaneous presence of both—the absence of sep - aration—allows the spoken speciﬁcation to become interdependent 144 sketching has been recognized , a dichotomy is still made between sketching and thinking : ¿inking is one of the most notoriously intractable parts of psy - chology since the thought process is not easily observed . … ¿e designer , however , has never resembled Rodin’s “¿inker” who sits in solitary meditation , but has in contrast always externali - zed his thoughts , not only as an end - product in the form of a design , but as an integral part of the process itself in the form of drawings and sketches . ( Lawson 1980 , p . 96 ) 146 6 . Making the world a part of cognition 6 . 1 Inquiring materials ¿e topic of the present chapter can be put in two di¡erent ways : speaking generally , it is concerned with the role of the world in in - teractive cognition . On a more immediate level , the argument con - cerns this issue as it materializes in design , in the cognitive role of physical working materials in designers’ activities . ¿e role of action in cognition was the topic of chapters 4 and 5 . ¿e heart of the argument there was that cognition is not organized around a mind working in isolation , but to carry out cognitive tasks throughmakingthemostof mind , action , andworldworkingincon - cert . For this reason , cognition is organized di¡erently , and thus works di¡erently , than if it were purely intramental . ¿e result is that when these three parts work together , performance is superior to that of an intramentally organized cognition . ¿e present chapter will carry this argument on to analyze the role of the physical world in this scheme : how can the world have a role in cognition , and what exactly is this role—what does the world contribute to cognition ? A short tentative answer is that it makes ef - fective interactive cognition possible ; this is the role of physical working materials in design . Interactive cognition relies on mind , action and world working together ; its superior performance de - pends on the immediate presence of those physical materials that it is concerned with . Such a short answer is not very informative , however , and a more substantial answer requires a deeper analysis . For this , I will begin by returning to the topic of sketching , although this time it is the sket - ches that are in focus ; the material rather than the activity . From the previous discussion of sketching , it should intuitively be somewhat clear that sketches have a cognitive purpose , just like the sketching that produces them . ¿at is to say , they are used by cognition and contribute something crucial to it . However , the stakes on the relation between cognition and world are quite high , and so many things have been said about it , that a convincing case needs to do much more than appeal to intuition . 147 ¿e substance will this time be found in the sketches themselves , and in other kinds of working material that designers use . I will start out with the notion of inquiring materials : working ma - terials with a cognitive purpose . ¿is idea is analogous to that of in - quiring action , which has been discussed at length in the previous chapters . Much of the argument here parallels and builds on the points that were made there . ¿e analogy lies in the following : the artifacts we normally asso - ciate with design are the products of the design process . Hence we have a productive purpose of materials , just as we normally think of the productive e¡ects of action . If however a material is created in the design process , not as an end product , but rather to serve the in - quiry that the design process is , then it has a second , inquiring purpose . Again , this parallels the inquiring purpose of action . An “inquiring material” then , like and inquiring action , does not function as an end product of design , but as a means for the inquiry that design is . Sketches have this very purpose , and are therefore the ﬁrst kind of inquiring material examined in this chapter . 6 . 2 Sketches ‡ile the material about sketching came from architecture , the best evidence for the cognitive purpose of sketches comes from graphic design : Right from the earliest stages of tackling a problem , designers’ thinking is mediated by the sketches or visible notes that they make to familiarize themselves with the material they are mani - pulating . On paper , these notes may be very rough to start with : possibly just thumbnail sketches that indicate the structural re - lationships between elements of a document without focusing in detail on any particular elements . ( Black 1990 , p . 284 ) ¿is is the use of sketching that we recognize from chapter 4 : for gra - phic designers as much as architects , sketching is the way in which they work on a problem . In the very early stage that Black describes here , designers make sketches to “familiarize themselves” with their problem . As the work proceeds , sketches are used in many other ways , too . Still , a statement such as this is not enough for determining that sketches have a cognitive role . ¿e case will be much stronger if it can be shown that sketches do not serve any productive purpose at all . 149 W o r l d 148 Figure 6 . 1 Two kinds of sketch for a magazine cover , with two dif - ferent levels of precision and refinement . Note the relative sizes of each kind . ing several variations on it . … Be as neat and precise as is necessary to show the relationships between elements and their general shap - es . ( Arntson 1993 , pp . 5 – 6 , my italics ) Arntson here details the process that creates thumbnails . ‡at makes them noteworthy , and a category of their own , is their purpose— they are the solution to a very common problem in graphic design . As Black noted above , thumbnails are used right from the beginning . Graphic designers use them to explore the problem and to become fa - miliar with it ( chapter5 ) . ¿is exploratoryuse is what thumbnails are adapted to . First , as Arntson states , they are used for generating many ideas with several variations , and therefore they should be fast to draw . ¿is is why they are made small , if not literally quite as small as thumbnails . Second , exploration does not involve testing ( “rejec - 151 If so , then they are created for a cognitive purpose only , and there - fore qualify as a pure inquiring material . ¿e evidence for this lies in the properties of sketches themselves . ¿ey do not look like produc - tion drawings—the kind of drawing that is made as the end product of design , and which is passed on to other people—they look much more informal and unﬁnished , and thereby lack the precision requi - red for serving any productive purpose ( cf . ﬁgure 6 . 1 ) . A second reason is the following : ‡y would sketches be created from the very beginning of design , when just about everything is likely to change before you arrive at the ﬁnal product ? ¿is would surely be a waste of e¡ort . Hence , their purpose must be to serve the inquiry that creates them . And since they are created so early on , they have to serve this purpose right from the start . ¿is is an essentially negative argument—they can’t be anything but inquiring materials . However , the fundamental reason behind this roughness is positive : their being unﬁnished is what makes sket - ches suitable for their inquiring purpose . But what is more , di¡erent kinds of sketches are given di¡erent properties , to ﬁt their di¡erent purposes . For example : Rather like language , these drafts have di¡erent levels of precision andformality ( inﬂexions ) depending on whether designers are us - ing them for feedback to themselves , or for communicating ide - as to colleagues and clients . ( ibid . ) Thumbnails Hence , the format of sketches in general is adapted for di¡erent pur - poses . Sometimes , such an adapted sketch format is a category im - portant enough to get its own name . One format used by graphic de - signers is the thumbnail ( ﬁgures 6 . 1 , 6 . 2 ) . An introductory textbook in graphic design gives the following description ; I have emphasized the expressions that indicate their cognitive function : ¿umbnails are ideasketches ; theyare visual evidence of thethink - ing , searching , sorting process that brings out solutions . … ¿umbnails are usually small because they are meant to be fast and undetailed . … Fill a sheet of paper with evenly spaced small rectangles and then ﬁll them with ideas . Never reject an idea ; just sketch it in and go on . Work through the idea with your pencil from every perspective you can imagine . ¿en try taking one idea and do - 150 Figure 6 . 2 Thumbnails ( dimensions somewhat reduced ) . whether the idea still works on a larger scale . Take this opportunity to workoutsmallproblemareasthatcouldnotbedealtwithorfore - seen at the thumbnail stage . ( 1993 , pp . 6 – 7 , my italics ) Hence in roughs there is once again a close parallel between pur - pose , process , and the properties of the material . Roughs are used when the best ideas are to be taken beyond their initial conceptions at the thumbnail stage , and be worked toward a ﬁnal result . Arntson lists the main purpose of these roughs as testing the best ideas ; a switch from thumbnails to roughs is thereby also a shift from explora - tion to experiment . She also notes two other functions : ﬁrstly , that such a test implies further reﬁnement as well , and secondly , that you now work out problems that did not appear in the thumbnail format ( cf . ﬁgure 6 . 1 ) . To fulﬁll these objectives , the properties of this particular kind of sketch are adjusted accordingly : ‡ereas the minimal size and im - 153 ting” ) ideas , or going into great detail . ¿erefore they “may be very rough to start with” , and should only “indicate the structural rela - tionships” , according to Black . ¿e small size also helps to keep them rough ; you cannot add much detail on this scale . In this way , it is clear that the properties of thumbnails as a physi - cal working material are thoroughly adapted to both their purpose and the process of drawing them . ¿ey are small because they are meant to be fast and undetailed , and they should only be as neat and precise as is necessary to show the relationships between elements and their general shapes . ¿ereby , thumbnails are given properties that enable them to support , even enhance , a rather speciﬁc use , the exploration of a graphic design problem . ¿is close relation between their physical properties and their purpose and use activity is a very signiﬁcant fact that applies to all kinds of inquiring material . Arntson also describes how thumbnails are created . ¿is is a work - ing procedure well suited for its exploratory purpose , spanning a wide area of possibilities without heading in any speciﬁc direction or searching for a particular goal . ¿e thumbnails’ physical charac - teristics have a major impact on the form of this exploratory sket - ching activity , and these characteristics are also essential in making it e¡ective . ¿e working material has certain characteristics that produce a highly adaptive and very e¡ective working procedure . ¿is enables the designer to focus on those aspects of her problem that she is pre - sentlyconcernedwith—thegeneralquestionsthatareimportantear - ly on—without having to work out the full details of design concepts that will later turn out not to work and which will therefore be aban - doned . ¿ese questions can instead be postponed until later . Hence the properties of the material and the format of the activityare close - ly adapted to their purpose . In this way , physical materials can have an impact on cognition that is both speciﬁc and substantial . ¿is is also good evidence that thumbnails are an inquiring material . Roughs In addition to thumbnails , Arntson gives a corresponding descrip - tion of roughs ( cf . ﬁgures6 . 1 , 6 . 3 ) . If thumbnails are exploratory , then roughs are best characterized as experimental ( cf . chapter 5 ) : Once the range of ideas has been fully explored , select the best two or three thumbnails for reﬁnement . … ¿e purpose is to test 152 Figure 6 . 3 Roughs ( dimensions greatly reduced , cf . ﬁgure 6 . 1 ) . ideas . ¿is interpretation ﬁnds support in Arntson’s advice to never reject an idea at this stage of work . A rough is in contrast an experi - mental sketch which is used just as such a test , and accordingly its characteristics are adapted to serve this purpose best . So sketches are an inquiring material whose properties and work processes are adapted both to how they are used and what they are used for . But they are not merely ﬁtted to their inquiring function in general , the adaptation goes even further , as the cases of thumb - nailsandroughsshow . ¿esetwokindsof sketcheshavedi¡erentpur - poses , and they are therefore given di¡erent properties to better ﬁt their speciﬁc functions ( cf . ﬁgure 6 . 1 ) . 6 . 3 Situating strategies With this initial analysis completed , we may now return to the the - oretical issue of the role of the world in cognition , which is that when the objects of your concern are physically present in front of you , they enable interactive cognition to work at its best . ¿is much I have already stated , but before any speciﬁc consequences can be derived and examined , as I am about to do , the general principle must be made into something much more tangible . To begin with , what are the objects that are of concern to the designer ? An obvious object of concern is the artifact that is being designed , butitisnottheonlyone . ¿edesigner’sconcernwithfunctionrequir - es her to consider more than the isolated object . Even though this has probably always been recognized in the design literature ( e . g . Alex - ander 1964 ) , the need for pointing this out may lie in the everyday sense of “design” , as it appears in “designer clothes” , “I like the de - sign of your watch” , and so on . For some strange reason , design in the everyday sense seems to be as remote from function , usefulness and other practical concerns as it could ever be . In fact , when something is referred to as design , it ironically enough always seems to refer to those aspects that have no purpose , but which exist only as decora - tion or embellishment . In any case , exactly what the designer must take into account may not be obvious . To design in the more precise sense discussed here , function is a central concern . ¿is means that the artifact that is pro - duced is not the genuine objective of design work . In terms of func - tion , theartifactisnotanend , butthe means bywhichthedesignercan achieve her real end . ¿is actual objective is to e¡ect certain changes on a particular situation , which is typically quite complex . ¿e arti - 155 W o r l d precision of a thumbnail are well matched to its uncommitted stage of work , the rough goes one step away from this by increasing both scale and precision . ¿us it becomes possible to evaluate the ideas more thoroughly . Again , the increase in detail is partlya consequence of the larger format . Conversely , one could say that a larger format is necessary if you want to work at a ﬁner level of detail . ¿e thumbnail format simply does not measure up to any serious testing of an idea ; this is why Arntson speciﬁes that the test should be done “on a larger scale” . Also because of the format , roughs are the right medium for further reﬁnement , as well as for dealing with issues that “could not be dealt with or foreseen at the thumbnail stage” . As a consequence , roughs also require more work . ¿at is why you have to select only a few thumbnails to work out in greater de - tail . ¿is is however entirely as it should be , it is not a fault of thumb - nails that they cannot do this . ¿umbnails are used not in spite of their small size and lack of detail , but because of them ; the same holds for roughs—each kind suits work at a certain stage of the design process . ¿e greater amount of work is rather a way of adapting procedure to purpose . With roughs the working process changes , from the rapid creation of many simple thumbnails into longer episodes of more detailed work , concentrating on just a few alternative designs . ¿is leads to an important point : It is a mistake to measure any kind of inquiring material by how di¡erent it is from the ﬁnal pro - duct . ¿ese di¡erences are not shortcomings , they are the very es - sence and raison d’etre of design materials that are created for a cog - nitive purpose . ¿ese two kinds of inquiring material , thumbnails and roughs , can be said to directly correspond to the two kinds of inquiring ac - tion introduced in chapter 5 , experiment and explore . ‡ile both kinds of inquiring action are doing for the sake of knowing , explo - ratory action is rather vague and probing by nature , in that it lacks a speciﬁc direction . Experimental action is more speciﬁc , in that is also works as a test of the action itself , and it is thereby also potential - ly much more rewarding . Transferring this distinction to inquiring materials , thumbnails and roughs are two kinds of “material for the sake of knowing” , i . e . with a cognitive purpose . ¿umbnails are exploratory sketches , used to generate visual ideas and explore the problem , but not to test the 154 ways . ¿erefore , steps still have to be taken to get at the non - existing , future conditions . ¿e remote conditions that the designer needs to understand can be characterized collectively as the future situation of use . Not only the artifact by itself , but also far from anything and everything in the world . For instance , design can be described as an inquiry into this future situation of use . Designers have a very distinctive and unique way of making up for this problem : ¿ere is a range of design techniques—with names such as sketching , prototyping , mock - ups , scenarios , storyboards , simulation , and usertesting , among others—that vary greatly in their surface char - acteristics , but still use the same strategy to enable the designer to get at the future situation of use . Quite simply , these techniques re - create the various parts of this situation that do not yet exist . To make interac - tive cognition work well , the designer has to create her own work - ing materials ; before the world can become a part of cognition , the designer has to create it . ¿erefore , I will collectively refer to these design techniques as situating strategies . ¿ey serve to make the world a part of cognition . ¿is provides a uniﬁed explanation of these techniques that are all widely used in design practice , and that are well recognized to be of great importance , but for which we heretofore have lacked a deeper theoreticalunderstanding . ¿isis , Ibelieve , muchbecausetheydonot adhere to the prevailing kinds of explanation ( cf . chapter 1 ) . Never - theless , once the need for re - creating the physical world has been formulated in this way , it orders all these apparently diverse phe - nomena under one simple explanatory principle . As it will turn out , their diversity comes with a purpose : the future situation of use is a concept that applies to situations whose conditions may be very dif - ferent from one another . Each strategyre - creates one aspect that may occur in a future situation of use . It is the diversity and large number of situating strategies that allow them to ﬁll their common function across a wide range of conditions and purposes , and di¡erent kinds of design . In this I am restricting the discussion to materials that are pro - duced as part of design , thereby excluding any ready - made materi - als that might have a cognitive purpose . ¿is makes the case strong - er for the world’s role in cognition , while strengthening the criteria for what qualiﬁes as evidence : If a designercan be shown in this man - ner to go out of her way to create materials that serve no productive 157 W o r l d fact’s function equals the role it will play in this changed , future situ - ation . ¿is rolewill usually be quite complex , as the artifact will have e¡ects in manydimensions : social , organizational and others as much as the physical domain ( cf . Brown & Duguid1994 , Ehn & Kyng 1991 , Greenbaum & Kyng 1991a , b ) . ¿e designer’s job is to ensure that the resulting function is indeed the one that she desires . According - ly , her concerns will span a large share of what might be called the functional situation , covering all the elements and dimensions that are relevant . Computer science often separates usability from functionality , but I ﬁnd this distinction largely redundant . How an artifact works together with the people who use or operate it is a fundamental part of its function , not something apart from it . To my mind , such a sep - aration only reﬂects how much computer science has historically been concerned with issues where human involvement is marginal . ¿e emphasis that has been given to usability was necessary to make up for this negligence , but to maintain the distinction here would yield unnecessary complications . Moreover , the distinction is irrele - vant to most design disciplines ; only a small fraction of all artifacts operate without human involvement . Hence , to keep things simple , I will not separate use from function . The designer re - creates the future situation of use Taken on its own , the claim that physical presence enables interac - tive cognition appears somewhat empty . However , there is a special circumstance that applies to design , and herein lies the twist : ¿e designer’s inquiry concerns the situation that I have just described . But this situation is not present to the designer , and therefore not availabletoherinteractivecognitiveprocess . Notonlyarethedesign - er’s concerns remote from her ; the functional situation is located in the future , and hence does not even exist yet . ¿erefore , the given basic provisions do not enable the designer to nurture a healthy , in - teractive cognitive process ; she will have to settle for something less . ¿e artifact itself , for example , will only come to exist as a result of design , when the work has been done . ¿e designer’s concerns are remote even when an existing situation is to be changed . ‡ile stud - ying the existing situation is useful , it only takes you so far—after all , the future conditions are what really matters . Unless the design itself is trivial , the existing situation will be changed in non - trivial 156 ¿e second function is when the re - created aspect is used in an inquiry into some other aspect , as support in a sense . For instance , it is easier to inquire into an artifact’s interaction with users , if not only a prototype is made , but it is also placed in the hands of a repre - sentative user . Here , the reason why is not as straightforward . Since the function of everything ( not just the artifact itself ) involves in - teractions with other aspects , an inquiry into a given aspect must also look at these interactions . ¿is interplay is easier to study if both of the involved aspects are made concrete , since this also makes the interaction between the two available to hands - on inquiry . I should also add that all parts of the future situation of use are equally eligible to be the focus of inquiry . ¿e designer is no less in - terested in inquiring into for example the user , than into the artifact itself . Prototypes may often be useful in the second role , as support for inquiring into the user and other aspects . 6 . 4 Prototypes ¿e probably most common situating strategy and working material used in design is the prototype : a lifelike model of the design - in - pro - gress itself , made as the design is being developed , and that is equip - ped with some of its properties . ¿e classical kind of prototype is the one used in industrial design ( ﬁgure6 . 4 ) : three - dimensional models , made of some easily manip - ulable material , and often in life size if practical . ¿e use of this kind of physical , hands - on model is not restricted to industrial design , but also occurs in other disciplines , including more recent ones such as interaction design . ¿ere are also many other kinds of prototypes that are used in many di¡erent design disciplines . ¿e purpose of the present section is to go deeper into the ques - tion of what makes a good inquiring material through an analysis of prototypes . ‡at characteristics make a material good for cognition in general , and for design in particular ? ¿is elaborates on the ana - lysis of thumbnails and roughs , and the observations that these ma - terials have their respective properties adapted to their speciﬁc in - quiring purposes . From their commonness , the uses of prototypes in design are very diverse . ¿e power drill prototypes in ﬁgure 6 . 4 were created to ex - plore and evaluate the possibilities for improving handling comfort and reducing noise , leading to the famous eight - hour grip , a break - through in industrial design ergonomics . Earlier models had been 159 W o r l d purpose , then this makes a stronger case for their cognitive impor - tance , than does merely using existing materials . How the strategies are used It can now be made clearer what role the world plays in cognition . It has been established that it is the re - created future situation of use that represents the “world” here . ‡at is the re - created future situ - ation used for ? ‡at kind of interactive cognition does it enable ? As this is best explained by example , I will keep this general intro - duction brief . Still , design is an inquiry into the future situation of use . ¿e function of the situating strategies is that they enable this inquiry to be performed interactively , with the advantages that were described in chapter 5 . ¿is means that situating strategies a ) always occur as part of an inquiring activity that b ) makes use of what it re - creates : there is never such a process of re - creation that is not tied to an inquiring design activity . ¿is connection means that the resul - ting activity is a single working process with two logical compo - nents : one is the strategy that re - creates the future situation of use , the other is the inquiry itself , which uses that which is re - created . However , these two components are so highly blended together that an analysis of such an activity cannot strictly tell them apart . ¿is is among other things due to the fact that one action can have both an inquiring and a productive purpose at the same time . For instance , as Quist’s demonstration of sketching showed , the activity of mak - ing the sketch is impossible to distinguish from the inquiry that makes use of it . At any rate , what is important for the present discus - sion is that without the situating strategy that produces the working material , the inquiry that uses this material would not be possible . ¿e general principle is that situating strategies serve to make in - teractive inquiry possible . Still , their function can be divided into two general categories . ¿e ﬁrst one is where the strategy re - creates the object of inquiry itself . ¿e value of having a prototype of the eventual design itself in hand should be obvious , particularly com - pared to evaluating the design on the basis of written speciﬁcations . ¿is also illustrates how the situating strategies can improve cogni - tion , since it shows the di¡erence between inquiring into an aspect with or without having a re - created version in hand . Holding a pro - totype allows the designer to inquire into the design interactively , rather than by intramental imagination of a design ( a remote / non - present entity ) that is merely described in writing . 158 by the dictionary deﬁnition , as a precursor of things to come , or as the ﬁrst in a series . ¿is is also the reason why images of actual working materials are so hard to ﬁnd in the design literature : they are not considered pret - ty enough . For illustrations , these are often “polished”or completely redrawn by an illustrator to become presentable ( all drawings from the Quist and Petra episode belong to this category ) . Sometimes this is even done contrary to the author’s wishes ( cf . Alexander 1971 ) . And when they make it to print , to “look good” they are often pre - sented as book illustrations normally are , with a distinctness and clar - ity that removes their transient character , which is their very essen - ce . But their lack of presentability often causes the designer to throw them away herself , too , making them hard to document and study . Perhaps even more clearly than with sketches , the partial and deli - berately unﬁnished nature of prototypes shows that they must have a cognitive purpose . ‡y else would a designer go out of her way to create a model of the design long before the product is ﬁnished ? ‡en she knows that it is certain to be changed , when she uses a spe - cial prototyping material , and when she also knows that it can only be given some of the properties of the ﬁnal design ? In cases such as the power drill prototypes ( ﬁgure 6 . 4 ) , the resemblance is even min - imal . ¿erefore , it is clear that prototypes are not built for a produc - tive purpose . Just as with sketches , the properties I have just enumerated are not problems but indeed desired features , as they make prototypes sim - pler than the real artifact . ¿is makes them suitable for use in in - quiry , for instance to test the design as it is being created and reﬁned . Classical design methods always had an evaluation phase at the end of the design process . ¿e problem is , there is little use in evaluating the design when you are done with it , as it is too late to use the test results . Testing should be done when the results are still useful . With a prototype , you do not have to wait until the design is completed , you can perform tests very early and use the results to inform de - sign . ¿is kind of testing is also known as formative evaluation ( Hix & Hartson 1993 ) . As a prototype is a model of the design itself , working on the de - sign may simply consist of developing a prototype which is the design that the product will be based on . In this manner , no other design speciﬁcation is used at all , and design as a whole becomes an entirely physical , interactive working procedure that involves no ab - 161 W o r l d inspired by science - ﬁction space - guns of the time ( seriously ! ) , and their styling thereby hampered practical use ( Heskett 1980 ) . ¿e realness of lifelike prototypes makes them particularly easy to relate to , in particular with respect to how they will function in their eventual use , rather than as isolated objects detached from a realistic setting . Prototypes give the designer a concrete , tangible model that she can relate to physically and practically , rather than intellectually . ¿e same advantages make them suitable for getting feedback from potential users and customers , a function that is at least as important . However , in some cases , models of a future product may be creat - ed purely as showpieces ; to impress clients , potential customers , and themedia . Often , theyareevennecessaryforpersuadingthemanage - ment and higher executives of your own company ( Shrage 1996 ) . ¿is kind of use is what we see in the“concept cars”that automobile makers often present at trade shows . In the eyes of the general pub - lic , prototypes of this kind may arguablydominate the image of what an industrial design prototype is : Albeit unrepresentative as proto - types , this kind simply has the greatest impact , and the visual appeal to attract attention . In reality , such a showpiece does not share the purpose of prototypes as discussed here , but qualiﬁes as such merely 160 Figure 6 . 4 Industrial design prototypes and the final products . for a real user interface on a computer screen . For these reasons , they are also known as “lo - ﬁ” prototypes . ¿ese two alternatives represent two almost diametrically oppos - ing approaches to the same prototyping problem , and this makes the prototypingoptionsavailabletoadesignerstandoutveryclearly , with their strengths and weaknesses . ¿e following comparison will show that the properties named as desirable by Rettig precisely the ones that make a prototype work well as an inquiring material . ¿is also serves as very good evidence for prototypes having a primarily cog - nitive purpose . ¿e merits of a prototype divide into two major kinds , building vs . using . ¿e obvious kind of merit is the extent towhich theyenable interactive cognition to work well . One might also call this their eªciency as inquiring materials . I will be referring to this aspect as using or testing ( i . e . inquiring into ) the prototype . ¿e second kind could be called their eªciency as situating strategies , since e . g . pro - totypes must be created before they can serve as the basis for inquiry . For this reason , a dimension to consider is how easy they are to build , before they can be used : how simple they are to create and also to modify . I will call this building or working with the prototype itself . I will begin with this second dimension , as it is conceptually simpler to explain . Workability and relevance ‡en Rettig ( 1994 ) compares paper and software prototypes , he makes the following remarks on their workability ( p . 22 ) : Hi - ﬁ prototypes take too long to build . … Paper prototypes , on the other hand , are extremely fast to develop and the technique is very easy to learn . ¿e point is that paper prototypes are simple to build . Hi - ﬁ proto - types are much more diªcult to work with . ¿ey are almost as com - plicated to make as the ﬁnal program itself , since they , too , are made in software ( ibid . ) : Even with the coolest of high - level tools , building a prototype is still essentially a programming exercise… Software is a much more diªcult medium to work in than paper and pencil . ‡ereas you can just start making a paper prototype o¡ the top of your head , a prototype in software is a design project of its 163 W o r l d stract , logical speciﬁcations or other means of that kind . Historical - ly , this has arguably been much more common : until the 16th centu - ry , historians have it , the artifact was built directly ; drawings , proto - types , or other intermediate forms were hardly used at all ( see e . g . Cooley1988 , Herbert1993 ) . Suchhands - onworkundoubtedlyqual - iﬁes as an interactive working procedure in every respect . At that time , design by drawing ﬁrst began to emerge . Even after that , ab - stract non - resembling design speciﬁcations , written or other , have been rare , and even then being used mostly as instruments for busi - ness and legal aspects of design projects ( Lawson 1980 ) . Hence , de - sign as work directly on prototypes probably prevails still today . Also like graphic sketches , the materials used for prototypes are chosen to match the ﬂuidity of design : balsa wood and other soft , workable woods , Styrofoam and other similar materials are common ( cf . ﬁgure 6 . 4 ) . ¿e same applies also to prototypes of less physical , seeminglymore“intellectual”prototyping work , such as in software or interaction design . User interface prototypes in paper vs . software In the discussion of thumbnails and roughs above , I made an initial analysis of the desirable properties of an inquiring material . For pro - totypes , this analysis can be made much more comprehensive . It will be based on an analysis by Rettig ( 1994 ) where he compares user in - terface prototypes built in two di¡erent media , paper and software , arguing that paper is a superior medium . Being a practitioner’s com - parison of two di¡erent kinds of prototype that share the same pur - pose , and which points out the advantages of one kind over the oth - er , this provides good insights into which qualities are desirable in a prototype . Rettig’s ( 1994 ) discussion of user interface prototypes—i . e . for the screen contents and visible behavior of a computer application— compares prototypes made in paper and software ; two alternatives that are quite di¡erent from one another . Prototypes built in soft - ware are computer - based , and their graphic screen displays and in - teraction are potentially indistinguishable from those of a real pro - gram . Accordingly these are known as “hi - ﬁ” prototypes . ¿e other kind is so - called paper prototypes : user interface mock - ups basically created on plain paper ( ibid . ) . Typically being drawn by hand and laid out on a table , paper prototypes give a very informal and non - technical impression , and they are impossible to mistake 162 purpose that the prototype is used for . ¿is obviously saves work— under good circumstances , a lot of work . ¿is can be expressed as a principle of relevance : A good proto - type serves its purpose as a basis for inquiry and interactive cogni - tion , while being simple to create . ¿is means that it should have the properties required for its purpose , and as fewother properties as pos - sible . It also means that relevance is always relative to just what ex - actly a prototype will be used for ; this determines what properties it will need to have . Hence a good inquiring material is the product of a successful trade - o¡ . How can relevance account for all the above questions ? Take the obvious ones ﬁrst : Relevance means leaving out unimportant as - pects . ¿is saves work for the designer , it makes the prototype easier both to build and to modify . It holds for all prototypes , too ; how - ever , it holds to di¡erent degrees in di¡erent media : working in paper allows you to leave out more than in software prototypes . ¿is is because you can often leave out detail in a prototype , and thereby save work because for its purpose the prototype does not need the details . It is often suªcient to make rough , preliminary versions of its component parts , compared to the full detail of these parts as they will appear in the ﬁnal product . In other words , you gain relevance by being able to leave out unimportant detail . Awork - able prototyping medium in this respect means that it is easy to leave out detail . ¿is is true for paper but not for software prototypes , where rough aspects also require detailed speciﬁcation ; all elements require this . ¿is yields more work , and it explains the points that remain for relevance to account for : it makes building software prototypes har - der to learn and to master , you have to learn and know how to pro - duce these detailed speciﬁcations ( knowing either programming or how to use a prototyping tool ) , which is obviously harder . It also di - verts your attention from what you are designing to how you can get what you want ( this is the 95 % principle ) . Finally , because software prototypesrequiredetailedspeciﬁcationof roughfeatures , eventhese rough features are sensitive to small , technical details . In contrast , using paper and pencil does not require detailed skills ; you can focus on what you are doing rather than on how to do it ; and paper prototypes are robust because no technical detail is in - volved . Hence , all of Rettig’s points can be traced to the relevance principle . 165 W o r l d own , that requires special consideration to avoid potential diªcul - ties . A prototyping tool does help a great deal , but you still need to know what it can do and what its limitations are ( Ehn & Kyng 1991 ) . And without a tool of this kind you are facing a full - scale program - ming project . Software prototyping tools also require specialized skills , where - as Rettig points out that paper and pencil require no training above kindergarten level . He adds on a more serious note that a paper pro - totype allows you to focus entirely on the features of the design it - self , without having to also ﬁgure out how to realize these features in the prototyping application or programming language . To make a broad generalization , interface designers spend 95 % of their time thinking about the design and only 5 % thinking about the mechanics of the tool . Software based tools , no mat - ter how well executed , reverse this ratio . ¿e paper medium is also very robust , whereas hi - ﬁ prototypes are sensitive to even the very smallest technical details , like all software . Minimal problems can bring the prototype down completely , or keep it from running at all . Fixing problems and making modiﬁca - tions become time - consuming tasks . Rettig notes that a “bug” in a paper prototype often can be ﬁxed as it is being tested on a user , with just a small interruption , and only using pencil or eraser : …we all know how hard it can be to get all the bugs out of a pro - gram . On the other hand , I often see teams correcting “bugs” in a paper prototype while the test is in progress . Relevance ¿ese points are all related to how easy the two kinds of prototype are to work with , for the designer who is building a prototype . Sev - eral aspects are mentioned : how quickly you can build it , how hard the technique is to master , how much you can concentrate on the design rather than ﬁguring out how to do what you want , how ro - bust they are , and how easily they can be changed . I will suggest that all of these points derive from one basic princi - ple , relevance . ¿e whole idea of building prototypes is that they are like the ﬁnal design in many respects , but not in all . In particular , they lack those features of the ﬁnal product that are unimportant for the 164 prototype itself . ¿e user is brought in to make the test of the proto - type more realistic . In theoretical terms , she serves as support , as an additional aspect of the recreated future situation of use . Furthermore , since this kind of test is performed when the design process is still very much in progress , it is a kind of formative evalu - ation . ¿e test gives the designer insights about her design , and it is performed to guide further design . ¿e ultimate purpose of both kinds of prototype is to make user testing successful ; to give the de - signer good and relevant feedback from the test . ¿is is their pur - pose ; it is for example not to represent the ﬁnal design as accurately as possible . ¿e following is what Rettig writes about the e¡ect that software prototypes have on user testing : Reviewers [ i . e . users ] tend to comment on “ﬁt and ﬁnished” issues . You are trying to get feedback on the big things … With a slick software prototype , you are just as likely to hear criticisms about your choice of fonts , color combinations , and button sizes . ¿e slickness of a software prototype , in other words its very hi - ﬁ - ness , causes users to comment on small details . At the early stage when these user interface prototypes are made , the designer’s con - cern is rather with the essential elements of the design : ¿edesigner wants toknow whether the fundamental ideas work as intended , but hi - ﬁ prototypes bring out the wrong kind of comments . If the fundamental ideas don’t work , the designer wants to know this soon , before more time and e¡ort is invested in a bad solution . Smaller details are easily ﬁxed later on ; deeper problems are not . So a hi - ﬁ prototype directs the user’s attention to the wrong issues , but what is more , Rettig claims that paper prototypes do exactly the opposite : In contrast , the hand - made appearance of a paper or acetate pro - totype forces users to think about content rather than appear - ance . Soherewehaveaclear - cutoppositionbetweenthetwokinds , regard - ing the same property and the same function , where the weakness in one is the strength of the other . ¿e ﬁnished - looking appearance is a weakness in software prototypes , whereas the rough unﬁnishedness 167 W o r l d ¿e twist with relevance is that it is directly linked to the degree of ﬁdelity in a prototype . ¿is should be somewhat obvious from the discussion about relevant detail . Between the two kinds of proto - type of concern here , the main di¡erence lies in their ﬁdelity to the ﬁnal product , and this is directly related to their relevance : A paper prototype looks much more unﬁnished than one built in software , which is more similar to the ﬁnal product , and thus has a greater amount of the properties the ﬁnal product will have . ¿is is just what the terms hi - ﬁ and lo - ﬁ refer to : a large amount of the ﬁnal properties yields high ﬁdelity with respect to the ﬁnal design , and low ﬁdelity from fewer details yields high relevance . ( It is safe to assume that it indeed is the irrelevant properties that de - signers leave out . ) Hence , it is the very ﬁdelity itself that lies behind relevance . ¿us , it is also the very fact that paper prototypes are lo - ﬁ that makes them superior to software prototypes . ¿is desire for low ﬁdelity makes clear that these prototypes do not have a productive , but an inquiring purpose . Goodness as an inquiring material Eventhoughbuildingaprototypeisalsoacognitiveactivity , theques - tion of how it functions as an inquiring material is more fundamen - tal—that is , how well it serves as a basis for inquiry and interactive cognition . ¿is is the genuine purpose for which the user interface prototype is built . ¿e major function of user interface prototypes in design inquiry is for user testing , which will be given a separate analysis in its own section below . For the present purposes however , it is suªcient to say that user testing serves to test how the interface design stands up under realistic circumstances , by having a representative user work with the prototype “live” and on a realistic task . ¿is applies equally to the use of both kinds of prototype . ¿e greatest di¡erence is that as a software prototype runs on a computer , the user can interact with it directly , whereas there will have to be a person who “runs” a paper prototype , to simulate the responses to the user’s actions . In the following , when there are references to the “user” , this im - plies the context of user testing , or possibly also more informal uses . For example , someone may just be asked to look at it or try it out without a formal procedure , and then to give their general opinion . User testing is part of the designer’s general inquiry into the problem domain . It is a test that focuses not on the user , but on the 166 working material , while leaving out those that are unimportant . A material that has only the right properties , and none other , will en - able you to focus on the important ones . ¿e rest are a potential sour - ce of distraction . From Rettig’s comments , it seems that users’ attention is drawn to the most eye - catching features of a prototype such as the choice of colors . If these features are present , it is harder to focus on less con - spicuous matters . In this case , the latter are the deeper , more concept - ual questions that designers want users to concentrate on . ¿is is again what I previously described as relevance . Irrelevant properties serve no purpose in an inquiring material , but reduce fo - cus ; they should not be in a good prototype . In particular , it is again the level of relevant detail that plays a prominent role : A hand - drawn button with a scribbled label is only speciﬁed to a low level of detail . If it its drawn by a computer , then it is given a speciﬁc size and position , and the text is given a typeface , text size and perhaps a color . ¿ese are all added details , and theyare just the things that Ret - tig claims have a bad inﬂuence on the attention of both designers and users . In the case of the designer’s focus , this is also linked to the issues above , with the 95 % rule in particular . Having to care about unnecessary details is a good example of how the designer’s focus can be disturbed , whether it is by the workings of the tool or the speciﬁcs of the prototype . Prototypes to experiment and explore with Software prototypes are not only used for user interfaces . In soft - ware engineering , there is also a use of “pure” software prototypes . ¿ey have no physical embodiment but share the purpose of con - ventional prototypes , as programs that have a part of the function - ality of the ﬁnal product . ‡at makes software engineering prototypes interesting here , eventhoughtheyarenotentirelyrepresentativeof prototypesingen - eral , is the painstaking detail with which they have been document - ed . ‡at other design disciplinewould devote entire conferences and books toprototyping alone ( Bischofsberger & Pomberger1992 , Bud - de etal . 1992 , Floyd1984 ) , not to mention the number of scientiﬁc pa - pers on the topic ? ¿is literature has made a distinction between prototypes that are used for exploration and experimentation ( Bischofsberger & Pom - berger 1992 , Budde et al . 1992 , Floyd 1984 ) . ¿eir meanings corre - 169 W o r l d of paper prototypes is a very big strength in them . However , this ef - fect applies not only to users that handle the prototypes . Rettig also states that they have the same inﬂuence on designers working with them : they too come to worry about typefaces , colors and layout , and about making screens and menus look good too early : On the back side of the same coin , developers easily become ob - sessed with the prettiness - power of a good tool , and spend their hours choosing colors instead of coming up with new ideas . ¿e reason why designers want feedback on the big issues is that thesearewhattheyareworkingonatthispoint . ¿eyshouldbework - ing on the fundamental questions , because e¡ort spent on details will be wasted every time a piece of work is thrown away or replac - ed by a new version . But software prototypes divert designers’ atten - tion , too , onto details that are of no concern yet . Also user feedback on the details of a design is wasted as soon as the design is changed . ¿e two kinds of prototype share the same function , but they ob - viously do not ﬁll this function equally well . ¿e di¡erence between the two kinds that Rettig describes can be construed as one of focus : One kind of prototype makes both designer and user focus their e¡orts on the proper issues , whereas the other kind pulls their atten - tion in unwanted directions , so that both users and designer instead waste their time on the wrong issues . Hence , according to Rettig , focus is the problem with high - ﬁdelity prototypes in user testing , whereas the same issue is the strength of paper prototypes . It is clear that Rettig’s discussion is concerned with the quality of the feedback from user testing , the function of prototypes that I de - scribed above : he is explicitly discussing how the two kinds of pro - totype a¡ect the feedback the designer gets , and this is also what his contrast between the two kinds is concerned with . ¿ereby , the ad - vantages he is discussing are cognitive advantages . His points also concern the prototypes’ cognitive impact on both designers and us - ers , asinquiringmaterialsthatfacilitateinteractivecognition . Hence , what he is saying is that a good prototype is one that is good for cog - nition . ¿ere is reason to believe that something in the prototypes has a focusing e¡ect on the cognitive performance of people using them ; on their interactive cognition . More speciﬁcally , Rettig’s descrip - tions indicate that focus is related to their degree of roughness and unﬁnished - lookingness . Focus is made possible by having important aspects present in a 168 on - the - keyboard . ¿e “basis of concrete examples” is named as im - portant for yielding insight . Concrete examples stand in contrast to abstract speciﬁcation , which is the norm in software engineering . ¿is implies that such intramental , abstract reasoning is inferior to the interactive cognition that is made possible by the prototype . ¿e authors have here also embedded a comment on relevance as the principle behind a good prototype . ¿ey declare “the quality of the prototype implementation” to be unimportant . ¿is quality re - fers to how good the program is according to the standards of soft - ware engineering , the standards by which “real” software , such as the ﬁnal product , is measured . Roughly , this means how well the software conforms to the requirements speciﬁcation . ¿is includes how many bugs there are , how fast the program is , and so forth , but also how complete the program is , with respect to the speciﬁcation . ¿ere is reason to believe that this is a major part of what the authors mean by “quality” . For example they subsequently quote two other textbooks which state that a prototype is “not necessarily represen - tative of a complete system” ( Bischofsberger & Pomberger 1992 , p . 19 , Boar 1983 , Connel & Shafer 1989 ) . In any case , they state that all of these factors are unimportant . But it is also a remark that software prototypes have a purpose that is quite di¡erent from those pro - grams that are the regular products of software engineering . Rather than quality , the authors state that “the functionality , the ease of modiﬁcation , and the speed of development” are factors that indeed are important . ¿e two last points speak for themselves , de - velopment and modiﬁcation are precisely the two aspects that were discussed earlier . “Functionality” , ﬁnally , iswhat youcan use the pro - totype for , the inquiring activity of exploratory prototyping that they are describing . But the most conclusive part is how the relation between these as - pects is stated . Important are not completeness and quality , which characterize the ﬁnal product , but the three “important factors” , pre - cisely those factors that are crucial to a situating strategy : its function in inquiry , plus being easy to build and modify . ¿is is precisely the relevance principle , where ﬁdelity is traded for usefulness in inquiry , translated into the language of software engineering . ¿ere is a cor - responding description of experimental prototyping : ¿e goal of experimental prototyping is toachieve aconcise spe - ciﬁcation of the components which form the system architec - 171 W o r l d spond to the sense in which I have used these two terms . I will draw upon some of this e¡ort to give some further illustrations of the ways in which prototypes are used in design . Exploratory prototyp - ing has been described in the following way : ¿e goal of exploratory prototyping is to obtain a requirements deﬁnition that is as complete as possible and that can be veriﬁed by the later user on the basis of realistic examples . Its purpose is to permit the developers an insight into the application area , to allow them to discuss various approaches to a solution , and to clarify the feasibility of the proposed system in a given organi - zational environment . Beginning with initial conceptions of the proposed system , a prototype ( of at least the user interface ) is developed that makes it possible to test these conceptions on the basis of concrete ex - amples and to successively ( re ) deﬁne the desired functionality . ¿e important factors are not the quality of the prototype im - plementation , but the functionality , the ease of modiﬁcation , and the speed of development … Exploratory prototyping is an approach that supports requirements analysis and requirements definition . ( Bischofsberger & Pomberger 1992 , p 16 – 17 ) I previously stated that a situating strategy is always performed with - in an inquiry , serving to make that inquiry possible . In this case , the inquiry concerns the analysis and deﬁnition of requirements ; to de - velop the designers’ understanding of what the authors refer to as “the application area”and“the proposed system in a given organiza - tional environment” . ¿ese are more abstract terms for what I have called “the future situation of use” . Exploratory prototyping is the activity that serves to make this inquiry possible : to “support” it , to “permit insight” , to “allow dis - cussion” . ¿ese terms show the relation of dependence between the situating strategyand the inquiring function that it enables . ¿e pro - totyping activity consists of exploring solution approaches and mak - ing a basic evaluation of them ( “clarify the feasibility of ” ) . Taken together , the pattern of exploratory prototyping is typical of situating strategies and how they are used : It is the prototype that makes these activities possible , as a material that enables interactive cognition . It “makes it possible to test these conceptions on the basis of concrete examples” ; in other words , through working interac - tively and hands - on—or with software prototypes , at least hands - 170 ‡ereas the adaptation to purpose is speciﬁc to each individual case , the principle can be illustrated through how a prototype can be adapted to either exploratory or experimental use . Relevance is achieved by leaving certain aspects of a design out of a prototype , and this can be done in two major types of ways : you can make either horizontal or vertical cuts , yielding horizontal or ver - tical relevance . ¿e interest in the two kinds of relevance lies in the connection to their function and how they are used , because they correspond to the two activities of inquiry that have been discussed , exploration and experimentation . Horizontal relevance is in fact what I introduced above to explain how you can gain relevance and focus on the higher level aspects of a design by leaving out detail . Although it is not immediately ob - vious , this is the kind of relevance that lies behind the roughness of a sketch or a paper prototype . Its crude - lookingness is a consequence of the minimal e¡ort put into the sketch , not going beyond the most basic features . Hence , it is given only a minimum of detail , which is what horizontal relevance means . Vertical relevance goes along the other dimension , working out certain aspects in full detail , while leaving others out entirely . ¿ese two kinds of relevance really correspond to two dimensions , both of which are involved in any actual prototype , as they are not exclusive in practice . ( ¿is distinction derived from software engineering terminology , e . g . Bischofsberger & Pomberger 1992 , Budde et al . 1992 . ¿ey ori - ginate in the view of a system as a hierarchical tree of components : larger functionality higher up branches out into progressively ﬁner detail downward in the tree , whereas related functionality is collec - ted on the same branch . Vertical cuts remove entire functions by fel - ling a whole branch , whereas horizontal cuts remove detail below them . ) ¿e connection between the two kinds of relevance and use can befoundinforexampleTognazzini1992 . Horizontalrelevanceisbest suited for exploratory purposes ( ibid . , p . 81 ) : Horizontal prototypes display most or all of the full range of the application … without going in depth on any one part . Use to test the overall design concepts . As the previous discussion showed , exploratory prototyping does not involve the speciﬁcs of a design . It serves insight , discussion and 173 W o r l d ture . Its purpose is to experimentally validate the suitability of system component speciﬁcations , architecture models , and ide - as for solutions for individual system components . … [ A ] proto - type is developed to permit the simulations of the interaction of the designed system components . … Experimental prototyping is an approach that supports system and component design . ( Bi - schofsberger & Pomberger 1992 , p . 17 ) Although this activity is somewhat di¡erent from the previous one , the description displays the pattern of a situating strategy : a software prototype of the system is developed ; the purpose of the prototype is “to permit” simulations of the system and its internal workings . ¿ese simulations in turn provide the basis for experiments by which the designer can test the design . ¿is experimental evaluation of the system is the inquiry , whose purpose is to work out the speciﬁcs of the design itself ; the authors lay stress on the internal parts of the soft - ware system . ¿is inquiry would not be possible without the situat - ing strategy , which by means of simulations of a software prototype re - creates the future system . As the last sentence states , experimental prototyping is the basis for the design of the system . ¿e purpose of this procedure is appropriately described as expe - rimental . It is explicitly described as being concerned with detailed tests—experiments—with thedesign itself and its internalworkings . In contrast , the term “exploratory” is appropriate for the previously described procedure , since it was characterized as serving “to per - mitinsight”and“allowdiscussion” , ratherthandetailedandthorough testing . It is also exploratory in that it is used to understand the “or - ganizational environment” , not just “the proposed system” ; the de - scription of experimental prototyping is only concerned with the internal workings of the design itself . Making prototypes function - relevant So far I have only discussed the adaptation of inquiring materials in general terms , even though relevance is relative to purpose . ¿is means that not all materials are made relevant in the same way . ¿ere may be two di¡erent prototypes of the same design whose di¡eren - ces make them better or worse for di¡erent kinds of inquiry . For this reason , adaptation can be taken further to match prototypes to their speciﬁc purpose . ¿ereby their relevance can be increased by match - ing their properties to how they will be used in inquiry . 172 ter” , that is all there is . It is a mock - up . ¿e box is empty , its func - tionality is zero . Still , it works very well ( Ehn & Kyng 1991 , p . 171 , my italics ) Sometimes you are even explicitly advised to avoid them : Construct a ﬁrst version completely by hand . Sketch thewidgets , hand - letter the labels . Don’t even worry about using a straight - edge at ﬁrst . Just get the ideas down on paper . ( Rettig1994 , p . 25 ) ¿is unﬁnished nature of prototypes , and the emphasis on keeping them unﬁnished , makes clear that they are not made to be the ﬁnal product , sincecompletenessandﬁnalityareexplicitlygivenup . ¿us , producing a prototype must serve the design process itself . ¿e same point is implicit in Brooks’ ( 1975 ) famous advice to al - ways plan to throw away the ﬁrst version of a software program ( “be - cause you will anyhow” ) . If a program is created only to be thrown away , it purpose is obviously not to be the product of design . If it is still made , it must be it must be to the process of creation itself that it is important . Nevertheless , as signiﬁcant as this inquiring role is , it is still un - dervalued and poorly understood . In fact , only rarely is it even re - cognized for what it is . For example , software engineering texts re - gard prototyping mainly as a technical problem ( e . g . Bischofsberger & Pomberger 1992 , Budde et al . 1992 , Floyd 1984 ) . ¿ey are mainly concerned with how to produce prototypes ; how to make them ﬁt intoestablishedworkingprocedures , orhowtheseproceduresshould be modiﬁed to accommodate them ; what tools are needed , etc . I think the same oversight is at work when Rettig ( 1994 ) enumer - ates all the advantages of paper prototypes , and even so consistently refers to them as “lo - ﬁ” prototypes . Low ﬁdelity is all but a deroga - tory term , which measures them by how much theydeviate from the ﬁnal result . ¿is is quite the wrong yardstick to measure them by . Instead , their name ought to reﬂect their strengths , because the issue is not how di¡erent they are from the end product . Fidelity in prototypes comes from the amount of productive pro - perties they are given , but what makes paper prototypes , thumbnails , and so forth so exceptionally useful is that these productive proper - ties are explicitly given up . Instead of “low ﬁdelity” , something like “high relevance” or “highly useful” would be more appropriate , in recognitionof their truecognitivepurpose . ¿eirpresentnamemere - 175 W o r l d the development of ideas , rather than their detailed testing . It con - cerns“the overall design concepts” , as well as the“organizational en - vironment” that it will become a part of , and the ﬁt between the two . Hence , e¡ortspentonthedetailsorinternalworkingsof thepro - totype is wasted , it should be limited to the “outer” functional lay - ers of the design . As the purpose of experimentation is complementary to explora - tion , totestcertainaspectsindepth , aprototypethatenablessuchtest - ing should also extend along the vertical dimension ( ibid . ) : Inareasreﬂectingnewdesignconceptsandtechnology , buildver - tical prototypes that carry the user deep into the behaviors of speciﬁc parts of the system . ¿e discussion of experimental prototyping explicitly described it as involving detailed experiments with the design itself and its inter - nal workings . Entirely new solutions are among the things that need to be tested in detail ; for this purpose you need a vertical prototype . ¿e previous di¡erence between thumbnails and roughs is also the same as that between these two kinds of prototype and their purpos - es . ¿e small size of thumbnails serves to keep them undetailed and thereby horizontally relevant , and their use was previously charac - terized as exploratory . ¿e connection between their form and func - tion was also noted there , and this was really an early statement of horizontal relevance . Similarly , the purpose of roughs was identiﬁed as experimental , and also that their size is larger to accommodate a greater amount of detail ; this is now recognized as the vertical rele - vance required for in - depth testing of a design . Cognitive purpose of prototypes is poorly understood Even with this array of evidence for prototypes as situating strate - gies—as materials created with a cognitive purpose in design—the perhaps best testimony is still how their productive properties are deemphasized in the literature : ¿e important factors are not the quality of the prototype… ( Bischofsberger & Pomberger 1992 , p . 17 ) Thumbnails are usually small because they are meant to be fast and undetailed . ( Arntson 1993 , p . 5 ) On the front [ of a cardboard box ] is written “desktop laser prin - 174 details of the scenes , etc . ” ¿e use of scenarios in design has a great deal in common with scenarios in the original , theatrical sense . In a play , a scene is a single situation or sequence , and a scenario speciﬁes the contents of such a scene . In design , the future situation of use is a scene where the artifact is being used , and a scenario serves to pro - vide the details of such a scene , vividly enough to give a clear pictu - re of what takes place there . ¿e primary beneﬁt of scenarios is thereby cognitive , although this hashardlyeverbeenspelledoutexplicitly . Aswithprototypes , thelit - erature normally addresses practical , technical aspects . ¿e excep - tion is John Carroll’s ( 1995 ) description , which captures the essence of scenarios remarkably well : ¿e deﬁning property of a scenario is that it projects a concrete description of activity that the user engages in when perform - ing a speciﬁc task , a description suªciently detailed so that design implications can be inferred and reasoned about . ( p . 4 , my italics ) And from the sentence that immediately follows , there can be no mistake that scenarios are a situating strategy ( ibid . ) : Using scenarios in system development helps keep the future use of theenvisionedsysteminviewasthesystemisdesignedandim - plemented ; it makes use concrete—which makes it easier to dis - cuss use and to design use . Carroll here makes the relation clear between how the scenario re - creates “the future use of the envisioned system” and makes it con - crete , and how this serves the designer’s work : this future use be - comes easier to discuss , to think about , and to reason about—and thereby easier to design . He also provides the following example : · Harry , acurriculumdesigner , hasjustjoinedaprojectdevelop - ing a multimedia information system for engineering educa - tion . He browses the project video history . Sets of clips are ca - tegorized under major iconically presented headings ; under some of these are further menu - driven subcategories . · He selects the Lewis icon from the designers , the Vision icon from the issues , and an early point on the project time - line . He then selects Play Clip and views a brief scene in which Lewis describes his vision of the project as enabling a new world of collaborative and experience - based education . 177 W o r l d ly proves the point that the cognitive purpose of paper prototypes is barely recognized . Rettig , Ehn and Kyng , and others also note that paper prototyp - ing is fun . I believe this is good evidence that it is an activity that lies close to what we and our minds are built to be good at . We enjoy in - formal , physical interaction with concrete materials , whereas ab - stract , symbolic reasoning is not quite so enjoyable . And “informa - tion processing” is the most boring work imaginable : processing forms , data entry , archival , record keeping , sorting , information re - trieval , and so on and so forth . It is no coincidence , I am convinced , that we are “good at frisbee , bad at logic” ( Edwin Hutchins , per - sonal communication ) . ¿is is like how sugar , fat , and red meat ( protein ) are the foods that taste best . ¿is is because theycontain the most energy and were the best kinds of food in the era before supermarkets . Today , these foods are no longer those that are best for people , just as handling tools and holding things between two ﬁngers are not the skills that employers look for anymore . Still , we should not forget that evol - utionary pressures were di¡erent when our inherent capacities were oncelaiddown , andthatrecord - keepingskillsdidnotimpressasabre - tooth tiger . 6 . 5 Scenarios ¿e use of prototypes by themselves does not diverge from the nar - row view of design activity which considers the artifact only . How - ever , prototypes are typically used together with other situating strat - egies , which cover other aspects of the future situation of use . As far as other physical materials are concerned , there is nothing that makes them di¡erent from prototypes besides not being the focus of design . ‡en in the UTOPIA project an empty cardboard box was used as a mock - up of a laser printer ( Ehn & Kyng1991 ) it was not the printer that was being designed . ¿ereby the box was strictly not a prototype , although it worked like one , for all practical purposes . But for other aspects , additional strategies are needed . ‡ereas a prototype embodies the focus of design , scenarios are used for re - creating the wider situation around it . ¿ey are thereby closely link - ed to designers’ concerns with more than the artifact alone ; with its relationship to other parts of the future situation of use . Dictionaries deﬁne a scenario as “the plot or outline of a dramatic work” , or “a written version of a play , etc . , in a ﬁlm production , with 176 ¿ere are also descriptions of the design itself , going beyond what a prototype can convey : “Sets of clips are categorized under major iconically presented headings…” . Without these , the script would not make sense , with its details of what button is clicked when . So scenarios also provide meaningful context about the design itself . ¿ere are also other , technically irrelevant descriptions , such as those of the user’s reactions and beneﬁts ( he reﬂects on the material , has insights , etc . ) ¿is wider perspective makes sense of the speciﬁc events within the scenario , and these in turn give meaning to the design and its technical details . Even though these meaning - related aspects are immaterial , they would be available to the participants of a genuine use situation , just as much as would the concrete what’s , where’s and who’s . ¿erefore , these are equally important parts of a naturally re - created future situation of use . So scenarios may cover all dimensions of such a realistic setting : the people , the things , the events , and so forth . And for each dimen - sion , they may include the concrete events as well as a wider per - spective . ¿is additional information is important in making the scenario meaningful , and to help the designer reason about it . ¿e all - embracing nature of scenarios has also been noted by Nardi ( 1992 ) : An important feature of a scenario is that it depicts activities in a full context , describing the social settings , resources , and goals of users . It is not a narrowly focused task description but the “big picture” of how some particular kind of work gets done… Concrete scenarios vs . abstract requirements Mack also sees a major role as “the use of scenarios to represent the broader cognitive , social , and contextual aspects of work” ( 1995 , p . 362 ) , and that they thereby enable designers to bring these aspects to bear on design . He also notes that scenarios are suitable for “driving design activities” . ¿ey thereby adopt the role that design methodol - ogy assigns to requirements speciﬁcations , as the vehicle of the de - sign process . For example , scenarios are often used for the same pur - pose as such speciﬁcations , that is , to set the objectives that the design should meet . However , speciﬁcations and scenarios represent two diametrically opposed approaches to the same task . 179 W o r l d … [ three more points similar to the second one , describing speciﬁc actions and their results ] … · Harry selects various combinations : other designers besides Walter and Lewis on these same issues and times , and other times and issues for Walter and Lewis . He begins to appreci - ate the project vision more broadly , attributing some of the di¡erences to individual interests and roles in the project team . He begins to see the course topic issue as a process of discovering and reﬁning new requirements through active consideration of alternatives . ( Carroll 1995 , p . 4 ) On an immediate level , the scenario speciﬁes exactly what is taking place in the scene itself : what people are present , what they do , in par - ticular how they interact with the design itself , but also with other stage props ( such as the cardboard box laser printer earlier ) , and of course , with each other . In this particular example , the script is sim - ple in this respect ; the only one present is Harry , and he is using the video database , performing the speciﬁed actions ( selects Lewis icon , then “Play Clip” , etc . ) . But this is only one part of the scenario . ¿e focus of interest is on how the design is used , and the implications thereof . However , in ad - dition to the artifact , the user , and her actions , there are many addi - tional ingredients that are essential in making the plot clear . ¿ere - fore , a scenarioalso provides a greater context beyondthesceneitself , and which gives meaning to what happens there . One dimension is the backgrounds of the people involved . ¿is scenario details Harry’s job title ( a “curriculum designer” , whatever that means ) , the project he is working on , and the design team he is part of . Another point of interest is education and relevant experi - ence . ¿is is only hinted at indirectly here , through Harry’s job title . ¿e activity is also located in physical , organizational , social set - tings . Moreover , it is also part of other higher - level activities , here that of browsing the project history , which in turn is part of de - veloping a multimedia system , and so on . Carroll’s scenario also de - scribes what the described events contribute to this bigger picture . Harry’s individual actions are part of a browsing activity that serves to get him familiar with the team and the work done so far . ¿is in turn gets him up to speed within the project . Other aspects that are speciﬁed may include a speciﬁc company , perhaps a certain depart - ment , and so forth . 178 duce it ( this type of use , and others , are also documented in Carroll 1995 ) . To ensure that the speciﬁcation is complete and so on , the re - quirements will have to be compared against several speciﬁc test cases . One might wonder , then , why you should bother at all to go via the abstract formulation—in particular if the underlying scenarios aren’thandedoveralongsidewithit . ¿entheriskof translationprob - lems seems apparent , not to mention the extra work required . The desirable properties of a scenario ‡at makes designers prefer scenarios to traditional speciﬁcations , and what causes them to spontaneously create such scenarios if there are none ? Having this side - by - side comparison with speciﬁcations in a speciﬁc case , it becomes easier to see precisely what it is that makes scenarios so cognitively useful : ¿ey are much like concrete examples of an abstract principle . ‡ereas requirements speciﬁca - tions are abstractions that require logical analysis , a scenario re - cre - ates something that is as similar to the real - life situation as possible . It re - creates a future situation of use that is speciﬁc , rich in details , and complete , and thereby enables interactive cognition to work under the best possible circumstances . ¿ese attributes capture the essence of what makes scenarios cognitively useful . Speciﬁc ¿e ﬁrst advantage is that scenarios are speciﬁc . ¿ey always refer to a particular situation , with speciﬁc ingredients , whereas abstractions describe things in general terms : Scenarios should be as speciﬁc as possible , identifying by name real people and real companies that the team have in mind as prototypical users . ( Tognazzini 1992 , p . 74 ) ‡ile abstractions refer to general classes , a scenario always has spe - ciﬁc instances ; Guindon’s example turns “all requests for ﬂoors” in - to speciﬁc requests for the second and third ﬂoor , for example . Going to speciﬁc instances Going to speciﬁc instances is a well - known strategy in problem solv - ing ; Guindon provides an example of this strategy at work , when the designer is unsure of how to handle door control : In fact that insight suggests that the door control could be done 181 W o r l d ¿e following is an excerpt from a prototypical requirements spe - ciﬁcation ( from Guindon 1990b , p . 287 ) : 4 . All requests for lifts from ﬂoors must be serviced eventually , with all ﬂoors given equal priority ( can this be proved or de - monstrated ? ) . 5 . All requests for ﬂoors within lifts must be serviced eventual - ly , with ﬂoors being serviced sequentially in the direction of travel ( can this be proved or demonstrated ? ) . Here , as is typical of traditional speciﬁcations , the criteria are for - mulated with the purpose of covering all cases , and to be logically complete and exhaustive , and to do so they abstract away from any speciﬁc situation . However , they also give little or no clues about the speciﬁc operations in any particular case , or as to what kind of solu - tion would meet these objectives . For instance , phrases such as “all requests must be given equal priority” , or “all requests must be ser - viced eventually” , do not say anything about how these criteria should be met , and the asking for a proof or demonstration shows that it is not even obvious whether a solution meets these criteria or not . ¿ere are also several abstract concepts , such as “eventually” and “equal priority” , whose exact meaning must be determined be - fore they can be used in design . ¿erefore , to meet these abstract criteria , the designers in Guin - don’s study translated them into possible scenarios which they used instead . Guindon gives the following example of how one designer made up a simple scenario , and then used it to develop his solution : I’m not sure I understand about scheduling . I’ll draw two eleva - tors with a few ﬂoors . … For each lift , I have , say , four buttons that are illuminated or not . And for each lift I also have to know the ﬂoor and the direction . Say Lift 1 is at ﬂoor 4 and there are requests to go down to ﬂoors 3 and 2 . … ¿e ﬂoors don’t move , the lifts move . It strikes me that I haven’t considered enough this idea of having lifts between ﬂoors . I’m going to handle that . ( Guindon 1990b , p . 286 , also cf . ﬁgure 6 . 5 ) Here , the designer translates the abstract requirements into speciﬁc conditions , by making up a simple scenario . He does this in order to use the requirements speciﬁcation . ( A closer analysis is given below . ) But you also have to go the same way via concrete instances to pro - 180 don’t move , the lifts move . ” ¿e value of trivial conclusions should not be underestimated . Rich in detail ¿e second property of scenarios is that they are rich in detail . ¿is also makes them more meaningful than abstractions . A situation that is richin detailbrings two kinds of advantages . For onething , it makes the larger situation around the artifact available to design . But it also enhances the understanding of the design itself . ¿is is because it al - lows you to study the design in its natural habitat , its interactions and relations with the surroundings , which brings out its natural pat - terns of behavior . Many of these will not be displayed when it is lift - edoutof itspropercontext , becausethereisnothingtherewhichwill evoke them . ¿ere are other design strategies than scenarios that also serve to provide rich detail around the design . One such technique is charac - ter maps ( table 6 . 1 ) : One technique used by IDEO … is the creation of character maps : detailed personality and activity descriptions for a small set of envisioned typical users . For example , in developing a product for automobile instrumentation , IDEO developed the characters of [ table 6 . 1 ] . ¿ey are ﬁctitious , created to cover a broad range of the characteristics that the team observed in the potential users of the product . Visualizing these characters helps designers to an - chor their thinking about what their designs will mean in practice to the di¡erent people who may use them . ( Winograd etal . 1996 , p . 167 , my italics ) ¿e “broad range of characteristics” gives each character it richness in detail , and makes it possible to draw speciﬁc conclusions about how they will use the design , what they will want to do , problems that may occur , and so on . Genuine Creating speciﬁc , detailed circumstances such as these will also make the designer’s expectations and ideas about use , problems of use , and so forth , more genuine and less contrived . It is a classical prob - lemof usabilitydesignthatdesignersarelargelyunabletoplacethem - selves in the shoes of the future users , and to imagine their genuine behavior to a suªcient degree : 183 W o r l d by a completely separate system from the handling of the service requests , but I’m not sure yet ( Guindon 1990b , p . 286 ) . Instead of starting to work on a general solution from the beginning , he ﬁrst tries to solve a speciﬁc case . He imagines howthe doors would operate in a speciﬁc situation : Yes , in fact , usually in elevators ﬁrst the doors open , then they stay open for a ﬁxed amount of time , and then they close . He therebydraws a speciﬁc conclusion about timing . ¿en he can use the insight to formulate a general requirement , and thus return to the initial , abstract problem of door control in general ( p . 286 ) : In fact , I should include a timer in the system controlling the opening and closing of the doors . Compared to an abstract concept , a speciﬁc instance is easier to make sense of , to reason about , and to deal with in every respect . In this case we see how the designer conjectures that doors ﬁrst open , then close . In the earlier example , the critical insight was : “¿e ﬂoors 182 Table 6 . 1 Character map of a few imagined car customers . Earl & Dimitri & Bob Sarah Stella Melissa Location Los Angeles Montana Florida Greece & Nevada Age 35 52 70 & 62 24 & 22 Hobby Work Riding Golﬁng Hang gliding Job Investment Horse ranch Retired from Engineer banker owner insurance and student and teacher Car ( in ‘92 ) Mercedes Range Rover Lincoln Corvette ( rent ) Continental Income High High Fixed Overextended Personality A - type Conﬁdent Set in ways Reckless Gear Communication Dog , riﬂe Toys for Personal stereo equipment grandkids High tech Misc . Lives for work Loves kids She teases On vacation and horses re . his driving arable dimensions . ¿ey all rather point to a complex of meanings blending together . For example , everyone knows what “concrete” means—at least we think we do , but if you ask yourself what “con - crete” and “realistic” mean , and in particular what is the di¡erence between them , then you probably see that their meanings are not very distinct . ¿e same goes for “speciﬁc” and “detailed” . ¿ere are many other similar terms that capture the qualities of scenarios , but there is no selection of such terms without overlap . In - stead I have tried to choose these terms to point out the most impor - tant aspects of this cluster of meanings . But what do they point at , what is it that they all have in common ; that they all describe ? I suggest that all these properties can be traced back to the attri - butes of everything that is concrete and physically real , as opposed to abstractions and generic concepts . So scenarios are the closest pos - siblethingtoreallife , andthisiswhytheysuitcognitionsowell . ‡en the genuine situation is remote—not available or non - existent—the purpose of scenarios is to re - create it , in Technicolor , producing the conditions that interactive cognition is built for . A fundamental thesis of interactive cognition is that mind com - plements , not replicates , the world . ¿e world plays the role of itself . If the world’s contribution is taken away , it becomes harder for the mind to do its share . A scenario serves to re - create the world’s part of cognition , which complements the mind’s contribution , and so allows the mind to work the way it is meant to . ¿is is for example why Guindon’s designer creates a concrete lift scenario , and draws it , to be able to think about the abstract requirements . Hence , the properties I have enumerated all derive from co - pre - sence and physical concreteness : In a real situation , every person is a particular one , and a real elevator is always in a speciﬁc location , not on ﬂoor n , where 1 £ n £ 4 . Also , a physical environment is always rich and detailed , unless an experimenter has removed everything that may yield context e¡ects . Furthermore , it cannot be contrived , and nothing can be overlooked or forgotten , because there isn’t anyone who must think of everything . ¿erefore a real situation is always complete , everything is there if only you look for it . Vividness is a term that describes scenarios well . One might say that scenarios are so good because they are vivid ; because they cre - ate such a strong impression of the vital issues , drawing out the dis - tinct , tangible consequences of abstract requirements . I would like to turn this argument around and suggest the con - 185 W o r l d Because most designers have only limited contact with users … they simplydo not realize how widely users di¡er , and , especial - ly , how di¡erent many users are from most designers . … it is al - most impossible to think about whether or not someone else will have trouble if you never encounter any yourself . In observ - ing complete novices … we have often been amazed as they en - counter major problems that we did not anticipate , or when problems that seemed simple to us were impossible for them to recover from . ( Gould & Lewis 1985 , p . 303 ) Designers see themselves instead of actual users , and the behavior they expect from users rather than their genuine troubles . So their view of the future users and their behavior is prone to be contrived and unrealistic , unless they take explicit measures to avoid this . ¿is is the purpose of creating speciﬁc and detailed descriptions of cha - racters , use situations , and so on ( Tognazzini 1992 , p . 78 ) : ¿e key is to infuse the design team with vivid pictures of a se - ries of prototypical users , so that the entire team will focus on designing for those people , not for themselves . Working through detailed scenarios mayfor example allow a design - er to discover things which would never have come across her mind otherwise : “¿e ﬂoors don’t move , the lifts move . It strikes me that I haven’t considered enough this idea of having lifts between ﬂoors . I’m going to handle that . ” Complete Designers’ intuitions maytherefore bedescribed as incomplete . Rarely is only one scenario used , or one single character description , since each only covers a single case . Speciﬁc examples like these therefore usually come in groups , and thereby cover a range of speciﬁc instan - ces . ¿iswill improve the completeness of the analysis , so that theeven - tual solution will be certain not to have left any blind spots ( p . 74 ) : Design with only a single user in mind , and you will ﬁnd that onlyasingleusercanuseyourprogram . Scenariosforceustocon - sider a wide range of users , in a wide variety of circumstances . Scenarios approximate the physical world So scenarios are speciﬁc , detailed , and so on . ¿ese are essential as - pects of scenarios , but do not point at independent properties or sep - 184 cause these tasks go against the nature of cognition , and therefore are improper measures of cognitive capacity . We should not accept them as limitations of human cognitive capacity , unless pigs’ lack of wingsalsocountsasevidenceof whataninferiorkindof birdpigsare ; it is in other words a question of what yardstick youu use . 6 . 6 Simulation ‡ereas a scenario usually has a narrative form and thereby includes the temporal dimension , it just speciﬁes the events it includes . It merely provides the script , it must somehow be dramatized to come alive , to re - create the ﬂow of time and events in a genuine situation . ¿e simplest formof doing this is bysimulation , where the design - er is re - creating—simulating—the future events by herself . In this sense , simulation is the simplest way of recreating a process , and less realistic than e . g . having real people actually perform the scene . For simple purposes , just reading the script to envision or imagine the scene may be suªcient . However , in design the situations that are re - created are usually complex enough to require paper and pencil , or more elaborate physical devices , in order to keep track of the par - ticulars of the ongoing events . Guindon has documented the use of simulation in the design of an elevator control program ( Guindon 1990b , Guindon , Krasner & Curtis 1987 ) . ¿is was where the earlier example was taken from , which illustrated how a designer created a small scenario to make sense of the requirements for the elevator system . All the reported “simulations of scenarios” followed the same pattern . ¿eir use was frequent , they were used by all participants at several points during design , and for several di¡erent purposes . In other words , they were important in all parts of the design process . In the following example , the designer ﬁrst sets up the scenario , and then simulates the events that follow from the initial conditions . He re - creates the ﬂow of events by simulating one step at a time , considering the consequences of each one ( Guindon 1990b , p . 287 ) : I’m going to imagine one elevator and a few scenarios . Say there’s a request from ﬂoor 2 to 4 . If there is a lift going to 2 on its way up , then stop the lift at 2 , open the doors , … If there is a lift going down from 5 to 1 , the lift does not stop at 2 … ‡at if you press up at the ﬂoor , but once in the lift , you press a down button . … So there’s deﬁnitively the need for a queue of lift requests for 187 W o r l d verse : scenarios arevivid to us because they are good , “good for cog - nition” as it were . Since they match the abilities of cognition , they are able to deliver their message , and thereby create a vivid experi - ence . Conversely , things that are not tuned to our frequencies fail to make a lasting impression . ¿is does not merelyentail loud noises and vibrant colors , but that the material complements the mind , and thus enables interactive cognition to work eªciently . ¿e principle of world complementing mind also means that spe - ciﬁcity , richness in detail , and so forth , are properties that the mind does not need to supply , since the world usually does . ¿ere is plen - ty of support for this , the value of scenarios is one point in case , but also e . g . Reisberg ( 1987 ) has pointed out that we can easily form a mental image of a tiger , but we cannot count the stripes . Similarly , even though anyone can picture themselves a horse , drawing a hor - se’s knee remains very diªcult to most of us . Our mental images aren’t speciﬁc and detailed enough , and so forth . Norman ( 1993 ) has made a similar point about dreams . ¿ey don’t follow the laws of physics ; in dreams we can ﬂy , walk through walls , people appear and disappear , and so forth . Norman argues that this is because these are constraints that the physical world imposes on us when we are awake , the mind doesn’t have to do it . ¿ere are also physiological facts supporting this . ‡en we dream , the brain generates the same kind of activity as in the awake state . Importantly , it generates the same activity in the motor cortex as when we are awake and walk , and the perceptual areas react as when we actually see things , and so forth . ‡at happens when we sleep is that the reticular activation system in the brain stem suppresses all in - and outgoing signals to the body ( e . g . Luria 1973 ) . ‡at this means is that the physical constraints of nature disappear from the mental realm at the same time as the feedback from the physical world is cut o¡ . Norman also notes that the physical constraints are very resource - hungry parts of computer ﬂight simulations . ¿e point is not that the mind is like a ﬂight simulator , but that enforcing the physical laws of nature is a very demanding task , and which the world usually does for free anyway . Because of the way things are today , I feel obliged to point out that this is not a sign of the limitations of human cognitive capacity , for the mind should complement , not replicate , the world . If some researchers ﬁnd that people are not good at some tasks , then it is be - 186 a ﬂoor request on the . Oh , I missed something here . Floor re - quest has originating ﬂoor and direction… Could I borrow that pencil ? ( 1987 , p . 76 , my italics ) ¿e drawings would serve to anchor the simulation , and keep the de - signer’s train of thought on the tracks . And though these sketches of - ten worked , as they were not perfect for the task , not all problems with simulations were alleviated . For example , they remained shal - low ( 1990b , pp . 291 – 293 ) . How mental are “mental simulations” ? It is therefore somewhat puzzling that Guindon , after stressing the necessity of using sketches , still persists in speakingof “mental” sim - ulations . For example : By exploratory design , we mean design with many mental sim - ulations of the problem environment and mental simulations of tentative solutions unguided by a plan . ( 1987 , p . 68 ) With this consistent use of “external representations” , how “men - tal” can these simulations really be ? ¿e conﬂicting terminology is striking , verging on self - contradiction : Our designers had multiple uses for the external representations of their design solutions . … [ One ] important use was to support 189 each lift , separate from the ﬂoor requests . … Maybe the ﬂoor re - quests could be handled by a completely separate system from the lift requests . Could I borrow that pencil ? Guindon describes at length the designers’ use of what she calls “ex - ternal representations” . Besides for such things as keeping notes and lists , their main use was for expressing the design - in - progress ( ibid . , p . 290 ) . But not merely for recording progress ; the main thrust of Guindon’s argument is in their role as the vehicle for simulations . ¿e simulations were made from an external point of view , incor - porating the elevators , their positions and movements , and the but - ton panels and displays both inside the elevators and by the elevator doors on the respective ﬂoors . All these aspects were included in the sketches that were used ( cf . ﬁgure 6 . 5 ) . ¿e information included in the drawings is external to the con - trol program itself , and is thus not part of the design solution . These items would rather serve as external points of reference , as context in which the solution was grounded , and against which the develop - ing was run and evaluated . ¿ese drawings were used universally , and they were as central to the design process as the simulations they were used in : All three designers in this study supported the simulations of Lift scenarios by using external representations . ( p . 287 ) All these simulations relied on external representations… ( p . 291 ) According to Guindon the designers’ major reason for using “exter - nal representations” was “ diªculty in performing complex mental simu - lations ” ( 1990b , pp . 287 – 293 , 1987 , p . 75 , also see ibid . pp . 69 – 70 , 75 – 77 ) . ¿ey were necessary even in the simplest simulations . ¿is is also supported by the designers’ comments : …it’s kind of confusing , there’s lifts ( requests ) and there’s ﬂoors ( requests ) and it says “all requests for ﬂoors within lifts must be serviced eventually with ﬂoors being serviced sequentially ( in the direction of travel ) ” . Apparently that means… Let me give a better example… I’ll have to draw a picture . Let’s say the third guy wants to go the ﬁfth ﬂoor . Let’s say there’s 188 Figure 6 . 5 “I’m not sure I understand about scheduling . I’ll draw two elevators with a few floors . … For each lift , I have , say , four buttons that are illuminated or not . And for each lift I also have to know the floor and the direction . Say Lift 1 is at floor 4 and there are requests to go down to floors 3 and 2 . ” ( Guindon 1990b , p . 286 , my italics ) the sketching activity is a form of inquiring action , and so on . ¿is is the same point that Hutchins ( 1995 , ch . 9 ) has made : the Turing ma - chine ( and subsequently the computer model of mind ) is really not a model of the mind alone , but of Turing plus the pencil in his hand and the sketchpad on his desk , and the interactions among them . “Mental” models Moreover , I believe that “mental” as used in these cases is an epithet thatoriginatesfrom“mentalmodels” . Maybecognitivesciencemight have looked verydi¡erent today had there only been a di¡erent word for “model” ; if it had begun with an “ I” or a “ C” instead of an “ M” , for instance , then “mental” might not have been used so much . As this connection implies , “mental models” are not particularly mental either . Observations of how people actually work do not support the idea of a mind that works well on its own . ¿is time the support is easy to ﬁnd , albeit in a somewhat surprising place . It has been there all the time , in the ﬁrst contributing chapter of the clas - sical book on mental models ( Gentner & Stevens 1983 ) : ¿e models that people bring to bear on a task are not the pre - cise , elegant models discussed so well in this book . Rather , they contain only partial descriptions of operations and huge areas of uncertainties . ( Norman 1983 , p . 8 ) Norman also elaborated this argument in six points ( ibid . ) , which I will discuss in greater detail . ¿ese points were presented as a list of problems with the then current theory of mental models ; they were not compiled or presented as a coherent proposal or alternative . Ra - ther , they were quite possibly regarded as assorted deﬁciencies of hu - man cognition , which was a verycommon explanatory themewithin the information processing theory of cognition . Only later would Norman propose an alternative explanation ( Norman 1988 ) , even though in retrospect , some of these six points foreshadowed what was to come . For this reason , one would not expect these six listed problems to collectively point in one direction , or that they suggest or support a single , coherent alternative interpretation . Also , these points do not suggest such an alternative . Nevertheless , these six points can each by itself , as well as collectively , be interpreted as support for an inter - active point of view : 191 W o r l d mental simulations of the solution , which would otherwise be too taxing cognitively and lead to breakdowns . ( 1990b , p . 290 ) Further evidence for the non - intramental nature of such simula - tions can be found in Newell & Simon ( 1972 ) . ¿e three problem solving tasks that theystudied—cryptarithmetic , theMoore – Ander - sontask , andchess—takeupthemajorityof the900 - oddpages . How - ever , there is one place where they describe genuine , non - labora - tory problem solving . ¿is happens in an addendum which is their own account of the early history of cognitive science . ¿ere , if only in passing , they describe their own work on developing the Logic ¿eorist ( cf . chapter 1 ) . In their own words , “on December 15 , 1955 , the ﬁrst successful hand simulation was carried out” ( Newell & Simon 1972 , p . 883 , my italics ) . ¿is is in other words the same activity that Guindon described , and they obviously used the same technique as her subjects did . ¿ey also brieﬂy mention that they missed a special test case when they performed the simulations manually , which was only discovered several months later when they ﬁrst ran them suc - cessfully on a computer . So the creation and use of drawings as material was essential for the successful use of these simulations . Nevertheless , Guindon per - sists in calling them “mental” simulations . How come ? I don’t think that we should take her words too literally . “Cogni - tive”hashistoricallybeensynonymouswith“mental”—somethingis cognitive and therefore in the head , the reasoning would go . But there may be even less behind it , because traditionally no real distinc - tion has been made between “cognitive” and “mental” . ¿ere may thus be no real motive behind calling these simulations “mental” . And neither does Guindon argue that the simulations are strictly intramental—but evidently she gives a long array of evidence of the opposite . So she might just as well have called them cognitive simula - tions , and I believe that this is an appropriate description . ¿e reason why I bring this up is that this fusion of the mental and the cognitive is very common , and I believe that little more lies behind it any - where than that no one has asked themselves why or even if these terms are synonymous . My point is that on closer consideration they are not synonymous ; these cognitive simulations are better characterized as interactive than intramental . ¿ey adhere closely to the pattern of interactive cogni - tion as presented in chapter 5 : ¿e sketches play the part of theworld , 190 ¿e second and third points state that the mind doesn’t record de - tail , and that they therefore do not intramentally preserve the di¡er - ences between similar objects . ¿is too was listed earlier as a proper - ty of the physical world , which the mind therefore has no reason to duplicate . Norman has more recently made a similar argument , re - ferring to a study by Nickerson & Adams where subjects were un - able to distinguish genuine one - cent coins from ones where the de - tails of their appearance had been altered ( Nickerson & Adams 1979 , Norman 1988 ) . Norman’s point was that to use these coins , we do not have to remember their exact layouts . We have to be able to tell one , ﬁve , and ten cent coins apart , but not to remember what the text says exactly , and where it is positioned . Consequently , he argu - ed , our memories do not have to have great precision , and indeed problems arise when they must , such as with bank account numbers , PIN codes , social security numbers . In these cases , supplying preci - sion—a responsibility that is normally assumed by the world—has been transferred to the mind . ¿en the capacities of an isolated mind are bound to appear limited . Hence , problems will also arise when objects that look similar are in fact di¡erent . Norman’s last two points bear most directly on the role of action : · Mental models are parsimonious : Often people do extra phy - sical operations rather than the mental planning that would allow them to avoid those actions ; they are willing to trade - o¡ extra physical action for reduced mental complexity . ¿is is especially true where the extra actions allow one simpliﬁed rule to apply to a variety of devices , thus minimizing the chances for confusions . · Mental models are “unscientiﬁc” : people maintain “supersti - tious” behavior patterns even when they know they are un - needed because they cost little in physical e¡ort and save mental e¡ort . ¿ese last remaining points apply more directly to the interactive perspective than the previous ones . Norman’s paradigmatic exam - ple is that people tend to press the Clear button on calculators not once but even three times or more , always and regardless of whether it is necessaryor not . ¿e ﬁrst point states the issue most clearly : Giv - en that the functional unit is the mind alone , cognitive performance appears to come short : “extra physical operations” make up for insuf - ﬁcient mental planning . 193 W o r l d · People’s abilities to “run” their mental models are severely limited . ¿is point is general and rather vague , but since “running” a mental model must be very close to what Guindon calls mental simulation , it does echo the problems she describes , while also implying that they are related to a general cognitive principle : Our ability for in - tramental simulation is “severely limited” , at least when we cannot employ physical materials as support . ¿e interactive explanation for this is that cognition is naturally adapted to work in interaction with the environment . If you remove the world’s share in this , the result is the operation of half a cogni - tive system , which is also trying to compensate for this loss . For this reason , the mind doesn’t behave like a computer , capable of imitat - ing any process . ¿e mind is built for operating in an environment , not for imitating or replicating it . Furthermore , by demonstrating that peoplecan givedecent“hand”simulations , given favorable con - ditions and suitable materials like paper and pencil , Guindon’s study supports this interactive point of view . ¿ree of Norman’s points are more speciﬁc , echoing the points made earlier with respect to scenarios : · Mental models are incomplete . · Mental models are unstable : people forget the details of the system they are using , especially when those details ( or the whole system ) have not been used for some period . · Mental models do not have ﬁrm boundaries : similar devices and operations get confused with one another . Both the ﬁrst and second points state that the mind doesn’t really store a copy of the world internally . ¿e ﬁrst one notes that mental models lack completeness , which reinforces the idea that complete - ness is a property of the world , and which the mind therefore doesn’t need to provide . Above , completeness was identiﬁed as one of the major advantages of scenarios . Guindon also makes this point re - garding simulations : ‡ereas designers had problems with main - taining the completeness of their simulations , Guindon lists this as one of the main issues that “external representations” provided help with , serving to “uncover missing information and to ensure com - pleteness of the solution” ( 1990b , p . 290 ) . 192 cognition , almost by deﬁnition and typically with regard to an ap - proach like distributed cognition ( e . g . Hutchins 1995 ) . But consider what I have just said about “mental” models and “mental” simula - tions . ¿ese have always been regarded as cognition , and they refer to a certain classes of well - deﬁned phenomena . But if now these phe - nomena were found to involve both action and world , would they then no longer count as cognition ? Would it be said that only a third of “interactive” simulations is actually cognition ? ‡at is then the rest ? ¿is way of speaking and thinking about cognition takes some getting used to , but in the end I think it is our view of cognition that will change . I hope it will be deﬁned in terms of function rather than location ; as processes that gives us adaptive capabilities , rather than processes that are located within the brain . Other situating strategies Beside the situating strategies that I have described in this chapter , there are others which I haven’t included here , but which still ﬁt this category perfectly . Notable are those which serve to “re - create” the future user and use activity . Examples are user - testing and the “live” enactment of work situations that have been used in participatory design ( as described by e . g . Ehn & Kyng1991 ) . In these , the future sit - uation is reenacted by what are typically the actual users themselves . In order to set the stage for reenactment , these activities draw heavi - ly on other situating strategies , for example prototypes and scenar - ios . ¿ey serve to make it easier for the “actors” to become as im - mersed in the conceived situation as possible , and to get them to act naturally , as they really would as users . ¿e previously mentioned cardboard - box laser printer was a case in point , which made the par - ticipants actually walk to the printer to get their proof printouts . ¿ere are relatively many , and quite diverse , situating strategies . ¿ereasonforthisisthattheytogetherformanecologyof sorts , where the various kinds are suitable for re - creating di¡erent aspects of fu - ture situations of use . ¿is applies for example to reenactment , as just discussed , but can also be seen for instance in Guindon’s study , where drawings were used to represent the lift system ( the artifacts ) , scenar - ios , to supply the speciﬁc conditions to test , and the so - called mental simulations , to recreate the process aspects of the future lift system in operation . Hence , the diversity of the various techniques indeed serves a purpose , which is to ﬁt the various niches that may need to be ad - 195 W o r l d Doubtlessly , in an intramental version , the cognitive task is to keep track of exactly which buttons to push , and then send these in - structions to the ﬁngers . But we should remember that the task at hand is not to plan what buttons to push , but to calculate the desired result . In an interactive version , the functional unit of cognition also includes action and world ( button pressing and the calculator ) . Nei - ther of the three parts in this functional unit is privileged or more correct , what matters is that the desired result is produced . Pressing Clear three or four times exploits the nature of calculators , to ensure that no previous calculations interfere with the present one : redun - dant pressing of Clear can have no unintended side - e¡ects , whereas doing it only once deﬁnitely does , on calculators that require two key presses to erase all previous operations . It also exploits the nature of human action , in that tapping a ﬁnger rapidly several times is an automatic motor pattern , not more diªcult than tapping it only once . So the mental part alone may appear imperfect , but the perfor - mance of the whole triad taken together is eªcient , simple , and sta - ble across varying conditions . Attaining the precision required—do - ing what you have to ; being speciﬁc enough—is done not by the mind alone , but partly by action , and even partly by the calculator ; each of the three contributing with one if its natural features that none of the others need to replicate . Moreover , you gain a method that is fool - proof across all kinds of calculators—you don’t even have to ﬁnd out how the Clear button works if you don’t know . In these cases the result is less work , by any measure : less key presses , shorter time , less mental e¡ort , etc . ¿is also includes the advantage from Tetris : physical action that is faster as well as easier than the intramental equivalent . From this perspective , people are neither “unscientiﬁc” nor “su - perstitious” . ¿eir mental abilities are however calibrated for being a part of the whole interactive triad , and not the mind operating alone . Bearing these things in mind , letting the mental third of this remain “incomplete” , “undetailed” , and “without ﬁrm boundaries” , makes good sense . It even makes the resulting whole somewhat more eªcient . ¿erefore , the focus is on carrying things out interactively , and not in accordance to “the precise , elegant models discussed so well in this book” . Still , it is somewhat odd that the arguments for the interactive nature of this modeling were provided in the classical text on mental models . It is sometimes said that things outside the head cannot count as 194 dressed , since also the varieties of future situations may be very dis - similar . An example of an unusual such situation was when Henry Dreyfuss ( 1955 ) and associates build a full - scale mockup of an air - liner cabin , and re - created an entire eight - hour ﬂight , including pas - sengers with luggage , crews at work , and so on . 196 7 . Intermission 7 . 1 Concerning the general validity of the theory I have spent the preceding chapters making the case for design as be - ing a cognitive process of a certain kind , but all this would be of li - mited interest if it applied only to design . ¿erefore , in this conclud - ing chapter I will ask : How does my argument generalize ? Does my exposition hold beyond the cases I have presented here ? It should ﬁrst be noted , however , that the previous chapters have notbeenconcernedonlywithdesign . Onthecontrary , ithasbeenmy aim to build a theory that is formulated on a general cognitive level , while using phenomena from design as the basis for this . Chapters 1 and 2 served to show the connection between design and the model of rational action , and thereby that the issues at stake in this book bear directly on the general views of cognition , in folk psychology as well as in scientiﬁc theories . Already in Dewey’s original formu - lation , the theory of inquiry concerned cognition in general , and in chapter 3 the inquiring function of action and the“no pure analysis” conclusion were both formulated as general theories of cognition , as was the model of interactive cognition and the related concepts in chapters 4 and 5 . ¿e general relevance of chapter 6 will be discussed as part of what follows . ¿us , the preceding pages have not only been of relevance to de - sign , even though one might at ﬁrst think so . I will now also return to the bigger issues that I mentioned brieﬂy in the Introduction , of whether cognition is intellectual or practical by nature . So how wide - ly does my case for the practical view hold ? Let me brieﬂy recapitulate the two contending views : In the view of cognition as basically intellectual , our most advanced cognitive ca - pacities are the intramental ones ; they comprise the highest achieve - ment of evolution , and theyare thereforewhat sets us apart from oth - er species , and bywhichwedowhat no other animal can do . ¿ese are the capacities that have always been the main concern of cognitive science : mental representation , mental models , mental simulation ; logical inference , case - based reasoning , planning , scripts , and so on . In the other view , cognition is basically practical . ¿ere , also intel - lectual abilities are practical skills of a special kind , where extra - 197 By a representation - hungry problem domain we mean a do - main in which one or both of the following conditions apply : 1 . ¿e problem involves reasoning about absent , non - existent , or counterfactual states of a¡airs . 2 . ¿e problem requires the agent to be selectively sensitive to parameters whose ambient physical manifestations are com - plex and unruly ( for example , open - endedly disjunctive ) . Point one is a straight - forward deﬁnition of remoteness ; Regarding the second point , the authors clarify that it mainly refers to cogni - tion that deals with abstract properties that have no physically“man - ifest stimuli” ( e . g . visual ) . So , the argument goes , whereas cognition may well work interac - tively under presence , under remoteness it still relies on the full in - tramental capacities ; indeed must rely on them , to compensate for these diªculties when remoteness prevents an interactive mode of operation . ¿is is the most natural line of defense , and it is after all how intramentality and representation has always been motivated : It is superior because it can go beyond the here and now ; beyond what is immediately present , beyond even what yet exists ; to con - sider alternative , hypothetical situations , and so forth . ¿is argu - ment has been advanced several times , in modern day e . g . by Popper ( 1935 / 1959 ) , who originally proposed that our hypotheses can die in our stead ( also cf . chapter5 ) , Craik ( 1943 ) , and Johnson – Laird ( 1983 ) . ¿is surrogate capacity ( cf . Clark & Grush in press ) has a straight - forward translation into the evolutionary claim : it is often held to be uniquely human or likewise ; other species can purportedly also do the interactive things , but humans can do more , because they can use surrogates when the real thing is in limited supply . Note , however , that Clark & Toribo have ( on purpose ) backed down from the fundamentally representational mind ( also cf . Clark 1997 ) . Previously , the advantages of mental surrogates have been tak - en as reasons for their being used by cognition universally , also when the original goods are readily available . However , with defense # 1 , a conservative position might even maintain that cognition still is in - tramental at the core , while conceding that it may take advantage of interactionwhenitcan . ¿eproblemremainsof explaininghowcog - nition is sometimes interactive and sometimes intramental , but this is doable and merely a practical matter , even though as always with hybrid models , the result may not be aesthetically pleasing : Perhaps 199 I n t e r m i ss i o n mental working materials and activities play key roles , and where these in turn are the products of cultural development and reﬁne - ment . Hence , these abilities are not attributed to certain intramen - tal equipment , as in the intellectual view . Surely the human brain goes beyond those of other animals , but to attribute our leg up only to mental modules that are uniquely human is too simple as an ex - planation , and too implausible as an evolutionary argument . Defense # 1 : Intramental substitutes are used when interaction doesn’t work ¿ese are the two antagonists . ¿e intramental model of cognition has always been advocated as superior , but this I have contested . To - day it is old news that it doesn’t work as advertised , but in addition to this I have sought to explain why it is so . And then I have present - ed a contrasting account of design as interactive and inquiring , but I have also made the case that because of its interactive nature , it is performed more e¡ectively than it could be , even at best , if it follow - ed the principles of traditional theory . ¿ese are two good reasons forcognitiontobeinteractiveratherthanintramental . ¿erebyIhave meant to , as it were , give cognition reason for being interactive . But from this only , proponents of intramental theory will not ac - cept that cognition is always interactive . ¿e model I have presented gets its superior performance from drawing on working materials , action , and so forth , in the cognitive process . But this is not always possible ; in particular , when the object of concern is not physically present and available to cognition . Let us call the favorable condi - tions presence , and the opposite conditions remoteness . Being “representation - hungry” A defense of the intramental view along these lines has been advanc - ed by Clark & Toribo ( 1994 ) who cannot be considered to be conser - vative in this matter ( pp . 418 – 419 ) : The basic trouble… is that the kinds of problem - domain invok - ed are just not suªciently“representation - hungry” . Instead they are , without exception , domains in which suitable ambient en - vironmental stimuli exist and can be pressed into service in place of internal representations . … it is unfair to use these cases to illu - strate any more general anti - representationalist claim . 198 Situating strategies : designers go out of their way to avoid intramental thinking Hence , design is a perfect match of the conditions where the intra - mental capacities should come to their very best advantage , but in chapter 6 I showed at length what actually happens : Rather than fal - ling back on intramental capacities , designers use situating strategies ; theystrivetorestoreor“re - create”presence , sothattheycanworkin - teractively nevertheless . ¿is goes to show that when hunger sets in , the switch from interactive to intramental cognition doesn’t happen . And , after all , isn’t it obvious that this is how it has to be ? ‡en you are starved , only thinking of food just makes you even more hungry . ¿ere are two circumstances that make the force of this argument particularly strong and generally valid . Firstly , this is not a choice be - tween equals , since the interactive alternative is not as readily avail - able as the intramental procedure : To at all make it into an option , designers ﬁrst have to use the situating strategies to create the work - ing materials to interact with . Since they in this manner go well out of their way to enable the interactive mode , it means that the advan - tages of interactivity over intramentality are very strong ( it might for example mean that the penalties of working intramentally are very high ) , which also increases the strength of this fact . So instead of falling back on intramental capacities , cognition spends extra phy - sical e¡ort with the only purpose of avoiding having to think intra - mentally . ¿e second “aggravating” circumstance makes a much stronger case for the generality of the interactive model : If cognition is not in - tramental even here , when the conditions for it are the best imagin - able , then when would it be , since all other situations are less suitable than this one ? Design is the purest possible manifestation of the ex - act problem that intramental theory was meant to solve ; even in the words of the proponents themselves . And in evolutionary terms , when these intramental abilities are in reason not used to perform the functions that are considered hard and uniquely human—the very functions for which they were once advanced—then when are they used ? And conversely , when we rely on the older , more primitive interactive capabilities to perform the mostdiªcult , hungrytasks , thenwhat is the reason for having the ad - vanced , intramental ones ? Hence , the “representation - hungriness” of design , and the use of 201 I n t e r m i ss i o n there are two systems that alternate , or maybe even the intramental processesarestillrunninginthebackgroundduringinteractivework , maintaining an internal surrogate model of the environment even though it is not used just then . By introducing the notion of “representation - hungry” domains , Clark & Toribohaveestablished aclear lineof defense , which is good since it identiﬁes a meaningful direction in which to proceed with the argument . ¿ese hungrydomains then ought to do the intramen - tal capacities more justice , and there their utility should be evident , theauthorsclaim : ‡eneverconditionsdegradefarenough , then cog - nition falls back on the representational , modeling , simulating sys - tem ; when no real food for thought is available , then surrogates are provided for a mind that is starved . Design is absolutely representation - starved So arguments against intramentality should not concern interac - tion - friendlydomains , i . e . presence , but representation - hungryones —remoteness . Let us therefore be fair and do just that , because it can be done quite easily . For as I argued brieﬂy in chapter6 , design is a re - presentation - hungrydomain ; acloser look shows that the conditions for design are just those where representations are purportedly need - ed the most , where intramental cognition should work best , and the - refore be of greatest value : Everything of that which is in the de - signer’s chief concern is twice remote , in the future situation of use : It is both absent spatially and non - existent temporally . And perhaps it counts also as counterfactual , in that the whole point of design is to bring about something that today is not so . Clark & Toribo state that one of these conditions is enough tomakedesigna hungry domain . Design then qualiﬁes as a perfect example of when mental surro - gates should be of greatest utility , also in the classical view . ¿e de - signer is concerned with a state of a¡airs that is distant in both time and space—and which Popper might well have called “hypotheti - cal” . And in many accounts , design is concerned with highly ab - stract properties , as in the second point above . Hence , it would be hard to think of a better match for their criteria on hunger . Design has also many times been explicitly stated as an important domain for intramental theory to explain in general ; without reference to this particular issue ( e . g . Akin 1986b , Newell & Simon 1972 , p . 7 , Si - mon 1973 , 1981 ) . It therefore cannot by any measure be regarded as an unfairly chosen domain . 200 resultshavealsobeenextremelypoor ; asseeninchapter2 , itisnoton - ly very hard to ﬁnd successful examples , but even any examples at all , since the methods have proven so thoroughly impossible to use . ¿ereby the view I have advocated here would explain why design methods have yielded such disappointing results . But to address this second defense on a general cognitive level re - quires a more elaborate discussion : it is a tricky matter , because the cognitive science tradition has made a diversive maneuver around the problem , rather than confronting it directly . And the diversion is lar - ge enough to require a section of its own . Explaining ( away ) poor intramental performance ¿e evidence from design is quite conclusive that purely intramen - tal performance is very poor , but the evidence is not restricted to de - sign . On the contrary , this is probably the mostwell - documented fact inallof cognitivescience : Innumerableexperimentshavedocument - ed so - called“cognitive limitations” , “cognitive strain” , etc . ‡ether the task studied has been concept formation ( Bruner , Goodnow & Austin1956 ) , planning ( Hayes - Roth & Hayes - Roth1979 ) , the com - prehension of complex sentences , syllogistic reasoning ( Johnson - Laird 1983 ) , attention span , memorizing , mental models and mental simulation ( cf . chapter6and Norman1983 ) —the list could go on for - ever—whenever purely intramental performance has been studied , the result has always been that people do not perform according to the principles of intramentality . Limitations on working memory : the tragical number seven , plus or minus two But what is truly striking is the role this supposed limitation has come to take . It is not regarded as a measure for explaining ( away ) a theoreticalmal - prediction , butasacelebratedscientiﬁcﬁndingabout the nature of human cognition—that is , the mind as having impor - tant limitations in its information processing capacity . ¿is theme is so central that it has even been elevated into a general scientiﬁc prin - ciple , withitsownelementinthestandardmodelsof thehumanmind , known as short - term memory or working memory . Because of its role as the heart of all mental processing , every cognitive function needs to involve working memory in its operation . It is thereby the spider in the web of these models , which can easily be made into the ﬂy in the 203 I n t e r m i ss i o n the strategies to re - create presence , are strong cases in point for the general plausibility of the interactive model . Defense # 2 : When also the strategies fail , then cognition becomes intramental But this does not exclude quite all possibilities for intramental cog - nition . An ardent defender would still not yield , but might instead present a second counterargument : Maybe designers work interac - tively when they can , and when they can’t do that , then they use the situating strategies ; but when they break down , then the mental mov - ie starts to roll . ¿is , someone might claim , is when the intramental capacities come to their best advantage . First , cognition would hardly be fundamentally intramental if this is the last way out ; one might however still claim that intramentality , though not fundamental , provides us with capabilities for handling theseextreme situations , whichweotherwisewouldn’t beable todeal with . But secondly , one then also comes to wonder what these cir - cumstances would be : more extreme than those for which these in - tramentaltheorieswerecreated ? Indesignforexample , moreextreme than design - by - drawing , so that the designer is forced to rely on ab - straction and thinking only , without working on solutions , without involving users , and so on . ‡at comes to mind is a designer trying to comply with one of the systematic design methods from chapter 1 . In terms of concrete workingmaterials , andfavorableconditionsforinteractivecognition , no approach to design could be more deprived than these methods : Design is inherently remote to begin with , and to a rather substantial extent , too . But on top of this , the approach that design methodology prescribes makes the inherently poor conditions even worse . ¿e objective of design methods is to focus on the abstract , logical structureof design problems , so from the viewI have presented , their e¡ect is essentially to deprive the design task to the fullest possible extent . From the ideal point of view , however , this approach is nat - ural , with its emphasis on abstraction : ¿e procedures that e . g . Alex - ander , Jones , and Simon advocated are concerned only with logical relations and abstract criteria like requirements and constraints—no drawings , nothing tangible , nothing concrete ( Alexander1963 , Jones 1970 , Simon 1981 ) . But from the interactive viewpoint , the goal that design methods aimforcomprisestheworstpossibleconditionsforcognition , andthe 202 tually do sayand howutterances of others are understood . ( Reber 1985 , p . 137 , emphasis added ) A better illustration of the contrast between the ideal and actual per - spectives cannot be found . Chomskian theory portrays the human language faculty as based on exact rules that determine with great precision what language should look like . ¿is theory is based on no - tions like formal grammars , automata theory , and other foundational theoretical principles of computer science . ¿e problem is , of course , that this is not what you ﬁnd if you look at the language that people use . To accommodate this circumstance , it is said that the theorycon - cerns people’s competence . ¿is they are held to indeed have deep downbelow , but it isn’t adequatelyrevealed in people’s behavior . ¿at instead reﬂects their performance , which is much less sophisticated . Now the crucial issue in this is to explain the discrepancy between competence and performance , and in particular howit can exist . ¿is is done precisely by referring to people’s inherent limitations in their “informationprocessingcapacity” , andstatingthatthecompetenceis degraded by the cognitive system that cannot fully handle it . ¿is is often done with a direct reference to working memory capacity and the magic number . Also the competence – performance theme has been used far be - yond the original domain of linguistics , since it addresses a wide - spread and general scientiﬁc need . As a result , everything related to people’s actual“performance”has attained a distinct derogatory ring to it . And since the study of performance is therefore not a study of cognition an sich , it has been regarded as“applied”science and of les - ser value , since it tells us little about howcognition really is ( and which we thus rarely see outside the laboratory ) . Psychology as the study of human mental imperfection Like so many other times , Newell & Simon have seen the weight and scope of also this matter clearer than many others , and they have ad - dressed it on a general , domain - independent level , thereby making the issue very clear . But in so doing , they have also made the serious - ness of the problem stand out more clearly , showing that it is not a minor issue with a restricted range of impact . In e¡ect , their con - clusion is that psychology is the study of human limitations and shortcomings : 205 I n t e r m i ss i o n ointment : If it is attributed with a ﬂaw , then a problem in any cogni - tive function can be ascribed to this single defect . ¿is theme has been even further reiﬁed , by saying that working memory can hold only the legendary 7 ± 2 items at a time . Equally le - gendary is the paper to which the origin of this fact is attributed , the full title of which is ¿e magical number seven , plus or minus two : Some limits on our capacity for processing information ( Miller 1956 ) . ¿is is arguably the most well known , most popularized and most widely disseminated fact that cognitive science has ever produced , as can be seen in anypopular scientiﬁcwriting that touches on the sub - ject of cognitive performance ( Csikszentmihalyi 1990 is a prototyp - ical case ) . Also , innumerable are the design features that have been claimed to “alleviate limitations in working memory” ; citing this as thereason , forexample , ithasbeenstatedthatcomputermenusshould hold no more than seven items for the user to choose between ; it even seems that phone numbers were made sevenish digits long for this reason , so as to minimize the number of calls to directory assistance ( Ellis & Beattie 1986 ) . Add to this the concept of a “chunk” , which means that one of these seven slots can be said to contain anything , however large or small , complex or simple , and the size of which can be chosen so as to suit your purposes . ¿ereby you can maintain , for any given body of material , that it either ﬁlls up , overﬂows , or barely ﬁts working mem - ory—whichever you prefer ( cf . Miller1956 , Simon1974 , 1976 , 1979 ) . In this way the generally held principle , “limitations on human cognitive capacity” , has been translated into its own architectural feature in these models , as a “limitation in working memory capaci - ty” , and has then been attributed to the speciﬁc size of this memory . It could arguably be maintained that the primary purpose of postu - lating this memory system has been to explain this “limitation” . Competence vs . performance Closely related to this idea is another explanatorymeta - themewhich is also very wide - spread . ¿is is the competence vs . performance distinc - tion originating in Chomskian linguistics : A theory of the former would be a theory of linguistic know - ledge and grammar , of what an idealized mature speaker - hearer of a language could say and understand ; a theory of the latter would be a theory of behavior , of what real speaker - hearers ac - 204 point in the same direction—“limited information - processing ca - pacity”—from empirical results , to magic numbers , to competence vs . performance , allthewayuptometa - scientiﬁcprinciples . ¿econ - clusion must then be that it is an extremely well - established fact that mental - only performance is quite circumscribed , not only in de - sign , but in cognition in general : the mind alone does not reach any great heights . Taken together , these “limitations” themes are how the ideal per - spective accounts for the fact that cognition doesn’t work as the the - ory dictates . Hence , this is a generally assumed position which ap - pears even more ardent than the second line of defense I proposed above : It states that when the mind is forced to work intramentally , then it performs very poorly—still , it is in essence intramental . In this position , there is indeed a discrepancy between competence and performance . 7 . 2 A matter of choosing the proper yardstick But now take a step back and look at what the “limited capacity” ar - gument really says . First , cognition is held to work in a certain way ; as a computer , intramentally , etc . ¿en , people are found not to be - have as predicted , and quite thoroughly so at that . But the conclu - sion drawn is that they are information processors nevertheless— only very bad ones . ¿e result is the following syllogism , which is the conclusion of defense # 2 : ¿e logic behind this reasoning does comes across as slightly twist - ed : Is it the mind or the theory that should be sent in for repair ? ( Oth - er variants are obtained byreplacing isacomputer with isintramental or is rational . ) ¿ereby , intramental theory faces two explanatory problems : In addition to the poor forced intramental performance , it should also account for how cognition can come to ﬂourish in the presence of extra - mental factors . ¿e sentiment is after all that the surrogate ca - pacity should make the presence of external materials and so forth an insigniﬁcant matter : 207 I n t e r m i ss i o n It is precisely when we begin to ask why the properly motivated subject does not behave in the manner predicted by the rational model that we recross the boundary again … to a psychological theory of human rationality . ¿e explanation must lie inside the subject : in limits of his ability to determine what the optimal behavior is , or to execute it if he can determine it . In simple concept attainment experiments , for example , the most impor - tant mechanism that prevents the subject from adopting an eª - cient strategy is usually the limit on the number of symbols he can retain and manipulate in short - term memory . To the extent that this is true , such experiments are experiments to reveal the structure of human short - term memory… 1 . To the extent that the behavior is precisely what is called for by the situation , it will give us information about the task environment . … 2 . To the extent that the behavior departs from perfect ratio - nality we gain information about the psychology of the sub - ject , about the nature of the internal mechanisms that are li - miting his performance . ( Newell & Simon 1972 , pp . 55 – 56 , referring to Bruner et al . 1956 ) Here , they virtually deﬁne psychology as the study of how people fail toperformrationally ; alternatively , of howtheyfailtobehaveasintra - mental theory says . Adequate performance is not a topic of psychol - ogy , it merely reﬂects the “task environment” , but poor performance is : “when the subject does not behave as predicted by the rational model , werecrosstheboundarytoapsychologicaltheory” . Withsuch an assumption as a prominent part of the underpinnings , the scien - tiﬁcresultsaresurelypredisposedtopointinacertaindirection . ¿ere also seems to be a division of labor between di¡erent disciplines : one sets up the theories , the other documents how people fail to follow them . No room is then left for the theories to be inﬂuenced by how people actually behave ; the ideal and the actual should not be mixed . ¿e same theme is discussed in Simon ( 1981 ) , and it is also related to Simon’s earlier work on “bounded rationality” and the concept of “satisﬁcing” , e . g . in Simon ( 1947 ) . His distinction is probablybased on the di¡erence between e . g . economic models which often have as - sumed that the behavior of the involved agents is rational , and psy - chology as the study of how it isn’t . With respect to defense # 2 , the cognate themes discussed here all 206 ¿e mind is a computer It does not perform like a computer \ ¿e mind is a malfunctioning computer form of human movement is by ﬂying . With the advent of mo - dern aviation , we are able to give a detailed model of this capa - city : we consider humans to be airplanes . Or more correctly , we consider humans , birds , and airplanes as three instances of ﬂying systems . However , experimental studies have consistently shown that the human capacity for ﬂying is limited—compared to for in - stance a Boeing747 – 400 . Muchof this can probably be attribut - ed to the human arms not being at all eªcient as wings . ¿e poor ﬂying capacity is very well documented . For exam - ple , experiments o¡ the Tower of Pisa , in the spirit of Galileo , have consistently shown that people can ﬂy for only 7 ± 2 sec - onds . Also , their landings are really messy . Accordingly , the study of human ﬂying in e¡ect becomes the study of human crashes . ¿is also explains why we outside experimental settings most - ly see people walking . Because of the limited abilities for ﬂight , the legs that are really meant to serve during take - o¡ and lan - ding have become the major means of compensating for these limitations . This discipline has also , via knowledge of the limitations of human ﬂying capacity , given us important guidelines that are most helpful for design . Some examples are : Build houses on or near the ground ; use ﬂoors in rooms , particularly if the rooms are above ground level . Also place furniture on the ﬂoor , and door openings on the lower parts of walls . Even though the points here may seem unjust , they have direct par - allels in the cognitive literature : almost all of the statements in the ﬁrst four paragraphs have direct counterparts in Newell & Simon ( 1972 ) ; some of them also e . g . in Miller ( 1956 ) and Card , Moran & Newell ( 1983 ) . As the model for the last paragraph stands the advice found in Applying Cognitive Psychology to User - Interface Design ( Gard - iner & Christie 1987 ) . ¿e following are some examples of guidelines related to working memory : · Working memory load increases the greater the amount of material that must be remembered temporarily , or “held in mind” . ( p . 159 ) · If the number of referents , or the numberof properties and re - lations ascribed to the referents used in a dialogue exceed the capacity available in working memory , then the probability of 209 I n t e r m i ss i o n For the crucial activities… take place centrally . ¿is is true even when the desired object and the required activity are physical . ( Newell & Simon 1972 , p . 72 , cf . chapter 4 ) ( But you already know the explanation : using the world alleviates thelimitationsonworkingmemory . ) Considerincomparisontheex - planation I have proposed . Concerning the latter question about the use of external material , I have already presented the interactive ac - count at length . But what about the problematic performance on strictly intramental tasks ? Quite simply , natural cognitive perform - ance counts in three contributing parties : mind , world , and action . Sowhathappens if youdisable two of these ? Of course , the perform - ance breaks down . But , more importantly , this constitutes a highly contrived , unnatural task and thus very atypical performance : the tasks that are studied in the laboratory are very poor benchmarks to measure human cognitive capacity by . ¿erefore they are of limited interest . Psychological experiments do not eliminate the inﬂuence of situation and context , thus providing “generalizable” results , as ex - perimental method holds ; instead , also an experiment is a situation and context of its own , but of a very peculiar kind , and with very unrepresentative characteristics , yielding equally unrepresentative performance ( cf . ‡iteside & Wixon1987 , Wixon & Holtzblatt1990 ) . ¿is can also explain why the experimental results have proven not to generalize to performance elsewhere . As I see it , the main problem with intramental theory is its choice of yardstick : ‡enthestandardof measureisbadlychosen , thenthere - sultingmeasurementswill necessarilybe skewed . In theIntroduction I gave a number of examples where human behavior had originally been framed as limited , substandard , and“irrational” , butwhere oth - ers have later showed , by taking a di¡erent point of view , that hu - man performance in these cases makes sense , even being clever and sophisticated . Comparewith the examples given in theIntroduction , e . g . the quotes regarding Micronesian navigation that were given there . My point is that the same is true here : ‡en intramentality is the badlychosen norm , the resulting accounts of human performan - cewill be biased bypredestination ; the resulting explanations will be in terms of deviations from the norm , that is , as limitations . Consid - er the following , admittedly somewhat drastic allusion : Our object of concern is human movement . ¿e fundamental 208 sue , but the main concern of the theory : intramental performance is anomalous to the theory of intramentality . ‡at the argument by Newell & Simon makes so clear is that the chosen yardstick can put you in a truly absurd situation , where the - ory forces certain decisions on you ; here , having to deﬁne psycholo - gy as the study of how people fail to match the explanation you have chosen . As I see it , the main failure is that what is really a diªculty for your theory is made into a fault in the object of study . Consider physicists claiming that the deviations from their theoretical predic - tions were due to the universe committing “physical error” , or limi - tations that give the world a restricted capacity to follow the laws of physics . Probably the fatal standard of measure was adopted without much deliberation , or even seeing that alternatives existed . Soon , however , this created a situation where theory had to accommodate to the re - sulting measurements : concepts such as bounded rationality , limita - tions in cognitive capacity , the competence vs . performance distinc - tion , working memory and its limited size , and so on . However , the premise in the above syllogism was never questioned . But when we look back today , we can see that the premise is the cause of the problem . Because implicit in the view of the human as arational , intramentalcomputerwasalsotheyardstick . Anditwasthis yardstick that created the problem to explain : In reality , the question thought to be howpeople perform so poorly , was in fact the problem of why they perform so poorly according to this yardstick , which had been implicit in the view of cognition as rational and intramental . Hence , it is worse not to realize that you are using a certain yard - stick , than it is to deliberately have made a choice that turns out to have been bad . ¿is is much like the matter of problem setting ( from chapter3 ) : Instead of believing that your work is to produce the right answerstotheonlyexisting question , themostimportantinsightisto know that whatquestion you are asking will greatlyinﬂuence the an - swers that result . ¿e yardstick you are using , like a question and a problem deﬁnition , sets the types of result your work will produce . ‡en you know that , the greatest part of choosing the right ques - tion or yardstick is already done . 7 . 3 From intramental functions to interactive technologies I have here advocated a shift in perspective , from an intellectual / in - 211 I n t e r m i ss i o n considering all the relevant referents , or relevant properties and relations , will be reduced . ( p . 117 ) · If the sentences used in a dialogue are open to more than one interpretation , then they are read slower and less accurately than sentences that are open to just one interpretation . ( p . 116 ) · Do not present information that is irrelevant to the task that users are trying to perform . ( p . 249 ) In the truisms that are stated here , it seems that cognitive psychology is either completely absent as in the last two points , or else its tech - nical terms have served to cloak the underlying self - evident truths with belabored sentences . Interestingly enough , the second point seems to say , “Complicated sentences are more diªcult to under - stand . ” My personal favorites are however the following guidelines : · hand - held devices , such as a mouse , light - pen or digitizing tablet - and - stylus combinations lend themselves ideally to drawing , pointing , selecting and moving tasks — in other words , spatial and visual tasks . ( p . 271 ) · keyboard - based commands are particularly appropriate for word - processing applications… Similarly , numerical data en - try is best served by a keypad ( ibid . ) But the original purpose of the ﬂying analogy was to show how the chosen perspective can bias your vision , to the pointwhereyour view of things becomes outlandish . ¿e whole theme of cognitive limita - tions was caused by the fatal choice of yardstick , which also lies be - hind the ill - conceived syllogism above : the yardstick is contained in the ﬁrst line of the syllogism , which states that the mind is an infor - mation processor , and as such this chosen perspective functions as the axiom on which the conclusion will rest . Also the change of yardsticks makes the di¡erence between the two explanations : Givenamoreappropriatestandardof measure , poorin - tramental performance is no anomaly , so the explanatory problem doesn’t even occur . In the interactive view , intramentality is forced and unnatural , and with such restrictions the poor performance is to be expected . Hence , for one perspective the performance is coher - ent with the theory , but for the other it is an anomaly , and the di¡er - ence results from the respective yardsticks . ‡at makes the anomaly particularly serious is that it concerns not a minor or peripheral is - 210 nitive capacities , once thought tobe naturallyintramental and“hard - ware - supported” in the brain’s computer , have begun to be reinter - preted as advanced cognitive technologies , highly developed working methods that are supported by likewise artifacts ; genuine hardware support , that is . ¿e procedures and artifacts alike have developed andmaturedovertime , theyinturnhavingbeenmadepossiblebyad - vances in mathematics and science . Hence , they didn’t spring out of nothing , nor have they always been there , in there . Also , using them requires acquired , non - trivial skills . ¿is is what it means that also an intellectual ability is much a prac - tical skill , but of a special variety . Plans are ways for organizing activ - itiesaheadof time , andtheymakeuseof technologieslikewritingand linguisticrepresentationsof activities , alphabetsandsoon , andinven - tions like paper and writing tools—all of which we take for granted . Taken together , these allow us to record , modify and reorganize re - sources for structuring activity , and later to use the resources to do just that . ¿e use of maps is even more obviously technological by nature . It involves the same writing tools , but also intellectual inventions like the birds - eye perspective , graphical abstraction and representations of the physical environment , 2 D - projections of space , and also such recent advances as geometry , trigonometry , the Mercator projection and its likes , thewhole domain of map - making methods and techno - logy , themeasurementandnumericalrepresentationof distances , and so on and so forth ( see Hutchins 1995 for a comprehensive account ) . ¿euseof mapscomesnaturaltomanypeople , particularlythosewith academic training , and even more so to those with a background in mathematics , geometry , and related disciplines like computer scien - ce—but not to everyone even in Western culture . Design restored ‡at I have been attempting on these pages is , in a sense , a similar de - construction and re - construction of design , aiming to show that design is not a purely intramental process closely tied to the funda - mentalmechanismsof intentionalityandplanning , butasimilarlyso - phisticated cognitive technology ; developed over ages , and relying on subtle but sophisticated co - evolved artifacts and working techni - ques . Such is the combination of soft lead pencil , drawing paper , and techniques such as thumbnails , which together enable a highly ﬂuid andexpressiveway of workingthatcomputersarefarfrom matching . 213 I n t e r m i ss i o n tramentalview to an practical / interactiveview of cognitive phenom - ena . If we are to make this shift , then what are the changes that will be necessary ? How should the theories be changed ? ‡at will the re - sults look like ? ¿ere already seems to be an emerging trend in which abilities , which were previously assumed to be intramental , are being reinter - preted as interactive and inquiring techniques . ¿ese developments are anything but concluded , and I can merely try to convey an idea of what may lie ahead of us . Planning can serve as a good illustration . Ever since the birth of cognitive science , planning has been thought of as a fundamental cognitive function that is hardwired in the human information pro - cessor ( Miller etal . 1960 ) . AccordingtoCamhis ( 1979 ) , theuseof plan - ning as a scientiﬁc concept began afterWorldWar II , in severaldi¡er - ent domains , urban planning as well as the philosophy of science , etc . , compare with Polya ( 1945 ) and chapter 1 . But since the emerg - ing critique of cognitive planning theory , by in particular Suchman ( 1987 ) , planning has begun to lose this status as a privileged and fun - damental cognitive capacity . Instead , as for example in Agre & Chap - man ( 1990 ) , plans have come to take on the status of one cognitive technique among many , not more fundamental than , say , writing or riding a bike , but neither any less . Spatial navigation and the use of maps are another example . For long now , animals as well as humans have been attributed with“cog - nitive maps” for navigational purposes . Gallistel ( 1990 ) represents this view , attributing them to animals as primitive as bees . Now there areindicationsthatthisattributionhasbeendonetoohastily . ¿iswas just what the Åkerlund quote in the Introduction concerned : since the Micronesian seafarers didn’t navigate or use maps as we do , it was ﬁrst concluded that they couldn’t navigate at all . So just because bees ﬁnd their way , they needn’t use maps , because this is not the only way . For example , Hutchins ( 1983 , 1995 ) showed that such things as viewer - independent perspective and certain representational tech - niques , which are required for creating maps , were invented in Re - naissance times , are acquired by schooling , and do not even make sense to people in some cultures . Still , as was his point , their naviga - tional feats are remarkable . Hardware support for cognitive processing ¿us , there is an emerging pattern by which these sophisticated cog - 212 procedural factors that have been forgotten , and which would show that navigation , like planning and so forth , may not be as intramen - tal as has been assumed . And if Micronesians navigate quite di¡er - ently from Western seamen , then why do bees necessarily navigate with Western techniques ? But since these intramental mechanisms are part and parcel of cognitive science , the revisions will have to reach deeply into the groundwork . It will not be suªcient to for example talk about “ex - ternal representations” and thereby keeping the theory of represen - tation in place , with a new “external” specimen added to it . Hence , human abilities need to be explained di¡erently , but also cognitive theory and explanation need to be reinvented . Instead of proposing new intramental innovations , we need to look for the answers else - where , in a very literal sense . The ﬁnal question ¿e topic in this last chapter has beenwhether cognition is intramen - tal or interactive in essence ; whether it is basically intellectual or basi - cally practical . I have presented possible arguments and defenses from both camps , but there is one point which they agree on : As I have shown with the “cognitive limitations” theme , both sides agree that mental - only performance is underwhelming , and on this the evi - dence is decisive— this is not a matter of debate . So if you still wish to maintain that cognition is intramental , thenyou also need to adopt the“cognitive limitations”explanation . In interactive theory in con - trast , the mind working on its own is only a circumscribed portion of the full cognitive system , and the unimpressive performance that has been documented so thoroughly is entirely to be expected . ¿us , between the alternative explanations of human performan - ce on cerebral tasks , it doesn’t come down to right or wrong , but to a matter of judgment . For example , the above syllogism seems to fol - low a rationality of its own : Would you say that this strange logic is due to limitations in the information processing capacity of its ori - ginators ? I personally wouldn’t . I’d grant them that they , too , would rather be playing frisbee . 215 I n t e r m i ss i o n A similar reinterpretation can be applied to for example mental simulation vs . hand simulation , as in chapter 6 ; we can do simula - tions reasonably well , given the proper supporting tools and techni - ques , but not so well otherwise . Some people have asked me , “Are you saying that we cannot plan ? ” No , I am saying , But look at how we do it ; for example , look at how “mental” simulation is done . In com - parison , am I saying that we cannot design , just because I argue that design is not a stage of pure intramental analysis , separated from the other activities of inquiry ? Hence , I don’t claim that we cannot plan , but accounts of plan - ning and so forth must be revised , like “mental” simulation . In one sense , design is the “restored” view of planning . “Plan” comes from the Middle French plant , which means ground plan or map ( also inﬂuenced by Fr . plan as in ﬂat surface , cf . English plain ) . In other words , from drawing a ﬂoor plan—i . e . architectural design . ¿e term planning is thus an abstract rendition of design , derived from a pro - cess whereby you make plans literally by drawing . It appears that the practice of sketching as a means of design was developed at the same timeaswhendesignbecameafunctionseparatefrombuilding ( Gom - brich 1960 , Herbert 1993 ) . Somewhere along the way , as “making plans” became intramentalized , both the working method and the materials and tools were dropped ; they were in e¡ect all made into epiphenomena—perhaps the tale of the singular creative idea was born here . Graphic designers also sometimes refer to sketching as “planning” the poster , folder , or other whatever they are producing ( e . g . Black 1990 ) . My account has thus merely reinstated the extra - mental components of the activity ( inquiry ) , the doing and working techniques ( sketching ) , and the materials and tools ( paper , pencil ) , into the cognitive function of planning—such as it was in the origi - nal meaning of the word . One purpose of chapter1 was to show how verycloselyrelateddesignistogeneralcognition , linkedviathemod - el of rationality and rational action . In the same way , many other important activities have always been interactive and inquiring , but the intramental yardstick has caused this to be ignored . As compensation , mental mechanisms have been invented to handle what is actually done by interaction : representa - tion and mental surrogates of the “outside” world are the paradig - matic examples ( cf . Hutchins 1995 , ch . 9 ) . It is such reconsideration that may lie ahead of us , for example re - garding cognitive maps : the potential rediscovery of material and 214 Bibliography Adelson B & Soloway E , 1985 . ¿eroleof domainexperienceinsoft - ware design . IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 11 ( 11 ) , pp . 1351 – 1360 . Adelson B & Soloway E , 1988 . A model of software design . In Chi M T , Glaser R & Farr M J ( eds . ) ¿e Nature of Expertise , pp . 185 – 208 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Agre P & Chapman D , 1987 . Abstract reasoning as emergent from concrete acivity . In Georgeff M P & Klansky A L ( eds . ) Reasoning about Actions and Plans : Proceedings from the1986 workshop , pp . 411 – 424 . Morgan Kaufmann , Los Altos , CA . Agre P & Chapman D , 1990 . ‡at are plans for ? Robotics and Autono - mous Systems 6 , pp . 17 – 34 . Åkerblom K , 1968 . Astronomy and Navigation in Polynesia and Micro - nesia . Statens etnograﬁska museum , Stockholm , Sweden . Akin O , 1986 . ¿e Psychology ofArchitectural Design . Pion , London , UK . Alexander C , 1963 . ¿e determination of components for an Ind - ian village . In Jones J C & Thornley D ( eds . ) Conference on Design Methods . Pergamon Press , Oxford . Alexander C , 1964 . NotesontheSynthesisof Form . Harvard UP , Cam - bridge , MA . Alexander C , 1966 . A city is not a tree . Design 206 , pp . 44 – 55 . Alexander C , 1971 . ¿e state of the art in design methods . DMG Newsletter 5 ( 3 ) , pp . 1 – 7 . Anderson J R , 1983 . ¿e Architecture of Cognition . Harvard UP , Cam - bridge , MA . Arntson A E , 1993 . Graphic Design Basics . Harcourt Brace Jovan - ovich , Orlando , FL . Asimow M , 1962 . Introduction to Design . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cli¡s , NJ . Bateson G , 1967 . Cybernetic explanation . American Behavioral Scien - tist 10 ( 8 ) , pp . 29 – 32 . Bischofsberger W R & Pomberger G , 1992 . Prototyping - OrientedSoft - ware Development : Concepts and Tools . Springer - Verlag , Berlin . Black A , 1990 . Visible planning on paper and on screen : the impact 217 ies 46 , pp . 501 – 522 . Carroll J M , Thomas J C & Malhotra A , 1979 . Clinical – experi - mental analysis of design problem solving . Design Studies 1 , pp . 84 – 92 . Chi M T H , Glaser R & Farr M J , 1988 . ¿e Nature of Expertise . Law - rence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Chomsky N , 1957 . Syntactic Structures . Mouton Gruyter , Paris . Clancey W , 1997 . Situated Cognition : On human knowledge and com - puter representations . Cambridge UP , Cambridge , MA . Clark A , 1997 . Being ¿ere : Putting brain , body , and world together again . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Clark A & Grush R , in press . Towards a cognitive robotics . Adaptive Behavior . Clark A & Toribo J , 1994 . Doing without representing ? Synthese 101 , pp . 401 – 431 . Clark H H , 1992 . Arenas of Language Use . U . of Chicago Press , Chi - cago , IL . Clark H H , 1996 . Using Language . Cambridge UP , Cambridge , MA . Clark H H & Wilkes - Gibbs D , 1986 . Referring as a collaborative pro - cess . Cognition 22 , pp . 1 – 39 . Connel J L & Shafer L B , 1989 . Structured Rapid Prototyping . Yourdon Press , New York . Cooley M , 1988 . From Brunelleschi to CAD – CAM . In Thackara J ( ed . ) Design After Modernism—Beyond the Object . ¿ames and Hud - son , New York . Craik K , 1943 . ¿eNatureof Explanation . Cambridge UP , Cambridge , MA . Cross N ( ed . ) 1984 . Developments in Design Methodology . John Wiley & Sons , Chichester , UK . Csikszentmihalyi M , 1990 . Flow : the psychology of optimal experience . Harper & Row , New York . Dasgupta S , 1989 . ¿estructureof designprocesses . Advances inCom - puters 28 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 67 . Dennett D C , 1991 . Consciousness Explained . Little , Brown & Co . , Boston , MA . Descartes R , 1628 . Regulae ad Directinem Ingenii ( Rules for the Direc - tion of the Mind ) . Descartes R , 1637 . Discours de la Méthode ( Discourse on method ) . Dewey J , 1903 . Studies in Logical ¿eory . ¿e U . of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . 219 B i b li o g r a p h y of working medium on decision - making by novice graphic de - signers . Behaviour and Information Technology 9 ( 4 ) , pp . 283 – 296 . Boar B H , 1983 . ApplicationPrototyping—Arequirementsdeﬁnitionstrat - egy for the80s . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Bødker S , Greenbaum J & Kyng M , 1991 . Setting the stage for design as action . In Greenbaum J & Kyng M ( eds . ) DesignatWork : Cooper - ativeDesignof ComputerSystems , pp . 139 – 154 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Boehm B W , 1975 . Software design and structuring . In Horowitz R ( ed . ) Practical Strategies For Developing Large Software Systems . Ad - dison – Wesley , Reading , MA . Brennan S E , 1990 . Seeking And Providing Evidence For Mutual Under - standing . Ph . D . dissertation , Stanford University , Palo Alto , CA . Broadbent G , 1973 . Design in Architecture . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Broadbent G , 1979 . ¿e development of design methods . Design Methods and ¿eories 13 ( 1 ) , pp . 41 – 45 . Brooks F P , 1975 . ¿e Mythical Man - Month : Essays on Software Engin - eering . Addison – Wesley , Reading , MA . Brooks R A , 1990 . Elephants don’t play chess . Robotics and Autono - mous Systems 6 , pp . 3 – 15 . Brooks R A , 1991a . Intelligence without reason . In IJCAI ’91—Inter - national Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp . 569 – 595 Brooks R A , 1991b . Intelligence without representation . Artiﬁcial In - telligence 47 , pp . 139 – 159 . Brown J S & Duguid P , 1994 . Borderline issues : social and material aspects of design . Human – Computer Interaction 9 ( 1 ) , pp . 3 – 149 . Bruner J S , Goodnow J J & Austin G A , 1956 . A Study of ¿inking . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Budde R , Kautz K , Kuhlenkamp K & Züllighoven H , 1992 . Proto - typing : An Approach to Evolutionary System Development . Springer - Verlag , Berlin . Camhis M , 1979 . Planning ¿eory and Philosophy . Tavistock Publi - cations , London , UK . Card S , Moran T P & Newell A , 1983 . ¿ePsychologyof Human – Com - puter Interaction . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Carroll J M ( ed . ) 1995 . Scenario - basedDesign : Envisioning workandtech - nology in system development . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Carroll J M , 1997 . Human – computer interaction : psychology as a science of design . International Journal of Human – Computer Stud - 218 Gombrich E H , 1960 . Art and Illusion ; A study in the psychology of picto - rial representation . Pantheon Books , New York . Goodwin C , 1979 . ¿e interactive construction of a sentence in nat - ural conversation . In Psathas G ( ed . ) Everyday Language : Studies in Ethnomethodology . Irvington , New York . Gould J D & Lewis C , 1985 . Designing for usability : key principles and what designers think . Communications of the ACM 28 ( 3 ) , pp . 300 – 311 . Graves M , 1977 . ¿e necessity for drawing . Architectural Design 6 , pp . 384 – 394 . Greenbaum J & Kyng M ( eds . ) , 1991a . Design at Work : Cooperative De - sign of Computer Systems . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Greenbaum J & Kyng M , 1991b . Introduction : Situated design . In Greenbaum J & Kyng M ( eds . ) Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems , pp . 1 – 24 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Guindon R , 1989 . ¿e process of knowledge discovery in system de - sign . In Salvendy G & Smith M J ( eds . ) Proceedings of the ¿ird In - ternational Conference on Human – Computer Interaction , pp . 727 – 734 . Elsevier , Amsterdam . Guindon R , 1990a . Designing the design process : exploiting oppor - tunistic thoughts . Human – Computer Interaction 5 ( 2 – 3 ) , pp . 305 – 344 . Guindon R , 1990b . Knowledge exploited by experts during soft - ware system design . International Journal of Man – Machine Studies 33 ( 3 ) , pp . 279 – 304 . Guindon R , 1992 . Requirements and design of DesignVision , an object - oriented graphical interface to an intelligent software de - sign assistant . In Proceedings of ACM CHI ’92 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , , pp . 499 – 506 Guindon R & Curtis B , 1988 . Control of cognitive processes during software design : ‡at tools are needed ? In Proceedings of ACM CHI ’88 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 263 – 268 . Guindon R , Krasner H & Curtis B , 1987 . Breakdowns and processes during the early activities of software design by professionals . In Olson G M , Sheppard S & Soloway E ( eds . ) EmpiricalStudiesof Pro - grammers : Second Workshop , pp . 65 – 82 . Ablex Publishing , Nor - wood , NJ . Hanson K , 1969 . Design from linked requirements in a housing 221 B i b li o g r a p h y Dewey J , 1925 . Experience and Nature . Open Court Publishing Co . , Chicago , IL . Dewey J , 1929 . ¿e Quest for Certainty : a study of the relation of know - ledge and action . Minton Balch , New York . Dewey J , 1933 . How We ¿ink . Heath , Boston , MA . Dewey J , 1938 . Logic : the ¿eory of Inquiry . H . Holt and Company , New York . Dewey J & Bentley A F , 1949 . Knowing and the Known . Beacon Press , Boston , MA . Dix A , Finlay J , Abowd G & Beale R , 1993 . Human – Computer Inter - action . Prentice Hall , New York . Donald M , 1991 . Origins of the Modern Mind : ¿ree stages in the evol - ution of culture and cognition . Harvard UP , Cambridge , MA . Dreyfus H L , 1991 . Being - in - the - world : A commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time , division I . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Dreyfuss H , 1955 . Designing For People . Simon and Schuster , New York . Eastman C M , 1970 . On the analysis of intuitive design processes . In Moore G T ( ed . ) Emerging Methods In Environmental Design And Planning . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Ehn P & Kyng M , 1991 . Cardboard computers : Mocking - it - up or hands - on the future . In Greenbaum J & Kyng M ( eds . ) Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems , pp . 169 – 196 . Law - rence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Ellis A & Beattie G , 1986 . ¿e Psychology of Language and Communica - tion . Weidenfeld & Nicolson , London . Ericsson K A & Smith J , 1991 . Toward a General ¿eory of Expertise : Prospects and Limits . Cambridge UP , Cambridge , MA . Floyd C ( ed . ) 1984 . ApproachestoPrototyping . SpringerVerlag , Berlin . Fodor J A , 1975 . ¿e Language of ¿ought . Crowell , New York . Gallistel C R , 1990 . ¿e Organization of Learning . MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA . Gardiner M M & Christie B , 1987 . Applying Cognitive Psychology To User - Interface Design . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Garﬁnkel H , 1967 . Studies in Ethnomethodology . Prentice - Hall , Eng - lewood Cli¡s , NJ . Gentner D & Stevens A L ( eds . ) , 1983 . Mental Models . Lawrence Erl - baum , Hillsdale , NJ . Goel V , 1995 . Sketches of ¿ought . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 220 Jeffries R , Turner A A , Polson P G & Atwood M E , 1981 . ¿e pro - cesses involved in designing software . In Anderson J R ( ed . ) Cog - nitiveSkillsand¿eirAcquisition , pp . 255 – 283 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Johnson - Laird P N , 1983 . Mental Models . Cambridge UP , Cambrid - ge , MA . Johnson - Laird P N , 1989 . Mental models . In Posner M ( ed . ) Foun - dations of Cognitive Science . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Jones J C , 1963 . A method of systematic design . In Jones J C & Thornley D ( eds . ) Conference on Design Methods . Pergamon Press , Oxford . Jones J C , 1970 . Design methods . Van Nostrand Reinhold , New York . Jones J C & Thornley D ( eds . ) , 1963 . Conference on Design Methods . Pergamon Press , Oxford . Kirsh D & Maglio P , 1992 . Some epistemic beneﬁts of action : Tetris , a case study . In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Kirsh D & Maglio P , 1994 . On distinguishing epistemic from prag - matic action . Cognitive Science . Krauss R M & Weinheimer S , 1964 . Changes in reference phrases as a function of frequency of usage in social interaction : A prelim - inary study . Psychonomic Science 1 , pp . 113 – 114 . Krauss R M & Weinheimer S , 1966 . Concurrent feedback , conﬁrma - tion , and the encoding of referents in verbal communication . So - cial Psychology 4 , pp . 343 – 346 . Larkin J , 1989 . Display - based problem solving . In Klahr D & Ko - tovsky K ( eds . ) Complex Information Processing : ¿e Impact of Her - bert A . Simon . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Larkin J H & Simon H A , 1986 . ‡y a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth ten thousand words . Cognitive Science 11 , pp . 65 – 99 . Lave J , 1988 . Cognition in Practice . Cambridge UP , Cambridge , MA . Lawson B , 1980 . How Designers ¿ink . Butterworth Architecture , Oxford , UK . Luria A R , 1973 . ¿e Working Brain—An introduction to neuropsycholo - gy . Basic Books , London . Mack R L , 1995 . Scenarios as engines of design . In Carroll J M ( ed . ) Scenario - based Design : Envisioning work and technology in system de - velopment , pp . 361 – 386 . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Malhotra A , Thomas J C , Carroll J M & Miller L A , 1980 . Cogni - 223 B i b li o g r a p h y problem . In Broadbent G & Ward ( eds . ) Design Methods in Archi - tecture . Lund Humphries , London . Hayes - Roth B & Hayes - Roth F , 1979 . A cognitive model of plan - ning . Cognitive Science 3 , pp . 275 – 310 . Heath T , 1921 . A History of Greek Mathematics . Clarendon Press , Ox - ford . Heidegger M , 1927 / 1962 . Being and Time . SCM Press , London . Herbert D M , 1993 . Architectural Study Drawings . Van Nostrand Rein - hold , New York . Heskett J , 1980 . Industrial Design . ¿ames and Hudson , London . Hintikka J & Remes U , 1974 . ¿e Method of Analysis : Its geometrical ori - gin and its general signiﬁcance . D . Reidel Publishing Co . , Dor - drecht . Hix D & Hartson H R , 1993 . Developing User Interfaces : Ensuring Usa - bility ¿rough Product & Process . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Holt J E , Radcliffe D F & Schoorl D , 1985 . Design or problem sol - ving—a critical choice for the engineering profession . Design Studies 6 , pp . 107 – 110 . Holyoak K J , 1991 . Symbolic connectionism : toward third - genera - tion theories of expertise . In Ericsson K A & Smith J ( eds . ) To - ward a General ¿eory of Expertise , pp . 301 – 335 . Cambridge UP , Cambridge , MA . Hultsch F ( ed . ) 1876 – 77 . Pappi Alexandrini Collectionis Quae Super - sunt . Vols . I – III . Weidmann , Berlin . Husserl E , 1900 / 1970 . Logical Investigations . Routledge and K . Paul ; Humanities Press , London . Hutchins E , 1980 . Culture and Inference : a Trobriand case study . Har - vard UP , Cambridge , MA . Hutchins E , 1983 . Understanding Micronesian navigation . In Gent - ner D & Stevens A L ( eds . ) Mental Models , pp . 191 – 225 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Hutchins E , 1990 . ¿e technology of team navigation . In Galeg - her J , Kraut R E & Egido C ( eds . ) Intellectual Teamwork , pp . 191 – 220 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Hutchins E , 1995 . Cognition in the Wild . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . James W , 1907 . Pragmatism , a new name for some old ways of thinking . Longmans , Green , New York . Jefferson G , 1973 . A case of precision timing in ordinary conversa - tion : Overlapped tag - positioned address terms in closing sequen - ces . Semiotica 9 , pp . 47 – 96 . 222 Polanyi M , 1958 . Personal Knowledge ; Towards a post - critical philosophy . U . of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . Polya G , 1945 . How To Solve It . Princeton UP , Princeton , NJ . Popper K R , 1935 / 1959 . ¿e Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery . Basic Books , New York . Reber A S , 1985 . ¿e Penguin Dictionary of Psychology . Penguin Books , London , UK . Reisberg D , 1987 . External representations and the advantages of externalizing one’s thoughts . In Proceedings of the Nineteenth An - nual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , pp . 281 – 293 . Law - rence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Rettig M , 1994 . Prototyping for tiny ﬁngers . Communications of the ACM 37 ( 4 ) , pp . 21 – 27 . Rittel H W J , 1972 . Second - generation design methods . ¿e DMG 5th anniversary report : DMG occasional paper No . 1 , pp . 5 – 10 . Rittel H W J & Weber M M , 1973 . Dilemmas in a general theory of planning . Policy Sciences 4 , pp . 155 – 169 . Robbins E , 1994 . ‡y Architects Draw . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Rumelhart D E , Smolensky P , McClelland J L & Hinton G E , 1986 . Schemata and sequential thought processes in PDP models . In McClelland J L & Rumelhart D E ( eds . ) Parallel Distributed Pro - cessing : Explorations in the microstructure of cognition , Vol . 2 , pp . 7 – 57 . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Sacks H & Schegloff E A , 1979 . Two preferences in the organization of reference to persons in conversation and their interaction . In Psathas G ( ed . ) Everyday language : Studies in ethnomethodology , pp . 15 – 21 . Irvington Publishers , New York . Sacks H , Schegloff E A & Jefferson G , 1974 . A simplest systematics for the organization of turn - taking for conversation . Language 50 , pp . 696 – 735 . Schegloff E A , Jefferson G & Sacks H , 1977 . ¿e preference for self - correction in the organization of repair in conversation . Lang - uage 53 ( 2 ) , pp . 361 – 382 . Schober M F & Clark H H , 1989 . Understanding by addressees and overhearers . Cognitive Psychology 21 , pp . 211 – 232 . Schön D , 1983 . ¿e Reﬂective Practitioner . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Schön D , 1987 . Educating the Reﬂective Practitioner . Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , CA . Schön D , 1988 . Designing : Rules , types and worlds . Design Studies 9 , pp . 181 – 190 . 225 B i b li o g r a p h y tive processes indesign . InternationalJournalof Man – MachineStud - ies 12 ( 2 ) , pp . 119 – 140 . Marr D , 1982 . Vision . Freeman , New York . Miller G A , 1956 . ¿e magical number seven , plus or minus two : Some limits on our capacity for processing information . Psycho - logical Review 63 , pp . 81 – 97 . Miller G A , Galanter E & Pribram K H , 1960 . Plans and the Structure of Behavior . Holt & Company , New York . Nardi B , 1992 . ¿e use of scenarios in design . SIGCHI Bulletin 24 ( 4 ) , pp . 13 – 14 . Nardi B A & Miller J R , 1991 . Twinkling lights and nested loops : dis - tributed problem solving and spreadsheet development . Internat - ional Journal of Man – Machine Studies 34 ( 2 ) , pp . 161 – 184 . Nardi B A & Zarmer C L , 1993 . Beyond models and metaphors : visual formalisms in user interface design . Journalof VisualLanguagesand Computing 4 , pp . 5 – 33 . Newell A , 1990 . Uniﬁed ¿eories of Cognition . Harvard UP , Cam - bridge , Mass . Newell A , Rosenbloom P S & Laird J E , 1989 . Symbolic architect - ures for cognition . In Posner M ( ed . ) Foundations of Cognitive Sci - ence . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Newell A & Simon H A , 1972 . Human Problem Solving . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cli¡s , NJ . Nickerson R S & Adams M J , 1979 . Long - term memory for a com - mon object . Cognitive Psychology 11 , pp . 287 – 307 . Norman D A , 1983 . Some observations on mental models . In Gent - ner D & Stevens A L ( eds . ) MentalModels , pp . 7 – 14 . Lawrence Erl - baum , Hillsdale , NJ . Norman D A , 1988 . ¿e Design of Everyday ¿ings . Basic Books , New York . Norman D A , 1993 . ¿ings ¿at Make Us Smart . Addison – Wesley , Reading , MA . Parnas D L , 1985 . Software aspects of strategic defense systems . Com - munications of the ACM 28 ( 12 ) , pp . 1326 – 1335 . Parnas D L & Clements P C , 1986 . A rational design process : how and why to fake it . IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 12 ( 2 ) , pp . 251 – 257 . Peirce C S , Hartshorne C & Weiss P , 1931 . ¿e Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce . Harvard UP , Cambridge , MA . 224 terfacing ¿ought : Cognitive aspects of Human – Computer Interaction , pp . 337 – 352 . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Winograd T , Bennett J , de Young L & Hartﬁeld B ( eds . ) , 1996 . Bringing Design to Software . ACM Press , New York . Wixon D & Holtzblatt K , 1990 . Contextual design : An emergent view of system design transcending perspectives . In Knox S ( ed . ) Proceedings of ACM CHI ’90 Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems , pp . 329 – 336 . Zhang J , 1992 . DistributedRepresentation : ¿einteractionbetweeninter - nal and external information . Ph . D . ¿esis , University of Califor - nia , San Diego , San Diego , CA . Zhang J & Norman D , 1994 . Representations in distributed cogni - tive tasks . Cognitive Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 87 – 122 . 227 B i b li o g r a p h y Schön D , 1992 . Design as reﬂective conversation with the material . Research in Engineering Design 3 , pp . 131 – 147 . Schön D A & Wiggins G , 1992 . Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing . Design Studies 13 ( 2 ) , pp . 135 – 156 . Shrage M , 1996 . Cultures of prototyping . In Winograd T , Ben - nett J , de Young L & Hartﬁeld B ( eds . ) Bringing Design to Soft - ware , pp . 192 – 204 . ACM Press , New York . Simon H A , 1947 . Administrative Behavior : A study of decision - making processes in administrative organization . Macmillan , New York . Simon H A , 1973 . ¿e structure of ill - structured problems . Artiﬁcial Intelligence 4 , pp . 181 – 201 . Simon H A , 1974 . How big is a chunk ? Science 183 , pp . 482 – 488 . Simon H A , 1976 . ¿e information - storage system called “human memory” . In Rosenzweig M R & Bennett E L ( eds . ) Neural Mecha - nisms of Learning and Motivation , pp . 79 – 96 . MIT Press , Cambrid - ge , MA . Simon H A , 1979 . Models of ¿ought . Yale UP , New Haven , CT . Simon H A , 1981 . ¿e Sciences of the Artiﬁcial . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Spiekermann E & Ginger E M , 1993 . Stop Stealing Sheep & ﬁnd out how type works . Adobe Press , Mountain View , CA . Suchman L , 1987 . Plans and Situated Actions : ¿e problem of human – machine communication . Cambridge UP , Cambridge , MA . Swartout W & Balzer R , 1982 . On the inevitable intertwining of speciﬁcation and implementation . Communications of the ACM 25 , pp . 438 – 440 . Tannen D , 1984 . Conversational Style : analyzing talk among friends . Ablex Pub . Corp . , Norwood , NJ . Tegethoff W , Dyckes W & Mies van der Rohe L , 1985 . Mies van der Rohe : the villas and country houses . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Thomas J C & Carroll J M , 1979 . ¿e psychological study of design . Design Studies 1 ( 1 ) , pp . 5 – 11 . Tognazzini B , 1992 . Tog on Interface . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Vera A & Simon H A , 1993 . Situated Action : A symbolic interpret - ation . Cognitive Science 17 ( 1 ) , pp . 7 – 48 . von Glasersfeld E , 1982 . An interpretation of Piaget’s construct - ivism . Revue Internationale de Philosophie 142 , pp . 612 – 635 . Whiteside J & Wixon D , 1987 . Improving Human – Computer In - teraction : A quest for cognitive science . In Carroll J M ( ed . ) In - 226