Representing collaborative work : The Airport as Common Information Space Extended Abstract Bob Fields , Paola Amaldi , and Antonello Tassi Technical Report : IDC - TR - 2003 - 003 December 2003 Interaction Design Centre Interaction Design Centre School of Computing Science Middlesex University Trent Park Campus Bramley Road N14 4YZ For further details of this technical report series contact : Paul Curzon ( p . curzon @ mdx . ac . uk ) Representing collaborative work : The Airport as Common Information Space Extended Abstract B OB F IELDS * , P AOLA A MALDI * , A NTONELLO T ASSI * * * Interaction Design Centre Middlesex University Bramley Road London , N14 4YZ , UK b . fields @ mdx . ac . uk , p . amaldi - trillo @ mdx . ac . uk * * Department of Engineering , Development and Production ( DISP ) University of Rome “Tor Vergata” Via del Politecnico , 1 00133 Rome , Italy antotassi @ inwind . it Introduction This paper describes a case study in understanding and explicating the activities in a complex , safety critical workplace : an airport control tower . Central to the safe , efficient and reliable accomplishment of work in the tower is the ability of tower staff to work collaboratively by sharing information and responsibilities . As with many complex systems , airport control towers are frequently the subject of re - designs , improvements , upgrades , and technological interventions both large and small . Anticipating the effect of making such changes is a major challenge for designers and for any attempt to model or represent the workings of the tower . In the case described here , one of the critical issues a design team must address is , when a new piece of equipment is installed in the tower , or a new procedure instituted , what will be the effect on the activities of those who work there ? And in particular , what will be the effect of new technology and procedures on the coordination of different elements of the system , and on the safe operation of the system as a whole . Two key observations inform our study . The first is that most of the time , complex systems such as ATC manage to function ( Rochlin 1999 ) . This suggests that we should focus less on unwanted but relatively rare events and aiming to “design them out” . Instead we should develop a better understanding of the ever - present factors , many of which may be interactional , that allow the system to work safely , and aim to design in a way that is sensitive to the often subtle ways workers organise their activity . The second observation is that much of what typically gets forgotten when representations of work are created ( and as a consequence , when systems are designed ) is the often invisible “articulation work” ( Strauss 1988 ) , and the role that work artefacts play in this work ( Schmidt and Simone 1996 ) . A claim that underpins some of our analysis is that an understanding of how information and artefacts are used and manipulated is key to understanding what permits coordination and cooperation to happen effectively and keeps a system running . Therefore in producing “thick description” ( Geertz 1973 ; Harper 2000 ) we take the Tower as a “distributed cognitive system” of people and artefacts working in a coordinated way ( Hutchins 1995 ) . Coupled with this , our analysis is informed by the notion of Common Information Space ( Schmidt and Bannon 1992 ) , which emphasises not only information - bearing artefacts , but also , crucially , the meanings that workers construct for artefacts and hold in common . In practice this has meant entertaining an analytic sensitivity to the various artefacts used and manipulated by workers in the Tower , paying particular attention to the way they function as representations . Context of the Study This ethnographically inspired study was carried out as part of an ongoing project to develop , install , and evaluate new prototype ground radar technology in an airport . 1 The Human Factors Evaluation component of this project has given us the opportunity to develop a richer account of work in the tower and other parts of the airport . This has involved conducting interviews with tower staff and personnel from other organisations and agencies involved in the running of the airport . This has been supplemented with a series of observations , producing notes and video and audio records of work in the tower and elsewhere in the airport . Similar field studies at other airports have provided us with a point of comparison . The Tower and Beyond The function of the control Tower at a airport is to provide information and instructions , in the form of clearances , to aircraft in certain areas of the airport and the airspace immediately around it , in order to ensure the safe and efficient movement of traffic . At the airport in question , the Tower is typically staffed by three or four controllers with different assigned roles ( roughly speaking , one to control aircraft on the runway and taxiway , one to control certain other areas of the airport and approves manoeuvres , and one to be in contact with other air traffic control facilities that manage the airspace around the airport ) . Clearly there is rather more to the airport than just the tower , and a variety of other companies and agencies are responsible for functions such as safety monitoring and regulation , organising services that are needed in the parking area , and operating the “Follow - me” and “Pushback” vehicles that are used when aircraft manoeuvre in the area known as the apron . As we shall see in an example later , the activities of the different agencies are highly interdependent , and there is clearly a need for the actions of ( say ) the Follow - me to be appropriately coordinated with those of the tower controllers . The organisations responsible for these various activities are located in different parts of the airport , and the channels of communication between them are relatively narrow : Phonecalls and radio 1 The Fast Prototyping project was sponsored by ENAV ( Ente Nazionale Assistenza al Volo ) and carried out by a consortium lead by Prof . Gaspare Galati from the Engineering Deprtament of the University of Rome " Tor Vergata " . conversations are relatively infrequent , though the service agencies are able to ‘listen inn’ on radio conversations on the Tower frequencies . Representation of collaborative work in tightly coupled systems : Common Information Space This paper will present an approach to representing and documenting the collaborative nature of activities in complex systems such as the control and management of aircraft moving in the air or on the ground . Two early assumptions in this work were not completely borne out , and the realisation of this prompted the use of a richer theoretical framework and set of representational concepts . The first assumption was that a viable unit of analysis and field for data collection for our study was the airport tower itself and the work that is conducted inside . The second assumption was that a conceptual framework such as Distributed Cognition , for studying the distributed nature of cognitive work would provide us with conceptual and analytic scaffolding to support our study . In fact it soon became clear that the work of the tower is inextricably bound up with other activities and agencies around the airport ( and indeed beyond ) and that the interdependencies between different activities meant the effect of changes to technology and practice in the tower may be subtly linked to activities going on elsewhere . We therefore broadened the study to encompass observations and interviews wither other actors in the airport . Once our empirical net had been cast more widely in this way , it was clear that the various workplaces and constituencies of workers are highly heterogeneous and do not constitute a single community of practice ( Wenger 2000 ) . Not only are the tasks and formal responsibilities of the tower and other agencies radically different , the forms of interpretation and meanings and significance ascribed to information artefacts varied widely across the different agencies too . So a framework , such as CIS , that takes meaning and interpretation as central , yields additional insights into the work processes observed , highlighting some of the often unrecognised interpretive work needed to ensure that things run smoothly , despite the apparent organisational and cultural hurdles . The main analytic focus of this study was on coordination , the forms of coordination that occur between individual workers in this complex setting , and the mechanisms of interaction through coordination which takes place ( Bossen 2002 ) . Mechanisms of interaction may be “immaterial” means through which the relationships between different activities may be regulated , for example standards , procedures , agreements , systems of classification , and divisions of labour . Interaction mechanisms may also be material means through which activities are brought together . Schmidt and Simone ( 1996 ) use the term “Coordination Mechanism” to refer to artefacts used to control and simplify the interactions between individuals . The classic example in Air Traffic Control of a Coordination Mechanism is the flight progress strip – a compact and efficient representation of the status of an aircraft that aids individuals in carrying out tasks , but also mediates some of the cooperative relations between different controllers . See , for example , ( Hughes , Randall and Shapiro 1992 ; Harper and Hughes 1993 ; Fields et al . 1998 ; Berndtsson and Normark 1999 ) . As part of this study we observed a variety of ways that coordination takes place , and in some cases fails to take place . One feature of some of the previous studies of coordination in ATC cited above is that the focus was on coordination within an ATC unit or between units . In other words between controllers , sometimes co - present , sometimes geographically dispersed . In the present study , some of the work activities to be brought into coordination were distributed not only across different physical locations , but across different professional communities ( for instance between the Tower controllers and the handling company who operates the “Follow - me” vehicles ) . Example : Coordinating departures In the study , many cases of coordination and lack of coordination were observed to persist as features of this heterogeneous system . From the data collected , we have selected a corpus of scenario situations that exemplify different ways that coordination may take place , in some cases “invisibly” , in other cases problematically . The case below illustrates how the CIS concept gives us a set of analytic categories through which to view our data . An example of cross - organisation coordination occurs when aircraft prepare to depart the airport . Once an aircraft wishing to depart has been given approval to start its engines and begin moving towards the taxiway , number of evens must occur . While at the airport , aircraft park in part of the apron area , that portion of the airport that is neither runway nor taxiway , and is therefore not officially under the control of the tower , and which aircraft must share with other users such as busses , baggage trucks and other vehicles . In order to permit aircraft to move safely in the apron area , they are guided by “follow - me” vehicles , which leads them from the parking area to the taxiway , from where they move , under the control of the Tower , to the runway . Currently the sequence in which aircraft depart is contingent upon a number of criteria , whose significance is dependent on local conditions and needs . These criteria include the time of an allocated departure “slot” , whether and to what extent a flight has been delayed , a first - come - first - served principle , the parking position , the estimated time necessary to reach the runway , the type and performance of aircraft , the various aircraft wishing to depart , and the overall level , status and location of other traffic , both on the ground or in the air . From the perspective of the Tower , departing sequences cannot be established far in advance as some of the criteria are highly dynamic and subject to change . Sequences are therefore decided only a few minutes ahead of time , typically involving no more than three or four aircraft at a time ; frequently , at the airport studied , the interval between departures is sufficiently long that no planned sequence is required . In order to make their decisions , controllers have at their disposal a variety of resources , including various pre - planned events ( such as the planned departure time and “slot time” of an aircraft ) , the view through the tower window of events taking place around the airport , and radio conversations with pilots . Possibly the most important resource , though , is the collection of flight progress strips , strips of paper which both record information and serve as a record for decisions and actions of the controller . The strips constitute a highly flexible means of planning departure sequences and can be written on , re - ordered and otherwise physically manipulated in this process . The drivers of the Follow - me vehicles , on the other hand , who in a sense “enact” their own sequence of departures , act on the basis of a different , locally achieved understanding of the situation . The information resources available to Follow - me vehicles are rather different to those present in the tower , and reflect a different a “time horizon” in the understanding they have of the movement of aircraft . Follow - me drivers rely on two main resources : firstly , a pre - printed schedule of the day’s planned departures , corresponding roughly to the airlines’ timetables ( and therefore prepared long in advance ) and secondly their immediate and on - the - spot view of what is happening to aircraft in the apron area . The pre - prepared schedule may give a general overview of how the situation is expected to unfold over the day , and Follow - me drivers orient to the schedule as a way of knowing what aircraft movements are likely in the near future . In order to know which aircraft is to depart next , however , the driver will use visual cues around the aircraft itself . Indeed some drivers report taking a tour of the apron area to see which aircraft look ready to go . These information resources serve as the primary mechanisms through which the work of the Follow - me is coordinated with the decisions and activities of the tower . One effect of this is that while the Tower may make decisions about departure sequence , and may issue “approvals” for aircraft to startup their engine in a particular order , it is often the Follow - me driver , without reference to the Tower , who will decide the actual order based on which aircraft appears to be ready . If more than one aircraft are ready for departure , then the driver will , in - situ and usually without contacting tower , make a decision , often confounding the expectations of both controllers and pilots . However , most of the time , the level of traffic is such that the problem , and the underlying lack of agreement about the departure sequence is never exposed . The meanings tower controllers and Follow - me drivers have of the situation are sufficiently ‘congruent’ to allow seamless coordination most of the time . That this largely backgrounded lack of negotiated agreement persists can be cast in the terms of Bossen’s ( 2002 ) “parameters of common information space” . In particular , two parameters seem relevant” . The first refers to differences in meaning and interpretation that exist , and the second to the menas of communication that are available to , among other things , negotiate a common understanding . Workers in the tower and those in the Follow - me are “spun in different webs of significance” – in other words they are members of different professional cultures whose meanings and interpretations are frequently divergent . Furthermore , the channels of communication between the Tower and Follow - me are somewhat limited . Workers rarely if ever visit each others’ places of work ; while the possibility exists for direct radio communication , it is used relatively infrequently . Discussion This paper discusses a case study in depicting the work that takes place in a complex . , critical system that is highly heterogeneous . Recent work in the CSCW literature has presented us with a number of representational concepts that allow us to view the object of study . Central to out presentation of collaborative activity in the airport has been an understanding of coordination work and how it takes place . The CIS concept , and in particular Bossen’s elaboration of it , has given us a collection of significant features of coordination work that a representational framework should highlight . References Berndtsson , J . and M . Normark ( 1999 ) . The Coordinative Functions of Flight Strips : Air Traffic Control Work Revisited . ACM GROUP ' 99 - International Conference on Supporting Group Work . Bossen , C . ( 2002 ) . The Parameters of Common Information Spaces : The Heterogeneity of Cooperative Work at a Hospital Ward . Computer Supported Cooperative Work CSCW ' 02 , ACM . Fields , R . , P . Wright , P . Marti and M . Palmonari ( 1998 ) . Air traffic control as a distributed cognitive system : a case study of external representations . ECCE9 : Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics , T . R . G . Green , L . Bannon , C . P . Warren and J . Buckley eds . , EACE . Geertz , C . ( 1973 ) . The Interpretation of Cultures : Essays in Interpretive Anthropology , Fontana Press . Harper , R . H . R . ( 2000 ) . The Organisation in Ethnography : A Discussion of Ethnographic Fieldwork Programs in CSCW . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 9 : 239 - 264 . Harper , R . H . R . and J . A . Hughes ( 1993 ) . “What a f - ing system ! Send ’em all to the same place and then expect us to stop ’em hitting” : Making Technology Work in Air Traffic Control . Technology in Working Order : Studies of Work , Interaction , and Technology . G . Button ed . London , Routledge : 127 - 144 . Hughes , J . A . , D . Randall and D . Shapiro ( 1992 ) . Faltering from ethnography to design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work CSCW ' 92 , J . Turner and R . Kraut eds . , ACM Press . Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) . Cognition in the Wild , MIT Press . Rochlin , G . ( 1999 ) . Safe Operation as a Social Construct . Ergonomics 42 ( 2 ) : 1 - 12 . Schmidt , K . and L . Bannon ( 1992 ) . Taking CSCW Seriously : Supporting Articulation Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 1 ( 1 ) : 7 - 40 . Schmidt , K . and C . Simone ( 1996 ) . Coordination Mechanisms : Towards a Conceptual Foundation of CSCW Systems Design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 5 ( 2 / 3 ) : 155 - 200 . Strauss , A . ( 1988 ) . The Articulation of Project Work : An Organizational Process . The Sociological Quarterly 29 ( 1 ) : 163 - 178 . Wenger , E . ( 2000 ) . Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning , and Identity , Cambridge University Press .