nature methods | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | 847 Biological systems , ranging from single molecules to cells and tissues , have heterogeneous structural , biophysi - cal and chemical properties that change dynamically to fulfill versatile functions . At the nanoscale , these prop - erties determine how the highly sophisticated molecular machinery of the living cell works and responds to its complex environment . Hence , there is an urgent need for methods that can image native biological systems in physiological buffer and simultaneously map the systems’ multiple properties at molecular resolution . Developed over the past 15 years , FD curve – based AFM imaging has now reached an exciting stage at which it can be used to image the architecture of complex bio - logical systems such as living cells , model and cellular membranes , protein complexes , viruses and nucleic acids and at the same time quantify and structurally map their biophysical properties at nanometer resolution 1 – 6 . To achieve this , an atomic force microscope is used to record an array of FD curves over the heterogeneous biological sample ( Fig . 1 ) . For each FD curve , the microscope tip detects localized interactions with the sample at angstrom precision and piconewton sensitivity . These interactions are mapped pixel by pixel and are directly correlated to the topography of the biological sample . From this , a vol - ume of interaction forces is reconstructed through which the probing tip moves on its way to the sample surface . Because the tip can be physically , chemically or biological - ly functionalized , it resembles a molecular toolbox , allow - ing the interaction forces associated with a given property to be specifically selected and quantified 7 , 8 . The method therefore offers a powerful approach for the quantitative three - dimensional ( 3D ) imaging of the biological , chemi - cal and physical properties of complex biosystems . Although powerful , FD - based AFM imaging has long been limited by poor spatial and temporal resolu - tion , which are critical in biology , as cellular processes are highly dynamic and occur at the molecular scale . This drawback has severely hampered the widespread use of FD - based AFM in the life sciences . However , recent advancements in AFM technology circumvent these limitations and enable researchers to record quan - titative 3D images of biological systems at molecular resolution and at the speed of conventional topographic AFM imaging . In this Review , we discuss the principles of FD - based AFM imaging , including the most recent technological developments , and survey the recent breakthroughs enabled by this AFM modality in improv - ing our molecular understanding of the organization , mechanics and interactions of complex biological systems in relation to function . 1 Institute of Life Sciences , Université Catholique de Louvain , Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium . 2 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering , Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule ( ETH ) Zürich , Basel , Switzerland . Correspondence should be addressed to D . J . M . ( daniel . mueller @ bsse . ethz . ch ) or Y . F . D . ( yves . dufrene @ uclouvain . be ) . RECEIVED 28 DECEMBER 2012 ; ACCEPTED 14 JULY 2013 ; PUBLISHED ONLINE 29 AUGUST 2013 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMETH . 2602 Multiparametric imaging of biological systems by force - distance curve – based AFM Yves F Dufrêne 1 , David Martínez - Martín 2 , Izhar Medalsy 2 , David Alsteens 1 & Daniel J Müller 2 A current challenge in the life sciences is to understand how biological systems change their structural , biophysical and chemical properties to adjust functionality . Addressing this issue has been severely hampered by the lack of methods capable of imaging biosystems at high resolution while simultaneously mapping their multiple properties . Recent developments in force - distance ( FD ) curve – based atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) now enable researchers to combine ( sub ) molecular imaging with quantitative mapping of physical , chemical and biological interactions . Here we discuss the principles and applications of advanced FD - based AFM tools for the quantitative multiparametric characterization of complex cellular and biomolecular systems under physiological conditions . review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 848 | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | nature methods should be similar to that of the sample 5 , 14 , 15 . If at the beginning of the experiment the sample stiffness is unknown , one may choose a first cantilever to estimate the sample stiffness and successively choose a more appropriate cantilever . In such situations , the user has to find a compromise between soft and high – Q - factor cantilevers to increase force sensitivity and low – Q - factor and high – resonance frequency cantilevers to detect fast events . As the cantilever spring constant can change during the experiment , it should be calibrated by measuring the thermal noise of the free cantilever before and after recording FD curves 16 , 17 . The atomic force microscope tip as a nanotechnological toolbox . In the case of a simple nonfunctionalized tip , FD curves recorded by FD - based AFM can be used to reveal physical and chemical sample properties such as indentation , elasticity , adhesion , energy dissipa - tion , electrostatic repulsion or surface charge distribution 3 ( Fig . 1b ) . A unique feature of FD - based AFM is its ability to record spatially resolved FD curves for each pixel of the biological sample imaged and to map sample properties that are directly correlated to the topogra - phy ( Fig . 1c ) . In the final FD - based AFM experiment , the number of different maps that can be recorded simultaneously to the sample topography depends on the number of parameters that can be extract - ed from the FD curves . Remarkably , the chemical , biological and physical functionalization of the atomic force microscope tip creates a molecular toolbox that offers the possibility of specifically detecting and mapping interactions of interest 5 , 7 , 8 ( Fig . 2a – c ) . For example , functionalizing the tip with a ligand enables measurement of the force required to separate the ligand from its receptor 18 – 20 . Modifying the tip with chemical groups allows the mapping of chemical groups of biological surfaces 21 – 24 , and conductive tips allow topography to be combined with conductiv - ity maps 25 . Applied to cellular systems , functionalized tips have been used to localize bacterial surface - layer proteins 26 ; to detect lipids , surface receptors and drug - binding sites of native cells 4 , 27 , 28 ; and to quantify and map chemical properties such as cell surface charge and hydrophobicity 23 , 24 . Such interactions of biological surfaces should be preferably measured in physiological solution and at physiological temperature to avoid denaturation and to maintain the native state of the sample . PrinCiPLes and PraCtiCe oF Fd - Based aFm imaGinG Recording force - distance curves with multifunctional tips To record an FD curve , the piezoelectric device of the atomic force microscope brings the cantilever and sample into contact and then separates them again ( Fig . 1a ) . As soon as the approaching micro - scope tip interacts with the sample , the cantilever bends and detects an interaction force ( Fig . 1a , b ) . Along with this movement , the displacement of the sample and the deflection of the cantilever are recorded in a so - called force - displacement curve , which is converted into an FD curve . This interaction can be used to describe the attrac - tion , repulsion or deformation of the sample . Upon withdrawal of the tip , interactions can be measured to describe the ( de - ) adhesion , elastic ( Young’s ) modulus or energy dissipation of the sample . These properties are usually determined by fitting FD curves to mathemati - cal models of contact mechanics through the use of home - written , open - access or commercially available software packages . In the fol - lowing sections we discuss the principles of recording FD curves for the quantitative multiparametric characterization of complex cellular and biomolecular systems in physio logical conditions . The challenge of accurately defining the tip - sample distance . For many applications ( see below ) , the distance and , thus , the contact point between the microscope tip and sample must be defined 9 . However , defining the contact point becomes increasingly complex when working with native biological systems that are very soft , struc - turally heterogeneous and dynamic . Therefore , in most cases the con - tact point between the microscope tip and the biological sample is only estimated in FD curves ( Fig . 1b ) . Fortunately , the error caused by this approximation is negligible in many AFM applications . Choosing the right cantilever . The choice of the cantilever depends on the FD - based AFM experiment to be done . In particular , the appropriate cantilever depends on which interaction forces , dis - tances and kinetics of the biological system are to be investigated . For instance , measuring the interaction forces that are governed by single biomolecules , which are typically in the range of 5 – 250 pN ( ref . 10 ) , requires soft atomic force microscope cantilevers ( spring constant , k ≈ 0 . 01 – 0 . 5 N m – 1 ) that show high quality ( Q ) - factors ( > 5 ) in liquids . However , detection of dynamic biomolecular inter - actions requires fast cantilevers that show high resonance frequencies ( > 100 kHz ) and low Q - factors ( < 5 ) 11 – 13 . Fortunately , liquids damp cantilevers and substantially lower their Q - factors ( to ~ 1 – 20 ) . On the other hand , if the experiment focuses on measuring the flexibility or stiffness of a sample , the spring constant ( stiffness ) of the cantilever Figure 1 | FD curve – based AFM reveals topography and quantitative maps of multiple properties of biological samples . ( a ) In FD - based AFM , the microscope tip approaches and withdraws from the sample in a pixel - for - pixel manner to record interaction forces , F , over the tip - sample distance in FD curves . The high precision of the approach allows detection of pixel sizes < 1 nm 2 with a positional accuracy of ~ 0 . 2 nm and forces at piconewton sensitivity . ( b ) Approach ( blue ) and withdrawal ( green ) FD curves . Zero indicates the contact point of tip and sample . Highlighted are some parameters that can be extracted from FD curves : distance ( sample height ) at maximum contact force , deformation , elasticity ( Young’s modulus ) , energy dissipation and adhesion . ( c ) FD - based AFM topography and directly correlated multiparametric maps of native purple membrane adsorbed onto mica and imaged in buffer solution . Analyzing the FD curves allows extraction of the topography and mapping of the elasticity , deformation and adhesion of the sample . Scale bars , 200 nm . Images in c adapted from ref . 39 with permission from Wiley . a c b Photodiode F L a s e r Maximum contact force Approach Deformation Fit region for Young’s modulus Energy dissipation Withdraw AdhesionDistance Young’s modulus Topography Deformation Adhesion 15 nm 35 MPa 0 0 0 0 MPa 0 nm Fo r ce Fo r ce D i s t a n ce review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | 849 Separating specific from nonspecific interactions . Atomic force microscope tips can establish various nonspecific and specific inter - actions with biological surfaces . For separation of specific from non - specific interactions , the functionalizing molecule can be attached via a polymeric linker to the microscope tip 29 – 32 . Separation of the tip from the sample first ruptures the nonspecific interactions between tip and sample , after which the linker is stretched until the specific bond formed by the functionalizing molecule ruptures from its binding partner ( Fig . 2a ) . The rupture force of the specific bond can then be read out at a stretching distance correlated to the length of the linker . However , such forces characterizing the ‘strength’ of specific bonds depend on the loading rate ( i . e . , force applied over time ) applied by the microscope tip . Hence , the rupture force provides only limited insight into the strength and dynamic nature of a bond . The Bell - Evans model was among the first to describe the dynamic behavior of a mechanically stressed molecular bond 33 – 35 . It charac - terizes the bound and unbound states as being separated by single or multiple energy barriers ( Fig . 2d ) . Externally applying a force to the bond increases the thermal likelihood of crossing the barrier toward the unbound state . This likelihood increases with the loading rate . Determining the mean rupture force of a particular bond over a wide range of loading rates can be used to approximate kinetic , energetic and mechanical parameters characterizing the bond 34 – 36 ( Fig . 2d , e ) . Recent approaches extend this Bell - Evans model toward revealing intrinsic unbinding rates and activation free energies from single - molecule force spectroscopy experiments 37 , 38 . Tip contamination and artifacts . Today , commercial atomic force microscopes are user friendly , and well - established protocols are avail - able for recording FD curves . Yet we stress that reliable FD data acqui - sition and interpretation are not routine and often require expertise , especially when functionalized microscope tips are used to character - ize complex biological specimens 5 , 10 , 29 , 31 , 32 . One central issue is the lifetime of the functionalized tip , which may be very short because of tip damage or contamination . When the sample is covered with loose - ly bound macromolecules , which is often the case when biological specimens are involved , the tip may become contaminated after a few FD curves are recorded . This contamination usually lowers the resolu - tion of the AFM topography , introduces imaging artifacts and irregu - larly alters the shape of the FD curves . To minimize this problem , users should first visualize their samples with an unmodified tip to identify the region of interest before engaging a functionalized tip on the same region . FD curves should be recorded immediately after the tip has been engaged on the selected region , and the FD curve shape should be monitored to identify the time point of tip contamination . Generally , tip contamination is limited at contact forces < 100 pN . data collection , analysis and interpretation Increasing imaging speed , resolution and force sensitivity . Conventionally , FD - based AFM imaging is rather slow and typically requires ~ 30 min to record high - resolution ( < 10 - nm ) topographs and multiparametric maps . This sluggishness severely limits the use of FD - based atomic force microscopes for characterizing dynamic biological processes at high resolution . Recently , however , atomic force microscopes have been optimized to record arrays of FD curves at much improved speed , positional accuracy and force sensitiv - ity . These dedicated , commercially available FD - based microscopes record FD curves at high frequencies of ~ 0 . 1 – 10 kHz , which is up to three orders of magnitude higher than frequencies of conventional FD - based AFM . With these newer instruments , the time required to acquire an FD - based AFM image approaches that of conventional AFM imaging ( ~ 1 – 3 min for 512 × 512 pixels ) . Cantilevers for AFM have also recently been optimized in terms of shape and have been decreasing in size and increasing in Q - factor , leading to the possibility of observing fast ( approximately 0 . 1 - s to 1 - s ) biomolecular processes in real time and at an increased force resolution of < 10 pN ( ref . 11 ) . Such improved detection sensitivity enables the detection of weak bio - molecular interactions , including , for example , chaperones , ligands or polypeptide loops 12 , 13 , 39 . In addition , shorter cantilevers show higher resonance frequencies , thereby increasing the FD - based AFM imag - ing speed 40 , 41 . Different force - distance – based AFM modes . Currently , com - mercially available FD - based AFM modes differ in how they move the cantilever ( or the sample ) to record FD curves . Whereas some FD - based atomic force microscopes move the cantilever up and down in a sinusoidal fashion , others move the cantilever in a rect - angular fashion . So that the cantilever follows the externally applied movement , the resonance frequency of the cantilever must be much higher ( by a factor of > 5 ) than the frequency at which FD curves are recorded . When applied movements are close to the resonance fre - Fo r ce F r e q u e n c y F r ee e n e r g y A pp r o ac h W i t h d r a w Approach Physicalmodification Chemicalmodification Biologicalmodification Biologicalmolecule Linker ( i ) ( i ) F F F F / ( i ) ( i ) ( ii ) ( ii ) 0 I Withdraw Bound state Unbound state Unbound state k u = k 0 k u = k 0 F = 0 F > 0 – ( F c o s θ ) x Δ G ‡ x u Distance Unbinding force Reaction coordinate ( x ) L o a d i n g r a t e ‡ a e b d c Figure 2 | Recording FD curves using functionalized atomic force microscope tips to characterize physical , chemical and biological properties of biological samples . ( a , b ) Exemplified FD curves recording nonspecific ( i ) and specific ( ii ) adhesion ( a ) using a microscope tip carrying a functionalized polypeptide linker ( b ) . Upon withdrawal , the linker is stretched , and the bond formed between the chemical group functionalizing the linker and the biological sample is mechanically stressed until it ruptures . The rupture - force peak occurs at the distance corresponding to the length of the linker , l . ( b ) The microscope tip resembles a molecular toolbox , which can be modified to detect physical , chemical or biological interactions . The tip shown at the bottom carries a linker that separates the functional group from the tip and is used to detect specific interactions . ( c ) Tips used to detect nonspecific ( i ) and specific ( ii ) interaction forces F on a cellular membrane . ( d ) Generally , the distribution of the rupture ( unbinding ) forces ( red curves ) of a ( bio ) molecular bond depends on the loading rate . ( e ) Probing the forces breaking a ( bio ) molecular bond at a wide range of loading rates allows determination of the parameters describing the free - energy barrier stabilizing the bond . These parameters include the free - energy difference Δ G ‡ between the bound state and transition state ‡ , the distance x u separating the bound from the transition state , and the transition rates k 0 and k u of the bound state crossing the energy barrier in the absence or presence of an externally applied force , F , respectively . review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 850 | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | nature methods include oscillation amplitude , resonance frequency or the ampli - tude of the signal exciting the cantilever 46 . This improved force - feedback control enables the use of much stiffer cantilevers ( k ≈ 40 N m – 1 ) , which show higher resonance frequencies ( ~ 120 kHz ) and can detect much faster interaction events without distorting the soft biological sample 14 , 15 , 46 . As a general rule , opti - mization of the force sensitivity requires that the cantilever oscilla - tion amplitude be in the range of the decay length of the interaction being probed 47 . Thus , large oscillation amplitudes ( ~ 10 – 100 nm ) are desirable for measuring long - range interactions ( e . g . , electrostatic and hydrophobic ) , whereas small oscillation amplitudes ( < 3 nm ) are suitable for sensing short - range interactions ( e . g . , Pauli repulsion and van der Waals ) . Detecting molecular interaction forces versus energy landscape . An important concern when recording FD - based AFM data is that the rupture forces of biological bonds depend on the pulling veloc - ity of the microscope tip ( e . g . , loading rate ) . Thus , characterizing the rupture force of a biological bond at a certain pulling velocity provides only limited insight into the bond properties . In addition , certain bio - logical bonds may be optimized to bind at specific pulling velocity ranges ( e . g . , catch bonds ) and frequencies ( e . g . , cyclic mechanical reinforcement ) 48 , 49 . In contrast to the rupture force of a biological bond , the ‘energy landscape’ can describe the energetic , kinetic and mechanical properties of the bond independently of the pulling veloc - ity 34 , 36 – 38 , 50 . Quantifying the energy landscape of a biological bond requires recording FD curves over a wide range of pulling velocities ( Fig . 2d , e ) . FD - based AFM moving the cantilever in the rectangular ( quasistatic ) mode is most appropriate for determining energy land - scapes because it can move the tip at a linear velocity and over a rela - tively wide range of velocities . However , to explore the widest range of pulling velocities , one may consider combining the rectangular mode with the much faster oscillation mode , although one must then find ways to analyze the nonlinear velocities applied by an oscillating cantilever . Determining energy landscapes opens an exciting avenue to struc - turally map and characterize biomolecular bonds in living systems . For example , it would be possible to quantify how a cellular receptor changes the kinetics or free energy of ligand binding as a function of the cellular environment and state . In a recent example , research - ers using FD - based AFM quantitatively showed that the mechanical stiffness of native proteins and membranes depends on loading rate and electrostatic interactions 51 . If this finding can be generalized , the consequence is that not only biomolecular bonds but also mechanical properties of biological systems could be characterized over a wide range of loading rates . However , an enormous amount of data will be required to reveal such insights . Processing FD - based AFM data . Another pressing issue is that a huge amount of FD - based AFM data must be analyzed to extract quantitative information . Analyzing an FD - based AFM image of 512 × 512 pixels requires processing at least 262 , 144 FD curves ( if only one FD curve has been recorded per pixel ) . Generally , the soft - ware provided with FD - based atomic force microscopes extracts topography , elasticity , deformation , energy dissipation and adhe - sion on - line so that these multiparametric maps can be displayed while the sample is imaged , without the need for time - consuming off - line analysis . However , as advanced FD - based AFM users need to adapt analysis procedures to characterize their biological systems , quency of the cantilever or are too fast , a cantilever showing a low Q - factor in liquids could be excited and affected by inertia effects and hydrodynamic dragging , and complex algorithms are consequently required to reconstruct the FD curves 9 . This limitation can be cir - cumvented by noncontact or intermittent - contact AFM , in which the cantilever is oscillated close to the flexural and / or torsional resonance frequency for recording ultrafast FD curves 42 , 43 . However , unlike qua - sistatic rectangular cantilever movements , sinusoidal or more com - plex movements have the drawback that the nonlinear velocity of the cantilever is difficult to interpret and that the contact time between microscope tip and sample can be hardly defined and controlled , and in most cases is limited to short contact times in the millisecond range . Defining the contact time between a functionalized tip and the sample is required to conduct , for example , binding studies of a tethered ligand to a receptor ( Fig . 2 ) . In comparison , it is difficult to define the applied loading rate when an oscillating cantilever moving at a nonlinear velocity is used , which is required for characterization of receptor - ligand bonds . With a rectangular movement , the microscope tip travels at ( nearly ) constant speed , which shows a well - defined con - tact time with the sample that , importantly , can be freely adjusted . Advantageously , with this rectangular movement , the loading rate applied to a biological system is well defined . Complementarily to FD - based AFM , exciting the cantilever close to its resonance frequency using small amplitudes ( ~ 0 . 1 – 15 nm ) while recording FD curves at much larger amplitude ( usually sev - eral tens to hundreds of nanometers ) and lower frequency 42 , 44 allows the use of more sensitive parameters for force - feedback control of the microscope cantilever 45 . These parameters can Force error pN 1 0 kPa 500 0 nm 250 0 Elasticity Deformation a c b d Figure 3 | FD - based AFM imaging and mapping of the mechanical properties of cells and viruses . ( a ) AFM force error , elasticity and deformation maps of living HaCaT keratinocytes . Color scales quantify the parameters . ( b ) 3D rendered AFM topography revealing the capsomere organization of icosahedral herpes simplex virus 1 capsid . The inset highlights the triangular face . Red arrows point at the pentons , blue arrows point at the exons at the twofold axes and blue dots mark the three central hexons in the center of the triangular face . ( c ) AFM topograph of a Φ 29 bacteriophage prohead showing the head - to - tail connector at the top . The full color scale of the topograph corresponds to a height scale of 60 nm . ( d ) The simultaneously acquired stiffness map reveals mechanical properties of connector and virus . Bright colors represent stiff regions , and dark colors represent soft regions with a full color scale corresponding to 0 . 25 N / m . Scale bars , 10 μ m ( a ) , 60 nm ( b ) and 30 nm ( c , d ) . Images adapted from ref . 65 with author permission and from refs . 58 , 66 with permission from Elsevier . review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | 851 specialized software that allows individualizing the off - line analysis of FD curves appears useful 52 , 53 . Case studies Over the past 15 years , FD - based AFM has enabled researchers to image the topography and to map and quantify physical , chemi - cal and biological properties of complex biological systems . Recent major breakthroughs in developing new AFM modalities allow simultaneous imaging and probing of mechanical properties ( e . g . , deformation , elasticity and adhesion ) and interactions ( e . g . , chemi - cal , hydrophobic and receptor - ligand ) of biological structures at enhanced speed and ( sub ) molecular resolution . Here we discuss selected studies in which FD - based AFM has been applied in the life sciences , with an emphasis on the application of new , high - resolution modes to complex biological systems . mapping the mechanical properties of cells and viruses The mechanical properties of living cells are important in a variety of cellular processes , including adhesion , migration , shape and division . FD - based AFM is well suited to quantify these mechanical properties . This is carried out by recording arrays of FD curves over the cell sur - face and by analyzing each curve to determine values of cell elasticity 54 . The approach has been applied to quantify the elasticity of living cells such as fibroblasts 55 , cerebral endothelial cells 56 , erythrocytes 57 , keratinocytes 58 , kidney cells 59 , metastatic cancer cells 60 and tissues 61 , bacterial pathogens 62 and yeast cells 63 . In a recent study , FD - based AFM was used to map the mechanical properties of breast cancer tissue and to provide quantitative indica - tors of clinical diagnosis 61 . In another , the nanomechanical proper - ties of marine diatoms were measured over the entire cell surface in sea water 64 . Applied to living human keratinocytes , FD - based AFM mapped the mechanical properties of the epithelial cell surface at impressive detail 58 ( Fig . 3a ) . When the carcinogen herbicide glypho - sate was added , the epithelial cells mechanically stiffened , whereas this mechanical phenotype was reversed in the presence of the anti - oxidant quercetin . This and other studies 60 , 61 highlight alternating cell mechanical properties that can indicate cancer . The mechanical properties of viruses are important for under - standing the assembly and stability of viral shells . Researchers behind recent FD - based AFM experiments and molecular dynamics simula - tions analyzed the spatial arrangement of capsid proteins and their contribution to the mechanical stability of herpes simplex viruses 65 ( Fig . 3b ) , Φ 29 bacteriophage proheads 66 ( Fig . 3c , d ) and the southern bean mosaic virus 67 . Applied to parvovirus minute viruses of mice , FD - based AFM showed that the genome contributes substantially to the mechanical stiffness of the capsid 68 . Furthermore , FD - based AFM was applied to image the phase separation of lipids in membranes and to detect their nanomechanical properties changing in the presence of ceramide or cholesterol 69 , 70 . high - resolution Fd - based aFm of native proteins Recently improved instrumental precision and data acquisition have allowed an increase in the lateral and vertical resolution of FD - based AFM topographs to ~ 1 nm and ~ 0 . 1 nm , respectively , on native proteins . This resolution is similar to those obtained by contact - mode and oscillation - mode AFM imaging 71 , 72 . Studies have been performed on the membrane protein bacteriorhodopsin 39 , 73 , the ferric hydroxamate uptake receptor FhuA 74 and fibrillar pro - teins such as the pathological a - synuclein amyloid fibrils 75 , human islet amyloid polypeptide fibrils 76 and Tau fibrils 77 . FD - based AFM of the light - driven proton pump bacteriorhodopsin demonstrated that the protein surface can be contoured at sufficient sensitivity and spatial resolution to image single polypeptide loops in the fully extended state or at slightly elevated imaging force in the revers - ibly compressed state 39 . Impressively , FD - based AFM of bacterio - rhodopsin revealed surface structures and structurally mapped information such as deformation , adhesion , energy dissipation and elasticity ( Fig . 4a ) . The properties of pathological neurofibrils that are associated with neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s , Parkinson’s or Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease have been discussed for many years . The core of pathological fibrils formed from the human Tau protein have been structurally characterized , but it has remained a challenge to characterize the much longer unstructured Tau termini . Imaging human Tau fibrils by FD - based AFM unraveled their structural poly - morphism and at the same time detected an ~ 18 - nm - thick layer of unstructured polypeptides covering the fibril core 77 , 78 ( Fig . 4b ) . The adhesion of this fuzzy coat—the polypeptide layer—depends on the a b Topography Deformation Dissipation 400 meV 0 meV Height – Height + Deform Adhesion 15 nm 0 nm 20 pN 0 pN 10 nm 0 nm Adhesion Overlay Deformation Figure 4 | High - resolution FD - based AFM of native proteins . ( a ) FD - based AFM topography of the cytoplasmic purple - membrane surface contoured at a force of ~ 125 pN . Individual bacteriorhodopsin trimers are clearly visible . Insets show the averaged topography , deformation map and energy - dissipation map of the bacteriorhodopsin trimer . Bacteriorhodopsin molecules of the trimer are outlined ( white ) with the seven transmembrane a - helices ( A – F ) indicated . The energy dissipation is mapped to the atomic model of the bacteriorhodopsin trimer ( bottom right ) . ( b ) FD - based AFM topography , deformation map , adhesion map , and overlay of deformation and adhesion map of pathological human Tau fibrils . Topography and maps detect the mechanical and adhesive properties of unstructured polypeptides that cover Tau fibrils and form a so - called fuzzy coat . Scale bars , 5 nm ( a ) and 100 nm ( b ) . Images adapted from ref . 39 with permission from Wiley and from ref . 77 with author permission . review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 852 | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | nature methods molecular recognition mapping studies show low temporal and lateral resolutions , too low to address most dynamic cellular events and to localize single cell - surface receptors . But recent generations of FD - based atomic force microscopes offer the possibility of probing receptors on living cells at improved temporal and spatial resolution . FD - based AFM has been applied to localize and mechanically char - acterize individual sensor proteins on living yeast cells 79 ( Fig . 5c , d ) . Researchers mapped the distribution of single His - tagged cell - sur - face sensors to a resolution of ~ 4 nm by scanning the cell surface with microscope tips carrying Ni 2 + - nitrilotriacetate groups . The FD - based AFM data were recorded at imaging speeds ( 8 min for 512 × 512 pixels ) similar to that of conventional AFM imaging and , thus , considerably exceeded the performance of conventional FD - based AFM imaging . In addition , the FD curves acquired could quantify the mechanical properties of individual cell - surface sensors . Hence , FD - based AFM has tremendous potential to localize single proteins of the living cell surface and to characterize their response to mechani - cal force . summarY FD - based AFM represents a powerful tool to quantify and structurally map chemical , biological and physical parameters of native biological systems ranging from complex tissues to single cells to single mol - ecules . In the past few years , key technological developments have resulted in dedicated FD - based AFM instrumentation that shows substantially improved force sensitivity , spatial accuracy and data acquisition speed . As a result of these developments , we anticipate that FD - based AFM imaging will become an established tool in life science research . Further improvements to the technique will be necessary to achieve subnanometer - resolution topographs and multiparametric maps of biological processes at the time scale of seconds . One pos - sibility for quantitatively mapping biomolecular interactions at high speed , improved resolution and force sensitivity may be to use very stiff cantilevers and to implement new dynamic AFM modalities to electrolyte concentration and pH of the buffer solution . This modula - tion of adhesive properties helps to explain why Tau fibrils attract each other and form pathological aggregates . nanoscale mapping of chemical and biological sites Nonspecific interactions , such as hydrophobic and electrostatic inter - actions , play essential roles in crucial biological processes , including protein folding , membrane fusion and cell adhesion . However , these interactions have been difficult to quantify and to map at the sub - cellular level owing to the paucity of appropriate methods . Atomic force microscope tips functionalized with well - defined chemical groups 29 – 32 provide unique opportunities for probing the distribution and interactions of ( bio ) chemical sites on live cells 4 , 21 . In pioneering work , FD - based AFM with hydrophobic , methyl - terminated tips was used to unravel the hydrophobic surface properties of spores from the human pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus 23 . The presence of an outer layer of hydrophobic proteins ( hydrophobins ) conveys remarkable hydrophobic properties to the cell surface , and the surface thus favors cell dispersion and adherence in turn . Upon germination , the hydro - phobic protein layer changes into a layer of hydrophilic polysaccha - rides . Oscillating FD - based AFM with chemically functionalized tips was used to map the heterogeneous hydrophobic properties on germi - nating spores at unprecedented speed and lateral resolution , demon - strating the potential for dynamic chemical imaging of live cells 79 ( Fig . 5a , b ) . FD - based AFM has also been used to follow how mycobacteria alter hydrophobicity upon interaction with various drugs 80 . Despite the importance of interactions mediating biomolecular recognition , their quantitative characterization has long been chal - lenging . As biological processes are linked to structures , it is of great interest to structurally locate biomolecular interactions . This empha - sizes the need for methods capable of measuring interactions of bio - surfaces at high force sensitivity and high spatial resolution . FD - based AFM using ligand - modified tips enables researchers to localize single molecular recognition sites on biosurfaces 5 . This can also be achieved using dynamic recognition imaging , which detects molecular recog - nition signals in a binary mode ( ON or OFF ) rather than through FD curves 81 . Examples of molecular recognition images include those from the mapping of vitronectin receptors on the surface of live osteoblastic cells 82 , the localization of prostaglandin receptors 83 and of vascular endothelial cadherin binding sites 84 , the mapping of the organization and stiffness of neuronal membrane domains containing glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins 85 , and the imaging of cell adhesion proteins and sensors on living bacteria 86 . Although elegant , the aforementioned FD - based AFM – based Figure 5 | High - resolution FD - based AFM mapping of chemical and biological sites on living cells . ( a ) AFM topography of a germinating spore of A . fumigatus recorded with a hydrophobic CH 3 - terminated tip . ( b ) Adhesion - force map recorded simultaneously with the topography , documenting the coexistence of hydrophobic ( bright pixels corresponding to hydrophobins ) and hydrophilic ( dark pixels reflecting polysaccharides ) regions . ( c ) AFM topography of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell expressing His - tagged Mid2 sensors , recorded using tips functionalized with Ni 2 + - nitrilotriacetate groups . ( d ) Adhesion - force map recorded simultaneously with the topography in the small square region in c . Each green pixel documents the detection of a single Mid2 sensor . The inset shows an enlarged view of a portion of the map , in which the red circle indicates the resolution approaching 4 nm , i . e . , the size of two adjacent pixels . Scale bars , 250 nm ( a , b ) , 1 µm ( c ) and 100 nm ( d ) . Images adapted from ref . 79 with permission from the American Chemical Society . a b c d review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | 853 excite and detect cantilevers motions at multiple frequencies 45 . Such improvements may make it possible to address the dynamic nature of many more biological systems and processes , including the functional modulation of membrane receptors , channels , pores and transporters ; dynamics of cytoskeletal fibrils and motor proteins ; heterogeneous ( bio ) chemical properties of the extracellular matrix ; assembly , func - tional modulation and signaling of cell membrane receptors ; self - or directed assembly of biomolecular machines ; restructuring of cellu - lar membranes ; formation of cell - adhesion complexes ; and dynamic structure , mechanics and interactions of living cells and tissues . aCKnowLedGments This work was supported by the European Molecular Biology Organization ( EMBO ) ( ALTF 506 - 2012 ) ; Swiss National Science Foundation ( SNF ) ; Belgian National Foundation for Scientific Research ( FNRS ) ; Université Catholique de Louvain ; Belgian Federal Office for Scientific , Technical and Cultural Affairs ( Interuniversity Poles of Attraction Programme ) ; and Research Department of the Communauté Française de Belgique ( Concerted Research Action ) . author ContriButions Manuscript and figures were assembled and outlined by Y . F . D . and D . J . M . All authors contributed to writing the manuscript . ComPetinG FinanCiaL interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . 1 . Ludwig , M . , Dettmann , W . & Gaub , H . E . Atomic force microscope imaging contrast based on molecular recognition . Biophys . J . 72 , 445 – 448 ( 1997 ) . Pioneering work showing for the first time that Fd - based aFm can be applied to image micropatterned surfaces that have been functionalized with receptors ( streptavidin ) and to map the specific interactions of the receptors with ligands ( biotin ) functionalizing the microscope tip . 2 . Gad , M . , Itoh , A . & Ikai , A . Mapping cell wall polysaccharides of living microbial cells using atomic force microscopy . Cell Biol . Int . 21 , 697 – 706 ( 1997 ) . 3 . Heinz , W . F . & Hoh , J . H . Spatially resolved force spectroscopy of biological surfaces using the atomic force microscope . Trends Biotechnol . 17 , 143 – 150 ( 1999 ) . 4 . Grandbois , M . , Dettmann , W . , Benoit , M . & Gaub , H . E . Affinity imaging of red blood cells using an atomic force microscope . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 48 , 719 – 724 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Hinterdorfer , P . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Detection and localization of single molecular recognition events using atomic force microscopy . Nat . Methods 3 , 347 – 355 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Roos , W . H . , Bruinsma , R . & Wuite , G . J . L . Physical virology . Nat . Phys . 6 , 733 – 743 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Gerber , C . & Lang , H . P . How the doors to the nanoworld were opened . Nat . Nanotechnol . 1 , 3 – 5 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Müller , D . J . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Atomic force microscopy as a multifunctional molecular toolbox in nanobiotechnology . Nat . Nanotechnol . 3 , 261 – 269 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Butt , H . - J . , Cappella , B . & Kappl , M . Force measurements with the atomic force microscope : technique , interpretation and applications . Surf . Sci . Rep . 59 , 1 – 152 ( 2005 ) . an excellent and extensive review describing the potential possibilities and caveats of force measurements with the aFm . a must for all of those dealing with force measurements . 10 . Müller , D . J . , Helenius , J . , Alsteens , D . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Force probing surfaces of living cells to molecular resolution . Nat . Chem . Biol . 5 , 383 – 390 ( 2009 ) . 11 . Viani , M . B . et al . Small cantilevers for force spectroscopy of single molecules . J . Appl . Phys . 86 , 2258 – 2262 ( 1999 ) . 12 . Viani , M . B . et al . Probing protein - protein interactions in real time . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 , 644 – 647 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Dong , M . & Sahin , O . A nanomechanical interface to rapid single - molecule interactions . Nat . Commun . 2 , 247 ( 2011 ) . 14 . Martínez - Martín , D . , Herruzo , E . T . , Dietz , C . , Gomez - Herrero , J . & Garcia , R . Noninvasive protein structural flexibility mapping by bimodal dynamic force microscopy . Phys . Rev . Lett . 106 , 198101 ( 2011 ) . 15 . Martínez - Martín , D . et al . Resolving structure and mechanical properties at the nanoscale of viruses with frequency modulation atomic force microscopy . PLoS ONE 7 , e30204 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Butt , H . - J . & Jaschke , M . Calculation of thermal noise in atomic force microscopy . Nanotechnology 6 , 1 – 7 ( 1995 ) . 17 . Florin , E . - L . et al . Sensing specific molecular interactions with the atomic force microscope . Biosens . Bioelectron . 10 , 895 – 901 ( 1995 ) . 18 . Lee , G . U . , Kidwell , D . A . & Colton , R . J . Sensing discrete streptavidin - biotin interactions with atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 10 , 354 – 357 ( 1994 ) . 19 . Moy , V . T . , Florin , E . - L . & Gaub , H . E . Intermolecular forces and energies between ligands and receptors . Science 266 , 257 – 259 ( 1994 ) . 20 . Dammer , U . et al . Specific antigen / antibody interactions measured by force microscopy . Biophys . J . 70 , 2437 – 2441 ( 1996 ) . 21 . Frisbie , C . D . , Rozsnyai , L . F . , Noy , A . , Wrighton , M . S . & Lieber , C . M . Functional group imaging by chemical force microscopy . Science 265 , 2071 – 2074 ( 1994 ) . 22 . Lee , H . , Scherer , N . F . & Messersmith , P . B . Single - molecule mechanics of mussel adhesion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 12999 – 13003 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Dague , E . et al . Chemical force microscopy of single live cells . Nano Lett . 7 , 3026 – 3030 ( 2007 ) . 24 . Dorobantu , L . S . , Bhattacharjee , S . , Foght , J . M . & Gray , M . R . Atomic force microscopy measurement of heterogeneity in bacterial surface hydrophobicity . Langmuir 24 , 4944 – 4951 ( 2008 ) . 25 . Frederix , P . L . et al . Atomic force bio - analytics . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 7 , 641 – 647 ( 2003 ) . 26 . Tang , J . et al . Recognition imaging and highly ordered molecular templating of bacterial S - layer nanoarrays containing affinity - tags . Nano Lett . 8 , 4312 – 4319 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Almqvist , N . et al . Elasticity and adhesion force mapping reveals real - time clustering of growth factor receptors and associated changes in local cellular rheological properties . Biophys . J . 86 , 1753 – 1762 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Arnal , L . et al . Adhesin contribution to nanomechanical properties of the virulent Bordetella pertussis envelope . Langmuir 28 , 7461 – 7469 ( 2012 ) . 29 . Friedsam , C . , Del Campo Bécares , A . , Jonas , U . , Gaub , H . E . & Seitz , M . Polymer functionalized AFM tips for long - term measurements in single - molecule force spectroscopy . ChemPhysChem 5 , 388 – 393 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Zimmermann , J . L . , Nicolaus , T . , Neuert , G . & Blank , K . Thiol - based , site - specific and covalent immobilization of biomolecules for single - molecule experiments . Nat . Protoc . 5 , 975 – 985 ( 2010 ) . 31 . Bergkvist , M . & Cady , N . C . Chemical functionalization and bioconjugation strategies for atomic force microscope cantilevers . Methods Mol . Biol . 751 , 381 – 400 ( 2011 ) . 32 . Barattin , R . & Voyer , N . Chemical modifications of atomic force microscopy tips . Methods Mol . Biol . 736 , 457 – 483 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Bell , G . I . Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells . Science 200 , 618 – 627 ( 1978 ) . 34 . Evans , E . Probing the relation between force—lifetime—and chemistry in single molecular bonds . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 30 , 105 – 128 ( 2001 ) . the energy landscape of a weak bond along a dissociation pathway is explored through Brownian - thermal excitations . this review explains how dynamic force spectroscopy can be applied to probe the complex relation between force , lifetime and chemistry in single biomolecular bonds and to probe the bond’s energy barriers that are difficult or impossible to detect in near - equilibrium assays . 35 . Evans , E . A . & Calderwood , D . A . Forces and bond dynamics in cell adhesion . Science 316 , 1148 – 1153 ( 2007 ) . 36 . Evans , E . Energy landscapes of biomolecular adhesion and receptor anchoring at interfaces explored with dynamic force spectroscopy . Faraday Discuss . 111 , 1 – 16 ( 1999 ) . 37 . Dudko , O . K . , Hummer , G . & Szabo , A . Intrinsic rates and activation free energies from single - molecule pulling experiments . Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 , 108101 ( 2006 ) . 38 . Dudko , O . K . , Hummer , G . & Szabo , A . Theory , analysis , and interpretation of single - molecule force spectroscopy experiments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 15755 – 15760 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Medalsy , I . , Hensen , U . & Müller , D . J . Imaging and quantifying chemical and physical properties of native proteins at molecular resolution by force – volume AFM . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 50 , 12103 – 12108 ( 2011 ) . this work applies Fd - based aFm to image proteins in physiological relevant conditions and to simultaneously map their multiple chemical and physical properties at high resolution ( ~ 1 – 2 nm ) . it is also shown that Fd - based aFm is sufficiently sensitive to image single polypeptide loops of native proteins in their fully extended state and to mechanically adjust the conformation of single loops . 40 . Hansma , P . K . , Schitter , G . , Fantner , G . E . & Prater , C . Applied physics . High - speed atomic force microscopy . Science 314 , 601 – 602 ( 2006 ) . review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 854 | VOL . 10 NO . 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 | nature methods nanomechanical mapping of marine diatom in seawater using peak force tapping atomic force microscopy . J . Phycol . 48 , 174 – 185 ( 2012 ) . 65 . Roos , W . H . et al . Scaffold expulsion and genome packaging trigger stabilization of herpes simplex virus capsids . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 9673 – 9678 ( 2009 ) . aFm images and Fd curves were recorded to characterize the structure and mechanical stability of herpes simplex virus type 1 ( hsv1 ) capsids . the measurements suggested that hsv1 capsids are stabilized after removal of the scaffold proteins and that this stabilization is triggered by the packaging of dna but independent of the actual presence of dna . 66 . Carrasco , C . et al . Built - in mechanical stress in viral shells . Biophys . J . 100 , 1100 – 1108 ( 2011 ) . 67 . Zink , M . & Grubmüller , H . Mechanical properties of the icosahedral shell of southern bean mosaic virus : a molecular dynamics study . Biophys . J . 96 , 1350 – 1363 ( 2009 ) . 68 . Carrasco , C . et al . DNA - mediated anisotropic mechanical reinforcement of a virus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 13706 – 13711 ( 2006 ) . 69 . Sullan , R . M . , Li , J . K . & Zou , S . Direct correlation of structures and nanomechanical properties of multicomponent lipid bilayers . Langmuir 25 , 7471 – 7477 ( 2009 ) . Fd - based aFm was applied to characterize the structure and mechanical responses of different phases and mixtures of lipid bilayers . the breakthrough forces , elastic moduli , adhesion forces and indentation of the microscope tip in dependence of the different phases in the lipid bilayers were systematically determined on the nanometer scale and presented as 2d maps . 70 . An , H . , Nussio , M . R . , Huson , M . G . , Voelcker , N . H . & Shapter , J . G . Material properties of lipid microdomains : force - volume imaging study of the effect of cholesterol on lipid microdomain rigidity . Biophys . J . 99 , 834 – 844 ( 2010 ) . 71 . Möller , C . , Allen , M . , Elings , V . , Engel , A . & Müller , D . J . Tapping - mode atomic force microscopy produces faithful high - resolution images of protein surfaces . Biophys . J . 77 , 1150 – 1158 ( 1999 ) . 72 . Engel , A . & Müller , D . J . Observing single biomolecules at work with the atomic force microscope . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 , 715 – 718 ( 2000 ) . 73 . Rico , F . , Su , C . & Scheuring , S . Mechanical mapping of single membrane proteins at submolecular resolution . Nano Lett . 11 , 3983 – 3986 ( 2011 ) . 74 . Thoma , J . , Bosshart , P . , Pfreundschuh , M . & Müller , D . J . Out but not in : the large transmembrane β - barrel protein FhuA unfolds but cannot refold via β - hairpins . Structure 20 , 2185 – 2190 ( 2012 ) . 75 . Sweers , K . K . , van der Werf , K . O . , Bennink , M . L . & Subramaniam , V . Atomic force microscopy under controlled conditions reveals structure of C - terminal region of a - synuclein in amyloid fibrils . ACS Nano 6 , 5952 – 5960 ( 2012 ) . 76 . Zhang , S . et al . Coexistence of ribbon and helical fibrils originating from hIAPP 20 – 29 revealed by quantitative nanomechanical atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 2798 – 2803 ( 2013 ) . 77 . Wegmann , S . , Medalsy , I . D . , Mandelkow , E . & Müller , D . J . The fuzzy coat of pathological human Tau fibrils is a two - layered polyelectrolyte brush . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , E313 – E321 ( 2013 ) . 78 . Wegmann , S . et al . Human Tau isoforms assemble into ribbon - like fibrils that display polymorphic structure and stability . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 27302 – 27313 ( 2010 ) . 79 . Alsteens , D . et al . High - resolution imaging of chemical and biological sites on living cells using peak force tapping atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 28 , 16738 – 16744 ( 2012 ) . 80 . Alsteens , D . et al . Organization of the mycobacterial cell wall : a nanoscale view . Pflugers Arch . 456 , 117 – 125 ( 2008 ) . 81 . Stroh , C . et al . Single - molecule recognition imaging microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 12503 – 12507 ( 2004 ) . 82 . Kim , H . , Arakawa , H . , Osada , T . & Ikai , A . Quantification of cell adhesion force with AFM : distribution of vitronectin receptors on a living MC3T3 - E1 cell . Ultramicroscopy 97 , 359 – 363 ( 2003 ) . 83 . Kim , H . et al . Quantification of the number of EP3 receptors on a living CHO cell surface by the AFM . Ultramicroscopy 106 , 652 – 662 ( 2006 ) . 84 . Chtcheglova , L . A . , Waschke , J . , Wildling , L . , Drenckhahn , D . & Hinterdorfer , P . Nano - scale dynamic recognition imaging on vascular endothelial cells . Biophys . J . 93 , L11 – L13 ( 2007 ) . 85 . Roduit , C . et al . Elastic membrane heterogeneity of living cells revealed by stiff nanoscale membrane domains . Biophys . J . 94 , 1521 – 1532 ( 2008 ) . 86 . Dupres , V . et al . Nanoscale mapping and functional analysis of individual adhesins on living bacteria . Nat . Methods 2 , 515 – 520 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Ando , T . High - speed atomic force microscopy coming of age . Nanotechnology 23 , 062001 ( 2012 ) . 42 . Dietz , C . et al . Nanotomography with enhanced resolution using bimodal atomic force microscopy . Appl . Phys . Lett . 92 , 143107 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Dong , M . , Husale , S . & Sahin , O . Determination of protein structural flexibility by microsecond force spectroscopy . Nat . Nanotechnol . 4 , 514 – 517 ( 2009 ) . specially designed torsional harmonic cantilevers have been applied to perform high - speed force spectroscopic measurements while imaging purple membranes extracted from Halobacterium salinarum by aFm . topographic and simultaneously recorded flexibility maps measure the Young’s modulus of the two surfaces of the light - driven proton - pump bacteriorhodopsin that is embedded in the purple membrane . 44 . Fukuma , T . , Ueda , Y . , Yoshioka , S . & Asakawa , H . Atomic - scale distribution of water molecules at the mica - water interface visualized by three - dimensional scanning force microscopy . Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 016101 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Garcia , R . & Herruzo , E . T . The emergence of multifrequency force microscopy . Nat . Nanotechnol . 7 , 217 – 226 ( 2012 ) . an excellent overview of recent advances of multifrequency force microscopy . as discussed in our review , these advances bring great potential to further improve the speed and sensitivity of Fd - based aFm . 46 . Jaafar , M . et al . Drive - amplitude - modulation atomic force microscopy : from vacuum to liquids . Beilstein J . Nanotechnol . 3 , 336 – 344 ( 2012 ) . 47 . Giessibl , F . J . Forces and frequency shifts in atomic - resolution dynamic - force microscopy . Phys . Rev . B Condens . Matter Mater . Phys . 56 , 16010 – 16015 ( 1997 ) . 48 . Thomas , W . E . , Vogel , V . & Sokurenko , E . Biophysics of catch bonds . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 37 , 399 – 416 ( 2008 ) . 49 . Kong , F . et al . Cyclic mechanical reinforcement of integrin - ligand interactions . Mol . Cell 49 , 1060 – 1068 ( 2013 ) . 50 . Evans , E . , Leung , A . , Heinrich , V . & Zhu , C . Mechanical switching and coupling between two dissociation pathways in a P - selectin adhesion bond . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 11281 – 11286 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Medalsy , I . D . & Müller , D . J . Nanomechanical properties of proteins and membranes depend on loading rate and electrostatic interactions . ACS Nano 7 , 2642 – 2650 ( 2013 ) . 52 . Polyakov , P . et al . Automated force volume image processing for biological samples . PLoS ONE 6 , e18887 ( 2011 ) . 53 . Roduit , C . et al . OpenFovea : open - source AFM data processing software . Nat . Methods 9 , 774 – 775 ( 2012 ) . 54 . Weisenhorn , A . L . , Khorsandi , M . , Kasas , S . , Gotzos , V . & Butt , H . - J . Deformation and height anomaly of soft surfaces studied with an AFM . Nanotechnology 4 , 106 – 113 ( 1993 ) . 55 . Rotsch , C . , Jacobson , K . & Radmacher , M . Dimensional and mechanical dynamics of active and stable edges in motile fibroblasts investigated by using atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 921 – 926 ( 1999 ) . 56 . Végh , A . G . et al . Spatial and temporal dependence of the cerebral endothelial cells elasticity . J . Mol . Recognit . 24 , 422 – 428 ( 2011 ) . 57 . Picas , L . , Rico , F . , Deforet , M . & Scheuring , S . Structural and mechanical heterogeneity of the erythrocyte membrane reveals hallmarks of membrane stability . ACS Nano 7 , 1054 – 1063 ( 2013 ) . 58 . H eu , C . , Berquand , A . , Elie - Caille , C . & Nicod , L . Glyphosate - induced stiffening of HaCaT keratinocytes , a Peak Force Tapping study on living cells . J . Struct . Biol . 178 , 1 – 7 ( 2012 ) . one of the first times Fd - based aFm was applied to characterize the structure and mechanical properties of human epidermal cells ( haCat keratinocyte ) under near - physiological conditions . the experiments show that herbicides induce cell membrane stiffening , the appearance of cytoskeleton structures at a subcellular level and membrane damage . 59 . Matzke , R . , Jacobson , K . & Radmacher , M . Direct , high - resolution measurement of furrow stiffening during division of adherent cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 607 – 610 ( 2001 ) . 60 . Cross , S . E . , Jin , Y . S . , Rao , J . & Gimzewski , J . K . Nanomechanical analysis of cells from cancer patients . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2 , 780 – 783 ( 2007 ) . 61 . Plodinec , M . et al . The nanomechanical signature of breast cancer . Nat . Nanotechnol . 7 , 757 – 765 ( 2012 ) . 62 . Francius , G . et al . Detection , localization , and conformational analysis of single polysaccharide molecules on live bacteria . ACS Nano 2 , 1921 – 1929 ( 2008 ) . 63 . Touhami , A . , Nysten , B . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Nanoscale mapping of the elasticity of microbial cells by atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 19 , 4539 – 4543 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Pletikapic´ , G . , Berquand , A . , Radic´ , T . M . & Svetlic˘ic´ , V . Quantitative review n p g © 2013 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .