Communication Dimensions 53 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion Gloria Mark University of California , lrvine 444 Computer Science Building Irvine , CA 92697 - 3425 gmark @ ics . uci . edu Steven Poltrock The Boeing Company Seattle , WA 981 24 - 2207 steven . poltrock @ boeing . mm PO BOX 3707 7L - 49 Danyel Fisher University of California , lrvine 444 Computer Science Building Irvine , CA 92697 - 3425 dan yelf @ ics . uci . ed u The rise of virtual collocation in distributed organizations may lead to new patterns of technology adoption . Whereas previous studies of technology diffusion ( e . g . Rogers 7995 ) point to the role of mass media and interpersonal communication in adoption , we find that collaborating partners who rarely see one another are important contributors to the diffusion of virtual collocation technologies . We studied a large distributed organization to discover how and why a data con ferencing technology was disseminated rapidly in a relatively short time . We interpret our results to show that the technology has spread on an ondemand basis rather than through formal channels that the company had established . We connect this growth in usage with Rogers ( 7995 ) theories about the diffusion of innovations and the social networks in place at this organization . Keywords : Technology Adoption , CSCW , Diffusion Studies , Data Conferencing , Social Networks 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 54 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion INTRODUCTION Working together across distance is a growing challenge in an increasingly networked world . The number of distributed organizations is rising , with people and teams in different states , or even countries , collaborating together . As Castells ( 1 996 ) observes , organizations are more likely to be networked , divided into small parts , and intensively coordinated with a variety of information technologies . They must , therefore , coordinate a wide number of job functions as well as locations . Data conferencing is a computing technology that enables people to communicate and share information with one another synchronously , and it is especially designed for supporting collaboration across distance . Over the past several years we have observed the diffusion of data conferencing technology in a large distributed organization . Our interest is in how information about the technology was communicated to people who are geographically dispersed . Communication across distance has been studied by a number of researchers ( Zach 1993 ; Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1998 ; Wiesenfeld , Raghuram et al . 1998 ) and results consistently show that geographic separation of partners presents a number of challenges , including establishing trust , achieving regular interaction , and identity formation . Yet we know that communication plays a central role in the adoption of technology ( Rogers 1995 ) . Therefore , given the challenges of communication across distance , we expected that the adoption of a new technology would be strongly impeded if it depended on communication across a geographic distance . The goal of our research was to discover how people who are widely distributed learn about and adopt a technology that supports their collaboration . Within large organizations there are different means of communication that could facilitate technology diffusion , e . g . company web pages , managers , a corporate - wide initiative , or a deployment team . We set out to find out what the principle means of communication was for spreading the word about this technology , in order to explain the rapid rise in system usage that occurred over the last three years . Consider the diffusion pattern of another , much earlier collaboration technology , the telephone . Fischer ( 1992 ) describes the growth in deployment of the telephone in small towns in the late 1800s and early 19OOs , a process that took several decades before most people had them in their homes . In Antioch , California , the local drug store was wired to a nearby larger town’s exchange in 1887 . However , because a local exchange would require 15 to 25 subscribers to pay for its upkeep - and because the connection , on small scales , was expensive - a number of years passed before the town gathered enough interest to support proliferation of home telephones . The drugstore provided a central place to pick up calls from outside the community - its phone was kept public - and there were few incentives to buy phones because nobody within the community had one . Gradually , most crucial central services ( the drug store , the mine , and the doctor ) installed telephones , creating the critical mass required to establish a local exchange . By 1895 , there were thirty subscribers and a local exchange in this town of 3000 . In 1900 , 3 % of households in Antioch subscribed to telephone service , and by 1910 , 25 % of the town were subscribers . In contrast , at the same time , many rural farmers saw the value of a local , internal phone system - way to share news , relieve loneliness , check prices , and ring for help . When local exchanges refused to awry their signal at rates they could afford to pay , some set up a local network running over barbed - wire fences , or would tap illegally into exchanges ( Fischer 1992 ) . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 011 $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 55 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion 1 y ) 0 . 9 - b 0 . 8 - 8 0 . 7 - f 0 . 6 - 0 0 . 5 - . - 0 . 4 - 0 . 3 - e 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 n 0 The spread of data conferencing today presents a quite different story for many reasons . Achieving a critical mass is still instrumental in influencing people’s choice to adopt a technology . However , it is not needed to establish a data conference , because this technology does not require adding expensive specialized infrastructure like the local exchange for telephone service . Any two or more people can simply install the data conferencing application and communicate with one another over the existing network infrastructure . Second , the cost of installing and using data conferencing is low . The data conferencing application could be downloaded from the company web pages at no cost and there is no charge for its use . Third , the value of long - distance collaboration is well recognized today , but in the early days of telephone service there were many who questioned the need for routine long - distance communication . Thus , in comparison to the telephone , the conditions within the organization were favorable for the adoption of data conferencing . I’ - 7 = _ _ _ _ I - - . BACKGROUND : THE DIFFUSION OF INNOVATIONS Rogers ( 1 995 ) describes how new ideas and technologies are generally introduced and adopted . Typically , adoptions begin slowly , with only the most innovative and daring people taking the risks of using a new technology . As other people observe the benefits that these early adopters gain from a new technology , the apparent risk is reduced and they begin to try it too . Plotting the number of people who use a technology over time generates an “S” shaped adoption curve , as shown by the solid line in Figure 1 . For interactive technologies such as telephones and e - mail the adoption curve is generally steeper . Early adopters have difficulty gaining benefits from these technologies because there are few other people to interact with using them . The benefits of a new interactive technology do not exceed the costs and risks until some critical mass of people begin using it . Once that critical mass is reached , however , the adoptions accelerate . Each new user increases the benefits to all other users because it expands the number of people with whom they can interact , and this increasing benefit draws additional users . The cost of reaching critical mass is high , but once critical mass is reached , the benefits of using the technology are evident ( Markus and Connolly 1990 ) . The dashed line in Figure 1 illustrates the adoption curve for such an interactive technology . Time Figure 1 : Logistic curve representing the typical course of technology diffusion . The Y axis represents the degree of saturation of the technology . The dashed line represents more rapid diffusion for interactive technologies . Redrawn from [ Rogers , 1995 # M I ) 0 - 7803 - 7 . 209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 56 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion Communication and the Diffusion of innovations across distance Communication plays an integral role in the choice to adopt a technology . Rogers ( 1 995 ) describes that mass media and interpersonal channels are important communication channels that influence adoption choices . Adopting a technology across distance is a particular challenge , especially because interpersonal communication channels are limited . According to Rogers ( 1995 ) , the process of choosing to adopt an innovation can be decomposed into a series of five steps . In the knowledge phase individuals must first learn that the technology exists and can apply to their problem . In the persuasion phase they prepare to adopt the technology . in the decision phase they decide to apply the innovation to their own situation . In the implementation phase they begin to apply the innovation . In the confirmation phase they review whether the innovation has been successful . During the knowledge phase , mass media can be very influential in spreading initial word about an innovation ; however , for the decision and persuasion phases , various forms of interpersonal contact are much more important . During the decision phase , there are several characteristics of an innovation that can affect its rate of adoption . Of course , interpersonal contact with current adopters is necessary - new adopters must be able to know about a critical mass of current users , and those adopters must have an opportunity to discuss the adoption process . ( Nolte that for adopters , it is to their advantage to promote the use of interactive technologies - each person who joins the system makes the system more useful , in what Matiler and Rogers ( 1999 ) refers to as the “backward flow of increased utility” ) . This essential interpersonal contact is difficult to achieve across distance . Just as importantly , for a technology to make it through the decision phase , Rogers claims that it must offer a relative advantage against older methods , yet must be compatible with the work process . It must not be too complex to use ; and it must be “trialable” and observable - that is , there has to be a way to try out the technology and see if it works , and to watch others use it before ! deciding to adopt . The notion of “observability” is closely related to Brown and Dugid’s ( 2000 ) idea of “socializable technologies’’ - those technologies that can be seen and used in a social context , and thus can be learned gradually and as needed from others . ( For example , playing videotapes happens at social occasions , and so cant be observed ; programming a VCR is a more solitary act . Brown and Duguid argue that it is no coincidence that many people do not know how to program VCRs , but most can play a tape . ) Distance technologies face a special challenge : though the relative advantage is high , interactive technologies are notoriously complex . This makes ; trialability and observability even more important ; it must be possible for a prospective adopter to watch someone else use the system . In contrast , the confirmation phase may actually be accelerated over distance . As the advantages of the technology become clearer , it becomes harder to imagine life without this new technology . Exposure to different forms of communication helps describe some of the differences between early adopters and later ones . For example , early adopters are more likely to be influenced by mass media than later adopters - the earlier adopters are unlikely to hear about the technology from friends who have already adopted it . Similarly , mass 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 57 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion media is more prevalent as a major factor during the knowledge phase , while interpersonal channels are more important for persuasion and implementation . Interpersonal channels - whether over distance or local - are the elements of a person’s social network . Valente ( 1995 , 1996 ) suggests that it is useful to consider a threshold network model . That is , a single person is likely to adopt the technology based upon whether the people around them have adopted it . Early adopters are those who are easily swayed , with few recommendations ; the later groups need more advice and exposure . In the case of a technology connecting remote people - such as data conferencing - this exposure may be a distant one across phone and online meetings , and may come across a network with nodes in a variety of places . Of course , the network can be guided by an organizational structure - in fact , some recent work ( Han 1996 ) suggests that the social networks that form at work may conform well to organization charts . For communication technologies , distance is not the only barrier . The value of a communications technology grows as the count of other , closely network - connected people who have the technology grows . The Role of Social Networks In Technology Diffusion Interpersonal channels allow a user to assess the potential benefits of using a new interactive technology . In essence , they judge whether the technology has reached critical mass - there must be enough other people using it to make the technology useful . This is best perceived through the user‘s social network . Each user asks : “are the people I want to interact with using this technology ? ” Some researchers ( e . g . Valente 1996 ) characterize this as a threshold : each person has an ( implicit ) measure of the number of influences they need in order to be convinced that a technology is worth adopting . Thus , social networks become crucial . People who are well - connected to those who use technology naturally have more exposure to new technologies , and may be more willing to try them out . On the other hand , well - connected people may have a higher threshold for technology adoption . They are connected to many people , who in fact , may use different communication technologies . There is a cost to adopting multiple systems , and therefore they may be more hesitant than less well - connected individuals . The perception of “critical mass” also depends on the mode of communication . Valente discusses “external influence” diffusion , when strong external pressure causes a sudden burst in diffusion . In groups with an external influence , the curve jumps suddenly as all people exposed to a mass communication medium adopt at once . Later , those stragglers with less exposure adopt more slowly as they perceive the critical mass around them ( Valente 1995 ) . A useful alternate measure is “cosmopolitanness” , one of Rogers’ indicators for early adopters . Highly cosmopolite people have access to a greater array of networks , and therefore may see something working on one network , and bring it to their other connections . An example of this type of situation is a person who is involved in a variety of contexts : working with remote teams and taking internal classes . They have access to new ideas that they can transfer across teams . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 011 $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 58 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion Corn pa ny Background In the late 199Os , The Boeing Company underwent rapid growth both in size and geographic diversity as a consequence of mergers . Before these mergers about 80 % of Boeing employees were located in the greater Seattle area and could attend most face - to - face meetings by driving less than 1 % hours . Following the merger , the company grew to about 235 , 000 employees . Only about 40 % were located in the Seattle area ; the rest were distributed across the United States . The workers in these various locations needed to work together to keep the company working successfully . With the change in employee distribution , came an increase in the need for collaboration across distance . Partly to deal with these issues , Boeing started implementing collaboration technologies in 1996 , and distributed Microsoft NetMeeting , a data - conferencing technology , in a pre - production pilot in late 1997 . By mid - 1998 , NetMeeting was released at production scale to the company as a whole , and its usage has grown dramatically within Boeing since its initial introduction . One of the authors has been investigating collaborative technologies at Boeing since 1990 . In the beginning of the decade , few empaoyees were interested in the data conferencing technologies then available . The mergers appeared to increase the perceived benefits of data conferencing because employees began to collaborate with partners thousands of miles away . METHOD We have been following the progress of the distribution of data conferencing since its introduction in 1998 . This study is part of a larger investigation of data conferencing usage and adoption . In an earlier study ( Mark et al . , 1999 ) , the earliest adopters reported a number of barriers to their adoption of this technology . Many of these barriers concerned the fact that collaborating partners were distant from each other , e . g . there was no technology support at the local site of one or more of the participants . We surveyed active users focusing on the barriers , they had experienced and on their adoption patterns . We wanted to learn how respondents had become interested in data conferencing , how often they were then using it , and how often they had introduced it to others . To ensure we found active users of the technology , we generated lists of currently logged - in users from an internal directory on three separate occasions , on the mornings of November 6 and December 18 , 2000 , and on January 10 , 2001 . We sent surveys to 240 people , receiving 111 responses ( a 46 % ) response rate ) . We revised the questionnaires , among other things to include more quantitative data , and sent them to another 146 people . This version received 83 responses ( a 57 % response rate ) . We tabulated and coded these responses . Because not all users answered all questions , our N varies for different questions . We then selected 14 respondents and called them for half - hour to hour - long loosely structured phone in1 . erviews . These interviews gave us a more in - depth perspective on the ways that users were adopting the data conferencing . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 59 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion RESULTS The surveys , combined together , gave a fairly deep picture of data conferencing use at Boeing . As this section shows , our respondents had been innovative in the ways that they used data conferencing technology . The technology was proving useful to them in many ways . They had learned about data conferencing dominantly from each other , and were using it to enhance their collaboration with people at other locations while minimizing the travel required for that collaboration . Uses of Data Conferences at Boeing The data conferencing service at Boeing includes Microsoft NetMeeting as a Windows - based data conference application , and server - side components . We observed many different ways that data conferencing was used , corresponding to the diverse ways that people can collaborate . We have identified three different major uses : formal training courses , scheduled team meetings , and ad - hoc collaborations . One of the most common uses is to give presentations for training or in - house education . The presenter may be in a conference room with a physically collocated audience and audio connection or may be seated alone at a computer with a telephone . In either case , the presenter shares slides so that the audience can see but not interact with the presentation . This usage is so common that some people have expressed surprise when they learn that data conferencing is not dependent on the slide presentation application , and could actually be used to share other applications . Employees who wish to attend the class are often required to use data conferencing . This was one of the most prominent ways of using data conferencing early in its distribution at Boeing , and several of our users reported learning about the technology by trying an in - house training program . As time has passed , and the software is being used more interactively , that rate seems to be slipping : many of our respondents reported introducing data conferencing to others for different purposes . This same presentation format used in training works also well for scheduled team meetings of geographically distributed people . The agenda of these meetings often includes a review of action items and presentations by one or more people . Data conferencing seems to support these activities very well . Often the team leader runs the application used to track action items and shares its window with the team . They all see the action item list and any updates made to it . Similarly , people generally give presentations by running and sharing Powerpoint . Everyone sees the same slide at the same time , neglecting the brief delays caused by network latencies . Occasionally , people chat with one another during the meeting via short text messages . This format has been used to replace short - distance commutes within the Puget Sound area . When the geographic distance between users is far , data conferencing replaces teleconferencing and photocopied documents , as this user reports : I have participated in these meetings for several years ( usually once a month ) . The briefing charts were emailed and I would have to keep track of the ' page ' that was currently being discussed . That was not always successful . NetMeeting has made the meeting much more meaningful . Travel budget was tight so that was not an option . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 60 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion We have also discovered that some distributed teams have not fully adopted data conferencing . There are a number of hybrid groups where some members may attend remotely using data conferencing . Others in the team use teleconferencing alone , and yet others might drive in to attend the meeting in person . These hybrids afford the opportunity for what Rogers ( 1995 ) describes as " observability " . These group members can gradually make their own adoption decisions about the data conferencing , as they are exposed to others using the technology . Many people use data conferences for ad hoc , unscheduled collaboration . For example , anyone calling Boeing ' s internal computing support staff for help using an application may be invited to participate in a data conference . The support staff can see the state of the application , see the user ' s inputs , and demonstrate proper use of the application . In this situation , both parties start their data conference application ( typically NetMeeting ) , and one person finds the other in the online directory and initiates a person - to - person call . Then they can share the application of interest , and the collaboration feature enables both people to manipulate an application running on just one of the two computers . As one respondent wrote , As part of Computing Systems , and performing help - desk functions , I use it to debug user ' s problems from my desk . I tutor the user over the phone as required . Thus , we are seeing that data conferencing is used to support a variety of different types of collaboration , ranging from scheduled distributed teams and distance training to more informal ad - hoc kinds of activities . The growth of data conferencing Since its introduction at Boeing , the usage of data conferencing has shown steady growth . Figure 2 shows the estimated number of user hours of data conference per month based on logs from the Boeing data conference servers and entries in a data conferencing directory . Data conferencing has , indeed , grown rapidly : the scheduled monthly meeting hours grew from a total of 1 , 872 in 1998 to 42 , 431 usage hours in 2000 . . . . . . " . , , . . . , . . , . . . . " . , , . . . . . . , . " . . " . , . . . . . . . Figure 2 : Estimated number of user hours of data conference per month . Graph is based on logs from the Boeing data conference servers and entries in a data conferencing directory . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . 61 Communication Dimensions Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion This curve differs from Rogers’ S - curve for several reasons . First , this curve doesn’t measure the rate of adoption : the hours in Figure 2 represent both increasing numbers of people using the system and increasing numbers of hours per person . Second , use of this technology is still growing rapidly : we are on the growth side of the curve as users learn about it and use it more often . We do expect that over time this curve will level off , at which point we will be able to compare it to the logistic diffusion curve . Third , use of the technology fluctuates from month to month for many reasons , including holidays , project schedules , and vacation schedules . Learning Remotely Our interest was to discover the main communication channels for learning about data conferencing across distance . Our survey asked users how they learned about data conferencing . While 24 % of respondents ( N = 82 ) mentioned a face - to - face encounter , 54 % mentioned a remote connection - either a distributed team , an ad hoc collaboration , or a company training session ( see figure 3 ) . Less than one in ten learned about it through the official channels of their manager or the corporate web page , as this user described : A couple of years ago I was on [ a team ] in Everett and we worked with folks in Renton on a regular basis . One of the fellows in our group knew about it and we all learned . The break between the knowledge phase - through mass - media - and the decision phase , is clearly illustrated by some people who were particularly aware of technological developments . Both declined to adopt until its adoption locally had reached critical mass , as these users reported : I’ve followed development of Microsoft products , so I knew it was available before my group / associates started using it . Started using NetMeeting when I joined [ a mid - western ] group . I was aware of NetMeeting prior to joining the group but my co - workers did not use it . Three - quarters of the users in our sample reported that they had introduced the technology to at least two others in the organization . Nearly a quarter reported that they had introduced it to more than 20 people . More than half of the early adopters had introduced the technology to more than ten people , which may be due to longer use . However , early adopters are also more likely to be more tightly integrated into social networks , and thus may have more need to work with more different people ( Rogers 1995 ) . Figure 3 : Frequency distribution of contexts in which users first learned about NetMeeting ( N = 83 ) 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 011 $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 62 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion Users introduce data conferencing technology to other people across the company to enable collaboration . Half the users said they introduced it to people for distributed meetings , and nearly a third introduced it to others for purposes of ad hoc collaboration ( see Figure 4 ) . In other words , as the need for cnllaboration occurs in the distributed organization , people introduce others to data conferencing as a means for conducting work across distance . > r V E 0 ) U U , a g ! Figure 4 : Frequency distribution of reasons why respondents introduced the technology to others ( N = 83 ; total doesn ' t match because of multiple responses ) We expected , then , that respondents who introduced data conferencing to others through training would be qualitatively different then those who introduced it for distributed meetings or small groups . Perhaps they would emphasize a different set of software features . We compared respondents to see if there was an association between how they learned about the technology , and whether they use particular software features . There were no clear differences between users . We did find that more frequent users had introduced somewhat more people to data conferencing ( Spearman ' s p = . 368 ; N = 78 , p x . 001 ) . That supports our idea that data conferencing is still diffusing through the organization . More frequent users still find that their social networks are not fully saturated . They can still introduce more people to the software and set up more connections . Data conferencing vs . face to face meeting Data conferencing has been presented as a richer alternative to teleconferencing , but cheaper then frequent travel . In the first questionnaire , we asked respondents whether they would travel if data conferencing were unavailable . There was a mixed response . 67 % of the N = 70 respondents said that they would have to travel if they did not have data conferencing in some form or another . Some of those who would not travel said that data conferencing enabled them to cope with budget shortfalls . Their groups could not afford to have them travel as frequently as they might want . We did it through telecons , e - mails , and printing of hard copy for review . We would not travel to the meetings , as we did not have the funding to travel . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions Remote Communication and Technoloav Diffusion 63 Without that travel , though , work was more difficult , badly coordinated , and harder to do . Before data conferencing , wrote one user , when meetings were coordinated with paper . We wasted a lot of time making sure we were all on the same slide . The exceptions were those who collaborated locally : teams distributed across the Puget Sound region . For these short - distance trips , data conferencing could adequately substitute for an hour ' s drive , but a phone call could not . [ Before conferencing , ] these meetings were just telecons and all information was e - mailed or faxed . There would be more travel locally [ in the Puget Sound region ] . I do not think that there would be more [ national ] travel . We did travel to meetings , but rarely got attendance from outside Puget Sound . Other groups found that data conferencing has fit into a combination program of more focused , less frequent travel , and they enjoyed the new ability to meet across distance easily : If NetMeeting were not available , I suspect we would have fewer meetings . ( Fewer meetings would NOT be a good thing , in this case . Still , in the end , there is a consensus that data conferencing pays off to reduce travel , but cannot substitute for the value and intimacy of human interaction . There is [ value ] about face to face meetings that is lost when participating by NetMeeting . NetMeeting is a good interim tool . Net Meeting is excellent for sharing data on a regular basis , but there is no replacement for face - to - face personal involvement to enhance working relationships . We still travel periodically . Data conferencing and social ties Data conferencing has the potential to help people form new geographically distributed teams . However , by using a technology for distance meetings , it may also be the case that team members may never meet face - to - face . In order to determine to what extent face - to - face contact was necessary in the new distributed teams , we asked our respondents whether they knew , or had met , members of their teams in person . All respondents said that they knew something about their co - workers ' roles and workplace settings from the context of the online conversation . Most of our participants knew their team members from personal meetings , either because they worked close together or because they arranged local travel . Nearly half ( 46 % ) of the people were members of groups that periodically met in person or had arranged for members to meet each other . They then used data conferencing to supplement their face - to - face meetings . These people knew , and felt comfortable with , each other , e . g . : I have met most of [ my group members ] in face - to - face meetings . I think it is difficult to establish effective rapport on a team without occasional such meetings . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions Remote Communication and Technoloav Diffusion 64 Only 17 % ( N = 84 ) of our respondents had never met their group members . Have worked with some of the Training people for two years , and have never met them face to face . Doesn’t stop me from gettirig a sense of them over the wires . The remaining ( 37 % ) of respondents met face - to - face with their teams occasionally , but not regularly and not with all members . They reflected on being aware of each other‘s work , and of gradually meeting others as the occasion came up . Many of these teams gained members , for example , after data conferencing made it possible to start a distributed group . It was after a team had formed , stormed , and normed , and we were into performing before we went to NetMeeting . Currently , there are several people in our [ group using ] NetMeeting whom I’ve never met . DISCUSSION Earlier in the paper we discussed the potential difficulty of adopting a technology across distance . Informal channels of communication play a central role in adoption ( Rogers , 1995 ) , and across distance , informal communication is limited . Instead , we have found that communication channels responsible for spreading information about the technology were different than we had expected . First , the technology was not introduced to others by formal channels , e . g . a deployment campaign . The rapid growth in usage cannot be attributed to advertisement or advocacy by the information systems group within the organization . The information systems group identified experts to act as product managers for the service components , and they managed the service but were not allowed to advowte its use . They established a web site where users could find information about data conferencing and could download the installation package . We discovered that data conferencing has spread on a grassroots level through the organization , without pressure from above . As the data suggests , this interaction technology has become important enough that some job roles could not work as well without them . One user discussed the broader effects for the organization : I would not travel to these meetings . Information would be stagnant within the specific regions . No exchange of processes or findings . Every region would invent their own wheel . This user is referring to the idea that data conferencing provides a benefit not only to the collaborating partners , but also to the company . This sharing is especially important because of the mergers that occurred in the organization several years ago . By using this technology , the employees prevent company sites remote from the main site from being isolated and insular . Second , many teams that use data conferencing had core members who originally met face - to - face , and they apparently play an important role in current distributed teams . For example , some were located in the greater Seattle area and could drive to meetings in that area . As data conferencing afforded opportunities for distant team partners to join in , 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3101 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . 65 Communication Dimensions Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion the nature of the meetings changed so that all members could participate virtually , and face - to - face participation declined ( Mark et al . , 1999 ) . In some cases , face - to - face meetings were abandoned entirely . Data conferencing thus presents an unusual situation . The communication among the core members initially was strong and supported by face - to - face meetings . As the team became more distributed , the core members may have reinforced critical communication necessary to sustain the team . One user described the value of knowing others who participate in the same team : Unfortunately ( not speaking very highly for myself ) , I often do NOT know the work roles or personal background of many of the people in the meeting . I have found that if I attend a few meetings in person for the specific purpose to get to know faces , voices and roles the people play , my participation level increases tremendously . Thus , for data conferencing to support distributed teamwork effectively , the team must carefully consider a schedule of face - to - face meetings that supplement the distributed meetings . As the quote above illustrates , familiarity can lead to better quality social interaction . Adoption of collaborative technologies Although social network theory predicts a slower startup for interactive technologies ( Valente , 1996 ) , a meeting - oriented technology behaves differently then a point - to - point technology like a telephone or fax machine . Like early farmers using telephones , there is an immediate and perceptible change when a team adopts data conferencing as a whole , even if it spreads no further than the team . There can be increased resistance , as more people need to agree to use the technology , but there can also be a surge in growth , as an entire team gets on board at once . I started using Net Meeting about 2 months ago . An interdivisional , interdisciplinary team I was assigned to use it to demo proposed changes to a systems program . The team leader sent out an email stating her intent to use Net Meeting for our team meetings . The effects of early adopters expanded quickly through the network . There were few technological barriers to joining , and users could find themselves very quickly able to run the application and connect to other people . Further , the cost of adoption was low : if desired , only one or two people might join in using data conferencing , and so the system could be tested before everyone started to use it . Data conferencing offers easily recognizable benefits , which is the primary reason why it has been adopted so quickly . Many respondents emphasized that their travel has been reduced and that their less - frequent meetings are more productive . More interestingly , data conferencing is being introduced into a variety of different workplace contexts . It is being used as a one - on - one teaching tool , and even as a technical support mechanism . There is a second interesting aspect to adopting data conferencing . Although data conferencing has a wide variety of features , it is possible to participate in a data conference with a bare minimum of knowledge , and learn about how the functionality can be used by observing others . Thus , for example , a user might start off attending non - interactive training courses , observing slide presentations . In other words , data conferencing is a “socializable” technology ( Brown and Duguid 2000 ) . It can be observed 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . 66 Communication Dimensions Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion as it is used . This observation allows them to quickly learn how to use more features as they progress . Thus , we can report that data conferencing diffusion is occurring as a bottom - up process . Users are learning about data conferencing from each other , and introducing it into their projects and their collaborations . The technology diffused rapidly across geographic distance because the collaborators themselves drove its diffusion . Inventing uses of data conferencing * Collaboration can occur in many ways , and data conferencing is a flexible technology . Taken together , we can expect that people would invent new uses for the data conferencing . In interviews with users , we discovered that people were learning about data conferencing in one context , and then discovering how they could apply it in a different context , for another type of collaboration . In some cases , they had changed the way they worked . One example is the case of a member of the technical support staff . Formerly , when someone on campus would call him for help , he woulid walk over to that person’s office , somewhere on the campus . A visitor from another site told him about data conferencing , which led him to search the company web pages to learn more about it . After evaluating it , he decided that he would use data conferencing when people called him requesting help for technical problems . Now he mostly uses data conferencing to connect to other users’ screens . This enables him to watch people using an application to see where they are having troubles , to see error messages , and to adjust control settings to fix problems . By solving technical problems remotely , this support person has more time to handle more calls . His colleagues in the support staff were skeptical for some time , but now they also use data conferencing for this purpose . Role of Social Networks in Adoption Across Distance Some of our respondents discussed some social barriers . As with the technical support person using NetMeeting to solve problems across his campus , local staff may not support and , in some cases , even oppose the use of data conferencing . We found that strong social networks across distance were a powerful tool for distributing the technology around the company . Users would be introduced to the technology by remote groups , would start to use it , and would then try to get local support teams to help teach and expand their use of the technology . For example , a participant in a remote collaboration using teleconferencing cannot directly observe data conferencing in action . Yet the participant can hear about the technology from her associates , and may even be asked by the collaborators to try it out . A number of our respondents discussed hearing about NetMeeting first from small - group collaborations that wanted to be able to work together more intensively . The user , facing local resistance , can observe a critical mass in the distributed group and decide that data conferencing is worth using . Once that user has brought the technology to her local site , local resistance may erode as other users can observe the technology and consider the ways it can work . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions e7 U . Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion Laying Groundwork to Encourage Adoption Adoption of the data conferencing technology at Boeing was a supported grassroots effort . The company didn ' t require data conferencing , but did put systems in place to allow data conferencing to be adopted easily . Certainly , without corporate support , users could not have picked up and used the technology . Less than half the respondents ( 53 out of 111 ) reported any barriers to using the data conferencing . Only 27 of these reported any sort of technical difficulty ; the rest of the users reported issues such as hesitation from other group members and learning curves . However , this has not always been the case . Boeing has adapted data conferencing as the user base has grown . An earlier study ( Mark , 1999 ) showed many more technical barriers to be overcome , and frustration from remote users . Only the most committed early adopters worked through these initial barriers to keep working with the software . Other users never adopted data conferencing , continuing to use audio conferencing even though their distributed colleagues were able to share data synchronously . A series of previous studies have examined adoption in different situations , with widely varying effects . Orlikowski ( 1992 ) examined the introduction of Lotus Notes into a large company , " Alpha . " Lotus Notes , a file sharing and email program , was promoted as a collaborative technology that would allow employees to work together , and would allow them to share information and results with other employees . The use of the technology was required within the company , as users were mandated to adopt the technology . Unfortunately , this approach didn ' t work . Users were unprepared to try this new technology . They had not chosen to use it themselves , and were unwilling and uninterested in putting the extensive time and effort into learning how to use a new technology , without being compensated for the effort . Worse , Notes fit in poorly with the corporate culture . In a company that emphasized individual performance , employees had little interest in collaborative sharing , and so did not want to share their hard - earned data with other employees . Data conferencing at Boeing worked very differently then Notes at Alpha . Boeing is a company with many collaborative teams : working together is considered an important part of many jobs . Employees do not feel penalized for sharing data with each other . The conditions at Boeing are more favorable for the adoption of collaborative technologies . Where Alpha forced employees to use the technology whether they wished to or not , Boeing has encouraged gradual adoption as the technology feels comfortable . Users seek out their own training , often informally , so they can join their peers who find the technology useful . A related case is that of Okamura et aPs study of internal bulletin boards ( 1994 ) . Okamura et a / describe a company adopting online bulletin - boards as a communication channel in a manufacturing company . The software was chosen by engineers in the group who had used the system in a personal context , and wanted to expand it to other members of their team . Working with their managers , they appointed a network administration group to help introduce the technology . That team ended up being responsible for adapting the technology to the company , clarifying rules such as the status of memos relayed on the online board and the frequency with which users were expected to check the system . The mediators were both users of the system and policy - makers , and were able to modify the system as they saw fit . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . . I Communication Dimensions Remote Communication and Technoloav Diffusion 68 In this company , the news system was quickly adopted . The network administrators were able to update both the technology and the work habits of the teams . Their combination of requiring participation , but carefully paying attention to the users ' needs , was an effective one , and users very quickly were integrated into the system . This situation compares nicely to the situation at Boeing . Unlike bulletin boards , the data conferencing technology is not an easy one to modify for users ; however , it is a flexible enough technology to allow many possible uses . Okamura discusses the technology being brought in by members of the group and then spread across to everyone . Data conferencing has not been made obligatory at Boeing , but each team has the flexibility to consider which technology to use . The question , then , is how to balance an adoption without heavy - handedly forcing the technology on a team or group but while providing sufficient corporate resources . It is important to have infrastructure in place so that there are few barriers to adoption , but users must ultimately come to the decision themselves that their team would benefit from using the technology . For the case of NetMeeting , Boeing presented the technology and allowed users to work out methods for using the technology themselves . Barriers to Adoption The previous section has suggested that a technology imposed upon users ( e . g . from high ranks in an organization ) presents different challenges for adoption than one that is spread as a grass roots process . A technology that is imposed from above is not one that the users feel they control . When they introduce the technology themselves , they gain ownership , and therefore might be more willing to work with the technology for a longer period of time , or try harder to make it work . In fact , using data conferencing software can be a bit of a challenge , and can cause difficulties for the team in the form of delays - which seem to be worth the time and effort , for the valuable better collaboration . It is not easy to initiate a meeting using NetMeeting as [ it ] is not completely user friendly . The first 15 minutes to 30 minutes of the meetings are often spent getting people connected Despite these difficulties , most users were willing to work with the technology . The company ' s relaxed attitude did cause some problems . One user involved in several different distributed teams described his biggest barrier : Lassitude . Others ' resistance to the new technology . Manager doesn ' t encourage it and we have some folk who only do what the manager says . Similarly , some respondents asked for more formalized support , such as education and training sessions . One user complained : Lack of formal training prevents me from usinlg NetMeeting to its full potential . Although some users wanted more structure , it s e e m that the growth has been gradual and successful , as teams find uses and introduce it into their work schedule . The dominant concerns may fade as the technology becomes more familiar to more people . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 69 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion CONCLUSION Earlier , one user reported that travel could not replace data conferencing ; our results also showed that data conferencing is not a replacement for travel . Rather , it is used for a wide variety of reasons . It is used as a cost - saving alternative to some travel , and as a way to help teams gather more frequently . It is a way to set up an informal collaboration quickly , and to transfer information . Meetings can have a combination of users coming in remotely and locally , can be formal or informal . Data conferencing , then , seems to be a useful tool - one of many , including e - mail and travelling to remote sites - that allows distributed teams to work together . As we enter the age of distance collaboration , we are not only seeing that the nature of work has changed , but the process of how technology diffuses has also changed . The adoption of data conferencing at Boeing was rapid due to a number of favorable factors : a lack of technological resistance , a useful technology , and users who need to collaborate across the country . The collaborative technology has shot up in popularity , exceeding 40 , 000 user - hours per month . This growth has happened between peers and groups , a testimony to the powerful role that communication networks can serve across distance . REFERENCES Brown , J . S . and P . Duguid . The Social Life of Information . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . 2000 . Castells , M . The Rise of the Nefwok Sociefv . Cambridge , MA : Blackwell Publishers 1996 . Fischer , C . S . America Calling : A Social Historv of the Telephone to 1940 . Berkeley : University of California Press . 1992 . Han , S . - K . Structuring Relations in on - the - job Networks . Social Networks . 18 : 47 - 67 . 1996 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . and D . E . Leidner . Communication and Trust in Global Virtual Teams . Journal of computer - Mediated Communication . 3 ( 4 ) . 1998 . Mahler , A . and E . M . Rogers . The Diffusion of Interactive Communication Innovations and the Critical Mass : the Adoption of Telecommunications Services by German Banks . Telecommunications Policy . 23 : 71 9 - 740 , 1999 . Mark , G . , J . Grudin , et al . Meeting at the desktop : An Empirical Study of Virtually Collocated Teams . Proceedings of ECSCW99 . The 6th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Copenhagen , Denmark , Dordrecht : Kluwer . 1999 . Markus , L . M . and T . Connolly . Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools . Proceedings of CSCW 7990 . ACM : New York . 371 - 380 . 1990 . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al . Communication Dimensions 70 Remote Communication and Technology Diffusion Okamura , K . , F . Masayo , et al . Helping CSCW Applications Succeed : The Role of Mediators in the Context of Use . Proceedings of CSCW 7992 . ACM : New York . 55 - 65 . 1994 . Orlikowski , W . Learning from Notes : Organizational Issues in Groupware Implementation . Proceedings of CSCW 7992 . ACM : New York . 362 - 369 . 1992 . Rogers , E . M . Diffusion of Innovations . New York : Free Press . 1995 . Valente , T . W . Network Models of the Diffusion of Innovations . Cresskill , N . J . , Hampton Press . 1995 . Valente , T . W . Social Network Thresholds in the Diffusion of Innovations . Social Networks 18 : 69 - 89 . 1996 . Wiesenfeld , B . M . , S . Raghuram , et al . Communication Patterns as Determinants of Organizational Identification in a Virtual Organization . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication . 3 ( 4 ) , 1998 . Zach , M . H . Interactivity and Communication Mode Choice in Ongoing Management Groups . Information Systems Research . 4 ( 3 ) : 207 - 239 , 1993 . ABOUT THE AUTHORS Gloria Mark is an Assistant Professor in the Information and Computer Science Department , University of California , Irvine . Prior to this , she had been a senior Research Scientist at the GMD in Germany . She is interested in the design , evaluation , and adoption of collaborative technologies . Steven Poltrock leads projects supporting teamwork , workflow management , and knowledge management in Boeing’s Mathematics & Computing Technology organization . He has researched and written about collaborative user interface design and development and about experiences deploying groupware systems . Danyel Fisher is a graduate student at the departrnent of Information and Computer Sciences at UC Irvine , studying computer - supported collaborative work . He recently finished his MS in CS at UC Berkeley . 0 - 7803 - 7209 - 3 / 01 / $ 10 . 00 0 2001 IEEE G . Mark et al .