Camera Angle Affects Dominance in Video - Mediated Communication Wei Huang , Judith S . Olson , Gary M . Olson Collaboratory for Research on Electronic Work ( CREW ) School of Information University of Michigan Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 1234 , USA + 1 734 - 615 - 6639 { huangwei , jsolson , gmo } @ umich . edu ABSTRACT Physical proximity and appearance guide people to interact with each other in different ways [ 1 , 6 ] . However , in Video - Mediated Communication ( VMC ) , these are distorted in various ways . Monitors and camera zooms make people look close or far , monitors and camera angles can be high or low making people look tall or short , volume can be loud or soft , making people sound assertive or submissive , - - all independent of the true physical characteristics or intentions of the participants . Here we test the apparent height of a person on how dominant they are in a group decision - making task . We found that the artificially tall people had more influence in the group decision than the artificially short people . Keywords Proximity , camera angle , VMC , distance , dominance , influence , height INTRODUCTION Proxemics is the name of the field of study of how behavior changes as a function of the physical arrangement of people [ 6 ] . For example , conversation has a different style when participants are physically close to each other than if they are not . Distant people speak in more formal , longer sentences , as if pronouncing to a group in public speaking . Those closer have a more casual , interrupted style , with a swifter negotiation of common ground . Technology can distort these distances . When participants are remote , the distance of the monitor from the viewer , the camera zoom setting and the monitor placement can determine the apparent distance one is from the remote person . Grayson & Coventry [ 4 ] examined the conversational patterns of pairs of people where the monitor was either close or far from the participant , and the camera either zoomed in or out from the face . Interestingly , the results showed that it was not the size of the person’s image on the retina that changed behavior from formal to more informal , but rather the relative size of the face on the screen . In essence , the viewer assumes the psychological position of the camera , with zoomed in views being interpreted as physically closer . There are other features of the presentation of the remote person that can potentially have an effect on behavior . For example , by placing the monitor and camera artificially high or low , one can give the impression that the remote person is either taller or shorter than they are . A person looking up all the time ( with the remote person apparently looking down ) may feel submissive ; the artificially tall person could feel dominant . The psychological literature suggests that tall people are significantly more powerful and successful than short [ 3 ] . In film and video production , the dominant effects are often generated using different camera angles . Low angle shots are used to make the person appear tall , dominant and powerful while high angle shots are used to make the person appear short , weak and submissive [ 4 ] . As VMC resembles film / video production at large , it is critical to know whether the perspective angle generated by the placement of camera leads to the dominance / submissive effect . In this laboratory study , we have dyads interact through a VMC system while engaged in a group decision - making task . We set the camera angle and monitor high in one room and low in another to simulate a situation where a ‘short’ person is talking to a ‘tall’ person . We wanted to see whether the ‘tall’ person is more influential than his ‘short’ partner . EXPERIMENT Design The study is a between subject design with camera angle : high vs . low [ - / + 30 ] . The screen size was 14” . The distance of the user from the monitor and camera is 4 feet . Figure 1 shows the high and low camera / monitor setup . Figure 1 . Subjects with high and low monitors . Participants Twenty - eight pairs of subjects were run . To control the impact of gender , age , race and status , we recruited only white American males , 19 - 28 years old . Participants were strangers before they entered the study . Procedure The participants were randomly assigned to two rooms with the camera / monitor pre - setup . They were asked to fill out a pre - test questionnaire to collect demographic data such as height , age , year in school and experience using audio - video communication technology . Questions to assess the dominance of the participants ( adapted from [ 2 ] ) were also included in the pre - test questionnaire . The participants were instructed to work on a problem privately and then negotiate a common solution through VMC . Each participant completed the ranking of the items he thought he should keep after a crashed landing in an artic area ( the Arctic Survival task ) . They then were to come to a common ranking collectively , talking through the VMC . They were encouraged to be persuasive and reasonable as they discussed with their partner . They were motivated through a reward if their final solution was close to that of the expert . After the negotiation , they filled out a post - test scale to assess the effectiveness of the technology , their perceived influence on the final decision , their own dominance , and the perceived dominance of their partner . Measure of influence The influence was measured as the sum of absolute differences between the individual ranking and team ranking . The larger the difference , the less his influence was judged to be . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The pre - test questionnaire revealed that the baseline of dominance of the subjects in the artificially tall and short condition is equivalent ( F ( 1 , 54 ) = 0 . 024 , n . s . ) . We assume that any differences in influence between ‘tall’ and ‘short’ individuals cannot be attributed to their baseline dominance . Individual influence on group decision - making was analyzed between ‘tall’ and ‘short’ groups . We found that ‘tall’ people are significantly more influential than are their ‘short’ peers ( F ( 1 , 54 ) = 4 . 229 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Consistent with the influence measure from the task , the post - test scale reveals that ‘tall’ people think they are slightly more influential than their ‘short’ partners ( Mean tall = 55 % , Mean short = 50 . 3 % , F ( 1 , 54 ) = 2 . 86 , p = 0 . 097 ) . These results are important , not only for understanding people’s behavior through technology distortions , but also for the practical world . Physical placement of video cameras , zoom angles and monitor distance can distort people’s perceptions of closeness and height . These factors affect behavior in both conversation and decision - making . In our experience those who set up video conferencing have not been especially sensitive to such issues . A number of other variables , such as the distance of the monitor or the volume of sound , are potentially important , and are being examined in ongoing research on this topic . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported in part by a grant from the NSF , IIS 9977923 to the Olsons at CREW . REFERENCE 1 . Argyle , M . and Dean H . " Eye - contact , distance and affiliation . " Sociometry 1965 , 38 ( 3 ) pp289 - 304 . 2 . Burgoon , J . K . , Johnson , M . L . , & Koch , P . T . , The Nature and Measurement of Interpersonal Dominance . Communication Monographs , 65 , 1998 . 3 . Ellis , L . , The high and the mighty among man and beast : How universal is the relationship between height ( or body size ) and social status ? Social Stratification and Socioeconomic Inequality . L . Ellis . Westport , CT , 4 . Giannetti , L . D . Understanding movies . Upper Saddle River , N . J . : Prentice Hall , c1999 5 . Grayson , D . & Coventry , L . , The effects of visual proxemic information in video mediated communication . SIGCHI’98 Bulletin . 1998 , 30 ( 3 ) pp . 30 - 39 . 6 . Hall , E . T . The hidden dimension . Garden City , NY , Doubleday & Company , Inc . 1966 .