REVIEWS Why study microbial surfaces ? Most microorganisms have a well - defined cell wall that has presumably evolved during the course of evolution by selection in response to environmental and ecological pressures 1 , 2 . As microbial surfaces form a boundary between the external environment and the cell , they have several important functions , including determining cell shape , growth and division , enabling cells to resist turgor pres - sure , acting as molecular sieves , and mediating molecu - lar recognition and cellular interactions . Therefore , studying the structure , properties and functions of microbial surfaces is an exciting and continuously expanding field of microbiology . Our current view of the organization of microbial surfaces owes much to the tremendous developments in electron microscopy techniques over the past 20 – 30 years . In particular , CRYO - ELECTRON MICROSCOPY methods have allowed researchers to obtain high - resolution images of cell - surface structures in conditions close to their native state 3 , 4 . Yet , these sophisticated methods are labour - and equipment - intensive , and they are not suit - able for examining specimens in aqueous solutions . As well as surface structure , physical properties such as elas - ticity and surface charge are also important determinants of the functions of cell surfaces . These properties have traditionally been difficult to study in microorganisms owing to their small size . Valuable information can be obtained using electron microscopy and surface - analysis techniques 1 , 5 ; however , these assays require cell manipula - tion ( for example , extraction , drying and labelling ) before examination and they generally provide averaged information obtained from many cells . Similarly , the forces that determine cellular interactions and molecu - lar - recognition events remain largely unknown owing to the lack of appropriate probing techniques . Consequently , there was an urgent need to develop new high - resolution tools to probe the structure , prop - erties and interactions of cell surfaces in their native environments . The invention of ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPY ( AFM ) in the mid - 1980s 6 , followed by continuous progress in instrumentation , sample preparation and recording conditions , has revolutionized the way in which micro - scopists explore biological structures . This surface - imaging technique involves scanning a sharp tip over the surface of a sample , while sensing the interaction force between the tip and the sample ( FIG . 1 ) . The images are therefore created not by using an incident beam , as in other classical microscopy methods , but by measuring ‘near - field’physical interactions between the instrument tip and the surface of interest . The main advantage of an atomic force microscope is that it provides direct images USING NANOTECHNIQUES TO EXPLORE MICROBIAL SURFACES Yves F . Dufrêne Our current understanding of microbial surfaces owes much to the development of electron microscopy techniques . Yet , a crucial limitation of electron microscopy is that it cannot be used to examine biological structures directly in aqueous solutions . In recent years , however , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has provided a range of new opportunities for viewing and manipulating microbial surfaces in their native environments . Examples of AFM - based analyses include visualizing conformational changes in single membrane proteins , the real - time observation of cell - surface dynamics , analysing the unfolding of cell - surface proteins and detecting individual cell - surface receptors . These analyses have contributed to our understanding of the structure – function relationships of cell surfaces and will hopefully allow new applications to be developed for AFM in medicine and biotechnology . CRYO - ELECTRON MICROSCOPY An electronmicroscopy technique in which the sample is frozen to protect it during imaging . ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPY ( AFM ) . A relatively new form of microscopy in which a sharp tip is scanned over the surface ofa sample , while sensing the interaction force between the tip and the sample . Because AFM does not rely on an incident beam , as in electron or light microscopy , the specimen can be directly observed at high resolution in aqueous solution . NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | JUNE 2004 | 451 Unité de chimie des interfaces , Université catholique de Louvain , Croix du Sud 2 / 18 , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium . e - mail : dufrene @ cifa . ucl . ac . be doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro905 FORCE SPECTROSCOPY A form ofAFM in which the force acting on the tip is measured with piconewton ( 10 – 12 N ) sensitivity as the tip is pushed towards the sample then retracted from it . S - LAYERS Two - dimensional arrays of protein or glycoprotein subunits with a molecular mass between 40 , 000 and 200 , 000 Daltons that are common constituents of bacterial cell walls . HPI The hexagonally packed intermediate ( HPI ) layer from Deinococcus radiodurans is an S - layer and was amongst the first S - layer systems to be viewed by AFM at submolecular resolution . PORIN A membrane protein that allows the passage ofsmall molecules such as glucose through the membrane . CANTILEVER AFM tips are mounted on cantilever beams or triangles , which are typically made of silicon or silicon nitride , that behave like springs . Using Hooke’s law , the magnitude of the tip – sample force is proportional to the deflection of the cantilever . 452 | JUNE 2004 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / micro R E V I E W S have been addressed using AFM are listed in TABLE 1 and include : is the surface ultrastructure of a living cell simi - lar to that observed by electron microscopy ? ; how does the surface morphology of bacterial cells change as they grow ? ; do physical properties such as cell - wall elasticity and surface charge vary across cell surfaces ? ; how flexi - ble are cell - surface polysaccharides ? ; and what forces are required to unfold a membrane protein ? Visualizing single membrane proteins S - LAYERS — two - dimensional ( 2 - D ) arrays of protein or glycoprotein subunits — are one of the most common cell - surface structures in bacteria 1 , 2 . As many isolated S - layer subunits can reassemble into stable 2 - D crys - talline arrays on solid surfaces , they have proved to be particularly well suited for high - resolution AFM analysis . After pioneering studies in the mid - 1990s 17 , 18 , continu - ous improvements in AFM instrumentation and methodology have allowed many different bacterial pro - tein crystals to be studied at sub - nanometre resolution , including not only S - layers in Bacillus spp . 19 and Deinococcus radiodurans 20 ( where the S - layer is also referred to as the hexagonally packed intermediate ( HPI ) layer ) , but also the purple membrane from the archaeon Halobacterium salinarium 21 and PORINS from Escherichia coli 22 , 23 . As the specimens are probed directly under phys - iological conditions , the information provided by AFM studies is complementary to that obtained by electron and X - ray crystallography . An elegant example of the analysis of a membrane protein by AFM is shown in FIG . 2 , in which the atomic model and the AFM images obtained for the surface of the OmpF porin are compared 24 . The OmpF porin is a channel - forming protein found in the E . coli outer membrane that consists of 16 antiparallel β - strands lining a transmembrane pore . Individual protrusions of single OmpF porin trimers were clearly resolved at sub - nanometre resolution using AFM . The antiparallel β - strands are connected by short turns at the periplasmic side of the membrane ( FIG . 2a ) and by long loops at the extracellular surface — these loops form a domain that protrudes up to 1 . 3 nm above the membrane ( FIG . 2b ) . of biological specimens at sub - nanometre resolution under physiological conditions ( BOX 1 ) . In fact , an atomic force microscope is more than just a microscope as it can also measure minute forces within or between biological molecules — a method known as FORCE SPECTROSCOPY — in a way that was not previously possible ( BOX 1 ) . Since the late 1980s , many biological specimens have been examined by AFM , ranging from biological mole - cules such as DNA , to lipid membranes and cells ( for reviews on the biological applications of AFM , see REFS 7 – 16 ) . In recent years , rapid advances have been made in applying AFM techniques to issues of microbi - ological importance , which indicates that AFM is becoming an established technique amongst microbio - logical researchers . Some of the exciting questions that Piezoelectricscanner Sample Laser Photodiode Tip Cantilever Figure 1 | The principles of atomic force microscopy . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) is a member of a family of new microscopic techniques that are referred to as scanning - probe microscopies ( SPMs ) . The concept on which all SPMs are based is the generation of images of surfaces by measuring the physical interaction between a sharp tip and the sample rather than by using an incident beam ( light or electrons ) as in classical microscopy . The main parts of an atomic force microscope are the sample stage , the CANTILEVER and the optical detection system , which comprises a laser diode and a photodetector . The sample is moved relative to the cantilever in three dimensions using PIEZOELECTRIC CERAMICS . The force interacting between the tip and the sample is monitored with piconewton ( 10 – 12 N ) sensitivity , by attaching the tip to a soft cantilever , which acts as a spring , and measuring the bending ( or deflection ) of the cantilever . The cantilever deflection is usually detected by a laser beam focused on the free end of the cantilever and is reflected into a photodiode . AFM cantilevers and tips are usually made of silicon or silicon nitride using MICROFABRICATION techniques . Box 1 | The different operating modes of atomic force microscopy Atomic force microscopes can be operated in various modes 7 , 8 . In the constant - force imaging mode , images are created by bringing the tip and sample into contact and scanning the tip across the surface while the sample height is adjusted using a feedback loop to keep the bending — or DEFLECTION — of the atomic force microscope cantilever constant . This yields a topographic image that gives calibrated height information about the sample . In many cases , small cantilever deflections occur because the feedback loop is not perfect , and the resulting error signal can be used to generate a deflection image , which is useful for revealing surface details of corrugated samples . In tapping mode atomic force microscopy ( TMAFM ) , an oscillating tip is scanned over the surface and the amplitude and phase of the cantilever are monitored near its resonance frequency . As the tip touches the sample surface only at the very end of its downward movement , lateral forces during imaging are greatly reduced , which is advantageous for imaging ‘soft’biological samples . In addition to being used as a microscope , an atomic force microscope can measure biomolecular forces with piconewton ( 10 – 12 N ) sensitivity 7 – 10 . In this mode — known as force spectroscopy — the cantilever deflection is recorded as the tip is pushed towards the sample and retracted from it . Using appropriate corrections , a force versus separation distance curve is obtained . Such a curve can be exploited to gain insights into a variety of surface properties and molecular interactions and to manipulate single molecules . Importantly , force – distance curves can be recorded at multiple locations of the ( x , y ) plane to yield spatially resolved maps of properties and interactions . NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | JUNE 2004 | 453 R E V I E W S such as , in this example , the extracellular surface of the OmpF porin 24 . After a critical transmembrane potential is applied , the large extracellular loops that normally protrude into the aqueous solution reversibly collapse onto the channel entrance . Interestingly , the same effect is obtained by decreasing the pH . The significance of this finding is that channel closure might be a mecha - nism that E . coli cells have evolved as a protective device against marked changes in the environment . This led to the proposal that E . coli might survive longer in the acidic environment of the stomach by closing its outer - membrane pores 24 . Conformational changes have been detected in other membrane proteins . In the HPI layer in D . radiodurans , individual pores were observed to switch from an open to a closed conformation , which indicates that the HPI layer could function as a molecular sieve , thereby supporting its putative protective function 20 . In BACTERIORHODOPSIN from H . salinarium purple mem - branes 25 , the force applied by the AFM instrument tip was used to induce conformational changes in the pro - tein subunits and to estimate the local flexibilities of the protein , indicating that , as well as probing confor - mations , AFM can also characterize dynamic aspects of protein structures . Tracking cell surfaces in their native environment AFM allows researchers to visualize the surface of microbial cells in aqueous environments , thereby providing information that is complementary to that obtained using other structure - determination tech - niques . An important requirement for successful and reliable cell imaging is that the samples be firmly attached to a support while avoiding denaturation ( BOX 2 ) . This can be achieved by immobilizing the cells mechanically within porous membranes . FIGURE 4a illustrates how this strategy can be used to generate three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) topographic images ( that is , images showing the surface features ) of native , living cells , in this case for the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Structure – function relationships are a key feature of the biological sciences . AFM offers new opportunities to probe function - related conformational changes in membrane proteins . FIGURE 3 illustrates how the tech - nique can be used to resolve conformational changes PIEZOELECTRIC CERAMICS Materials that expand or contract when subjected to a potential difference . MICROFABRICATION A range oftechniques that are derived from the techniques used in microelectronics to make integrated circuits and which are used to make AFM tips and cantilevers . DEFLECTION The vertical bending ofthe AFM cantilever resulting from the tip – sample interaction force . BACTERIORHODOPSIN A light - driven proton pump that is packed into a two - dimensional crystal lattice — known as the purple membrane — and integrated into the plasma membrane of Halobacterium salinarium . Table 1 | Applications of AFM in microbiology Property investigated * Selected references Structural properties Structure of native membrane proteins at sub - nanometre resolution 17 – 23 Function - related conformational changes in single proteins 20 , 24 , 25 Surface ultrastructure of living cells 26 – 28 , 32 , 36 , 61 , 62 Cell - surface dynamics 26 , 32 , 36 , 61 Morphology of biofilms 57 , 58 Physical properties and biomolecular interactions Stiffness of cell walls 33 , 37 – 40 Local surface charge and hydrophobicity 41 , 42 Elasticity and conformational properties of single molecules 36 , 44 – 48 Mechanical stability of supramolecular assemblies 49 , 51 Unfolding pathways of membrane proteins 50 Molecular forces determining cell adhesion and cell aggregation 52 , 53 , 69 – 71 * This article focuses on microbial surfaces . Studies on biological molecules such as DNA are beyond the scope of this paper ( for general reviews on biological AFM , see REFS 7 , 8 , 11 – 14 ) . a b Figure 2 | Observing native membrane proteins at sub - nanometre resolution . Comparison of high - resolution atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) images recorded in buffer solution of the outer - membrane porin OmpF from Escherichia coli ( brown - yellow ) and the atomic model derived from X - ray crystallographic data ( blue ) . a | The periplasmic surface . Short β - strands comprising only a few amino acids can sometimes be seen in the AFM image ( circled ) . The surface features correlate directly with the atomic model rendered at 3 Å . b | The extracellular surface . Comparison between the atomic model and the AFM image indicates that the loops protrude away from the membrane and are flexible , leading to a disordered appearance . The asterisks mark the two - fold axis of symmetry of rectangular unit cells , whereas the circles indicate two porin trimers with their triangular vestibules . The scale bars represent 50 Å . Reproduced with permission from REF . 24 © ( 1999 ) Elsevier . 454 | JUNE 2004 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / micro R E V I E W S consistent with earlier electron microscopy data and the presence of a glucan / mannoprotein outer layer . By contrast , it can be seen in FIG . 4b that the surface of spores of the fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium is covered by a crystalline layer of regularly arranged rodlets that has a periodicity of 10 nm and is up to several hundred nanometres in length 27 . These protein structures are remarkably stable during repeated scanning , even when strong forces are applied , confirming their protective function . In recent years , images from a variety of other microorganisms in aqueous solutions have been obtained , including the freshwater diatom Pinnularia viridis 28 , lactic acid bacteria 29 , spores of Bacillus species 30 , Staphylococcus aureus 31 , 32 , E . coli 31 , Enterococcus hirae 33 , Pseudomonas aeruginosa 33 , HIV 34 and vaccinia virus 35 . So far , high - resolution imaging of ‘soft’specimens such as Gram - negative bacteria , which lack the thick peptido - glycan layer that is found in Gram - positive bacteria , is often limited by the strong interaction between the instrument tip and the surface being analysed . A unique feature of AFM is the ability to visualize — in real - time — the surfaces of cells as they interact with external agents or change during cell growth and division . An example of such a dynamic study is the direct moni - toring of the enzymatic digestion of cell walls , as was recently shown with S . cerevisiae 26 . Successive images of the cell surface that were recorded after the addition of protease revealed the progressive formation of large depressions , about 500 nm in diameter and 50 nm in depth , which reflect the erosion of the mannoprotein outer layer . Touhami et al . recently combined AFM with thin - section transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) to investigate the changes in the cell wall of S . aureus cells as they grow and divide 32 . Nanoscale holes were seen around the SEPTAL ANNULUS at the onset of division and were attributed to the presence of cell wall structures with high autolytic activity . After cell separation , con - centric rings were observed on the surface of the new cell wall that were proposed to reflect newly formed peptidoglycan . Marked changes in the surface ultra - structure of germinating fungal spores have also been observed 36 : the crystalline rodlet layer changed into a gel layer of polysaccharide material that interacted strongly with the instrument tip . Using this approach , high - resolution ( for example , 250 nm × 250 nm ) images can be obtained from different locations on the cell surface , allowing subtle structural variations to be discerned . For S . cerevisiae , images of the surface were obtained to a lateral resolution of 2 nm , the highest resolution yet reported for a living microbial cell 26 . The images revealed a smooth surface , which is SEPTAL ANNULUS A structure formed during cell division that corresponds to the growth ofwall material into the cytoplasm . Open Closed a b c Figure 3 | Visualizing conformational changes in membrane proteins . Voltage - induced channel closure of the extracellular surface of the Escherichia coli porin OmpF . a | Trigonally packed porin trimers ( circled ) have 13 - Å - long protrusions surrounding a triangular vestibule . The scale bar represents 50 Å . b | After a membrane potential is applied , a marked conformational change occurs : the extracellular domains form ring - shaped structures about 6 Å in height ( circles ) . The scale bar represents 50 Å . c | Cross - sections of the monomer illustrating the open ( left panel ) and closed ( right panel ) conformations : the conformational change leading to channel closure can be modelled as a rotation of the extracellular domain about a hinge at the rim of the β - barrel . Reproduced with permission from REF . 24 © ( 1999 ) Elsevier . Box 2 | Advanced methodologies for sample preparation To observe biological structures in their native state by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , samples must be firmly attached to a solid support to resist the lateral forces exerted by the scanning tip . Several immobilization strategies have been established for microbial specimens . For isolated membrane proteins , the most frequently used procedure is based on physical adsorption on a flat support , such as mica , glass or silicon oxide , in the presence of the appropriate electrolytes 60 . For whole cells , however , immobilization by means of simple adsorption procedures is generally inappropriate because the contact area between the cells and the support is very small , often leading to the cell being detached by the scanning tip . To solve this problem , air - drying and chemical fixation can be used to promote cell attachment , but these treatments can cause significant denaturation of the specimen . Alternatively , more gentle immobilization procedures have been developed in which the cells are mechanically trapped either in an agar gel 61 or in a porous membrane 27 , 62 . In the latter method , a concentrated cell suspension is gently sucked through an isopore polycarbonate membrane with a pore size that is slightly smaller than that of the cell . This simple approach can be used to image single , spherical , bacterial , yeast and fungal cells under aqueous conditions , while minimizing denaturation of the surface molecules ( FIG . 4 ) . NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | JUNE 2004 | 455 R E V I E W S modified tips provide information with nanoscale lat - eral resolution , they are a valuable complement to the more traditional approaches 1 , 5 used to assess the prop - erties of cell surfaces . The future of this kind of experi - ment lies in the detailed understanding of interfacial interactions , such as cell – cell support and cell – cell , cell – drug and cell – ion interactions . Manipulating single molecules AFM allows researchers to manipulate and dissect indi - vidual molecules and molecular assemblies . In doing so , the mechanical and conformational properties of DNA , proteins and polysaccharides can be investigated at the single - molecule level ( for reviews , see REFS 13 , 15 , 43 , 44 ) . An example of a pioneering single - molecule experiment is shown in FIG . 5a ( REF . 45 ) . The AFM tip was used to ‘fish’ for and then stretch individual filaments from the microbial polysaccharide dextran . On pulling the tip away from the surface , the so - called force - extension curves show attractive elongation forces that reflect the stretching of the flexible filaments . Models from statisti - cal mechanics can be used to understand the elasticity of the stretched molecules . Interestingly , for dextran and other related polysaccharides the molecules undergo a reversible conformational change at high forces , which Mapping cell - surface properties Although AFM was initially developed as an imaging tool , it has rapidly evolved into a quantitative probe of biomolecular forces and physical properties . As is dis - cussed in the following sections , a mode known as force spectroscopy ( BOX 1 ) , which combines high force sensi - tivity with positional precision , has several novel appli - cations in microbiology — for example , the nanoscale probing of cell - surface properties , the controlled manipulation of individual biological molecules , the dissection of supramolecular assemblies and the detec - tion of molecular - recognition events . Such precise and sensitive analyses are important as there are significant variations in the individual properties and interactions of different cell surfaces . An interesting example of such measurements is the characterization of cell - wall elasticity . By pushing the AFM tip onto microbial cell walls , their elastic proper - ties ( expressed as elastic or YOUNG’S MODULUS ) can be measured quantitatively . These studies , which have been pioneered by the research groups of Jericho and Beveridge , are important for understanding the mecha - nisms underlying cell shape and cell growth . In this way , the elasticity of the sheath of the archaeon Methanospirillum hungatei was determined , indicating that this single - layered structure of unusual strength can withstand an internal pressure of 400 atm 37 . The elastic properties of the MUREIN SACCULI of Gram - negative bacteria were also assessed and the results obtained by AFM were found to be in agreement with theoretical calculations 38 . Nanoscale mechanical measurements can also be carried out on whole cells , allowing , for example , the elasticity and turgor pressure of bacteria in liquid medium to be assessed 33 , 39 . Importantly , spatially resolved force maps — maps that are obtained by recording force curves at many locations on the surface being analysed ( BOX 1 ) — allow us to discern local varia - tions of elasticity on single cells , as was recently demon - strated for the yeast S . cerevisiae 40 . Force maps that were recorded in parallel with topographic images of the surface of individual budding cells yielded Young’s modulus values of 6 . 1 MPa and 0 . 6 MPa for the BUD SCAR and surrounding cell surface , respectively . This provided the first demonstration that , in yeast , the bud scar is ten times stiffer than the surrounding cell wall , a finding that is consistent with the accumulation of chitin in this area . So , force spectroscopy is a comple - mentary approach to AFM imaging to investigate cell growth and cell division . Surface charge and surface hydrophobicity both have essential roles in governing cellular interactions . Modifying the surface of AFM tips with specific chemi - cal groups allows researchers to map local variations of such properties across single cells ( BOX 3 ) . For example , AFM tips modified with ionizable carboxyl groups have been used to probe the local ISOELECTRIC POINT of S . cerevisiae 41 . In other work , hydrophilic and hydro - phobic tips ( modified with hydroxyl and methyl groups , respectively ) were used to map the surface hydro - phobicity of P . chrysosporium spores 42 . As chemically YOUNG’S MODULUS Young’s modulus , or the tensile elastic modulus , is a parameter that reflects the resistance ofa material to elongation . The higher the Young’s modulus , the larger the force needed to deform the material . MUREIN SACCULI Murein sacculus is the term used to refer to the net - like peptidoglycan layer that is found in the cell wall ofbacteria . BUD SCAR The process by which S . cerevisiae proliferates is known as budding . A ring ofchitin is formed between the mother cell and the daughter cell ( or bud ) and once the bud has been pinched off , a mark is left on the surface ofthe mother cell that is known as the bud scar . Chitin is the main constituent ofthe bud scar . ISOELECTRIC POINT The isoelectric point ( or pI ) of a protein is the pH at which the protein has an equal number of positive and negative charges . a b Figure 4 | Tracking cell surfaces in their native state . a | Three - dimensional atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) height image of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cell immobilized in a porous membrane . This simple preparation method allows single bacterial , yeast and fungal cells to be viewed in solution , while minimizing denaturation of the specimen ( BOX 2 ) . The scale bar represents 1 µ m . b | High - resolution deflection image of the surface of Phanerochaete chrysosporium fungal spores obtained using the same preparation procedure ; as opposed to the very smooth yeast surface , the spore surface is covered with nanoscale rodlets . The scale bar represents 100 nm . 456 | JUNE 2004 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / micro R E V I E W S high - resolution imaging . In another remarkable study , individual bacteriorhodopsin molecules were extracted from the native purple membranes of H . salinarium 50 . This well - characterized membrane protein comprises seven transmembrane helices . Once the AFM tip was retracted , the helices unfolded and the force spectra revealed the pattern of the unfolding of the individual molecules . Here again , high - resolution images of the manipulated surface could be obtained , revealing mole - cular vacancies in the membrane . Similar nanodissec - tion has recently been performed on the S - layer of Corynebacterium glutamicum , providing new informa - tion on its stability 51 . Accordingly , the combination of AFM imaging and single - molecule force spectroscopy allows us to subject membrane proteins to controlled manipulation , thereby providing details of their unfolding pathways and of the forces that anchor them into the membrane . In the future , it is hoped that this technology will be applicable to living cells , enabling us to learn more about the organization and stability of their surface constituents . Detecting molecular - recognition events Molecular recognition is an important event in immunological reactions , microbial infection and symbiosis . It is also of great relevance for developing new bioanalytical ( detection ) and medical ( diagnostic ) techniques . Researchers can now measure the minute forces between complementary biological molecules using biologically modified AFM tips ( BOX 3 ) . FIGURE 6 illustrates how this form of nanobiotech - nology can be used in microbiology to gain an insight into the molecular bases of cell adhesion and cell aggre - gation . This example focuses on the lectin – carbohy - drate interactions that mediate yeast FLOCCULATION , an aggregation event that occurs in brewing and wine - making . The force curves that are recorded between might have an important role in accommodating mechanical stresses and modulating ligand binding in biological systems 46 . Single - molecule - stretching experiments can also be carried out on whole cells . In FIG . 5b , the force - extension curves that were recorded for germinating spores of Aspergillus oryzae show the presence of attractive elongation forces , which have been attributed to the stretching of long cell - surface polysaccharide chains 36 . This interpretation is supported by the underlying theory : that is , modelling the force - extension curves yields mechanical parameters that are similar to those reported for pure amylose and dextran molecules 45 , 46 . The sticky and flexible nature of the surface polysac - charides on A . oryzae spores could have a biological significance in that it might promote the spore aggre - gation that is observed when the spores germinate . In other studies , experiments on the biopolymer chains found on the cell surface of Pseudomonas putida showed that these chains were less extended in the presence of salt 47 and that heterogeneity in their prop - erties , both on an individual bacterium and within a population of bacterial cells , could be much greater than previously believed and should be incorporated into models of bacterial adhesion 48 . The functions of membrane proteins are deter - mined by the folding of the peptide chains and their interactions with the cell membrane . Single - molecule force spectroscopy and high - resolution imaging can be combined to gain an insight into the folding and assembly of membrane proteins . In the first such study , the force - extension curves that were recorded for the HPI layer of D . radiodurans showed multiple adhesion peaks that were attributed to the sequential ‘unzipping’ of the HPI - layer pores , which are formed by six pro - tomers 49 . After recording the force - extension curve , the resulting molecular defect could be localized using FLOCCULATION A process involving the aggregation ofmicrobial cells . In beer - brewing , yeast flocculation occurs spontaneously near the end offermentation , thereby providing an easy method to dispose ofthe cells . Box 3 | Making tips with chemical and biological specificity Most commercial atomic force microscope tips have a poorly defined surface chemistry , and might not be suited for quantitative force measurements . Therefore , methods have been introduced to attach well - defined chemical groups ( for example , hydroxyl , methyl , carboxyl or amino groups ) to their surface . The most common and versatile approach is based on the formation of self - assembled monolayers of alkanethiols on gold surfaces 63 . The procedure involves coating , by thermal evaporation , microfabricated cantilevers with a thin adhesive layer of chromium or titanium , followed by a thin layer of gold , immersing the coated cantilevers in dilute ethanol solutions of the selected alkanethiol , rinsing with ethanol and drying . Such chemically modified nanotips are very sensitive to specific chemical groups 63 and can be used to probe the nanoscale surface properties of cell surfaces 41 , 42 . Understanding biomolecular forces such as those involved in molecular recognition requires modification of the tip with biological molecules . Here , several important issues must be considered 64 . First , the binding of the biological molecules should be stronger than the intermolecular force being studied . Second , the attached biological molecules should have enough mobility so that they can freely interact with complementary molecules . Third , the contribution of nonspecific adhesion to the measured forces should be minimized . To fulfil these requirements , several flexible spacer molecules have been introduced , including polyethylene glycol 64 and carboxymethyl - amylose 65 . The biological molecules are covalently bound and able to move and orient freely , while nonspecific adsorption is inhibited . Using these ‘biotips’ , a variety of intermolecular forces have been measured , including the forces between biotin – avidin 66 , antibody – antigen 64 , complementary strands of DNA 67 and lectin – carbohydrate 65 , 68 . Importantly , several techniques have also been developed to attach cells directly onto AFM cantilevers , thereby allowing researchers to probe cell – solid support and cell – cell interactions 53 , 69 – 71 . Current strategies involve the use of specific receptor – ligand interactions 53 , electrostatic interactions 69 , glue 70 or chemical fixation 71 . An important issue when applying these approaches is to ensure that the surface of the attached cells is still representative of the native surface . NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | JUNE 2004 | 457 R E V I E W S recognition of host cell - surface receptors by microbial adhesins are well known , little is known about the mole - cular forces that control these interactions . In collabora - tion with Menozzi’s group 54 , we are currently addressing this challenge by combining AFM force spectroscopy with biochemical and genetic approaches . The project focuses on Mycobacterium tuberculosis , which is known to interact specifically with epithelial cells through a so - called heparin - binding haemagglutinin adhesin , and will hopefully shed new light on the molecular mechanisms of M . tuberculosis pathogenicity . Implications for basic and applied research Although microbiological AFM is still in its infancy , it is believed that both imaging and force spectroscopy analyses will have an important impact on many areas of microbiology ( BOX 4 ) . As the instrumentation and methodologies are further developed ( for example , faster imaging and weaker inter - action forces , see BOX 5 for more details ) , AFM imaging will be able to help address many previously inaccessible questions . For example , in S - layer research , and possibly also in cellular microbiology , AFM imaging will allow an increasing number of conformational changes and other carbohydrate - coated AFM tips and Saccharomyces carlsbergensis under flocculating conditions show typi - cal adhesion forces , which reflect the specific interac - tions between individual cell - surface lectins and the glucose residues on the tip . In the presence of mannose , however , the adhesion is strongly reduced , indicating that mannose has blocked the lectin receptor sites , thereby confirming the specificity of the measured adhesion force . Specific adhesion forces were correlated with the ability of the cells to flocculate , indicating their involvement in the flocculation process 52 . Another striking example of cellular aggregation is found in the eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum . In this organism , an adhesion glycoprotein is expressed in aggregating cells that are engaged in the development of a multicellular organism . By attaching individual cells to an AFM tip ( BOX 3 ) , Benoit and co - workers were able to measure an adhesion force of 23 pN between two adjacent cells 53 . Using genetic manipulation , this force could be ascribed to a discrete interaction between two adhesion glycoproteins . Molecular recognition is a crucial step in the infection of mammalian cells by pathogenic bacteria and viruses . Although the mechanisms that are involved in the 600 500 500 400 400 300 300 200 200 100 0 Extension ( nm ) F o r ce ( p N ) 400 16 , 000 300 12 , 000 200 8 , 000 4 , 000 100 0 0 Extension ( Å ) F o r ce ( p N ) a b Figure 5 | Manipulation of single molecules . a | Stretching of dextran molecules . As shown in the schematic ( left panel ) , dextran filaments linked to a gold support are picked up by an atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) tip through a biotin – streptavidin bond . The measured force - extension curves ( right panel ) show elongation events reflecting the deformation of individual filaments . The data ( shown as dots ) can be modelled by entropy springs with segment elasticity ( solid line ) . Reproduced with permission from REF . 45 © ( 1997 ) American Association for the Advancement of Science . b | Stretching of polysaccharides on cell surfaces . A typical force - extension curve recorded between a silicon nitride tip and the surface of Aspergillus oryzae . The elongation force ( shown as dots ) can be described using the same model as in part a ( shown as a solid line ) , supporting the notion that individual polysaccharide filaments are stretched . Modified with permission from REF . 36 © ( 2001 ) American Chemical Society . 458 | JUNE 2004 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / micro R E V I E W S bacteria that have been subject to antibiotic therapy have already been observed using AFM in air 55 , indicating that monitoring drug - induced surface alterations in hydrated cells might soon become possible . In pathogenesis research , nanoscale imaging provides the opportunity for visualizing animal and plant cell cul - tures that are infected with viruses or bacteria . In this context , high - resolution images of fibroblasts infected with mouse leukaemia virus were recently obtained after cell fixation 56 , which indicates that AFM has the potential to become an important tool to investigate cell – virus interactions . Environmental and industrial microbiology are two other fields that should benefit from AFM imaging . Here , the technology will be useful to investigate the formation of biofilms on solid surfaces 57 . Such studies could have an impact on geomicrobiology by providing an insight into the microbial – mineral interface 58 , as well as in industrial situations , where the association of microorganisms with solid surfaces in the form of cont - amination or corrosion can cause large economic losses . What about force spectroscopy analyses ? As standard protocols for attaching biological molecules and cells to AFM cantilevers become available , biologically modi - fied tips will increasingly be used to investigate cellular interactions and to detect bioanalytes . Such ‘biotips’ have particular promise for clinical microbiology and pathogenesis as they could be used to investigate the interactions between microbial pathogens and host cells and to localize cell - surface receptors , which might help to develop new therapeutic approaches . Promising applications are also expected in environmental micro - biology , where biotips will contribute to the elucidation of , and perhaps also modulate , microbial – plant interac - tions and microbial – mineral interactions at the molecu - lar level . In diagnosis , highly parallel cantilever arrays 59 combined with automatic analyses will provide a basis for a new generation of biochips and binding assays for dynamic events to be understood . In antimicrobial ther - apy , it is anticipated that real - time imaging of cells in liquid environments will make it possible to visualize small surface alterations that are induced by antibiotics and other drugs , thereby shedding new light on their mechanisms of action . In fact , morphological changes in Box 4 | Ten questions that AFM could help to answer in the next decade Molecular and cellular microbiology • How does the conformation of cell - surface molecules change in response to environmental alterations ? • What are the forces driving the folding and assembly of membrane proteins ? • What are the nanomechanical properties of cell - wall constituents and how do they change during growth ? Clinical microbiology and pathogenesis • How does the surface architecture of microorganisms change as they interact with antibiotics ? • What are the molecular forces driving host – pathogen interactions and how can they be modulated for therapy ? • How does a virus or a bacterium penetrate a plant or animal host cell ? Diagnostics • What are the concentrations of toxins or pathogens in a medical sample ? Environmental microbiology • What are the molecular forces involved in microbial – plant and microbial – mineral interactions ? • How do biofilms form on solid surfaces and what do they look like in the hydrated state ? Industrial microbiology • What are the concentrations of microbial metabolites , such as enzymes , in a liquid culture and how do they vary during fermentation ? a b c F o r ce 0 50 Distance ( nm ) 100 150 200 250 100 pN Figure 6 | Detection of molecular - recognition events at cell surfaces . a | Flocculation of Saccharomyces carlsbergensis cells is mediated by the interaction between complementary cell - surface lectins and carbohydrates . b | To probe this interaction at the level of single molecules , force – distance curves are recorded between the cell surface and an atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) tip functionalized with carbohydrates . c | Set of typical force – distance curves showing single or multiple adhesion peaks of 121 ± 53 pN magnitude attributed to the rupture of single lectin – carbohydrate complexes . Modified with permission from REF . 52 © ( 2003 ) The Society for General Microbiology . NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | JUNE 2004 | 459 R E V I E W S resolution and follow structural changes as the cells grow or interact with their environment . Importantly , atomic force microscopes have matured from surface - imaging tools to quantitative probes of biomolecular interactions . With force spectroscopy , microbiologists can apply force to cell - wall constituents to understand their elasticity , map the surface charge and hydropho - bicity across single cells , manipulate single molecules to gain insights into the molecular bases of protein folding and protein – protein assemblies , and detect molecular - recognition sites . In conclusion , I am confi - dent that as AFM further develops and becomes a more routine technique , it will engage the interest of micro - biologists from all disciplines , whether fundamental , environmental , clinical or industrial . the rapid , highly sensitive detection of microbial antigens and toxins , and for the screening of cell - surface markers . AFM - based biochips could also have valuable applica - tions in industrial microbiology for identifying micro - bial metabolites ( for example , enzymes and antibiotics ) during fermentation . Conclusion AFM has become a powerful addition to the range of techniques that are available to investigate the struc - ture , properties and functions of microbial surfaces . When used as a microscope , AFM can visualize mem - brane proteins at sub - nanometre resolution , monitor conformational changes in single molecules , observe the surface of untreated living cells with unprecedented Box 5 | Technological challenges that remain to be addressed Although significant progress has been made in applying atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) to biological problems , there are still many limitations and technological issues that must be solved before the full potential of this technique can be exploited . As already discussed ( BOX 2 ) , a key prerequisite for successful AFM imaging is sample preparation . Although excellent immobilization strategies are available for membrane protein layers , improved procedures are still needed for many cell types , such as rod - shaped bacteria . An important problem in cell imaging is the alteration of the specimen that can be caused by the scanning tip . In fact , images of‘soft’samples , such as bacteria coated with gel layers and appendages , are generally of poor resolution due to strong interaction with the tip . The recent development of an active resonance control in tapping mode AFM ( TMAFM ) is an important step towards solving this problem 72 . With this new technology , tip – specimen interactions are much weaker , resulting in images at higher resolution or images that would otherwise be unattainable 16 . Time resolution is a crucial factor that currently limits dynamic imaging studies . For two - dimensional protein crystals , acquiring a high - resolution image takes about 30 seconds , whereas for whole cells this can take several minutes owing to the highly corrugated character of the surface . This is much greater than the timescale at which dynamic processes usually occur in biology . Interestingly , remarkable advances have been made in developing scanning - probe instruments with increased imaging rates , giving access to unprecedented timescales ( to millisecond resolution ) 73 – 75 . These very fast techniques will provide fascinating new prospects in microbiology to explore molecular and cellular dynamics . Another exciting challenge will be the imaging of intracellular structures in three dimensions . This might become possible using a new class of instruments , referred to as photonic force microscopes , in which the AFM cantilever is replaced by the three - dimensional trapping potential of a laser focus 16 . In force spectroscopy , current procedures for attaching chemical groups , biological molecules and cells to AFM cantilevers are labour - intensive and require specific expertise that is not usually found in microbiology laboratories . In the future , defining simple standard protocols or developing kits for modifying tips and making them readily available to the microbiological community will contribute to increase the use of force spectroscopy in the field . The use of nanotube tips terminated with single active biological molecules 76 should make it possible to map cell - surface receptors with a resolution that would be difficult to achieve with conventional tips . In applied research , automating force spectroscopy analyses will provide a basis for the development of ultrasensitive biosensors for diagnosis and screening purposes . 1 . Beveridge , T . J . & Graham , L . L . Surface layers of bacteria . Microbiol . Rev . 55 , 684 – 705 ( 1991 ) . 2 . Sleytr , U . B . & Beveridge , T . J . Bacterial S - layers . Trends Microbiol . 7 , 253 – 260 ( 1999 ) . 3 . Beveridge , T . J . Structures of Gram - negative cell walls and their derived membrane vesicles . J . Bacteriol . 181 , 4725 – 4733 ( 1999 ) . 4 . Matias , V . R . F . , Al - Amoudi , A . , Dubochet , J . & Beveridge , T . J . Cryo - transmission electron microscopy of frozen - hydrated sections of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa . J . Bacteriol . 185 , 6112 – 6118 ( 2003 ) . 5 . Mozes , N . , Handley , P . S . , Busscher , H . J . & Rouxhet , P . G . Microbial Cell Surface Analysis : Structural and Physicochemical Methods . ( VCH Publishers , New York , 1991 ) . 6 . Binnig , G . , Quate , C . F . & Gerber , C . Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 , 930 – 933 ( 1986 ) . 7 . Morris , V . J . , Kirby , A . R . & Gunning , A . P . Atomic Force Microscopy for Biologists ( Imperial College Press , London , 1999 ) . 8 . Jena , B . P . & Hörber , J . K . H . in Methods in Cell Biology Vol . 68 , 33 – 50 ( Academic Press , San Diego , 2002 ) . 9 . Butt , H . – J . , Jaschke , M . & Ducker , W . Measuring surface forces in aqueous electrolyte solution with the atomic force microscope . Bioelectrochem . Bioenerg . 38 , 191 – 201 ( 1995 ) . 10 . Heinz , W . F . & Hoh , J . H . Spatially resolved force spectroscopy of biological surfaces using the atomic force microscope . Trends Biotechnol . 17 , 143 – 150 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Shao , Z . , Mou , J . , Czajkowsky , D . M . , Yang , J . & Yuan , J . – Y . Biological atomic force microscopy : what is achieved and what is needed . Adv . Phys . 45 , 1 – 86 ( 1996 ) . 12 . Hansma , H . G . & Pietrasanta , L . Atomic force microscopy and other scanning probe microscopies . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 2 , 579 – 584 ( 1998 ) . 13 . Clausen - Schaumann , H . , Seitz , M . , Krautbauer , R . & Gaub , H . E . Force spectroscopy with single bio - molecules . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 4 , 524 – 530 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Engel , A . & Müller , D . J . Observing single biomolecules at work with the atomic force microscope . Nature Struct . Biol . 7 , 715 – 718 ( 2000 ) . 15 . Fisher , T . E . , Marszalek , P . E . & Fernandez , J . M . Stretching single molecules into novel conformations using the atomic force microscope . Nature Struct . Biol . 7 , 719 – 724 ( 2000 ) . 16 . Hörber , J . K . H . & Miles , M . J . Scanning probe evolution in biology . Science 302 , 1002 – 1005 ( 2003 ) . 17 . Karrasch , S . , Hegerl , R . , Hoh , J . , Baumeister , W . & Engel , A . Atomic force microscopy produces faithful high - resolution images of protein surfaces in an aqueous environment . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 836 – 838 ( 1994 ) . Early work showing that high - resolution AFM images of native proteins correlate remarkably well with 3 - D models determined by established structural methods . 18 . Pum , D . & Sleytr , U . B . Monomolecular reassembly of a crystalline bacterial cell surface layer ( S - layer ) on untreated and modified silicon surfaces . Supramol . Sci . 2 , 193 – 197 ( 1995 ) . 19 . Gyorvary , E . S . , Stein , O . , Pum , D . & Sleytr , U . B . Self - assembly and recrystallization of bacterial S - layer proteins at silicon supports imaged in real time by atomic force microscopy . J . Microsc . 212 , 300 – 306 ( 2003 ) . 20 . Müller , D . J . , Baumeister , W . & Engel , A . Conformational change of the hexagonally packed intermediate layer of Deinococcus radiodurans monitored by atomic force microscopy . J . Bacteriol . 178 , 3025 – 3030 ( 1996 ) . 460 | JUNE 2004 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / micro R E V I E W S 21 . Müller , D . J . , Schabert , F . A . , Büldt , G . & Engel , A . Imaging purple membranes in aqueous solutions at subnanometer resolution by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 68 , 1681 – 1686 ( 1995 ) . 22 . Schabert , F . A . , Henn , C . & Engel , A . Native Escherichia coli OmpF porin surfaces probed by atomic force microscopy . Science 268 , 92 – 94 ( 1995 ) . 23 . Scheuring , S . et al . High resolution topographs of the Escherichia coli water channel aquaporin Z . EMBO J . 18 , 4981 – 4987 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Müller , D . J . & Engel , A . Voltage and pH - induced channel closure of porin OmpF visualized by atomic force microscopy . J . Mol . Biol . 285 , 1347 – 1351 ( 1999 ) . Demonstrates how AFM can be applied to observe conformational changes in single membrane proteins . 25 . Müller , D . J . , Fotiadis , D . & Engel , A . Mapping flexible protein domains at subnanometer resolution with the AFM . FEBS Lett . 430 , 105 – 111 ( 1998 ) . 26 . Ahimou , F . , Touhami , A . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Real - time imaging of the surface topography of living yeast cells by atomic force microscopy . Yeast 20 , 25 – 30 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Dufrêne , Y . F . , Boonaert , C . J . P . , Gerin , P . A . , Asther , M . & Rouxhet , P . G . Direct probing of the surface ultrastructure and molecular interactions of dormant and germinating spores of Phanerochaete chrysosporium . J . Bacteriol . 181 , 5350 – 5354 ( 1999 ) . The surface of hydrated P . chrysosporium spores was viewed by AFM to a resolution of a few nanometres . 28 . Crawford , S . A . , Higgins , M . J . , Mulvaney , P . & Wetherbee , R . Nanostructure of the diatom frustule as revealed by atomic force and scanning electron microscopy . J . Phycol . 37 , 543 – 554 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Schaer – Zammaretti , P . & Ubbink , J . Imaging of lactic acid bacteria with AFM — elasticity and adhesion maps and their relationship to biological and structural data . Ultramicroscopy 97 , 199 – 208 ( 2003 ) . 30 . Chada , V . G . R . , Sanstad , E . A . , Wang , R . & Driks , A . Morphogenesis of Bacillus spore surfaces . J . Bacteriol . 185 , 6255 – 6261 ( 2003 ) . 31 . Doktycz , M . J . et al . AFM imaging of bacteria in liquid media immobilized on gelatin coated mica surfaces . Ultramicroscopy 97 , 209 – 216 ( 2003 ) . 32 . Touhami , A . , Jericho , M . & Beveridge , T . J . Atomic force microscopy of cell growth and division in Staphylococcus aureus . J . Bacteriol . ( in the press ) . A combination of AFM imaging of samples in aqueous solution and thin - section transmission electron microscopy was used to investigate the changes in the bacterial cell wall as the cells grow and divide . 33 . Yao , X . et al . Atomic force microscopy and theoretical considerations of surface properties and turgor pressures of bacteria . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 23 , 213 – 230 ( 2002 ) . 34 . Kuznetsov , Y . G . , Victoria , J . G . , Robinson , W . E . & McPherson , A . Atomic force microscopy investigation of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) and HIV - infected lymphocytes . J . Virol . 77 , 11896 – 11909 ( 2003 ) . 35 . Malkin , A . J . , McPherson , A . & Gershon , P . D . Structure of intracellular mature vaccinia virus visualized by in situ atomic force microscopy . J . Virol . 77 , 6332 – 6340 ( 2003 ) . 36 . van der Aa , B . C . et al . Stretching cell surface macromolecules by atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 17 , 3116 – 3119 ( 2001 ) . Shows how force spectroscopy can be applied to living cells to gain insights into the mechanical properties of surface polysaccharides . 37 . Xu , W . et al . Modeling and measuring the elastic properties of an archaeal surface , the sheath of Methanospirillum hungatei , and the implication for methane production . J . Bacteriol . 178 , 3106 – 3112 ( 1996 ) . A pioneering work that uses AFM to quantitatively measure the elastic properties of a bacterial sheath in relation to its function . 38 . Yao , X . , Jericho , M . , Pink , D . & Beveridge , T . Thickness and elasticity of Gram - negative murein sacculi measured by atomic force microscopy . J . Bacteriol . 181 , 6865 – 6875 ( 1999 ) . 39 . Arnoldi , M . et al . Bacterial turgor pressure can be measured by atomic force microscopy , Phys . Rev . E Stat . Phys . Plasmas Fluids Relat . Interdiscip . Topics 62 , 1034 – 1044 ( 2000 ) . 40 . Touhami , A . , Nysten , B . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Nanoscale mapping of the elasticity of microbial cells by atomic force microscopy , Langmuir 19 , 4539 – 4543 ( 2003 ) . 41 . Ahimou , F . , Denis , F . A . , Touhami , A . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Probing microbial cell surface charges by atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 18 , 9937 – 9941 ( 2002 ) . 42 . Dufrêne , Y . F . Direct characterization of the physicochemical properties of fungal spores using functionalized AFM probes . Biophys . J . 78 , 3286 – 3291 ( 2000 ) . 43 . Fotiadis , D . , Scheuring , S . , Müller , S . A . , Engel , A . & Müller , D . J . Imaging and manipulation of biological structures with the AFM . Micron 33 , 385 – 397 ( 2002 ) . 44 . Abu - Lail , N . I . & Camesano , T . A . Polysaccharide properties probed with atomic force microscopy . J . Microsc . 212 , 217 – 238 ( 2003 ) . 45 . Rief , M . , Oesterhelt , F . , Heymann , B . & Gaub , H . E . Single molecule force spectroscopy on polysaccharides by atomic force microscopy . Science 275 , 1295 – 1297 ( 1997 ) . Pioneering study demonstrating how the AFM tip can be used in the force spectroscopy mode to pull on single macromolecules , providing new insights into their mechanical and conformational properties . 46 . Marszalek , P . E . , Oberhauser , A . F . , Pang , Y . P . & Fernandez , J . M . Polysaccharide elasticity governed by chair – boat transitions of the glucopyranose ring . Nature 396 , 661 – 664 ( 1998 ) . 47 . Abu - Lail , N . I . & Camesano , T . A . Elasticity of Pseudomonas putida KT2442 surface polymers probed with single - molecule force microscopy . Langmuir 18 , 4071 – 4081 ( 2002 ) . Bacterial cell - surface macromolecules were stretched to learn about their elastic behaviour . 48 . Camesano , T . A . & Abu - Lail , N . I . Heterogeneity in bacterial surface polysaccharides , probed on a single - molecule basis . Biomacromolecules 3 , 661 – 667 ( 2002 ) . 49 . Müller , D . J . , Baumeister , W . & Engel , A . Controlled unzipping of a bacterial surface layer with atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 13170 – 13174 ( 1999 ) . 50 . Oesterhelt , F . et al . Unfolding pathways of individual bacteriorhodopsins . Science 288 , 143 – 146 ( 2000 ) . References 49 and 50 are outstanding papers showing how the combination of AFM imaging and single - molecule force spectroscopy allows researchers to subject membrane proteins to controlled manipulation , thereby providing details of their unfolding pathways and of the forces that anchor them to the membrane . 51 . Scheuring , S . et al . Charting and unzipping the surface layer of Corynebacterium glutamicum with the atomic force microscope . Mol . Microbiol . 44 , 675 – 684 ( 2002 ) . 52 . Touhami , A . , Hoffmann , B . , Vasella , A . , Denis , F . A . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Aggregation of yeast cells : direct measurement of discrete lectin – carbohydrate interactions . Microbiology 149 , 2873 – 2878 ( 2003 ) . Biologically modified tips are used to measure the receptor – ligand interaction forces that mediate the aggregation of yeast cells . 53 . Benoit , M . , Gabriel , D . , Gerisch , G . & Gaub , H . E . Discrete interactions in cell adhesion measured by single - molecule force spectroscopy . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 313 – 317 ( 2000 ) . Presents a powerful method for probing cell – cell interactions at the single - molecule level . Uses genetic controls to demonstrate single unbinding events of adhesion proteins . 54 . Pethe , K . et al . Characterization of the heparin - binding site of the mycobacterial heparin - binding hemagglutinin adhesin . J . Biol . Chem . USA 275 , 14273 – 14280 ( 2000 ) . 55 . Braga , P . C . & Ricci , D . Atomic force microscopy : application to investigation of Escherichia coli morphology before and after exposure to cefodizime . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 42 , 18 – 22 ( 1998 ) . 56 . Kuznetsov , Y . G . et al . Atomic force microscopy investigation of fibroblasts infected with wild - type and mutant murine leukemia virus ( MuLV ) . Biophys . J . 83 , 3665 – 3674 ( 2002 ) . 57 . Beech , I . B . , Smith , J . R . , Steele , A . A . , Penegar , I . & Campbell , S . A . The use of atomic force microscopy for studying interactions of bacterial biofilms with surfaces . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 23 , 231 – 247 ( 2002 ) . 58 . Forsythe , J . H . , Maurice , P . A . & Hersman , L . E . Attachment of a Pseudomonas sp . to Fe ( III ) - ( hydr ) oxide surfaces . Geomicrobiology 15 , 293 – 308 ( 1998 ) . 59 . Fritz , J . et al . Translating biomolecular recognition into nanomechanics . Science 288 , 316 – 318 ( 2000 ) . 60 . Müller , D . J . , Amrein , M . & Engel , A . Adsorption of biological molecules to a solid support for scanning probe microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 119 , 172 – 188 ( 1997 ) . 61 . Gad , M . & Ikai , A . Method for immobilizing microbial cells on gel surface for dynamic AFM studies . Biophys . J . 69 , 2226 – 2233 ( 1995 ) . 62 . Kasas , S . & Ikai , A . A method for anchoring round shaped cells for atomic force microscope imaging . Biophys . J . 68 , 1678 – 1680 ( 1995 ) . 63 . Frisbie , C . D . , Rozsnyai , L . F . , Noy , A . , Wrighton , M . S . & Lieber , C . M . Functional group imaging by chemical force microscopy . Science 265 , 2071 – 2074 ( 1994 ) . 64 . Hinterdorfer , P . , Baumgartner , W . , Gruber , H . J . , Schilcher , K . & Schindler , H . Detection and localization of individual antibody – antigen recognition events by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 3477 – 3481 ( 1996 ) . 65 . Grandbois , M . , Dettmann , W . , Benoit , M . & Gaub , H . E . Affinity imaging of red blood cells using an atomic force microscope . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 48 , 719 – 724 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Florin , E . – L . , Moy , V . T . & Gaub , H . E . Adhesion forces between individual ligand – receptor pairs . Science 264 , 415 – 417 ( 1994 ) . 67 . Lee , G . U . , Chrisey , L . A . & Colton , R . J . Direct measurement of the forces between complementary strands of DNA . Science 266 , 771 – 773 ( 1994 ) . 68 . Touhami , A . , Hoffmann , B . , Vasella , A . , Denis , F . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Probing specific lectin – carbohydrate interactions using atomic force microscopy imaging and force measurements . Langmuir 19 , 1745 – 1751 ( 2003 ) . 69 . Lower , S . K . , Hochella , M . F . & Beveridge , T . J . Bacterial recognition of mineral surfaces : nanoscale interactions between Shewanella and α - FeOOH . Science 292 , 1360 – 1363 ( 2001 ) . 70 . Bowen , W . R . , Lovitt , R . W . & Wright , C . J . Atomic force microscopy study of the adhesion of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Coll . Interf . Sci . 237 , 54 – 61 ( 2001 ) . 71 . Razatos , A . , Ong , Y . – L . , Sharma , M . M . & Georgiou , G . Molecular determinants of bacterial adhesion monitored by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 11059 – 11064 ( 1998 ) . 72 . Tamayo , J . , Humphris , A . D . L . , Owen , R . J . & Miles , M . J . High - Q dynamic force microscopy in liquid and its application to living cells . Biophys . J . 81 , 526 – 537 ( 2001 ) . 73 . Viani , M . B . et al . Probing protein – protein interactions in real time . Nature Struct . Biol . 7 , 644 – 647 ( 2000 ) . 74 . Ando , T . , Kodera , N . , Takai , E . , Maruyama , D . , Saito , K . & Toda , A . A high - speed atomic force microscope for studying biological macromolecules . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 12468 – 12472 ( 2001 ) . 75 . Humphris , A . D . L . , Hobbs , J . K . & Miles , M . J . Ultrahigh - speed scanning near - field optical microscopy capable of over 100 frames per second . Appl . Phys . Lett . 83 , 6 – 8 ( 2003 ) . 76 . Wong , S . S . , Joselevich , E . , Woolley , A . T . , Cheung , C . L . & Lieber , C . M . Covalently functionalized nanotubes as nanometre - sized probes in chemistry and biology . Nature 394 , 52 – 55 ( 1998 ) . Acknowledgements The author is a research associate of the Belgian National Foundation for Scientific Research ( FNRS ) . The support of the FNRS , the Université catholique de Louvain ( Special Fund for Research ) , the Federal Office for Scientific , Technical and Cultural Affairs ( Inter - university Poles of Attraction Programme ) and the Research Department of Communauté Française de Belgique ( Concerted Research Action ) is gratefully acknowledged . He thanks nanobiotechnology researchers both in his laboratory and worldwide for sharing exciting experiments and discussions . Competing interests statement The author declares that he has no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Entrez : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / Entrez / Corynebacterium glutamicum | Deinococcus radiodurans | Dictyostelium discoideum | Escherichia coli | Halobacterium salinarium | Mycobacterium tuberculosis | Phanerochaete chrysosporium | Pseudomonas aeruginosa | Pseudomonas putida | Saccharomyces cerevisiae | Staphylococcus aureus SwissProt : http : / / www . ca . expasy . org / sprot / OmpF FURTHER INFORMATION Encyclopedia of Life Sciences : http : / / www . els . net Atomic force microscopy Scanning probe microscopy : http : / / www . mobot . org / jwcross / spm / Yves Dufrêne’s laboratory : http : / / www . cifa . ucl . ac . be Access to this links box is available online .