Alix is required during development for normal growth of the mouse brain . Marine H . Laporte 1 , 2 , Christine Chatellard 1 , 2 , Victoria Vauchez 1 , 2 , Fiona J . Hemming 1 , 2 , Jean-­‐Christophe Deloulme 1 , 2 , Frédérique Vossier 1 , 2 , Béatrice Blot 1 , 2 , Sandrine Fraboulet 1 , 2 * and Rémy Sadoul 1 , 2 , * 1 ) Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale ( INSERM ) , U1216 , F-­‐38042 Grenoble , France 2 ) Université Grenoble Alpes , Institut des Neurosciences , F-­‐38042 Grenoble , France * Corresponding authors email : remy . sadoul @ univ-­‐grenoble-­‐alpes . fr ; sandrine . fraboulet @ univ-­‐grenoble-­‐alpes . fr Supplementary Figure 1 . Physical features of Alix ko mice . ( a ) Mendelian inheritance in Alix heterozygous ( Hz ) progeny is abnormal : fewer Alix ko pups than expected were born from crossing Hz mice . However , the expected number of Alix ko E12 . 5 embryos was found ( n = 20 animals ) . ( b ) Weight gain from E12 to adult and ( c ) size of adults are equivalent in wt and Alix ko ( n = 6 animal for each age ) . ( d , e ) Alix ko testes are dramatically reduced ( d ) with normal organization of seminiferous tubules ( e ) . Supplementary Figure 2 . Western blot demonstrating the reduction of Tuj1 protein only in E13 . 5 Alix ko cortices compared to wt cortices ( n = 2 animals * p < 0 . 05 ) . Supplementary Figure 3 . Alix is homogeneously expressed in the cortex . Alix protein , revealed by immunofluorescence ( a ) and mRNA , detected by in situ hybridization ( b ) , are homogeneously distributed in the cortical wall of wt E12 . 5 embryos . Dashed lines delimit the basal surface of the cortex . Supplementary Figure 4 . Clusters of dying cells are engulfed by Iba1 + microglia at E12 . 5 . ( a ) Coronal section labelled with anti-­‐β-­‐catenin , anti-­‐Tuj1 antibodies and DAPI showing an aggregate of pyknotic nuclei ( red arrowheads ) . Dashed lines delimit the basal surface of the cortex . ( b ) Anti-­‐Iba1 staining shows microglial cells engulfing pyknotic nuclei throughout the Alix ko telencephalon whereas none is seen in wt cortices . Dashed lines delimit the basal surface of the cortex . ( c ) Clump of apoptotic cells surrounded by an engulfing , putative microglial cell observed by EM in sections of Alix ko cortices . Supplementary Figure 5 . Conditional ablation of Alix in Nestin ; Alixfl / fl mice abolishes caspase-­‐3 activation in embryos and mainly affects the thickness . ( a ) Western blot demonstrating the lack of Alix expression in olfactory bulb ( OB ) , cortex ( Cx ) , midbrain ( Mb ) , pons ( Ps ) and cerebellum ( Cb ) of adult Nestin ; Alixfl / fl mice . ( b ) C3a + cells are undetectable in sections of E12 . 5 of Nestin ; Alix fl / fl cortex immunostained with anti-­‐Tuj1 ( red ) and anti-­‐C3a ( green ) . For comparison the left photograph ( wide field ) shows an equivalent section of an Alix ko embryo . ( c ) Alix protein , revealed by immunofluorescence is homogeneously distributed in the cortical wall of wt and Nestin ; Alix fl / fl embryos . Dashed lines delimit the basal surface of the cortex . ( d ) Relative medio-­‐lateral length ( left ) and cortical thickness ( right ) of adult cortex . The difference in cortical thickness between Nestin ; Alixfl / fl and Alixfl / fl is identical to that seen between Alix ko and wt , whereas the difference in medio-­‐lateral size is far less pronounced ( n = 4 animals ) . Supplementary Figure 6 . The cell number and soma volume of cortical neurons is not different between wt and Alix ko animals . ( a ) Golgi stained neurons in layers V-­‐VI of the adult cortex . The size of neuronal cell bodies does not vary between Alix ko and wt mice ( n = 3 animals ) . ( b ) The number of NeuN + neurons , counted along a radial line in the adult cortical wall , is not affected by the lack of Alix ( n = 4 animals ) . ( c ) The ratio of the number of NeuN + neurons to the total number of cells stained with haematoxylin-­‐eosin , does not differ between Alix ko and wt cortices . ( n = 4 animals ) . Supplementary Figure 7 . Full length western blot showing Alix expression in organs of wt , Alix ko , Alix fl / fl and Nestin ; Alix fl / fl animals , shown as cropped images in Figure 1 . ( a , a’ ) Actin expression in different organs of wt , Alix ko animals from low ( a ) and high ( a’ ) film exposures ( arrows represent specific band for Actin ) . ( b , b’ ) Actin expression in different organs of Alix fl / fl and Nestin ; Alix fl / fl animals from low ( b ) and high ( b’ ) film exposures ( arrows represent specific band for Actin ) . ( c , c’ ) Alix expression in different organs of wt , Alix ko animals from low ( c ) and high ( c’ ) film exposure showing the absence of Alix expression in Alix ko organs . ( d , d’ ) Alix expression in different organs of Alix fl / fl and Nestin ; Alix fl / fl animals from low ( d ) and high ( d’ ) film exposures showing the strong reduction of Alix expression in Nestin ; Alix fl / fl brain . 1 : brain ; 2 : heart ; 3 : liver ; 4 : muscle ; 5 : lung ; 6 : spleen ; 7 : testis ; 8 : kidney ( note the short form of Alix presents in the kidney ) . Supplementary Figure 8 . Full-­‐length western blot showing Alix expression in brain regions of wt and Alix ko , shown as cropped images in Figure 2 . Alix ( upper panel ) and Actin ( lower panel ) expression in different brain regions of wt ( left ) and Alix ko ( right ) showing the strong reduction of Alix expression in all brain regions of Alix ko examined . 1 : olfactory bulb ; 2 : cortex ; 3 : midbrain ; 4 : pons ; 5 : cerebellum . Supplementary Figure 9 . Full-­‐length western blot of extracts from dorsal telencephalons shows C3a detection in E11 . 5 and E12 . 5 Alix ko cortices , shown as cropped images in Figure 6 . ( a , a’ ) Alix and C3a expression in extracts from dorsal telencephalon of wt and Alix ko embryos from low ( a ) and high ( a’ ) film exposure . ( b ) Actin expression in extracts from dorsal telencephalon of wt and Alix ko embryos . 1 : wt E10 . 5 ; 2 : wt E11 . 5 ; 3 : wt E12 . 5 ; 4 : wt E13 . 5 ; 5 : wt E15 . 5 ; 6 : Alix ko E10 . 5 ; 7 : Alix ko E11 . 5 ; 8 : Alix ko E12 . 5 ; 9 : Alix ko E13 . 5 ; 10 : Alix ko E15 . 5 .