ADAM B . JAFFE PROFESSIONAL POSITIONS Brandeis University , Faculty of Arts and Sciences and Graduate School of International Economics and Finance 1994 - Associate Professor ( 1994 - 99 ) and then Professor of Economics . Teaching industrial organization , environmental economics and regulatory economics . Current research examines the use of patent citation data to trace knowledge flows ; evaluation of public science and technology programs ; and the role of energy prices and public policy in energy - related technological change . 2000 - Economics Department Chair 2001 Chair , University Intellectual Property Policy Committee 2001 Member , University Advisory Council National Bureau of Economic Research 1999 - Co - organizer , Innovation Policy and the Economy Group . IPE brings together academics and public policy professionals to discuss research results that bear on major issues of public policy relating to innovation and its effects on the economy . Activities include research meetings and an annual volume of papers published by MIT Press . 1994 - 99 Project Coordinator , NBER Research Project on Industrial Technology and Productivity . This project encourages economists who study productivity issues to include direct observation of plants and interviews with business people as part of their research methodology . Harvard University , Faculty of Arts and Sciences 1989 - 94 Associate Professor of Economics . Taught graduate and undergraduate courses in Applied Microeconomics , Industrial Organization , Economics of Innovation , and Government Regulation and Antitrust Policy . ( On leave , academic year 1990 - 91 ; visiting the Kennedy School of Government , 1992 - 94 ) 1985 - 89 Assistant Professor of Economics . President ' s Council of Economic Advisers 1990 - 91 Senior Staff Economist . Adam B . Jaffe Page 2 EDUCATION 1980 - 85 Ph . D . in Economics , Harvard University . Thesis : " Quantifying the Effects of Technological Opportunity and Research Spillovers in Industrial Innovation . " 1976 - 78 S . M . in Technology and Policy , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Thesis : " Regulating Chemicals : Product and Process Technology as a Determinant of the Compliance Response . " 1973 - 76 S . B . in Chemistry , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . TEACHING EXPERIENCE Introductory Economics ( undergraduate ) Microeconomic Theory ( Ph . D . ) Law and Economics ( undergraduate ) Environmental and Natural Resource Economics ( undergraduate ) Government Regulation and Antitrust Policy ( undergraduate and Ph . D . ) R & D , Innovation and Productivity Growth ( undergraduate ) Industrial Organization ( Ph . D . and undergraduate ) Applied Welfare Economics ( John F . Kennedy School of Government ) Foundation for American Communications , economics education for journalists , “The Role of Government in the Economy” ( 1996 ) WORKING PAPERS “Patent Citations and International Knowledge Flow : The Cases of Korea and Taiwan” ( with A . Hu ) , NBER Working Paper No . W8528 , October 2001 “The NBER Patent Citation Data File : Lessons , Insights and Methodological Tools” ( with B . Hall and M . Trajtenberg ) , NBER Working Paper No . W8498 October 2001 “Market Value and Patent Citations : A First Look” ( with B . Hall and M . Trajtenberg ) , NBER Working Paper No . 7741 , June 2000 , revised June 2001 “The Meaning of Patent Citations : Report on the NBER / Case - Western Reserve Survey of Patentees” ( with M . Trajtenberg and M . Fogarty ) , NBER Working Paper No . 7631 , April 2000 Adam B . Jaffe Page 3 BOOKS AND EDITED VOLUMES Patents , Citations and Innovations : A Window on the Knowledge Economy ( with M . Trajtenberg ) , M . I . T . Press , forthcoming 2002 Innovation Policy and the Economy , ( edited with J . Lerner and S . Stern ) , M . I . T . Press , Cambridge , Volume 1 ( 2001 ) and Volume 2 ( 2001 ) MAJOR ARTICLES “Building Programme Evaluation into the Design of Public Research - Support Programmes , ” Oxford Review of Economic Policy ( forthcoming ) “Environmental Policy and Technological Change” ( with R . Newell and R . Stavins ) , Environmental and Resource Economics ( forthcoming ) “Technological Change and the Environment” ( with R . Newell and R . Stavins ) , in Karl - Göran Mäler and Jeffrey Vincent , eds , Handbook of Environmental Economics , North - Holland , forthcoming “Reinventing Public R & D : Patent Policy and the Commercialization of National Laboratory Technologies” ( with Josh Lerner ) , Rand Journal of Economics , Spring 2001 “Knowledge Spillovers and Patent Citations : Evidence from a Survey of Inventors” ( with Manuel Trajtenberg and Michael Fogarty ) , American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings , 2000 “The U . S . Patent System in Transition : Policy Innovation and the Innovation Process , ” Research Policy , 2000 “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and Energy - Saving Technological Change” ( with R . Newell and R . Stavins ) , Quarterly Journal of Economics , 1999 “International Knowledge Flows : Evidence from Patent Citations” ( with M . Trajtenberg ) , Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 1999 " Evidence from Patents and Patent Citations on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial Innovation” ( with B . Banks and M . Fogarty ) , Journal of Industrial Economics , June 1998 “Universities as a Source of Commercial Technology : A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting , 1965 - 1988” ( with R . Henderson and M . Trajtenberg ) , Review of Economics and Statistics , February 1998 ; also published in a slightly different form as “University Patenting Amid Changing Incentives for Commercialization” in G . B . Navaretti , P . Dasgtupta , K . - G . M (cid:142) ler and D . Siniscalco , eds . , Creation and Transfer of Knowledge , Springer , 1998 Adam B . Jaffe Page 4 “Environmental Regulation and Innovation : A Panel Data Study” ( with K . Palmer ) , Review of Economics and Statistics , November 1997 “University Versus Corporate Patents : A Window on the Basicness of Invention” ( with M . Trajtenberg and R . Henderson ) , Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 1997 “Bounding the Effects of R & D : An Investigation Using Linked Establishment and Firm Data” ( with J . Adams ) , Rand Journal of Economics , Winter 1996 “Flows of Knowledge from Universities and Federal Labs : Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations over Time and Across Institutional and Geographic Boundaries” ( with M . Trajtenberg ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 93 : 12671 - 12677 , November 1996 " The Emerging Coexistence of Competition and Regulation in Natural Gas Transportation " ( with S . Makowka ) , Hume Papers on Public Policy , 1995 " Dynamic Incentives of Environmental Regulations : The Effects of Alternative Policy Instruments on Technology Diffusion " ( with R . Stavins ) , Journal of Environmental Economics and Management , 1995 " Environmental Regulation and the Competitiveness of U . S . Manufacturing : What Does the Evidence Tell Us ? " ( with S . Peterson , P . Portney and R . Stavins ) , The Journal of Economic Literature , 1995 ; reprinted in Trade and the Environment : Economic , Legal and Policy Perspectives , Alan M . Rugman and John J . Kirton , eds . , Edward Elgar Publishing Limited , 1998 The Energy - Efficiency Gap " ( with R . Stavins ) , Energy Policy , 1994 " The Energy Paradox and the Diffusion of Conservation Technology " ( with R . Stavins ) , Resource and Energy Economics , 1994 " Energy - Efficiency Investments and Public Policy " ( with R . Stavins ) , The Energy Journal , 1994 " Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations " ( with M . Trajtenberg and R . Henderson ) , Quarterly Journal of Economics , 1993 " How High are the Giants ' Shoulders : An Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth " ( with R . Caballero ) , in O . Blanchard and S . Fischer , eds . , National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual , Vol . 8 , MIT Adam B . Jaffe Page 5 Press , 1993 ; reprinted in Gene M . Grossman , ed . , Economic Growth : Theory and Evidence , Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar Publishing Limited , 1996 " The Effect of Liquidity on Firms ' R & D Spending " ( with K . Hao ) , Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 1993 " Market Power of Local Cable Television Franchises : Evidence from the Effects of Deregulation " ( with D . Kanter ) , Rand Journal of Economics , 1990 " Unintended Impacts of Public Investments on Private Decisions : The Depletion of Forested Wetlands " ( with R . Stavins ) , American Economic Review , 1990 " Real Effects of Academic Research , " American Economic Review , 1989 ; reprinted in The Economics of Science and Innovation , Paula E . Stephan and David B . Audretsch , eds . , Edward Elgar Publishing Limited , forthcoming " Characterizing the ‘Technological Position’ of Firms , with Application to Quantifying Technological Opportunity and Research Spillovers , " Research Policy , 1989 " Demand and Supply Influences in R & D Intensity and Productivity Growth , " Review of Economics and Statistics , August 1988 " Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R & D : Evidence from Firms ' Patents , Profits and Market Value , " American Economic Review , 1986 ; reprinted in Edward N . Wolff , ed . , The Economics of Productivity , Edward Elgar Publishing Limited , 1997 ; also reprinted in R . Towse and R . W . Holzhauer , eds . , The Economics of Intellectual Property , Edward Elgar Publishing Limited , forthcoming OTHER PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS “International Taxation and the Location of Inventive Activity” ( with J . R . Hines , Jr . ) , in James R . Hines Jr . ed . , International Taxation and Multinational Activity , Chicago : University of Chicago Press ( 2001 ) “The Cigarette Industry , ” in Walter Adams and James Brock , ed . , The Structure of American Industry , Tenth Edition , Prentice Hall , 2000 “Energy - Efficient Technologies and Climate Change Policies : Issues and Evidence” ( with R . Newell and R . Stavins ) , Resources for the Future Climate Issue Brief No . 19 , December 1999 Adam B . Jaffe Page 6 “The Regional Economic Impact of Public Research Funding : A Case Study of Massachusetts” ( with Amy B . Candell ) , in L . M . Branscomb , F . Kodama , and R . Florida , eds . , Industrializing Knowledge : University - Industry Linkages in Japan and the United States , MIT Press , 1999 “Special Issue on Geography and Innovation : Editors’ Introduction” ( with R . Henderson ) , Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 1999 Comment on “Inventors , Firms and the Market for Technology : U . S . Manufacturing in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries , ” in Daniel Raff , Naomi Lamoreaux and Peter Temin , eds . , Learning By Doing in Firms , Markets , and Nations , University of Chicago Press , 1999 Comment on “What Do Technology Shocks Do ? ” in Bernanke , Ben S . and Julio Rotemberg , eds . , NBER Macroeconomics Annual , 1998 “The Importance of ‘Spillovers’ in the Policy Mission of the Advanced Technology Program , ” Journal of Technology Transfer , Summer 1998 “Inside the Pin - Factory : Empirical Studies Augmented by Manager Interviews : Introduction” ( with S . Borenstein and J . Farrell ) , Journal of Industrial Economics , June 1998 “Measurement Issues , ” in Investing in Innovation , L . M . Branscomb & J . Keller , Editors , MIT Press , 1998 Review of Green , Inc . by Frances Cairncross , Journal of Economic Literature , March 1997 “Economic Analysis of Research Spillovers : Implications for the Advanced Technology Program , ” Economic Assessment Office , The Advanced Technology Program , National Institutes of Standards and Technology , U . S . Department of Commerce , November 1996 “Trends and Patterns in U . S . Research and Development Expenditures , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 93 : 12658 - 12663 , November 1996 “Regional Localization of Technological Accumulation : Application to the Tri - State Region , ” The Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 1996 Comment on “Cross - Country Variations in National Economic Growth Rates” by J . Bradford Delong , in Technology and Growth , Jeffrey C . Fuhrer and Jane Sneddon Little , eds . , Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No . 40 , June 1996 Adam B . Jaffe Page 7 “Regulatory Reform and the Economics of Contract Confidentiality : The Example of Natural Gas Pipelines” ( with J . P . Kalt , S . T . Jones , and F . A . Felder ) , Regulation , 1996 “Should Electricity Markets Have a Capacity Requirement : If So , How Should It Be Priced ? ” ( with F . Felder ) , Proceedings of the Electric Power Research Institute Conference on Competitive Electricity Pricing , March 1996 . Planning for Change , Preparing for Growth : Implications for Massachusetts of Reductions in Federal Research Spending , prepared for the Massachusetts Technology Collaborative , March 1996 " On the Microeconomics of R & D Spillovers " ( with J . Adams ) , in Louis A . Lefebvre and Élisabeth Lefebvre , eds . , Management of Technology and Regional Development in a Global Environment , Paul Chapman Publishing , Ltd . , 1995 " Incentive Regulation for Natural Gas Pipelines " ( with J . Kalt ) , in Ellig , J . and J . P . Kalt , eds . , New Horizons in Natural Gas Deregulation , 1995 Comment on " Taxes , Technology Transfer , and the R & D Activities of Multinational Firms " by James R . Hines , Jr . , in Martin Feldstein , James R . Hines , Jr . and R . Glenn Hubbard , eds . , The Effects of Taxation on Multinational Corporations , University of Chicago Press , 1995 The Investment Consequences of the Re - Regulation of Cable Television ( with W . Emmons and J . Taylor ) , The Economics Resource Group , Cambridge , MA , 1994 " Insight on Oversight " ( with J . Kalt ) , Public Utilities Fortnightly , April 15 , 1994 " Prices , Regulation and Energy Conservation : An Econometric Analysis " ( with R . Stavins ) , delivered at the Conference on Market Approaches to Environmental Regulation , Stanford University , December 1993 Comment on " R & D and Market Value in the 1980s " by Bronwyn Hall , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , Microeconomics , 1993 Environmental Regulations and the Competitiveness of U . S . Industry ( with S . Peterson , P . Portney and R . Stavins ) , U . S . Department of Commerce , Economics and Statistics Administration , Washington DC , NTIS No . PB - 93 - 193514 , July 1993 Adam B . Jaffe Page 8 " Achieving Maximum Benefit from Competitive Natural Gas and Emission Allowance Markets " ( with J . Kalt ) , Proceedings of the U . S . Department of Energy / National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners Conference on Natural Gas Use , State Regulation and Market Dynamics in the Post 636 / Energy Policy Act Era , March 1993 . " The Diffusion of Energy - Conserving Windows : The Effect of Economic Incentives and Building Codes " ( with R . Stavins ) , presented at the American Economic Association annual meeting , Anaheim CA , January 1993 Review of Investing in the Future , by John Irvine , et al . , Journal of Economic Literature , June , 1992 Review of Productivity and U . S . Economic Growth by D . Jorgenson , et al . , Business History Review , 1991 " Evaluating the Relative Effectiveness of Economic Incentives and Direct Regulation for Environmental Protection : Impacts on the Diffusion of Technology " ( with R . Stavins ) , CSIA Discussion Paper No . 91 - 1 , Center for Science and International Affairs , Environment and Natural Resources Program , John F . Kennedy School of Government , Harvard University , February 1991 " Economic Evaluation of Policy Options for Global Climate Change : Some Methodological Reflections , " Center for Energy and Environmental Policy , John F . Kennedy School of Government , Harvard University , August 1990 " Universities and Regional Patterns of Commercial Innovation , " REI Review , Center For Regional Economic Issues , Case - Western Reserve University , 1989 " Who Does R & D and Who Patents " ( with J . Bound , et al . ) , in Z . Griliches , ed . , R & D , Patents and Productivity , University of Chicago Press , 1984 " Benefit - Cost Analysis and Multi - Objective Evaluation of Federal Water Projects , " Harvard Environmental Law Review , 1980 " Preventing Groundwater Pollution : Towards a Coordinated Strategy to Protect Critical Recharge Zones ( with J . T . B . Tripp ) , Harvard Environmental Law Review , 1979 Adam B . Jaffe Page 9 RECENT INVITED PRESENTATIONS “Public Research Funding and Economic Growth , ” American Chemical Society Science and the Congress series , December 2001 “Research on Research : What We Know and Don ' t Know about the Payoffs to Research , ” Federal Reserve Bank of New York , July 2001 “What Do We Know About the Effects of Intellectual Property Regimes , ” Distinguished Speakers in Economics Series , Industry Canada , Ottawa , April 2000 “Technology Potentials and Climate Change Policy , ” Roundtable on Global Climate Change Policy , Allied Social Sciences Annual Meeting , January 2000 National Science and Technology Council , “White House Summit on Innovation : Federal Policy for the New Millennium , ” November 1999 " Measuring Knowledge in the Health Sector , " Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development / National Science Foundation , “High - Level Forum on Measuring Knowledge in Learning Economies and Societies , ” Washington DC , May 1999 " Environmental Regulation and Competitiveness : An Interpretive Update , " Environmental Law Institute - Carnegie Mellon University Symposium on Environmental Regulation and Innovation , April 1999 “R & D and Innovation in a Restructured Electricity Industry , ” American Association for the Advancement of Science , Annual Meeting , February , 1998 “Assessing the Economic Return to Basic Research , ” National Academy of Sciences , National Research Council , Committee on Condensed Matter and Material Physics , September 1997 Resources for the Future Workshop : The Economics of Carbon Policy and the Importance of Endogenous Technical Change , March 1997 National Research Council , Board on Science , Technology and Economic Policy , Workshop on Research and Innovation Indicators for Public Policy , February 1997 Adam B . Jaffe Page 10 OTHER PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES Member , Board of Editors , Journal of Industrial Economics , 1995 - present Associate Editor , Rand Journal of Economics , 1997 - present Guest Associate Editor , Management Science Special Issue : “Managing Knowledge in Organizations , ” 2001 Member , Board of Editors , American Economic Review , 1995 - 2000 Lead Author , Third Assessment Report , Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , 1998 - 2001 Member , National Academy of Engineering Committee on the Impact of Academic Research on Industrial Performance , 1998 - 2001 Co - organizer of the NBER Science and Technology Policy Research Workshop , 1995 - 1998 Member , Economic Impact Committee , Association of University Technology Managers , 1994 - 95 Contributing Author , Working Group III ( socioeconomics ) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) , 1994 Member , Stanford Energy Modeling Forum , Working Group on Energy Conservation ( EMF 13 ) , 1992 - 94 Referee / Reviewer for American Economic Review , Journal of Applied Econometrics , Econometrica , Economic Inquiry , Economic Journal , Economics of Innovation and New Technology , Journal of Economics Organization and Management , Journal of Environmental Economics and Management , Journal of Health Economics , Journal of Industrial Economics , Journal of Law and Economics , Journal of Political Economy , Quarterly Journal of Economics , Rand Journal of Economics , Research Policy , Review of Economics and Statistics , Science , and MIT Press . Adam B . Jaffe Page 11 RESEARCH GRANTS AWARDED “A Protocol for Empirical Measurement of the Impact of Public Research Funding , ” National Science Foundation , 2000 - 2001 “The Effects of Government Policies on the Invention , Innovation , and Diffusion of Energy - Efficient Technologies , ” U . S . Department of Energy , 1998 - 2001 " Energy - Efficiency Innovation and the Economic and Regulatory Environment : Analyzing Endogenous and Autonomous Technological Change for Integrated Assessment Models , " U . S . Department of Energy , 1995 - 1998 " Using Patent Citation Data to Trace Knowledge Flows , " National Science Foundation , 1994 - 98 " The Sources and Effects of Knowledge Spillovers , " National Science Foundation , 1994 - 97 " Getting Down to Basics : Using University and Corporate Patents to Identify Basic Inventions and Trace Their Diffusion , " National Science Foundation , 1991 - 92 " Evaluating the Relative Effectiveness of Economic Incentives and Direct Regulation for Environmental Protection : Impacts on the Diffusion of Technology , " U . S . Environmental Protection Agency , 1991 - 93 HONORS AND AWARDS Research Associate ( 1994 - present ) and Faculty Research Fellow ( 1985 - 1994 ) , National Bureau of Economic Research Alfred P . Sloan Dissertation Fellowship , Harvard , 1984 - 85 Alfred P . Sloan Research Fellowship , MIT , 1976 - 77 ; Phi Beta Kappa , MIT , 1976 Other Information Department of Economics , MS 021 ( 781 ) 736 - 2251 ( v ) Brandeis University ( 781 ) 736 - 2269 ( f ) Waltham MA 02454 - 9110 ajaffe @ brandeis . edu www . brandeis . edu / ~ ajaffe