Group Decis Negot ( 2008 ) 17 : 387 – 402 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10726 - 008 - 9113 - 2 Groups Formation and Operations in the Web 2 . 0 Environment and Social Networks Linda S . L . Lai · Efraim Turban Published online : 10 June 2008 © Springer Science + Business Media B . V . 2008 Abstract The Internet and the Web are evolving to a platform for collaboration , sharing , innovation and user - created content—the so - called Web 2 . 0 environment . This environment includes social and business networks , and it is inﬂuencing what people do on the Web and intranets , individually and in groups . This paper describes the Web 2 . 0 environment , its tools , applications , characteristics . It also describes var - ious types of online groups , especially social networks , and how they operate in the Web 2 . 0 environment . Of special interest is the way organization members commu - nicate and collaborate mainly via wikis and blogs . In addition , the paper includes a proposed triad relational model ( Technology – People – Community ) of social / work life on the Internet . Particularly , social / work groups are becoming sustainable because of the incentives for participants to connect and network with other users . A discussion of group dynamics that is based on the human needs for trust , support , and sharing , regardless if the setting is a physical or virtual one , follows . Finally , future research directions are outlined . Keywords Blogs · Collaboration · Communication · Enterprise 2 . 0 · Group dynamics · Virtual community · Social networks · Social network services · Web 2 . 0 · Wikis L . S . L . Lai ( B ) School of Business , Macau Polytechnic University , Rua de Luís Gonzaga Gomes , Macau SAR , China e - mail : sllai @ ipm . edu . mo E . Turban Paciﬁc Institute for Information Systems Management , College of Business , University of Hawaii , Honolulu , HI , USA e - mail : efraimtur @ yahoo . com 123 388 L . S . L . Lai , E . Turban 1 Part I : Introduction Web2 . 0isthepopulartermforadvancedInternettechnologyandapplicationsincluding blogs , wikis , RSS , podcasting , mashups , and social networks . One of the most significant differences between Web 2 . 0 and the traditional Web is that content is user - generated , and there is greater collaboration among Internet users . As an umbrella term for an emerging core of technologies , trends , and principles , Web 2 . 0 is not only chang - ing what’s on the Web , but also how the Web works . Many believe that organizations that understand these new applications and technologies—and utilize their beneﬁts early stand to greatly improve internal business processes and their supply chains . Among the biggest advantages is better collaboration with customers , suppliers , and other partners , as well as among internal users . This paper describes the Web 2 . 0 environment , its characteristics , tools and appli - cations . It also describes various types of social and other groups and how they operate in the Web 2 . 0 environment . Special attention is given to the use of wikis and blogs by organizations to enhance group communication and collaboration . The paper also proposes a model that describes social / work groups and their operation . The paper ends with a discussion of group dynamics in online groups and suggested research directions . The remainder of this paper is divided into the following parts : Part II—The characteristics , tools and applications of the Web 2 . 0 environment . Part III—Social Networks groups and operations Part IV—Enterprise 2 . 0 applications : Collaboration and sharing Part V—Discussion Part VI—A proposed model of social life on the Internet Part VII—Research opportunities 2 Part II : Representative Characteristics of Web 2 . 0 The following are representative characteristics of Web 2 . 0 : (cid:127) User - created content ( self publishing ) (cid:127) The ability to tap into the collective intelligence of users . The more users contribute the more popular and valuable a Web 2 . 0 site becomes . (cid:127) Unique communication and collaborative environment . (cid:127) Making data available in new or never - intended ways . Web 2 . 0 data can be remixed or “mashed up , ” often through Web - Service interfaces , much the way dance - club DJ mixes music (cid:127) The presence of lightweight programming techniques and tools let nearly anyone act as a developer ( e . g . , wikis , blogs , RSS , and podcasting ) . (cid:127) The virtual elimination of software - upgrade cycles makes everything a perpetual beta or work in progress , and allows rapid prototyping using the Web as a platform . (cid:127) Unique sharing of content or all media . (cid:127) Networks as platforms , delivering and allowing users to use applications entirely through a browser . 123