Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media Andreas M . Kaplan * , Michael Haenlein ESCP Europe , 79 Avenue de la Re ´ publique , F - 75011 Paris , France 1 . The specter of Social Media As of January 2009 , the online social networking application Facebook registered more than 175 million active users . To put that number in perspec - tive , this is only slightly less than the population of Brazil ( 190 million ) and over twice the population of Germany ( 80 million ) ! At the same time , every minute , 10 hours of content were uploaded to the video sharing platform YouTube . And , the image hosting site Flickr provided access to over 3 billion photographs , making the world - famous Louvre Museum’s collection of 300 , 000 objects seem tiny in comparison . According to Forrester Research , 75 % of Internet surfers used ‘‘Social Media’’ in the second quarter of 2008 by joining social networks , reading blogs , or contributing reviews to shopping sites ; this repre - sents a signiﬁcant rise from 56 % in 2007 . The growth is not limited to teenagers , either ; members of Generation X , now 35—44 years old , increasingly populate the ranks of joiners , spectators , and crit - ics . It is therefore reasonable to say that Social Media represent a revolutionary new trend that should be of interest to companies operating in online space – —or any space , for that matter . Yet , not overly many ﬁrms seem to act comfort - ably in a world where consumers can speak so freely Business Horizons ( 2010 ) 53 , 59—68 www . elsevier . com / locate / bushor KEYWORDS Social Media ; User Generated Content ; Web 2 . 0 ; Social networking sites ; Virtual worlds Abstract The concept of Social Media is top of the agenda for many business executives today . Decision makers , as well as consultants , try to identify ways in which ﬁrms can make proﬁtable use of applications such as Wikipedia , YouTube , Facebook , Second Life , and Twitter . Yet despite this interest , there seems to be very limited understanding of what the term ‘‘Social Media’’ exactly means ; this article intends to provide some clariﬁcation . We begin by describing the concept of Social Media , and discuss how it differs from related concepts such as Web 2 . 0 and User Generated Content . Based on this deﬁnition , we then provide a classiﬁcation of Social Media which groups applications currently subsumed under the generalized term into more speciﬁc categories by characteristic : collaborative projects , blogs , content communities , social networking sites , virtual game worlds , and virtual social worlds . Finally , we present 10 pieces of advice for companies which decide to utilize Social Media . # 2009 Kelley School of Business , Indiana University . All rights reserved . * Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : mail @ andreaskaplan . eu ( A . M . Kaplan ) , haenlein @ escpeurope . eu ( M . Haenlein ) . 0007 - 6813 / $ — see front matter # 2009 Kelley School of Business , Indiana University . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bushor . 2009 . 09 . 003 Copyright 2009 by Kelley School of Business , Indiana University . For reprints , call HBS Publishing at ( 800 ) 545 - 7685 . BH 369 with each other and businesses have increasingly less control over the information available about them in cyberspace . Today , if an Internet user types the name of any leading brand into the Google search , what comes up among the top ﬁve results typically includes not only the corporate webpage , but also the corresponding entry in the online encyclopedia Wikipedia . Here , for example , cus - tomers can read that the 2007 model of Hasbro’s Easy - Bake Oven may lead to serious burns on chil - dren’s hands and ﬁngers due to a poorly - designed oven door , and that the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company has been accused of using child labor in its Liberian rubber factory . Historically , companies were able to control the information available about them through strategically placed press announce - ments and good public relations managers . Today , however , ﬁrms have been increasingly relegated to the sidelines as mere observers , having neither the knowledge nor the chance – —or , sometimes , even the right – —to alter publicly posted comments provided by their customers . Wikipedia , for example , ex - pressly forbids the participation of ﬁrms in its online community . Such an evolution may not be surprising . After all , the Internet started out as nothing more than a giant Bulletin Board System ( BBS ) that allowed users to exchange software , data , messages , and news with each other . The late 1990s saw a popularity surge in homepages , whereby the Average Joe could share information about his private life ; today’s equivalent would be the weblog , or blog . The era of corporate web pages and e - commerce started relatively re - cently with the launch of Amazon and eBay in 1995 , and got a right ticking - off only 6 years later when the dot - com bubble burst in 2001 . The current trendtowardSocialMediacanthereforebeseenasanevolutionbacktotheInternet’sroots , since it re - transforms the World Wide Web to what it was initially created for : a platform to facilitate informa - tion exchange between users . But does that mean that Social Media is just old wine in new bottles ? Probably not ! As we will delve into further , the technical advances that have been made over the past 20 years now enable a form of virtual content sharing that is fundamentally different from , and more powerful than , the BBS of the late 1970s . This article discusses the challenges and opportu - nities that emerge from this evolution for ﬁrms , and provides structure to better understand the rapidly evolvingﬁeld of SocialMedia . We begin by providinga deﬁnition andclassiﬁcation ofSocialMediaby looking at their historical roots , technical speciﬁcities , and differences from other entities such as Web 2 . 0 and User Generated Content . We then focus on six types of Social Media – —collaborative projects , blogs , content communities , socialnetworking sites , virtual game worlds , and virtual social worlds – —and present ways in which companies can efﬁciently make use of these applications . Based on this analysis , we then derive a set of 10 recommendations companies should follow when thinking about developing their own Social Media strategy , be it with respect to these aforementioned types or other applications which might emerge in the future . 2 . What is Social Media – —And what is it not ? As highlighted , the idea behind Social Media is far from groundbreaking . Nevertheless , there seems to be confusion among managers and academic re - searchers alike as to what exactly should be includ - ed under this term , and how Social Media differ from the seemingly - interchangeable related concepts of Web 2 . 0 and User Generated Content . It therefore makes sense to take a step back and provide insight regarding where Social Media come from and what they include . By 1979 , Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis from Duke University had created the Usenet , a worldwide discussion system that allowed Internet users to post public messages . Yet , the era of Social Media as we understand it today probably started about 20 years earlier , when Bruce and Susan Abelson founded ‘‘Open Diary , ’’ an early social networking site that brought together online diary writers into one community . The term ‘‘weblog’’ was ﬁrst used at the same time , and truncated as ‘‘blog’’ a year later when one blogger jokingly transformed the noun ‘‘weblog’’ into the sentence ‘‘we blog . ’’ The growing availability of high - speed Internet access further added to the popularity of the concept , leading to the creation of social networking sites such as MySpace ( in 2003 ) and Facebook ( in 2004 ) . This , in turn , coined the term ‘‘Social Media , ’’ and contributed to the prominence it has today . The most recent addition to this glamorous grouping has been so - called ‘‘virtual worlds’’ : computer - based simulated environments inhabited by three - dimensional avatars . Perhaps the best known virtual world is that of Linden Lab’s Second Life ( Kaplan & Haenlein , 2009c ) . Although the list of the aforementioned applica - tions may give some idea about what is meant by Social Media , a formal deﬁnition of the term ﬁrst requires drawing a line to two related concepts that are frequently named in conjunction with it : Web 2 . 0 and User Generated Content . Web 2 . 0 is a term that was ﬁrst used in 2004 to describe a new way in which software developers and end - users started to 60 A . M . Kaplan , M . Haenlein utilize the World Wide Web ; that is , as a platform whereby content and applications are no longer created and published by individuals , but instead are continuously modiﬁed by all users in a partici - patory and collaborative fashion . While applications such as personal web pages , Encyclopedia Britannica Online , and the idea of content publishing belong to the era of Web 1 . 0 , they are replaced by blogs , wikis , and collaborative projects in Web 2 . 0 . Although Web 2 . 0 does not refer to any speciﬁc technical update of the World Wide Web , there is a set of basic function - alities that are necessary for its functioning . Among them are Adobe Flash ( a popular method for adding animation , interactivity , and audio / video streams to web pages ) , RSS ( Really Simple Syndication , a family of web feed formats used to publish frequently updated content , such as blog entries or news head - lines , in a standardized format ) , and AJAX ( Asynchro - nous Java Script , a technique to retrieve data from web servers asynchronously , allowing the update of web content without interfering with the display and behavior of the whole page ) . For the purpose of our article , we consider Web 2 . 0 as the platform for the evolution of Social Media . When Web 2 . 0 represents the ideological and technological foundation , User Generated Content ( UGC ) can be seen as the sum of all ways in which people make use of Social Media . The term , which achieved broad popularity in 2005 , is usually applied to describe the various forms of media content that are publicly available and created by end - users . According to the Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development ( OECD , 2007 ) , UGC needs to fulﬁll three basic requirements in order to be considered as such : ﬁrst , it needs to be published either on a publicly accessible website or on a social networking site accessible to a select - ed group of people ; second , it needs to show a certain amount of creative effort ; and ﬁnally , it needs to have been created outside of professional routines and practices . The ﬁrst condition excludes content exchanged in e - mails or instant messages ; the second , mere replications of already existing content ( e . g . , posting a copy of an existing newspa - per article on a personal blog without any modiﬁ - cations or commenting ) ; and the third , all content that has been created with a commercial market context in mind . While UGC has already been available prior to Web 2 . 0 , as discussed above , the combination of technological drivers ( e . g . , increased broadband availability and hardware capacity ) , economic drivers ( e . g . , increased avail - ability of tools for the creation of UGC ) , and social drivers ( e . g . , rise of a generation of ‘‘digital natives’’ and ‘‘screenagers’’ : younger age groups with substantial technical knowledge and willingness to engage online ) make UGC nowadays fundamentally different from what was observed in the early 1980s . Based on these clariﬁcations of Web 2 . 0 and UGC , it is now straightforward to give a more detailed deﬁnition of what we mean by Social Me - dia . In our view – —and as used herein – —Social Media is a group of Internet - based applications that build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2 . 0 , and that allow the creation and exchange of User Generated Content . Within this general deﬁnition , there are various types of Social Media that need to be distinguished further . However , although most people would prob - ably agree that Wikipedia , YouTube , Facebook , and Second Life are all part of this large group , there is no systematic way in which different Social Media ap - plications can be categorized . Also , new sites appear in cyberspace every day , so it is important that any classiﬁcation scheme takes into account applications which may be forthcoming . To create such a classiﬁ - cation scheme , and to do so in a systematic manner , we rely on a set of theories in the ﬁeld of media research ( social presence , media richness ) and social processes ( self - presentation , self - disclosure ) , the two key elements of Social Media . Regarding the media - related component of Social Media , social presence theory ( Short , Williams , & Christie , 1976 ) states that media differ in the degree of ‘‘social presence’’ – —deﬁnedastheacoustic , visual , andphys - ical contact that can be achieved – —they allow to emerge between two communication partners . Social presence is inﬂuenced by the intimacy ( inter - personalvs . mediated ) andimmediacy ( asynchronous vs . synchronous ) of the medium , andcan be expected to be lower for mediated ( e . g . , telephone conversa - tion ) than interpersonal ( e . g . , face - to - face discus - sion ) and for asynchronous ( e . g . , e - mail ) than synchronous ( e . g . , live chat ) communications . The higher the social presence , the larger the social inﬂuence that the communication partners have on each other’s behavior . Closely related to the idea of social presence is the concept of media richness . Media richness theory ( Daft & Lengel , 1986 ) is based on the assumption that the goal of any communica - tion is the resolution of ambiguity and the reduction of uncertainty . It states that media differ in the degree of richness they possess – —that is , the amount of information they allow to be transmitted in a given time interval – —and that therefore some media are more effective than othersin resolving ambiguity and uncertainty . Applied to the context of Social Media , we assume that a ﬁrst classiﬁcation can be made based on the richness of the medium and the degree of social presence it allows . With respect to the social dimension of Social Media , the concept of self - presentation states that Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media 61 in any type of social interaction people have the desire to control the impressions other people form of them ( Goffman , 1959 ) . On the one hand , this is done with the objective of inﬂuencing others to gain rewards ( e . g . , make a positive impression on your future in - laws ) ; on the other hand , it is driven by a wish to create an image that is consistent with one’s personal identity ( e . g . , wearing a fashionable outﬁt in order to be perceived as young and trendy ) . The key reason why people decide to create a personal webpage is , for example , the wish to present them - selves in cyberspace ( Schau & Gilly , 2003 ) . Usually , such a presentation is done through self - disclosure ; that is , the conscious or unconscious revelation of personal information ( e . g . , thoughts , feelings , likes , dislikes ) that is consistent with the image one would like to give . Self - disclosure is a critical step in the development of close relationships ( e . g . , during dating ) but can also occur between complete strangers ; for example , when speaking about per - sonal problems with the person seated next to you on an airplane . Applied to the context of Social Media , we assume that a second classiﬁcation can be made based on the degree of self - disclosure it requires and the type of self - presentation it allows . Combining both dimensions leads to a classiﬁca - tion of Social Media which we have visualized in Table 1 . With respect to social presence and media richness , applications such as collaborative projects ( e . g . , Wikipedia ) and blogs score lowest , as they are often text - based and hence only allow for a rela - tively simple exchange . On the next level are con - tent communities ( e . g . , YouTube ) and social networking sites ( e . g . , Facebook ) which , in addition to text - based communication , enable the sharing of pictures , videos , and other forms of media . On the highest level are virtual game and social worlds ( e . g . , World of Warcraft , Second Life ) , which try to replicate all dimensions of face - to - face interac - tions in a virtual environment . Regarding self - pre - sentation and self - disclosure , blogs usually score higher than collaborative projects , as the latter tend to be focused on speciﬁc content domains . In a similar spirit , social networking sites allow for more self - disclosure than content communities . Finally , virtual social worlds require a higher level of self - disclosure than virtual game worlds , as the latter are ruled by strict guidelines that force users to behave in a certain way ( e . g . , as warriors in an imaginary fantasy land ) . We will now provide more detail on each of these six different types of Social Media , and discuss the challenges and opportunities they offer companies . 3 . The challenges and opportunities of Social Media 3 . 1 . Collaborative projects Collaborative projects enable the joint and simul - taneous creation of content by many end - users and are , in this sense , probably the most democratic manifestation of UGC . Within collaborative proj - ects , one differentiates between wikis – —that is , websites which allow users to add , remove , and change text - based content – —and social bookmark - ing applications – —which enable the group - based col - lection and rating of Internet links or media content . Exemplary applications within this category include the online encyclopedia Wikipedia , a wiki currently available in more than 230 different languages , and the social bookmarking web service Delicious , which allows the storage and sharing of web bookmarks . The main idea underlying collaborative projects is that the joint effort of many actors leads to a better outcome than any actor could achieve individually ; this is similar to the efﬁcient - market hypothesis in behavioral ﬁnance ( Fama , 1970 ) . From a corporate perspective , ﬁrms must be aware that collaborative projects are trending toward becoming the main source of information for many consumers . As such , although not everything written on Wikipedia may actually be true , it is believed to be true by more and more Internet users . This may be particularly crucial as regards corporate crises . For example , 62 A . M . Kaplan , M . Haenlein Table 1 . Classiﬁcation of Social Media by social presence / media richness and self - presentation / self - disclosure when online book retailer Amazon started to test the idea of dynamic pricing , comments declaring such a practice as unfair showed up instantaneously under the Wikipedia entry on ‘‘time - based pricing . ’’ Yet , collaborative projects also provide some unique opportunities for ﬁrms . Finnish handset manufac - turer Nokia , for instance , uses internal wikis to update employees on project status and to trade ideas , which are used by about 20 % of its 68 , 000 staff members . Likewise , American computer soft - ware company Adobe Systems maintains a list of bookmarks to company - related websites and con - versations on Delicious . 3 . 2 . Blogs Blogs , which represent the earliest form of Social Media , are special types of websites that usually display date - stamped entries in reverse chronologi - cal order ( OECD , 2007 ) . They are the Social Media equivalent of personal web pages and can come in a multitude of different variations , from personal diaries describing the author’s life to summaries of all relevant information in one speciﬁc content area . Blogs are usually managed by one person only , but provide the possibility of interaction with others through the addition of comments . Due to their historical roots , text - based blogs are still by far the most common . Nevertheless , blogs have also begun to take different media formats . For exam - ple , San Francisco - based Justin . tv allows users to create personalized television channels via which they can broadcast images from their webcam in real time to other users . Many companies are al - ready using blogs to update employees , customers , and shareholders on developments they consider to be important . Jonathan Schwartz , CEO of Sun Micro - systems , maintains a personal blog to improve the transparency of his company ; so does automotive giant General Motors . Yet , as is the case with col - laborative projects , blogs do not come without risks . These generally present in two fashions . First , customers who – —for one reason or another – —turn out to be dissatisﬁed with or disappointed by the company’s offerings may decide to engage in virtual complaints in the form of protest websites or blogs ( Ward & Ostrom , 2006 ) , which results in the avail - ability of potentially damaging information in online space . Second , once ﬁrms encourage employees to be active on blogs , they may need to live with the consequences of staff members writing negatively about the ﬁrm . Microsoft’s former ‘‘technical evan - gelist’’ Robert Scoble , for example , had a tendency to ﬁercely criticize the products of his employer – — before he decided to leave the Redmond - based software company in 2006 . 3 . 3 . Content communities The main objective of content communities is the sharing of media content between users . Content communities exist for a wide range of different media types , including text ( e . g . , BookCrossing , via which 750 , 000 + people from over 130 countries share books ) , photos ( e . g . , Flickr ) , videos ( e . g . , YouTube ) , and PowerPoint presentations ( e . g . , Slideshare ) . Users on content communities are not required to create a personal proﬁle page ; if they do , these pages usually only contain basic information , such as the date they joined the com - munity and the number of videos shared . From a corporate viewpoint , content communities carry the risk of being used as platforms for the sharing of copyright - protected materials . While major con - tent communities have rules in place to ban and remove such illegal content , it is difﬁcult to avoid popular videos – —such as recent episodes of comedy dramas – —being uploaded to YouTube only hours after they have been aired on television . On the positive side , the high popularity of content communities makes them a very attractive contact channel for many ﬁrms ; this is easy to believe when one con - siders that YouTube serves over 100 million videos per day . In 2007 , Procter & Gamble organized a contest for its over - the - counter drug Pepto - Bismol , whereby users were encouraged to upload to You - Tube 1 - minute videos of themselves singing about the ailments Pepto - Bismol counteracts , including heartburn and nausea . In a similar spirit , kitchen appliances manufacturer Blendtec became popular for its bevy of inexpensive ‘‘Will it blend ? ’’ videos , which have been watched by millions of people . Other ﬁrms , such as Cisco and Google , rely on content communities to share recruiting videos , as well as keynote speeches and press announce - ments , with their employees and investors . 3 . 4 . Social networking sites Social networking sites are applications that enable users to connect by creating personal information proﬁles , inviting friends and colleagues to have access to those proﬁles , and sending e - mails and instant messages between each other . These per - sonal proﬁles can include any type of information , including photos , video , audio ﬁles , and blogs . Ac - cording to Wikipedia , the largest social networking sites are U . S . - based Facebook ( initially founded by Mark Zuckerberg to stay in touch with his fellow students from Harvard University ) and MySpace ( with 1 , 500 employees and more than 250 million registered users ) . Social networking sites are of such high popularity , speciﬁcally among younger Internet Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media 63 users , that the term ‘‘Facebook addict’’ has been included in the Urban Dictionary , a collaborative project focused on developing a slang dictionary for the English language . Several companies are already using social networking sites to support the creation of brand communities ( Muniz & O’Guinn , 2001 ) or for marketing research in the context of netnography ( Kozinets , 2002 ) . To pro - mote the movie ‘‘Fred Claus , ’’ a 2007 Christmas comedy ﬁlm , Warner Brothers created a Facebook proﬁle via which visitors could watch trailers , down - load graphics , and play games . Likewise , the Adidas custom soccer community on MySpace allows visi - tors to associate themselves with one of two brands of elite soccer cleats produced by the German sports apparel manufacturer , and to access product re - views and information on professional soccer play - ers who play using ‘‘their’’shoes . Some ﬁrms even go one step further and use Facebook as a distribution channel . Consider U . S . - based ﬂorist 1 - 800 - Flower - s . com , which offers a widget on Facebook called ‘‘Gimme Love’’ whereby users can send ‘‘virtual bouquets’’ to friends or , with a click of the mouse , be directly transferred to the company’s website to send real ﬂowers . 3 . 5 . Virtual game worlds Virtual worlds are platforms that replicate a three - dimensional environment in which users can appear in the form of personalized avatars and interact with each other as they would in real life . In this sense , virtual worlds are probably the ultimate manifesta - tion of Social Media , as they provide the highest level of social presence and media richness of all applications discussed thus far . Virtual worlds come in two forms . The ﬁrst , virtual game worlds , require their users to behave according to strict rules in the context of a massively multiplayer online role - play - ing game ( MMORPG ) . These applications have gained popularity in recent years , as standard game con - soles – —such as Microsoft’s X - Box and Sony’s Play - Station – —now allow simultaneous play among a multitude of users around the globe . Examples of virtual game worlds include the cod - medieval ‘‘World of Warcraft , ’’ which counts around 8 . 5 mil - lion subscribers who explore the virtual planet of Azeroth in the form of humans , dwarves , orcs , or night elves , to ﬁght monsters or to search for trea - sure ; and Sony’s EverQuest , in which 16 different races of players ( e . g . , wizards , clerics ) travel the fantasy world of Norrath . The rules of such games usually limit the degree of self - presentation and self - disclosure possible , although some users spend so much time with these applications that their character – —be it a warrior , a wizard , or a dragon hunter – —starts to more and more closely resemble their real life personality . Besides their use for in - game advertising ( similar in idea to product placement in blockbuster movies ) , the high popu - larity of virtual game worlds can also be leveraged in more traditional communication campaigns . Japanese automotive giant Toyota , for example , used pictures and mechanics from the World of Warcraft application in its latest Tundra commercial to reach the 2 . 5 million players in the U . S . alone . 3 . 6 . Virtual social worlds The second group of virtual worlds , often referred to as virtual social worlds , allows inhabitants to choose their behavior more freely and essentially live a virtual life similar to their real life . As in virtual game worlds , virtual social world users appear in the form of avatars and interact in a three - dimensional virtual environment ; however , in this realm , there are no rules restricting the range of possible interactions , except for basic physical laws such as gravity . This allows for an unlimited range of self presentation strategies , andit hasbeen shown that withincreasing usageintensityandconsumptionexperience , users of virtual social worlds – —or ‘‘residents , ’’ as they prefer to be called – —show behavior that more and more closely mirrors the one observed in real life settings ( Haenlein & Kaplan , 2009 ; Kaplan & Haenlein , 2009a , 2009b ) . Arguably , the most prominent example of virtual social worlds is the Second Life application , founded and managed by the San Francisco - based company Linden Research Inc . Besides doing every - thing that is possible in real life ( e . g . , speaking to other avatars , taking a walk , enjoying the virtual sunshine ) , Second Life also allows users to create content ( e . g . , to design virtual clothing or furniture items ) and to sell this content to others in exchange for Linden Dollars , a virtual currency traded against the U . S . Dollar on the Second Life Exchange . Some residents are so successful in this task that the virtual money earned that way complements their real life income . Virtual social worlds offer a multitude of opportunities for companies in market - ing ( advertising / communication , virtual product sales / v - Commerce , marketing research ) , and human resource and internal process management ; for a more detailed discussion , see Kaplan and Haenlein ( 2009c ) . 4 . Ten pieces of advice for companies deciding to use Social Media Social Media is a very active and fast - moving do - main . What may be up - to - date today could have 64 A . M . Kaplan , M . Haenlein disappeared from the virtual landscape tomorrow . It is therefore crucial for ﬁrms to have a set of guidelines that can be applied to any form of Social Media , whether they are part of the aforementioned list or not . Next , we provide such a set of recom - mendations . Given that Social Media have both a social - and a media - component , we split our advice into two sections : ﬁve points about using media and ﬁve points about being social . 4 . 1 . Five points about using media 4 . 1 . 1 . Choose carefully There are dozens – —if not hundreds – —of Social Media applications , and new ones are appearing on the horizon every day . If you still need time to run your core business , you simply cannot participate in them all , especially since ‘‘being active’’ is one key re - quirement of success ( see below ) . Choosing the right medium for any given purpose depends on the target group to be reached and the message to be communicated . On the one hand , each Social Media application usually attracts a certain group of people and ﬁrms should be active wherever their customers are present . For example , if your main target audience is book lovers , a content community via which users share self - written novels or poems is likely better suited to your purpose than a virtual world which centers on ﬁghting dragons and ﬁnding treasures . On the other hand , there may be situa - tions whereby certain features are necessary to ensure effective communication , and these features are only offered by one speciﬁc application . For example , when the U . S . Army undertook an initia - tive in 2007 to reach the Hispanic community , it decided to utilize the social networking site Univision rather than the more popular Facebook . This choice was driven in part by the fact that Univision – —a Spanish - language television network in the U . S . and Puerto Rico – —is the social networking application with the largest Latin American audi - ence , due to an extensive range of telenovelas and Mexican programs produced by Grupo Televisa . However , another reason Univision was chosen is because it offers a moderating service which checks comments from users for appropriateness before posting them on the site . In contrast , other appli - cations , including Facebook , allow users to post messages without supervision . 4 . 1 . 2 . Pick the application , or make your own Once you know which game you’re playing , the next decision involves whether to make or buy . In some cases , it might just be best to join an existing Social Media application and beneﬁt from its popularity and user base . After all , there is no need to reinvent the wheel if somebody has already done it , espe - cially given that Social Media show positive network externalities in the sense that they get more attrac - tive to join the more participants they already have . But in some cases , the right application might just not be available yet . Japan’s Fujiﬁlm , for example , recently launched its own social network to build a community of photo enthusiasts . In a similar spirit , U . S . - based department store ﬁrm Sears collaborat - ed with MTV music television to create a social network around back - to - school shopping . Yet , what - ever the ultimate decision – —to buy , make , or both – — it is vital that there is an understanding of the basic idea behind Social Media . It’s all about participa - tion , sharing , and collaboration , rather than straightforward advertising and selling . 4 . 1 . 3 . Ensure activity alignment Sometimes you may decide to rely on various Social Media , or a set of different applications within the same group , in order to have the largest possible reach . In this case , it is crucial to ensure that your Social Media activities are all aligned with each other . A prime example in this context is computer manufacturer Dell and its ‘‘Digital Nomads’’ cam - paign . Dell uses a combination of social networking sites ( Facebook , LinkedIn ) , blogs , and content com - munities ( YouTube videos ) to show how its range of laptop computers enable individuals to become a nomadic mobile workforce . In a similar spirit , Chrys - ler’s Jeep brand connects with its customers by combining photos shared on the content community Flickr , with groups on social networking sites such as MySpace and Facebook . Using different contact channels can be a worthwhile and proﬁtable strate - gy . But remember : one goal of communication is the resolution of ambiguity and reduction of uncertain - ty , and nothing is more confusing than contradicting messages across different channels . 4 . 1 . 4 . Media plan integration What is true for different types of Social Media also holds for the relationship between Social Media and traditional media : Integration is key ! While you may consider these two arenas to be completely differ - ent , in customers’ eyes they are both part of the same : your corporate image . Consider the actions of soft drink giant Coca - Cola . In June 2006 , a pair of performance artists shot a video featuring a series of geysers they created by dropping Mentos brand mints into 2 - liter bottles of Coke ; the clip became a major hit on YouTube . Realizing customers’ enthu - siasm for this performance , Coca - Cola fostered the sensation by airing the video on late - night television and ensuring broad digital distribution across differ - ent content communities . Besides the advantage of Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media 65 high impact / low cost media coverage , the campaign also resulted in a measurable sales uplift . 4 . 1 . 5 . Access for all Although this might sound elementary , once the ﬁrm has decided to utilize Social Media applications , it is worth checking that all employees may actually access them . Commonly , ﬁrms block Facebook , YouTube , and Second Life on corporate PCs for fear that staff might spend too much time networking instead of working . While this is certainly a consid - eration , it cannot imply that employees must have special permission to be able to access the company blog . At the same time , there is a need to curtail the possibility of the entire organization spending all its time producing funny videos and uploading them to YouTube . One possible approach involves deﬁning groups of employees whose primary objective is the management of corporate Social Media ; all other staff members are treated as occasional partici - pants . Under this scenario , the ﬁrst group is given administrator rights – —which allows the opening of new discussion threads and deletion of inappropri - ate posts – —while the second group is not . Also , at some point , it will be necessary to develop certain guidelines for Social Media usage ; as done , for instance , by ‘‘Big Blue’’ IBM , which has a corporate charta for appropriate behavior within Second Life . For example , it is important to highlight that every employee needs to identify himself or herself as such when posting a comment on the corporate blog . Otherwise , end - consumers could get the impression that anonymous accounts are used to enable employees to post fake messages and over - ly - positive feedback , which could severely damage the credibility of your whole Social Media campaign . 4 . 2 . Five points about being social 4 . 2 . 1 . Be active If you want to develop a relationship with someone , it is always advisable to take the lead and to be active . Social Media are all about sharing and inter - action , so ensure that your content is always fresh and that you engage in discussions with your cus - tomers . Consider the aforementioned blog kept by Sun Microsystems CEO Jonathan Schwartz . Via this outlet , the ﬁgurehead discusses – —on an ongoing basis – —his corporate strategy , new product develop - ment projects , and company values , and replies directly to correspondence received . In considering your Social Media efforts , be aware that ﬁrm in - volvement must extend beyond responding to neg - ative comments and defending product offerings . Social Media is less about explaining why your baking mix , detergent , or shampoo is better than anyone else’s than it is about engaging others in open and active conversation . Participants on Social Media applications have the desire to actively engage and to become both producers and consumers of information , so - called ‘‘prosumers’’ ( Tofﬂer , 1980 ) . Be considerate of this need and act accordingly . 4 . 2 . 2 . Be interesting Let’s face it : nobody is interested in speaking to a boring person . As such , if you would like your cus - tomers to engage with you , you need to give them a reason for doing so – —one which extends beyond saying you are the best airline in town , or manufac - ture the most robust kitchen blender . The ﬁrst step is to listen to your customers . Find out what they would like to hear ; what they would like to talk about ; what they might ﬁnd interesting , enjoyable , and valuable . Then , develop and post content that ﬁts those expectations . Coffee powerhouse Star - bucks , for example , created the ‘‘My Starbucks Idea’’ platform , via which customers can submit new ideas for the company . These ideas are subse - quently voted on by other users , with the winners being considered for implementation by Starbucks top management . As stated by Oscar Wilde in his novel , The Picture of Dorian Grey : The one sin for which there is no forgiveness is ennui . 4 . 2 . 3 . Be humble Never forget that Social Media existed before you decided to engage in them ; indeed , in many cases , even before you knew about their existence . In this light , do not expect that you know better how to use them than others who have spent countless hours on Facebook or Second Life , for example . Before you enter any application , ﬁrst take some time to dis - cover it and to learn about its history and basic rules . Only once you have gained the necessary understanding , start to participate . When aero - space and defense ﬁrm Boeing decided to launch its ﬁrst corporate blog , the site was designed such that users were not allowed to comment on what they saw . Yet , interaction and feedback are critical elements of all Social Media , blogs included . Hence , many readers perceived the Boeing blog as a fake , and simply corporate advertising in disguise . If there is one certain path to failure , it involves thinking that Social Media is just about posting existing TV spots on YouTube or putting prefabricated press announcements on corporate blogs . 4 . 2 . 4 . Be unprofessional Have you ever noticed that in Hollywood blockbust - er ﬁlms , it’s not usually the handsome guy who ends up with the girl , but rather the clumsy , charming one ? The same goes for Social Media , and ﬁrms 66 A . M . Kaplan , M . Haenlein would be wise to avoid overly - professional content offerings . There’s no need to spend $ 100 , 000 to design the perfect MySpace presence , or hire a professional writer to manage your corporate blog . Instead , try to blend in with other users and don’t be afraid to make mistakes ! Bill Marriott , Chairman and CEO of the Marriott International Hotel chain , uses his blog , for example , to post regular updates and stories from his travels to Marriott properties around the world – —very much in the same way as would a work colleague when describing her last vacation . Social Media users are people like you , who under - stand that things do not always go smoothly . And , if you’re nice to them , they may even give you free advice on how to do it better the next time . 4 . 2 . 5 . Be honest Last but not least , be honest and respect the rules of the game . Some Social Media – —such as Wikipedia – — may not allow companies to be involved , so do not try to force your way in . Consider Anheuser - Busch , owner of SeaWorld marine mammal parks . Anheus - er - Busch tried to ‘‘rectify’’ misleading information on Wikipedia through the use of PR ﬁrms , and failed miserably at it . Never expect that other participants may not ﬁnd out who stands behind some anonymous user account ; after all , you’re dealing with some of the most technologically sophisticated people on the planet . 5 . Nothing to lose but their chains Today , everything is about Social Media . Some in - dustry gurus claim that if you do not participate in Facebook , YouTube , and Second Life , you are not part of cyberspace anymore . Social Media allow ﬁrms to engage in timely and direct end - consumer contact at relatively low cost and higher levels of efﬁciency than can be achieved with more tradi - tional communication tools . This makes Social Media not only relevant for large multinational ﬁrms , but also for small and medium sized companies , and even nonproﬁt and governmental agencies . Using Social Media is not an easy task and may require new ways of thinking , but the potential gains are far from being negligible . Dell , for example , states that its use of Twitter – —a micro blogging application that allows sending out short , text - based posts of 140 characters or less – —has generated $ 1 million in in - cremental revenue due to sales alerts . Some ﬁrms may even be too successful for their own good , as illustrated by Burger King’s ‘‘Whopper Sacriﬁce’’ campaign : In December 2008 , the fast food giant developed a Facebook application which gave users a free Whopper sandwich for every 10 friends they deleted from their Facebook network . The cam - paign was adopted by over 20 , 000 users , resulting in the sacriﬁcing of 233 , 906 friends in exchange for free burgers . Only one month later , in January 2009 , Facebook shut down Whopper Sacriﬁce , citing pri - vacy concerns . Who would have thought that the price of a friendship is less than $ 2 a dozen ? A new trend is on the horizon , though ; Watch out forMobile SocialMedia ! Mobile Web 2 . 0is very similar to Web 2 . 0 , as discussed earlier . In contrast to its predecessor Mobile Web 1 . 0 , which relied on propri - etary protocols ( e . g . , WAP ) and use - based pricing , Mobile Web 2 . 0 is characterized by open standards ( e . g . , a transition to the TCP / IP protocol , the tech - nical foundationof the World Wide Web ) and ﬂat - rate systems . Even the manual entry of web addresses using small and difﬁcult - to - handle keyboards is becoming history . Soon , all items around you will be equipped with Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation ( RFID ) tags that will be able to automatically connect to your mobile phone and send URLs to them , similar to today’s text messages . This technical evolution is laying the groundwork for moving Social Media ap - plications away from desktop PCs and laptops , to - ward mobile devices . Why log into Facebook if you can easily update all your friends using Twitter ? Why wait until you return home to watch the new YouTube video if you can do so conveniently on your iPhone ? According to Jupiter Research , the market for Mobile Web 2 . 0 evolutions will grow from a mere $ 5 . 5 billion today to an impressive $ 22 . 4 billion by 2013 . Mobile Social Media applications are expected to be the main driver of this evolution , soon ac - counting for over 50 % of the market . In one way , this surge toward Mobile Social Media can even be seen as another step toward Internet democratization and closing the digital divide between developed and emerging countries . In India , for example , mo - bile phones outnumber PCs by 10 to 1 . In Thailand , only 13 % of the population owns a computer , versus 82 % who have access to a mobile phone . It is there - fore not surprising that the Pew Research Center – —a Washington - based think tank – —estimates that by 2020 , a mobile device will be the primary Internet connection tool for most people in the world . Making Social Media applications mobile is likely to tap a currently unexploited base of new users . Even if per - capita spending in these countries may still be low , vast population numbers make them relevant for virtually any ﬁrm . Obviously , Mobile Social Media does not come without a price . Some would argue that while it enables the detailed following of friends half - way across the world , it can foster a society where we don’t know the names of our own next - door neighbors . Be that as it may , and independent of Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media 67 whether or not one approves of such an evolution , it seems undisputable that ( Mobile ) Social Media will be the locomotive via which the World Wide Web evolves . Businesses , take note – —and don’t miss this train ! References Daft , R . L . , & Lengel , R . H . ( 1986 ) . Organizational information requirements , media richness , and structural design . Manage - ment Science , 32 ( 5 ) , 554—571 . Fama , E . F . ( 1970 ) . Efﬁcient capital markets : A review of theory and empirical work . Journal of Finance , 25 ( 2 ) , 383—417 . Goffman , E . ( 1959 ) . The presentation of self in everyday life . New York : Doubleday Anchor Books . Haenlein , M . , & Kaplan , A . M . ( 2009 ) . Flagship brand stores within virtualworlds : Theimpactofvirtualstoreexposureonreallife brand attitudes and purchase intent . Recherche et Applica - tions en Marketing 24 ( 3 ) . Kaplan , A . M . , & Haenlein , M . ( 2009a ) . Consumer use and business potential of virtual worlds : The case of Second Life . The International Journal on Media Management 11 ( 3 ) . Kaplan , A . M . , & Haenlein , M . ( 2009b ) . Consumers , companies , and virtual social worlds : A qualitative analysis of Second Life . Advances in Consumer Research , 36 ( 1 ) , 873—874 . Kaplan , A . M . , & Haenlein , M . ( 2009c ) . The fairyland of Second Life : Aboutvirtualsocialworldsandhowtousethem . Business Horizons , 52 ( 6 ) , 563—572 . Kozinets , R . V . ( 2002 ) . The ﬁeld behind the screen : Using netno - graphy for marketing research in online communities . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 ( 1 ) , 61—72 . Muniz , A . M . , & O’Guinn , T . C . ( 2001 ) . Brand community . Journal of Consumer Research , 27 ( 4 ) , 412—432 . OECD . ( 2007 ) . Participative web and user - created content : Web 2 . 0 , wikis , and social networking . Paris : Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development . Schau , H . J . , & Gilly , M . C . ( 2003 ) . We are what we post ? Self - presentation in personal web space . Journal of Consumer Research , 30 ( 3 ) , 385—404 . Short , J . , Williams , E . , & Christie , B . ( 1976 ) . The social psychology of telecommunications . Hoboken , NJ : John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Tofﬂer , A . ( 1980 ) . The third wave : The classic study of tomorrow . New York : Bantam Books . Ward , J . C . , & Ostrom , A . L . ( 2006 ) . Complaining to the masses : The role of protest framing in customer - created complaint web sites . Journal of Consumer Research , 33 ( 2 ) , 220—230 . 68 A . M . Kaplan , M . Haenlein