P1 : FRK April 26 , 2001 17 : 25 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 2001 . 30 : 105 – 28 Copyright c (cid:176) 2001 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved P ROBING THE R ELATION B ETWEEN F ORCE —L IFETIME — AND C HEMISTRY IN S INGLE M OLECULAR B ONDS Evan Evans Physics and Pathology , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , Canada V6T 2A6 ; Biomedical Engineering , Boston University , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 ; e - mail : evans @ physics . ubc . ca Key Words imaging the landscape of energy barriers in macromolecular bonds , strengths of single and multiple molecular bonds , dynamic force spectroscopy n Abstract On laboratory time scales , the energy landscape of a weak bond along a dissociation pathway is fully explored through Brownian - thermal excitations , and energy barriers become encoded in a dissociation time that varies with applied force . Probed with ramps of force over an enormous range of rates ( force / time ) , this kinetic proﬁle is transformed into a dynamic spectrum of bond rupture force as a function of loading rate . On a logarithmic scale in loading rate , the force spectrum provides an easy - to - read map of the prominent energy barriers traversed along the force - driven pathwayandexposesthedifferencesinenergybetweenbarriers . Inthisway , themethod of dynamic force spectroscopy ( DFS ) is being used to probe the complex relation between force—lifetime—and chemistry in single molecular bonds . Most important , DFS probes the inner world of molecular interactions to reveal barriers that are difﬁcult or impossible to detect in assays of near equilibrium dissociation but that determine bond lifetime and strength under rapid detachment . To use an ultrasensitive force probe as a spectroscopic tool , we need to understand the physics of bond dissociation under force , the impact of experimental technique on the measurement of detachment force ( bond strength ) , the consequences of complex interactions in macromolecular bonds , and effects of multiply - bonded attachments . CONTENTS INTRODUCTION : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 106 Innovation of Dynamic Force Spectroscopy : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 106 GENERIC FEATURES OF TESTING BOND STRENGTHS WITH FORCE PROBES : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 108 Probe Mechanics : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 108 Testing Bond Strength : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 109 Loading Dynamics : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 109 Single Bond or Multiple Bonds ? : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 111 1056 - 8700 / 01 / 0610 - 0105 $ 14 . 00 105 P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 106 EVANS SINGLE BOND KINETICS IN LIQUIDS UNDER EXTERNAL FORCE : : : : : : : : 111 Rate of Escape Over an Idealized Barrier Under Force : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 111 Rate of Unbinding in Complex Molecular Bonds : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 113 STOCHASTIC PROCESS OF BOND RUPTURE IN PROBE EXPERIMENTS : : : : 114 Rupture of a Simple Bond Under Dynamic Loading : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 114 Impact of Rebinding on Rupture Force and Role of Probe Mechanics : : : : : : : : : : 115 Impact of Soft - Polymer Linkages on Rupture Force : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 117 Dynamic Force Spectroscopy of Simple Bonds : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 118 Dynamic Force Spectroscopy of Complex Molecular Bonds : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 120 Force Spectra of Multiple Bonds : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 121 FINAL COMMENTS : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 125 INTRODUCTION Weak noncovalent interactions govern structural cohesion and mediate many of life’s functions in cells . Weak bonds and structures have limited lifetimes and so will dissociate under almost any level of force if pulled on for modest periods of time . Close to equilibrium in solution , large numbers of molecules continuously bond and dissociate under zero force , and application of a ﬁeld to the reacting molecules simply reduces the ratio of bound - to - free constituents . But at inﬁnite dilution , an isolated - single bond exists far from equilibrium and only has non - zero strength on time scales shorter than the time t off D 1 = k off needed for spontaneous dissociation . Pulled apart faster than t off , a bond resists detachment . The detachment force can range up to—and even exceed—the adiabatic limit f 1 » j @ E = @ x j max deﬁned by the intermolecular potential E ( x ) if the bond is broken in less time than required for diffusive relaxation ( as done in molecular dynamics simulations ; 19 , 25 , 29 , 31 ) . Therefore , the key to understanding measurements of bond strength lies in the relation between force—lifetime—chemistry at the molecular level . Innovation of Dynamic Force Spectroscopy Onlaboratorytimescales , Brownian - thermalexcitationsfullyexplorethechemical energy landscape of a bond , and barriers along optimal pathways for dissociation determine bond lifetime . Under external force , barriers in the energy landscape are lowered and bond lifetime shortens . When isolated bonds are ruptured under steady ramps of force , barriers diminish in time and , thus , rupture force depends on rate of loading ( D force / time ) . Measured over an enormous range of loading rates , the most frequent forces for failure plotted on a scale of log ( loading rate ) establish a dynamic spectrum of bond strength that images the prominent energy barriers traversed along the force - driven pathway ( 10 , 13 ) . In this way , the method of DFS probes the inner world of molecular interactions to reveal barriers that are difﬁcult or impossible to detect in assays of near equilibrium dissociation . These inner barriers are the determinants of bond lifetime and strength under rapid detachment . P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 107 An important advance in single molecule methods , the DFS concept has been used to explore energy landscapes of biotin - ( strept ) avidin bonds ( 34 ) , lipid anchoring in membranes ( 12 , 30 ) , carbohydrate - ( selectin ) proteinbonds ( 11 , 17 ) , unfoldingofIg domainsinthemuscleproteintitin ( 37 ) andinrecombinantproteins ( 32 ) , unfolding of FNIII domains in the extracellular matrix protein tenascin ( 36 ) , cooperative unbinding of short DNA duplexes ( 46 ) , homotypic bonds between cadherins ( 3 ) , and even an attempt at covalent bonds ( 18 ) . Because of the inherent exponential dependence of kinetic rates on barrier energies , the DFS method is most revealing when bonds are tested over many orders of magnitude in loading rate . Although pioneering the study of molecular bond strength , most of the work before 1997 must be regarded as qualitative assays of bond failure because there was no systematic investigation of the dependence on time scale and because there was signiﬁcant uncertainty in the numbers of bonds formed in probe - surface contact . Moreover , even when explored over a wide range of loading rates and certain that only single bonds are being tested , measurements of strength versus loading rate are vulnerable to subtle effects arising from probe mechanics and chemical linkage to the bond . So the objective of this chapter is not to give a detailed review of a burgeoning ﬁeld , but rather to provide basic concepts and guidelines for how ultrasensitive force probes can be used as spectroscopic tools to help construct an accurate picture of bond chemistry . The focus is on probing the strengths of isolated bonds far from equilibrium , where energy barriers along the unbinding pathway create characteristic signatures in DFS . Where possible , important features are illustrated by key examples from the literature . The em - phasis here is fundamentally different from the beautiful near - equilibrium studies of conformational transitions in homopolymers ( 33 , 38 ) and DNA ( 8 , 41 ) , slow separation of strands in long DNA ( 9 ) , plus other interesting elastic transitions in single DNA molecules ( 42 – 44 ) . Likewise , although governed in many cases by similar far - from - equilibrium kinetics and a very exciting ﬁeld of study , dynam - ics of molecular motors ( e . g . 6 , 16 , 23 , 24 , 28 , 35 , 47 ) and mechanical enzymes ( e . g . 21 , 45 , 49 – 51 ) , are not discussed because of the dependence on chem - ical energy and the more complicated molecular mechanics involved in these actions . At the outset , it is important to deﬁne the relevant length , force , and energy scales . These scales are quite familiar to single molecule experimenters but often not to other researchers . The length scale for molecular dimensions and interactions is obviously a nanometer ( nm D 10 ˚A ) . One nanometer is comparable to spacing of molecules at a concentration of » 1 mole / liter and ﬁve hundred - fold smaller than wavelengths of visible light . In the case of force , weak noncovalent bonds break in the piconewton ( pN ) range . One piconewton is about one ten - billionth of a gram weight ( 10 ¡ 10 gm ) or ten thousand - fold smaller than what can be measured with an analytical microbalance . Together , the product of length and force scales provides the appropriate scale for energy—thermal energy k B T—which is » 4 pN ¢ nm at biological temperatures ( » 300 – K ) or » 0 . 6 Kcal / mole for Avogadro’s number ( » 6 £ 10 23 ) of molecules . P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 108 EVANS GENERIC FEATURES OF TESTING BOND STRENGTHS WITH FORCE PROBES Probe Mechanics Most direct measurements of single bond strength have been performed with three types of ultrasensitive probes : the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) ( 5 ) , where force is sensed by deﬂection of a thin silicon nitride cantilever ; the biomembrane force probe ( BFP ) ( 15 , 40 ) , where force is sensed by axial displacement of a glass microsphere glued to the pole of a micropipet - pressurized membrane capsule ; and the laser optical tweezer ( LOT ) ( 1 , 1a , 2 ) , where force is sensed by displacement of a microsphere trapped in a narrowly focused beam of laser light . Each of these probes acts as a very soft spring with a small elastic constant • f ( increase in force 1 f per deﬂection 1 x ) that ranges from < 1 pN / nm to 1 nN / nm ( also given in other units by pN / nm D mN / m D dyn / cm ) . Obviously , low values of probe stiffness represent high sensitivity to force for each nm deﬂection of the transducer . The subtle drawbacks of low stiffness are that the probe is susceptible to thermal ﬂuctuations in position ( – x 2 » k B T = • f ) and the response time t f can be slow in an overdamped viscous - water environment . On the other hand , high probe stiffness results in large thermal ﬂuctuations of the applied force ( – f 2 » k B T ¢ • f ) . Little attention has been paid to hydrodynamic interactions , which can add signiﬁcant forces to the probe when tests are performed at very high speeds in liquids . For example , quick application of a pulling force to the probe is retarded by viscous drag so that the tip deﬂection reports a smaller force than is actu - ally applied . The hidden force is governed by the damping coefﬁcient ‡ of the probe and deﬂection speed v , i . e . ‡ D f = v . Difﬁcult to predict accurately , the damping coefﬁcient is essentially the product of a viscosity · for the liquid envi - ronment and a characteristic dimension L ‡ for the probe , i . e . ‡ … · L ‡ . Thus , probe damping is expected to be of order ‡ » 10 ¡ 3 pN - sec / nm for an AFM , of order ‡ » 10 ¡ 4 pN - sec / nm for a BFP , and of order ‡ » 10 ¡ 5 pN - sec / nm for a particle trapped by LOT . With typical values of stiffness ( 10 – 100 pN / nm for AFM , 0 . 1 – 1 pN / nm for BFP and LOT ) , time scales for viscoelastic response of probes lie in the range t f D ‡ = k f » 10 ¡ 5 – 10 ¡ 3 sec . Hydrodynamic interactions also arise from rapid movement of the substrate relative to the probe and its tip . In AFM tests , the ﬂoor of the chamber is moved to / from contact with the tip so ﬂuid is pushed past the cantilever and applies drag along the full length . Because the substrate is usually moved at ﬁxed speed , the viscous force is constant and adds a bias to the cantilever deﬂection . Although similar in BFP tests , the ﬂow past a BFP capsule and the drag are much lower because the moving substrates are small . Lastly , close proximity of the substrate to any of the probe tips leads to a hydrodynamic coupling that depends inversely on the separation between tip and substrate . When held together by a bond , there is little relative motion between tip and substrate so this coupling has minimal effect on the force experienced by the bond . But after bond rupture , the hydrodynamic coupling transiently retards probe P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 109 recovery as the substrate is retracted . Clearly , all of these hydrodynamic effects should be considered carefully in each force probe application . Testing Bond Strength With few exceptions , tests of bond strength with force probes follow a common approach . The tips and substrates are ﬁrst decorated with reactive molecules using methods that vary from serendipitous physisorbtion to speciﬁc covalent attach - ment through heterobifunctional polymer spacers and attachment mediated by high - afﬁnity noncovalent complexes such as biotin - streptavidin or monoclonal antibodies . Once prepared , the probe and substrate are repeatedly brought to / from contact by steady , precision movements . If decorated with a very low density of reactive sites , contact between the probe tip and the test surface will only produce an occasional bond . Under controlled conditions of contact , a low frequency of attachments in repeated trials provides quantitative veriﬁcation of the likelihood of rare , single bond events ( e . g . probability > 0 . 9 when 1 attachment occurs out of 10 touches ) . When a rare bond has formed , the tip is held to the substrate during separation of the surfaces and the transducer is stretched . Bond rupture is signaled by rapid recoil of the transducer to its rest position with no intervening arrests . Rupture force is quantiﬁed by the maximum transducer extension . Histories of force over the course of approach—touch—separation with formation and rupture of a bond are demonstrated in Figures 1 a and b . After hundreds of touches , the few detachment forces are cumulated into a histogram and the peak ( most likely force for rupture ) establishes the statistical measure of bond strength . Not well appreciated , bond forces—no matter how carefully measured or how precise the technique—are always spread in value , and the most frequent force depends on how fast the bonds are loaded . The subtle feature of the generic method is that the force experienced by an attachment is not constant but increases in time . This is important because thermally activated kinetics under rising force lead to a recip - rocal relation between bond lifetime and rupture force . As shown by comparison of Figures 1 a and 1 b , bonds under slow loading have long lifetimes but only withstand small forces , whereas bonds under fast loading have shorter lifetimes and withstand larger forces . In this way , measurements of rupture force at many loading rates from very slow to extremely fast are used to explore the chemical energy landscape traversed in force - driven dissociation . Loading Dynamics Bond strength depends critically on how fast force is applied . With a linear spring attached directly to the bond , the loading rate r f is constant for steady separation speed v s as illustrated in Figures 1 a and 1 b . However , molecular structures con - nected to the bond play an important role in the rate of force application to the bond . Assuming that the bond is linked symmetrically to tip and substrate by components with a stiffness • m , the effective spring constant • s for coupling force to the bond is determined by the serial compliance 1 = • s D 2 = • m C 1 = • f . Further P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 110 EVANS Figure 1 Rupture of single bonds with ultrasensitive force probes . ( a , b ) Steady loading of bonds with a biomembrane force probe BFP ( 0 . 1 pN / nm < • f < 3 pN / nm ) . Here , the micron - size glass tip of the BFP was decorated with a speciﬁc carbohydrate ligand and tested against a second glass microsphere decorated with a recombinant selectin receptor ( as described in reference 11 ) . ( a ) Moved toward the BFP tip , contact ( touch ) by the test particle was sensed at a force of » 5 pN and fed back to signal retraction of the test particle . Slow retraction exposed a bond that held the BFP tip to the test particle for » 0 . 5 sec and broke at f b » 5 pN under a loading rate of » 10 pN / sec . ( b ) Similarly moved to contact the BFP , a test particle was stopped , paused for » 0 . 5 sec after sensing a force of » 30 pN , then retracted at high speed . Here , a bond held the tip to the surface for » 0 . 003 sec and broke at higher force f b » 180 pN under the extremely fast loading rate of » 60000 pN / sec . ( c , d ) Nonsteady loading of bonds through soft polymer linkages to stiff atomic force cantilevers AFM ( 20 pN / nm < • f < 1 nN / nm ) . ( c ) A substrate decorated with PEG - linked strands of short DNA was retracted after contact with an AFM tip decorated with complementary PEG - linked strands of DNA ( taken from Strunz et al , 46 ) . The formation of a duplex resulted in tensile forces ( negative in the convention of AFM ) that increased steeply as the linkage was stretched beyond 50 nm at a speed of 100 nm / sec . The asymptotic stiffening is consistent with the 30 nm lengths of the PEG chains . ( d ) The famous sawtooth pattern of force versus extension obtained from unfolding Ig domains in a recombinant construct of 8 - Ig domains under constant pullingspeedwithanAFM ( takenfromRiefetal , 37 ) . Eachunfoldingeventproducedaprecipitous drop in force and added » 30 nm to the contour length . The curves superposed on each event are correlations with the worm - like chain model for polymer elasticity . P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 111 complications arise because most biomolecules and chemical linkers are highly ﬂexible polymers with nonlinear elastic properties . First , these components are very soft , as revealed by the small thermal scale k B T / ( L p b ) for stiffness of a poly - mer determined by contour length L p and persistence length b . Thus , the stiffness scale is < 1 pN / nm even for relatively short linkers ; and when connected to stiff probes like AFM cantilevers ( • f > 10 pN / nm ) , the soft linkage dominates the effective spring constant ( i . e . • s » • m ) . Second , we see in Figures 1 c and 1 d that bonds held by polymer - like connections experience highly nonlinear loading dy - namics . Rupture occurs most often in the asymptotic regime ( x ! L p ) of polymer stretch where force diverges as , f » ( k B T = c b ) = ( 1 ¡ x = L p ) ﬁ , with ﬁ D 1 & c D 1 for a freely - jointed polymer and ﬁ D 2 & c D 4 for a worm - like polymer . The loading rate under constant speed separation increases very rapidly as the polymer is pulled taut in time , r f ( t ) … ( ﬁ k B T = c L p b ) v s = ( 1 ¡ v s t = L p ) ﬁ C 1 . We later see that this highly nonsteady loading can signiﬁcantly affect the dependence of rupture force on detachment speed . Single Bond or Multiple Bonds ? The principal concern in experiments is the number of bonds produced at each contact . Biomolecular structures bound to solid materials usually form compliant layers ; so , the level of touching force determines the size of the contact area and the number of sites available for bonding . With a low density of sites and controlled impingement , the efﬁciency of bond recruitment over the duration of contact depends then on the mobility and lengths of linkages to the reactive sites . In addition , lateral ﬂuctuations in probe position can increase bond recruitment over time for immobilized structures with short linkers . Thus , in order to use attachment frequency as a statistical estimator for rare single - bond events , each touch to the surface must have the same magnitude and history of contact force . This necessitates feedback control as demonstrated in Figures 1 a and 1 b . Even though rupture events only involve single molecular sites , it is still possible— and very likely under certain conditions—that a reactive pair of molecules may rupture and rebind many times before ﬁnal separation . We later see that rebinding can signiﬁcantly increase the level of detachment force . SINGLE BOND KINETICS IN LIQUIDS UNDER EXTERNAL FORCE Rate of Escape Over an Idealized Barrier Under Force The connection between strength and lifetime of weakly bonded structures fol - lows from the physics developed 60 years ago by Kramers ( 20 , 27 , 48 ) to de - scribe overdamped kinetics of chemical reactions in condensed liquids . Starting far from equilibrium with all states conﬁned local to a deep energy minimum , es - capefromaboundstateismodelledasaconstantdiffusiveﬂuxofthermalizedstates P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 112 EVANS ( Smoluchowski theory ) along a preferential path over the conﬁning barrier via a saddle point in the energy surface . There can be many such paths with tortuous trajectories in conﬁguration space . However , application of an external ﬁeld or force f acts to select a reaction path , which can then be represented by a scalar coordinate x . Analyzed along this coordinate , the outcome is a generic expression for escape or forward - transition rate k ! that depends on how the energy landscape E ( x ) is deformed under the applied ﬁeld ( 10 , 13 ) , k ! D . D = l c l ts / exp [ ¡ E b . f / = k B T ] : ( 1 ) Neglecting many important aspects , the diffusive dynamics are embodied in the attempt frequency D = l c l ts , or diffusive relaxation time t D D l c l ts = D , which is gov - erned by molecular damping ( ‡ m · k B T = D ) and two length scales . The ﬁrst length l c represents the thermal spread in bound states limited by the rise in energy 1 E c ( x ) away from the minimum at x c , i . e . l c D R dx ¢ exp [ ¡ 1 E c ( x ) = k B T ] . The second length l ts is the energy - weighted width of the barrier governed by the fall in energy , 1 E ts ( x ) , away from the transition state at the top of the barrier at x ts , i . e . l ts D R dx ¢ exp [ 1 E ts ( x ) = k B T ] . With local harmonic approximations [ e . g . 1 E c ( x ) … • c ( x ¡ x c ) 2 = 2 . . . and 1 E ts ( x ) … ¡ • ts ( x ¡ x ts ) 2 = 2 . . . ] , these length scales are related to local curvatures , • D ( @ 2 E = @ x 2 ) , of the energy landscape by l c … ( 2 … k B T = • c ) 1 = 2 and l ts … ( 2 … k B T = • ts ) 1 = 2 . The major impact of force stems from changes in the thermal likelihood of reaching the top of the energy barrier , i . e . exp [ ¡ E b ( f ) = k B T ] , where E b ( f ) describes the dependence of barrier height on applied force . In the most idealized view , the energy landscape is assumed to rise from the bound state and end with a sharp energy barrier . For a sharp barrier , the shape and location of the transition state are insensitive to force , but the barrier is lowered by force in proportion to the ther - mally averaged projection , x ﬂ D < x ts cos ( (cid:181) ) > , of the barrier along the direction of force , i . e . E b ( f ) D E b ( 0 ) ¡ fx ﬂ , as sketched in Figure 2 a . In this way , thermal activation sets the scale for force through the ratio of thermal energy to the distance x ﬂ , i . e . f ﬂ D k B T = x ﬂ , which can be surprisingly small since k B T » 4 pN nm at room temperature and x ﬂ can reach » 1 nm . On the scale f ﬂ , rate of escape increases exponentially , k ! D ( 1 = t off ) exp ( f = f ﬂ ) , with force as ﬁrst postulated by Bell ( 4 ) more than twenty years ago . But in contrast to the resonant frequency of bond excitations appearing in Bell’s model , Kramers established that the attempt fre - quency for overdamped transitions in liquids is 1 = t D D ( • c • ts ) 1 = 2 = 2 …‡ m , which is at least a thousand - fold slower . This attempt frequency drives thermally activated escape but the rate of escape is strongly discounted by the thermal unlikelihood of reaching the top of the barrier , which is the well known Arrhenius depen - dence on initial barrier height E b . Thus , Kramers classic result for overdamped kinetics , 1 = t off D ( 1 = t D ) exp ( ¡ E b = k B T ) , sets the scale for escape rate at zero force . In liquids , kinetics of dissociation start with attempt frequencies of » 10 9 – 10 10 / sec but end up at » 1 / sec for barrier heights of » 21 k B T or astonishingly at » 1 = 40 years for barrier heights of » 42 k B T and so on ! Most important to note P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 113 Figure 2 Conceptual energy landscapes for bonds conﬁned by sharp activation barriers— transition states ( ts ) . Oriented at an angle (cid:181) to the molecular coordinate x , external force f adds a mechanical potential ¡ ( f ¢ cos (cid:181) ) x that tilts the landscape and lowers barriers . ( a ) A single barrier under force . ( b ) A cascade of barriers under force where an inner barrier emerges to dominate kinetics when the outer barrier falls below by » k B T . is that the sharp barrier model—albeit na¨ıve—captures the profound impact of thermally activated kinetics in bond rupture , i . e . the rate of failure rises expo - nentially once force reaches a small scale k B T = x ﬂ well below the adiabatic limit » E b = x ﬂ ! Rate of Unbinding in Complex Molecular Bonds In reality , macromolecular bonds involve many widely distributed atomic - scale interactions that can create a mountainous terrain of barriers in the energy land - scape . When force is applied , outer barriers are driven below inner barriers so that an inner barrier then becomes the dominant impedance to unbinding as sketched in Figure 2 b . This leads to a hierarchy of exponential ampliﬁcations in rate of escape under force ( 10 ) . The transition rate for escape past a cascade of n sharp barriers is easily derived with Kramers’ stationary - ﬂux method . Implicit in this approach is the near equilibration of states over regions of the energy landscape below the principal barrier ; states diffuse forward and back frequently over the lower barriers on the time scale for passage of the dominant barrier . The outcome is an unbinding rate governed by the sum of times needed to transit individual barriers starting from the bound state ( 10 ) , k ! D 1 = 6 n t off . n / exp [ ¡ f = f ﬂ . n / ] : ( 2 ) P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 114 EVANS Like a single barrier , the kinetic impedance of each n th barrier in the hierarchy is described by a time for forward passage , t off ( n ) … t D exp [ E b ( n ) = k B T ] , set by its height E b ( n ) above the bound state and a force scale f ﬂ ( n ) D k B T = x ﬂ ( n ) for rate exponentiation set by its projection x ﬂ ( n ) along the direction of force . At low force , the unbinding rate grows rapidly with the steepest exponential governed by the outermost barrier . At larger forces , the rate crosses over to more shallow exponentials deﬁned by the inner barriers . We later see that this hierarchy of exponential scales for ampliﬁcation does indeed characterize unbinding kinetics for complex biomolecular bonds under external force . STOCHASTIC PROCESS OF BOND RUPTURE IN PROBE EXPERIMENTS Rupture of a Simple Bond Under Dynamic Loading Because of the enormous gap in time scale between diffusive relaxation ( t D » 10 ¡ 10 – 10 ¡ 9 sec ) and laboratory experiments ( » 10 ¡ 4 sec to minutes ) , kinetic rates during bond rupture become continuous functions of the instantaneous force on the laboratory time scale . In the limit of large statistics , the distributions of rup - ture times and forces follow a ﬁrst - order ( Markov ) process ( 48 ) where time and force are tied together through the loading dynamics . With no other constituents close enough to participate in binding , the master equation for evolution of an isolated pair of interacting molecules involves the net of unbinding ( forward ! ) and rebinding ( reverse ˆ ) transitions , dS 1 = dt D ¡ k ! . t / S 1 . t / C k ˆ . t / S o . t / ; ( 3 ) where S 1 ( t ) is the likelihood of being in the bound state , and S o ( t ) · 1 ¡ S 1 ( t ) is the likelihood of being detached . When pulled by an elastic linkage at constant speed , the loading dynamics are set by pulling speed v s and the dependence of linkage stiffness • s ( f ) on force , i . e . df D [ • s ( f ) v s ] dt . Thus , the likelihood of bond survival can be described in terms of instantaneous force—now equivalent to time , dS 1 = d f D ¡ t off [ k ! . f / C k ˆ . f / ] S 1 . f / = r f . f / C t off k ˆ . f / = r f . f / ; ( 4 ) as expressed in dimensionless force f D f = f ﬂ and loading rate r f ( f ) · t off [ • s ( f ) v s ] = f ﬂ . The easiest rupture process to analyze is one where the disjoining force is per - sistent and does not diminish with separation distance ( as illustrated in Figure 2 ) . Once force rises above the thermal scale f ﬂ , i . e . R r f dt > t off , molecules separated well beyond the barrier continue to move apart faster than diffusion can recombine them and rebinding vanishes ( k ˆ S o » 0 ) . Driven far from equilibrium , the kine - tics of escape determine the likelihood of being in the bound state , i . e . dS 1 = d f … ¡ ( t off k ! = r f ) S 1 or equivalently S 1 . f / … exp f¡ R o ! f [ t off k ! . y / = r f . y / ] d y g . P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 115 The statistics of rupture between forces of f and f C 1 f are described by the distribution p ( f ) … [ k ! ( f ) = r f ( f ) ] S 1 ( f ) . The distribution peak locates the force f ⁄ for most frequent rupture , which deﬁnes bond strength . The peak arises from the crossover between exponentiation of failure rate and precipitous decline in bond survival under increasing force . The maximum , @ p . f / = @ f D 0 , relates bond strength f ⁄ to loading rate r f through the expression , [ t off k ! ] f D f ⁄ D r f [ @ ln . k ! / = @ f ¡ @ ln . r f / = @ f ] f D f ⁄ : ( 5 ) Thus , far from equilibrium , a bond conﬁned by a single - sharp barrier [ where t off k ! D exp ( f ) ] fails most often at a force exactly proportional to log ( loading rate ) , i . e . f ⁄ = f ﬂ D ln ( r f ) , with a slope set by the thermal force f ﬂ ( 10 , 13 ) . This simple relation shows that strength emerges when the loading rate becomes fast enough to contribute k B T of energy or greater to the bond within its natural lifetime t off , i . e . ( 1 f = 1 t ) ‚ f ﬂ / t off . Even with no experimental uncertainty , the distribution is broadened by kinetics and the standard deviation ( 1 f ) is set by the thermal force , 1 f D f ﬂ . Impact of Rebinding on Rupture Force and Role of Probe Mechanics As depicted in Figure 2 , a persistent force tilts the energy landscape so that the bond exists far from equilibrium with little chance of rebinding after escape . In experiments , however , pulling on a bond with a probe creates a transient capture well that enables rebinding as illustrated in Figure 3 a . The energy landscape only approaches the far - from - equilibrium condition if the probe linkage to the bond is very soft or once the force has become large enough to drop the energy level of the capture well below the bound state . For a harmonic disjoining potential , the ratio of rebinding - to - unbinding rates k ˆ = k ! will diminish as » exp ( ¡ f 2 = 2 • s ) on a scale set by the dimensionless spring constant • s · • s x ﬂ = f ﬂ and force f · f = f ﬂ . In the context of Kramers’ 1 - D theory , on rate ( 1 / time / concentration ) is idealized by k on D ( x ﬂ = t off ) exp [ E o = k B T ] , where E o is the difference in energy between free and bound states . But when linked to a probe , the rate of rebinding can be retarded signiﬁcantly so that we need to include the effect of probe - linkage dynamics in the kinetics . In addition , stiffness of the probe linkage ( curvature of the potential ) diminishes the reduction in barrier height under force and introduces a bias into the dependence of escape rate on force , i . e . t off k ! D exp ( f ¡ • s = 2 ) for f ‚ • s . This bias shows that the force must be large enough to push the capture well beyond the transition state to allow escape . [ For extremely stiff probe linkages ( > 1 nN / nm ) , the caveat is that the level of force • s x ﬂ may exceed the maximum gradient j @ E = @ x j max in the molecular potential of mean force . As such , thermal activation would not aid escape . Over the course of detachment , the probe force would reﬂect a thermally - weighted average of the gradient in free energy potential based on the variance in force , – f 2 » k B T ¢ • s . ] P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 116 EVANS Figure 3 ( a ) Conceptual energy landscape for a simple bond under probe detachment . Elastic compliance of the probe linkage creates a transient capture well that enables rebinding and depends on stiffness • s . ( b ) Force thresholds for bond rupture produced at low rates of loading by rebinding as a function of probe linkage stiffness . Crossover to rate - dependent forces occurs when forward ( escape ) rate exceeds reverse ( rebinding ) rate , i . e . k ! > k ˆ , which depends on a characteristic ratio ‰ $ of dissociation - to - rebinding time scales ( see text ) . At the most simple level , rebinding is modelled by kinetics in two contiguous regions : The ﬁrst region is the capture well , where viscous damping ‡ s and elas - ticity • s of the probe linkage govern relaxation time , i . e . t s · ‡ s = • s . The second region is local to the barrier , where t on D x ﬂ = k on sets the time scale for entry to the bound state . Analyzed with Kramers’ approach , the combined impedance of the two regions and the elastic potential yield the ratio of transition rates , k ˆ = k ! … ‰ $ ( • s = 2 … ) 1 = 2 exp ( ¡ f 2 = 2 • s ) , which depends on a pseudo - equilibrium constant , ‰ $ D t off = [ t on C t s g . f / ] with g . f / » 1 = f for f > 1 . Based on this model and constant detachment speed , solutions of the master equation ( Equation 4 ) demon - strate that rupture force remains close to a threshold until rebinding events vanish ( i . e . once k ! > k ˆ or f > [ 2 • s ln ( ‰ $ ) ] 1 = 2 ) . We see in Figure 3 b that the threshold depends strongly on stiffness of the probe linkage . Consequently , rebinding ef - fects diminish when bonds are connected to probes by soft linkages like polymers . For example , consider freely jointed chains in the asymptotic regime ; the ratio of transition rates is approximated by , k ˆ = k ! … ‰ $ ( • s = 2 … ) 1 = 2 = ( f C 1 ) Lp = b . ( Again , ‰ $ D t off = [ x ﬂ = k on C t s g . f / ] with g . f / » 1 = . f C 1 / ; the polymer is characterized by dimensionless stiffness , • s … ( x ﬂ 2 = L p b ) , and damping ‡ s . ) Because rebinding P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 117 vanishes when k ! > k ˆ , long polymers ( L p = b (cid:192) 1 ) signiﬁcantly suppress rebind - ing and the threshold drops to small forces approximated by f » ( ‰ $ ) b = Lp ¡ 1 . Arising from transient conﬁnement , the strength threshold is analogous to the close - to - equilibrium situation where depth of the disjoining potential matches the free energy of binding . However , in the case of bond breakage , the threshold regimemaynotrepresentunrestrictedequilibrium ; retardationbytheprobelinkage can lead to steady balances between unbinding and rebinding on a much longer time scale . Examining the rate - independent threshold and the crossover to a rate - dependent force could be a useful way to explore the approach to a bound state . On the other hand , accurate determination of barriers to dissociation requires that the rupture process be kept far from equilibrium , which reveals a special role for polymer linkages in the case of stiff probes . Impact of Soft - Polymer Linkages on Rupture Force Polymerlinkagesareveryusefulforprojectingandisolatingreactivesitesinsingle - molecule experiments as well as for suppression of rebinding events . However , polymer linkages to stiff probes can introduce unexpected deviations in bond strength under steady speed detachment ( 14 ) . Described earlier and demonstrated in Figures 1 c and 1 d , polymer connections produce nonlinear loading dynamics , where loading rate increases markedly near bond failure . For a stiff probe and constant detachment speed , the rate of loading increases with level of force , r f ( f ) … ( v s = v ﬂ ) f 1 C 1 = ﬁ , parameterized by a characteristic velocity , v ﬂ … ( L p = ﬁ t off ) ( x ﬂ = c b ) 1 = ﬁ . ( Recall : ﬁ D 1 & c D 1 for a freely jointed polymer and ﬁ D 2 & c D 4 for a worm - like polymer . ) The thermal scale v ﬂ for velocity represents the speed needed to pull the polymer taut within the time t off for spontaneous unbinding . Hence , far from equilibrium , the most likely rupture force is derived from Equation 5 to be , f ⁄ … f ﬂ ln . v s = v ﬂ / C f ﬂ [ ln . f ⁄ = f ﬂ ¡ 1 ¡ 1 = ﬁ / C . 1 = ﬁ / ln . f ⁄ = f ﬂ / ] ; ( 6 ) which approaches the expected proportionality to log ( detachment rate ) at high speeds ( v s (cid:192) v ﬂ ) but deviates signiﬁcantly at low speeds . Equation 6 shows that when pulled by polymers , measurements of rupture force versus separation veloc - ity with stiff probes yield thermal scales for force f ﬂ and velocity v ﬂ but not the time scale t off . In order to establish t off , contour and persistence lengths ( L p , b ) of the polymer linkage must be known . These features are demonstrated ﬁrst in Figure 4 a by correlation of Equation 6 to AFM tests of unfolding Ig domains in native titin , which yields f ﬂ … 12 pN and v ﬂ … 6 . 7 £ 10 ¡ 3 nm / sec . Taking L p » 100 nm and b » 0 . 4 nm for the contour and persistence lengths of the titin worm - like chain ( 37 ) , the approximate time scale for unfolding is t off » 1 hr . Second in Figure 4 b , correlation of Equation 6 to AFM tests of unbinding vascular endothelial ( VE ) cadherin dimers linked by PEG polymers ( 3 ) appears similar in form but yields very different values , f ﬂ … 5 pN and v ﬂ … 8 . 3 nm / sec . Tak - ing a range of » 20 nm – 60 nm reported ( 3 ) for the extended length L p of the P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 118 EVANS Figure 4 ( a ) Force versus log ( velocity ) obtained by unfolding Ig domains in » 100 nm pieces of native titin at steady speed with AFM ( data replotted from Rief et al , 37 ) . Matched to the data , the dotted curve is force as a function of pulling speed predicted by Equation 6 for asymptotic loading of a bond through worm - like polymers . ( b ) By comparison , lower forces were needed to rupture PEG - linked cadherin dimers with AFM under much faster speeds ( data replotted from Baumgartner et al , 3 ) . Matched to the data , the dotted curve is the prediction from Equation 6 for asymptotic loading of a bond through freely jointed polymers . freely - jointed PEG ( polyethyleneglycol ) and b » 0 . 4 nm for segment length , the time scale for unbinding is , t off » 5 – 17 sec . It is important to note that proper treatment of the polymer loading dynamics can lead to different barrier locations x ﬂ and very different time scales t off vis - a - vis those derived from straight line ﬁts based on steady loading dynamics . Dynamic Force Spectroscopy of Simple Bonds Under steady ramps of force in time , the signature of escape over a sharp energy barrier is a straight line in a plot of rupture force versus log ( loading rate ) . An example of this ideal behavior is shown in Figure 5 a by BFP measurements of forces needed to extract single diC14 lipids from the surface of a lipid : cholesterol vesicle ( 12 , 30 ) . Linear in log ( loading rate ) over a thousand - fold span in rate , the slope f ﬂ of the data in this case is governed by hydrophobic exposure of the lipid alkyl chains to water , which is ideally set by the insertion depth in the membrane . Thus , with » 2 nm for the half - thickness of a lipid : cholesterol membrane , the slope P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 119 Figure 5 ( a ) Force versus log ( loading rate ) obtained by BFP extraction of single recep - tor lipids ( biotin - PEG - diC14 PE ) from a SOPC : CHOL lipid vesicle ( 12 , 30 ) . ( b ) Force ver - sus log ( loading rate ) obtained by BFP rupture of single biotin bonds to streptavidin ( 34 ) . Matched to the data , the solid curve shows the continuous spectrum predicted by Equation 7 for passage of two energy barriers . The dotted lines show the linear spectra of force proportional to log ( loading rate ) that each barrier would produce independently set by its thermal scale for force f ﬂ D k B T = x ﬂ and rate of transition 1 = t off . of strength versus log ( loading rate ) is expected to be » k B T / 2 nm , which is close to the slope » 2 . 1 pN of the data in Figure 5 a . The loading rate ( 1 f = 1 t ) f ⁄ D o ex - trapolated to zero force and the slope f ﬂ establish an apparent force - free lifetime , i . e . t off … f ﬂ = ( 1 f = 1 t ) f ⁄ D o , which is » 30 seconds for diC14 lipid anchoring . To - gether , the thermal scales for force and apparent lifetime deﬁne the kinetics of lipid unbinding as a function of pulling force , which is a single exponential in this case . The outcome reveals the profound impact of force on the rate of lipid unbinding , which increased from an apparent force - free off rate of » 0 . 03 / sec to > 1500 / sec at small forces of » 23 pN . The off rate 1 = t off obtained from extrapolation of lipid pullout to zero force is labelled apparent because the value is ﬁfty - fold faster than the rate for dissocia - tion of similar PEG - biotinylated diC14 lipids from lipid vesicles in solution ( 39 ) . The slower rate in solution implies that lipids stick transiently to a membrane interface—albeit weakly—after leaving the hydrocarbon core . This comparison demonstrates that molecular attractions exterior to a binding site can signiﬁcantly prolong association in solution yet escape detection in probe tests because the P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 120 EVANS peripheral interaction is overwhelmed by small forces ( e . g . • 1 pN ) . Likewise , application of force could also eliminate pathways available to spontaneous dis - sociation , which would yield a slower apparent off rate . Hence , there is no reason to expect that the apparent lifetime derived from extrapolation of rupture kinetics to zero force should match the lifetime measured for dissociation in solution . Very useful , however , the logarithmic intercept ln ( 1 f = 1 t ) f ⁄ D o is governed by height of the barrier , i . e . ln ( 1 f = 1 t ) f ⁄ D o D ¡ E b = k B T C ln ( f ﬂ = t D ) , relative to a logarithmic bias set by the molecular scale f ﬂ = t D for loading rate . Hence , changes in the intercept and slope of a linear regime can be used to quantify chemical modiﬁcations of barrier energy , i . e . 1 E b = k B T … ¡ 1 ln ( 1 f = 1 t ) f ⁄ D o C 1 ln ( f ﬂ ) , as - suming that molecular damping remains constant . With location x ﬂ of a transition state implicit in the slope and barrier energy linked to loading rate intercept , linear proportionality of force to log ( loading rate ) provides a dynamic - spectral image of a single activation barrier . Dynamic Force Spectroscopy of Complex Molecular Bonds Rupture of a complex molecular bond is likely to involve passage over a cascade of activation barriers . As described earlier , application of force leads to suppression of outer barriers and exposure of inner barriers , which then dominate kinetics ( cf . Figure 2 b ) . Because force increases with time , the nontrivial aspect of a complex bond is that the ﬂux of states can vary signiﬁcantly over the energy landscape where the local minima between barriers may act as transient “attractors” for states . In this situation , a hierarchy of master equations ( Table 1 ) must be solved to describe transitions from the bound state to the next local minimum and so on until reaching the ﬁnal detached state , where likelihood of being in the N th level ( local minimum ) is the function S N ( t ) of time . Under the rising force , the forward transition rates k N ! N ¡ 1 and ratios of forward - to - reverse rates ( k N ! N ¡ 1 = k N ˆ N ¡ 1 ) evolve as exp [ f ( t ) = f ﬂ ( N ) ] and exp ( ¡ 1 E N , N C 1 ( t ) = k B T ) driven by time - dependent changes in force . Although rapid dynamics can be very complicated ( 20 ) , the simplifying feature for barriers separated by large differences in energy is that a prominent barrier , exposed by the instantaneous level of force , effectively limits the diffusive trickle of states leading to rupture at a particular time . Thus , the rate of escape can be approximated by the reciprocal sum of times to transit barriers expressed in Equation 2 but where force now depends on time . Under a ramp of force , ruptureofacomplexbondistherebyreducedtoescapeoverasingle - dynamic barrier that changes location along the reaction coordinate as well as height with time . ( Far from equilibrium , solution of the master equations for dissociation at constant force yields exactly the result given by Equation 2 . ) With the time - dependent unbinding rate approximated by Equation 2 , the most frequent force f ⁄ for detachment of a complex bond is easily derived from Equation 5 and follows a transcendental dependence on loading rate 1 f = 1 t given by , 6 n [ t off . n / = f ﬂ . n / ] exp [ ¡ f ⁄ = f ﬂ . n / ] D 1 = . 1 f = 1 t / : ( 7 ) P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 121 TABLE 1 Master equations for evolution of states in an N - level system Bound . . dS N = dt D ¡f k N ! N ¡ 1 C k N C 1 ˆ N g S N ( t ) C k N C 1 ! N S N C 1 ( t ) C k N ˆ N ¡ 1 S N ¡ 1 ( t ) . . Unbound dS o = dt D ¡ k 1 ˆ o S o ( t ) C k 1 ! o S 1 ( t ) [ Again , each n th barrier is described by a time scale for passage t off ( n ) … t D exp [ E b ( n ) = k B T ] set by the height E b ( n ) above the bound state and a force scale f ﬂ ( n ) D k B T = x ﬂ ( n ) set by the length x ﬂ ( n ) . ] The continuous nature of this spec - trum is demonstrated in Figure 5 b by correlation to BFP detachment of biotin - streptavidin bonds ( 34 ) . The analytical spectrum for multiple barriers crosses over smoothly from one near - linear regime to the next , connected by a high - curvature bend . ThedashedlinesinFigure5 b showthelinearfunctionsoflog ( force / time ) de - ﬁned by the transition rate 1 = t off ( n ) and force f ﬂ ( n ) derived for each barrier from the correlation . We then see that throughout each regime , a single activation barrier or chemical transition state dominates unbinding kinetics . In Figure 5 b , the strength regimes for biotin - streptavidin place the ﬁrst barrier at x ﬂ » 0 . 1 nm and the next barrier at x ﬂ » 0 . 5 nm . These two transition states are consistent with the effective locations of prominent chemical barriers revealed by molecular dynamics ( 19 , 22 ) in simulations of biotin - streptavidin rupture ( when averaged over rapid motions ; 10 , 13 ) . Though difﬁcult to access , another low strength regime seems to charac - terize very long time scales at forces below 5 pN ( 34 ) . Relative to the off rate of » 1 = 55 hrs in solution , the rate of unbinding for biotin - streptavidin bonds increases dramatically in these experiments , ﬁrst to » 1 / min under minuscule forces of » 5 pN , and ultimately to » 3000 / sec as force reaches 200 pN—almost nine orders of magnitude ampliﬁcation ! The power of DFS is the capability to look inside molecular interactions and accurately determine properties of prominent transition states that govern this incredible reduction in lifetime . Moreover , the prominent barriers imaged by DFS along the force - driven reaction coordinate provide im - portant data for comparison with molecular dynamics simulations to provide new insights into molecular chemistry ( 10 , 22 , 29 ) . However , the challenge is to mea - sure forces over many orders of magnitude in loading rates . Force Spectra of Multiple Bonds A major complication in measurements of bond strength is the occurrence of mul - tiple bonds . Moreover , single attachments between macromolecules often involve binding interactions distributed over many widely separated groups and behave as multiply bonded systems . Even if the numbers of bonds or localized sites for P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 122 EVANS binding are known , force spectra for multiply bonded structures can be difﬁcult or impossible to interpret because the partition of force and the degree of cooperativity among binding sites are unknown . However , force spectra for a few generic types of multiple bonds can provide useful insights into the nature of hidden interactions in a molecular assembly . We begin with a description of mechanical scenarios for these multiple bonds . In the case of bonds in series , force is experienced fully by each bond . By comparison , a zipper is an array of bonds where force is applied only to the lead bond ; once that bond fails , force propagates to the next bond and so on . Finally , for bonds in parallel , the force is partitioned among existing bonds in the attachment . These idealized cases are simple stereotypes of multiply bonded attachments . It is important to recognize that structural deformation on the nanoscale can lead to very different conditions of loading for multiple bonds . Still , the series , zipper , and parallel bond descriptions encompass a broad range of conﬁgurations . For complete cooperativity , the series and parallel loading cases are simple . The bonds act as a macro - single bond with a barrier given by the sum of individual barrier energies . When N - identical bonds are considered , the time scale for disso - ciation rises exponentially as approximated by t off ( N ) … N t off exp [ ( N ¡ 1 ) E b = k B T ] . ( The prefactor N is based on the putative model that molecular damping also scales with N . ) For identical bonds in parallel , location of the transition state and thermal force scale remain that for a single bond , i . e . f D f = f ﬂ . However , for identical bonds in series , each bond contributes an increment in length along the direction of force in unbinding , and thus , the thermal force scale is reduced N - fold , i . e . f D N f / f ﬂ . The unbinding rate for N bonds in series , t off ( N ) k ! D exp ( N f ) , increases much faster with force than the rate for N bonds in parallel , t off ( N ) k ! D exp ( f ) . As such , it takes much less force for cooperative failure of N bonds in series far from equilibrium , i . e . f ⁄ … . f ﬂ = N / [ ln . r f / C 2 ln . N / C . N ¡ 1 / E b = k B T ] ; ( 8 ) than for N bonds in parallel , i . e . f ⁄ … f ﬂ [ ln . r f / C ln . N / C . N ¡ 1 / E b = k B T ] ; ( 9 ) as derived with Equation 5 . An important corollary for cooperative failure of N bonds in series is that the width of the force distribution narrows as 1 = N , i . e . stan - dard deviation 1 f D f ﬂ = N , which is to be expected . Cooperative unbinding of N bonds in series has been beautifully demonstrated by AFM fracture of short DNA duplexes ( 46 ) . In Figure 6 a , the forces needed to fracture duplexes as a function of detachment speed are shown correlated with Equation 8 . Each force spectrum follows the form given in Equation 6 because PEG polymers were used as linkages for the complementary strands ( 46 ) . Thus , the correlation in Figure 6 a yields thermal scales for force f ﬂ = N » ( 35 = N ) pN ( i . e . x ﬂ » N £ 0 . 116 nm ) and velocity , v ﬂ ( N ) » ( 3 £ 10 5 nm / sec ) exp [ ¡ ( N ¡ 1 ) E b = k B T ] , characterized by an energy per base pair E b » 1 . 4 k B T . To derive the P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 123 apparent lifetime t off ( N ) for each duplex , the contour length L p and persistence length b of the polymer linkage must be speciﬁed , i . e . t off ( N ) … ( 1 = N ) [ L p = v ﬂ ( N ) ] [ x ﬂ ( N ) = b ] . Figure 1 c taken from the report ( 46 ) indicates that the contour length for the PEG linkers is approximately L p » 60 nm with a segment length b » 0 . 4 nm . Thus , the apparent lifetime for a duplex increases exponentially with the number of base pairs as , t off ( N ) … ( 10 ¡ 5 £ 10 0 . 6N ) sec . The decrease of force scale and exponentiation of time scale with number of base pairs were nicely demonstrated in the report ( 46 ) . However , more explicit treatment of the nonlinear loading dynamics in Figure 6 a yields a much faster time scale for kinetics than was obtained from straight line ﬁts and steady loading dynamics based on a ﬁxed estimate for polymer stiffness . Random , uncooperative failure leads to a completely different behavior for multiply bonded attachments . The trivial case is that of N - identical bonds in series . Here , each bond experiences the same force history and any rupture event leads to failure of the attachment . Thus , when driven far from equilibrium , the rate of failure events is N - fold faster than the rate for one bond , which weakens the attachment slightly compared to a single bond at a particular loading rate , i . e . f ⁄ D f ﬂ [ ln ( r f ) ¡ ln ( N ) ] . More subtle , we expect a linkage of dissimilar bonds to rupture most often at the weakest bond and na¨ıvely also expect that strong versus weak should scale as the energy barriers sustaining the bonds . But surprisingly , thermal force scales for exponentiation of unbinding rates are also important factors in determination of strong versus weak . This follows from the failure rate given by the sum of unbinding rates for the bonds . Taking properties ( t off or E b , and f ﬂ ) of the bond with smaller barrier energy for a reference , the rate of failure for two bonds in series is expressed as , t off k ! … exp ( f = f ﬂ ) { 1 C exp [ ¡ 1 E b = k B T C f 1 ( 1 = f ﬂ ) ] g ; 1 E b > 0 and 1 ( 1 = f ﬂ ) are the differences of barrier energy and rate - exponentiation scale for the bond with the higher barrier . Based on the combinded rate of failure , the force spectrum derived from Equation 5 shows that the bond with the smaller energy barrier will remain the weak bond so long as the inequality , 1 E b / k B T > f 1 ( 1 = f ﬂ ) , holds . This means that the bond with a small barrier always unbinds faster [ i . e . 1 ( 1 = f ﬂ ) < 0 or equivalently 1 ( x ﬂ ) > 0 ] . However , if the bond with a higher barrier has a greater ampliﬁcation of rate under force [ i . e . 1 ( 1 = f ﬂ ) > 0 ] , then a crossover , 1 E b = k B T < f 1 ( 1 = f ﬂ ) , will occur as the force is increased . Beyond the crossover , the bond with a higher barrier will become the most likely site of failure ( i . e . the weak bond ) . Thus , in a DFS spectrum , an abrupt reduction of slope from a linear regime at low loading rates to the next linear regime at higher rates signals a switch in site for failure among bonds in a series linkage ( 10 ) . In zipper - like failure , bonds break in sequence at random times from ﬁrst to last . As such , the master equations in Table 1 predict the likely sequence of rupture events where each bond along the zipper acts like a barrier in a complex bond , and the index “n” ranges over the number of bonds , i . e . N ‚ n ‚ 1 . Hence , far from equilibrium , the single - dynamic barrier model expressed by Equations 2 and 7 can be used to approximate the detachment force under steady loading . Given identical bonds , t off k ! … 1 = [ 6 n n exp ( ¡ f ) ] D exp ( f ) = N , so ﬁnal separation P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 124 EVANS Figure 6 ( a ) Force versus log ( velocity ) obtained by fracture of PEG - linked duplexes of DNA at steady speed with AFM ( data replotted from Strunz et al , 46 ) . The slopes of the data diminish with increase in number of base pairs , which led to the conclusion that the unbinding process was cooperative ( 46 ) . Matched to the data , the dotted curves are forces as a function of pulling speed predicted by the cooperative model in Equation 8 using Equation 6 to represent loading of the duplexes through freely jointed polymers . ( b ) Force versus log ( loading rate ) obtained by BFP rupture of single carbohydrate ligand bonds to L - selectin ( 11 ) . The ligands represent important functional components of the mucin P - selectin glycoprotein ligand - 1 : the native homodimer ( PSGL - 1 ) , an Ig chimera of the 19 amino acid tip of PSGL - 1 ( 19FT ) , and the tetrasaccharide sialyl Lewis X ( bsLe X ) . Both native L - selectin on leukocytes ( PMN ) and recombinant L - selectin on glass microspheres ( ms ) were probed with the ligand - decorated BFP . Matched to the data , the solid curve shows the continuous spectrum predicted by Equation 7 for passage of two energy barriers . The dotted lines show the force proportional to log ( loading rate ) spectrum that each barrier would produce independently . of the zipper occurs at a force , f ⁄ D f ﬂ [ ln ( r f ) C ln ( N ) ] , only slightly larger than needed to break the lead bond . This feature is seen in multiple unfolding of Ig domains along native titin by LOT ( 26 ) . On the other hand , macromolecular zippers are made up of widely separated and chemically diverse bonds . A good example is the complex carbohydrate - protein bond formed between the mucin P - selectin glycoprotein ligand - 1 ( PSGL - 1 ) and the lectin domain of a selectin receptor . In Figure 6 b , force spectra are shown for detachment of PSGL - 1 bonds ( and small molecular components of PSGL - 1 ) to L - selectin ( 11 ) . Surprisingly , strengths of bonds between the small tetrasaccharide sLe X and L - selectin are nearly P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 125 indistinguishable from strengths of L - selectin bonds to the native 316 amino acid PSGL - 1 or its outer 19 amino acid tip ( which has one site for sLe X ) over almost four orders of magnitude in loading rate . The spectra reveal a sequence of two transition states . As found by correlation with Equation 7 in Figure 6 b , slopes of the two strength regimes place the ﬁrst barrier at x ﬂ < 0 . 1 nm and the next barrier at x ﬂ … 0 . 4 nm . When EDTA was added to chelate Ca CC , the high strength regime vanished and , thus , the transition state was shown to originate speciﬁcally from a Ca CC bond between a single sLe X group and the lectin domain ( 11 ) . This demonstrates how DFS can be used to identify unique arrangements of small molecules that govern bond strength on different time scales . Finishing with identical bonds loaded in parallel , we assume that each bond rupture event is far from equilibrium with no chance of rebinding and that force is shared equally by existing bonds in the attachment . Thus , the force experienced by bonds increases with each failure event during detachment , i . e . f = bond D f = ( N ¡ n ) with n from 0 ! N ¡ 1 . Also , at each step , there are N ¡ n possibilities for unbinding , which decreases the time scale for events by 1 = ( N ¡ n ) . With these rules for load distribution and time scale , rupture of N - bonds in parallel under constant rate of loading can again be modeled far from equilibrium with Equations 2 and 7 . As such , the unbinding rate , t off k ! D 1 = f 6 1 ! N ( 1 = n ) exp ( ¡ f = n ) g , is roughly approximated by , t off k ! … ( f = N ) exp ( f = N ) , which implies that forces needed to break a parallel bond attachment are essentially a factor of N larger than for a single bond under the same rate of loading , f ⁄ … N f b [ ln . r f / ¡ ln . f ⁄ = f b / ] : ( 10 ) As a ﬁnal note regarding these multiple bond models , numerical solutions to the master equations yield nearly the same detachment forces as those predicted by collapse of the N - level hierarchy to a single - dynamic barrier when driven far from equilibrium . This demonstrates the efﬁcacy of the approximation expressed by Equations 2 and 7 . FINAL COMMENTS We have seen that measuring the relation between force and lifetime can provide an intimate view of prominent barriers in the chemical energy landscape that govern physical strength and kinetics of molecular bonds under stress . At the same time , speciﬁc experimental requirements must be met to obtain a reliable picture of this landscape . Not only do we need an accurate and sensitive force probe , we ﬁrst have to be conﬁdent that we are only testing single molecular attachments . This means we have to operate with extremely dilute sites for attachments , and we must also regulate the assembly process ( e . g . through very soft touch under feedback control ) . Next , we have to know the compliance properties of the linkage to the bond ( e . g . the contour and persistence lengths of polymeric connections ) and the dynamic response when coupled to the probe . Having met these requirements , it P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 126 EVANS is imperative to measure forces over an enormous range of time scales or , more speciﬁcally , loading rates . As shown by the force spectra for ligand - receptor bonds , measuring forces over two orders of magnitude or less in rate , as done in many probe experiments , only provides a narrow glimpse of the landscape and can completely miss important features of complex chemical interactions . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author gratefully acknowledges support from US National Institutes of Health grants HL31579 and HL54700 and from Medical Research Council of Canada grant MT7477 . Visit the Annual Reviews home page at www . AnnualReviews . org LITERATURE CITED 1 . Ashkin A . 1992 . Forces of a single - beam gradient laser trap on a dielectric sphere in the ray optics regime . Biophys . J . 61 : 569 – 82 1a . Ashkin A . 1997 . Optical trapping and ma - nipulation of neutral particles using lasers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 4853 – 60 2 . Ashkin A , Schutze K , Dziedzic JM , Eu - teneuer U , Schliwa M . 1990 . Force genera - tionoforganelletransportmeasuredinvivobyaninfraredlasertrap . Nature 348 : 346 – 48 3 . Baumgartner W , Hinterdorfer P , Ness W , Raab A , Vestweber D , et al . 2000 . Cad - herin interaction probed by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 : 4005 – 10 4 . Bell GI . 1978 . Models for the speciﬁc ad - hesionofcellstocells . Science 200 : 618 – 27 5 . Binning G , Quate CF , Gerber CH . 1986 . Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 : 930 – 33 6 . Block SM . 1995 . One small step for myosin . Nature 378 : 132 – 33 7 . Clausen - Schaumann H , Rief M , Tolksdorf C , Gaub HE . 2000 . Mechanical stabil - ity of single DNA molecules . Biophys . J . 78 : 1997 – 2007 8 . Cluzel P , Lebrun A , Heller C , Lavery R , Viovy J - L , et al . 1996 . DNA : an extensible molecule . Science 271 : 792 – 94 9 . Essevaz - Roulet B , Bockelmann U , Heslot F . 1997 . Mechanical separation of comple - mentary strands of DNA . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 11935 – 40 10 . Evans E . 1998 . Energy landscapes of biomolecular adhesion and receptor an - choring at interfaces explored with dy - namic force spectroscopy . Faraday Dis - cuss . Chem . Soc . 111 : 1 – 16 11 . Evans E , Leung A , Hammer D , Simon S . 2000 . Chemically - distinct transition states govern rapid dissociation of single L - selectin bonds under force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA In press 12 . Evans E , Ludwig F . 2000 . Dynamic strengths of molecular anchoring and ma - terial cohesion in ﬂuid biomembranes . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 12 : A315 – 20 13 . Evans E , Ritchie K . 1997 . Dynamic strength of molecular adhesion bonds . Bio - phys . J . 72 : 1541 – 55 14 . Evans E , Ritchie K . 1999 . Strength of a weak bond connecting ﬂexible polymer chains . Biophys . J . 76 : 2439 – 47 15 . Evans E , Ritchie K , Merkel R . 1995 . Sen - sitive force technique to probe molec - ular adhesion and structural linkages at biological interfaces . Biophys . J . 68 : 2580 – 87 16 . Finer JT , Simmons RM , Spudich JA . 1994 . Single myosin molecule mechanics : P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 PROBING STRENGTHS OF MOLECULAR BONDS 127 piconewton forces and nanometer steps . Nature 368 : 113 – 19 17 . Fritz J , Katopodis AG , Kolbinger F , Ansel - metti D . 1998 . Force mediated kinet - ics of single P - selectin / ligand complexes observed by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 : 12283 – 88 18 . Grandbois M , Beyer M , Rief M , Clausen - Schaumann H , Gaub HE . 1999 . How strong is a covalent bond ? Science 283 : 1727 – 30 19 . Grubmuller H , Heymann B , Tavan P . 1996 . Ligand binding : molecular mechanics cal - culation of the streptavidin - biotin rupture force . Science 271 : 997 – 99 20 . Hanggi P , Talkner P , Borkovec M . 1990 . Reaction - rate theory : ﬁfty years after Kra - mers . Rev . Mod . Phys . 62 : 251 – 342 21 . Harada Y , Funatsu T , Murakami K , Nonoyama Y , Ishihama A , Yanagida T . 1999 . Single molecule imaging of RNA polymerase - DNA interactions in real time . Biophys . J . 76 : 709 – 15 22 . Heymann B , Grubmuller H . 2000 . Dy - namic force spectroscopy of molecular ad - hesion bonds . Phys . Rev . Lett . 84 : 6126 – 29 23 . Howard J . 1998 . Molecular motors : struc - tural adaptations to cellular functions . Na - ture 389 : 561 – 66 24 . Hunt AJ , Gittes F , Howard J . 1994 . The force exerted by a single kinesin molecule against a viscous load . Biophys . J . 67 : 766 – 81 25 . Izrailev S , Stepaniants S , Balsera M , Oono Y , Schulten K . 1976 . Molecular dynam - ics study of unbinding of the avidin - biotin complex . Biophys . J . 72 : 1568 – 81 26 . Kellermayer MSZ , Smith SB , Granzier HL , Bustamante C . 1997 . Folding - unfold - ing transitions in single titin molecules characterized with lazer tweezers . Science 276 : 1112 – 16 27 . Kramers HA . 1940 . Brownian motion in a ﬁeld of force and the diffusion model of chemical reactions . Physica 7 : 284 – 304 28 . Kuo SC , Sheetz MP . 1993 . Force of single kinesin molecules measured with optical tweezers . Science 260 : 232 – 34 29 . Lu H , Schulten K . 1999 . Steered molec - ular dynamics simulations of force - induced protein domain unfolding . Pro - teins : Struct . Funct . Genet . 35 : 453 – 63 30 . Ludwig F , Evans E . 2000 . How strong is molecular anchoring in biomembranes ? BIF Futura 15 : 96 – 103 31 . Marrink S - J , Berger O , Tieleman P , Jahnig F . 1998 . Adhesionforcesoflipidsinaphos - pholipid membrane studied by molecular dynamics simulations . Biophys . J . 74 : 931 – 43 32 . Marszalek PE , Lu H , Li H , Carrion - Vazquez M , Oberhauser AF , et al . 1999 . Mechanical unfolding intermediates in titin molecules . Nature 402 : 100 – 3 33 . Marszalek PE , Oberhauser AF , Pang Y - P , Fernandez JM . 1998 . Polysaccharide elas - ticity governed by chair - boat transitions of the glucopyranose ring . Nature 396 : 661 – 64 34 . Merkel R , Nassoy P , Leung A , Ritchie K , Evans E . 1999 . Energy landscapes of re - ceptorligandbondsexploredwithdynamicforcespectroscopy . Nature 397 : 50 – 53 35 . Meyhofer E , Howard J . 1995 . The force generated by a single kinesin molecule against an elastic load . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 574 – 78 36 . Oberhauser AF , Marszalek PE , Erickson HP , Fernandez JM . 1998 . The molecular elasticity of the extracellular matrix pro - tein tenascin . Nature 393 : 181 – 85 37 . Rief M , Gautel M , Osterhelt F , Fer - nandez JM , Gaub HE . 1997 . Reversible unfolding of individual titin immunoglob - ulin domains by AFM . Science 276 : 1109 – 12 38 . Rief M , Osterhelt F , Heymann B , Gaub HE . 1997 . Single molecule force spec - troscopy on polysaccharides by AFM . Sci - ence 275 : 1295 – 97 39 . Silvius JR , Zuckermann MJ . 1993 . Inter - bilayer transfer of phospholipid - anchored P1 : FRK April 12 , 2001 18 : 40 Annual Reviews AR128 - 05 128 EVANS macromolecules via monomer diffusion . Biochemistry 32 : 3153 – 61 40 . Simson DA , Ziemann F , Strigl M , Merkel R . 1998 . Micropipet - basedpicoforcetrans - ducer : indepth analysis and experimental veriﬁcation . Biophys . J . 74 : 2080 – 88 41 . Smith SB , Cui Y , Bustamante C . 1996 . Over stretching B - DNA : the elastic res - ponse of individual double - stranded and single - stranded DNA molecules . Science 271 : 795 – 99 42 . StrickTR , AllemandJF , BensimonD , Ben - simon A , Croquette V . 1996 . The elasticity of a single supercoiled DNAmolecule . Sci - ence 271 : 1835 – 37 43 . Strick TR , Allemand JF , Bensimon D , Cro - quetteV . 1998 . Thebehaviorofsupercoiled DNA . Biophys . J . 74 : 2016 – 28 44 . StrickTR , CroquetteV , BensimonD . 1998 . Homologous pairing in stretched super - coiled DNA . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 : 10579 – 83 45 . StrickTR , CroquetteV , BensimonD . 2000 . Single - molecule analysis of DNA uncoil - ing by a type II topoisomerase . Nature 404 : 901 – 4 46 . Strunz T , Oroszlan K , Shafer R , Gun - therodt H - J . 1999 . Dynamic force spec - troscopy of single DNA molecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 11277 – 82 47 . Svoboda K , Schmidt CF , Schnapp BJ , Block SM . 1993 . Direct observations of ki - nesin stepping by optical trapping interfer - ometry . Nature 256 : 721 – 27 48 . van Kampen NG . 1992 . Stochastic Pro - cesses in Physics and Chemistry . Amster - dam : North - Holland . 465 pp . 49 . Wang H , Oster G . 1998 . Energy transduc - tion in the F1 motor of ATP synthase . Na - ture 396 : 279 – 82 50 . Wang MD , Schnitzer MJ , Yin H , Landick R , Gelles J , Block SM . 1998 . Force and velocity measured for single molecules of RNA polymerase . Science 282 : 902 – 7 51 . Yin H , Wang MD , Svoboda K , Landick R , Block SM , Gelles J . 1995 . Transcrip - tion against an applied force . Science 270 : 1653 – 56