Supplemental Data Ligands for Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Are Differentially Sorted into Distinct Populations of Early Endosomes Melike Lakadamyali , Michael J . Rust , and Xiaowei Zhuang Supplemental Experimental Procedures Cell Culture BS - C - 1 cells were maintained in a 5 % CO 2 environment at 37 ° C in MEM with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS unless otherwise mentioned . In some cases , cells were incubated with the lipoprotein - deficient serum overnight before experiments , as specified in the text . Transfection We transiently transfected BS - C - 1 cells with fluorescent protein constructs 24 hours after the cells were plated . Solutions containing 1 - 2 µ g of plasmids and 6 - 9 µ L of FuGENE 6 in 100 µ L of MEM was used for transfection . Experiments were conducted either 24 or 48 hours post - transfection . Immunofluorescence Cells were fixed in 2 % ( v / v ) formaldehyde for 40 min . After being washed in PBS , the cells were permeabilized in a blocking buffer containing 10 % ( v / v ) FBS , 3 % ( w / v ) BSA and 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) Triton X - 100 in PBS . The cells were then incubated at 4 ° C with primary antibodies against EEA1 , CI - MPR , clathrin heavy chain or the α subunit of AP - 2 for 6 - 12 hours . Excess antibody was removed by extensive washing with PBS containing 0 . 2 % ( w / v ) BSA and 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) Triton X - 100 , and the cells were then incubated at room temperature for 30 min with secondary antibodies ( Molecular Probes ) . For immunofluorescence experiments involving transferrin , experimental procedures are similar except that the blocking buffer used contains 0 . 1 % Tween 20 and 5 % BSA and the wash buffer contains 0 . 1 % Tween 20 and 1 % BSA . For immunofluorescence against Dab2 , cells were extracted with 0 . 03 % saponin in cytosolic buffer ( 25mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , 25 mM KCl , 2 . 5 mM magnesium acetate , 5 mM EGTA and 150 mM K - glutamate ) for 1 min prior to fixation with 4 % paraformaldhyde for 20 min . These cells were then permeabilized in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 10 min , blocked in PBS containing 1 % BSA for 60 min , and then incubated with primary antibodies for 90 min and the appropriate secondary antibodies for 60 min . AP2 Knockdown by siRNA To deplete cells of functional AP - 2 , BS - C - 1 cells were transfected twice with siRNA against the µ 2 subunit of AP - 2 , following a previously established protocol ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) . Briefly , 50 µ L of 20 µ M siRNA solution was diluted to a total volume of 1 mL with 50 µ L oligofectAMINE ( Invitrogen ) in serum - free OptiMEM ( Invitrogen ) . This mixture was added to cell culture in a total of 5 mL of OptiMEM . After 4 hours , 5 mL of MEM supplemented with 20 % FBS was added to the cells . This knockdown procedure was performed twice , 24 hours apart , before cells were harvested or used for fluorescence experiments . The AP - 2 expression level was tested by western blot against µ 2 subunit and immunofluorescence against the α subunit . Image Analysis Image analysis and single - particle tracking were carried out using custom - written software as previously described ( Rust et al . , 2004 ) . Colocalization between different structures is identified by an automated program and confirmed by eye . As endosomes have mosaic structures , containing different domains enriched in different proteins , the criteria for colocalization is that the different colored objects ( 1 ) show at least partial overlap and ( 2 ) move together . In fixed cells , the second criterion cannot be used . To estimate the error in the calculated colocalization fraction due overlap by random chance , randomly distributed spots of two different colors with the same densities and spot sizes as in the experimental images were generated by simulation . This typically results a colocalization fraction smaller than 5 % . Supplemental References Lakadamyali , M . , Rust , M . J . , Babcock , H . P . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2003 ) . Visualizing infection of individual influenza viruses . Proc Natl Acad Sci , USA 100 , 9280 - 9285 . Morris , S . M . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Disabled - 2 colocalizes with LDLR in clathrin - coated pits and interacts with AP - 2 . Traffic 2 , 111 - 123 . Motley , A . , Bright , N . A . , Seaman , M . N . J . , and Robinson , M . S . ( 2003 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J Cell Biol 162 , 909 - 918 . Rust , M . J . , Lakadamyali , M . , Zhang , F . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2004 ) . Assembly of endocytic machinery around individual influenza viruses during viral entry . Nat Struct Mol Biol 11 , 567 - 573 . Figure S1 . The Expression of ECFP - Rab5 and EYFP - Rab7 Does Not Significantly Affect the Recycling Kinetics of Transferrin The overall fluorescence signal from Alexa 647 - labeled transferrin per unit area of the cells is plotted as a function of time for untransfected cells ( black ) and cells co - transfected with EYFP - Rab7 and ECFP - Rab5 ( red ) . The decay of fluorescence is due to recycling and subsequent loss of transferrin into the surrounding medium . Experimental procedure : Untransfected or transfected BS - C - 1 cells were incubated with Alexa 647 - labeled transferrin at 0 o C . Unbound transferrin was washed away and the temperature was raised to 37 ˚ C rapidly to allow endocytosis and recycling for 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 25 min . Cells were then fixed on ice and imaged . Error bars are standard errors derived from images of multiple cells . Figure S2 . The Expression of ECFP - Rab5 and EYFP - Rab7 Does Not Significantly Affect the Internalization and Fusion Kinetics of Influenza Viruses ( A ) According to our previous work , influenza virus particles undergo rapid , microtubule - dependent transport from the cell periphery towards the perinuclear region . This microtubule - dependent transport quickly follows uncoating of the clathrin - coated vesicle carrying the virus ( Lakadamyali et al . , 2003 ; Rust et al . , 2004 ) . Here we use the onset of this microtubule - dependent transport as an indication for internalization and determine the time that it takes for each virus particle to begin microtubule - dependent motion after binding to the cell surface ( t MT - t bind ) . Plotted are histograms of t MT - t bind for many randomly selected virus particles in untransfected BS - C - 1cells ( black ) and cells co - transfected with EYFP - Rab7 and ECFP - Rab5 ( red ) . The viruses were labeled with DiD and added to cells in situ at 37 o C . ( B ) The lipid bilayer of the virus must fuse with an acidic endosome before the viral genetic material can be delivered into the cytoplasm . Here we determine the time that it takes for each virus particle to fuse with an endosome after binding to the cell surface ( t fusion - t bind ) . Fusion events are identified by fluorescence dequenching caused by the spreading of DiD into the much larger endosome membrane ( Lakadamyali et al . , 2003 ) . Plotted are fusion time histograms for many randomly selected virus particles . Figure S3 . Temperature Jump Does Not Affect the Endosome Maturation Kinetics Cells co - transfected with ECFP - Rab5 and EYFP - Rab7 were incubated on ice for 15 minutes , transferred to the microscope stage and warmed to 37 o C using a temperature - controlled microscope stage . Data was taken three minutes after the temperature jump . The maturation time histogram obtained in these cells ( color columns ) agrees well with that obtained in cells that have always been kept at 37 o C ( dashed columns ) . Figure S4 . Physical Trajectory ( Top ) and Mean - Square - Displacement versus Time ( Bottom ) for Two Exemplary Dynamic Endosomes ( A and B ) As endosomes exhibit intermittent rapid and directed transport separated by pauses during which the endosomes undergo slow and seemingly random movement that is probably due to diffusion , we screened for the periods of rapid transport with instantaneous velocity greater than 0 . 25 µm / s . The total lengths of the trajectories sampled are typically longer than 150 frames ( 75 s ) . The mean - square - displacement , < ∆ r 2 > , is calculated for these periods . The < ∆ r 2 > vs . ∆ t is clearly super - linear indicating active transport . Figure S5 . Global Analysis of the Transferrin and LDL Distribution in Endosomes In these experiments , ligands ( transferrin ( Tfn ) or LDL ) were added to cells for various amounts of time at 37 o C before fixation and their colocalization with Rab5 , Rab7 , EEA1 and CI - MPR proteins was analyzed in the fixed cells . ( A ) Alexa 647 - labeled transferrin ( 50 µ g / mL ) was added to cells co - expressing ECFP - Rab5 and EYFP - Rab7 at 37 o C . After 2 minutes , cells were washed with ice cold medium and fixed . Shown are fluorescence images for transferrin ( red ) , EYFP - Rab7 ( green ) , ECFP - Rab5 ( blue ) and a three - color composite . Most transferrin molecules that entered Rab5 - positive endosomes do not colocalize with Rab7 ( three examples are indicated by arrows ) . ( B ) DiD - labeled LDL ( 20 µ g / mL ) was added to cells co - expressing ECFP - Rab5 and EYFP - Rab7 at 37 o C . After 2 minutes , cells were washed with ice cold medium containing heparin and then fixed . LDL particles in Rab5 - positive endosomes show a large degree of colocalization with Rab7 . Arrows mark examples of LDL spots that colocalize with both Rab5 and Rab7 . We note that some of the non - internalized LDL still remains on the cell surface after heparin treatment , and separate experiments using acid wash further reduce the surface density of uninternalized LDL particles . ( C ) Quantitative analysis of the colocalization of LDL ( black ) and transferrin ( red ) with Rab proteins after adding these ligands to the cells for 1 , 2 , and 5 min . Plotted is the ratio between the total amount of ligand ( transferrin or LDL ) present in Rab5 and Rab7 co - positive endosomes and the total ligand signal in all Rab5 - positive endosomes . These observations are quantitatively consistent with the single - particle tracking results , which show that transferrin is non - selectively delivered to all Rab5 endosomes , among which only 14 % contain Rab7 , whereas LDL particles are preferentially delivered to the rapidly maturing endosomes with 53 % of the LDL being delivered directly to endosomes containing both Rab5 and Rab7 . ( D ) To test whether this differential sorting behavior for LDL and transferrin might potentially be caused by the expression of ECFP - Rab5 and EYFP - Rab7 , the global distributions of transferrin and LDL ( Cy5 - labeled ) were also analyzed in non - transfected cells . After adding ligands to the cells for 1 , 2 , and 5 min , cells were fixed and stained for immunofluorescence against EEA1 and CI - MPR . Plotted is the ratio between the total amount of ligand in EEA1 and CI - MPR co - positive endosomes and the total ligand signal in all EEA1 - positive endosomes ( solid symbols ) . This ratio is low for transferrin but starts out much higher for LDL . Considering that 10 % of Rab5 - only endosomes and 57 % of Rab5 and Rab7 co - positive endosomes colocalize with CI - MPR , we estimated the fraction of ligands in Rab5 and Rab7 co - positive endosomes by taking these factors into account ( open symbols ) . This estimate agrees quantitatively with the results obtained in ECFP - Rab5 and EYFP - Rab7 expressing cells ( shown in ( C ) ) , indicating that the expression of fluorescent Rab proteins did not alter the trafficking behavior significantly . ( E ) DiD - LDL ( 20 µ g / mL ) and TMR - transferrin ( 50 µ g / mL ) were added to cells simultaneously at 37 o C for 2 minutes . Cells were washed in ice - cold acidic buffer to remove most of the surface - bound material then chased for 3 minutes at 37 o C , fixed and imaged . Although LDL - positive spots ( red ) substantially overlap with transferrin ( green ) , the converse is not true . This is consistent with transferrin being indiscriminately delivered to all early endosomes , while LDL is preferentially targeted to a subset of the early endosomes . Error bars are standard errors derived from images of multiple cells . Figure S6 . Colocalization between Dab2 and CCPs and the Preferential Association of LDL with Dab2 - Positive CCPs ( A ) Colocalization between clathrin and Dab2 . EGFP - clathrin expressing BSC - 1 and HeLa cells were saponin - extracted , fixed and immunostained for Dab2 . In BSC - 1 cells , roughly 30 % of CCPs show colocalization with Dab2 spots . A computer simulation with the same density and size of Dab2 spots shows that less than 8 % of CCPs would colocalize with Dab2 if Dab2 does not preferentially associate with CCPs , but distributes randomly . In HeLa cells , roughly 60 % of CCPs show colocalization with Dab2 , which agrees quantitatively with previous results ( Morris and Cooper , 2001 ) . ( B ) Fraction of CCPs occupied by LDL in HeLa cells . After incubation of EGFP - clathrin expressing HeLa cells with LDL for 3 min at 37 o C , cells were saponin - extracted , fixed and imaged . No matter how high a concentration of LDL was used , the fraction of CCPs loaded with LDL saturated at about 20 % . Immunostaining for Dab2 further shows that the fraction of Dab2 - positive CCPs occupied by LDL is about 2 - fold larger than the fraction of Dab2 - negative CCPs occupied by LDL , similar to the results obtained in BSC - 1 cells . Error bars are standard errors derived from images of multiple cells . Figure S7 . Effect of AP - 2 Knockdown on the Uptake of Transferrin , LDL , EGF , and Influenza Virus ( A ) Immunofluorescence against the α - subunit of AP - 2 in control cells and in cells treated with siRNA to knockdown AP - 2 . Both images were taken under identical laser excitation conditions . Consistent with previous work ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) , the expression of α - subunit is much reduced and shows only very dim spots at a lower density compared to untreated cells . Reduction in the expression of the µ 2 - subunit of AP - 2 was also confirmed by Western blot ( not shown ) . ( B ) Transferrin uptake is blocked by AP - 2 knockdown . Alexa 647 - labeled transferrin ( 50 µ g / mL ) was bound to control cells ( left ) or AP - 2 knockdown cells ( middle and right ) on ice . Unbound ligand was removed , and endocytosis was allowed to proceed at 37 o C for 5 minutes . In the right panel , surface - bound , uninternalized transferrin was removed using an acidic buffer ( 0 . 2M acetic acid , 0 . 5M sodium chloride ) . Cells were then fixed and imaged using identical imaging conditions . Unlike in untreated cells , no detectable signal of transferrin is found in punctate endosomes in AP - 2 knockdown cells , and upon removal of the surface - bound transferrin , little transferrin signal is left in the cells , indicating that the transferrin uptake is blocked by AP - 2 knockdown . ( C ) LDL entry is not inhibited by AP - 2 knockdown . The total amount of LDL that reached Rab5 - positive endosomes is identical within 11 % for control and AP - 2 knockdown cells . We further quantified the uptake rate of LDL by measuring the time it takes each LDL particle to reach a Rab5 - positive endosome after the temperature was raised to 37 o C . Plotted are the time histograms from many randomly selected LDL particles in control ( red ) and AP - 2 knockdown cells ( green ) . No statistically significant difference was found between the two cases . ( D ) EGF entry is not inhibited by AP - 2 knockdown . Analysis is similar to ( C ) . The total amount of EGF that reached Rab5 - positive endosomes is identical within 6 % for control and AP - 2 knockdown cells . There is also no statistically significant difference in the uptake rate . ( E ) Influenza entry is not affected by AP - 2 knockdown . ( Left panel ) The histogram of internalization time for influenza viruses in control ( red ) and AP - 2 knockdown cells ( green ) . The internalization time of a virus particle is defined as the time between binding to cell ( t bind ) and the onset of microtubule dependent movement ( t MT ) , which quickly follows clathrin uncoating , as we have shown previously ( Rust et al . , 2004 ) . The internalization rates of influenza in control and AP - 2 knockdown cells are identical within error . ( Right panel ) The fractions of virus particles that are internalized by the clathrin - mediated or clathrin - independent endocytic pathways in control and AP - 2 knockdown cells . The difference between the two cases is not statistically significant .