JAEPR , 3 ( 1 ) , Copyright © 2017 UNDERSTANDING OF NEW IDEAS How Do Students Understand New Ideas ? In Response to the Deans for Impact Report ( DFI ) Jacob Boula , Kristina Morgan , CarieAnn Morrissey , and Rebecca Shore University of North Carolina at Charlotte The first Key Question posed in the Deans for Impact report ( 2015 ) asks “How do students understand new ideas ? " This question emerged from research that produced 3 cognitive principles regarding learning , particularly learning new information . Those principles are : 1 ) students learn new ideas by reference to ideas they already know . 2 ) To learn , students must transfer information from working memory to long - term memory . 3 ) The mastery of new concepts occurs in “fits” and “starts” . Sequencing the curriculum in order to ensure that students have the necessary prior knowledge to connect to new concepts , scaffolding by modeling and using worked examples to support problem solving , and integrating multiple modalities that complement each other into instructional presentations , can increase the effectiveness of teaching and learning in the educational environment . Keywords : cognitive science principles , cognitive load , working memory , multiple modalities , long - term memory , transfer Founded in 2015 , Deans for Impact is a national nonprofit organization representing leaders in educator preparation who are committed to transforming educator preparation and elevating the teaching profession . The organization is guided by four key principles : data - informed improvement , common outcome measures , empirical validation of effectiveness , and transparency and accountability for results . The Deans for Impact report ( DFI ) posed six guiding questions and outlined their underlying cognitive principles , supported by current research about cognition . By working through the six questions and related cognitive principles , teacher candidates and educational professionals can gain deeper understanding of the science of learning by connecting current research to their existing understanding of how students learn , apply , and transfer new knowledge . Although the mission of the DFI organization focuses on teacher preparation programs and teacher candidates , the questions can also be used for authentic professional development to help teachers and administrators build a better understanding of how learning takes place , and connect that work to their practice in order to improve the quality of teaching and learning in the educational environment . The following literature review focuses on the cognitive principles addressed by Key Question number one in DFI Report , “How do students understand new ideas ? ” ( Deans for Impact , 2015 ) . 6 BOULA ET AL . COGNITIVE PRINCIPLE 1 Students learn new ideas by reference to ideas they already know . To consider this cognitive principle , instructional leaders must consider content on both the micro and macro levels . Teachers must consider prior learning for each single classroom lesson , while administrators and teacher leaders carefully consider the curriculum from year to year . According to Bransford , Brown , and Cocking ( 2000 ) , referencing a relationship between new ideas and what students already know is a key to enhancing learning in schools . Extensive learning opportunities for teachers are required in order to enable teachers to better meet these needs . In order to teach in a manner consistent with new theories of learning and connecting students’ prior knowledge to new concepts different professional development for teachers is required . Their research gave examples of quality lessons showing that expert teachers have a deep understanding of the structure and epistemologies of their disciplines , combined with knowledge of the kinds of teaching activities that will help students come to understand the discipline for themselves . Furthermore , Bransford , et al . ( 2000 ) stated that incorporating students’ prior knowledge creates an opportunity for “organizing information into a conceptual framework [ which ] allows for greater ‘transfer’ ; that is , it allows the student to apply what was learned in new situations and to learn related information more quickly” ( Bransford , et al . , 2000 , p . 17 ) . Agodini , Harris , Atkins - Burnett , Heaviside , Novak , and Murphy ( 2009 ) developed an extensive study to measure different math curricula and its impact on the learning of students . This study examined whether some early elementary school math curricula are more effective than others at improving student math achievement in schools that serve students from economically disadvantaged homes . The authors cited national achievement data from the 2009 National Assessment of Educational Progress to show that elementary school students in the United States , particularly those from low socioeconomic backgrounds , had weak math skills ( Agodini , et al . , 2009 ) . The data also showed substantial differences in average math scores between students from different socioeconomic backgrounds : ethnic minority students and those eligible for free or reduced - price meals had an average math scale score about 20 points ( 0 . 69 standard deviations ) lower than their peers ( Agodini , et al . , 2009 ) . The study focused on integral parts of the content knowledge of teachers and program training . Researchers found that small group instruction , teacher preparation , and hands on learning showed greatest impact on the degree to which students mastered and retained the math skills ( Agodini , et al . , 2009 ) . Richland , Zur , and Holyoak ( 2007 ) investigated how certain mathematics classroom activities differed between the United States and nations in which students score higher on international tests . This study focused on factors of cognition and memory , which can be distinguished from cultural differences in instruction . Mathematical reasoning involves understanding abstract relations ( such as equality , proportion , and integers ) that can appear in different contexts . Such abstract relations may be best taught by drawing parallels to similar examples . National differences emerged in adherence to sound cognitive principles for teaching by relational comparisons . For all six principles that were coded , the U . S . sample yielded lower scores , indicating less promotion of relational learning ( Richland , et . al . , 2007 ) . In addition to the research cited by DFI , Baxter , Woodward , and Olson ( 2001 ) further supported that opening discussions facilitate conjecture and argumentation in an environment where students create and develop ideas that " matter mathematically” ( Baxter , et al . , 2001 , p . DFI Q1 7 535 ) . The reform - based curriculum highly recommended using open - ended discussions where the intent was to validate student - derived solutions to problems , including algorithmic procedures . This was additional support for the cognate that instructors facilitate learning by using students’ previous knowledge of topics ( Baxter , et al . , 2001 ) . Implementing these discussions promotes synergy within the learning environment , further activating the use of prior learning within groups of students in classrooms . In another article not cited by DFI , Kilpatrick , Swafford and Findell ( 2001 ) described how children begin learning mathematics well before they enter elementary school . They observed that preschoolers’ mathematical thinking rested on a combination of conceptual understanding , procedural fluency , strategic competence , adaptive reasoning , and productive disposition ( Kilpatrick , et al . , 2001 ) . The research suggested that students learn more from guided discovery than pure discovery in the area of agent - based multimedia learning environments ( Moreno , 2004 ) . Unguided instructional strategies impose heavy cognitive demands on novice learners . Worked examples reduce the extraneous cognitive load imposed by means - ends problem solving , and explanatory feedback increases a student’s understanding . COGNITIVE PRINCIPLE 2 To learn , students must transfer information from working memory ( where it is consciously processed ) to long - term memory ( where it can be stored and later retrieved ) . Students have limited working memory capacities that can be overwhelmed by tasks that are cognitively too demanding . Understanding new ideas can be impeded if students are confronted with too much information at once . The DFI report states that in order to learn new ideas , students must transfer information from working memory to long - term memory , and that one effective way teachers can make this happen is by using " worked examples " as part of their instruction ( DFI , 2015 ) . In using worked examples , the cognitive load on the working memory is reduced . According to Sweller ( 1988 ) , the depth of knowledge of schemas determines the proficiency level of a problem solver . Conventional problem solving creates a heavy cognitive load , which impedes schema acquisition . Therefore , it might be beneficial if some conventional problems were replaced by worked examples . Atkinson , Derry , Renkl , and Wortham ( 2000 ) supported Sweller ' s findings when they concluded that pairing practice problems with worked examples increased problem - solving performance . It appeared that using worked examples proved most successful in the beginning stages of developing cognitive skills , and showed minimal success in the latter stages . In further research , Sweller ( 2006 ) found that worked examples may produce greater amounts of learning for beginner problem solvers due to the limited use of working memory . This is due to worked examples requiring less cognitive processing of random informational factors involved in problem solving . The less complex the problem , the fewer random factors the problem contains . The use of worked examples reduces the extraneous cognitive load imposed by means - ends problem solving , and explanatory feedback increases a student’s understanding ( Moreno , 2004 ) . Kalyuga and Sweller ( 2015 ) found that when students are learning complex material , high levels of guidance are likely to result in enhanced performance over lower levels of 8 BOULA ET AL . guidance . When learning simple material that is easy for students to understand , learners should practice generating responses . Active participation in the learning process produces better retention than passive observations when learning simple material . For example , worked examples can increase problem - solving success by using analogy : the connection of new information to concepts already learned . Analogies are very successful when the teacher explains the parts of an analogy , demonstrates how to " read " and interpret an analogy from left to right , and when students learn to recognize the different relationships that can exist in different analogies , such as compare / contrast , number , time , and opposites ( Morgan , 2016 ) . Students can make connections between known concepts and new information through the various relationships used in analogies . The DFI ( 2015 ) report explained that the guidance given to students when learning through worked examples should slowly be decreased to allow students to become more proficient at solving problems independently . Teachers can make this happen by incorporating appropriately paced explanations , modeling , and worked and / or modeled examples . Von Gog and Rummel ( 2010 ) showed that using worked examples to give learners specific steps to work out a problem works well in applied math , such as algebra , geometry , and statistics . Students using worked examples are not necessarily focused on learning the solutions to the problems , but on learning the steps to solve problems ( Von Gog et al . , 2010 ) . Modeling examples may be a more effective way to teach less structured skills such as writing , collaboration , and metacognitive skills such as self - regulation and self - assessment . The researchers demonstrated that the same neural circuits that are involved in executing a motor action oneself also respond to observing someone else executing that action . The neural circuits that are active when executing and observing motor actions also respond when hearing sentences that describe such actions ( Von Gog et al . , 2010 ) . In light of this study , modeling may help classrooms of students move more uniformly through the curriculum . Intrinsic cognitive load is the natural complexity of information that is to be learned ( Sweller 2010 ) . Information to be learned has high or low levels of element interactivity . Inefficient instructional procedures impose an extraneous cognitive load , whereas germane cognitive load varies because it is determined in part by the learner’s characteristics . A cognitive load can be imposed by instructional material and by element interactivity associated with either intrinsic or extraneous cognitive load . Working memory resources must be dispersed to deal with those interacting elements . So when planning instructional procedures , the three loads must be taken into account and decisions made on how to lower the extraneous load for learners . To increase retention , learning should be spaced over time of weeks or months , and students should be exposed to material at least twice ( Pashler , Bain , Bottge , Graesser , Koedinger , & McDaniel , 2007 ) . Problem solving and worked examples should be interleaved to increase student learning . Illustrations and graphics should be used in conjunction with verbal explanations . When presenting a concept , both concrete and abstract representations should be used . When introducing new material , pre - tests should be given to assess prior knowledge and to identify concepts that need to be learned . Closed book tests and quizzes repeatedly expose students to material , thus increasing retention . It would also be beneficial to allow students to reflect on their learning and evaluate how well they are retaining information . Teachers should use quizzes and tests to identify material that needs to be studied again . Teachers need to provide specific feedback and correct answers for tests and quizzes as soon as possible . The DFI report concluded that using multiple modalities to present an idea increases learning ( 2015 ) . The report also stated that if different sources of information are presented at the DFI Q1 9 same time , the student ' s attention is divided and as a result , learning may be impeded . Chandler and Sweller ( 1992 ) found that worked examples require less of a cognitive load . Worked examples that are made up of two or more sources of information , such as diagrams , tables , and text , require cognitive combination of information , and a student’s attention is divided . If a problem solver must search for information and match it within a problem , his / her cognitive effort is not directed towards learning . Therefore , attention is split , or divided , so understanding and learning is impaired ( Chandler & Sweller , 1992 ) . Furthering Chandler and Sweller ' s research , Moreno and Mayer ( 1999 ) concluded that mixed modality presentations increase learning . More information is retained when verbal narration is paired with visual graphics than when text and visual graphics are paired together . More information is retained in the visual and auditory working memory when they are paired together in mixed modality presentations ( Moreno & Mayer , 1999 ) . Goolkasian and Foos ( 2002 ) further examined the ability to retrieve information from working memory . They had subjects compare three types of presentation formats ( pictures , printed words , and spoken words ) , to determine influence of format on the processing task and for item recall . They found that stimulus items presented as spoken words and as pictures were recalled and recognized equally well or better than printed words . For example , if students saw a picture of a ball or spoke the word , “ball , ” their ability to retrieve the word was better than if they read the word , “ball . ” In follow - up studies , Foos and Goolkasian ( 2005 ) found that a recall disadvantage for printed words may lie in the fact that learners were not able to give their full conscious attention to printed words , supporting earlier studies that found that less cognitive load was beneficial to learning . This research shows how deeply educators must understand cognitive science research to carefully plan lessons to maximize learning for all students . Kirschner , Sweller , and Clark ( 2006 ) found that long - term memory is the central component of human cognition . Problem solvers draw on the wide experience stored in their long - term memory . Direct instruction , involving much guidance , results in a much higher level of learning than unguided instruction , also known as discovery learning . Unguided exploration of the learning environment creates a heavy cognitive load as problem solvers build a loaded working memory , which is less conducive to learning . Therefore , unguided learning may lead students to learn misconceptions , incorrect , incomplete , or erroneous information and concepts . Students who received instructional explanations and no explanations showed a higher level of learning than those who relied on self - explanations of conceptual learning ( Kirschner , et al . , 2006 ) . Attempting to apply some cognitive science principles into classrooms can also impact learning , perhaps by inadvertently increasing cognitive load or through the additional inevitable distractions of having peers nearby . Many cognitive science principles are established by testing one student at a time ( oftentimes college Psychology students ) in a laboratory . This more structured testing environment produces a result that may differ when the strategy is implemented in a classroom full of students . In one study , researchers did just that ; applied cognitive science principles in middle school science classrooms to test for retention of complex science terminology ( Shore , Ray , Goolkasian , 2015 ) . In this study , researchers worked with teachers to develop two active learning strategies , having students draw pictures of what the terms meant to them , and having students engage in conversations with their shoulder neighbors about the meanings of the science terms . These two more active strategies were compared to a strategy whereby students simply copy the definitions of the terms from the back of a textbook . Three units of science terms were 10 BOULA ET AL . used and an iterative development process was implemented resulting in data collected from every student using every strategy across the 3 units . Researchers expected the two more active strategies to result in better retention of the science terms . However , results showed significantly higher retention of the terms using the drawing or copying strategies , over the conversation strategies ( Shore , Ray , Goolkasian , 2015 ) . Upon reflection , the researchers discovered that when the conversation strategy was employed , teachers were not walking around the classroom monitoring the conversations to help enforce that the conversations were , in fact , about the science terms . The researchers also surveyed the students and found that while they thought that the copying strategy would be the most effective ( they were “used to it” ) , they liked participating in the drawing and conversation strategies best ( Shore , Ray , Goolkasian , 2013 ) . So perhaps opting for the drawing strategy , since it was enjoyed by the students and proved to be effective , might be the best choice for teachers . However , teachers reflected that the drawing strategy took the most time to implement . Discussions following this research resulted in a teacher decision to assign the drawing of the term meanings for homework instead of using class time to implement the strategy . This scenario is an example of the difficulty of translating some cognitive science principles into classrooms . The group dynamic introduces a vastly more complex environment with many additional variables that can affect learning outcomes . It also , however , reveals the importance of the group learning potential by teachers and researchers when working together to explore implementing the science of learning into classrooms . COGNITIVE PRINCIPLE 3 Cognitive development does not progress through a fixed sequence of age - related stages . The mastery of new concepts happens in fits and starts . Current theories of cognitive development are general , global , and universal , describing the types of cognitive behavior one might generally expect from a person based on their chronological age . Weinert and Helmke ( 1998 ) referred to theories of cognitive development as “structural” , which they defined as focused on information processing structures and cognitive competencies rather than changes in specific knowledge , skills and performance . The authors further defined the naturalistic - descriptive nature of cognitive development theories : developmental occurrences are inherent to human nature and cannot be impacted by external conditions ( Weinert , et al . , 1998 ) . However , in a longitudinal study of children between the ages of 4 and 12 years , although there was a linear increase in performance related to age , within the general developmental patterns there were “extremely large intraindividual and interindividual differences underlying the overall mean changes” ( Weinert , et al , 1998 , p . 321 ) . The authors urged for the integration of a differential perspective , not to replace but to rather to complement the current general and structural focus . Some research suggests that following a strict sequence of instruction that is aligned to cognitive stage theory may not be appropriate . When teachers intentionally activate prior knowledge to scaffold the acquisition of new understanding this approach can have a greater impact on learning . Flynn , O’Malley , and Wood ( 2004 ) demonstrated that it is not necessary for children to have a theory of mind in order to be successful with executive inhibition tasks . Children develop inhibition skills gradually , not through a sudden shift , and at first the DFI Q1 11 development is unstable . There appears to be a period during development when children are unsuccessful at tasks that they were previously successful with ( Flynn , et al . , 2004 ) . Gray and Reeve ( 2016 ) examined how different cognitive markers are associated with math ability profiles in preschoolers . The research indicated that domain - specific cognitive markers are more strongly related than general cognitive markers to differences in mathematical performance among young children . Gray and Reeve assessed preschoolers using number - specific markers , general cognitive markers , and math ability measures . The researchers used number - specific markers and math ability measures to classify the children into math profiles : excellent math , good arithmetic , good math / poor count sequence , average math , and poor math . Age , magnitude comparison efficiency , working memory , response inhibition , and attention were not significantly associated with math profiles . Children in the “Good Math , Poor Count Sequence” group performed poorly on basic skills like count sequence , but did well on the more complex ordinal relations tasks ( Gray & Reeve , 2016 ) . The findings of Gray and Reeve ( 2016 ) supported the position of Holmes and Dowker ( 2013 ) that children have different growth profiles and that one skill is not necessarily a required prerequisite for another skill . Daniel Willingham ( 2008 ) argued that developmentally appropriate practice , linked to cognitive development theory , is not an effective tool for instruction because development does not occur in “discrete , pervasive stages” ( Willingham , 2008 , p . 36 ) , but rather is more continuous and depends on “…the details of what they are asked to understand and how they are asked to show that they understand it” ( Willingham , 2008 , p . 37 ) . Willingham recommends that educators use general information about cognitive principles , but realize that they are not absolute . Content may not be developmentally inappropriate , if scaffolding occurs so that students can access the content at a level that makes sense to them . Instead of assuming that a task is not developmentally appropriate because most students were not successful , educators might instead think about whether students have the necessary background knowledge to understand the new content , or whether a different way of presenting the information would be more effective . Because children’s performance varies , teachers might consider using different methods of presenting and solving problems . Introducing complex ideas by making them concrete and helping children connect the new information to their experiences , or providing experiences to help them gain background knowledge , helps children scaffold the new information by connecting it to existing knowledge . Understanding of new concepts will be incomplete for children , but this does not mean they are not ready to be introduced to those concepts ( Willingham , 2008 ) . CONCLUSION By working through the DFI report and other current research related to the question , “How do students learn new ideas ? ” ( Deans for Impact , 2015 ) , teachers and teacher candidates develop an understanding of the cognitive principles related to the question , and develop the ability to consider and apply those principles when planning and reflecting upon instructional presentations . Sequencing the curriculum in order to ensure that students have the necessary prior knowledge to connect to new concepts , scaffolding by modeling and using worked examples to support problem solving , and integrating multiple modalities that complement each other into instructional presentations , can increase the effectiveness of teaching and learning in the educational environment . 12 BOULA ET AL . These are all suggestions based on cognitive science research that aim to help facilitate the understanding of new ideas by students . Far from being prescriptive or comprehensive , the questions and cognitive principles are a jumping - off point to encourage research and reflection , so that teacher candidates and current educators will continue to develop a deeper understanding of cognitive science principles and how they can be applied in different educational contexts to increase the quality of teaching and learning . The next article offers more strategies for applying these cognitive science principles into classrooms . REFERENCES Agodini , R . , Harris , B . , Atkins - Burnett , S . , Heaviside , S . , Novak , T . , & Murphy , R . ( 2009 ) . Achievement effects of four early elementary school math curricula : Findings from first graders in 39 schools . NCEE 2009 - 4052 . National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance . Atkinson , R . K . , Derry , S . J . , Renkl , A . , & Wortham , D . ( 2000 ) . Learning from examples : instructional principles from the worked examples research . Review of Educational Research , 70 ( 2 ) , 181 - 214 . Baxter , J . , J . Woodward , & Olson , D . ( 2001 ) , “Effects of reform - based mathematics instruction on low - achievers in five third - grade classrooms . ” The Elementary School Journal , 101 ( 5 ) , 2001 , 529 – 547 . Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . R . ( 2000 ) . How People Learn : Brain , Mind , Experience , and School . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Chandler , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 1992 ) . The split - attention effect as a factor in the design of instruction . British Journal of Educational Psychology , 62 ( 2 ) , 233 - 246 . Deans for Impact ( 2015 ) . The Science of Learning . Austin , TX : Deans for Impact . Flynn , E . , O’Malley , C . , & Wood , D . ( 2004 ) . A longitudinal , microgenetic study of the emergence of false belief understanding and inhibition skills . Developmental Science , 7 ( 1 ) , 103 - 115 . Foos , P . , & Goolkasian , P . ( 2005 ) . Presentation format effects in working memory : The role of attention . Memory & Cognition , 33 , 499 - 513 . Goolkasian , P . , & Foos , P . ( 2002 ) . Presentation format and its effects on working memory . Memory & Cognition , 30 , 1096 - 1105 . Gray , S . A . , & Reeve , R . A . ( 2016 ) . Number - specific and general cognitive markers of preschoolers’ math ability profiles . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 147 , 1 - 21 . Holmes , W . & Dowker , A . ( 2013 ) . Catch up numeracy : A targeted intervention for children who are low - attaining in mathematics . Research in Mathematics Education , 15 , 249 - 265 . Kalyuga , S , & Sweller , J . ( 2015 ) . The worked example effect , the generation effect , and element interactivity . Journal of Educational Psychology , 107 , 689 - 704 . Kilpatrick , J . Swafford , B . Findell , Eds . , Adding It Up : Helping Children Learn Mathematics ( National Research Council , National Academy Press , Washington , DC , 2001 ) . Kirschner , P . A . , Sweller , J . , & Clark , R . E . ( 2006 ) . Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work . Educational Psychologist , 41 ( 2 ) , 75 - 86 . Moreno , R . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive principles of multimedia learning : The role of modality and contiguity . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 ( 2 ) , 358 - 368 . Moreno , R . ( 2004 ) . Decreasing cognitive load for novice students : Effects of explanatory versus corrective feedback on discovery - based multimedia . Instructional Science , 32 , 99 – 113 . Morgan , K . ( 2016 or 2017 ) . Unpublished manuscript from this journal issue . Pashler , H . , Bain , P . M . , Bottge , B . A . , Graesser , A . , Koedinger , K . , & McDaniel , M . ( 2007 ) . Organizing Instruction and Study to Improve Student Learning . U . S . Department of Education . Washington DC : National Center for Education Research , Institute of Education Sciences . Richland , L . E . , Zur , O . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom . Science , 316 ( 5828 ) , 1128 - 1129 . Shore , R . , Ray , J . , & Goolkasian , P . ( 2013 ) . Too close for ( brain ) comfort . Middle School Journal , 44 ( 5 ) , 16 - 21 . Shore , R . , Ray , J . , & Goolkasian , P . ( 2015 ) . Applying cognitive science principles to improve retention of science vocabulary . Learning Environments Research , DOE 10 . 1007 / s10984 - 015 - 9178 - 1 . Sweller , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognitive load during problem solving . Effects on learning . Cognitive Science , 12 ( 2 ) , 257 - 285 . Sweller , J . ( 2006 ) . The worked example effect and human cognition . Learning and Instruction , 16 ( 2 ) , 165 - 169 . DFI Q1 13 Sweller , J . ( 2010 ) . Element interactivity and intrinsic , extraneous , and germane cognitive load . Educational Psychology Review , 22 , 123 – 138 . Von Gog , T . & Rummel , N . ( 2010 ) Example - based learning : Integrating cognitive and social - cognitive research perspectives . Educational Psychology Review , 22 , 155 - 174 . Weinert , F . E . , & Helmke , A . ( 1998 ) . The neglected role of individual differences in theoretical models of cognitive development . Learning and Instruction , 8 ( 4 ) , 309 - 323 . Willingham , D . T . ( 2008 , Summer ) . What is developmentally appropriate practice ? American Educator , 34 - 39 .