1 BIOE 476 : Tissue Engineering , Fall 2018 Take - Home Questions / In - class Discussion , October 25th Part 1 Consider these questions related to the article : Engler et al . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell ( 2006 ) vol . 126 ( 4 ) pp . 677 - 89 . 1 . Typically , increasing the ECM density will result in increased stiffness as well as increased density of ECM ligands ( which results in increased signaling ) . In this paper , how do the authors decouple ECM stiffness from ECM ligand density , in order to focus only on the effects of mechanical stiffness ? 2 . The addition of Blebbistatin is used as a condition in many of the experiments in the paper . What is the function of Blebbistatin ? What is its role in these experiments and what is revealed by the experimental data ? 3 . What effect do stiffer substrates have on focal adhesions ? What effect do stiffer substrates have on actin assembly ? 2 4 . The last paragraph of the paper ( prior to experimental procedures ) discusses the implications of these research findings as related to stem cell therapy in the heart . In your own interpretation / words , what is the concern that the authors are trying to raise ? 5 . Can you think of any differences between the experimental system in this paper and normal in vivo environments that may affect the interpretation ? 3 Part 2 Read this recent follow - up article : Wen et al . Interplay of matrix stiffness and protein tethering in stem cell differentiation . Nat Mat ( 2014 ) , 13 , 979 - 987 . http : / / www . nature . com / nmat / journal / v13 / n10 / full / nmat4051 . html 6 . For the polyacrylamide - based approach , the authors perform experiments to rule out an alternative explanation for their 2006 findings that implicated material stiffness in guiding stem cell differentiation . What is this alternative explanation and what did they test to rule it out ? Matrix Elasticity Directs Stem Cell Lineage Speciﬁcation Adam J . Engler , 1 , 2 Shamik Sen , 1 , 2 H . Lee Sweeney , 1 and Dennis E . Discher 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , * 1 Pennsylvania Muscle Institute 2 School of Engineering and Applied Science 3 Cell & Molecular Biology Graduate Group 4 Physics Graduate Group University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA * Contact : discher @ seas . upenn . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 06 . 044 SUMMARY Microenvironments appear important in stem cell lineage speciﬁcation but can be difﬁcult to adequately characterize or control with soft tis - sues . Naive mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) are shown here to specify lineage and commit to phenotypes with extreme sensitivity to tissue - level elasticity . Soft matrices that mimic brain are neurogenic , stiffer matrices that mimic mus - cle are myogenic , and comparatively rigid matrices that mimic collagenous bone prove osteogenic . During the initial week in culture , reprogramming of these lineages is possible with addition of soluble induction factors , but after several weeks in culture , the cells commit to the lineage speciﬁed by matrix elasticity , consistent with the elasticity - insensitive com - mitment of differentiated cell types . Inhibition of nonmuscle myosin II blocks all elasticity - directed lineage speciﬁcation – without strongly perturbing many other aspects of cell function and shape . The results have signiﬁcant implica - tions for understanding physical effects of the in vivo microenvironment and also for therapeu - tic uses of stem cells . INTRODUCTION Adult stem cells , as part of normal regenerative pro - cesses , are believed to egress and circulate away from their niche ( Katayama et al . , 2006 ) , and then engraft and differentiate within a range of tissue microenvironments . The tissue or matrix microenvironments can be as physi - cally diverse as those of brain , muscle , and bone precur - sor osteoid ( respectively , Flanagan et al . 2002 ; Georges et al . , 2006 ; Kondo et al . , 2005 , Engler et al . , 2004a ; Ferrari et al . , 1998 ; Andrades et al . , 2001 ; Holmbeck et al . , 1999 ; Morinobu et al . , 2003 ) . Mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) are marrow - derived and have indeed been reported to differentiate into various anchorage - dependent cell types , including neurons , myoblasts , and osteoblasts ( respec - tively , [ Deng et al . , 2005 ; Hofstetter et al . , 2002 ; Kondo et al . , 2005 ] , [ Pittenger et al . , 1999 ] , and [ McBeath et al . , 2004 ; Pittenger et al . , 1999 ] ) . For differentiated cells such as ﬁbroblasts , it is well known that responses to the typical soluble inducers such as growth factors couple to matrix anchorage ( Nakagawa et al . , 1989 ) . However , with naive stem cells , direct effects of matrix physical at - tributes such as matrix stiffness have yet to be examined . Differentiated cells ranging from neurons to osteoblasts adhere , contract , and crawl not only within soft tissues such as that of the brain or on top of crosslinked collagen ‘‘osteoids’’ in remodeling bone but also in vitro on colla - gen - coated acrylamide gels and glass ( Figure 1A ) . Such a wide variation in matrix stiffness for differentiated cells is known to inﬂuence focal - adhesion structure and the cytoskeleton ( Bershadsky et al . , 2003 ; Cukierman et al . , 2001 ; Discher et al . , 2005 ; Engler et al . , 2004a ; Lo et al . , 2000 ; Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . Past results with cells committed to a particular lineage , especially ﬁbroblasts , on ﬂoating collagen gels and wrinkling - silicone sheets also suggest some responsiveness to the physical state of the matrix ( Hinz et al . , 2001 ; Nakagawa et al . , 1989 ; Tomasek et al . , 2002 ; Wozniak et al . , 2003 ) , but gel poros - ity and ﬁlm topography complicate identiﬁcation of possi - ble contributions of substrate stiffness . In contrast , tissue - level matrix stiffness is distinct and shown here in sparse cultures to exert very strong effects on the lineage speci - ﬁcation and commitment of naive MSCs , as evident in cell morphology , transcript proﬁles , marker proteins , and the stability of responses . How might MSCs ‘‘feel’’ or sense matrix elasticity and transduce that information into morphological changes and lineage speciﬁcation ? At the molecular scale , matrix sensing ﬁrst requires the ability to pull against the matrix and , secondly , requires a cellular mechano - transducer ( s ) to generate signals based on the force that the cell must generate to deform the matrix . Of the cell’s cytoskeletal motors , one or all of the nonmuscle myosin II isoforms ( NMM IIA , B , and C [ Kim et al . , 2005 ] ) are candidates , as they are implicated in tensioning cortical actin structures Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . 677 ( McBeath et al . , 2004 ; Wang et al . , 2002 ) . These actin structures are in turn linked to focal adhesions that provide the pathway of force transmission from inside the cell to the elastic matrix ( Beningo et al . , 2001 ; Tamada et al . , 2004 ) and associated with the focal - adhesion complexes are a number of well - known signaling molecules that are well - placed to act as the mechano - transducers ( Bershad - sky et al . , 2003 ; Alenghat and Ingber , 2002 ) . With MSCs here , we demonstrate that one or all of the NMM IIA – C are likely to be involved in the matrix - elasticity sensing that drives lineage speciﬁcation . The resistance that a cell feels when it deforms the ECM is measured by the elastic constant , E , of the matrix or mi - croenvironment . Formicroenvironmentsofrelevancehere , Figure 1 . Tissue Elasticity and Differenti - ation of Naive MSCs ( A ) Solid tissues exhibit a range of stiffness , as measured by the elastic modulus , E . ( B ) The in vitro gel system allows for control of E through crosslinking , control of cell adhesion by covalent attachment of collagen - I , and con - trol of thickness , h . Naive MSCs of a standard expression phenotype ( Table S1 ) are initially small and round but develop increasingly branched , spindle , or polygonal shapes when grown on matrices respectively in the range typical of (cid:1) E brain ( 0 . 1 – 1 kPa ) , (cid:1) E muscle ( 8 – 17 kPa ) , or stiff crosslinked - collagen matrices ( 25 – 40 kPa ) . Scale bar is 20 m m . Inset graphs quantify the morphological changes ( mean ± SEM ) versus stiffness , E : shown are ( i ) cell branchingperlengthofprimarymouseneurons ( Flanagan et al . , 2002 ) , MSCs , and blebbista - tin - treated MSCs and ( ii ) spindle morphology of MSCs , blebbistatin - treated MSCs , and mitomycin - C treated MSCs ( open squares ) compared to C2C12 myoblasts ( dashed line ) ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . ( C ) Microarray proﬁling of MSC transcripts in cells cultured on 0 . 1 , 1 , 11 , or 34 kPa matrices with or without blebbistatin treatment . Results are normalized to actin levels and then normal - ized again to expression in naive MSCs , yield - ing the fold increase at the bottom of each array . Neurogenic markers ( left ) are clearly highest on 0 . 1 – 1 kPa gels , while myogenic markers ( center ) are highest on 11 kPa gels and osteogenic markers ( right ) are highest on 34 kPa gels . Blebbistatin blocks such speciﬁ - cation ( < 2 - fold different from naive MSCs ) . 678 Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . that of the brain ( Flanagan et al . , 2002 ) is considerably softer than muscle ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) , and muscle is softer than collagenous osteoid precursors of bone ( mea - sured here ) . Thewide range of microenvironment elasticity highlighted in Figure 1A is central , we show , to predicting speciﬁcation ofMSCs . Matrixelasticity ismimicked invitro herewithinertpolyacrylamide gelsinwhichtheconcentra - tion of bis - acrylamide crosslinking sets the elasticity ( Pel - ham and Wang , 1997 ) , and adhesion is provided by coat - ing the gels with collagen I , which is known to support myogenic and osteogenic differentiation ( Engler et al . , 2004a ; Garcia and Reyes , 2005 ) . Using this well - deﬁned , elastically tunable gel system ( Figure 1B ) , as opposed to wrinkling ﬁlms or degrading collagen gels ( Hinz et al . , 2001 ; Wozniak et al . , 2003 ) , we provide the ﬁrst evidence with sparse cultures of MSCs that matrix can specify line - age toward neurons , myoblasts , and osteoblasts—all in identical serum conditions . We document the matrix regu - lation of key lineage markers and myosins , including NMM IIs , which—when inhibited with blebbistatin ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) —blocks differentiation . We also show that soluble induction factors tend to be less selective than matrix stiff - ness in driving speciﬁcation , and cannot reprogram MSCs that are precommitted for weeks on a given matrix . Finally , by controlling gel thickness , h , we establish how far stem cells can feel and thus physically deﬁne their micro - environment . RESULTS Cell Morphology Suggests Lineage Speciﬁcation Is Directed by Matrix Stiffness and Dependent on Nonmuscle Myosin II On soft , collagen - coated gels that mimic brain elasticity ( E brain (cid:1) 0 . 1 – 1 kPa ) ( Flanagan et al . , 2002 ) , the vast major - ity of MSCs adhere , spread , and exhibit an increasingly branched , ﬁlopodia - rich morphology ( Figure 1B ) . Branch - ing densities after 1 week in culture approach those of pri - mary neurons on matrigel - coated gels ( Flanagan et al . , 2002 ) , and the dynamics of outward extension with branching is clearly opposite to DMSO - induced retraction of the cell body that can leave pseudoextensions behind ( Neuhuber et al . , 2004 ) . MSCs on 10 - fold stiffer matrices that mimic striated muscle elasticity ( E muscle (cid:1) 8 – 17 kPa ) lead to spindle - shaped cells similar in shape to C2C12 myoblasts ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . Stiffer matrices ( 25 – 40 kPa ) that we show below mimic the crosslinked collagen of osteoids ( Garcia and Reyes , 2005 ; Kong et al . , 2005 ) yield polygonal MSCs similar in morphology to osteo - blasts . Analyses of cell morphologies ( Figure 1B ; plots i and ii ) show that matrix - dependent shape variations of MSCs are similar to differentiated cells . It is important to also note in these plots and elsewhere below that the re - sults with stiff acrylamide gels extrapolate to those with collagen - coated , rigid glass ; this is expected if substrate elasticity is a key variable of importance . Furthermore , since the inhibition of proliferation by mitomycin - C ( open squares , Figure 1B ; plot ii ) has little impact on average cell shape , the morphology results are consistent with lin - eage development being a population - level response to substrate elasticity . As introduced above , nonmuscle myosin II is likely to be involved in exerting force through focal adhesions in mechanisms of sensing matrix elasticity . All of the NMM II isoforms are inhibited by blebbistatin , which does not inhibit any other myosin found in MSCs ( see below ) , other than myosin VI ( Limouze et al . , 2004 ) . Addition of blebbis - tatin during plating blocks branching , elongation , and spreading of MSCs on any substrate ( Figure 1B ; plots ) ; however , addition of blebbistatin 24 hr postplating does not signiﬁcantly reverse cell shape or spreading on E muscle gels after the cells have already spread and adopted a spindle morphology ( e . g . , 24 hr per Figure 1B ) . Less spe - ciﬁc and less potent myosin inhibitors such as BDM ( at (cid:1) mM concentrations ) are already known to block neu - ronal motility as well as the sensitivity of differentiated cells to substrate elasticity ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) , but blebbistatin is far more selective and potent ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) . It inhibits actin activation of NMM II ATPase activity ( at (cid:1) m M concentrations ) and blocks migration andcytokinesisinvertebratecellswithoutaffectingMLCK . Crystal structures show inhibition of actin - activated ATPase activity by blebbistatin ( Allingham et al . , 2005 ) requires a speciﬁc alanine ( or serine ) residue that is found only in class II and VI myosins ( Limouze et al . , 2004 ; Straight et al . , 2003 ) . We conﬁrm below that MSCs ex - press the three NMM IIs and myosin VI , but we implicate NMM IIs and the cytoskeleton as critical to differentiation . To reinforce this conclusion and to rule out a role for my - osin VI in matrix sensing , we repeated the above experi - ments with the myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) inhibitor , ML7 ( Dhawan and Helfman , 2004 ) . Of the myosins found in MSCs thusfar ( see below ) , regulatory light chain phos - phorylation via MLCK is only used to activate the NMM IIs . ML7 will block activation of these as well as smooth muscle myosin isoforms but will not affect activation of any other myosins in MSCs . Results with ML7 prove below to be identical to those seen with blebbistatin , and so NMM II activity appears to be necessary for matrix elastic - ity - driven lineage speciﬁcation . RNA Proﬁles Indicate Lineage Speciﬁcation on Matrices of Tissue - like Stiffness Transcriptional proﬁles of neurogenic , myogenic , and osteogenic markers—from early commitment markers through mid / late development markers—prove consistent with indications from morphology . On the softest gels , MSCs show the greatest expression of neurogenic tran - scripts ( Figure 1C , left column ; Table S3 ) . Neuron - speciﬁc cytoskeletal markers such as nestin , an early commitment marker , and b 3 tubulin , expressed in immature neurons , as well as the mature marker neuroﬁlament light chain ( NFL ) ( Lariviere and Julien , 2004 ) and the early / midadhe - sion protein NCAM ( Rutishauser , 1984 ) , are all upregu - lated . In terms of a simple average across various key Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . 679 neurogenic transcripts , upregulation on the softest gels is 5 - fold above early passage MSCs . On moderately stiff matrices near E muscle ( 11 kPa ) , MSCs express 6 - fold more myogenic message , with clear upregulation of early to late transcriptional proteins such as Pax activators and myogenic factors ( e . g . , MyoD ) ; comparisons of expres - sion levels to committed muscle cells are also provided below . On the stiffest matrices ( 34 kPa ) , MSCs express 4 - fold greater osteogenic message , upregulating osteo - calcin and the early transcriptional factor CBF a 1 ( middle and right column , respectively ) . Importantly , transcrip - tional proﬁles of early versus late MSCs ( up to passage 12 ) do not differ signiﬁcantly ( Table S1 ) , even though population expansion has been suggested by others to dramatically alter MSCs ( Maitra et al . , 2005 ) . However , lineage speciﬁcation on each matrix is clearly blebbistatin sensitive ( Figure 1C + blebbistatin ) . A number of terminal differentiation markers such as lineage speciﬁc integrins ( a 3 , a 7 , and b 1D ) and morphoge - netic proteins are not upregulated relative to naive MSCs . However , these are generally not expressed until later de - velopment , e . g . , cell fusion into myotubes is required for b 1D expression . Matrix stiffness undoubtedly couples to cell density for fusion and synaptogenesis as well as other noncollagenous ECM components and soluble factors ( see below ) . Clarifying Neuro - Induction and Osteogenic Microenvironments The results above and that follow below provide insight into the NMM II - based contractility and considerable sen - sitivity of stem cells to mechanical microenvironment , which are important issues in and of themselves , but the results also bring to the fore several questions in the liter - ature regarding induction strategies and the physical nature of in vivo microenvironments . For example , uncer - tainty exists regarding the inducibility of stem cells toward neurogenic lineages . Soluble agonists such as retinoic acid and dimethylsulfoxide ( DMSO ) have been reported to induce reversible branching in stem cells ( Dinsmore et al . , 1996 ; Woodbury etal . , 2002 ) , butDMSOalso causes ﬁbroblasts to appear ‘‘branched , ’’ and this appears due to cytoskeletal disruption with centripetal retraction of the cell body that leaves extensions attached ( Neuhuber et al . , 2004 ) . The time series of images in Figure 1B shows outwardly branching MSCs on the softest gels ( 0 . 1 – 1 kPa ) which , in immunoﬂuorescence ( Figure 2A ) , also show expression and branch localization of neuron - speciﬁc b 3 tubulin and neuroﬁlament heavy chain ( NFH and its phosphoform , P - NFH ) . The latter are widely recognized as late neuronal markers ( Lariviere and Julien , 2004 ) . Indeed , both MSCs and primary neurons ( Flanagan et al . , 2002 ) spread and branch with time on the softest matrices ( Figure 2B ) , unlike ﬁbroblasts that do not branch or express neurogenic pro - teins . Similarly , on myogenic matrices , both MSCs and myoblasts spread and become spindle shaped with time , unlike ﬁbroblasts ( Figure S1A ) . Intensity analyses of immunoﬂuorescent images ( e . g . , Figures 2A and 2C ) as well as Western blots ( Figure 2C ; inset ) conﬁrm that only cells on the softest matrices express protein markers for neuronal commitment ( nestin ) , immature neurons ( b 3 tu - bulin ) , mid / late neurons ( microtubule associated protein 2 ; MAP2 ) , and even mature neurons ( NFL , NFH , and P - NFH ) . These ﬁndings clearly agree with neurogenesis of MSCs , as seen in more complex microenvironments , especially the brain ( Kondo et al . , 2005 ; Wislet - Gendebien et al . , 2005 ) . Uncertainty also exists in the literature regarding the compliance and thickness of osteoid . This crosslinked collagen precursor to bone is secreted by osteoblasts and reportedly is the matrix upon which MSCs undergo a transition to preosteoblasts ( Figure 2D ) ( Andrades et al . , 2001 ; Morinobu et al . , 2003 ; Raisz , 1999 ) , before the matrix calciﬁcies over week ( s ) ( Rattner et al . , 2000 ) to rigid bone ( (cid:1) 10 6 kPa ) . We have made the ﬁrst mea - surements here of the compliance and thickness of the osteocalcin - rich osteoid matrix ( Figure 2E ) that surrounds osteoblasts in culture ( see AFM in Experimental Proce - dures ) . The matrix is 350 ± 100 nm thick ( Figure 2F ) and has a stiffness , E osteoid (cid:1) 27 ± 10 kPa ( Figure 2G ) , that is similar to a concentrated collagen gel ( Roeder et al . , 2002 ) . Osteoid thus possesses stiffness in the same range that we ﬁnd MSCs take on the shape and expression proﬁles of an osteogenic lineage ( 25 – 40 kPa in Figures 1B and 1C ) . Cytoskeletal Markers and Transcription Factors also Indicate Lineage Speciﬁcation Immunostaining of cytoskeletal markers and transcription factors across the range of matrix stiffnesses ( Figure 3A ) proves consistent with the lineage proﬁling of Figure 1 . On the softest , neurogenic matrices , a majority of cells ex - press b 3 tubulin , which , along with P - NFH and NFH , is vis - ible in long , branched extensions but is poorly expressed , if at all , in cells on stiffer gels ( Figure 2C ) . On moderately stiff , myogenic matrices , MSCs upregulate the transcrip - tion factor MyoD1 , localizing it to the nucleus ( large arrow ; Figure 3A ) . Compared with C2C12 myoblasts , transcript levels ( Figure 3B ; Table S3 ) as well as ﬂuorescence inten - sity analyses ( Figure 3C ) indicate about 50 % relative ex - pression levels after 1 week on the myogenic matrix ; MSCs on softer and stiffer matrices do not express signif - icant MyoD1 or other muscle markers ( e . g . , titin , pax - 3 , 7 , and myogenin ) . On the stiffest , osteogenic matrices , MSCs upregulate the transcription factor CBF a 1 ( Fig - ure 3A ; open arrow ) , which is a crucial early marker of osteogenesis ( Gilbert et al . , 2002 ) . Compared with hFOB osteoblasts , transcript levels ( Figure 3B ; Table S3 ) as well as ﬂuorescence intensity analyses ( Figure 3C ) again indicate about 50 % relative expression levels after 1 week on the osteogenic matrix ; MSCs on softer matrices do not express signiﬁcant CBF a 1 or other osteoblast markers ( e . g . , collagen - 1s and BMPs ) . Elasticity - directed marker protein expression on the various substrates is summarized in Figure 3C . A single , 680 Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . nonoverlapping optimum in matrix stiffness after 1 week is seen for the speciﬁcation of each of the three lineages . The intensity scale is normalized to the primary cells C2C12 and hFOB , which also show optimal matrix elastic - ities for expression ( MyoD and CBF a 1 , respectively ) and further exhibit an elevated baseline in expression on sub - optimal matrices . In other words , primary cells appear preprogrammed to express an elevated basal level of the characteristic markers regardless of matrix . In con - trast , MSCs express no signiﬁcant levels of the lineage markers , except of course on the optimal matrices . Bleb - bistatin again blocks expression of all markers on all ma - trices ( Figure 3C ; gray curve ) , consistent with an inhibition of the cell’s ability to feel and respond to its matrix . Induction Media Adds to Inductive Matrix before Lineage Commitment In culture , differentiation of MSCs is usually induced by addition of speciﬁc soluble factors , such as Dexametha - sone , which can permeate cell membranes and can , in principle , directly activate lineage programs . The myo - blast induction media used here ( MIM , Table S2 ) is already known to promote myogenesis , with expression of MyoD , Myogenin , and skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain ( Gang et al . , 2004 ; Pittenger et al . , 1999 ) . Across the various elas - tic matrices here , MIM induces MSCs to express high basal levels of MyoD that approach the constitutive ex - pression levels of C2C12 myoblasts ( Figure 4A ) . A clear peak for MSC + MIM on the myogenic matrix ( 8 – 17 kPa ) Figure 2 . Neurogenic Branching and Osteogenic Microenvironments ( A ) Immunoﬂuorescence images of b 3 tubulin and NFH in branched extensions of MSCs on soft matrices ( E (cid:1) 1 kPa ) . Scale bars are 5 m m . ( B ) MSCs and ﬁbroblasts on a range of elastic matrices show an increase in projected area with matrix stiffness , but only MSCs on the softest gels ( with smallest areas ) show an increasing number of branches per extension length with time . ( C ) b 3 tubulin , NFH , and P - NFH all localize tothe branches ofMSCs on thesoftest substrates with E < 1kPa ( mean ± SEM ) . Nestin , b 3tubulin , MAP2 , and NFL Western blotting ( inset ) conﬁrms expression only on soft gels . ( D ) Schematic of the compliant , collagenous ‘‘osteoid’’ microenvironment ( green ) that MSCs encounter in initial remodeling of bone matrix ( adapted from Raisz , 1999 ) . Committed osteoblasts remodel microenvironments by secreting matrix proteins that are slowly calciﬁed . ( E ) hFOBosteoblastssecreteosteocalcinafterbeingplatedonglass . Byday7 , thematrixisthick ( F ) andcompliant with E osteo (cid:1) 25 – 40kPa ( G ) based on measurements made by AFM . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . 681 is evident and suggests a statistically similar level of line - age commitment for MSCs and C2C12 cells . Addition of blebbistatin to persistently block NMM II ac - tivity ( i . e . , MIM + blebbistatin ) still blocks cell spreading , but MyoD expression is found to be signiﬁcantly above baseline . However , expression lacks the usual matrix - induced peak expression near E muscle ( Figure 4A ) . Thus , matrix - driven expression changes appear to depend on active NMM II , while induction media stimulates basal - level myogenesis regardless of cell shape or active NMM II . Additionally , when blebbistatin is added to MSCs that are allowed to ﬁrst spread and become spindle shaped for 24 hr on E muscle gels ( see Figure 1B ) , MSCs maintain their morphology ( Figure S2 ) , but the blebbistatin suppresses MyoD expression . Subsequent washout of the drug 72 hr later allows full recovery of MyoD expres - sion . When taken together , ( 1 ) lack of MyoD expression by spindle - shaped blebbistatin - treated MSCs , ( 2 ) induced Figure 3 . Protein and Transcript Proﬁles Are Elasticity Dependent under Identical Media Conditions ( A ) The neuronal cytoskeletal marker b 3 tubulin is expressed in branches ( arrows ) of initially naive MSCs ( > 75 % ) and only on the soft , neurogenic matrices . The muscle transcription factor MyoD1 is upregulated and nuclear localized ( arrow ) only in MSCs on myogenic matrices . The osteoblast transcription factor CBF a 1 ( arrow ) is likewise expressed only on stiff , osteogenic gels . Scale bar is 5 m m . ( B ) Microarray proﬁles of MSCs cultured on 11 or 34 kPa matrices , with expression normalized ﬁrst to actin and then to expression of committed C2C12 myoblasts and hFOB osteoblasts . ( C ) Fluorescentintensityofdifferentiationmarkersversussubstrateelasticityrevealsmaximallineagespeciﬁcationatthe E typicalofeachtissuetype . Averageintensity isnormalized topeakexpressionof control cells ( C2C12or hFOB ) , forwhichonlyﬁtstoEquation S3are shown . Blebbistatin blocks all marker expression in MSCs . 682 Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . expression in MIM of unspread cells , and also ( 3 ) MIM - induced MyoD expression on ‘‘incorrect’’ matrices ( e . g . , MSC + MIM on 1 kPa or 34 kPa gels ) all imply that active NMM II is indeed important to lineage speciﬁcation inde - pendent of cell shape . It is also clear , however , that on ECM with the ‘‘correct’’ elasticity , active NMM IIs , and soluble induction factors synergistically combine for more complete myogenesis , as calibrated against com - mitted cells ( i . e . , C2C12 ) . Similar results as above are found with a standard oste - oblast induction media ( OIM ) , which is known to promote cytoskeletal rearrangement and alkaline phosphatase production ( Jaiswal et al . , 1997 ; McBeath et al . , 2004 ) . Increased basal expression of CBF a 1 occurs on all Figure 4 . Induction Media and Matrix Reveal Synergy as well as Lineage Plasticity and Eventual Commitment ( A and B ) After 1 week in culture in standard MSC growth media , ﬂuorescent intensities of MyoD1 and CBF a 1 in MSCs reveal little to no expression except at peaks near E muscle and E osteo , respectively . When myogenic or osteogenic induction media ( MIM or OIM ) is added , MyoD1 or CBF a 1 expression occurs on all substrates , with peak expression at levels near those of control cells , indicating a synergy of matrix and media induction . When cultured in both MIM and blebbistatin ( ﬁlled symbol and dashed line ) , MSCs also express a constant level of MyoD . Curve ﬁts throughout use Equation S3 . ( C ) Western blots conﬁrm lineage speciﬁcation with matrix or supplemented media alone : when normalized to actin , CBF a 1 , and MyoD expression reach control levels only when both matrix stiffness and media are conducive for speciﬁcation . ( DandE ) MSCsplatedonneurogenicmatricesinstandardgrowthmediawereculturedfor1or3weekspriortohavingtheirmediachangedtoMIMor OIM for an additional week ( open data points ) . After mixed induction for 1 week + 1 week , MSC expression of b 3 tubulin is seen to decrease while MyoD1 or CBF a 1 expression increases , thus creating trans - differentiated cell types when compared tocultures innormal growthmedia ( closed data points ) . However , after 3 weeks of matrix induction , MSCs become committed and unperturbed by 1 week in trans - induction media . Cells remain branched and express the same high levels of b 3 tubulin with little to no signiﬁcant expression of MyoD or CBF a 1 . Fluorescence intensities ( mean ± SEM ) were measured for dual - labeled cells . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . 683 substrates , and there is still a clear optimum for lineage speciﬁcation on the stiffest , osteogenic gels ( Figure 4B ) . The quantitative immunoﬂuorescence assessments above are conﬁrmed by Western blots and clearly high - light the precommitted nature of C2C12 and hFOB ‘‘con - trol cells’’ as well as both the constitutive and additive effects of induction media on MSCs ( Figure 4C ) . The results above indicate that cells grown on a matrix that is , for example , neurogenic due to its softness ( 1 kPa ) , can be induced by soluble factors ( MIM or OIM ) to also express myogenic or osteogenic factors yielding a ‘‘mixed MSC phenotype . ’’ To assess commitment due to matrix alone , MSCs were preplated in standard growth media for either 1 or 3 weeks on the soft neurogenic gels and then switched to the different induction media . With - out the added induction media , cells stably express the neurogenic marker b 3 tubulin at a constant level from 1 to 4 weeks ( Figures 4B and 4D ; closed points ) . However , when either MIM or OIM is added after 1 week , a further week of culture reduces b 3 tubulin levels by about half and increases negligible MyoD levels several - fold ( Figures 4B and 4D ; open points ) . These ‘‘mixed phenotype’’ MSCs display multiple lineage signals , albeit at low levels , rather than creating two MSC populations committed to different lineages in the same culture , as cells at this plating con - centration are very slow to proliferate , even in growth media ( McBeath et al . , 2004 ) . In contrast , when MSCs are preincubated for 3 weeks on neurogenic matrices before switching media for a ﬁnal week , MSCs are less plastic and more ﬁrmly committed to their matrix - deﬁned lineage : high levels of b 3 tubulin remain statistically the same , and CBF a 1 is essentially undetectable . Similar re - sults are also observed for matrix changes where MSCs , replated from stiff to soft matrices , maintain their original speciﬁcation when given sufﬁcient incubation time ( not shown ) . Slight perturbations under delayed mixed induc - tion might be real ( e . g . , MyoD upregulation in Figure 4D ) , since plasticity of ‘‘differentiated’’ cell types has been demonstrated in various systems with ( a ) chemical ago - nists that trans - differentiate myotubes ( Rosania et al . , 2000 ) , ( b ) transfected transcription regulators that trans - differentiate ﬁbroblasts to myoblasts ( Davis et al . , 1987 ) , and ( c ) classical growth factor pathways that trans - differ - entiate myotubes to osteocytes ( Katagiri et al . , 1994 ) . Myosins in MSCs Couple Expression to Matrix Stiffness and Reveal a Key Role for NMM IIs Forces generated and / or imposed on the cell’s actin cyto - skeleton have been postulated to inﬂuence differentiation ( Engler et al . , 2004a ; Hinz et al . , 2001 ; McBeath et al . , 2004 ) , but no past reports have hinted at strong , tissue - directed feedback of microenvironment elasticity on myo - sin expression or stem cell lineage speciﬁcation . Cellular tension must be modulated by matrix stiffness , with force transmission occurring via focal adhesions . As described in the introduction and supported by the blebbistatin and ML7 results above , the likely generators of force are the nonmuscle myosin II isoforms . We indeed ﬁnd that these and a number of myosin transcripts are not only ex - pressed in naive MSC but also upregulated on stiffer gels ( 11 and 34 kPa ) when compared to softer matrices ( Figure 5A ; left ) . Western blots and immunoﬂuorescent im - aging both conﬁrm array results and show that NMM IIB is up more than 2 - fold relative to myosin levels before differ - entiation ( Figures 5B and 5C ) on stiff matrices but is down - regulated on the softest substrates . It is also found that induction media has comparatively little effect on these stiffness - responsive expression proﬁles ( Figure 5C ) . The kinetics of NMM IIB imply that it generates higher force than NMM IIA ( Rosenfeld et al . , 2003 ) since it spends a greater amount of time strongly attached to actin . We therefore speculate that as matrix stiffness increases , the cell alters its nonmuscle myosin expression in order to generate greater forces on its actin cytoskeleton , which would be necessary to deform a stiffer matrix . Select myosin genes appear more matrix sensitive than others based on microarray data clustered by RNA varia - tion ( Var ) ( Figure 5A ; left ) . Western blots conﬁrm the varia - tion ; NMM IIB expression is more sensitive to matrix elas - ticity than NMM IIA expression ( Figure 5B ) . The blots also conﬁrm ( 1 ) myogenic commitment with requisite upregu - lation of both MyoD and the intermediate ﬁlament protein desmin ( Weitzer et al . , 1995 ) and ( 2 ) osteogenic commit - ment with CBF a 1 . Immunoﬂuorescence images of NMM IIA not only reinforce microarray and blot results but further reveal changes in myosin organization ( Figure 5C ; inset images ) . On soft matrices , NMM II staining is diffuse . On moderately stiff matrices , myosin striations emerge that have an appearance previously described as premyo - ﬁbrillar structures in committed myoblasts ( Sanger et al . , 2002 ) . Spacing between these nascent striations is the same for MSCs and age - matched C2C12 myocytes ( 1 . 0 ± 0 . 3 m m ) , and while these striations are lost on the stiffest matrices where stress ﬁbers predominate , NMM II striation appears consistent with nonmuscle myosin organization ( Verkhovsky et al . , 1995 ) . However , the striation period is clearly smaller than the spacing set by myogenic molecular ‘‘rulers’’ such as titin ( TTN in Fig - ure 3B ) ( Sanger et al . , 2002 ) , indicating that MSCs have not assembled mature myoﬁbrils after a week in culture . This is consistent with low levels of skeletal muscle myosin transcript ( MHC2A ; Figure 5A ) and protein ( Figure S1B ) , emphasizing the fact that these sparse cultures of mononucleated MSCs can become committed but remain early myoblasts . Chronic inhibition of NMM II’s ATPase activity with bleb - bistatin ( Limouze et al . , 2004 ; Straight et al . , 2003 ) not only inhibits morphological changes of MSCs on various matri - ces ( Figures 1Bi and 1Bii ) but also reduces transcripts levels for NMM IIA ( to 50 % ) , IIB ( to 8 % ) , and IIC ( to 3 % ) ( Figure 5A ; right ) . Importantly , myosins that are not directly affected by blebbistatin treatment changed to a lesser extent from control levels , with one - third of the panel showing no change ( MYO5B , MYO1A , MLC3 , and MYH3 ) . This highlights the speciﬁcity of a key mechanosensing feedback loop between blebbistatin - inhibited activity 684 Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . and NMM II expression . Western blots conﬁrm similar iso - form sensitivity at the protein level to blebbistatin and also to ML7 , an inhibitor that also inhibits the NMM II’s through its inhibition of MLCK . NMM IIA expression only slightly downregulates , while NMM IIB expression drops about 10 - fold to levels comparable to MSCs on soft gels ( Figures 5B and 5C ) , and NMM IIC is no longer detectable . The downregulation suppresses both striation and stress - ﬁber formation , consistent with a relaxation effect on blebbista - tin - treated cells ( Grifﬁn et al . , 2004 ) as well as the crosstalk between nonmuscle myosin II activity and morphogenetic and phenotypic speciﬁcation . On soft gels , cells generally display less cytoskeletal organization ( Engler et al . , 2004a ; Flanagan et al . , 2002 ) , as reinforced with results below . Both blebbistatin and ML7 suppress expression of key lin - eage markers ( Figures 1C and 5B ) , consistent with NMM II activity , ultimately regulating lineage marker proﬁles in addition to its own expression . MSC Focal Adhesions Increase with NMM II - Based Contractility and Both Increase with Matrix Stiffness Stiff substrates promote focal adhesion growth and elon - gation , based on paxillin immunoﬂuorescence ( Figure 6A ) . Consistent with this observation , stiff substrates led to in - creased expression of focal adhesion components ( Table S4 ) , including nonmuscle a - actinin , ﬁlamin , talin , and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK or PTK2 ) . These results with MSCs are fully consistent with the earliest reports of the sub - strate - stiffness responses of differentiated cells ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . We also ﬁnd that MSCs feel into matri - ces on the length scales of their adhesions and not much deeper . This is based on the ﬁnding that a thin soft gel on glass ( h (cid:1) 0 . 5 – 1 m m ) fosters cell spreading similar to that of cells on stiffer gels ( Figure S3 ) . Actin assembly follows the trends in adhesion assembly ( Figure 6B ) , which Figure 5 . Multiple Myosins Are Expressed by MSCs Depen - dent on Matrix and Contractility ( A ) A range of myosin transcripts show graded sensitivity to stiffness ( Var ) and an overall average expression ( Avg ) that is upregulated for MSCs on stiffer matrices . Blebbistatin downregulates many myosin transcripts , especially those for NMM IIB , IIC , and myosin VI , which are directly inhibited . ( B ) Immunoblots showlarge variations withsubstrate stiffnessinNMM IIB , C , and various differentiation markers : neurogenic ( b 3 tubulin ) , myogenic ( MyoD and Desmin ) , and osteogenic markers ( CBF a 1 ) . These also show sensitivity to blebbistatin and ML7 . ( C ) Immunoﬂuorescence of NMMIIB ( mean ± SEM ) showssimilarstiff - ness sensitivity and does not change with induction media ( i . e . MIM or OIM ) , butblebbistatininhibitsexpression (cid:1) 10 - fold ( dashedline ) based on Western blots . Inset images of NMM II highlight organization of NMM II with striations ( arrowheads ) on E muscle matrix ( 11 kPa ) and stress ﬁbers on the stiffer matrix ( 34 kPa ) . Scale bar is 5 m m . Figure 6 . Adhesions Grow and Cytoskeletal Organization In - creases with Substrate Stiffness ( A ) Paxillin - labeled adhesions grow from undetectable diffuse ‘‘con - tacts’’onneurogenic , softgels ( 1kPa ) topunctateadhesionsonstiffer , myogenic gels ( 11 kPa ) . On the stiffest , osteogenic gels ( 34 kPa ) , the adhesions are long and thin and slightly more peripheral than they ap - pear on glass . ( B ) F - actin organization shows a similar trend , from diffuse on soft gels toprogressivelyorganizedonstiffersubstrates ( asstressﬁbers ) . Scale bar is 20 m m . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . 685 generalizes the matrix - driven assembly of the cytoskele - ton to MSCs . NMM II is already known to promote the as - sembly of focal adhesions ( Conti et al . , 2004 ) , and so the prominent adhesions on stiffer substrates is consistent with greater activity of NMM II . Focal adhesions provide MSCs the necessary force transmission pathways to ‘‘feel’’ their microenvironment through actin - myosin contractions . This pulling or con - tractility by cells can be measured as a mean cellular pre - stress , s , that balances the traction stresses , t , exerted on the gel by the cell ( Wang et al . , 2002 ) ( Figure 7 ) . Consistent with monotonic increases in focal adhesions versus matrix stiffness , the prestress s for MSCs , C2C12 myoblasts , and hFOB osteoblasts all show a linear increase versus matrix stiffness ( Figure 7 ; top ) . Blebbistatin prevents any of the cells from developing either a prestress s ( Grifﬁn et al . , 2004 ) or—as measured by a single - cell micropipette aspiration method ( Figure S4 ) —a signiﬁcant cell cortex stiffness k on any matrix ( Figure 7 ; bottom , open points ) . The simplistic measures here of cell mechanics demon - strate that stiffer matrices produce stiffer and increasingly tensed cells . DISCUSSION Lineage speciﬁcation of naive stem cells induced by solu - ble stimuli has been well described ( Gang et al . , 2004 ; Jaiswal et al . , 1997 ; McBeath et al . , 2004 ; Pittenger et al . , 1999 ) , but the results here report a strong and pre - viously undocumented inﬂuence of microenvironment stiffness on stem cell speciﬁcation . Naive stem cells ex - press no baseline levels of lineage - speciﬁc markers , in contrast to committed cells ( myoblasts and osteoblasts in Figures 3B , 3C , 4A , and 4B ) , so that—against this low baseline—MSCs are seen to respond dramatically in both morphology and lineage to the matrix presented . The responses here do not include remodeling the micro - environment ; for example , collagen - I production is very low in MSCs on soft matrices < 11 kPa ( see downregulated matrix transcripts ; Figure 1C ) , whereas on 34 kPa matrices , MSCs appear somewhat more secretory ( e . g . , BMP1 - 5 and COL3A1 ) , consistent with the secreting hFOB osteoblasts ( Figure 2E ) ( Kong et al . , 2005 ) . This pas - sive , initial response of MSCs to the microenvironment would be expected from a multipotent stem cell awaiting instruction . MSC plasticity is evident in the initial responsiveness to conﬂicting signals from soft matrix and media ( Figures 4D and 4E ) , consistent with passive responsiveness to inputs . The slow time course of true lineage commitment here contrasts with the rapid and controversial morphological changes with DMSO ( Dinsmore et al . , 1996 ; Woodbury et al . , 2002 ) . Here , MSCs spread with time , and branching increases on soft matrices ( Figure 2B ) , indicating an active process . In contrast , ﬁbroblasts ( Figure 2B ) , myoblasts ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) , and osteoblasts ( not shown ) do not appear branched on soft substrates . The committed differentiation of the latter cell types ( epigenetic ) to spec - iﬁed lineages precludes , for example , the reprogramming of myosin levels with changes of matrix ( Table S4 ) . In com - parison , MSCs prove far more responsive , and while evi - dence for roles of nonmuscle myosins in MSCs feeling the matrix is suggestive , more work on mechanism is clearly needed . Possible Implications for Stem Cell Therapies Regenerative applications of stem cells are being investi - gated for a number of tissues , including clinical trials for postmyocardial infarction patients ( Lee et al . , 2004 ) . Efﬁ - cacy appears uncertain or mixed ( Murry et al . , 2004 ) , and recent ﬁndings have raised the possibility that the in - jured microenvironment loses compliance with ﬁbrotic scarring , producing a noninducing environment ( Berry et al . , 2006 ) that , as we show here , stem cells cannot suf - ﬁciently remodel . The results here suggest the need for optimizing matrix elasticity to foster regeneration , which seems applicable to a number of regenerative applica - tions of stem cells such as cardiomyoplasty , muscular dystrophy , and neuroplasty . Any starting point for such approaches must include characterization of the mecha - nosensitivity of the stem cell of interest to matrix elasticity . Figure 7 . Stiffer Matrices Produce Stiffer and More Tense Cells Cell prestress , s , in both MSCs and control cell lines increases linearly with substrate elasticity , E . Inset image shows a myoblast ( outlined ) displacing beads embedded in the gel ( white arrows ) that equates to a strain ﬁeld represented by the color map ( red is high strain ) . Scale bar is 10 m m . Lower plot shows membrane cortical stiffness measured bymicropipette aspirationincreaseswithgelstiffness , butblebbistatin treatment softens all cell membranes > 3 - fold . Middle inset shows mean intracellular strain , 3 in ( (cid:1) s / k ) , versus the mean extracellular strain , 3 out ( (cid:1) t / E ) , ﬁt to a power law ( i . e . , 3 in = B 3 outb ) for all cell types . The trend implies larger deformation within the cell on stiff matrices and larger deformation in the matrix on softer matrices . Results shown are Mean ± SEM . 686 Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . The results of this study also suggest that ‘‘precommit - ting’’ stem cells to a speciﬁc lineage via appropriate in vitro matrix conditions might partially overcome an inappropri - ate in vivo microenvironment . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells ( MSCs ; Osiris Therapeutics ; Balti - more , MD ) , human osteoblasts ( hFOBs , ATCC ) , primary human skin ﬁ - broblasts ( 1F7 ) ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) , and murine myoblasts ( C2C12s , ATCC ) were cultured in normal growth media listed in Table S2 . To chemically induce differentiation , cells were placed in the appropriate induction media also listed . All cells were used at low passage num - bers , were subconﬂuently cultured , and were plated at (cid:1) 10 3 cells / cm 3 for experiments . Cells were cultured for 7days or cultured and re - plated for a speciﬁed time unless otherwise noted . All chemicals were purchased from Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) unless otherwise noted . To in - hibitproliferation , cellswereexposedtomitomycinC ( 10 m g / ml ) for2hr and washed three times with media prior to plating . Blebbistatin ( 50 m M , EMD Biosciences ) , a nonmuscle myosin II inhibitor , was ap - plied with every media change and was stable in culture media for up to 48 hr , as determined by thin - layer chromatography . Y27632 ( 10 m M , EMD Biosciences ) , a ROCK inhibitor , and ML7 ( 10 m M ; EMD Biosciences ) , a myosin light chain kinase inhibitor , were also added to inhibit speciﬁcation . Substrate Preparation Cells were plated on variably compliant polyacrylamide gels , accord - ing to a previously established protocol by Pelham and Wang ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) , creating gels that were (cid:1) 70 – 100 m m thick as mea - sured by microscopy . To produce thin gels , a protocol from Engler and coworkers was used ( Engler et al . , 2004b ) . Type 1 collagen was used at 0 . 25 – 1 m g / cm 2 ( BD Biosciences ) , as quantiﬁed using ﬂuores - cent collagen for calibration ( per Engler et al . , 2004a ) . AFM for Matrix Elasticity and Cell Mechanics Methods Substrate elasticity was characterized per Engler et al . ( 2004b ) . For matrix secreted by hFOB osteoblasts , cells were plated for 7 days on glass substrates to allow matrix deposition . Samples were placed on an Asylum 1 - D atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) ( Asylum Research ; Santa Barbara , CA ) and indented by a pyramid - tipped probe ( Veeco ; SantaBarbara , CA ) withaconstant , k sp (cid:1) 60pN / nm . Force - indentation proﬁles were obtained immediately adjacent to a cell , and each inden - tation proﬁle was ﬁt up to the point at which probe indentation into the secreted matrixstopped withaHertz cone model ( Rotsch etal . , 1999 ) . Details of the cell mechanics measurements can be found in the Sup - plemental Data . Lineage Speciﬁcation Assays Morphological Changes and Immunoﬂuorescence Changes in cell shape ( < 4 days ) , especially the development of branches ( Flanagan et al . , 2002 ) or spindle - like morphologies ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) , were quantiﬁed either by the number of membrane branches per mm of cell or by a ‘‘spindle factor , ’’ the major / minor cellaxis , respectively . Cellsalsowerestainedwithlineage - speciﬁcan - tibodies : myogenesiswith MyogenesisDifferentiationProtein 1 ( MyoD1 ; Chemicon ) and desmin ( Sigma ) ; osteogenesis with Core Binding Fac - tor a 1 ( CBFA1 ; Alpha Diagnostic International ) and osteocalcin ( EMD Biosciences ) ; and neurogenesis with phosphorylated and dephos - phorylated Neuroﬁlament Heavy chain ( NFH ; Sternberger Monoclo - nal ) , Neuroﬁlament Light chain ( NFL ; Sigma ) , nestin ( BD Pharmagen ) , Microtubule Associated Protein 2 ( MAP2 ; Chemicon ) , and b 3 tubulin ( Sigma ) along with paxillin ( Chemicon ) , skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain ( Zymed ) , nonmuscle myosin IIA and IIB ( Sigma ) , IIC ( courtesy of R . Adelstein , NIH ) , and rhodamine - labeled phalloidin . Cells were ﬁxed , blocked , permeabilized , and labeled with Hoechst 33342 , pri - mary and secondary antibodies , or 60 m g / ml TRITC - phalloidin . Cell morphology and ﬂuorescently labeled cells were examined on a TE300 inverted epiﬂuorescent Nikon or Olympus ( TIRF ) microscope , imagedonaCascadeCCDcamera ( Photometrics ) , andquantiﬁedwith Scion Image . Intensity analysis was displayed as the fold - change of the whole cell average above background ﬂuorescence and staining with secondary antibodies only . For Figure 3C only , however , intensi - ties were then normalized by the maximal expression of the positive control cell . For Figure 5C only , intensities were then normalized by theexpression ofinitially isolatedMSCstoshowachangefromtheini - tial myosin level . Western Blotting Cells were plated on gels on 45 3 50 sq . mm coverslips to obtain enough cells for Western blotting . Cells were permeablized ( 1 : 1 of 10 % SDS , 25 mM NaCl , 10 nM pepstatin , and 10 nM leupeptin in dis - tilled water and loading buffer ) , boiled for 10 min , and placed in reduc - ing PAGE ( Invitrogen ) . Proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose , blocked , and labeled via HRP - conjugated antibodies ( Biorad ) . All Westerns were run in duplicate , along with an additional blot for actin and Coomassie blue staining to ensure constant protein load among samples . Oligonucleotide Array Assays Total RNA ( 3 – 5 m g ) was obtained from MSCs cultured on gel sub - strates of varying stiffness , as well as C2C12 myoblasts and hFOB osteoblasts , using an ethanol - spin column extraction . Samples were labeled with an Ampolabeling Linear Polymerase Reaction kit ( Super - Array Bioscience ) and hybridized to custom oligonucleotide arrays . Chemiluminescent signals were detected on Biomax Film ( Kodak ) . Arrayswereﬁrstcorrectedforarraybackgroundﬂuorescenceandnor - malized to a control gene , b - actin . Data for genes indicating mesen - chymal origin ( Table S1 ) along with genes for contractile , adhesive , and activating proteins ( Table S4 ) were displayed only as this actin - normalized value . Genes for neuro - , myo - , and osteogenesis , how - ever , were further analyzed by either ( 1 ) comparing MSCs on gels to initially isolated MSCs ( Figure 1C and Table S3 ; i . e . , [ MSC on speciﬁc gel ] / [ initially isolated MSC ] ) or ( 2 ) normalizing MSC expression on gels to control cell expression level ( Figure 3B and Table S3 ; i . e . , [ MSC on speciﬁc gel ] / [ control cell ] ) . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include four ﬁgures , four tables , experimental pro - cedures , and references and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 126 / 4 / 677 / DC1 / . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge Drs . Jean and Joe Sanger , Dr . Paul Jan - mey , Dr . Jonathan Raper , Dr . Masaki Noda , Dr . Louis , and Dr . Robert Adelstein for reagents and discussions . Support was provided by grants from NIAMS ( H . L . S . and D . D . ) , NHLBI and NIBIB ( D . D . ) , MDA ( H . L . S . and D . D . ) , NSF ( D . D . ) , NSF - MRSEC , and the Ashton Founda - tion . ( A . E . ) . Received : November 1 , 2005 Revised : March 7 , 2006 Accepted : June 6 , 2006 Published : August 24 , 2006 REFERENCES Alenghat , F . J . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 2002 ) . Mechanotransduction : all sig - nals point to cytoskeleton , matrix , and integrins . Sci . STKE 119 , PE6 . Allingham , J . S . , Smith , R . , and Rayment , I . ( 2005 ) . The structural basis of blebbistatin inhibition and speciﬁcity for myosin II . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 12 , 378 – 379 . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . 687 Andrades , J . A . , Santamaria , J . A . , Nimni , M . E . , and Becerra , J . ( 2001 ) . Selectionandampliﬁcationofabonemarrowcellpopulationanditsin - ductiontothechondro - osteogeniclineagebyrhOP - 1 : aninvitroandin vivo study . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 45 , 689 – 693 . Beningo , K . A . , Dembo , M . , Kaverina , I . , Small , J . V . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2001 ) . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 881 – 888 . Berry , M . F . , Engler , A . J . , Woo , Y . J . , Pirolli , T . J . , Bish , L . T . , Bell , P . , Jayasankar , V . , Morine , K . J . , Gardner , T . J . , Discher , D . E . , and Swee - ney , H . L . ( 2006 ) . Mesenchymal stem cell injection after myocardial in - farction improves myocardial compliance . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 290 , H2196 – H2203 . Bershadsky , A . D . , Balaban , N . Q . , and Geiger , B . ( 2003 ) . Adhesion - de - pendent cell mechanosensitivity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 677 – 695 . Conti , M . A . , Even - Ram , S . , Liu , C . , Yamada , K . M . , and Adelstein , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Defects in cell adhesion and the visceral endoderm following ablation of nonmuscle myosin heavy chain II - A in mice . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 41263 – 41266 . Cukierman , E . , Pankov , R . , Stevens , D . R . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Taking cell - matrix adhesions to the third dimension . Science 294 , 1708 – 1712 . Davis , R . L . , Weintraub , H . , andLassar , A . B . ( 1987 ) . Expressionofasin - gle transfected cDNA converts ﬁbroblasts to myoblasts . Cell 51 , 987 – 1000 . Deng , J . , Petersen , B . E . , Steindler , D . A . , Jorgensen , M . L . , andLaywell , E . D . ( 2005 ) . Mesenchymal stem cells spontaneously express neural proteinsincultureandareneurogenicaftertransplantation . StemCells 24 , 1054 – 1064 . Dhawan , J . , and Helfman , D . M . ( 2004 ) . Modulation of acto - myosin contractility in skeletal muscle myoblasts uncouples growth arrest from differentiation . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 3735 – 3748 . Dinsmore , J . , Ratliff , J . , Deacon , T . , Pakzaban , P . , Jacoby , D . , Galpern , W . , and Isacson , O . ( 1996 ) . Embryonic stem cells differentiated in vitro as a novel source of cells for transplantation . Cell Transplant . 5 , 131 – 143 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . A . , and Wang , Y . - L . ( 2005 ) . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 – 1143 . Engler , A . J . , Grifﬁn , M . A . , Sen , S . , Bonnemann , C . G . , Sweeney , H . L . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2004a ) . Myotubes differentiate optimally on sub - strates with tissue - like stiffness : pathological implications for soft or stiff microenvironments . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 877 – 887 . Engler , A . J . , Richert , L . , Wong , J . Y . , Picart , C . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2004b ) . Surfaceprobemeasurementsoftheelasticityofsectionedtis - sue , thingelsandpolyelectrolytemultilayerﬁlms : correlationsbetween substrate stiffness and cell adhesion . Surf . Sci . 570 , 142 – 154 . Ferrari , G . , Cusella - De Angelis , G . , Coletta , M . , Paolucci , E . , Stor - naiuolo , A . , Cossu , G . , and Mavilio , F . ( 1998 ) . Muscle regeneration by bone marrow - derived myogenic progenitors . Science 279 , 1528 – 1530 . Flanagan , L . A . , Ju , Y . E . , Marg , B . , Osterﬁeld , M . , and Janmey , P . A . ( 2002 ) . Neurite branching on deformable substrates . Neuroreport 13 , 2411 – 2415 . Gang , E . J . , Jeong , J . A . , Hong , S . H . , Hwang , S . H . , Kim , S . W . , Yang , I . H . , Ahn , C . , Han , H . , and Kim , H . ( 2004 ) . Skeletal myogenic differen - tiation of mesenchymal stem cells isolated from human umbilical cord blood . Stem Cells 22 , 617 – 624 . Garcia , A . J . , and Reyes , C . D . ( 2005 ) . Bio - adhesive surfaces to pro - mote osteoblast differentiation and bone formation . J . Dent . Res . 84 , 407 – 413 . Georges , P . C . , Miller , W . J . , Meaney , D . F . , Sawyer , E . , and Janmey , P . A . ( 2006 ) . Matrices with compliance comparable to that of brain tissue select neuronal over glial growth in mixed cortical cultures . Biophys J . 90 , 3012 – 3018 . Gilbert , L . , He , X . , Farmer , P . , Rubin , J . , Drissi , H . , van Wijnen , A . J . , Lian , J . B . , Stein , G . S . , and Nanes , M . S . ( 2002 ) . Expressionof the oste - oblast differentiation factor RUNX2 ( Cbfa1 / AML3 / Pebp2alpha A ) is in - hibitedbytumornecrosisfactor - alpha . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 2695 – 2701 . Grifﬁn , M . A . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2004 ) . Adhe - sion - contractile balance in myocyte differentiation . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 5855 – 5863 . Hinz , B . , Celetta , G . , Tomasek , J . J . , Gabbiani , G . , and Chaponnier , C . ( 2001 ) . Alpha - smooth muscle actin expression upregulates ﬁbroblast contractile activity . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2730 – 2741 . Hofstetter , C . P . , Schwarz , E . J . , Hess , D . , Widenfalk , J . , El Manira , A . , Prockop , D . J . , and Olson , L . ( 2002 ) . Marrow stromal cells form guiding strands in the injured spinal cord and promote recovery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 2199 – 2204 . Holmbeck , K . , Bianco , P . , Caterina , J . , Yamada , S . , Kromer , M . , Kuz - netsov , S . A . , Mankani , M . , Robey , P . G . , Poole , A . R . , Pidoux , I . , et al . ( 1999 ) . MT1 - MMP - deﬁcient mice develop dwarﬁsm , osteopenia , ar - thritis , and connective tissue disease due to inadequate collagen turn - over . Cell 99 , 81 – 92 . Jaiswal , N . , Haynesworth , S . E . , Caplan , A . I . , and Bruder , S . P . ( 1997 ) . Osteogenic differentiation of puriﬁed , culture - expanded human mes - enchymal stem cells in vitro . J . Cell . Biochem . 64 , 295 – 312 . Katagiri , T . , Yamaguchi , A . , Komaki , M . , Abe , E . , Takahashi , N . , Ikeda , T . , Rosen , V . , Wozney , J . M . , Fujisawa - Sehara , A . , and Suda , T . ( 1994 ) . Bone morphogenetic protein - 2 converts the differentiation pathway of C2C12 myoblasts into the osteoblast lineage . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1755 – 1766 . Katayama , Y . , Battista , M . , Kao , W . - M . , Hidalgo , A . , Peired , A . J . , Thomas , S . A . , and Frenette , P . S . ( 2006 ) . Signals from the sympathetic nervous system regulate hematopoietic stem cell egress from bone marrow . Cell 124 , 407 – 421 . Kim , K . Y . , Kovacs , M . , Kawamoto , S . , Sellers , J . R . , andAdelstein , R . S . ( 2005 ) . Disease - associatedmutations and alternative splicing alter the enzymatic and motile activity of nonmuscle myosins II - B and II - C . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 22769 – 22775 . Kondo , T . , Johnson , S . A . , Yoder , M . C . , Romand , R . , and Hashino , E . ( 2005 ) . Sonic hedgehog and retinoic acid synergistically promote sen - sory fate speciﬁcation from bone marrow - derived pluripotent stem cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 4789 – 4794 . Kong , H . J . , Polte , T . R . , Alsberg , E . , and Mooney , D . J . ( 2005 ) . FRET measurements of cell - traction forces and nano - scale clustering of ad - hesionligandsvariedbysubstratestiffness . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 4300 – 4305 . Lariviere , R . C . , and Julien , J . P . ( 2004 ) . Functions of intermediate ﬁla - ments in neuronal development and disease . J . Neurobiol . 58 , 131 – 148 . Lee , M . S . , Lill , M . , andMakkar , R . R . ( 2004 ) . Stemcelltransplantationin myocardial infarction . Rev . Cardiovasc . Med . 5 , 82 – 98 . Limouze , J . , Straight , A . F . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Sellers , J . R . ( 2004 ) . Speciﬁcity of Blebbistatin , an inhibitor of myosin II . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 25 , 337 – 341 . Lo , C . M . , Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Cell move - mentisguidedbytherigidityofthesubstrate . Biophys . J . 79 , 144 – 152 . Maitra , A . , Arking , D . E . , Shivapurkar , N . , Ikeda , M . , Stastny , V . , Kassauei , K . , Sui , G . , Cutler , D . J . , Liu , Y . , Brimble , S . N . , Noaksson , K . , Hyllner , J . , Schulz , T . C . , Zeng , X . , Crook , J . , Abraham , S . , Colman , A . , Sartiny , P . , Matsui , S . , Carpenter , M . , Gazdar , A . F . , Rao , M . , and Chakravarti , A . ( 2005 ) . Genomic alterations in cultured human embry - onic stem cells . Nat Genet . 37 , 1099 – 1103 . 688 Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . McBeath , R . , Pirone , D . M . , Nelson , C . M . , Bhadriraju , K . , and Chen , C . S . ( 2004 ) . Cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Dev . Cell 6 , 483 – 495 . Morinobu , M . , Ishijima , M . , Rittling , S . R . , Tsuji , K . , Yamamoto , H . , Nifuji , A . , Denhardt , D . T . , andNoda , M . ( 2003 ) . Osteopontinexpression in osteoblasts and osteocytes during bone formation under mechani - cal stress in the calvarial suture in vivo . J . Bone Miner . Res . 18 , 1706 – 1715 . Murry , C . E . , Soonpaa , M . H . , Reinecke , H . , Nakajima , H . , Nakajima , H . O . , Rubart , M . , Pasumarthi , K . B . S . , Ismail Virag , J . , Bartelmez , S . H . , Poppa , V . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Haematopoietic stem cells do not trans - differentiate into cardiac myocytes in myocardial infarcts . Nature 428 , 664 – 668 . Nakagawa , S . , Pawelek , P . , andGrinnell , F . ( 1989 ) . Extracellular matrix organization modulates ﬁbroblast growth and growth factor respon - siveness . Exp . Cell Res . 182 , 572 – 582 . Neuhuber , B . , Gallo , G . , Howard , L . , Kostura , L . , Mackay , A . , and Fischer , I . ( 2004 ) . Reevaluation of in vitro differentiation protocols for bone marrow stromal cells : disruption of actin cytoskeleton induces rapidmorphologicalchangesandmimicsneuronalphenotype . J . Neu - rosci . Res . 77 , 192 – 204 . Pelham , R . J . , and Wang , Y . - L . ( 1997 ) . Cell locomotion and focal adhe - sions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 . Pittenger , M . F . , Mackay , A . M . , Beck , S . C . , Jaiswal , R . K . , Douglas , R . , Mosca , J . D . , Moorman , M . A . , Simonetti , D . W . , Craig , S . , andMarshak , D . R . ( 1999 ) . Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells . Science 284 , 143 – 147 . Raisz , L . G . ( 1999 ) . Physiology and pathophysiology of bone remodel - ing . Clin . Chem . 45 , 1353 – 1358 . Rattner , A . , Sabido , O . , Le , J . , Vico , L . , Massoubre , C . , Frey , J . , and Chamson , A . ( 2000 ) . Mineralization and alkaline phosphatase activity in collagen lattices populated by human osteoblasts . Calcif . Tissue Int . 66 , 35 – 42 . Roeder , B . A . , Kokini , K . , Sturgis , J . E . , Robinson , J . P . , and Voytik - Har - bin , S . L . ( 2002 ) . Tensile mechanical properties of three - dimensional type I collagen extracellular matrices with varied microstructure . J . Biomech . Eng . 124 , 214 – 222 . Rosania , G . R . , Chang , Y . T . , Perez , O . , Sutherlin , D . , Dong , H . , Lock - hart , D . J . , andSchultz , P . G . ( 2000 ) . Myoseverin , amicrotubule - binding molecule with novel cellular effects . Nat . Biotechnol . 18 , 304 – 308 . Rosenfeld , S . S . , Xing , J . , Chen , L . Q . , and Sweeney , H . L . ( 2003 ) . Myo - sin IIb is unconventionally conventional . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 27449 – 27455 . Rotsch , C . , Jacobson , K . , andRadmacher , M . ( 1999 ) . Dimensionaland mechanical dynamics of active and stable edges in motile ﬁbroblasts investigated by using atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 921 – 926 . Rutishauser , U . ( 1984 ) . Developmental biology of a neural cell adhe - sion molecule . Nature 310 , 549 – 554 . Sanger , J . , Chowrashi , P . , Shaner , N . , Spalthoff , S . , Wang , J . , Free - man , N . , and Sanger , J . ( 2002 ) . Myoﬁbrillogenesis in skeletal muscle cells . Clin . Orthop . Relat . Res . 403S , S153 – S162 . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 – 1747 . Tamada , M . , Sheetz , M . P . , and Sawada , Y . ( 2004 ) . Activation of a sig - naling cascade by cytoskeleton stretch . Dev . Cell 7 , 709 – 718 . Tomasek , J . J . , Gabbiani , G . , Hinz , B . , Chaponnier , C . , andBrown , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Myoﬁbroblasts and mechano - regulation of connective tissue remodelling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 349 – 363 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1995 ) . Myosin II ﬁl - amentassembliesintheactivelamellaofﬁbroblasts : theirmorphogen - esisandroleintheformationofactinﬁlamentbundles . J . CellBiol . 131 , 989 – 1002 . Wang , N . , Tolic - Norrelykke , I . M . , Chen , J . , Mijailovich , S . M . , Butler , J . P . , Fredberg , J . J . , and Stamenovic , D . ( 2002 ) . Cell prestress . I . Stiff - nessandprestressarecloselyassociatedinadherentcontractilecells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C606 – C616 . Weitzer , G . , Milner , D . J . , Kim , J . U . , Bradley , A . , and Capetanaki , Y . ( 1995 ) . Cytoskeletal control of myogenesis : a desmin null mutation blocks the myogenic pathway during embryonic stem cell differentia - tion . Dev . Biol . 172 , 422 – 439 . Wislet - Gendebien , S . , Wautier , F . , Leprince , P . , and Rogister , B . ( 2005 ) . Astrocytic and neuronal fate of mesenchymal stem cells ex - pressing nestin . Brain Res . Bull . 68 , 95 – 102 . Woodbury , D . , Reynolds , K . , andBlack , I . B . ( 2002 ) . Adultbonemarrow stromal stem cells express germline , ectodermal , endodermal , and mesodermal genes prior to neurogenesis . J . Neurosci . Res . 69 , 908 – 917 . Wozniak , M . A . , Desai , R . , Solski , P . A . , Der , C . J . , andKeely , P . J . ( 2003 ) . ROCK - generated contractility regulates breast epithelial cell differen - tiation in response to the physical properties of a three - dimensional collagen matrix . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 583 – 595 . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 , August 25 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . 689 ARTICLES PUBLISHED ONLINE : 10 AUGUST 2014 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 Interplay of matrix stiffness and protein tethering in stem cell differentiation Jessica H . Wen 1 † , Ludovic G . Vincent 1 † , Alexander Fuhrmann 1 , Yu Suk Choi 1 ‡ , Kolin C . Hribar 2 , Hermes Taylor - Weiner 1 , Shaochen Chen 2 and Adam J . Engler 1 , 3 * Stem cells regulate their fate by binding to , and contracting against , the extracellular matrix . Recently , it has been proposed that in addition to matrix stiffness and ligand type , the degree of coupling of ﬁbrous protein to the surface of the underlying substrate , that is , tethering and matrix porosity , also regulates stem cell differentiation . By modulating substrate porosity without altering stiffness in polyacrylamide gels , we show that varying substrate porosity did not signiﬁcantly change protein tethering , substrate deformations , or the osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation of human adipose - derived stromal cells and marrow - derived mesenchymal stromal cells . Varying protein – substrate linker density up to 50 - fold changed tethering , but did not affect osteogenesis , adipogenesis , surface – protein unfolding or underlying substrate deformations . Differentiation was also unaffected by the absence of protein tethering . Our ﬁndings imply that the stiffness of planar matrices regulates stem cell differentiation independently of protein tethering and porosity . T he stiﬀness of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) has been shown to regulate both short - and longer - term cell functions such as cell spreading 1 and stem - and progenitor - cell phenotype changes on planar substrates 2 – 7 . For example , many types of adult stromal cell grown on substrates of stiﬀness similar to that of the osteoid or muscle express lineage markers of terminally diﬀerentiated cells found in those tissues 3 , 4 , 6 . Common myosin - based contractile mechanisms are needed for matrix - induced diﬀerentiation in two dimensions 3 , 8 – 10 . However , in three dimensions , a labile 11 or degradable matrix 12 , which permits cells to first spread and then adhere to the ECM , is required . Similarly , force - mediated protein unfolding in the ECM in vivo regulates cell responses as a function of stiﬀness 13 , 14 . Whereas creating three - dimensional matrices has become a widespread approach towards understanding how the matrix aﬀects cell fate , the regulatory role of substrate - anchored fibrous - protein deformations on stem cell fate in two dimensions is still unclear . Recent literature suggests that the mechanical resistance provided by the ECM , which opposes myosin - based contractility that results in cell signalling and diﬀerentiation , could , for planar cultures , arise from protein tethers rather than substrate stiﬀness 15 . As most synthetic planar matrices are not normally cell - adhesive , an adhesive layer of matrix protein is attached to the hydrogel surface and covalently ‘tethered’ to the substrate surface at distinct anchoring points . Thus , changing protein – substrate linker density or substrate porosity can vary the length of the fibre segment between two adjacent anchoring points . When a load is applied perpendicularly to the fibre segment , its deflection is directly related to the load applied , fibre stiﬀness , and the cube of the length of the fibre segment 15 , 16 . If enough resistance were present in these tethers , stem cells could diﬀerentiate independently of substrate stiﬀness . However , it is unclear what the length of these tethers is and how it compares to substrate deformations 17 , which have been implicated in mechanotransduction and hence stem cell diﬀerentiation 18 . Thus , it is critical to decouple protein tethering and substrate stiﬀness to determine whether and how these factors collectively regulate stem cell diﬀerentiation . Tuning hydrogel porosity independently of stiffness Tuning the ratio of acrylamide monomer and bis - acrylamide crosslinker can change the porosity of the polyacrylamide ( PA ) hydrogel , that is , the distance between tethering points , while maintaining constant stiﬀness . To accomplish this , three separate acrylamide / bis - acrylamide formulations were polymerized to yield hydrogels of ∼ 4 , ∼ 13 and ∼ 30 kPa ( Fig . 1a ) , which correspond to the stiﬀness of adipose tissue , muscle and osteoid 2 , 3 , 6 , 19 – 21 , respectively . Diﬀerences in volume and mass swelling ratios between each of the hydrogels with similar stiﬀness suggest significant diﬀerences in porosity among each substrate subgroup ( Supplementary Fig . 1a , b ) . The radius of gyration of extended DNA may be used to estimate the eﬀective maximum pore size of the hydrogel 22 . DNA size standards were exposed to an electrophoretic gradient in swollen and unconfined 4 and 30 kPa PA hydrogels to further quantify hydrated pore size . For 30 kPa hydrogels , a 45 nm DNA fragment failed to migrate through the 8 / 0 . 55 formulation , indicating that the maximum pore size of this formulation is between 23 and 45 nm . Larger DNA fragments migrated through the 10 / 0 . 3 and 20 / 0 . 15 gel formulations , indicating that the approximate pore sizes are between 88 and 166 nm for both formulations ; diﬀerences in DNA mobility suggest that the two gels have pore sizes that diﬀer within this range . Similarly , diﬀerences in DNA mobility suggest that the three 4 kPa formulations yield hydrogels with diﬀerent pore sizes ( Supplementary Fig . 1c ) . Scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) of dried PA hydrogels showed increasing pore sizes with increasing acrylamide and decreasing bis - acrylamide concentrations for the 4 , 13 and 30 kPa hydrogel formulations ( Fig . 1b ) ; these data are consistent with pore size trends in hydrated measurements and together demonstrate that 1 Department of Bioengineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , California 92093 , USA , 2 Department of Nanoengineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , California 92093 , USA , 3 Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine , La Jolla , California 92037 , USA . † These authors contributed equally to this work . ‡ Present address : Kolling Institute of Medical Research , Royal North Shore Hospital , The University of Sydney , Sydney , New South Wales 2065 , Australia . * e - mail : aengler @ ucsd . edu NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 979 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ARTICLES NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 4 / 0 . 4 0 6 / 0 . 0 6 1 0 / 0 . 0 2 6 / 0 . 4 5 1 0 / 0 . 1 0 2 0 / 0 . 0 3 8 / 0 . 55 1 0 / 0 . 3 0 2 0 / 0 . 1 8 Acrylamide % Bis - acrylamide % 30 kPa 4 kPa 13 kPa 10 / 0 . 10 10 / 0 . 30 20 / 0 . 18 8 / 0 . 55 3 0 k P a 4 k P a NS NS NS 1 3 k P a S t i ff n e ss ( k P a ) Acrylamide % / bis - acrylamide % ( w / v ) Acrylamide % / bis - acrylamide % ( w / v ) M e a n d i s p l a c e m e n t ( n m ) 10 / 0 . 10 6 / 0 . 06 10 / 0 . 02 4 / 0 . 40 4 / 0 . 4 0 6 / 0 . 0 6 1 0 / 0 . 0 2 8 / 0 . 55 1 0 / 0 . 3 0 2 0 / 0 . 1 8 NS NS D i s p l a c e m e n t s ( µ m ) 10 / 0 . 30 20 / 0 . 18 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 4 kPa 4 / 0 . 40 6 / 0 . 06 10 / 0 . 02 30 kPa 0 5 10 15 20 25 a c d e f b 30 35 8 / 0 . 55 10 / 0 . 30 20 / 0 . 18 0 200 400 600 800 1 , 000 13 kPa 30 kPa 30 kPa 4 kPa Figure 1 | Inﬂuence of substrate porosity on ASC differentiation . a , Elastic modulus measured by AFM ( n = 3 ) for the indicated acrylamide / bis - acrylamide ratios ( mean ± s . d . ) . b , SEM images of PA hydrogels made with varying monomer - to - crosslinker ratios as indicated . Scale bars , 50 µ m ( top and bottom ) , 10 µ m ( middle ) . c , ALP staining of ASCs on 13 and 30kPa hydrogels of the indicated compositions after 14 days of culture in normal media . Arrowheads indicate stained but yet negative cells . Scale bar , 500 µ m . d , ORO staining of ASCs on 4kPa and 30kPa hydrogels of the indicated compositions after 7 days of culture in adipogenic induction media . Arrowheads indicate stained but yet negative cells . Scale bar , 100 µ m . e , Displacement maps of embedded ﬂuorescent particles resulting from ASC traction forces on 4kPa and 30kPa hydrogels of the indicated compositions . Scale bar , 50 µ m . f , Quantiﬁcation of mean displacement was plotted for hydrogels of the indicated composition and stiffness range ( n > 20 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; NS , not signiﬁcant ) . increasing the concentration of the bis - acrylamide crosslinker decreases the relative pore size without substantially changing the modulus of the hydrogel . However , it is important to note here that pore sizes derived from SEM images of freeze - dried hydrogels are probably not representative of actual substrate pore sizes in a hydrated state . Cells interact with hydrated substrates in vitro , and thus SEM images are provided only for relative comparison of pore sizes for the hydrogel formulations reported . 980 NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 ARTICLES Differentiation does not depend on porosity Human adipose stromal cells ( ASCs ) were plated onto 13 and 30 kPa PA hydrogels from the formulations indicated in Fig . 1c . After 14 days of culture in normal growth media , osteogenic diﬀerentia - tion ( as indicated by positive alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) staining in subconfluent cells ) occurred regardless of hydrogel formula - tion and was directly dependent on substrate stiﬀness , as 13 kPa substrates were negative for ALP ( Fig . 1c ) . Further confirmation of this is demonstrated by positive and nuclear localized RUNX2 immunofluorescence staining after 7 days in culture on all 30 kPa hydrogels ( Supplementary Fig . 2a ) . The expression levels of the early osteogenic markers ALP and RUNX2 suggest that changes in porosity independently of stiﬀness have no noticeable eﬀects on dif - ferentiation for the range of hydrogel formulations tested . However , allowing cells to reach confluence in normal media on any hydrogel formulation was suﬃcient to override substrate - stiﬀness - mediated diﬀerentiation and induce osteogenesis as previously observed 15 , most likely owing to other factors including cell – cell signalling and secreted paracrine factors ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . To avoid complications arising from confluent monolayers and to focus only on cell – ECM signalling , osteogenic - diﬀerentiation studies were conducted at low cell densities . Mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) , another commonly used cell type in diﬀerentiation experiments , also stained positive for ALP after 14 days in culture on the three 30 kPa hydrogel formulations ( Supplementary Fig . 3b ) , implying that substrate porosity has little eﬀect on multiple stem cell types . In addition , after 14 days in culture in adipogenic induction media , adipogenic diﬀerentiation , as assessed by oil red O ( ORO ) presence , was found in over 40 % of ASCs on all 4 kPa substrates regardless of hydrogel formulation and was directly dependent on substrate stiﬀness , as 30 kPa substrates were negative for ORO ( Fig . 1d and Supplementary Fig . 2c ) . As cell – ECM signalling depends on contractility , and diﬀerences in contractility have been shown to regulate diﬀerentiation 3 , 8 – 10 , displacement maps of embedded fluorescent particles resulting from ASC traction forces on all 4 and 30 kPa hydrogel formulations were computed ( Fig . 1e and Supplementary Fig . 4 ) using traction force microscopy 23 ( TFM ) . Mean displacements were similar between all formulations of 4 and 30 kPa hydrogels , but diﬀerent between hydrogels of diﬀerent stiﬀness ( Fig . 1f ) . These data indicate that over the range of formulations tested , hydrogel deformations due to cell contractions are similar regardless of porosity but are dependent on stiﬀness ( Fig . 1e , f ) . Taken together , these data show that varying porosity alone does not seem to be suﬃcient to alter the fate of two diﬀerent adult stem cell sources . Modulating protein tethering by changing linker density Culturing cells on synthetic hydrogels requires the covalent coupling of a cell - adhesive matrix protein , such as collagen type I , to the hydrogel surface using a protein – substrate linker , such as sulpho - SANPAH ( ref . 1 ) . Changingtheconcentrationofthislinkerhasbeen proposedtomodulateproteintethering 15 . Tomodulatethetethering of fibrous collagen to PA hydrogels , we tuned the surface density of anchoring points by varying the concentration of sulpho - SANPAH , thus varying the average distance between adjacent anchoring points . To assess possible diﬀerences in the physical structure or total amount of bound protein , immunofluorescence staining of collagen covalently coupled to PA substrates activated with varying concentrations of sulpho - SANPAH was performed . Images revealed noticeable surface heterogeneity , making quantification of absolute protein amount diﬃcult ( Supplementary Fig . 5a ) ; this was further illustrated by collagen pixel intensity histograms for 13 and 30 kPa hydrogels over a range of sulpho - SANPAH concentrations ( Supplementary Fig . 5b ) . Fluorescent detection was unable to quantify surface - bound protein as previously suggested 15 . To directly quantify collagen tethering , we obtained individual force spectrograms ( Supplementary Fig . 6a ) from microindentations of collagen - coated PA hydrogels . Substrates activated with a range of sulpho - SANPAH concentrations were indented using a probe functionalized with an anti - collagen type I antibody ( Fig . 2a ) . As the tip retracts from the surface , the collagen unfolds and / or stretches until the antibody – protein bonds rupture ( Supplementary Fig . 6a ) . Force spectrograms were analysed to locate rupture events and to determine the force at rupture , that is , the force required to break a protein – antibody bond , and the rupture length that is , the deflection of the collagen fibre segment at rupture . Larger rupture forces and a greater number of rupture events were detected in the presence of collagen I ( Fig . 2b , left and Supplementary Fig . 6b ) and indicate that the antibody was specifically binding and loading collagen . Decreasing rupture length with increasing sulpho - SANPAH concentration ( Fig . 2b , right ) confirmed that the number of protein anchoring points scaled with sulpho - SANPAH concentration without substantial changes in rupture force ( Fig . 2b ) . This trend held for all 30 kPa formulations tested despite significant changes in the number of available protein anchoring sites , which is proportional to acrylamide concentration . We observed diﬀerences in rupture length between sulpho - SANPAH concentrations across hydrogel formulations ( Fig . 2c , grey versus white bars ) , indicating that anchoring sites must not be saturated . Furthermore , for a given sulpho - SANPAH concentration , although small diﬀerences in average rupture length were detected between the three 30 kPa hydrogel formulations , that is , < 40 nm , these diﬀerences were smaller than the changes in pore size , which were up to 120 nm ( Supplementary Fig . 1c ) . Thus , diﬀerences in rupture lengths between the hydrogel formulations are not likely to be due to porosity changes . Differentiation does not depend on tethering To investigate whether or not tethering impacts stem cell fate , subconfluent ASCs and MSCs were cultured in normal growth medium on 30 kPa hydrogels over a range of sulpho - SANPAH concentrations and assessed for osteogenic diﬀerentiation . Positive ALP and RUNX2 staining was observed on all 30 kPa hydrogels regardless of sulpho - SANPAH concentration , hydrogel formulation and cell type ( Fig . 2d and Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . ASCs were also cultured on 4 kPa hydrogels over a range of sulpho - SANPAH concentrations , and ORO expression was observed in over 30 % of ASCs regardless of sulpho - SANPAH concentration ( Supplementary Fig . 8 ) . Together , these data indicate that the degree of collagen tethering to the substrate surface had no observable eﬀect on stem cell fate , unlike what has been suggested 15 . Myosin contractility deforms the ECM and is required for matrix - induced diﬀerentiation 3 , 8 – 10 ; thus , to confirm diﬀerentiation results , substrate displacements for hydrogels across a range of sulpho - SANPAH concentrations were mapped using TFM ( Fig . 2e ) . Average displacements of beads embedded in hydrogels were independent of sulpho - SANPAH concentration and dependent only on substrate modulus ( Fig . 2f ) , suggesting that for the range of protein – substrate linker concentrations used in this study , the surface density of collagen fibre covalent anchoring points has no impact on how cells deform the underlying substrate . To determine whether or not diﬀerences in rupture lengths , that is , tethering , detected by force spectrograms could be felt by cells on a molecular scale , a fibronectin Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) sensor 14 was covalently attached to hydrogels in place of collagen . Cell - generated forces unfold the protein thus increasing the distance between paired fluorescent probes , which results in a decrease in the FRET ratio ( Supplementary Fig . 9a ) that can also be shown by chemical denaturation ( Supplementary Fig . 9b , c ) . Changing sulpho - SANPAH concentration has no statistical eﬀect on the FRET ratio of fibronectin underneath spread ASCs regardless NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 981 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ARTICLES NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 Crosslinker Polyacrylamide gel T i p 8 / 0 . 55 10 / 0 . 3 20 / 0 . 18 R u p t u r e f o r c e ( p N ) ∗∗ ∗∗ SS ( mg ml −1 ) : R u p t u r e l e n g t h ( n m ) Collagen I ( μ g ml −1 ) : R u p t u r e l e n g t h ( n m ) 1 . 0 mg ml −1 SS 0 . 2 mg ml −1 SS Acrylamide % / bis - acrylamide % ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ 0 . 02 mg ml −1 0 . 1 mg ml −1 0 . 2 mg ml −1 0 . 5 mg ml −1 1 . 0 mg ml −1 0 mg ml −1 D i s p l a c e m e n t s ( μ m ) 0 . 1 mg ml −1 0 . 02 mg ml −1 0 . 2 mg ml −1 1 . 0 mg ml −1 Hydrogel Protein x beads ( TFM ) Cell 13 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 1 ) 30 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 3 ) M e a n d i s p l a c e m e n t ( n m ) SS ( mg ml −1 ) : 4 kPa ( 6 / 0 . 06 ) ∗∗ SS ( mg ml −1 ) : 13 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 1 ) 30 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 3 ) 4 kPa ( 6 / 0 . 06 ) M e a n F R E T r a t i o x protein ( FRET ) ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ C2456 Collagen Rupture Indentation Retraction 0 100 200 300 400 500 0 50 100 150 a b d g h f e c 0 0 0 . 2 1 . 0 0 0 50 50 200 0 400 600 0 0 0 . 2 1 . 0 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 20 1 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 20 1 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 20 1 . 00 400 200 0 600 0 . 65 0 . 60 0 . 55 0 . 50 0 . 45 0 . 40 1 . 0 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 8 0 . 0 0 . 2 Bleb 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 20 1 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 20 1 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 20 1 . 00 Figure 2 | Inﬂuence of protein tethering on ASC differentiation . a , Schematic depicting the interaction between an AFM tip ( orange ) functionalized with a collagen I antibody ( C2456 ; green ) and the hydrogel ( blue ) functionalized with bound collagen I ( red ) . The black arrow indicates the direction of motion . A rupture event occurs following retraction of the tip from the surface . b , Measured rupture force ( left ) and rupture length ( right ) for rupture events that occurred on 10 / 0 . 3 30kPa hydrogels activated with the indicated sulpho - SANPAH ( SS ) and collagen I concentrations ( n = 500 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; ∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 ) . c , Rupture length was measured for rupture events that occurred on 30kPa hydrogels with the indicated monomer - to - crosslinker ratios . Hydrogels were activated with either 0 . 2mgml − 1 or 1mgml − 1 sulpho - SANPAH . ( n = 500 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; ∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 ) . d , Images of ASCs stained for ALP expression on 10 / 0 . 3 hydrogels as a function of sulpho - SANPAH concentration after 14 days of culture in normal media . Scale bar , 500 µ m . e , Displacement maps of embedded ﬂuorescent particles resulting from ASC traction forces on 10 / 0 . 3 hydrogels for a range of indicated sulpho - SANPAH concentrations . Scale bar , 50 µ m . f , Quantiﬁcation of mean bead displacement for the indicated hydrogel stiffness and composition as well as sulpho - SANPAH ( SS ) concentration ( n = 20 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; ∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 ) . g , Measured ﬁbronectin FRET intensity ratio for ASCs on 4 , 14 and 30kPa hydrogels activated with the indicated concentrations of sulpho - SANPAH ( n = 8 ; ∗∗ P < 0 . 001 ) . h , Proposed model of a cell on a protein - coated substrate attached to a rigid base ( glass coverslip ) where cell forces are translated through the protein and through the substrate . Deformations of the substrate are measured by TFM and deformations of the protein are measured by FRET . 982 NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 ARTICLES of hydrogel formulation , whereas perturbing myosin contractility using blebbistatin caused a significant increase in the FRET ratio ( Fig . 2g and Supplementary Fig . 9d ) . Thus , molecular conformational changes in protein caused by ASC traction forces are similar regardless of protein – substrate linker concentration , implying that ASCs deform the surface protein similarly on all sulpho - SANPAH activated hydrogels . On the basis of these findings , we propose that cells deform both the adhesive protein on the hydrogel surface as well as the underlying PA substrate according to the model depicted in Fig . 2h . Cell forces are translated sequentially through the protein layer and the hydrogel . However , our findings suggest that the degree of coupling of the protein to the substrate does not influence substrate deformation and thus diﬀerentiation ; therefore , it was not depicted in Fig . 2h . Differentiation occurs in the absence of tethering To demonstrate that stiﬀness - induced diﬀerentiation is possible in the absence of fibrous protein tethering , RGD , a short cell - adhesive peptide from fibronectin 24 , was directly incorporated into the PA backbone by including acrylated polyethylene glycol bound to RGD ( acrylated - PEG – RGD ) during polymerization rather than by teth - ering an adhesive protein to the substrate . Three separate hydrogel formulations with 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 and 2 . 5 mM RGD yielding the same gel stiﬀness were made for 4 , 13 and 30 kPa substrates using the acrylamide / bis - acrylamide ratios listed above ( Fig . 3a ) . A hydroxy - coumarin dye - conjugated acrylated - PEG – RGD confirmed that the peptide was incorporated in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 3b ) . SEM images of dried hydrogels show similar pore sizes regardless of the concentration of acrylated - PEG – RGD incorporated within each substrate ( Fig . 3c ) . This ensures that diﬀerentiation eﬀects can be attributed to changes in adhesive - peptide density and not porosity . Furthermore , to ensure that the PEG moiety does not act as a tether , individual force spectrograms were obtained from biotin - terminated PEG - coated PA hydrogels and an avidin - functionalized probe . Larger rupture forces and a greater number of rupture events were detected on substrates before blocking with excess avidin in solution ( Fig . 3d , left and middle ) , which indicate that the avidin - functionalized probe was specifically bound to the biotin - coated surface . Rupture lengths before and after blocking were not statis - tically diﬀerent ( Fig . 3d , right ) and were similar to rupture lengths measured on control PA substrates with no surface coating ( Fig . 2b , right ) . In contrast to collagen - coated PA substrates that exhibited significantly greater rupture lengths , the deformations of the PEG moiety are minimal . Thus , PA – PEG – RGD substrates are a valid culture platform absent of protein tethering for the given concen - tration range and size of PEG tested . ASCs were then cultured for 14 days in normal growth media to determine whether diﬀeren - tiation was possible without tethering over the range of peptide concentrations tested . ASCs underwent osteogenic diﬀerentiation on 10 / 0 . 3 30 kPa hydrogels independently of RGD concentration ( Fig . 3e ) . Furthermore , osteogenic diﬀerentiation was seen in ASCs andMSCsculturedonall30 kPahydrogelformulationswith2 . 5 mM RGD ( Fig . 3f and Supplementary Fig . 10 ) . Together , these data sug - gestthatdiﬀerentiationoccursintheabsenceoffibrousproteinteth - eringovertherangeofpeptideconcentrationstested . Cell - generated substrate displacements were similar to that of collagen - coated hydrogels ( Fig . 3g ) , lending further evidence that matrix - induced diﬀerentiation operates through common myosin - based contractile mechanisms given that diﬀerentiated cells on these and collagen - coated hydrogels were similar . Cell spread area on PA and PDMS substrates To further support the claim that stiﬀness mediates cell functions generally , we observed the basic behaviour of cell spreading on PA – PEG – RGD hydrogels in the absence of protein tethers . ASC spread area 24 h after seeding scaled with increasing hydrogel stiﬀness ( Supplementary Fig . 11a ) . This suggests that stiﬀness is an important physical factor regardless of how adhesive ligands are presented ( although dependent on concentration 25 ) . To determine whether or not this phenomenon is specific to acrylamide - based systems , polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) substrates were fabricated with base - to - curing ratios of 100 : 1 , 75 : 1 and 50 : 1 to modulate stiﬀness as noted previously 15 . These substrates were not functionalized with adhesive protein . Without covalently attaching or tethering ligands to the surface , cell adhesion and spreading was still possible for all substrates , owing to the well - known fouling properties of PDMS . Furthermore , cell spread area was similar on all substrates ( Supplementary Fig . 11b ) . This observation is in agreement with previous observations that imply stiﬀness - independent cell spreading on PDMS substrates 15 , suggesting that cells may sense similar mechanical cues on the three PDMS formulations . PDMS mechanical properties on a cell - sensing scale Owing to a lack of correlation between cell spread area and PDMS base - to - curing ratio , we independently measured PDMS stiﬀness by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) microindentation . The stiﬀnesses of 50 : 1 and 100 : 1 PDMS were found to be 250 and 550 kPa ( Supplementary Fig . 12a ) —orders of magnitude greater than previously reported 15 . As PDMS has previously been shown to be viscoelastic at higher base - to - curing ratios 26 , substrates were instead indented using diﬀerent indenter geometries and at diﬀerent indentation speeds . Indenting substrates with two diﬀerent probes and a wide range of indentation speeds confirmed the viscoelastic behaviour of PDMS ( Supplementary Fig . 12b ) and suggests that diﬀerent methods of characterization may account for discrepancies in reported values of PDMS stiﬀness . Given the lack of consensus on measuring the mechanical properties of PDMS , it is important to use the most appropriate technique to closely mimic cell – substrate interactions . Cells pull against substrates at 20 – 120 nm s − 1 , resulting in deformations that scale inversely with stiﬀness 17 , 27 ( Fig . 4a ) . We can match AFM tip - retraction velocity to the pulling velocity and size of focal adhesions . Consequently , we can simulate these dynamically fluctuating pulling events by analysing the retraction curves ( as opposed to indentation curves ) obtained by AFM where the tip has pulled and deformed the material above the surface ( Fig . 4b ) . The substrate stiﬀness is determined by fitting the linear region beginning at the contact point with the ( undeformed ) surface ( F = 0 pN ) to where the force reaches − 100 pN ( Fig . 4c ) . PA hydrogels of 1 and 30 kPa demonstrated little variation in stiﬀness over a range of cell - relevant strains 26 and retraction speeds 17 , 27 . The stiﬀnesses of 50 : 1 and 100 : 1 PDMS were both significantly higher than the PA hydrogels , and the stiﬀness of 100 : 1 PDMS increases 50 - fold over the range of retraction velocities tested ( Fig . 4d ) . These data confirm that 100 : 1 PDMS is highly viscoelastic and 50 : 1 PDMS is predominantly elastic , but both are stiﬀ over cell - relevant strains in agreement with previous data 26 . Although previous studies have noted lower stiﬀness values of PDMS for the same cure ratios 15 , it is well known that the mechanical properties of PDMS are diﬀerent at the cellular mechanosensing scale than at the macroscopic scale 28 . At the scale at which a cell mechanosenses 17 , 27 , both 50 : 1 and 100 : 1 PDMS substrates are stiﬀer than 30 kPa PA hydrogels ( Fig . 4d ) . This provides a reasonable explanation as to why cell spreading ( Supplementary Fig . 11b ) and osteogenic diﬀerentiation ( Fig . 4e ) , neither of which changed with cure ratio , were previously reported to be stiﬀness independent 15 . We note here , however , that it is possible to decrease the eﬀective stiﬀness of PDMS by fabricating microposts of identical cure ratios but diﬀerent heights . In ref . 28 , it was found that MSC contractility and diﬀerentiation towards adipogenic or osteogenic lineages scaled as a function of eﬀective stiﬀness pillar height . Thus , even NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 983 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ARTICLES NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 4 kPa 13 kPa 30 kPa 0 . 5 m M 13 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 1 ) 0 . 1 m M 30 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 3 ) 2 . 5 m M 2 . 5 mM 0 . 1 mM 0 . 5 mM 8 / 0 . 55 34 kPa 2 . 5 m M 20 / 0 . 18 10 / 0 . 30 S t i ff n e ss ( k P a ) aPEG−RGD concentration ( mM ) NS NS NS m 13 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 1 ) 30 kPa ( 10 / 0 . 3 ) 2 . 5 m M 0 . 1 m M 0 . 5 m M mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm 0 . 2 mg ml −1 SS 2 . 5 mM RGD M e a n d i s p l a c e m e n t ( n m ) NS D i s p l a c e m e n t s ( μ m ) − + − + − + Avidin blocking ∗∗ R u p t u r e f o r c e ( p N ) R u p t u r e l e n g t h ( n m ) N u m b e r o f r u p t u r e s NS 0 . 1 0 . 5 2 . 5 0 . 1 0 . 5 2 . 5 0 . 1 0 . 5 2 . 5 0 50 100 150 200 0 500 1 , 000 1 , 500 2 , 000 2 , 500 0 50 100 150 200 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 a e f g b c d 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 8 0 . 2 Figure 3 | Direct incorporation of a short adhesive peptide to the PA substrate . a , Elastic modulus measured by AFM ( mean ± s . d . ; n = 3 ; NS , not signiﬁcant ) . b , aPEG – RGD – dye incorporation is detected under ultraviolet light . c , SEM images of PA hydrogels of the indicated stiffness made with varying RGD concentration . Scale bar , 50 µ m . d , Measured rupture force ( left ) , number of events ( middle ) , and rupture length ( right ) for rupture events that occurred on 10 / 0 . 3 30kPa hydrogels coated with PEG – biotin ( n = 1 , 000 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; NS , not signiﬁcant ; ∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 ) . e , ALP staining of ASCs on 13kPa and 30kPa hydrogels with low , medium and high concentrations of RGD . Scale bar , 500 µ m . f , ALP staining of ASCs on 30kPa hydrogels of varying monomer - to - crosslinker ratio and constant high concentration of RGD after 14 days of culture in normal media . Scale bar , 500 µ m . g , Representative displacement map ( left ) of embedded ﬂuorescent particles resulting from ASC traction forces on a 30kPa hydrogel with 2 . 5mM RGD . Mean displacement is shown ( right ) for a collagen - coated hydrogel ( 0 . 2mgml − 1 sulpho - SANPAH and 50 µ gml − 1 collagen I ) and a PA – PEG – RGD hydrogel ( 2 . 5mM RGD ) . ( n = 30 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; NS , not signiﬁcant ; scale bar , 50 µ m . ) 984 NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 ARTICLES PDMS 50 : 1 −200 −150 −100 −50 0 50 −200 −100 0 F o r c e ( p N ) Tip Z - position ( nm ) PA 1 kPa PA 30 kPa b d 58 pN nm −1 2 . 5 pN nm −1 0 . 19 pN nm −1 c S u r f a c e PDMS 100 : 1 Retraction speed ( nm s −1 ) S u b s t r a t e s p r i n g c on s t a n t ( p N n m − 1 ) PA 1 kPa Contraction speed Cell sensing range C e ll s p r i n g s t i ff n e ss PDMS 50 : 1 PDMS 100 : 1 PA 30 kPa 10 1 10 1 10 2 10 2 10 3 10 3 10 4 10 0 10 −1 10 −2 a AFMtip Substrate S u b s t r a t e Surface F - actin bundle Myosin Focal adhesion Contraction Contraction Stiff substrate Soft substrate e PDMS 75 : 1 PDMS 100 : 1 Figure 4 | Cells sense by contracting against their substrates . a , Schematic depicting how cells dynamically deform soft and stiff substrates by pulling ( and not pushing ) through myosin contractions . Softer substrates are deformed to a greater extent than stiffer substrates . b , Schematic depicting the interaction between an AFM tip and the surface of a substrate . The arrow indicates the direction of motion of the tip during retraction . c , Representative retraction curves for 1 and 30kPa PA hydrogels and a 100 : 1 PDMS substrate . The dashed line indicates the point at which the tip is no longer indenting into the substrate ( shaded light blue ) . Substrate stiffness is calculated by ﬁtting the linear region of the retraction curve starting at the ( undeformed ) surface . d , Substrate spring constant determined by the method depicted in c for 1 and 30kPa PA hydrogels and 50 : 1 and 100 : 1 PDMS substrates as a function of AFM tip retraction speed ( mean ± s . d . ) . Cells are sensitive to substrate stiffnesses of 1 – 100kPa . Previously measured myosin contraction speeds range from 10 – 100nms − 1 ( grey ) . e , ALP staining of ASCs on PDMS substrates after 7 days of culture in normal media . Scale bar , 500 µ m . in PDMS systems where cure ratio is not directly modulated , eﬀectively modulating stiﬀness can still yield mechanically driven diﬀerentiation . PDMS substrates do not support protein tethering To address the possibility of fibrous protein tethering on PDMS , 50 : 1 PDMS substrates were examined using force spectroscopy . When 50 : 1 PDMS substrates were pre - incubated in a collagen solution , rupture events with lengths and forces much greater than that of PA substrates were detected ( Fig . 5a ) , confirming that collagen nonspecifically adsorbs to PDMS . Attempting to functionalize PDMS with sulpho - SANPAH before collagen incubation 15 did not alter the rupture force ( Fig . 5b ) . However , the rupture length markedly increased from 450 nm to 1 . 5 µ m , which is larger than cell deformations on stiﬀ PA substrates ( Figs 2g and 5a ) . This observation is opposite to what was seen with PA ; treating PA with sulpho - SANPAH increases fibrous - collagen tethering to PA , consequently decreasing the rupture length ( Fig . 2b ) . The increased rupture lengths seen in PDMS may be attributed to the formation of long chains of collagen forming on the PDMS sur - faceascollagencontainsmanyprimaryaminesforsulpho - SANPAH to crosslink , whereas PDMS is void of amines ( Supplementary Fig . 13a , left ) . In this hypothesis , sulpho - SANPAH is not directly coupled to the PDMS surface , but rather only to collagen chains . To test this hypothesis , substrates were functionalized with sulpho - SANPAH before incubation in NH 2 – PEG – biotin , which has only one free primary amine ( Supplementary Fig . 13a , right ) . Rupture lengths and forces obtained from force spectrograms using avidin tips were similar on biotin - coated substrates functionalized with and without sulpho - SANPAH ( Fig . 5a ) . To further confirm that sulpho - SANPAH does not react with PDMS , amines were covalently bound to PDMS substrate surfaces using the chemistry outlined in Supplementary Fig . 13b . At least one rupture event was detected in more than 90 % of the force spectrograms obtained from biotin - coated samples . In contrast , rupture events were detected in only 30 % of the force spectrograms obtained from biotin - coated but not amine - functionalized PDMS samples independently of sulpho - SANPAH ( Fig . 5b ) . Thus , it is clear that the sulpho - succinimidyl group requires amines to form a covalent bond . Regardless of ultraviolet treatment , PDMS surfaces do not display free amines , and thus protein cannot be covalently bound to the surface through sulpho - SANPAH . Previous eﬀorts do not seem to have amine - functionalized PDMS ( ref . 15 ) , and thus it is diﬃcult to attribute fibrous - protein tethering on PDMS to cell spreading and diﬀerentiation . These results , in conjunction with cure ratio - independent stem cell spreading ( Supplementary Fig . 11b ) and diﬀerentiation ( Fig . 4e ) , emphasize the shortcomings of PDMS as a model system to investigate stiﬀness - dependent behaviour over a relevant cell - sensing range 28 . Elastic two - dimensional hydrogel systems with controlled stiﬀness such as PA , PEG ( ref . 29 ) , hyaluronic acid 30 , 31 and alginate 32 are better suited to investigate these cell behaviours . Summary The commonly used PA hydrogel system is easily tuned to modulate substrate porosity , and in combination with diﬀerent concentrations of sulpho - SANPAH , provides a platform to investigate how substrate stiﬀness , porosity and ligand tethering aﬀect stem cell fate . The data presented here provide direct evidence that the mechanical feedback provided by hydrogel deformations on planar matrices regulates osteogenic and adipogenic diﬀerentiation of ASCs and MSCs independently of protein tethering and substrate porosity . Furthermore , these data indicate that substrates have fibrous - protein tethers as previously suggested 15 ; however , these tethers are not essential for the osteogenic and adipogenic diﬀerentiation of ASCs and MSCs . This work further highlights the importance of bulk matrix stiﬀness as the main mechanical regulator of stem cell diﬀerentiation . NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 985 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ARTICLES NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 0 50 100 150 500 1 , 000 1 , 500 2 , 000 R u p t u r e l e n g t h ( n m ) No data SS ( mg ml −1 ) : 0 0 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 − Collagen Biotin Ligand : SS ( mg ml −1 ) : 0 0 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 − Collagen Biotin Ligand : 0 100 200 300 400 500 R u p t u r e f o r c e ( p N ) No data a + SS −SS + SS + APTES / + SNB 0 20 40 60 80 100 b P e r c e n t a g e o f s p e c t r o g r a m s w i t h a t l e a s t 1 r u p t u r e e v e n t Collagen Biotin Ligand : PA PDMS Substrate : Figure 5 | Atomic force spectrography analysis of ligand - coated PDMS substrates . a , Measured rupture length ( top ) and rupture force ( bottom ) for rupture events detected on 50 : 1 PDMS substrates activated with the indicated sulpho - SANPAH ( SS ) and collagen or NH 2 – PEG – biotin concentrations ( mean ± s . e . m . ) . No data indicates that no rupture events were detected . b , Percentage of spectrograms with at least one rupture event on PA and PDMS substrates activated with the linkers and ligands shown . Methods PA gels . Glass coverslips were functionalized using 3 - ( trimethoxysilyl ) propyl methacrylate to facilitate covalent attachment of hydrogel substrates to glass . A polymer solution containing acrylamide monomers , crosslinker N , N methylene - bis - acrylamide , ammonium persulphate and N , N , N (cid:48) , N (cid:48) - tetramethylethylenediamine ( TEMED ) was prepared . The polymerizing solution was sandwiched between a functionalized coverslip and a dichlorodimethylsilane - treated slide to ensure easy detachment of hydrogels . The ratio of acrylamide % / bis - acrylamide % was varied to control hydrogel stiﬀness and porosity . To allow for cell adhesion and fibrous - protein tethering , substrates were incubated in 0 . 02 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 2 , 0 . 5 or 1mgml − 1 N - sulphosuccinimidyl - 6 - ( 4 (cid:48) - azido - 2 (cid:48) - nitrophenylamino ) hexanoate ( sulpho - SANPAH ) , activated with ultraviolet light , washed , and then incubated in collagen overnight . For AFM experiments , 0 . 5mgml − 1 amine – PEG3400 – biotin was used instead of collagen . Coated hydrogels were ultraviolet sterilized before use in cell culture . PA – PEG – RGD gels . PA – PEG – RGD hydrogels were fabricated by incorporating 0 . 1mM , 0 . 5mM or 2 . 5mM acrylated - PEG3400 – GRGD - amide ( aPEG – RGD ) into the polymerizing solution described above . To visualize RGD concentration diﬀerences , a fluorescent hydroxycoumarin dye was conjugated to the peptide . PDMS substrates . PDMS was mixed at various elastomer base / curing agent ratios ( 50 : 1 , 75 : 1 , 90 : 1 , 100 : 1 ) , thoroughly mixed , and degassed under vacuum before pouring directly into multi - well plates or onto coverslips and baked overnight . In certain instances , substrates were functionalized with sulpho - SANPAH and ligand ( Supplementary Information and Supplementary Fig . 13a ) . For covalent attachment of moieties to the surface , PDMS substrates were treated with ultraviolet / ozone following an incubation under vacuum in the presence of ( 3 - aminopropyl ) triethoxysilane . Surfaces were then incubated in sulpho - NHS – biotin ( Supplementary Fig . 13b ) . SEM . PA and PA – PEG – RGD solutions were polymerized . Hydrogels were swelled in water overnight , flash frozen , then lyophilized overnight . Lyophilized samples were sputter coated with iridium . DNA gel electrophoresis . DNA ladders were run through PA electrophoresis gels in TAE buﬀer with ethidium bromide at 30V for 14h . DNA fragment lengths were converted to radius of gyration as described elsewhere 22 . Stem cell culture . Human ASCs were isolated from freshly aspirated human subcutaneous adipose tissue according to the method described elsewhere 33 . Commercially available MSCs were purchased . MSCs and ASCs were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium with fetal bovine serum and antibiotics . For diﬀerentiation experiments , MSCs and ASCs were seeded on PA and PDMS substrates at a density of 1 , 000cellscm − 2 and on PA – PEG – RGD gels at a density of 2 , 000cellscm − 2 . See Supplementary Information for inductive media formulations . Immunofluorescence . Cells were fixed , permeabilized and then stained with rhodamine phalloidin and Hoechst . For osteogenic diﬀerentiation studies , cells were stained with RUNX2 . To quantify RUNX2 expression , CellProfiler 34 ( Broad Institute ) was used to measure cytoplasmic and nuclear fluorescent intensities using the nuclei and cell outlines as masks to define these regions of interest in the RUNX2 fluorescent channel . Diﬀerentiation assays . ASCs and MSCs were stained for ALP and ORO as per manufacturer protocols . See Supplementary Information for additional methods . AFM . To determine the mechanical properties of PA hydrogels by indentation and to quantify protein tethering by force spectroscopy , a MFP - 3D - Bio atomic force microscope was used . Chromium / gold - coated , silicone nitride cantilevers with pyramid - shaped tips with ∼ 50pNnm − 1 nominal spring constants were used for both methods . Samples were indented at a velocity of 2 µ ms − 1 until a trigger of 2nN was detected using . All AFM data were analysed using custom - written code in Igor Pro to determine Young’s modulus as previously described 35 . PDMS substrates were indented with the same cantilevers mentioned above . In addition , a cantilever with a 45 - µ m - diameter polystyrene bead tip with 0 . 03Nm − 1 nominal spring constant was used . For retraction experiments , samples were indented with approach and retraction velocities ranging from 1nms − 1 to 10 µ ms − 1 . The substrate spring constants were determined by fitting the linear portion of the retraction curve starting at the undeformed surface . For force spectroscopy , cantilevers were functionalized ( Fig . 3a ) with an anti - collagen type I antibody , or avidin using a previously established method 36 , 37 . Briefly , cantilevers were cleaned with chloroform and immersed in ethanolamine - HCl in dimethylsulphoxide . Tips were incubated in bis ( sulphosuccinimidyl ) suberate , rinsed , and then immersed either in an antibody or avidin solution to crosslink the protein to the tip . Force curves were taken in a regular 10 × 10 array of points spaced ∼ 10 µ m apart . To promote binding of the antibody to collagen or avidin to biotin , a dwell time of 1s was added between approach and retraction cycles . Force curves were converted to force versus tip Z - position curves ( Supplementary Fig . 6a ) and then analysed for 986 NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE MATERIALS DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMAT4051 ARTICLES rupture events using a previously described algorithm 38 ; rupture lengths and forces were determined . Traction force microscopy . Traction force microscopy was performed as previously described 23 . Briefly , fluorescent 0 . 2 µ m microspheres were added to the pre - polymer solution . Substrates were functionalized and treated as described above . The microspheres underneath selected live cells were imaged with a confocal imaging system . Cells were released with trypsin and the same confocal stacks were acquired . Bead displacements were determined using a particle image velocimetry MATLAB script . FRET . Concentrated fibronectin was denatured in guanidine hydrochloride and dual - labelled with donor and acceptor fluorophores , as previously described 13 . Denatured fibronectin was incubated with a molar excess of Alexa Fluor 546 C5 maleimide and subsequently buﬀer exchanged into sodium bicarbonate . The single - labelled fibronectin was then incubated with a molar excess of Alexa Fluor 488 succinimidyl ester . Unreacted donor fluorophores were removed using a spin desalting column . The emission spectrum of the dual - labelled fibronectin was characterized in varying concentrations of denaturant by fluorescence spectroscopy . The resulting emission spectrum was measured from 510 to 700nm ( Supplementary Fig . 9b ) and the ratio of the maximum acceptor emission ( ∼ 570nm ) to the maximum donor emission ( ∼ 520nm ) was determined at each concentration of GdnHCl ( Supplementary Fig . 9c ) . Images of the dual - labelled fibronectin were acquired using a confocal microscope and analysed using a custom MATLAB script , as previously described 14 . The mean FRET ratio within the selected regions was calculated for each cell and then averaged over all of the cells in each condition ( n = 16 cells per condition ; Fig . 2g ) . See Supplementary Information for additional methods . Received 9 January 2014 ; accepted 4 July 2014 ; published online 10 August 2014 References 1 . Pelham , R . J . Jr & Wang , Y . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Gilbert , P . M . et al . Substrate elasticity regulates skeletal muscle stem cell self - renewal in culture . Science 329 , 1078 – 1081 ( 2010 ) . 3 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Choi , Y . S . , Vincent , L . G . , Lee , A . R . , Dobke , M . K . & Engler , A . J . Mechanical derivation of functional myotubes from adipose - derived stem cells . Biomaterials 33 , 2482 – 2491 ( 2012 ) . 5 . Saha , K . et al . Substrate modulus directs neural stem cell behavior . Biophys . J . 95 , 4426 – 4438 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Rowlands , A . S . , George , P . A . & Cooper - White , J . J . Directing osteogenic and myogenic diﬀerentiation of MSCs : Interplay of stiﬀness and adhesive ligand presentation . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 295 , C1037 – C1044 ( 2008 ) . 7 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 ( 2006 ) . 8 . McBeath , R . , Pirone , D . M . , Nelson , C . M . , Bhadriraju , K . & Chen , C . S . Cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Dev . Cell 6 , 483 – 495 ( 2004 ) . 9 . Dupont , S . et al . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 183 ( 2011 ) . 10 . Kilian , K . A . , Bugarija , B . , Lahn , B . T . & Mrksich , M . Geometric cues for directing the diﬀerentiation of mesenchymal stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 4872 – 4877 ( 2010 ) . 11 . Huebsch , N . et al . Harnessing traction - mediated manipulation of the cell / matrix interface to control stem - cell fate . Nature Mater . 9 , 518 – 526 ( 2010 ) . 12 . Khetan , S . et al . Degradation - mediated cellular traction directs stem cell fate in covalently crosslinked three - dimensional hydrogels . Nature Mater . 12 , 458 – 465 ( 2013 ) . 13 . Baneyx , G . , Baugh , L . & Vogel , V . Fibronectin extension and unfolding within cell matrix fibrils controlled by cytoskeletal tension . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 5139 – 5143 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Smith , M . L . et al . Force - induced unfolding of fibronectin in the extracellular matrix of living cells . PLoS Biol . 5 , e268 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Trappmann , B . et al . Extracellular - matrix tethering regulates stem - cell fate . Nature Mater . 11 , 642 – 649 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Rossman , J . S . & Dym , C . L . Introduction to Engineering Mechanics : A Continuum Approach ( CRC Press , 2008 ) . 17 . Plotnikov , S . V . , Pasapera , A . M . , Sabass , B . & Waterman , C . M . Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ECM - rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration . Cell 151 , 1513 – 1527 ( 2012 ) . 18 . Holle , A . W . et al . In situ mechanotransduction via vinculin regulates stem cell diﬀerentiation . Stem Cells 31 , 2467 – 2477 ( 2013 ) . 19 . Lutolf , M . P . , Gilbert , P . M . & Blau , H . M . Designing materials to direct stem - cell fate . Nature 462 , 433 – 441 ( 2009 ) . 20 . Guilak , F . et al . Control of stem cell fate by physical interactions with the extracellular matrix . Cell Stem Cell 5 , 17 – 26 ( 2009 ) . 21 . Discher , D . E . , Mooney , D . J . & Zandstra , P . W . Growth factors , matrices , and forces combine and control stem cells . Science 324 , 1673 – 1677 ( 2009 ) . 22 . Stellwagen , N . C . Apparent pore size of polyacrylamide gels : Comparison of gels cast and run in tris - acetate - EDTA and tris - borate - EDTA buﬀers . Electrophoresis 19 , 1542 – 1547 ( 1998 ) . 23 . Del Alamo , J . C . et al . Three - dimensional quantification of cellular traction forces and mechanosensing of thin substrata by fourier traction force microscopy . PLoS ONE 8 , e69850 ( 2013 ) . 24 . Ruoslahti , E . & Pierschbacher , M . D . New perspectives in cell adhesion : RGD and integrins . Science 238 , 491 – 497 ( 1987 ) . 25 . Engler , A . et al . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys . J . 86 , 617 – 628 ( 2004 ) . 26 . Murrell , M . , Kamm , R . & Matsudaira , P . Substrate viscosity enhances correlation in epithelial sheet movement . Biophys . J . 101 , 297 – 306 ( 2011 ) . 27 . Bangasser , B . L . , Rosenfeld , S . S . & Odde , D . J . Determinants of maximal force transmission in a motor - clutch model of cell traction in a compliant microenvironment . Biophys . J . 105 , 581 – 592 ( 2013 ) . 28 . Fu , J . et al . Mechanical regulation of cell function with geometrically modulated elastomeric substrates . Nature Methods 7 , 733 – 736 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Khatiwala , C . B . , Peyton , S . R . , Metzke , M . & Putnam , A . J . The regulation of osteogenesis by ECM rigidity in MC3T3 - E1 cells requires MAPK activation . J . Cell . Physiol . 211 , 661 – 672 ( 2007 ) . 30 . Young , J . L . & Engler , A . J . Hydrogels with time - dependent material properties enhance cardiomyocyte diﬀerentiation in vitro . Biomaterials 32 , 1002 – 1009 ( 2011 ) . 31 . Chopra , A . et al . Reprogramming cardiomyocyte mechanosensing by crosstalk between integrins and hyaluronic acid receptors . J . Biomech . 45 , 824 – 831 ( 2012 ) . 32 . Kong , H . J . , Polte , T . R . , Alsberg , E . & Mooney , D . J . FRET measurements of cell - traction forces and nano - scale clustering of adhesion ligands varied by substrate stiﬀness . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 4300 – 4305 ( 2005 ) . 33 . Choi , Y . S . et al . The alignment and fusion assembly of adipose - derived stem cells on mechanically patterned matrices . Biomaterials 33 , 6943 – 6951 ( 2012 ) . 34 . Carpenter , A . E . et al . CellProfiler : Image analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell phenotypes . Genome Biol . 7 , R100 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Kaushik , G . et al . Measuring passive myocardial stiﬀness in Drosophila melanogaster to investigate diastolic dysfunction . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 16 , 1656 – 1662 ( 2012 ) . 36 . Bonanni , B . et al . Single molecule recognition between cytochrome C 551 and gold - immobilized azurin by force spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 89 , 2783 – 2791 ( 2005 ) . 37 . Chirasatitsin , S . & Engler , A . J . Detecting cell - adhesive sites in extracellular matrix using force spectroscopy mapping . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 22 , 194102 ( 2010 ) . 38 . Fuhrmann , A . , Anselmetti , D . , Ros , R . , Getfert , S . & Reimann , P . Refined procedure of evaluating experimental single - molecule force spectroscopy data . Phys . Rev . E 77 , 031912 ( 2008 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank M . Joens , J . Kasuboski and J . Fitzpatrick at the Waitt Advanced Biophotonics Center at the Salk Institute ( supported by NCI P30 Cancer Center Support Grant CA014195 - 40 and NINDS P30 Neuroscience Center Core Grant NS072031 - 03A1 and by the W . M . Keck Foundation ) for technical assistance with microscopy , and W . Murphy ( University of Wisconsin ) , T . McDevitt ( Georgia Tech ) and J . C . del Alamo ( UC San Diego ) for helpful conversations . The National Institutes of Health ( DP02OD006460 to A . J . E . ) , the Human Frontiers Science Program ( RGY0064 / 2010 to A . J . E . ) , the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program ( to J . H . W . , L . G . V . and H . T - W . ) , the Siebel Scholars Program , and the Achievement Rewards for College Scientists ( to L . G . V . ) supported this work . Author contributions All authors contributed to the design of experiments . Y . S . C . , K . C . H . and S . C . characterized the hydrogel substrates . H . T - W . characterized and performed experiments with the FRET probe . J . H . W . , L . G . V . and A . F . conducted all other experiments and performed the data analysis . J . H . W . , L . G . V . and A . J . E . wrote the manuscript . Additional information Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper . Reprints and permissions information is available online at www . nature . com / reprints . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A . J . E . Competing ﬁnancial interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . NATUREMATERIALS | VOL 13 | OCTOBER 2014 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 987 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved