Kinds of inspiration in interaction design Kim Halskov Centre for Digital Urban Living and CAVI , Aarhus University , Denmark halskov @ cavi . dk Abstract In this paper , we explore the role of sources of inspi - ration in interaction design . We identify four strategies for relating sources of inspiration to emerging ideas : selection ; adaptation ; translation ; and combination . As our starting point , we argue that sources of inspiration are a form of knowledge crucial to creativity . Our research is based on empirical ﬁndings arising from the use of Inspiration Card Workshops , which are colla - borative design events in which domain and technology insight are combined to create design concepts . In addition to the systematically introduced sources of inspiration that form part of the workshop format , a number of spontaneous sources of inspiration emerged during these workshops . Keywords : interaction design , creativity , innovation , inspiration , kinds of seeing 1 Introduction Consciously seeking inspiration is part of the inno - vation strategy discussed by Kelley and Littman ( 2001 ) : ‘Take a trip to Akihabara , the blinking electronic hub of Tokyo’ or ‘Looking for the future of athletics apparel ? Head to the beach’ . Foster takes an even more radical stance , recom - mending , in his book on generating ideas , the deliberate pursuit of unaccustomed experiences , for instance : ‘Study Latin’ , ‘Read a magazine that you’ve never heard of’ ( Foster 1966 , p . 72 ) , or ‘Take up water - colour painting’ . In this paper , we explore the role of sources of inspiration in interaction design . In particular , we address two fundamental questions : what is the nature of the sources of inspiration in design pro - cesses ? And how do sources of inspiration relate to emerging ideas ? Before we start , we situate our research question in the larger context of inno - vation and creativity research . Sternberg and Lubart ( 1999 ) have identiﬁed ﬁve conceptions of the sources of creativity . According to the Mythical Approach , the source of creativity is divine intervention , as when the muse dictates what a poet creates . Another of the early perspectives on creativity , the Psychody - namic Approach , suggests that creativity emerges from the tension between conscious and uncon - scious realities , as argued by Freud , for instance , in his studies of famous inventors such as Leonardo da Vinci . The Cognitive Approach goes back to the early 1900s , focuses on thinking ability as well as knowledge , and has developed in parallel with the Social Psychological Approach , which also takes into account aspects Digital Creativity 2010 , Vol . 21 , No . 3 , pp . 186 – 196 ISSN 1462 - 6268 # 2010 Taylor & Francis DOI : 10 . 1080 / 14626268 . 2010 . 502236 http : / / www . informaworld . com of personality and the sociocultural environment . Many contemporary theories are to some extent partial syntheses of earlier theories , and subscribe to the position that multiple components converge in a creative process . Lubart has labelled such a perspective the Conﬂuence Approach , and it has been used as the platform for identifying and addressing six components of creativity . According to Lubart ( 1994 ) , Intellectual Abil - ities constitute the most prominent component of creativity , and include problem deﬁnition and the balancing of divergent and convergent thinking ; here , the intellectual abilities are closely related to Thinking Styles , which , among other aspects , include the distinction between adapting an exist - ing solution , or more radically restructuring a problem . Personality traits , such as perseverance , and the Environment and Motivation are three essential components of creativity . In this paper , we focus on the sixth component , Knowledge , including knowledge of the ﬁeld in general , but more particularly experience from previous situations . Speciﬁcally , we focus on the role that sources of inspiration play in design pro - cesses theoretically based on the pragmatic design theory of Scho¨n ( 1983 , 1988 , 1992 ) . According to Scho¨n , rather than look for stan - dard solutions , the designer sees the situation as something already present in his repertoire of para - digm cases or prototypes . This way of beneﬁting from prior knowledge by using it as a resource in creative or innovative design processes has been echoed by Lanzara ( 1983 ) in his investi - gation of the role of frames and metaphors in design . A similar path has been pursued by Madsen ( 1989 , 1994 ) in an exploration of the use of metaphors as an almost magical source of innovation in design . In the process of seeing as , the designer sees the situation as unique , paying as much attention to dissimilarities as to similarities ( Scho¨n 1983 ) . The designer works selectively in different media or materials , experimenting with different aspects of his design . Each move on the part of the designer is an experiment ; Scho¨n distinguishes between three kinds of experiment : in the explora - tive experiment , the designer acts only to see what follows ; in hypothesis testing , the designer acts to test which one of a number of competing hypoth - eses holds true ; in the move testing experiment , the designer takes action to produce an intended change . In this paper , we do not focus on the various kinds of experiments , but instead seek to identify the nature of the various kinds of inspiration in interaction design , together with the related kinds of seeing . The paper unfolds as follows : we start out by presenting an overview of related work , focusing on the sources of inspiration in design processes , followed by an account of the methods and cases which have provided the platform for our discus - sion of three main kinds of inspiration in design processes . 2 Related work First , we take an overview of the role of sources of inspiration in design , in disciplines ranging from textile design to engineering , then follow with an introduction to sources of inspiration from an interaction design perspective . 2 . 1 Textile design Eckert and Stacey ( 2000 ) have investigated how sources of inspiration play an important role in the context of knitwear design . They use the terms ‘sources of inspiration’ for all conscious uses of previous design and other objects and images in a design process ( Eckert and Stacey 2000 , p . 524 ) , and distinguish between the various speciﬁc roles of sources of inspiration in design : starting design ; precedents , as in architec - ture ; reuse of an existing component ; pattern , a solution principle known from Alexander’s work ( Alexander et al . 1977 ) , and prime generators . Sources of inspiration have two different functions in the knitwear industry , where they play a role in positioning a new design in relation to the current fashion , and function as the starting point for the new design . In this paper , we focus on the latter , in the area of interaction design . According to Eckert and Stacey ( 2000 , p . 526 ) , for knitwear designers previous designs are not the Kinds of inspiration in interaction design 187 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 only sources of inspiration , but ‘they also actively search for sources of shapes , patterns , motifs and colour combinations’ in their stock of sources of inspiration ( Kerne et al . 2008 ) . Based on interviews and the observations of designers from eighteen knitwear design compa - nies , Petre et al . ( 2006 ) have gone into great detail concerning the sort of inspiration used by knitwear designers , and have identiﬁed six main categories : . other garments . representations of garments . materials , including other textiles . work of arts . artefacts from other domains . natural phenomena and objects . According to their study , designers apply sources of inspiration in a combination of three basic strat - egies : ( 1 ) selection ; ( 2 ) adaptation ; and ( 3 ) trans - formation . In the case of selection , the designer chooses what he or she considers an interesting feature , for instance a certain pattern , and incor - porates it in his or her own design . Adaptation takes a number of forms , including literal ( i . e . no adaptation ) , simpliﬁcation , abstraction , modiﬁ - cation and association . Transformations are various forms of geometric manipulation , for instance rotation , scaling , mirroring . The basic strategies and the subordinate distinctions clearly reﬂect that the study is concerned with the design practices of visual designers . 2 . 2 Engineering and design In the context of engineering , Petre ( 2004 ) has , based on observations of and interviews with twelve engineering consultancies , identiﬁed the innovation strategies used in a number of technical domains , ranging from telecommunication to medical instruments production . Not surprisingly , identifying opportunities or gaps in the market - place is a fundamental innovation strategy for com - mercial companies . Another practice common to all companies is systematic knowledge acquisition , including technical literature review and patent searches , in order to identify exploitable techno - logies . A particularly prevalent group of strategies concerns various kinds of record - keeping of design documents , ‘loose possibilities’ and completed projects . Systematic reﬂections on completed pro - jects , together with systematic reuse or reapplica - tion of recent innovations , are also particularly common . A ﬁnal category of strategies is com - posed of speciﬁc techniques , such as brainstorming and the use of scenarios . Last , working from pre - vious research , Petre documents and ﬁnds additional support in her study for the well - estab - lished fact that expertise plays a prominent role , and that knowing or remembering previous examples and cases is an important skill of experts . Based on a study of more than one hundred speciﬁc product innovations in various ﬁelds of engineering , von Hippel ( 1988 ) has investigated sources of innovation at an organisational level , from a lead - user research perspective . His main ﬁnding supports the conventional wisdom that manufacturers are indeed typical innovators , but he also ﬁnds strong evidence of the fact that users are prominent innovators , and that suppliers of components and materials are innovators in the industries they supply . A later study conducted by Lu¨thje and Herstatt ( 2004 ) found additional support for the potential of identifying lead - users ( i . e . users within a ﬁeld who contribute to the inno - vation of the products they themselves use ) in a number of ﬁelds , including engineering , as well as in the production of equipment for extreme sports , such as kite surﬁng and mountain biking . Kerne and his co - researchers ( Kerne et al . 2008 ) have developed a software - based creative tool , combinFormation , which supports searching , browsing and integrating information , and which has been tested by numerous students . Basically , this is a tool that smoothly enables the compilation of information from numerous sources . In particu - lar , the tool relies on the potential of mixing and re - mixing pieces of text and images , enabling the emergence of new ideas through juxtaposition of previously unrelated material . In their book about innovation and creative pro - cessesatIDEO , KelleyandLittman ( 2001 ) describe The Tech Box , which is a centrally located ﬁle cabinet ﬁlled with gadgets and materials , such as tiny switches , Aerogel , Kevlar , rubber balls that don’t bounce , super - heat - conducting copper heat Halskov 188 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 pipes and the like . People look in the Tech Box for inspiration , then use it for launching new projects and for selecting items to bring to design meetings , to spark innovation , etc . 2 . 3 Interaction design Bødker et al . ( 2000 ) have addressed ways of sti - mulating idea generation from the user - centred design tradition , and , illustrating this with two cases from museum exhibitions and home IT , they discuss how theory and the making of extreme and multiple voices may act as a source of inspiration in design . The latter is quite closely related to Djajadiningrat et al . ’s ( 2000 ) notions of interaction relabelling and extreme characters , which are two methods of exploring aesthetic interaction ( Petersen et al . 2004 ) in a shift of attention from functionality to interaction . As an example , when designing a PDA , they imagine what kind of interaction one would design if the user were the pope , a drug dealer or some other kind of extreme character . Their inter - est lies in developing new kinds of interaction , which are not only guided by ease of use and efﬁ - ciency but also by richness , attractiveness and other aesthetic qualities . Sanders ( 2005 ) has argued that inspiration plays a prominent role in experience design , and points out what she sees as a clash between an information - oriented approach and an inspi - ration - oriented approach . The inspirational approach ‘draws primarily from the future and the unknown’ , and works ‘through experimen - tation , ambiguity and surprise’ . Returning to the user - centred design tradition , Madsen ( 1994 ) has suggested the systematic use of metaphors as an innovation strategy in digital design . In the late 1980s , Madsen ( 1989 ) explored the nature of using metaphors in interaction design . Based on the design of digital technologies for libraries , as well as other cases , a number of charac - teristics of this particular kind of ‘seeing as’ have been identiﬁed ; for instance , that metaphors provide a new perspective on the design task , and that metaphors provide speciﬁc design options . Based on his analysis of the cases , Madsen ( 1994 ) also provides a list of design guidelines . The metaphorical design approach discussed here has strong roots in the work of Scho¨n , who has coined the term ‘generative metaphor’ to describe the particular kind of metaphor that provides new design options . One of the cases reported by Scho¨n describes how a group of product designers experienced a breakthrough in their work when they saw a paintbrush as a pump ( Scho¨n 1979 , pp . 257 – 258 ) . Clearly , the prominent role played by activat - ing a large number of previous examples is a common thread running through the studies of innovation in design ; bringing unorthodox examples into play in the design process seems to be particularly relevant . 3 Method and cases The empirical ﬁndings that we present and use in the following sections derive from the use of Inspi - ration Card Workshops ( Halskov and Dalsgaard 2006 , 2007 ) , collaborative design events invol - ving professional designers and participants with knowledge of the design domain , and in which domain and technology insight are combined to create design concepts . Over the past four years , our research group has conducted more than ﬁfteen Inspiration Card Workshops , but in this paper we focus on three of them , all conducted as part of the research project , ‘Experience - Oriented Applications of Digital Technology in Knowledge Dissemination and Marketing’ . The project explores the use of digital technologies in settings ranging from museums to the retail sector . 3 . 1 Inspiration Card Workshops Inspiration Card Workshops are primarily used in the early stages of a design process , during which professional designers and their collaborators narrow down potential future designs . The goal of the workshop is to develop design concepts starting from Technology Cards and Domain Cards . ATechnology Card represents either a speciﬁc technology ( e . g . motion capture ) or an application of one or more technologies . As an example , the card in Figure 1 is a Technology Card representing Kinds of inspiration in interaction design 189 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 a speciﬁc application of thermal camera tracking technology . Domain Cards represent information about the domains for which we design . This infor - mation may pertain to situations , people , settings , themes , etc . from the domain . Figure 2 is an example of a Domain Card from the speciﬁc setting for which we designed in the case addressed in the next part of this article . The preparation for the workshop primarily involves selecting and generating the cards . Tech - nology Cards , primarily generated by the designers , represent technologies that may directly or indirectly be part of the design concepts . Tech - nology Cards can often be reused in various other projects , and the ones we produce are predomi - nantly created from a pool of resources available at http : / / www . digitalexperience . dk . The Domain Cards may be generated by the designers , based on studies of the domain , or by the participants , from their design domain . The workshop itself commences with a presen - tation of the Domain and Technology Cards selected . The main phase of the workshop consists of the participants collaboratively combining the cards on posters in order to capture design con - cepts ( see Figure 3 and Figure 4 ) . After the combination and co - creation phase , the participants discuss each poster in plenum . Figure 5 gives an overview of the workshop phases 3 . 2 Three speciﬁc workshops As mentioned above , our empirical ﬁndings derives from workshops conducted as part of a research project that explores the use of digital technologies in settings ranging from museums to commercial enterprises : ‘7th Heaven , Gumlink , and The Salling Department Store’ . 7th Heaven is small consultancy company spe - cialising in designing experience - oriented installa - tions for children . Gumlink is a large international chewing gum research and manufacturing company with approximately 450 employees . We have collabo - rated with Gumlink to create interactive elements for their booth at the world’s largest annual sweets convention , which is held in Germany , and hosts more than 35 , 000 visitors . Figure 3 . Combination and co - creation of design concepts , using Inspiration Cards . Photo : CAVI , 2005 . Figure 1 . ATechnology Card : ‘Drifting text’ . Photo : CAVI , 2005 . Figure 2 . A Domain Card : ‘Today’s special offer’ . Photo : CAVI , 2005 . Halskov 190 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 The Salling department store is one of the oldest and most renowned stores in Denmark , and has just celebrated its 100th anniversary . The store has undergone a recent expansion , and as part of the rethinking of the store , we collaborated with Salling in developing interactive ways of inviting potential customers to explore the store and its products . 3 . 3 Resultant design The concrete results of the Inspiration Card Work - shop with 7th Heaven were two installations at a children’s literature centre , focusing on Norse mythology : the ﬁrst installation , Balder’s Funeral Pyre , is an interactive corridor in which one of the sides features an immersive rear projection of ﬁre ( Halskov and Dalsgaard 2007 ) . The second Installation is Mimer’s Well , a 3 - D stereo cinema that presents elements of Norse mythology . As indicated above , the workshop with Gumlink was executed in order to create interac - tive elements for their booth at the world’s largest annual sweets convention . Two of the con - cepts developed at the workshop have been implemented : a walk - up - and - use interactive console using tangible interaction , and a large , motion - sensing interactive display at the front of the booth , intended to draw in passers - by ( Halskov and Dalsgaard 2007 , Mailund and Halskov 2008 ) . The workshop with Salling was conducted in order to develop new ways of promoting products in a retail setting . One of the concepts which grew out of the workshop , Dynamically Transparent Windows ( DTW ) , was implemented and tested as part of the fac¸ade of the department store ( Dals - gaard and Halskov 2009 ) . The DTW are based on strips of electro - chromatic foil that can change from opaque to transparent when an elec - tric current runs through them , making it possible to partially reveal what is on display in the store , in response to the movements of passers - by . 4 Kinds of inspiration The three workshops each lasted between one and a half and two hours , and all were videotaped for subsequent analysis . The analysis reported in this article focuses on how the various sources of inspi - ration have served as a springboard for design ideas or for establishing the direction for the design process . In terms of methodological challenges encoun - tered during the analysis , it is important to note that in several instances is was not absolutely clear to which aspect of a source of inspiration a workshop participant referred , what actually con - stituted the idea and how the idea related to the source of inspiration . For the part of the analysis reported in this paper , we have selected instances Figure 4 . A poster with cards combined to generate and capture a design concept . The scribbled notes on the poster translate as ( clockwise from the top ) : ‘Waiting / Queue / Transit / Waste’ , ‘Checkout line’ , ‘Info about level content / elevator’ , ‘Art + play’ , ‘Better mood while waiting’ , ‘Mirror activities outside the lavatories inside the lavatories’ , and ‘Checkout + waiting time’ . Photo : CAVI , 2005 . Figure 5 . The workshop phases . Kinds of inspiration in interaction design 191 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 with an evident relation between inspiration and idea . During our analysis , we identiﬁed four ways of relating sources of inspiration to emerging ideas : selection ; adaptation ; translation ; and combi - nation . Next , we also address how , in addition to the use of the sources of inspiration represented by Technology Cards , a number of other sources of inspiration were spontaneously brought into the workshop by participants . But ﬁrst , we brieﬂy present our thoughts behind our choice of sources of inspiration , as rep - resented by the Technology Card . 4 . 1 Kinds of sources As a basic principle , for each of the workshops we have always chosen a source of inspiration close to the domain for which we were designing : for instance , an innovative museum application , in the case of the design for the children’s museum . But we have also introduced concepts distant from the context for which we were designing : for instance , a digital art project such as The Listen - ing Post , by artists Ben Rubin and Mark Hansen . Some sources of inspiration were selected with the purpose of pushing the creative process in a certain direction ; for instance , with the purpose of exploring experience design and interaction beyond the desktop . 4 . 2 Selection In the case of Selection , the designer picks a certain aspect or feature of the source of inspiration , which is perhaps the most fundamental strategy , when we discuss the role of sources of inspiration in design . In many instances during the workshop , the selected feature constituted only a minor aspect of the source of inspiration . As an example , Blin - kenlights ( http : / / www . blinkenlights . net ) was intro - duced as a complex setup in which the windows of a building on the Alexanderplatz in Berlin consti - tuted the individual pixels of a huge , low - resol - ution display to which people could upload animations to be displayed on the building’s fac¸ade , or on which users could play Pong by dial - ling a dedicated phone number and using their mobile phone to play . But in the speciﬁc instance of the workshop , Blinkenlights only played the role of suggesting the idea of ‘doing something on the fac¸ade’ , whereas the other elements of Blin - kenlights were largely ignored . Asimilarrolewasplayedby Drumhead , Figure6 , which consists of a polystyrene wig stand onto which is projected a video of a face ; when the wig stand is struck by a drumstick , a sound is played and the face responds to being struck . Among the elements of Drumhead , we have inter - action with a drumstick , interactive sound and pro - jection on a non - ﬂat surface , but the speciﬁc aspect that played an inspirational role was the idea of having a physical object one could carry around . In a few instances , a source of inspiration was directly used as a speciﬁc idea . For instance , during the workshop with Salling , Drifting Text ( see Figure 1 ) , an experiment in exploring using one’s body to interact with gently falling pieces of text , was considered for direct implementation on displays in the store or as a projection on the columns at the department store . In other situations , the selection of a speciﬁc aspect of the essence of a source of inspiration was the jumping - off point for idea generation . Slow Technology ( Hallana¨s et al . 2001 ) , which played such a role in several instance , includes a collection of informative art pieces ; for instance , an interface which , with a Mondrian - inspired style of straight lines and coloured rectangles , is used to display information about weather conditions , or a physical waste basket in which the paper rattles when incoming mail is received , Figure6 . Technologycard Drumhead byMuratnKonar . Photo : Murat n Konar , # 2010 . Halskov 192 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 see Figure 7 . Here , the essence of the source of inspiration was that information could be dis - played in unconventional ways , rather than being dictated by the speciﬁc kinds of interfaces . 4 . 3 Adaptation The selection of a certain aspect of a source of inspiration is in many cases followed by some kind of Adaptation or modiﬁcation . Drifting Text directly sparked the idea of having a gentle shower of pieces of chewing gum as an interactive fac¸ade at the Gumlink booth . Similarly , a design for a display with a gentle shower of Lego bricks was considered for the toy department at the Salling department store . A similar strategy could be observed during the discussion of Duality , during the workshop with 7th Heaven . Duality is an installation at the exit of the Osaki metro station in Tokyo : a six - metre - long section of the walkway beside a small pond is equipped with LED panels , and when ped - estrians walk by , their steps provoke virtual waves on the LED panels , and when the ripples hit the edge of the pond the waves extend into the water , see Figure 8 . Although having real ﬁre at the children’s literature museum was not con - sidered , an interactive , virtual wall of ﬁre , similar to the virtual water in Duality , was . 4 . 4 Translation Translation is the strategy of taking an element of a source of inspiration into a new place or context . One of the sources of inspiration considered at the Salling workshop was the art installation , sur la table , by Osman Khan , which consists of a table with colourful objects , over which are sus - pended a camera and a projector , which together create the effect of the colours of the objects ﬂowing down the tablecloth , see Figure 9 . During the workshop with the Salling department store , the idea emerged that a similar effect could be implemented on the sides of the escalator , creat - ing the effect of the colours of people’s clothes ‘bleeding’ down the sides of the escalator . 4 . 5 Combination Whereas Selection is perhaps the most fundamen - tal strategy , Combination of previously unrelated elements is an essential strategy in innovation . One of the ideas that emerged during the workshop with the Salling department store is based on the Figure 8 . Technology card Duality by ART + COM . Photo : ART + COM , # 2010 . Figure 7 . Technology card Slow Technology by Interactive Institute . Photo : Interactive Institute , 2010 . Figure 9 . Technology card Sur la table by Osman Khan . Photo : CAVI , 2005 . Kinds of inspiration in interaction design 193 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 combination of Drumhead ( presented above ) and an Animatronics Technology Card representing the art installation , Watschendiskurs ( Fietzek and Winters ) , see Figure 10 . Based on these two sources of inspiration , the ( perhaps crazy ) idea of having a personal guide with multiple personal - ities was developed . One part of the guide ( the ‘devil’ ) would tempt you to buy sweets and other kinds of unhealthy items , and the other ( the ‘angel’ ) would encourage you to go to the sports department . For a detailed analysis of this part of the workshop , see Halskov and Dalsgaard ( 2007 ) . 4 . 6 External sources of inspiration In addition to the systematically introduced sources of information as part of the workshop format , a number of spontaneous sources of inspi - ration emerged during the workshop . Some of them came from contemporary art , such as the works of Bill Viola , who , as a ﬁlm and video artist among other things , has explored the use of high - speed cameras to achieve a profound effect , as in the case of the piece Five Angels for The Mil - lennium , which shows a man sinking in water . Another of his works is The Crossing , which shows a man slowly becoming completely envel - oped in ﬁre . Participants in the workshop with 7th Heaven were clearly familiar with the art of Bill Viola , and when someone pointed out that they wanted to achieve a certain atmosphere , such as that in the works of Bill Viola , it seems clear what the intention behind this particular ‘seeing as’ meant . A similar kind of seeing occurred in the work - shop with Salling , during which reference was made to the work of Olafur Eliasson , a Danish - Icelandic artist known for his monumental installa - tions . Recently ( in 2008 ) , Eliasson installed four artiﬁcial waterfalls in New York City , one of them under the Brooklyn Bridge , and another of his famous works is The Weather Project , which was a kind of huge , artiﬁcial sun installed in the Turbine Hall at Tate Modern in London during the winter of 2003 – 2004 , which was seen by more than two million visitors . The Weather Project was explicitly mentioned during this work - shop , together with a sensory - deprivation elevator designed for a Louis Vuitton ﬂagship store in Paris , which was a black box that moved people between ﬂoors without their experiencing any external stimuli . Similarly to the role played by Viola’s work , the works of Eliasson were used as a point of reference for a certain atmosphere . More mundane sources of inspiration were also introduced , such as a swimming facility where visi - tors can control water cannons with their mobile phones ; or , referring to the old - fashioned and rustic Copenhagen bar and restaurant , Vin og Ølgod ( ‘Wine and Beer’ ) , to indicate a certain atmosphere of roughness for Valhalla ( in Norse Mythology , a hall in Asgar , ruled by the god Thor ) . 5 Discussion and conclusion In this paper we have zeroed in on the various roles played by sources of inspiration in interaction design , and addressed four strategies for relating sources of inspiration to emerging ideas : selection ; adaptation ; translation ; and combination . Though it has not been our particular focus in this study , it should be mentioned that the four strategies do not appear in isolation ; on the contrary , they are part of a complex network of selections , adap - tations , translations , and combinations . The four categories are related to the set of cat - egories proposed by Petre and her colleagues ( Petre et al . 2006 ) . The fact that Petre is primarily concerned with the visual design of knitwear , whereas our study is in the domain of interaction design , may account for some of the differences . Figure 10 . Technology card Animatronics . Watschendiskurs by Fietzek and Winters . Photo : CAVI , 2005 . Halskov 194 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 Petre et al . haveastrongfocus ongeometricalmodi - ﬁcations , whereas we also consider other kinds of modiﬁcation . Moreover , we have identiﬁed Combi - nation asaseparatestrategy , inkeepingwiththerole played by the combination of unrelated elements as part of an innovation process . In the case of the industrial design studies men - tioned in the introduction , inspiration seems to be found predominantly in areas close to a given industry ; for instance , textile designers seek inspi - ration in other garments or artefacts from other domains . In the Inspiration Card Workshops ana - lysed in this paper , it seems that inspiration from more remote areas has been particularly pro - ductive , for instance the introduction of digital art projects into the design of more mundane appli - cations . In this study we have touched only brieﬂy on new materials as a potential source of innovation , as discussed by Halskov ( 2009 ) , together with the familiar strategies of translation , adaptation , and combination . Our main concerns in this paper have been with what happens at a micro - speciﬁc level ( i . e . within the time frame of approximately two minutes ) in contrast to coming to grips with the emergence of ideas during a time frame of a full two - hour workshop , as addressed , for instance , in a previous study of ours ( Halskov and Dalsgaard 2007 ) , or during the time frame of a small - scale project lasting around two months ( Dalsgaard et al . 2009 ) . In the case of the latter project , we not only addressed sources of inspi - ration ( without distinguishing between different strategies ) but also explored the role of the various design materials . Acknowledgements Section 3 is based on Halskov and Dalsgaard ( 2007 ) . This research has been support by the Danish Council for Strategic Research , grant 09 - 063245 ( Digital Urban Living ) . References Alexander , C . , Ishikawa , C . , and Silverstein , M . , 1977 . A pattern language : towns , buildings , construction . Center for Environmental Structure . New York : Oxford University Press . Bødker , S . , Nielsen , C . , and Petersen , M . G . , 2000 . Crea - tivity , cooperation and interactive design . In : Pro - ceedings of the 3rd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 17 – 19 August 2000 New York . New York : ACM , 185 – 190 . Dalsgaard , P . and Halskov , K . , 2009 . Dynamically trans - parent window . In : CHI ’09 : Proceedings of the 27th International Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors In Computing Systems , 4 – 9 April 2009 Boston , MA . New York : ACM , 3019 – 3034 . Dalsgaard , P . , Halskov , K . , and Nielsen , R . , 2009 . Maps for design reﬂection . Artifact , 2 ( 3 – 4 ) , 176 – 189 . Djajadiningrat , J . P . , Gaver , W . W . , and Fres , J . W . , 2000 . Interaction relabelling and extreme characters : methods for exploring aesthetic interactions . In : DIS ’00 : Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 17 – 19 August 2000 New York . New York : ACM , 66 – 71 . Eckert , C . andStacey , M . , 2000 . Sourcesof inspiration : a language of design . Design Studies , 21 ( 5 ) , 523 – 538 . Foster , J . , 1966 . How to get ideas . San Francisco , CA : Barrett - Koehler . Hallana¨s , L . , Jaksetic , P . , ljungstand , P , Redstro¨m , J . , and Skog , T . , 2001 . Expressions towards a design practice of slow technology . In : J . Redstro¨m , ed . Designing everyday computational things . Gothen - burg : School of Business , Economics and Law , Go¨teborg University , 193 – 218 . Halskov , K . , 2009 . Tradition and transcendence . In : T . Binder , J . Lo¨wgren and L . Malmborg , eds . ( Re ) searching the digital bauhaus . London : Springer Verlag , 79 – 98 . Halskov , K . andDalsga˚rd , P . , 2006 . Inspirationcardwork - shops , DIS 2008 Conference Proceedings , Cape Town , 26 – 28 June 2006 , New York : ACM , 1 – 10 . Halskov , K . and Dalsgaard , P . , 2007 . The emergence of ideas : the interplay between sources of inspiration and emerging design concepts . CoDesign , 3 ( 4 ) , 185 – 211 . Kelley , T . and Littman , J . , 2001 . The art of innovation : lessons in creativity from IDEO . New York : Cur - rency / Doubleday . Kerne , A . , Koh , E . , Smith , S . M . , Webb , A . , and Dwor - aczyk , B . , 2008 . combinFormation : mixed - initiative composition of image and text surrogates promotes information discovery . ACM Transactions on Infor - mation Systems , 27 ( 1 ) , 1 – 45 . Kinds of inspiration in interaction design 195 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 Lanzara , G . F . , 1983 . The design process : frames , meta - phors and games . In : U . Briefs , C . Ciborra and L . Schneider , eds . Systems design for , with and by the user . Amsterdam : North - Holland , 29 – 40 . Lu¨thje , C . and Herstatt , C . , 2004 . The lead user method : an outline of empirical ﬁndings and issues for future research . SSRN eLibrary . Lubart , T . I . , 1994 . Creativity . In : R . J . Sternberg , ed . Thinking and problem solving . San Diego , CA : Aca - demic Press , 289 – 332 . Madsen , K . H . , 1989 . Breakthroughbybreakdown : meta - phors and structured domains , In : H . K . Klein and K . Kumar , eds . Systems Development for Human Progress , Proceedings of the IFIP WG 8 . 2 Working Conferences , Atlanta , GA , 29 – 31May1987 , Amster - dam : Elsevier Science Publishers , 41 – 53 . Madsen , K . H . , 1994 . A guide to metaphorical design . Communications of the ACM , 37 ( 12 ) , 57 – 62 . Mailund , L . and Halskov , K . , 2008 . Designing market - ing experiences , DIS ’08 : Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 25 – 27 February 2008 Cape Town . New York : ACM , 222 – 229 . Petersen , M . G . , Iversen , O . S . , Krogh , P . G . , and Ludvig - sen , M . , 2004 . Aesthetic interaction : a pragmatist’s aesthetics of interactive systems . In : DIS ’04 : Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 1 – 4 August 2004 Cambridge , MA New York : ACM , 269 – 276 . Petre , M . , 2004 . How expert engineering teams use disciplines of innovation . Design Studies , 25 ( 5 ) , 477 – 493 . Petre , M . , Sharp , H . , and Johnson , J . , 2006 . Complexity through combination : an account of knitwear design . Design Studies , 27 ( 2 ) , 183 – 222 . Sanders , E . B . N . , 2005 . Information , inspiration and co - creation , The 6th International Conference of the European Academy of Design , Bremen , Germany , Un - paginated . Scho¨n , D . , 1979 . Generative metaphor : a perspective on problem - setting in social policy . In : A . Ortony , ed . Metaphor and thought . Cambridge : Cambridge Uni - versity Press , 254 – 283 . Scho¨n , D . A . , 1983 . The reﬂective practitioner : how pro - fessionals think in action . New York : Basic Books . Scho¨n , D . A . , 1988 . Designing : rules , types and words . Design Studies , 9 ( 3 ) , 181 – 190 . Scho¨n , D . A . , 1992 . Designing as reﬂective conversation with the materials of a design situation . Knowledge - Based Systems , 5 ( 1 ) , 3 – 14 . Sternberg , R . J . and Lubart , T . I . , 1999 . The concept of creativity : prospects and paradigms . In : R . J . Stern - berg , ed . Handbook of creativity . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press , 386 – 388 . von Hippel , E . , 1988 . The sources of innovation . New York : Oxford University Press . Kim Halskov is professor in interaction design at The Department of Information and Media Studies at Aarhus University , Denmark , where , in addition to being director of the Centre for Advanced Visu - alization and Interaction ( see http : / / www . CAVI . dk ) , he is also director of the Centre for Digital Urban Living ( http : / / www . DigitalUrbanLiving . dk ) . From a background in participatory design , Kim Halskov’s research areas include innovation processes , design processes and transformation of design ideas . Halskov 196 D i g i t a l C r ea t i v i t y , V o l . 21 , N o . 3 Copyright of Digital Creativity is the property of Routledge and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder ' s express written permission . However , users may print , download , or email articles for individual use .