From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies Olof C . Biermann Ning F . Ma Dongwook Yoon ocbier @ cs . ubc . ca ning . ma @ ubc . ca yoon @ cs . ubc . ca University of British Columbia University of British Columbia University of British Columbia Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada ABSTRACT Modern large - scale language models approach the quality of human - level writing . This promises the advent of AI writing companions performing AI - led writing under human control , surpassing tra - ditional writing tools limited to revision and ideation supports . However , human - AI co - writing may endanger writers’ control , au - tonomy , and ownership by overstepping co - creative boundaries . Our design workbook study with 7 hobbyists and 13 professional writers elicited three sets of primary barriers to the adoption of human - AI co - writing . Storywriters desire retaining control over writing rather than letting AI take the lead when they ( 1 ) prioritize emotional values in turning ideas into words over the productivity of AI - generated writing ; ( 2 ) have high self - confdence and distrust AI in challenging sub - tasks ( e . g . , creating characters and dialogue ) ; and ( 3 ) expect the AI control mechanism to mismatch their writing strategies . We lay the groundwork for AI companions that respect storywriters’ personal values and writing methods . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in inter - action design ; • Computing methodologies → Natural lan - guage generation ; • Applied computing → Arts and human - ities . KEYWORDS human - AI interaction , AI co - writing , AI writing support , creative writing , storywriting , personal values , ownership , trust ACM Reference Format : Olof C . Biermann , Ning F . Ma , and Dongwook Yoon . 2022 . From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’22 ) , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533506 1 INTRODUCTION Language models are approaching human - like text generation ca - pabilities , with large - scale models like GPT - 3 [ 15 ] and Jurassic - 1 [ 59 ] writing natural language on a level which has convinced some Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9358 - 4 / 22 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533506 that AI has now passed the Turing test . This opens a new opportu - nity for human - AI collaboration in writing tasks . We refer to this mode of writing support as an AI companion , a co - writing agent which performs storywriting under the creative control of a human writer . While current AI - based systems act as tools which support grammar and style revision , as well as ideation , AI companions can directly translate writers’ high - level ideas into fully expanded text with minimal to zero user input and can adapt to the writer’s style , given only a few examples . AI companions can therefore take on the role of " co - creative partners " [ 38 ] , in addition to acting as ideation tools . While there are currently no agents which can fully function as an AI collaborator , this radically diferent mode of AI writing support promises to be more powerful and autonomous than exist - ing systems . Hence , the potential impact of such technology must be examined to steer AI companion design . Storywriting is a complex task which imposes a high cognitive load on the writer and remains challenging , even for experienced writers . This task is modeled by the Cognitive Process Theory of Writing [ 34 ] which describes writing as a set of three interleaved processes , namely planning , translating , and reviewing . In plan - ning , writers synthesize relevant information from their long - term memory to form ideas , organize these ideas , and set writing goals . Translating is the process of turning symbolically represented ideas into language which conveys those ideas . Finally , reviewing in - volves evaluating the current text against writing goals and re - vising it based on evaluation results to match these goals more closely . Writers frequently struggle with frustrating problems in translating such as writer’s block [ 82 ] and cognitive overload [ 84 ] , hindering efcient writing . AI companions promise robust translat - ing capabilities which can address these challenges , alleviating the storywriter’s burden , supercharging their abilities , and eventually promoting their intellectual well - being in creative tasks . While AI companions promise a powerful form of support to writers , it is unclear how storywriters perceive AI companion col - laboration and which barriers and facilitators infuence the adoption of such technology . Writing is a personal process for many story - writers who have diverse needs , depending on their underlying motivations . On the one hand , some storywriters see writing purely as a serious leisure [ 90 ] activity allowing for personal expression [ 58 , 80 ] and supporting emotional well - being [ 78 , 83 ] . On the other hand , professional writers , such as ghostwriters on gig platforms , see it as a source of income . However , even professional storywrit - ers derive satisfaction from engaging in the process of creation [ 12 ] . While existing work identifes storywriters’ idiosyncratic priorities , it has not been shown how these priorities impact their expecta - tions for AI writing support . Therefore , investigating how personal 1209 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . motivations infuence storywriters’ requirements for AI support is of critical importance in informing AI companion design . Machine assistance in storywriting has largely been limited to a supportive role and has not come close to realizing the potential of AI collaboration for supporting the translating process . Cur - rent tools primarily focus on supporting revision and ideation . For example , Microsoft Word , Grammarly , and ProWritingAid are all popular solutions for supporting syntactic and semantic re - vision ( i . e . , grammar , spelling , and style checking ) . Considering ideation , this area has been explored extensively in creative writing [ 16 , 20 , 21 , 38 , 39 , 81 , 92 ] . While there has also been some focus on translating support in recent years [ 2 , 23 , 93 , 97 ] , the current work on machine - assisted storywriting ultimately misses out in investi - gating writers’ needs for AI - led writing support in the translating process , revealing a crucial gap . To go beyond revision and ideation in AI - assisted storywriting , there is a need to determine how to divide writing responsibilities between the writer and the AI companion and best utilize the capabilities of both . In general terms , this is a vitally important issue of balancing automation and control in a human - centered AI system [ 88 ] . In this type of mixed - initiative system , understanding users’ social expectations [ 44 ] of the behavior of a collaborator is a key priority , exemplifying the need to match relevant social norms in AI interaction [ 1 ] . Much like a human collaborator , an AI companion can become an interference to the writer’s creative process if it encroaches on their boundaries by taking away too much control over writing , creating frustration and confict . Broadly , several factors are known to impact people’s acceptance of AI . Individuals’ personality traits can induce fear and distrust towards AI [ 73 , 89 ] . Additionally , cultural factors [ 74 ] such as fear of unemployment due to AI deployment [ 49 , 63 ] ) , portrayals of AI in popular culture [ 5 , 6 ] , degree of familiarity with modern AI technologies [ 76 ] , and expectations of privacy in interaction [ 62 ] all infuence perceptions of AI . However , an explorative study on the factors specifc to storywriters’ perceptions and practices that might impact on AI is an untrodden pathway . Therefore , we investigate the following research questions : What primary considerations impact storywriters’ perception of co - writing with an AI companion ? And how ? Specifcally , we consider : ( 1 ) What are the major barriers and facilitators impacting storywriters’ adop - tion of diferent types of AI collaborator support ? ( 2 ) What value do storywriters expect an AI companion to bring to , or take away from , their writing practices ? and ( 3 ) For which kinds of writing subtasks and to what extent are storywriters willing to collaborate with AI companions in the writing process ? To answer these questions , we conducted an interview study with 20 expert writers , comprised of 7 hobbyists and 13 profession - als . We highlighted that co - writing with AI companions promises increased efciency in expressing writers’ narrative plans with low user efort , alleviating their writing burden . Collectively , our fndings highlight the efects of writers’ emotional values in writ - ing , productivity , trust in AI’s writing ability , self - confdence , and planning method . Based on these factors , we identifed three key sets of barriers hindering the adoption of AI co - writing . Writers wished to maintain control over translating ideas to words when they : ( 1 ) prioritized emotional values of writing attached to writ - ing over increased productivity and prolifc writing ; ( 2 ) had high self - confdence and distrust in AI’s ability to perform challenging writing sub - tasks ( e . g . , character generation and dialogue genera - tion ) ; and ( 3 ) perceived that the AI control mechanism mismatches their planning strategies . We also revealed two main facilitators driving storywriters to relinquish control in translating . Writers were willing to let the AI do the writing when they : ( 1 ) emphasized productivity to achieve prolifc writing ( specifcally professionals ) and ( 2 ) felt diminished self - confdence about performing challeng - ing writing sub - tasks . Our work makes the following contributions : ( 1 ) We identify three main barriers and two facilitators of storywriters’ adoption of AI companions . ( 2 ) Our results further characterize how such barriers and facilitators are infuenced by relevant factors ( e . g . , writ - ers’ occupation and division of writing sub - tasks in AI companion design ) . ( 3 ) Our results generate implications for understanding and designing AI companions in the context of writers’ value structure , writing practices , and intellectual well - being . 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Factors Infuencing Perception of AI Numerous factors infuence humans’ perception of AI . These in - clude psychological factors and practical concerns within the indi - vidual , as well as extraneous cultural infuences . Several individual diferences impact perception of AI . First , ex - amining the impact of psychological factors shows that individuals’ attitude towards AI is infuenced by their personality traits [ 73 ] . In [ 89 ] , it was shown that fear and distrust towards AI are associated with neuroticism , while openness and agreeableness are related to acceptance of AI . Additionally , personal values have been shown to impact artists’ attitude towards AI co - creation in creative tasks . For example , [ 38 ] describes how poem writers’ individual sense of ownership impacts their cognitive model of usage when interacting with an AI collaborator . Another factor impacting users’ attitude is their existing familiarity with AI technologies , which is associ - ated with increased confdence in AI and reduced fearfulness of intelligent agents [ 76 ] . Finally , for individuals in some professions , fear of being replaced or losing income is also a major consider - ation [ 63 ] . This can be seen in journalism , where journalists are concerned that data collection and writing tasks will be replaced by AI [ 49 , 53 ] . Likewise , in [ 45 ] radiologists describe a sense of fear that their expertise would become redundant due to AI , although moderate to advanced knowledge of AI technology was associated with increased acceptance . Looking beyond the individual , cultural factors have also been shown to impact humans’ perception of AI . Portrayal of AI in popular culture through movies and other media infuence notions of its capabilities and potential impact [ 5 , 6 ] . Additionally , social and informational privacy expectations for interaction with human - like AI agents displaying social capabilities ( social robots ) are infuenced by cultural norms [ 62 ] . Results in [ 74 ] suggest that users are willing to forego privacy when they desire a closer connection to the AI . The existing literature shows the efect of several personal and social factors infuencing how people perceive intelligent agents . However , the impact of writers’ personal values in AI - assisted writing is currently underexplored . 1210 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia 2 . 2 AI Support for Writing and Other Creative Tasks Human - machine co - creation [ 27 , 41 , 61 , 87 ] has been explored across many felds in the arts . In [ 19 ] , 111 papers on creativity support tools ( CSTs ) are reviewed . We highlight a few areas where CST interaction has been evaluated . Considering writing , recent years have seen signifcant inter - est in the formidable task of designing computer - assisted writing tools . In [ 101 ] , the authors outline the challenges inherent to pro - totyping NLP systems and present several solutions . They explore approaches for supporting writers’ experience of translating ideas to text using sketching and rapid prototyping techniques which enable the design of novel NLP - based writing assistance systems , balancing users’ needs with technical limitations . Looking at tools which have emerged for supporting creative writing specifcally , there has been signifcant focus on co - ideation support . The tools in [ 81 ] and [ 93 ] ( evaluated in [ 16 ] ) allow writers to explicitly re - quest next - sentence suggestions for collaborative brainstorming . In [ 39 ] , writers can request random plots , story themes , and writing prompts acting as “story triggers . ” By contrast , the collaborative writing support tools in [ 92 ] and [ 21 ] automatically provide user - editable , next - sentence suggestions after each sentence the writer produces , providing a source of inspiration . In [ 38 ] , the collabora - tive tool supports metaphor creation based on the writer’s context . Breaking away from suggestion - based co - ideation approaches , vi - sual line sketch interaction has recently been used as a novel AI steering mechanism for a GPT - based language model in [ 20 ] , giving writers an intuitive understanding of the AI’s output and allowing them to control the protagonist’s fortune while collaboratively gen - erating a narrative outline . Beyond ideation , tools such as [ 93 ] , can provide translating support by ofering sentence - level suggestions , although they aford limited control over suggestion topics and direction , sometimes deviating from the narrative [ 16 ] . In [ 2 ] , the ensemble - based system ofers the ability to translate a sequence of story events to full sentences . The conversational interaction approach in [ 23 ] enables users to generate story text via natural requests ( e . g . , “help me describe how Taylor is feeling” ) , while [ 97 ] supports dynamic , text - based video game adventure building . Fi - nally , [ 57 ] presents a dataset allowing designers to explore GPT - 3’s capabilities as a writing collaborator . Besides writing support , in drawing , [ 28 ] explores how users collaborate with AI in drawing pictures via an AI agent called Drawing Apprentice . The system is intended to act as a “casual creator” [ 24 ] , which is a type of creative technology which cre - atively engages users and increase enjoyment instead of focusing on creating a better end - product . In [ 71 ] , evaluation of DuetDraw , a system which allows artists to collaboratively sketch with an AI drawing partner in real time , shows that artists always want to lead the drawing process and clearly distinguish their role from that of the AI . Additionally , [ 68 ] explores the use of adaptive conceptual guidance via contextual examples to assist novice artists in sketch - ing . Finally , [ 98 ] evaluates presents an intelligent tutoring system teaching novices fundamentals of sketching . Considering music , creative co - creation can support both compo - sition and performance . In [ 60 ] , AI music co - creation is supported via steering tools which enable composition . Creative AI can also support human - human collaboration in pair composition [ 91 ] . Con - sidering musical performance , [ 65 ] presents an AI drummer which communicates its confdence through visual cues to improve com - munication in collaborative improvisation , promoting a fow state and building musicians’ trust in the agent . A vital aspect of human - AI co - creation is to consider how artists’ existing practices and values will be considered in design . This will allow the system to adapt to the input of the user to ofer a collaborative experience [ 29 ] . Rather than trying to replace the artists in a particular role , the system should aford task delegation to the AI [ 71 ] . 2 . 3 Psychological Ownership and Control Writers and other creators often feel a sense of ownership over their work which is closely tied to their control over the creative process . The concept of ownership has been well described in psychological literature as a relationship between an individual and a target of ownership where that person feels that the target belongs to them [ 75 , 95 ] . Ownership is strongly tied to control over objects which produces positive and pleasurable emotions , both in the case of individual and group ownership . Objects that can be controlled are seen as objects of ownership , while those outside of the control of the individual are excluded from this category [ 35 ] . Emotional connection is a key reason individuals value possessions [ 30 ] . There is also a sense in which possessions are an extension of an individual , since possessions refect and contribute to one’s identity ; this aspect of ownership can be defned as relatedness [ 7 ] . Work on psychological ownership has also been extended to the domain of writing . Writers often have a strong personal connection and a feeling of ownership towards work they produce , particularly in the case of storywriting , but also in other forms of creative and academic writing [ 69 ] . In fact , Murray [ 67 ] goes so far as to say that all writing is in some sense autobiographical , whether this is explicit or implicit . 2 . 4 Challenges Facing Writers in Planning and Translation Writers commonly face challenges in planning and translating . One of these is writer’s block which can be described as a state in which writers are unable to generate an idea of what to write about next or to determine how to translate an idea into language [ 82 ] . Although some writers are more prone to sufering from writer’s block , this can have a strongly negative emotional impact on any writer , including emotional numbness , anxiety , and frustration [ 85 ] . In [ 72 ] , the authors propose a set of strategies for addressing writer’s block , including systematic questioning in which writers are asked a series of questions to stimulate thinking , and freewriting , where the writer writes uninterrupted for 10 - 15 minutes to translate as many ideas as possible without performing revision . Writers also face cognitive overload since writing is a complex , dynamic task in which they must apply several skills simultane - ously [ 84 ] . The authors in [ 94 ] describe two contributing factors in human cognitive processing constraints : ( 1 ) dual task interference , where writers attempt to perform two tasks in temporal proximity , thus degrading the performance of both tasks ; and ( 2 ) the transience of short - term memory which causes ideas to be lost if the writer is 1211 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . disrupted ( e . g . , they halt because they are unsure of what to write next ) . For mitigating cognitive overload , [ 48 ] proposes using out - lining to produce a structured plan which summarizes the writer’s ideas to reduce planning during translating , while [ 36 ] describes using rough drafting to reduce revision efort during translating . 3 METHOD Our objective is to establish storywriters’ considerations impacting their perception of AI writing companions . In particular , we aim to understand how the values writers ascribe to writing infuence their willingness to collaborate with AI companions in planning and translating and in diferent writing roles within those processes . We also hope to explore how writers’ current storywriting methods impact their perception of AI co - writing mechanisms and how AI companions can address their current needs . To this end , we used the design workbook method [ 37 ] to elicit storywriters’ intuition , perception , and refection with a set of fve speculative AI companion designs . Design workbook is an estab - lished method to elicit user feedback and refection on conceptual designs within a design space [ 9 , 17 , 99 ] . This approach efectively alleviates the potential constraints in implementing the design pro - totype while enabling participants to envision using the companion in their writing process . The speculative nature of our workbook facilitated the exploration of key issues and perspectives beyond any one particular design . The designs we presented to participants portrayed several modes of interaction with AI companions based on existing writing methods , as detailed in subsection 3 . 3 . They illustrate diferent divisions of writing roles between the human and the AI co - writer in planning and translating . This allowed us to uncover the considerations which impact storywriters’ perception of AI support in diferent writing processes . It also provided insight into the extent to which writers are willing to collaborate with AI companions in various writing sub - tasks . Finally , participants’ reac - tions ofered glimpses into the perceived value AI - assisted writing would add to diferent parts of the writing process and highlighted where AI companions can disrupt the writer . 3 . 1 Participants We used purposive and snowball sampling to recruit 20 ( 13 women , 7 men ) storywriters , including 7 hobbyists ( H1 - H7 ) and 13 profes - sionals ( P1 - P13 ) . Our study included both types of writers since we suspected that writers with diferent underlying motivations for writing would have diferent perceptions of AI companions . See Table 1 for information about participant demographics , writing approach , and writing experience . Hobbyist writers were recruited through social media platforms ( e . g . , Reddit threads and Facebook groups ) and by disseminating recruitment information in local hob - byist writing circles , while we reached out to professional writers through the Upwork . com 1 gig working platform . All recruited pro - fessional writers do writing work via Upwork , although they also engage in paid writing outside the platform . We aimed to include writers from diferent domains of storywriting : short stories , fash fction , novels , game stories , memoirs , poetry , news articles , pro - motional material ( copywriting ) , and technical material . All writers reported an intermediate level of technological aptitude or better , 1 https : / / www . upwork . com except P7 , and at least an intermediate writing tool aptitude in using word - processors and similar technology . Our participants resided on 4 continents : Africa , Asia , Europe , and North America . Participant ages ranged from 21 to 55 ( median 39 ) . We recruited the two main groups of writers using a slightly dif - ferent set of criteria . For hobbyist writers , we selected participants with at least one year of experience . In the case of professionals , we recruited writers with at least two years of experience and an Upwork . com project success rate of 90 % or greater . We set these criteria to ensure participants were not novice writers . We used the criterion of two years for professionals rather than one year since it generally takes longer to become established as a professional writer . All participants were fuent in English . Writers were paid an honorarium for participation . The institution’s research ethics board has approved the protocol . 3 . 2 Interview Methodology This study used semi - structured interviews which included ques - tions and a design workbook feedback component . Our interviews used open - ended questions focusing on participants’ current prac - tices and the challenges they face . The design workbook component provided participants an opportunity to explore a set of design con - cepts based on several models for AI writing companions and ofer their insights . Our methodology is also partly inspired by the Speed Dating approach [ 26 , 102 ] where participants compare potential scenarios of use for an envisioned system to help assess their cur - rent needs and ways to address them . It also allows designers to surface critical design issues and ultimately provides insight into the underlying factors infuencing users’ perceptions . Due to the COVID - 19 pandemic , our interview process is simplifed with de - signs presented in an electronic slideshow format rather than a physical booklet , similar to [ 17 ] . All interviews were conducted through Zoom web conferencing software . The AI companion de - signs and details of the protocol were refned through fve pilots which were conducted with fve graduate and undergraduate com - puter science students who are familiar with interaction design techniques . Our design workbook contains several static pages ( slides ) which allowed us to simulate usage scenarios for each design concept by displaying pages to participants in order . This explorative approach suits our objectives better than an interactive evaluation , for two main reasons . First , an interactive system would constrain partici - pants to the current limitations of generative language models . We would like to go beyond the current state - of - the - art and explore speculative scenarios where AI companions can perform writing roles at a human level . We wanted our participants to focus on diferent human - AI co - writing mechanisms and how they ft to their own writing practices . Showing " live " results could draw the participants’ attention to the specifc defects in the selected lan - guage model or faws in technical implementations , like latency or UI details . For example , we found that GPT - 3 has a highly irregular latency for requests , which sometimes exceeds 30 seconds . This delay may cause a signifcant disruption to the interview process . Therefore , we used textual examples from existing stories which we extended , where needed , to show diferent simulated AI companion 1212 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Table 1 : Self - reported general technology skill level , writing tool aptitude , planning method , and genres of writing experience for hobbyists ( Hx ) and professionals ( Px ) . ID Self - reported Tech Savviness Self - reported Writing Tool Aptitude Planning Approach Genres of Writing Experience H1 Intermediate Advanced Structured Short story , novel , poetry , creative non - fction , personal blog H2 Advanced Intermediate Freeform Short story , novel H3 Advanced Advanced Structured Short story , novel , technical H4 Intermediate Advanced Freeform Short story , novel , journalistic H5 Intermediate Intermediate Structured Short story , poetry , copywriting , fash fction H6 Advanced Advanced Freeform Short story , novel H7 Intermediate Advanced Structured Novel P1 Intermediate Advanced Freeform Short story , novel , copywriting P2 Advanced Advanced Structured Short story , novel , copywriting , game writing P3 Intermediate Intermediate Freeform Short story , novel , copywriting P4 Advanced Advanced Structured Short story , novel , copywriting , journalistic P5 Advanced Advanced Structured Short story , novel , copywriting , journalistic , creative non - fction P6 Advanced Advanced Structured Short story , novel , copywriting P7 Novice Intermediate Freeform Novel P8 Intermediate Advanced Structured Short story , novel , copywriting , journalistic P9 Intermediate Intermediate Structured Novel , game writing , screenplay P10 Advanced Advanced Structured Creative non - fction ( memoir ) P11 Intermediate Advanced Freeform Short story , novel , copywriting P12 Intermediate Advanced Freeform Short story , novel P13 Intermediate Advanced Structured Short story , novel , game writing , video script responses . Second , it would be infeasible to implement and eval - uate fve diferent types of AI writing companions to support an interactive design probe . Using low - cost interactive methods such as Wizard - of - Oz ( WoZ ) [ 25 ] is not practical since it is not possible for the wizard to write simulated AI - generated text in a reasonable time ( a few seconds ) , particularly when long text is required . Fur - thermore , it would be labor intensive for participants to write a story using each prototype . The data collection process had two main components : a back - ground screening survey and a semi - structured interview which incorporates a design workbook session . Construction of the de - sign workbook is discussed further in subsection 3 . 3 . Our screening survey recorded information on participant demographics , general technological skill level , and aptitude in using writing software . It also probed each potential participant’s years of writing experience and the type ( genre ) of writing they had experienced . The interview sessions lasted for approximately 60 minutes and were conducted by the lead author . Participants were audio and video recorded while the interviewer took notes . Our interviews consisted of three main components : ( 1 ) introductory questions about participants’ background and writing practices , ( 2 ) the design workbook session , and ( 3 ) a debriefng interview exploring writers’ values ascribed to the writing process . The interviews started with an introduction where the interviewer explained the procedure to participants and asked participants questions about their : ( 1 ) genre of writing , ( 2 ) primary motivations and goals in storywriting , ( 3 ) primary chal - lenges they encounter in the writing process , ( 4 ) current and past use of AI - assisted writing tools , and ( 5 ) current practices for their planning and translating processes . During the design workbook session , participants viewed the designs and gave feedback . For each design , the interviewer explained the design concept and pre - sented the corresponding pages to illustrate a scenario where an AI companion based on the current design would assist the user in a writing task to address a particular need . After each design concept , the interviewer asked questions to elicit a response and initiate a conversation framed around the role ( s ) the AI companion would take on in the design . Participants were encouraged to elaborate on the scenarios to describe how they would ft into their current workfow . Additionally , the interviewer asked probing questions as the conversation developed to form an understanding of the writer’s values in writing and of how writers envisioned aspects of the given AI companion would impact their current writing prac - tices . In the debriefng interview , the interviewer asked follow - up questions based on participant feedback during the design work - book session . Participants were asked to rank the designs according to perceived applicability and support in their current writing tasks ( ranking data can be found in supplementary materials ) . 2 The inter - viewer then asked participants to justify their ranking , establishing the factors impacting their preferences . Finally , writers answered follow - up questions further exploring their value perceptions in writing . 3 . 3 Creating the Design Workbook We constructed our design workbook to efectively convey fve main conceptual models describing how the writer would interact with AI companions . Our design space describes these diverse types of AI companions in terms of the division of control between the human and the AI co - writer in diferent planning and translating tasks across the writing process , which is outlined in Figure 2 . Note that the designs are intended to elicit reactions from participants to 2 The ranking data was collected to set the stage of the conversation about their perception about types of AI writers , not to evaluate the perceived quality of the designs . 1213 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . ( a ) Linear writing with unguided suggestions ( b ) Keyword - based writing with guided suggestions ( d ) Character web and character arcs in the character - driven design ( c ) The scene - based design ; ( left ) scene list ; ( right ) expanded scenes based on scene - list ( e ) Dialogue generation in the conversation - driven design Figure 1 : Samples of the AI companion designs in our design workbook . Each design has been annotated for clarity , with orange boxes indicating user input text and blue boxes marking text that the AI is intended to generate . help answer our research questions and do not in themselves aim of control and diferent writing sub - tasks , as described in [ 34 ] . We to ofer a design contribution . strove to ideate diverse AI types which span these two dimensions . Our designs are grounded in existing writing methods ( e . g . , This is discussed in more detail for each design in this subsection . character - driven writing , the Snowfake method [ 46 ] ) . We adapted First , the authors conducted a review of existing writing methods . these methods to incorporate AI companions . Additionally , we were We then met weekly for three weeks ( approx . 3 hours in total ) to guided by conceptual underpinnings of AI writing support - level discuss and brainstorm potential designs based on writing methods 1214 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia identifed by the lead author . In brainstorming , our research ques - tions acted as a starting point and anchor . While we incorporated several writing methods , we did not include those which could not be adapted to AI co - writing . We also merged or discarded design ideas which were deemed to be too similar and discarded those which were not applicable for supporting planning and / or trans - lating . The designs were then rapidly created using presentation software prior to the pilots . We ultimately developed fve designs with fve corresponding underlying interaction models . Therefore , we named the designs accordingly and ordered them , with the most traditional ( “status quo” ) approaches appearing frst and more un - conventional or controversial designs shown later . Following each pilot interview session , we iteratively refned these designs based on feedback received . This allowed us to streamline our designs by resolving aspects which were confusing or distracted from the intended concept being conveyed . See Figure 1 which contains snapshots of the designs . A PDF version of the design “workbook” can be found in supplementary material . 3 . 3 . 1 Design 1 : Linear approach . Linear writing aims to address writer’s block and support co - ideation with unguided suggestions . This follows a similar approach to existing predictive text solutions such as [ 93 ] where users receive a potential completion based on their existing text . The AI companion provides a set of suggestions for the next sentence ( s ) which are intended to ft the current context of the writer’s narrative . Suggestions are unguided in the sense that the user cannot direct the system’s focus to a certain aspect of the text or describe the intended narrative direction . Thus , the “best” suggestions are generated based purely on the previous text . Writers have some additional control in that they can specify the number of sentences they receive in each suggestion and access previous suggestions in the suggestion history . 3 . 3 . 2 Design 2 : Keyword - based approach . In this design , the AI companion generates guided contextual suggestions directed by the writer’s idea for the next narrative event . This approach builds upon the linear design , aiming to mitigate blocking and provide ideation assistance while giving writers a greater degree of control over suggestions . Users specify a high - level description of the next event and a set of keywords which help guide the AI’s focus towards specifc themes within the main text . In creating this design , we aimed to build on writers’ practice of sketching a rough description of narrative events in brackets within the text or in the margins when they are unsure of how to express the full portrayal of that event [ 85 ] . We also drew inspiration from [ 21 ] where keywords are used to develop slogans . 3 . 3 . 3 Design 3 : Scene - based approach . In scene - based writing , the AI companion afords low - efort translating support while writers focus on top - down narrative planning based on the diferent scenes within the story . Writers frst provide the story theme and setting , as well as an early synopsis of the narrative they envision . They then create a scene list and specify the motivating factors which are driving the events in each scene . These motivating factors are plot facts which shape the characters’ motivations in each scene . The AI companion subsequently generates the story text for each scene to create a full frst draft of the story . To support refnement , writers can later update the scene list and select which scenes should be updated in the story . The corresponding scene text is then updated accordingly . This design is inspired by the Snowfake method of writing [ 46 ] which involves building an iteratively refned scene list that provides a high - level story outline . 3 . 3 . 4 Design 4 : Character - driven approach . The character - driven approach allows writers to rapidly generate characters at any stage of storywriting . It is inspired by the character - driven writing method which is commonly used to write stories centered around character building and characters’ relationships [ 8 , 32 ] . For example , this approach is used in writing video game stories [ 52 ] . Writers start with ideas about characters and then develop the character arc and properties of each character . We envision a scenario where the writer provides the system with a description of the properties of each character , which includes the character’s physical appearance , role , personality , faws , and strengths , as well as their goals and challenges . Writers provide a description of the relationships between characters in a character - web format . The AI companion then generates a set of character arcs based on the character descriptions and relationships between characters . These describe potential scenarios of how the character develops across the story . 3 . 3 . 5 Design 5 : Conversation - driven approach . The fnal approach focuses on supporting the writer in developing dialogue among characters and aims to provide natural , context - aware dialogue generation which refects characters’ attributes . This design may be used for writing dialogue directly , ideating about character devel - opment , or developing narrative events involving particular char - acters . It is inspired by collaborative text - based roleplaying where writers attempt to imagine themselves as a particular character and talk to characters in their story . This activity is supported in online roleplaying communities such as Forum Roleplay [ 96 ] . We envisage that the writer can choose two or more characters involved in a conversation and defne the conversation context . The writer then takes on the role of one character who initiates a conversation with the other character ( s ) via a chat - like interaction where the writer is in control of directing the conversation . If they desire , they may take on the role of diferent characters throughout the conversation . The output of the chat may then be used as inspiration ( similar to [ 51 ] ) or as dialogue in the story , which the writer may edit as they desire . 3 . 4 Analysis All audio from the video recordings was fully transcribed prior to analysis . We performed a refexive thematic analysis [ 13 ] since this is a rigorous process which was adaptable to our needs . We applied both inductive and deductive analysis methods . We inductively de - veloped codes through open coding and iteratively refned existing codes by comparing them to the interview transcripts . These codes were then grouped into categories based on commonalities between them . Additionally , we deductively grouped codes into categories based on AI companion designs , known writing approaches , writ - ing processes , and related concepts . We then used the relationships between categories to develop a set of themes which relate de - ductive and inductive categories . Ultimately , we created 112 codes and 18 main themes , such as : " Storywriters’ self - assessed skill in 1215 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . Division of control : Designs Translating Planning Dialogue Narrative Setting narrative goals Organizing narrative ideas Generating characters Generating plot Linear Shared Shared Writer Writer Writer Shared Keyword - based Shared Shared Writer Writer Writer Shared Character - driven Writer AI Writer Shared Shared AI Scene - based AI AI Writer Shared Writer Writer Conversation - driven Shared Writer Writer Shared Shared Shared Writer Shared AI Figure 2 : AI companion design space describing the division of control for writing sub - tasks in each AI companion design . The AI companion designs from our design workbook are listed in the left column . For each design , cells are color - coded to show the division of control between the writer and the AI companion in planning and translating sub - tasks , including those where the writer has control ( yellow ) , AI and writer share control ( green ) , and the AI has control ( blue ) . performing writing tasks impacts their willingness to give up con - trol over specifc parts of the writing process " and " ‘Labor of love’ : storywriters are concerned that AI companions which dominate in translating will take away from the joy and pride of writing . " Throughout this process , the three authors met virtually every week for 4 months to discuss the codes and developing themes . We continued conducting interviews until thematic saturation was reached . We continuously checked the appropriateness of the de - veloped themes against our research questions , as recommended in [ 14 ] . Based on these discussions , the lead author wrote several memos which eventually developed into the key insights in our fndings . 4 FINDINGS We found that storywriters’ perception of AI support is strongly infuenced by emotional values they attribute to writing , their desire for productivity , trust in AI and self - confdence , and their planning method . Our fndings highlight how these considerations impact the type and extent of AI support which writers desire . See Table 2 which summarizes these fndings . We relate our results to the AI companion design space depicted in Figure 2 . When illustrating their perceptions towards AI , storywriters grounded such descriptions on common challenges in their current writing workfow which echo previous work , including high efort and cognitive overload in translating [ 34 , 84 ] and writer’s block in planning [ 4 , 10 , 70 , 82 ] . Currently , many participants frequently apply writing assistance tools ( e . g . , Grammarly ) to aid in auto - checking spelling , grammar , and style , where these tools provide satisfactory support for spelling and grammar revision , although they sometimes cause frustration by failing to capture the user’s intent and personal writing style . 4 . 1 Emotional Values of Writing and Productivity One unique strength of modern large - scale language models in writing is their capacity for the translating task , namely the process of turning ideas into words [ 34 ] . The primary pattern identifed in our analysis is the way writers’ personal values shape their desire to take ( or relinquish ) control over the translating process . We group these values into two sets . Some storywriters , mostly hobbyists , tend to desire greater control in translating their ideas to text and would not like to let an AI companion do the writing . These writers prioritize their fulfllment , ownership , and integrity , which we collectively refer to as the emotional values of writing . By contrast , professional storywriters who desire greater productivity in producing writing deliverables are willing to give up control and are receptive to the notion of letting the AI take the lead in translating while they focus on high - level planning . 4 . 1 . 1 " Labor of love " : storywriters who emphasize the emotional values of writing expect direct control over the translating process , diminishing the AI companion to an ideation tool . Work on AI co - creation such as [ 71 ] has revealed that artists would like to retain creative control while delegating tedious tasks to AI agents . This suggests that writers might prefer to have control over planning while delegating manual tasks in translating to the AI companion . On the contrary , we found that some writers do not want to let the AI lead the translating process . A key reason for this hesitation is that these writers emphasize the emotional values of writing . This seems counterintuitive , since the process of expressing ideas is often arduous and restricts writers’ focus on planning ( e . g . , plot generation and character generation ) . Indeed , several writers de - scribed translating as the most tedious part of the overall writing process ( H1 , P2 , P5 , H5 , P9 ) , with P9 calling it “the grind of turning out chapters . ” However , we found that storywriters prioritizing the emotional values of writing see their engagement in this process as a “labor of love . ” We show how these writers’ values drive them to reject AI - led support in translating , even when it promises to relieve their writing burden . Some writers want control over translating because they fnd ful - fllment in writing by closely engaging in the process of expressing their ideas . This tendency was particularly prevalent in hobbyist writers , none of whom wanted to miss out on the joy of turning 1216 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Table 2 : Five major barriers and facilitators impacting the desire to adopt AI companions are grouped into three types . The impacted writing process in column 4 describes the major area ( s ) of writing wherein each consideration infuences writers’ perceptions . Sub - tasks within each process are specifed , where relevant . # Barriers & Facilitators Impacting Desire to Adopt AI Companions Type Impacted Writing Process Writers’ Personal Values 1 Prioritizing emotional values of writing ( fulfllment , ownership , and integrity ) leads to desiring control , rather than delegating writing to AI companions . Barrier Translating 2 Emphasizing productivity makes professional writers more willing to relinquish control over writing to achieve prolifc writing output . Facilitator Translating Perceived Competence of AI and Writers 3 Distrust in AI companions’ capacity leads to desiring control over sub - tasks requiring commonsense reasoning . Barrier Planning ( generating characters ) , Translating ( dialogue , narrative ) 4 Diminished self - confdence makes writers more willing to delegate challenging writing sub - tasks to AI companions . Facilitator Planning ( generating characters ) , Translating ( dialogue ) Writers’ Planning Approach 5 Mismatch between the AI companion control mechanism and their planning method ( e . g . , freeform , structured ) for generating and organizing ideas drives storywriters to reject AI companion support . Barrier Planning ideas into words . For example , H2 clearly describes that they would not continue a story if they do not enjoy writing it , saying : “It’s a labor of love , not a labor of hate . . . if you look at your piece of work and you’re . . . just hating yourself and going into depressionville it’s like . . . the piece is done , just throw it away . ” For H2 and other hobbyist writers , the act of writing goes beyond completing a task . They attach personal feelings to the writing activity and do not want to engage in a writing project which does not provide them enjoyment ( “the piece is done , just throw it away” ) . Rather , they see writing as a difcult task which should provide enjoyment ( “labor of love” ) . Expanding on this theme , we saw that writers who are motivated by emotional values achieve pleasure by persevering in the writing process . P3 expressed that “the pleasure of writing is tearing [ the language ] from your mind , as hard as that can be sometimes . ” They derive pleasure from engaging in the difcult or even painful task of fnding the best way to express their ideas as words ( “tearing [ the language ] from your own mind” ) . Writers like them value the fulfllment they achieve by being actively involved in the process of translating their ideas to words , even though it can be arduous . In response to Design 3 : Scene - based approach , H3 went on to say that such AI - led writing “would not be very satisfying” since they would not like “the text written for [ them ] . ” Thus , they emphasize that they would not achieve satisfaction if the AI companion did the writing . Our analysis also revealed that some storywriters desire to con - trol the process of expressing their ideas in stories since they want to establish a sense of ownership over their writing . Not only do these writers want to feel that the story ideas are their own , but they also want to feel that the end product belongs to them by actively engaging in the process of translating . P3 described own - ership as a key motivation for controlling various aspects of the writing process : “ [ . . . ] it’s a combination of the plot , characters and the language style . . . that makes you feel like you have control over [ the writing pro - cess . . . I ] want [ the story ] to be my own so I want it to take place where I want it , and for [ the characters ] to talk how I want it . ” Writers like them want the story to “be [ their ] own” and a key way they accomplish this is by controlling the “language style” in translating . In particular , they would like the characters’ speech to refect their intended style of dialogue ( “talk how [ they ] want it” ) . Additionally , they want to control the generation of “plot and characters” in planning , particularly the story setting ( “take place where I want it” ) . Moreover , H4 described why they would dislike an AI - led approach as in Design 3 : Scene - based approach which takes over the translating process , saying : “I don’t want to feel like someone else is doing my work [ . . . ] I don’t want to be the editor of my piece , I want to be the writer of my piece . ” Here they express their sentiment that this type of AI companion would overstep the boundaries of a collaborator and make them feel that another writer is “doing [ their ] work . ” They would then no longer feel that they command the language and that the writing product ( “ [ their ] piece” ) belongs to them , but rather that they are relegated to only being “the editor . ” We found that storywriters who prefer AI companions which allow the writer to lead the writing process are driven by a desire to maintain a sense of their personal writing identity . Indeed , these writers saw writing as a deeply personal product . Writers like H3 feel that their writing style is as integral to them as their fngerprint , who reacted to Design 3 : Scene - based approach as follows : “ [ Just as ] we all as humans have distinctive fngerprints , we have distinctive writing styles [ . . . ] I would not want my fngerprint of writ - ing destroyed by letting someone else do it [ . . . ] it’s important : picking that vocabulary , pick - ing how the character should speak , and how characters should not speak like one another . ” 1217 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . They would like to control the language style ( “picking that vo - cabulary” ) , particularly the character dialogue ( “picking how the character should speak” ) . H3 relates this control to their personal writing identity ( “fngerprint of writing” ) . By allowing an AI to lead the writing ( “letting someone else do it” ) and not engaging in applying their personal language style , they feel that their identity would not be refected in the end product and that their “fngerprint of writing” would be destroyed . Finally , some storywriters would like to command the writing process as this allows them to maintain a sense of integrity and pride in their writing . They felt that sacrifcing control over translating to increase efciency would threaten their integrity . Specifcally , these writers were concerned that letting the AI do the writing would be dishonorable and that it would feel like cheating . They felt it would be dishonest to use generated content in the fnal product rather than merely utilizing it as a source of inspiration . H4 exemplifes this attitude in response to Design 3 : Scene - based approach , indicating that " it just feels like you’re cheating . [ If ] you got stuck you’re just gonna hit this button . . . [ and ] it’ll fll it all rather than give you ideas . ” Here , H4 expresses that creating an entire draft ( “fll it all” ) with the scene - based AI companion ( “hit this button” ) after creating an outline would make them feel that they are being dishonest ( " cheating " ) . Additionally , some participants expressed concerns that using an AI companion to do the writing may damage their reputation if their audience realizes they are utilizing AI - generated text . They considered that publishing stories containing AI - generated text to be dishonorable and felt that they would be " called out by [ their ] readers and by [ their ] conscience " ( P7 ) for using an AI companion . Here , P7 alludes to their fear that readers will react negatively ( “call [ them ] out” ) if they discover story text was written by AI , even in part . The writer is also concerned that they would damage their own sense of honor ( “called out by their conscience” ) if they let an AI collaborator do the writing . In contrast to translating support , all storywriters are receptive to leveraging AI companion for co - ideation in plot and character generation since it is not perceived as a threat to their creative control . For instance , writers like H4 who do not want to give up ownership favor using AI companions for ideation support over translating . H4 expressed this attitude : “I want to feel ownership over the project in general , but I feel like I’d be much more open to collaboration about the ideas and building things rather than the actual words [ . . . ] I would rather collaborate with the AI to build a charac - ter or build a plot and build these things , than actually have it write things for me . " Here , H4 expresses that collaboratively generating ideas about char - acters and plot ( “build a character or build a plot” ) does not threaten their ownership of the writing product , while “havi [ ing ] the AI write things for [ them ] ” would make them feel that they lose con - trol and ownership over the project . These agents are expected to provide collaborative support which augments existing ideation practices and supports diferent parts of writing to overcome block - ing . Participants felt that the types of ideation support aforded by AI companions would build on their current practices for developing story narratives and characters and help break through writer’s block . Several writers described facing writer’s block ( H2 , H3 , H4 , H5 , H6 , H7 , P2 , P5 , P8 ) . They described resorting to the following ideation methods which help overcome this challenge : subconscious ideation while performing an unrelated activity ( H2 , P1 , P2 , P7 ) , writing prompts from online sources ( e . g . , Reddit r / WritingPrompts community 3 ) ( H2 , H3 , H4 , H6 , P11 ) , inspiration from other literary works and other media ( H2 , H3 , H7 , P2 , P3 , P5 , P6 , P9 ) , collaborating with colleagues and members of their social circle ( H1 , P4 , P8 , P10 , P11 ) , and conversation roleplaying ( H3 , H7 , P11 , P12 ) . Using AI companions as an ideation mechanism was perceived as an excellent support for plot and character generation by pro - viding serendipitous writing insights shedding light on unthought aspects of story narratives , character arcs , and conversations . First , participants perceived suggestion - based approaches to be helpful in creating brainstorming prompts for plot generation ( H1 , H5 , P2 , P3 , P6 , P7 , P10 , P11 ) . Unguided suggestions in Design 1 : Linear ap - proach provide inspiration from cold start . Participants like H1 felt that suggestions that were “totally random and unexpected” could “give [ the writer ] ideas of where to go” when they are unsure of the narrative direction . By contrast , guided suggestions in the Design 2 : Keyword - based approach support controlled ideation based on the writer’s foreknowledge of next events in the story ( H1 , H5 , P2 , P6 , P10 ) . H1 describes the value of being able to direct suggestions to match narrative direction when developing ideas , expressing that " when writing about a specifc theme it can keep your story going in that direction [ . . . ] I could see that being quite useful and it could help generate ideas [ about that topic ] . " Looking next at character generation , some participants expressed that Design 4 : Character - driven approach can provide a “fresh perspective , " much like an external human collaborator which gives a writer new in - sight into how a character can evolve ( P7 ) . This design was also seen as being efective in creating initial characters ( P11 ) and adding characters further in the writing process ( P6 ) . Additionally , several storywriters also indicated that the Design 5 : Conversation - driven approach would ofer an opportunity for understanding characters better by supporting a conversation roleplaying ideation method . For example , H3 indicated that this approach would help them to add depth to characters , saying : " The characters need to be 3D and you almost have conversations with them [ characters ] in your head while you’re writing [ . . . ] having something like this to just give you a prompt , I would love it since it would let me do that [ conversation roleplaying ] . " H3 refers to adding depth to characters [ “be 3D” ] and describes how this design would ft with their existing ideation practice of con - versation roleplaying ( “have conversations with them [ characters ] in your head” ) . Finally , considering ideation in dialogue develop - ment , some writers ( H1 , H3 , P12 ) described that they would use conversation generation as a source of inspiration for advancing conversations . P12 indicated that conversing with the AI compan - ion would elicit novel conversation directions : “It would be helpful in [ . . . ] giving me an idea , and I might do it [ converse with the AI ] a couple [ of ] times to get a few lines and then I’m ready to go , and 3 https : / / www . reddit . com / r / WritingPrompts 1218 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia I’ve got an idea of where I’m heading . " After conversing with the AI to generate “a few lines” of dialogue they envisioned that they would develop an idea of the direction of the conversation ( “an idea of where [ they are ] heading” ) . 4 . 1 . 2 Professional storywriters who prioritize productivity are will - ing to give away control in translating , envisioning AI companions as writing collaborators . Our analysis revealed that some professional writers are receptive to the notion of letting the AI take the lead in writing and are willing to relinquish control to increase their productivity by collaborating with the AI . This is because these professionals prioritize productivity over the emotional values of writing to achieve fnancial gain . Thus , this fnding expands on existing research investigating other domains of work with output - based compensation which has demonstrated that increased income is a key incentive driving worker productivity [ 3 , 11 , 54 , 55 , 86 ] . Storywriters prioritizing productivity felt that AI - led writing would reduce the efort required in expressing their ideas , thus reducing their workload . Writing the frst draft and “getting the words onto the page” ( P5 ) is often challenging and labor - intensive . For instance , P2 described how they would like to use an AI compan - ion based on Design 3 : Scene - based approach to provide translating support in this task . " It [ the AI companion ] would take out the busy work of writing out the details . . . of what hap - pens in a scene . This would defnitely save a lot of time [ in the frst draft . . . ] ” They envisioned that AI - led writing would improve productivity by alleviating their burden in the tedious process of writing each scene ( “busy work of writing out the details” ) for the frst time when confronted with a blank page . Some writers ( P2 , P4 , P5 , P8 ) hoped that this form of AI - led writing would allow them to deliver writing products to clients more quickly , decreasing the stress of meeting deadlines . A key reason why writers who prioritize productivity do so is that they see writing as a job for fnancial gain . While this was not the case for all professionals , 6 of the 13 professional writers ( P2 , P4 , P5 , P8 , P10 , P13 ) we interviewed showed this tendency , all of whom are gig workers on Upwork . com . For example , P8 “takes on a high volume of work” and “needs the writing process to [ be ] efcient” to meet their clients’ time constraints . They went on to describe generating an income as their main motivation for writing : “I work 100 % as a ghostwriter . . . it is a business for me . . . it is my living [ . . . ] I entered it [ writing ] as a business [ to ] pay the bills . ” This reveals how writers like them are primarily motivated to write so that they can increase their income to support their livelihood ( “it is my living” ) and meet fnancial obligations ( " pay the bills " ) . Writers who were receptive to AI - led writing support saw AI companions which assisted in the translating process as writing partners which would augment their own writing ability . This goes beyond what is expected of writing support tools . For instance , P13 described co - writing with an AI companion as follows : " It would be really a partnership [ . . . ] an AI like this would be partnering with me to make me better at what I’m doing , [ better than what ] I can do on my own , [ and to ] make [ writing ] more efcient , so that I can speed up my process and be able to deliver the end goal at a quicker rate . " They describe how this " partnership " would allow them to improve their writing ability ( " partnering with me to make me better at what I’m doing " ) , much like collaborating with another writer . Addition - ally , they expect that the AI co - writer will allow them to surpass the level of writing efciency they could achieve on their own ( " [ bet - ter than ] what I can do on my own [ and to ] make [ writing ] more efcient . . . " ) . Likewise , P4 indicated that a scene - based AI companion would be helpful in developing a story from an outline . However , they would also like to establish a sense of ownership over the generated content : " I think it defnitely would help because some - times even when you have an outline [ . . . ] it can be difcult to fgure out what do I do with it ? How do I make it interesting ; how do I make it really fll out the rest of text ? So having at least a starter [ when ] writing scenes could defnitely help out [ . . . ] I’d probably take the content that it has generated and then [ . . . ] put a little of my own spin on it , or [ . . . ] maybe reword things [ . . . ] add , or edit . " Here , P4 describes the challenge of writing the frst draft from an outline ( “once you have outline , it can be difcult to fgure out what do I do with it” ) . They envision that the AI companion would reduce their writing burden by giving them a frst draft as a starting point ( “a starter” ) . However , they would like to establish their writing identity and ownership in this process ( “put a little of [ their ] own spin on it” ) by exercising control over the writing style by modifying the generated content ( “reword things [ . . . ] add , or edit” ) . Participants’ reactions to AI companions which dominate in translating ultimately reveal that all writers aspire to have some degree of control over expressing their ideas . Even those valuing productivity most highly wanted to have some control because they want to form a sense of ownership and have the writing refect their identity . Therefore , what we see is not a dichotomy , but diferent shades of ways that writers assign value to their writing practices . We have highlighted the corresponding diferences in the type and degree of control storywriters seek in translating . 4 . 2 Trust in AI Companions and Self - confdence Our storywriters reported having varying degrees of trust in AI companions and in their own writing abilities in specifc writing tasks ( e . g . , generating characters ) . In contrast to the personal val - ues ascribed to writing , trust and self - confdence impact writers’ perception of AI support at the more fne - grained level of specifc writing sub - tasks within high level processes such as planning . We highlight how trust and self - confdence infuence storywriters’ acceptance of AI companions in diferent writing roles . 4 . 2 . 1 Distrust in AI companions’ capabilities leads storywriters to desire control over roles requiring commonsense reasoning , such as 1219 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . character generation . Participants understood the notion of an AI companion and attended to discussing their perception of AI writers’ high - level writing capabilities , going far beyond what can be commonly expected from writing support tools ( e . g . , grammar checking , style transfer , etc . ) and including ( 1 ) Capturing the back - ground and attributes of characters in character generation , ( 2 ) refecting personality and the current narrative context in translat - ing dialogue , and ( 3 ) incorporating the interplay between events in translating narration in scene descriptions . Looking frst at character generation , some writers expected AI companions to be inefective in this area since they distrusted the AI’s capabilities to grasp the contextual , nuanced aspects of char - acters . Specifcally , they felt that an AI companion modelled after Design 4 : Character - driven approach would not efectively capture characters’ complex goals and personality ( H7 , P2 , P5 , P6 , P9 ) . Since character development is a complex process , there was a perception that an AI companion would fnd it challenging to grasp all the attributes of a character based only on the writer’s character outline . We found that the cause of this distrust is a perception that the AI would lack intuition . The participants’ expectation matches tests showing that generative language models like GPT - 3 sometimes show a lack of commonsense reasoning [ 64 ] . Writers felt that this type of reasoning is required to accurately interpret their descrip - tion of the characters by relating their goals and personality to the wider narrative context . For example , P2 expressed doubt whether the AI would be able to do understand the writer’s intention in describing character attributes : “Can it [ the AI ] really understand a character’s goals [ the writer ] stated so that they connect to the story . . . and [ can the AI understand ] the dis - position of the character . . . ? A writer might say , ‘oh he’s a happy go lucky guy . ’ What does that really mean ? Does that mean , he is a positive person ? Or [ does it mean ] he is self destructive in a way that he ignores problems ? ” Here , they describe their distrust in character generation . First , they feel that the AI may not understand the writer’s description of char - acters’ goals and would not be able to relate them to the rest of the story ( “connect to the story” ) . They also use the ambiguous term " happy go lucky " as an example of a personality description ( “dis - position of the character” ) which can only be resolved by having an intuitive understanding of the character and their background within the context of the story . Some writers were hesitant to accept AI support in translating dialogue because of distrust in the AI companion’s capabilities to capture the narrative context and portray characters’ emotions . They felt that AI companions would not be able to create compelling dialogue . Specifcally , they did not trust that an AI companion design based on Design 5 : Conversation - driven approach would achieve the natural colloquialism of a conversation , being overly perfect in grammar and formal in style . While technically “correct , ” this style of language would not match the reader’s expectation of a natural conversation within the characters’ current context . They perceived dialogue to be one of the most challenging parts of writing and felt it would be difcult for an AI to achieve something which is already demanding for a human writer ( P7 , P9 , P10 ) . P7 expressed this concern by saying : “We were taught to write a certain way [ . . . ] using complete sentences with a sentence and a verb and preposition . Everything has to be grammatically correct . And I’m afraid that AI would pick up on that [ . . . ] it would be very structured and very proper and that’s not how we speak in real life [ . . . ] artifcial intelligence [ . . . ] would have a really hard time making it sound natural . ” Here , they describe a prescriptive and grammatically correct form of writing taught to beginners ( “everything has to be grammatically correct” ) which is “structured and very proper” but does not match the way humans typically converse ( “not how we speak in real life” ) . Several participants also felt that the AI would not be able to match the scene context and intended narrative direction when generating dialogue ( P2 , P6 , P7 , P9 , P10 , H6 ) . P9 indicated they would not trust the AI to create context - aware dialogue : “It would be a struggle [ for the AI to convey ] the information that you want to get into the scene to move the plot forward with what the character would actually say in that situation [ . . . ] I think you . . . have to be a good writer to do dialogue so that could be quite a challenge for the AI . ” Writers like P9 indicated that they felt that dialogue writing de - mands signifcant skill for writers ( “you have to be a good writer to do dialogue” ) . When comparing the perceived capabilities of an AI writer to human writers , they felt that the AI would not measure up to an experienced writer . Therefore , they are concerned that the generated dialogue might diverge substantially from the narrative context ( “what the character would actually say in that situation” ) and would not match the writer’s idea for advancing the narrative ( “move the plot forward” ) . Finally , some writers expressed scepticism about the ability of the scene - based AI companion to perform complex scene writing as they did not trust that the AI would have an intuitive understanding of the interplay between events and characters . They were con - cerned that the generated narrative text would not be compelling since it would lack coherence between events and characters which are referenced within the text ( P1 , P6 , P9 ) . Specifcally , they felt that it would not be possible for the AI to understand the writer’s intention based on the scene outline without requiring a prohibi - tively high level of detail . P6 expressed that “there are [ characters and events ] that I’m thinking of that . . . impacts what’s happening now , and what’s happening now is going to impact that later and I can’t . . . input every single thing into the AI , right ? ” They explain their concern that the AI’s lack of intuitive understanding would mean that they would be obliged to provide an overly detailed out - line for a complex narrative ( “input everything into the AI” ) which describes characters , events and the relationship between events ( “what’s happening now is going to impact that later” ) . 1220 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia 4 . 2 . 2 Storywriters with diminished self - confidence in performing challenging writing roles are more receptive to AI companion col - laboration . Writers’ confdence in their own abilities in roles like character generation and translating dialogue , which require an intuitive understanding of context and emotion , infuences their perception of AI writing assistance . We found writers are more re - ceptive toward AI companion support in these types of roles when they are less confdent in their skill but tend to be hesitant to accept AI collaboration in areas where they feel adept . This sense of self - confdence is distinct from storywriters’ trust in AI companions described in subsection 4 . 2 . 1 . Trust impacts storywriters’ perception of AI co - writers based on their judgement of the AI’s capabilities . By contrast , self - confdence is determined by writers’ trust in their own writing ability . While many storywriters distrusted AI’s ability to perform roles like dialogue writing and character generation , our analysis revealed that their self - confdence was another con - founding factor infuencing their perception of AI assistance in performing challenging tasks requiring commonsense reasoning , particularly context - awareness and an intuitive understanding of emotion . Ultimately , the efects of trust and self - confdence are not contradictory or redundant , and both should be considered in AI companion design . Storywriters are more willing to give up control and collaborate with the AI in challenging parts of writing where they feel their own abilities are weaker . We found that participants who perceived themselves to be less adept in dialogue writing would like to col - laborate with the AI in this area . This can be seen in reactions to Design 5 : Conversation - driven approach , like the following : “I’m not super strong with dialogue . . . it’s not like anyone is going to read my writing because I have fantastic dialogue . . . I would be most will - ing to pass the buck in that area . ” ( P5 ) Here , H5 describes giving up control ( “pass the buck” ) since they have lower confdence in their ability to write dialogue compared to other areas ( “not super strong with dialogue” ) . Likewise , their weakness in character generation tends to motivate storywriters to accept AI help in this role . For instance , P11 fnds character generation difcult and said that they would accept help from an AI companion based on Design 4 : Character - driven approach . “One of my weakest points is character cre - ation . . . so I think that having that [ character generation ] available to me , would really help me and make that process a lot easier for me . ” They emphasize their lack of self - confdence in developing charac - ters ( " one of my weakest points " ) as a key consideration for being receptive towards AI assistance in this area . By contrast , storywriters would like to be more heavily engaged in areas where they feel confdent since this helps maintain a sense of ownership over the writing product . This attitude can be seen in P8’s justifcation of why they dislike the conversation - driven AI companion design where they expressed that : “ [ Writing ] the dialogue makes me feel like I have some control . . . the dialogue has always been mine . . . I think it’s probably why I’ve man - aged to make a living as a writer , because the one thing that they [ clients ] 100 % need me to do when I write [ writing dialogue ] , I don’t fnd it difcult . ” For writers like P8 who are profcient in writing conversations ( “I don’t fnd it difcult” ) , engaging in translating dialogue establishes a sense of ownership ( “the dialogue has always been mine” ) and they would not like the AI to take over this task . Similarly , storywriters like H2 who felt confdent in character generation expressed that they would not accept assistance in this area . They indicated that “ [ they ] wouldn’t use this [ the character - driven design ] since [ they ] “don’t have any problems with characters getting stuck , " indicating that they are confdent in their own abilities to develop characters . 4 . 3 Planning Method Our analysis showed a distinct pattern of two broad types of writers based on where and how frequently in the writing process they perform planning . See Table 1 which shows each participant’s plan - ning approach . These two groups are consistent with the two well - known approaches to planning in writing : structured and freeform . Structured writers create and adhere to a preconceived story outline while writing . By contrast , freeform writers ( sometimes referred to as " partners " ) switch rapidly between planning and translating throughout the writing process to iteratively plan the narrative while writing and do not create a structured outline . We elaborate why AI companions should match the writer’s planning method . 4 . 3 . 1 Storywriters expect the AI companion control mechanism to match their planning method for generating and organizing ideas . Writers following a structured approach prefer AI companions which allow them to guide the translating process through a high - level narrative outline . They need to do ideation and idea organiza - tion before they start writing . This group of writers indicated that Design 3 : Scene - based approach fts well into their current workfow as it supports top - down planning , with many ranking the design highly ( H5 , P5 , P8 , P9 , P10 ) . For example , P10 describes how they would like to use a scene list to plan the narrative and convey the structure to the scene - based AI companion . “I would actually rely on [ the scene - based com - panion ] quite a bit . It would be incredibly help - ful to show how the scenes are put together and to compartmentalize so we can see what the skeleton is . . . to then generate a draft . Even if it’s later in the writing process , I think this would be helpful for revising [ the draft ] . ” Here , P10 describes how the scene - based design would help support their planning process by dividing the story into scenes ( “compart - mentalize” ) and show the relationship between scenes and the overall story structure ( “what the skeleton is” ) before they “gen - erate a draft” . They also describe how this design would support revision ( “revising [ the draft ] ” ) . By contrast , writers that engage in an unstructured ( freeform ) writing approach expect AI companion support which does not require the rigid structure of a plot outline as this would constrain their process of generating and organizing ideas . They need to do ideation and organizing ideas while they are writing . Therefore , freeform writers would like AI companion support which allows them to interleave iterative planning with their translating process 1221 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . so that they can rely on the story they have written so far to guide their ideation . For example , most freeform writers reacted positively to Design 2 : Keyword - based approach ( H2 , H4 , H6 , P1 , P3 , P11 , P12 ) . Writers like H2 valued the fact that this design does not “require a whole outline” and supports incremental planning by generating small chunks of text based on a brief description and keywords about the next narrative event when they are “stuck on a specifc sentence . ” These writers indicated that they would fnd it challenging to adapt their planning method to write with an AI companion which requires structured outlining and disliked the Design 3 : Scene - based approach ( H2 , H4 , H6 , P3 , P11 , P12 ) . For instance , H4 ranked this design lowest , describing how it would not match their approach to planning : For my own writing style , it [ the scene - based companion ] would not be helpful . . . I’m more of a plan as you go writer . . . and I don’t write out full summaries or outlines . . . to have them in the future . . . it’s just not me . ” Here , they describe themselves as a “plan as you go writer , ” indicat - ing that they engage in planning as they write . They explain that this type of support would “not be helpful” since it would force them to plan the narrative ahead of time with “structured summaries or outlines , ” rather than planning while performing translating . 5 DISCUSSION 5 . 1 Respect for Writers’ Value Perception as a Guiding Principle of AI Writers The existing discourses about AI design have been focused on per - formance , such as speed and costs , and social values , including privacy and fairness [ 47 ] . Within the domain of AI co - creation , our study sheds light on a new dimension of considerations – per - sonal values . Our fndings have highlighted that storywriters ex - pect the design of a human - AI co - writing mechanism shall respect their value perceptions of writing tasks . Previous work in AI co - creation [ 71 ] has emphasized that artists want to clearly distinguish their role from that of the AI and that they would like to take the lead in the process of creation through fne - grained control at ev - ery step , only delegating “chores” and follow - up work which are troublesome or tiring ( e . g . , coloring regions of an image ) . However , we have revealed that this is not always the case for storywriters . While writers who highly value their own fulfllment , ownership , and integrity want to lead a particular writing task of translating , those that emphasize their productivity and fnancial gain are will - ing to let the AI do the writing . To illustrate the importance of considering writers’ values in AI co - writer design , we present an example of a storywriter and describe how an AI companion should behave to meet their idiosyncratic needs . Mary 4 is a professional writer who works for clients on Up - work . com and other gig platforms , writing fctional novels , short stories , and scripts for video games and videos . She depends on writing for her livelihood . Meeting clients’ deadlines is therefore vitally important to her , and thus she wants to achieve prolifc writing . At the same time , she would like to achieve satisfaction by producing a writing product which meets her personal standards , 4 a pseudonym , previously referred to as P13 satisfes the client , and engages the reader . She feels a moderate sense of ownership over her writing and wants it to refect her own voice and identity , even if an AI writer performs translating . Having control over writing style allows her to establish this sense of ownership , although she is willing to give up control over the story plot and character arcs based on clients’ instructions and input from collaborators . When developing a narrative , Mary fol - lows a structured , plot - driven writing approach . Mary trusts that AI will be able to create compelling characters and dialogue which refects characters’ personality and the narrative context . However , in scene generation , she feels that it would not be able to match her writing style . Finally , Mary has a high degree of self - confdence in character development and does not fnd this area challenging . Considering Mary’s profle , an ideal AI companion will prioritize Mary’s need for productivity but also consider her desire to control writing style , and her structured writing method . Her role in the writing process should be to generate character and plot ideas and to iteratively revise content while the AI does the “heavy lifting” of writing the body of the text . Given Mary’s structured writing approach and primary requirement for productivity , the writing companion should support scene generation based on her plot outlines . It should allow her to tailor the generated content to match her own voice , taking care to adapt to her writing style . The AI companion should also provide collaborative dialogue generation and guided text suggestions which match the style of existing text , further increasing her efciency while giving control over style . In addition , the AI should aford collaborative ideation to increase efciency in the planning process . The AI companion described above is ideal to writers who share the value systems and priorities with Mary . This persona highlights professional storywriters who prioritize productivity as the major type of user of AI companions which lead the translating process . However , our participants manifested diverse characters in terms of the emphasis on diferent values as it relates to the other considera - tions such as trust , self - confdence , and writing method . Moreover , diferences in these dimensions did not follow any predictable pat - terns , and it was not possible for us to identify concrete types of writers for which AI support mechanisms can be standardized . AI companions , therefore , need to adapt to the idiosyncratic character of the writer , much like human collaborators which negotiate and adapt to diferent working styles among each other . This implica - tion poses design challenges in creating contextually adaptive AI agent , as foreshadowed in [ 50 ] . 5 . 2 Implications of Storywriters’ Trust Users’ distrust has been shown to negatively infuence their reliance on automated systems , particularly when trust to AI is lower than self - confdence [ 56 ] . Our fndings have revealed how diminished trust or increased self - confdence can lead storywriters to reject AI writing assistance in particular writing roles . Considering trust in working with an AI companion , previous work has focused on tasks with a well defned “correct” outcome . These include tasks like controlling an automated pasteurization plant [ 56 ] , controlling central heating for a plant [ 66 ] , and playing chess [ 18 ] . However , evaluating the efect of trust in creative tasks like storywriting is 1222 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia challenging since the most desirable outcome is inherently subjec - tive . For example , a next - sentence suggestion might not match the writer’s intention within the narrative context , but it may inspire a novel story direction . Our fndings ofer a glimpse into the impact of storywriters’ trust in AI co - writers ( see subsection 4 . 2 ) . We showed that many writers distrust AI in performing roles that require commonsense reasoning and an intuitive understanding of the narrative context and characters’ emotions . They would like to be able to efectively direct the AI co - writer when it is performing these types of roles . However , much like guiding a powerful horse , efectively control - ling a language model requires the correct control mechanism to “rein in” its vast capabilities . This problem is confounded since writers want to control many dimensions of writing ( e . g . , topic , characters , plot , language sentiment ) . Improving the capabilities of generative language models and AI writing tools in capturing context and emotion is key in overcoming storywriters’ existing distrust . Additionally , providing users explainability of the auto - mated system’s output promises to create an increased sense of trust [ 31 , 42 , 65 , 79 ] . However , ofering users a useful explanation is challenging due to the complexity of large language models . The ideation tool in [ 20 ] takes a decisive step in addressing both these challenges in the feld of AI co - writing by providing sketching con - trol to guide characters’ fortune in the narrative and a visualization of the model’s output to support sensemaking . At the same time , this sketch - based interaction approach intuitively communicates to users that there will be some degree of uncertainty in the output text , lowering their expectations for control . However , additional work is needed in AI co - creation to develop AI writing companions that go beyond ideation to establish trust in AI - led writing under human direction . 5 . 3 Storywriters’ Sense of Integrity and Readers’ Perception of AI Generated Content Our fndings have shown that maintaining a sense of integrity is important for writers who cherish the emotional values of writing . They attached feelings of pride to producing content that they perceive as authentic . They maintained that using AI - generated text in their work would feel dishonest , diminishing their sense of pride in their writing . Additionally , these writers were concerned that readers would react negatively if they realized that any part of the writing was produced by an AI co - writer . This raises the question : how does the reader’s perception of stories which have been co - written with AI shape the culture of storywriting , and how does this perception impact writers’ values and preferences for AI companion support ? We can look to previous studies on perceptions towards AI - generated content for potential clues to answering this question . In the case of journalism , readers generally do not perceive a sig - nifcant diference in credibility between AI - generated and AI co - written articles from those written completely by human journalists [ 100 ] . However , earlier work showed that they fnd human - written articles to be more readable and enjoyable [ 22 ] , with the diference in perceived readability being particularly pronounced when users were informed of the article source ( i . e . , human or AI ) [ 40 ] . This reveals a potential bias against the AI - generated content . It remains to be seen whether this will still be the case in the face of improve - ments in AI language generation technologies . Our fndings suggest that storywriters perceive readers to be extremely sensitive to the writers’ unique identity ( " fngerprint of writing " ) refected in their writing . Therefore , readers may be biased against content which deviates from expectations . Beyond writing , humans may also be biased against AI - generated visual art as they evaluate paintings perceived to painted by humans signifcantly higher than those they believe were created by AI [ 77 ] . Viewers also tend to view a piece more as “art” when it was created by a human rather than AI , since they felt the latter lacks human emotion , originality , and uniqueness [ 43 ] . However , based on the results in [ 33 ] , it is unclear whether this bias exists in all art styles , as participants found the AI - generated art to be more novel and aesthetically pleasing in their study . Further studies are required to explore whether there is audience bias against AI - generated content which extends to textual forms of artistic expression such as storywriting . 5 . 4 Cognitive Models and Writers’ Perception of AI Companions Our fndings revealed that storywriters’ emotional values ( e . g . , own - ership ) and need for productivity infuence their perception of AI companions and ultimately determine the role that they want such technology to play in their writing process . To describe writers’ en - visioned roles of AI companions requires diferent cognitive models . We therefore relate our fndings to Gero and Chilton’s discussion on three main cognitive models of usage for AI writers [ 38 , p . 9 ] : co - creative partner , cognitive ofoading tool , and casual creator [ 24 ] . Participants who used their tool as a co - creative partner felt that it was doing an excessive portion of the writing work , while those who utilized it as a cognitive ofoading tool only allowed the tool to assist in narrow and specifc word generation . Finally , those who employed the tool as a casual creator , felt that it would allow them to explore new creative directions . While their discus - sion emphasizes ownership as a key consideration for writers , our fndings have highlighted how several additional emotional values , such as fulfllment and integrity , and productivity impact writers’ perception of AI assistance . To specify , hobbyist writers empha - sizing the emotional values of writing see AI companions which dominate in the translating process as co - creative partners which would overstep their boundaries , diminishing not only ownership but also fulfllment and integrity . They would prefer to use AI com - panions as casual creators for generating story and character ideas as part of planning , only using AI - generated output as a source of inspiration . In stark contrast , storywriters who prioritized produc - tivity would like to employ AI co - writers as co - creative partners to help turn their ideas into words in the translating process and ease their writing burden . 5 . 5 Reactions to AI Companion Designs and Design Implications Throughout our fndings , we have utilized storywriters’ reactions to our AI companion designs as evidence to show which barriers and facilitators infuence writers’ perception of AI companions and 1223 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . to highlight how these considerations would be impacted by difer - ent ways of dividing roles in writing sub - tasks . We would now like to give an overview of participants’ reactions to our designs and dis - cuss a few potential design implications . First , we highlighted that storywriters are receptive to the notion of co - ideation support and expect the AI companion to act merely as a mechanism for exploring ideas . This was apparent in their reactions to the suggestion - based designs ( Design 1 : Linear approach and Design 2 : Keyword - based approach ) . Storywriters felt that an AI companion based on the linear design would be helpful in developing ideas when the story direction was unclear , while a Keyword - based AI companion would be helpful for building on their pre - existing notions of plot direc - tion . Additionally , they felt that Design 4 : Character - driven approach would be helpful for ideating about character arcs , despite concerns that such an AI companion might not always capture the characters’ complex goals and personality due to a lack of intuition ( common - sense reasoning ) . By contrast , when envisioning translating sup - port , it was clear that storywriters had much higher expectations . This was particularly apparent in reactions to Design 3 : Scene - based approach . Participants expected this type of AI companion to take on the role of a co - writer which would understand their plot outline and other instructions . While several writers were hopeful that this type of agent would signifcantly increase their writing output for both narrative and dialogue , they expressed concerns that it would not understand the relationship between plot events and between characters . Additionally , some writers envisioned that an AI com - panion based on Design 5 : Conversation - driven approach would aid in the challenging task of translating dialogue . However , there was a concern that generated dialogue would lack naturalness , failing to match the context and the characters’ personality . These diferences in participants’ reactions reveal the importance of managing user expectations when designing AI companions . The design for co - ideation should therefore emphasize exploration over efciency . For example , this type of agent can generate multiple versions of the requested text to stimulate divergent narrative di - rections . At the same time , authors should still have the option to control the story direction , if desired , as in the keyword - based de - sign . By contrast , AI companions which support translating should be designed to efciently develop fully expanded text based on the writer’s intention . Here , the focus should be efciency rather than exploration . It is important that the generated text should closely match the writer’s plot , as well as their writing style . In particular , it should maintain coherence between plot events and characters’ development in the narrative , as well as matching the context and colloquialism of natural dialogue . Writers should also be able to provide a high - level outline which is converted into a full draft and request the AI companion to revise the text if it does not match their goals . 6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Collaborative writing with AI promises to signifcantly enhance writers’ ideation capacity and ease their writing burden in trans - lating , allowing them to focus on executive planning . Currently , writers face challenges such as writer’s block and cognitive over - load in the complex task of storywriting . Our design workbook study used fve AI co - writing approaches to identify storywriters’ perception of diverse types of AI companion support which promise to address these challenges . Analyzing interview data revealed that storywriters’ attitude towards AI companions is strongly impacted by fve main barriers and facilitators . Our fndings have implica - tions for storywriters’ intellectual well - being , as we describe the efects of the values writers ascribe to writing . Writers desired to maintain control and express their ideas on their own when they cherished the emotional values ( e . g . , fulfllment , ownership , and integrity ) . Additionally , they wished to perform challenging writ - ing sub - tasks themselves when they had diminished trust in the AI or high self - confdence . Finally , writers were not receptive to AI companion support if its control mechanism did not match their planning method . By contrast , professional storywriters who priori - tized productivity were willing to let the AI take the lead to achieve a high volume of writing output , reducing their workload . When they had diminished self - confdence in challenging writing roles , writers were also more receptive to AI collaboration . Our results assist in capturing storywriters’ needs and ultimately set the stage for AI companion design , supporting a novel writing paradigm with vast potential in creative writing and beyond . While our static design probe ofered novel insights into story - writers’ perception of AI collaboration , future work is needed to assess users’ dynamic interactions with AI co - writers , since our approach was limited to speculative interaction . Although it was infeasible to tackle the task of developing a set of AI companions within the scope of this study , our contributions lay the ground - work for future AI co - writer design and evaluation . Comparing the usage of co - ideation and AI - led writing tools in hobbyist and professional writers would provide further insights into the efects of the considerations we identifed . Additionally , we expected that participants’ genre of writing work ( e . g . , short story writing or game storywriting ) would infuence their perception of AI com - panion collaboration . However , the interview data did not reveal any patterns indicating that this was the case . Further investigation focusing specifcally on genre - specifc writing needs might reveal patterns that were latent in our study . Finally , it would be helpful to explore the efect of writers’ AI literacy on their value perception , integrity , ownership , and trust . Another potential future direction is the application of AI com - panions in training novice writers . We foresee that AI compan - ions could be benefcial in an educational context , particularly for prospective writers who do not have access to individualized writ - ing training . Here , one issue to be explored is learners’ potential overreliance on co - writing support and how this would impact their natural learning process . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was partially supported by the NSERC Discovery Grant and CREATE programs , as well as the KEIT grant funded by the Korean government ( MOTIE , No . 20009940 ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Saleema Amershi , Dan Weld , Mihaela Vorvoreanu , Adam Fourney , Besmira Nushi , Penny Collisson , Jina Suh , Shamsi Iqbal , Paul N . Bennett , Kori Inkpen , Jaime Teevan , Ruth Kikin - Gil , and Eric Horvitz . 2019 . Guidelines for Human - AI Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) ( May 4 - 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK ) . 1224 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300233 [ 2 ] Prithviraj Ammanabrolu , Ethan Tien , Wesley Cheung , Zhaochen Luo , William Ma , Lara J . Martin , and Mark O . Riedl . 2020 . Story Realization : Expanding Plot Events into Sentences . Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artifcial Intelligence 34 , 05 ( Apr 2020 ) , 7375 – 7382 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1609 / aaai . v34i05 . 6232 [ 3 ] Oriana Bandiera , Iwan Barankay , and Imran Rasul . 2007 . Incentives for Managers and Inequality among Workers : Evidence from a Firm - Level Experiment . The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 729 – 773 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 25098857 [ 4 ] Rosanne Bane . 2010 . Bane , The Writer’s Brain - What Neurology Tells Us about Teaching Creative Writing . Creative Writing : Teaching Theory & Practice 2 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 10 pages pages . http : / / www . rosannebane . com / uploads / 2 / 5 / 6 / 2 / 25628316 / the _ writers _ brain . rosanne _ bane . 41 - 501 . pdf [ 5 ] Michael Barnett , Heather Wagner , Anne Gatling , Janice Anderson , Meredith Houle , and Alan Kafka . 2006 . The Impact of Science Fiction Film on Student Understanding of Science . Journal of Science Education and Technology 15 , 2 ( Sep 2006 ) , 179 – 191 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10956 - 006 - 9001 - y [ 6 ] Christoph Bartneck , Tomohiro Suzuki , Takayuki Kanda , and Tatsuya Nomura . 2006 . The infuence of people’s culture and prior experiences with Aibo on their attitude towards robots . AI & SOCIETY 21 , 1 - 2 ( Nov 2006 ) , 217 – 230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00146 - 006 - 0052 - 7 [ 7 ] Russell W . Belk . 1988 . Possessions and the Extended Self . Journal of Consumer Research 15 , 2 ( Sep 1988 ) , 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 209154 [ 8 ] Robert A Berman . 1997 . Fade In : The Screenwriting Process ( 2 ed . ) . Michael Wiese Productions , Studio City , Los Angeles , CA , USA . [ 9 ] Mark Blythe , Enrique Encinas , Jofsh Kaye , Miriam Lueck Avery , Rob McCabe , and Kristina Andersen . 2018 . Imaginary Design Workbooks : Constructive Criticism and Practical Provocation . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) ( April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 12 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173807 [ 10 ] Margaret A Boden . 1990 . The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms ( 2 ed . ) . Routledge , London . [ 11 ] Alison L . Booth and Jef Frank . 1999 . Earnings , Productivity , and Performance - Related Pay . Journal of Labor Economics 17 , 3 ( Jul 1999 ) , 447 – 463 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 209927 [ 12 ] Alice C Brand and Phoebe A Leckie . 1988 . The Emotions of Professional Writ - ers . Journal of Psychology 122 , 5 ( Sep 1988 ) , 421 – 439 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00223980 . 1988 . 10542948 [ 13 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( Jan 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 14 ] Virginia Braun , Victoria Clarke , Nikki Hayfeld , and Gareth Terry . 2019 . The - matic Analysis . In Handbook of Research Methods in Health Social Sciences , Pranee Liamputtong ( Ed . ) . Springer Singapore , Singapore , 843 – 860 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 10 - 5251 - 4 _ 103 [ 15 ] Tom Brown , Benjamin Mann , Nick Ryder , Melanie Subbiah , Jared D Kaplan , Prafulla Dhariwal , Arvind Neelakantan , Pranav Shyam , Girish Sastry , Amanda Askell , Sandhini Agarwal , Ariel Herbert - Voss , Gretchen Krueger , Tom Henighan , Rewon Child , Aditya Ramesh , Daniel Ziegler , Jefrey Wu , Clemens Winter , Chris Hesse , Mark Chen , Eric Sigler , Mateusz Litwin , Scott Gray , Benjamin Chess , Jack Clark , Christopher Berner , Sam McCandlish , Alec Radford , Ilya Sutskever , and Dario Amodei . 2020 . Language Models are Few - Shot Learners . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , H . Larochelle , M . Ranzato , R . Hadsell , M . F . Balcan , and H . Lin ( Eds . ) , Vol . 33 . Curran Associates , Inc . , Red Hook , NY , US , 1877 – 1901 . https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2020 / fle / 1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a - Paper . pdf [ 16 ] Alex Calderwood , Vivian Qiu , K . Gero , and Lydia B . Chilton . 2020 . How Novelists Use Generative Language Models : An Exploratory User Study . In HAI - GEN + user2agent @ IUI ( IUI ’20 Workshops ) ( March 17 - 20 , 2020 , Cagliari , Italy ) . CEUR Workshop Proceedings , Aachen , Germany , 5 pages pages . http : / / ceur - ws . org / Vol - 2848 / HAI - GEN - Paper - 3 . pdf [ 17 ] Janet X . Chen , Francesco Vitale , and Joanna McGrenere . 2021 . What Happens After Death ? Using a Design Workbook to Understand User Expectations for Preparing their Data . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) ( May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445359 [ 18 ] Leah Chong , Guanglu Zhang , Kosa Goucher - Lambert , Kenneth Kotovsky , and Jonathan Cagan . 2022 . Human confdence in artifcial intelligence and in them - selves : The evolution and impact of confdence on adoption of AI advice . Com - puters in Human Behavior 127 ( 2022 ) , 107018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2021 . 107018 [ 19 ] John Joon Young Chung , Shiqing He , and Eytan Adar . 2021 . The Intersec - tion of Users , Roles , Interactions , and Technologies in Creativity Support Tools . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) . Associ - ation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1817 – 1833 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462050 [ 20 ] John Joon Young Chung , Kim Wooseok , Kang Min Yoo , Hwaran Lee , Eytan Adar , and Minsuk Chang . 2022 . TaleBrush : Sketching Stories with Generative Pretrained Language Models . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) ( April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 19 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501819 [ 21 ] Elizabeth Clark , Anne Spencer Ross , Chenhao Tan , Yangfeng Ji , and Noah A . Smith . 2018 . Creative Writing with a Machine in the Loop : Case Studies on Slogans and Stories . In 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’18 ) ( March 7 – 11 , 2018 , Tokyo , Japan ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 329 – 340 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3172944 . 3172983 [ 22 ] Christer Clerwall . 2014 . Enter the Robot Journalist . Journalism Practice 8 , 5 ( Sep 2014 ) , 519 – 531 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17512786 . 2014 . 883116 Routledge . [ 23 ] Andy Coenen , Luke Davis , Daphne Ippolito , Emily Reif , and Ann Yuan . 2021 . Wordcraft : a Human - AI Collaborative Editor for Story Writing . In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Bridging Human – Computer Interaction and Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguistics , Stroudsburg , PA , USA , 7 pages pages . [ 24 ] Kate Compton and Michael Mateas . 2015 . Casual Creators . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Computational Creativity ( ICCC 2015 ) ( June 29 – July 2 , 2015 , Park City , Utah , USA ) , Hannu Toivonen , Simon Colton , Michael Cook , and Dan Ventura ( Eds . ) . Brigham Young University , Park City , Utah , 228 – 235 . [ 25 ] N . Dahlbäck , A . Jönsson , and L . Ahrenberg . 1993 . Wizard of Oz studies — why and how . Knowledge - Based Systems 6 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 258 – 266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0950 - 7051 ( 93 ) 90017 - N [ 26 ] Scott Davidof , Min Kyung Lee , Anind K . Dey , and John Zimmerman . 2007 . Rapidly Exploring Application Design Through Speed Dating . In UbiComp 2007 : Ubiquitous Computing . UbiComp 2007 ( September 16 - 19 , 2007 , Innsbruck , Austria ) ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science , LNCS volume 4717 ) . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , 429 – 446 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 74853 - 3 _ 25 . [ 27 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - Pin Hsiao , Yanna Popova , and Brian Magerko . 2015 . An Enactive Model of Creativity for Computational Collaboration and Co - creation . In Creativity in the Digital Age , Nelson Zagalo and Pedro Branco ( Eds . ) . Springer London , London , 109 – 133 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4471 - 6681 - 8 _ 7 [ 28 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - PIn Hsiao , Kunwar Yashraj Singh , Lisa Li , and Brian Magerko . 2016 . Empirically Studying Participatory Sense - Making in Abstract Drawing with a Co - Creative Cognitive Agent . In Proceedings of the 21st Inter - national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’16 ) ( March 7 - 10 , 2016 , Sonoma , CA , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 196 – 207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2856767 . 2856795 [ 29 ] Nicholas Mark Davis . 2013 . Human - Computer Co - Creativity : Blending Human and Computational Creativity . In The Doctoral Consortium at AIIDE 2013 : Papers from the 2013 AIIDE Workshop , Vol . 9 . The AAAI Press , Palo Alto , California , 9 – 12 . [ 30 ] Helga Dittmar . 1991 . Meanings of material possessions as refections of identity : Gender and social - material position in society . Journal of Social Behavior and Personality 6 , 6 ( 1991 ) , 561 – 585 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0167 - 4870 ( 94 ) 90011 - 6 [ 31 ] Mary T . Dzindolet , Scott A . Peterson , Regina A . Pomranky , Linda G . Pierce , and Hall P . Beck . 2003 . The role of trust in automation reliance . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 58 , 6 ( Jun 2003 ) , 697 – 718 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1071 - 5819 ( 03 ) 00038 - 7 [ 32 ] Lajos Egri . 1960 . The Art of Dramatic Writing ( 1 ed . ) . Simon & Schuster , New York , NY , USA . [ 33 ] Ahmed Elgammal , Bingchen Liu , Mohamed Elhoseiny , and Marian Mazzone . 2017 . CAN : Creative Adversarial Networks , Generating " Art " by Learning About Styles and Deviating from Style Norms . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Creativity ( ICCC 2017 ) ( June 19 - 23 , 2017 , Atlanta , GA , USA ) . Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA , USA , 22 pages pages . [ 34 ] Linda Flower and John R . Hayes . 1981 . A Cognitive Process Theory of Writing . College Composition and Communication 32 , 4 ( Dec 1981 ) , 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 356600 [ 35 ] Lita Furby . 1978 . Possession in humans : An exploratory study of its meaning and motivation . Social Behavior and Personality 6 , 1 ( 1978 ) , 49 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2224 / sbp . 1978 . 6 . 1 . 49 [ 36 ] David Galbraith and Gert Rijlaarsdam . 1999 . Efective strategies for the teaching and learning of writing . Learning and Instruction 9 , 2 ( Apr 1999 ) , 93 – 108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 4752 ( 98 ) 00039 - 5 [ 37 ] William Gaver . 2011 . Making spaces : how design workbooks work . In Proceed - ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) ( May 7 – 12 , 2011 , Vancouver , BC , Canada ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1551 – 1560 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979169 [ 38 ] Katy Ilonka Gero and Lydia B . Chilton . 2019 . Metaphoria : An Algorithmic Companion for Metaphor Creation . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings ( CHI 2019 ) ( May 4 - 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 12 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300526 1225 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Biermann et al . [ 39 ] Frederica Gonçalves , Pedro Campos , Julian Hanna , and Simone Ashby . 2015 . You’re the Voice : Evaluating User Interfaces for Encouraging Underserved Youths to express themselves through Creative Writing . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C ’15 ) ( June 22 - 25 , 2015 , Glasgow , UK ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 63 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757236 [ 40 ] Andreas Graefe , Mario Haim , Bastian Haarmann , and Hans - Bernd Brosius . 2018 . Readers’ perception of computer - generated news : Credibility , expertise , and readability . Journalism 19 , 5 ( May 2018 ) , 595 – 610 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1464884916641269 [ 41 ] Mathew Guzdial and Mark Riedl . 2019 . An Interaction Framework for Studying Co - Creative AI . In CHI Human - Centered Machine Learning Perspectives ( HCMLP ) Workshop ( May 04 , 2019 , Glasgow , UK ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 6 pages pages . [ 42 ] Jonathan L . Herlocker , Joseph A . Konstan , and John Riedl . 2000 . Explaining collaborative fltering recommendations . In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM confer - ence on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’00 ) ( December 2 - 6 , 2000 , Philadelphia , PA , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 241 – 250 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 358916 . 358995 [ 43 ] Joo - Wha Hong . 2018 . Bias in Perception of Art Produced by Artifcial Intelli - gence . Human - Computer Interaction . Interaction in Context 10902 ( 2018 ) , 290 – 303 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 91244 - 8 _ 24 [ 44 ] Eric Horvitz . 1999 . Principles of mixed - initiative user interfaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’99 ) ( May 15 - 20 , 1999 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 159 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303030 [ 45 ] Merel Huisman , Erik Ranschaert , William Parker , Domenico Mastrodicasa , Martin Koci , Daniel Pinto de Santos , Francesca Coppola , Sergey Morozov , Marc Zins , Cedric Bohyn , Ural Koç , Jie Wu , Satyam Veean , Dominik Fleischmann , Tim Leiner , and Martin J Willemink . 2021 . An international survey on AI in radiology in 1 , 041 radiologists and radiology residents part 1 : fear of replacement , knowledge , and attitude . European Radiology 31 , 9 ( Sep 2021 ) , 7058 – 7066 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00330 - 021 - 07781 - 5 [ 46 ] Randall Ingermanson . 2014 . How to Write a Novel Using the Snowfake Method ( 1 ed . ) . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform , Scotts Valley , California , US . [ 47 ] Michael Kearns and Aaron Roth . 2019 . The Ethical Algorithm . Oxford University Press , Inc . , New York , NY , United States . https : / / go . exlibris . link / gGFfgmBf [ 48 ] Ronald T Kellogg . 1988 . Attentional Overload and Writing Performance : Efects of Rough Draft and Outline Strategies . Journal of Experimental Psychology 14 , 2 ( 1988 ) , 355 – 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 14 . 2 . 355 [ 49 ] Daewon Kim and Seongcheol Kim . 2017 . Newspaper companies’ determinants in adopting robot journalism . Technological Forecasting and Social Change 117 ( Apr 2017 ) , 184 – 195 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2016 . 12 . 002 [ 50 ] Yelim Kim , Mohi Reza , Joanna McGrenere , and Dongwook Yoon . 2021 . Designers Characterize Naturalness in Voice User Interfaces : Their Goals , Practices , and Challenges . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) ( May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445579 [ 51 ] Google Creative Lab . 2019 . Banter Bot . https : / / experiments . withgoogle . com / banter - bot [ 52 ] Petri Lankoski . 2011 . Character - driven game design : A design approach and its foundations in character engagement ( 1 ed . ) . Vol . 101 . TaiK Books , Helsinki , Finland . [ 53 ] Noam Lemelshtrich Latar . 2018 . Robot Journalism . In Robot Journalism : Can Human Journalism Survive ? World Scientifc Publishing , Singapore , 29 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1142 / 10913 [ 54 ] Edward P Lazear . 2000 . Performance Pay and Productivity . The American Economic Review 90 , 5 ( 2000 ) , 1346 – 1361 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / aer . 90 . 5 . 1346 [ 55 ] Edward P . Lazear . 2018 . Compensation and Incentives in the Workplace . Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 , 3 ( Aug 2018 ) , 195 – 214 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / jep . 32 . 3 . 195 [ 56 ] John D . Lee and Neville Moray . 1994 . Trust , self - confdence , and operators’ adaptation to automation . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 40 , 1 ( Jan 1994 ) , 153 – 184 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / ijhc . 1994 . 1007 [ 57 ] Mina Lee , Percy Liang , and Qian Yang . 2022 . CoAuthor : Human - AI Collaborative Writing Dataset . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) ( April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 19 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502030 [ 58 ] Carl Leggo . 2008 . Autobiography : Researching Our Lives and Living Our Re - search : Why Do We Tell Stories ? In Being with A / r / tography . Brill , Leiden , The Netherlands , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1163 / 9789087903268 _ 002 [ 59 ] Opher Lieber , Or Sharir , Barak Lenz , and Yoav Shoham . 2021 . Jurassic - 1 : Techni - cal Details And Evaluation . Technical Report . AI21 Labs . [ 60 ] Ryan Louie , Andy Coenen , Cheng Zhi Huang , Michael Terry , and Carrie J . Cai . 2020 . Novice - AI Music Co - Creation via AI - Steering Tools for Deep Generative Models . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) ( April 25 - 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376739 [ 61 ] Todd Lubart . 2005 . How can computers be partners in the creative process : Classifcation and commentary on the Special Issue . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 63 , 4 - 5 ( Oct 2005 ) , 365 – 369 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2005 . 04 . 002 [ 62 ] Christoph Lutz , Maren Schöttler , and Christian Pieter Hofmann . 2019 . The privacy implications of social robots : Scoping review and expert interviews . Mobile Media & Communication 7 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 412 – 434 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2050157919843961 [ 63 ] Spyros Makridakis . 2017 . The forthcoming Artifcial Intelligence ( AI ) revolution : Its impact on society and frms . Futures 90 ( Jun 2017 ) , 46 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . futures . 2017 . 03 . 006 [ 64 ] Gary Marcus and Ernest Davis . 2020 . Experiments testing GPT - 3’s abil - ity at commonsense reasoning : results . https : / / cs . nyu . edu / ~ davise / papers / GPT3CompleteTests . html [ 65 ] Jon McCormack , Toby Giford , Patrick Hutchings , Maria Teresa Llano Rodriguez , Matthew Yee - King , and Mark d’Inverno . 2019 . In a Silent Way : Communication Between AI and Improvising Musicians Beyond Sound . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) ( May 4 - 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 11 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300268 event - place : Glasgow , Scotland Uk . [ 66 ] Neville Moray and Toshiyuki Inagaki . 2000 . Adaptive Automation , Trust , and Self - Confdence in Fault Management of Time - Critical Tasks . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology : Applied 6 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 44 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / / 1076 - 898x . 6 . 1 . 44 [ 67 ] Donald M . Murray . 1991 . All Writing Is Autobiography . College Composition and Communication 42 , 1 ( Feb 1991 ) , 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 357540 [ 68 ] Tricia J . Ngoon , Joy O Kim , and Scott Klemmer . 2021 . Shöwn : Adaptive Con - ceptual Guidance Aids Example Use in Creative Tasks . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) ( June 28 - July 2 , 2021 , Online ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1834 – 1845 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462072 [ 69 ] Justin Nicholes . 2017 . Measuring ownership of creative versus academic writing : Implications for interdisciplinary praxis . Writing in Practice 3 ( 2017 ) , N . A . pages . https : / / www . nawe . co . uk / DB / current - wip - edition - 2 / articles / measuring - ownership - of - creative - versus - academic - writing - implications - for - interdisciplinary - praxis . html [ 70 ] Bernard A Nijstad , Wolfgang Stroebe , and Hein F . M Lodewijkx . 2003 . Production blocking and idea generation : Does blocking interfere with cognitive processes ? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 39 , 6 ( Nov 2003 ) , 531 – 548 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 1031 ( 03 ) 00040 - 4 [ 71 ] Changhoon Oh , Jungwoo Song , Jinhan Choi , Seonghyeon Kim , Sungwoo Lee , and Bongwon Suh . 2018 . I Lead , You Help but Only with Enough Details : Understanding User Experience of Co - Creation with Artifcial Intelligence . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) ( April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174223 [ 72 ] Lawrence J . Oliver . 1982 . Helping Students Overcome Writer’s Block . Journal of Reading 26 , 2 ( 1982 ) , 162 – 168 . https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 40029248 [ 73 ] Jiyoung Park and Sang Eun Woo . 2022 . Who Likes Artifcial Intelligence ? Personality Predictors of Attitudes toward Artifcial Intelligence . The Journal of Psychology 156 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 68 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00223980 . 2021 . 2012109 [ 74 ] Anders Persson , Mikael Laaksoharju , and Hiroshi Koga . 2021 . We Mostly Think Alike : Individual Diferences in Attitude Towards AI in Sweden and Japan . The Review of Socionetwork Strategies 15 , 1 ( May 2021 ) , 123 – 142 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12626 - 021 - 00071 - y [ 75 ] Jon L Pierce . 2001 . Toward a Theory of Psychological Ownership in Orga - nizations . Academy of management review 26 , 2 ( 2001 ) , 298 – 310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2001 . 4378028 [ 76 ] D . Pinto dos Santos , D . Giese , S . Brodehl , S . H . Chon , W . Staab , R . Kleinert , D . Maintz , and B . Baeßler . 2019 . Medical students’ attitude towards artifcial intelligence : a multicentre survey . European Radiology 29 , 4 ( Apr 2019 ) , 1640 – 1646 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00330 - 018 - 5601 - 1 [ 77 ] Martin Ragot , Nicolas Martin , and Salomé Cojean . 2020 . AI - Generated vs . Human Artworks . A Perception Bias Towards Artifcial Intelligence ? . In Ex - tended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems ( CHI EA ’20 ) ( April 25 - 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA ) . Associa - tion for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 10 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3382892 [ 78 ] Helena Rampley , Frances Reynolds , and Kevin Cordingley . 2019 . Experiences of creative writing as a serious leisure occupation : An interpretative phenomeno - logical analysis . Journal of Occupational Science 26 , 4 ( Oct 2019 ) , 511 – 523 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14427591 . 2019 . 1623066 [ 79 ] Marco Tulio Ribeiro , Sameer Singh , and Carlos Guestrin . 2016 . " Why Should I Trust You ? " : Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifer . In Proceedings of 1226 From Tool to Companion : Storywriters Want AI Writers to Respect Their Personal Values and Writing Strategies DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ( KDD ’16 ) ( August 13 - 17 , 2016 , San Francisco , California , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1135 – 1144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2939672 . 2939778 [ 80 ] Laurel Richardson . 2001 . Getting personal : Writing - stories . International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education 14 , 1 ( Jan 2001 ) , 33 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09518390010007647 [ 81 ] Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S . Gordon . 2015 . Creative Help : A Story Writing Assistant . In 8th International Conference on Interactive Digital Storytelling ( ICIDS 2015 ) ( Nov . 30 – Dec . 4 , 2015 , Copenhagen , Denmark ) ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) , Henrik Schoenau - Fog , Luis Emilio Bruni , Sandy Louchart , and Sarune Baceviciute ( Eds . ) . Springer , Cham , Switzerland , 81 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 27036 - 4 _ 8 [ 82 ] Mike Rose . 1980 . Rigid Rules , Infexible Plans , and the Stifing of Language : A Cognitivist Analysis of Writer’s Block . College Composition and Communication 31 , 4 ( Dec 1980 ) , 389 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 356589 [ 83 ] Tobie R . Sanders . 1985 . Why People Write : Ethnogrephies of Writing end lm - plications for Instruction . Technical Report . American Educational Research Association , Chicago , IL , USA . [ 84 ] Marlene Scardamalia . 1981 . How Children Cope with the Cognitive Demands of Writing . In Writing : The nature , development and teaching of written commu - nication , C . H . Frederiksen and J . F . Dominic ( Eds . ) . Vol . 2 . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 81 – 103 . [ 85 ] Lucille M . Schultz and Mike Rose . 1985 . Writer’s Block : The Cognitive Di - mension . College Composition and Communication 36 , 4 ( Dec 1985 ) , 497 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 357873 [ 86 ] Bruce Shearer . 2004 . Piece Rates , Fixed Wages and Incentives : Evidence from a Field Experiment . The Review of Economic Studies 71 , 2 ( Apr 2004 ) , 513 – 534 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 0034 - 6527 . 00294 [ 87 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2007 . Creativity Support Tools : Accelerating Discovery and Innovation . Commun . ACM 50 , 12 ( Dec 2007 ) , 20 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1323688 . 1323689 [ 88 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2020 . Human - Centered Artifcial Intelligence : Reliable , Safe & Trustworthy . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 36 , 6 ( Apr 2020 ) , 495 – 504 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2020 . 1741118 [ 89 ] Cornelia Sindermann , Haibo Yang , Jon D . Elhai , Shixin Yang , Ling Quan , Mei Li , and Christian Montag . 2021 . Acceptance and Fear of Artifcial Intelligence : associations with personality in a German and a Chinese sample . Discover Psychology 2 , 1 ( Dec 2021 ) , 8 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s44202 - 022 - 00020 - y [ 90 ] Robert A . Stebbins . 1982 . Serious Leisure : A Conceptual Statement . The Pacifc Sociological Review 25 , 2 ( Apr 1982 ) , 251 – 272 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1388726 [ 91 ] Minhyang ( Mia ) Suh , Emily Youngblom , Michael Terry , and Carrie J Cai . 2021 . AI as Social Glue : Uncovering the Roles of Deep Generative AI during Social Music Composition . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) ( May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 11 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445219 [ 92 ] Reid Swanson and Andrew S . Gordon . 2012 . Say Anything : Using Textual Case - Based Reasoning to Enable Open - Domain Interactive Storytelling . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 2 , 3 ( Sep 2012 ) , 1 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2362394 . 2362398 [ 93 ] Hugging Face team . 2019 . Write with Transformer . https : / / transformer . huggingface . co / [ 94 ] Mark Torrance and David Galbraith . 2008 . The Processing Demands of Writ - ing . In The Handbook of Writing Research ( 1 ed . ) , Charles A . MacArthur , Steve Graham , and Jill Fitzgerald ( Eds . ) . Guildford Press , New York , NY , USA . [ 95 ] Linn Van Dyne and Jon L . Pierce . 2004 . Psychological ownership and feelings of possession : three feld studies predicting employee attitudes and organiza - tional citizenship behavior : Psychological Ownership . Journal of Organizational Behavior 25 , 4 ( Jun 2004 ) , 439 – 459 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / job . 249 [ 96 ] K . " Sie " W . 2021 . Forum Roleplay . https : / / forumroleplay . com / [ 97 ] Nick Walton . 2019 . AI Dungeon 2 . https : / / aidungeon . cc / [ 98 ] Blake Williford , Matthew Runyon , Wayne Li , Julie Linsey , and Tracy Hammond . 2020 . Exploring the Potential of an Intelligent Tutoring System for Sketching Fundamentals . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) ( April 25 - 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376517 [ 99 ] Richmond Y . Wong , Deirdre K . Mulligan , Ellen Van Wyk , James Pierce , and John Chuang . 2017 . Eliciting Values Refections by Engaging Privacy Futures Using Design Workbooks . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW , Article 111 ( Dec 2017 ) , 26 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134746 [ 100 ] Anja Wölker and Thomas E Powell . 2021 . Algorithms in the newsroom ? News readers’ perceived credibility and selection of automated journalism . Journalism 22 , 1 ( Jan 2021 ) , 86 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1464884918757072 [ 101 ] Qian Yang , Justin Cranshaw , Saleema Amershi , Shamsi T . Iqbal , and Jaime Teevan . 2019 . Sketching NLP : A Case Study of Exploring the Right Things To Design with Language Intelligence . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) ( May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 12 pages pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300415 [ 102 ] John Zimmerman and Jodi Forlizzi . 2017 . Speed Dating : Providing a Menu of Possible Futures . She Ji : The Journal of Design , Economics , and Innovation 3 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 30 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sheji . 2017 . 08 . 003 1227