Social Distance Capturing and Alerting Tool Mogula Yeshasvi , Department of IT BVRIT Hyderabad College of Engineering for Women , Hyderabad , India . yeshasvireddy26 @ gmail . com Veeramachaneni Bindu , Department of IT BVRIT Hyderabad College of Engineering for Women , Hyderabad , India . bindukrishna789 @ gmail . com Subetha T , Department of IT BVRIT Hyderabad College of Engineering for Women , Hyderabad , India . subetha . t @ bvrithyderabad . edu . in Abstract — The Novel Coronavirus outbreak worldwide has made people think about the possibility of protecting themselves from infections . Various precaution measures like social distancing , maintain hand hygiene , stay away from crowded places , refrain touching eyes , mouth , and nose . The pandemic has also challenged various researchers , mathematicians , Pharmacists etc . , to dig out the solutions in this pandemic situation . Machine learning concepts and algorithms also find a great place amidst various scientists . Among all the preventive measures , social distancing plays a vital role in flattening the COVID - 19 curve . This paper proposes an effective social distancing capturing and alerting tool to detect humans if they are not maintaining the social distance . The system acquires images / videos as input and process it to detect the Region of Interest ( ROI ) and human in the image frame . Then , the pairwise distance is computed between all the identified people and depending on the distance value obtained the system will alert the people who are not maintaining the social distance . The system is evaluated for various image input acquisition techniques like image , video , and camera image / video to compute the performance of the system . Experimental results shows that the proposed system obtains a better precision of 99 . 7 % for images and 97 % recall for videos . The system can also be extended to applications like human tracking , pedestrian detection , and vehicle tracking . Keywords— Social distancing , YOLO , COVID - 19 , Object detection I . I NTRODUCTION Coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a transmittable disease instigated by the currently revealed coronavirus . The entire world , approximately 213 countries , and territories got afflicted by this virus . The progressive cases till April 2021 are around 136 million , and the fatality rate is around 2 . 94 million making the condition of the world very wretched . The World Health Organization ( WHO ) [ 3 ] prepare SARS - COV2 as a global public health emergency , and this virus is originated in Wuhan , China , in December 2019 , and WHO formally announced it as COVID - 19 . WHO has instructed the community to be accustomed to ourselves to safeguard from COVID - 19 . They have given various guidelines and preventative measures to be followed to defend ourselves from the virus . Some of them are social distancing , maintaining hand hygiene , staying away from crowded places , and refraining from touching the eyes , mouth , and nose . Out of all these precaution measures , social distancing plays a significant role in downsizing the infections . The impact of social distancing is witnessed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . They state that the ultimate practice to detain the dispersion of the COVID 19 by refraining proximate contact with an adjacent human . They also set forth that to deflate the COVID 19 curve , and the entire world must start following bodily distance . The term " Social distancing " is enforced to particular actions that the world ' s health officials commence flattening the curve of the disease spread . The sample social distancing is shown in Figure 1 . The higher officials are insisting the citizens follow the social distancing . This paper aims to develop a social distance capturing and alerting tool to detect and alert people if they are not following social distance . The proposed system targets identifying the people who can be captured through images / video streams and measuring the distance between the two humans to predict whether they follow social distancing . Fig . 1 : Sample Social distancing image [ 4 ] The paper is systematized as follows . Section II illustrates the pertinent works in the detection of social distancing . Section III depicts the proposed social distance capturing and alerting tool . Section IV project about experiential results trailed by the inference in Section V . II . RELATED WORKS Several related works are carried on object tracking and identification , and it is discussed in the below section . Various research papers discussed in [ 5 ] [ 7 ] show how human activity detection can be performed and contact tracing can be done . Narinder et al . [ 6 ] exploit the YOLO v3 object detection model to detect humans from the background , and the humans 2021 3rd International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication ( ICPSC ) | 13 – 14 May 2021 | Coimbatore 978 - 1 - 6654 - 2864 - 4 / 21 / $ 31 . 00 ©2021 IEEE 568 2021 3 r d I n t e r n a ti on a l C on f e r e n ce o n S i gn a l P r o ce ss i ng a nd C o mm un i ca ti on ( I C PS C ) | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 2864 - 4 / 20 / $ 31 . 00 © 2021 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / I C SP C 51351 . 2021 . 9451695 are tracked using the Deepsort approach using bounding boxes and the designated IDs . Pramit et al . [ 8 ] investigated the effect of social distancing while reducing the COVID - 19 curve [ 10 ] using the Stochastic Simulation Model . The results suggest that only social distancing does not flatten the curve of COVID 19 . In addition to social distancing , the number of hospital beds also has to increase to handle the COVID19 . YOLO Object detector [ 9 ] is the current prevalent technique of object detection algorithm . The recognized model identifies 80 varieties of images and videos . The main advantage of using this algorithm is its faster computation and efficiency . Dongfang et al [ 11 ] developed a social distancing detection system by considering four properties : the developed system never stores the cache data , the individuals should not be targeted , and the high - level human should not be detected . III . PROPOSED SOCIAL DISTANCE CAPTURING AND ALERTING SYSTEM The proposed system focuses on analyzing a person ' s individuality on image / video stream and determining whether they are maintaining social distance or not with the support of computer vision and deep learning innovation . The proposed architecture is shown in the Figure 2 . The proposed system follows 3 types of approaches • Human detection is performed using yolov3 . • Distance calculation is computed between every human who is visible in the frame . • Visualization of persons at varied risks such as High , Low , and not at risk . Fig . 2 : Sequential Diagram . The algorithm used in the social distance capturing tool is DNN ( Deep neural network ) . The system first detects the Region of Interest ( ROI ) from the framework and considers the points as parallel and perpendicular . Secondly , the image recovery and physique detects the people & takes center point of them . Finally , it can illustrate those near and endanger people by the layout of disparate colors . A . Camera Panorama Transformation or Camera Calibration The images are taken from an arbitrary point of view . Firstly , we have to transform the viewpoint vision to the prospect . The input framework is monocular ( since it is taken from an individual camera ) ; the most straightforward conversion approach / arrangement encompasses discovering four ROI points in the panorama view . The identified ROI points are utilized to observe social distance and calibrate them to form a rectangle connection in the view . These edge points are connected and form parallel boundaries in the real world as visualized from the top panoramic view . The result leads to the view of all persons standing on the same tenement ground plane . These visions have the ownership , and those points are appropriated uniformly vertically and horizontally . The ttransformation techniques are performed to the integrated viewpoint image . Fig . 3 : ROI & scale points discovery The above Figure 3 displays the Region of Interest ( ROI ) , with a one - time stride . The first framework plot 8 points employing mouse click action . Out of 8 points , the beginning four points depict the ROI through which social distancing is monitored , and the last three points express the perpendicular and parallel measures by which the similarity lines are formed along with the ROI . B . Detection The next stage is to keep track of pedestrians by object detection and tracking using bounding rectangles . Some Get Domain of interest from first frame View of ROI Calculate Horizontal & Upright roots from points Image Acquisition Image frame Detect human beings exist & take center point Project detected points in View Display View Find distance between points using horizontal & upright unit length Display line between people who are near and risk drawing different color 2021 3rd International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication ( ICPSC ) | 13 – 14 May 2021 | Coimbatore 569 heuristics and non - max suppression techniques are applied to avoid overfitting . C . Distance calculation The bounding box for each person is constructed . The person located in the framework is also noted to take the base point of the bounding frame . Then , we have to examine [ x , y ] location in the vision by handling transformation to the bottom midpoint of each person ' s bounding box , resulting in their area in the view . The last step is to figure out the view distance between each one or match society and scale the separation by the escalating factor in the parallel and perpendicular orders predicted from the survey and the sample distance calculation is shown in Figure 4 . Fig . 4 : Social distance indicator detecting the distance D . Working : The Software and libraries used are Python , Open CV , and NumPy . Executing the programs will give the frame where ROI and distance range are detected . The ROI and separation scale points from the first structure code are converted into perspective , and horizontal and vertical views are computed . ROI and scale lead to the collection of the first frame . The second step is to identify the walkers and construct a boundary box over each pedestrian . Finally we can draw the view of Region of Interest ( ROI ) and tie boundary packs according to possibility factor for humans in the framework and edges / boundaries between boxes according to exposure aspect between two people . Red , Yellow and Green points are denoted to classify various risks to humans in view / vision . The Red color means they are not following the social distance , and it indicates high danger , Yellow means it is low danger , and finally , Green means it is no danger . If people are not maintaining proper distance in society then the color reveal as red and yellow between the two persons , and the sample output is shown in Figure 5 . IV . METHODOLOGY The proposed system involves a two - stage model including person detection and inter - distance computation for finding the complete solution of a social distance capturing and alerting tool . The system can be cohesive and applied to all CCTV observation cameras with a remote resolution of Full - HD , with the real - time exhibition and the output is given in Figure 6 . Fig . 5 : Social distance capturing A . Person detection CCTV Camera gathers the audio - visual input and transmits them to the Deep Neural Network model . The result of this model will detect the people in the unit with a single bounding box . The objective of this model is to detect humans by handling various issues like handling cloth differences , view - invariant , position invariant , and occlusion . CNN - based models are connected layer with the classification frames , and subsequently , they can only agree to take fixed dimensions of images as an input which can cause two types of problems . The first issue is we cannot take low - resolution images , and next , detecting the small objects would be more difficult . The first problem is tackled by utilizing YOLO with no Fully Convolutional Networks ( FCNs ) thereby , accepting any surveillance input image sizes and resolutions . The second issue is handled by performing a pyramid technique to improve the approachable field and extract images at different scales . B . Inter - Distance Computation The distance between each human is calculated using Stereo - vision . This approach is not effective when the object is not near . It should be applied in all community spaces using surveillance . Thus , a single view solution is required . The projection of 3 - D into a 2 - D perception image pixels influences impractical pixel length among the objects called the perception effect , in which we can not distinguish the uniform distribution of the image distances in the complete image . For example , parallel lines are interconnected at the prospect and beyond the camera appear much shorter than those near the camera . V . EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS The proposed system is evaluated using three kinds of input such as image , video , and camera . Since the system is pretrained with YOLO ( You Only Look Once ) deep learning 2021 3rd International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication ( ICPSC ) | 13 – 14 May 2021 | Coimbatore 570 algorithm , there is no need for a separate dataset to detect humans in the frame . Some open images are added and trained to improve the detection and localization of humans in the frame . The dataset taken for evaluation holds a good variety of images , such as clothing variants , view variants , and position variations . The system is evaluated using the performance measures such as precision , recall , F - score as given in the equation 1 , 2 , and 3 . Fig . 6 : Detecting the human beings position and tracking the distance . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) The values are computed and noted down in Table 1 using the above equations and plotted in the chart , and it is given in Figure 7 . Experimental results show that the proposed social distance capturing and alerting tool achieves a precision of 99 . 7 % in images , 99 . 3 % in the video , and 84 . 8 % for camera images / video . The results show there is better precision obtained for the image in comparison to video and camera . In addition to precision , recall values also remain low for camera images . F - score , which is the harmonic mean , is better for images and video when compared to Camera input images . T ABLE 1 : P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON Method Precision Recall F - Score Image 99 . 7 % 96 . 5 % 98 . 07 Video 99 . 3 % 97 . 0 % 98 . 13 Camera 84 . 8 % 68 . 3 % 75 . 66 Fig . 7 : Performance Comparison Chart VI . CONCLUSION This paper develops a social distance capturing and alerting tool to calculate the distance between the two humans and alert them when they did not maintain the proper distance . The model presents a methodology to automate monitoring the people carefully to identify and alert them if they did not follow the social dissociate . The social distance calculation can be performed by object discovery , locating each individual in real - time through bounding boxes . The peoples are grouped by keeping in view of panoramic view and measures the closeness property . The number of breaching violations is computed by identifying the clusters formed , and the breach index term is calculated as the proportion of the number of humans identified to the number of clusters . The proposed system works very efficiently and can identify the social distance among the people and provokes an alert by monitoring the people . In the future , we have planned to increase the system ' s performance by handling various issues such as view - invariant , occlusion , etc . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Dietrich , Alexander M . , Keith Kuester , Gernot J . Muller , & Raphael S . Schoenle ( 2020 ) News and Uncertainty about COVID - 19 : Survey Evidence and Short - Run Economic Impact , Becker Friedman Institute for Economic White Paper [ 2 ] 2 . Qiu , J . , Shen , B . , Zhao , M . , Wang , Z . , Xie , B . , & Xu , Y . ( 2020 ) . A nationwide survey of psychological distress among Chinese people in the COVID - 19 epidemic : implications and policy recommendations . General psychiatry , 33 ( 2 ) , e100213 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / gpsych - 2020 - 100213 [ 3 ] 3 . Cucinotta , D . , & Vanelli , M . ( 2020 ) . WHO Declares COVID - 19 a Pandemic . Acta bio - medica : Atenei Parmensis , 91 ( 1 ) , 157 – 160 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 23750 / abm . v91i1 . 9397 [ 4 ] https : / / favtutor . com / blog - details / social - distancing - tool - using - tensorflow [ 5 ] Subetha , T . , & Chitrakala , S . ( 2016 , February ) . A survey on human activity recognition from videos . In 2016 International Conference on Information Communication and Embedded Systems ( ICICES ) ( pp . 1 - 7 ) . IEEE . [ 6 ] Punn , N . S . , Sonbhadra , S . K . , & Agarwal , S . ( 2020 ) . Monitoring COVID - 19 social distancing with person detection and tracking via fine - tuned YOLO v3 and Deepsort techniques . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2005 . 01385 . 2021 3rd International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication ( ICPSC ) | 13 – 14 May 2021 | Coimbatore 571 [ 7 ] Gaeta , G . ( 2020 ) . Social distancing versus early detection and contacts tracing in epidemic management . Chaos , Solitons & Fractals , 140 , 110074 . [ 8 ] Ghosh , P . , Basheer , S . , Paul , S . , Chakrabarti , P . , & Sarkar , J . ( 2020 ) . Increased detection coupled with social distancing and health capacity planning reduce the burden of COVID - 19 cases and fatalities : A proof of concept study using a stochastic computational simulation model . medRxiv . [ 9 ] YOLO object detection with OpenCV . ( URL - https : / / www . pyimagesearch . com / 2018 / 11 / 12 / yolo - object - detection - with - opencv / ) [ 10 ] Wu , J . , Tang , B . , Bragazzi , N . L . , Nah , K . , & McCarthy , Z . ( 2020 ) . Quantifying the role of social distancing , personal protection and case detection in mitigating COVID - 19 outbreak in Ontario , Canada . Journal of mathematics in industry , 10 , 1 - 12 . [ 11 ] Yang , D . , Yurtsever , E . , Renganathan , V . , Redmill , K . A . , & Özgüner , Ü . ( 2020 ) . A Vision - based Social Distance and Critical Density Detection System for COVID - 19 . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2007 . 03578 . 2021 3rd International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication ( ICPSC ) | 13 – 14 May 2021 | Coimbatore 572