U N E S C O – E O L S S S A M P L E C H A P T E R S PSYCHOLOGY – Vol . I - Cognitive Psychology - P . Lemaire © Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems ( EOLSS ) COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY P . Lemaire Université de Provence and CNRS , Marseille , France Keywords : cognition , decision making , language processing , memory , problem solving , reasoning Contents 1 . Introduction 2 . Memory 2 . 1 . Several Types of Memory 2 . 1 . 1 . Working Memory 2 . 1 . 2 . Long - Term Memory 2 . 2 . Main Determinants of Memory Performance 2 . 2 . 1 . Effects of Material Characteristics 2 . 2 . 2 . Effects of Memory Strategies 2 . 2 . 3 . Effects of Information Organization 2 . 2 . 4 . Individual Differences 3 . High - level Cognitive Activities 3 . 1 . Definition and Illustration of High - Level Cognitive Activities 3 . 1 . 1 . Reasoning 3 . 1 . 2 . Decision Making 3 . 1 . 3 . Problem Solving 3 . 2 . Main Determinants of People’s High - Level Cognitive Performance 3 . 2 . 1 . Effects of Material Characteristics 3 . 2 . 2 . Effects of Cognitive Strategies 3 . 2 . 3 . Individual Differences 4 . Language Processing 4 . 1 . Main Determinants of Language Performance 4 . 1 . 1 . Effects of Material Characteristics 4 . 1 . 2 . Effects of Language Processing Strategies 4 . 1 . 3 . Individual Differences 5 . Conclusion Glossary Bibliography Biographical Sketch Summary This article presents an overview of cognitive psychology and how cognitive psychologists investigate human cognition . In particular , it summarizes what we know of different cognitive activities , such as memory , high - level cognitive activities ( reasoning , decision making , and problem solving ) , and language . The main determinants of people’s performance in these activities are briefly presented and discussed . Finally , future directions considering what we shall learn from imaging techniques are proposed . U N E S C O – E O L S S S A M P L E C H A P T E R S PSYCHOLOGY – Vol . I - Cognitive Psychology - P . Lemaire © Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems ( EOLSS ) 1 . Introduction Cognitive psychologists want to understand ( human and animal ) cognition . Cognition , a modern term for “intelligence , ” is the life function accomplished by the cognitive system ( i . e . the mind ) and is involved in many everyday and formal activities . Such activities include remembering a telephone number for a short while , recognizing a friend in a crowd , learning a new set of knowledge at school , making personal and social decisions , understanding the implications of what people say to us , solving formal ( e . g . mathematical ) and informal ( e . g . personal ) problems , speaking and writing language material , and understanding what other people say . Put more formally , cognition involves a wide variety of domains , such as perception , pattern recognition , memory , reasoning , decision making , problem solving , and language processing . Within as well as above and beyond each cognitive domain , research aims at understanding precisely ( a ) by what mental processes and representations people accomplish cognitive tasks and ( b ) what are the general constraints ( e . g . memory limitations ) on cognitive functioning . To understand cognitive processes and mental representations involved in cognition , psychologists collect data ( via experiments or other forms of observations ) and build theoretical models . Experiments enable psychologists to determine what factors affect people’s cognitive performance , as measured by the time taken to accomplish a task or how accurate people are when they solve problems or try to store information in memory . To illustrate , suppose psychologists want to determine the processes involved in solving simple arithmetic problems . They can run an experiment in which they ask participants to solve a series of addition problems ( e . g . 8 + 7 = ? ) . Solution latencies and percent errors as a function of the type of problems will be good indicators of how participants solve these problems . For example , suppose the issue is to determine whether people count from the larger addend or retrieve the solution directly from memory . The hypothesis that people use counting predicts that solution latencies should vary across problems as a function of the smaller operand ( i . e . in 8 + 4 , 4 is the smaller operand ) , so that people should solve 8 + 4 faster than 8 + 5 , which they should solve faster than 8 + 6 . The linear relationship between size of the smaller operand and solution latencies is thus to be examined . If the best predictor of solution latencies is the smaller addend , it is reasonable to assume that people count . However , suppose the best predictor of solution latencies is the size of the correct sum . This would falsify the counting model and make the retrieval model ( i . e . people access the solution directly in long - term memory ) more plausible . Relationships between different kinds of variables ( like problem or participant characteristics ) and different behavioral indices ( like latencies or percent errors ) are often fruitfully used in cognitive psychology to understand how people accomplish cognitive tasks . This will be illustrated in this article when considering memory , high - level cognitive activities , and language processing . For each of these , we first provide generic definitions and then an overview of what determines people’s cognitive performance . U N E S C O – E O L S S S A M P L E C H A P T E R S PSYCHOLOGY – Vol . I - Cognitive Psychology - P . Lemaire © Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems ( EOLSS ) 2 . Memory Memory is fundamental for our survival . With no memory , it is impossible to know who we are and who the people around us are , where food is , how to get back home , and so on . Psychologists have always wondered what the fundamental characteristics ( i . e . capacities and mechanisms ) of memory are . To find out , they run experiments and build theoretical models to understand how human memory works , that is how we store ( and retrieve ) information in ( and from ) memory , how information is represented and organized in memory , how many memory systems there are , and what are the causes of forgetting . Psychologists have discovered that human memory involves a set of different types of memory , what the facilitative factors of memory performance are , and how information is organized in ( and retrieved from ) long - term memory . We first present the distinction made by psychologists among several types of memory and then the main determinants of memory performance . 2 . 1 . Several Types of Memory 2 . 1 . 1 . Working Memory There are two memory systems : working memory and long - term memory . Working memory refers to the temporary storage and processing of information in a variety of cognitive tasks . Working - memory capacity is limited ( i . e . people can store 7 ± 2 elements for about 15 seconds if they do not mentally rehearse the material ) . That is , if I show you 25 words with one word every second , you are going to memorize 7 ± 2 words ; if I show you 25 pictures , you are going to remember 7 ± 2 of them ; and if I show you 25 digits , you may recall 7 ± 2 of them . This memory capacity can be circumvented to some extent if we use strategies like mental rehearsal or chunking . Chunking consists of grouping material , such as when words are grouped into sentences or digits into three - digit numbers . This working - memory limit constrains people’s performance in a wide variety of cognitive tasks . Working memory is subdivided into ( at least ) three components : The central executive monitors the allocation of attentional resources during cognitive activities , the phonological - articulatory loop stores and manipulates speech - based material ( such as when we have a conversation with friends ) , and the visuo - spatial sketchpad is responsible for storage and manipulation of visuo - spatial material ( such as when we try to find our way to visit friends ) . 2 . 1 . 2 . Long - Term Memory Long - term memory ( LTM ) refers to the ( almost permanent ) storage of information and retrieval of information . It has also been subdivided into subsystems . Classically , psychologists distinguish between semantic memory ( in which general knowledge is stored ) and episodic memory ( in which episodes or personal events are stored ) . Another distinction is between explicit ( in which material is consciously stored and retrieved ) and implicit memories ( for which conscious awareness is not necessary during storage U N E S C O – E O L S S S A M P L E C H A P T E R S PSYCHOLOGY – Vol . I - Cognitive Psychology - P . Lemaire © Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems ( EOLSS ) or retrieval ) . Whether working - and long - term memories are fractionated or involve different kinds of processes in different kinds of tasks is still a matter of debate in the memory domain . To investigate different types of LTM , psychologists have devised several kinds of tasks . A typical experiment in explicit and implicit memory research involves two phases , one storage phase ( which is the same for both explicit and implicit memory ) and one recall phase ( which is different for both types of memory ) . During the storage phase , psychologists ask participants to learn some material ( e . g . lists of words , sentences , pictures , objects ) . To learn this material , individuals do either whatever they want ( e . g . they can mentally rehearse material or do mental images ) or what the experimenter asks them to do ( e . g . participants are required to make mental images with each word of the to - be - remembered list ) . In the second phase of an explicit memory task , participants are explicitly asked to recall the material . To do this recall , participants are asked to say all the words they remember either in whatever order they want ( i . e . free recall ) or in the same order they studied ( serial recall ) . Recall can be cued recall ( i . e . people are given a cue such as the name of the category of the to - be - recalled word ) or not ( i . e . people are just asked to recall what they just learned ) . People’s performance is investigated as a function of a number of factors , such as list length , word frequency , or whether people were asked to do some special mental activity ( e . g . to make mental images while storing material ) . Thousands of memory experiments have shown that memory performance is improved when people learn concrete material ( as compared with abstract material ) , process information as deeply as possible ( e . g . doing mental images with to - be - remembered material ) , create mental associations between newly - processed information and previously ( familiar ) stored information , or are very motivated or under high pressures to learn new material . 2 . 2 . Main Determinants of Memory Performance 2 . 2 . 1 . Effects of Material Characteristics Some information is easier to store in memory than other information . For example , when people’s memory is tested through asking them to store a list of words to remember , words that refer to concrete objects ( e . g . table ) are easier to remember than words that refer to abstract entities ( e . g . justice ) either because these words are more common or because people can more easily make mental images with them . Material organization is another example of material characteristics that affect memory performance . Suppose participants in a memory experiment are asked to memorize the following list of words : “apple , carrot , leeks , peach , pear , banana , green beans , potato , cranberries , orange , broccoli , cabbage , ” or to memorize the same list but in the following order : “apple , carrot , peach , pear , banana , cranberries , orange , leeks , green beans , potato , broccoli , cabbage . ” It will be easier to remember the second list than the first , because it is categorically organized ( all fruits are stored and recalled together and all vegetables are grouped together ) . U N E S C O – E O L S S S A M P L E C H A P T E R S PSYCHOLOGY – Vol . I - Cognitive Psychology - P . Lemaire © Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems ( EOLSS ) 2 . 2 . 2 . Effects of Memory Strategies Memory strategies refer to how people try to encode , store , and retrieve information in memory . Examples of such strategies include mentally rehearsing the material , processing the material as deeply as possible ( i . e . building mental images and establishing mental links between new and old material , hierarchically reorganizing the material ) , finding good cues . Some strategies are much more efficient than others . For example , in a 1974 experiment Eysenck gave four groups of people the same lists of 24 words each to learn . The first group was asked to count the number of letters in each word ( e . g . the word “table” has 5 letters ) . The second group was asked to provide a word with the same rime as the to - be - learned word ( e . g . “plate” and “slate” have the same rime ) . In the third group , participants were asked to provide a characteristic for each word ( e . g . “sweet” for “warm” ) . Finally , the fourth group had to build a mental image of each word of the list . People had better performance in the third and fourth groups than in the first two groups , because they processed information more deeply ( i . e . they had to process the meaning of each word ) . 2 . 2 . 3 . Effects of Information Organization How information is organized in memory has proved as crucial in memory performance as mental activities during both storage and encoding of information . In memory , information is associatively organized . Associative networks include nodes representing concepts and links between nodes for interrelated concepts ( see illustrative example in Figure 1 ) . Links are of different strengths and retrieval of a concept operates through the activation of one node . Activation spreads through the associative network . Changes in node strengths characterize part of the learning process . Figure 1 . Example of associative networks U N E S C O – E O L S S S A M P L E C H A P T E R S PSYCHOLOGY – Vol . I - Cognitive Psychology - P . Lemaire © Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems ( EOLSS ) - - - TO ACCESS ALL THE 11 PAGES OF THIS CHAPTER , Visit : http : / / www . eolss . net / Eolss - sampleAllChapter . aspx Bibliography Anderson J . R . and Lebiere C . ( 1998 ) . The Atomic Components of Thought , 490 pp . Mahwah , N . J . : Lawrence Erlbaum . [ This book is a collection of theoretical papers showing the kind of theory cognitive psychologists are able to build to account for human cognitive performance in a wide variety of cognitive activities . ] Best J . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive Psychology , 5th edn . , 524 pp . New York : West . [ This is a good textbook in cognitive psychology , presenting in great detail what we know about human cognition . ] Harley T . A . ( 2001 ) . The Psychology of Language . From Data to Theory , 2nd edn . , 528 pp . Hove , U . K . : Psychology . [ This book provides a good overview of what we know regarding language processing . ] Lemaire P . ( 1999 ) . Psychologie Cognitive . Bruxelles : De Boeck Université . [ in French . ] [ A cognitive psychology textbook . ] Newell A . ( 1990 ) . Unified Theories of Cognition ( The William James Lectures ; 1987 ) , 549 pp . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . [ Present a theoretically - oriented overview of human cognition and detailed models of cognitive activities . ] Biographical Sketch Patrick Lemaire started his career as a researcher at the Laboratoire de psychologie cognitive ( CNRS ) in Marseille , France , after completing postdoctoral studies at Carnegie Mellon University with R . S . Siegler . He continues to conduct research in this laboratory and is also professor of psychology at the Université de Provence in Marseille , France . Besides his duties as a professor and researcher , he is also an active member in various professional and scientific societies : Psychonomic Society , Society for Research in Child Development , American Psychological Association , American Psychological Society , European Society for Cognitive Psychology , and the Société Française de Psychologie . Professor Lemaire is author of two books and some 30 articles on cognition , numeric cognition , and cognitive development and aging .