Single - Molecule Force Spectroscopy and Imaging of the Vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala Interaction Yann Gilbert , † Marie Deghorain , ‡ Ling Wang , § Bing Xu , § Philipp D . Pollheimer , | Hermann J . Gruber , | Jeff Errington , ^ Bernard Hallet , ‡ Xavier Haulot , † Claire Verbelen , † Pascal Hols , ‡ and Yves F . Dufreˆne * , † Unite ´ de Chimie des Interfaces , Uni V ersite ´ catholique de Lou V ain , Croix du Sud 2 / 18 , B - 1348 Lou V ain - la - Neu V e , Belgium , Unite ´ de Ge ´ ne ´ tique , Institut des Sciences de la Vie , Uni V ersite ´ catholique de Lou V ain , Croix du Sud 5 / 6 , B - 1348 Lou V ain - la - Neu V e , Belgium , Department of Chemistry , Hong Kong Uni V ersity of Science & Technology , Hong Kong , Institute for Biophysics , Johannes Kepler Uni V ersity of Linz , Altenbergerstr . 69 , A - 4040 Linz , Austria , and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences , The Medical School , Uni V ersity of Newcastle , Newcastle NE2 4HH , United Kingdom ReceivedJanuary12 , 2007 ; RevisedManuscriptReceivedFebruary10 , 2007 ABSTRACT The clinically important vancomycin antibiotic inhibits the growth of pathogens such as Staphylococcusaureusby blocking cell wall synthesis through specific recognition of nascent peptidoglycan terminating in D - Ala - D - Ala . Here , we demonstrate the ability of single - molecule atomic force microscopy with antibiotic - modified tips to measure the specific binding forces of vancomycin and to map individual ligands on living bacteria . The single - molecule approach presented here provides new opportunities for understanding the binding mechanisms of antibiotics and for exploring the architecture of bacterial cell walls . Glycopeptide antibiotics of the vancomycin group are of crucial clinical importance in the treatment of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus . Vancomycin binds with high affinity and specificity to the terminal D - Ala - D - Ala of peptidoglycan precursors , thereby preventing their incorpora - tion into the bacterial cell wall and leading eventually to cell lysis . 1 - 5 Besides being used in the treatment of disease , vancomycin molecules represent an important research tool . In particular , they can be used as a highly sensitive molecular probe to label peptidoglycan , a major component of bacterial cell walls which maintains cell shape and integrity , thereby providing novel insights into the growth and assembly of the cell walls . 6 During the past decades , key insights into the structural biology of molecular recognition by vanco - mycin have been gained using NMR , X - ray crystallography , computational analysis , kinetic and thermodynamic studies , and new semisynthetic derivatives . 5 Yet , progress in under - standing the molecular forces that control the vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala interaction has been hampered by the lack of ultrasensitive force probes . In the past years , the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) has emerged has a powerful tool to measure the minute forces within or between single biomolecules . 7 - 14 Besides its piconewton force sensitivity , AFM also offers nanometer positional accuracy , thereby allowing researchers to map the distribution of single recognition sites on cell surfaces . These single - molecule force spectroscopy analyses imply modifying the AFM tip with specific molecules , bringing the tip in contact with the sample and then pulling it away in order to measure the receptor - ligand interaction forces . 14 So far , the use of antibiotic - modified tips in molecular recognition studies has never been reported . Here , we have demonstrated the ability of AFM with vancomycin tips to measure the forces and the dynamics of the vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala interaction and to image individual D - Ala - D - Ala sites on the division septum of living Lactococcus lactis bacteria . The AFM results were supported by the use of a genetically engineered mutant lacking D - Ala - D - Ala sites and by imaging peptidoglycan insertion sites with fluorescent vancomycin . We first used single - molecule force spectroscopy to explore the vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala binding forces ( Figure * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : dufrene @ cifa . ucl . ac . be . Phone : ( 32 ) 10 47 36 00 . † Unite´ de Chimie des Interfaces , Universite´ catholique de Louvain . ‡ Unite´ de Ge´ne´tique , Institut des Sciences de la Vie , Universite´ catholique de Louvain . § Hong Kong University of Science & Technology . | Johannes Kepler University of Linz . ^ University of Newcastle . NANO LETTERS xxxx Vol . 0 , No . 0 A 10 . 1021 / nl0700853 CCC : $ 37 . 00 © xxxx American Chemical Society PAGE EST : 5 . 3 Published on Web 02 / 23 / 2007 1 ) . To this end , we coupled vancomycin molecules to gold - coated AFM tips via strong Au - S bonds . 15 Gold supports treated in parallel with the tips were analyzed using both X - ray photoelectron spectroscopy ( surface chemical com - position ) and AFM imaging ( surface morphology ) to validate the quality of the surface modification . The data ( not shown ) confirmed the presence of a (cid:24) 1 nm thick layer of vanco - mycin molecules strongly bond to the gold surface . D - Ala - D - Ala - D - Ala peptides were covalently immobilized onto flat supports modified with mixed self - assembled monolayers ( SAMs ) terminated with oligo ( ethylene glycol ) ( OEG ) and OEG propionic acid ( Figure 1A ) . This surface chemistry allows peptides to be uniformly oriented on the surface at low density , thus ensuring single - molecule recognition . Using this strategy , we recorded force - distance curves between vancomycin tips and D - Ala - D - Ala supports ( Figure 1B ) . A significant fraction of the retraction curves displayed single adhesion forces , the remaining measurements exhibit - ing no adhesion . The corresponding adhesion force histogram displayed a single maximum with a mean magnitude of 98 ( 33 pN ( n ) 978 ) . We suggest that the measured binding forces reflect the rupture of single vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala complexes for the following reasons . First , supports were modified with a mixed SAM containing only 10 % of Figure 1 . Single - molecule force spectroscopy of the vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala interaction . ( A ) Surface chemistry for preparing AFM tips and supports . Gold tips are functionalized with bis ( vancomycin ) cystamide while gold supports terminated with OEG and OEG propionic acid groups are covalently reacted with D - Ala - D - Ala - D - Ala peptides . ( B ) Representative force curve and adhesion force histogram ( n ) 978 ) obtained in PBS between a vancomycin tip and a D - Ala - D - Ala support , using approach and retraction speeds of 1000 nm / s and an interaction time of 500 ms . Similar data were obtained using more than 10 different tips and independent supports . ( C ) Control experiment showing a dramatic reduction of adhesion frequency when the force measurements are performed in the presence of free D - Ala - D - Ala - D - Ala peptides ( 0 . 1 mg / mL ) . ( D ) Plot of the adhesion force as a function of the logarithm of the loading rate applied during retraction , while keeping constant the interaction time ( 500 ms ) and the approach speed ( 1000 nm / s ) . Data represent the mean of 100 measurements ( the standard error of the mean ( SEM ) is 5 pN ; not visible on the graph ) . ( E ) Plot of the adhesion frequency as a function of the interaction time , measured at a constant approach and retraction speed of 1000 nm / s . Data represent the mean of 100 measurements ( the SEM is 1 . 5 pN ; not visible on the graph ) . B NanoLett . propionic acid groups to make sure that a low surface density of peptides is exposed , thus favoring the detection of single monomeric interactions . At lower peptide density , we noted a dramatic reduction of adhesion frequency without any modification of the mean adhesion force , while at larger density much stronger adhesion forces were often detected suggesting multiple interactions were measured ( data not shown ) . Second , when force curves were recorded in a 0 . 4 mM solution of D - Ala - D - Ala - D - Ala ( Figure 1C ) , a dramatic reduction of adhesion frequency was observed ( from 90 % to 15 % ) , demonstrating that the measured adhesion forces originate from specific vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala interactions . Theoretical and experimental studies have shown that receptor - ligand binding forces depend on the loading rate , that is , the rate at which the force is applied to the complex . 16 - 19 To demonstrate whether this applies to van - comycin , we explored the dynamics of the unbinding process by recording force curves while varying the loading rate ( Figure 1D ) . The mean adhesion force ( F ) increased linearly with the logarithm of the loading rate ( r ) , as observed for other receptor - ligand systems . 17 - 19 From these dynamic force spectroscopy data , the length scale of the energy barrier , x (cid:226) , was assessed from the slope f (cid:226) of the F vs ln ( r ) plot and found to be (cid:24) 0 . 36 nm , while extrapolation to zero forces yielded the kinetic off - rate constant of dissociation at zero force : k off ) r F ) 0 x (cid:226) / k B T ) 2 (cid:2) 10 - 3 s - 1 . Besides changing the loading rate , we also varied the interaction time while keeping the loading rate ( or pulling speed ) constant ( Figure 1E ) . Interestingly , we found that the adhesion frequency increased exponentially with contact time to reach a constant value . This time dependency agrees well with earlier kinetic studies , which revealed that the associa - tion rate in aqueous solution is much too slow to reflect a diffusion - controlled association mechanism . 20 Such a slow binding process may actually reflect slow rearrangement of the initial complex and / or of the solvent molecules . From these data , we found the interaction time needed for half - maximal probability of binding , t 0 . 5 , to be 0 . 25 s . This allowed us to estimate the association rate constant , k on ) t 0 . 5 - 1 N A V eff ) 5 M - 1 s - 1 , where V eff is the effective volume explored by the tip - tethered vancomycin , approximated here to a half - sphere of 1 nm radius . 9 Considering the above rate constant values , we then estimated the equilibrium dissocia - tion constant : K D ) k off / k on ) 0 . 4 mM . This is much larger than the value determined for the vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala pair in solution , 21 a finding that may reflect the influence of steric restrictions on the recognition process . Indeed , it is likely that the short spacer used here did not provide maximal motional freedom to the attached vancomycin molecules . Nevertheless , the above data indicate that AFM is a valuable tool to assess the rate constants of vancomycin on solid surfaces , which was not possible using SPR owing to mass transport limitations . 22 Next we used vancomycin tips to map the distribution of single D - Ala - D - Ala ligands on living bacteria , with a lateral resolution of (cid:24) 20 nm ( Figure 2 ) . We chose Lactococcus lactis as a model for Gram - positive cocci in view of its great biotechnological and biomedical relevance 23 and because its cell wall peptidoglycan was recently shown to contain D - Ala - D - Ala termini . 24 Bacteria were immobilized in porous polymer membranes , a method allowing AFM analysis of living cells while preserving their native macromolecular architecture . 25 Topographic images obtained for dividing cells revealed a smooth and elongated cell morphology as well as a well - defined division septum ( Figure 2A ) . Furthermore , we observed ringlike structures at a certain distance from the septum . These annular structures , presumably formed by an outgrowth of the cell wall , are reminiscent of so - called “equatorial rings” in streptococci , which mark the position of the division site , duplicate , and then separate to form the edges of the newly synthesized peptidoglycan zone during cell elongation . 26 Force curves recorded in the septum region with vanco - mycin tips showed single unbinding events in 12 % of the cases ( Figure 2B , 2C ) . As opposed to D - Ala - D - Ala supports , cells showed elongation forces with rupture lengths of about 10 - 20 nm reflecting stretching of flexible - cell surface macromolecules ( Figure 2C ) . The adhesion force histogram ( n ) 1536 ) revealed a bimodal distribution of adhesion forces with maxima at 83 ( 22 pN and 150 ( 16 pN ( Figure 2C ) . The (cid:24) 83 pN peak was close to the (cid:24) 98 pN value obtained for the D - Ala - D - Ala supports , suggesting this peak reflects the detection of single D - Ala - D - Ala sites on the bacterial surface . The slightly smaller value observed on cells may result from a reduction of the actual loading rate ascribed to the higher flexibility of the ligands . The (cid:24) 150 pN peak may reflect cooperative binding which is well - documented for vancomycin . 5 , 27 Clearly , it would be most interesting in future research to explore the dimerization and cooperative interac - tion of vancomycin , for example , by using different tip surface chemistries , since these phenomena are known to enhance the drug affinity for bacterial cell walls . 28 , 29 Notably , affinity maps demonstrated that binding sites were essentially located in the septum region , and more specifically on the equatorial rings ( Figure 2B ) , suggesting that newly formed peptidoglycan was inserted in these regions . This finding is consistent with recent immunofluo - rescence microscopy observations on Streptococcus pneu - moniae , showing that penicillin - binding proteins that syn - thesize peptidoglycan are localized at duplicated equatorial rings . 26 We confirmed the detection of D - Ala - D - Ala sites on cell surfaces by constructing a mutant of L . lactis that produces peptidoglycan precursors ending by D - Ala - D - Lac instead of D - Ala - D - Ala . We found that both the affinity maps and force histograms recorded in the septum region showed a dramatic reduction of adhesion frequency ( Figures 2D - F ) , supporting the notion that D - Ala - D - Ala ligands were probed on the wild - type strain . As a complementary approach to our single - molecule study , we used fluorescence microscopy with a fluorescent vancomycin probe to visualize the sites of peptidoglycan insertion into the entire cell wall of L . lactis ( Figure 3 ) . In agreement with AFM , fluorescence staining of the wild - type strain was found around the septum and at the poles of the daughter cells at a later stage of the cell cycle , while no fluorescent labeling was detected for the D - Ala - D - Lac mutant NanoLett . C strain . Accordingly , the above data show that AFM with vancomycin tips is a complementary approach to fluorescent vancomycin to explore the architecture and assembly process of peptidoglycan during the cell cycle of Gram - positive bacteria . While fluorescence microscopy generates micros - cale images allowing the localization of peptidoglycan in the entire cell wall , AFM provides nanoscale affinity maps revealing the distribution of single peptidoglycan molecules on the outermost cell surface . In summary , our data demonstrate that AFM with antibiotic - modified tips is a valuable tool for exploring the forces and the dynamics of antibiotic - ligand interactions . Particularly , Figure 2 . Imaging individual D - Ala - D - Ala sites on living bacteria . ( A ) AFM image showing a single wild - type Lactococcus lactis cell during the course of the division process . The cell is located at the center of the image and trapped into a porous polymer membrane for noninvasive , in - situ imaging . This elongated , exponentially growing cell shows a well - defined division septum as well as a ringlike structure expected to be rich in nascent peptidoglycan ( white box ) . ( B , C ) Affinity map ( gray scale : 100 pN ) , adhesion force histogram ( n ) 1536 ) , and representative force curves recorded with a vancomycin tip on the septum region ( highlighted by the white box in panel A ) , using constant retraction speed ( 1000 nm / s ) and interaction time ( 500 ms ) . ( D - F ) Control experiment using a L . lactis mutant expressing peptidoglycan with D - Ala - D - Lac instead of D - Ala - D - Ala : ( D ) AFM image of a single dividing cell ; ( E , F ) affinity map ( gray scale : 100 pN ) , adhesion force histogram , and representative force curve recorded with a vancomycin tip on the septum region , using constant retraction speed ( 1000 nm / s ) and interaction time ( 500 ms ) . Figure 3 . Staining of D - Ala - D - Ala sites of nascent cell - wall peptidoglycan using fluorescent vancomycin . ( A ) Fluorescence image ( left ) and corresponding phase contrast image ( right ) of wild - type L . lactis cells . Schemes 1 to 3 are suggested representations of the cell - wall organization at the different division stages . Following duplication of the initial equatorial ring formed by an outgrowth of the cell wall , the two resulting rings are progressively separated until the two daughter cells ultimately divide ( septation stage ) . Arrowheads indicate brighter fluorescence spots that appear at the division site , duplicate , and separate ( move apart ) at a later stage of cell division , likely corresponding to the duplicated equatorial ring . ( B ) Fluorescence image ( left ) and corresponding phase contrast image ( right ) of L . lactis mutant cells expressing peptidoglycan precursors ending by D - Ala - D - Lac instead of D - Ala - D - Ala groups . For the different cell cycle stages , no significant fluorescence labeling was observed . The contrast of the fluorescence images was increased to visualize the position of the cell in the field . Scale bars ) 1 (cid:237) m . D NanoLett . this single - molecule approach allows researchers to assess association and dissociation rate constants that are not accessible using SPR because of mass transport limitations . In addition , affinity imaging with antibiotic tips is shown to be a complementary approach to fluorescence microscopy for studying the architecture and assembly process of peptidoglycan in Gram - positive bacteria . Materials and Methods . The L . lactis wild - type strain used in this study was NZ3900 . 30 The D - Ala - D - Lac - producing mutant MD003 was an isogenic derivative of NZ3900 that was obtained by mutating the endogenous D - Ala - D - Ala ligase and expressing the D - Ala - D - Lac - ended peptidoglycan precur - sor biosynthesis genes from Lactobacillus plantarum , an intrinsically resistant Gram - positive bacterium ( unpublished data ) . The L . lactis wild type and MD003 mutant strains were cultured at 28 (cid:176) C in M17 medium ( DIFCO ) added with glucose 0 . 5 % . For MD003 , growth medium was supple - mented with 15 mM of D - lactate as a substrate for D - Ala - D - Lac peptidoglycan precursor synthesis . AFM tips and supports were functionalized with vanco - mycin molecules and D - Ala - D - Ala - D - Ala peptides as follows . AFM cantilevers and silicon wafers ( Siltronix , France ) were coated using electron beam thermal evaporation with a 5 - nm thick Cr layer followed by a 30 - nm thick Au layer . Before use , the gold - coated surfaces were cleaned for 5 min by UV / ozone treatment ( Jelight Co . , Irvine , CA ) , rinsed with ethanol , and dried with a gentle nitrogen flow . Gold tips were immersed overnight in an aqueous solution containing 0 . 05 mM bis ( vancomycin ) cystamide ( for details about the synthesis of this compound , see ref 21 ) , rinsed three times with deionized water , and then immediately used . Gold supports were immersed for 36 h in an ethanol solution containing a 20 (cid:237) M mixture ( 90 : 10 ; mol / mol ) of alkanethiols terminated with OEG and OEG propionic acid , respectively ( Figure 1A ) . For synthesis of the former , azido - OEG ( Polypure , Oslo , Norway ) was reduced with triphenylphos - phine and the resulting amine was acylated with 16 - ( acetylsulfanyl ) - hexadecanoic acid 31 and the thioester was cleaved with K - t - butoxide in methanol . For synthesis of the latter , azido - OEG was alkylated with t - butyl acrylate in toluene / K - t - butoxide , the butyl ester was cleaved with trifluoroacetic acid / dichloromethane , the azide was reduced with zink / acetic acid , the resulting amino group was reacted with the N - succinimidyl ester of 16 - ( acetylsulfanyl ) - hexa - decanoic acid , and the thioester was cleaved as above . All compounds were purified on Sephadex LH20 in methanol . After the supports were rinsed with ethanol , sonication was briefly applied to remove alkanethiol aggregates that may be adsorbed . The supports were immersed for 30 min into a PBS solution containing 20 g / l N - hydroxysuccinimide ( NHS ) ( Aldrich ) and 50 g / l 1 - ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl ) - carbodiimide ( EDC ) ( Sigma ) , rinsed with PBS , incubated with 0 . 01 mg / l D - Ala - D - Ala - D - Ala ( Sigma ) in PBS for 3 h , further rinsed , and then immediately used . AFM contact mode images and force - distance curves were obtained using a Nanoscope IV Multimode AFM ( Veeco Metrology Group , Santa Barbara , CA ) . For cell experiments , bacteria were harvested from exponentially growing cultures ( OD 600nm of 0 . 3 ) , resuspended in Tris - maleate , and mechanically immobilized onto porous poly - carbonate membranes ( Millipore ) . Measurements were per - formed either in PBS for D - Ala - D - Ala supports or in Tris - maleate for cells , at room temperature , using triangular - shaped silicon nitride cantilevers ( Microlevers , Veeco Metrology Group , Santa Barbara , CA ) . Blocking experiments were performed with a D - Ala - D - Ala - D - Ala solution ( 0 . 1 mg / l in PBS ) . For force measurements , the maximal applied force was kept at 250 pN to minimize indentation . For D - Ala - D - Ala supports , the loading rate was obtained by multiplying the retraction speed by the cantilever spring constant , since rupture forces did not show significant elongation events . Affinity images were obtained by recording 16 (cid:2) 16 force - distance curves on areas of given size and calculating the adhesion force for each force curve . To estimate the spring constants of the cantilevers , we measured their geometrical dimensions using scanning electron microscopy as well as their free resonance frequency . Then , the cantilever mechan - ical properties were adjusted in order to match the calculated frequencies to the measured ones . The determined mechan - ical properties and the measured geometrical dimensions were then used to calculate the spring constants , which were found to be (cid:24) 0 . 011 N / m . Van - FL staining was carried out on cells from exponen - tially growing cultures using vancomycin BODIPY FL conjugate ( Molecular Probes ) mixed with an equal amount of unlabeled vancomycin ( SIGMA ) and added to the cultures giving a final concentration of 3 (cid:237) g / mL . After 30 min of incubation at 28 (cid:176) C , cells were fixed with formaldehyde 1 . 6 % ( in PBS ) , mounted on polylysine coated slides and then visualized by fluorescence microscopy ( 484 nm set filter ) . Images were taken and analyzed as previously described . 6 Acknowledgment . This work was supported by the National Foundation for Scientific Research ( FNRS ) , the Universite´ catholique de Louvain ( Fonds Spe´ciaux de Recherche ) , the Federal Office for Scientific , Technical , and Cultural Affairs ( Interuniversity Poles of Attraction Pro - gramme ) , and the Austrian Science Foundation ( Project P - 15295 ) . Work in the laboratory of J . E . was funded by a grant from the BBSRC . We thank L . Piraux for the use of the thermal evaporator and E . Ferain for the use of the scanning electron microscope . Y . F . D and P . H . are Research Associates of the FNRS . References ( 1 ) Nieto , M . ; Perkins , H . R . Biochem . J . 1971 , 123 , 773 . ( 2 ) Glycopeptide Antibiotics ; Nagarajan , R . , Ed . ; Marcel Dekker Inc . : New York , 1994 . ( 3 ) Williams , D . H . Nat . Prod . Rep . 1996 , 13 , 469 . ( 4 ) Walsh , C . Nature 2000 , 406 , 775 . ( 5 ) Loll , P . J . ; Axelsen , P . H . Annu . Re V . Biomol . Struct . 2000 , 29 , 265 . ( 6 ) Daniel , R . A . ; Errington , J . Cell 2003 , 113 , 767 . ( 7 ) Lee , G . U . ; Chrisey , L . A . ; Colton , R . J . Science 1994 , 266 , 771 . ( 8 ) Florin , E . L . ; Moy , V . T . ; Gaub , H . E . Science 1994 , 264 , 415 . ( 9 ) Hinterdorfer , P . ; Baumgartner , W . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Schilcher , K . ; Schindler , H . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1996 , 93 , 3477 . ( 10 ) Engel , A . ; Mu¨ller , D . J . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2000 , 7 , 715 . ( 11 ) Benoit , M . ; Gabriel , D . ; Gerisch , G . ; Gaub , H . E . Nat . Cell . Biol . 2000 , 2 , 313 . ( 12 ) Grandbois , M . ; Dettmann , W . ; Benoit , M . ; Gaub , H . E . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 2000 , 48 , 719 . NanoLett . E ( 13 ) Dupres , V . ; Menozzi , F . D . ; Locht , C . ; Clare , B . H . ; Abbott , N . L . ; Cuenot , S . ; Bompard , C . ; Raze , D . ; Dufreˆne , Y . F . Nat . Methods 2005 , 2 , 515 . ( 14 ) Hinterdorfer , P . ; Dufreˆne , Y . F . Nat . Methods 2006 , 3 , 347 . ( 15 ) Gu , H . ; Ho , P . L . ; Tong , E . ; Wang , L . ; Xu , B . Nano Lett . 2003 , 3 , 51261 . ( 16 ) Evans , E . ; Richie , K . Biophys . J . 1997 , 72 , 1541 . ( 17 ) Merkel , R . ; Nassoy , P . ; Leung , A . ; Ritchie , K . ; Evans , E . Nature 1999 , 397 , 50 . ( 18 ) Fritz , J . ; Katopidis , A . G . ; Kolbinger , F . ; Anselmetti , D . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1998 , 95 , 12283 . ( 19 ) Nevo , R . ; Stroh , C . ; Kienberger , F . ; Kaftan , D . ; Brumfeld , V . ; Elbaum , M . ; Reich , Z . ; Hinterdorfer , P . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2003 , 10 , 553 . ( 20 ) Popienek , P . H . ; Pratt , R . F . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1991 , 113 , 2264 . ( 21 ) Sundram , U . M . ; Griffin , J . H . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1996 , 118 , 13107 . ( 22 ) Lahiri , J . ; Isaacs , L . ; Tien , J . ; Whitesides , G . M . Anal . Chem . 1999 , 71 , 777 . ( 23 ) Steidler , L . ; Hans , W . ; Schotte , L . ; Neirynck , S . ; Obermeier , F . ; Falk , W . ; Fiers , W . ; Remaut , E . Science 2000 , 289 , 1352 . ( 24 ) Courtin , P . ; Miranda , G . ; Guillot , A . ; Wessner , F . ; Me´zange , C . ; Domakova , E . ; Kulakauskas , S . ; Chapot - Chartier , M . - P . J . Bacteriol . 2006 , 188 , 5293 . ( 25 ) Dufreˆne , Y . F . Nat . Re V . Microbiol . 2004 , 2 , 451 . ( 26 ) Morlot , C . ; Zpun , A . ; Dideberg , O . ; Vernet , T . Mol . Microbiol . 2003 , 50 , 845 . ( 27 ) Williams , D . H . ; Maguire , A . J . ; Tsuzuki , W . ; Westwell , M . S . Science 1998 , 280 , 711 . ( 28 ) Groves , P . ; Searle , M . S . ; Mackay , J . P . ; Williams , D . H . Structure 1994 , 2 , 747 . ( 29 ) Beauregard , D . A . ; Williams , D . H . ; Gwynn , M . N . ; Knowles , D . J . C . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 1995 , 39 , 781 . ( 30 ) de Ruyter , P . ; Kuipers , O . ; Beerthuyzen , M . ; Van alen - Boerrigter , I . ; de Vos , W . J . Bacteriol . 1996 , 178 , 3434 . ( 31 ) Svedhem , S . ; Hollander , C . - A . ; Konradsson , P . ; Liedberg , B . ; Svensson , S . C . T . J . Org . Chem . 2001 , 66 , 4494 . NL0700853 F PAGEEST : 5 . 3 NanoLett .