Lamellipodial Versus Filopodial Mode of the Actin Nanomachinery : Pivotal Role of the Filament Barbed End Citation Mejillano , Marisan R . , Shin - ichiro Kojima , Derek Anthony Applewhite , Frank B . Gertler , Tatyana M . Svitkina , and Gary G . Borisy . “Lamellipodial Versus Filopodial Mode of the Actin Nanomachinery . ” Cell 118 , no . 3 ( August 2004 ) : 363 - 373 . Copyright © 2004 Cell Press As Published http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 07 . 019 Publisher Elsevier Version Final published version Accessed Fri Mar 08 02 : 28 : 14 EST 2019 Citable Link http : / / hdl . handle . net / 1721 . 1 / 83498 Terms of Use Article is made available in accordance with the publisher ' s policy and may be subject to US copyright law . Please refer to the publisher ' s site for terms of use . Detailed Terms The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters . Cell , Vol . 118 , 363 – 373 , August 6 , 2004 , Copyright  2004 by Cell Press Lamellipodial Versus Filopodial Mode of the Actin Nanomachinery : Pivotal Role of the Filament Barbed End others , such as dendritic cells or the growth cones of neurons , are dominated by filopodia . Thus , understand - ing how a particular cell type expresses one or the other formoftheactinmachineryisessentialtounderstandingacell’sfunctionalinteractions . An emerging general is - Marisan R . Mejillano , 1 Shin - ichiro Kojima , 1 Derek Anthony Applewhite , 1 Frank B . Gertler , 2 Tatyana M . Svitkina , 3 and Gary G . Borisy 1 , * 1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology Feinberg School of Medicine sue in cell biology is how the nanomachinery of a cell Northwestern University self - organizes . In the context of the actin machinery for 303 E . Chicago Avenue protrusive motility , this issue may be expressed as how Chicago , Illinois 60611 the cell “chooses” between lamellipodial and filopodial 2 Department of Biology modes of the “molecular hardware . ” Massachusetts Institute of Technology Two models have been proposed to account for the Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 formation of actin - based protrusions in crawling cells : 3 Department of Biology the dendritic nucleation model for lamellipodia ( Mullins University of Pennsylvania et al . , 1998 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ; Svitkina and Bor - Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 isy , 1999 ) and the convergent elongation model for filo - podia ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . In lamellipodia , branched nucleation of actin is driven by activation of the Arp2 / 3 Summary complex , followed by filament elongation and barbed - end capping . The necessity for barbed - end capping in Understanding how a particular cell type expresses lamellipodial protrusion is counterintuitive since it termi - the lamellipodial or filopodial form of the actin machin - nates filament elongation , which is the driving force for ery is essential to understanding a cell’s functional motility ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . However , capping interactions . To determine how a cell “chooses” among is necessary to keep filaments short and their number these alternative modes of “molecular hardware , ” we constant ( Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ; Carlier , 1998 ; Coo - tested the role of key proteins that affect actin filament per and Schafer , 2000 ) . In filopodia , both branching and barbed ends . Depletion of capping protein ( CP ) by capping need to be prevented to allow continuous elon - short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) caused loss of lamellipodia gation of parallel filaments at their tip ( Katoh et al . , 1999 ; and explosive formation of filopodia . The knockdown Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ) . In the convergent - phenotype was rescued by a CP mutant refractory to elongation model ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ; Vignjevic et al . , shRNA , but not by another barbed - end capper , gel - 2003 ) , filopodia are initiated from a dendritic network solin , demonstrating that the phenotype was specific byactionofatipcomplexthatprotectsfilamentsagainst for CP . In Ena / VASP deficient cells , CP depletion re - capping allowing for their elongation coordinated with sulted in ruffling instead of filopodia . We propose a a bundling activity . Thus , these models focus on the model for selection of lamellipodial versus filopodial elongation status of the actin filament barbed end as a organization in which CP is a negative regulator of crucial determinant of whether lamellipodial or filopodial filopodia formation and Ena / VASP has recruiting / acti - protrusion results . vating functions downstream of actin filament elonga - The elongation status of the barbed end may be con - tion inaddition to its previouslysuggested anticapping sidered asthe net resultof an interplaybetween capping and antibranching activities . and anti - capping activities . Capping protein ( CP ) , an (cid:1) / (cid:2) heterodimer ( M r (cid:1) (cid:1) 36 kDa ; (cid:2) (cid:1) 32 kDa ) ( Schafer et al . , Introduction 1994 ) is considered the major barbed - end terminator during cell motility because it ( a ) has high affinity ( K d (cid:3) Two alternate forms of actin machinery coexist at the 0 . 1 – 1 nM ) for actin filament barbed ends in vitro , ( b ) is leading edge of most motile cells : lamellipodia which ubiquitous in eukaryotes ( Cooper et al . , 1999 ) , ( c ) is seem designed for persistent protrusion over a surface , enriched in lamellipodia ( Schafer et al . , 1998 ) , and ( d ) and filopodia which appear to perform sensory and ex - supports in vitro reconstituted bacterial comet tail motil - ploratory functions to steer cells depending on cues ity ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , loss of function or from the environment . Although lamellipodia have been null mutations in genetic systems such as yeast ( Ama - investigated since the pioneering work of Abercrombie trudaetal . , 1990 , 1992 ; Sizonenkoetal . , 1996 ) , Drosoph - ( 1970 ) , filopodia have emerged in recent years as impor - ila ( Hopmann et al . , 1996 ) , and Dictyostelium ( Hug et al . , tant in a broad range of cell biological processes , includ - 1995 ) resulted in aberrant actin architecture . The Ena / ing epithelial sheet closure in development , wound heal - VASP family of proteins have been shown to promote ing , neuronal path finding , immune cell function , cell formation of longer and less branched actin filaments invasion , and metastasis of cancer cells ( Jacinto and at the leading edge in vivo and to be present at the tips Wolpert , 2001 ; Rorth , 2003 ) . of filopodia ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , Ena / VASP have Although most cells in culture express both lamelli - been considered to have anticapping activity and are podia and filopodia , some cells , such as keratocytes therefore candidate effectors controlling barbed ends . or neutrophils , express lamellipodia almost exclusively ; Models of lamellipodial and filopodial formation pre - dict barbed - end capping lies at the fork in the road of these two pathways . Consequently , we tested whether * Correspondence : g - borisy @ northwestern . edu Cell364 proteins that affect actin filament barbed ends could determine which form of the actin machinery was se - lected . Experiments were carried out in highly motile cells expressing both protrusive structures to facilitate observation of alternate phenotypes . Specifically , we tested whether barbed - end capping by CP and anticap - ping by Ena / VASP proteins are key elements in the mechanism of the lamellipodial / filopodial transition . We report that CP depletion resulted in inhibition of lamelli - podia and explosive formation of filopodia . Contrary to expectations based on only an anticapping role for Ena / VASP , CP depletion in the absence of Ena / VASP re - sulted in ruffling , not filopodia . We propose a model for regulation of the lamellipodial / filopodial transition in which CP is a negative regulator of filopodia formation and Ena / VASP has functions downstream of actin fila - ment elongation in addition to its previously suggested anticapping activity ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Results Strategy of CP Depletion and Rescue Targeted depletion of CP by RNA interference was used here as an approach to investigate CP function in cul - tured cells . For this purpose , we prepared a hairpin Figure 1 . Expression of Hairpin siRNA Results in CP Depletion in siRNA expression vector with a GFP marker ( Kojima et B16F1 Cells al . , 2004 ) for the added advantage of easier detection ( A ) Target sequences , T1 and T2 , selected for mouse and rat (cid:2) 1 and sorting of expressing cells . Vertebrates have three and (cid:2) 2 mRNA . Control mismatch target sequences , T1 * and T2 * , (cid:1) isoforms , each encoded by a separate gene , and three contain two nucleotide changes ( red ) . Nucleotide numbers from (cid:2) isoforms produced from a single gene by alternative start codon of mouse (cid:2) 2 subunit are indicated . splicing . (cid:2) 1 is found mostly in muscle ( at the Z - line ) , (cid:2) 2 ( B ) Immunoblots and densitometry results of lysates prepared from is widespread in nonmuscle cells ( Schafer et al . , 1994 ) , FACS - purifiedcell populationsfive daysaftertransfection ofshRNA constructs . The same blot was first probed with CP (cid:1) antibody ( (cid:1) ) , and (cid:2) 3 is present exclusively in male germ cells ( von thenwiththepanCP (cid:2) ( R22 ) antibody ( (cid:2) ) ; (cid:1) - tubulinservedasloading Bulowetal . , 1997 ) . Twodifferent19 - nucleotidetargeting control . Bar chart shows relative protein levels from densitometry sequences ( T1 , T2 ; Figure 1A ) were selected that were analysis of the immunoblots shown above . Protein amount from common to mouse and rat CP (cid:2) 1 and (cid:2) 2 mRNA - coding lysates expressing pG - Super empty vector was assigned 100 % . regions while not having significant homology to any CP (cid:1) , white bars ; CP (cid:2) black bars . Knockdown of CP (cid:2) subunit also resulted in loss of (cid:1) subunit . other known genes in the mouse or rat database as determined by BLAST search ( NCBI ) . Since functional CP exists only as a heterodimer , silencing of the (cid:2) - subunit was predicted to lead to functional loss of CP Depletion in B16F1 Cells capping activity ( Amatruda et al . , 1992 ; Schafer et al . , Detailed analysis of the CP knockdown phenotype was 1992 ) . performed using the mouse melanoma B16F1 cell line Controls for the specificity of silencing involved two because these cells are highly motile and express lamel - approaches : expression of siRNAs with mismatching lipodia and filopodia . Cells expressing T1 - or T2 shRNA nucleotides and rescue of the knockdown phenotype were surprisingly viable and could be grown in culture by a CP gene that was refractory to silencing . siRNAs for more than a week . GFP - expressing cells were col - are known to be highly specific and modification of only lected by fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) one one or two base pairs in the target sequence is enough day after transfection ( (cid:4) 99 % GFP positive in the sorted to abrogate silencing . Therefore , we designed hairpin population ) and analyzed 3 – 5 days later . Microscopic constructs , T1 * and T2 * , identical to T1 and T2 , respec - inspection of the sorted cell population showed that tively , except for two base pair mismatches in the target (cid:4) 90 % of cells were still GFP positive after five days . sequence ( Figure 1A ) . CP (cid:2) 2 cDNAs refractory to silenc - Immunoblotting confirmed silencing at the protein level ing were designed by introducing mutations in the third ( Figure 1B ) with the average reduction in CP being 95 % nucleotide position of two codons ( identical to those in for T1 and 90 % for T2 . Control transfections with T1 * T1 * and T2 * ) that did not affect the amino acid sequence . and T2 * hairpin constructs did not result in decreased These silent mutations would produce mutant mRNAs CP amounts compared to transfection with GFP alone , refractory to RNAi , thus permitting expression of wild - demonstrating that knockdown achieved by T1 or T2 type protein that could support rescue . Empty pG - Super siRNA was specific . Consistent with earlier studies that vector that expresses just the soluble GFP marker was CP is stable only as a heterodimer ( Amatruda et al . , 1992 ; Schafer et al . , 1992 ) , knockdown of the (cid:2) - subunit used as a control for transfection and GFP expression . Mode of Actin Protrusive Machinery 365 Figure 2 . Phenotype of CP Knockdown B16F1 Cells ( A ) Distributionofactinrevealedbyphalloidin staining ( leftcolumn ) and CPrevealedbyR26 antibody ( middle column ) in fixed cells ex - pressing pG - Super - T2 * ( upper row ) or pG - Super - T2 ( lowerrow ) for5days . Rightcolumn showsmergedimages . Boxedregionsareen - larged in insets . T2 * - expressing cell exhibits normal morphology with CP localized at ex - treme leading edge of lamellipodia and ex - cluded from filopodia ( insets ) . T2 - expressing cell displays numerous filopodia , reduction of lamellipodia , and no CP staining at the cell periphery . Residual diffuse fluorescence in thick cell regions is attributed to nonspecific binding of secondary antibody . Scale bar is equal to 10 (cid:5) m . ( B ) Phase contrast ( upper row ) and GFP fluo - rescence ( lower row ) images of live control ( T1 * ) and knockdown ( T1 and T2 ) cells four days after transfection with respective pG - Super constructs demonstrate increase in la - mella density ( phase ) and thickness ( GFP ) after CP knockdown . Scale bar is equal to 10 (cid:5) m . ( C and D ) Quantification of lamellipodia re - duction ( C ) or filopodia enrichment ( D ) after CP knockdown . Bars represent average % of cell perimeter occupied by lamellipodial network ( C ) or average number of filopodia ( D ) inphalloidin - stainedcellstransfectedwith indicatedshRNAconstructs ( n (cid:3) 16 – 20cells ) . CP induced changes were significant ( p (cid:6) 0 . 0001 ) for both lamellipodia and filopodia as determined by Student’s t test . ( E ) Stars formed at ventral surface of knock - down cells detected by phalloidin staining ( left ) and by phase contrast microscopy ( right ) . Insets showenlarged examples . Scale bar is equal to 5 (cid:5) m . also resulted in comparable depletion of the (cid:1) - subunit partially or completely embedded in the lamellipodia . ( Figure 1B ) . However , in knockdown cells , lamellipodia were signifi - CP depletion was assayed at the cellular level by im - cantly attenuated . CP depletion caused cells to lose munostaining with CP antibody . Phalloidin was used to their characteristic flat , thin morphology with a convex visualize actin in the same cells . CP in control cells leading edge and the cell perimeter lost its smooth out - ( Figure 2A , upper row ) was enriched at the extreme line . The whole leading lamella extending from the cell leading edge of lamellipodia and was excluded from edge toward the cell body appeared much denser in filopodia , as demonstrated previously ( Svitkina et al . , phasecontrastimages ( Figure2B , upperrow ) ; influores - 2003 ) . In knockdown cells ( Figure 2A , lower row ) , CP cence images , they had higher intensity of soluble GFP labeling was abolished at the leading edge , consistent because of increased thickness ( Figure 2B , lower row ) . with reduction in CP protein levels shown by immu - Phalloidin staining revealed a significant decrease in noblotting . the lamellipodial actin network and an increase in actin staining in deeperlamellar regions ( Figure 2A , lower row ) compared to cells expressing GFP alone or mismatched Attenuation of Lamellipodia Formation hairpin constructs ( Figure 2A , upper row ) . Morphometric by CP Knockdown in B16F1 Cells analysis showed a 3 – 4 - fold decrease in the percentage Control B16F1cells ( nontransfected cells , cells express - of lamellipodial perimeter associated with diffuse actin ing GFP alone or T1 * and T2 * constructs , Figure 2A , network ( Figure 2C ) , whereas overall cell shape and upper row ) , growing on laminin - coated glass protruded spread area were not dramatically changed . large thin lamella with broad actin - rich lamellipodia at their leading edge , and a variable number of filopodia Attenuation of lamellipodia was confirmed by dimin - Cell366 Figure 3 . Displacement of the Arp2 / 3 Com - plex in Knockdown B16F1 Cells ( A ) Distribution of Arp2 / 3 complex revealed by p16 - Arc antibody ( middle row ) and actin by phalloidin staining ( top row ) in fixed cells expressingpG - Super - T2 * ( leftcolumn ) orpG - Super - T2 ( middle column ) for five days . Bot - tom row shows merged images . Boxed re - gions are enlarged in insets . T2 * - expressing cell exhibits normal morphology with Arp2 / 3 complexlocalizedthroughoutthelamellipod - ium and excluded from filopodia ( insets ) . T2 - expressing cell displays numerous filopodia and is almost devoid of lamellipodia , with Arp2 / 3 labeling absent from periphery but with some diffuse staining observed in the cytoplasm . Scale bar is equal to 10 (cid:5) m . Right columnshowsArp2 / 3andactindistributionin stars , withArp2 / 3localizedonlyatthecenter . Scale bar is equal to 5 (cid:5) m . ( B ) Immunoblots performed five days after shRNAtransfectionwithindicatedconstructsandprobedwitheitherp16 ( left ) or Arp3 ( right ) antibody indicate no decrease in Arp2 / 3 complex protein levels after CP knockdown . (cid:1) - Tubulin antibody probing was used as loading control . ished Arp2 / 3 staining at the leading edge ( Figure 3A ) . like structures which could be identified both in phase - In control cells , Arp2 / 3 complex was enriched in lamelli - contrast images and after phalloidin staining ( Figure 2E ) podia and substantially colocalized with lamellipodial were present at the ventral cell surface of 60 (cid:7) 15 % actin but was significantly diminished at the perimeter ( 100 cells , n (cid:3) 3experiments ) of knockdown cells . These of knockdown cells . However , protein levels of two dif - “stars” were found in lamellar and perinuclear regions . ferent Arp2 / 3 complex subunits ( p16 and Arp3 ) were They consistedof actin - containing spikesradiating from unchanged as shown by Western blotting ( Figure 3B ) , a center brightly stained with phalloidin . indicating that lamellipodial attenuation was not due to a Ahallmarkofgenuinefilopodiaisenrichmentoffascin , reduction in overall cellular levelsof the Arp2 / 3 complex . an actin bundling protein , along the length of filopodia Thus , lamellipodial attenuation by CP depletion was ac - ( Kureishy et al . , 2002 ) , and VASP , a barbed - end binding companied by a redistribution of the Arp2 / 3 complex protein ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) , at their tips ( Lanier et al . , so that it was no longer enriched at the cell perimeter . 1999 ; Rottneretal . , 1999 ) . Cellularlevelsofbothproteins remainedunchangedafterCPknockdowninB16F1cells as determined by immunoblotting ( data not shown ) . By Enhanced Filopodia Formation immunofluorescence , alllateral , dorsal , orventral spikes in CP Knockdown B16F1 Cells showed fascin staining along their lengths ( Figure 4A , Concomitantly with lamellipodia attenuation , CP deple - upper row ) and VASP staining at their tips ( Figure 4B , tion caused explosive formation of filopodia ( Figure 2A , upper row ) . A lamellipodial marker , Arp2 / 3 complex is lower row ) . Increased filopodia were apparent as early usually depleted from filopodial bundles ( Svitkina and as three days after siRNA - plasmid transfection and the Borisy , 1999 ) . Consistent with this , we found that all increase was confirmed by quantitative analysis ( Figure filopodiainduced byCP knockdownlacked Arp2 / 3com - 2D ) . Filopodia formation in knockdown cells occurred plex ( Figure 3A ) , including the ventral stars , which were not only at the cell edges , but also on the dorsal cell positive for Arp2 / 3 complex at their center but not along surface . Since it was feasible to count only those filo - their radii ( Figure 3A , right column ) . The staining pattern podia originating from cell edges , the real magnitude of of ventral stars was similar to the filopodial - like bundles enhanced filopodia formation may be greater than esti - reconstructed in vitro from beads coated with Arp2 / 3 mated . In addition to peripheral and dorsal filopodia , star - activators ( Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , molecular marker Mode of Actin Protrusive Machinery 367 Figure 4 . Filopodial Markers Have Normal Distribution in Filopodia Induced by CP Knockdown . Knockdown B16F1 cells expressing pG - Super - T1 construct for four days show numerous lateral filopodia ( left column ) , dorsal filopodia ( middle column ) and ventral stars ( right column ) . ( A ) Antibody staining reveals fascin along the length of filopodia . ( B ) VASP ( upperrow ) andactin ( middlerow ) costainingrevealsVASP at the filopodial tips . Merged images of VASP and actin are shown in bottom row . Boxed regions are enlarged in insets . Scale bars are equal to 10 (cid:5) m ( left and middle columns ) and 5 (cid:5) m ( right column ) . analyses confirmed that the spikes and stars induced by CP depletion were similar to filopodia . Electron microscopy was carried out to evaluate the phenotype of CP knockdown in B16F1 cells in more detail . Low magnification views showed that control Figure 5 . Structural Organization of Filopodia in B16F1 Cells cells contained few filopodia that were restricted to the ( A and B ) Control cells . Platinum replica EM shows few peripherally cell periphery ( Figure 5A ) , whereas CP knockdown cells located filopodia embedded into lamellipodial network . Deeper cy - showed abundant filopodial - like protrusions around the toplasm shows sparser filament network . cell perimeter and on the dorsal surface ( Figure 5C ) , ( C and D ) CP knockdown cells . Abundant filopodia are apparent at which significantly varied in thickness and appeared both leading edge and dorsal surface . Deeper cytoplasm shows emerging from the surrounding network . In addition , the dense filament network . High magnification images of control ( B ) leading lamella of knockdown cells was filled with a andCPknockdown ( D ) filopodiashowtheirsimilarstructuralorgani - zation . Enlarged image of boxed region in ( C ) shows that dorsal dense actin filament network , which contrasted with a filopodium contains a bundle of parallel filaments . Scale bars are rather sparse lamella cytoskeleton in control cells and equal to 5 (cid:5) m ( A , C ) and 1 (cid:5) m ( B , D ) . suggested increased actin filament assembly away from the leading edge after CP depletion . High resolution analysis demonstrated that similar to normal filopodia Kinetic analysis was performed to determine the dy - namics of induced filopodia and to evaluate the effect ( Figure 5B ) , lateral ( Figure 5D ) and dorsal ( inset in Figure 5C ) protrusions in CP knockdown cells contained bun - of CP knockdown on the protrusion of the leading edge ( See Supplemental Movies S1 and S2 available at http : / / dles of long unbranched actin filaments that extended almost the entire length of the bundle . Thus , EM data www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 118 / 3 / 363 / DC1 ) . Time lapse movies of knockdown cells demonstrated that are also consistent with the idea that CP knockdown - induced genuine filopodia with proper structural organi - induced filopodia displayed normal dynamic features : protrusive , retractile , and sweeping motility . Dorsal filo - zation . Cell368 podia were not formed as a result of retrograde translo - cation but were formed de novo . When behavior of the leading edge was analyzed using kymographs , control cells displayed smooth and persistent protrusion for long periods of time , whereas CP - depleted cells dis - played erratic protrusion - withdrawal behavior with no obvious coordination between adjacent regions of the leading edge ( Supplemental Figure S1 , Supplemental Movies S1 and S2 available on Cell website ) . As a result , knockdown cells demonstrated significant decrease in net protrusion . The average rate of leading edge ad - vance in CP - depleted cells ( 0 . 32 (cid:7) 0 . 36 (cid:5) m / min ) was 2 . 0 (cid:8) lower as compared to their mismatch controls ( 0 . 64 (cid:7) 0 . 41 (cid:5) m / min ) ( 4 s frame rate ; 5 min observation period ; 42 kymographs ; 10 cells , p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . Rescue of Knockdown Phenotype WeattemptedtorescueCPdepletedcellsbyexpressingCPrefractorytothesiRNA . Successful rescue would not only provide a stringent test for the specificity and reversibility of the knockdown phenotype ; it would also test whether CP tagged with fluorescent protein could efficiently substitute for endogenous capping activity . We constructed CP (cid:2) 2 subunits containing silent muta - tions ( T1 * , T2 * ; Figure 1A ) . To monitor simultaneously knockdown and rescue constructs in transfected cells , CFP was substituted for GFP in the pG - Super T1 and T2 knockdown constructs , and the rescue constructs , T1 * - and T2 * - CP (cid:2) 2 , were expressed as YFP - fusion pro - teins . Thus , CFP was taken as the indicator of knock - down and YFP the indicator of rescue . Cells were first transfected with knockdown constructs to allow pheno - type development and on day 3 were transfected with one of the rescue constructs . The phenotype of expressing cells 2 – 3 days after YFP - CP ( T1 * or T2 * ) transfection was analyzed by phase contrast and fluorescence microscopy . Most cells ex - pressing both CFP and YFP ( 90 % ; n (cid:3) 101 ) exhibited prominent flat , thin lamellipodia and distinct CP localiza - Figure 6 . Rescue of CP Knockdown Phenotype in B16F1 Cells tion at the cell periphery , a phenotype characteristic of ( A ) RescuebyCPrefractorytosiRNA . ( i ) Cellexpressingbothknock - control cells ( Figure 6A , i ) . These results also indicated down ( CFP - T1 hairpin ) construct ( left ) and rescue construct ( YFP - that adding back the (cid:2) - subunit by transfection of YFP - CP ( T1 * ) ) refractory to siRNA ( middle ) shows wild - type phenotype CP (cid:2) restored CP (cid:1) - subunit to normal cellular levels . In withYFP - CP ( T1 * ) localizingtotheextremeleadingedgeasinnormal the same population , cells expressing only CFP ( 100 % ; cells . Phase image ( right ) shows flat and thin lamellipodial morphol - ogy indistinguishable from control cells . ( ii ) Cell expressing CFP - T1 n (cid:3) 106 ) still showed the knockdown phenotype ( Figure hairpin ( left ) , butnotYFP - CP ( T1 * ) ( middle ) , displayscharacteristicof 6A , ii ) , characterized by abundant filopodia and thick , theknockdownphenotypewithnumerousspikyprotrusionsevident dense lamella . All YFP - only positive cells ( n (cid:3) 100 ) had from the phase contrast image ( right ) and thick lamella as revealed normal CP localization at the leading edge indistinguish - bydistributionofsolubleCFP ( left ) . ( iii ) Cellexpressingsilentmutant able from wild - type ( Figure 6A , iii ) . Thus , expression of YFP - CP ( T1 * ) ( middle ) , but not CFP - T1 ( left ) shows wt distribution of the rescue construct induced phenotypic reversion in CP at extreme leading edge . Corresponding phase contrast image ( right ) illustratesnormallamellipodialmorphology . Scalebarisequal the presence of inhibitory siRNA demonstrating speci - to 10 (cid:5) m . ficity and lack of irreversible downstream effects of CP ( B ) Gelsolin does not rescue CP knockdown phenotype . ( i , ii ) Cells depletion . Rescue also established that CP tagged with expressing both CFP - T1 and YFP - gelsolin ( i ) , as well as cells ex - derivatives of GFP could support normal capping pressing CFP - T1 alone ( ii ) still show abundant filopodia and dimin - function . ished lamellipodia ( phase images ) , characteristic of CP knockdown Next , we tested whether rescue could be achieved phenotype . ( iii ) Cell expressing only YFP - gelsolin displays gelsolin localization at the leading edge ; corresponding phase image shows with another barbed - end capper , gelsolin , or whether control phenotype . Scale bar is equal to 10 (cid:5) m . thephenotypewasindeedspecificforCP . Weconfirmed that gelsolin is present in B16F1 melanoma cells by immunoblotting ( data not shown ) . Immunofluorescence staining ( Supplemental Figure S2 available on Cell web - extreme leading edge ( see Figures 2A and 6A ) , gelsolin distribution is broader , usually colocalizing with most of site ) showed that gelsolin is enriched in the lamellipodia , consistent with earlier studies ( Chou et al . , 2002 ) . How - the lamellipodial actin network . For rescue experiments with gelsolin , we used the same strategy as for CP . ever , compared to CP , which is present mostly at the Mode of Actin Protrusive Machinery 369 Results showed that 100 % of cells expressing both CFP - T1 and YFP - gelsolin ( n (cid:3) 100 ) still showed the CP knockdown phenotype characterized by excessive filopodia and loss of lamellipodia , and that they were indistinguishable from cells expressing only CFP - T1 ( Figure 6B , i , ii ) . Cells expressing only YFP - gelsolin ex - hibited gelsolin localization at the leading edge similar to that revealed by immunostaining . In phase contrast images , they displayed flat , thin lamellipodia , typical of control cells ( Figure 6B , iii ) . These results show that another barbed - end - capping protein , gelsolin , does not functionallysubstitute forCPinthese cellsandsuggests thattheabilitytocontrolthelamellipodial / filopodialtran - sition requires properties specific to CP . Generality of CP Knockdown Phenotype To determine whether the phenotypic response of CP depletion reflects a general principle , we performed CP knockdown with shRNA in two other mammalian cell types : a murine fibroblast cell line , NIH3T3 , and a rat fibroblast cell line , Rat2 . Both cell types ( Supplemental Figures S3 and S4 available on Cell website ) displayed attenuation of lamellipodia and excessive formation of filopodia after CP depletion . As in B16F1 cells ( see Fig - ure 2A ) , control Rat2 and NIH3T3 cells expressing T2 * construct showed that CP localized at the extreme lead - ing edge and was excluded from filopodia ; whereas in cells expressing the T2 knockdown construct , CP stain - ing was abolished at the cell edge . Phalloidin staining and phase contrast microscopy revealed excessive filo - podia and diminished ( sometimes absent ) lamellipodia in knockdown cells , a phenotype essentially similar to that of B16F1 cells depleted of CP . CP Knockdown in Cells Lacking Ena / VASP CP activity in vivo may be affected by Ena / VASP family proteins that antagonize actin filament capping at the lamellipodial leading edge ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Therefore , we performed CP depletion in MV D7 murine fibroblasts lacking all endogenous Ena / VASP proteins ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . The phenotype of these cells was evaluated during spreading on laminin shortly ( (cid:1) 30 – 45 min ) after replating , during which time cells displayed extensive Figure 7 . Phenotype of CP Depletion Depends on the Presence of protrusive activity favorable for analysis . Control un - Ena / VASP Proteins transfected MV D7 cells , as well as the derivative cells ( A ) Ena / VASP - deficient MV D7 cells spreading on laminin - coated reexpressing Mena ( MV D7 EM ) , displayed a smooth , cir - glass display the smooth outline of the cell perimeter in control cular lamellipodium under these conditions ( Figures 7A ( upper image ) , but express numerous phase - dark ruffles after ex - pressing CFP - T1 knockdown construct for five days ( lower image ) and 7B , upper rows ) . Less than 4 % showed filopodia as observed by phase contrast microscopy of living cells . and these were few in number . Less than 10 % of un - ( B ) Similar to its parent cell line , untransfected MV D7 reexpressing transfected cells showed any ruffling and this was re - GFP - Menacells ( MV D7 EM ) ( upperimage ) , displaysmoothcellperim - stricted to a small fraction of the cell perimeter . How - eter but show increased filopodial - like protrusions after expressing ever , after expression of the T1 knockdown construct CFP - T1 knockdown construct for five days . Enlarged insets show for five days , both cell types lost the smooth outline of GFP - Mena at extreme leading edge of control cell and at the tips of filopodia - like protrusions in knockdown cell . Scale bar is equal their cell perimeter , but they did so in strikingly different to 10 (cid:5) m . ways ( Figures 7A and 7B , lower rows ) . Most MV D7 EM cells ( 73 % ) , as expected , formed excessive filopodia ( 44 . 0 (cid:7) 2 . 0 per cell , n (cid:3) 16 cells ) , whereas most MV D7 cells ( 60 % ) exhibited extensive ruffling all along the cell Discussion perimeter , but not filopodia that were extremely rare ( 4 . 0 (cid:7) 0 . 2 , n (cid:3) 15 ; p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) . These data confirm the CP - Dependent Control of the Lamellipodial / Filopodial Transition results with the other cell lines that CP depletion com - promised lamellipodia formation . In addition , they The main features of the CP depletion phenotype were severe attenuation of lamellipodia and dramatic in - showedthat CPdepletionwasnot sufficientforfilopodia formation , but that Ena / VASP was required as well . crease of filopodia . Lamellipodial attenuation was evi - Cell370 dent by the redistribution of Arp2 / 3 away from the cell tently and attain significant lengths . Other elements of perimeter , by loss of the normal dendritic brush near the convergent elongation mechanism work on these the leading edge and by appearance of a dense network preformed long filaments allowing their convergence of filaments throughout the cytoplasm , suggestive of and subsequent bundling to form filopodia . uncontrolled polymerization . The loss of Arp2 / 3 at the cell perimeter needs to be explained because the overall Control of Barbed - End Elongation cellular level of Arp2 / 3 was not affected by CP depletion How is barbed - end elongation controlled ? The mecha - and lack of capping is not predicted to interfere with nism of CP regulation is a long - standing issue that has branched nucleation . The simplest explanation is that not yet been resolved . In vitro , capping activity of CP the filopodial machinery , which excludes Arp2 / 3 com - can be inhibited by PIP2 micelles ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) , plexalong thelengthof actinbundles , becomes sodom - but it is not known whether such regulation takes place inant at the cell perimeter as to force the redistribution in vivo . No phosphorylation of CP has been reported of Arp2 / 3 . Another possibility is that the activities of CP ( Schafer et al . , 1994 ) . Recently , two proteins interacting and Arp2 / 3 complex are tightly coordinated in cells to with CP have been identified . One of them , V - 1 , forms produce a balanced dendritic network . Independent of a stable complex with CP and inhibits its binding to the explanation of the redistribution of Arp2 / 3 , these actin filaments in vitro ( Taoka et al . , 2003 ) . Another CP - results indicate the positive requirement of CP for nor - interacting protein , CARMIL , was found in Dictyostelium mal lamellipodial expression . and Acanthamoeba ( Jung et al . , 2001 ; Remmert et al . , An even more striking result of CP knockdown was 2004 ) , but it remains unknown whether it affects CP the extensive formation of filopodia , not just at the lead - activity in vitro or in vivo . ing edge but also at the dorsal and ventral surfaces of Regulation of barbed - end elongation may involve pro - cells . These results complement our previous findings teins that antagonize capping . One group of such pro - in vitro ( Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ) showing that plastic beads teins is the Ena / VASP family . Ena / VASP proteins when coated with Arp2 / 3 - activating proteins and placed into targeted to the membrane promote formation of longer CP - depletedbrain cytoplasmicextractswerenot ableto and less branched actin filaments at the leading edge assemblecomettails , butassembledfilamentbundlesin and , conversely , depletionofEna / VASPleadstoshorter , star - like configuration strikingly similar to ventral stars more branched filaments ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . VASP is also described here . The role of Arp2 / 3 - activator coated enriched at filopodial tips ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Rottner et beads in cells may beplayed by Arp2 / 3 - rich cytoplasmic al . , 1999 ) , and accumulates at sites on the lamellipodial foci , which are abundant in B16F1 ( Ballestrem et al . , leading edge where filopodia emerge ( Svitkina et al . , 1998 ) and other cell types ( Schafer et al . , 1998 ) . Taken 2003 ) . Deficiency of Ena / VASP in Dictyostelium ( Han et together , these results establish that CP is necessary al . , 2002 ) or neuronal cells ( Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) resulted for formation of dendritic arrays and that decreased in inhibition of filopodia , whereas overexpression or CP concentrations favor transformation of the dendritic membrane targeting of VASP produced overabundant network into filopodial bundles . filopodia in Dictyostelium , aswell as increased filopodial Although a number of barbed - end cappers exist in length and number in neurons . Ena / VASP proteins are cells ( Schafer and Cooper , 1995 ) , our data demonstrate known to be regulated by PKA / PKG - dependent phos - that the filopodial phenotype was produced specifically phorylation ( Kwiatkowski et al . , 2003 ) at multiple phos - by CP knockdown as it could be rescued by an RNAi - phorylation sites . The conserved N - terminal Ser residue resistant mutant of CP , but not by gelsolin , another in vertebrate Ena / VASP proteins seems to be involved abundant ubiquitous barbed - end capper ( Kwiatkowski , in fibroblast motility ( Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) . Moreover , 1999 ) . These findings agree with previous reports that increased phosphorylation of this Ser in Mena in re - gelsolin null cells show normal filopodial protrusion and sponse to activation of PKA directly paralleled formation display only a subtle phenotype with respect to their of filopodia in neurons ( Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , cap - protrusive behavior ( Azuma et al . , 1998 ) . Although filo - ping antagonists in their active form may serve as posi - podia were reported to be more abundant in gelsolin tive regulators of actin filament elongation and , there - null neuronal growth cones as compared to wt , the in - fore , filopodia formation . Evidence that the balance crease was due to impaired retraction as opposed to between capping and anticapping is critical to the increased protrusion ( Lu et al . , 1997 ) . “choice” of actin organization that dominates in a spe - Based on our current findings and work from other cific cell type or site comes from genetic analysis in groups , we propose a model for the mechanism of regu - Drosophila of microvilli and cleavage furrows ( Greven - lation of lamellipodial versus filopodial protrusion by CP goed et al . , 2003 ) and from immunoblot analysis of actin ( Figure 8 ) . In this model , Arp2 / 3 - dependent dendritic binding proteins in cell cultures showing low levels of nucleation of actin filaments is the starting point for CP and high levels of Ena / VASP in neurons as compared formation of both actin filament arrays , but then the to fibroblasts ( Strasser et al . , 2004 ) . two pathways diverge depending on CP activity . We In addition to Ena / VASP , another group of proteins propose that when CP activity in the cell is high ( Figure that antagonize capping has been identified recently , 8 , upper images ) , newly nucleated filaments elongate namely , formins . In vitro , formins nucleate actin fila - for only a short period of time and become capped . To ments and remain associated with their growing barbed maintain protrusion , capped filaments are replaced by ends ( Evangelista et al . , 2003 ; Pruyne et al . , 2002 ) while newly nucleated side branches produced by the Arp2 / 3 protecting them from capping ( Evangelista et al . , 2003 ; complex . This favors the formation of a dendritic lamelli - Harris et al . , 2004 ; Moseley et al . , 2004 ; Pruyne et al . , podial network . In contrast , when activity of CP is low ( Figure 8 , lower images ) , filaments can elongate persis - 2002 ; Zigmond et al . , 2003 ) . Therefore , regulation of Mode of Actin Protrusive Machinery 371 Figure 8 . Model for Mechanism of Regulation of Lamellipodial Versus Filopodial Protrusion by Filament Capping Box on left illustrates starting point for both types of protrusion and possible regulation of the proposed key players . Smaller boxes illustrate scenarios for lamellipodia ( top ) or filopodia ( bottom ) depending on capping activity : Top : when capping activity dominates either by activation of CP or inhibition of capping antagonists such as Ena / VASP , filaments elongate for a brief period before becoming capped and , as a consequence , these filaments are relatively short . To maintain protrusion , capped filaments are replaced by newly nucleated side branches produced by Arp2 / 3 complex , favoring the formation of a dominantly branched , lamellipodial network . Bottom : low capping activity resulting either from inhibition of CP or activation of proteins that promote anticapping and antibranching such as Ena / VASP , favor filament elongation leading to long and unbranched filaments , which converge and subsequently become bundled by fascin . Filopodia formation is therefore more predominant . CP inhibition may be mediated by PIP2 , the CARMIL complex or the V - 1 protein ; Ena / VASP proteins may be activated by PKA / PKG - dependent phosphorylation . formins also has the potential to influence the balance elongation is allowed ? In this study , we showed that an Ena / VASP family member was essential for filopodia between filopodia and lamellipodia in cells . formation . Without Ena / VASP but with normal levels of CP , actinfilamentswereshortandhighlybranched ( Bear Control of Filopodia Formation et al . , 2002 ) . Depleting CP in Ena / VASP deficient cells Why does CP depletion lead to filopodia formation and allowed for filament elongation . However , very few filo - not just erratic protrusive behavior ? According to the podia formed and cells switched to ruffling , similar to convergentelongationmodel , filamentelongationrepre - Drosophila S2 cells . Cells reexpressing Ena / VASP formed sents only the first step of transition from the dendritic filopodia upon CP depletion . Thus , Ena / VASP proteins network to parallel bundles . Any missing or inactive ele - are not only capping antagonists ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) , ment of the filopodial machinery downstream of filament but also part of the filopodial machinery downstream of elongation , such as filament bundling , would prevent elongation ( this study ) . Downsteam functions of Ena / filopodia formation and lead to uncontrolled polymeriza - VASP may involve establishing the functionality of the tion . The fact that CP depletion led to explosive forma - filopodial tip complex ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . Alterna - tion of filopodia indicates that the rest of the filopodia - tively , Ena / VASP may participate in recruiting fascin or making machinery was present in the cells and ready its activators , which are important for filament crosslink - to go . This suggests that under normal conditions , con - ing , and therefore bundling ( Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ) . trol of the status of the actin filament barbed end at the In summary , our analysis has demonstrated that key leading edge serves as a crucial determinant of whether proteins , CP and Ena / VASP , play a critical role at the the lamellipodial or filopodial mode of the actin machin - molecular “hardware” level of the actin protrusive ma - ery is expressed . chinery . They sit at a fork in the road of the dendritic - Drosophila S2 cells treated with dsRNA against CP nucleation and convergent - elongation pathways for displayed excessive ruffling , but not filopodia ( Rogers lamellipodia and filopodia formation , respectively . CP et al . , 2003 ) . Since filopodia were absent in S2 cells even serves as a negative regulator of filopodia and a positive in normal culture , an intrinsic deficiency of the filopodial regulator of lamellipodia . Low levels of CP or high levels machinery in this cell type is likely responsible for the of its antagonists determine the extent of prolonged different phenotype . The observed ruffling can be inter - filament growth , which , if allowed , degrades the den - preted as a manifestation of inefficient protrusion re - dritic network , but allows for engagement of down - sulting from long filaments buckling under the mem - stream machinery and filopodia formation . Ena / VASP brane . proteins play an important role not only in terms of What are the elements of the filopodial machinery anticapping activity but also in the engagement of the downstream filopodial machinery . If absent or deficient , necessary to complete filopodia formation after filament Cell372 The number of filopodia per cell was determined by counting only actin filament growth results in ruffling , not filopodia filopodia crossing the cell edge and having fluorescence intensity formation . Although thefull upstreampathway ofregula - 1 . 2 (cid:8) abovebackground . Tworesearchersperformedbothmeasure - tion of cappers and anticappers remains to be eluci - ments independently . Motility analysis was done using kymograph dated , it is clear that such mechanisms exist and that function in Metamorph . Statistical significance was determined by theyarelikelycomplexandintertwined . Thesalientpoint Student’s t test . Graphs and statistical analysis were done using SigmaPlot software . Samples for platinum replica electron micros - ofthisstudyisthattheelongationstatusofactinfilament copy were processed as described ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1998 ) . barbed ends determines the expression of the lamelli - podial or filopodial mode of actin protrusion , contingent Immunoblotting and Densitometry on the functionality of the downstream filopodial ma - Cells were lysed in buffer containing 10 mM Tris , [ pH 7 . 5 ] , 150 mM chinery . NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10 % glycerol , and protease inhibitor tablet ( Roche ) . Protein concentration of the lysates was determined using Experimental Procedures BCA reagent ( Pierce ) . SDS - PAGE ( 4 % – 20 % polyacrylamide ) and immunoblotting were according to standard protocols . Densitome - Expression Plasmids try analysis was performed using NIH Image software . pG - SuperhairpinsiRNAconstruct ( Kojimaetal . , 2004 ) wasbasedon the pSuper expression vector ( Brummelkamp et al . , 2002 ) . pEGFP - Acknowledgments CP (cid:2) 2 was a gift from D . Schafer ( University of Virginia ) . YFP - CP (cid:2) 2 was obtained by transferring the CP (cid:2) 2 cDNA into pEYFP - C1 ( Clon - We thank D . Schafer , T . Uruno , H . L . Yin , and C . Ballestrem for gifts tech ) . Silent mutations in YFP - CP were introduced using the Quik - of reagents ; O . Chaga for technical assistance with phase contrast changesite - directedmutagenesiskitII ( Stratagene ) . pEYFP - gelsolin and electron microscopy ; J . Peloquin for preparing CP (cid:1) and p16 was constructed based on a cDNA fragment of human cytoplasmic antibodies ; A . Mongiu , O . Danciu , and G . Woodhead for help in gelsolin from pCMV - gelsolin , a gift from H . L . Yin ( Univ . of Texas preparing constructs ; M . Paniagua for assistance in FACS ; and S . Southwestern Medical Center ) , and pEYFP - C1 with their HindIII - Zigmond for critical reading of the manuscript . Supported by grants BamHI sites . To remove the 5 (cid:9) - untranslated region , a XhoI - NotI part NIH GM62431 to G . G . B . and NIH GM58801 to F . B . G . in the 5 (cid:9) region was replaced with a PCR - amplified fragment . Received : October 29 , 2003 Antibodies Revised : June 14 , 2004 The following rabbit polyclonal antibodies were obtained as gifts : Accepted : June 18 , 2004 CP (cid:2) 2 C terminus ( R26 ) and the pan - CP (cid:2) - subunit ( R22 ) from D . Published : August 5 , 2004 Schafer ; Arp3 from T . Uruno ( Holland American Red Cross Labora - tory ) ; and gelsolin from H . L . Yin . CP (cid:1) antibody was generated in References rabbits against the peptide IESHQFQPKNFWNGRWRSEWK and affinitypurified . Arp2 / 3complexp16 - Arcsubunitantibody ( Vignjevic Abercrombie , M . , Heaysman , J . E . , and Pegrum , S . M . ( 1970 ) . The et al . , 2003 ) and VASP antibody ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) were described locomotion of fibroblasts in culture . II . “Ruffling . Exp . Cell Res . previously . Thefollowingantibodieswerefromcommercialsources : 60 , 437 – 444 . fascin ( DAKO Cytomation ) , (cid:1) - tubulin ( Sigma ) , secondary antibodies Amatruda , J . F . , Cannon , J . F . , Tatchell , K . , Hug , C . , and Cooper , J . A . ( Sigma , Jackson Laboratories ) . All other reagents were from Sigma ( 1990 ) . Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton in yeast capping protein unless indicated otherwise . mutants . Nature 344 , 352 – 354 . Amatruda , J . F . , Gattermeir , D . J . , Karpova , T . S . , and Cooper , J . A . Cell Culture and Microscopy ( 1992 ) . Effects of null mutations and overexpression of capping B16F1mousemelanomacellswereprovidedbyC . Ballestrem ( Weiz - proteinonmorphogenesis , actindistributionandpolarizedsecretion mann Institute of Science ) and cultured as described previously in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1151 – 1162 . ( Ballestrem et al . , 1998 ) . NIH3T3 cells was purchased from ATCC and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS . Rat2 , MV D7 , Azuma , T . , Witke , W . , Stossel , T . P . , Hartwig , J . H . , and Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Gelsolin is a downstream effector of rac for fibroblast andMV D7 EMwereculturedasdescribed ( Bearetal . , 2000 ) . Transient expression of proteins and shRNA was performed with FuGENE6 motility . EMBO J . 17 , 1362 – 1370 . ( Roche ) accordingtomanufacturer’srecommendations . Forlivecell Ballestrem , C . , Wehrle - Haller , B . , and Imhof , B . A . ( 1998 ) . Actin dy - imaging , cells were transferred into L - 15 medium or phenol red - free namics in living mammalian cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1649 – 1658 . DMEM ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % FBS . Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fassler , R . , Wehland , J . , and Immunostaining was performedafter cell extraction for5 min with Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . NegativeregulationoffibroblastmotilitybyEna / 1 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer ( 100 mM PIPES , [ pH 6 . 9 ] , 1 mM VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 – 728 . MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA ) containing 4 % PEG , MW 40 , 000 ( Serva ) and Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , 2 (cid:5) M phalloidin , followed by fixation with 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde and Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , quenching with NaBH 4 . Texas red phalloidin ( 0 . 033 (cid:5) M , Molecular and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins Probes ) was used for actin staining . Fascin staining was performed and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , after methanol fixation of extracted cells . For VASP staining , cells 509 – 521 . were extracted and fixed simultaneously using a mixture of 0 . 5 % Borisy , G . G . , and Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin machinery : pushing Triton X - 100 and 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde in PEM buffer . Primary anti - the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 – 112 . body concentrations used were 5 – 50 (cid:5) g / ml . Light microscopy was performed using an inverted microscope Brummelkamp , T . R . , Bernards , R . , and Agami , R . ( 2002 ) . A system ( Eclipse TE2000 or Diaphot 300 , Nikon ) equipped with Plan 100 (cid:8) for stable expression of short interfering RNAs in mammalian cells . 1 . 3NA objectiveanda back - illuminatedcooledCCD camera ( model Science 296 , 550 – 553 . CH250 , Roper Scientific ) driven by Metamorph imaging software Carlier , M . F . ( 1998 ) . Control of actin dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . ( Universal Imaging Corp ) . For live imaging , cells were kept on the 10 , 45 – 51 . microscope stage at 37 (cid:10) C during observation . Chou , J . , Stolz , D . B . , Burke , N . A . , Watkins , S . C . , andWells , A . ( 2002 ) . Quantification of both lamellipodia and filopodia was done on Distribution of gelsolin and phosphoinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in la - fixed cells stained with Texas red phalloidin . Only spread cells con - mellipodia during EGF - induced motility . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . taining a prominent leading lamella were chosen . For quantification 34 , 776 – 790 . of lamellipodia , Metamorph line function was used to trace and Cooper , J . A . , and Schafer , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Control of actin assembly measure the whole - cell perimeter and cell perimeter with adjacent and disassembly at filament ends . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 97 – 103 . lamellipodial network . The fraction of cell perimeter occupied by lamellipodial network was used as a parameter for quantification . Cooper , J . A . , Hart , M . C . , Karpova , T . S . , and Schafer , D . A . ( 1999 ) . Mode of Actin Protrusive Machinery 373 Guidebook to the cytoskeletal and motor proteins , 2nd ed . ( Oxford : capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 . Oxford University Press ) . Evangelista , M . , Zigmond , S . , and Boone , C . ( 2003 ) . Formins : signal - Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . ing effectors for assembly and polarization of actin filaments . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 2603 – 2611 . Pruyne , D . , Evangelista , M . , Yang , C . , Bi , E . , Zigmond , S . , Bretscher , A . , and Boone , C . ( 2002 ) . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucle - Grevengoed , E . E . , Fox , D . T . , Gates , J . , andPeifer , M . ( 2003 ) . Balanc - ing different types of actin polymerization at distinct sites : roles for ation and barbed - end association . Science 297 , 612 – 615 . Abelson kinase and Enabled . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1267 – 1279 . Remmert , K . , Olszewski , T . E . , Bowers , M . B . , Dimitrova , M . , Gins - burg , A . , and Hammer , J . A . , 3rd . ( 2004 ) . CARMIL is a bona fide Han , Y . H . , Chung , C . Y . , Wessels , D . , Stephens , S . , Titus , M . A . , Soll , D . R . , andFirtel , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Requirementofavasodilator - stimulated capping protein interactant . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 3068 – 3077 . phosphoprotein family member for cell adhesion , the formation of Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . filopodia , and chemotaxis in dictyostelium . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Dro - 49877 – 49887 . sophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 – 1088 . Harris , E . S . , Li , F . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2004 ) . The mouse formin , FRL - Rorth , P . ( 2003 ) . Communicationbytouch : roleofcellularextensions alpha , slows actin filament barbed end elongation , competes with in complex animals . Cell 112 , 595 – 598 . capping protein , accelerates polymerization from monomers , and Rottner , K . , Behrendt , B . , Small , J . V . , and Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . VASP severs filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 19 , 20076 – 20087 . dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 321 – 322 . Hopmann , R . , Cooper , J . A . , and Miller , K . G . ( 1996 ) . Actin organiza - Schafer , D . A . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Control of actin assembly at tion , bristle morphology , and viability are affected by actin capping filament ends . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 , 497 – 518 . protein mutations in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1293 – 1305 . Schafer , D . A . , Mooseker , M . S . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1992 ) . Localization Hug , C . , Jay , P . Y . , Reddy , I . , McNally , J . G . , Bridgman , P . C . , Elson , ofcappingproteininchickenepithelialcellsbyimmunofluorescence E . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Capping protein levels influence actin and biochemical fractionation . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 335 – 346 . assembly and cell motility in dictyostelium . Cell 81 , 591 – 600 . Schafer , D . A . , Korshunova , Y . O . , Schroer , T . A . , and Cooper , J . A . Jacinto , A . , and Wolpert , L . ( 2001 ) . Filopodia . Curr . Biol . 11 , R634 . ( 1994 ) . Differential localization and sequence analysis of capping Jung , G . , Remmert , K . , Wu , X . , Volosky , J . M . , and Hammer , J . A . , protein beta - subunit isoforms of vertebrates . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 3rd . ( 2001 ) . TheDictyostelium CARMILprotein linkscapping protein 453 – 465 . and the Arp2 / 3 complex to type I myosins through their SH3 do - Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Dynamics of mains . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1479 – 1497 . cappingproteinandactinassemblyinvitro : uncappingbarbedends Katoh , K . , Hammar , K . , Smith , P . J . , and Oldenbourg , R . ( 1999 ) . Bire - by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 . fringenceimagingdirectlyrevealsarchitecturaldynamicsoffilamen - Schafer , D . A . , Welch , M . D . , Machesky , L . M . , Bridgman , P . C . , Meyer , tous actin in living growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 197 – 210 . S . M . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Visualization and molecular analysis Kojima , S . , Vignjevic , D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Improvedsilencing of actin assembly in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1919 – 1930 . vector co - expressing GFP and small hairpin RNA . Biotechniques Sizonenko , G . I . , Karpova , T . S . , Gattermeir , D . J . , and Cooper , J . A . 36 , 74 – 79 . ( 1996 ) . Mutational analysis of capping protein function in Saccharo - Kureishy , N . , Sapountzi , V . , Prag , S . , Anilkumar , N . , and Adams , myces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 1 – 15 . J . C . ( 2002 ) . Fascins , and their roles in cell structure and function . Strasser , G . A . , Rahim , N . A . , VanderWaal , K . E . , Gertler , F . B . , and Bioessays 24 , 350 – 361 . Lanier , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Arp2 / 3 is a negative regulator of growth cone Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 1999 ) . Functions of gelsolin : motility , signaling , translocation . Neuron 43 , 81 – 94 . apoptosis , cancer . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 103 – 108 . Svitkina , T . M . , andBorisy , G . G . ( 1998 ) . Correlativelight and electron Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Gertler , F . B . , and Loureiro , J . J . ( 2003 ) . Function microscopy ofthe cytoskeleton of culturedcells . Methods Enzymol . and regulation of Ena / VASP proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 386 – 392 . 298 , 570 – 592 . Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , A . S . , Wehman , A . M . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and tread - Mena isrequired for neurulationand commissureformation . Neuron milling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 22 , 313 – 325 . 1026 . Lebrand , C . , Dent , E . W . , Strasser , G . A . , Lanier , L . M . , Krause , M . , Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , Svitkina , T . M . , Borisy , G . G . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2004 ) . Critical role of S . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of filopodia Ena / VASPproteinsforfilopodiaformationinneuronsandinfunction initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . downstream of netrin - 1 . Neuron 42 , 37 – 49 . 160 , 409 – 421 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Taoka , M . , Ichimura , T . , Wakamiya - Tsuruta , A . , Kubota , Y . , Araki , T . , Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using Obinata , T . , andIsobe , T . ( 2003 ) . V - 1 , aproteinexpressedtransiently pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . during murine cerebellar development , regulates actin polymeriza - tion via interaction with capping protein . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 5864 – Loureiro , J . J . , Rubinson , D . A . , Bear , J . E . , Baltus , G . A . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Critical roles of phosphorylation and 5870 . actin binding motifs , but not the central proline - rich region , for Ena / Vignjevic , D . , Yarar , D . , Welch , M . D . , Peloquin , J . , Svitkina , T . , and vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) function during cell Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Formation of filopodia - like bundles in vitro from migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 2533 – 2546 . a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 951 – 962 . Lu , M . , Witke , W . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , andKosik , K . S . ( 1997 ) . Delayed von Bulow , M . , Rackwitz , H . R . , Zimbelmann , R . , and Franke , W . W . retraction of filopodia in gelsolin null mice . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1279 – ( 1997 ) . CP beta3 , a novel isoform of an actin - binding protein , is a 1287 . component of the cytoskeletal calyx of the mammalian sperm head . Exp . Cell Res . 233 , 216 – 224 . Mallavarapu , A . , andMitchison , T . ( 1999 ) . Regulatedactincytoskele - ton assembly at filopodium tips controls their extension and retrac - Zigmond , S . H . , Evangelista , M . , Boone , C . , Yang , C . , Dar , A . C . , Sich - tion . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1097 – 1106 . eri , F . , Forkey , J . , and Pring , M . ( 2003 ) . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr . Biol . Moseley , J . B . , Sagot , I . , Manning , A . L . , Xu , Y . , Eck , M . J . , Pellman , D . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2004 ) . A conserved mechanism for Bni1 - and 13 , 1820 – 1823 . mDia1 - induced actin assembly and dual regulation of Bni1 by Bud6 and profilin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 896 – 907 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end