36 “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary EUNJEONG CHEON , Indiana University Bloomington , USA NORMAN MAKOTO SU , Indiana University Bloomington , USA We describe more than 19 months of ethnographic fieldwork with people who have embraced minimalism , a lifestyle movement focused on reducing modern life’s clutter . We found that for minimalists , the home is a central but porous site for making and staging their values around objects . The home’s porous boundary allows minimalists to reinforce their values around objects for others and themselves , but it also necessitates adopting strategies to assert their values when objects—entangled with others’ values—move in and out the boundaries of the home . Drawing from our fieldwork , we introduce the concept of the porous boundary . “Porosity” impels us to consider the coupling of objects with values as we do boundary practices for the home . A porous boundary perspective , we argue , can open new design spaces in the development of novel technologies for the home . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Computer sup - ported cooperative work ; Additional Key Words and Phrases : Minimalism , home , domestic , objects , value negotiation , boundary , value sensitive design , subcultures ACM Reference Format : EunJeong Cheon and Norman Makoto Su . 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW , Article 36 ( November 2018 ) , 24 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274305 1 INTRODUCTION Minimalism is an alternative lifestyle movement whose practitioners , minimalists , seek to reduce modern life’s clutter . This ethos of living with less is not new—minimalism in various guises have sporadically re - emerged and gained popularity . It is a hallmark of philosophies and virtues in many Asian religions , including Buddhism and Taoism . During the 20th century , American essayist and philosopher , Henry David Thoreau , detailed living simply in his book Walden . Richard Gregg [ 31 ] , a social philosopher , advocated for what he called “a voluntary simplicity movement . ” Recently , two self - proclaimed American minimalists [ 59 ] have been particularly prominent figures in helping to label and spread the minimalist movement globally . As of 2018 , more than 554 , 000 people have followed their Facebook page and subscribed to their website ( https : / / www . theminimalists . com / ) . Certainly , minimalism is not limited to the US . In Japan , South Korea , and France , similar minimalist groups ( e . g . , Zen Buddhism [ 84 ] , Capsule Wardrobe [ 57 ] ) have moved into the spotlight . Despite their different forms ( e . g . , as religion , social movement , or alternative lifestyle ) , all share a central Authors’ addresses : EunJeong Cheon , School of Informatics , Computing , and Engineering , Indiana University Bloomington , Bloomington , IN , USA , echeon @ indiana . edu ; Norman Makoto Su , Indiana University Bloomington , School of Informatics , Computing , and Engineering , Bloomington , IN , USA , normsu @ indiana . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2018 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2018 / 11 - ART36 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274305 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 2 E . Cheon & N . M . Su practice : re - evaluating what we possess with the goal of having less and eventually pursuing other life goals that they consider more important ( e . g . , spending more time with family , developing new skills ) . However , we caution that there is no single definition or source for minimalism [ 40 ] . We also focus on minimalism as a lifestyle , although we acknowledge that minimalist “thinking” has pervaded other arenas ( e . g . , interaction design [ 14 ] ) . The idea of minimalist living encompasses contemporary concerns of HCI and CSCW such as sustainability , eco - feminism , and civic movement . From our initial investigations , we found that minimalists constantly question whether an object is valuable to their lives , reflect on decluttering , and iteratively reconstruct their home spaces [ 16 ] . Yet , minimalists do not live in isolation—they negotiate with others over their own transition to a minimalist lifestyle . Decluttering and down - sizing also provide an opposing yet fruitful perspective to past CSCW studies [ 65 , 85 ] by framing questions in terms of why people reject , rather than keep , objects . Additionally , minimalist living has mainstream appeal ; aspects of minimalism can be found in popular self - help styled books [ 48 ] . Hence , we found that minimalists are an information - rich case for not only understanding how people judge their material possessions [ 85 ] but also the relationship of their objects to their home , others , and society [ 71 , p . 169 ] . As with previous studies [ 34 , 52 , 54 , 82 , 93 , 94 ] on specialized groups , we believe that minimalist values and lifestyle—people especially attuned to objects and values—could offer a valuable insight into design spaces for us all . In this paper , we draw on more than 19 months of ethnographic work studying minimalists as a case study [ 25 ] . We define “minimalist living” or “minimalist practices” as a set of identified , common practices labeled as such by our informants who describe themselves as minimalists ; as our findings will show , many interpret and appropriate minimalism in their own , varied terms . We will describe how the domestic place played a significant role as an anchor for our informants’ values . Hence , our work builds upon past work [ 47 ] on the contested values of the home while also asking [ 19 ] : “ [ W ] hat have we overlooked when we talked about the home ? ” More specifically , our research is concerned with how objects , practices , and values are intertwined with the home , how alternative lifestyles of the home provide new insight into how members of subcultures assert , protect , and integrate their values with others , and finally , how such insights provide a fruitful lens into traditional and more radical views of the home . The new perspectives on the practices and values around the non - computational objects of minimalists have the potential to offer insights on how computing may play a role in both objects and the spaces they occupy . Our paper makes three main contributions . First , we provide an empirical account of the mini - malist subculture . Minimalists see the home as the primary site for reinventing themselves . It is through the home that minimalists curate objects and spaces to reify their values . Minimalists also integrate and influence others while negotiating the values of objects entering and leaving their home . Second , grounded in our findings , we suggest an alternative concept of the home as one with a porous boundary that acknowledges the interaction and the “leaks” ( intended or not ) between the home and the outside . On first glance , the concept of porous boundary may seem an intuitively obvious phenomenon ; however , if developed as a theoretical contribution [ 91 ] , we posit it provides a constructive lens for CSCW on the home . Porous boundaries posit a tight relation of objects with values and that our practices with objects should be seen with respect to place—in our case , the home . More specifically , porous boundaries draw our attention to how the border makes one place distinct from the other , the mobility of objects and the fragility of their ties with values between spaces , and the collaborative processes of creating and reinforcing the porous boundary . Finally , we sketch out how porous boundaries suggest promising , alternative design spaces for the home . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 3 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Values in the Traditional Home and Beyond in CSCW Studies of domestic environments have become a central focus of CSCW . Here , we first summarize how studies of the home in CSCW often focus on what we call the “traditional home” and its dynamics and values . This focus sees the home as separate from the workplace , as a space for families to enjoy group activities , and as a safe and comfortable space . We then identify areas in which CSCW has gone beyond this traditional viewpoint . We see our own work as building upon traditional views of the home as well as providing an alternative perspective on the home . Minimalists do not outright reject all tenets of the traditional home , but they do provide a perspective that is itself critical of the traditional home . First , the traditional home is set apart from the workplace [ 46 , 53 , 68 ] . Hindus [ 38 ] further underpinned this contrast by emphasizing that a family is not an organization , and family members are not knowledge workers . Families have different sets of values from those in the workplaces ( e . g . , productivity and efficiency [ 27 ] ) . For example , in contrast with the workplace , Gaver [ 27 ] highlighted the home as a place for ludic technologies to support fun and creativity . Second , the traditional home is a place for families [ 34 , 61 , 85 , 89 ] to engage in collaborative activities . This work often examines how a family adapts to or uses a particular technology or prototype , such as video - mediated communication technologies [ 4 , 46 ] , archiving devices [ 47 ] , gaming systems [ 35 ] , home networking devices [ 32 ] , or family health monitors [ 7 ] . These studies focus on the overall home or certain areas ( e . g . , kitchen [ 69 ] , wardrobe [ 23 ] , bowls and drawers [ 85 ] ) that are shared among family members . Some studies have focused on everyday use of household artifacts [ 87 ] by noting sequences of actions [ 18 ] when using a certain technological device at home . Hupfeld and Rodden [ 41 ] investigated books as domestic objects and the wide range of their practices within four major dimensions—temporal , spatial , material and social—to identify design opportunities for future e - books . Taylor and Swan [ 88 ] kept track of families’ to - do lists to see how they arranged various family members’ household chores and individual activities . Vyas et al . [ 90 ] also examined families’ calendars and noticeboards to examine their financial management . Håkansson and Sengers [ 34 ] focused on overall uses of ICT among simple living families to gain design insights for sustainable HCI . Many of these studies highlight the importance of understanding mundane activities and household routines [ 18 ] . Although these studies do not explicitly identify values of the home , they nonetheless suggest that the traditional home is a place to support smooth family collaboration and planning . Lastly , the traditional home is a safe and comfortable place —a place that has the opposite attributes of a hospital or professional healthcare setting [ 7 , 33 , 70 ] . For example , Palen and Aaløkke [ 70 ] studied older adults’ homes to design domestic technologies to support reliable medication . The researchers carefully consider familiar places in home ( e . g . , kitchen shelf ) and daily routine ( e . g . , meal times ) to create adaptable health care practices in the home . Although the traditional home has been emphasized in CSCW , social science and anthropology have had a long interest in expanding the meaning of the home [ 8 , 27 , 62 ] . For example , Garvey [ 27 ] shows how home decorations for low - income workers serve as a channel for self - presentation . The home serves as “a place of public exhibition of the tastes and values of the householders living there , ” or a place where householders may “ stamp their character upon the house and actively make it their home” [ 63 , p . 257 ] . In line with this , HCI researchers [ 19 ] have recently proposed a new research perspective to move away from adhering to current dominant views ( e . g . , author interpreter or anthropocentric view ) . Work in CSCW and HCI has started to go beyond the traditional aspects of the home , such as religious practices [ 95 ] , conflicts between landlord and tenant regarding over energy use [ 21 ] , Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 4 E . Cheon & N . M . Su domestic network traffic records [ 12 ] , privacy issues [ 73 ] , emergency situations [ 24 ] , and home entertainment [ 67 ] in domestic environments . Alternative forms of the home have also been explored in the context of mobile lifestyles [ 58 , 72 ] , moving into a smaller home or a care home [ 51 ] , and alternative housing [ 20 , 43 ] , illustrating how diverse research approaches and angles can produce rich meanings of the home . Desjardins et al . [ 19 ] conducted a critical review of 121 works on the home in HCI and identified seven genres of domestic research . Our work is broadly aligned with the contested values of a home genre since it uncovers alternative configurations that “go beyond the traditional meaning of the home” and “common assumptions about what the home is” [ 19 ] . It also is aligned with the home as a site for interpretation in that it considers the home as a site for reflecting upon objects and their values . Finally , this study can be seen in light of two future perspectives on the home that Desjardins et al . [ 19 ] advocate : the material and first person perspective . Our work overlaps with the material perspective by centering the crucial role of ( material ) objects in reifying the values of minimalists in the spheres of their daily lives . The first - person view argues for the benefits of capturing how the self experiences and interprets the home ; in particular , this viewpoint highlights the need to understand how the home is a site for both multiple meanings and experiences . We do not claim our work neatly fits within these genres and / or two perspectives , but we do find inspiration in the trajectory of home - situated research suggested by Desjardins et al . [ 19 ] . Our study aims to build on current studies of domestic life in CSCW by providing an additional , unique perspective of the home as a site for value negotiation through individuals adopting an alternative , nontraditional values , objects , and practices in pursuit of the minimalist movement . 2 . 2 Cherished Objects in the Home Studies have investigated the values people attribute to the cherished objects of their home [ 60 ] . Notably , Odom and his colleagues researched what leads people to keep or discard objects in their home to inform the design of durable technologies to which people could grow strongly attached . The authors identified four dimensions informing the relationship between owner and object : engagement , histories , augmentation , and perceived durability [ 65 ] . Based on these dimensions , the study analyzed various household objects that participants brought up during interviews at their home . Furthermore , the research team focused on understanding how participants’ perception of the objects they were most strongly attached to changed over time [ 64 ] . One study analyzing cherished objects in teenagers’ bedrooms focused on virtual objects—for example , how they were stored , displayed , and managed [ 66 ] . They identified spaces in which values could be created : through rich metadata , control across places , and as tools of presenting self . By examining the patterns of how people perceived their meaningful objects in the home , Miller [ 60 ] presents design implications for managing digital objects in more sustainable ways . Bales and Lindley [ 5 ] consider important life transitions , such as leaving home for college . They identified how physical ( e . g . , pipe statues , baskets ) and digital objects ( e . g . , Facebook photos ) allow high school graduates to feel a sense of connection to the home . Specifically , the authors focused on a set of practices with participants’ meaningful objects ( e . g . , moving , placing , sorting , and deleting objects in their new living place or digital space ) and how these practices made their objects more meaningful . Beside personal objects at home , objects shared among family members have also been examined . Oftentimes , values of the objects were not only associated with the self but with family members and memories [ 47 ] . Several studies [ 44 , 45 ] have investigated how families curate and interact with their collective memories through physical objects to seek ways in which technologies could support archiving shared memories . They noticed that an object that elicited memories sometimes caused tensions when family members had conflicting memories about that object [ 45 ] . In another study [ 44 ] , the authors looked at how people “declutter” their excessive objects and , particularly , Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 5 Fig . 1 . Fieldwork ( left to right ) : tiny house roadshow with minimalists Meet - up members , Jars for zero waste practices ( consisting of 6 - months of trash at P22’s house ) , tool library that West - coast Meet - up members use for minimalist living what challenges may exist when dealing with their sentimental objects . The study identified several patterns of curating a large collection of personal objects at home called the “curation regime” and discussed how to apply these patterns to building and designing digital collections . In a similar vein , Swan et al . [ 85 ] focused on the ways families contain and classify clutter . They found that idiosyncratic ways of dealing with clutter allowed families to create their own unique vision of the home . This past work has highlighted the meaningful objects of the home and how people have perceived , managed , curated , and shared them with others . Like our minimalists , cherished objects are an important way to signal one’s identity . Our findings expand on these studies by detailing how people judge the value of the objects in the home , and—importantly—how the very judgment of value itself becomes a point of tension in and outside the home in establishing and asserting one’s identity . 3 METHODOLOGY We draw on more than 19 months ( July 2016 to March 2018 ) of ethnographic fieldwork at multiple sites : five online communities on minimalist living , three offline local minimalist Meetup groups in the US , and miscellaneous minimalist events and places including a tiny house roadshow and a tool - lending library . Data from our fieldwork included participant observations at those multiple sites and 23 semi - structured interviews . Field work was conducted by the first author , and all authors were involved in planning and analyzing the data . 3 . 1 Initial Engagement We familiarized ourselves with the minimalist movement by observing and participating in two of the largest closed and open online minimalism living Facebook groups ( 9 , 151 and 139 , 815 members , respectively , as of March 2018 ) , and three local minimalist Meetup groups—one on the West Coast ( 855 members ) and two in the Midwest ( 482 and 956 members , each ) . When observing online groups , we took notes and archived particularly interesting questions and pictures posted to the forums . We also posted requests for books or documentaries for those new to minimalism . In this engagement , we gained fluency in their language and identified broad practices among minimalists [ 10 ] . For example , many of them shared pictures of their de - cluttering process at home . We found that minimalists also often pursued other alternative lifestyles such as the Tiny House ( living simply in a smaller but more efficient space ) and Zero Waste movement ( living with fewer items and producing less waste ) in Fig . 1 . Finally , we also frequently encountered online articles and video clips featuring minimalists in Asian countries—minimalism has a wide following , particularly in Korea and Japan . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 6 E . Cheon & N . M . Su These initial engagements with minimalist Meetup groups led us to their monthly offline meetings as well as local , informal gatherings . From September 2016 to March 2018 , we attended seven Meetup group meetings . We disclosed our intentions with Meetup leaders in advance , and during meetings , we introduced ourselves as researchers . Through these participant observations , we could build rapport with members of the local Meetup groups ; they proved invaluable for recruiting minimalists from the online community [ 13 ] and offline meetings [ 37 ] . Our field notes and archival materials ( e . g . , brochures and pamphlets ) were also included to aid our analysis of interview data later . 3 . 2 Participants Recruitment and Interviews We conducted semi - structured interviews with 23 adult minimalists ( 18 females and 5 males , ranging in their late 20s to early 50s ) —20 participants in the US and three in Korea . Even though there is—to the best of our knowledge—no official data about the gender makeup of minimalists , we did observe that most participants in offline Meetup meetings were female . We did not find significant differences between female and male minimalist interviews . We do not have precise information about our informants’ education or income level . However , based on their occupations ( cf . Table 1 ) and neighborhood , we surmise that our participants are middle - class , which is a potential limitation of our study [ 4 ] . Participants’ level of engagement with minimalism varied : over years of practices , some participants adjusted minimalist practices ( e . g . , how much and often they will downsize ) within their comfort zone while some went to the extreme ( e . g . , throwing out a rolling pin upon discovering they can use a tin can to flatten dough , moving to a smaller house to progress as a minimalist ) . Participants in the US were recruited from three Meetup groups located in two Midwest cities ( N = 13 ) , one Meetup group in a West Coast city ( N = 6 ) , and via a Facebook group for minimalists ( N = 1 ) . Interviews lasted 1 . 5 hours on average ( min = 50 min , max = 3 . 5 hrs ) . Interviews often took place before or after Meetup meetings ; otherwise , we conducted interviews at places participants suggested , such as cafes and public libraries . One minimalist Meetup leader invited us to a home tour . All interviews were audio - recorded and transcribed for later analysis . After noting a number of references to East Asian minimalists during our initial engagements , we also recruited three people well - known in the Korean minimalist community – a book author , a blogger , and a community leader—via their email contact information found on their blogs or online communities . The first author , a native Korean speaker , conducted these face - to - face interviews ; they were transcribed and translated to English for open coding . In this paper , we did not find noticeable cultural differences in our data with respect to their minimalist values and practices . Instead , we found mostly shared codings between our Korean and US informants . This commonality may be because US and Korean minimalists rely on the same information sources for minimalism ( e . g . , particular blogs , podcasts , and books ) and share similar ancillary interests ( e . g . , sustainable living , fair trade ) . Therefore , we will not differentiate Korean versus US participants . The interview protocol began with background on participants’ motivations and strategies for adopting and learning minimalism . This was followed with questions on their routines , habits , possessions , relationships , and community interactions as minimalists . Following some interviews , we amended our interview protocols to focus on how minimalists changed various aspects of their lives . We ceased conducting interviews upon reaching data saturation with our analysis . 3 . 3 Data Analysis Our research team held meetings on a weekly basis and exchanged thoughts to identify emerging themes based on the collected data—observations and interviews . Following the grounded theory approach [ 15 ] , all authors individually coded all the data with the ATLAS . ti qualitative data analysis software . In total , we generated 436 codes from open coding , which were narrowed down to a Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 7 ID Neighborhood Occupation Years Practicing Minimalism P1 Midwest City 1 Self - employed 3 . 5 P2 Midwest City 1 NGO worker 6 P3 Midwest City 1 Professional organizer 20 P4 Midwest City 1 Pilot 3 P5 Midwest City 1 Airline worker 3 . 5 P6 South Korea Self - employed 2 P7 South Korea Teacher for public elementary school 4 P8 South Korea University staff 2 . 5 P9 West Coast Architecture designer 10 P10 Midwest City 2 Art teacher for elementary school 1 P11 Midwest City 2 Part - time worker 3 . 5 P12 Midwest City 2 Software technician 3 . 5 P13 Midwest City 2 Municipal official 4 P14 Midwest City 2 Teacher for secondary school 1 P15 Midwest City 2 Full - time office worker 1 . 5 P16 Midwest City 2 Professional organizer 3 . 5 P17 Midwest City 2 Software Engineer 1 P18 West Coast City 1 PhD student in health care system 6 P19 West Coast City 1 Professional organizer 3 . 5 P20 West Coast City 1 Freelance translator 3 P21 West Coast City 1 Biologist 2 . 5 P22 West Coast City 1 Retiree 3 . 5 P23 West Coast City 1 Freelancer 11 Table 1 . Minimalist Demographics : Neighborhood , Occupation , and Experience few major themes or parent codes . Axial coding and labeling of major themes were facilitated through affinity diagramming . For example , data coded as values , one of our parent codes , were classified into 29 sub - themes ( e . g . , threaten others’ value , prioritize their own value over other people’s values , human interaction is more valued ) . In total , we created 27 parent codes and 118 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 8 E . Cheon & N . M . Su subcodes . Our analyses was iterative : we continually went back and forth between our codings and data to update , refine , and reflect upon the practices and values of minimalists . 4 FINDINGS The home serves as the main staging ground to demonstrate and represent values and practices with their objects to visitors . We will discuss how minimalists invent and reinvent their values via objects and space in the home . We then will describe how minimalists “protect” their home’s values through concerns and practices over objects ; namely , to pragmatically deal with value tensions , minimalists negotiate with non - minimalists . Lastly , we discuss how minimalists interact to preserve their values outside the home with objects . 4 . 1 Home Sweet Home : A Place for ( Re ) Inventing Values Many of our participants fortuitously stumbled into the minimalist movement after learning about it from popular media or friends . Yet , to be a true minimalist requires more than reading about it . The values of minimalism emphasize that these values must be put into practice . Only then can one label themselves as a minimalist or , at the very least ( many of our informants said there is no final state of minimalism that could be reached ) , a practitioner of minimalism . All participants reported that , through the minimalist movement , they gained the sensitivity and practices to think about what “things” in their lives were most important and how to judge that importance . We argue that the home is a key site for value invention and reinvention . Moreover , minimalists , although independent , are certainly not hermits—values are not done in a vacuum but rather sometimes despite or with others in the home . To set the stage , it is important to understand what minimalists do in the home . We will first describe how practices that reify values revolve around objects and space . That is , these practices of deliberately choosing and thinking about objects and space in the home make the home internally and externally a signifier for the values of minimalists . 4 . 1 . 1 Objects . For our informants , the home is the site for practicing minimalism . After making the decision to adopt the tenets of minimalist living , our participants first applied the principles and practices of minimalism to their everyday objects and spaces at home . For instance , upon starting minimalism , many participants immediately came to realize how much “clutter” they had in their home . As two participants ( P7 , 11 ) explained , before becoming minimalists , they were confident that their current practices already helped maintain a clean and tidy home . Yet , this confidence soon dissipated after becoming minimalists . P7 illustrated how differently she began to perceive and define “clutter” : Before I learned about it [ minimalism ] , I thought arranging , piling , and hiding represent good cleaning . I thought that’s how to live an organized life . But later I realized I was living in a bunch of garbage I don’t need . Back then , I was proud of it [ my current house practices ] , and I took pictures . But when I see it now , I can see all the stuff needed to be recycled like plastic bottles , empty bottles and everything was piled . P7 kept her recyclable bottles and arranged them in her kitchen , regardless of whether they were actually going to be used . For her , well - organized objects did not count as clutter . Now de - cluttering to her is more than just good arrangement ; it actually requires discarding objects . For participants , life as a minimalist is an ongoing process requiring careful examination of one’s possessions and constant questioning and self - reflection . Participants commonly noted that de - cluttering made them pay close attention to the individual objects they had at home , enabling them to reevaluate the value of each object and decide whether such objects are really necessary for their lives . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 9 Over the course of these careful considerations , participants describe having their eyes opened to a new relationship between objects and themselves ( P5 , 6 , 8 , 18 ) . For example , P18 mentioned how she felt a kind of moral influence from her objects which compelled her to maintain relationships with them : “You know sometimes things have that kind of emotional pull on me , and I really need to evaluate and heal that to have a different relationship with all of the objects in my life . ” She confided to us that she had an awful experience on her clothes , reminiscent of her mother and a feeling of anger . But , she added , she has healed this anger by changing her perspectives on objects . Further , we found that this new sensitivity to objects was gradually cultivated by minimalists through the de - cluttering processes . For example , P6 explained that his careful selection of objects allowed him to value the few objects he had decided to keep even more ; every individual object had been made special in his life : “Now that I have fewer things , the remaining stuff is something I try to use and feel worthwhile . And everything I [ own ] now is something I love . So I enjoy using them because I carefully picked every single one of them . ” No remaining object is superfluous . Participants commented that they could now articulate which objects they favored in terms of specific ”feelings” toward their objects ( e . g . , anxiety about objects , feeling burdened by , or free because of the objects ) . In another comment , P6 said , “I think I am more sensitive about the things in the house and everything is becoming richer in every way . Being sensitive makes me find out what I really need . ” Due to his sensitivity to certain objects , P6 viewed that he now can dwell on his favorite objects in his home—making his home an enchanted world . We now turn to describing how important space is to minimalists . Rather than regarding space as emptiness , minimalists made space a first - class , desirable “object” to consider in relation to everyday objects . 4 . 1 . 2 Spaces . In addition to objects , participants also became more sensitive to spaces at home . This led to values that emphasized empty space which , to our minimalists , are often ignored . Going through their possessions frequently , most participants came to recognize and appreciate empty spaces at home ( P4 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 13 , 19 , 20 ) . They lauded empty spaces in the home , reporting that such spaces create room for them to breathe and feel peaceful . Some participants further imbued empty spaces with special significance because of the alluring possibilities for what the space could become or what it could hold . For example , P20 shared a cathartic moment of unexpectedly encountering empty spaces : “it was funny because in my kitchen I realized that there was one cupboard that was empty . . . Just the fact that I hadn’t even noticed that there was one big empty space in my kitchen , to me , was amazing . . . I totally find solace in space , empty space . ” Just as some show great care for their favorite objects , so , too , do several participants lavish care upon empty spaces . Minimalism has changed the ways they utilize these spaces . P9 designates places for each of her objects . In particular , only valued objects are able to take up space on her coffee table . During the interview , she showed us a special pocket she made that hangs off the table ; this pocket stores less valued objects like the TV remote control : “I tried to create different types of spaces from what I had . . . That’s how I figure out what is important that I want to keep on certain surfaces , and stuff that’s not important that I could put to the side or tuck away or something like that . ” Like P9 , participants try to figure out better ways to use spaces for objects that are most deserving of their own precious space . This sensitivity to spaces at home has also led minimalists to question and redefine the conventional concept of a room . For instance , participants P9 , 11 , 12 , and 20 , explained that the living room could be a bedroom , and a dining room could be a work place . Minimalists need not be boxed into social conventions on dividing homes into rigid and set rooms . 4 . 1 . 3 Staging Values with Objects in the Home . We have set the stage by describing how the home is the central site where participants express their minimalist values—a site to examine and Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 10 E . Cheon & N . M . Su reduce possessions to redefine their living spaces . We now discuss how such constructions are not private affairs . Rather , the space of the home is a social space in which values are espoused and demonstrated . This reinvention of the home is something other non - minimalists could visibly notice . Participants’ homes served as showrooms for their values to outsiders . Thus , the home visit is a key event ( P4 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 19 , 20 , 22 ) in which the values of minimalists are tangibly exposed to outsiders who may hold different ( often , in this case , mainstream ) values . Participants shared stories about these opportune moments . When exposed to their homes , our minimalists related that visitors got a sense of what a minimalist home environment was , and most responded positively ( e . g . , “oh wow , it’s so organized , and clean ( P19 ) . ” ) . P22 showed us her zero - waste jars ( Figure 1 ) during a home tour . She described how her jars in the kitchen play a role of promulgating her values : The main way it [ the jars ] showed up is when I was first doing Airbnb . I didn’t say I was vegan , and I didn’t say I was eco - conscious , and most of the time , I just rent a room upstairs . I’m here , but occasionally , I would rent up the whole house . . . . I did put up this [ a jar ] thing that just said my trash project . . . You are the guests , you’re on vacation but just help me recycle so they at least know that this is of interest to me . Since then , I attract all these people who are very interested in these things [ zero - waste practices ] now . As a result of her gentle nudge , she successfully got her guests interested in continuing zero - waste practices . In addition , P20 recalled a friend who commented , “Oh , there’s no décor . There’s nothing that doesn’t have a purpose . ” Even though visitors usually did not know that participants were practicing minimalists , visitors could perceive that the home was somehow different from others . Participants considered the home itself an important reflection of their identity as minimalists . P9 eloquently describes how an outsider might interpret the spaces of her home as representative of herself , a minimalist : “I’m proud that my space represents who I am now . If someone , a complete stranger , were to walk in this space , they could probably tell what kind of person I am . It’s almost like my soul mirrors my living space . . . I’m very proud of the space I created . ” Certainly , our participants were concerned about how the values displayed at home would be seen as a reflection of themselves to others ; this concern necessitated constant maintenance of their living spaces . P14 told us about her sister who inspired P14 to be a minimalist : Where other people are like , “Oh guests are coming , we have to clean the house and pick up , ” with her house , [ it ] is always , she calls it , staged for living . You know how you can stage a home to sell it ? Like you make it look really nice ? She stages her home everyday so that it’s . . . how she would want it to be presented to other people is the way she wants to present it all the time so she really likes it . She appreciates it when people comment and understand that this is my [ her ] lifestyle . [ emphasis added ] Here , P14 plays on the typical meaning of staging a home by real estate agents . Staging a home artificially places furniture and other objects in the house to give the potential home buyer a sense of what the home might look like when someone is living in it . For P14’s sister , however , the home is a stage for demonstrating her own life . Yet , this play on the phrase doubly indicates that staged for living conveys both our informants’ individualism as well as desire to be received and influence others . With light ribbing aside , minimalists found it “reassuring” that their homes would inspire the values and practices of visitors and others . Thus , the house is a place to reinvent and stage their values for others to facilitate mutual understanding of their minimalist lifestyle . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 11 4 . 2 Protecting Porous Boundaries Earlier , we argued that the home is a key site for inventing and reinventing values . The home and the objects within outwardly and inwardly embody the values of the minimalists we interviewed . This set of values is publicly visible , commented on , and even influential on visitors . In this section , we turn to the space between the home and the outside world—the boundary between . Here , we do not mean that these activities actually occur on some real boundary , but rather these activities seek to maintain and protect the boundary between the home ( where the minimalist’s subculture and its values shine ) and outside social worlds . More specifically , this border is porous . This means two things . First , minimalists try , not always successfully , to take action to maintain their practices and values within the home . Second , value negotiation to protect the border often happens when objects are received by the home or move to other people’s homes . 4 . 2 . 1 Within the Boundary : Resisting Objects from the Outside World . Minimalists stressed about the reception of objects from or with non - minimalists . This tension stems from how minimalists and non - minimalists differently interpreted the value of particular objects . This was a particular source of consternation with family members . P18 noted that in a consumerist society , objects are an important “love language . ” Here , she describes an ongoing tension with her mother’s well - intended gifts for her children : My mother’s [ love language ] in particular , is gifts . My mother has seen my house . She knows we have a very small space . But she will do things like buy and send my kids a rocking horse . A rocking horse ! That would take up half of their bedroom . So I don’t try and explain it . . . but that’s the size of her love : ’This is how much I love you , I bought you this huge rocking horse because it’s huge and I love you a lot . ’ The rocking horse and other gifts from her mother are “ dollar tree ” items that are antithetical to minimalist values . They fall apart , are not useful , not age appropriate , and their shipment wastes resources . P18 even prepared a list of things her mother could give her children like “ a certificate to this place we go to all the time and to have really great experiences . ” Again , we see the emphasis here that the importance is the experience rather than the object . P5 noted that he would let his son decide how to celebrate a birthday but nonetheless couched such decisions in terms of items vs . experiences , “We tell them a birthday party is going to cost us $ 400 . . . in many cases what we end up doing is inviting two or three or four of their best friends to . . . go fishing or go on a boat , or go to watch a movie , go play games . ” Birthdays for many minimalists are emblematic of the values they are trying to avoid . Minimalists may forcefully exert their values but recognize that sometimes a more pragmatic approach involving compromise may be best . Above , we described situations and reasons why minimalists decline gifts . However , minimalists certainly do sometimes keeps objects which violate their values . P14 spoke to us about receiving hand - made gifts ( e . g . , sweaters , earrings , and scarves ) from her sister . These items are difficult candidates to de - clutter because “ she put time into the homely thing , so those always make me feel worse to get rid of . ” So , P14 compromises : “ I’ll just try and make sure I do use them just when I’m around her . . . I may not enjoy them as much as something else , but I know it brings her joy to see me wearing or using things that she made me , so I’m okay with that because I know that makes her happy . ” Crucial to this point is that P14 believes showing appreciation for other people’s values is important . Minimalists acknowledged that they were unable to resist unwanted objects . Accepting unwanted objects sometimes actually helped minimalists to resist the temptation of consumerism : “Even if you are not able to part with certain items for whatever reason ( e . g . , for sentimental reasons ) , perhaps Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 12 E . Cheon & N . M . Su it’s making you conscientious about what you DO bring into your home” ( Meetup meeting , January 2018 ) . These unwanted objects served as a reminder to avoid purchasing more items and be aware of what is allowed into the home . 4 . 2 . 2 Out of the Boundary : Asserting Values through Giving Objects . When objects no longer have a place in their home , minimalists de - clutter and often donate these items . Once they have made a decision to give away an object ( rather than dispose of it ) , minimalists think hard about how the object will be appropriated by its new owner . Thus , the decision to rid oneself of an object is sometimes tied with whether that object will find the right home . P12 discusses feeling good about his decision to give away his guitar : “Every time I think about the guitar that I don’t even have anymore I feel so good about it . I know it’s in better hands” ( P12 ) . P14 describes this as giving “ objects a second chance . . . at a price they can afford . ” Many minimalists that we met in a Meetup believed donations are less wasteful and more responsible because the objects go to “ the community of people who need it now ” ( Meetup meeting , 2017 ) . However , minimalists are often torn about donations because they worry whether the values inscribed in their objects will be upheld . In one Meetup meeting , participants discussed how donations do not guarantee that items would find a home—one minimalist noted that Goodwill ( American thrift stores ) and other organizations “ keep it [ donated items ] for four weeks and then it goes to the landfill . . . It makes me crazy . ” Even if items are successfully transferred to a new owner , minimalists are skeptical regarding the consequences of their objects . Minimalists worry if donations merely exacerbate the very problems they were originally trying to solve by adopting their new lifestyle : Now , I’m just enabling someone else . Here’s another spoon that they could have in their kitchen that they don’t need . . . it’s a struggle for me to feel like it’s okay for me to let go , and if someone else wants it—if it’s okay for them to have it ( P14 ) . [ emphasis added ] Organizations such as Goodwill or the Salvation Army do not “store” the value the previous owner had for the object . P4 describes her dilemma in donating a collection of prized African leather boxes . She did not “ want to donate them to like Salvation Army . They’re too precious . ” So although she didn’t need to use the boxes—“ I have nothing in them anymore ”—and wanted to donate them , she nonetheless wanted that preciousness to be carried on . Such tensions with the views of minimalists on gifting are amplified during customs of main - stream society . P22 knows during Christmas her grandchildren will ask , “ ‘Did you bring me something ? ’ Because she’s used to the other grandma . I said , ‘Yeah , I brought myself . ’ ” Naturally , teaching grandchildren to value holidays for “ relationships and time together ” is difficult , and P22 recognizes her attitudes may be “Scrooge” - like or “anti - Christmas” ; however , her refusal to give gifts is consistent with her beliefs at home . By donating items , these items are removed from any sort of original value they had , and , moreover , become tawdry objects that clutter someone’s life . Once outside their homes , the objects no longer have its heirloom , personal , or utilitarian characteristics but are in danger of becoming part of a consumerist society . 4 . 3 Values Outside the Home We have just explored the concept of the home border where participants take great care to control and preserve the values in their homes . Once our participants leave their home , however , their values are exposed to the greater public . Moreover , minimalists are able to assert themselves and have their practices and their values percolate to the people and local communities around them . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 13 4 . 3 . 1 Inculcating Values in Others’ Homes & the Local Community . Our participants felt strongly about the values they have adopted from minimalism . This conviction with minimalism was practiced in the home but also outside the home to other places . In particular , family and friends who visited our participants’ home ( P2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 14 , 18 , 20 ) were not only exposed to values via the observed home practices of minimalists but also came away from these visits having adopted some of these values . Outside the home , our participants’ homes became exemplars to others . At the same time , it is in the home where others try out the values of minimalist living . However , when dealing with strangers unfamiliar with minimalism , it was difficult for our participants to fully follow minimalist values outside the home . Some of the zero waste practices that participants follow at home , such as not bringing plastic products home , are socially awkward to do in public . For example , P9 related how she initially felt uncomfortable bringing her own jars and bags to the grocery store as opposed to the provided plastic bags because others were staring at her as she put bulk products into her own containers— “I think they thought I was stealing the food . ” Carrying her jars and bags around was a powerful way for her to enact her minimalist values outside the home ; however , this purposeful assertion of her values through these objects was something other shoppers had no way of knowing—making it bizarre to some . Similarly , P20 also described a time a shop proprietor would not allow her to use her own container . In response , she successfully convinced the shop itself to adopt minimalists practices : There’s a little market close to my house , and they have a deli counter and I actually told them . . . I used to bring my own containers and eventually they told me , “Oh , we’re not allowed to do that . ” So I started an email exchange with the owner and she told me , “Oh you know what , now I’m going to provide my own containers and you would be able to bring them back later on and I will clean them . ” By toting her things , it created a chance to begin a conversation on minimalist practices outside the home . Earlier , we discussed how objects are carefully curated to fulfill the values of minimalists . Within the home , control over which objects are kept and discarded is possible . However , even when venturing outside the home , minimalists still want to maintain their ethos . One way many of the minimalists do this is by engaging in a sharing economy . A prime example is described by P4 . As a result of her value to not be wasteful , she sought out objects from organizations that support that ethos . She needed to be resourceful to find a “subculture of renting” : For example , I needed a stapler to do a project . I was like , ‘I don’t want to buy a stapler . I don’t need one . It’s just for this project . ’ I’m like , ‘What am I going to do ? ’ I ended up going to my local hardware store . Not Home Depot or anything , just a local place , and just walking there . I’m like , “Well , you know , I need a stapler” . . . He’s like , “No , take it . You can rent it for $ 5 for 24 hours . Take it and bring it back whenever you’re done with it . ” P4 loved this interaction because it empowered and “ enriched ” her—she discovered that “ I could do things . . . without having to own tools . ” Minimalism forced her to find resources that were in line with her values within her home—places that valued objects and also allowed people to rent without waste . P19 spoke of how a Facebook group allowed him to connect with people who gave away objects . He gave away tools , and that , like with P4 , forced him to seek out friends to borrow goods . Minimalism here fosters human interaction : “So it’s just the free section of Craigslist but much more local . . . once I got rid of a bunch stuff , I was forced to ask my friends and stuff to use their things , and it brought us closer together ’cause we were spending time together and interacting more . ” Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 14 E . Cheon & N . M . Su 5 DISCUSSION In our findings , we found that minimalists often participate in value negotiations with regards to objects in the home . These phenomena highlight domestic environments as sites for building and preserving values . In this section , we propose the concept of porous boundaries as a promising analytic lens to understand how artifacts , coupled with their values , are preserved or resisted through the boundaries of a place . To make our case , we will first articulate the characteristics of porous boundaries . Next , we articulate the benefits of the porous boundary concept in the context of previous work and concepts in CSCW . This concept , we believe , provides proper depth and nuance to the interrelatedness of the practices and values of minimalists with their home and objects . Moreover , porous boundaries can be found in other homes ; they are not unique to the homes of minimalists . By gleaning porous boundaries from our minimalists , whom have an acute sensitivity to objects and spaces , we can more generally think about our objects and their relationship to our spaces and social spheres . Lastly , we sketch out how porous boundaries can point to new , fruitful design opportunities and concerns for the home . 5 . 1 The Concept of Porous Boundary For our minimalists , the home boundary is situated between the inside and outside home—not only as a physical line that divides the home from the outside world but also as a conceptual line demarcating two different places where different practices , norms , and values exist . Adopting new life values and principles , our minimalists tried to preserve their values inside the home while excluding opposing values . They selectively allowed objects to enter into their home ; for instance , refusing free items from events , repudiating gifts from visitors , and not putting stock in sentimental objects such as their infant’s clothes or birthday cards . In this way , minimalists reinvented their home by filling it exclusively with objects that they value . Furthermore , these principles reflected the ways minimalists brought these objects outside their home . Minimalists gave serious thought to externally representing their life values through their objects ( e . g . , using their containers instead of disposable bags offered by a grocery shop ) . Our minimalists also had to negotiate or compromise their values on managing objects and spaces with family members ( inside the home ) and friends or communities ( outside the home ) . Although such negotiations with their value sometimes stay within their home , sometimes they cross the home’s boundary . In other words , this is a porous boundary . The porous boundary of the minimalist home draws inspiration from the biological cell with its semi - permeable membrane that selectively enables movement of substances in and out to maintain cellular homeostasis . Two aspects of this biological metaphor are salient to our theory . First , semi - permeability enables the membrane to control and regulate the movement of substances in and out of cells . Second , the membrane’s purpose is to maintain an optimal difference between the interior and exterior of the cell ( called the cell potential ) . There is precedence in using biological metaphors in CSCW . For example , the concept of stigmergy [ 17 ] was introduced as an explanatory device for the cooperative practices in architectural offices and building sites . However , we emphasize that while the semi - permeable membranes of cells gave us insight , the concept of porous boundaries should not be taken to literally exhibit all the characteristics of their biological cousins . Figure 2 visually represents our concept . We define a porous boundary as a boundary ( 1 ) lying between two separate places ( e . g . , an inside and outside place , Fig . 2a ) ( 2 ) in which a process of selection happens that allow only certain things to enter and exit ( e . g . , Fig . 2c , d1 ) . Its mechanisms ( principles ) regulating and controlling the movement of things across the boundary allows it to continuously ( 3 ) ensure one side is different from the other side , thereby protecting one side ( Fig . 2b ) . Thus , porous boundaries particularly focus on one side as the “protected” place . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 15 Object Value Protected Boundary Porous Boundary ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( c ) ( d ) ( d 1 ) ( d 2 ) ( e ) Fig . 2 . Visual Depiction of Porous Boundary – a : porous boundary between the place and outside , b : delimits the place of interest ( e . g . , home ) ; Possible Scenarios with Objects / Values – c : rejection of object , d : acceptance but eventual rejection of object and value , e : fading value when object goes outside A porous boundary focuses our attention to a border demarcating a place from the outside— seeing two sides that maintain their distinctiveness . At the same time , the border’s permeable nature focuses our attention to the things that pass through the border . More concretely , this concept asks us to consider the formation , management , and reinforcement of the boundary as well as the activities and objects that contribute to the porosity of the boundary . In the next section , we will delimit porous boundaries in regard to other notions of “boundaries” in CSCW , thus clarifying the benefits of a porous boundary lens and our contribution . 5 . 1 . 1 Versus Blurred Boundaries in CSCW . The “blurred” border or boundary is a common and powerful metaphor in sociology ( e . g . , [ 3 , 62 ] ) and CSCW ( e . g . , [ 50 , 86 ] ) . A number of studies have pointed out that the Internet and mobile connectivity have blurred the boundary between home and work [ 36 , 62 ] , home and secondary home [ 56 , 72 ] , or between home and other , multiple sites [ 58 ] . Since work can now be easily accomplished outside the company , any place can be a workplace [ 18 ] . Studies on telecommuting or nomadic work [ 83 ] have also noted how workers are able to reconfigure other workplaces to be their own workplace . Others have shown the elasticity of outside places such as the coffee shop and airport [ 74 ] . Further , Aipperspach et al . [ 2 ] emphasized that spatial boundaries are increasingly blurred “even in spatially complex homes” because technologies in home “create similar landscapes throughout the home ( p . 2 ) ” ( e . g . , televisions playing in multiple rooms ) . The blurred boundary concept is helpful for visualizing how activities of social worlds [ 81 ] that once were separate are no longer temporally and geographically demarcated . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 16 E . Cheon & N . M . Su To highlight the contributions and benefits of our conceptual lens , we now turn to contrasting porous boundaries with blurred boundaries . Whereas a blurred border is about nearly eliminating borders so that the two sides are nearly indistinguishable ( e . g . , in the case of home and work where both activities begin to interleave with each other ) , porous boundaries remain as borders separating social worlds [ 81 ] . Simultaneously , porous boundaries highlight the work to maintain borders—acknowledging that we sometimes allow and / or prevent influence from other worlds . With respect to objects , when using blurred boundaries , objects may lie in the blurred boundary , serving both sides of the boundary—for example , a laptop may be regarded as an object used for both the home and workplace . On the other hand , if we apply the lens of porous boundaries , objects can only be on one side of a boundary . Thus , our concept sees objects as inherently belonging in one place at a time . Following this , porous boundaries highlight the instability and fragility of value - laden objects— objects go from one space to another , and its intertwined meaning and value may fade away after passing through the porous boundary ( of course , sometimes , an object’s value is retained ) ( Fig . 2d2 , e ) . For example , in our findings , meaningful objects such as hand - made sweaters by the mother - in - law were seen as clutter by minimalists . Although minimalists initially received these objects , they eventually expelled them ( Fig . 2d ) . On the contrary , the personal jars minimalists used at groceries do not speak for themselves—their purpose was justified to others outside the home ( Fig . 2e ) . In both cases , we can see how the value of objects was both broken and preserved as they moved past boundaries . Thus , a porous boundary often requires value negotiation and compromise in order to accept an object into a space , whereas a blurred boundary tends to underplay the significance of objects . For example , people who adopt a mobile lifestyle [ 72 ] have a blurred boundary between their primary and secondary home . The secondary home is an extension of the home ; the physical and spatial arrangements of the secondary home are duplicated from their primary domicile . The blurred boundary does not addresses how objects may interplay with the meanings of each or both homes . In sum , in contrast to blurred boundaries , a porous boundary lies ( 1 ) in - between two incompatible spaces , ( 2 ) its porosity comes from the mobility of objects across the boundary , and ( 3 ) may have its meanings and values leak or fade away . In this way , a porous boundary preserves values without blurring the identities of each space . This concept illustrates how the mobility of objects and values across boundaries and the ensuing negotiations often defines the home space ( or whatever the space of interest is ) as a site for value exploration . 5 . 1 . 2 Versus Boundary Objects in CSCW . Since boundary objects are perhaps the key concept of CSCW [ 1 , 6 , 49 , 55 , 76 ] , we now discuss its relation to our concept of porous boundary . Although the objects in our porous boundary are generally mundane , everyday artifacts , boundary objects have been associated with academic disciplines that have different jargons , methodologies , and agendas . For example , boundary objects are often a knowledge object such as a map [ 80 ] or a blueprint [ 55 ] . Star [ 79 ] explains that the “boundary” of boundary objects is “a shared space where exactly that sense of here and there are confounded” ( p . 603 ) . Boundary here resembles a blurred boundary . The boundary object concept [ 11 , 80 ] acknowledges diverse epistemological backgrounds and facilitates an open exchange of different interpretations that leads to finding common ground that can support collaboration . Thus , the porous boundary and boundary object concept share a recognition that objects inherit pluralistic values and knowledge , thereby making them sites for tension or negotiation . Star [ 79 ] see this dynamic as the core of the boundary object concept . Recent CSCW scholars have called for an elaboration on the boundary object concept . Lee [ 49 ] suggested that a notion of boundary negotiating object could incorporate the disorganized practices inherent in collaboration and push “past the assumptions of standardization and stable Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 17 boundaries between communities on which it lies” [ 49 , p . 404 ] . Lutters and Ackerman [ 55 ] further advanced discussion on boundary objects with their fieldwork on aircraft technical support . He showed that boundary objects are actually more complex than originally thought and emphasized a holistic approach—one should examine boundary processes : “the various boundary objects , memory processes , and meta - negotiations” [ 55 , p . 370 ] . Our definition of a porous boundary is aligned with this on - going discussion . We highlight the unstable nature of the boundary and the process of forming and maintaining the boundary—specifically by attending to the mobility of objects ( when passing the object across a boundary ) and the fragility of values in objects ( e . g . , which values fail to be delivered ? ) once they cross the boundary . 5 . 2 The Design Space of Porous Boundaries As alluded to in Section 2 , past research has sought to go beyond the “traditional meaning of the home” [ 19 ] . Studies in these different domains point us to new aspects of “homemaking , ” such as its dynamism [ 39 ] , materialism [ 30 , 75 ] , and role in identify - making [ 26 , 27 , 30 ] . Home can range from a haven filled with harmony and comfort to a place of conflict , violence , and injustice [ 78 ] . This suggests we cannot make easy assumptions in our research on the home . Crabtree and Rodden [ 18 ] tried to demystify researchers’ assumptions on the home as a particularly private place with limited access . They pointed out that the home is not necessarily more or less private than a workplace since the workplace also denies access to outsiders and often engages more gatekeepers . To explore “unstated assumptions about the nature of homes and domestic life” ( p . 375 ) , Bell and Dourish [ 9 ] explored the properties of the shed as “both part of the home and separated from it . ” Looking at the shed spatially and conceptually as a space at the edges and boundaries of the home , the authors problematized the stable category of the home and critically re - examined domestic issues of space . For example , Bell and Dourish discussed gendered divisions of space—the shed as a masculine space and a place of male refuge from the house and family . In a similar line , Aipperspach et al . [ 2 ] wrote of the “heterogenous home , ” a future home with different kinds of spatial boundaries ( e . g . , boundaries between technology - rich and technology - free spaces ) . To explore alternative meanings of home , Desjardins et al . [ 19 ] also proposed that we speculate the home of the future ( e . g . , what would the home look like in 200 years ? ) . As a starting point to examining how porous boundaries can help inform the design space , we turn to the notion of threshold devices by Gaver et al . [ 28 ] . They developed devices to transmit information around the home ( e . g . , weather , neighboring events ) into the home , thereby expanding the boundary of domesticity via what they call “electronic thresholds . ” Their goal ultimately was to create new experiences for inhabitants of homes about “where they are , what and who is around them , and may occasion their attitudes towards these facts . ” Features of threshold devices important for their success include being open to interpretation [ 77 ] , their aesthetically pleasing form , and providing a view on information relative to the home’s location . Both electronic thresholds and porous boundaries can be seen as prioritizing the “view” from inside the home . Although we do not intend to offer concrete design solutions for minimalists nor the home , we will take the tack of comparing and contrasting our notion of porous boundaries to ask what role computing may take in the home . We acknowledge that this contrast with threshold devices is not meant to be exhaustive ( there are other research designs which might be useful to compare against ) but believe it helpful to elucidate how porous boundaries may contribute to design . 5 . 2 . 1 Finding , Protecting , and Opening Boundaries . Threshold devices embrace open interpretation . The connection between information around the home is not always concretely linked with the information portrayed on the threshold device . When the weather is windy , for example , the device Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 18 E . Cheon & N . M . Su will portray far away events without telling the user it is windy . Thus , while the information transmitted from outside the home creates novel experiences for users , the user cannot definitively know what triggered that information receipt . Over time , users can understand how events around their homes triggered certain content to be sent to their house—users were thus invited to open interpretations of their objects . A porous boundary notion however may argue against multiple interpretation . In some cases , users may want to advocate the “right” values of objects . If boundaries need to protect the meaning of objects , this suggests that the meaning of boundaries needs to be made explicit . If researchers examine what objects are allowed to pass a boundary , they may be better positioned to design technology that fits users’ perceptions and expectations of home . For example , we can look at how shoes signify a boundary ; we can see how some people remove their shoes at the front door while others may leave them in a foyer or in the kitchen . In this case , shoes ( objects ) demarcate boundaries and reveal how we treat spaces differently . We believe that researchers could take advantage of this approach practically as a design research method to better cater to their users’ values . Taking the example further , examining places where people remove their shoes could be a starting point to identify a boundary and use it as a space for design intervention . Thus , boundaries signify authoritatively that a space is meant to be interpreted in a specific manner . This is one manner in which porous boundaries can guide design research . If we rally against multiple interpretation , however , porous boundaries suggest clashes in in - terpretation . Pragmatically , the home is also a temporary site for contested values . The home may be in an “unstable” state if not all objects cohere to a certain set of values ( each of which are unequivocally defined ) . For example , clutter is the grouping of heterogeneous things that are “out of place” and can be classified as something else , which connotes a sense of ambiguity and uncertainty around the notion of clutter [ 85 ] . This suggests that a design space for porous boundaries must include ways of informing or making apparent the harmony or instability between objects . For example , designs may consider the assemblages of intended values of objects in a home . The intertwining of value negotiation and objects also suggests that objects may need to be recognized as a set . What makes a home a minimalist’s home is not one single object but rather , the home and its entire set of objects and spaces . Thus , design needs to also consider how interpretation is done only by considering multiple objects . That is , upon viewing an assemblage of objects , how might design convey the work done to create this set ? This may consist of devices conveying where and from whom they come from , and how they are related to other objects . Designers may need to reflect how to get a sense of the desired state for the home , the current state , and how incoming and outgoing objects effect this state ( e . g . , identifying the “centerpiece” of a collection ) . In this sense , porous boundaries suggest that designs need to account for the “equilibrium” of spaces . As minimalists showed , they engage in porous boundaries continually to redefine their home , reflecting their identity to achieve a sense of well - being . So , design may help point out how assemblages represent values to both visitors and inhabitants . This way , people can recognize the roles each object plays in fulfilling this idealized , positive state of the home . 5 . 2 . 2 The Aesthetics of Objects . Threshold devices require attention—they are designed to be promi - nently placed and used at home . They are not to “be experienced primarily at the periphery” Gaver et al . [ 28 , p . 1437 ] . This is achieved partly by their aesthetic appeal . We can draw an analogy to how porosity pointed to the display or staging of values to others . In terms of design , we may think about the ways users can display their objects collectively in an aesthetic , coherent manner . One intriguing avenue is media art—mobile phone orchestras or laptop orchestras are a creative means to aesthetically represent a single message out of many [ 92 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 19 Just as affordances in HCI have pointed to how use can be suggested through ( often mobile ) form , we may ask how the values of an entire home can be made mobile and apparent to others . This is akin to how some researchers have looked at how objects and infrastructures leave traces of past activity [ 22 , 29 ] . For example , how can we design objects that retain some value as they pass from owner to owner ? Although Odom et al . [ 65 ] emphasize what makes objects valuable , porosity also speaks of values that transform . Thus , an object may have different values as they pass boundaries . We suggest that designs can convey , perhaps aesthetically , previously held values that are also amenable to becoming valuable for others ( even if those values are different ) . In other words , how can “one person’s treasure be another person’s ( different ) treasure ? ” Such designs can ensure that digital artifacts fit with sustainable practices . What needs to be made apparent are not only the values inscribed in objects but when values have faded or are lost . How can we convey the fragility of values in objects ? For instance , a fragile object may have had many owners with many different interpretations . How can this aesthetically be portrayed like the patina in the History Table Cloth [ 29 ] ? Fragility of values can be a positive and negative . It is positive because such artifacts may be valuable for many parties , but it is negative because these past values are not persistent . 5 . 2 . 3 The View from Inside and Outside . Porous boundaries emphasize that the outside is also viewing inside the home . Threshold devices are unidirectional , but devices for porosity need to be bidirectional . The home is not isolated from one’s community [ 93 ] . When we situate home in the community , individual values could implicitly or explicitly spill out and circulate throughout its community . Thus , if devices like threshold devices can help us experience the outside world , what would it mean for the outside world to experience our homes ? For example , the outside of our homes—lawns , door ornaments—signify something about the inside of our homes . How can we experience what is valued in a home ? Certainly , smart technologies for the home have adopted this perspective . Smart security cameras and smart doorbells enable inhabitants to view the goings - on of the home . However , a porous boundary perspective may suggest that “viewers” do not need to be limited to inhabitants or owners of the home . Visitors may glean information about the home . Of course , we are not proposing that strangers have unvarnished access to the home . Rather , people who have a relationship with the inhabitant may view a “staged” perspective on the home—through the porous boundary , only particular facets are “leaked” through to the outside . For example , we may surmise that a family that values cooking and eating together can present an activity heatmap of their home to exemplify how they accomplish and reinforce their values . We posit that these multiple home views available for visitors may help community members understand the values of their neighbors . Just as minimalists sought out related movements or practitioners , displaying values can help influence others to adopt or seek out information about different lifestyles . 6 CONCLUSION Inspired by our minimalists’ practices , we found that home is a space with a porous boundary . Focusing on the porosity of these borders provides a macroscopic perspective of how a place ( e . g . , the home ) is intertwined with a heterogeneous and related set of actors , objects , practices , and values . Future CSCW research on domains with so - called alternative values may find the concept of porous boundary useful . It encourages researchers to articulate value practices but also how certain values are bound to multiple places and objects . Methodologically , this suggests that we ought to see what practices over the boundary of home make one’s home experiences meaningful . Given that smart home technologies now connect our home to the outside world and have potentially provided more opportunities for transferring things ( physical or digital ) over the boundary of our Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 20 E . Cheon & N . M . Su home , the concept of porous boundary may be even more relevant as it simultaneously becomes less visible [ 42 ] . We may focus our gaze on where these porous areas and surfaces are digitally situated in our daily practices . Porous boundaries , we hope , point to further promising concepts and frameworks that will help us understand and support re - configurations enacted by people on the objects and spaces that are tied to one another via the values and priorities of people’s lives . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank our anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback which helped improve this paper immensely . We are also grateful for our participants , who , with open arms , shared their lifestyles with us . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mark S . Ackerman and Christine Halverson . 2004 . Organizational Memory as Objects , Processes , and Trajectories : An Examination of Organizational Memory in Use . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 13 , 2 ( Apr 2004 ) , 155 – 189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / B : COSU . 0000045805 . 77534 . 2a [ 2 ] Ryan Aipperspach , Ben Hooker , and Allison Woodruff . 2008 . The heterogeneous home . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’08 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1409635 . 1409666 [ 3 ] Richard Alba . 2006 . On the Sociological Significance of the American Jewish Experience : Boundary Blurring , Assimila - tion , and Pluralism . Sociology of Religion 67 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 347 – 358 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 25046754 [ 4 ] Morgan G Ames , Janet Go , Joseph ’Jofish’ Kaye , and Mirjana Spasojevic . 2010 . Making Love in the Network Closet : The Benefits and Work of Family Videochat . In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 145 – 154 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1718918 . 1718946 [ 5 ] Elizabeth S Bales and Siân Lindley . 2013 . Supporting a Sense of Connectedness : Meaningful Things in the Lives of New University Students . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1137 – 1146 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441905 [ 6 ] Liam Bannon and Susanne Bødker . 1997 . Constructing Common Information Spaces . In Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht , 81 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 015 - 7372 - 6 _ 6 [ 7 ] Andrea Barbarin , Tiffany C Veinot , and Predrag Klasnja . 2015 . Taking Our Time : Chronic Illness and Time - Based Objects in Families . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 288 – 301 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675200 [ 8 ] Richard Baxter and Katherine Brickell . 2014 . For Home Un making . Home Cultures 11 , 2 ( Jul 2014 ) , 133 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2752 / 175174214X13891916944553 [ 9 ] Genevieve Bell and Paul Dourish . 2007 . Back to the shed : Gendered visions of technology and domesticity . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 11 , 5 ( May 2007 ) , 373 – 381 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 006 - 0073 - 8 [ 10 ] Harvey Russell Bernard . 2011 . Research Methods in Anthropology : Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches ( 5 , illustr ed . ) . AlraMira Press , United Kingdom . 666 pages . [ 11 ] Geoffrey C . Bowker and Susan Leigh Star . 1999 . Sorting Things Out : Classification and its Consequences . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA . 377 pages . [ 12 ] Anthony Brown , Richard Mortier , and Tom Rodden . 2014 . An Exploration of User Recognition on Domestic Networks Using NetFlow Records . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing : Adjunct Publication ( UbiComp ’14 Adjunct ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 903 – 910 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2638728 . 2641560 [ 13 ] Amy Bruckman . 2012 . Interviewing members of online communities . In Research Methods for Studying Groups and Teams : A Guide to Approaches , Tools , and Technologies . , Marshall Scott Hollingshead , Andrea B , Poole ( Ed . ) . Routledge , New York , NY , Chapter 11 , 199 – 210 . [ 14 ] John M . Carroll . 1990 . An overview of minimalist instruction . In Twenty - Third Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , Vol . 4 . IEEE Computer Society Press , Washington , DC , USA , 210 – 219 vol . 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 1990 . 205259 [ 15 ] Kathy Charmaz . 2006 . Constructing Grounded Theory : A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis . Pine Forge Press , Thousand Oaks , CA , USA . [ 16 ] EunJeong Cheon and Norman Makoto Su . 2018 . The Value of Empty Space for Design . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173623 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 21 [ 17 ] Lars Rune Christensen . 2014 . Practices of Stigmergy in the Building Process . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 23 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 012 - 9181 - 3 [ 18 ] Andy Crabtree and Tom Rodden . 2004 . Domestic Routines and Design for the Home . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 13 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 191 – 220 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / B : COSU . 0000045712 . 26840 . a4 [ 19 ] Audrey Desjardins , Ron Wakkary , and William Odom . 2015 . Investigating Genres and Perspectives in HCI Research on the Home . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 3073 – 3082 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702540 [ 20 ] Audrey Desjardins , Ron Wakkary , and William Odom . 2016 . Behind the Lens . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 360 – 376 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901910 [ 21 ] Tawanna Dillahunt , Jennifer Mankoff , and Eric Paulos . 2010 . Understanding Conflict Between Landlords and Tenants : Implications for Energy Sensing and Feedback . In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 149 – 158 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1864349 . 1864376 [ 22 ] Tao Dong , Mark S . Ackerman , and Mark W . Newman . 2014 . " If These Walls could Talk " : Designing with Memories of Places . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’14 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 63 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598605 [ 23 ] Lucy E . Dunne , Jingwen Zhang , and Loren Terveen . 2012 . An Investigation of Contents and Use of the Home Wardrobe . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 203 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2370216 . 2370247 [ 24 ] Sheena Lewis Erete . 2013 . Protecting the Home : Exploring the Roles of Technology and Citizen Activism from a Burglar’s Perspective . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2507 – 2516 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481347 [ 25 ] Bent Flyvbjerg . 2006 . Five Misunderstandings About Case - Study Research . Qualitative Inquiry 12 , 2 ( Jan . 2006 ) , 219 – 245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1077800405284363 [ 26 ] Pauline Garvey . 2005 . Domestic Boundaries : Privacy , Visibility and the Norwegian Window . Journal of Material Culture 10 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 157 – 176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1359183505053073 [ 27 ] Bill Gaver . 2001 . Designing for Ludic Aspects of Everyday Life . European Research Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics ( ERCIM EEIG ) 47 ( October 2001 ) . http : / / www . ercim . eu / publication / Ercim { _ } News / enw47 / gaver . html [ 28 ] William Gaver , Andy Boucher , Andy Law , Sarah Pennington , John Bowers , Jacob Beaver , Jan Humble , Tobie Kerridge , Nicholas Villar , and Alex Wilkie . 2008 . Threshold devices : looking out from the home . In Proceeding of the Twenty - Sixth Annual CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM Press , New York , USA , 1429 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357278 [ 29 ] William Gaver , John Bowers , Andy Boucher , Andy Law , Sarah Pennington , and Nicholas Villar . 2006 . The History Tablecloth : Illuminating Domestic Activity . In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 199 – 208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1142405 . 1142437 [ 30 ] Andrew Gorman - Murray . 2008 . Reconciling self : gay men and lesbians using domestic materiality for identity management . Social & Cultural Geography 9 , 3 ( 2008 ) , 283 – 301 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14649360801990504 [ 31 ] Richard B . Gregg . 2009 . The value of voluntary simplicity . Floating Press . 67 pages . [ 32 ] Rebecca E . Grinter , Chris Greenhalgh , Steve Benford , W . Keith Edwards , Marshini Chetty , Erika S . Poole , Ja - Young Sung , Jeonghwa Yang , Andy Crabtree , Peter Tolmie , and Tom Rodden . 2009 . The ins and outs of home networking . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 16 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 1 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1534903 . 1534905 [ 33 ] Julien Guibourdenche , Jacqueline Vacherand - Revel , Michèle Grosjean , Myriam Fréjus , and Yvon Haradji . 2011 . Using Multiple Scores for Transcribing the Distributed Activities of a Family . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 637 – 640 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958933 [ 34 ] Maria Håkansson and Phoebe Sengers . 2013 . Beyond being green : simple living families and ICT . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 2725 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481378 [ 35 ] Richard Harper and Helena Mentis . 2013 . The Mocking Gaze : The Social Organization of Kinect Use . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 167 – 180 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441797 [ 36 ] Richard Harper and Richard . 2003 . Inside the smart home . Springer - Verlag New York , Inc . , Secaucus , NJ , USA . 264 pages . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 940815 [ 37 ] Monique M . Hennink , Inge . Hutter , and Ajay Bailey . 2011 . Qualitative research methods . SAGE , Thousand Oaks , CA , USA . 304 pages . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 22 E . Cheon & N . M . Su [ 38 ] Debby Hindus . 1999 . The Importance of Homes in Technology Research . In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Cooperative Buildings , Integrating Information , Organization , and Architecture ( CoBuild ’99 ) . Springer - Verlag , London , UK , 199 – 207 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 645969 . 674876 [ 39 ] Mark Holton . 2015 . Living together in student accommodation : Performances , boundaries and homemaking . Area 48 ( Mar 2015 ) , 57 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / area . 12226 [ 40 ] Mary E . Huneke . 2005 . The face of the un - consumer : An empirical examination of the practice of voluntary simplicity in the United States . Psychology and Marketing 22 , 7 ( Jul 2005 ) , 527 – 550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mar . 20072 [ 41 ] Annika Hupfeld and Tom Rodden . 2014 . Books As a Social Technology . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 639 – 651 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531647 [ 42 ] Lars - Erik Janlert and Erik Stolterman . 2015 . Faceless Interaction—A Conceptual Examination of the Notion of Interface : Past , Present , and Future . Human – Computer Interaction 30 , 6 ( Nov . 2015 ) , 507 – 539 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2014 . 944313 [ 43 ] Tom Jenkins . 2017 . Living Apart , Together : Cohousing As a Site for ICT Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1039 – 1051 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064663 . 3064751 [ 44 ] Jasmine Jones and Mark S . Ackerman . 2016 . Curating an Infinite Basement . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’16 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 87 – 97 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2957276 . 2957316 [ 45 ] Jasmine Jones and Jasmine . 2016 . Designing Social Memory Artifacts in a Smart Home . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’16 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 473 – 477 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2957276 . 2997021 [ 46 ] David S Kirk , Shahram Izadi , Abigail Sellen , Stuart Taylor , Richard Banks , and Otmar Hilliges . 2010 . Opening Up the Family Archive . In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 261 – 270 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1718918 . 1718968 [ 47 ] David S . Kirk and Abigail Sellen . 2010 . On human remains . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 17 , 3 ( Jul 2010 ) , 1 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1806923 . 1806924 [ 48 ] Marie Kond¯o . 2014 . The life - changing magic of tidying up : the Japanese art of decluttering and organizing ( 1st edition ed . ) . Ten Speed Press , Berkeley , US . 224 pages . [ 49 ] Charlotte P . Lee . 2005 . Between Chaos and Routine : Boundary Negotiating Artifacts in Collaboration . In ECSCW 2005 . Springer - Verlag , Berlin / Heidelberg , 387 – 406 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 4023 - 7 _ 20 [ 50 ] Gilly Leshed , Maria Håkansson , and Joseph ’Jofish’ Kaye . 2014 . " Our Life is the Farm and Farming is Our Life " : Home - work Coordination in Organic Farm Families . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 487 – 498 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531708 [ 51 ] Siân Lindley and Jayne Wallace . 2015 . Placing in Age : Transitioning to a New Home in Later Life . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 22 , 4 ( Jun 2015 ) , 1 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2755562 [ 52 ] Jessa Lingel . 2017 . Digital Countercultures and the Struggle for Community . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 53 ] Wei Liu , Pieter Jan Stappers , Gert Pasman , and Jenneke Taal - Fokker . 2011 . Supporting Generation Y Interactions : Challenges for Office Work . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 669 – 672 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958941 [ 54 ] Sara Ljungblad and Lars - Erik Holmquist . 2007 . Transfer scenarios : grounding innovation with marginal practices . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’07 ) . ACM Press , New York , USA , 737 – 746 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240738 [ 55 ] Wayne G . Lutters and Mark S . Ackerman . 2007 . Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Tech - nical Support . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 16 , 3 ( Jun 2007 ) , 341 – 372 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 006 - 9036 - x [ 56 ] Aviaja Borup Lynggaard , M . G . Petersen , R . Gude , and M . Mortensen . 2010 . Home awareness . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’10 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 416 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858251 [ 57 ] Wendy Mak . 2017 . The Capsule Wardrobe : 1 , 000 Outfits from 30 Pieces . Skyhorse Publishing , New York , NY , USA . [ 58 ] Thomas Meneweger , Marianna Obrist , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2015 . Meanings of a Blurred Mobile - Home Context for People aged 50plus . In Interact 2015 Adjunct Proceedings : 15th IFIP TC . 13 International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction 14 - 18 September 2015 , Bamberg , Germany . University of Bamberg Press , Bamberg , Germany , 335 – 341 . [ 59 ] Joshua Fields Millburn and Ryan Nicodemus . 2014 . Everything that remains : a memoir by the Minimalists . Asymmetrical Press ; 1st edition ( January 1 , 2014 ) . 216 pages . [ 60 ] Daniel Miller . 2008 . The comfort of things ( Selection ) . Polity , Cambridge , UK . 302 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1469540509104856 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . “Staged for Living” : Negotiating Objects and their Values over a Porous Boundary 36 : 23 [ 61 ] Carman Neustaedter , Svetlana Yarosh , and A . J . Brush . 2009 . Designing for Families . In CHI ’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2735 – 2738 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1520340 . 1520394 [ 62 ] Christena E . Nippert - Eng . 1996 . Home and Work : Negotiating Boundaries through Everyday Life . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL , USA . 325 pages . [ 63 ] Jon O’Brien and Tom Rodden . 1997 . Interactive systems in domestic environments . In Proceedings of the Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques ( DIS ’97 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 247 – 259 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 263552 . 263617 [ 64 ] William Odom and James Pierce . 2009 . Improving with age . In CHI ’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’09 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 3793 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1520340 . 1520573 [ 65 ] William Odom , James Pierce , Erik Stolterman , and Eli Blevis . 2009 . Understanding why we preserve some things and discard others in the context of interaction design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 1053 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518862 [ 66 ] William Odom , John Zimmerman , and Jodi Forlizzi . 2011 . Teenagers and their virtual possessions . In Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 1491 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979161 [ 67 ] Corinna Ogonowski , Benedikt Ley , Jan Hess , Lin Wan , and Volker Wulf . 2013 . Designing for the Living Room : Long - term User Involvement in a Living Lab . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1539 – 1548 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466205 [ 68 ] Corinna Ogonowski , Benedikt Ley , David Randall , Mu Mu , Nicholas Race , and Mark Rouncefield . 2014 . Designing with Users for Domestic Environments : Methods - Challenges - Lessons Learned . In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW Companion ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 335 – 338 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556420 . 2558855 [ 69 ] Jeni Paay , Jesper Kjeldskov , and Mikael B Skov . 2015 . Connecting in the Kitchen : An Empirical Study of Physical Interactions While Cooking Together at Home . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 276 – 287 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675194 [ 70 ] Leysia Palen and Stinne Aaløkke . 2006 . Of Pill Boxes and Piano Benches : " Home - made " Methods for Managing Medication . In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 79 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180888 [ 71 ] Michael Quinn Patton . 1990 . Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks : Sage Publications , Inc , Thousand Oaks , CA , USA . [ 72 ] Marianne Graves Petersen , Aviaja Borup Lynggaard , Peter Gall Krogh , and Ida Wentzel Winther . 2010 . Tactics for homing in mobile life . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( MobileHCI ’10 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1851600 . 1851646 [ 73 ] Peter J . Radics and Denis Gracanin . 2011 . Privacy in Domestic Environments . In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1735 – 1740 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979837 [ 74 ] Alena Sanusi and Leysia Palen . 2008 . Of Coffee Shops and Parking Lots : Considering Matters of Space and Place in the Use of Public Wi - Fi . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 17 , 2 - 3 ( 2008 ) , 257 – 273 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 007 - 9062 - 3 [ 75 ] Peter Saunders . 1989 . The meaning of ‘home’ in contemporary English culture . Housing Studies 4 ( Jul 1989 ) , 177 – 192 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02673038908720658 [ 76 ] Kjeld Schmidt and Ina Wagner . 2004 . Ordering Systems : Coordinative Practices and Artifacts in Architectural Design and Planning . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 13 , 5 - 6 ( Dec 2004 ) , 349 – 408 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 004 - 5059 - 3 [ 77 ] Phoebe Sengers and Bill Gaver . 2006 . Staying Open to Interpretation : Engaging Multiple Meanings in Design and Evaluation . In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 99 – 108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1142405 . 1142422 [ 78 ] D Sibley . 1995 . Geographies of Exclusion : Society and Difference in the West ( 1 edition ed . ) . Routledge , New York , NY , USA . https : / / books . google . com / books ? id = ZyNT3uZQnqgC [ 79 ] Susan Leigh Star . 2010 . This is Not a Boundary Object : Reflections on the Origin of a Concept . Science , Technology , & Human Values 35 , 5 ( Sep 2010 ) , 601 – 617 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0162243910377624 [ 80 ] Susan Leigh Star and James R . Griesemer . 1989 . Institutional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . Social Studies of Science 19 , 3 ( Aug 1989 ) , 387 – 420 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 030631289019003001 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 . 36 : 24 E . Cheon & N . M . Su [ 81 ] Anselm Strauss . 1982 . Social Worlds and Legitimation Processes . Studies in Symbolic Interaction : A Research Annual 4 ( 1982 ) , 171 – 190 . [ 82 ] Norman Makoto Su and EunJeong Cheon . 2017 . Reconsidering Nature : The Dialectics of Fair Chase in the Practices of American Midwest Hunters . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 6089 – 6100 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025966 [ 83 ] Norman Makoto Su and Gloria Mark . 2008 . Designing for Nomadic Work . In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 305 – 314 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1394445 . 1394478 [ 84 ] Daisetsu Teitaro Suzuki and Carl Jung . 1994 . An Introduction to Zen Buddhism ( reissue edition ed . ) . Grove Press , New York . [ 85 ] Laurel Swan , Alex S . Taylor , and Richard Harper . 2008 . Making Place for Clutter and Other Ideas of Home . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 15 , 2 , Article 9 ( July 2008 ) , 24 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1375761 . 1375764 [ 86 ] John C Tang , Chen Zhao , Xiang Cao , and Kori Inkpen . 2011 . Your Time Zone or Mine ? : A Study of Globally Time Zone - shifted Collaboration . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 235 – 244 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958860 [ 87 ] Alex S Taylor and Laurel Swan . 2004 . List Making in the Home . In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’04 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 542 – 545 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1031607 . 1031697 [ 88 ] Alex S . Taylor and Laurel Swan . 2005 . Artful systems in the home . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’05 ) . ACM Press , New York , NY , USA , 641 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1054972 . 1055060 [ 89 ] Amy Voida and Elizabeth D . Mynatt . 2005 . Conveying User Values Between Families and Designers . In CHI ’05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’05 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2013 – 2016 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1057080 [ 90 ] Dhaval Vyas , Stephen Snow , Paul Roe , and Margot Brereton . 2016 . Social Organization of Household Finance : Understanding Artful Financial Systems in the Home . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1777 – 1789 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819937 [ 91 ] Susann Wagenknecht , Ingrid Erickson , Carsten Østerlund , Melissa Mazmanian , and Pernille Bjørn . 2017 . Theory Transfers ? : Social Theory & CSCW Research . In Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 Companion ) . ACM Press , New York , USA , 371 – 376 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3022198 . 3022654 [ 92 ] Ge Wang , Georg Essl , and Henri Penttinen . 2013 . The Mobile Phone Orchestra . In Oxford Handbook of Mobile Music Studies . Oxford University Press , New York . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / gmo / 9781561592630 . article . L2293951 [ 93 ] Allison Woodruff , Sally Augustin , and Brooke Foucault . 2007 . Sabbath day home automation : " it’s like mixing technology and religion " . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’07 ) . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 527 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240710 [ 94 ] Allison Woodruff , Jay Hasbrouck , and Sally Augustin . 2008 . A bright green perspective on sustainable choices . In Proceeding of the twenty - sixth Annual CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM Press , New York , USA , 313 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357109 [ 95 ] Susan P . Wyche and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2009 . Extraordinary Computing : Religion As a Lens for Reconsidering the Home . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 749 – 758 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518817 Received April 2018 ; revised July 2018 ; accepted September 2018 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 36 . Publication date : November 2018 .