Accounting and Co - Constructing : The Development of a Standard for Electronic Health Records Claus Bossen Information and Media Studies , Aarhus University , Denmark , Helsingforsgade 14 ( 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark ( Phone : + 45 - 89429243 ; Fax : + 45 - 89425950 ; E - mail : imvcb @ hum . au . dk ) Abstract . Patient records are central , constitutive parts of health care and hospitals . Currently , substantial sums are being invested in making patient records electronic , in order to take advantage of IT ’ s ability to quickly accumulate , compute , and propagate data to multiple sites , to enhance coordination of health care services and cooperation among staff , and make patient records immediately accessible to distributed actors . Investors also aim to increase health care services ’ accountability and integration , and improve quality and ef ﬁ ciency . This paper analyses a Danish national standard for electronic health records , on the basis of an application prototype test designed to that standard . The analysis shows that , inscribed in the standard is an ambition to increase the accountability of staff and health care services at the cost of increased work , loss of overview , and fragmentation of patient cases . Signi ﬁ cantly , despite the standard having been conceived and developed in a process of co - construction involving clinicians , clinicians did not ﬁ nd it adequate for their work . This analysis argues this was the result of the model of work embedded in the standard coming from a stance external to practice . Subsequently , a ﬂ ip - over effect occurred , in which the model of work became a model for work . Hence , this paper argues that co - construction processes should not only include users as representatives of a profession , but strive to produce experiences and knowledge intrinsic to practice . Key words : accountability , clinical work , co - construction , electronic health records , health care , hospitals , participatory design , representations , user involvement 1 . Introduction Patient records are central , constitutive parts of health care and hospitals . They have developed along with , and enabled the formation of large , increasingly specialized org ' anizational units , by accumulating data and coordinating activities . They are central writing and reading tools that contribute to the constitution of competent clinicians , quality care and treatment , and continuous patient treatment trajectories ( Berg 1999 ) . Presently , substantial sums are being directed at making patient records electronic in Europe and North America , in order to take advantage of IT ’ s ability to accumulate and compute data , and propagate it quickly to multiple sites so that , for example , distributed health care Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2011 ) 20 : 473 – 495 © Springer 2011 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 011 - 9141 - 3 staff may simultaneously access the same , immediately updated patient records . The goals are multiple : to support the work of professionals in the complex health care sectors , enable more integrated patient care paths , increase quality and ef ﬁ ciency of health care and health care organizations , and provide consistent and comprehensive health care information to management and politicians . 1 Building health care information infrastructures is fraught with dif ﬁ culties and challenges . One challenge is to develop standards that ensure interoperability among various electronic health records ( EHR ) and other IT systems , so that the strived - for , integrated information infrastructure is achieved . EDIFACT and Health Level 7 ( HL7 ) have proven successful standards for the exchange of messages , whereas procedural standards that structure ongoing patient treatment and care histories , and provide clinicians with an integrated and relevant view of these , have proven dif ﬁ cult to achieve , despite the efforts of HL7 and open EHR ( Kalra 2006 ) . A key issue is the adequacy of the model of the domain and work – inevitably embedded in a standard – for the practice in which it is to be used . Another , related challenge is to encompass and balance the multiple ambitions invested in standards and EHRs : for example , augment practitioners ’ health care work , strengthen coordination across professions and units , and improve account - ability for health care work to colleagues , management , politicians , and so forth . The empirical case presented here involves a Danish standard for EHRs , and the test of an EHR prototype based on it . The development of the Basic structure for Electronic Health Records ( BEHR ) was initiated in the early part of the ﬁ rst decade of the twenty - ﬁ rst century by the National Board of Health in Denmark , and had a three - fold purpose : to ensure that information could be exchanged among various EHRs under construction in different counties ; to ensure the registration of information about treatment and diagnoses in a national database ; and to ensure the continuity of multi - professional health care across all divisions and professions ( National Board of Health 2003 : Section 4 ) . Hence , the BEHR sought to combine under one standard the concerns for information exchange and systems integration , clinician accountability for health care to patients and central decision makers , and support for clinical work . The case of the BEHR is interesting , because it was based on a model of health care work that allegedly supported that work and its documentation , while simultaneously establishing accountability as a by - product . The BEHR is also interesting because clinicians were involved in its conception and development , as well as in tests in the daily use of application prototypes based on the BEHR . Yet , when a prototype based on the most mature version of the BEHR was tested , the clinicians ’ assessment of the standard shifted : Before the test , the clinicians involved stated that the BEHR represented their way of thinking and working ; after the test , the same clinicians concluded that the BEHR did not support their work . Thus , the BEHR case is one that may add to our understanding of accountability and coordination , and of the challenges of user involvement in , or co - construction of IT systems . 474 Claus Bossen This paper presents an empirical case study that explores the dif ﬁ culties and costs of achieving the multiple ambitions invested in EHR by means of a basic standard , and the challenges of producing an understanding of work that provides adequate models upon which to base standards and IT systems , even when users are involved in a process of co - construction . 2 . Standards , user involvement , and models of and for work In general , standards may come in four ideal , typical forms : design standards set structural speci ﬁ cations ( e . g . for EHRs ) ; terminological standards seek to ensure stability of meaning , and are crucial for the accumulation of health data ; performance standards set outcome speci ﬁ cations ; procedural standards specify processes ( e . g . clinical guidelines ) ( Timmermans and Berg 2003 ) . Whereas EHR standards necessarily incorporate design and terminological standards , performance and procedural standards are rarer and less explicit , though approaches such as open EHR , which de ﬁ ne a generic information model and the formal rules through which pieces of information may be combined ( the Reference Model and Archetypes ) , tend to yield procedural elements ( Kalra 2006 ) . Since the aim of standards is to impose some kind of consistency on existing practices , and limit and enable actions and cooperative arrangements , any standard may be controversial . This is even more likely to be the case with procedural standards , which seek to format the process of work itself . The extent to which this is controversial depends on the degree to which the actors involved deem the standard ’ s embedded model of work to be adequate , and whether the cost of taking it into use is balanced by its bene ﬁ ts : For example , increasing data entry work for accountability purposes might be acceptable , if it improves coordination between actors and organizational units ( Hanseth and Monteiro 1997 ; Rolland and Monteiro 2002 ) . The concern for accountability when developing EHRs is relevant for management and decision makers , since health care expenditures seem to continually rise , and new governance policies ( e . g . New Public Management ) , and citizens demand that the sector and its staff and services be more accountable ( Cotton et al . 2000 ; Power 1997 ; Wiener 2000 ; Winthereik et al . 2007 ) . This may pose signi ﬁ cant challenges to the efforts to support work and its coordination , which are traditionally the focus in CSCW , and may easily be caught up with a concern for accountability ( e . g . Bowers et al . 1995 ) . A core insight of CSCW is that standards , models of work , and the balancing of various interests require detailed domain knowledge acquired through empirical studies and user involvement in the process . User involvement also seems to have become part of many EHR development projects , which may arise from the fact that health care organizations are ‘ professional bureaucracies ’ . These are characterized by the central role of professions that have a high degree of autonomy , because their work rests on expert - based judgement , and is dif ﬁ cult 475 Accounting and Co - Constructing to standardize ( Glouberman and Mintzberg 2001a , 2001b ) . Successful imple - mentation of EHRs relies on professionals such as physicians and nurses to champion them , which they will only do if the EHRs support their work ( Lorenzi and Riley 2004 ) . However , as the case of the BEHR shows , involving users may not be enough to develop EHRs adequate for health care work . In addition to establishing design and terminology standards , the BEHR was explicitly developed by clinicians as a procedural standard based on a model of health care work , with the aim of supporting , coordinating , and accounting for that work . The following two subsections will introduce two central issues : ﬁ rst , modelling work , coordination , and accountability , and , second , user involvement . 2 . 1 . Modelling work : coordinating and accounting The questions of how to model work , and the role of such models in information systems may start from the distinction , introduced by Suchman ( 1987 ) , between models of action , ‘ plans ’ , and actual action in its temporal , spatial , and contextual aspects , that is , ‘ situated action ’ : ‘… plans are resources for situated action , but do not in any strong sense determine its course ’ ( Suchman 1987 : 52 ) . Plans are rational anticipations before the act , and post hoc reconstructions , after . Though not determining action , they may provide different kinds of resources for action . Some plans may have the characteristics of maps that support orientation and overviews – for instance , a ‘ to - do ’ list – others are scripts that provide procedural guidelines – for instance , a sequenced checklist ( Schmidt 1997 ) . Embedded in coordinative devices such as IT systems , plans enable new and more complex forms of cooperation and organization by reducing the amount of articulation work needed , ordering data , stipulating what to do next , and facilitating updates on the present state of tasks ( Schmidt and Simone 1996 ) . Updated information facilitates coordination among actors that are parts of the cooperative arrange - ment , and also makes these and other parties accountable for the work accomplished between them . Therefore , coordination devices are most often also ‘ accountability systems ’ ( Suchman 1993 ) . The dual roles of coordinating and accounting for work may not align easily . For example , Bowers et al . ( 1995 ) describe the consequences of introducing a new system for coordinating and documenting work at a print shop : The system was based on a model of work as viewed from ‘ without ’ the situated work practices , and ordered activities so as to provide an account of the work to an external contractor . As a result , the system hindered multi - tasking , switching between orders , and so on , and impeded the local and internal ordering of work from ‘ within ’ the shop ﬂ oor ( Bowers et al . 1995 ) . Similarly , a new IT - based records system for general practitioners in the UK created a similar con ﬂ ict between local coordination , and accountability to external parties ( Heath and Luff 1996 ) . A recent survey of literature on EHRs suggests that the issue is still relevant . The survey concluded that , ‘ while 476 Claus Bossen secondary work ( audit , research , billing ) may be made more ef ﬁ cient by the EPR , primary clinical work is often made less ef ﬁ cient . ’ ( Greenhalgh et al . 2009 : 767 ) . There is no easy solution to the conundrum of how coordination and accountability should be balanced between multiple considerations and the impingement of external parties . At a technical level , one option is to separate the aspects of coordination and organizational accountability , and design technologies that visualize work as an ordered , coherent whole , without directing or constraining it : ‘ the role of the system is to ﬁ nd and present the order in the work , rather than , as traditionally conceived , to prespecify and enforce it ’ ( Dourish 2001 : 57 ) . However , this may run counter to coordination devices ’ and standards ’ capacities for augmenting cooperation across time and space by ordering information and stipulating action , and may be dif ﬁ cult to maintain , as system complexity and , by extension , built - in constraints increase . Furthermore , modelling work and developing IT systems is neither neutral nor disinterested . Representations and IT systems are made for a purpose at a certain time and place , by a certain group of people , and underscore certain aspects of work , while neglecting or concealing others ( Suchman 1995 ) . Therefore , a complementary strategy to the ﬁ nd - and - present - only option is to engage various groups and stakeholders in the process , to facilitate a process wherein the stakes and issues surrounding coordination and accountability are made explicit , and interested parties are involved in devising a compromise . 2 . 2 . Involving users and co - constructing IT systems The involvement of users may be depicted as including , minimally , a concern for including users in the design of new IT artefacts or information systems , and , maximally , a concern for empowering users and their codetermination . This minimalist - maximalist span may be found within the ﬁ eld of participatory design , and covers concerns from product usability to those relating to industrial democracy and quality of life . Whereas the emancipatory 2 concerns in participatory design were clearly evident in the 1960s and 1970s , they became more diffuse in the 1980s and 1990s , and today , participatory design is a heterogeneous ﬁ eld with a wide variety of interests and concerns ( For overviews , see Blomberg and Kensing 1998 ; Törpel et al . 2009 ) . Co - construction is more a way forward and , in its maximalist sense , an ideal , than a procedure or recipe merely to be followed , since it may take different forms , depending on parameters such as the kinds of people who participate ( e . g . end - users , management , or decision - makers ) , the type of participation ( direct involvement of end - users , indirect participation by user representatives , or imagined representation ( e . g . the persona approach ) ) , the degree of participation ( users providing information on work practices , or as equal design or project partners ) , the duration of participation ( Are users involved in the acquisition and initial design phase , or right through to implementation and redesign ? ( e . g . Suchman 2005 ; Hartswood et al . 2008 ) ) , and 477 Accounting and Co - Constructing ﬁ nally , the arena of participation ( the project , the organization , or the national arena ( Gärtner and Wagner 1996 ) ) ( From Bossen et al 2010 ) . 3 Realizing the aims of co - construction includes balancing various interests and design considerations , and depends on the skilled and situated use of the repertoire of methods and techniques , as well as the working relationships among various users , stakeholders , and decision makers . This is especially true in large - scale projects such as the development of EHRs and the BEHR , which entail complex combinations of different groups , which , over a number of years , become involved in varying degrees and types of participation in different arenas ( See e . g . Martin et al . 2009 ) . In the process , a number of models , use cases , UML diagrams , and requirement speci ﬁ cations will be made to model the domain , the work , and the IT system , in order to facilitate coordination and communication between the parties involved . However , these ‘ boundary objects ’ ( Star and Griesemer 1989 ) do not travel between groups without peril . Robinson and Bannon make ‘ an analytic case against an objective reality that can be usefully “ captured ” in a model and subsequently used as a suf ﬁ cient basis on which to develop a computerized system ’ ( Robinson and Bannon 1991 : 219 ) . They argue that representations of work are heuristic devices in design processes , and there is signi ﬁ cant danger when such representations pass through various groups , and are used for different purposes : The language of work is abstracted in a language of representation , useful to analysts . This is transformed again into an abstract formalism , chosen for its usefulness to the system implementers . The resulting system is then imposed on workers / users , taking a critical perspective , and changes the nature of the work that the representation was built on . This is a cycle that has clear potential for catastrophic change via a positive feedback loop . ( Ibid : 1991 : 224 ) To the extent that different groups , or ‘ semantic communities ’ , are involved in analysis , formalization , and implementation , ‘ ontological drift ’ may occur , as the representation is interpreted differently by each group . A ‘ ﬂ ip - over ’ effect may occur , as one group ’ s ‘ model of ’ work becomes a ‘ model for ’ work , and description becomes prescription . This ‘ drift ’ and ‘ ﬂ ip - over ’ effect cannot be done away with , they argue , though they take comfort in the fact that the ﬁ nal interpretation is made by the users , and that the realization of that fact and of the ‘ drift ’ may change design efforts ( ibid ) . Implementing the system and redesigning it based on emergent experiences is a principal way of checking representations , ﬂ ip - over effects , and ontological drift . Ultimately , the full implications of designs only become visible in practical use ( Hartswood et al . 2008 ) . Co - construction is a way to make users project partners , and promote the maximalist version of participatory design , as well as a way of designing systems that are adequate and valuable to the work practices and organizations of which they will be parts . However , the case of the BEHR indicates that , while co - construction may augment the probability of adequate design , the process is still 478 Claus Bossen fraught with challenges , since assessing use and attributing causes for intended and unintended effects of new systems may be dif ﬁ cult and controversial . 3 . Development of a national standard and the BEHR model The development of the BEHR was initiated by the National Board of Health in 1999 , as part of a national strategy of digitizing the health care sector . The project group included representatives from the board of health , the counties ( which , in Denmark , at that time were responsible for hospitals and the introduction of EHRs . In 2007 , responsibility was handed over to ﬁ ve regions that replaced the thirteen counties ) , computer ﬁ rms , central decision - makers at hospitals , and clinicians . The process integrated public hearings , workshops , and trial tests of BEHR - based application prototypes , and was in many respects guided by an earnest effort by the National Board of Health to engage and involve various kinds of users and stakeholders . In 2000 , the ﬁ rst version of the BEHR was published , and further developed over the next few years , to be stabilized in version 2 . 2 , in 2005 . During the development of the different versions of the BEHR , a number of application prototypes were developed to test its practical adequacy and technical realizability . The BEHR is based on a model of clinical practice , which , according to the National Board of Health , may be seen as a special case in the health care domain of a general problem - solving method . The idea behind this approach was originally conceived in the 1960s by the American physician , Lawrence Weed , in an effort to improve clinical work , patient records , and clinician accountability . Weed lamented the state of records at that time , and proposed problem - orientation as a solution . Through the creation of a proper record and the proper management of that record , the physician ’ s actual performance in given areas can be exposed to critical evaluation in the same way that the scientist ’ s work is evaluated by journal editors ; the physician can be assisted to demonstrate thoroughness and reliability in the formulation of all of the patient ’ s problems ; and he can be guided in the exercise of sound analytical thought , coupled with good clinical judgment , in establishing patient - care plans and in following up patient progress in each problem area . ( Weed 1969 : 10 ) To achieve this , he suggested a sequence of steps in clinical practice ( known as ‘ SOAP ’ ) : gather the patient ’ s own story ( Subjective ) , make clinical observations ( Objective ) , evaluate ( Assessment ) , and make a plan for treatment and care ( Plan ) . Data from these steps would be documented in the record listed under a patient ’ s problems . The aim was compensate for a variety of de ﬁ ciencies , such as medical problems addressed out of context , inef ﬁ ciency in practice , lack of continuity of care , failure to apply basic scienti ﬁ c facts and principles , mediocre education , and , notably , the absence of meaningful audits ( ibid : 107 ) . He argued that computeriza - tion would improve medical practice by standardizing language and data structure , and creating large databases , synthetic expertise and intelligent guidance systems 479 Accounting and Co - Constructing ( ibid : 119 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , a computerized , problem - oriented record would allow the selection of problems and the evaluation of the care and treatment provided , , and enable a visible , dynamic , and ﬁ scally manageable relationship between a patient ’ s problems , and hospital resources and costs ( ibid : 122 ) . The problem - oriented approach spread throughout North America and Europe , and though the approach had strong proponents amongst physicians ( Hurst 1971 ; Walker et al . 1973 ; Mellner et al . 1976 ) , it was primarily adopted by nurses ( Donnelly and Brauner 1992 ) . However , there have been few studies of the use of computerized , problem - oriented medical records in practice ( however , see Ho et al . 1999 ) . 4 In the BEHR , clinical problem solving is called ‘ Clinical Process ’ , and is depicted as a series of steps similar to SOAP . The clinician ﬁ rst obtains information about a patient ’ s present condition , then diagnoses the patient ’ s problems , plans examina - tions and / or treatment , and subsequently conducts an evaluation of the examination and / or treatment results . Having performed this series of steps , clinicians may then embark on a new round of information gathering , diagnosis , planning , and evaluation ( Figure 1 , below ) . As described by the National Board of Health , at a generic level Clinical Process includes ‘ Diagnostic consideration ’ , leading to the identi ﬁ cation of a ‘ Health condition ’ ( = diagnosis by a physician , or care problem by a nurse ) . ‘ Planning ’ leads to ‘ Health intervention ’ ( e . g . care activities , or the prescription of treatment , medication , or examination ) , the ‘ Execution ’ of which produces ‘ Outcomes ’ that may be subjected to ‘ Evaluation ’ against ‘ Operational goals ’ ( Asp and Petersen 2003 ) . Signi ﬁ cantly , the BEHR ( version 2 . 0 ) stipulates that all health conditions should have ‘ Focused Information ’ as the basis of their assessment , in order to document the reason a health condition was entered . Similarly , all health interventions must have a health condition as their indication , in order to document the reason for intervention , as well as a stated ‘ Intention ’ , to document the goal of the intervention . Health conditions and health interventions are listed separately , and may be placed in a Figure 1 . Visual representation of the interdisciplinary Clinical Process . From BEHR version 2 . 0 . ( National Board of Health 2004 , author ’ s translation ) . 480 Claus Bossen hierarchy with the principal condition or intervention uppermost ; furthermore , they may be ordered into primary conditions , under which secondary conditions are subsumed ( National Board of Health 2004 ) . Figure 2 ( below ) shows the interface of the BEHR prototype , the ‘ County Application Prototype ’ , which was constructed according to the principles of BEHR 2 . 0 , and which is the subject of this paper . The development of the BEHR must be seen in the context of another , parallel initiative of the National Board of Health , which wanted to revise the national patient register established in 1977 , because it was based on patients ’ contact with hospital units . The contact - based register provided information on admissions and treatments by unit , but not on a patient ’ s health care trajectory across units . To increase the quality , scope , and depth of available health care information at a national level , the development of a trajectory - based register was part of the national IT strategy 2000 – 2002 , and regarded as an integrated part of the development of EHRs . Because the BEHR was regarded as modelling the entire process of clinical work , it was perceived as generating the necessary information for the trajectory - based registry as a by - product of documenting patient care and treatment in any Danish EHR ( National Board of Health 2000 ) . To summarize , the BEHR is a cross - professional , trajectory - based , problem - oriented standard for interoperability , intended to support coordination , account - Figure 2 . The BEHR model and its relation to the prototype developed . 481 Accounting and Co - Constructing ability , and integration across organizational units based on a speci ﬁ c model of clinical work that was developed with the involvement of clinicians , amongst other groups , and through prototype testing . 4 . Research setting and methods The most extensive application prototype test of the most mature version of the BEHR was conducted with the ‘ County Prototype ’ at an Endocrinology Department that was also the setting of this study . The Endocrinology Department is part of a large university hospital , and comprises two wards with forty - eight beds , an outpatient ward , and an emergency admissions ward for acute patients . The department employs around twenty - four senior and junior physicians , ﬁ fty nurses , twenty social - and health - care assistants , fourteen medical secretaries , and eighteen assistants . All application prototype tests of the BEHR conducted between 2001 and 2004 suffered from delays , owing to dif ﬁ culties with the construction of the prototypes , training of clinicians , and performance . The County Prototype test that is the focus of this paper was no exception . The prototype was an extension of a previous prototype that was redesigned according to the requirements of the BEHR , in close cooperation with the head nurse and the head physician . Initially , the test was planned for the autumn of 2003 , but because of additional work on the development of a clinical terms system , and its incorporation into the prototype , the test was postponed until the spring of 2004 . In May 2004 , 120 clinicians were trained in the use of the prototype ( 12 h each ) , and these training sessions further informed the design , because the prototype was not fully complete . However , the ﬁ rst test was a disappointment : Performance was slow , and there were several bugs , some of which were serious . Furthermore , many clinicians did not consider themselves suf ﬁ ciently trained to work with the BEHR prototype , in part because of their unfamiliarity with the application itself , and in part because of a lack of experience with problem - oriented record keeping . Ultimately , the ﬁ rst test was terminated after a month and a half , during which the prototype had not become part of daily clinical practice . During the next months , the County Prototype was further developed , based on experiences of this ﬁ rst test : bugs were resolved , network and servers were adjusted , and clinicians received additional training . Finally , a second , three - month test , which is the focus of this paper , was conducted in late 2004 . 4 . 1 . Methods This case is based on a longitudinal ethnographic study of the test of the County Prototype , and combines qualitative methods , such as participant observation , 482 Claus Bossen semi - structured interviews , and documentary evidence ( Hammersley and Atkinson 1997 ) . While this paper is primarily based on data generated by the second test in late 2004 , it is informed by an ethnographic study conducted intermittently over a year , covering both tests . During the ﬁ rst test , the author participated in planning meetings ( 11 ) , training in the use of the prototype based on the BEHR ( 2 days ) , observation of use ( 4 days ) , and interviews with clinicians who had used the County Prototype most ( 25 in all : 14 nurses , 6 physicians , 1 secretary , 4 IT professionals ; average interview length , 31 min . ) . The ﬁ rst part of the study focused on the process of designing the County Prototype according to the BEHR , the clinicians ’ reception of the BEHR ’ s mode of presenting clinical work , and their experiences with using it . During the second test , in late 2004 , the author attended eight planning meetings and one focus - group interview with physicians and nurses following the completion of the test ( 6 participants . Interview length : 1½ hours ) , and thirteen individual interviews were conducted with clinicians who had used the prototype most ( 5 nurses , 2 social - and health - care assistants , 4 physicians , 2 IT support staff ; average interview length , 29 min . ) . Notes were taken during meetings , and afterwards elaborated into rich narratives . The interviews focused on four issues : the process of taking the County prototype into use , including training ; organization of the implementation process and support ; experiences of using the County Prototype , including its bene ﬁ ts and drawbacks , changes in daily work , bugs , and the user interface ; the BEHR model and it adequacy for clinical practice . Interviews were transcribed and analysed for general patterns and interesting points relating to these four issues . No distinct difference was found between physician and nurse responses . The data generated by the second test became part of the County Report , co - authored by the head physician and head nurse of the ward where the test took place , and formed the basis for this paper . Throughout the entire period , documents regarding the various published versions of the BEHR ( 0 . 2 , 1 . 01 , 2 . 0 , 2 . 1 , 2 . 2 ) and evaluation reports for two other tests of BEHR prototypes were also collected ( the ABE and ‘ Brug GEPKA ’ projects ( Danish Institute for Health Services Research 2001 ; Mediq 2004 ) ) . 5 . The BEHR in working practice : evaluations and attributions of causes During the second test period , the County Prototype was used in daily clinical practice on the ward : Sixty - six patients had their records maintained in the County Prototype without ( in principle ) any back - up records . Most of the sixty - six patients were admitted for one or two days , while around ten patients were admitted for approximately three weeks . Despite the technical improvements and renewed training since the previous test , the prototype still had bugs , and the clinicians interviewed found it cumbersome and more time - consuming than their previous paper - based patient record . The test was only completed through the dedication of a group of about twenty clinicians , high - quality technical support , 483 Accounting and Co - Constructing and the backing of the ward ’ s management , which was involved in the trial on a daily basis . The test led to controversy regarding the adequacy of the BEHR as a standard : Two evaluation reports on the same test of the County Prototype reached two different conclusions . One evaluation report , commissioned by the county , concluded that the BEHR was inadequate as a standard for EHRs . Another report by the ‘ Observatory ’ , which had been assigned by the National Board of Health to evaluate the various the BEHR trials , concluded that the test was inconclusive , and that the BEHR might be maintained as a standard . A short summary of the two reports will provide the background for the subsequent discussion . 5 . 1 . The county report : The BEHR is inadequate for clinical work The County Report concluded that the prototype did not support daily clinical practice , but required additional work for documentation and reading the record . Except for simple patient cases , the prototype led to a critical lack of overview of patient treatment and care . None of the interviewees considered the test of the County Prototype a success , since the prototype ’ s performance remained slow , and the user interface ’ s logic was not always clear to the clinicians . Both physicians and nurses stated that the prototype required more effort to obtain an overview of patient cases and more documentation work , and fragmented the overview . While not all interviewees knew whether to attribute these con - sequences to inadequacies in the prototype , or their lack of familiarity with the new form of documentation , a core group of seven clinicians , including physicians and nurses who had been most involved in its design and in its daily use , argued that the dif ﬁ culties originated in the BEHR model : ‘ It has had its chance . Not something for clinical use ’ ( Interview with physician 3 ) . One nurse who had used the model said , ‘ There is something wrong with the model . Not everything can be tied to the model , it becomes too complicated . ’ ( Interview with nurse 2 ) . It was argued that dif ﬁ culties with the BEHR could be related to two issues : the fragmentation of patient cases , and additional work . First , the BEHR divides a patient case into separate ‘ health conditions ’ , making a comprehensive assessment of a patient ’ s condition dif ﬁ cult . According to the clinicians , this leads to a fragmentation of a patient ’ s condition , and the loss of the overview : ‘ A patient might have elevated blood sugar levels , which should be documented under “ diabetes ” . At the same time , his temperature is high , which should be documented under “ pneumonia ” , for example , and then he has developed a rash , which might have to be documented in a third place . All the time , fragmentation , fragmentation , fragmentation . And then you lose the interrelations ’ ( Interview with senior physician 1 ) . Another problem is that information from observations , examinations , and tests is sorted according to individual diagnoses ( health 484 Claus Bossen conditions ) , but may be related to several of these . For example , a thoracic x - ray may be ﬁ led under the health condition , ‘ pneumonia ’ , but may also be relevant to the health condition , ‘ cardiac problem ’ . Therefore , when clinicians have to classify information , they either enter the information under the health condition they consider most appropriate ( e . g . pneumonia ) , with the inherent danger of its being overlooked when another health condition is addressed ( e . g . a cardiac problem ) , or enter the same information under several relevant health conditions ( e . g . pneumonia and cardiac problem ) , creating redundant information . As a senior nurse explained : ‘ A patient might suffer from anaemia , appendicitis , and a broken leg , and where then should personal care be documented ? She has to be washed , but that could be related to any of the diagnoses , or actually all three . In the end , if I look at each of the three diagnoses , I will be reading the same note on personal care , and therefore the systems entails repetition upon repetition , if you document correctly ’ ( Interview with senior nurse ) . Such redundancy forces the clinicians to do a lot of reading , and entails that they cannot establish an overview . Second , the BEHR requires more documentation of clinical practice than previously , since it is mandatory for every ‘ health condition ’ and ‘ health intervention ’ to have a documented ‘ indication ’ or ‘ focused information ’ . For many health conditions and interventions , such a requirement makes good sense , because diagnoses and interventions should be based on reasons and indications . However , the requirement is also applied to routine interventions such as measuring temperature , blood pressure , and pulse rate , which were previously just written down , but now , in the BEHR , require ‘ focused information ’ or a ‘ health condition ’ to be documented . For example , in the case of a patient developing a rash because of urinary incontinence , this would be noted as ‘ rash owing to urinary incontinence ’ in the old record , whereas in the BEHR , the physician is required to enter ‘ rash ’ as focused information , then to enter ‘ urinary incontinence ’ as a health condition , and subsequently link the focused information , ‘ rash ’ , with the health condition of ‘ urinary incontinence ’ . Similarly , the application of a cream for the rash would be written as ‘ salve XX applied because of rash due to urinary incontinence ’ in the old record , but in the BEHR it is necessary to follow the steps described above , and then the nurse must enter the health intervention , ‘ Application of cream XX ’ , which must be linked to the health condition , ‘ urinary incontinence ’ . All in all , the BEHR demands more documentation work , because of the requirement that all health interventions and conditions be linked to focused information , and because the BEHR model itself breaks down practice into separate steps , each of which must be documented . ‘ If a patient has three diagnoses , we have to go through the wheel three times , including 12 steps which have to be linked . We become link - administrators ’ ( Interview with head physician ) . The conclusion reached by the core group of clinicians was that the BEHR might re ﬂ ect how clinicians think or ought to think , but it did not provide the 485 Accounting and Co - Constructing information resources needed in daily clinical practice . Instead , the BEHR led to more work , loss of the overview , and fragmentation of patient case documenta - tion . As a physician stated : ‘ It is the model that is not adequate . It is too cumbersome . In theory it seems sensible . It is how many physicians and I think . But it is something we do in fractions of seconds , and then we go on with our work . When you have to document it , and spend time documenting it , it requires a terrible amount of time . And we don ’ t have that time at all …’ ( Interview with senior physician 1 ) . Or , in the words of another physician : ‘ The model as such , from a purely theoretical perspective , where you don ’ t consider time and such matters , you can argue that the model might work . That is why it is important to test it in practice . Even with all the support we received , we couldn ’ t make it work ’ ( Interview with head physician ) . The problem - oriented approach alone could not satisfy the information needs of daily practice , and the clinicians recommended that source ( x - ray , laboratory results , MR scans , etc . ) and time - oriented ( chronological ) modes be incorporated as complementary means of organizing data . A senior physicians said : ‘… instead of having chronological documentation , where you know that the patient ’ s condition is like THIS , right now , and that is what I have to act upon , you have to read about a lot of different ‘ health conditions ’ , and develop an overview of a patient ’ s state in your head upon which to act . And you can ’ t ’ ( Interview with senior physician ) . In all fairness , the point about chronological ordering applies only the County Prototype , since the BEHR does not exclude chronological displays of information , although this was not supported by the County Prototype . 5 . 2 . The observatory report : inconclusive test – The BEHR is not compromised The Observatory ’ s report argued that the test of the County Prototype did not lead to any conclusive evidence against the BEHR . Delays , technical problems , a technology driven process , and insuf ﬁ ciently trained clinicians who lacked the motivation to take the prototype into use owing to the failure of the ﬁ rst test , resulted in the second test not ful ﬁ lling the requirements established for the evaluation test of full - scale , daily use . The criticism of the BEHR , the Observatory Report argued , stemmed from the department ’ s management only , and was misdirected : The problems encountered could be ascribed to a badly designed interface that mirrored the BEHR model too crudely ( see Figure 2 ) , and the absence of an overview functionality . The report argued that it was impossible to determine whether the dif ﬁ culties mentioned in the interviews , regarding fragmented patient case documentation , added work , and redundant information could be attributed to the user interface of the application , or to the BEHR model . The differences in opinion about the BEHR , arising from the test of the County Prototype , were debated in public media and at workshops , and a hearing organized by the National Board of Health as part of the development of version 2 . 2 of the BEHR in early 2005 . Participants at the hearing and workshops 486 Claus Bossen included county representatives , clinicians , the National Board of Health , and computer ﬁ rms involved in the development of the various BEHR prototypes . In the end , the National Board of Health maintained that the BEHR was robust and adequate for clinical work , though concessions were made to reduce the additional work of documentation demanded by the BEHR . Thus , for example , frequent and routine health interventions such as measurements of blood pressure , temperature , and pulse were not required to have ‘ focused information ’ as an indicator , in order to be documented . 6 . Discussion BEHR version 2 . 2 , of 2005 , remains the last version published , and no prototypes based on the BEHR have been developed since the County Prototype . Though the BEHR has never been formally abandoned by the National Board of Health , it is presently de facto shelved . Nonetheless , its development and the County Prototype test present an interesting and relevant case , because of the issues involved in the discussion of whether the BEHR is an adequate standard or not . At a practical level , one issue to be resolved is that of the controversy raised by the two con ﬂ icting reports on the County Prototype test . One approach to pursue could be a thorough methodological comparison of the two evaluations to determine which is the more reliable , and an effort could be made to develop better methods for conducting evaluations , whether formative ones for redesigns , or summative ones for making decisions . This is not the place for such a methodological discussion , and it should merely be noted that this approach might not necessarily resolve the issue , since there is often an element of judgement involved in such an assessment . For example , we might note that , while the County Report was co - authored by user representatives , the Observatory report was commissioned by the National Board of Health , and speculate as to whether that made any difference . To counter such a possibility , the involvement of users in a process of respondent validation , or , better yet , as evaluation partners , could be recommended . Since evaluation results depend on the established criteria , the co - construction of evaluations would appear to be a constructive approach ( Lilley 1996 ; Berg 2001 ) . Such a move towards a maximalist version of co - construction , as argued by Hartswood et al . , in their recommendation of co - realization ( 2008 ) , might be a practical way to resolve the question of the BEHR ’ s adequacy . Only through a redesign based on actual use can an IT system ’ s adequacy become evident . Co - construction in the maximalist sense is recommendable for many reasons , but the instance of the BEHR complicates this as a solution , since ‘ users ’ , in the form of clinicians , were involved with the BEHR throughout its development . The problem - oriented approach was conceived by the physician , Weed , and turned into the BEHR by physicians at the National Board of Health , who made an earnest effort to develop BEHR to maturity through a process of testing of 487 Accounting and Co - Constructing prototypes in actual use . Hence , the BEHR does not appear to be constructed from a ‘ view from nowhere ’ , nor do the problems with the BEHR seem to be caused by ‘ ontological drift ’ ( Robinson and Bannon 1991 ) , since clinicians have been involved in its construction from the start . A process of co - construction of a kind was involved , and yet something went wrong . An analysis of the entire process of developing the BEHR is beyond the scope of this paper and its empirical data ; instead , an answer will be suggested by analysing the way in which the BEHR represents work in health care . 6 . 1 . The BEHR as a partial representation of health care work As a preamble to the following discussion of how the BEHR represents health care work , it should be stated that the co - authors of the County Report , including this author , maintain that the BEHR does not adequately conceptualize health care work . First , the attribution of the insuf ﬁ ciencies of the prototype to the BEHR itself was made by the users with the most experience with the BEHR and the prototype . Their judgement was not hampered by a lack of understanding or experience with either . Second , the problems of fragmentation and lack of overview encountered in the County test were also found in other tests of the BEHR . For example , one Observatory report on a BEHR prototype test mentions precisely the same problems as those of the County Prototype . However , ‘ despite considerable criticism of and dif ﬁ culties in using [ the prototype ] ’ ( Danish Institute for Health Services Research 200 : 59 ) , no profound difference was found between clinical work and the BEHR . It remains unclear why that report favoured the BEHR , while the Observatory Report on the County Prototype was inconclusive . Third , the conclusions of the County Report agree with other criticism of the problem - oriented approach to patient records ( Feinstein 1973c ; Gold ﬁ nger 1973 ) . The National Board of Health was aware of this criticism , but argued – like Weed , the originator of the problem - oriented approach – that computerization would make that criticism void . So , what is wrong with the BEHR ? The National Board of Health argued that the BEHR ‘ relates closely to real - life situations in the domain of healthcare ’ ( Asp and Petersen 2003 : 6 ) . Exactly what occurs in clinical work and in the minds of clinicians is arguable , but one description is found in the work of the physician Alvan Feinstein ( Feinstein 1973a , 1973b , 1973c , 1974 ) . According to Feinstein , clinical reasoning consists of ﬁ nding and assessing information of multiple kinds and from different sources , and , based on this , constructing a coherent account of the patient ’ s condition . Thus , there are at least two phases . In one phase , the clinician gathers information and identi ﬁ es problems by surveying a wide variety of data , such as information about previous conditions , physical observations , examinations , and oral accounts . The challenge is to construct a coherent overview that establishes meaningful and valid relationships between information 488 Claus Bossen about symptoms , complaints , and examinations , on the one hand , and , on the other , to relate this general idea to a diagnosis . In the ﬁ rst phase , information is evaluated and ﬁ ltered ; in the second phase , a rational account of the patient ’ s state is constructed . There is a crucial difference between the two phases . In the ﬁ rst phase , there is a need for widespread information gathering , and the scanning and ﬁ ltering of information , before coherence can be achieved . In the second phase , coherent and rational relationships between information , diagnosis , plans , and subsequent evaluation must be stated . The BEHR seems to provide resources for the latter , . The clinicians ’ demand for source - and chronologically - organized patient records may be seen as a demand for other modes of gathering , scanning , and ﬁ ltering information than the linear sequence of the BEHR . Thus , the BEHR is only a partial representation of health care work . 6 . 2 . A view from nowhere and ﬂ ip - over effect The BEHR is allegedly based on a ‘ universal ’ problem - solving paradigm applied to health care . However , problem solving is often an process of interacting actors with bodies using physical artefacts and their environment ( Lave 1988 : Kirsh 1995 ) . Moreover , from a more ecological approach , it may be argued that clinical work and knowledge production are the results of processes dispersed over time and space , and among personnel , instead of unique acts undertaken by individual clinicians ( Atkinson 1995 ) . In this context , the BEHR stands out as an individualistic , disembodied , and decontextualized abstraction , a view from nowhere , rather than a universal model . It is notable that many clinicians at the Endocrinology Department reacted to the BEHR and its ‘ wheel ’ ( Figure 1 ) by exclaiming , ‘ That is actually how we think ! ’ As it turned out in the test , the core group of clinicians concluded that while they might think as depicted by the BEHR , this was not how they worked : ‘ It has simply not worked in practice . The theory and all , it looks so logical . You can show it to any physician , and it really looks logical . It is how we physicians think . … It is how we think , but it just doesn ’ t work in practice . It is too time - consuming . There is no gain ’ ( Interview with senior physician 3 ) . However , the BEHR does represent a mode of representing clinical work that corresponds to what physicians and , to some extent , nurses are taught : that they should think and work in a rational , ‘ scienti ﬁ c ’ way . The BEHR ’ s continued con ﬁ rmation during its development seems to have thrived on the dominance of an abstract representation of knowledge and action within the medical profession . Ultimately , the BEHR is a case of a ‘ ﬂ ip - over ’ effect , as a representation of work becomes a prescription for that work . This is not a result of ontological drift caused by different semantic communities , but instead the result , within the clinical professions , of a representation from a ‘ nowhere ’ which has been abstracted from actual practice , and then drifts too easily between professions and sectors . 489 Accounting and Co - Constructing A number of factors may explain why this ﬂ ip - over effect prevailed , despite the BEHR being put into use , and the involvement of the users . The problems encountered when using BEHR - based prototypes could be attributed to bugs , missing interfaces , insuf ﬁ cient training , and unfamiliarity with the problem - oriented way of working , as happened in the Observatory Report , and other evaluations of BEHR prototypes . Users ’ voices could have been ignored , which is generally unlikely , with the strongly positioned professions of physicians and nurses , and there is no evidence of this having been the case with the BEHR . However , the most signi ﬁ cant point might be the change in the Endocrinology Department clinicians ’ assessment of the BEHR : Before using the County Prototype in practice , they regarded the BEHR as depicting how they worked ; after , it was seen as inadequate . A central point that emerges from this is that being ‘ a user ’ is not only a question of being a member of the future user group in terms of profession , for example , a physician or a nurse , but also a matter of the kind of knowledge , or stance towards an IT system that is established . Being a ‘ user ’ is a question of being in a position of practice . While ultimately , only actual practical use will reveal the full implications of a system ( Hartswood et al . 2008 ) , there should be more intermediate steps in a development process , so that experiences and knowledge from positions within use are created . 7 . Conclusion : shaping EHRs , building health care 5 Despite a process of co - construction , in which users were involved in the conception and development of the core design idea , and the use of application prototypes in actual practice , the BEHR emerges as a partial representation of health care work that causes a ﬂ ip - over effect , because it was produced from a stance external to practice . The model of practice became a model for practice , with undesirable consequences . While the BEHR provides resources for documenting rationalized accounts of patient cases , it does not support the process by which these accounts are made , when information must be gathered and ﬁ ltered . The strived - for accountability inscribed in the standard does not emerge as a by - product of the process of health care , as intended , but at the cost of more work , redundancy of information , and the fragmentation of the overview of patient cases . Three main points emerge from the case of the BEHR . First , the case indicates that , while a detailed understanding of the domain in which an IT system is to be used is valuable , the crucial issue is not to represent that work , but whether such an understanding , presented in a model of work , for example , depicts the resources that actors need for acting in various situations . When constructing standards for health care , the challenge is not to depict health care work as such , but instead to describe the resources actors need in particular situations of use . For example , plans inscribed in procedural standards can be rational anticipations preceding , and post hoc reconstructions following action , and there seem to be good reasons to examine them separately : for example , differentiating between 490 Claus Bossen gathering and ﬁ ltering information , and documenting a rationalized account . The standards and models incorporated in coordinative devices such as EHRs should provide resources for action , not depict it , and the challenge is to then produce plans that are resources for most , if not all use situations . Second , the agential effect of ordering information and stipulating action through coordinative devices , does make new kinds of cooperation and organization possible , but caution should be used when attempting to stipulate or inscribe in standards increased accountability to third parties . Embedded in the BEHR is a requirement to document ‘ rationally ’ and extensively , since it stipulates that the wheel ’ s sequenced steps are to be followed , and each step must have a documented reason . However , this comes at the cost of more work , redundancy of information , and fragmentation of the overview of patient cases . Third , the case of the BEHR supports an argument for a maximalist approach to co - construction , because users should not only participate in the design , development , and testing of IT systems , but also of their evaluation and redesign . Users need to be involved , when aims of augmenting work , strengthening coordination , and producing accountability must be balanced against each other . However , it is crucial to be aware that valuable input is not necessarily guaranteed by users as professionals , but from knowledge produced from a stance within practice . Co - construction processes should elicit experiences and feedback from a broad spectrum of situations of use . IT enables new ways of working , cooperating , and organizing what might otherwise be impossible . The plans inscribed in coordinative devices via standards and software architecture stipulate actions . In this sense , IT shapes or co - constructs health care staff , work , and organization ( Berg 1999 ; Latour 1992 ) . When EHRs and their standards are shaped in certain ways , health care is built in certain ways . Presently , accountability is a central concern for politicians , states , and citizens as part of policies in the ‘ value - for - money ’ and New Public Management vein ( Power 1997 ; Strathern 2000 ) . At the same time , user involvement in innovation projects has been adopted by state bureaucracies and large corporations under labels such as ‘ user - driven innovation ’ and ‘ lead - user innovation ’ ( von Hippel 2006 ) . In such situations , engaging in the development of standards and EHRs , and attention to the organizational and societal agendas of which information technology is part , are important . While accountability is a legitimate concern , the cost of achieving it should be brought forward and discussed . Accounting for work in the dual sense of modelling work and establishing accountability , as well as co - constructing , in the dual sense of facilitating cooperation between users and developers , and shaping EHRs and health care , are som e of the central issues involved . Acknowledgements Sincere thanks to the staff at the Endocrinology Department , and the three anonymous reviewers . 491 Accounting and Co - Constructing Notes 2 . For a comprehensive overview of the literature on EHRs , see Greenhalgh et al . 2009 . For overviews of national initiatives , see for example , Chantler et al . 2006 ( UK ) ; Dorda et al . 2008 ( Austria ) ; Berner et al . 2005 , Singer 2009 ( USA ) ; and Ellingsen and Røed 2010 ( Norway ) . 3 . ‘ Emancipatory ’ will be used as an inclusive term here , for concerns about quality of life , quality of work , democracy , dominance , and different possible futures . 4 . Procter et al . , 2009 , distinguish between context , timing , scale and purpose of engagement , and user experience . 5 . Computerized problem - oriented records have been used at the Vermont Hospital ( 1970 – 74 ) in the U . S . ( Schultz 1988 ) and the Karolinska Hospital in Sweden ( 1968 – 71 ) ( Mellner , Selander et al . 1976 ) . A CPOMR for general practitioners was in use in Norway from 1984 to 2008 ( Botsis et al 2010 ) . 6 . Referring to Bijker and Law 1992 . References Asp , L . , & Petersen , J . ( 2003 ) . A conceptual model for documentation of clinical information in the EHR . From http : / / www . sst . dk / upload / papermie2003 _ asp013 _ dk . pdf . Atkinson , P . ( 1995 ) . Medical talk and medical work . London : Sage . Berg , M . ( 1999 ) . Accumulating and coordinating : occasions for information technologies in medical work . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 8 ( 4 ) , 373 – 401 . Berg , M . ( 2001 ) . Implementing information systems in health care organizations : myths and challenges . International Journal of Medical Informatics , 64 ( 2 – 3 ) , 143 – 156 . Berner , E . S . , Detmer , D . E . , & Simborg , D . ( 2005 ) . Will the wave ﬁ nally break ? A brief view of the adoption of electronic medical records in the United States . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 – 7 . Bijker , W . E . , & Law , J . ( Eds . ) ( 1992 ) . Shaping technology / building society . Cambridge ( Mass ) & London : MIT Press Blomberg , J . , & Kensing , F . ( 1998 ) . Participatory design : issues and concerns . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 7 , 167 – 185 . Bossen , C . , Dindler , C . , & Iversen , O . S . ( 2010 ) . User gains and PD aims : assessment from a participatory design project . Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference . ( pp . 141 – 150 ) . Sydney , Australia : ACM . Bowers , J . , Button , G . , & Sharrock , W . ( 1995 ) . Work ﬂ ow from within and without : technology and cooperative work on the print industry shop ﬂ oor . In H . Marmolin , Y . Sundblad , & K . Schmidt ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the fourth European conference on computer - supported cooperative work ( pp . 51 – 66 ) . Dordrecht : Klüwer Academic Publishers . Chantler , C . , Clarke , T . , & Granger , R . ( 2006 ) . Information technology in the english national health service . Journal of the American Medical Association , 296 ( 18 ) , 2255 – 2258 . Cotton , P . , Fraser , I . M . , & Hill , W . Y . ( 2000 ) . The social audit agenda — primary health care in a stakeholder society . International Journal of Auditing , 4 ( 1 ) , 3 – 28 . Danish Institute for Health Services Research . ( 2001 ) . Test of conceptual model for electronic health records , DSI , Copenhagen [ In Danish : Aftestning af Begrebsmodel for Elektronisk patientjournal ] . Donnelly , W . J . , & Brauner , D . J . ( 1992 ) . Why SOAP is bad for the medical records . Archives of Internal Medicine , 152 , 481 – 484 . Dorda , W . , Duftschmid , G . , Gerhold , L . , Gall , W . , & Gambal , J . ( 2008 ) . Austria ’ s path toward nationwide electronic health records . Methods of Information in Medicine , 47 ( 2 ) , 117 – 123 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 492 Claus Bossen Dourish , P . ( 2001 ) . Process description as organisational accounting devices : the dual use of work ﬂ ow technologies . In C . Ellis & I . Zigurs ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 2001 international ACM SIGGROUP conference on supporting group work ( pp . 52 – 60 ) . New York : ACM Press . Ellingsen , G . , & Røed , K . ( 2010 ) . The role of integration in health - based information ’ infrastructures . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 19 ( 6 ) , 557 – 584 . Feinstein , A . R . ( 1973a ) . The problems of the ‘ problem - oriented medical record ’ . Annals of Internal Medicine , 78 ( 5 ) , 751 – 762 . Feinstein , A . R . ( 1973b ) . An analysis of diagnostic reasoning . I . The domains and disorders of clinical macrobiology . The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine , 46 , 212 – 232 . Feinstein , A . R . ( 1973c ) . An analysis of diagnostic reasoning . II . The strategy of intermediate decisions . The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine , 46 , 264 – 283 . Feinstein , A . R . ( 1974 ) . An analysis of diagnostic reasoning III . The construction of clinical algorithms . The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine , 47 ( 1 ) , 5 – 32 . Gärtner , J . , & Wagner , I . ( 1996 ) . Mapping actors and agendas : political frameworks of systems design and participation . Human Computer Interaction , 11 ( 3 ) , 187 – 214 . Glouberman , S . , & Mintzberg , H . ( 2001a ) . Managing the care of health and the cure of disease — Part I : differentiation . Health Care Management Review , 56 – 69 . Glouberman , S . , & Mintzberg , H . ( 2001b ) . Managing the care of health and the cure of disease — Part II : integration . Health Care Management Review , 70 – 84 . Gold ﬁ nger , S . E . ( 1973 ) . The problem - oriented record : a critique from a believer . The New England Journal of Medicine , 288 ( 12 ) , 606 – 608 . Greenhalgh , T . , Potts , H . W . , Wong , G . , Bark , P . , & Swinglehurst , D . ( 2009 ) . Tensions and paradoxes in electronic patient record research : a systematic literature review using the meta - narrative method . The Milbank Quarterly , 87 ( 4 ) , 729 – 788 . Hammersley , M . , & Atkinson , P . ( 1997 ) . Ethnography . Principles in practice . New York : Routledge . Hanseth , O . , & Monteiro , E . ( 1997 ) . Inscribing behaviour in information infrastructure standards . Accounting , Management and Information Technologies , 7 ( 4 ) , 183 – 211 . Hartswood , M . , Procter , R . , Slack , R . , Voss , A . , Büscher , M . , Rounce ﬁ eld , M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Co - realization : towards a principled synthesis of ethnomethodology and participatory design . In M . S . Ackerman , C . A . Halverson , T . Erickson , & W . A . Kellogg ( Eds . ) , Resources , co - evolution and artifacts ( pp . 59 – 94 ) . London : Springer . Heath , C . , & Luff , P . ( 1996 ) . Documents and professional practice : ‘ bad ’ organisational reasons for ‘ good ’ clinical records . In M . S . Ackerman ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( pp . 354 – 363 ) . New York : ACM Press . Ho , L . M . , McGehee , S . M . , Hedley , A . J . , & Leong , J . C . Y . ( 1999 ) . The application of a computerized problem - oriented medical record system and its impact on patient care . International Journal of Medical Informatics , 55 ( 1 ) , 47 – 59 . Hurst , J . W . ( 1971 ) . Ten reasons why lawrence weed is right . The New England Journal of Medicine , 284 ( 1 ) , 51 – 52 . Kalra , D . ( 2006 ) . Electronic health record standards . In R . Haux & C . Kulikowski ( Eds . ) , IMIA Yearbook of medical informatics 2006 ( pp . 136 – 144 ) . Stuttgart : Shattauer . Kirsh , D . ( 1995 ) . The intelligent use of space . Arti ﬁ cial Intelligence , 73 ( 1 – 2 ) , 31 – 68 . Latour , B . ( 1992 ) . Where are the missing masses ? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts . In W . E . Bijker & J . Law ( Eds . ) , Shaping technology / building society ( pp . 225 – 258 ) . London : MIT Press . Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life . New York : Cambridge University Press . Lilley , S . ( 1996 ) . Re ﬁ ning accountabilities : Opening the black box of management systems success . In R . Munro & J . Mouritsen ( Eds . ) , Accountability . Power , ethos and technologies of managing ( pp . 118 – 143 ) . London : Thomson Business Press . 493 Accounting and Co - Constructing Lorenzi , N . M . , & Riley , R . T . ( 2004 ) . Managing technological change : Organizational aspects of health informatics . New York : Springer Verlag . Martin , D . , Mariani , J . , & Rounce ﬁ eld , M . ( 2009 ) . Practicalities of participation : Stakeholder involvement in an electronic patient records project . In A . Voss , M . Hartswood , R . Procter , M . Rounce ﬁ eld , R . Slack , & M . Büscher ( Eds . ) , Con ﬁ guring user - designer relations : Interdisci - plinary perspectives ( pp . 133 – 155 ) . London : Springer . Mediq . ( 2004 ) . Use BEHR in clinical practice . Copenhagen [ In Danish : ‘ BRUG - GEPKA projektet i Københavns Amt ’ ] . Mellner , C . , Selander , H . , & Wolodarski , J . ( 1976 ) . Computerized problem - oriented medical record at Karolinska hospital : format and function , users ’ acceptance and patient attitude to questionnaire . Methods of Information in Medicine , 15 ( 1 ) , 11 – 20 . National Board of Health . ( 2000 ) . National strategi for IT i sygehusvæsenet 2000 – 2002 [ National Strategy for IT in Health Care ] . Copenhagen : National Board of Health . National Board of Health . ( 2003 ) . National IT Strategy 2003 – 2007 for Danish Health Care Service . Copenhagen : Ministry of Interior and Health . National Board of Health . ( 2004 ) . Beskrivelse af GEpj — på begrebsniveau [ In English : Description of BEHR — on conceptual level . Version 2 . 0 ] . ’ from http : / / www . sst . dk / applikationer / epj / gepj / 020 _ 20040416 / index . html . Power , M . ( 1997 ) . The audit society . Rituals of veri ﬁ cation . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Robinson , M . , & Bannon , L . ( 1991 ) . Questioning representations . In L . Bannon , M . Robinson , & K . Schmidt ( Eds . ) , ECSCW´91 . Proceedings of the European conference on computer supported cooperative work ( pp . 219 – 233 ) . Amsterdam : Klüwer Academic Publishers . Rolland , K . H . , & Monteiro , E . ( 2002 ) . Balancing the local and the global in infrastructural information systems . The Information Society , 18 ( 2 ) , 87 – 100 . Schmidt , K . ( 1997 ) . Of maps and scripts . The status of formal constructs in cooperative work . Proceedings of the International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work : the Integration Challenge ( pp . 138 – 147 ) . Phoenix : ACM . Schmidt , K . , & Simone , C . ( 1996 ) . Coordination mechanisms : towards a conceptual foundation of CSCW systems design . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 5 ( 2 – 3 ) , 155 – 200 . Singer , E . ( 2009 ) . A digital health - care revolution : twenty billion dollars might ﬁ nally turn the U . S . health - care system digital . Technology Review , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , http : / / www . technologyreview . com / biomedicine / 22026 / ( accessed September 2010 ) . Star , S . L . , & Griesemer , J . R . ( 1989 ) . Institutional ecology , ‘ translations ’ and boundary objects : amateurs and professionals in Berkeley ’ s museum of vertebrate zoology , 1907 – 39 . Social Studies of Science , 19 ( 3 ) , 387 – 420 . Strathern , M . ( Ed . ) ( 2000 ) . Audit cultures : Anthropological studies in accountability , ethics and the academy . London : Routledge . Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) . Plans and situated actions . The problem of human - machine communication . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Suchman , L . ( 1993 ) . Technologies of accountability : Of lizard and aeroplanes . In G . Button ( Ed . ) , Technology in working order ( pp . 113 – 126 ) . New York : Routledge . Suchman , L . ( 1995 ) . Making work visible . Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 9 ) , 56 – 63 . Suchman , L . ( 2005 ) . Located accountabilities in technology production published by the Centre for Science Studies , Lancaster University , Lancaster LA1 4YN , UK , at http : / / www . comp . lancs . ac . uk / sociology / papers / Suchman - Located - Accountabilities . pdf . Timmermans , S . , & Berg , M . ( 2003 ) . The gold standard . The challenge of evidence - based medicine and standardization in health care . Philadelphia : Temple University Press . Törpel , B . , Voss , A . , Hartswood , M . , & Procter , R . ( 2009 ) . Participatory design : issues and approaches in dynamic constellations of use , design , and research . In A . Voss , M . Hartswood , & 494 Claus Bossen R . Procter ( Eds . ) , Con ﬁ guring user - designer relations : interdisciplinary perspectives ( pp . 13 – 29 ) . London : Springer . von Hippel , E . ( 2006 ) . Democratizing innovation . Cambridge : MIT Press . Walker , H . K . , Hurst , J . W . , & Woody , M . F . ( Eds . ) ( 1973 ) . Applying the problem - oriented system . New York : Medcom Press . Weed , L . L . ( 1969 ) . Medical records , medical education , and patient care . The problem - oriented record as a basic tool . Chicago : Year Book Medical Publishers . Wiener , C . L . ( 2000 ) . The elusive quest : Accountability in hospitals . Hawthorne : Aldine . Winthereik , B . R . , van der Ploeg , I . , & Marc , B . ( 2007 ) . The electronic patient record as a meaningful audit tool : accountability and autonomy in general practitioner work . Science , Technology & Human Values , 32 ( 1 ) , 6 – 25 . 495 Accounting and Co - Constructing