P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 1997 . 13 : 83 – 117 Copyright c (cid:13) 1997 by Annual Reviews Inc . All rights reserved MICROTUBULE POLYMERIZATION DYNAMICS Arshad Desai and Timothy J . Mitchison (cid:3) Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , and (cid:3) Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143 ; e - mail : arshad @ socrates . ucsf . edu ; mitchi @ socrates . ucsf . edu KEY WORDS : cytoskeleton , dynamic instability , mechanism , regulation A BSTRACT The polymerization dynamics of microtubules are central to their biological func - tions . Polymerizationdynamicsallowmicrotubulestoadoptspatialarrangements that can change rapidly in response to cellular needs and , in some cases , to per - form mechanical work . Microtubules utilize the energy of GTP hydrolysis to fuel a unique polymerization mechanism termed dynamic instability . In this review , we ﬁrst describe progress toward understanding the mechanism of dynamic insta - bility of pure tubulin and then discuss the function and regulation of microtubule dynamic instability in living cells . CONTENTS INTRODUCTION : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 84 MICROTUBULE STRUCTURE : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 85 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS IN VITRO : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 88 Brief History : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 88 Observation of Dynamic Instability In Vitro : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 89 Thermodynamic Basis of Dynamic Instability : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 91 Evidence for a Stabilizing Structure at Microtubule Ends : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 94 The GTP CAP Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 95 Structural Basis of Dynamic Instability : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 97 Relationship of Structural and Chemical Transitions : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 99 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS IN VIVO : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 100 Functions of Microtubule Dynamic Instability In Vivo : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 100 Methodology for Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics In Vivo : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 102 Features of Microtubule Dynamics In Vivo : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 103 Microtubule Stabilizing Factors : MAPs : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 105 Microtubule Destabilizing Factors : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 107 83 1081 - 0706 / 97 / 1115 - 0083 $ 08 . 00 P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 84 DESAI & MITCHISON Microtubule Nucleating Factors : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 109 EVOLUTION OF MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 110 INTRODUCTION Microtubules ( MTs ) are noncovalent polymers of the protein tubulin found in all dividing eukaryotic cells and in most differentiated cell types . During cell division , a large dynamic array of MTs , called the mitotic spindle , functions to physically segregate the chromosomes and to orient the plane of cleavage . In nondividing cells , MTs organize the cytoplasm , position the nucleus and organelles , and serve as the principal structural element of ﬂagella and cilia . MTs are physically robust polymers , with an intrinsic resistance to bending and compression . The mechanical properties of the ensemble of MTs , actin ﬁla - ments , and intermediate ﬁlaments provide shape and strength to the cytoplasm , justifying the use of the term cytoskeleton . This term is misleading , however , in the sense that it suggests a static structure . Cytoskeletal polymers are in fact highly dynamic , capable of polymerizing , depolymerizing , and moving within the cytoplasm on a time scale of seconds to minutes . The dynamic properties of MTs were apparent to early cytologists , who depictedmitoticspindlesascompositionsoflinearelementswhosearrangementchangedrapidlywithtime ( Wilson 1928 ) . The ﬁrst proof that spindles are composed of dynamic linear elements came with the advent of polarization microscopy , which allowed the observation of MTs in living cells ( reviewed in Inou´e & Salmon 1995 ) . This method was also used to demonstrate the importance of polymerization dynamics to MT function during mitosis ( Inou´e & Sato 1967 ) . The subunit of a MT , a heterodimer of (cid:11) - and (cid:12) - tubulin , was ﬁrst puriﬁed using its afﬁnity for colchicine , one of the many natural product drugs that targets mitosis ( Weisenberg et al 1968 ) . Further biochemical studies led to the discovery that (cid:12) - tubulin hydrolyzes GTP during polymerization ( Weisenberg et al 1976 ) . The energy input from GTP hydrolysis allows for nonequilibrium polymerization dynamics including dynamic instability , a behavior in which individual MT ends alternate stochastically between prolonged phases of poly - merization and depolymerization ( Mitchison & Kirschner 1984a ) . Dynamic instability appears to dominate the behavior of many types of MT arrays in living cells , but its precise mechanism and biological functions are still poorly understood . Cytoskeletal polymer dynamics , including dynamic instability , are energet - ically expensive yet evolutionarily conserved , suggesting important biologi - cal roles . Both tubulin and actin use intrinsic nucleoside triphosphate ( NTP ) hydrolysis ( Mitchison 1992 ) , whereas intermediate ﬁlaments use accessory P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 85 proteins , notably kinases and phosphatases ( Eriksson et al 1992 ) , to transduce chemical energy into polymer dynamics . Although we remain ignorant of many of the ways that polymerization dynamics are utilized in vivo , we can make some general remarks . At the most fundamental level , polymerization dynam - ics allow the cytoskeleton to rapidly reorganize . Were the cytoskeletal polymers to assemble to true thermodynamic equilibrium in vivo , it would be slow and difﬁcult to change their spatial organization ( Kirschner & Mitchison 1986 ) . A second general property of MTs and actin ﬁlaments that arises from the direct coupling of polymerization dynamics to NTP hydrolysis is the potential for polymerization and depolymerization to perform mechanical work . Although precise mechanisms are poorly understood , there is good evidence that actin polymerization is harnessed to produce force in cells ( Lauffenburger & Horwitz 1996 ) , and MTs have been implicated in generating both pushing force by poly - merization and pulling force by depolymerization ( Inou´e & Salmon 1995 ) . In this review , we set the stage for a discussion of MT polymerization dy - namics by reviewing what is known about MT structure . We then focus on the mechanism of dynamic instability of pure tubulin , discussing the thermo - dynamic basis of dynamic instability and the evidence for special structures at the ends of polymerizing and depolymerizing MTs . Finally , we discuss the functions and regulation of dynamic instability in vivo . MICROTUBULE STRUCTURE The (cid:11) - and (cid:12) - tubulin monomers , which make up the heterodimer subunit of a MT , are (cid:25) 50 % identical at the amino acid level ( Burns 1991 ) , and each has a molecular mass of about 50 , 000 . Tubulin heterodimers copurify with two moles of guanine nucleotide per mole (cid:11)(cid:12) dimer ( Weisenberg et al 1968 ) . During polymerization , GTP bound to (cid:12) - tubulin ( at the exchangeable or E - site ) is hydrolyzed ( David - Pfeuty et al 1977 , MacNeal & Purich 1978 ) ; the resulting E - site GDP does not exchange , while (cid:12) - tubulin remains in the polymer . Upon depolymerization , the released tubulin subunits can exchange E - site GDP for GTP and undergo another round of polymerization . (cid:11) - tubulin also binds GTP , but this GTP is bound in a non - exchangeable manner ( at the N - site ) and is not hydrolyzed during polymerization ( Spiegelman et al 1977 ) . In vitro , MT assembly occurs in two phases , nucleation and elongation . Our focus is on the elongation phase during which tubulin dimers add in an end - wise manner to preformed MT seeds or physiological nucleating structures such as axonemes and centrosomes ( for a discussion of MT nucleation , see Fygenson et al 1994 , 1995 , Erickson & Stofﬂer 1996 ) . Within a MT , tubulin heterodimers are arranged in linear protoﬁlaments ( Figure 1 a ) that associate laterally to form 25 nm wide hollow cylindrical P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 86 DESAI & MITCHISON Figure 1 MT Structure : ( a ) Head - to - tail interactions of (cid:11)(cid:12) dimers form linear protoﬁlaments . Thirteen linear protoﬁlaments associate laterally to form 25 nm diameter hollow cylindrical poly - mers ( MTs ) . ( b ) A theoretical A - type lattice MT is shown on the left , where the lateral interactions between protoﬁlaments are (cid:11) to (cid:12) . Shown on the right is one of the 3 - start helices that would be formed by adjacent tubulin monomers in an A - type lattice . The single 3 - start helix [ on the right in both ( b ) and ( c ) ] is drawn as a visual aid ( to show the lateral interactions between adjacent monomers and the helical nature of the MT lattice ) and does not represent a structural intermedi - ate of MT assembly . Monomers on the back surface of the MT are intermediate shades of gray to aid depth perception . ( c ) A 13 protoﬁlament MT with a B - type lattice with seam ( left ) , the accepted lattice structure for MTs . Lateral interactions between protoﬁlaments are (cid:11) to (cid:11) and (cid:12) to (cid:12) , except at the seam . A seam is formed because one turn of a 3 - start helix results in a rise of 1 . 5 (cid:11)(cid:12) tubulin dimers ( or 3 tubulin monomers ) . MTs with 11 – 15 protoﬁlaments must have a seam ; 10 and 16 protoﬁlament MTs do not have a seam and are truly helical . The protoﬁlaments in a 13 - protoﬁlament MT are perfectly straight , whereas the protoﬁlaments in MTs with other protoﬁlament numbers are helical , with a very long pitch ( Chretien & Wade 1991 ) . Plus and minus signs indicate MT polarity and the brackets delineate (cid:11)(cid:12) dimers within the MT lattice ( adapted from Wade & Chretien 1993 ) . polymers . In vitro , the protoﬁlament number of MTs spontaneously assem - bled from mammalian brain tubulin varies between 10 and 15 , with the vast majority having 14 protoﬁlaments . Although exceptions are known , MTs in vivo and MTs nucleated in vitro from centrosomes and axonemes have pre - dominantly 13 protoﬁlaments ( Evans et al 1985 ) . Genetic studies suggest that , in addition to control by a nucleating structure , protoﬁlament number can also be controlled by speciﬁc isoforms of (cid:12) - tubulin ( Savage et al 1989 , Raff et al 1997 ) . MTs are polar structures formed by the head - to - tail association of (cid:11)(cid:12) het - erodimers ( Amos & Klug 1974 ) . The different polymerization rates of the two ends of the MT are a consequence of this polarity ; the faster growing end is P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 87 referred to as the plus end and the slower growing end as the minus end ( Allen & Borisy 1974 ) . The polarity of the MT lattice is also central to the function of MT motor proteins of the kinesin ( R Vale & R Fletterick , this volume ) and dynein ( Hyams & Lloyd 1994 ) families , which utilize the energy of ATP hydrolysis to move unidirectionally along the MT . After considerable controversy , a consen - sus has been reached on the orientation of the (cid:11)(cid:12) dimer relative to the polarity of the MT lattice . Within each protoﬁlament , (cid:11)(cid:12) heterodimers are oriented with their (cid:12) - tubulin monomer pointing toward the plus end of the MT . Therefore , (cid:12) - tubulin is exposed at the plus end and (cid:11) - tubulin is exposed at the minus end of the MT . Three lines of evidence support this orientation . First , GTP - coated ﬂuorescent beads bind exclusively to MT plus ends , presumably through the E - site on (cid:12) - tubulin ( Mitchison 1993 ) . Second , the motor domain of kinesin binds primarily to (cid:12) - tubulin in the presence of AMPPNP , and ultrastructural studies of motor - decorated MT lattices have shown that the kinesin - binding tubulin monomer is at the plus end ( Hirose et al 1995 ) . Third , beads coated with an antibody speciﬁc to a peptide in (cid:11) - tubulin bind to the minus ends of MTs ( Fan et al 1996 ) ; the minus ends were unambiguously identiﬁed using kinesin motility assays . Until recently , the precise nature of the lateral interactions between sub - units of adjacent protoﬁlaments was also controversial . Two distinct lattice structures are possible : ( a ) an A - type lattice , in which the lateral associations between protoﬁlaments arise from interactions between (cid:11) and (cid:12) monomers ( i . e . the (cid:11) monomers of one protoﬁlament interact with (cid:12) monomers of adja - cent protoﬁlaments and vice versa ) ; and ( b ) a B - type lattice , in which the (cid:11) and (cid:12) monomers of one protoﬁlament associate with the (cid:11) and (cid:12) monomers , respectively , of adjacent protoﬁlaments . The lateral bonds between monomers in adjacent protoﬁlaments in a MT lattice deviate from the horizontal with a 10 (cid:14) pitch , thereby forming a helical path that travels up the MT lattice . This path is called a 3 - start helix because if you follow the path of adjacent monomers for one complete helical turn you end up three monomers above where you started , and three such parallel helices must be started to cover the entire surface of the MT lattice ( Figure 1 b , c ) . MTs were originally postulated to have an A - type lattice , where neighboring monomers in each 3 - start helical path alternate be - tween (cid:11) and (cid:12) with perfect helical continuity ( Figure 1 b ; Amos & Klug 1974 ) . However , ultrastructural analysis of motor - decorated MTs has established the correct lattice structure as the B - type lattice with a seam ( Figure 1 c ; Mandelkow et al 1986 , Song & Mandelkow 1993 , Kikkawa et al 1994 ) . In this arrangement , the neighboring monomers within a 3 - start helical path are either both (cid:11) or both (cid:12) except at the seam , where there is a discontinuity and each 3 - start helical path changes from (cid:11) to (cid:12) or vice versa ( Figure 1 c ) . Although the MT lattice can be formally described as helical , it is now known that MTs do not assemble by P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 88 DESAI & MITCHISON a classical helical polymerization . Rather , MTs appear to grow as a sheet of interacting protoﬁlaments that later close into a tube ( discussed below ) . A key missing element in the study of MT structure is an atomic resolution picture of the tubulin molecule . Stable protoﬁlament sheets formed by tubulin in the presence of zinc ions have been utilized in electron crystallography to obtain a 6 . 5 ˚A structure of tubulin ( Nogales et al 1995 ) . To date , the lability of tubulin , combined with its strong tendency to aggregate or polymerize , has hindered higher resolution structural studies using X - ray crystallography . MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS IN VITRO Brief History The characterization of MT dynamics in vitro began when Weisenberg demon - strated the reversible self - assembly of tubulin in buffers containing calcium chelators and GTP ( Weisenberg 1972 ) . Since then , the analysis of MT dynam - ics has passed through three discrete phases . Initially , the dynamics of MTs were interpreted in terms of the classical polymerization theory of Oosawa ( 1975 ) . Subunit exchange at polymerization steady state was thought to be lim - ited to the slow association - dissociation of tubulin dimers at MT ends . In the late 1970s and early 1980s , observation of continuous incorporation of tubulin into MTs at steady state led to the concept of treadmilling ( Margolis & Wilson 1978 ) . Treadmilling was predicted from a consideration of the consequences of nucleotide hydrolysis on the assembly of a polar polymer , and experimental evidence for treadmilling had been obtained for actin ﬁlaments ( Wegner 1976 ) . At steady state , a treadmilling polymer has constant assembly of subunits at one end , with a balanced loss of subunits at the opposite end . In 1984 , a novel mechanism , termed dynamic instability , was postulated for MT dynamics based on an analysis of the length distributions of ﬁxed MTs ( Mitchison & Kirschner 1984a , b ) . According to this model , although a population of MTs exhibits a bulk steady state , a single MT never reaches a steady state length but persists in prolonged states of polymerization and depolymerization that interconvert infrequently . The existence of dynamic instability was conﬁrmed by real - time analysis of single MT polymerization dynamics using dark ﬁeld and DIC ( dif - ferential interference contrast , or Nomarski ) video microscopy ( Horio & Hotani 1986 , Walker et al 1988 ) . Extensive studies since 1984 have convincingly es - tablished the phenomenon of MT dynamic instability both in vitro and in vivo , and it has come to gain acceptance as the predominant mechanism governing MT polymerization dynamics ( Cassimeris et al 1987 , Gelfand & Bershadsky 1991 , Erickson & O’Brien 1992 , Wordeman & Mitchison 1994 ) . Much of the work on MT dynamics in vitro over the last ten years concerns the mechanism of dynamic instability . We divide our discussion of this work into three sections . The ﬁrst section describes some of the important issues raised by P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 89 observation of dynamic instability of pure tubulin in vitro . The second section discusses the thermodynamic basis of dynamic instability , which is now well established . The third section concerns the precise kinetic mechanism , which is much less certain , and in this context we will discuss progress on testing the GTP cap model and analyzing the structural basis of dynamic instability . Observation of Dynamic Instability In Vitro Direct observation of MTs assembled from puriﬁed tubulin has led to a descrip - tion of MT dynamic instability by four parameters : the rates of polymerization and depolymerization , and the frequencies of catastrophe ( the transition from polymerization to depolymerization ) and of rescue ( the transition from depoly - merization to polymerization ) ( Figure 2 ) . In the polymerization phase , GTP - tubulin subunits add to the end of a MT . During or soon after polymerization , the tubulin subunits hydrolyze their bound GTP and subsequently release the hydrolyzed phosphate ( P i ) . In the depolymerization phase , GDP - tubulin sub - units are released from MT ends at a very rapid rate . The central questions in the analysis of dynamic instability are how MT ends maintain prolonged states of polymerization and depolymerization and how these states interconvert . In their pioneering study , Walker et al ( 1988 ) used DIC microscopy of sin - gle MTs to measure all four parameters of dynamic instability as a function of tubulin concentration . MT polymerization is a bimolecular reaction , dependent on free tubulin concentration , whereas MT depolymerization is a unimolecular reaction , independent of free tubulin concentration . By measuring rates of MT polymerization and depolymerization at various free tubulin concentrations , Walker et al ( 1988 ) determined the rate constants for association and dissocia - tion of GTP - tubulin at polymerizing ends and for dissociation of GDP - tubulin at depolymerizing ends . Their original contribution was the measurement of the frequencies of catastrophe and rescue as a function of tubulin concentra - tion . These values , and subsequent values obtained by similar analyses , must be accounted for by theoretical models attempting to explain dynamic instability . The rate constant for GTP - tubulin association with MTs is generally agreed to be in the range of 2 – 10 (cid:2) 10 6 M − 1 s − 1 . However , a controversy has arisen over the value for the rate constant of GTP - tubulin dissociation during the polymerization phase . There is nearly a 500 - fold discrepancy in the estimates of this rate ( 0 . 1 dimers s − 1 versus 45 dimers s − 1 ) in similar studies by different groups ( Mitchison & Kirschner 1984a , Walker et al 1988 , O’Brien et al 1990 , Drechsel et al 1992 , Trinczek et al 1993 ) . Because the rate of GTP - tubulin dissociation can contribute signiﬁcantly to a mechanism for dynamic instability ( discussed in Walker et al 1988 , Bayley et al 1994 ) , this discrepancy needs to be resolved . Deﬁning the relationship between the free tubulin concentration and the transition frequencies is central to understanding the mechanism of dynamic P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 90 DESAI & MITCHISON Figure2 Microtubuledynamicinstability : Dynamicinstabilityischaracterizedbythecoexistence of polymerizing and depolymerizing MTs . GTP - tubulin is incorporated at polymerizing MT ends , the bound GTP is hydrolyzed during or soon after polymerization , and P i is subsequently released . Thus the MT lattice is predominantly composed of GDP - tubulin ( and is often referred to as a GDP MTinthetext ) . PolymerizingMTsinfrequentlytransittothedepolymerizationphase ( catastrophe ) . Depolymerization is characterized by the very rapid loss of GDP - tubulin subunits and oligomers from the MT end . Depolymerizing MTs can also infrequently transit back to the polymerization phase ( rescue ) . Thetransitionsindynamicinstabilityaremeasuredasfrequencies ( e . g . catastrophe frequency D numberofcatastrophesperunittimeinthepolymerizationphase ) . Thetermfrequency is used rather than rate because it is not clear if the transitions are simple ﬁrst order processes . This representation incorporates the notions of a small GTP / GDP (cid:1) P i cap acting as a stabilizing structure at polymerizing ends and different conformational conﬁgurations at polymerizing and depolymerizing ends , both of which are discussed in the text . For quantitative details on the various parameters , see Walker et al ( 1988 ) ( adapted from Inou´e & Salmon 1995 ) . instability . Increasing the tubulin concentration , and thus the polymerization rate , results in a decrease in the catastrophe frequency , but the relationship between these two parameters is complex and poorly understood ( Erickson & O’Brien 1992 ) . In addition , there exist clear examples where catastrophe frequency is uncoupled from the polymerization rate . For example , similar catastrophe frequencies occur at MT plus ends when Mg 2 C is increased from 0 . 5 to 6 mM , despite a twofold increase in polymerization rate ( O’Brien et al 1990 ) . Catastrophes are assumed to be stochastic events with ﬁrst order ki - netics ; however , plus end catastrophes display non - ﬁrst order kinetics , indi - cating hidden complexities in this phase transition ( Odde et al 1995 ) . The relationship between rescue frequency and the tubulin concentration is even P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 91 less well understood , and it is not even clear that any signiﬁcant dependency exists ( O’Brien et al 1990 , Walker et al 1991 , Erickson & O’Brien 1992 ) . A surprising result of the real - time analysis of MT dynamics was the extent of minus end dynamic instability . Minus end behavior can be thought of as the dark side of MT dynamics . Dynamic instability of minus ends is probably not physiologically relevant because minus ends in cells are either capped by other proteins , for example at centrosomes , or depolymerizing when free in the cytoplasm ( discussed below ) . However , the minus ends of MTs assembled from pure tubulin exhibit dynamic instability , which is quite similar to that of plus ends ( Walker et al 1988 , Erickson & O’Brien 1992 ) . This is surprising , given their different structure and different association and dissociation rate constants . The behavior of minus ends in vitro must reﬂect intrinsic properties of the mechanism of dynamic instability and provides useful constraints for the development of mechanistic models . Finally , two additional observations may be relevant to understanding dy - namic instability . First , MTs sometimes pause , where they neither polymerize nor depolymerize . Pauses are frequent in vivo ( Shelden & Wadsworth 1993 ) and also occur in vitro with pure tubulin , although much less frequently ( Walker et al 1988 ) . Substoichiometric amounts of MT destabilizing drugs can enhance the paused state at MT plus ends , both in vitro and in vivo ( Toso et al 1993 , Dhamodharan et al 1995 , Wilson & Jordan 1995 ) . Second , polymerization and depolymerization rates of individual MTs exhibit signiﬁcant variability ( O’Brien et al 1990 , Drechsel et al 1992 , Gildersleeve et al 1992 ) . This obser - vation implies that some structural feature governing rates of polymerization and depolymerization , although transient relative to the lifetime of the MT , is stably maintained over many subunit addition / loss events . This feature might be protoﬁlament number ( Chretien et al 1992 ) or perhaps some propagating structure at MT ends ( Gildersleeve et al 1992 , Chretien et al 1995 ) . Under special solution conditions , the transitions in MT dynamics become synchronized for the whole MT population , resulting in oscillatory polymeriza - tion cycles . Oscillatory polymerization can be treated as a special manifestation of dynamic instability , and the mechanism for this intriguing behavior has been discussed by Mandelkow & Mandelkow ( 1992 ) . Thermodynamic Basis of Dynamic Instability Dynamic instability is a profoundly nonequilibrium behavior and thus requires an energy source . Because the only possible source is GTP hydrolysis by (cid:12) - tubulin during polymerization , we may safely state that GTP hydrolysis powers dynamic instability . One approach to understanding the role of GTP hydrolysis in dynamic instability is to ask how the free energy from the hydro - lysis of GTP ( (cid:25) 7 . 5 kcal mol − 1 under standard conditions , or (cid:25) 12 . 5 kcal mol − 1 P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 92 DESAI & MITCHISON in vivo ; Lehninger et al 1993 ) is partitioned among the different reactions in the kinetic cycle . To perform such an energy partitioning , the energy changes associated with polymerization and depolymerization must be determined in the absence of GTP hydrolysis . One way to ascertain this is to analyze tubulin polymerization / depolymerization with a nonhydrolyzable GTP analogue bound to its E - site . Studies of tubulin polymerization in the presence of the classic nonhydrolyz - able GTP analogues GMPPNP and GMPPCP led to the important conclusions that polymerization does not require GTP hydrolysis and that the MT lattice is more stable with a GTP analogue bound to (cid:12) - tubulin than with GDP ( Kirschner 1978 , Mejillano et al 1990 ) . However , these studies were complicated by the very weak afﬁnity of (cid:12) - tubulin for most GTP analogues , relative to GTP and GDP ( Erickson & O’Brien 1992 ) . Recent studies with the analogue GMPCPP , which binds relatively well to (cid:12) - tubulin , have shown that , contrary to earlier claims ( Sandoval & Weber 1980 ) , the normal P - O - P linkage between the (cid:12) and γ phosphates in this analogue is resistant to hydrolysis by tubulin ( Hyman et al 1992 ) . Under standard conditions , the hydrolysis of GMPCPP in the MT lattice is negligible over the time course of most experiments . Tubulin poly - merizes normally with GMPCPP , conﬁrming that the free energy of hydrolysis is not required for this step of the reaction . GMPCPP MTs are structurally more rigid than GDP MTs ( Vale et al 1994 , Mickey & Howard 1995 ) , depoly - merize extremely slowly ( (cid:25) 0 . 1 dimers s − 1 versus (cid:25) 1000 dimers s − 1 for GDP MTs ) , and do not exhibit dynamic instability . These properties suggest that the primary role of GTP hydrolysis is to destabilize the MT lattice by creating GDP - bound subunits that make weaker intersubunit contacts . Direct evidence for this conclusion was obtained when buffer conditions were found that trig - ger hydrolysis of GMPCPP in the MT lattice ( substitution of Na C for K C and addition of glycerol ) ; this hydrolysis destabilizes the lattice and results in rapid depolymerization ( Caplow et al 1994 ) . By comparing tubulin polymerization and depolymerization in the presence of GMPCPP and its hydrolyzed product GMPCP , Caplow et al ( 1994 ) deter - mined how the free energy of hydrolysis of GMPCPP is partitioned in the poly - merization cycle of tubulin . Their analysis showed that the polymerization of GMPCPP - tubulin is 4 kcal mol − 1 more favorable than that of GMPCP - tubulin . This difference in the stability of the two lattices must be derived from the hy - drolysis of GMPCPP . Because the free energy of hydrolysis of GMPCPP is only − 5 . 2 kcal mol − 1 , this study suggests that most of the free energy released upon GMPCPP hydrolysis is used to destabilize the MT lattice . The same general conclusion is thought to hold for GTP hydrolysis . It is interesting to try and extend these thermodynamic conclusions from pure tubulin to the situation in living cells . Such an analysis can tell us how P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 93 Figure 3 Thermodynamics of the tubulin polymerization cycle in vivo : The free energy for GTP hydrolysis in vivo is (cid:25)− 12 . 5 kcal mol − 1 . This free energy is partitioned in the tubulin polymerization cycle as indicated . The main purpose of this ﬁgure is illustrative because several parameters needed for a complete quantitative analysis have not been measured . The free energy of polymerization ( 1 G poly D − RTln ( k on / k off ) D − 3 kcal mol − 1 ) is obtained assuming a free GTP - tubulin concentration of 10 (cid:22) M , an association rate constant of 2 (cid:2) 10 6 M − 1 s − 1 and a dissociation rate constant of 0 . 1 s − 1 ( k on represents the dimer association rate , which is the product of the association rate constant and the free GTP - tubulin concentration ; these values result in k on / k off D 200 ) . The free energy of nucleotide exchange ( 1 G exch D − RTln ( 39 ) D − 2 kcal mol − 1 ) is obtained by accounting for the threefold higher afﬁnity of tubulin for GTP versus GDP ( Purich & Angelastro1994 ) andanintracellularGTP / GDPratioof13 : 1 ( Angelastro & Purich1992 ) . The dashed line , whose position depends on the free energy change accompanying hydrolysis and P i release on the polymerized tubulin dimer , is difﬁcult , if not impossible , to measure directly and is estimated here as − 2 . 5 kcal mol − 1 by assuming that 1 G depol D − 5 kcal mol − 1 ( Caplow et al 1994 ) . Maximal pushing and pulling forces can be calculated from 1 G poly and 1 G depol assuming an average displacement of 0 . 61 nm for a tubulin dimer at a MT end ( for discussion see Caplow et al 1994 , Inou´e & Salmon 1995 ) . much free energy is released during polymerization and depolymerization in vivo , which puts upper bounds on the force that could be generated by motile processes driven by polymerization dynamics . We lack detailed information on several parameters , so only an approximation is possible , as shown in Figure 3 . According to this estimate , polymerization could produce a pushing force of up to 35 pN / MT and depolymerization a pulling force of up to 60 pN / MT . For comparison , the stall force for a single kinesin is (cid:25) 5 pN ( Svoboda & Block 1994 ) . P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 94 DESAI & MITCHISON Utilizing the free energy released during polymerization / depolymerization to move structures within the cell requires a molecular interface that can cou - ple MT dynamics to movement . For pushing force , this interface can be a simple barrier ; MT polymerization inside synthetic vesicles has been observed to deform the vesicle membrane ( Hotani & Miyamoto 1990 , Elbaum et al 1996 ) . A more complex coupling interface of unknown molecular composi - tion , termed TAC ( Tip Attachment Complex ) , was implied by observations of MT polymerization - driven extension of membrane tubules in Xenopus extracts ( Waterman - Storer et al 1995 ) . Intuitively , it seems more difﬁcult to couple MT depolymerization to movement because the coupling interface would have to hold on to a depolymerizing end . However , recent studies have shown that pure kinesins coupled to beads can remain attached to depolymerizing MTs ( Lombillo et al 1995 ) . Although the precise mechanism is not understood , the resulting minus end - directed motility is not dependent on ATP or on the inherent directionality of the kinesin . Therefore , in addition to being motile ATPases , kinesins can also act as coupling factors to depolymerizing MTs . The biological importance of MT polymerization dynamics is highlighted dur - ing chromosome movement in mitosis . Deﬁning the mechanisms by which chromosome movement is tightly coupled to MT dynamics remains one of the greatest challenges in the study of MT dynamics ( for a detailed discussion , see Inou´e & Salmon 1995 ) . Although we can conclude from thermodynamic analysis of dynamic insta - bility that GTP hydrolysis weakens the MT lattice , and we can estimate the capacity of MT dynamics to perform mechanical work , we can not tell much about the detailed mechanism of dynamic instability . Most importantly , we do not know how a MT persists for many minutes in a polymerizing state or how this state decays infrequently when a catastrophe occurs . To address these issues , we need to analyze the kinetic processes underlying dynamic instability . Evidence for a Stabilizing Structure at Microtubule Ends GTP hydrolysis is known to occur very rapidly during polymerization , and from thermodynamic analysis we know that GDP - tubulin makes a very unstable lattice . So how can tubulin polymerize at all ? A fundamental idea underlying all recent studies of MT dynamics is that polymerizing MTs are stabilized by some special structure at their ends . This structure was originally postulated to be a cap of GTP - tubulin ( Mitchison & Kirschner 1984a ) . Below we examine the evidence for such a cap , but ﬁrst , what is the evidence that any stabilizing structure exists ? The most direct way to test for a special stabilizing structure at polymerizing ends is to cut a polymerizing MT and determine the behavior of the newly ex - posed ends . In the original dynamic instability paper , severing MTs by shearing P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 95 was found to promote rapid depolymerization ( Mitchison & Kirschner 1984a ) ; this conclusion was conﬁrmed by more quantitative studies using inelastic light scattering ( Keates & Hallett 1988 ) . A more elegant approach involves using microscopy to directly observe the effect of severing an individual MT . Salmon and coworkers ( Walker et al 1989 ; PT Tran , RA Walker & ED Salmon , personal communication ) have characterized the behavior of MTs severed by a UV mi - crobeam or a ﬁne glass needle . As predicted , if a special stabilizing structure is required at polymerizing ends , the newly exposed plus ends were unstable and rapidly depolymerized . Surprisingly , newly exposed minus ends were sta - ble and immediately resumed polymerization . This behavior may suggest that minus ends do not require a stabilizing structure or that rescue is very efﬁcient at minus ends . Alternatively , the stability of minus ends could be explained by the existence of an intermediate between polymerization and depolymerization ( see below for details ) . The MT - cutting experiments provide compelling evidence that polymerizing MT plus ends are stabilized by a special structure located near or at their ends ( howclosetotheendisfarfromclear ) . Whatisthisstructure ? Belowwediscuss evidence that it is a part of the MT lattice differentiated either by different chemistry , for example the presence of GTP , or by a different structure , for example a ﬂatter , sheet - like lattice . These two views are not exclusive , and we conclude with a discussion about their integration . The GTP CAP Model Soluble tubulin has a very slow rate of GTP hydrolysis ( David - Pfeuty et al 1977 , Caplow & Shanks 1990 ) ; this rate increases tremendously when tubulin subunits are incorporated into a MT . Thus by analogy with signaling GTPases , tubulin can be thought of as its own GAP ( GTPase Activating Protein ) , acceler - ating hydrolysis by the formation of intersubunit contacts during polymeriza - tion . The original model for dynamic instability proposed that polymerizing MTs are stabilized by a cap of subunits in which GTP hydrolysis has not yet occurred ( Mitchison & Kirschner 1984a ) . The infrequent loss of such a GTP cap would result in a catastrophe , whereas the reacquisition of such a cap by a depolymerizing end would result in a rescue . This model was based on early observations of a relatively long kinetic lag between tubulin polymerization and GTP hydrolysis ( Carlier & Pantaloni 1981 ) . A stabilizing cap at polymerizing MT ends could be composed of either GTP - tubulin or GDP (cid:1) P i – tubulin subunits . In proteins where nucleotide hydrolysis drives a conformational change , the step correlating with the conformational change is often not hydrolysis but phosphate ( P i ) release ( Vale 1996 ) . In actin polymerization , where NTP hydrolysis also accompanies polymerization , a conformational change that weakens the polymer is thought to occur upon P i P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 96 DESAI & MITCHISON release ( Carlier 1989 , 1991 ) . If this were also true for tubulin , we might expect a GDP (cid:1) P i MT lattice to be as stable as a GTP lattice . MTs appear to be stabilized by the phosphate analogue BeF x ( Carlier et al 1989 ) ; however , unlike actin , addition of high concentrations of phosphate does not stabilize MTs ( Caplow et al 1989 , Trinczek et al 1993 ) . Therefore , whether a GDP (cid:1) P i lattice is stable remains to be resolved . WhetheroneproposesastabilizingcapofGTP - tubulinorofGDP (cid:1) P i - tubulin , the key question is the same : At rates of MT polymerization relevant to dynamic instability , does a polymerizing end accumulate a run of GTP ( or GDP (cid:1) P i ) sub - units sufﬁcient to stabilize it against rapid depolymerization ? Experimentally , this question resolves into two issues : ( a ) How long is the lag between poly - merization and GTP hydrolysis / P i release ( or how tight / loose is the coupling between polymerization and GTP hydrolysis / P i release ? ) ; and ( b ) how many subunits at a MT end need to be bound to GTP or GDP (cid:1) P i to stabilize it ? Contrary to earlier observations , several recent studies indicate that there is little , if any , lag between polymerization and GTP hydrolysis ( discussed in de - tail by Caplow 1992 , Erickson & O’Brien 1992 ) . Therefore , can we conclude there is no GTP cap under dynamic instability conditions ? Unfortunately , we do not conclusively know the answer . A stabilizing GTP cap may be as small as one layer of subunits , thereby escaping detection in the assays employed to date ( Erickson & O’Brien 1992 , Bayley et al 1994 , Caplow & Shanks 1996 , Flyvbjerg et al 1996 ) . An additional complication is that MT plus ends have exposed E - sites on the terminal (cid:12) - tubulin subunits ( Mitchison 1993 ) whose nucleotide state may affect the behavior of MT ends ( Caplow & Shanks 1995 ) . Recently , more progress has been made in determining the lag between poly - merization and P i release . Studies using relatively low time resolution ( 5 – 20 s ) ﬁltration methods presented contradictory evidence regarding the existence of a signiﬁcant lag between polymerization and P i release ( Melki et al 1990 , Stewart et al 1990 , Caplow 1992 ) . This issue was reexamined by simultaneous moni - toring of polymerization and P i release using an enzyme - linked spectrophoto - metric assay for detecting free P i ( Melki et al 1996 ) . Convincing evidence for a lag between assembly and P i release was obtained for rapid taxol - driven poly - merization . The extent of such a lag under conditions of dynamic instability remains to be determined . Nevertheless , these data support a model in which polymerizing ends are stabilized by a cap of predominantly GDP (cid:1) P i - tubulin subunits . Two alternate approaches have been taken to measure the size of a GTP ( or GDP - P i ) cap required to stabilize a polymerizing MT . The ﬁrst involves esti - mating the kinetic lifetime of the cap by rapidly diluting polymerizing MTs and measuring the time lag before the MTs undergo a catastrophe . Observations on individual MTs in a microscopic ﬂow cell ( Walker et al 1991 ) showed that P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 97 polymerizing MTs transit very rapidly ( within 1 – 4 s ) upon dilution , suggest - ing that the cap size is fairly small , less than 100 subunits . This analysis also showed that cap size is independent of the polymerization rate ( within a tenfold range ) . These results are inconsistent , within the explored range of tubulin con - centrations , with models predicting larger caps at faster polymerization rates . Dilution of bulk populations of brain MTs has yielded similar conclusions ( Voter et al 1991 ) . The second method used to estimate the minimal cap size is to deﬁne the smallest number of GMPCPP - tubulin subunits required to sta - bilize a GDP MT to depolymerization by dilution . Using statistical analysis of ﬁxed MTs and direct ﬂuorescence measurements , Drechsel & Kirschner ( 1994 ) concluded that as few as 22 (cid:6) 11 GMPCPP subunits—one to three layers of the lattice—were sufﬁcient to stabilize a MT . Using real - time analysis , Caplow & Shanks ( 1996 ) obtained a similar conclusion ; they provided further evidence for stabilization by a single layer of GMPCPP subunits , by analyzing MTs composed of a mixture of GMPCPP - and GDP - tubulin . Such mixed lattice MTs exhibit a mean lifetime of a subunit at a MT end ( reciprocal of the de - polymerization rate ) that is proportional to the 13th or 14th power of the mole fraction of GMPCPP in the mixed lattice . This remarkable proportionality sug - gests that a single monolayer of tubulin - GMPCPP subunits ( and by extension tubulin - GTP / GDP (cid:1) P i subunits ) is both necessary and sufﬁcient to stabilize a MT . Whether this is indeed the case in MTs undergoing dynamic instability remains a daunting challenge for future studies . Structural Basis of Dynamic Instability Since electron microscopy ( EM ) was ﬁrst used to study tubulin polymerization , there have been clues suggesting an intimate relationship between MT dynam - ics and the geometry of the intersubunit bonds in the MT lattice ( reviewed in Kirschner 1978 ) . Within MTs , protoﬁlaments are relatively straight , whereas the depolymerization products of MTs are often highly curved protoﬁlament oligomers ( Kirschner 1978 , Mandelkow & Mandelkow 1985 , Mandelkow et al 1991 , Tran et al 1997 ) . Cryoelectron microscopy ( cryoEM ) makes it feasible to trap kinetic intermediates by rapid freezing and image them directly with - out staining ( Mandelkow & Mandelkow 1986 , Wade & Chretien 1993 ) . Us - ing cryoEM and X - ray scattering to analyze polymerizing and depolymerizing MTs , Mandelkow et al ( 1985 , 1988 , 1991 ) hypothesized that the predominant driving force for MT depolymerization is the curling up of protoﬁlaments . Recent cryoEM studies have conﬁrmed the existence of curved oligomers at the ends of depolymerizing MTs ( Figure 4 a ) . Divalent cations stabilize these curved protoﬁlament oligomers , thereby promoting protoﬁlament peeling and increasing the depolymerization rate , which results in ram’s horn - type struc - tures at the depolymerizing MT ends ( Tran et al 1997 ) . P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 98 DESAI & MITCHISON Figure4 Cryoelectronmicroscopyof ( a ) depolymerizingand ( b ) polymerizingmicrotubuleends : In cryoEM images , the body of the MT is delineated by two thick edges . Between these thick edges , discrete lines can be seen running along the length of the MT . These lines arise from the superposition of protoﬁlaments on opposite sides of the MT cylinder , and their number and long range periodicities can be quantitatively interpreted to determine the protoﬁlament number and other structural parameters of the MT lattice ( Chretien & Wade 1991 ) . Note the curvature of protoﬁlament oligomers at depolymerizing MT ends in ( a ) and the presence of sheets at ends of polymerizingMTsin ( b ) . Thesheetstendtoorientperpendiculartothesurfaceandoftenappearasa singlethickline ( theprojectionimageofmultipleprotoﬁlaments ) . ( c ) Diagrammaticrepresentation of the structure of polymerizing ( top ) and depolymerizing ( bottom ) MT ends with a hypothetical structural mechanism for catastrophe . Catastrophe is postulated to occur as a consequence of sheet closure catching up to a MT end ( middle ) ( see text for details ) [ images in ( a ) and ( b ) reprinted from Chretien et al 1995 ] . CryoEM studies have also led to a structural hypothesis for the mechanism of catastrophe . Chretien et al ( 1995 ) analyzed MTs nucleated by centrosomes and observed striking long protoﬁlament sheets at the plus ends of polymerizing MTs ( Figure 4 b ) . This observation demonstrates that polymerization occurs primarily by extension of protoﬁlament sheets as opposed to helical subunit addition . A similar conclusion had been reached in earlier negative stain EM studies ( Erickson 1974 , Kirschner et al 1975 , Detrich & Jordan 1986 , Simon & Salmon 1990 ) , and protoﬁlament sheets have also been observed at MT ends in vivo ( McIntosh et al 1985 ) . These protoﬁlament sheets eventually close to form the cylindrical body of the MT , presumably along the seam in the lattice ( Figure 1 c ) , although this is not known for certain . Chretien et al ( 1995 ) hypoth - esize that sheet closure occurs at a variable rate , with the consequence of sheet closure catching up to the polymerizing end being a catastrophe ( Figure 4 c ) . Thus the sheets may represent a structural cap that stabilize a polymerizing MT . This suggestion is intriguing , and it seems plausible that sheet closure induces catastrophe by some physical mechanism . At present , however , the evidence that protoﬁlament sheets stabilize polymerizing ends is only a correlation . A P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 99 careful comparison of sheets at plus and minus ends of MTs , and under condi - tions that appear to uncouple catastrophe frequency from polymerization rate ( discussed above ) , may shed further light on the relationship of sheet closure to the mechanism of catastrophe . Relationship of Structural and Chemical Transitions How does the structural view of dynamic instability mesh with the chemical transitions that occur as a consequence of GTP hydrolysis ? The effect of GTP hydrolysis on MT structure has been analyzed by comparison of GMPCPP and GDP MTs using cryoEM . The lattice structure of GMPCPP and GDP MTs appears to be very similar . Using optical diffraction and lattice accommodation theory ( Chretien & Wade 1991 ) , Hyman et al ( 1995 ) showed that the inter - monomer spacing along the protoﬁlament decreases from 4 . 2 nm in GMPCPP MTs to 4 . 05 nm in GDP MTs . More signiﬁcantly , the curvature of protoﬁlament oligomers at depolymerizing ends of GDP MTs is twofold greater than that of similar oligomers at ends of GMPCPP MTs ( the latter could be induced to de - polymerize at a reasonable rate using calcium ; T Muller - Reichert , D Chretien , F Severin & AA Hyman , personal communication ) . These results provide quan - titative support for a model in which GTP hydrolysis causes tubulin to enter a curved conformation , destabilizing the MT lattice ( Melki et al 1989 ) . Because GDP - tubulin is prevented from adopting the fully curved conformation while in the lattice ( presumably by speciﬁc lattice interactions ) , the energy of GTP hydrolysis is stored in the lattice as mechanical strain . This strain is released when the GDP - tubulin subunits are exposed at MT ends and provides the driving force for the rapid depolymerization phase of dynamic instability . This struc - tural explanation for how the free energy of GTP hydrolysis destabilizes the MT lattice is incorporated in the representation of dynamic instability in Figure 2 . Although these studies deﬁne the structural differences between GTP - like and GDP MT lattices , they do not relate the kinetics of structural changes to the relative rates of polymerization , hydrolysis and P i release . Ideally , we would like to understand the cause - effect relationships between chemical and structural changes at MT ends . Chretien et al ( 1995 ) hypothesize that closure of protoﬁlament sheets triggers GTP hydrolysis . In our opinion , the change in the rate of GTP hydrolysis between soluble tubulin and tubulin in the MT lattice is so large that it seems unlikely to be triggered by a structural change as subtle as a change in the curvature of the protoﬁlament sheet . Furthermore , hydrolysis is known to occur in ﬂat tubulin sheets formed in the presence of zinc ions ( Melki & Carlier 1993 ) , in taxol - induced oligomers that are also often sheet - like ( Melki et al 1996 ) , and upon interaction of tubulin dimers with MT ends at concentrations too low to support MT assembly ( Caplow & Shanks 1990 ) . The identiﬁcation of cause - effect relationships between chemical and P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 100 DESAI & MITCHISON structural transitions will require determining where GTP and GDP (cid:1) P i are still present in the lattice of the growing MT end . This information most likely will come from reﬁnement of the kinetic data and correlation with structural analysis . The more ambitious idea of directly visualizing the bound nucleotide in the lattice is attractive , but it is not clear what technology could achieve this . The striking structural and kinetic differences between polymerizing and de - polymerizing ends highlight the central mystery of dynamic instability—the interconversion of polymerizing and depolymerizing ends . The current two - state model suggests that interconversion can be explained by stochastic loss or reacquisition of a stabilizing cap . However , pauses in MT dynamics and non - ﬁrst order kinetics for catastrophes ( discussed above ) have provided sug - gestive evidence for an intermediate state between polymerization and depoly - merization . To explain the disparate stability of plus and minus ends in cutting experiments , a three - state model has been proposed recently that postulates the existence of a kinetic intermediate between polymerization and depolymeriza - tion ( PT Tran , RA Walker & ED Salmon , personal communication ) . Because of the polarity of the MT lattice , such an intermediate could be signiﬁcantly different at plus and minus ends . This model has important implications for the mechanisms of the transitions of dynamic instability . Although this three - state model is derived purely from kinetic analysis , it is tempting to speculate that a closed - tube state , which presumably exists as a structural intermediate between polymerizing ends with sheets and depolymerizing ends with peeling GDP - tubulin oligomers ( Figure 4 c ) , may represent a structural correlate of such a kinetic intermediate . MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS IN VIVO Functions of Microtubule Dynamic Instability In Vivo As discussed in the introduction , polymerization dynamics facilitate spatial or - ganization and rapid remodeling of the cytoskeleton . But what are the speciﬁc in vivo beneﬁts of dynamic instability ? Several biological functions have been proposed ( Kirschner & Mitchison 1986 ) . One simple idea is that dynamic in - stability allows newly formed regions of cytoplasm to rapidly ﬁll with MTs which , in turn , facilitate recruitment of membrane systems using MT motor proteins . Such colonization of newly extruded cytoplasm with MTs has been visualized during motility of growth cones ( Tanaka & Kirschner 1991 ) . A more interesting idea for the function of dynamic instability is that it allowsMTstosearchthree - dimensionalspacemoreeffectivelythanequilibrium polymerization , thereby enabling MTs to ﬁnd speciﬁc target sites within the cell ( the search - capture model ) . This idea has been conceptually veriﬁed by quantitative modeling ( Holy & Leibler 1994 ) . The search - capture model was initially formulated to account for a difﬁcult targeting problem—the capture of P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 101 MTs by the kinetochore region of chromosomes early in mitosis . Plus ends of centrosome - nucleated dynamically unstable MTs were hypothesized to probe through the cytoplasm , searching for binding sites on kinetochores that could capturethem . Thisprocesshasbeenvisualizedinlivingnewtlungcells ( Hayden et al 1990 ) and is thought to account for the initial attachment of outlying chromosomes to the spindle . The search - capture model is particularly attractive as a conceptual basis for understanding the generation of asymmetric MT arrays . In several biological processes , one can hypothesize that a single MT nucleated by the MT organiz - ing center ( MTOC ) is initially captured by a specialized cortical site , leading to subsequent movement of the MTOC towards the capture site and forma - tion of a multi - MT attachment ( Figure 5 a ) . Captured MTs may be stabilized Figure 5 Mechanisms for generating asymmetric microtubule distributions : ( a ) Search - capture mediated by dynamic instability . Search - capture has been implicated in attachment of the meiotic spindle to a speciﬁc cortical site in marine eggs prior to polar body formation ( Lutz et al 1988 ) ; in asymmetric cell division in nematode embryos ( Hyman 1989 ) ; in positioning of the budding yeast spindle to the mother - bud neck prior to anaphase ( Yeh et al 1995 ) ; and in the reorientation of the interphase centrosome toward the site of cell - cell interaction in cytotoxic and helper lymphocytes ( Kupfer & Singer1989 ) . ( b ) LocalregulationofMTdynamics : Asshownhere , chromatininmeiotic spindles produces a gradient of MT stabilization , presumably through local post - translational reg - ulation of MAPs and / or catastrophe factors ( Karsenti et al 1984 , Zhang & Nicklas 1995 , Dogterom et al 1996 ) . ( c ) Movement of pre - existing MTs through the cytoplasm : The example depicted here occurs during growth cone pathﬁnding ( Tanaka & Kirschner 1995 ) ; another example is movement mediated by MT motors during mitotic spindle assembly ( Gaglio et al 1996 , Heald et al 1996 ) . P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 102 DESAI & MITCHISON subsequently or differentiated by post - translational modiﬁcations of (cid:11) - tubulin ( Bulinski & Gundersen 1991 ) . Search - capture , when ﬁrst proposed in 1986 , was thought to be the dominant mechanism for inducing asymmetry in the MT cytoskeleton . Since then it has become clear that several alternative processes are also important . Two such processes are local regulation of factors control - ling MT dynamics ( Figure 5 b ) and movement of pre - existing MTs through the cytoplasm ( Figure 5 c ) . In general , dissecting the mechanisms by which com - plex asymmetric arrays of MTs are assembled remains a fascinating research goal . Although the precise biological functions of dynamic instability continue to be explored , a considerable amount is known about the behavior of MTs in cells . In the remainder of this review we focus on MTs in vivo by ﬁrst describing some of the methodology used to analyze MT dynamics , then describing the nature and regulation of MT dynamics in vivo , and ﬁnally discussing speciﬁc regulatory molecules that modulate MT dynamics . Methodology for Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics In Vivo Most of our information on MT dynamics in vivo has come from optical mi - croscopy . Single MTs can be visualized using DIC microscopy in thin , outlying regions of certain cells ( Cassimeris et al 1988 ) . This type of imaging results in minimal light - induced damage , but unfortunately its use is restricted to ex - tremely ﬂat cells . More generally applicable is ﬂuorescence imaging of individ - ual MTs ( Sammak & Borisy 1988 , Schulze & Kirschner 1988 ) . Photodamage is a greater concern with this method , but it can be limited in certain cases by oxygen - scavenging systems ( Tanaka & Kirschner 1991 , Waterman - Storer et al 1993 ) . To date , most observations have been performed on cells microinjected with rhodamine - labeled tubulin . However , the advent of green ﬂuorescent pro - tein ( GFP ) fusions will extend these observations to a wider range of cell types , including yeast cells ( Stearns 1995 ) . All imaging methods suffer problems in more interior regions of the cell and in MT - rich structures such as the mitotic spindle , where high MT density makes visualization of single MTs difﬁcult . Overall , single MT imaging has shown that dynamic instability occurs in cells , and values for the different parameters have been obtained ( Cassimeris et al 1988 , Hayden et al 1990 , Shelden & Wadsworth 1993 ) . Live cell measurements have been supplemented by ﬂuorescence observa - tions in crude extracts , notably from Xenopus eggs where spindle assembly and function can also be followed . Extract work suffers the disadvantage that true physiological rates may not be observed but has the great advantage that the system can be perturbed in speciﬁc ways , either by control of cell - cycle state ( Belmont et al 1990 , Verde et al 1992 ) or by removal of speciﬁc proteins with antibodies ( Walczak et al 1996 ) . Video - enhanced DIC microscopy can be P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 103 used in cell extracts clariﬁed by centrifugation ( Gliksman et al 1992 , Parsons & Salmon 1997 ) . Although clariﬁed extracts are less physiological than crude extracts , they represent a useful starting point for the biochemical puriﬁcation of proteins that inﬂuence MT dynamics . Fluorescence perturbation techniques , notably photobleaching and photoac - tivation of ﬂuorescence , have been used to observe the average rate of turnover of MTs in a small region of the cell . These assays led to the discoveries that MT dynamics are regulated in the cell cycle ( Salmon et al 1984 , Saxton et al 1984 ) , that different regions of the spindle turn over at different rates ( Zhai et al 1995 ) , and that MTs ﬂux polewards in spindles ( Mitchison 1989 ) . Photobleaching is probably the more convenient technique , but it has been criticized because of the likelihood of photodamage artifacts . Photobleaching of GFP - tagged pro - teins , including tubulin , may turn out to be less toxic and artifact - prone than bleaching of conventional ﬂuorophores ( Cole et al 1996 ) , presumably because the ﬂuorophore in GFP is contained within a protein capsule ( Ormo et al 1996 ) . Simpler assays measuring the amount of tubulin partitioning into detergent - soluble ( (cid:11)(cid:12) dimers ) and detergent - insoluble ( polymer ) fractions have also been informative . The amount of tubulin in each fraction has been determined by at least two methods : quantitative immunoassay ( Solomon 1986 , Liao et al 1995 ) and ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Zhai & Borisy 1994 ) . This type of simple assay has been used to analyze the fraction of tubulin polymerized at different stages of the cell cycle ( Zhai & Borisy 1994 ) and in response to expression of proteins regulating MT stability ( Marklund et al 1996 ) . Finally , we should mention an interesting biochemical technique for analyzing turnover in vivo that relies on incorporation of radioactive GTP into the polymer fraction ( Purich & Angelastro 1994 ) . A promising new approach to understanding the role of GTP hydrolysis by (cid:12) - tubulin in dynamic instability , as well as the biological role of MT dynam - ics , is mutational analysis of yeast (cid:12) - tubulin ( summarized in Burns & Farrell 1996 ) . Farrell and coworkers have characterized the in vivo phenotypes and in vitro properties of (cid:12) - tubulin mutations ( Davis et al 1994 , Sage et al 1995 ) . In addition to deﬁning the residues important for GTP binding and hydrolysis , this approach has demonstrated that mutationally altered GTP hydrolysis by (cid:12) - tubulin strongly affects MT function in vivo and MT dynamic instability in vitro . Features of Microtubule Dynamics In Vivo How do the parameters of MT dynamic instability in vivo compare with those measured for pure tubulin ? MTs in vivo differ from pure tubulin primar - ily in their rapid polymerization rates and their high transition frequencies ( Cassimeris 1993 ) . The polymerization rate of tubulin in vivo is about ﬁve - to tenfold higher than that of a similar concentration of pure tubulin . Despite P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 104 DESAI & MITCHISON these rapid polymerization rates , MTs in vivo exhibit a high frequency of catas - trophe . If we use the relationship between polymerization rate and catastrophe frequency for pure tubulin as a reference , at the polymerization rates observed in vivo we would expect a near - zero frequency of catastrophe . This apparent para - dox can be resolved if distinct mechanisms exist to promote polymerization and to induce catastrophes in vivo . In order to elucidate these mechanisms , many efforts have been directed at identifying and characterizing cellular factors that modulate dynamic instability . MT dynamics in vivo change extensively in response to regulatory signals , providing further support for the existence of mechanisms for modulating MT dynamics . A well - studied example of intracellular regulation of MT dynamics is the interphase - mitosis transition . MTs in interphase tissue culture cells turn over with a half - life of greater than 5 – 10 min , whereas MTs in mitosis turn over with a half - life of 30s − 1 min ( reviewed in McNally 1996 ) . MT stability can also change signiﬁcantly ( over two to three orders of magnitude ) as a conse - quence of cellular differentiation ( Bulinski & Gundersen 1991 ) . Differentiation of both neuronal ( Baas et al 1991 ) and epithelial ( Bre et al 1990 ) cells is cor - related with an increase in MT stability . MTs are also likely to be regulated by signal transduction pathways , but relatively little is known in this area . Stimula - tion of macrophages with phorbol esters , which presumably trigger endogenous signaling pathways , causes a rapid increase in both the total polymer level and numberofMTs ( Robinson & Vandre1995 ) . DissectingtheregulationofMTdy - namics by signaling pathways will be an important area of research in the future . In the cases where the parameters of dynamic instability have been mea - sured , the transition frequencies appear to be the primary targets of regula - tory molecules . Regulating the transition frequencies is attractive because MT lengths and overall dynamic behavior are very sensitive to changes in these parameters ( Verde et al 1992 , Gliksman et al 1993 ) . For example , in Xenopus extracts induced to enter a mitosis - like state by the addition of cyclin , a ﬁve - to tenfold increase in the catastrophe frequency , without signiﬁcant changes in other parameters of dynamic instability , results in the transformation of relatively stable arrays of long MTs into very dynamic arrays of short MTs ( Belmont et al 1990 , Verde et al 1992 ) . In urchin eggs treated with phosphatase inhibitors , a decrease in the rescue frequency has been shown to promote a sim - ilar transformation ( Gliksman et al 1992 ) . Thus the increased turnover of MTs in mitosis appears to be driven primarily by changes in catastrophe and rescue frequencies . However , the extent to which it depends on regulation of catastro - phe versus rescue is controversial and may vary between different cell types . Studies on regulation of MT dynamics in Xenopus extracts were performed in the presence of protein synthesis inhibitors , implying that rapid regulation of MT dynamics can be completely post - translational ; however , transcriptional P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 105 regulation is also important in many cases , as in the induction of MAP synthesis during neuronal differentiation ( Drubin et al 1985 ) . In order to account for the dynamics of MTs in cells , much effort has been directed toward identifying proteins that regulate MT dynamics and under - standing how these proteins are themselves regulated . Below we discuss some of these factors with an emphasis on how they modulate the polymerization dynamics of MTs . Microtubule Stabilizing Factors : MAPs Until recently , all of the proteins known to regulate MT polymerization were MAPs ( Microtubule Associated Proteins ) ; MAPs are proteins that bind in a nucleotide - insensitive manner to the MT lattice . A great deal of characteri - zation has been performed on what we term classical MAPs : MAP1 , MAP2 , and tau in neurons , and MAP4 in non - neuronal cells , and detailed summaries have been recently presented ( Hyams & Lloyd 1994 ) . These proteins bind to , stabilize , and promote the assembly of MTs . Neuronal MAPs weakly in - crease the polymerization rate of pure tubulin , strongly suppress catastrophes , and promote rescues ( Drechsel et al 1992 , Pryer et al 1992 , Trinczek et al 1995 ) . The net effect of these changes is to reduce the turnover rate and in - crease the fraction of tubulin in polymer at steady state . Neuronal MAPs are thought to exert their effects primarily by binding to the MT lattice in such a way as to cross link adjacent tubulin subunits . Consistent with this idea , the tubulin - binding sites in neuronal MAPs often consist of repeated motifs ( Lewis et al 1988 ) , and neuronal MAPs saturate their binding sites on MTs at ratios of 1 : 4 – 10 ( MAP : tubulin ) . These cross links have the effect of suppressing subunit dissociation and , perhaps , also inhibiting protoﬁlament peeling , thus inhibiting catastrophe and promoting rescue . Neuronal MAPs also promote polymerization , but whether this involves increasing the association rate or decreasing the dissociation rate of GTP - tubulin subunits at MT ends remains controversial ( Drechsel et al 1992 , Pryer et al 1992 , Trinczek et al 1995 ) . MAP4 is evolutionarily conserved from Drosophila to humans and is found in both neuronal and non - neuronal cell types . MAP4 promotes MT assembly in vitro , although , unlike the neuronal MAPs , it does so by strongly enhancing the rescue frequency without decreasing the catastrophe frequency ( Ookata et al 1995 ) . Surprisingly , genetic as well as biochemical disruption of MAP4 function failed to show a signiﬁcant phenotype , perhaps due to functional overlap with other MAPs ( Pereira et al 1992 , Wang et al 1996 ) . XMAP215 was identiﬁed in Xenopus eggs ( Gard & Kirschner 1987 ) , and recently a human homologue has been identiﬁed ( Charrasse et al 1996 ) . XMAP215 affects MT dynamics in a very different manner than conventional MAPs ( Vasquez et al 1994 ) . XMAP215 strongly increases the polymerization P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 106 DESAI & MITCHISON rate of pure tubulin , but only at MT plus ends . XMAP215 also increases the rate of rapid depolymerization and decreases the rescue frequency , thereby in - creasing MT turnover . The ability of XMAP215 to differentially affect the two ends of a MT and to promote assembly while also increasing turnover suggests a novel mechanism of action . Furthermore , XMAP215 may play an important role in vivo , where rapid polymerization is also matched by rapid turnover . Because XMAP215 decreases the rescue rate , it must bind to the MT lattice in a manner that differs from classic MAPs . This mode of MT - binding by XMAP215 is supported by its lower saturation stoichiometry ( 1 : 20 XMAP215 : tubulin ) relative to classic MAPs ( 1 : 4 – 10 MAP : tubulin ) . Investi - gation of the novel mechanism of action of XMAP215 and its interaction with MT lattices deserves future study . In addition to the MAPs discussed above , many MT - binding proteins have been isolated in diverse systems ( Kreis & Vale 1993 , Maccioni & Cambiazo 1995 ) . SDS - PAGE of MAP preparations , particularly from non - neuronal cell types , demonstrates a large number of bands of which relatively few have been identiﬁed ( e . g . Andersen et al 1994 ) . Therefore , it is not clear if most of the MAPs controlling MT dynamics are known , or if we are only at the tip of the iceberg . MAP REGULATION Most identiﬁed MAPs are known to be regulated by phos - phorylation , and in all cases the more phosphorylated forms are inhibited in their ability to stabilize MTs ( Drechsel et al 1992 , Trinczek et al 1995 ) . The binding of MAPs to MTs is predominantly electrostatic , involving the highly acidic C - terminal domains of both (cid:11) - and (cid:12) - tubulin ( Rodionov et al 1990 ) . Phosphorylation inhibits MAP function by reducing the afﬁnity of the MAP for the MT lattice , presumably by weakening this electrostatic interaction , al - though exceptions to this rule are known ( Ookata et al 1995 ) . The inactivation of MAPs by phosphorylation reduces the frequency of rescue and is one mech - anism by which MT turnover can be increased in vivo ( McNally 1996 ) . In addition to phosphorylation , alternative mechanisms may exist for regulating MAP - MT interactions as demonstrated by the recent characterization of map - modulin ( Ultizer et al 1997 ) , a protein capable of modulating the binding of multiple MAPs to MTs in vitro . Kinases that phosphorylate a given MAP in vivo have not been rigorously identiﬁed in most cases , although many kinases are known to phosphorylate MAPs in vitro . Extensive phosphorylation site analysis has been performed for classic MAPs ( summarized in Hyams & Lloyd 1994 ) , especially tau , which has been implicated in Alzheimer’s disease . Biochemical fractionation of brain extracts for an activity capable of phosphorylating a speciﬁc region in the tau MT - binding domain resulted in the identiﬁcation of a novel protein kinase , P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 107 p110 MARK , which can phosphorylate and inactivate multiple MAPs in vitro and cause reorganization of the MT cytoskeleton when expressed in tissue culture cells ( Drewes et al 1996 ) . p110 MARK shows sequence similarity to a protein kinase required for the asymmetric division of the one - cell nematode embryo and also to protein kinases found in budding yeast . These homologies suggest exciting new avenues for the analysis of MAP regulation in diverse biolog - ical processes . In addition to the conservation of a protein kinase probably important for regulating MAPs , proteins that exhibit motifs characteristic of the MT - binding sites in neuronal MAPs have been found in both nematodes and budding yeast ( Irminger - Finger et al 1996 , McDermott et al 1996 ) . Along with providing the ability to utilize genetic systems to analyze the function and regulation of MAPs , such evolutionary conservation indicates the fundamental importance of MAPs to the MT cytoskeleton . Microtubule Destabilizing Factors The high frequency of catastrophe of MTs in vivo compared with pure tubulin suggests the existence of factors that induce catastrophes . Such factors would destabilize MTs and oppose the action of MAPs , reducing net assembly and in - creasing turnover . Regulation of catastrophe factor activity may underly rapid changes in MT dynamics in vivo , as during the interphase - mitosis transition ( McNally 1996 ) . In addition to their potential importance in regulation of dy - namics , study of such factors may help elucidate the mechanism of catastrophe , which is still unclear from pure tubulin work . Recently three types of molecules have been identiﬁed that destabilize MTs but appear to do so using different mechanisms . Op18 / stathmin is a small heat - stable protein that was ﬁrst identiﬁed because it is abundant , highly induced in some tumor cells , and is a substrate for a number of protein kinases ( Sobel 1991 ) . Op18 is probably ubiquitous in vertebrate cells but is not present in budding yeast in a form recognizable by sequence . Op18 was puriﬁed as a MT destabilizing factor from calf thymus with a MT polymer - ization inhibition assay ( Belmont & Mitchison 1996 ) . The ability of Op18 to destabilize MTs was conﬁrmed by increased MT polymerization upon its im - munodepletion from Xenopus extracts and a decrease in the fraction of tubulin in polymer upon its overexpression in human tissue culture cells ( Figure 6 top ; Marklund et al 1996 ) . Interestingly , Op18 is regulated negatively by phospho - rylation ; it is highly phosphorylated in mitotic cells , thus presumably inactive , suggesting that its function is more important in interphase cells ( Marklund et al 1996 ) . One exciting possibility is that Op18 plays a role in signal transduction to the MT cytoskeleton . The mechanism by which Op18 destabilizes MTs is unclear . Op18 binds to the (cid:11)(cid:12) tubulin dimer ( the binding afﬁnity has yet to be determined ) , and preliminary experiments suggest that it acts primarily to P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 108 DESAI & MITCHISON Figure 6 Microtubule destabilizing factors : Top panels show the effect of wild - type Op18 over - expression on the MT cytoskeleton in K562 cells . Paired images of DAPI - labeled DNA and tubulin immunoﬂuorescence indicate the extensive loss of MTs in Op18 - overexpressing cells ( Marklund et al 1996 ) . Bottom panels show effect of inhibition of XKCM1 function , by addition of inhibitory antibodies , during in vitro spindle assembly in Xenopus egg extracts . Inhibition of XKCM1 func - tion severely disrupts spindle structure , primarily as a result of the formation of very long MTs ( Walczak et al 1996 ) ( top panels reprinted from Marklund et al 1996 ) . increase the catastrophe frequency ( Belmont & Mitchison 1996 ) . The precise mechanism by which Op18 inhibits MT polymerization and the intracellular functions of Op18 are both issues deserving future study . A second class of proteins recently implicated in MT destabilization are certain members of the superfamily of kinesin - related MT motor proteins ( ki - nesins ) . The ﬁrst clear demonstration of a kinesin inﬂuencing MT stability was for Kar3 , a minus end - directed kinesin in budding yeast . Kar3 preferentially destabilizes the minus ends of taxol - stabilized MTs in vitro ( Endow et al 1994 ) . This activity may play a role in the process of karyogamy ( nuclear fusion after mating ) , where Kar3 at one spindle pole body may reel in and depolymerize MTs emanating from the second spindle pole body . A further suggestion that kinesins might inﬂuence MT dynamics was obtained in a study showing an P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 109 increase in the depolymerization rate of MTs by a chimeric nonmotile kinesin attached to beads ( Lombillo et al 1995 ) . The most dramatic example of a kinesin inﬂuencing MT dynamics came from a study of XKCM1 , a kinesin identiﬁed in Xenopus eggs ( Walczak et al 1996 ) . XKCM1 belongs to the central motor domain subfamily of the kinesin superfamily . Inhibition of XKCM1 function during in vitro spindle assembly , by either immunodepletion or addition of blocking antibodies , caused a dra - matic increase in MT length and , as a consequence , a complete disruption of mitotic spindle assembly ( Figure 6 bottom ) . This effect is most likely due to a decrease in the catastrophe frequency , which was reduced fourfold in extracts lacking XKCM1 . Thus one of the functions of this kinesin is to increase the catastrophe frequency of MTs . XKCM1 is homologous throughout its motor domain to another kinesin , XKIF2—a plus end – directed vesicle motor identi - ﬁed in mouse brain ( Noda et al 1995 ) . This homology suggests that XKCM1 is also a plus end – directed motor , although direct evidence for this is lacking . XKCM1 may walk to the plus end of a MT and act as a catastrophe factor by affecting either the structural or chemical properties of special stabilizing struc - tures at the ends . XKCM1 and its mammalian homologue MCAK ( Wordeman & Mitchison 1995 ) are enriched on kinetochores , where they may play an im - portant role in chromosome movement as motors and / or as catastrophe factors . A new class of proteins that destabilize MTs are the MT severing proteins . Three such proteins have been puriﬁed on the basis of their ability to sever taxol - stabilized MTs in vitro ( Shiina et al 1995 ) . Of these , the best characterized is katanin , a heterodimeric ATPase isolated from sea urchin eggs ( McNally & Vale 1993 ) . Katanin is enriched at centrosomes and spindle poles of sea urchin embryos ( McNally et al 1996 ) , suggesting a role in mitotic spindle assembly or dynamics . At present , the physiological roles of severing proteins remain unknown , as do their effects on MT dynamics . Microtubule Nucleating Factors The kinetic barrier to nucleation plays a fundamental role in the function and in - tracellular dynamics of MTs by inhibiting spontaneous polymerization of MTs in the cytoplasm . Without this barrier , the spatial organization of MTs would be random . MTs in most animal cells are nucleated primarily at the centrosome ( Kellogg et al 1994 ) . A major breakthrough in understanding the mechanism of nucleation by centrosomes came in 1989 , when Oakley & Oakley ( 1989 ) dis - covered γ - tubulin , a new type of tubulin that localizes to centrosomes in higher eukaryotes and to spindle pole bodies in fungi . The localization of γ - tubulin , combined with genetic and biochemical disruption studies , strongly implicated it in MT nucleation by centrosomes ( Oakley 1994 ) . Direct support for this hy - pothesis was recently obtained when a γ - tubulin - containing complex γ TuRC P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 110 DESAI & MITCHISON ( γ - Tubulin Ring Complex ) was isolated from Xenopus egg extracts ( Zheng et al 1995 ) . This complex forms a ring structure containing 10 – 13 γ - tubulin molecules , with approximately the same diameter as a MT . The ring complex is not a closed ring but has a helical pitch causing it to appear as a lock washer . Puriﬁed γ TuRC stimulates MT nucleation and can cap minus ends , preventing subunit addition . In a complementary study , EM tomography demonstrated the presence of hundreds of γ - tubulin - containing rings of the same diameter as the γ TuRC on intact Drosophila centrosomes ( Moritz et al 1995 ) . These rings serve as the initiation points for centrosome - nucleated MTs . These com - plementary studies led the authors to suggest that the γ TuRC functions as a direct template for MT polymerization , remaining bound as a ring at the minus end of the nascent MT . An alternative mechanism has also been postulated that involves unrolling of the γ TuRC to form a specialized protoﬁlament of the nascent MT ( Erickson & Stofﬂer 1996 ) . Distinguishing between these models will require higher resolution structural analysis of γ TuRC - nucleated MTs . In addition to nucleation , the γ TuRC may inﬂuence MT dynamics by play - ing a role in MT release from centrosomes . There is evidence that centro - somes release MTs in interphase and that this release is stimulated in mitosis ( Kitanishi - Yimura & Fukui 1987 , Belmont et al 1990 ) . MT release may al - low depolymerization at minus ends , as required for polewards ﬂux of spindle MTs ( Mitchison 1989 ) , and has also been implicated in assembly of the axonal cytoskeleton ( Ahmad & Baas 1995 ) . The behavior of free minus ends in vivo is a relatively unexplored area . In one case , free minus ends were shown to depolymerize , resulting in net treadmilling of the MT toward the cell periphery ( Rodionov & Borisy 1997 ) . EVOLUTION OF MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS To end on a speculative note , we consider the evolutionary origins of the dy - namic MT cytoskeleton . (cid:11) - and (cid:12) - tubulin are highly conserved among all extant eukaryotes , indicating that they arose early in evolution , before the radi - ation of multicellular organisms . The existence of MTs in prokaryotes is still an open question ( Bermudes et al 1994 ) , although no true homologues have been found in any of the genomes sequenced to date . It is now clear that all eubacteria ( Mukherjee & Lutkenhaus 1994 ) , and probably also all archae ( Bult et al 1996 ) , contain a protein , FtsZ , that shares an evolutionary ancestor with tubulin . FtsZ plays a central but poorly understood role in the process of sep - tation during bacterial division ( D Bramhill , this volume ) . Like tubulin , FtsZ binds and hydrolyzes GTP , and this may regulate its polymerization behavior ( Erickson 1995 ) . In addition , under certain conditions FtsZ forms protoﬁla - ment sheets and rings similar to those formed by tubulin ( Erickson et al 1996 ) . P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 111 Thus GTP - regulated conformational change may have arisen very early in the ancestor of modern tubulin . We favor the idea that modern tubulin arose from an ancestral protein that already had GTP - regulated dynamics and that the orig - inal role of MTs in early eukaryotes was to promote chromosome segregation ( Mitchison 1995 ) . In this view , specialized motile structures , including ﬂag - ella , came later . An alternative view proposes that ﬂagella came ﬁrst , initially as spirochete - like bacterial symbionts that were later absorbed and became the modern MT cytoskeleton ( Margulis 1981 ) . A CKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Denis Chretien , Martin Gullberg , and Claire Walczak for providing ﬁgures ; Ted Salmon and Tony Hyman for sharing unpublished information ; Karen Oegema for much helpful editing and discussion ; and Andrew Murray , Ted Salmon , Michael Caplow , Denis Chretien , Claire Walczak , Matt Welch , Jim Wilhelm , Jack Taunton , Mimi Shirasu , Wallace Marshall , Michelle Moritz , Sarita Jain , Jennifer Frazier , and Heather Deacon for many helpful comments on the manuscript . TJM is supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health . AD is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute pre - doctoral fellow . Visit the Annual Reviews home page at http : / / www . annurev . org . Literature Cited Ahmad FJ , Baas PW . 1995 . Microtubules re - leased from the neuronal centrosome are transported into the axon . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 2761 – 69 Allen C , Borisy GG . 1974 . Structural polar - ity and directional growth of microtubules of Chlamydomonas ﬂagella . J . Mol . Biol . 90 : 381 – 402 Amos L , Klug A . 1974 . Arrangement of sub - units in ﬂagellar microtubules . J . Cell Sci . 14 : 523 – 49 Andersen SS , Buendia B , Dominguez JE , Sawyer A , Karsenti E . 1994 . Effect on microtubule dynamics of XMAP230 , a microtubule - associated protein present in Xenopuslaevis eggsanddividingcells . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1289 – 99 Angelastro JM , Purich DL . 1992 . Adenine and guanine nucleotide content of Triton - extractedcytoskeletalfractionsofnonmusclecells . Anal . Biochem . 204 : 47 – 52 Baas PW , Slaughter T , Brown A , Black MM . 1991 . Microtubule dynamics in axons and dendrites . J . Neurosci . Res . 30 : 134 – 53 Bayley PM , Sharma KK , Martin SR . 1994 . Mi - crotubule dynamics in vitro . See Hyams & Lloyd , pp . 111 – 37 Belmont LD , Hyman AA , Sawin KE , Mitchi - son TJ . 1990 . Real - time visualization of cell cycle - dependent changes in microtubule dy - namics in cytoplasmic extracts . Cell 62 : 579 – 89 BelmontLD , MitchisonTJ . 1996 . Identiﬁcation of a protein that interacts with tubulin dimers and increases the catastrophe rate of micro - tubules . Cell 84 : 623 – 31 Bermudes D , Hinkle G , Margulis L . 1994 . Do prokaryotes contain microtubules ? Micro - biol . Rev . 58 : 387 – 400 Bre MH , Pepperkok R , Hill AM , Levilliers N , Ansorge W , et al . 1990 . Regulation of micro - tubule dynamics and nucleation during po - larization in MDCK II cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 3013 – 21 Bulinski JC , Gundersen GG . 1991 . Stabiliza - tion of post - translational modiﬁcation of mi - crotubules during cellular morphogenesis . BioEssays 13 : 285 – 93 Bult CJ , White O , Olsen GJ , Zhou L , Fleis - chmann RD , et al . 1996 . Complete genome P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 112 DESAI & MITCHISON sequence of the methanogenic archaeon , Methanococcus jannaschii . Science 273 : 1058 – 73 Burns RG . 1991 . Alpha - , beta - , and gamma - tubulins : sequence comparisons and struc - tural constraints . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 20 : 181 – 89 Burns RG , Farrell KW . 1996 . Getting to the heart of (cid:12) - tubulin . Trends Cell Biol . 6 : 297 – 303 Caplow M . 1992 . Microtubule dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 4 : 58 – 65 CaplowM , RuhlenRL , ShanksJ . 1994 . Thefree energyforhydrolysisofamicrotubule - bound nucleotide triphosphate is near zero : All of the free energy for hydrolysis is stored in the microtubule lattice . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 779 – 88 Caplow M , Ruhlen R , Shanks J , Walker RA , Salmon ED . 1989 . Stabilization of micro - tubules by tubulin - GDP - P i subunits . Bio - chemistry 28 : 8136 – 41 Caplow M , Shanks J . 1990 . Mechanism of the microtubule GTPase reaction . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 8935 – 41 Caplow M , Shanks J . 1995 . Induction of micro - tubule catastrophe by formation of tubulin - GDP and apotubulin subunits at microtubule ends . Biochemistry 34 : 15732 – 41 Caplow M , Shanks J . 1996 . Evidence that a sin - glemonolayertubulin - GTPcapisbothneces - sary and sufﬁcient to stabilize microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 : 663 – 75 CarlierMF . 1989 . Roleofnucleotidehydrolysis in the dynamics of actin ﬁlaments and micro - tubules . Int . Rev . Cytol . 115 : 139 – 70 Carlier MF . 1991 . Nucleotide hydrolysis in cy - toskeletal assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 : 12 – 17 Carlier MF , Didry D , Simon C , Pantaloni D . 1989 . MechanismofGTPhydrolysisintubu - lin polymerization : characterization of the kinetic intermediate microtubule - GDP - P i us - ing phosphate analogues . Biochemistry 28 : 1783 – 91 Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . 1981 . Kinetic analy - sis of guanosine 5 0 - triphosphate hydrolysis associated with tubulin polymerization . Bio - chemistry 20 : 1918 – 24 Cassimeris L . 1993 . Regulation of microtubule dynamic instability . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 26 : 275 – 81 Cassimeris L , Pryer NK , Salmon ED . 1988 . Real - time observations of microtubule dy - namic instability in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 2223 – 31 Cassimeris LU , Walker RA , Pryer NK , Salmon ED . 1987 . Dynamic instability of micro - tubules . BioEssays 7 : 149 – 54 Charrasse S , Schroeder M , Gauthier - Rouviere C , CassimerisL , GardDL , LarroqueC . 1996 . The human ch - TOG protein is associated with mitotic spindles and is homologous to the Xenopus microtubule associated protein , XMAP215 . Mol . Biol . Cell 7s : 1292 ( Abstr . ) Chretien D , Fuller SD , Karsenti E . 1995 . Struc - ture of growing microtubule ends : Two - dimensional sheets close into tubes at vari - able rates . J . Cell Biol . 129 : 1311 – 28 Chretien D , Metoz F , Verde F , Karsenti E , Wade RH . 1992 . Lattice defects in microtubules : Protoﬁlament numbers vary within individ - ual microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 1031 – 40 Chretien D , Wade RH . 1991 . New data on the microtubule surface lattice . Biol . Cell 71 : 161 – 74 Cole NB , Smith CL , Sciaky N , Terasaki M , Edidin M , Lippincott - Schwartz J . 1996 . Dif - fusional mobility of Golgi proteins in mem - branes of living cells . Science 273 : 797 – 801 David - Pfeuty T , Erickson HP , Pantaloni D . 1977 . Guanosine triphosphatase activity of tubulin associated with microtubule assem - bly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 74 : 5372 – 76 Davis A , Sage CR , Dougherty CA , Farrell KW . 1994 . Microtubule dynamics modulated by guanosine triphosphate hydrolysis activity of beta - tubulin . Science 264 : 839 – 42 Detrich HW , Jordan MA . 1986 . Mechanism of assembly of sea urchin egg tubulin . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 466 : 529 – 42 Dhamodharan R , Jordan MA , Thrower D , Wil - son L , Wadsworth P . 1995 . Vinblastine sup - presses dynamics of individual microtubules in living interphase cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 : 1215 – 29 Dogterom M , Felix MA , Guet CC , Leibler S . 1996 . Inﬂuence of M - phase chromatin on the anisotropy of microtubule asters . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 125 – 40 DrechselDN , HymanAA , CobbMH , Kirschner MW . 1992 . Modulation of the dynamic insta - bilityoftubulinassemblybythemicrotubule - associated protein tau . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 : 1141 – 54 Drechsel DN , Kirschner MW . 1994 . The min - imum GTP cap required to stabilize micro - tubules . Curr . Biol . 4 : 1053 – 61 DrewesG , BiernatJ , PreussU , MandelkowEM . 1996 . Microtubule afﬁnity regulating kinase ( MARK ) , a potential regulator of the micro - tubule cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 7s : 1299 ( Abstr . ) Drubin DG , Feinstein SC , Shooter EM , Kirschner MW . 1985 . Nerve growth factor - induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells involves the coordinate induction of mi - crotubule assembly and assembly - promoting factors . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 1799 – 807 Elbaum M , Fygenson DK , Libchaber A . 1996 . Bucklingmicrotubulesinvesicles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 76 : 4078 – 81 EndowSA , KangSJ , SatterwhiteLL , RoseMD , P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 113 Skeen VP , Salmon ED . 1994 . Yeast Kar3 is a minus - end microtubule motor protein that destabilizesmicrotubulespreferentiallyattheminusends . EMBO J . 13 : 2708 – 13 Erickson HP . 1974 . Microtubule surface lattice and subunit structure and observations on re - assembly . J . Cell Biol . 60 : 153 – 67 EricksonHP . 1995 . FtsZ , aprokaryotichomolog of tubulin ? Cell 80 : 367 – 70 Erickson HP , O’Brien ET . 1992 . Microtubule dynamic instability and GTP hydrolysis . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 21 : 145 – 66 Erickson HP , Stofﬂer D . 1996 . Protoﬁlaments and rings , two conformations of the tubu - lin family conserved from bacterial FtsZ to alpha / beta and gamma tubulin . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 5 – 8 Erickson HP , Taylor DW , Taylor KA , Bramhill D . 1996 . Bacterial cell division protein FtsZ assembles into protoﬁlament sheets and minirings , structural homologs of tubulin polymers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 : 519 – 23 Eriksson JE , Opal P , Goldman RD . 1992 . Inter - mediate ﬁlament dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 4 : 99 – 104 EvansL , MitchisonT , KirschnerM . 1985 . Inﬂu - enceofthecentrosomeonthestructureofnu - cleated microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 1185 – 91 Fan J , Grifﬁths AD , Lockhart A , Cross RA , AmosLA . 1996 . Microtubuleminusendscan belabelledwithaphagedisplayantibodyspe - ciﬁc to alpha - tubulin . J . Mol . Biol . 259 : 325 – 30 Flyvbjerg H , Holy TE , Leibler S . 1996 . Mi - crotubule dynamics : caps , catastrophes , and coupled hydrolysis . Phys . Rev . E 54 : 5538 – 60 Fygenson DK , Braun E , Libchaber A . 1994 . Phase diagram of microtubules . Phys . Rev . E 50 : 1579 – 88 Fygenson DK , Flyvbjerg H , Sneppen K , Libch - aber A , Leibler S . 1995 . Spontaneous nucle - ation of microtubules . Phys . Rev . E 51 : 5058 – 63 Gaglio T , Saredi A , Bingham JB , Hasbani MJ , Gill SR , et al . 1996 . Opposing motor activ - ities are required for the organization of the mammalianmitoticspindlepole . J . CellBiol . 135 : 399 – 414 Gard DL , Kirschner MW . 1987 . A microtubule - associated protein from Xenopus eggs that speciﬁcally promotes assembly at the plus - end . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2203 – 15 GelfandVI , BershadskyAD . 1991 . Microtubule dynamics : mechanism , regulation , and func - tion . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 7 : 93 – 116 Gildersleeve RF , Cross AR , Cullen KE , Fagen AP , WilliamsRCJr . 1992 . Microtubulesgrow and shorten at intrinsically variable rates . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 7995 – 8006 Gliksman NR , Parsons SF , Salmon ED . 1992 . Okadaic acid induces interphase to mitotic - like microtubule dynamic instability by inac - tivating rescue . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1271 – 76 Gliksman NR , Skibbens RV , Salmon ED . 1993 . How the transition frequencies of micro - tubule dynamic instability ( nucleation , catas - trophe , and rescue ) regulate microtubule dy - namics in interphase and mitosis : analysis using a Monte Carlo computer simulation . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 : 1035 – 50 HaydenJH , BowserSS , RiederCL . 1990 . Kine - tochores capture astral microtubules during chromosome attachment to the mitotic spin - dle : direct visualization in live newt lung cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1039 – 45 HealdR , TournebizeR , BlankT , Sandaltzopou - losR , BeckerP , etal . 1996 . Self - organization of microtubules into bipolar spindles around artiﬁcial chromosomes in Xenopus egg ex - tracts . Nature 382 : 420 – 25 Hirose K , Fan J , Amos LA . 1995 . Re - examination of the polarity of microtubules and sheets decorated with kinesin motor do - main . J . Mol . Biol . 251 : 329 – 33 Holy TE , Leibler S . 1994 . Dynamic instability of microtubules as an efﬁcient way to search inspace . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 : 5682 – 85 Horio T , Hotani H . 1986 . Visualization of the dynamic instability of individual micro - tubules by dark - ﬁeld microscopy . Nature 321 : 605 – 7 HotaniH , MiyamotoH . 1990 . Dynamicfeatures of microtubules as visualized by dark - ﬁeld microscopy . Adv . Biophys . 26 : 135 – 56 Hyams JS , Lloyd CW , eds . 1994 . Microtubules . New York : Wiley - Liss . 439 pp . HymanAA . 1989 . Centrosomemovementinthe early divisions of Caenorhabditis elegans : a cortical site determining centrosome posi - tion . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1185 – 93 Hyman AA , Chretien D , Arnal I , Wade RH . 1995 . Structural changes accompa - nying GTP hydrolysis in microtubules : information from a slowly hydrolyzable analogue guanylyl - ( alpha , beta ) - methylene - diphosphonate . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 117 – 25 Hyman AA , Salser S , Drechsel DN , Unwin N , Mitchison TJ . 1992 . Role of GTP hydrolysis in microtubule dynamics : information from a slowly hydrolyzable analogue , GMPCPP . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 : 1155 – 67 Inou´e S , Salmon ED . 1995 . Force generation by microtubule assembly / disassembly in mi - tosis and related movements . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 : 1619 – 40 Inou´e S , Sato H . 1967 . Cell motility by la - bile association of molecules . The nature of mitotic spindle ﬁbers and their role in P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 114 DESAI & MITCHISON chromosome movement . J . Gen . Physiol . 50 : 259 – 92 ( Suppl . ) Irminger - Finger I , Hurt E , Roebuck A , Col - lart MA , Edelstein SJ . 1996 . MHP1 , an es - sential gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae re - quired for microtubule function . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 1323 – 39 Karsenti E , Newport J , Hubble R , Kirschner M . 1984 . Interconversion of metaphase and in - terphase microtubule arrays , as studied by the injection of centrosomes and nuclei into Xenopus eggs . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1730 – 45 Keates RA , Hallett FR . 1988 . Dynamic in - stability of sheared microtubules observed by quasi - elastic light scattering . Science 241 : 1642 – 45 Kellogg DR , Moritz M , Alberts BM . 1994 . The centrosome and cellular organization . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 63 : 639 – 74 Kikkawa M , Ishikawa T , Nakata T , Wakabayashi T , Hirokawa N . 1994 . Di - rect visualization of the microtubule lattice seam both in vitro and in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1965 – 71 Kirschner MW . 1978 . Microtubule assembly and nucleation . Int . Rev . Cytol . 54 : 1 – 71 Kirschner MW , Honig LS , Williams RC . 1975 . Quantitative electron microscopy of mi - crotubule assembly in vitro . J . Mol . Biol . 99 : 263 – 76 KirschnerMW , MitchisonT . 1986 . Beyondself - assembly : from microtubules to morphogen - esis . Cell 45 : 329 – 42 Kitanishi - Yimura T , Fukui Y . 1987 . Reorga - nization of microtubules during mitosis in Dictyostelium : dissociation from MTOC and selective assembly / disassembly in situ . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 8 : 106 – 17 Kreis T , Vale R , eds . 1993 . Guidebook to the Cytoskeletal and Motor Proteins . New York : Oxford . 276 pp . KupferA , SingerSJ . 1989 . Cellbiologyofcyto - toxicandhelperTcellfunctions : immunoﬂu - orescence microscopic studies of single cells andcellcouples . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 7 : 309 – 37 Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . 1996 . Cell mi - gration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 : 359 – 69 Lehninger AL , Nelson DL , Cox MM . 1993 . Principles of Biochemistry . New York : Worth . 1013 p . 2nd ed . Lewis SA , Wang DH , Cowan NJ . 1988 . Micro - tubule - associated protein MAP2 shares a mi - crotubule binding motif with tau protein . Sci - ence 242 : 936 – 39 Liao G , Nagasaki T , Gundersen GG . 1995 . Low concentrations of nocodazole interfere with ﬁbroblast locomotion without signiﬁcantly affecting microtubule level : implications for the role of dynamic microtubules in cell lo - comotion . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 3473 – 83 Lombillo VA , Stewart RJ , McIntosh JR . 1995 . Minus - end - directedmotionofkinesin - coated microspheres driven by microtubule depolymerization . Nature 373 : 161 – 64 Lutz DA , Hamaguchi Y , Inou´e S . 1988 . Micromanipulation studies of the asymmet - ric positioning of the maturation spindle in Chaetopterus sp . oocytes : I . Anchorage of the spindle to the cortex and migration of a displaced spindle . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 11 : 83 – 96 Maccioni RB , Cambiazo V . 1995 . Role of microtubule - associated proteins in the con - trol of microtubule assembly . Physiol . Rev . 75 : 835 – 64 MacNeal RK , Purich DL . 1978 . Stoichiometry and role of GTP hydrolysis in bovine neu - rotubule assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 253 : 4683 – 87Mandelkow EM , Lange G , Jagla A , Spann U , Mandelkow E . 1988 . Dynamics of the mi - crotubule oscillator : role of nucleotides and tubulin - MAP interactions . EMBO J . 7 : 357 – 65Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E . 1985 . Un - stained microtubules studied by cryo - elec - tron microscopy . Substructure , supertwist and disassembly . J . Mol . Biol . 181 : 123 – 35 Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E . 1986 . Cryo - electron microscopy of unstained frozen - hydrated microtubules . Methods Enzymol . 134 : 612 – 33 Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E . 1992 . Micro - tubule oscillations . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 22 : 235 – 44 Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E , Milligan RA . 1991 . Microtubule dynamics and micro - tubule caps : a time - resolved cryo - electron microscopy study . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 977 – 91 MandelkowEM , SchultheissR , RappR , Muller M , Mandelkow E . 1986 . On the surface lat - tice of microtubules : helix starts , protoﬁla - ment number , seam , and handedness . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1067 – 73 Margolis RL , Wilson L . 1978 . Opposite end as - sembly and disassembly of microtubules at steady state in vitro . Cell 13 : 1 – 8 Margulis L . 1981 . Symbiosis in Cell Evolution : Life and Its Environment on the Early Earth . San Francisco : Freeman Marklund U , Larsson N , Gradin HM , Brattsand G , Gullberg M . 1996 . Oncoprotein 18 is a phosphorylation - responsive regulator of mi - crotubule dynamics . EMBO J . 15 : 5290 – 98 McDermott JB , Aamodt S , Aamodt E . 1996 . ptl - 1 , a Caenorhabditis elegans gene whose products are homologous to the tau microtubule - associated proteins . Biochem - istry 35 : 9415 – 23 McIntosh JR , Roos UP , Neighbors B , P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 115 McDonald KL . 1985 . Architecture of the microtubule component of mitotic spindles from Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Cell Sci . 75 : 93 – 129 McNally FJ . 1996 . Modulation of microtubule dynamics during the cell cycle . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 : 23 – 2z9 McNally FJ , Okawa K , Iwamatsu A , Vale RD . 1996 . Katanin , the microtubule - severing AT - Pase , is concentrated at centrosomes . J . Cell Sci . 109 : 561 – 67 McNally FJ , Vale RD . 1993 . Identiﬁcation of katanin , an ATPase that severs and disassem - bles stable microtubules . Cell 75 : 419 – 29 MejillanoMR , BartonJS , HimesRH . 1990 . Sta - bilizationofmicrotubulesbyGTPanalogues . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 166 : 653 – 60MelkiR , CarlierMF . 1993 . Thermodynamicsof tubulin polymerization into zinc sheets : as - sembly is not regulated by GTP hydrolysis . Biochemistry 32 : 3405 – 13 Melki R , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . 1990 . Di - rect evidence for GTP and GDP - P i interme - diatesinmicrotubuleassembly . Biochemistry 29 : 8921 – 32 Melki R , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D , Timasheff SN . 1989 . Cold depolymerization of micro - tubules to double rings : geometric stabiliza - tion of assemblies . Biochemistry 28 : 9143 – 52 Melki R , Fievez S , Carlier MF . 1996 . Con - tinuous monitoring of P i release following nucleotide hydrolysis in actin or tubulin assembly using 2 - amino - 6 - mercapto - 7 - methylpurine ribonucleoside and purine - nucleoside phosphorylase as an enzyme - linked assay . Biochemistry 35 : 12038 – 45 Mickey B , Howard J . 1995 . Rigidity of micro - tubules is increased by stabilizing agents . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 909 – 17 MitchisonTJ . 1989 . Polewardsmicrotubuleﬂux in the mitotic spindle : evidence from pho - toactivation of ﬂuorescence . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 637 – 52 MitchisonTJ . 1992 . Compareandcontrastactin ﬁlaments and microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 : 1309 – 15 Mitchison TJ . 1993 . Localization of an ex - changeable GTP binding site at the plus end of microtubules . Science 261 : 1044 – 47 MitchisonTJ . 1995 . Evolutionofadynamiccy - toskeleton . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . LondonSer . B 349 : 299 – 304 Mitchison T , Kirschner M . 1984a . Dynamic instability of microtubule growth . Nature 312 : 237 – 42 Mitchison T , Kirschner M . 1984b . Microtubule assembly nucleated by isolated centrosomes . Nature 312 : 232 – 37 Moritz M , Braunfeld MB , Sedat JW , Alberts B , Agard DA . 1995 . Microtubule nucleation by gamma - tubulin - containing rings in the cen - trosome . Nature 378 : 638 – 40 Mukherjee A , Lutkenhaus J . 1994 . Guanine nucleotide - dependent assembly of FtsZ into ﬁlaments . J . Bacteriol . 176 : 2754 – 58 Noda Y , Sato - Yoshitake R , Kondo S , Nan - gaku M , Hirokawa N . 1995 . KIF2 is a new microtubule - based anterograde motor that transports membranous organelles distinct from those carried by kinesin heavy chain or KIF3A / B . J . Cell Biol . 129 : 157 – 67 Nogales E , Wolf SG , Khan IA , Luduena RF , Downing KH . 1995 . Structure of tubulin at 6 . 5 ˚A and location of the taxol - binding site . Nature 375 : 424 – 27 O’Brien ET , Salmon ED , Walker RA , Erickson HP . 1990 . Effects of magnesium on the dy - namic instability of individual microtubules . Biochemistry 29 : 6648 – 56 Oakley BR . 1994 . γ - tubulin . See Hyams & Lloyd , pp . 33 – 45 Oakley CE , Oakley BR . 1989 . Identiﬁcation of gamma - tubulin , a new member of the tubu - lin superfamily encoded by mipA gene of A . nidulans . Nature 338 : 662 – 64 Odde DJ , Cassimeris L , Buettner HM . 1995 . Kinetics of microtubule catastrophe assessed byprobabilisticanalysis . Biophys . J . 69 : 796 – 802 Ookata K , Hisanaga S , Bulinski JC , Murofushi H , Aizawa H , et al . 1995 . Cyclin B inter - action with microtubule - associated protein 4 ( MAP4 ) targets p34cdc2 kinase to micro - tubules and is a potential regulator of M - phase microtubule dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 849 – 62 Oosawa F , Asakura S . 1975 . Thermodynamics of the Polymerization of Protein . New York : Academic . 204 pp . Ormo M , Cubitt AB , Kallio K , Gross LA , Tsien RY , Remington SJ . 1996 . Crystal structure of the Aequorea victoria green ﬂuorescent pro - tein . Science 273 : 1392 – 95 Parsons SF , Salmon ED . 1997 . Microtubule as - semblyinclariﬁed Xenopus eggextracts . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 36 : 1 – 11 Pereira A , Doshen J , Tanaka E , Goldstein LS . 1992 . Genetic analysis of a Drosophila microtubule - associated protein . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 377 – 83 Pryer NK , Walker RA , Skeen VP , Bourns BD , Soboeiro MF , Salmon ED . 1992 . Brain microtubule - associated proteins mod - ulate microtubule dynamic instability in vitro . Real - timeobservationsusingvideomi - croscopy . J . Cell Sci . 103 : 965 – 76 Purich DL , Angelastro JM . 1994 . Microtubule dynamics : bioenergetics and control . Adv . Enzymol . Relat . Areas Mol . Biol . 69 : 121 – 54 Raff EC , Fackenthal JD , Hutchens JA , Hoyle HD , Turner FR . 1997 . Microtubule P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 116 DESAI & MITCHISON architecturespeciﬁedbya (cid:12) - tubulinisoform . Science 275 : 70 – 73 Robinson JM , Vandre DD . 1995 . Stimulus - dependent alterations in macrophage mi - crotubules : increased tubulin polymerization and detyrosination . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 645 – 55 Rodionov VI , Borisy GG . 1997 . Microtubule treadmilling in vivo . Science 275 : 215 – 18 Rodionov VI , Gyoeva FK , Kashina AS , Kuznetsov SA , Gelfand VI . 1990 . Micro - tubule - associated proteins and microtubule - based translocators have different binding sites on tubulin molecule . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 5702 – 7 Sage CR , Davis AS , Dougherty CA , Sullivan K , Farrell KW . 1995 . beta - Tubulin mutation suppressesmicrotubuledynamicsinvitroandslowsmitosisinvivo . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 30 : 285 – 300 SalmonED , LeslieRJ , SaxtonWM , KarowML , McIntosh JR . 1984 . Spindle microtubule dy - namics in sea urchin embryos : analysis us - ing a ﬂuorescein - labeled tubulin and mea - surementsofﬂuorescenceredistributionafterlaserphotobleaching . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 2165 – 74 Sammak PJ , Borisy GG . 1988 . Direct observa - tion of microtubule dynamics in living cells . Nature 332 : 724 – 26 Sandoval IV , Weber K . 1980 . Guanosine 5 0 - ( alpha , beta - methylene ) triphosphate en - hances speciﬁcally microtubule nucleation and stops the treadmill of tubulin protomers . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 6966 – 74 Savage C , Hamelin M , Culotti JG , Coulson A , Albertson DG , Chalﬁe M . 1989 . mec - 7 is a beta - tubulin gene required for the pro - duction of 15 - protoﬁlament microtubules in Caenorhabditis elegans . Genes Dev . 3 : 870 – 81 Saxton WM , Stemple DL , Leslie RJ , Salmon ED , Zavortink M , McIntosh JR . 1984 . Tubu - lin dynamics in cultured mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 2175 – 86 Schulze E , Kirschner M . 1988 . New features of microtubule behaviour observed in vivo . Nature 334 : 356 – 59 SheldenE , WadsworthP . 1993 . Observationand quantiﬁcation of individual microtubule be - havior in vivo : microtubule dynamics are cell - type speciﬁc . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 935 – 45 Shiina N , Gotoh Y , Nishida E . 1995 . Micro - tubule - severing in M phase . Trends Cell Biol . 5 : 283 – 86 Simon JR , Salmon ED . 1990 . The structure of microtubule ends during the elongation and shortening phases of dynamic instabil - ity examined by negative - stain electron mi - croscopy . J . Cell Sci . 96 : 571 – 82 Sobel A . 1991 . Stathmin—a relay phosphopro - tein for multiple signal transduction . Trends Biochem . Sci . 16 : 301 – 5 Solomon F . 1986 . Direct identiﬁcation of microtubule - associated proteins by selective extraction of cultured cells . Methods Enzy - mol . 134 : 139 – 47 Song YH , Mandelkow E . 1993 . Recombinant kinesin motor domain binds to beta - tubulin and decorates microtubules with a B surface lattice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 90 : 1671 – 75 Spiegelman BM , Penningroth SM , Kirschner MW . 1977 . Turnover of tubulin and the N site GTP in Chinese hamster ovary cells . Cell 12 : 587 – 600 Stearns T . 1995 . Green ﬂuorescent protein . The green revolution . Curr . Biol . 5 : 262 – 64 Stewart RJ , Farrell KW , Wilson L . 1990 . Role of GTP hydrolysis in microtubule polymer - ization : evidence for a coupled hydrolysis mechanism . Biochemistry 29 : 6489 – 98 SvobodaK , BlockSM . 1994 . Forceandvelocity measured for single kinesin molecules . Cell 77 : 773 – 84 Tanaka EM , Kirschner MW . 1991 . Microtubule behavior in the growth cones of living neu - rons during axon elongation . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 345 – 63 Tanaka E , Kirschner MW . 1995 . The role of mi - crotubulesingrowthconeturningatsubstrateboundaries . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 127 – 37 Toso RJ , Jordan MA , Farrell KW , Matsumoto B , Wilson L . 1993 . Kinetic stabilization of microtubule dynamic instability in vitro by vinblastine . Biochemistry 32 : 1285 – 93 Tran PT , Joshi P , Salmon ED . 1997 . How tubu - lin subunits are lost from the shortening ends of microtubules . J . Struct . Biol . In press Trinczek B , Biernat J , Baumann K , Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E . 1995 . Domains of tau protein , differentialphosphorylation , anddy - namic instability of microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 : 1887 – 902 Trinczek B , Marx A , Mandelkow EM , Murphy DB , Mandelkow E . 1993 . Dynamics of mi - crotubules from erythrocyte marginal bands . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 : 323 – 35 Ulitzur N , Humbert M , Pfeffer SR . 1997 . Map - modulin : apossiblemodulatoroftheinterac - tion of MAPs with microtubules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . In press Vale RD . 1996 . Switches , latches and ampli - ﬁers : common themes of G proteins and molecular motors . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 291 – 302 Vale RD , Coppin CM , Malik F , Kull FJ , Mil - ligan RA . 1994 . Tubulin GTP hydrolysis in - ﬂuencesthestructure , mechanicalproperties , andkinesin - driventransport ofmicrotubules . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 23769 – 75 Vasquez RJ , Gard DL , Cassimeris L . 1994 . P1 : MBL / dat P2 : M / NBL / vks QC : MBL / uks T1 : MBL August 21 , 1997 10 : 19 Annual Reviews AR041 - 04 MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS 117 XMAP from Xenopus eggs promotes rapid plus end assembly of microtubules and rapid microtubule polymer turnover . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 985 – 93 Verde F , Dogterom M , Stelzer E , Karsenti E , Leibler S . 1992 . Control of microtubule dy - namics and length by cyclin A - and cyclin B - dependent kinases in Xenopus egg extracts . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1097 – 108 Voter WA , O’Brien ET , Erickson HP . 1991 . Dilution - induced disassembly of micro - tubules : relation to dynamic instability and the GTP cap . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 18 : 55 – 62Wade RH , Chretien D . 1993 . Cryoelectron mi - croscopy of microtubules . J . Struct . Biol . 110 : 1 – 27 Walczak CE , Mitchison TJ , Desai A . 1996 . XKCM1 : a Xenopus kinesin - related protein that regulates microtubule dynamics during mitotic spindle assembly . Cell 84 : 37 – 47 Walker RA , Inou´e S , Salmon ED . 1989 . Asym - metric behavior of severed microtubule ends after ultraviolet - microbeam irradiation of in - dividual microtubules in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 931 – 37 Walker RA , O’Brien ET , Pryer NK , Soboeiro MF , Voter WA , et al . 1988 . Dynamic in - stability of individual microtubules analyzed by video light microscopy : rate constants and transition frequencies . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 1437 – 48 Walker RA , Pryer NK , Salmon ED . 1991 . Di - lution of individual microtubules observed in real time in vitro : evidence that cap size is small and independent of elongation rate . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 73 – 81 Wang XM , Peloquin JG , Zhai Y , Bulinski JC , Borisy GG . 1996 . Removal of MAP4 from microtubules in vivo produces no observable phenotype at the cellular level . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 345 – 57 Waterman - Storer CM , Gregory J , Parsons SF , Salmon ED . 1995 . Membrane / microtubule tip attachment complexes ( TACs ) allow the assembly dynamics of plus ends to push andpullmembranesintotubulovesicularnet - works in interphase Xenopus egg extracts . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 1161 – 69 Waterman - Storer CM , Sanger JW , Sanger JM . 1993 . Dynamics of organelles in the mitotic spindles of living cells : membrane and mi - crotubuleinteractions . CellMotil . Cytoskelet . 26 : 19 – 39 Wegner A . 1976 . Head to tail polymerization of actin . J . Mol . Biol . 108 : 139 – 50 Weisenberg RC . 1972 . Microtubule formation in vitro in solutions containing low calcium concentrations . Science 177 : 1104 – 5 Weisenberg RC , Borisy GG , Taylor EW . 1968 . The colchicine - binding protein of mam - malian brain and its relation to microtubules . Biochemistry 7 : 4466 – 79 WeisenbergRC , DeeryWJ , DickinsonPJ . 1976 . Tubulin - nucleotide interactions during the polymerization and depolymerization of mi - crotubules . Biochemistry 15 : 4248 – 54 Wilson EB . 1928 . The Cell in Development and Heredity . New York : MacMillan . 3rd ed . Wilson L , Jordan MA . 1995 . Microtubule dy - namics : takingaimatamovingtarget . Chem . Biol . 2 : 569 – 73 Wordeman L , Mitchison TJ . 1994 . Microtubule dynamics in vivo . See Hyams & Lloyd , pp . 287 – 301 Wordeman L , Mitchison TJ . 1995 . Identiﬁca - tion and partial characterization of mitotic centromere - associated kinesin , a kinesin - related protein that associates with cen - tromeresduringmitosis . J . CellBiol . 128 : 95 – 104 Yeh E , Skibbens RV , Cheng JW , Salmon ED , Bloom K . 1995 . Spindle dynamics and cell cycle regulation of dynein in the budding yeast , Saccharomycescerevisiae . J . CellBiol . 130 : 687 – 700 Zhai Y , Borisy GG . 1994 . Quantitative determi - nation of the proportion of microtubule poly - mer present during the mitosis - interphase transition . J . Cell Sci . 107 : 881 – 90 Zhai Y , Kronebusch PJ , Borisy GG . 1995 . Kinetochore microtubule dynamics and the metaphase - anaphase transition . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 721 – 34 ZhangD , NicklasRB . 1995 . Theimpactofchro - mosomesandcentrosomesonspindleassem - bly as observed in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 129 : 1287 – 300 Zheng Y , Wong ML , Alberts B , Mitchison T . 1995 . Nucleationofmicrotubuleassemblyby a gamma - tubulin - containing ring complex . Nature 378 : 578 – 83