BRIDGING THE MUTUAL KNOWLEDGE GAP : COORDINATION AND THE COMMERCIALIZATION OF UNIVERSITY SCIENCE REDDI KOTHA Singapore Management University GERARD GEORGE Imperial College London KANNAN SRIKANTH Indian School of Business We examine why commercialization of interdisciplinary research , especially from distant scientific domains , is different from commercialization of inventions from specialized or proximate domains . We argue that anticipated coordination costs aris - ing from the need to transfer technology to licensee firms and from the need for an inventor team’s members to work together to further develop a technology significantly impact commercialization outcomes . We use a sample of 3 , 776 university invention disclosures to test whether variation in the types of experience of the scientists on a team influences the likelihood that an invention will be licensed . We proffer evidence to support our hypotheses that anticipated coordination costs influence whether an invention is licensed and that specific forms of team experience attenuate such coor - dination costs . The implications of these findings for theories of coordination , inno - vation , and entrepreneurship are discussed . Organizations exist to achieve joint action , de - fined as individuals working together to achieve a desired outcome . Coordination is the problem of aligning actions so they are synchronized to achieve this objective . The ability of interdepen - dent actors to coordinate actions stems from ade - quate mutual knowledge that enables individuals to act as if they can predict others’ actions ( Cam - erer , 2003 ; March & Simon , 1958 ; Puranam , Raveendran , & Knudsen , 2012 ) . The traditional view is that coordination problems are strictly a consequence of misaligned incentives and that , when appropriate incentives are provided , such problems should disappear ( Holmstrom & Mil - grom , 1994 ) . This incentive - based approach con - flicts with findings that coordination problems per - sist even when incentives are aligned ( Camerer , 2003 ; Faems , Janssens , Madhok , & Van Looy , 2008 ; Gulati , Lawrence , & Puranam , 2005 ) . Specifically , scholars from the knowledge - based view ( KBV ) ar - gue that a significant proportion of joint production failures in organizations occur because of inability to synchronize joint efforts ( Grant , 1996 ; Heath & Staudenmayer , 2000 ; Postrel , 2009 ) , either because of inadequate mutual knowledge or difficulty in creating such knowledge . In the context of commer - cializing discoveries , we examine how different An earlier version of this article received the Distin - guished Paper Award of the Business Policy and Strategy Division of the Academy of Management in 2010 . We thank the staff of the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foun - dation ( WARF ) for their generous contribution of time and their willingness to share data , ideas , expertise , and organizational memory . In particular , we thank Carl Gul - brandsen , Michael Falk , Howard Bremer , Ken Lutz , and Kristi Sullivan . Our manuscript benefited from the com - ments of Olav Sorenson , Ed Zajac , and seminar partici - pants at Copenhagen Business School , Emory University , Erasmus University , IESE Barcelona , London School of Economics , and Singapore Management University . Reddi Kotha acknowledges the support of Singapore Management University research grant for part funding of this study ( 07 - C207 - SMU - 030 ) . Gerard George ac - knowledges the support of the Professorial Fellowship of the UK’s Economic and Social Research Council ( RES - 051 - 27 - 0321 ) and the Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at Imperial College London . Kan - nan Srikanth acknowledges the support of the Strategic Organization Design Unit , University of Southern Denmark . 498 (cid:1) Academy of Management Journal 2013 , Vol . 56 , No . 2 , 498 – 524 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2010 . 0948 Copyright of the Academy of Management , all rights reserved . Contents may not be copied , emailed , posted to a listserv , or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s express written permission . Users may print , download , or email articles for individual use only . kinds of inventor experience help mitigate coordi - nation problems under varying levels of mutual knowledge . The scientific discovery process has increasingly become a team production function , with a gradual shift in the locus of invention from solo inventors to teams and networks of inventors ( Paruchuri , 2010 ) . Using a comprehensive sample of 19 million publications and 2 million patents spanning five decades , Wuchty , Jones , and Uzzi ( 2007 ) found that teams generate far more innovations than solo in - ventors , that large teams are commonplace , and that teams generate more heavily cited ( more im - pactful ) research . From an examination of patent records , Singh and Fleming ( 2010 ) confirmed that teams are more likely to produce breakthrough in - ventions than solo inventors . Given a large scien - tific base , longer educational training in progres - sively narrower specializations is necessary to push the knowledge frontier ( Jones , 2009 ) . Conse - quently , the proliferation of team - based inventions is driven largely by two trends : first , the need for specialization to push the scientific frontier and second , the need for interdisciplinary work to solve challenging scientific and practical problems . Whereas teams facilitate and focus use of collective knowledge to solve a problem , concomitant coor - dination costs incurred when teams perform these complex tasks hinder team activity ( Cummings & Kiesler , 2005 ; Guimerà , Uzzi , Spiro , & Nunes Ama - ral , 2005 ) . Though solving complex scientific prob - lems can enhance social benefit ( Basalla , 1988 ) , the productivity of such efforts is necessarily dimin - ished by their attendant coordination losses ( Phelps , 2010 ; Weitzman , 1998 ) . Therefore , how to gainfully combine different knowledge domains is a core problem in both the innovation and organi - zation literatures ( Vural , Dahlander , & George , 2013 ; Zahra & George , 2002 ) . Drawing from the knowledge - based view , we ap - proach technology commercialization as a joint production effort involving multiple specialists who are required to coordinate effort to perform complex tasks ( Grant , 1996 ; Kogut & Zander , 1992 ; Lawrence & Lorsch , 1967 ) . Though knowledge in - tegration can be difficult and costly ( Kapoor & Lim , 2007 ) , it is essential for the commercialization of impactful technology ( George , Kotha , & Zheng , 2008 ; Kotha , Zheng , & George , 2011 ) , although this facet is often neglected . Studies that draw on evo - lutionary theories argue that the inventions that build on the same knowledge domain have limited upside potential , whereas those that build on dif - ferent , complementary knowledge domains could potentially be valuable ( Fleming , 2001 , 2004 ; Flem - ing & Sorenson , 2004 ; Makri , Hitt , & Lane , 2010 ) . For example , combining knowledge domains such as molecular biology and photolithography can yield fundamental breakthroughs such as DNA ar - rays that transform genetic sequencing and map - ping capabilities . Scholars from organization theory , social psy - chology , and sociology have pointed out that it is extremely difficult for specialists from different knowledge domains to work together fruitfully . This is because specialists have different knowl - edge , beliefs , languages , and norms of working , so that it becomes difficult for them to understand each other and effectively complement each others’ knowledge ( Cronin & Weingart , 2007 ; Dougherty , 1992 ; Heath & Staudenmayer , 2000 ; Latour , 1986 ) . This suggests that the most desirable recombina - tions may also be difficult to fructify ( Fleming , 2004 ; Phelps , 2010 ; Vural et al . , 2013 ) . The desir - ability - difficulty trade - off makes it challenging , ex ante , to understand how the likelihood of commer - cialization varies with the underlying science dis - tance . Science distance in an invention is the dis - tance between multiple knowledge domains on which the invention is based . We argue that antic - ipated coordination costs in the joint production task of technology commercialization help explain why commercialization of interdisciplinary re - search , especially from distant domains , differs from the commercialization process for inventions from specialized or proximate domains . Using insights from the KBV on coordination costs and from individual / group learning theories on the role of experience in reducing coordination costs , we add to the literatures on the production and commercialization of science as well as to broader discussions of coordination in teams . We contribute to the innovation literature by distin - guishing between two sources of coordination costs in technology commercialization : Coordination costs arise both from the need to coordinate across inventor - licensee teams and from the need to coor - dinate within an inventor team for further refine - ment and modification of its invention to facilitate commercialization . Whereas prior work on coordi - nation in teams and in interfirm technology rela - tionships has generally referred to the importance of prior joint work experience , we identify two specific types of experience—licensing experience and collaboration experience—as reducing the an - 2013 499 Kotha , George , and Srikanth ticipated coordination costs 1 for inventions charac - terized by differing levels of mutual knowledge . We tested our predictions using event history models that estimate the licensing hazard of 3 , 776 unique inventions from a large US research univer - sity disclosed between 1981 and 2007 . This study is among the first large - sample , longitudinal , em - pirical tests of coordination among scientific teams and its implications for commercialization . We add a complementary perspective to prior work by highlighting the coordination - related aspects of combining distant knowledge domains in pro - ducing the type of inventions that are valuable ( Fleming , 2001 ; Kapoor & Lim , 2007 ) . Unlike prior work on technology commercialization , which has largely ignored nonpatented inventions ( e . g . , Shane , 2002 ; Vural et al . , 2013 ) , this study ad - dresses the commercialization of both patented and not - patented inventions . This comprehensive sam - ple raises the quality of theoretical and practical discourse beyond inventions for which intellectual property rights have been secured through patents , and this extension has important implications for the commercialization of scientific knowledge and the practice of technology transfer . THEORY AND HYPOTHESES The theory development is structured as follows . First , we observe that the commercialization of in - ventions comprises two tasks : ( 1 ) effective knowl - edge transfer and coordination between an inventor team and subsequent ( downstream ) parts of the same or different organization and ( 2 ) effective knowledge transfer and coordination within the inventor team to further develop and modify the invention as required for successful commercial application . We hypothesize that these coordina - tion costs and the value of an invention vary sys - tematically with science distance and affect the likelihood of licensing . Next , we propose that learning from prior licensing experience helps at - tenuate coordination costs between inventor team and licensee firm ( henceforth , firm - team coordina - tion ) . Finally , we posit that learning from prior collaboration experience helps mitigate coordina - tion costs between members of the inventor team ( henceforth , within - team coordination ) . Commercialization of University Research Scholars following an evolutionary economics tradition have argued that inventions are created by recombining existing knowledge ( Basalla , 1988 ; Fleming , 2001 ; Schumpeter , 1934 ) . Though inven - tors can combine any two pieces of knowledge , what actually gets combined is constrained by the localness of search and the social construction of what pieces can be gainfully combined ( Basalla , 1988 ; George et al . , 2008 ; Kotha et al . , 2011 ) . Stud - ies have argued that breakthrough inventions are typically the result of combining distant knowledge domains and are rarely produced by recombining proximate knowledge domains ( Fleming , 2001 , 2004 ; Fleming & Sorenson , 2001 ; Vural et al . , 2013 ) . Our focus , however , is not the discovery of , but rather the commercialization of , such inventions . Inventions that recombine elements from the same technological domain are likely to be incremental , and they are therefore less valuable to a firm seek - ing commercial benefits than are inventions that combine relatively more distant domains that offer the potential for breakthroughs . Therefore , from a commercial value perspective , inventions that combine proximate knowledge domains are less likely to be licensed than those that combine more distant knowledge domains . Increasing science distance , however , creates a concomitant coordination problem . For a typical university invention , licensing is only the first stage in a long process of commercialization . From on a survey of 62 American universities , Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) concluded that most university technology is embryonic and requires significant further work for successful commercialization . They report that about 75 percent of inventions were no more than a “proof of concept” at the time of licensing ; 48 percent did not have a prototype ; and manufacturing feasibility was known for only 8 percent of inventions . The authors concluded that “at the time of license , most university inventions are at such an early stage of development that no one knows if they will eventually result in a com - mercially successful innovation or not . Moreover , they are so embryonic that further development with the active involvement by the inventor is required for any chance of commercialization” ( Jensen & Thursby , 2001 : 240 ; emphasis added ) . Examples abound of the time and effort required to 1 We use “coordination costs” as a convenient short - hand to denote both the cost of generating adequate pre - dictive knowledge ( Puranam et al . , 2012 ) and the cost of the “wasted effort” that arises from misaligned actions ( Postrel , 2009 ) . 500 April Academy of Management Journal move inventions to commercial viability ( Clarysse , Wright , Lockett , Van de Velde , & Vohora , 2005 ; George , Zahra , & Wood , 2002 ; Jain , George , & Mal - tarich , 2009 ) . As a professor at St . Mary’s Hospital , part of Imperial College London , Alexander Flem - ing discovered that a mold inhibited the growth of bacteria in 1928 . Although the significance of this discovery was immediately felt , attempts to treat human subjects failed owing to insufficient quan - tities of the drug being produced . Commercial pro - duction of penicillin was achieved only in the early 1940s , when its chemical structure was decoded . The issue of further development effort required of university inventions continues to remain a chal - lenge today and gives rise to firm - team and within - team coordination costs . The firm - team coordina - tion cost arises from the need for adequate knowledge transfer and synchronization between inventor team and licensee firm to help the firm understand the value of the invention and work jointly toward commercialization . The within - team coordination cost arises from the need for the members of the inventor team to work together to integrate their knowledge to further develop the invention to create working prototypes and estab - lish manufacturing scale . Below , we argue how jointly considering the likely value from a recom - bination and the two types of coordination costs involved in its commercialization help us under - stand the likelihood of licensing for university - gen - erated technologies . Science Distance and Coordination Costs in Commercialization Several studies have argued that combining more distant knowledge domains is more risky than com - bining more proximate knowledge domains , but a few of these distant combinations result in funda - mental breakthroughs of immense value ( Ahuja & Lampert , 2001 ; Fleming , 2001 ; Fleming & Soren - son , 2001 ; Foster , 1986 ; Katila & Ahuja , 2002 ; Utterback , 1994 ) . Inventions that recombine distant knowledge domains can be valuable because re - combining different disciplines can introduce plu - ralism in mental models and facilitate problem solving ( Amabile , 1988 ) . Increasing variety in prob - lem solving also concomitantly increases the like - lihood that solutions can be found for challenging problems ( Fleming , 2007 ; George et al . , 2008 ; Singh & Fleming , 2010 ) . However , many of these recom - binations have little value because inventors have limited knowledge of the nature of interdepen - dence between elements from two distant domains and ex ante have inaccurate expectations regarding their potential value . In contrast , inventors typi - cally have some idea of the nature of interactions between two moderately distant domains and can make informed choices regarding which experi - ments are more likely to succeed ( Basalla , 1988 ) . For example , as Fleming and Sorenson ( 2004 ) pointed out , inventors typically use science as a “map” to indicate regions of potentially valuable combinations in their search attempts . Since there is little interaction between distant sciences , scien - tific research is likely to provide a crude map . In contrast , the search space for recombinations in - volving proximate domains , though well under - stood , tends to be saturated , since a lot of experi - mentation has already occurred ( Ahuja & Katila , 2001 ; Fleming , 2001 ; Rosenkopf & Almeida , 2003 ; Rosenkopf & Nerkar , 2001 ; Vural et al . , 2013 ) . Therefore , any recombination involving proximate domains is likely to yield incremental improvements . Fleming and coauthors examined how the value of an invention covaries with the knowledge dis - tance between the sciences on which it is founded . Drawing on patent data analysis , Fleming ( 2004 ) argued that inventions that arise from proximate knowledge domains have limited upside potential . In contrast , when distant domains are combined , the average value of such inventions is lower , but the variance increases , with a small number of in - ventions becoming extremely valuable . Fleming ( 2001 ) found that patents belonging to a single pat - ent class have significantly fewer forward citations . Fleming and Sorenson ( 2001 ) similarly showed that interdependence between the knowledge bases that underlie a patent positively impacts patent value , but the square of interdependence negatively impacts that value ; an inverted U - shaped effect is shown . They measured interdependence as the density of citations between two knowledge do - mains ; the higher the cross - citation , the closer the knowledge domains and the more familiar special - ists in one domain are with advances in the other domain . Kotha et al . ( 2011 ) also showed that the knowledge distance of a firm , calculated on the basis of its patenting profile , has a positive impact on both innovative output and innovation quality , but the squared term for distance has a negative impact on both innovative output and innovation quality . Taken together , the evidence suggests that if potential licensee firms were concerned only about the value of inventions , researchers would on average see an inverse U - shaped relationship be - 2013 501 Kotha , George , and Srikanth tween an invention’s science distance and its haz - ard ( likelihood ) of licensing . Next , we argue that this potential relationship between science distance and licensing of an in - vention is reinforced when the coordination costs involved in commercializing academic inventions are considered . Since most university inventions lead their industry by several years ( Bayus & Agar - wal , 2007 ) , a technology transfer organization and an inventor team need to educate a potential li - censee firm regarding the prospective value of in - ventions . Apart from being the target of an effort to convey invention value , the licensee needs to be reassured that the inventor team will fully engage with the commercialization process , is committed to generating further add - on inventions , and will work with the firm’s employees to transfer ade - quate knowledge to make the required modifica - tions for scale - up and manufacturing ( Dechenaux , Thursby , & Thursby , 2009 ; Jensen & Thursby , 2001 ) . Our premise is that if potential coordination costs are perceived to be high for an invention relative to its perceived value , firms are unlikely to license such inventions . When an invention combines proximate do - mains , a firm is more likely to possess the requisite absorptive capacity to evaluate its commercial po - tential ( Cohen & Levinthal , 1990 ) . It is also more likely to have scientists and engineers who possess the requisite knowledge to work with inventors , to understand the nuances of the invention , and to further develop it for commercial application . From a within - team coordination cost perspective , inventors from the same or proximate disciplines are likely to have shared knowledge and common training that will allow them to easily work to - gether . Though both types of coordination costs are lower when science distance is low relative to when science distance is high , they may not be trivial . There are multiple demands on academic scientists’ time ( Mowery , Nelson , Sampat , & Ziedo - nis , 2004 ) , and given the considerable distance be - tween typical industry and academic knowledge frontiers ( Bayus & Agarwal , 2007 ) , considerable ef - fort may be needed in firm - team coordination . Yet such proximate inventions may not have much value for firms because they may lie adjacent to existing technology portfolios or be perceived as marginal improvements . Firms are thus more selec - tive in commercializing proximate inventions ( Rosenkopf & Nerkar , 2001 ) . Consequently , jointly considering the potential value of an invention and the likely coordination costs for its commercializa - tion , it is likely that low science distance inven - tions have a lower likelihood of licensing than dis - tant inventions . In an invention that combines distant scientific knowledge , coordination costs are likely to be much higher ( Lockett , Siegel , Wright , & Ensley , 2005 ; Schilling & Phelps , 2007 ; Siegel , Waldman , Atwater , & Link , 2003 ) . First , from a firm - team co - ordination cost perspective , it becomes more diffi - cult to educate a potential licensee firm regarding the benefits of the invention , because the average licensee firm may not possess the requisite absorp - tive capacity in all the different knowledge do - mains . This is especially difficult since , as noted above , the knowledge underlying academic inven - tions on average leads the industry by several years . Whereas firms may recognize the potential of breakthrough inventions , they may not have the ability to evaluate their commercial potential in the medium term . This is a nontrivial problem , since even breakthrough technologies have valuable and less valuable patents . This difficulty is com - pounded by managerial coalitions and dominant paradigms of “what works” in their industry , which are likely to hinder the adoption of these inventions ( Kaplan , Murray , & Henderson , 2003 ) . Second , when distant domains are combined , the lack of absorptive capacity makes it more difficult to transfer the underlying tacit knowledge from these domains to licensee scientists and engineers ( Lane & Lubatkin , 1998 ) . Given these high costs and the large effort needed to develop an invention for commercialization , a firm may not choose to li - cense it unless the value of the invention outweighs the cost of this effort . In addition , since the average licensee firm typi - cally does not possess adequate knowledge to fur - ther develop such an invention to make it commer - cially viable , this burden usually falls on the inventor team ( Dechenaux et al . , 2009 ) . When dis - tant knowledge domains are combined , intrateam coordination costs are also likely to be higher be - cause inventors from multiple domains are un - likely to have high levels of shared knowledge ( Cronin & Weingart , 2007 ) . First , scientists from distant domains are less likely to share a common language that allows them to effectively communi - cate their ideas between themselves . Second , dif - ferent disciplines vary in their dominant logics re - garding the nature of science and the most profitable avenues for further explorations to solve problems . For example , Knez and Camerer ( 1994 ) discussed how experiments are conducted for dif - 502 April Academy of Management Journal fering reasons using varied methods by psycholo - gists and economists . Finally , disciplinary training and the scientific communities in different disci - plines also typically adopt different approaches re - garding acceptable trade - offs in research methods . Since much of this knowledge is tacit and taken for granted , it becomes cumbersome for specialists from multiple knowledge domains to coordinate among themselves in further developing their inventions . Even though the members of an innovating team have coordinated among themselves to create a fo - cal invention , the low level of mutual knowledge among specialists remains a coordination challenge in the commercialization process . Team members need to carry forward their ideas from proof - of - concept stage to creating a prototype , then on to manufacturing scale ( Jensen & Thursby , 2001 ) . Typically , at this stage , interdependence between various elements that are combined becomes tighter as solutions have to be optimized for scale efficiencies . For example , there was a time lag of about a decade after the discovery of human em - bryonic stem cells for it to show commercial prom - ise . A significant roadblock was the fragility of the cell lines themselves and the difficulty in propagat - ing adequate quantities of the cells for commercial applications . The inventor team generated further inventions in the manufacturing processes to culti - vate these cells to be more robust for commercial applications ( Jain & George , 2007 ) . The inventor teams needed to invest significantly to learn and solve these additional problems . Therefore within - team coordination is likely to remain a severe chal - lenge for diverse teams even though they have al - ready worked together to create the focal invention . For a firm , even though a distant recombination is valuable , it may be reluctant to license because of high anticipated within - team coordination costs . In sum , the lower average value of inventions that combine distant domains when they are compared with those that combine moderately distant do - mains , and the high anticipated coordination costs , together reduce the hazard of licensing for a high - science - distance invention . A recombination of moderately distant knowl - edge domains is likely to be more valuable than those that recombine proximate or very distant sci - ences ( Fleming & Sorenson , 2001 ; Kotha et al . , 2011 ; Vural et al . , 2013 ) . These moderately distant inventions are also less likely to suffer from very high coordination costs because there are overlaps in the knowledge base , and scientists need to invest less effort to communicate the benefits of their in - ventions . Adequate absorptive capacity may also help a firm’s scientists to understand the improve - ment necessary for commercialization and signifi - cantly reduce the knowledge transfer effort com - pared to that needed for distant inventions ( Lane & Lubatkin , 1998 ; Phelps , 2010 ) . Firms are more likely to see moderately distant recombinant inven - tions as extensions of their product lines and capa - bilities ( Katila & Ahuja , 2002 ) . Dominant para - digms and managerial coalitions are therefore less likely to interfere with adoption of these new tech - nologies . These effects on average reduce the firm - team coordination costs for inventions combining moderately distant sciences as compared with in - ventions combining distant sciences . Within - team coordination costs are also corre - spondingly lower in moderately distant inventions . When knowledge domains are only moderately dis - tant , different specialists in an innovating team are more likely to have some degree of shared knowl - edge . For instance , they are more likely to read each others’ journals and are conversant with scientific norms and paths of progress in the different fields—that is , they share a common language that facilitates exchanging ideas and integrating knowl - edge . Therefore , potential licensee firms are likely to conclude that within - team coordination costs are manageable in moderately distant inventions and that further development for commercialization is feasible . In sum , the higher average value of mod - erately distant combinations and the lower antici - pated coordination costs relative to the invention value together , on average , increase the hazard of licensing for an invention that combines moder - ately distant knowledge domains over that of one involving very proximate or very distant combina - tions . Drawing on these arguments , we posit : Hypothesis 1 . The relationship between inven - tor science distance and licensing likelihood is curvilinear and is such that the slope is positive from low to moderate science distance and negative from moderate to high science distance . Prior Licensing Experience and Firm - Team Coordination Costs Because new technology can be difficult to de - scribe and evaluate , it takes significant effort to convince a potential licensee of the value of an invention . Successful commercialization also re - 2013 503 Kotha , George , and Srikanth quires significant further development , often to cre - ate prototypes , experimenting to ensure stability , robustness , and refinement to ensure manufactur - ability to sufficient scale ; these modifications likely will draw on the commercialization expertise of the licensee firm ( Jensen & Thursby , 2001 ) . From the perspective of the inventor team , we argue below that the firm - team coordination costs are lower for a team with prior experience in commercialization . Inventor teams with prior licensing experience are likely more aware of firm - team coordination challenges and the need to invest significant time and resources in commercializing their inventions . Licensing experience likely provides inventors with an understanding of the state of the art in an industry and the primary concerns that drive in - dustrial R & D ( Owen - Smith & Powell , 2003 ) . In other words , licensing experience provides higher levels of shared knowledge between an inventor team and a licensee firm , enabling them to more clearly explain the technology and tailor their knowledge transfer efforts to the needs of the li - censee firm ( George , 2005 ) . Prior licensing experi - ence is also likely to provide the inventor team with the knowledge and routines needed to better interact with their industry partners . An inventor team that has limited commercialization experi - ence may not anticipate the effort involved in trans - ferring knowledge and coordinating actions with a licensee and may be unable to communicate the value of an invention persuasively to counter dom - inant logics . These teams are also unlikely to have routines in place to effectively transfer tacit knowl - edge to licensee firm scientists and engineers . These coordination challenges may lead the li - censee firm to take a skeptical view of the team’s capacity to assist with commercialization . This suggests that inventor teams with high licensing experience are likely to have greater odds of licens - ing than teams with limited experience . Hypothesis 2a . The greater the prior licensing experience of an inventor team , the greater the licensing likelihood for an invention , ceteris paribus . Next , we argue that the prior licensing experience of an inventor team moderates the relationship be - tween science distance and the hazard of licensing by differentially changing anticipated firm - team coordination costs for inventions at low , medium , and high science distance . At medium science dis - tance , firm - team coordination costs are neither low nor high , as they are in the corresponding low and high science distance inventions . As discussed ear - lier , the greater a team’s prior licensing experience , the lower the likely firm - team coordination costs . However , inventions that recombine moderately distant knowledge domains are on average more valuable ( Fleming , 2004 ; Fleming & Sorenson , 2001 ) . Furthermore , firms may perceive these mod - erate distance inventions as logical extensions to their current work and therefore perceive these in - ventions to be more valuable . To realize this per - ceived value , licensee firms may be more willing to undertake the additional firm - team coordination costs when working with an inventor team with low prior licensing experience . Therefore , taking a firm - team coordination cost perspective , we argue that teams with high licensing experience are un - likely to have a significant advantage over teams with average licensing experience ; similarly , teams with low licensing experience are unlikely to have a significant disadvantage when compared to teams with average prior licensing experience . In other words , for medium science distance inventions , higher licensing experience is unlikely to be asso - ciated with significantly higher odds of licensing . High science distance inventions are character - ized by a significant need for knowledge transfer and coordination in multiple knowledge domains between an inventor team and a licensee firm . This is likely to be difficult because the internal organ - ization architecture of firms reflects prevalent com - binations and links between fields rather than novel and infrequent combinations ( Henderson & Clark , 1990 ) . Inventor teams with high levels of prior licensing experience are likely to have lower firm - team coordination costs . These teams can rely on routines and processes developed from previous interactions to more effectively convey their knowledge to an industry’s participants . Their prior experience interacting with the industry is also likely to enable them to better understand and act upon the concerns of licensee firms about im - proving inventions for commercial use . Therefore , at high science distance , increase in prior licensing experience from average to high is likely to be associated with a significant increase in the hazard of licensing . On the other hand , a team with low levels of licensing experience is likely to lack the tools , rou - tines , and processes that enable an invention team to relate to and address the concerns of a licensee firm and therefore is likely to face significant firm - team coordination costs . The typical licensee firm understands the crucial role played by an inventor 504 April Academy of Management Journal team in transferring knowledge and developing an invention , and it therefore , may look for a positive track record among the inventors for licensing ( Mowery & Rosenberg , 1998 ) . Therefore , the licens - ing likelihood for an invention at high science dis - tance is likely to significantly decrease as licensing experience decreases from mean to low . Firm - team coordination costs for low science dis - tance inventions , though lower than at medium and high science distance , are still likely to be challenging because academic inventions typically lead industrial research by a significant margin . Since low science distance inventions are on aver - age incremental improvements that have lower value than moderate science distance inventions , licensee firms are likely to license only those in - ventions that they believe can be commercialized with very little additional cost . Since teams with high prior licensing experience have low firm - team coordination costs , their low science distance in - ventions are likely to have a higher hazard of li - censing when compared with the inventions of teams with average experience . Similarly , since teams with low prior licensing experience on aver - age have high firm - team coordination costs , their low science distance inventions are likely to have a lower hazard of licensing than those of teams with average experience . Putting the above arguments together : Hypothesis 2b . Prior licensing experience mod - erates the curvilinear relationship between in - ventor science distance and licensing likeli - hood : the inverted U - shaped pattern is amplified when experience is low and neutralized when experience is high . Prior Collaboration Experience and Within - Team Coordination Costs Within - team coordination costs arise from the need for members of an inventor team to jointly work to further develop their inventions for suc - cessful commercialization . Commercialization re - quirements impose significant coordination needs on inventors to configure subsystems for proto - types and achieving efficient scale ( Jensen & Thursby , 2001 ) . These concerns may differ from typical early stage invention concerns such as dem - onstrating proof of concept . For example , in drugs research and development , early concerns as to the efficacy of the active ingredient in a medicine are supplanted later on by concerns about finding for - mulations that help the body absorb the medicine with few side effects ( Henderson & Cockburn , 1996 ) . Therefore , even teams that have worked to - gether in developing a focal invention need to in - vest in significant learning to solve these commer - cialization problems ; this gives rise to within - team coordination costs ( Hoang & Rothaermel , 2005 ) . Coordination problems that arise when special - ists from different disciplines work together have been studied by scholars in diverse streams of re - search , including organization theory , social psy - chology , and sociology . Lawrence and Lorsch ( 1967 ) argued that organizations need to straddle the differentiation - integration trade - off and pro - posed that mechanisms such as cross - functional training and experience working in multifunctional teams can help resolve the most difficult coordina - tion problems . In our context , studies of coordina - tion problems that arise when multiple specialists work together in scientific labs have shown that these teams incur significant coordination prob - lems that are mitigated by specialists’ working to - gether and developing degrees of shared knowledge ( Knorr - Cetina , 1999 ) . Social psychologists have also extensively stud - ied this issue , comparing the information gains from diversity , especially functional diversity , and the concomitant process losses that arise from the difficulty diverse individuals have in working to - gether ( Van Knippenberg & Schippers , 2007 ) . In our setting , within - team coordination requires that sci - entists relate to each other’s needs and require - ments and understand the trade - offs they have to make and the consequences of such trade - offs . These inventors need to develop shared knowledge regarding the challenges in further development , decide on future directions for development , and agree on a division of labor based on who is best equipped to solve specific challenges . They may need to understand specific tools and methods pro - posed by members and dovetail their own effort to match those of their colleagues , all of which in - crease within - team coordination costs ( Cronin & Weingart , 2007 ; Heath & Staudenmayer , 2000 ) . Prior collaboration experience alleviates within - team coordination costs by enabling participants to generate shared mental models ( Klimoski & Mo - hammed , 1994 ; Mohammed & Dumville , 2001 ) . Prior experience increases both aspects of shared mental models—that is , it provides both a shared representation of a task , called a task mental model , and shared understanding of the distribution of expertise in a team , called a team mental model 2013 505 Kotha , George , and Srikanth or transactive memory system ( Liang et al . , 1995 ; Mathieu , Heffner , Goodwin , Salas , & Cannon - Bowers , 2000 ) . Recent work has suggested that co - ordination utility of a transactive memory system is not limited to the task on which it was obtained but is transferrable to distinct but related tasks ( Lewis , Belliveau , Herndon , & Keller , 2007 ; Lewis , Lange , & Gillis , 2005 ) . Collaboration experience also allows a team to develop a shared language and routines that facilitate coordinating future work . Finally , teams with prior collaboration expe - rience also share tacit knowledge on tools and techniques , and their uses and constraints , thus enabling inventors with prior collaboration experi - ence to substantially reduce intrateam coordina - tion costs . Our theoretical concern is the reduction in coor - dination costs that accompanies an increase in mu - tual knowledge among interdependent individuals . Our specific argument is that when more members of an inventor team have worked together before , the greater the development among them of shared mental models , shared language , and shared rou - tines for achieving coordination . The density of prior collaborative ties among an inventor team captures our core theoretical construct . In contrast , most prior work on the effects of prior experience has measured intensity of prior collaboration . In - tensity of collaboration measures the number of prior interactions , but this need not be an accurate indicator of increase in mutual knowledge in a team . For example , in a five - member team , if two members have worked together ten times before , and none of the others have worked together , these two members are the only ones who likely have common ground . In contrast , if all five team mem - bers have worked together before , but only twice for each dyad , this team’s prior experience count is still 10 ; however , a team with the latter experience pattern is likely to have much greater common ground that enables them to reduce coordination costs more effectively . In other words , we expect that the density of prior collaborations among a inventor team leads to increase in common ground and a corresponding decrease in coordination costs , even if we control for the intensity of prior experience . Drawing on the arguments above , we hypothesize : Hypothesis 3a . The greater the prior collabora - tion experience within an inventor team , the greater the licensing likelihood for an inven - tion , ceteris paribus . Next , we posit that collaboration experience moderates the relationship between science dis - tance and licensing by differentially changing an - ticipated within - team coordination costs for inven - tions at low , medium , and high science distance . Parallel to our arguments for licensing experience , first take the case of a moderate - science - distance invention for which prior collaboration experience increases from average to high . At moderate science distance , within - team coordination costs are signif - icant , but manageable . Inventors are likely to share some common ground regarding underlying knowl - edge domains and may be able to build on this preexisting knowledge to modify their invention for commercialization . This is especially likely to be true if the inventors have some level of prior collaboration experience . Teams with low prior collaboration experience undoubtedly face higher within - team coordination costs than teams with high experience . However , inventions that recom - bine moderately distant knowledge domains are on average more valuable ( Fleming & Sorenson , 2001 ) and , as argued above , are also likely to be perceived to be more valuable . Given this high value estima - tion , firms may be willing to incur the additional coordination costs associated with commercializ - ing an invention from a team with low experience . Since the knowledge domains are marginally dis - tant , licensee firms may also believe that these ad - ditional costs may be low . Therefore , taking a co - ordination costs perspective , we argue that teams at moderate science distance , with high collaboration experience , are unlikely to have a large advantage over teams with average experience ; and also , teams with low collaboration experience are un - likely to have a significant disadvantage . At high science distance , within - team coordina - tion costs are likely to be extremely high ( Makri et al . , 2010 ; Schilling & Phelps , 2007 ; Siegel et al . , 2003 ) . Unlike the moderate - distance case , the high - distance case is likely to involve very little com - mon ground between scientists from very different disciplines ( Cronin & Weingart , 2007 ; Dougherty , 1992 ) . It is likely to be quite difficult for inventors to understand the nuances of sciences with very little overlap and build on them substantially to create new knowledge ( Heath & Staudenmayer , 2000 ; Huber & Lewis , 2010 ) . As argued above , teams with high level of collaboration experience are likely to have developed requisite common ground among all experts , reducing anticipated within - team coordination costs . Therefore , at high science distance , increasing collaboration experi - 506 April Academy of Management Journal ence from average to high is likely to have signifi - cant positive impact on the hazard of licensing . Conversely , decreasing collaboration experience from average to low is likely to exacerbate within - team coordination costs . Therefore , at high science distance , decreasing collaboration experience from average to low is likely to be associated with a lower hazard of licensing . When an invention has low science distance , teams with high collaboration experience are , for similar coordination cost reasons , likely to be very efficient in working together in further developing it . Because low science distance inventions , on av - erage , have lower value than moderate science dis - tance inventions , licensee firms are likely to license only those inventions that they believe can be com - mercialized with little additional cost . Therefore , for low – science - distance inventions , teams with high collaboration experience are likely to have a higher hazard of licensing than teams with average levels of experience . Similarly , given an invention at low science dis - tance , even though inventors are fairly familiar with each other’s knowledge domains , they still need to invest considerable time and effort in fur - ther developing the invention for successful com - mercialization ( Jensen & Thursby , 2001 ) . Inventors with no prior experience are unlikely to have de - veloped shared routines and have limited knowl - edge of each other’s skills , expertise , and idiosyn - cratic preferences , likely resulting in increased costs of further collaboration . Given that inventions at low science distance , on average , have lower value than inventions at moderate science distance ( Fleming & Sorenson , 2001 ) , and that academic in - ventors have competing demands on their time ( Mowery et al . , 2004 ) , a licensee firm may believe that an inventor team will not invest the requisite effort in collaboration to further develop an inven - tion for commercialization . Therefore , reducing collaboration experience from average to low is likely to reduce the licensing hazard for low sci - ence distance inventions . Given the above argu - ments , we predict that : Hypothesis 3b . Prior collaboration experience moderates the curvilinear relationship be - tween inventor science distance and licensing likelihood : The inverted U - shaped pattern is amplified when collaboration experience is low and neutralized when collaboration expe - rience is high . METHODS The research site for testing our hypotheses was the technology transfer office ( TTO ) of a large US university . Established in 1925 , this TTO receives over $ 50 million in licensing and other annual income . The members in our research team visited the TTO frequently and conducted extensive inter - views with managers from the four major func - tional areas : intellectual property , licensing , legal , and general administration . Almost all university employees disclose their inventions to the TTO . The intellectual property right managers ( IPMs ) li - aise with the inventors and educate them on the need for , and the process of disclosure . This TTO prides itself in its outreach efforts to achieve com - prehensive disclosures , even of risky inventions . When a disclosure is made , the TTO records the names of all the inventors , and the principal inves - tigator is typically assigned the role of the first inventor . The IPMs then interview the inventors and write a report that evaluates the commercial potential of the invention . A decision about pursu - ing patent protection and commercialization is taken on the basis of this disclosure report at a monthly review meeting . The TTO records all dis - closures and decisions including whether to pat - ent , how widely to patent , and whether to seek licensing without patent protection . By document - ing archived paper records and computerized data - bases , we constructed this data set and gathered additional data as described next . Sample The data for this study , collected in 2006 and 2007 , include disclosures made to this university TTO between 1981 and 2006 . We started at 1981 to reflect a dramatic change in institutional environ - ment with the passing of the Bayh - Dole Act . This act enabled university faculty to benefit from the intellectual property ( IP ) created by government - sponsored research and obliged universities to en - sure that such output be transferred as goods and services back into the economy . Although we re - cord all disclosures from 1981 onward , we include all relevant information regarding inventors and TTO , such as experience , since 1960 . From 1981 to 2006 , inventors in teams of two or more disclosed 3 , 776 unique inventions to the TTO . Of the 3 , 776 disclosures , 755 ( 20 % ) were licensed ; of these , 431 inventions were licensed once , and the rest were licensed multiple times . Of these 3 , 776 disclosures , 2013 507 Kotha , George , and Srikanth 874 were patented , 339 ( or 38 % ) of which were licensed . Of the remaining 2 , 902 disclosures that were not patented , 416 ( 14 % ) were licensed . Estimation Strategy and Dependent Variable To estimate the impact of inventor characteristics on technology licensing , we used an event history methodology . For all disclosures , we collected dis - closure date and licensing dates . About 80 percent of all disclosures were not licensed at the end of the study period . Since survival models control for right censoring , they were the most appropriate model to use in this study . They also control for multiple failure events , which was important for our estimation , since in our data 43 percent of licensed disclosures were licensed multiple times . Our dependent variable is the licensing odds for a given invention . The estimation strategy was based on the steps recommended by Cleves , Gould , Gutierrez , and Marchenko ( 2010 ) and Kleinbaum and Klein ( 2012 ) . First we focused on the underlying theoret - ical rationale—that is , the drivers of the distribu - tional form of licensing hazard . An invention dis - closed to the TTO is unlikely to be licensed instantly ; hence with time the hazard of licensing may increase . In our data , the average licensing time is about 7 . 8 years , and the modal licensing time is 4 years . However , after a given time , inventions that have not been licensed have a lower hazard of licensing . We checked to see if the underlying dis - tribution of licensing hazard was indeed initially increasing and then decreasing , and we found this to be the case . This distributional form meant we had to use parametric estimations that fit non - monotonic hazard functions . We used a log - logistic model to estimate the survival odds that best fit this hazard function . We conducted tests to see if the log - logistic form was appropriate and found this to be the case . Survival odds are the inverse of licens - ing odds that we use to state our hypothesis and are similar in theory and interpretation to ( the inverse of ) the hazard of licensing ( Kleinbaum & Klein , 2012 ) . That is , coefficients that are negative and significant imply that an increase in the indepen - dent variable leads to an increased hazard of licens - ing . We tested to see whether our results were sensitive to the specific parametric assumption and found that they were robust to multiple distribu - tional specifications and also to nonparametric estimations . Explanatory Variables Science distance . Our theory suggests that the more distant the knowledge domains that are com - bined in an invention , the more difficult it is to license that invention . We captured the breadth of knowledge domains that are combined by consid - ering how many different specialists contributed to an invention . We assigned its inventors to special - izations on the basis of the schools and depart - ments in which these scientists were employed . 2 A simple construction of science distance is to code an invention as “proximate” if its inventors are employed in the same department / school , and as “distant” if they are employed in different schools . This simplicity may overstate science dis - tance ; for example , it masks the fact that scientists in biology and medicine may share a larger overlap in mutual knowledge than scientists in physics and biology . Therefore , we replaced the coarse category classification with a fine - grained measure of dis - tance between sciences based on the prevalence of cross - disciplinary research between any given pair of sciences . Sociology of science has long focused on study - ing the relationship between sciences . One tool often used for this purpose is citation analysis . The more field A draws from field B , the lower the knowledge distance between fields A and B . To map the knowledge distances between sciences , we followed Leydesdorff and Rafols ( 2009 ) . To under - stand cross - disciplinary citation patterns , they first classified 6 , 164 journals into 172 subject categories used by the Institute of Science Information ( ISI ) . 3 2 Recent work to capture the knowledge distance be - tween scientists has focused on the patent subcategories in which their discoveries are classified ( Fleming & So - renson , 2001 ; Tzabbar , 2009 ) , the intuition being that if two scientists file in the same category , their knowledge bases overlap . The distance between the categories is measured using the citation proportion between all pat - ents in one subcategory with the other patent subcate - gory . We do not use the patent - based measure but rely on the intuition behind these measures . The reasons we do not use the patent - based measure are ( i ) about 77 percent of the inventions in our data are not patent pro - tected and ( ii ) recent evidence ( Alcácer & Gittelman , 2004 ) suggests that assignment of a patent to subclasses is done by patent appraisers , and the inventors may not see their work as being in a particular category . 3 Interdisciplinary journals complicate the story , as they are hard to assign to a unique science category . Scholars have followed one of two approaches : either 508 April Academy of Management Journal They did not conduct this analysis at the journal level because the matrix was sparse ; out of the nearly 38 million possible dyads ( 6 , 164 (cid:1) 6 , 164 ) , only 3 percent had values greater than zero . The authors used the 172 subject categories listed by ISI in 2006 4 as the starting unit of analysis . Journals are assigned to a subject category by ISI staff based on a list of factors that include the journal’s coverage and main audience . The average number of jour - nals per category is 56 . 3 , and the range by category varies from a low of 5 to a high of 262 . Even with the reduced set of 172 subject categories , the re - vised matrix of citation patterns between the 172 (cid:1) 172 categories results in nearly 30 , 000 cells , most of which are zero . The authors collapsed the 172 subject categories into 14 broad categories via clus - ter analysis and recommended that analysis of the citation pattern between the 172 subject cate - gories identified by ISI and the 14 broad categories yielded the best results for measuring knowledge distance between sciences . The values in the cells in this 172 (cid:1) 14 matrix range from 0 ( which indicates no citations between journals in category i to the journals in category j ) to a high of . 91 ( which indicates that 90 percent of the citations in category i are to journals in category j ) . We calculated science distance as one minus the proximity value calculated using the science prox - imity matrix described above , so that high values indicate high science distance representing limited cross - citation between two fields . To use this scientific distance matrix , we had two graduate students with engineering or science un - dergraduate degrees classify all inventors in our database into the 172 scientific specializations , us - ing the department and school in which each in - ventor worked . In the few cases in which the coders disagreed , we consulted experts to resolve the dif - ference . We measured science distance at the level of inventor team . We aggregated the dyadic distance of every pair of inventors and averaged it across all dyads to get a team - level measure of science dis - tance . Science distance is bounded by 0 and 1 , with 0 indicating that all inventors are in domains with high knowledge overlap and 1 indicating little overlap between inventors’ knowledge domains . In our sample , the average science distance for a team is 0 . 3 , with a standard deviation of 0 . 4 . Prior licensing experience . Prior licensing expe - rience for a team was measured as the total number of prior licenses held by its members from 1960 until the time of licensing or censoring , as appro - priate , divided by team size . The variable has a mean of 14 . 5 licenses and standard deviation of 27 . 9 . An alternative measure of prior licensing ex - perience , the cumulative count of the licensing expe - rience of all inventors in a team without standardiz - ing , yielded the same results in our estimations . Prior collaboration experience . Inventors with large stocks of common ground are more able to coordinate with each other in further improving an invention . We used prior joint work experience as a proxy for preexisting stocks of common ground that can be leveraged in this coordination situation . For good intrateam coordination , it is best if all the members of a team have adequate shared knowl - edge in the form of a common language , rules and routines , and common understanding of decision premises . For this purpose , we were interested in the completeness of shared experience ( Latour , 1986 ) rather than in a simple count of prior shared experience , as we argued in the hypothesis devel - opment section . We measured prior collaboration experience as the proportion of dyads in an inven - tor team with prior collaboration experience . Spe - cifically , we counted the dyads who had worked together prior to licensing date or censoring date ( as appropriate ) and divided this count by the total possible number of dyads in an inventor team . This variable ranges from 0 to 1 , where 0 implies no inventors have worked together before and 1 implies that all the inventors have worked together before . Its mean is 0 . 6 and its standard deviation is 0 . 4 . Control Variables Following prior research , we constructed a host of control variables derived from the patents that ignore interdisciplinary journals altogether and concen - trate on the top few journals in each science or include the interdisciplinary journals in only one science category . 4 We use a static measure of science distance instead of a truly time - varying measure from 1981 through 2006 . ISI has published data classifying journals into subject cat - egories only since 1997 ; therefore it is empirically diffi - cult to obtain this information before 2006 . However , Rafols , Porter , and Leydesdorff ( 2010 ) suggested that at higher levels of aggregation such as ours , science dis - tance measures are very robust . Also , since we used data from the end of our sample period in 2006 , we are more likely to understate than overstate science distance . This is more likely to downward bias our coefficients and work against our finding any results in support of our hypotheses . 2013 509 Kotha , George , and Srikanth underlay the inventions ( Elfenbien , 2007 ; Shane , 2002 ) . We also used a number of non - patent - based measures for all the inventions , including whether each focal invention was patented . For inventions that were not patented , we set the control variables derived from patents to be zero . We also used an alternative approach to derive the mean value for these variables based on observed values of all other variables used in the estimation . The results for the theory variables are similar under both these approaches . Quality of invention . To understand why some disclosures are licensed , we needed to control for the quality of each studied invention . Ziedonis ( 2007 ) suggested that the number of citations re - ceived by a patent is a good indicator of economic potential . We counted the total citations a patent had received , excluding self - citations , up to 2007 . Stage of development of invention . Most uni - versity disclosures are at an early stage in the tech - nology commercialization cycle and include no commercial prototype or field data ( Thursby & Thursby , 2002 ) . Ziedonis ( 2007 ) used the number of other patents that a focal patent cited as a mea - sure of whether the patent was radical or was built on existing technologies and further along the com - mercialization cycle . Similarly , we counted the number of backward citations of a focal patent as a measure of its stage of development . Inventor academic prestige . Elfenbein ( 2007 ) re - ported that inventors’ academic prestige was posi - tively linked to licensing outcomes . To control for the quality of inventors , we collected data on the academic publications of the members of each in - ventor team . Government - funded intellectual property . We used an indicator variable to determine whether intellectual property ( IP ) associated with or consti - tuting a sampled invention was funded by a gov - ernment agency . Government - sponsored scientific projects may likely push the frontiers of science , which may have a material effect on licensing hazard . Privately funded intellectual property . We used an indicator variable to determine whether the IP for an invention was funded by a private organiza - tion . Funded projects are likely to be of greater commercial interest to a sponsoring firm and , hence , are likely to get licensed sooner . Intellectual property not protected . Given that our sample includes nonpatented intellectual prop - erty such as biological materials , tools , and software that can also be licensed , we used a binary variable ( 1 (cid:2) “not patented” ) to control for the absence of patent protection at the time of licensing . Collaboration intensity . In our theory develop - ment , we argued that completeness of prior joint work experience among a team’s members is im - portant for achieving coordinated outcomes . We also controlled for prior collaboration intensity among team members , measured as the average of the count of the number of prior collaborations between each dyad in a team until the time of licensing or censoring . TTO capabilities . A TTO’s degree of experience licensing different technologies may impact the likelihood of licensing for a given invention . We controlled for TTO capabilities by counting the number of prior inventions a TTO had handled in the technological domain of the focal invention . Year effects and time since sample start date . We included a year indicator variable to control for unobserved year fixed effects . In addition , we added a control for the number of days since Janu - ary 1 , 1981 , and a disclosure date . This variable captures any time trends that may lead to changes in the dependent variable . Furthermore , this vari - able accounts for the possibility that disclosures in recent periods may be treated differently from the disclosures in prior periods . Omitting the time since start of sample variable did not change the results for the theory variables . RESULTS We report descriptive statistics and the correla - tions between variables in Table 1 . All correlations above . 02 are significant at the . 05 level . In Table 2 , we report the results of survival models with robust standard errors , clustered for multiple disclosures by the same inventor team . The dependent variable is the survival odds of an invention—that is , the odds that an invention survives in the observation period without a licensing event . Consequently , positive values of the coefficient imply a negative relationship between the variable and licensing hazard . In model 1 , we report the baseline model containing only the control variables . In model 2 , we included the main effects of theory variables : science distance , science distance squared , prior licensing experience , and prior collaboration expe - rience . In model 3 , we add the moderations be - tween science distance and the experience variables . Hypothesis 1 predicts a curvilinear relationship between science distance and survival odds that is 510 April Academy of Management Journal such that moderate distance inventions should have the lowest survival odds . In line with this prediction , in model 2 the main effect for science distance is negative and significant ( (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 . 54 , p (cid:4) . 05 ) and the squared term is positive and significant ( (cid:1) (cid:2) 1 . 86 , p (cid:4) . 01 ) . To test if moderate distance inventions have the lowest survival odds , we plot - ted the estimated licensing odds across the ob - served range of science distance in our sample . See Figure 1 for this plot . Note that the model predicts survival odds ; we calculated the licensing odds as one minus predicted survival odds . As hypothe - sized , we find that moderate distance inventions have the highest licensing odds . The highest value licensing odds reaches is 0 . 30 when science dis - tance is 0 . 42 . Whereas when science distance is at the mean minus one standard deviation , the licens - ing odds are 0 . 23 ; and when science distance is at the mean plus one standard deviation , the licensing odds are 0 . 26 . Hypothesis 1 is supported . Hypoth - esis 2a predicts that licensing odds will be higher as licensing experience increases . In model 2 , there is a negative and significant relationship between licensing experience and survival odds ( (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 0 . 009 , p (cid:4) . 01 ) , supporting our prediction in Hy - pothesis 2a . Hypothesis 3a predicts a positive rela - tionship between prior collaboration experience and licensing odds for an invention . The coefficient for prior collaboration experience ( (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 0 . 0149 ) is not significant in model 2 . Hypothesis 3a is not supported . We tested the moderation effects using the re - sults from model 3 in Table 1 . Hypothesis 2b pre - dicts positive moderation by licensing experience of the relationship between science distance and licensing odds that is such that the curvilinear re - lationship is neutralized as prior licensing experi - ence increases . The interaction term between sci - ence distance and licensing experience is negative and significant ( (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 0 . 081 , p (cid:4) . 01 ) , and the interaction term between science distance squared and licensing experience is positive and significant ( (cid:1) (cid:2) 0 . 095 , p (cid:4) . 01 ) . To facilitate interpretation , we plotted the licensing odds at different levels of science distance and different levels of licensing experience , as shown in Figure 2 . We plotted these figures at the median time it takes to license an invention in our sample ( approximately eight years ) . 5 When prior experience is low ( i . e . , one standard deviation below mean prior licensing experience ) , the hazard of licensing an invention is 0 . 24 , 0 . 40 , and 0 . 23 at low , moderate , and high science dis - tance , respectively . When prior experience is at the mean , the hazard of licensing an invention is 0 . 27 , 0 . 50 , and 0 . 28 at low , moderate , and high science distance , respectively . When prior experience is high ( i . e . , one standard deviation above the mean ) , the hazard of licensing and invention is 0 . 29 , 0 . 69 , and 0 . 29 at low , moderate , and high science dis - tance , respectively ( Figure 2 ) . This suggests that curvilinearity is more pronounced as experience increases , contrary to Hypothesis 2b . Though not 5 We checked for robustness using different years : 3 , 5 , 10 , and 12 years , as well as at the mean ( 7 . 8 years ) and mode ( 4 years ) . Our results are similar to those presented in the text . TABLE 1 Descriptive Statistics and Correlations of the Variables in the Study a Variables Mean s . d . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 . Time ( years ) 8 . 0 5 . 4 2 . Government funded 0 . 2 0 . 4 (cid:3) . 07 3 . Privately funded 0 . 6 0 . 5 (cid:3) . 08 (cid:3) . 51 4 . Quality of invention 4 . 7 12 . 5 . 04 . 05 (cid:3) . 06 5 . Stage of development 1 . 9 5 . 3 (cid:3) . 01 . 03 . 01 . 48 6 . Inventor academic prestige 6 . 7 1 . 7 (cid:3) . 15 (cid:3) . 05 . 03 (cid:3) . 04 . 00 7 . Intellectual property not protected 0 . 7 0 . 5 (cid:3) . 06 . 00 . 00 (cid:3) . 58 (cid:3) . 56 (cid:3) . 04 8 . Time from start 8 . 6 5 . 9 (cid:3) . 62 . 09 . 13 (cid:3) . 34 (cid:3) . 12 . 03 . 33 9 . TTO capabilities 6 . 3 1 . 6 (cid:3) . 41 . 02 . 15 (cid:3) . 14 (cid:3) . 01 . 33 . 06 . 45 10 . Collaboration intensity 1 . 2 1 . 5 . 16 (cid:3) . 01 (cid:3) . 15 . 25 . 09 . 32 (cid:3) . 25 (cid:3) . 55 (cid:3) . 02 11 . Science distance 0 . 3 0 . 4 . 18 . 04 (cid:3) . 12 . 09 (cid:3) . 02 (cid:3) . 12 . 01 (cid:3) . 18 (cid:3) . 24 (cid:3) . 07 12 . Science distance squared 0 . 2 0 . 4 . 17 . 05 (cid:3) . 10 . 08 (cid:3) . 02 (cid:3) . 17 . 03 (cid:3) . 12 (cid:3) . 25 (cid:3) . 13 . 96 13 . Licensing experience 14 . 5 27 . 9 . 05 (cid:3) . 02 (cid:3) . 08 . 06 . 05 . 55 (cid:3) . 15 (cid:3) . 36 . 11 . 61 (cid:3) . 06 (cid:3) . 11 14 . Prior collaboration experience 0 . 6 0 . 4 . 05 (cid:3) . 06 (cid:3) . 02 . 15 . 11 . 28 (cid:3) . 18 (cid:3) . 22 . 09 . 51 (cid:3) . 12 (cid:3) . 13 . 34 a n (cid:2) 3 , 776 disclosures . 2013 511 Kotha , George , and Srikanth presented here , a plot of the entire data range shows that at extreme values of prior licensing ex - perience , in line with our hypothesis , the relation - ship between science distance and hazard of licens - ing is essentially flat except at the ends , very low and very high science distance . However , within the two standard deviation range , Hypothesis 2b is not supported . Hypothesis 3b predicts that the curvilinear relationship between science distance and licensing hazard is more pronounced at low values of prior collaboration and is neutralized at high values of prior collaboration . We tested the moderation effects using the results from model 3 of Table 1 . The interaction term between science TABLE 2 Predicting the Survival Odds of an Invention a Dependent Variable : Survival Odds Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Government funded (cid:3) 0 . 214 (cid:3) 0 . 252 (cid:3) 0 . 227 ( 0 . 169 ) ( 0 . 169 ) ( 0 . 167 ) Privately funded (cid:3) 0 . 393 * * (cid:3) 0 . 408 * * (cid:3) 0 . 421 * * ( 0 . 144 ) ( 0 . 143 ) ( 0 . 142 ) Quality of invention (cid:3) 0 . 0333 * * (cid:3) 0 . 0354 * * (cid:3) 0 . 0364 * * ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) Stage of development 0 . 0213 * 0 . 0217 * 0 . 0221 * ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 010 ) Inventor academic prestige (cid:3) 0 . 0544 0 . 0420 0 . 0408 ( 0 . 038 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 044 ) Intellectual property not protected 0 . 505 * * 0 . 471 * * 0 . 499 * * ( 0 . 144 ) ( 0 . 143 ) ( 0 . 141 ) Time from start (cid:3) 0 . 000302 * * (cid:3) 0 . 000318 * * (cid:3) 0 . 000336 * * ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) TTO capabilities (cid:3) 0 . 261 * * (cid:3) 0 . 214 * * (cid:3) 0 . 216 * * ( 0 . 049 ) ( 0 . 047 ) ( 0 . 047 ) Collaboration intensity (cid:3) 0 . 269 * * (cid:3) 0 . 196 * * (cid:3) 0 . 181 * * ( 0 . 043 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 057 ) Theory Variables Science distance (cid:3) 1 . 542 * * (cid:3) 1 . 404 * ( 0 . 551 ) ( 0 . 555 ) Science distance squared 1 . 858 * * 1 . 788 * * ( 0 . 559 ) ( 0 . 560 ) Licensing experience (cid:3) 0 . 00882 * * (cid:3) 0 . 00907 * * ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 003 ) Prior collaboration experience (cid:3) 0 . 0149 0 . 0501 ( 0 . 170 ) ( 0 . 168 ) Licensing (cid:1) science distance (cid:3) 0 . 0809 * * ( 0 . 017 ) Licensing (cid:1) science distance squared 0 . 0950 * * ( 0 . 017 ) Collaboration (cid:1) science distance 4 . 329 * * ( 1 . 317 ) Collaboration (cid:1) science distance squared (cid:3) 4 . 497 * * ( 1 . 336 ) Constant 8 . 866 * * 5 . 960 * * 6 . 063 * * ( 1 . 001 ) ( 0 . 854 ) ( 0 . 854 ) Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Chi - square 507 . 8 546 . 8 545 . 6 Log - likelihood (cid:3) 4 , 374 . 3 (cid:3) 4 , 336 . 0 (cid:3) 4 , 297 . 1 Observations 5 , 010 5 , 010 5 , 010 a Survival means an invention was not licensed in a given observation period . Hence negative and significant coefficients mean that the hazard of licensing increases with an increase in the explanatory variable . * p (cid:4) . 05 * * p (cid:4) . 01 Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses . 512 April Academy of Management Journal distance and collaboration experience is positive and significant ( (cid:1) (cid:2) 4 . 329 , p (cid:4) . 01 ) , and the inter - action between science distance squared and li - censing experience is negative and significant ( (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 4 . 497 , p (cid:4) . 01 ) . To interpret the moderation hy - potheses , we plotted Figure 3 , which shows the relationship between science distance and licens - ing hazard at various levels of prior collaboration experience . When prior collaboration experience is at the mean , the hazard of licensing an invention is 0 . 29 , 0 . 33 , and 0 . 24 at low , moderate , and high science distance , respectively . When prior collabo - ration experience is low ( mean – 1 s . d . ) , the value of the hazard of licensing and invention is 0 . 25 , 0 . 34 , and 0 . 20 at low , moderate , and mean science distance , respectively . This suggests that the curvi - linear relationship of science distance and licens - ing hazard is more curvilinear ( inverted U - shaped ) at low than at moderate distance , as per Hypothesis 3b . When prior collaboration is high ( mean (cid:5) 1 s . d . ) , the hazard of licensing an invention is 0 . 32 , 0 . 30 , and 0 . 28 at low , moderate , and high science distance , indicating that the curvilinear relation - ship is now flatter , supporting Hypothesis 3b . Robustness Checks We conducted several robustness checks to test the sensitivity of our results to alternative specifi - cations , different measures , and the influence of FIGURE 1 Hazard of Licensing at Different Levels of Science Distance 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Science Distance 0 . 18 0 . 20 0 . 22 0 . 24 0 . 26 0 . 28 0 . 30 Licensing Odds FIGURE 2 Science Distance and Hazard of Licensing Moderated by Licensing Experience 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Science Distance 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 Licensing Odds Low Experience Mean Experience High Experience 2013 513 Kotha , George , and Srikanth outliers . First , our sample combines disclosures that are patented and those that are not patented . We checked to see if our theory holds across these subsamples . We report the estimations by patented ( model 3 ) and not patented ( model 2 ) subsamples in Table 3 . The results for the theory variables are broadly similar in these two subsamples . The main difference is that the moderation terms for prior licensing experience are not significant in the pat - ented subsample . One explanation for this result is that the patenting process potentially codifies a large part of the tacit knowledge that underlies an invention , which may reduce firm - team coordina - tion costs . We ran several other estimations that are not reported in this article . We tested results’ sensitiv - ity to our assumption of the parametric form in the survival models . Our results were qualitatively un - changed for several different parametric assump - tions as well as in nonparametric estimations . We tested the robustness of our results to multiple li - censing events of the same disclosure . We ran sur - vival models with only a single failure event ( li - censing or censoring ) per disclosure and compared it to survival models with multiple failure events ( multiple licenses for the same disclosure ) , clus - tered by disclosure and inventor team . Our results were qualitatively identical for these estimations . Some licensee firms may have licensed more than one invention from a TTO and had routines in place that reduced the coordination cost in licens - ing . Since we could not explicitly use a control variable capturing the history of licensing between a licensee firm and TTO , as this record is not de - fined for inventions not licensed , we reran our estimations clustering for the repeated licensing by some firms . Similar results were obtained . In addition to controls for demand conditions , we included variables from the Yale Survey on industrial research and development , on the rela - tionship between sciences and industry , that may influence certain types of science to be commer - cialized faster ( Klevorick , Levin , Nelson , & Winter , 1995 ) . These variables are not significant in the hazard of licensing and hence are not included in our estimations . Furthermore , we ran estimations dropping outliers , and our results remain un - changed . We also tried to check if unobserved fac - tors regarding team formation impacted licensing . We followed a two - stage method to predict the likelihood that a given team would form and then used the hazard ratio from this prediction as an additional control in predicting licensing . Our re - sults remain robust . DISCUSSION We examined the coordination problems that stem from lack of mutual knowledge when innova - tive teams attempt joint action . By contrasting the coordination of experts from distant versus proxi - mate scientific domains , we were able to highlight the different coordination challenges in commer - cializing inventions , specifically , the challenges of taking university research to industry application . Our findings suggest that mutual knowledge among FIGURE 3 Science Distance and Hazard of Licensing Moderated by Collaboration Experience 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Science Distance 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 35 Licensing Odds Low Collaboration Mean Collaboration High Collaboration 514 April Academy of Management Journal inventors and routines that transfers knowledge to licensee firms is important to overcome coordina - tion challenges . We find that prior collaborative and prior licensing experience respectively help mitigate these two types of coordination costs . The implications for theories of coordination in organ - izational design and the production and commer - cialization of discoveries are discussed next . Theories of Organizational Design and Coordination Recent approaches to organization design draw - ing on the knowledge - based view have emphasized the role of achieving coordination in joint produc - tion tasks and the role of organizations as vehicles for generating adequate mutual knowledge or com - mon ground that enables interdependent agents to TABLE 3 Robustness Subsample Estimation of the Survival Odds of Inventions a Dependent Variable : Survival Odds Full Sample Not Patented Patented Government funded (cid:3) 0 . 227 (cid:3) 0 . 204 (cid:3) 0 . 259 ( 0 . 167 ) ( 0 . 291 ) ( 0 . 243 ) Privately funded (cid:3) 0 . 421 * * (cid:3) 0 . 845 * * (cid:3) 0 . 0625 ( 0 . 142 ) ( 0 . 231 ) ( 0 . 202 ) Quality of invention (cid:3) 0 . 0364 * * (cid:3) 0 . 0298 * * ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) Stage of development 0 . 0221 * 0 . 0179 † ( 0 . 010 ) ( 0 . 010 ) Inventor academic prestige 0 . 0408 0 . 0328 0 . 0489 ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 067 ) ( 0 . 063 ) Intellectual property not protected 0 . 499 * * ( 0 . 141 ) Time from start (cid:3) 0 . 000336 * * (cid:3) 0 . 000277 * (cid:3) 0 . 000452 * * ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) TTO capabilities (cid:3) 0 . 216 * * (cid:3) 0 . 216 * * (cid:3) 0 . 254 * * ( 0 . 047 ) ( 0 . 066 ) ( 0 . 087 ) Collaboration intensity (cid:3) 0 . 181 * * (cid:3) 0 . 230 * (cid:3) 0 . 140 † ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 093 ) ( 0 . 082 ) Theory Variables Science distance (cid:3) 1 . 404 * (cid:3) 1 . 460 † (cid:3) 2 . 218 * * ( 0 . 555 ) ( 0 . 900 ) ( 0 . 773 ) Science distance squared 1 . 788 * * 2 . 390 * * 1 . 835 * ( 0 . 560 ) ( 0 . 926 ) ( 0 . 786 ) Licensing experience (cid:3) 0 . 00907 * * (cid:3) 0 . 0148 * * (cid:3) 0 . 0064 † ( 0 . 003 ) ( 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 0038 ) Prior collaboration experience 0 . 0501 0 . 0838 0 . 241 ( 0 . 168 ) ( 0 . 257 ) ( 0 . 214 ) Licensing (cid:1) science distance (cid:3) 0 . 0809 * * (cid:3) 0 . 118 * * (cid:3) 0 . 0307 ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 023 ) Licensing (cid:1) science distance squared 0 . 0950 * * 0 . 140 * * 0 . 0304 ( 0 . 017 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 028 ) Collaboration (cid:1) science distance 4 . 329 * * 5 . 879 * * 3 . 667 † ( 1 . 317 ) ( 2 . 005 ) ( 2 . 000 ) Collaboration (cid:1) science distance squared (cid:3) 4 . 497 * * (cid:3) 5 . 433 * * (cid:3) 4 . 317 * ( 1 . 336 ) ( 2 . 046 ) ( 1 . 995 ) Constant 6 . 063 * * 3 . 814 * * 6 . 587 * * ( 0 . 854 ) ( 0 . 761 ) ( 0 . 772 ) Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Chi - square 545 . 6 476 . 4 237 . 9 Log - likelihood (cid:3) 4 , 297 . 1 (cid:3) 2 , 734 . 2 (cid:3) 1 , 430 . 2 Observations 5 , 010 3 , 510 1 , 500 a Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses . † p (cid:4) . 10 * p (cid:4) . 05 * * p (cid:4) . 01 2013 515 Kotha , George , and Srikanth coordinate their activities ( Grant , 1996 ; Kogut & Zander , 1992 , 1996 ; Puranam et al . , 2012 ) . These approaches articulate a view of organizations as coordination systems , as opposed to the traditional view of organizations as incentive systems ( Holm - strom & Milgrom , 1994 ; Williamson , 1991 ) . We ex - plicitly adopted a coordination lens to study the joint production problem , specifically by focusing on the variation in the level of mutual knowledge in an inventor team , holding other factors constant . We found support for our arguments that antici - pated coordination costs help explain licensing patterns of university technology . The main effect of prior collaboration experience on licensing was not significant ; instead , prior col - laborative experience became pertinent only as a moderator of science distance . We found that low - experience teams perform much more poorly at high science distance that is due to lack of mutual knowledge and its attendant coordination costs . Joint work experience is likely to reduce coordina - tion costs under all conditions ; however , our find - ing suggests that in the invention commercializa - tion process , such efficiencies gain importance only under some conditions . Specifically , within - team coordination costs become important only when the cost of coordination is expected to be large relative to the expected value of an invention . Further , theoretically , we differentiate firm - team coordination costs from within - team coordination costs and argue that these costs are respectively mitigated by different kinds of experience—that is , licensing experience and collaboration experience , respectively . Though we do not empirically distin - guish between these two kinds of coordination costs , our moderation results strongly suggest that these different costs do drive the invention com - mercialization process . It is intuitive that prior joint working experience is helpful in collaboration efforts by specialists from multiple domains . Specifically , we contribute to the literature on the impact of prior experience on coordination in specialist teams in two ways . First , prior research on joint work has typically used dichotomous measures for knowledge dis - tance , conceptualizing distance as within - domain or across - domains . By measuring knowledge dis - tance as a continuous variable , we contribute to understanding how prior experience likely impacts coordination costs depending on variation in the level of mutual knowledge available in a team . It is interesting to note that though levels of mutual knowledge likely vary monotonically with knowl - edge distance , prior experience that bridges this mutual knowledge gap has a nonmonotonic impact on the likelihood of commercialization . Second , studies have typically measured prior collaboration experience by intensity of joint work , using metrics such as the amount of time partners teams have worked together ( e . g . , Latour , 1986 ; Vural et al . , 2013 ) . However , intensity in addition to mutual knowledge creation can capture other effects , such as socialization . This confound prevents pinpoint - ing whether observed effects are indeed a function of generating mutual knowledge . For instance , in our data , though collaboration intensity has a pos - itive main effect on licensing odds , the interactions with science distance are not significant . This find - ing would be in line with our theory if collabora - tion intensity were actually capturing socialization effects rather than mutual knowledge effects . In contrast , we argue that the density or the closure of prior experience ( i . e . , the proportion of team mem - bers that have worked together before ) is also an important consideration in reducing coordination costs . This is a more accurate measure of the exis - tence of mutual knowledge , especially in large in - novative teams , which are becoming more com - mon . We show that the density of prior experience has an impact on coordination costs ( and the like - lihood of forming technology commercialization relationships ) even after the intensity of prior ex - perience is controlled for . Our findings reinforce the crucial role played by mutual knowledge and coordination costs in organ - izational design and joint action . Future extensions of this study could take a more dynamic approach to the distances between science fields and con - sider how incentives and coordination costs jointly and independently influence outcomes of team ac - tion . Nevertheless , this is among the first large - scale longitudinal settings for a test of coordination when mutual knowledge is low in joint team pro - duction of inventions . The Commercialization of Scientific Discoveries Our study proffers evidence for the coordination costs perspective in technology commercialization . In so doing , this study speaks to the heart of com - mercialization of scientific discoveries and to the core challenges in integrating knowledge from dis - parate technical niches . The trend toward team production of scientific discoveries ( Paruchuri , 2010 ; Wuchty et al . , 2007 ) and the shift toward interdisciplinary science that recombines distant 516 April Academy of Management Journal rather than insular domains push forward the fron - tiers of human knowledge ( Basalla , 1988 ; George et al . , 2008 ) . In that context , our empirical finding of licensing likelihood at moderate science distance presents an interesting pattern . Figures 2 and 3 show that at moderate science distance , teams with a high level of collaboration experience do not per - form better than teams with moderate experience . Though average experience seems to be beneficial when compared to low experience , the magnitude of the impact of experience seems to be lower than at the low or high ends of science distance . It is likely that moderate - distance inventions occupy a “sweet spot” in the commercialization process— they tend to be more valuable than inventions re - sulting from adjacent or very distant combinations , and potential licensee firms are likely to recognize their value and partner with these inventions’ aca - demic inventors for commercialization . Therefore , potential licensees may be more willing to license such inventions and partner with teams that have some ( rather than low ) experience . Future research should explore these processes further . However , it is interesting to note that prior licensing experience is valued highly by potential licensee firms even at moderate science distance , and TTOs have higher success licensing inventions by teams with high prior licensing experience . An explanation complementary to our coordina - tion costs logic is that inventor teams with high licensing experience are working in more applied areas that are more readily commercialized , and teams with prior collaboration experience may be working on more incremental improvements to their prior work that could also have commercial applications . We attempted to control for these ef - fects . First , we controlled for the academic publi - cation record of inventors ; presumably , more aca - demic publications point to more basic research . Second , in the patented subsample , we controlled for the relative weight of academic citations to other ( patent ) citations . Arguably , the more aca - demic work cited by a patent , the more basic it is ; and the more applied work cited by the patent , the more incremental the invention . Our results for our coordination cost variables were unchanged in these robustness tests . Future work should more carefully delineate the impact of these different mechanisms . The findings also add to the substantial reposi - tory of empirical work on the value of patents . The citations that a patent receives have been used as a proxy for the quality of the patent . In our study , the results suggest that the likelihood of licensing in - creases by 2 percent with every additional patent citation . The innovation literature has predomi - nantly relied on patents as an indicator to explain both the process of creating knowledge and the performance of firms , which has drawn some crit - icism as scholars have questioned the value of pat - ents , given the explosion of patenting activity by firms ( Jaffe & Lerner , 2004 ) . Furthermore , others have questioned the link between empirical mea - sures and the reality of the patenting process , wherein some critical variables such as citations to prior art are frequently added by patent examiners ; this suggests that either inventors may have not used the prior art cited or may have been unaware of it ( e . g . , Alcácer & Gittelman , 2004 ) . There is a paucity of empirical work that examines commer - cialization beyond patenting . In this study , we include all inventions disclosed at a university that could potentially be licensed . Of the 3 , 776 disclosures , only 23 percent were pat - ented . Of the 2 , 902 disclosures that were not pat - ented , 416 were licensed . The number of licenses from nonpatented inventions is 1 . 23 times greater than the number of licenses from patented inven - tions . This suggests that it is important to go beyond patenting to understand discovery and commercialization processes . For example , Shane ( 2002 ) found that nearly 60 percent of inventions at MIT were patented , out of which 52 percent were licensed . In that study and most others in this lit - erature , inventions that could be licensed but were not patented are ignored . By including all inventions whether patented or not , we provide the first large - sample investigation of licensing of non - patented inventions . Our research also has implications for more tra - ditional licensing of technology between firms and , more broadly , for interorganizational technol - ogy transfer or development . In the past decade , an increasing number of studies on technology - sourcing relationships , including buyer - supplier relationships ( Becker & Zirpoli , 2011 ; Srikanth & Puranam , 2011 ) , technology alliances , joint ven - tures ( Gulati & Singh , 2009 ; Hoetker & Mellewigt , 2009 ) , and acquisition integration – acquisition per - formance ( Ahuja & Katila , 2001 ; Makri et al . , 2010 ; Puranam & Srikanth , 2007 ) have begun to empha - size the role of knowledge integration in the suc - cess of interorganizational relationships . We ex - tend this coordination costs logic to the formation of technology - licensing relationships characterized 2013 517 Kotha , George , and Srikanth by need for close joint work between the licensee and licensor . Our setting is particularly interesting because we observe the formation of technology licensing rela - tionships where the traditional make - or - buy con - siderations do not apply . The university does not commercialize its own inventions . Therefore , any inventions that are not licensed essentially have zero net present value , which provides an oppor - tunity to observe the role of coordination costs in the formation of a licensing relationship . We draw from theories of experience , especially theories of learning by doing at the individual and group lev - els of analysis , to inform our understanding of the influence of coordination problems on the forma - tion of interorganizational licensing relationships . Considering the role of coordination costs in tech - nology commercialization relationships is an inter - esting extension to prior research on role of coor - dination costs in make - or - buy decisions ( Hoetker , 2005 ; Monteverde , 1995 ) . The literature on open innovation suggests that firms should take advantage of innovations pro - duced by specialists outside their boundaries ( Chesborough , Vanhaverbeke , & West , 2006 ) . A sig - nificant and growing portion of these licenses are from universities and scientific research laborato - ries ( Mowery & Rosenberg , 1998 ) , where the respec - tive partners have complementary capabilities : basic research and commercialization of innova - tions . Our study suggests that the licensing of in - terdisciplinary inventions could involve signifi - cant coordination costs that may not occur in licensing specialized inventions . Since managing these coordination costs is likely to hold the key to commercial success , firms should keep in mind such costs when making decisions regarding the external procurement versus internal development of innovations . Incentives and Coordination In this study , we focused on the anticipated co - ordination cost as an explanation of why some inventions are licensed and others are not . Presum - ably incentives offered to license intra - and inter - disciplinary inventions could be heterogeneous . Whereas a wealth of theoretical work focuses on the optimal contract structure between licensee and licensor , there is little empirical work on this topic . Future work could consider the variations in incentive contracts with differences in types of in - ventions and how these contracts change with the experience of licensee and licensor capabilities . Such research efforts would throw light on the role of incentive structure on successful commercializa - tion of a licensed invention as a product or service . Future research could also be enriched by exam - ining the role of a central coordinating agent in a team . It is plausible that , in lieu of dyadic ties between inventors working across distant scientific domains , one central coordinating agent , who has worked with all the inventors on a team and can interpret results of the work of all members , may be just as effective . Because this coordinating team member will expend more effort in orchestrating the actions of others , whether the central coordina - tor should be rewarded with a higher share of the income is an important question . More fundamen - tally , does the bearer of the coordination cost also commensurately benefit from its success ? The lim - ited empirical evidence on incentive sharing is seen in the literature on entrepreneurs distributing equity to their helpers . A substantial majority of founders of nascent ventures tend to share incen - tives equally with their helpers ( Ruef , 2009 ) , whereas some entrepreneurs with specific human capital are able to deviate away from the equal distribution of incentives ( Kotha & George , 2012 ) . Consequently , the effects of specific and general human capital of the inventors on incentive distri - bution and its implications for team performance become interesting and economically meaningful questions for future research . Opportunity Recognition in Entrepreneurship The central debate in the literature on entrepre - neurship concerns the nature of opportunities ( Al - varez & Barney , 2010 ; Dimov , 2011 ) . Some scholars have taken the view that opportunities for bringing new products and services to market are objective and that entrepreneurs identify these opportunities drawing on their prior experience ( Shane , 2012 ) . Other scholars have viewed entrepreneurs as con - structing opportunities where it is not possible to specify an opportunity ex ante unless it has been enacted ( Venkataraman , Sarasvathy , Dew , & For - ster , 2012 ) . Our study considers inventions as po - tential opportunities that might be commercialized and that vary in value on the basis of science dis - tance and anticipated coordination costs . We find support for the likelihood that moderately distant inventions have a higher probability of being suc - cessfully licensed . These results are consistent with the treatment of opportunities as objective and 518 April Academy of Management Journal the view that inventor experience improves the odds of success , which is consistent with an oppor - tunity - individual nexus view of entrepreneurship ( Shane , 2012 ) . By starting with all inventions that could potentially be licensed , we avoided the fal - lacy of defining opportunities on the basis of their successful outcome . On the issue of whether oppor - tunities objective or subjective , we proffer evidence to support the view that the value of opportunities , on average , may be objectively assessed by the sci - entific distance between the inventors in a team . Individual factors further improve the likelihood of licensing in distant domains , in keeping with the notion of opportunities being objective , as is con - sistent with the literature’s treatment of individual experience effects in entrepreneurship . TTO Role and Managerial Implications We argued that the variation in the level of mu - tual knowledge of inventors in a team influences the perceived value of a technology and its antici - pated coordination cost , thereby influencing which inventions gets licensed . The central actors in our setting are inventors , TTOs , and licensing firms . TTOs are tasked with protecting and licensing in - ventions . It is TTOs that communicate with poten - tial licensee firms , negotiate and monitor contracts , and protect the inventions assigned to them against infringements . Given the importance of TTOs , it is not surprising that they are able to license more inventions in domains in which they have high level of capabilities—that is , have handled a higher number of inventions . We found that TTO exper - tise is positively and significantly related to the hazard of licensing an invention . It would be inter - esting to consider the joint variation in TTO capa - bilities and mutual knowledge of inventors as fur - ther steps in future studies . This study also holds implications for managing technology transfer organizations , especially in a university setting . From initial interviews , we found that TTO intellectual property managers and licensing managers realize how helpful and avail - able specific inventors have been in prior deals . TTO managers use this information to assuage concerns from potential licensee firms regarding knowledge transfer and industry engagement issues—the effects of prior licensing experience un - derscore the importance of this strategy . The added implication is that TTO managers should consider the mutual knowledge in teams and how comfort - able inventors are as a team , especially if they are from different scientific domains . The findings re - veal that prior collaboration experience makes a substantive difference to inventions combining highly proximate and distant domains—highlight - ing that the “chemistry” between inventors and their ability to work together in commercialization is especially important . Limitations This study is not without its limitations . First , we relied on a single institution for data . There may be a risk of idiosyncratic institutional practices that influence our results . However , a single institution naturally controls for between - institution differ - ences that can confound results , especially with regard to coordination costs that arise from differ - ences in administrative bureaucracies . Further - more , we follow the tradition of prior studies that have argued that with the advent of technology transfer associations and journals , best practices are widely spread ( Clarysse et al . , 2005 ; Nerkar & Shane , 2007 ; Shane , 2000 ; Siegel et al . , 2003 ) . An - other issue that stems from our setting is that the relationship between academic inventors and li - censee firms is mediated by universities’ TTOs , organizations dedicated to pursuing commercial - ization opportunities stemming from academic set - tings . Findings from this context may not be di - rectly applicable to commercialization of R & D from corporate labs . However , the rise of contract re - search organizations and the increasing establish - ment of units dedicated to licensing technologies arising from corporate labs that a firm chooses not to commercialize itself may be appropriate avenues for generalizing the insights from this study . Second , we used a time - invariant measure of sci - ence distance , measuring it at the end of our sample period in 2006 . Since sciences are growing closer , we are more likely to be understating , rather than overstating , science distance . If there is any bias , it is more likely to suggest that sciences are closer than they actually were at the time of the invention . Since our moderation hypotheses specify different effects at high science distance , this bias should work against our finding any results . Finally , sci - entists may elect to pursue projects taking into ac - count their likelihood of commercialization , and plausibly , our study may suffer from an endogene - ity problem . Theoretically , whereas endogeneity can confound the interpretation of main effects , it is hard to think of a compelling story that explains the moderator effects . It is possible that only inven - 2013 519 Kotha , George , and Srikanth tors who believe their coordination costs are low engage in inventions combining distant sciences . If this were the case , then we should not find evi - dence for the moderation by prior collaboration experience . The fact that we still find significant results suggests that ours is a more conservative test for the impact of coordination costs on licensing . Conclusion This study adds to the literatures on coordination of experts from distant domains to commercialize new inventions . We capture disclosure and licens - ing data over a 26 - year - long window that starts with the uniform change in legislation ( Bayh Dole Act ) for all US universities . Our sample includes both patented and nonpatented inventions , and our estimation is robust for single and multiple licens - ing events . We find support for our predictions that prior licensing and collaboration experience in - creases the hazard of licensing an invention . The pattern of our results suggests a nuanced mecha - nism of how prior collaboration within a team in - fluences intrateam coordination costs and the haz - ard of licensing an invention . Specifically , we find that prior collaboration experience increases the hazard of licensing more for inventions that com - bine very proximate or very distant sciences than it does for inventions that combine moderately dis - tant sciences . In doing so , this study expands empirical investigation to the practice of commer - cialization of innovation and to theories of coordi - nation and organizational design . REFERENCES Ahuja , G . , & Katila , R . 2001 . Technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of acquiring firms : A longitudinal study . Strategic Management Jour - nal , 22 : 197 – 220 . Ahuja , G . , & Lampert , C . M . 2001 . Entrepreneurship in the large corporation : A longitudinal study of how established firms create breakthrough inventions . Strategic Management Journal , 22 : 521 – 543 . Alcácer , M . , & Gittelman , M . 2004 . Patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows : The influence of exam - iner citations . Review of Economics and Statistics , 88 : 774 – 779 . Alvarez , S . , & Barney , J . 2010 . Entrepreneurship and epistemology : The philosophical underpinnings of the study of entrepreneurial opportunities . In A . P . Brief & J . P . Walsh ( Eds . ) , Academy of Management annals , vol . 4 : 557 – 583 . Essex , UK : Routledge . Amabile , T . M . 1988 . A model of creativity and innova - tion in organizations . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cum - mings ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior , vol . 10 . Greenwich , CT : JAI . Basalla , G . 1988 . The evolution of technology . Cam - bridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Bayus , B . L . , & Agarwal , R . 2007 . The role of pre - entry experience , entry timing , and product technology strategies in explaining firm survival . Management Science , 53 : 1887 – 1902 . Becker , M . C . , & Zirpoli , F . 2011 . What happens when you outsource too much ? MIT Sloan Management Review , 52 ( 2 ) : 59 – 67 . Camerer , C . 2003 . Behavioral game theory : Experi - ments in strategic interaction . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Chesborough , H . , Vanhaverbeke , W . , & West , J . 2006 . Open innovation : Researching a new paradigm . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Clarysse , B . , Wright , M . , Lockett , A . , Van de Velde , E . , & Vohora , A . 2005 . Spinning out new ventures : A ty - pology of incubation strategies from European re - search institutions . Journal of Business Venturing , 20 : 183 – 216 . Cleves , M . , Gould , W . , Gutierrez , R . , & Marchenko , Y . 2010 . An introduction to survival analysis using Stata . College Station , TX : Stata . Cohen , W . M . , & Levinthal , D . A . 1990 . Absorptive - ca - pacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 : 128 – 152 . Cronin , M . A . , & Weingart , L . R . 2007 . Representation gaps , information processing and conflict in func - tionally diverse terms . Academy of Management Review , 32 : 761 – 773 . Cummings , J . N . , & Kiesler , S . 2005 . Collaborative re - search across disciplinary and organizational bound - aries . Social Studies of Science , 35 : 703 – 722 . Dechenaux , E . , Thursby , M . C . , & Thursby , J . G . 2009 . Shirking , sharing risk , and shelving : The role of uni - versity license contracts . International Journal of Industrial Organization , 27 : 80 – 91 . Dimov , D . 2011 . Grappling with the unbearable elusive - ness of entrepreneurial opportunity . Entrepreneur - ship : Theory and Practice , 35 : 57 – 81 . Dougherty , D . 1992 . Interpretive barriers to successful product innovation in large firms . Organization Sci - ence , 3 : 179 – 203 . Elfenbein , D . W . 2007 . Publications , patents and the mar - ket for university inventions . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 63 : 688 – 715 . 520 April Academy of Management Journal Faems , D . , Janssens , M . , Madhok , A . , & Van Looy , B . 2008 . Toward an integrative perspective on alliance governance : Connecting contract design , contract ap - plication , and trust dynamics . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 51 : 1053 – 1078 . Fleming , L . 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technolog - ical search . Management Science , 47 : 117 – 132 . Fleming , L . 2004 . Perfecting cross - pollination . Harvard Business Review , 82 ( 9 ) : 22 – 24 . Fleming , L . 2007 . Breakthroughs and the “long tail” of innovation . MIT Sloan Management Review , 49 ( 1 ) : 69 – 74 . Fleming , L . , & Sorenson , O . 2001 . Technology as a com - plex adaptive system : Evidence from patent data . Research Policy , 30 : 1019 – 1039 . Fleming , L . , & Sorenson , O . 2004 . Science as a map in technological search . Strategic Management Jour - nal , 25 : 909 – 928 . Foster , R . 1986 . Innovation : The attackers advantage . New York : Summit . George , G . 2005 . Learning to be capable : Patenting and li - censing at the Wisconsin Alumni Research Founda - tion 1925 – 2002 . Industrial and Corporate Change , 14 : 119 – 151 . George , G . , Kotha , R . , & Zheng , Y . 2008 . Entry into insu - lar domains : A longitudinal study of knowledge structuration and innovation in biotechnology firms . Journal of Management Studies , 45 : 1448 – 1474 . George , G . , Zahra , S . , & Wood , D . 2002 . The effects of business - university alliances on innovative output and financial performance : A study of publicly traded biotechnology companies . Journal of Busi - ness Venturing , 17 : 577 – 609 . Grant , R . M . 1996 . Toward a knowledge - based theory of the firm . Strategic Management Journal , 17 : 109 – 122 . Guimerà , R . , Uzzi , B . , Spiro , J . , & Nunes Amaral , L . A . 2005 . Team assembly mechanisms determine collab - oration network structure and team performance . Science , 308 : 697 – 702 . Gulati , R . , Lavie , D . , & Singh , H . 2009 . The nature of partnering experience and the gains from alliances . Strategic Management Journal , 30 : 1213 – 1233 . Gulati , R . , Lawrence , P . , & Puranam , P . 2005 . Adaptation in vertical relationships : Beyond incentive conflict . Strategic Management Journal , 26 : 415 – 440 . Heath , C . , & Staudenmayer , N . 2000 . Coordination ne - glect : How lay theories of organizing complicate co - ordination in organizations . In R . I . Sutton & B . M . Staw ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior , vol . 22 : 153 – 191 . Greenwich , CT : JAI . Henderson , R . , & Cockburn , I . 1996 . Scale , scope and spillovers : The determinants of research productiv - ity in drug discovery . RAND Journal of Economics , 27 : 32 – 59 . Hoang , H . , & Rothaermel , F . 2005 . The effect of general and partner - specific alliance experience on joint R & D project performance . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 48 : 332 – 345 . Hoetker , G . 2005 . How much you know vs . how well I know you : Selecting a supplier for a technically in - novative component . Strategic Management Jour - nal , 26 : 75 – 96 . Hoetker , G . , & Mellewigt , T . 2009 . Choice and perfor - mance of governance mechanisms : Matching alli - ance governance to asset type . Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 30 : 1025 – 1044 . Holmstrom , B . & Milgrom , P . 1994 . The firm as an incen - tive system . American Economic Review , 84 : 972 – 991 . Huber , G . P . , & Lewis , K . 2010 . Cross - understanding : Implications for group cognition and performance . Academy of Management Review , 35 : 6 – 26 . Jaffe , A . , & Lerner , J . 2004 . Innovation and its discon - tents : How our broken patent system is endanger - ing innovation and its progress , and what to do about it . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Jain , S . , & George , G . 2007 . Technology transfer offices as institutional entrepreneurs : The case of Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and human embryonic stem cells . Industrial and Corporate Change , 16 : 535 – 567 . Jain , S . , George , G . , & Maltarich , M . 2009 . Academics or entrepreneurs ? Investigating role identity modifica - tion of university scientists involved in commercial - ization activity . Research Policy , 38 : 922 – 935 . Jensen , R . , & Thursby , M . 2001 . Proofs and prototypes for sale : The licensing of university inventions . Ameri - can Economic Review , 91 : 240 – 259 . Jones , B . F . 2009 . The burden of knowledge and the “death of the renaissance man” : Is innovation getting harder ? Review of Economic Studies , 76 : 283 – 317 . Kaplan , S . , Murray , F . , & Henderson , R . 2003 . Disconti - nuities and senior management : Assessing the role of recognition in pharmaceutical firm response to bio - technology . Industrial and Corporate Change , 12 : 185 – 233 . Kapoor , R . , & Lim , K . 2007 . The impact of acquisitions on the productivity of inventors at semiconductor 2013 521 Kotha , George , and Srikanth firms : A synthesis of knowledge - based and incen - tive - based perspectives . Academy of Management Journal , 50 : 1133 – 1155 . Katila , R . , & Ahuja , G . 2002 . Something old , something new : A longitudinal study of search behavior and new product introduction . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 45 : 1183 – 1194 . Kleinbaum , D . , & Klein , M . 2012 . Survival analysis a self learning text . New York : Springer Science and Media . Klevorick , A . K . , Levin , R . C . , Nelson , R . R . , & Winter , S . G . 1995 . On the sources and significance of inter - industry differences in technological opportunities . Research Policy , 24 : 185 – 205 . Klimoski , R . , & Mohammed , S . 1994 . Team mental mod - el : Construct or metaphor ? Journal of Management , 20 : 403 – 437 . Knez , M . , & Camerer , C . 1994 . Creating expectational assets in the laboratory : Coordination in “weakest - link” games . Strategic Management Journal , 15 : 101 – 119 . Knorr - Cetina , K . 1999 . Epistemic cultures : How the sci - ences make knowledge . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Kogut , B . , & Zander , U . 1992 . Knowledge of the firm , combinative capabilities , and the replication of tech - nology . Organization Science , 3 : 383 – 397 . Kogut , B . , & Zander , U . 1996 . What firms do ? Coordina - tion , identity and learning . Organization Science , 7 : 502 – 518 . Kotha , R . , & George , G . 2012 . Friends , family , or fools : Entrepreneur experience and its implications for equity distribution and resource mobilization . Jour - nal of Business Venturing , 27 : 525 – 543 . Kotha , R . , Zheng , Y . , & George , G . 2011 . Entry into new niches : The effects of firm age and the expansion of technological capabilities on innovative output and impact . Strategic Management Journal , 32 : 1011 – 1024 . Lane , P . J . , & Lubatkin , M . H . 1998 . Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational learning . Strategic Management Journal , 19 : 461 – 477 . Latour , B . 1986 . Laboratory life : The construction of scientific facts . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Lawrence , P . R . , & Lorsch , J . W . 1967 . Organization and environment : Managing differentiation and inte - gration . Boston : Harvard University Press . Lewis , K . , Belliveau , M . , Herndon , B . , & Keller , J . 2007 . Group cognition , membership change , and perfor - mance : Investigating the benefits and detriments of collective knowledge . Organization Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 103 : 159 – 178 . Lewis , K . , Lange , D . , & Gillis , L . 2005 . Transactive mem - ory systems , learning , and learning transfer . Organi - zation Science , 16 : 581 . Leydesdorff , L . , & Rafols , I . 2009 . A global map of science based on the ISI subject categories . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 60 : 348 – 362 . Liang , D . W . , Moreland , R . , & Argote , L . 1995 . Group versus individual training and group performance : The mediating role of transactive memory . Person - ality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 21 : 384 – 393 . Lockett , A . , Siegel , D . , Wright , M . , & Ensley , M . 2005 . The creation of university spin - off firms at public re - search institutions : Managerial and policy implica - tions . Research Policy , 34 : 981 – 993 . Makri , M . , Hitt , M . A , Lane , P . J . 2010 . Complementary technologies , knowledge relatedness , and invention outcomes in high technology mergers and acquisi - tions . Strategic Management Journal , 31 : 602 – 628 . March , J . G . & Simon , H . A . 1958 . Organizations . New York : Wiley . Mathieu , J . E . , Heffner , T . S . , Goodwin , G . F . , Salas , E . , & Cannon - Bowers , J . A . 2000 . The influence of shared mental models on team process and performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 85 : 273 – 283 . Mohammed , S . , & Dumville , B . C . 2001 . Team mental models in a team knowledge framework : Expanding theory and measurement across disciplinary bound - aries . Journal of Organization Behavior , 22 : 89 – 106 . Monteverde , K . 1995 . Technical dialog as an incentive for vertical integration in the semi - conductor indus - try . Management Science , 41 : 1624 – 1638 . Mowery , D . C . , Nelson , R . R . , Sampat , B . N . , & Ziedonis , A . A . 2004 . Ivory tower and industrial innovation : University - industry technology transfer before and after the Bayh - Dole Act . Palo Alto , CA : Stan - ford University Press . Mowery , D . , & Rosenberg , N . 1998 . Paths to innovation . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Nerkar , A . , & Shane , S . 2007 . Determinants of invention commercialization : An empirical examination of ac - ademically sourced inventions . Strategic Manage - ment Journal 28 : 1155 – 1166 . Owen - Smith , J . , & Powell , W . 2003 . The expanding role of university patenting in the life - sciences : Assess - 522 April Academy of Management Journal ing the importance of experience and connectivity . Research Policy , 32 : 1695 – 1711 . Paruchuri , S . 2010 . Intraorganizational networks , interor - ganizational networks , and the impact of central in - ventors : A longitudinal study of pharmaceutical firms . Organization Science , 21 : 63 – 80 . Phelps , C . C . 2010 . A longitudinal study of the influence of alliance network structure and composition on firm exploratory innovation . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 53 : 890 – 913 . Postrel , S . 2009 . Multitasking teams with variable com - plementarity : Challenges for capability management . Academy of Management Review , 34 : 273 – 296 . Puranam , P . , Raveendran , M . , & Knudsen , T . 2012 . Orga - nization design : The epistemic interdependence per - spective . Academy of Management Review , 37 : 419 – 440 . Puranam , P . , & Srikanth , K . 2007 . What they know vs . what they do : How acquirers leverage technology acquisitions . Strategic Management Journal , 28 : 805 – 825 . Rafols , I . , Porter , A . L . , & Leydesdorff , L . 2010 . Science overlay maps : A new tool for research policy and library management . Journal of the American Soci - ety for Information Science and Technology , 61 : 1871 – 1887 . Rosenkopf , L . , & Almeida , P . 2003 . Overcoming local search through alliances and mobility . Management Science , 49 : 751 – 766 . Rosenkopf , L . , & Nerkar , A . 2001 . Beyond local search : Boundary spanning , exploration and impact in the optical - disk industry . Strategic Management Jour - nal , 22 : 287 – 306 . Schilling , M . , & Phelps , C . 2007 . Interfirm collaboration networks : The impact of large - scale network struc - ture on firm innovation performance . Management Science , 53 : 1113 – 1126 . Schumpeter , J . A . 1934 . The theory of economic devel - opment . New York : Springer . Shane , S . 2000 . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities . Organization Sci - ence , 11 : 448 – 469 . Shane , S . 2002 . Selling university technology : Patterns from MIT . Management Science , 48 : 122 – 137 . Shane , S . 2012 . Delivering on the promise of entrepre - neurship as a field of research . Academy of Man - agement Review , 37 : 10 – 20 . Siegel , D . , Waldman , D . , Atwater , L . , & Link , A . 2003 . Commercial knowledge transfers from universities to firms : Improving the effectiveness of university - industry collaboration . Journal of High Technology Management Research , 14 : 111 – 133 . Singh , J . , & Fleming , L . 2010 . Lone inventors as sources of breakthroughs : Myth or reality ? Management Sci - ence , 56 : 41 – 56 . Srikanth , K . , & Puranam , P . 2011 . Integrating distributed work : Comparing task design , communication and tacit coordination mechanisms . Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 32 : 849 – 875 . Thursby , J . G . , & Thursby , M . C . 2002 . Who is selling the ivory tower ? Sources of growth in university licens - ing . Management Science , 48 : 90 – 104 . Tzabbar , D . 2009 . When does scientist recruitment affect technology reposition ? Academy of Management Journal , 52 : 873 – 896 . Utterback , J . M . 1994 . Mastering the dynamics of inno - vation . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Van Knippenberg , D . , & Schippers , M . C . 2007 . Work group diversity . In M . I . Posner & M . K . Rothbart ( Eds . ) , Annual review of psychology , vol . 58 : 515 – 541 . Palo Alto , CA : Annual Reviews . Venkataraman , S . , Sarasvathy , S . D . , Dew , N . , & Forster , W . R . 2012 . Reflections on the 2010 AMR decade award : Whither the promise ? Moving forward with entrepreneurship as a science of the artificial . Acad - emy of Management Review , 37 : 21 – 33 . Vural , O . , Dahlander , L . , & George , G . 2013 . Collaborative benefits and coordination costs : Learning and capa - bility development in science . Strategic Entrepre - neurship Journal , 7 : In press . Weitzman , M . L . 1998 . Recombinant growth . Quarterly Journal of Economics , 113 : 331 – 360 . Williamson , O . 1991 . Comparative economic organiza - tion : The analysis of discrete structural alternatives . Administrative Science Quarterly , 36 : 269 – 296 . Wuchty , S . , Jones , B . F . , & Uzzi , B . 2007 . The increasing dominance of teams in production of knowledge . Science , 316 : 1036 – 1039 . Zahra , S . A . , & George , G . 2002 . Absorptive capacity : A review , reconceptualization and extension . Acad - emy of Management Review , 27 : 185 – 203 . Ziedonis , A . A . 2007 . Real options in technology licens - ing . Management Science , 53 : 1618 – 1633 . 2013 523 Kotha , George , and Srikanth Reddi Kotha ( reddikotha @ smu . edu . sg ) is an assistant professor in the Strategy and Organization Group at the Lee Kong Chian School of Business , Singapore Man - agement University . Reddi received his Ph . D . in entre - preneurship from London Business School . He studies organizational structures and processes used by entrepre - neurs and firms to bring new products and services to market . Gerry George ( g . george @ imperial . ac . uk ) is the deputy principal for faculty and programs and professor of in - novation and entrepreneurship at Imperial College Lon - don . Gerry also serves as the director of the Rajiv Gandhi Center at Imperial College London . He received his Ph . D . from Virginia Commonwealth University . His recent work examines strategic and organizational factors , such as business models and organizational design , and their impact on innovation and performance in technology ventures and emerging markets . Kannan Srikanth ( kannan _ srikanth @ isb . edu ) is an assis - tant professor of strategy in the Indian School of Busi - ness . He received his Ph . D . from the London Business School . His research focuses on learning and coordina - tion aspects of organizational adaptation and innovation . 524 April Academy of Management Journal