( 1 ) DNA intercalators and RNA Pol inhibitors induced canonical nucleolar stress manifested by partial dispersion of granular component ( GC ) and segregation of rDNA and fibrillar center ( FC ) components UBF , Treacle , and POLR1A within nucleolar stress caps . ( 2 ) Inhibition of mTOR and PI3K growth pathways induced a metabolic suppression of function accompanied by the decrease in nucleolar normality score , size , and rRNA production , without dramatic re - organization of nucleolar anatomy . ( 3 ) Inhibitors targeting HSP90 and proteasome induced proteotoxicity , resulting in the disruption of protein homeostasis and the accumulation of misfolded and / or undegraded proteins . These effects were accompanied by a decrease in nucleolar normality score , rRNA output , and in some cases formation of protein aggregates ( aggresomes ) inside the nucleolus . ( 4 ) Inhibition of transcriptional CDK activity led to the disruption of interactions between rDNA , RNA Pol I , and GC proteins . This resulted in almost complete nucleolar dissolution , leaving behind an extended bare rDNA scaffold with only a few associated FC proteins remaining . UBF and PolI - recruiting protein Treacle remained associated with the rDNA , while POLR1A and GC dispersed in the nucleoplasm . rRNA production ceased and the nucleolar normality score was greatly reduced . 1 Distinct states of nucleolar stress induced by anti - cancer drugs Tamara A . Potapova 1 * , Jay R . Unruh 1 , Juliana Conkright - Fincham 1 , Charles A . S . Banks 1 , Laurence Florens 1 , David A . Schneider 3 , and Jennifer L . Gerton 1 , 2 1 Stowers Institute for Medical Research Kansas City , MO 64110 . 2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University of Kansas Medical Center , Kansas City , KS 66160 . 3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics , University of Alabama at Birmingham , Birmingham , AL 35294 * Correspondence to tpo @ stowers . org Abstract Ribosome biogenesis is a vital and energy - consuming cellular function occurring primarily in the nucleolus . Cancer cells have an especially high demand for ribosomes to sustain continuous proliferation . This study evaluated the impact of existing anticancer drugs on the nucleolus by screening a library of anticancer compounds for drugs that induce nucleolar stress . For a readout , a novel parameter termed “nucleolar normality score” was developed that measures the ratio of the fibrillar center and granular component proteins in the nucleolus and nucleoplasm . Multiple classes of drugs were found to induce nucleolar stress , including DNA intercalators , inhibitors of mTOR / PI3K , heat shock proteins , proteasome , and cyclin - dependent kinases ( CDKs ) . Each class of drugs induced morphologically and molecularly distinct states of nucleolar stress accompanied by changes in nucleolar biophysical properties . In - depth characterization focused on the nucleolar stress induced by inhibition of transcriptional CDKs , particularly CDK9 , the main CDK that regulates RNA Pol II . Multiple CDK substrates were identified in the nucleolus , including RNA Pol I – recruiting protein Treacle , which was phosphorylated by CDK9 in vitro . These results revealed a concerted regulation of RNA Pol I and Pol II by transcriptional CDKs . Our findings exposed many classes of chemotherapy compounds that are capable of inducing nucleolar stress , and we recommend considering this in anticancer drug development . Keywords : nucleolus , anticancer drugs , ribosomal DNA , UBF , RNA Pol I , CDK9 , TCOF1 / Treacle , NPM1 . Types of nucleolar stresses identified in this study : Introduction The nucleolus is the most prominent nuclear organelle . Its primary function is the biogenesis of ribosomes – a pivotal housekeeping process essential for the translation of all proteins . Ribosome biogenesis is a major metabolic expense in a cell . This biosynthetic program requires transcription and processing of the most abundant cellular RNA – the ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) , and the production of ∼ 80 ribosomal proteins and hundreds of other nucleolar proteins involved in rRNA processing and assembly of ribosomal subunits ( Moss and Stefanovsky 2002 , Granneman and Tollervey 2007 ) . Rapidly proliferating cancer cells have ribosome biogenesis shifted into overdrive , which may be one of their primary metabolic alterations ( Drygin , Rice et al . 2010 ) . Several anticancer drugs targeting ribosome biogenesis pathways have been developed ( Ferreira , Schneekloth et al . 2020 ) , yet anticancer therapies targeting nucleolar function have not been a major focus of new drug development because of the universal role of this pathway in maintaining basic cellular functions . The main objec(cid:415)ve of this study was to iden(cid:415)fy compounds that disrupt normal nucleolar physiology and further explore the new and unconven(cid:415)onal agents that induce nucleolar stress . The nucleolus is a membrane - less organelle that assembles around ribosomal RNA genes ( rDNA ) . rRNA genes in eukaryotic cells are present in hundreds of tandemly arranged repetitive copies that are transcribed by RNA Polymerase I ( Pol I ) ( reviewed in ( Potapova and Gerton 2019 ) . Nucleolar anatomy in animal cells is comprised of three distinct compartments : the fibrillar center ( FC ) , the dense fibrillar component ( DFC ) , and the granular component ( GC ) ( Pederson 2011 ) . FC is the site of transcription that consists of rDNA and its associated transcription machinery such as transcription factor UBF and RNA Pol I . The DFC is the site of pre - rRNA processing distinguished by early RNA processing factors such as fibrillarin . The GC contains proteins involved in late rRNA processing and assembly of pre - ribosomal particles . It is marked by proteins such as nucleolin and nucleophosmin ( NPM1 ) . Changes in nucleolar organization during stress have not been studied extensively , except for the inhibition of RNA Pol I that causes the reorganization of rDNA arrays and associated FC proteins into round nucleoli with peripheral “stress caps” . Biophysical and biochemical events underlying nucleolar reorganization under stress remain poorly understood . Nucleoli in mammalian cells can be highly polymorphic - different in shape , size , and number . It is difficult to find a single parameter that can quantitatively distinguish normal nucleolar anatomy from abnormal . To quantify the impact of anticancer drugs on nucleoli , we developed a novel imaging - based parameter that we termed “the nucleolar normality score” . It is based on measuring nucleolar / nucleoplasmic ratios of GC component nucleolin and FC component UBF . Measuring the normality score allowed us to detect distinct states of nucleolar stress in a screen of more than a thousand chemical compounds developed as anticancer agents . The screen was conducted using a non - cancer - derived cell line RPE1 . This cell line was selected for evaluating the effects of anticancer drugs on normal nucleolar function . The outcome of the screen provided a broad atlas of aberrant nucleolar morphologies and their molecular triggers , where multiple drugs with the same target often produced a similar morphological and functional state . We classify four distinct categories of nucleolar stress : ( 1 ) canonical nucleolar stress with the formation of stress caps caused by DNA intercalators , ( 2 ) metabolic suppression of function caused by PI3K and mTOR inhibitors , ( 3 ) proteotoxicity with or without formation of aggresomes caused by HSP90 and proteasome inhibitors , and ( 4 ) nucleolar dissolution with an extended bare rDNA scaffold caused by CDK inhibitors . An in - depth examination of the nucleolar stress caused by CDK inhibitors uncovered previously unknown regulation of RNA Pol I by cyclin - dependent kinases and suggests the possibility of concerted regulation of Pol I and Pol II by transcriptional CDK activity . Finally , our study highlights the fact that many anticancer drugs can cause unintended effects on the nucleolus that can underly off - target toxicity , which should be considered in the development and use of antineoplastic agents . 2 Results The biological basis for the nucleolar normality score . To establish a robust quantitative method for measuring nucleolar stress , we first investigated the properties of nucleolar components during the inhibition of RNA Pol I . Inhibition of Pol I transcription manifests in acute morphological changes referred to as canonical nucleolar stress . Canonical nucleolar stress is well characterized in the instance of antineoplastic agent Actinomycin D ( dactinomycin ) that stalls Pol I transcription by intercalating into G / C‐rich rDNA . This causes nucleoli to shrink and round up , with the partial dissolution of some GC proteins into the nucleoplasm and the formation of so‐called “stress caps” at the nucleolar periphery . Stress caps consist of segregated rDNA with bound FC proteins ( Shav‐Tal , Blechman et al . 2005 , Mangan , Gailin et al . 2017 ) . In this study , we inhibited Pol I using a small molecule compound CX‐5461 ( Drygin , Lin et al . 2011 ) . This drug has been shown to arrest Pol I at the rDNA promoter , which blocks transcription initiation ( Mars , Tremblay et al . 2020 ) . To quantify the effects of CX‐5461 on nucleoli by live imaging , we used hTERT immortalized human RPE1 cell lines stably expressing GC component nucleolin tagged with eGFP , or FC component UBF tagged with the eGFP . Expression of eGFP‐nucleolin enabled us to visualize the process of nucleolar shrinking and rounding up , and the formation of small circular remnants within the first hour after RNA Pol I inhibitor treatment ( Figure 1A and Video 1 ) . With the first hour after treatment , the average intensity of eGFP‐nucleolin decreased in the nucleoli and increased in the nucleoplasm ( Figure 1A , right panel ) , indicating a higher proportion of total nucleolin dissolved in the nucleoplasm . This resulted in a decrease in the fluorescence intensity ratio of the nucleolar pool relative to the nucleoplasmic pool . In cells expressing eGFP‐UBF , treatment with CX‐5461 induced UBF condensation at the periphery of the nucleolar remnants and the formation of stress caps ( Figure 1B and Video 2 ) . The intensity of eGFP‐UBF‐ increased in these small stress caps , while the intensity in the nucleoplasm did not change ( Figure 1B , right panel ) . For UBF‐GFP , the average fluorescence intensity ratio of the stress caps relative to the nucleoplasmic pool increased . Next , we investigated the mobility of the eGFP‐nucleolin and eGFP‐UBF by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) before and after nucleolar stress induced with CX‐5461 . Nucleolin became more mobile in stressed cells ( the average half‐time recovery T 1 / 2 went down from 4 . 58 + / ‐1 . 88 seconds to 2 . 89 + / ‐0 . 88 seconds Figure 1C ) , consistent with its redistribution to the nucleoplasm . The T 1 / 2 of UBF did not significantly change with stress and stayed on the average of 12‐14 seconds ( Figure 1D ) , indicating that the rDNA‐binding properties of UBF that likely underlie its FRAP behavior were not affected by RNA Pol I inhibition . This is consistent with UBF acting as a stable bookmark of the rDNA during mitosis , when RNA Pol I activity is very low ( Roussel , Andre et al . 1993 , Gebrane‐Younes , Fomproix et al . 1997 ) . This contrasting behavior of nucleolin and UBF after Pol I inhibition provided the basis for the nucleolar stress parameter that we termed the nucleolar normality score . The nucleolar normality score is a ratio of the nucleolar fraction of nucleolin relative to the nucleolar fraction of UBF ( Figure 1E ) . Image processing and calculation of the normality score are explained in detail in Materials and Methods . This parameter is applicable to fixed cells where both proteins are labeled by immunofluorescence . In a normal , unstressed situation the average normality score has a consistent value that is characteristic for a given experimental system . As nucleolin dissolves in the nucleoplasm and UBF becomes segregated , the normality score decreases . The normality score was very robust at detecting the strong nucleolar stress phenotype caused by CX‐5461 , but it was also proven to detect more subtle morphological changes , such as the stress caused by Topoisomerase inhibitor Camptothecin ( Figure 1F ) . This parameter allowed us to detect nucleolar stress phenotypes that are less pronounced and measure the degree of nucleolar perturbations of various origins . 3 Figure 1 Nucleolar normality score as a parameter for measuring nucleolar stress Nucleolin UBF DNA Normality = Nucleolin ( nucleolar / nucleoplasmic intensity ) score UBF ( nucleolar / nucleoplasmic intensity ) Nucleoli Nucleoplasm DMSO CX - 5461 Camptothecin 0 : 00 0 : 30 0 : 15 0 : 45 0 : 59 0 : 00 0 : 30 0 : 15 0 : 45 1 : 00 Untr CX - 5461 0 2 4 6 8 T 1 / 2 , s e c Untr CX - 5461 0 5 10 15 20 25 T 1 / 2 , s e c DMSO CX - 5461 Camptothecin 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 N o r m a li t y sc o r e , no r m . Nucleolin UBF DNA Nucleolin - GFP UBF - GFP CX - 5461 CX - 5461 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 NucleoliNucleoplasm Time , min . N o r m . i n t en s i t y , a . u . 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 N o r m . i n t en s i t y , a . u . Time , min . NucleoliNucleoplasm 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 2 6 10 14 18 22 26 30 34 38 42 Untreated CX - 5461 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 - 3 8 18 28 38 48 58 68 Untreated CX - 5461 N o r m . i n t en s i t y , a . u . N o r m . i n t en s i t y , a . u . Time , sec . Time , sec . A B C D E F FRAP nucleolin - GFP FRAP UBF - GFP * ns * * * * * * * * A . Time - lapse images of eGFP - nucleolin expressing cell treated with 2 . 5 μM Pol I inhibitor CX - 5461 at time 0 are shown . Nucleoli shrink and round up forming small circular remnants . Fluorescence intensity decreases in nucleolar remnants and increases in the nucleoplasm . The complete video sequence is shown in Video 1 . Bar , 10μm . The plot on the right shows the average intensity of eGFP - nucleolin in nucleoli and in the nucleoplasm normalized to the initial intensity at time 0 . The plot is an average of 10 cells , bars denote standard deviation . 4 High ‐ throughput imaging screen for anticancer drugs that induce nucleolar stress . We screened nucleolar normality in cells treated with a chemical library containing 1180 anti‐cancer compounds developed for multiple cancers , some of them FDA‐approved and used clinically . The main goal was to broadly identify and categorize distinct states of nucleolar stress and their molecular triggers . For the screen , normal human hTERT‐ immortalized RPE1 cells were seeded in 384‐well plates and treated with the library compounds at 1 µM and 10 µM for 24 hours . Drug treatment was followed by fixation and labeling with antibodies against UBF and nucleolin ( Figure 2A ) . Forty single‐plane fields containing hundreds of cells were imaged per well . Compounds were called hits if their normality score was more than two standard deviations away from the DMSO ( vehicle ) control average . Of 1180 compounds present in the library , 12 . 9 % were hits . 7 % of the compounds in the library were hits at both 1 and 10 µM , and 5 . 8 % were hits only at 10 µM ( Figure 2B ) . The majority of the hits were validated in a control run ( Sup . Figure 1 ) . The complete list of hits is provided in Supplementary Table 1 . All hits in the screen had normality scores lower than the control , i . e . this parameter only went down , not up , in drug‐treated cells . The number of cells in hit wells was typically lower than in control wells , indicating that the majority of drugs that induced nucleolar stress were cytostatic or cytotoxic ( Figure 2C ) . The screening process did not distinguish whether the cytotoxic effects of the identified hits were a result of inhibiting their intended targets , impacting the nucleolus , or a combined effect . It is important to note that a low normality score is not necessarily a consequence of reduced viability , because many drugs in the screen were cytostatic / cytotoxic without causing nucleolar stress . Rather , it underscores the fact that inhibition of nucleolar biological processes is overall detrimental to viability and proliferation . One of the internal positive controls for nucleolar stress in the screen was the compound BMH‐21 ‐ a well‐ characterized RNA Pol I inhibitor present in the library . BMH‐21 intercalates in the DNA and binds strongly to GC‐rich rDNA , repressing RNA Pol I transcription ( Colis , Peltonen et al . 2014 , Wei , Najmi et al . 2018 ) . BMH‐21 induced a canonical nucleolar stress phenotype with dispersed nucleolin and segregation of UBF into stress caps . Cells treated with BMH‐21 showed a 7 . 7‐fold reduction in the normality score and a 2‐fold reduction in cell number compared to DMSO control ( highlighted in Figure 2C ) . The anticancer compound library contained chemical inhibitors for various targets , mostly enzymes . Grouping hits by drug target showed that inhibitors of mTOR and PI3 kinase had the highest frequency among all hits . Other frequently hit drug targets were HSP90 , Topoisomerases , and cyclin‐dependent kinases ( CDKs ) ( Figure 2D ) . However , the overall representation of targets in the library varied : prioritized cancer targets and highly druggable targets were among the most represented . B . Time‐lapse images of eGFP‐UBF expressing cell treated with 2 . 5 µM CX‐5461 at time 0 are shown . UBF condenses on the periphery of nucleolar remnants forming stress caps of high fluorescence intensity . The complete video sequence is shown in Video 2 . Bar , 10µm . The plot on the right shows the average intensity of eGFP‐UBF in stress caps and in the nucleoplasm normalized to the initial intensity at time 0 . The plot is an average of 10 cells , bars denote standard deviation . C . FRAP analysis of eGFP‐nucleolin in untreated cells and cells treated with 2 . 5 µM CX‐5461 is shown . The plot is an average of normalized fluorescence intensities of ≤10 cells . Bars denote standard deviation . The graph on the right shows corresponding individual T 1 / 2 measurements . Asterisk indicates P < 0 . 05 ( T‐test comparing the drug‐treated group to untreated ) . D . FRAP analysis of eGFP‐UBF in untreated cells and cells treated with 2 . 5 µM CX‐5461 . The plot is an average of normalized fluorescence intensities of ≤10 cells . Bars denote standard deviation . The graph on the right shows corresponding individual T 1 / 2 measurements . T‐test did not detect a significant difference between the two treatments . E . The immunofluorescence image illustrates the nucleolar normality score measurement . RPE1 cells were labeled with antibodies against nucleolin and UBF and counter‐stained with DAPI . Segmentation of nucleolar regions was performed on UBF , and whole nuclei were segmented on DAPI . Nucleoplasm regions are areas within the nuclei without nucleoli . The nucleoplasmic intensity was calculated by subtracting the integrated intensity of nucleoli from the integrated intensity of the whole nuclei . For both nucleolin and UBF , the integrated intensity of the nucleolar regions of each cell was divided by the integrated intensity of the nucleoplasm of that cell , giving the nucleolar / nucleoplasm ratio . Dividing the nucleolar / nucleoplasm ratio of the nucleolin by the nucleolar / nucleoplasm ratio of the UBF provides a nucleolar normality score for each cell . F . Normality score measurements of individual cells treated with DMSO ( vehicle ) , 2 . 5 µM CX‐5461 , or 5 µM Topoisomerase inhibitor Camptothecin , normalized to the average value of DMSO‐treated cells . Asterisks indicate P < 0 . 0001 ( unpaired T‐test comparing drug‐ treated groups to DMSO ) . 5 Figure 2 . Anticancer drug screen for compounds that induce nucleolar stress 1180 83 69 Total 1 and 10µM 10µM only 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 - 8 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 Enrichment P r obab ili t y HSP90 mTOR , PI3K Topoisomerase TOPK DHFR Pim CDK Microtubule Proteasome DNA - PK Src GSK - 3 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 50 100 150 Normality 10µM ( norm . to DMSO ) C e ll c oun t 10 µ M ( % o f D M S O ) BMH - 21 1 and 10µM 10µM only DMSO hTERT RPE1 cells , seeded on 384 - well plates Anti - cancer compound library , 1µM and 10µM Fixation and immuno - fluorescence High - throughput imaging Nucleolar normality score analysis A B C D E 22 13 10 8 6 5 4 4 3 333 33 22222222 46 mTOR , PI3K HSPTopoisomerase CDK Microtubule EGFR Src Bcr - Abl ALK DNA - PK MEK Aurora Kinase HDAC c - Met TOPK DHFR Pim Proteasome GSK - 3 IκB / IKK STAT Raf Other 152 total F A . The diagram illustrates the workflow for the library screen for anticancer compounds that induce nucleolar stress . B . From the total 1180 compounds , 83 were hits at both 1 and 10 µM , and 69 were hits at 10 µM only . The full list of hit compounds with normality scores is provided in Supplementary Table 1 . C . Normality score results from cells treated with 10 µM drug are plotted versus cell count . Both parameters were normalized to the average of the DMSO control ( black points ) . Red points denote hits at 1 and 10 µM , purple points 10 µM only . BMH21 is a Pol I inhibitor present in the library and serves as an internal control . D . Combined 1 and 10 µM hits and 10 µM only hits grouped by the target . E . Enrichment of hit drug targets relative to their presence in the library is plotted versus the probability of random occurrence ( p - value ) . A low p - value indicates that the probability of a target being enriched at random is low . Gray points indicate targets whose enrichment was not significant , colored points with labels denote significantly enriched targets ( p < 0 . 05 ) . F . Validation of selected hits from different target classes in multiple cell lines is shown . For each cell line , normality scores were normalized to their own DMSO controls . All drugs caused significant ( p < 0 . 05 ) reductions in normality scores in all cell lines . 6 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 N o r m a li t y 10 μ M , n o r m . t o D M S O RPE1 BJ5TA CHON - 002 DLD1 HCT116 HSP90 Cdk Proteasome Topo PolI m T O R P I 3 K Since the representation of targets in the library was not equivalent , we calculated the enrichment of targets among hits relative to their presence in the library . The most significantly enriched targets ( p < 0 . 001 ) were HSP90 , mTOR , PI3K , and Topoisomerase inhibitors . Among other significantly enriched targets ( p < 0 . 05 ) were inhibitors of Dihydrofolate reductase ( DFHR ) , proteasome , CDKs , and other kinases ( Figure 2E ) . To ensure that the drug responses were not unique to RPE1 cells , validation was performed on additional cell lines with a panel of selected potent hits from different target classes : HSP90 inhibitors – 17‐AAG , onalespib , BIIB‐21 ; CDK inhibitors – dinaciclib , flavopiridol , LY2857785 ; proteasome inhibitors – carfilzomib and oprozomib ; mTOR inhibitor sapanisertib ; PI3K inhibitor taselicib ; and topoisomerase inhibitors camptothecin and doxorubicin . This panel of drugs was validated in four other cell lines : two hTERT‐immortalized cell lines ‐ BJ5TA skin fibroblasts and CHON‐002 fibroblasts , and two cancer‐derived cell lines ‐ DLD1 colon adenocarcinoma and HCT116 colon carcinoma . In all experimental cell lines , raw nucleolar normality scores before the drug treatments were different . Cancer cell lines had lower starting normality scores than hTERT cell lines ( Sup . Figure 1B - C ) . To compensate for this initial difference , the results of drug treatments from each cell line were normalized to the vehicle control of that cell line . The degree of reduction in nucleolar normality scores varied between cell lines , which could be attributed to differences in baseline normality scores , as well as proteomic and metabolic shifts , alterations in signaling pathways that control ribosome production , and , potentially , variations in intracellular drug levels . Nonetheless , all compounds caused a significant reduction in nucleolar normality scores in all cell lines ( Figure 2F ) . This result ensures that the nucleolar stress induced by these drugs was not specific to a particular cell line . Characterization of nucleolar stress induced by selected inhibitors . Canonical nucleolar stress induced by Pol I inhibitors is linked to reduced rRNA production . We measured the effect of the selected drug panel on rRNA synthesis by incorporation of 5‐ethynyluridine ( 5‐EU ) into nascent RNA ( Jao and Salic 2008 ) . Since ribosomal RNA can account for ~ 80 % of the total cellular RNA ( Palazzo and Lee 2015 ) , the total amount of nascent RNA approximates the synthesis of ribosomal RNA . All drugs in the panel caused a decrease in 5‐EU incorporation , but to varying degrees . The level of reduction was similar within the same classes of drugs based on target , but different between classes ( Figure 3A ) . Correlation analysis with normality scores showed that there was a trend for drugs with lower normality scores to have lower rRNA synthesis , but it was not statistically significant ( Figure 3B ) . Furthermore , nucleolar stress phenotypes were distinct by target ( Sup . Figure 2 ) . This lack of significant correlation implied that the normality score may not be explained by a reduction in rDNA transcription alone . Inhibitors of mTOR and PI3 kinase had the highest representation among all hits in the anticancer compound library . mTOR and PI3K are metabolic pathways that positively regulate ribosome biogenesis on multiple levels including rDNA transcription ( Mayer and Grummt 2006 , Pelletier , Thomas et al . 2018 ) , so the strong ( ~ 60 % ) reduction in 5‐EU incorporation in mTOR inhibitor sapanisertib and PI3K inhibitor taselicib was predictable . The reduction in normality score was likely a consequence of inhibiting upstream activating pathways that stimulate rDNA transcription and ribosome biogenesis . Another major class of drugs that induced low normality scores were inhibitors of topoisomerase II , particularly anthracyclines that intercalate into DNA and act as Topoisomerase poisons ( doxorubicin , epirubicin , idarubicin , daunorubicin , pirarubicin , mitoxantrone , pixantrone ) . All DNA intercalating topoisomerase poison hits caused nucleolar shrinkage , rounding , and the canonical stress caps associated with RNA Pol I inhibition . Notably , actinomycin D and CX‐ 5461 can also poison the action of topoisomerases ( Trask and Muller 1988 , Bruno , Lu et al . 2020 ) . Topoisomerase activity may be needed to resolve topological stress at the rDNA to continue transcription . rDNA transcription may be hypersensitive to DNA intercalators in general ( Andrews , Ray et al . 2021 ) , and for many DNA intercalating drugs the nucleolar stress cap phenotype is well‐characterized ( Ferreira , Schneekloth et al . 2020 ) . From this point on , we further characterized the effects of representative drugs from non‐intercalating , non‐ metabolic classes with less explored nucleolar stress phenotypes : HSP90 inhibitor 17‐AAG ( tanespimycin ) , proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib ( kyprolis ) , and CDK inhibitor flavopiridol ( alvocidib ) . 17‐AAG blocks the ATP‐binding pocket of 7 molecular chaperone HSP90 , leading to the accumulation of misfolded proteins ( Trepel , Mollapour et al . 2010 ) . Carfilzomib inhibits the chymotrypsin‐like activity of the 20S proteasome , blocking the degradation of poly‐ubiquitinated proteins ( Orlowski and Kuhn 2008 ) . Flavopiridol is an ATP‐competitive inhibitor of cyclin‐dependent kinases ( CDKs ) and can be considered a pan‐CDK inhibitor ( Senderowicz 1999 ) . For detailed visualization of nucleolar morphology , we performed fluorescent in situ hybridization with antibody immunolabeling ( immuno‐FISH ) , where ribosomal DNA and nucleolar proteins UBF and nucleolin were labeled simultaneously ( Figure 3C ) . In untreated cells , this labeling delineated the normal nucleolar anatomy : rDNA with bound UBF comprised the fibrillar center of the nucleolus , surrounded by granular component marked by nucleolin . Pol I inhibitor CX‐5461 , our positive control for nucleolar stress , induced classic peripheral stress caps with rDNA wrapped around condensed UBF foci ( high‐resolution images of rDNA and UBF are shown in magnified inserts in figure 3C ) . HSP90 inhibitor 17‐AAG caused mild rDNA and UBF condensation that resembled the formation of stress caps but was less severe . It was recently shown that misfolded proteins can accumulate in the nucleolus upon heat shock ( Azkanaz , Rodriguez Lopez et al . 2019 , Frottin , Schueder et al . 2019 ) . Given the ~ 40 % reduction in rRNA synthesis , this stress phenotype may be brought about partly by reduced Pol I transcription and partly by the accumulation of misfolded proteins inside the nucleolar compartment . The nucleolar stress phenotype induced by proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib was similar to that of 17‐AAG , except that many nucleoli contained a diffuse pool of UBF not associated with the rDNA ( Figure 3C , arrow ) . Proteasome inhibition was previously shown to cause nucleolar accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins , termed aggresomes ( Latonen , Moore et al . 2011 ) . In addition , UBF itself can be ubiquitinated ( Liu , Tu et al . 2007 ) . We speculate that in addition to reduced transcription ( by ~ 50 % ) , this type of stress phenotype may reflect the nucleolar accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins normally targeted for degradation . As with 17‐AAG stress , rRNA production may be directly impaired by abnormal protein accumulation in the nucleolus , or these two factors may be linked indirectly . The effect of CDK inhibitor flavopiridol on the nucleolus was profound and entirely different from all other stress phenotypes . Normally , rDNA and UBF form a compacted structural scaffold of the nucleolus . In CDK inhibitor‐treated cells , this scaffold extended into undulant fibers , while nucleolin fully dispersed in the nucleoplasm . Discernable nucleolar boundaries demarcated by granular component proteins were completely lost , implying that the nucleolar compartment disintegrated , and only the bare scaffold remained ( Figure 3C , last panel ) . We further investigated the effects of flavopiridol on nucleoli by live imaging of RPE1 cell lines stably expressing eGFP‐ nucleolin or eGFP‐UBF . Within 2‐3 hours after flavopiridol addition , EGFP‐nucleolin became dispersed in the nucleoplasm forming many small round droplets within the diffused pool ( Sup . Figure 3A and Video 3 ) . In cells expressing eGFP‐UBF , flavopiridol treatment induced UBF decompaction into dotted strings with some diffusion into the nucleoplasm ( Sup . Figure 3B and Video 4 ) . This effect was not consistent with apoptosis or necrosis , and it was fully reversible within 4 - 6 hours after the inhibitor was washed out ( Sup . Figure 3C and Video 5 ) . Given that flavopiridol caused the most severe reduction in 5‐EU incorporation ( more than 80 % ) we measured the Pol I rDNA occupancy by immunolabeling its catalytic subunit POLR1A . In the DMSO control and all drug treatments except flavopiridol , POLR1A was associated with the rDNA marked by UBF . In flavopiridol‐treated cells , this association was reduced by nearly 70 % ( Figure 3D , E , Sup . Figure 3D ) . The total cellular amount of POLR1A protein did not decrease with any of the drug treatments ( Figure 3F ) , indicating that the loss of POLR1A association with rDNA in flavopiridol was not due to its degradation . These data suggest that inhibiting CDK activity with flavopiridol creates a unique and extreme nucleolar stress state with only the bare scaffold remaining . This stress is associated with very low RNA Pol I transcription and dissassociation of POLR1A from the rDNA . 8 Figure 3 . Characterization of nucleolar stresses in a panel of selected drugs rDNA UBF DNA Nucleolin DNA DMSO CX - 5461 17 - AAG Carfilzomib Flavopiridol 0 . 0 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 5 Average normality score DMSO 17 - AAG BIIB21 BMH - 21 Carfilzomib CX - 5461 Camptothecin Doxo - FlavopiridolLY2857785 Onalespib Oprozomib Sapanisertib Dinaciclib Taselicib rubicin A B D F D M S O 17 - AA G O n a l e s p i b B II B 21 D i n a c i c li b F l a v o p i r i d o l L Y 2857785 C a r f il z o m i b O p r o z o m i b S a p a n i s e r t i b T a s e li c i b C a m p t o t h e c i n D o x o r ub i c i n C X - 5461 B M H - 21 N o 5 E U 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 5 - E U a v e r age f l uo r e sc en c e , a . u . HSP90 Cdk Proteasome Topo PolI m T O R P I 3 K C rDNA UBF E D M S O C X 5461 F l a v o p i r i d o l 17 - AA P O L R 1 A a v e r age i n t en s i t y nu c l eo l u s / nu c l eop l a s m * * * * 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 UBF POLR1A DNA DMSO CX - 5461 Flavopiridol 17 - AAG Carfilzomib UBF POLR1A POLR1A D M S O C X - 5461 F l a v o p i r i d o l 17 - AA G C a r ﬁ l z o m i b 120 40 A . 5 - ethynyluridine ( 5 - EU ) incorporation in RPE1 cells treated with the panel of selected drug hits from the screen . All compounds were added for 10h followed by 4 hours of 0 . 5 mM 5 - EU incorporation . All drugs were at 10 µM concentration except LY2857785 and CX - 5461 were used at 2 . 5 µM , Camptothecin and flavopiridol were used at 5 µM , and Doxorubicin and BMH - 21 at 1 µM . 5 - EU labeled RNA was detected with fluorescent azide and quantified by imaging . Plots represent means with standard deviations of ≤3 large fields of view containing hundreds of cells . Raw fluorescent intensity values were normalized to the average of the DMSO controls . All drug treatments caused a significant reduction in 5 - EU incorporation compared to DMSO ( p < 0 . 05 , unpaired T - tests ) . B . A correlation plot of average nucleolar normality scores versus average 5 - EU fluorescence . Both parameters were normalized to the average of the DMSO controls . The trend for drugs with lower normality scores to have lower 5 - EU incorporation was not significant ( Pearson’s r = 0 . 33 , p = 0 . 23 ) . C . Immuno - FISH images of drug - treated RPE1 cells labeled with human rDNA probe ( green ) , UBF ( red ) , and nucleolin ( magenta ) . Nuclei were counter - stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Bar , 10µm . The duration of 2 . 5 µM CX - 5461 and 10 µM flavopiridol treatments was 5 hours , 10 µM 17 - AAG and 10 µM Carfilzomib 10 hours . Magnified inserts show details of individual nucleoli ( bar , 1µm ) . Note peripheral stress caps in CX - 5461 and unfolded rDNA / UBF in flavopiridol – treated cells . The arrow in the Carfilzomib panel indicates the diffuse pool of UBF not associated with rDNA . 9 5 - E U a v e r age f l uo r e sc en c e , a . u . f i β - actin C a r f il z o m i b Inhibition of transcriptional CDK9 causes disassociation of RNA Pol I from rDNA and disintegration of the granular component of the nucleolus . Our subsequent experiments focused on discerning the mechanism of nucleolar stress induced by CDK inhibitors . The focus on CDK inhibitors was prompted by the severe and unexplained “bare scaffold” phenotype they induced , implying the existence of an unknown mechanism through which CDKs regulate nucleolar structure and function . Furthermore , chemotherapeutic approaches involving CDK inhibitors demonstrated a high rate of clinical failure linked to their difficult - to - explain toxicity ( Whittaker , Mallinger et al . 2017 ) , which may be attributed at least in part to their unrecognized impact on nucleolar organization and ribosome biogenesis . We speculated that the CDK activity was needed for maintaining RNA Pol I transcription . CDKs are serine - threonine kinases that require an activation subunit – a cyclin – to phosphorylate their substrates . The human genome encodes 21 CDKs , some of which have been studied extensively while others remain cryptic . There are well - studied CDKs that drive cell cycle progression ( e . g . , CDK1 , CDK2 , CDK4 , CDK6 ) . Transcriptional CDKs drive the activity of RNA polymerase II ( CDK8 , CDK9 , CDK12 , CDK19 ) . There are also CDKs with poorly understood biological functions ( CDK15 , CDK18 , CDK20 ) ( Malumbres , Harlow et al . 2009 ) . For RNA Pol II transcription , CDK9 is the important kinase that phosphorylates the C - terminal domain ( CTD ) to control transcription initiation , elongation , and termination ( Bacon and D ' Orso 2019 ) . RNA Pol I lacks a CTD and currently there are no known CDK - related mechanisms that control RNA Pol I . Flavopiridol is a pan - CDK inhibitor . To define inhibition of which CDK induces nucleolar stress , we tested three more CDK inhibitors that reportedly have selectivity for the transcriptional CDK9 and were not in our library : AZD4573 ( Barlaam , Casella et al . 2020 , Cidado , Boiko et al . 2020 ) , JSH - 150 ( Wang , Wu et al . 2018 ) and MC180295 ( Zhang , Pandey et al . 2018 ) . In addition , we included the established catalytic inhibitor of RNA Pol II , α - amanitin ( Bushnell , Cramer et al . 2002 , Brueckner and Cramer 2008 ) . Cells treated with AZD4573 , JSH - 150 , and MC180295 showed an extended rDNA / UBF scaffold and dispersed nucleolin analogous to flavopiridol - treated cells ( Figure 4A ) , suggesting that the nucleolar stress was induced by inhibition of CDK9 . Quantification of nucleolar normality scores gave similar values ( 70 - 75 % reduction ) for all three CDK inhibitors ( Figure 4B ) . Importantly , α - amanitin did not produce these effects and only caused a minor reduction in the normality score , indicating that catalytic inhibition of RNA Pol II alone was insufficient to cause the nucleolar stress phenotype observed with pan - CDK and CDK9 - specific inhibitors . Production of nascent RNA , most of which is rRNA , was decreased by 70 - 80 % in all CDK inhibitors as measured by incorporation of 5 - EU ( Figure 4C ) . The RNA Pol II inhibitor α - amanitin induced a small ( ~ 10 % ) but significant decrease in 5 - EU incorporation , which was expected because 5 - EU is also incorporated in RNA Pol II transcripts . To examine the amount of rRNA by another method , we measured the total amount of rRNA by Y10b ( anti - rRNA ) antibody fluorescence . Y10b antibody labeling showed 45 - 55 % decrease in total rRNA that was comparable in all CDK inhibitors . α - Amanitin treatment did not cause a significant decrease in total rRNA ( Figure 4D ) . These data showed that CDK inhibition caused a dramatic reduction of RNA Pol I function . Next , we measured RNA Pol I occupancy on the rDNA by immunofluorescence labeling of POLR1A and rDNA marker UBF . In flavopiridol - treated cells , POLR1A association with rDNA was reduced by ~ 70 % , and in CDK9 inhibitors it was reduced by ~ 60 % ( Figure 4E , F ) . The effect of α - amanitin on the association of POLR1A with rDNA was much smaller ( 20 % ) . These data suggest that CDK inhibition reduces rRNA production by causing the disassociation of RNA Pol I from the rDNA , and not through a secondary effect of inhibition of RNA Pol II . Our data further suggest that transcriptional CDK activity , potentially CDK9 , is necessary for RNA Pol I activity and nucleolar integrity . D . Immunofluorescence images of RPE1 cells treated as in C and labeled with antibodies against UBF ( green ) and POLR1A ( red , antibody C - 1 ) . Nuclei were counter - stained with DAPI . Bar , 10µm . Magnified inserts show details of individual nucleoli ( bar , 1µm ) . UBF and POLR1A label the same structures in all treatments except flavopiridol . E . The quantification of POLR1A immunofluorescence from D is plotted . The box plot depicts ratios of POLR1A signal intensity in the nucleolus versus nucleoplasm normalized to the average of DMSO controls . The plots represent the means of 4 - 5 fields of view containing a minimum of 80 - 100 cells . Asterisks indicate a significant reduction in nucleolar POLR1A ( P < 0 . 0001 , unpaired T - test flavopiridol vs . DMSO ) . F . Western blot analysis of POLR1A protein levels in RPE1 cells treated with the indicated drugs for 8 hours . Total POLR1A levels were not altered . 10 Figure 4 . Effects of CDK9 inhibitors on nuclear morphology and function 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 A v e r age no r m a li t y sc o r e A v e r age Y 10b f l uo r e sc en c e , a . u . A B D E * D M S O a - A m a n i � n F l a v o p i r i d o l A Z D 4573 J S H - 150 A v e r age 5 - E U f l uo r e sc en c e , a . u . C 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * D M S O F l a v o p i r i d o l A Z D 4573 J S H - 150 a - A m a n i � n A v e r age P O L R 1 A i n t en s i t y nu c l eo l u s / nu c l eop l a s m 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 F * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * M C 180295 Nucleolin UBF DNA DMSO α - Amanitin Flavopiridol AZD4573 JSH - 150 MC180295 POLR1A UBF UBF POLR1A DNA DMSO α - Amanitin Flavopiridol AZD4573 JSH - 150 MC180295 * * * * M C 180295 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 D M S O a - A m a n i � n F l a v o p i r i d o l A Z D 4573 J S H - 150 M C 180295 * * * * D M S O a - A m a n i � n F l a v o p i r i d o l A Z D 4573 J S H - 150 M C 180295 * A . Immunofluorescence images of drug - treated cells labeled with antibodies against nucleolin ( magenta ) and UBF ( green ) are shown . Nuclei were counter - stained with DAPI . Cells were treated with DMSO ( vehicle ) , 5 µg / ml Pol II inhibitor α - Amanitin , 5 µM pan - CDK inhibitor flavopiridol , or 5 µM CDK9 inhibitors AZD4573 , JSH - 150 , and MC180295 for 5 hours . Note that all CDK inhibitor - treated cells have similar phenotypes . Bar , 10µm . B . Normality score measurements of in RPE1 cells treated as in A . Raw normality scores were normalized to the average of DMSO treated cells . Box plots represent means of 4 - 5 fields of view containing many cells . Asterisks : * P < 0 . 05 , * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ( unpaired T - test comparing treatments vs . DMSO ) . C . 5 - EU incorporation in RPE1 cells treated as in A . 5 - EU labeled RNA was detected with fluorescent azide and quantified by imaging . Plots represent means with standard deviations of 5 - 8 large fields of view containing hundreds of cells . Raw fluorescence intensity values were normalized to the average of the DMSO - treated control cells . Asterisks : * P < 0 . 05 , * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ( unpaired T - test comparing treatment vs . DMSO ) . D . Quantification of Y10b ( anti - rRNA ) antibody labeling of RPE1 cells treated as in A . Plots represent means with standard deviations of 3 large fields of view containing hundreds of cells . Raw fluorescent intensity values were normalized to the average of the DMSO control . Asterisks indicate P < 0 . 05 ( unpaired T - test comparing treatments vs . DMSO ) . E . Immunofluorescence images of RPE1 cells treated as in A and labeled with antibodies against UBF ( green ) and POLR1A ( red ) are shown . Nuclei were counter - stained with DAPI . Bar , 10µm . Magnified inserts show details of individual nucleoli ( bar , 1µm ) . F . Quantification of POLR1A immunofluorescence from E is shown . The box plot depicts ratios of POLR1A signal intensity in the nucleolus versus nucleoplasm normalized to the average of DMSO - treated cells . Plots represent means of 4 - 5 fields of view containing many cells . Asterisks : * P < 0 . 05 , * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ( unpaired T - test comparing treatment vs . DMSO ) . 11 t i t i t i t i Multiple nucleolar proteins are phosphorylated by CDK9 , including Treacle , the transcriptional co ‐ activator of Pol I . CDKs phosphorylate a large number of proteins , yet the scope of their targets in the interphase nucleolus is largely unexplored . To search for potential CDK target proteins in the nucleolus , we used mass spectrometry combined with titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment . Nuclear lysates were made from untreated RPE1 cells and cells treated with pan‐CDK inhibitor flavopiridol or CDK9‐specific inhibitor AZD4573 . Tryptic peptides were then prepared from equal amounts of each lysate . 10 % of each peptide sample was used to measure the total protein abundance by MudPIT , and 90 % of each sample was enriched for phosphopeptides followed by Orbitrap‐based mass spectrometry analysis ( Figure 5A ) . The total protein abundance analysis identified 61 enriched and 22 depleted proteins in both drug treatments ( Figure 2B ) . Enrichment and depletion from nuclear extracts could be due to both changes in synthesis / degradation or nuclear import / export rates . Among commonly enriched proteins with the highest fold change was the stress‐induced transcription factor p53 . The tumor suppressor protein p53 has previously been shown to accumulate in flavopiridol‐treated cells by multiple studies ( Shapiro , Koestner et al . 1999 , Alonso , Tamasdan et al . 2003 , Demidenko and Blagosklonny 2004 ) , confirming our quantitative proteomics results . The commonly depleted group of proteins included ribosome biogenesis factors RPF1 , RRP36 , and DDX56 . Nuclear export or degradation of these factors could occur due to nucleolar disassembly caused by CDK inhibition . The complete list of enriched and depleted proteins is provided in Supplementary Table 2 . The subsequent phospho‐proteomics approach was focused on identifying proteins that became dephosphorylated in cells treated with CDK inhibitors using titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment . The number of spectra for phosphorylated peptides recovered from untreated samples was compared to treated samples . Peptides from proteins that were significantly depleted by drug treatments were excluded from this analysis . We detected 148 proteins with peptides that had lower phosphorylation in both treatments ( Figure 5C , Supplementary Table 3 ) . Most of the phosphorylation sites were serines and threonines . Multiple identified phosphosites belonged to POLR2A , the catalytic subunit of RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) . Transcriptional CDKs are recognized for their prominent role in regulating the activity of Pol II by phosphorylating the unique C‐terminal domain ( CTD ) in POLR2A , which is absent in POLR1A ( Burton 2014 , Parua and Fisher 2020 , Barba‐Aliaga , Alepuz et al . 2021 ) . In particular , CDK9 phosphorylates the CTD on multiple residues , controlling transcription initiation , elongation , and recruitment of the splicing machinery ( Eick and Geyer 2013 , Guo , Manteiga et al . 2019 ) . We recovered differentially phosphorylated POLR2A peptides for eight C‐ terminal residues ( Figure 5C , red rings ) , validating this approach for detecting CDK substrates . Out of 148 proteins with lower phosphorylation after treatment with CDK inhibitors , 27 were nucleolar proteins ( Figure 5C , denoted by yellow circles ) . The list of nucleolar CDK targets included proteins involved in multiple steps of ribosome biogenesis , including rRNA processing assembly of ribosomal subunits , as well as architectural nucleolar proteins . Lower phosphorylation of these components could change the function and / or affinity of these proteins , contributing to the nucleolar disassembly phenotype . For instance , the Ki‐67 protein implicated in organizing heterochromatin around the nucleolus ( Sobecki , Mrouj et al . 2016 ) had lower phosphorylation on four sites and became speckled throughout the nucleus ( Sup . Figure 4A ) . Given that POLR1A disassociates from the rDNA in CDK inhibitors , we searched for a substrate that could provide a link for Pol I association with the rDNA . Key rDNA transcription factors UBF and RRN3 , as well as the components of selectivity factor 1 ( SL1 ) that promote Pol I transcription initiation ( Friedrich , Panov et al . 2005 ) and POLR1A itself were absent from our list . One notable candidate for linking POLR1A to the rDNA was the protein Treacle , encoded by the TCOF1 gene . Mutations in TCOF1 gene cause Treacher Collins syndrome , a congenital craniofacial disorder associated with tissue - specific disruptions in ribosome biogenesis ( Sakai and Trainor 2009 , Noack Watt , Achilleos et al . 2016 ) . Treacle is a large nucleolar protein containing multiple low‐complexity regions with alternating acidic and basic tracts in its central disordered region ( Grzanka and Piekielko‐Witkowska 2021 ) . Treacle was shown to be involved in rDNA transcription by connecting UBF and Pol I ( Valdez , Henning et al . 2004 ) , and was also reported to recruit Pol I machinery independently of UBF ( Lin and Yeh 2009 ) . Treacle is a phosphoprotein that contains numerous serine and threonine residues within its central disordered domain , but the functional significance of this phosphorylation is unknown . 12 Figure 5 . Effects of CDK9 inhibitors on the nuclear proteome and phospho - proteome 1 100 1 10 100 10 Spectral count ratio ( untreated / ﬂavopiridol ) S p e c t r a l c o un t r a t i o ( un t r e a t e d / A Z D 45 73 ) AKAP8 S328 AKAP8 S323 CCDC86 S80 DDX21 S71 DDX54 S39 , S41 DNAJC2 S60 , S63 EEF1D T513 ILF3 S62 LEO1 S294 LEO1 S300 LEO1 S171 , S179 MKI67 S1253 MKI67 S1376 MKI67 S1256 MKI67S1131 NFIB S284 NIFK T234 NOM1 S280 , T287 NPM1 S125 PELP1 S334 PHF8S857 POP1 S730 PRKDC S3205 PWP1 S50 RCC2 S50 , S51 Treacle S1301 Treacle S1299 UTP14A S29 , S31 UTP20 T1741 WASHC2A S158 , S160 WDR55 S382 XRCC1 S241 ZEB2 S336 ZEB2 T326 POLR2A S1845 POLR2A S1917 POLR2A S1850 , S1889 , S1906 POLR2A T1891 , T1882 , Y1916 MAP1B S1527 SDAD1 S548 Nucleolar proteins Nucleolar ﬂagged POLR2A Other proteins Untreated Flavopiridol AZD4573 Nuclear extracts 10 % MudPIT 90 % TiO 2 phospho - peptide enrichment dNSAF values Spectral counts Enriched 48 22 21 Untreated Flavopiridol AZD4573 - 1 - 0 . 50 0 . 5 1 Depleted Flavopiridol AZD4573 Flavopiridol AZD4573 D M S O C X - 5461 F l a v o p i r i d o l A Z D 4573 J S H - 150 IP T reacle blot POLR1A WCL POLR1A WCL Treacle WCL β - actin T r e a c l e , n o C D K 9 T r e a c l e , w i t h C D K 9 P o l I I , w i t h C D K 9 T reacle A B C D E R o w Z - sc o r e 57 61 76 In vitro kinase assay 120 kDa 120 220 40 13 191138 The phosphorylation of Treacle went down when cells were treated with CDK inhibitors . However , this could be attributed to direct or indirect effects of inhibiting CDK9 . To test if CDK9 can phosphorylate Treacle directly , we performed a radioactive in vitro kinase assay with recombinant CDK9 / cyclin K complex using recombinant Treacle protein as a substrate . CDK9 / cyclin K effectively phosphorylated recombinant Treacle in vitro ( Figure 5D ) . Purified RNA Pol II holoenzyme complex was used as a positive control , showing multiple phosphorylated bands as expected . Treacle kinase assays using recombinant CDK9 complexed with cyclin T were not successful presumably due to the low activity of this recombinant protein complex , as indicated by minimal phosphorylation of a known substrate , RNA Pol II ( Sup . Figure 4B ) . In line with the phosphoproteomics analysis , CDK9 did not phosphorylate purified RNA Pol I holoenzyme ( Sup . Figure 4C ) . Therefore , CDK9 can directly phosphorylate Treacle and RNA Pol II , but not RNA Pol I . Treacle localized to the fibrillar center of the nucleolus together with UBF in untreated cells . This localization was unaffected in cells treated with CDK inhibitors ( Sup . Figure 4C ) . Therefore , CDK inhibition did not impact its subcellular localization as it did for POLR1A . Next , we asked if CDK inhibition affected Treacle interaction with POLR1A . For this , we immunoprecipitated Treacle protein from untreated and drug‐treated cell lysates and probed for POLR1A . Anti‐Treacle antibody efficiently pulled down POLR1A from lysates of cells treated with vehicle or Pol I inhibitor CX‐5461 , but not from cells treated with pan‐CDK inhibitor flavopiridol or CDK9‐specific inhibitors AZD4573 and JSH‐150 ( Figure 5E ) . Western blotting of whole cell lysates did not show the degradation of Treacle or POLR1A in any drug treatments . These results suggest that the phosphorylation of Treacle , possibly by CDK9 , plays a significant role in recruiting Pol I machinery to the rDNA to facilitate Pol I transcription . In summary , inhibition of CDK9 creates an extreme form of nucleolar stress where only the bare rDNA scaffold with few associated proteins remains . The subunits of the Pol I machinery dissociate from rDNA , potentially due in part to the dephosphorylation of Treacle . Thus , transcriptional CDK activity must be necessary for maintaining rDNA transcription and nucleolar integrity . A . An overview of the nuclear phospho‐protein profiling workflow is shown . Nuclear protein extracts were generated from RPE1 cells or following treatment with 5 µM flavopiridol or 5 µM AZD4573 for 5 hours . After trypsin digestion , peptide samples were split into two parts : 10 % of each sample was used for MudPIT and 90 % was enriched for phosphopeptides using High‐Select™ TiO 2 phosphopeptide enrichment spin tips ( Thermo Scientific ) . Peptides prepared from nuclear extracts and phospho‐peptide enriched samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer coupled with an Agilent 1260 Infinity quaternary pump ( 2 biological replicates per condition ) . B . Nuclear proteins selectively enriched or depleted in cells treated with indicated CDK inhibitors were determined . The clustered heatmap shows Z‐score values ( calculated from dNSAF values ) for proteins enriched or depleted in drug‐treated cells ( LogFC > + / ‐1 . 5 , QPROT FDR < 0 . 05 ) . The Venn diagrams depict overlaps between enriched and depleted proteins in both drug treatments . The full list of proteins is provided in Supplementary Table 2 . C . Detection of phosphopeptides that decreased after drug treatment . Axes indicate the ratio of numbers of spectra for phosphopeptides detected in untreated relative to drug‐treated samples . If no phospho‐peptides were detected in drug‐treated samples , the number 0 was replaced with 0 . 1 to avoid dividing by zero . Proteins with significantly decreased abundance after drug treatment ( QPROT FDR < 0 . 0001 ) were filtered out . In addition , phosphosites with fewer than 2 spectral counts in either of the untreated samples were not considered . Yellow circles indicate proteins with the GO‐term nucleolus for the subcellular compartment , labeled with phosphorylation sites . Blue outlines flag proteins with non‐significant dNSAF decrease in any of the treatments . Red outlines denote phospho‐peptides belonging to POLR2A , labeled with sites . All other nuclear phospho‐peptides are shown as open circles . Treacle phospho‐site labels are highlighted in green . The full list of phospho‐peptides with sites is provided in Supplementary Table 3 . D . Representative in vitro CDK9 / cyclin K kinase assay with recombinant human Treacle protein substrate and radiolabeled [ γ - 32 P ] ATP . The negative control ( first lane ) contained the Treacle substrate without the kinase . The second lane contained both the kinase and the substrate . In the third lane , the Pol II holoenzyme complex purified from S . cerevisiae served as a positive control . Molecular weights of RNA Pol II holoenzyme subunits Rbp1 ( 191 kDa ) and Rbp2 ( 138 kDa ) are indicated . E . Immunoprecipitation ( IP ) of Treacle from drug‐treated cells followed by western blotting with anti‐POLR1A antibody . Treacle antibody pulled down POLR1A from lysates of cells treated with DMSO or CX‐5461 , but not from cells treated with CDK inhibitors . Lower panels show POLR1A and Treacle immunoblots of corresponding whole‐cell lysates ( WCL ) . β‐actin was used as a loading control . 14 Biophysical properties of nucleoli under Pol I versus CDK inhibition . To better understand how the transcriptional state impacts nucleolar integrity , we investigated biophysical properties of nucleoli by probing the molecular dynamics of NPM1 ( nucleophosmin ) using FRAP . NPM1 is a multifunctional nucleolar protein involved in the assembly of ribosomal subunits that occupies the granular component ( GC ) of the nucleolus . It contains an N‐terminal oligomerization domain , a C‐terminal RNA‐binding domain , an intrinsically disordered region ( IDR ) , and multiple acidic tracts throughout the protein . It forms a homopentamer , binds rRNA , and can form multivalent interactions with other proteins that contain arginine‐rich domains . Studies of IDR‐ containing proteins including NPM1 demonstrated that these proteins can form homotypic and heterotypic interactions that drive liquid‐liquid phase separation ( LLPS ) , which has been proposed to play a role in the assembly of membrane‐ less organelles such as the nucleolus ( Feric , Vaidya et al . 2016 , Mitrea , Cika et al . 2018 , Lafontaine , Riback et al . 2021 ) . We generated an RPE1 cell line where the endogenous NPM1 is monoallelically tagged with monomeric eGFP and used it to study the molecular exchange within nucleoli and between nucleoli and nucleoplasm . First , we determined the dynamics of NPM1 in normal , untreated RPE1 cells . For this , we performed FRAP analysis of NPM1‐GFP by photobleaching a whole nucleolus or a part of the nucleolus . For a classical phase‐separated liquid condensate the recovery time of a partially bleached structure was expected to be faster than the recovery of the entire structure due to rapid internal molecular rearrangements ( Brangwynne , Eckmann et al . 2009 ) . There was no significant difference in the recovery rate between fully‐bleached and partially‐bleached nucleoli ( Figure 6 A‐B ) . Full‐ and half‐FRAP regions were roughly the same size . The average recovery rate ( T 1 / 2 ) was ~ 28 + / ‐9 . 9 seconds for fully bleached nucleoli and ~ 24 + / ‐7 . 8 seconds for partially bleached nucleoli . This similarity in the T 1 / 2 was also true for cells treated with RNA Pol I inhibitor CX‐5461 ( ~ 11 + / ‐ 3 . 4 seconds and ~ 10 + / ‐3 . 2 seconds ) . Nucleoplasmic recovery rates were much faster than nucleolar recovery rates in both cases . In cells with more than one nucleolus , the partial bleach analysis revealed that as the photobleached part gained and the unbleached part expended fluorescence , the separate , unconnected nucleolus also lost fluorescence at a comparable rate ( an example is shown in Figure 6C ) . This implied that nucleolar and nucleoplasmic pools of NPM1 both contributed to the recovery process , and the diffusion within the nucleolus does not necessarily dominate the exchange with nucleoplasm as would be expected of a prototypical phase‐ separated condensate . Treatment with the Pol I inhibitor CX‐5461 caused NPM1‐GFP to concentrate inside the nucleolar remnants ( Figure 6D and Video 6 ) . In contrast , CDK inhibitor treatment triggered the dispersal of the NPM1‐GFP into multiple small globules and increased the diffuse pool in the nucleoplasm ( Figure 6E and Video 7 ) . Although NPM1‐GFP globules had the appearance of classic phase‐separated droplets , they did not merge over time despite being in close proximity and being quite mobile . The overall amount of NPM1‐GFP was not reduced . FRAP analysis of whole nucleoli in Pol I inhibitor‐treated cells demonstrated a ~ 2 . 5‐fold increase in the recovery rate compared to the untreated cells ( Figure 6F‐G ) , indicating a higher exchange rate of NPM1 molecules between the nucleolar remnants and the nucleoplasm and / or lower nucleolar viscosity . In CDK inhibitor‐treated cells , photobleached NPM1‐GFP globules recovered even faster ( T 1 / 2 ~ 6 . 9 + / ‐2 . 4 seconds ) ( Figure 6 F‐G ) , at a rate comparable to nucleoplasm ( T 1 / 2 ~ 6 + / ‐1 . 7 seconds , Figure 6H ) . This rapid exchange rate suggests very weak interactions of NPM1 molecules with the components of these globules . Overall , NPM1 dynamics in Pol I inhibitor‐treated cells were consistent with a compromised but extant nucleolar GC layer , while in CDK inhibitor‐treated cells they were in line with GC disassembly . Our interpretation of these results is that nucleolar organization , normal or during stress , is more complex than predicted by multi - component liquid - liquid phase separation alone . Understanding nucleolar stress phenotypes observed in this study from a biophysical perspective will require moving beyond current models that rely solely on phase separation a s the basis for nucleolar assembly . Transcriptional activity is strongly correlated with nucleolar integrity and impacts a large number of protein - protein and protein - nucleic acid interactions , some of which occur through specific binding while others are driven by phase separation ( Tartakoff , DiMario et al . 2022 ) . The combination of both modes of interaction is likely required for the formation and function of the nucleolus . 15 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 - 2 4 9 14 19 24 29 34 Figure 6 . Analysis of biophysical properties of the nucleoli using endogenous NPM1 tagged with GFP 0 : 00 1 : 30 1 : 00 2 : 00 2 : 30 3 : 00 3 : 31 4 : 09 - 1 sec 4 sec 0 sec 14 sec 30 sec 100 sec 0 : 00 0 : 30 0 : 15 0 : 45 1 : 00 1 : 30 2 : 00 Time , sec . N o r m . i n t en s i t y , a . u . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 - 2 9 19 29 39 49 59 69 79 89 99109119129139149 Whole Partial Nucleoplasm Whole Partial 0 10 20 30 40 T 1 / 2 , s e c ns Bleached part Unbleached part Unbleached whole 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 0102030405060708090100110120130140150160170 Time , sec . N o r m . i n t e n s i t y , a . u . 1 2 3 A 1 - Bleached part 2 - Unbleached part 3 - Unbleached whole CX - 5461 Flavopiridol NPM1 - GFP NPM1 - GFP Untr . CX - 5461 Flavopiridol T 1 / 2 , s e c 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 - 2 19 39 59 79 99 119 139 Untreated CX - 5461 Flavopiridol Time , sec . A B C D E 0 10 20 30 40 F G NPM1 - GFP * * * * * * * * Time , sec . N o r m . i n t en s i t y , a . u . Droplets Nucleoplasm H N o r m . i n t en s i t y , a . u . Flavopiridol Whole Partial 0 5 10 15 20 T 1 / 2 , s e c ns Untreated CX - 5461 16 Discussion Screening a diverse library of chemotherapy drugs has allowed us to identify several compounds that cause changes in nucleolar architecture . This categorization of morphologically distinct nucleolar stresses has provided insights into the biological processes underlying these stresses . Our results show that nucleolar stress can manifest in different forms depending on the biological pathway or pathways targeted by a particular drug . The canonical nucleolar stress caused by DNA intercalating agents and manifested by the segregation of stress caps was only one of the nucleolar stress phenotypes . Inhibition of mTOR and PI3K growth pathways resulted in a decrease in nucleolar normality score and rRNA synthesis without dramatic re - organization of nucleolar anatomy . This response may not represent stress per se , but a consequence of the overall downregulation of ribosome biogenesis processes ( Iadevaia , Huo et al . 2012 , Davis , Lehmann et al . 2015 ) . Inhibitors of HSP90 and proteasome caused proteotoxic stress – acute loss of protein homeostasis . Accumulation of misfolded and / or not degraded proteins may impair nucleolar functions directly , by clogging its compartments and creating “aggresome” based nucleolar stress ( Frottin , Schueder et al . 2019 ) , and / or indirectly , by suppressing growth signaling through metabolic pathways ( Su and Dai 2017 , Guang , Kavanagh et al . 2019 ) . Nucleoli are often used by pathologists to predict cancer aggressiveness ; our studies extend the ability to use nucleolar morphology as a biomarker of underlying cellular state . The most extreme nucleolar stress in our screen was caused by CDK inhibitors . Rapid nucleolar disintegration implied that constitutive CDK activity is necessary for the assembly of functional RNA Pol I transcriptional complexes and the integrity of the nucleolar compartment . CDK inhibitor flavopiridol was previously shown to impede rRNA production and processing ( Burger , Muhl et al . 2010 , Burger , Muhl et al . 2013 ) . A recent study attributed the disruptive effect of flavopiridol on RNA Pol I transcription to its inhibition of RNA Pol II ( Abraham , Khosraviani et al . 2020 ) . The absence of nucleolar disruption in cells treated with the catalytic RNA Pol II - specific inhibitor α - Amanitin suggests otherwise . Our phospho - proteomics analysis identified multiple nucleolar CDK substrates , arguing that transcriptional CDK activity may affect nucleolar function directly . In vitro phosphorylation of Treacle by CDK9 confirms the kinase specificity at least for this target , which is needed for tethering RNA Pol I machinery on the rDNA . Our findings are consistent with a recent large - scale proteomic study that identified multiple nucleolar proteins as targets of CDK9 ( Johnson , Yaron et al . 2023 ) . The idea that transcriptional CDKs drive the RNA production for both RNA Pol I and RNA Pol II offers a coordination mechanism for ribosome biogenesis that requires products of both mRNA and rRNA genes . The same theme of overarching regulation is typical for cell cycle CDKs that drive concerted processes of DNA replication and mitosis by phosphorylating multiple substrates . There are many existing CDK inhibitors with varying degrees of specificity . Developing inhibitors that target a particular CDK with high specificity is challenging due to the presence of multiple transcriptional CDKs in the human genome that share nearly identical ATP - binding pockets that are targeted by ATP - competitive inhibitors ( Jorda , Hendrychova et al . 2018 ) . All CDK inhibitor hits in our screen that had low normality scores were pan - CDK inhibitors . A . FRAP analysis of NPM1 - GFP in whole - bleached or partially - bleached nucleoli in untreated cells is shown . Plots are averages of normalized fluorescence intensities of 10 cells or more . Bars denote standard deviation . B . Individual T 1 / 2 measurements of whole and partially bleached nucleoli are shown in untreated cells and in cells treated with 2 . 5 µM Pol I inhibitor CX - 5461 . The difference between whole and partially bleached nucleoli was not significant in both groups ( T - test ) . C . An example of a partially bleached nucleolus in a cell with two nucleoli is shown . The normalized intensity plot on the left shows the fluorescence recovery of the photobleached part ( 1 ) , the corresponding loss of fluorescence in the unbleached part ( 2 ) , and the loss of fluorescence in the separate unbleached nucleolus ( 3 ) . Bar , 10µm . D . Time - lapse images of NPM1 - GFP expressing cell treated with 2 . 5 µM CX - 5461 at time 0 are shown . NPM1 - GFP concentrated inside the nucleolar remnants over time . The complete video sequence is shown in Video 6 . Bar , 10µm . E . Time - lapse images of NPM1 - GFP expressing cell treated with 10 µM flavopiridol at time 0 are shown . NPM1 - GFP dispersed into multiple small round globules , and the fluorescent intensity of the nucleoplasm pool increased . The complete video sequence is shown in Video 7 . Bar , 10µm . F . FRAP analysis of NPM1 - GFP in untreated cells ( whole nucleoli ) and cells treated with 2 . 5 µM CX - 5461 ( whole remnants ) or 10 µM flavopiridol ( whole globules ) is shown . Plots are averages of normalized fluorescence intensities of more than 10 cells . Bars denote standard deviation . G . Corresponding individual T 1 / 2 measurements in untreated cells and cells treated with 2 . 5 µM CX - 5461 or 10 µM flavopiridol are . . shown . Asterisks indicate P < 0 . 0001 ( unpaired T - test comparing treated groups to untreated ) . H . FRAP analysis of NPM1 - GFP in cells treated with flavopiridol is compared for droplets versus nucleoplasm . Plots are averages of normalized fluorescence intensities of more than 10 cells . Bars denote standard deviation . 17 Acknowledgments We thank Tissue Culture and Microscopy core facilities at the Stowers Institute for enabling many of our experiments . We are grateful to Kym Delventhal , Brandon Miller and Kyle Weaver from Genomic Engineering core facility and Kevin Ferro from Flow Cytometry core facility for their help with generating Cas - 9 edited NPM1 - eGFP RPE1 cell line . We are thankful to Lauren Weems and Ella Leslie from the Screening core facility for their help with the drug screen . We thank members of Gerton lab for the discussions . We are grateful to Mark Miller for help with illustrations . This study was supported by R35 - GM140710 to David A . Schneider and by funding from the Stowers Institute for Medical Research . Materials and Methods Cell culture , plasmid transfections , and generation of stable cell lines All cell lines in this study were obtained from ATCC ( Manassas , VA ) and grown at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 . hTERT RPE1 , hTERT CHON - 002 , hTERT BJ5TA were grown in DMEM - F12 medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) . HCT116 cells were grown in McCoy ' s 5a modified medium with 10 % FBS , DLD1 cells were grown in RPMI - 1640 medium with 10 % FBS . Plasmids encoding the human UBF gene tagged with EGFP and nucleolin gene tagged with EGFP were obtained from Addgene ( plasmids # 26672 and # 28176 , respectively ) ( Chen and Huang 2001 , Takagi , Absalon et al . 2005 ) . For generating stable cell lines , RPE1 cells were transfected using X - tremeGENE 9 DNA Transfection Reagent ( Roche ) according to the manufacturer’s directions . Transfected cells were selected with 1 mg / ml G418 ( A . G . Scientific ) . Immunofluorescence , high - throughput nucleolar measurements , and calculation of nucleolar normality score For immunofluorescence , cells were grown on # 1 . 5 glass coverslips , fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde / PBS for 15 minutes , and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Blocking was done with 5 % BSA in PBS / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 2 . 5 % BSA / PBS / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Specimens were incubated with primary antibodies overnight , washed 3 times for 5 - 10 minutes , and incubated with fluorescently conjugated secondary 18 The anticancer compound library also contained CDK inhibitors that were more specific to key cell cycle CDKs : RO3306 ( CDK1 ) , BMS265246 ( CDK1 / 2 ) , PD0332991 – palbociclib , LY2835219 – abemaciclib , and LEE011 - ribociclib ( CDK4 / 6 ) . These drugs were not hits in our screen , indicating that the nucleolar stress caused by pan - CDK inhibitors may not be a result of inhibiting cell cycle CDKs . Newer drugs such as AZD4576 , JSH - 150 , and MC180295 are claimed to be specific to the transcriptional CDK9 , but it is conceivable that they may have some impact on other transcriptional CDKs . Cyclin - dependent kinases exhibit redundancy in terms of substrate specificity and may compensate for related kinases at least partially . This aspect of CDK biology is better explored for cell cycle CDKs – for instance , mouse and yeast knockout studies showed that the entire cell cycle can run on just CDK1 in the absence of other CDKs ( Kozar and Sicinski 2005 , Santamaria , Barriere et al . 2007 ) . The ability of related transcriptional CDKs to functionally compensate for each other and / or perform redundant functions has not been well - explored . We allow the possibility that we may be targeting other kinases that can phosphorylate the same nucleolar substrates as CDK9 and their inhibition can cause similar nucleolar stress phenotype . Thus , while our results suggest that CDK9 activity plays a key role in rDNA transcription and nucleolar integrity , it is still possible that other transcriptional CDKs can perform similar functions . The results of our screen demonstrate that the nucleolus is targeted by many anticancer compounds , whether intentional or not . By combining multiple metrics and approaches , such as live cell imaging , proteomics , biochemistry , rRNA measurements , and immunofluorescence , we highlight the correlation between nucleolar integrity and RNA Pol I transcription in various stressors and provide simple categories that can be used to classify nucleolar stress moving forward . Our biophysical studies emphasize that understanding organizing principles of nucleoli responsible for the diversity of nucleolar stress phenotypes may require integration of both phase separation and affinity models . For drugs that cause nucleolar stress , their anti - proliferative activity can be at least in part mediated by disrupting nucleolar processes . Unintended nucleolar stress can also be a source of toxicity . Therapeutic and mechanistic studies should consider nucleolar stress as a potential confounding factor in determining the mechanism of action and toxicity in drug development . antibodies for 2 - 4 hours . All washes were performed with PBS / 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 . DNA was counterstained with DAPI or Hoechst 33342 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Z - stack images were acquired on the Nikon TiE microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSU W1 spinning disk and Hamamatsu Flash 4 . 0 camera using 60x NA 1 . 4 or 100x NA 1 . 45 objectives . Calculation of the nucleolar normality score was performed on multi - channel single - plane or projection images containing nucleolin , UBF , and DAPI channels , utilizing a custom plugin called “segment nucleoli jru v4” ( https : / / github . com / jayunruh / Jay _ Plugins3 / ) . It was written for the open - source image processing program ImageJ ( NIH , Bethesda , MD ) and is freely available in the Fiji package ( Schindelin , Arganda - Carreras et al . 2012 ) under the “Stowers” update site . First , nuclei were segmented based on DAPI labeling . To obtain nuclear masks the background in a DAPI channel was subtracted with a rolling ball of a large radius , and the resulting image was thresholded at an intensity of ~ 10 % of the image’s maximum value . Objects on the edges and outside the size range were excluded . For nucleolar segmentation , the background in the nucleolar channels was subtracted with a small radius rolling ball , and images were smoothened by applying Gaussian blur was applied with a standard deviation of 0 . 7 pixels . To generate nucleolar masks , UBF signals in each nucleus were thresholded at 40 % of the difference between the minimum and maximum values . Objects smaller than 4 pixels were eliminated as noise . The output table contained intensity and area measurements for each nucleolus . All nucleolar measurements were associated with their corresponding nuclei . Nucleoplasmic intensity values were calculated by subtracting the integrated intensity of all nucleoli from the integrated intensity of the whole nuclei . Normality scores for each nucleus were then calculated by dividing the nucleolar / nucleoplasmic ratio of nucleolin by that of UBF : Nucleolar normality score = ( nucleolin 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑜𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑚𝑖𝑐 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) / ( UBF 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑜𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑚𝑖𝑐 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) For nucleolar measurements of the nucleolar enrichment of POLR1A , an analogous UBF segmentation strategy was utilized to segment nucleoli within individual nuclei , and POLR1A intensity was determined within and outside nucleolar masks . At least three large fields containing multiple cells were analyzed per condition . Anti - cancer compound library screen , high - throughput imaging , and analysis The anti - cancer screening library containing 1180 compounds was purchased from Selleck ( cat . # L3000 - Z304781 ) . For the screen , RPE1 cells were seeded in 384 - well plates at 2000 cells / well and incubated for 4 hours at 37 o C . The compound library was added to the cells using a PerkinElmer Janus G3 with a 384w nanohead at a final concentration of 10 µM or 1 µM and incubated for 24h . Vehicle - only no - treatment conditions were maintained as controls . Cells were fixed in 4 % Paraformaldehyde for 15min and washed / permeabilized in PBS containing 0 . 1 % Triton X100 . Liquid handling steps were performed on an Integra Viafill bulk liquid dispenser or by multichannel pipetting . Following fixation and washes using a Biotek 406 washer / dispenser with a 192 - pin head , cells were incubated in a blocking solution containing 5 % normal goat serum for 1 hour and then with primary antibodies overnight at 4 o C . No - primary antibody samples were used as a control for nonspecific secondary antibody binding . Secondary antibodies containing DAPI stain ( 1 µg / ml final concentration ) were applied using the Viafill bulk liquid dispenser and incubated overnight at 4°C . Plates were washed and maintained with PBS at 4°C until imaging . Plates were imaged on an Opera Phenix high - content microscope ( PerkinElmer ) operated by Harmony High - Content Imaging and Analysis Software 4 . 9 . Images were acquired using a 40x water objective ( NA 1 . 1 ) . Excitation / emission wavelengths used were 405 / 435 - 480 for DAPI , 488 / 500 - 550 for AlexaFluor 488 , and 640 / 650 - 760 for Cy5 . Forty single - plane fields containing hundreds of cells were imaged per well . Images were exported as individual 16 - bit TIFF files for processing . High - throughput image processing and calculation of nucleolar normality scores were performed in FIJI . The normality score measurements were performed using “segment nucleoli jru v4” plugin as described above . All measurements were aggregated and averages of all fields were calculated for each well . Vehicle controls were highly consistent from plate to plate and were therefore aggregated across all plates to calculate cutoffs for hit selection . Cutoffs for hit calling were set at two standard deviations above the average normality score of all DMSO wells . 19 5 - EU and Y10b labeling and quantification For 5 - EU incorporation assays , cells were typically seeded in 24 - well black optically clear bottom tissue culture - treated plates ( Ibidi ) and treated with 0 . 5 mM 5 - EU ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 3 hours . Cells were fixed in ice - cold methanol for 10 minutes and washed with PBS / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Fixed cells were stained with 1 μM Alexa Alexa Fluor 555 – conjugated Azide diluted in PBS containing 2mM CuSO 4 and 50mM Ascorbic acid . To counter - stain the DNA , Hoechst 33342 ( Sigma ) was added to 2 μg / mL . Cells were incubated for several hours or overnight at room temperature protected from light and evaporation , then washed 3x with PBS . For Y10b ( anti - rRNA ) antibody labeling , cells were grown and fixed as above but processed as regular immunofluorescence . Z - stack images were acquired on the wide - field Nikon Ti2 microscope equipped with Prime95B CMOS camera using 20x NA 0 . 5 objective . Image processing was done in FIJI : first , sum intensity Z - projections were generated , then nuclei were segmented on DAPI , and 5 - EU or Y10b intensity was measured within nucleolar masks . At least three large fields of view containing hundreds of cells were analyzed to determine the average of each field . The averages of all treatments were normalized to the average of DMSO controls . The final output represents normalized averages of these fields with standard deviation . Immuno - FISH For immuno - FISH assays , cells were grown on # 1 . 5 glass coverslips , fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 minutes , and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS . Specimens were then treated with 1mg / ml RNAse A ( Qiagen ) in PBS for 30 minutes at 37°C and stored in 25 % glycerol / PBS at 4°C . Before hybridization , coverslips were subjected to two freeze - thaw cycles by dipping into liquid nitrogen , treated with 0 . 1 N HCl for 5 min , washed twice in 2× SSC buffer , and pre - incubated in 50 % formamide / 2× SSC . Fluorescein - labeled probe for human rDNA ( BAC clone RP11 - 450E20 ) was obtained from Empire Genomics ( Buffalo , NY ) . Specimens and the probe were denatured together for 7 min at 85°C and hybridized under HybriSlip hybridization cover ( GRACE Biolabs ) sealed with Cytobond ( SciGene ) in a humidified chamber at 37°C for 48 - 72hours . After hybridization , slides were washed in 50 % formamide / 2X SSC 3 times for 5 minutes per wash at 45°C , then in 1x SSC solution at 45°C for 5 minutes twice and at room temperature once . Slides were washed again in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS and blocked with 5 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) in PBS / 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 . Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 2 . 5 % ( weight / volume ) BSA / PBS / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Specimens were incubated with primary antibody overnight , washed 3 times for 5 minutes , incubated with secondary antibody for several hours , and washed again 3 times for 5 minutes . All washes were performed with PBS / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Vectashield containing DAPI ( Vector Laboratories ) was used for mounting . Z - stack images were acquired on the Nikon TiE microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSU W1 spinning disk and Hamamatsu Flash 4 . 0 camera using 100x NA 1 . 45 objectives . NPM1 gene editing and validation Donor plasmid encoding homology arms and linker - mEGFP sequence for C - terminus tagging of human NPM1 was designed by the Allen Institute for Cell Science and obtained from Addgene ( AICSDP - 50 ) . The plasmid encoding NPM1 - mEGFP was a gift from the Allen Institute for Cell Science ( Addgene plasmid # 109122 ) . The sgRNA was synthesized by Synthego with modifications using the protospacer sequence UCCAGGCUAUUCAAGAUCUC ( Wienert , Nguyen et al . 2020 ) . Recombinant high - fidelity Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 HiFi V3 protein was from IDT ( cat # 1081061 ) . Cas9 RNP complexes were pre - assembled by mixing 160pmol Cas9 protein and 140pmol sgRNA in water and incubated together for 10 minutes at room temperature . After incubation , 4µg of donor plasmid DNA was added to the assembly and incubated for an additional 5 minutes . For electroporation , RPE1 cell pellets containing 1x10 ^ 6 cells were resuspended in Nucleofection Solution for Primary Mammalian Epithelial Cells ( Lonza cat # VPI - 1005 ) in the presence of nucleofection enhancer ( cat # 1075915 ) to the total reaction volume of 100µl . Electroporation was carried out using Amaxa 2b Lonza Nucleofector , program W001 . Subsequently , cells were cultured for 7 days , and GFP - positive cells were FACS - sorted into 96 - well plates at one cell per well using FACSMelody - Cytometer ( BD ) operated by FACSDiva 9 . 1 . 2 software . Single - cell subclones were expanded , and gene editing was confirmed by fluorescent microscopy , PCR assays for gene insertion 20 with primers outside the homology arms ( primer sequences below ) , and amplicon sequencing by Illumina MiSeq at 250 bp x 250bp paired - end reads . The resulting sequence data were demultiplexed , followed by an analysis of on - target indel frequency and any expected sequence changes using CRIS . py ( 1 ) . Selected clones were further validated by western blotting using antibodies against NPM1 and GFP . In addition , cytogenetic analysis was performed on several candidate clones to ensure euploid chromosome number . The edited single - cell subclone used in this study had a correct heterozygous insertion of the mEGFP on the C - terminus of NPM1 and maintained the euploid karyotype ( 46 chromosomes ) . Primer Sequences : Primers around the guide site 301 - NPM1 - ds - F1 CACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTAACTCTCTGGTGGTAGAATGAAA 301 - NPM1 - ds - R1 GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTAACCAAGCAAAGGGTGGA 5 ` NPM1 - mEGFP Junction 301 - NPM1 - 5p - ds - F1 CACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTACTTTGGGAGGCAACATGG 301 - NPM1 - 5p - ds - R1 GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTAGGTGTTGGATCACCTGAGA 3 ` NPM1 - mEGFP Junction 301 - NPM1 - 3p - ds - F1 CACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTACCAGCCCGGCTAATTT 301 - NPM1 - 3p - ds - R1 GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTGAGAACATTCCCTCACCTACTC Out Homology Primers : NPM1 - GFP - OutHA - F2 GCGTGGTAGTTCATGCCTATAA NPM1 - GFP - OutHA - R2 ACATTCCCTCACCTACTCAAAC Live Cell Imaging , FRAP and analysis For live cell imaging , cells were grown on 35mm ibiTreat µ - dishes ( Ibidi , Fitchburg , WI ) . Time - lapse Z - stack images were captured on a Nikon TiE microscope equipped with 60x phase contrast objective NA 1 . 4 , Perfect Focus ( PFS ) mechanism , Yokogawa CSU - W1 spinning disk , and Flash 4 . 0 sCMOS camera . Cells were imaged in the regular growth medium ; 37 o C temperature and 5 % CO 2 were maintained using an environmental control chamber ( Okolab ) . Images were acquired with the NIS Elements software . Image processing ( maximum intensity projection , background subtraction , image registration , and average intensity measurements ) was done in FIJI ( NIH ) . For FRAP , 100x objective NA 1 . 45 was used and single - plane images were acquired . GFP was photobleached within a region of interest ( ROI ) with a pulse of high 488 - nm laser power after the initiation of acquisition , and the acquisition continued to monitor the recovery of fluorescence . For FRAP analysis , the background was subtracted using the average intensity value of ROI outside the cell nucleus . The image stack was registered to correct for the cell movement . For every photobleached region , the recovery curve of average intensity was collected , then normalized to the pre - bleach intensity . The average intensity of the whole nucleus was used to correct for photobleaching during the time - lapse acquisition . To calculate T 1 / 2 recovery curves were fit with a two - component exponential recovery function . At least 10 cells were analyzed per condition . Phospho - proteomics For nuclear extracts preparation , RPE1 cells were collected after being treated with 5 µM Flavopiridol or 5 µM AZD4573 for 5 hours . Cells were washed with PBS , incubated in hypotonic buffer ( 0 . 075M KCl ) containing Halt tm protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ( Thermo ) for 10 minutes at 4°C , and lysed by douncing 10 times . After 21 douncing lysates were spun down for 5 minutes at 1500g at 4°C to collect nuclei . Nuclei were resuspended in a low salt buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 9 , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM KCl , 0 . 2 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ) , followed by addition of an equal volume of a high salt buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 9 , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 . 4M KCl , 0 . 2 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ) . Nuclear proteins were extracted for 30 minutes at 4°C followed by a 15 - minute spin at 18 , 000g , 4°C . Protein precipitation was carried out by the addition of a Trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) to a final concentration of 20 % and incubation at 4°C overnight . The protein pellet was washed twice with ice - cold acetone and air - dried . TCA precipitated samples ( 500 µg ) were resuspended in a buffer containing 100 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 5 and 8M urea . Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding Bond - Breaker™ TCEP Solution ( 5 mM final concentration ) and incubating at room temperature for 30 minutes . To prevent bond reformation , chloroacetamide was added ( 10 mM final concentration ) and samples were incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature . Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys - C ( 0 . 4 µg ) at 37°C for 6 hours . Samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 5 to reduce the urea concentration to 2M , CaCl 2 was added ( 2 mM final concentration ) , and 2 µg trypsin was added to continue the digestion . Samples were then incubated overnight at 37°C . After digestion , the pH of the samples was reduced by adding formic acid ( 5 % final concentration ) . Samples were desalted using peptide desalting spin columns ( Pierce™ 89852 ) . After desalting , 10 % of each sample was retained for direct mass spectrometry analysis . Phosphopeptides were enriched from the remaining 90 % of each sample using the High - Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit ( Pierce™ A32993 ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Enriched phosphopeptides were resuspended in 25 µl of 0 . 1 % formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis . Proteins were analyzed using Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology ( MudPIT ) . In brief , samples were loaded offline onto 3 - phase chromatography columns and peptides were eluted using 10 MudPIT steps into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer in positive ion mode ( Thermo Scientific ) using an Infinity 1260 quaternary pump ( Agilent ) . RAW files were converted to . ms2 files using RAWDistiller v . 1 . 0 . Data were searched using the ProLuCID algorithm version 1 . 3 . 5 to match MS / MS spectra to a database containing 44093 human protein sequences ( National Center of Biotechnology Information , December 2019 release ) and 426 common contaminants , as well as shuffled versions of all sequences ( for estimating false discovery rates ( FDRs ) ) . Searches were for peptides with static carboxamidomethylation modifications on cysteine residues ( + 57 . 02146 Da ) , for peptides with dynamic oxidation modifications on methionine residues ( + 15 . 9949 Da ) , and for peptides with dynamic phosphorylation modifications on serine , threonine and tyrosine residues ( + 79 . 9663 Da ) . The in - house software algorithms , swallow and sandmartin , were used in combination with DTASelect and Contrast to filter out inaccurate matches , set protein FDRs below 0 . 05 , and assemble results tables . Proteins were quantified by spectral counting using dNSAF values calculated using NSAF7 . Proteins differentially expressed in drug - treated versus untreated cells were determined using the statistical tool QPROT . Proteomics data are available at https : / / massive . ucsd . edu / ProteoSAFe / static / massive . jsp under the identifier MSV000092420 . CDK9 kinase assays Human recombinant Cdk9 / cyclin K and CDK9 / cyclin T ( Sigma Aldrich ) were incubated with the substrate at 30°C for 30 minutes in reaction buffer ( 25 mM Tris - acetate ( pH 7 . 9 ) , 10 % glycerol , 100 mM KCl , 3 mM DTT ) in the presence of 60 µM ATP and 10 µCi gamma - 32 P - ATP . 1µl ( 0 . 1 µg or 0 . 01 µg ) of Cdk9 / cyclin K was added per 20 µl reaction . The following substrates were used in reactions : 0 . 15 µg of recombinant human Treacle ( OriGene ) , and ~ 25 nM Pol I or Pol II isolated from S . cerevisiae ( Appling and Schneider 2015 ) . Reactions were halted with an equal volume of SDS protein loading dye . Samples were heated to 95°C for 5 minutes and loaded into a 5 - 20 % SDS PAGE gel . After electrophoresis , the gel was wrapped in cellophane and analyzed by phosphoimager ( Typhoon 5 ; GE ) . 22 Treacle immunoprecipitation and western blotting . Cells were collected by spinning down trypsinized cultures at ~ 200G for 5 minutes at 4˚C ; trypsin was neutralized by the addition of FBS before centrifugation . Cell pellets were washed with ice - cold PBS and lysed in ice - cold IP lysis buffer ( Pierce 87787 ) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 30 minutes and dounced 10 times . Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16000G for 10 minutes at 4˚C . Rabbit anti - Treacle antibody was bound to protein A Dynabeads ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 30 minutes and washed in PBS with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 . Cell lysates containing an equivalent amount of total protein were incubated with Dynabeads conjugated to Treacle - antibody for 3 hours at 4˚C , shaking . Dynabeads were washed 3 times using IP lysis buffer and re - suspended in RIPA buffer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Proteins were eluted by the addition of NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) containing 5 % beta - mercaptoethanol ( Sigma ) and boiling for 10 minutes . Protein samples were separated by SDS – PAGE in 4 – 12 % Bis - Tris gels ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , transferred to PVDF membrane , blocked in SuperBlock ( TBS ) Blocking Buffer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and washed with TBST . Primary antibodies were detected using horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies and developed using the WesternBright ( Advansta ) detection kit . Chemiluminescence was detected using G : Box Chemi XT4 ( Syngene ) . Antibodies used in this study . Anti - UBF # H00007343 - M01 , Abnova Anti - UBF NBP1 - 82545 , Novus Biologicals Anti - Nucleolin # ab70493 ; Abcam Anti - Ki - 67 # 9449 ; Cell Signaling Technology Anti - rRNA ( Y10b ) # sc - 33678 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology Anti - Treacle ( TCOF1 ) # ab224544 , Abcam Anti - POLR1A ( RPA 194 , C - 1 ) # sc - 48385 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology Anti - POLR1A ( RPA 194 , F - 6 ) # sc - 46699 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology Anti - β - Actin # 3700 ; Cell Signaling Technology Secondary antibodies for immunofluorescence ( Alexa 488 , 555 , and 647 conjugates ) were obtained from Life Technologies and used at 1 : 500 dilution . Secondary HRP - conjugated antibodies for Western blotting were from Cell Signaling Technology and typically used at 1 : 5000 dilution . 23 References Abraham , K . J . , N . Khosraviani , J . N . Y . Chan , A . Gorthi , A . Samman , D . Y . Zhao , M . Wang , M . Bokros , E . Vidya , L . A . Ostrowski , R . Oshidari , V . Pietrobon , P . S . Patel , A . Algouneh , R . Singhania , Y . Liu , V . T . Yerlici , D . D . De Carvalho , M . Ohh , B . C . Dickson , R . Hakem , J . F . Greenblatt , S . Lee , A . J . R . Bishop and K . Mekhail ( 2020 ) . " Nucleolar RNA polymerase II drives ribosome biogenesis . " Nature 585 ( 7824 ) : 298 - 302 . Alonso , M . , C . Tamasdan , D . C . Miller and E . W . Newcomb ( 2003 ) . " Flavopiridol induces apoptosis in glioma cell lines independent of retinoblastoma and p53 tumor suppressor pathway alterations by a caspase - independent pathway . " Mol Cancer Ther 2 ( 2 ) : 139 - 150 . Andrews , W . J . , S . Ray , T . Panova , C . Engel and K . I . Panov ( 2021 ) . " DNA Intercalators Inhibit Eukaryotic Ribosomal RNA Synthesis by Impairing the Initiation of Transcription . " Genes ( Basel ) 12 ( 9 ) . Appling , F . D . and D . A . Schneider ( 2015 ) . " Purification of active RNA polymerase I from yeast . " Methods Mol Biol 1276 : 281 - 289 . Azkanaz , M . , A . Rodriguez Lopez , B . de Boer , W . Huiting , P . O . Angrand , E . Vellenga , H . H . Kampinga , S . Bergink , J . H . Martens , J . J . Schuringa and V . van den Boom ( 2019 ) . " Protein quality control in the nucleolus safeguards recovery of epigenetic regulators after heat shock . " Elife 8 . Bacon , C . W . and I . D ' Orso ( 2019 ) . " CDK9 : a signaling hub for transcriptional control . " Transcription 10 ( 2 ) : 57 - 75 . Barba - Aliaga , M . , P . Alepuz and J . E . Perez - Ortin ( 2021 ) . " Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases : The Many Ways to Transcribe a Gene . " Front Mol Biosci 8 : 663209 . Barlaam , B . , R . Casella , J . Cidado , C . Cook , C . De Savi , A . Dishington , C . S . Donald , L . Drew , A . D . Ferguson , D . Ferguson , S . Glossop , T . Grebe , C . Gu , S . Hande , J . Hawkins , A . W . Hird , J . Holmes , J . Horstick , Y . Jiang , M . L . Lamb , T . M . McGuire , J . E . Moore , N . O ' Connell , A . Pike , K . G . Pike , T . Proia , B . Roberts , M . San Martin , U . Sarkar , W . Shao , D . Stead , N . Sumner , K . Thakur , M . M . Vasbinder , J . G . Varnes , J . Wang , L . Wang , D . Wu , L . Wu , B . Yang and T . Yao ( 2020 ) . " Discovery of AZD4573 , a Potent and Selective Inhibitor of CDK9 That Enables Short Duration of Target Engagement for the Treatment of Hematological Malignancies . " J Med Chem 63 ( 24 ) : 15564 - 15590 . Brangwynne , C . P . , C . R . Eckmann , D . S . Courson , A . Rybarska , C . Hoege , J . Gharakhani , F . Julicher and A . A . Hyman ( 2009 ) . " Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . " Science 324 ( 5935 ) : 1729 - 1732 . Brueckner , F . and P . Cramer ( 2008 ) . " Structural basis of transcription inhibition by alpha - amanitin and implications for RNA polymerase II translocation . " Nat Struct Mol Biol 15 ( 8 ) : 811 - 818 . Bruno , P . M . , M . Lu , K . A . Dennis , H . Inam , C . J . Moore , J . Sheehe , S . J . Elledge , M . T . Hemann and J . R . Pritchard ( 2020 ) . " The primary mechanism of cytotoxicity of the chemotherapeutic agent CX - 5461 is topoisomerase II poisoning . " Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 ( 8 ) : 4053 - 4060 . Burger , K . , B . Muhl , T . Harasim , M . Rohrmoser , A . Malamoussi , M . Orban , M . Kellner , A . Gruber - Eber , E . Kremmer , M . Holzel and D . Eick ( 2010 ) . " Chemotherapeutic drugs inhibit ribosome biogenesis at various levels . " J Biol Chem 285 ( 16 ) : 12416 - 12425 . Burger , K . , B . Muhl , M . Rohrmoser , B . Coordes , M . Heidemann , M . Kellner , A . Gruber - Eber , V . Heissmeyer , K . Strasser and D . Eick ( 2013 ) . " Cyclin - dependent kinase 9 links RNA polymerase II transcription to processing of ribosomal RNA . " J Biol Chem 288 ( 29 ) : 21173 - 21183 . Burton , Z . F . ( 2014 ) . " The Old and New Testaments of gene regulation . Evolution of multi - subunit RNA polymerases and co - evolution of eukaryote complexity with the RNAP II CTD . " Transcription 5 ( 3 ) : e28674 . Bushnell , D . A . , P . Cramer and R . D . Kornberg ( 2002 ) . " Structural basis of transcription : alpha - amanitin - RNA polymerase II cocrystal at 2 . 8 A resolution . " Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 ( 3 ) : 1218 - 1222 . Chen , D . and S . Huang ( 2001 ) . " Nucleolar components involved in ribosome biogenesis cycle between the nucleolus and nucleoplasm in interphase cells . " J Cell Biol 153 ( 1 ) : 169 - 176 . Cidado , J . , S . Boiko , T . Proia , D . Ferguson , S . W . Criscione , M . San Martin , P . Pop - Damkov , N . Su , V . N . Roamio Franklin , C . Sekhar Reddy Chilamakuri , C . S . D ' Santos , W . Shao , J . C . Saeh , R . Koch , D . M . Weinstock , M . Zinda , S . E . Fawell and L . Drew ( 2020 ) . " AZD4573 Is a Highly Selective CDK9 Inhibitor That Suppresses MCL - 1 and Induces Apoptosis in Hematologic Cancer Cells . " Clin Cancer Res 26 ( 4 ) : 922 - 934 . Colis , L . , K . Peltonen , P . Sirajuddin , H . Liu , S . Sanders , G . Ernst , J . C . Barrow and M . Laiho ( 2014 ) . " DNA intercalator BMH - 21 inhibits RNA polymerase I independent of DNA damage response . " Oncotarget 5 ( 12 ) : 4361 - 4369 . Davis , W . J . , P . Z . Lehmann and W . Li ( 2015 ) . " Nuclear PI3K signaling in cell growth and tumorigenesis . " Front Cell Dev Biol 3 : 24 . 24 Demidenko , Z . N . and M . V . Blagosklonny ( 2004 ) . " Flavopiridol induces p53 via initial inhibition of Mdm2 and p21 and , independently of p53 , sensitizes apoptosis - reluctant cells to tumor necrosis factor . " Cancer Res 64 ( 10 ) : 3653 - 3660 . Drygin , D . , A . Lin , J . Bliesath , C . B . Ho , S . E . O ' Brien , C . Proffitt , M . Omori , M . Haddach , M . K . Schwaebe , A . Siddiqui - Jain , N . (cid:32)Streiner , J . E . Quin , E . Sanij , M . J . Bywater , R . D . Hannan , D . Ryckman , K . Anderes and W . G . Rice ( 2011 ) . " Targeting(cid:32) RNA polymerase I with an oral small molecule CX - 5461 inhibits ribosomal RNA synthesis and solid tumor growth . " (cid:32) Cancer Res 71 ( 4 ) : 1418 - 1430 . Drygin , D . , W . G . Rice and I . Grummt ( 2010 ) . " The RNA polymerase I transcription machinery : an emerging target for the(cid:32) treatment of cancer . " Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 50 : 131 - 156 . Eick , D . and M . Geyer ( 2013 ) . " The RNA polymerase II carboxy - terminal domain ( CTD ) code . " Chem Rev 113 ( 11 ) : 8456 - 8490 . Feric , M . , N . Vaidya , T . S . Harmon , D . M . Mitrea , L . Zhu , T . M . Richardson , R . W . Kriwacki , R . V . Pappu and C . P . (cid:32) Brangwynne ( 2016 ) . " Coexisting Liquid Phases Underlie Nucleolar Subcompartments . " Cell 165 ( 7 ) : 1686 - 1697 . (cid:32) Ferreira , R . , J . S . Schneekloth , Jr . , K . I . Panov , K . M . Hannan and R . D . Hannan ( 2020 ) . " Targeting the RNA Polymerase I(cid:32) Transcription for Cancer Therapy Comes of Age . " Cells 9 ( 2 ) . Friedrich , J . K . , K . I . Panov , P . Cabart , J . Russell and J . C . Zomerdijk ( 2005 ) . " TBP - TAF complex SL1 directs RNA polymerase(cid:32) I pre - initiation complex formation and stabilizes upstream binding factor at the rDNA promoter . " J Biol Chem 280 ( 33 ) : (cid:32) 29551 - 29558 . Frottin , F . , F . Schueder , S . Tiwary , R . Gupta , R . Korner , T . Schlichthaerle , J . Cox , R . Jungmann , F . U . Hartl and M . S . Hipp(cid:32) ( 2019 ) . " The nucleolus functions as a phase - separated protein quality control compartment . " Science 365 ( 6451 ) : 342 - 347 . Gebrane - Younes , J . , N . Fomproix and D . Hernandez - Verdun ( 1997 ) . " When rDNA transcription is arrested during mitosis , (cid:32) UBF is still associated with non - condensed rDNA . " J Cell Sci 110 ( Pt 19 ) : 2429 - 2440 . Granneman , S . and D . Tollervey ( 2007 ) . " Building ribosomes : even more expensive than expected ? " Curr Biol 17 ( 11 ) : (cid:32) R415 - 417 . Grzanka , M . and A . Piekielko - Witkowska ( 2021 ) . " The Role of TCOF1 Gene in Health and Disease : Beyond Treacher(cid:32) Collins Syndrome . " Int J Mol Sci 22 ( 5 ) . Guang , M . H . Z . , E . L . Kavanagh , L . P . Dunne , P . Dowling , L . Zhang , S . Lindsay , D . Bazou , C . Y . Goh , C . Hanley , G . Bianchi , K . (cid:32) C . (cid:32)Anderson , P . O ' Gorman and A . McCann ( 2019 ) . " Targeting Proteotoxic Stress in Cancer : A Review of the Role that(cid:32) Protein Quality Control Pathways Play in Oncogenesis . " Cancers ( Basel ) 11 ( 1 ) . Guo , Y . E . , J . C . Manteiga , J . E . Henninger , B . R . Sabari , A . Dall ' Agnese , N . M . Hannett , J . H . Spille , L . K . Afeyan , A . V . (cid:32) Zamudio , K . Shrinivas , B . J . Abraham , A . Boija , T . M . Decker , J . K . Rimel , C . B . Fant , T . I . Lee , Cisse , II , P . A . Sharp , D . J . (cid:32) Taatjes and R . A . Young ( 2019 ) . " Pol II phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing(cid:32) condensates . " Nature 572 ( 7770 ) : 543 - 548 . Iadevaia , V . , Y . Huo , Z . Zhang , L . J . Foster and C . G . Proud ( 2012 ) . " Roles of the mammalian target of rapamycin , mTOR , in(cid:32) controlling ribosome biogenesis and protein synthesis . " Biochem Soc Trans 40 ( 1 ) : 168 - 172 . Jao , C . Y . and A . Salic ( 2008 ) . " Exploring RNA transcription and turnover in vivo by using click chemistry . " Proc Natl Acad(cid:32)Sci U S A 105 ( 41 ) : 15779 - 15784 . Johnson , J . L . , T . M . Yaron , E . M . Huntsman , A . Kerelsky , J . Song , A . Regev , T . Y . Lin , K . Liberatore , D . M . Cizin , B . M . (cid:32) Cohen , N . Vasan , Y . Ma , K . Krismer , J . T . Robles , B . van de Kooij , A . E . van Vlimmeren , N . Andree - Busch , N . F . Kaufer , M . (cid:32) V . (cid:32)Dorovkov , A . G . Ryazanov , Y . Takagi , E . R . Kastenhuber , M . D . Goncalves , B . D . Hopkins , O . Elemento , D . J . Taatjes , A . (cid:32) Maucuer , A . Yamashita , A . Degterev , M . Uduman , J . Lu , S . D . Landry , B . Zhang , I . Cossentino , R . Linding , J . Blenis , P . V . (cid:32) Hornbeck , B . E . Turk , M . B . Yaffe and L . C . Cantley ( 2023 ) . " An atlas of substrate specificities for the human serine / threonine kinome . " Nature 613 ( 7945 ) : 759 - 766 . Jorda , R . , D . Hendrychova , J . Voller , E . Reznickova , T . Gucky and V . Krystof ( 2018 ) . " How Selective Are Pharmacological(cid:32) Inhibitors of Cell - Cycle - Regulating Cyclin - Dependent Kinases ? " J Med Chem 61 ( 20 ) : 9105 - 9120 . Kozar , K . and P . Sicinski ( 2005 ) . " Cell cycle progression without cyclin D - CDK4 and cyclin D - CDK6 complexes . " Cell Cycle(cid:32) 4 ( 3 ) : 388 - 391 . Lafontaine , D . L . J . , J . A . Riback , R . Bascetin and C . P . Brangwynne ( 2021 ) . " The nucleolus as a multiphase liquid(cid:32) condensate . " Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 22 ( 3 ) : 165 - 182 . Latonen , L . , H . M . Moore , B . Bai , S . Jaamaa and M . Laiho ( 2011 ) . " Proteasome inhibitors induce nucleolar aggregation of(cid:32) proteasome target proteins and polyadenylated RNA by altering ubiquitin availability . " Oncogene 30 ( 7 ) : 790 - 805 . Lin , C . I . and N . H . Yeh ( 2009 ) . " Treacle recruits RNA polymerase I complex to the nucleolus that is independent of UBF . " (cid:32) Biochem Biophys Res Commun 386 ( 2 ) : 396 - 401 . 2 5 Liu , M . , X . Tu , G . Ferrari - Amorotti , B . Calabretta and R . Baserga ( 2007 ) . " Downregulation of the upstream binding factor1 by glycogen synthase kinase3beta in myeloid cells induced to differentiate . " J Cell Biochem 100 ( 5 ) : 1154 - 1169 . Malumbres , M . , E . Harlow , T . Hunt , T . Hunter , J . M . Lahti , G . Manning , D . O . Morgan , L . H . Tsai and D . J . Wolgemuth ( 2009 ) . " Cyclin - dependent kinases : a family portrait . " Nat Cell Biol 11 ( 11 ) : 1275 - 1276 . Mangan , H . , M . O . Gailin and B . McStay ( 2017 ) . " Integrating the genomic architecture of human nucleolar organizer regions with the biophysical properties of nucleoli . " FEBS J 284 ( 23 ) : 3977 - 3985 . Mars , J . C . , M . G . Tremblay , M . Valere , D . S . Sibai , M . Sabourin - Felix , F . Lessard and T . Moss ( 2020 ) . " The chemotherapeutic agent CX - 5461 irreversibly blocks RNA polymerase I initiation and promoter release to cause nucleolar disruption , DNA damage and cell inviability . " NAR Cancer 2 ( 4 ) : zcaa032 . Mayer , C . and I . Grummt ( 2006 ) . " Ribosome biogenesis and cell growth : mTOR coordinates transcription by all three classes of nuclear RNA polymerases . " Oncogene 25 ( 48 ) : 6384 - 6391 . Mitrea , D . M . , J . A . Cika , C . B . Stanley , A . Nourse , P . L . Onuchic , P . R . Banerjee , A . H . Phillips , C . G . Park , A . A . Deniz and R . W . Kriwacki ( 2018 ) . " Self - interaction of NPM1 modulates multiple mechanisms of liquid - liquid phase separation . " Nat Commun 9 ( 1 ) : 842 . Moss , T . and V . Y . Stefanovsky ( 2002 ) . " At the center of eukaryotic life . " Cell 109 ( 5 ) : 545 - 548 . Noack Watt , K . E . , A . Achilleos , C . L . Neben , A . E . Merrill and P . A . Trainor ( 2016 ) . " The Roles of RNA Polymerase I and III Subunits Polr1c and Polr1d in Craniofacial Development and in Zebrafish Models of Treacher Collins Syndrome . " PLoS Genet 12 ( 7 ) : e1006187 . Orlowski , R . Z . and D . J . Kuhn ( 2008 ) . " Proteasome inhibitors in cancer therapy : lessons from the first decade . " Clin Cancer Res 14 ( 6 ) : 1649 - 1657 . Palazzo , A . F . and E . S . Lee ( 2015 ) . " Non - coding RNA : what is functional and what is junk ? " Front Genet 6 : 2 . Parua , P . K . and R . P . Fisher ( 2020 ) . " Dissecting the Pol II transcription cycle and derailing cancer with CDK inhibitors . " Nat Chem Biol 16 ( 7 ) : 716 - 724 . Pederson , T . ( 2011 ) . " The nucleolus . " Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 ( 3 ) . Pelletier , J . , G . Thomas and S . Volarevic ( 2018 ) . " Ribosome biogenesis in cancer : new players and therapeutic avenues . " Nat Rev Cancer 18 ( 1 ) : 51 - 63 . Potapova , T . A . and J . L . Gerton ( 2019 ) . " Ribosomal DNA and the nucleolus in the context of genome organization . " Chromosome Res 27 ( 1 - 2 ) : 109 - 127 . Roussel , P . , C . Andre , C . Masson , G . Geraud and D . Hernandez - Verdun ( 1993 ) . " Localization of the RNA polymerase I transcription factor hUBF during the cell cycle . " J Cell Sci 104 ( Pt 2 ) : 327 - 337 . Sakai , D . and P . A . Trainor ( 2009 ) . " Treacher Collins syndrome : unmasking the role of Tcof1 / treacle . " Int J Biochem Cell Biol 41 ( 6 ) : 1229 - 1232 . Santamaria , D . , C . Barriere , A . Cerqueira , S . Hunt , C . Tardy , K . Newton , J . F . Caceres , P . Dubus , M . Malumbres and M . Barbacid ( 2007 ) . " Cdk1 is sufficient to drive the mammalian cell cycle . " Nature 448 ( 7155 ) : 811 - 815 . Schindelin , J . , I . Arganda - Carreras , E . Frise , V . Kaynig , M . Longair , T . Pietzsch , S . Preibisch , C . Rueden , S . Saalfeld , B . Schmid , J . Y . Tinevez , D . J . White , V . Hartenstein , K . Eliceiri , P . Tomancak and A . Cardona ( 2012 ) . " Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . " Nat Methods 9 ( 7 ) : 676 - 682 . Senderowicz , A . M . ( 1999 ) . " Flavopiridol : the first cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor in human clinical trials . " Invest New Drugs 17 ( 3 ) : 313 - 320 . Shapiro , G . I . , D . A . Koestner , C . B . Matranga and B . J . Rollins ( 1999 ) . " Flavopiridol induces cell cycle arrest and p53 - independent apoptosis in non - small cell lung cancer cell lines . " Clin Cancer Res 5 ( 10 ) : 2925 - 2938 . Shav - Tal , Y . , J . Blechman , X . Darzacq , C . Montagna , B . T . Dye , J . G . Patton , R . H . Singer and D . Zipori ( 2005 ) . " Dynamic sorting of nuclear components into distinct nucleolar caps during transcriptional inhibition . " Mol Biol Cell 16 ( 5 ) : 2395 - 2413 . Sobecki , M . , K . Mrouj , A . Camasses , N . Parisis , E . Nicolas , D . Lleres , F . Gerbe , S . Prieto , L . Krasinska , A . David , M . Eguren , M . C . Birling , S . Urbach , S . Hem , J . Dejardin , M . Malumbres , P . Jay , V . Dulic , D . Lafontaine , R . Feil and D . Fisher ( 2016 ) . " The cell proliferation antigen Ki - 67 organises heterochromatin . " Elife 5 : e13722 . Su , K . H . and C . Dai ( 2017 ) . " mTORC1 senses stresses : Coupling stress to proteostasis . " Bioessays 39 ( 5 ) . Takagi , M . , M . J . Absalon , K . G . McLure and M . B . Kastan ( 2005 ) . " Regulation of p53 translation and induction after DNA damage by ribosomal protein L26 and nucleolin . " Cell 123 ( 1 ) : 49 - 63 . Tartakoff , A . , P . DiMario , E . Hurt , B . McStay , V . G . Panse and D . Tollervey ( 2022 ) . " The dual nature of the nucleolus . " Genes Dev 36 ( 13 - 14 ) : 765 - 769 . 2 6 Trask , D . K . and M . T . Muller ( 1988 ) . " Stabilization of type I topoisomerase - DNA covalent complexes by actinomycin D . " Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 85 ( 5 ) : 1417 - 1421 . Trepel , J . , M . Mollapour , G . Giaccone and L . Neckers ( 2010 ) . " Targeting the dynamic HSP90 complex in cancer . " Nat Rev Cancer 10 ( 8 ) : 537 - 549 . Valdez , B . C . , D . Henning , R . B . So , J . Dixon and M . J . Dixon ( 2004 ) . " The Treacher Collins syndrome ( TCOF1 ) gene product is involved in ribosomal DNA gene transcription by interacting with upstream binding factor . " Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 ( 29 ) : 10709 - 10714 . Wang , B . , J . Wu , Y . Wu , C . Chen , F . Zou , A . Wang , H . Wu , Z . Hu , Z . Jiang , Q . Liu , W . Wang , Y . Zhang , F . Liu , M . Zhao , J . Hu , T . Huang , J . Ge , L . Wang , T . Ren , Y . Wang , J . Liu and Q . Liu ( 2018 ) . " Discovery of 4 - ( ( ( 4 - ( 5 - chloro - 2 - ( ( ( 1s , 4s ) - 4 - ( ( 2 - methoxyethyl ) amino ) cyclohexyl ) amino ) pyridin - 4 - yl ) thiazol - 2 - yl ) amino ) methyl ) tetrahydro - 2H - pyran - 4 - carbonitrile ( JSH - 150 ) as a novel highly selective and potent CDK9 kinase inhibitor . " Eur J Med Chem 158 : 896 - 916 . Wei , T . , S . M . Najmi , H . Liu , K . Peltonen , A . Kucerova , D . A . Schneider and M . Laiho ( 2018 ) . " Small - Molecule Targeting of RNA Polymerase I Activates a Conserved Transcription Elongation Checkpoint . " Cell Rep 23 ( 2 ) : 404 - 414 . Whittaker , S . R . , A . Mallinger , P . Workman and P . A . Clarke ( 2017 ) . " Inhibitors of cyclin - dependent kinases as cancer therapeutics . " Pharmacol Ther 173 : 83 - 105 . Wienert , B . , D . N . Nguyen , A . Guenther , S . J . Feng , M . N . Locke , S . K . Wyman , J . Shin , K . R . Kazane , G . L . Gregory , M . A . M . Carter , F . Wright , B . R . Conklin , A . Marson , C . D . Richardson and J . E . Corn ( 2020 ) . " Timed inhibition of CDC7 increases CRISPR - Cas9 mediated templated repair . " Nat Commun 11 ( 1 ) : 2109 . Zhang , H . , S . Pandey , M . Travers , H . Sun , G . Morton , J . Madzo , W . Chung , J . Khowsathit , O . Perez - Leal , C . A . Barrero , C . Merali , Y . Okamoto , T . Sato , J . Pan , J . Garriga , N . V . Bhanu , J . Simithy , B . Patel , J . Huang , N . J . Raynal , B . A . Garcia , M . A . Jacobson , C . Kadoch , S . Merali , Y . Zhang , W . Childers , M . Abou - Gharbia , J . Karanicolas , S . B . Baylin , C . A . Zahnow , J . Jelinek , X . Grana and J . J . Issa ( 2018 ) . " Targeting CDK9 Reactivates Epigenetically Silenced Genes in Cancer . " Cell 175 ( 5 ) : 1244 - 1258 e1226 . 2 7 Supplementary figure 1 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 BMH - 21 1 and 10µM hits 10µM only DMSO r = 0 . 8 p < 0 . 0001 Screen normality 10µM ( norm . to DMSO ) V a li da t i on no r m a li t y 10 µ M ( no r m . t o D M S O ) Nucleolin UBF DNA RPE1 BJ5TA CHON - 002 DLD1 HCT116 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 RPE1 BJ5TA CHON - 002 DLD1 HCT116 N u c l e o l a r n o r m a li t y s c o r e A B A . Correlation between the normality score for 152 hit compounds from the screen and the average from validation runs is plotted . RPE1 cells were treated with each compound at 10 µM for 24h . The validation experiment was replicated four times ( four plates ) . Normality scores were normalized to the average of DMSO control ( black points ) . Red points denote 1 and 10 µM hits , purple points denote 10 µM hits only . BMH21 – internal positive control , a known Pol I inhibitor present in the library . Normality scores from the validation runs strongly correlated with normality scores from the screen ( Pearson’s r = 0 . 8 , p < 0 . 0001 ) . C . Raw nucleolar normality scores of cell lines shown in ( B ) . Note lower normality scores in cancer cell lines DLD1 and HCT116 . B . Examples of normal nucleolar morphologies in control ( DMSO - treated ) hTERT cell lines RPE1 , BJ5TA , CHON - 002 , and cancer cell lines DLD1 and HCT116 . Fixed cells were labeled with antibodies against nucleolin and UBF and counter - stained with DAPI . DLD1 and HCT116 cells tend to have larger and more amorphous nucleoli than hTERT cell lines . Bar , 10µm . C 2 8 Supplementary f igure 2 Doxorubicin , 1µM BMH - 21 , 1µM Camptothecin , 5µM 17 - AAG , 10µM BIIB21 , 10µM Onalespib , 10µM Carfilzomib , 10µM Oprozomib , 10µM Nucleolin UBF DNA DMSO Sapanisertib , 10µM Taselicib , 10µM Dinaciclib , 10µM LY2857785 , 2 . 5 µ M Flavopiridol , 5µM Examples of immunofluorescence labeling of RPE1 cells treated with a panel of indicated compounds . Fixed cells were labeled with antibodies against nucleolin and UBF and counter - stained with DAPI . Bar , 10µm . 2 9 Supplementary figure 3 0 : 00 1 : 30 1 : 00 2 : 00 2 : 30 3 : 54 0 : 00 1 : 30 1 : 00 2 : 00 2 : 30 3 : 01 Nucleolin - GFP D A Flavopiridol addition Flavopiridol addition UBF - GFP 0 : 00 1 : 15 2 : 00 3 : 00 4 : 30 6 : 00 B Flavopiridol washout UBF POLR1A DNA DMSO CX - 5461 Flavopiridol 17 - AAG Carfilzomib UBF POLR1A P O L R 1 A a v e r age i n t en s i t y nu c l eo l u s / nu c l eop l a s m D M S O C X 5461 F l a v o p i r i d o l 17 - AA G C a r ﬁ l z o m i b * * * * 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 C Nucleolin - GFP D . Immunofluorescence images of RPE1 cells treated with indicated drugs as in Figure 3D and labeled with a different POLR1A mouse monoclonal antibody ( F - 6 ) than in Fig . 3D . UBF was labeled with the same antibody as in Figure 3D . Nuclei were counter - stained with DAPI . Bar , 10µm . Magnified inserts show details of individual nucleoli ( bar , 1µm ) . The plot on the right shows ratios of POLR1A signal intensity in the nucleolus versus nucleoplasm normalized to the average of DMSO controls . Asterisks indicate a significant reduction in nucleolar POLR1A ( P < 0 . 0001 , unpaired T - test flavopiridol vs . DMSO ) . A . Time - lapse images ( h : min ) of eGFP - nucleolin expressing cell RPE1 treated with 10 µM flavopiridol at time 0 are shown . Nucleolin largely disperses forming small round droplets within the diffused nucleoplasmic pool . The complete video sequence is shown in Video 3 . Bar , 10µm . B . Time - lapse images ( h : min ) of eGFP - UBF expressing RPE1 cell treated with 10 µM flavopiridol at time 0 are shown . UBF de - compacts into strings with some diffusion into the nucleoplasm . The complete video sequence is shown in Video 4 . Bar , 10µm . C . Time - lapse images ( h : min ) after flavopiridol washout are shown . RPE1 cell expressing eGFP - nucleolin was pre - treated with 10 µM flavopiridol for 5 hours , then the drug was washed out before imaging . Nucleoli re - formed within 4 - 5 hours . The complete video sequence is shown in Video 5 . Bar , 10µm . 30 Supplementary figure 4 DMSO CX - 5461 Flavopiridol AZD4573 JSH - 150 DMSO CX - 5461 Flavopiridol AZD4573 JSH - 150 Ki - 67 UBF Ki - 67 DNA A D UBF Treacle DNA B In vitro kinase assay CD K 9 / cy c li n K CD K 9 / cyc li n T N o k i na s e CD K 9 / cy c li n K CD K 9 / cyc li n T - ATP - ATP CD K 9 / cyc li n K CD K 9 / cy c li n T Pol II Treacle MW , kDa Substrate 170130 100 70 55 40 35 CDK9 / cyclin K dilution Substrate none Pol I Pol II 1x 1x 0 . 1x 0 . 1x 1x In vitro kinase assay 191138 C kDa A . Examples of immunofluorescence labeling of RPE1 cells treated with CX - 5461 ( 2 . 5 µM ) and flavopiridol ( 5 µM ) , AZD4573 ( 5 µM ) , and JSH - 150 ( 5 µM ) for 5 hours . Fixed cells were labeled with antibodies against Ki - 67 and UBF . Nuclei were counter - stained with DAPI . Bar , 10µm . Magnified inserts show details of individual nucleoli ( bar , 1µm ) . B . In vitro radiolabeled [ γ - 32 P ] ATP CDK9 / cyclin K and CDK9 / cyclin T kinase assays with isolated RNA Pol I and RNA Pol II holoenzymes and recombinant Treacle as substrates . Lanes 1 - 2 contained isolated RNA Pol II complex as a substrate , while lanes 3 - 7 contained Treacle as a substrate . CDK9 / cyclin K effectively phosphorylated both RNA Pol II and Treacle . CDK9 / cyclin T activity towards RNA Pol II ( positive control ) was minimal , suggesting low activity of the reagent . No kinase and no [ γ - 32 P ] ATP control lanes were blank as expected . Molecular weight markers are shown on the corresponding image of the gel stained with Coomassie blue . C . In vitro CDK9 / cyclin K kinase assays with isolated RNA Pol I and RNA Pol II holoenzymes and [ γ - 32 P ] ATP . CDK / cyclin complex was used at 1x ( 0 . 1 µg ) or 0 . 1x ( 0 . 01 µg ) concentrations . The first two lanes contained RNA Pol I complex and the second two lanes contained RNA Pol II complex as a substrate . CDK9 phosphorylated RNA Pol II but not RNA Pol I . The negative control ( last lane ) contained no substrate . Molecular weights of RNA Pol II holoenzyme subunits Rbp1 ( 191 kDa ) and Rbp2 ( 138 kDa ) are indicated . D . Examples of immunofluorescence labeling of RPE1 cells treated as in ( A ) and labeled with antibodies against Treacle and UBF . Nuclei were counter - stained with DAPI . Bar , 10µm . Magnified inserts show details of individual nucleoli ( bar , 1µm ) . 31 Video legends : Video 1 . Fluorescence and phase - contrast time - lapse video of a human RPE1 cell stably expressing eGFP - nucleolin that was treated with 2 . 5 µM Pol I inhibitor CX - 5461 . Nucleoli shrink and round up forming small circular remnants . Fluorescence intensity decreases in nucleolar remnants and increases in the nucleoplasm . Time is indicated as minutes after drug addition . Bar , 10μm . Video 2 . Fluorescence and phase - contrast time - lapse video of a human RPE1 cell stably expressing eGFP - UBF that was treated with 2 . 5µM RNA Pol I inhibitor CX - 5461 . UBF condenses on the periphery of nucleolar remnants forming stress caps of high fluorescence intensity . Time is indicated as minutes after drug addition . Bar , 10μm . Video 3 . Fluorescence and phase - contrast time - lapse video of a human RPE1 cell stably expressing eGFP - nucleolin that was treated with 10 µM CDK inhibitor flavopiridol . Nucleolin largely disperses forming small round droplets within the diffused nucleoplasmic pool . Time is indicated as minutes after drug addition . Bar , 10μm . Video 4 . Fluorescence and phase - contrast time - lapse video of a human RPE1 cell stably expressing eGFP - UBF that was treated with 10 µM CDK inhibitor flavopiridol . UBF de - compacts into strings with some diffusion into the nucleoplasm . Time is indicated as minutes after drug addition . Bar , 10μm . Video 5 . Fluorescence and phase - contrast time - lapse video of a human RPE1 cell stably expressing eGFP - nucleolin after flavopiridol washout . The cell was pre - treated with 10 µM flavopiridol for 5 hours , then the drug was washed out before imaging . Nucleoli re - form within 4 - 6 hours . Time is indicated as minutes after drug washout and initiation of imaging . Bar , 10μm . Video 6 . Fluorescence and phase - contrast time - lapse video of a human RPE1 cell with endogenous NPM1 tagged with eGFP treated with 2 . 5 µM CX - 5461 . NPM1 - GFP concentrates inside the nucleolar remnants over time . Time is indicated as minutes after drug addition . Bar , 10μm . Video 7 . Fluorescence and phase - contrast time - lapse video of a human RPE1 cell with endogenous NPM1 tagged with eGFP treated with 10 µM flavopiridol . NPM1 - GFP disperses into multiple small round globules , and the fluorescent intensity of the nucleoplasm pool increases . Time is indicated as minutes after drug addition . Bar , 10μm . 32