doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00341 . 2002 283 : 1801 - 1808 , 2002 . First published Aug 14 , 2002 ; Am J Physiol Cell Physiol Kenneth J . Cavanaugh , Jr . and Susan S . Margulies method epithelial barrier integrity with a novel in vitro Measurement of stretch - induced loss of alveolar You might find this additional information useful . . . 25 articles , 19 of which you can access free at : This article cites http : / / ajpcell . physiology . org / cgi / content / full / 283 / 6 / C1801 # BIBL 11 other HighWire hosted articles , the first 5 are : This article has been cited by [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , August 1 , 2008 ; 105 ( 2 ) : 652 - 661 . J Appl Physiol E . U . Azeloglu , J . Bhattacharya and K . D . Costa stiffnessAtomic force microscope elastography reveals phenotypic differences in alveolar cell [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , November 1 , 2008 ; 295 ( 5 ) : L958 - L965 . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol L . P . Desai , K . E . Chapman and C . M . Waters involving Rac1 and Tiam1 Mechanical stretch decreases migration of alveolar epithelial cells through mechanisms [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , January 1 , 2009 ; 106 ( 1 ) : 221 - 232 . J Appl Physiol H . L . Dailey , L . M . Ricles , H . C . Yalcin and S . N . Ghadiali reopeningImage - based finite element modeling of alveolar epithelial cell injury during airway [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , April 1 , 2009 ; 296 ( 4 ) : L574 - L581 . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol S . P . Arold , E . Bartolak - Suki and B . Suki Variable stretch pattern enhances surfactant secretion in alveolar type II cells in culture [ PDF ] [ Full Text ] [ Abstract ] , November 1 , 2009 ; 297 ( 5 ) : L881 - L891 . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol H . C . Yalcin , K . M . Hallow , J . Wang , M . T . Wei , H . D . Ou - Yang and S . N . Ghadiali airway reopening Influence of cytoskeletal structure and mechanics on epithelial cell injury during cyclic including high - resolution figures , can be found at : Updated information and services http : / / ajpcell . physiology . org / cgi / content / full / 283 / 6 / C1801 can be found at : AJP - Cell Physiology about Additional material and information http : / / www . the - aps . org / publications / ajpcell This information is current as of May 6 , 2010 . http : / / www . the - aps . org / . American Physiological Society . ISSN : 0363 - 6143 , ESSN : 1522 - 1563 . Visit our website at a year ( monthly ) by the American Physiological Society , 9650 Rockville Pike , Bethesda MD 20814 - 3991 . Copyright © 2005 by the is dedicated to innovative approaches to the study of cell and molecular physiology . It is published 12 times AJP - Cell Physiology on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m special communication Measurement of stretch - induced loss of alveolar epithelial barrier integrity with a novel in vitro method KENNETH J . CAVANAUGH , JR . AND SUSAN S . MARGULIES Department of Bioengineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 Received 23 July 2002 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 6 August 2002 Cavanaugh , Kenneth J . , Jr . and Susan S . Margulies . Measurement of stretch - induced loss of alveolar epithelial barrier integrity with a novel in vitro method . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 : C1801 – C1808 , 2002 . First published Au - gust 14 , 2002 ; 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00341 . 2002 . —Mechanical ven - tilation with high tidal volumes has been shown to contribute to the formation or worsening of interstitial and alveolar edema . Previously we showed that application of large bi - axial deformations in vitro perturbs the concentration and distribution of functional tight junction proteins in alveolar epithelial cells . Using a novel method , we determined that applied epithelial strain increases paracellular permeability in a dose - and rate - dependent manner . Primary rat alveolar epithelial cells were subjected to 12 % , 25 % , or 37 % change in surface area ( (cid:1) SA ) cyclic equibiaxial stretch for 1 h . Cells were also stretched noncyclically at 25 % (cid:1) SA for 1 h . During the experimental period , a ﬂuorescently tagged ouabain de - rivative was added to the apical ﬂuid . Evidence of binding indicated functional failure of the paracellular transport bar - rier . The percentage of ﬁeld area stained was quantiﬁed from microscopic images . There was no signiﬁcant evidence of basolateral ﬂuorescent staining at 12 % (cid:1) SA or at 25 % (cid:1) SA applied cyclically or statically . However , cyclic stretch at 37 % (cid:1) SA resulted in signiﬁcantly more staining than in un - stretched cells ( P (cid:2) 0 . 0001 ) or those stretched at either 12 % ( P (cid:2) 0 . 0001 ) or 25 % cyclic ( P (cid:2) 0 . 0005 ) or static ( P (cid:2) 0 . 05 ) (cid:1) SA . These results suggest that large cyclic tidal volumes may increase paracellular permeability , potentially resulting in alveolar ﬂooding . injury ; lung ; transport PATIENTS SUFFERING FROM acute or chronic lung injury , or who experience poor pulmonary gas exchange , are able to receive respiratory assistance through controlled mechanical ventilation . However , ventilation with ex - cessive regional lung volumes or high pressures can result in the development of ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) ( 14 ) . VILI occurs in (cid:3) 5 – 15 % of ventilated patients and carries an associated mortality rate of 34 – 60 % ( 14 , 20 , 25 ) , representing a signiﬁcant health risk for patients requiring ventilation ( 20 , 25 ) . VILI is commonly marked by the formation or worsening of alveolar air leaks , interstitial and pulmonary edema , and alveolar cell dysfunction , indicative of decreased endothelial and epithelial barrier function ( 9 ) . Previously , investigators demonstrated a strong qualitative link between lung inﬂation volume and pulmonary barrier function in whole lung and animal models . In an open - chest preparation , the number of pulmonary epithelial and endothelial breaks increased at higher lung volumes , regardless of the transmural pressure of the alveolar wall ( 13 ) . When animals were ventilated with high airway pressures but normal tidal volumes , lungs were uninjured , as determined by wet - to - dry ratio and albumin permeability ( 8 ) . Conversely , ventilation with high tidal volumes , with or without high airway pressure , resulted in increased wet - to - dry ratios and permeability to albumin in these studies , demonstrating that large tidal volumes impair barrier properties of previously uninjured lungs . To quantify the extent of barrier dysfunction due to “volutrauma , ” investigators have measured transport of large and small solutes across the epithelium , often expressing the results as an equivalent pore radius , a measure that increases as the epithelium allows larger molecules to pass more easily . Many of these ﬁndings indicate that high static inﬂation volumes adversely affect the solute and ﬂuid balance that is required for proper pulmonary function ( 10 – 12 , 15 ) . However , none of these studies examined lungs experiencing cyclic changes in volume , which is the most clinically rele - vant mode of ventilation . Also , these studies examined lobar or whole lung inﬂations , which are inherently heterogeneous , and did not examine the effects of lung inﬂation at the local , or cellular , level . The cellular structures that provide the majority of resistance to paracellular transport are the gasketlike tight junctions ( TJ ) of the alveolar epithelium located Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : S . S . Mar - gulies , Dept . of Bioengineering , Univ . of Pennsylvania , 3320 Smith Walk , Philadelphia , PA 19104 ( E - mail : margulie @ seas . upenn . edu ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . The article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘ advertisement ’’ in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 : C1801 – C1808 , 2002 . First published August 14 , 2002 ; 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00341 . 2002 . 0363 - 6143 / 02 $ 5 . 00 Copyright © 2002 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajpcell . org C1801 on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m at the apical end of the intercellular space between adjacent epithelial cells . Intact , they minimize paracel - lular transport , allowing the cells to regulate transport via transcellular pathways ( 16 ) . Previously , we demon - strated ( 5 ) that application of high magnitudes of cyclic mechanical stretch decreases the concentration of functional TJ proteins in cultured alveolar epithelial cells and alters their distribution around the cell mem - brane . Given the importance of the TJ in maintaining the alveolar epithelial paracellular transport barrier , we hypothesized that these stretch - induced cytostruc - tural changes are associated with an increase in epi - thelial paracellular permeability . In this article , we test this hypothesis by examining the alveolar epithelial paracellular permeability re - sponse to changes in the magnitude and mode of stretch . The common measures of epithelial permeabil - ity , such as transepithelial electrical resistance and transport of labeled tracers ( 3 , 6 , 18 ) , require the cells to be cultured onto a permeable substrate . Further - more , stretching of cultured cells usually involves the use of elastic and ﬂexible substrates . Heretofore , the lack of cell culture substrates that are permeable , elastic , and biocompatible hindered the measurement of stretch - induced alterations in paracellular perme - ability in cultured cells . In this article we present a new method to assess paracellular permeability useful for alveolar epithelial cells cultured onto an imperme - able substrate . Changes in paracellular permeability of cultured alveolar epithelial cells were evaluated after application of stretch at various magnitudes under both cyclic and static stretch modes . At a given mag - nitude , stretch mode did not affect paracellular perme - ability in these cells . Paracellular permeability in - creased afte r 1 h ofcyclic stretch at 37 % change in surface area ( (cid:1) SA ) , consistent with our previously re - ported structural data . Together , these results indicate that sustained cycling at physiological magnitudes of alveolar strain may impair epithelial barrier function , increasing the likelihood of pulmonary edema forma - tion or enhancement . MATERIALS AND METHODS Method rationale . The technique used for the assessment of paracellular permeability described in this article is made possible by the polarity that alveolar epithelial cells display and by the extremely low paracellular permeability that conﬂuent monolayers of type I cells demonstrate , as indi - cated by their high transepithelial electrical resistance of (cid:3) 2 , 000 (cid:4) (cid:1) cm 2 ( 6 ) . These cells possess functional Na (cid:5) - K (cid:5) - ATPases only on the basolateral surfaces of the plasma membrane ( 26 ) . The Na (cid:5) - K (cid:5) - ATPases are inhibited by the compound ouabain , which has a high afﬁnity for the extra - cellular domain of this transmembrane protein in all cell types . In designing this study , we hypothesized that paracel - lular permeability will increase when cells are stretched above a certain threshold . Thus , if ouabain is present only in the ﬂuid surrounding the apical surface of a conﬂuent mono - layer of type I - like cells , stretched cells will allow a greater amount of ouabain transport through the TJ than un - stretched cells and will therefore demonstrate a greater ex - tent of ouabain - ATPase binding . To detect the appearance of ouabain in the basolateral space and to measure the extent of binding , we used a derivative of ouabain bound to the ﬂuo - rescent dye BODIPY - FL that possesses the same speciﬁcity of binding as unconjugated ouabain . Cell culture protocol . The protocol for lung cell isolation was approved by the University of Pennsylvania Institu - tional Animal Care and Use Committee and is based on the method of Dobbs and coworkers ( 7 ) . Alveolar type II cells were isolated from healthy male Sprague - Dawley rats ( 180 – 200 g ) . The rats were anesthetized with pentobarbital so - dium ( 50 mg / kg body wt ip ) . The trachea was cannulated , the lungs were mechanically ventilated , an abdominal aortotomy was performed to exsanguinate the animal , and excess blood was removed via pulmonary arterial perfusion . The lungs were then excised and instilled with an elastase solution ( 3 U / ml ; Worthington Biochemical , Lakewood , NJ ) and minced in the presence of deoxyribonuclease ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) with a tissue chopper ( Sorvall , Newtown , CT ) . The elastase reaction was stopped with fetal bovine serum ( Life Technol - ogies , Rockville , MD ) . Cells were ﬁltered through progres - sively ﬁner Nitex mesh ( Crosswire Cloth , Bellmawr , NJ ) , and plated on an IgG - coated culture dish ( 3 mg / 5 ml Tris (cid:1) HCl ) . After a 1 - h incubation at 37°C , gentle panning isolated type II cells from the macrophages and contaminating cells pref - erentially adhered to the culture dish . Ultimately , cells were spun down and resuspended in minimum essential medium ( MEM ) with Earle’s salts and supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 25 (cid:6) g / ml gentamicin , and 0 . 25 (cid:6) g / ml ampho - tericin B ( Life Technologies ) . Cell purity of this isolation procedure is (cid:7) 95 % , as determined by phosphine 3R staining of adherent cells ( 17 ) . All cells were seeded at a density of 1 (cid:8) 10 6 cells / cm 2 onto ﬁbronectin - coated ( 10 (cid:6) g / cm 2 ; Boehringer Mannheim Bio - chemicals , Indianapolis , IN ) ﬂexible Silastic membranes ( Specialty Manufacturing , Saginaw , MI ) mounted in custom - made wells . The cells were cultured in MEM supplemented as above for 5 days . It was reported previously that rat alveolar type II cells differentiate into type I cells ( which cover (cid:7) 90 % of the alveolar surface in vivo ) after 5 days under similar culture conditions ( 4 ) . The medium was replaced daily . By the ﬁfth day of culture , the cells had formed a conﬂuent monolayer and displayed a phenotype consistent with that observed for cultured type I cells . We showed previously ( 19 ) that (cid:7) 95 % of identically cultured cells stain positively for RTI - 40 , a type I cell - speciﬁc surface antigen . After 5 days , the cells were washed with dye - free Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ; Life Technologies ) and subjected to the stretch protocol described in Stretch appli - cation . Unstretched wells served as controls in all experi - ments . Four isolations were performed for each stretch magni - tude . Two wells per isolation were stretched at each magni - tude , resulting in a total of eight wells for each group . The unstretched control group also consisted of two wells per isolation . Stretch application . Wells were mounted onto a custom - built cell - stretching device capable of applying equibiaxial strain to the samples at a precise user - deﬁned magnitude and frequency , as previously described ( 22 ) . Cells were stretched cyclically at 15 cycles / min for 1 h at12 % , 25 % , or 37 % (cid:1) SA . These changes in surface area approximately cor - respond to strains experienced by the alveolar epithelium in vivo at 70 % , 90 % , and 100 % total lung capacity ( TLC ) , re - spectively ( 23 ) . An additional set of wells was stretched statically ( 0 cycles / min ) for 1 h at 25 % (cid:1) SA . As a positive control , a separate population of unstretched cells was scraped once with a rubber policeman . During the 1 - h stretch C1802 STRETCH ALTERS ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 283 • DECEMBER 2002 • www . ajpcell . org on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m period , or for 1 h after the scrape , the apical surface of the stretched and unstretched cells was bathed in DMEM con - taining 2 (cid:6) M BODIPY - ouabain ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) . Nonspeciﬁc binding was evaluated by adding 2 (cid:6) M unconjugated BODIPY ( Molecular Probes ) to a separate pop - ulation of two wells stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA . Cells were stretched in darkness to prevent photobleaching of the dye . The temperature of the stretch device was maintained at 20°C to minimize endocytosis of the dye but not impair cellular homeostasis . Under identical conditions , we reported previously ( 22 ) that cyclic mechanical stretch of similarly cultured cells produces death because of membrane rupture in 2 – 9 % of the monolayer . To determine whether BODIPY - ouabain was preferentially binding to dead cells , two wells from each of three isolations stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA were also incubated with 230 nM ethidium homodimer - 1 ( Molecular Probes ) , which speciﬁcally stains cells whose plasma membranes have been compromised . Unstretched double - stained wells from each isolation served as unstretched controls . After stretch , the cells were washed three times with DMEM to remove the apical BODIPY - ouabain and ethidium homodimer - 1 . The wells were then examined with the proto - col described in Microscopic examination . Microscopic examination . Wells were mounted onto a Ni - kon TE - 300 inverted epiﬂuorescence microscope and exam - ined at (cid:8) 20 magniﬁcation . Two ﬁelds from each well were selected randomly , and two images of each ﬁeld with a phase objective or a green ( BODIPY - ouabain ﬂuorescence ) emission ﬁlter were captured and stored with Metamorph imaging software ( Universal Imaging , West Chester , PA ) and a mi - croscope - mounted Hamamatsu camera and controller . Iden - tical image acquisition times were used for all images of each type acquired . After all images were captured , we wanted to distinguish whether the observed green ﬂuorescence was due to endocy - tosis of BODIPY - ouabain into the cell or whether BODIPY - ouabain had in fact bound to the basolateral surface of the plasma membrane . Anti - BODIPY antibody ( Molecular Probes ) was added in a 1 : 40 dilution to one of the two wells from each group in every isolation . All wells were then kept overnight at 4°C to inhibit nonspeciﬁc endocytosis ( 21 , 24 ) , and images were obtained again as above on the following day . Anti - BODIPY , when bound with BODIPY - ouabain , quenches the ﬂuorescent signal of the BODIPY - ouabain bound to Na (cid:5) - K (cid:5) - ATPase pumps . Given the large size of the anti - BODIPY molecule ( radius (cid:3) 15 – 20 Å ) and the low incu - bation temperature , it was expected that anti - BODIPY would not be internalized by the cells . To rule out the possi - bility that loss of BODIPY - ouabain ﬂuorescence overnight could be attributed to dye photobleaching and not antibody quenching , the other well from each group was incubated overnight without the antibody for comparison . If both wells remained brightly ﬂuorescent , the BODIPY - ouabain had been internalized . If both became dark , the BODIPY - ouabain had been photobleached . However , if wells treated with anti - BODIPY demonstrated reduced ﬂuorescence compared with those without antibody treatment , we would conclude that the BODIPY - ouabain was bound in the extracellular domain . Additional experimentation . The inﬂuence of speciﬁc endo - cytotic pathways on cell staining was determined by treating one unstretched well and one well stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA from each of three isolations with 5 (cid:6) M phenylarsine oxide ( PAO ; Sigma ) , an inhibitor of receptor - mediated endocytosis . These wells were treated during the entire 1 - h experimental period with PAO , BODIPY - ouabain , and ethidium homodimer - 1 and examined as described in Microscopic examination . One untreated , unstretched well and one untreated well stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA from each isolation served as untreated controls . Treatment of alveolar epithelial cells with PAO using a similar concentration and duration has been shown to de - crease endocytotic activity without adversely affecting cellu - lar viability ( 2 ) . In a limited manner , cells were also treated with a higher concentration of PAO ( 10 (cid:6) M ) , but these results were no different than those at 5 (cid:6) M ( data not shown ) . Signiﬁcantly more BODIPY - ouabain staining in the stretched , PAO - treated group compared with the stretched , untreated group would indicate that receptor - mediated en - docytosis was involved in stretch - induced BODIPY - ouabain binding . Two additional wells from each of three isolations were treated with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( TX ; Sigma ) for 10 min to permeabilize the cells . After this time , the cells were washed and bathed in BODIPY - ouabain and ethidium homodimer - 1 , during which one of these wells was then stretched for 1 h at 37 % (cid:1) SA and the other remained unstretched . One un - treated , unstretched well and one untreated well stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA from each isolation served as untreated controls . Wells were then examined microscopically as described in Microscopic examination . These experiments served as a positive control for BODIPY - ouabain transport to the cell membrane due to nonspeciﬁc membrane permeabilization . The contribution of speciﬁc stretch - induced endocytosis to increased BODIPY - ouabain staining was also investigated . Six wells from each of two cell isolations were stretched for 1 h at 37 % (cid:1) SA . Half of the wells were treated with BODIPY - ouabain for 1 h during stretch , and the remainder were treated for 1 h after completion of the stretch stimulus . Three wells from each isolation served as unstretched controls . Wells were then examined microscopically and analyzed as above . Signiﬁcantly more staining in the wells stained during stretch would indicate that the stretch - induced increase in BODIPY - ouabain staining is the result of transient and spe - ciﬁc stretch - induced uptake . Data analysis . With Metamorph , a ﬂuorescence intensity threshold was applied to each ﬂuorescence image to examine the signal above background ﬂuorescence levels . Background ﬂuorescence levels were determined for each isolation by selecting a large region from each unstretched ﬂuorescence image and calculating the maximum pixel intensity in each of these regions . This intensity was used as the threshold for all stretched and unstretched images from that isolation . Occasional regions that contained non - cell - speciﬁc autoﬂuo - rescence were not included . For each image , the pixels pos - sessing intensities above the threshold and below saturation were counted and expressed as a percentage of total ﬁeld area . Average intensity of these pixels was also calculated for each ﬁeld of stretched cells . Stained area and intensity mea - surements from unstretched and stretched wells were com - pared with the Tukey test for signiﬁcant differences across multiple groups ( 28 ) . Results are expressed as means (cid:9) SE . RESULTS Extent of BODIPY - ouabain stained area . Both stretched and unstretched cells displayed at least a small degree of BODIPY - ouabain staining ( Fig . 1 ) . Cells stretched cyclically for 1 h at 12 % (cid:1) SA ( 2 . 4 (cid:9) 0 . 6 % of ﬁeld area stained ) or 25 % (cid:1) SA ( 4 . 2 (cid:9) 0 . 9 % ) did not experience signiﬁcantly greater BODIPY - ouabain staining than unstretched , untreated cells ( 2 . 1 (cid:9) 0 . 3 % ) . In contrast , cyclic stretch at 37 % (cid:1) SA increased the area of BODIPY - ouabain staining to 16 . 8 (cid:9) 4 . 7 % of C1803 STRETCH ALTERS ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 283 • DECEMBER 2002 • www . ajpcell . org on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m the ﬁeld . This increase was signiﬁcant compared with unstretched cells and with all other stretched popula - tions ( Fig . 2 ) . BODIPY - ouabain staining was not pref - erentially colocalized with ethidium homodimer - 1 binding , indicating that plasma membrane rupture was not a main factor by which BODIPY - ouabain was able to bind to cells ( Fig . 3 ) . Previously , we showed ( 5 ) that this stretch regimen alters distribution and ex - pression of the functional TJ protein occludin in simi - larly cultured cells . Together , these results indicate that stretch magnitude is a determinant of the extent of paracellular barrier dysfunction in cultured alveolar epithelial cells . To determine whether this increase in ﬂuorescence could be due to an increase in visible cellular surface area , we measured the surface areas of individual cells before stretch application and com - pared them to the areas of the same cells measured afte r 1 h of 37 % (cid:1) SA cyclic stretch . Paired analysis of the measured areas did not reveal a signiﬁcant change in cell surface area ( data not shown ) . Static stretch at 25 % (cid:1) SA ( 7 . 5 (cid:9) 1 . 7 % ) did not result in increased ﬂuorescence staining compared with un - stretched cells or those stretched cyclically at 25 % (cid:1) SA ( Fig . 2 ) . Thus stretch mode did not affect paracellular permeability at this magnitude during this study . BODIPY - ouabain staining in scraped monolayers was conﬁned to cells immediately bordering the scraped re - gion ( Fig . 1 , left ) . No staining was observed in the de - nuded region or in areas where the monolayer remained conﬂuent . As in stretched cells , this staining did not colocalize with ethidium homodimer - 1 staining ( Fig . 3 ) , indicating that BODIPY - ouabain binding in cells near the scraped regions was not due to plasma membrane rupture . Treatment of cells with unconjugated BODIPY dye during 1 h of cyclic stretch at 37 % (cid:1) SA did not result in signiﬁcant cellular staining ( 7 . 3 (cid:9) 2 . 9 % staining com - pared with 5 . 8 (cid:9) 3 . 1 % staining of unstretched controls ; n (cid:10) 8 wells for both groups ) , indicating that BODIPY - ouabain binding to the cells was not merely the result of nonspeciﬁc interactions between the BODIPY - ouabain and the cells ( Fig . 2 ) . Furthermore , overnight treatment of cells at 4°C with an anti - BODIPY anti - body after stretch signiﬁcantly decreased the observed stained region from 16 . 8 (cid:9) 4 . 8 % to 1 . 2 (cid:9) 0 . 5 % of the ﬁeld ( Fig . 4 ) . This decrease is not merely the result of dye photobleaching or other factors that would cause a nonspeciﬁc loss of ﬂuorescence overnight , because cells incubated overnight without anti - BODIPY showed no signiﬁcant loss of ﬂuorescent signal ( 15 . 3 (cid:9) 2 . 3 % of region stained ) . Because ﬂuorescence was quenched to 1 . 2 (cid:9) 0 . 5 % , we believe that the BODIPY - ouabain was not internalized and that the ﬂuorescent regions mea - sured after stretch were caused by BODIPY - ouabain that was bound to the cell exterior . PAO treatment did not affect BODIPY - ouabain staining in either stretched or unstretched cells ( Fig . 5 ) , indicating that receptor - mediated endocytosis was not involved in BODIPY - ouabain binding . Cellular vi - Fig . 1 . Superimposed phase and ﬂuorescence micrographs of cells stained with BODIPY - ouabain after being scraped once with a rub - ber policeman ( left ) and after 1 - h cyclic stretch at 25 % ( center ) or 37 % ( right ) change in surface area ( (cid:1) SA ) . Bar (cid:10) 20 (cid:6) m . Fig . 2 . Extent of BODIPY - ouabain and unconjugated BODIPY bind - ing as a function of applied strain . Cells stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA demonstrated signiﬁcant BODIPY - ouabain staining , thus indicating failure of tight junction barrier function . Unconjugated BODIPY staining did not change after stretch , indicating that the stretch - induced increase in ﬂuorescence was speciﬁc to BODIPY - ouabain . Results are means (cid:9) SE ( n (cid:10) 8 wells for all groups ) . * P (cid:2) 0 . 0001 compared with controls and 12 % (cid:1) SA , P (cid:2) 0 . 0005 compared with cyclic 25 % (cid:1) SA , P (cid:2) 0 . 05 compared with static 25 % (cid:1) SA . Fig . 3 . Phase ( A and B ) and superimposed green ( BODIPY - ouabain ) and red ( ethidium homodimer - 1 ) ﬂuorescence ( C and D ) micro - graphs . A and C : cell monolayer was scraped once with a rubber policeman . B and D : cells were stretched cyclically fo r 1 h at 37 % (cid:1) SA . Bars (cid:10) 50 (cid:6) m . C1804 STRETCH ALTERS ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 283 • DECEMBER 2002 • www . ajpcell . org on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ability was not affected by PAO treatment , as deter - mined by ethidium homodimer - 1 staining . Treatment of cells with TX produced an increase in ethidium homodimer - 1 staining , conﬁrming that the cells had been permeabilized ( Fig . 6 ) . The amount of BODIPY - ouabain ﬂuorescence in unstretched cells in - creased from 0 . 3 (cid:9) 0 . 1 % to 46 . 3 (cid:9) 4 . 6 % after TX treatment . Stretched cells also experienced a signiﬁ - cant increase in BODIPY - ouabain ﬂuorescence after TX treatment , from 14 . 2 (cid:9) 0 . 8 % to 62 . 4 (cid:9) 4 . 5 % . The increase in ﬂuorescence after TX treatment in un - stretched cells is signiﬁcantly greater than in stretched and untreated cells ( Fig . 6 ) , indicating that stretch - induced BODIPY - ouabain staining occurs via a path - way different from that which occurs after permeabili - zation of the cells . This difference in binding pathways is also evident in the signiﬁcant difference between BODIPY - ouabain staining in unstretched , TX - treated cells and stretched , TX - treated cells ( Fig . 6 ) . Stretch - induced BODIPY - ouabain staining did not dif - fer in cells stained during ( 16 . 1 (cid:9) 1 . 3 % ) or after ( 17 . 4 (cid:9) 2 . 3 % ) stretch . This provides further evidence that the observed increase in staining is not due to stretch - in - duced endocytotic pathways speciﬁc to BODIPY - ouabain . Intensity of BODIPY - ouabain staining . Average in - tensity of suprathreshold pixels in stretched cell ﬁelds did not differ signiﬁcantly from those in unstretched control wells at 12 % ( 108 . 0 (cid:9) 4 . 3 % of average intensity of controls ) , 25 % cyclic (cid:1) SA ( 103 . 9 (cid:9) 6 . 6 % ) , and 25 % static (cid:1) SA ( 121 . 0 (cid:9) 5 . 5 % ; Fig . 7 ) . However , at 37 % (cid:1) SA , intensity was signiﬁcantly higher than in con - trols ( 130 . 7 (cid:9) 5 . 9 % ; P (cid:2) 0 . 01 ) . This result suggests that this magnitude of stretch increases the amount as well as the extent of BODIPY - ouabain binding to the basolateral surface . DISCUSSION Our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that moderate static and cyclic inﬂation volumes do not adversely affect paracellular barrier function . The BODIPY - ouabain staining in unstretched , untreated cells was low , averaging 2 . 1 % of the microscopic ﬁeld areas ex - amined . Cyclic stretch for 1 h at 12 % or 25 % (cid:1) SA did not result in an increase in ﬂuorescence . One hour of static stretch at 25 % (cid:1) SA did not produce a signiﬁ - cantly different staining intensity compared with con - trol levels or with staining after cyclic stretch at 25 % (cid:1) SA . Thus we conclude that paracellular permeability did not increase in cells stretched at these magnitudes , which correspond roughly to inﬂations to lung volumes averaging 70 % and 90 % TLC ( 23 ) . In contrast , 1 h of cyclic inﬂations to 100 % TLC ( 23 ) ( 37 % (cid:1) SA ) resulted in signiﬁcantly increased paracellular transport ( 16 . 8 % of the ﬁeld stained ) , compared with all other experimen - tal groups . Fig . 5 . BODIPY - ouabain binding in phe - nylarsine oxide ( PAO ) - treated and un - treated cells , both unstretched and stretched cyclically fo r 1 h at 37 % (cid:1) SA . PAO treatment did not affect BODIPY - ouabain staining compared with un - treated controls . Representative ﬂuores - cence microscopic ﬁelds showing ethidium homodimer - 1 ( EthD - 1 ) staining ( a marker of cell membrane rupture ) are provided for each group , and they indicate that PAO treatment did not affect cell viability . * P (cid:2) 0 . 05 compared with both unstretched con - ditions . Fig . 4 . BODIPY - ouabain binding in cells stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA before and after anti - BODIPY treatment . BODIPY - ouabain staining was not signiﬁcantly different in cells viewed immediately after stretch and 12 h after stretch . Cells treated with anti - BODIPY antibody and viewed 12 h after stretch demonstrated signiﬁcantly decreased staining . * P (cid:2) 0 . 05 compared with cells viewed immedi - ately after stretch , P (cid:2) 0 . 001 compared with cells viewed 12 h after stretch . Results are means (cid:9) SE ( n (cid:10) 8 wells for all groups ) . C1805 STRETCH ALTERS ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 283 • DECEMBER 2002 • www . ajpcell . org on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Given that mechanical stimuli can induce endocyto - sis in other kinds of epithelia ( 1 ) , we performed speciﬁc studies to rule out this pathway as a signiﬁcant mech - anism responsible for the observed increase in ﬂuores - cence after stretch . First , PAO treatment did not affect dye binding in stretched cells ( Fig . 5 ) , ruling out the contribution of receptor - mediated endocytosis to the process of BODIPY - ouabain binding . Second , staining cells after stretch instead of during stretch did not affect the extent of BODIPY - ouabain binding , ruling out the contribution of speciﬁc stretch - induced endocy - tosis . Third , stretch studies with BODIPY - ouabain ad - ministered at 37°C were followed by treatment with anti - BODIPY at 4°C . This temperature has been re - ported to block endocytosis in similar alveolar epithe - lial cells ( 21 , 24 ) , restricting the quenching action of anti - BODIPY to externally bound BODIPY - ouabain only . The treatment quenched the ﬂuorescent staining from 16 . 8 % to 1 . 2 % of the ﬁeld area ( Fig . 4 ) . Thus we conclude that most of the BODIPY - ouabain is bound extracellularly , ruling out nonspeciﬁc endocytotic pathways . Fourth , our TX experiments , which demon - strated signiﬁcantly higher ﬂuorescence after cell per - meabilization compared with stretch - induced ﬂuores - cence levels ( Fig . 6 ) , disprove the hypothesis that stretch - induced increases in plasma membrane perme - ability , rather than TJ permeability , are primarily responsible for the ﬁndings presented in Fig . 2 . Fifth , we show that stretch did not increase the amount of cell staining with unconjugated BODIPY ( Fig . 2 ) , con - ﬁrming that the stretch - induced increases in ﬂuores - cence were speciﬁc to increased numbers of BODIPY - ouabain - bound sites rather than nonspeciﬁc stretch - induced increases in intracellular dye concentration . Finally , BODIPY - ouabain ﬂuorescence was demon - strated in unstretched and intact cells near a scraped monolayer region ( Fig . 1 ) , suggesting that any type of TJ disruption , not merely mechanical stretch , can re - sult in increased BODIPY - ouabain staining . Our data also reveal additional information regard - ing BODIPY - ouabain binding in these cells . The fact that anti - BODIPY is apparently able to diffuse through the TJ and quench BODIPY - ouabain ﬂuores - cence provides evidence that barrier injury in this model is irreversible over the 24 - h experimental pe - riod . The absence of a strong correlation between re - gions of strong BODIPY - ouabain and ethidium ho - modimer - 1 binding indicate that plasma membrane rupture does not by itself produce cellular BODIPY - ouabain binding . Also , because treatment with uncon - jugated BODIPY did not produce a signiﬁcant differ - ence in staining between cells stretched at 37 % (cid:1) SA and unstretched cells , we can conclude that the binding of BODIPY - ouabain to the cell exterior was speciﬁc to the Na (cid:5) - K (cid:5) - ATPase sites . The average intensity of the stained regions also increased at 37 % (cid:1) SA , indicating that a higher amount of BODIPY - ouabain was bound Fig . 6 . BODIPY - ouabain binding in Tri - ton X - 100 ( TX ) - treated and untreated cells , both unstretched and stretched cy - clically for 1 h at 37 % (cid:1) SA . In summary , all conditions were signiﬁcantly different from each other ( * P (cid:2) 0 . 05 , Tukey - Kramer test ) . TX treatment increased BODIPY - ouabain staining in stretched and unstretched cells compared with un - treated controls . In addition , stretched wells had signiﬁcantly more BODIPY - ouabain staining compared with either unstretched condition . Representative ﬂu - orescence microscopic ﬁelds showing ethidium homodimer - 1 staining ( a marker of cell membrane rupture ) are provided for each group , and they conﬁrm that TX treatment produced an increase in plasma membrane permeability . Fig . 7 . Average intensity of suprathreshold pixels of images of stretched cells . Results are mean (cid:9) SE percentages of corresponding unstretched control intensity ( n (cid:10) 8 wells for all groups ) . Intensity differed signiﬁcantly from controls at 37 % (cid:1) SA . * P (cid:2) 0 . 01 compared with controls . Dotted line indicates the average intensity of control wells paired with the given experimental group . C1806 STRETCH ALTERS ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 283 • DECEMBER 2002 • www . ajpcell . org on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m in these regions than in the stained regions of mono - layers stretched at lower magnitudes . Our cyclic stretch data from the current study indi - cate the possibility of a stretch magnitude threshold between 25 % and 37 % (cid:1) SA above which barrier integ - rity suffers . This stretch magnitude corresponds to the average strain experienced by the alveolar epithelium between 90 % and 100 % TLC and is the same threshold magnitude previously discovered for TJ structural dis - ruption in cells cultured under identical conditions ( 5 ) . Both studies provide evidence that high , yet physiolog - ically relevant , epithelial strains can cause alveolar dysfunction and injury in an in vitro preparation . Similar threshold - dependent , stretch - induced TJ in - jury at high lung inﬂation volumes has been observed in animal preparations using tracers of similar size to BODIPY - ouabain ( radius (cid:3) 20 Å ) . Egan and coworkers examined the effects of static inﬂation on whole sheep and rabbit lungs , noting that inﬂation below 100 % TLC did not produce an increase in paracellular permeabil - ity to tracers of 14 - to 34 - Å radius ( 11 , 12 ) . Inﬂation volumes above 100 % TLC removed all resistance to paracellular transport of these molecules , indicative of a complete loss of epithelial barrier function ( 11 , 12 ) . These injury thresholds determined in whole lung studies agree with our structural ( 5 ) and functional ( current study ) ﬁndings in vitro in a primary cell cul - ture preparation . Additional permeability assessment has been per - formed in animals with tracers of smaller size ( radius (cid:2) 10 Å ) , which provide more sensitive detection of im - paired barrier properties . Egan et al . ( 10 , 12 ) observed that static inﬂation of dog and sheep lungs at 75 – 80 % TLC produced an increase in paracellular permeability to tracers of small size . In contrast , Kim and Crandall ( 15 ) noted that static inﬂation of bullfrog lungs within the physiological range did not result in increased paracellular transport to these tracers and that only supraphysiological inﬂation caused increased solute and ﬂuid transport across the alveolar barrier in these animals . Thus there is some disagreement in the liter - ature over the extent of injury measured with small solutes at static inﬂation volumes below 100 % TLC , but the results of Kim and Crandall support the cur - rent ﬁndings of a decrease in TJ integrity at or above 100 % TLC . In humans , repeated inﬂation of the whole lung to 80 – 85 % TLC can occur in well - trained athletes during vigorous exercise with no apparent loss of pulmonary epithelial barrier function ( 27 ) . These lung inﬂation volumes correspond to an alveolar epithelial change in surface area of (cid:2) 25 % ( 23 ) , a stretch magnitude that was found to be below the injury threshold in this study . Thus these in vivo observations are consistent with the results of the in vitro experiments presented here . The main advantage provided by this in vitro exper - imental system is that the local physical environment of a monolayer of cultured cells can be controlled more readily than that of a whole lung . Furthermore , the relative contributions of the cellular and extracellular components of the monolayer and of the apical milieu can be investigated more effectively than in whole lungs . However , although our model of alveolar epithe - lial injury possesses type I - like pneumocytes that cover the vast majority of the alveolar epithelium , it is not fully representative of conditions in the in vivo alveo - lus . It does not contain macrophages or ﬁbroblasts , and therefore the composition of the extracellular matrix and of the interstitial and luminal milieu may not be identical to that of the viable whole lung . Additionally , after 5 days in culture , the majority of type II cells differentiate to type I phenotype ( 19 ) , resulting in a lack of surfactant production that may alter the sur - face tension milieu of the in vitro alveolar epithelium . Once the basic mechanisms of stretch - induced alveolar epithelial dysfunction are elucidated with new meth - ods such as that presented here , a more representative in vitro model of the epithelium may be constructed to determine how these other constituents of the in vivo alveolus affect the susceptibility of alveolar epithelial cells to mechanical injury . Using a novel technique for the assessment of para - cellular permeability , we have demonstrated that the paracellular permeability of stretched alveolar epithe - lial cells in culture is dependent on the magnitude of the applied stretch . This study represents the ﬁrst time that paracellular permeability has been assessed in cultured and mechanically stretched epithelial cells , and this method should prove useful to other transport physiologists , especially those interested in cellular injury . Although this study provides evidence that al - veolar epithelial barrier integrity is altered at high magnitudes of applied strain , for a more complete description there is a need to supplement these ﬁnd - ings with data from tracers of varying size and charge to determine critical cell deformations required to dis - rupt the epithelial barrier to transport of small charged solutes , large macromolecules , and other types of physiologically relevant compounds . After identify - ing the chemical pathways by which excessive stretch is transduced into an injurious cellular response , we may develop injury interventions to reduce the severity of stretch - induced alveolar epithelial injury and mini - mize the incidence and mortality of ventilator - induced lung injury . We thank Dr . James F . Sanzo of the University of Pennsylvania for assistance with microscopy and Dr . Kenneth R . Spring of the National Institutes of Health for helpful discussions . This work was supported by National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute Grant HL - 57204 , National Science Foundation Grant BES - 9702088 , and the Whitaker Foundation . K . J . Cavanaugh was sup - ported by a Whitaker Graduate Fellowship . REFERENCES 1 . Apodaca G . Modulation of membrane trafﬁc by mechanical stimuli . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 282 : F179 – F190 , 2002 . 2 . Bates SR , Tao JQ , Schaller S , Fisher AB , and Shuman H . Lamellar body membrane turnover is stimulated by secreta - gogues . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 278 : L443 – L452 , 2000 . 3 . Berg MM , Kim KJ , Lubman RL , and Crandall ED . Hydro - philic solute transport across rat alveolar epithelium . J Appl Physiol 66 : 2320 – 2327 , 1989 . C1807 STRETCH ALTERS ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 283 • DECEMBER 2002 • www . ajpcell . org on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 4 . Borok Z , Danto SI , Zabski SM , and Crandall ED . Deﬁned medium for primary culture de novo of adult rat alveolar epithe - lial cells . In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 30A : 99 – 104 , 1994 . 5 . Cavanaugh KJ , Oswari J , and Margulies SS . Role of stretch on tight junction structure in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 25 : 584 – 591 , 2001 . 6 . Cheek JM , Kim KJ , and Crandall ED . Tight monolayers of rat alveolar epithelial cells : bioelectric properties and active sodium transport . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 256 : C688 – C693 , 1989 . 7 . Dobbs LG , Gonzalez R , and Williams MC . An improved method for isolating type II cells in high yield and purity . Am Rev Respir Dis 134 : 141 – 145 , 1986 . 8 . Dreyfuss D and Saumon G . Role of tidal volume , FRC , and end - inspiratory volume in the development of pulmonary edema following mechanical ventilation . Am Rev Respir Dis 148 : 1194 – 1203 , 1993 . 9 . Dreyfuss D and Saumon G . Ventilator - induced lung injury : lessons from experimental studies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 157 : 294 – 323 , 1998 . 10 . Egan EA . Response of alveolar epithelial solute permeability to changes in lung inﬂation . J Appl Physiol 49 : 1032 – 1036 , 1980 . 11 . Egan EA . Lung inﬂation , lung solute permeability , and alveolar edema . J Appl Physiol 53 : 121 – 125 , 1982 . 12 . Egan EA , Nelson RM , and Olver RE . Lung inﬂation and alveolar permeability to non - electrolytes in the adult sheep in vivo . J Physiol 260 : 409 – 424 , 1976 . 13 . Fu Z , Costello ML , Tsukimoto K , Prediletto R , Elliott AR , Mathieu - Costello O , and West JB . High lung volume in - creases stress failure in pulmonary capillaries . J Appl Physiol 73 : 123 – 133 , 1992 . 14 . Haake R , Schlichtig R , Ulstad DR , and Henschen RR . Barotrauma . Pathophysiology , risk factors , and prevention . Chest 91 : 608 – 613 , 1987 . 15 . Kim KJ and Crandall ED . Effects of lung inﬂation on alveolar epithelial solute and water transport properties . J Appl Physiol 52 : 1498 – 1505 , 1982 . 16 . Lubman RL , Kim KJ , and Crandall ED . Alveolar epithelial barrier properties . In : The Lung : Scientiﬁc Foundations ( 2nd ed . ) , edited by Crystal RG and West JB . Philadelphia : Lippin - cott - Raven , 1997 , p . 585 – 602 . 17 . Mason RJ . Transepithelial transport by pulmonary alveolar type II cells in primary culture . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 79 : 6033 – 6037 , 1982 . 18 . Matsukawa Y , Lee VH , Crandall ED , and Kim KJ . Size - dependent dextran transport across rat alveolar epithelial cell monolayers . J Pharm Sci 86 : 305 – 309 , 1997 . 19 . Oswari J , Matthay MA , and Margulies SS . Keratinocyte growth factor reduces alveolar epithelial susceptibility to in vitro mechanical deformation . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 281 : L1068 – L1077 , 2001 . 20 . Parker JC , Hernandez LA , and Peevy KJ . Mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury . Crit Care Med 21 : 131 – 143 , 1993 . 21 . Stroetz RW , Vlahakis NE , Walters BJ , Schroeder MA , and Hubmayr RD . Validation of a new live cell strain system : characterization of plasma membrane stress failure . J Appl Physiol 90 : 2361 – 2370 , 2001 . 22 . Tschumperlin DJ and Margulies SS . Equibiaxial deforma - tion - induced injury of alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 275 : L1173 – L1183 , 1998 . 23 . Tschumperlin DJ and Margulies SS . Alveolar epithelial sur - face area - volume relationship in isolated rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 86 : 2026 – 2033 , 1999 . 24 . Vlahakis NE , Schreoder MA , Pagano RE , and Hubmayr RD . Deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells is both temperature and cholesterol dependent ( Abstract ) . FASEB J 15 : A494 , 2001 . 25 . Ware LB and Matthay MA . The acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1334 – 1349 , 2000 . 26 . Waters CM , Ridge KM , Sunio G , Venetsanou K , and Sznaj - der JI . Mechanical stretching of alveolar epithelial cells in - creases Na (cid:5) - K (cid:5) - ATPase activity . J Appl Physiol 87 : 715 – 721 , 1999 . 27 . Whipp BJ and Pardy RL . Breathing during exercise . In : Handbook of Physiology . The Respiratory System . Mechanics of Breathing . Bethesda , MD : Am Physiol Soc , 1986 , sect . 1 , vol . III , pt . 2 , p . 605 – 629 . 28 . Zar J . Biostatistical Analysis . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall , 1999 . C1808 STRETCH ALTERS ALVEOLAR EPITHELIAL PERMEABILITY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 283 • DECEMBER 2002 • www . ajpcell . org on M a y 6 , 2010 a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m