r Academy of Management Journal 2015 , Vol . 58 , No . 3 , 1 – 26 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2014 . 0170 HOT BUTTONS AND TIME SINKS : THE EFFECTS OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DURING NONWORK TIME ON EMOTIONS AND WORK - NONWORK CONFLICT MARCUS M . BUTTS University of Texas at Arlington WILLIAM J . BECKER Texas Christian University WENDY R . BOSWELL Texas A & M University As advances in communication technologies have made organizations more easily connected to their workforce outside of normal work hours , there is increased concern that employees may experience heightened work - nonwork conflict when away from the office . The current study investigates the effects of electronic communication received during nonwork time using an experience sampling methodology to examine within - person relationships among elements of electronic communication ( affective tone , time required ) , emotional responses ( anger , happiness ) , and work - to - nonwork conflict in a sample of 341 working adults surveyed over a seven - day period . Hierarchical linear modeling results suggested that both affective tone and time required were associated with anger , but only affective tone was associated with happiness . Further , anger was associated with work - to - nonwork conflict and mediated the effects of affective tone and time required on work - to - nonwork conflict . Results also revealed cross - level moderat - ing effects of abusive supervision and communication sender together , as well as seg - mentation preference . Implications of these findings for future theorizing and research on electronic communication during nonwork time are discussed . Through the advent of technologies such as e - mail , wireless internet , and cell phones , organ - izations are becoming more wired both within and outside of the workplace . This new era of workplace connectivity has not only changed when and where employees work but also blurred the boundaries between work and nonwork domains ( Derks , van Mierlo , & Schmitz , 2014 ; Tomlinson , 2007 ) . In ad - dition , workplace interactions that once only oc - curred face - to - face are now commonly carried out through electronic communication . A 2008 report indicated that 96 % of employees use internet , e - mail , or cell phones to stay in touch with communications from work , and since 2002 the number of employees that check their work - related electronic communications in the evening or on the weekend has tripled ( Madden & Jones , 2008 ) . With innovations in technology such as lightweight lap - tops , tablets , and smartphones , these numbers are likely to be even higher in the future . This has led to what has been called “ the new night shift ” ( Stone , 2014 ) , when after normal business hours employees log back on to work ( or never log off ) in order to address incoming electronic communications . Thus , although advances in communication tech - nologies have added more flexibility to employees ’ lives , they have also made it increasingly difficult to disconnect from work when away from the workplace . Although still in its infancy , research to date suggests that as employees use communication technologies to stay connected to the workplace outside of normal work hours , there are deleterious We thank Brent Scott and three anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback and guidance during the review process . We are also grateful to Jenny Hoobler for her helpful insights during the development of this man - uscript . Finally , we would like to thank our five emotions researchers for the time they spent rating electronic communications for our supplemental analyses . 1 Copyright of the Academy of Management , all rights reserved . Contents may not be copied , emailed , posted to a listserv , or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder ’ s express written permission . Users may print , download , or email articles for individual use only . effects on work - nonwork conflict ( Boswell & Olson - Buchanan , 2007 ; Diaz , Chiaburu , Zimmerman , & Boswell , 2012 ; Duxbury , Towers , Higgins , & Thomas , 2006 ) . This research has relied heavily on qualitative and cross - sectional studies focused on communication technology adoption rates or vol - ume of use . Although informative , these studies do not capture the possibility that individual electronic communications may possess unique elements that determine the extent of negative , or positive , effects on employees . Indeed , theory and research suggests that electronic communications are comprised of both verbal and nonverbal elements that elicit emotions in their recipients ( Byron , 2008 ; Walther & D ’ Addario , 2001 ) , which may be key considerations for how perceptions of work - nonwork conflict are formed . Examining electronic communications during nonwork time through this lens underscores that each communication and employee reaction differs on an event - by - event basis . Similarly , Weiss and Cropanzano ( 1996 ) argued that work events are dynamic occurrences that have immediate affective consequences , emphasizing the importance of fo - cusing on within - person affective experiences over time . Recently , Maertz and Boyar ( 2011 ) advocated that research should adopt a within - person ap - proach to daily experiences of work - nonwork con - flict . These literature streams converge to suggest that within - person variation in electronic commu - nication experiences , emotional responses , and work - nonwork conflict represent meaningful fluc - tuations that are essential to consider in organiza - tional scholarship . Electronic communication by definition entails exchanges with other people . Just as with other in - terpersonal interactions , the social and relational patterns underlying electronic communications likely exert a strong influence on the construal of employees ’ affective reactions to electronic com - munications received during nonwork time , thus serving as critical moderating factors . Dating back to Berlo ’ s ( 1960 ) communication model , social context factors have consistently been connected to per - ceptions formed via different media ( e . g . , Byron , 2008 ; Schmitz & Fulk , 1991 ) . In addition to the communication sender being a critical social con - text factor ( Berlo , 1960 ) , the nature of the relation - ship one has with his / her supervisor has long been suggested as a paramount consideration for how employees interpret and react to workplace stimuli ( Scandura & Graen , 1984 ; Tepper , 2000 ) , which should include electronic communications . Also , important to the communication exchange process is the central role that characteristics of the receiver play in how information is perceived , cognitively processed , and the emotional responses that result ( Baralou & McInnes , 2013 ; Byron , 2008 ) . Because of the exceedingly blurred demarcation between work and nonwork time and the ubiquitous nature of electronic communication , individual differences in preference for managing the boundaries between work and nonwork are a particularly important re - ceiver characteristic with potential implications for how one reacts to electronic communications re - ceived during nonwork time . Using a within - person approach and experience sampling methodology in the current study , we aim to contribute to the growing literature on electronic communication during nonwork time by focusing on perceived affective tone and time required as ele - ments of electronic communication that serve as antecedents to employees ’ affective reactions . In - tegrating research on emotions in electronic com - munication ( Byron , 2008 ; Byron & Baldridge , 2005 ) with affective events ( Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) and appraisal theory of emotion ( Lazarus , 1991 , 1999 ) , we propose that employees appraise work - related electronic communications during nonwork time as favorable or unfavorable events depending upon the affective tone conveyed and time required by the electronic communication , resulting in negative ( anger ) or positive ( happiness ) emotional responses and subsequent work - to - nonwork conflict . We draw from the literature on how emotions can deplete or conserve / enhance resources ( i . e . , Baumeister & Heatherton , 1996 ; Fredrickson , 1998 ; Weiss , Suckow , & Cropanzano , 1999 ) and position anger and happiness as mediators of the relationships between electronic com - munication elements and work - to - nonwork conflict . However , in line with research on positive – negative asymmetry effects ( i . e . , Baumeister , Bratslavsky , Finkenauer , & Vohs , 2001 ) , we propose that the in - direct effects are stronger through anger than through happiness . Finally , extending theorizing on the role of social context and receiver factors in emotional responses to electronic communication ( Byron , 2008 ) , we examine how the nature of the supervisory relationship ( abusive supervision ) , the communica - tion sender ( supervisor versus non - supervisor ) , and individual differences in boundary management strategies ( segmentation preference ) serve as poten - tial moderators of the predicted within - person relationships . Figure 1 summarizes our proposed relationships . In examining our proposed relationships , the current research makes a number of significant 2 June Academy of Management Journal contributions to the literature . First , we actively answer Boswell and Olson - Buchanan ’ s ( 2007 ) call for research that helps us better understand both the potential costs and benefits of “ after hours ” elec - tronic communication usage by providing a more complete test of electronic communications from work during nonwork time . In doing so , we recog - nize that the interplay between electronic commu - nication elements , negative and positive emotions , and work - nonwork conflict is a complex process that entails immediate emotional and attitudinal reactions to work events in the moment . Further , we integrate disparate literatures and theories on verbal and nonverbal communication , emotions , positive – negative asymmetry effects , and work - nonwork spill - over to provide a unified conceptual framework that advances understanding of work - related electronic communication during nonwork time . Second , following sentiments by Dabbish and Kraut ( 2006 ) , our study challenges the assumption that the quantity of electronic communication from work during nonwork time is the determining factor of consequences for employees . Rather , in line with past theories of affect ( e . g . , Lazarus , 1991 ; Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) , we adopt a more nuanced view of electronic communications during nonwork time as external work events experienced while in the nonwork domain that serve as elicitors of specific emotional responses depending on the nature of the communication . This approach allows us to exam - ine how certain relational dynamics ( abusive su - pervision , communication sender ) might work in conjunction to account for why employees react more negatively or positively to some electronic communications , which has been overlooked by research to date ( Barley , Meyerson , & Grodal , 2011 ) . Similarly , we advance understanding of the role of individual differences in emotional reactions to electronic communication by considering how seg - mentation preference serves as an additional bound - ary condition of the proposed relationships , thereby extending work on integration - segmentation tenden - cies in the work – family literature ( e . g . , Kreiner , Hollensbe , & Sheep , 2009 ) . Finally , the current research advances practice by providing management with guidance about which electronic communication elements may produce the strongest negative emotional responses and cause harm to employees ’ nonwork lives , as well as whether electronic communications may offer poten - tial benefits by eliciting positive emotional reactions and improving nonwork functioning . Understanding FIGURE 1 Conceptual Model for the Effects of Work - Related Electronic Communication during Nonwork Time 2015 3 Butts , Becker , and Boswell how to best ameliorate the deleterious effects and enhance the positive effects of electronic commu - nications from work during nonwork time is valu - able to organizations given that technologies will continue to make it difficult for employees to dis - connect from the workplace , and organizations are not likely to adopt policies restricting the use of electronic communications to regular business hours ( Perlow , 2012 ) . Below , we develop the theo - retical rationale and explanation for our proposed relationships . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESES According to affective events theory ( AET ; Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) , work - related events are proximal causes that spark emotions and subsequent attitudes . AET clearly defines work - related events as signifi - cant occurrences that precipitate change in one ’ s circumstances and “ generate an emotional reaction or mood in people ” ( Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 : 31 ) . Further , positive events are viewed as goal congruent ( e . g . , receiving praise from your boss ) and differen - tiated from negative events that are viewed as in - congruent with one ’ s goals and personal strivings ( e . g . , being reprimanded by your boss ) . The premise of AET is that specific workplace events are situa - tional antecedents of emotional responses and transmit their influence on subsequent attitudes through the affect - laden response of the individual ( Frijda , 1988 ; Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) . Research has supported AET , finding that emotional responses help explain how a myriad of workplace events re - late to job satisfaction ( Scott & Judge , 2006 ) , organi - zational commitment ( Mignonac & Herrbach , 2004 ) , and engagement ( Bledow , Schmitt , Frese , & K¨uhnel , 2011 ) . AET has also been invoked across the work - nonwork interface to investigate how family events relate to job satisfaction and performance through work mood ( Carlson , Kacmar , Zivnuska , Ferguson , & Whitten , 2011 ) . However , to date , very little research has adopted an AET framework to examine how events experienced from one domain ( i . e . , work ) while occupying another domain ( i . e . , nonwork ) may elicit emotions and / or subsequent attitudes . We adopt an AET framework to suggest that electronic communications from work during nonwork time represent work - related events that occur in the non - work realm , and affective responses should impact one ’ s nonwork experiences in the moment . While AET provides a general framework for un - derstanding the role of emotions in the relationship between work events and attitudes , Byron ’ s ( 2008 ) theoretical model of emotion in e - mail describes how specific electronic communication elements elicit emotional responses in their recipients . Drawing from the literature on verbal and non - verbal communication of emotion ( e . g . , Elfenbein & Ambady , 2002 ) , Byron ( 2008 ) proposed that al - though constrained by inherent characteristics of the media , senders of electronic communication convey emotionally - laden information to others . The most straightforward way in which senders do this is by verbalizing their emotion ( i . e . , “ I am very happy with your recent work on this project . ” ) , and this verbalized emotional content is readily inter - preted by receivers . According to Byron ( 2008 ) , receiver ’ s emotional responses to electronic com - munication are also highly dependent upon non - verbal cues such as degree of formality , presence of a greeting , as well as temporal aspects ( i . e . , time to respond , message length , duration of the in - teraction ) . To our knowledge , no studies have ex - amined how nonverbal cues , together with verbal cues , may elicit discrete emotions in receivers of electronic communication , especially when the communication occurs across the work - nonwork interface . Following the established literature on chronemics , which focuses on “ how we perceive , structure , and react to time and . . . the messages we interpret from such usage ” ( Burgoon & Saine , 1978 : 99 ) , we suggest that in addition to explicit verbal information ( i . e . , affective tone ) , receiver emotional responses are also strongly impacted by the non - verbal component of time involved to read and comply with the sender ’ s request ( i . e . , time required ) . An important issue to consider when examining electronic communication as an affective event is the relevant emotions that may be elicited . Schwarz and Clore define emotions as feelings that arise “ in response to ongoing , implicit appraisals of sit - uations with respect to positive or negative impli - cations for one ’ s goals and concerns ” ( 1996 : 385 ) . Further , Lazarus and Folkman ( 1984 ) suggest that how a specific event is construed , and the associ - ated pattern of cognitive appraisal , evokes a partic - ular emotion . Each emotion also involves changes in action tendency ranging from approach to avoidance , which manifests in more ( less ) personal meaningfulness , expressive behavior , and orga - nized effort ( Frijda , 1988 ) . Anger and happiness are the discrete emotions most often described as approach - oriented expressions with strong signifi - cance to personal goal success / failure ( Lazarus , 4 June Academy of Management Journal 1991 ; Slepian , Weisbuch , Adams Jr , & Ambady , 2011 ) . 1 Anger is the most intense negatively - valenced emotion and arises when goal blockage is attributed to the intentional actions of others ( Lerner & Keltner , 2001 ) . It is accompanied by frustration and aggression inclinations ( Berkowitz , 1989 ; Carver & Harmon - Jones , 2009 ) . Happiness is the positively - valenced counterpart to anger . It has a similar intensity but an internal locus of control focus , and is accommodated by an urge toward exuberance and seeking contact with others ( Frijda , 1988 ) . Further , in contrast to an - ger , happiness results from goal attainment ( Smith , Haynes , Lazarus , & Pope , 1993 ) . Anger and happiness are both highly interpersonally - oriented emotions that arguably cannot be fully understood apart from the situational context in which they occur ( Averill , 1983 ; Frijda , 1988 ) . Because electronic communica - tions are interpersonal by nature and often emotion - ally charged , intense emotional reactions may serve as key mechanisms in the relationships between af - fective work events during nonwork time and ensu - ing experiences of work - nonwork interference . For this reason , we consider the effects of electronic communication verbal ( affective tone ) and nonverbal ( time required ) elements in relation to the emotions of anger and happiness elicited during nonwork time , and subsequent episodes of work - nonwork conflict . Electronic Communication Affective Tone and Emotions Whether intentional or not , electronic communi - cation is capable of delivering an emotionally - charged tone ( Barsade & Gibson , 2007 ; Walther , 1996 ) , whereby messages of support , recognition , and encouragement convey a positive affective tone and uncivil , hostile , or degrading content reflect a negative affective tone . Thus , in the current study we view affective tone as a single continuum rang - ing from positive to negative . However , perceived affective tone in electronic communication differs from face - to - face communication in that electronic communication lacks much of the richer nonverbal information ( e . g . , inflection , gesture ) that normally helps the receiver decipher the sender ’ s intended meaning , particularly when the message is ambig - uous ( Kruger , Epley , Parker , & Ng , 2005 ) . Thus , in the absence of nonverbal cues derived from message characteristics or the interpersonal context , receiv - ers respond to whatever affective tone they perceive in electronic communication . In line with both AET and Lazarus ’ ( 1991 ) ap - praisal theory of emotion , the event of receiving electronic communication during nonwork time represents a sudden change in current circum - stances , which motivates individuals to make sense of the event through cognitive appraisal . During this appraisal , which occurs quickly and automatically , the individual primarily judges whether the event is favorable or unfavorable for one ’ s self and his / her current goals as well as its relevance to personal well - being ( Frijda , 2007 ; Lazarus , 1991 ; Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) . Negative emotions , such as an - ger , arise from events appraised as unfavorable and obstructing valued goals ; positive emotions , such as happiness , stem from events appraised as favorable and facilitating valued goals ( Frijda , 1988 ; Lazarus , 1991 , 1999 ) . In accordance with this , we suggest that the perceived affective tone of electronic communication signals situational favorability or unfavorability and goal facilitation or obstruction , influencing subsequent emotions of anger and happiness . Electronic communication perceived as negative in affective tone is likely viewed as a situ - ational attack on the receiver ( Izard , 2007 ) , an attack that is especially unwarranted because it occurs outside the confines of the normal workday . This event that conveyed a negative tone will be ap - praised as unfavorable , but it may also represent a deliberate assault by the sender on the receiver ’ s goals of having pleasant relations with friends and family and maintaining well - being in the nonwork domain ( Averill , 1983 ; Carver & Harmon - Jones , 2009 ) . This sense of goal obstruction and the asso - ciated frustration should contribute to the experi - ence of anger ( Berkowitz , 1989 ) . In addition , just as anger may occur as a result of an electronic 1 Other emotions such as fear and sadness are also pos - sibly elicited in response to electronic communication . However , it has been suggested that fear is an avoidance - oriented emotion , and characterized by weak behavioral tendencies ( Adams Jr , Ambady , Macrae , & Kleck , 2006 ) . Sadness is a complex emotion that can vary in intensity and expression , and it is often difficult to associate with a proximal cause ( Frijda , 1994 ) . Because of the difficulties in understanding sadness , Barr - Zisowitz ( 2000 ) suggested that it is better to focus on other negatively - valenced emotions such as anger . Since work electronic communi - cation during nonwork time is by nature a sudden en - croachment on one ’ s personal life , we focused on intense , approach - oriented emotions , such as anger and happiness that can clearly impact one ’ s emotion processing and atti - tudes while occupying the nonwork domain . We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting we clarify this point so as not to suggest that electronic communications can only elicit the emotions of anger and happiness . 2015 5 Butts , Becker , and Boswell communication ’ s negative affective tone , happiness may occur when a positive affective tone is per - ceived . According to Lazarus ( 1991 ) , happiness is experienced when one strives and makes progress toward valued goals . Electronic communication from work during nonwork time that conveys a positive affective tone should facilitate a sense of goal accomplishment regarding one ’ s work and life in general , resulting in felt happiness . Viewing af - fective tone as a continuum ranging from positive to negative , this suggests that electronic communica - tion perceived more negatively should encourage anger and inhibit happiness . Hypothesis 1 : Within individuals , electronic communication affective tone is related to an - ger and happiness , such that a more negative affective tone is ( a ) positively related to anger and ( b ) negatively related to happiness . Electronic Communication Time Requirements and Emotions Previous theorizing by Byron ( 2008 ) suggests that although the verbalized content of an electronic communication message contains emotionally - laden components , nonverbal cues can also elicit emotion in message receivers . According to the liter - ature on chronemics ( e . g . , Prasopoulou , Pouloudi , & Panteli , 2006 ) , temporal aspects of electronic com - munication play a critical role as nonverbal cues that are interpreted by message receivers . Integrating this literature with Lazarus ’ ( 1991 ) appraisal theory of emotion , we propose that the time required to read and comply with electronic communication messages during nonwork time elicits emotional responses of anger and happiness . Work by Byron and Baldridge ( 2005 ) and Walther and Tidwell ( 1995 ) suggests that the longer it takes to attend to an electronic communication message , the more the experience contributes to negative affect . Studies also show that employees can use e - mail as a medium to assert their power over other employees ( Fragale , Sumanth , Tiedens , & Northcraft , 2012 ) , and receiving electronic communication during nonwork time rather than during the workday does very little to mitigate receivers ’ felt obligations to read , re - spond , and comply with any associated requests ( Barley et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , a receiver of time - intensive electronic communication may view the occurrence as an attempt by the sender to exhibit his / her dominance over the receiver , particularly since work - related electronic communication during non - work time goes against historical societal norms ( Prasopoulou et al . , 2006 ) . This negative appraisal reflects a type of goal frustration ( Lazarus , 1991 ) , in which one ’ s sense of identity and preservation of well - being in the nonwork domain is thwarted , thereby precipitating a negative emotional response . Conversely , electronic communication that is rel - atively effortless to read and requires minimal work by the receiver is likely appraised favorably . An electronic message requiring a brief amount of time may facilitate goal accomplishment and a sense of personal well - being because the receiver of the message now has one less work task to complete , of which the completion was straightforward , and he / she can readily re - engage in the nonwork domain . Less time demanding communication is also likely perceived as being considerate of one ’ s personal time , eliciting a positive emotional response as the receiver ’ s well - being and identity is recognized and supported . Therefore , we predict : Hypothesis 2 : Within individuals , electronic communication time required is ( a ) positively related to anger and ( b ) negatively related to happiness . Electronic Communication , Work - to - Nonwork Conflict , and the Mediation of Emotions Numerous studies have found that general elec - tronic communication usage during nonwork time is related to work - to - nonwork conflict ( e . g . , Boswell & Olson - Buchanan , 2007 ; Fenner & Renn , 2010 ; Kennedy , Wellman , & Amoroso , 2011 ) as well as negative personal consequences such as sleep dep - rivation , burnout , and marital dissatisfaction ( Chesley , 2005 ; Lanaj , Johnson , & Barnes , 2014 ; Towers , Duxbury , Higgins , & Thomas , 2006 ) . Often invoked in these studies is the premise that because of the difficulty in transitioning between and meeting the demands of multiple roles , electronic communication usage during nonwork time intrudes and detracts from one ’ s personal life . Al - though we agree with the fundamental tenet that experiencing work intrusions while participating in the nonwork domain increases work - to - nonwork conflict ( e . g . , Williams & Alliger , 1994 ) , this premise does not account for the role of specific electronic communication elements in shaping employees ’ experiences and the possibility that electronic communication during nonwork could have bene - ficial effects on one ’ s personal life . We contend that 6 June Academy of Management Journal electronic communications from work during non - work time should be treated as episodic events with unique elements that determine whether each event has a beneficial or deleterious impact on an employee ’ s nonwork life ( i . e . , work - to - nonwork conflict ) . Greenhaus and Beutell ( 1985 ) described work - nonwork ( family ) conflict as a form of interrole conflict where the role demands of one role ( e . g . , work ) interferes with meeting the demands of an - other role ( e . g . , family ) . Cross - domain research clearly illustrates that attitudes , emotions , and cog - nitions from work can interfere with nonwork ( Eby , Maher , & Butts , 2010b ) . Further , previous meta - analytic work on the antecedents of work - to - family conflict has shown that unfavorably viewed aspects of one ’ s work experience such as job stress , psy - chological demands from work , and workload are related to work - to - family conflict ( Byron , 2005 ; Demerouti , Bakker , & Bulters , 2004 ) . Taken together , we expect the elements that determine favorability / unfavorability of electronic communication events ( affective tone , time required ) will relate to work - to - nonwork conflict . However , we propose that these relationships are mediated by the elicited emotions of anger and happiness . To the extent that the ele - ments of electronic communication episodes are viewed unfavorably ( i . e . , negative affective tone , more time required ) , anger should occur and in - crease work - to - nonwork conflict . In contrast , when features of electronic communication episodes are viewed favorably ( i . e . , positive affective tone , less time required ) , happiness should occur and lessen work - to - nonwork conflict . When anger is experienced in response to an unfavorably appraised event , event - related thoughts are difficult to dismiss , and both attentional and cognitive resources are heavily depleted as indi - viduals engage in narrowed information processing to assess blame and preserve self - identity ( Lazarus , 1991 ; Martin & Tesser , 1989 ) . An effect of this nar - rowed information processing is that attention is confined to the immediate , anger provoking event and not easily directed toward subsequent nonwork activities ( Baumeister & Heatherton , 1996 ) . Feelings of anger tend to linger and become difficult to self - regulate and suppress ( Potegal , 2010 ) , increasing the likelihood that anger bleeds over and is detrimental to nonwork social relationships ( i . e . , spouse , chil - dren , friends ) . This lack of self - regulation is even more likely to occur later in the evening , when fa - tigue and overexertion have already depleted the ability to control one ’ s emotions ( Baumeister & Heatherton , 1996 ) , causing further exhaustion and making individuals even less apt to engage in non - work activities . Based on the above reasoning , we expect that when electronic communication is viewed unfavorably ( i . e . , negative affective tone , more time required ) and anger is elicited , this anger will hinder functioning and involvement in the nonwork domain as well as induce more strain , thus increasing work - to - nonwork conflict . In comparison to negative emotions such as an - ger , a clear distinction has been made regarding happiness as an emotional response . Specifically , accumulated evidence suggests that happiness results from an appraisal of relevance to personal well - being and goal congruence , and is not de - pendent upon identity preservation or assessing the accountability of others ( Smith et al . , 1993 ; Weiss et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , experiencing happiness occupies less attentional and cognitive resources than experiencing anger . Because these resources are not diverted from the nonwork domain , greater attention is focused on nonwork activities . Simi - larly , broaden and build theory ( Fredrickson , 1998 , 2001 ) argues that positive experiences and emo - tions enhance health and flourishing by expanding one ’ s cognitions and action repertoires . This allows positive emotions to provide instant bene - fits in the way of physical , cognitive , and psycho - logical resources that are available for use in the nonwork domain , thereby decreasing work - to - nonwork conflict . Altogether , these arguments suggest electronic communication affective tone and time required are related to work - to - nonwork conflict , and these relationships are mediated by immediate effects on anger and happiness . Thus , we hypothesize : Hypothesis 3 : Within individuals , ( a ) electronic communication affective tone is positively related to work - to - nonwork conflict , and this relationship is mediated by ( b ) anger and ( c ) happiness . Hypothesis 4 : Within individuals , ( a ) electronic communication time required is positively related to work - to - nonwork conflict , and this relationship is mediated by ( b ) anger and ( c ) happiness . Negative Versus Positive Emotions In her model of emotions in e - mail , Byron ( 2008 ) proposed a negativity bias , whereby individuals overemphasize negative ( rather than positive ) 2015 7 Butts , Becker , and Boswell information conveyed in e - mail . Supporting the notion that “ bad is stronger than good , ” Baumeister et al . ( 2001 ) provided evidence that negatively valenced events ( e . g . , losing money , receiving crit - icism ) have a greater impact on individuals than do positively valenced events ( e . g . , winning money , receiving praise ) . Similarly , euphoria from posi - tively valenced events tends to be more transitory than the lasting impression of negatively valenced events ( Brickman , Coates , & Janoff - Bulman , 1978 ) . This pattern has been confirmed in research on the positive – negative asymmetry effect ( e . g . , Peeters , 1971 ; Peeters & Czapinski , 1990 ) which stipulates that negative stimuli are processed more exten - sively and contribute more to one ’ s overall impres - sion than do positive stimuli . Lazarus alluded to a similar positive – negative asymmetry effect as it pertains to emotions by stating , “ My best guess is that goal incongruent or negative emotions have a much more obvious and powerful impact on adaptation and subjective well - being than do positive ones ” ( 1991 : 264 ) . Taken together , because happiness is more fleeting than anger and anger involves more cognitive processing and rumination , we expect that the indirect effects of electronic communication elements on work - to - nonwork conflict are stronger through anger than through happiness . Hypothesis 5 : The within - person indirect effects from ( a ) electronic communication af - fective tone and ( b ) time required to work - to - nonwork conflict through anger are stronger than the indirect effects from electronic com - munication affective tone and time required to work - to - nonwork conflict through happiness . The Moderating Role of Social Context and Receiver Factors Although generally overlooked , some research in the electronic communication literature emphasizes that reactions to others ’ communication are shaped by ingrained relational patterns ( Baralou & McInnes , 2013 ; Boudens , 2005 ) and individual differences that influence how environmental stimuli are eval - uated ( Byron & Baldridge , 2007 ) . Byron ( 2008 ) posited that social context and receiver factors in - fluence how electronic communication is inter - preted and the emotions that are elicited . Drawing from this literature , we propose that abusive su - pervision , communication sender , and segmenta - tion preference serve as key moderators of how electronic communication affects proximal emo - tions and work - to - nonwork conflict . Receivers of electronic communication draw upon the accrued knowledge of their interpersonal experiences to reduce uncertainty about the ap - praised meaning of a current electronic commu - nication ( Byron & Baldridge , 2007 ) , which is especially relevant for more subjective elements of electronic communication such as perceived af - fective tone ( versus more objective elements such as time required ) . The relationship quality that an employee has with his / her supervisor is a key factor that may influence appraisals of affective tone in electronic communication . In particular , the effect of affective tone on emotions and work - to - nonwork conflict may be contingent upon whether an employee is experiencing abusive su - pervision . Abusive supervision represents the ex - tent to which a supervisor engages in a sustained display of hostile and self - serving verbal and nonverbal behavior toward the subordinate ( Mitchell & Ambrose , 2007 ) and has been linked to work – family conflict , emotional labor , and psy - chological distress ( Carlson , Ferguson , Hunter , & Whitten , 2012 ; Tepper , 2000 ) . In contrast to other indicators of relationship quality , such as leader - member exchange ( LMX ; Graen & Uhl - Bien , 1995 ) , abusive supervision focuses more on negative aspects of the supervisor – subordinate relationship . Although we acknowledge that general perceptions of how positive the relationship is between the su - pervisor and subordinate may play a role in how individuals react to the affective tone of electronic communication , previous theory and empirical work suggests that negative work relationships have greater predictive power in explaining employee outcomes than positive relationships ( Eby , Butts , Durley , & Ragins , 2010a ; Labianca & Brass , 2006 ) . A commonly espoused tenet in the social cognitive literature is that individuals develop relational schemas for interactions with others derived from internal representations of a particularly salient re - lationship , such as the relationship with one ’ s su - pervisor ( Andersen & Chen , 2002 ; Baldwin , 1992 ; Horowitz , 1991 ) . These cognitive structures serve as generic scripts for an expected pattern of interaction with others that help an individual efficiently in - terpret incoming information and make inferences about missing or ambiguous information . Support for this premise has been found regarding dysfunctional relational patterns , whereby subordinates who ex - perienced supervisor abuse or aggression in the past expected similar malicious treatment in the future 8 June Academy of Management Journal from their supervisor as well as others in the workplace ( Barling , Rogers , & Kelloway , 2001 ; LeBlanc & Kelloway , 2002 ) . These dysfunctional relational patterns should be particularly impor - tant for employee reactions to the affective tone of electronic communication because the lack of audio and visual cues in such communication causes ambiguity and uncertainty that increases the receiver ’ s reliance on his / her predominant re - lational schema to infer the appropriate response to the message . Relational schemas , on the other hand , should have little bearing on the effects of time re - quired by electronic communication because this element is relatively unambiguous , leaving few , if any , inferences to be drawn by the receiver . Aligning with Lazarus ( 1991 ) , relational sche - mas are elements of the cognitive structure rep - resenting regularities in patterns of interpersonal relationships that can prime , or influence , the appraisal process and subsequent emotional responses ( Baldwin , 1992 ; Higgins , 1987 ) . When an electronic communication received during nonwork time conveys a positive or negative affective tone , employees likely use their knowledge of how abusive their supervisor typically is as a “ role - relationship model ” ( Horowitz , 1989 : 260 ) to appraise and react to the current interpersonal ex - change , no matter whether the exchange is with their supervisor or another work constituency ( e . g . , coworker ) . Of course , the communication sender ( i . e . , supervisor versus non - supervisor ) also likely plays a role in how abusive supervision influences the effects of affective tone in electronic communi - cation . A relational schema is more strongly acti - vated when an interpersonal exchange includes the target person from whom the relational schema was primarily derived ( Baldwin , 1992 ) . Thus , abusive supervision should have more applicability when employees are communicating with their super - visors , in comparison to peers or subordinates . Be - cause of this , we suggest that abusive supervision interacts with the communication sender to in - fluence how affective tone affects emotional responses . Specifically , electronic communication with a negative affective tone received from a su - pervisor who is perceived as highly abusive should elicit the strongest emotional response ( i . e . , more anger , less happiness ) because the activated re - lational schema of abusive supervision primes the employee to appraise the intent of the supervisor ’ s communication as malicious and demeaning ( even if not intended to be ) . We also expect a similar , but weaker , effect when electronic communication with a negative affective tone is received from a non - supervisor and the employee perceives his / her su - pervisor as abusive because it is likely that abusive supervision still operates as a relational schema in the employee ’ s cognitive appraisal process , albeit with a less profound effect due to the presence of a different exchange partner than the one primarily represented by the relational schema . In contrast , electronic communication perceived as negative in affective tone from either a supervisor or non - supervisor when the employee does not experi - ence abusive supervision should elicit weaker emotional responses because the employee ’ s over - arching positive relational schema for interpersonal exchanges contrasts with the unfavorable electronic communication and may override or discount the appraisal of the specific event and lessen the emo - tional response ( Baldwin , 1992 ) . Further , we expect the weakest effect to occur for communication that is negative in affective tone from a supervisor who is generally perceived as not abusive due to people being most prone to disattend or explain away epi - sodic information from a highly significant other when it is inconsistent with one ’ s overarching re - lational schema which was derived from that spe - cific relationship ( i . e . , communication negative in affective tone and low abusive supervision ) . Finally , we propose that abusive supervision and commu - nication sender should interact in a similar manner to moderate the relationship between affective tone and work - to - nonwork conflict . For example , an employee likely ruminates most over an electronic communication negative in affective tone , thereby experiencing interference with nonwork participa - tion and engagement , when the communication is received from a supervisor viewed as generally abusive toward the employee . Thus , we expect : Hypothesis 6 : In a three - way interaction , abu - sive supervision and communication sender together moderate the within - person relation - ships between electronic communication af - fective tone with ( a ) anger , ( b ) happiness , and ( c ) work - to - nonwork conflict such that the relationships are strongest when abusive supervision is higher ( versus lower ) and com - munications are from supervisors ( versus non - supervisors ) and the relationships are weakest when abusive supervision is lower ( versus higher ) and electronic communications are from supervisors ( versus non - supervisors ) . Characteristics of receivers , such as individ - ual differences in how employees manage their 2015 9 Butts , Becker , and Boswell personal boundaries between the work and non - work domain , also likely impact reactions to electronic communication received during non - work time . According to boundary theory ( Ashforth , Kreiner , & Fugate , 2000 ) , individuals vary in their preferences for segmenting work and nonwork domains , coined segmentation preference ( Powell & Greenhaus , 2010 ) . Those with a high segmenta - tion preference like to keep their work domain separate from their nonwork domain , and those with a low segmentation preference prefer to in - tegrate or blend the two domains by maintaining highly permeable boundaries around work and nonwork . To date , empirical research has consis - tently painted a bleak picture of those that prefer to integrate work and nonwork in favor of those that prefer to segment , demonstrating that segmenta - tion preference is negatively related to work - to - nonwork conflict and stress ( Kreiner , 2006 ) and positively related to psychological detachment from work and life satisfaction ( Hahn & Dormann , 2013 ) . In contrast to these findings , we argue that a high segmentation preference can exacerbate negative reactions and lessen positive reactions , particularly in the case of electronic communica - tion that encroaches upon one ’ s temporal bound - aries ( i . e . , time required ) . As mentioned earlier , people feel obligated to read , respond , and comply with electronic communications received during nonwork time ( Barley et al . , 2011 ) , and this obli - gation has become expected by most organizations today ( Perlow , 2012 ) . Thus , employees with a high segmentation preference that receive electronic communication during nonwork time likely still read and act upon any requests in the electronic communication . However , because individuals with a high preference for segmentation desire to protect their nonwork time from unwanted work intrusions and limit the duration of such intrusions ( Powell & Greenhaus , 2010 ) , we expect that the time required to deal with electronic communica - tion from work during nonwork time will elicit stronger emotions ( more anger , less happiness ) and be more debilitating in the way of work - to - nonwork conflict for these employees in compari - son to those with a preference for integrating work and nonwork . We do not make predictions for segmentation preference moderating the effects of affective tone . Employees who prefer to segment work and nonwork desire to limit work from in - truding upon their time occupying the nonwork domain . Thus , segmentation preference largely pertains to maintaining work - nonwork boundaries regarding time and place ( Kreiner , 2006 ) , which has conceptual relevance for time required by electronic communication but not for the affective tone of such communication . Hypothesis 7 : Segmentation preference mod - erates the within - person relationships between electronic communication time required with ( a ) anger , ( b ) happiness , and ( c ) work - to - nonwork conflict such that the relationships are strongest when segmentation preference is higher ( versus lower ) . Taken together , our aforementioned hypothe - ses imply potential moderated mediation . We propose that abusive supervision and communi - cation sender together strengthen the indirect effects of affective tone on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger and happiness . We also predict that segmentation preference strengthens the indirect effects of time required on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger and happiness . Thus , we hypothesize : Hypothesis 8a : The indirect effects of electronic communication affective tone on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger and happi - ness are moderated by both abusive supervision and communication sender together such that the indirect effects are strongest when abusive supervision is higher ( versus lower ) and com - munications are from supervisors ( versus non - supervisors ) and the relationships are weakest when abusive supervision is lower ( versus higher ) and electronic communications are from supervisors ( versus non - supervisors ) . Hypothesis 8b : The indirect effects of electronic communication time required on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger and happi - ness are moderated by segmentation preference such that the relationships are strongest when segmentation preference is higher ( versus lower ) . METHODS Participants and Procedure Using the authors ’ personal and professional networks , participants for this study were recruited from a variety of industries including technology , finance , manufacturing , government , and health - care . Initially , e - mail invitations were sent to ap - proximately 300 of the authors ’ contacts outside of 10 June Academy of Management Journal academia that described the study , requested their voluntary participation , and asked them to forward the invitation to others in their professional net - works . Subsequently , approximately 600 e - mail invitations were sent to business school alumni of a university in the Southwestern United States . Study invitations were also posted on various LinkedIn interest groups . This “ snowball sampling ” methodology is consistent with approaches used previously in the literature ( e . g . , Grant & Mayer , 2009 ; Piccolo , Greenbaum , Hartog , & Folger , 2010 ) , and it allowed for us to sample from a broad range of organizations with a wide spectrum of communi - cation technologies utilized by their employees . Participants completed an initial on - line survey assessing background characteristics ( age , gender , marital status , parental status , hours worked per week , workplace expectations for segmentation ) , perceptions of abusive supervision and segmenta - tion preference . Following the initial survey , par - ticipants were asked to complete seven on - line experience sampling surveys after the end of their workday and after receiving a work - related elec - tronic communication . Participants were entered into a draw for two tablet computers that were awarded at the end of the study . We used experi - ence sampling methodology to assess day - to - day variation in elements of electronic communication within - person while at the same time controlling for possible between - person confounds and biases . This approach also allowed us to best capture emotional reactions to electronic communication and episodes of work - to - nonwork conflict , which are likely transitory and occur simultaneously in the moment ( Eby et al . , 2010 Q : 1 ) . For each of the seven daily surveys , participants were sent a reminder e - mail with a link for that day ’ s online survey between 5 : 00 and 6 : 00 p . m . We adopted an “ event contingent ” sampling strategy , whereby participants were instructed to complete the survey based upon the most recent electronic communication received from work after working hours . Because of possible discrepancies in defining the workday , participants were instructed that if they received the survey before the end of their workday or had not yet received a work communi - cation , to complete the survey after the next work communication during nonwork hours was re - ceived . Participants did not provide study data on days when no work electronic communication was received after work hours . Seven hundred and two participants completed the initial on - line survey , and 385 participants completed daily surveys . We dropped 28 partic - ipants because they received no work communica - tion during nonwork time over the course of the study , and 16 participants were removed due to missing data on individual - level variables . This resulted in a final sample of 341 participants , 176 of whom could be identified as university alumni and 69 came from the authors ’ contacts . The remaining 96 participants resulted from the snowball sam - pling . In all , the 341 participants completed a total of 1 , 572 daily surveys for which work - related elec - tronic communication was received during non - work time . The majority of participants were male ( 64 % ) , married or living with a partner ( 70 % ) , and had at least one child under the age of 18 at home ( 52 % ) . The median participant age range was 36 – 40 years old , and they worked an average of 47 hours per week ( SD 5 9 . 20 ) . Participants had been employed in the current organization an average of 8 . 54 years ( SD 5 7 . 57 ) and reported a median salary of $ 75 , 000 to $ 100 , 000 . Measures Electronic communication affective tone and time required . Both affective tone and time re - quired were assessed daily , after participants re - ceived a work communication . In line with how previous studies have measured the perceived tone of written text and affective responses to external stimuli ( e . g . , Cantor , Bryant , & Zillmann , 1974 ; Mauss , Levenson , McCarter , Wilhelm , & Gross , 2005 ) , perceptions of affective tone were measured using a single item that asked “ How would you describe the tone of this electronic communica - tion ? ” The response scale was 1 ( “ negative ” ) to 5 ( “ positive ” ) . To align with the directionality of our hypotheses , we then reversed - scored the item so that higher scores represented more negative affec - tive tone . To assess the time required by electronic communication , each of the daily surveys asked participants “ How long did it take you to read and comply with what was requested in this electronic communication ? ” Responses were coded in hours and fractions of hours . Anger and happiness . Participants ’ emotions were measured daily after receiving work - related electronic communication . We measured both an - ger and happiness using four emotion words for each emotion ( Shaver , Schwartz , Kirson , & O ’ Connor , 1987 ; Weiss et al . , 1999 ) . Participants were asked , “ Please indicate the extent to which you felt the fol - lowing after reading the most recent work - related 2015 11 Butts , Becker , and Boswell electronic communication , ” followed by a random - ized list of emotion words that corresponded with anger ( anger , aggravation , resentment , irritation ) and happiness ( happiness , pride , enthusiasm , eagerness ) . The response scale was from 1 ( “ not at all ” ) to 5 ( “ very much ” ) . Coefficient a was . 90 for anger and . 89 for happiness . Work - to - nonwork conflict . Following previous research , we conceptualized work - nonwork conflict as a unidimensional construct comprised of time demands and psychological strain ( see Q : 2 Netemeyer , Boles , & McMurrian , 1996 ) . Thus , we measured daily work - to - nonwork conflict using the five - item scale from Netemeyer et al . ( 1996 ) , changing the wording to pertain to the nonwork domain in gen - eral and not just family . A sample item is “ Today the demands of my work interfered with my home and personal life . ” The response scale was 1 ( “ strongly disagree ” ) to 5 ( “ strongly agree ” ) . Coefficient a was . 93 . Abusive supervision . We assessed abusive super - vision on the initial survey using the nine - item scale from Zellars , Tepper , and Duffy ( 2002 ) . Participants were asked to report the frequency that their super - visor demonstrated a variety of behaviors such as “ talked down to me ” using a scale ranging from 1 ( “ never ” ) to 5 ( “ very often ” ) . Coefficient a was . 89 . Communication sender . In the daily surveys , we also asked participants to report who sent the focal electronic communication . Sender was coded as 1 if the communication was received from a supervisor and 0 if the sender was a coworker , subordinate , or client / customer . In all , 21 % of electronic commu - nications were received from supervisors , 41 % were from coworkers , 16 % were from subordinates , and 22 % were from clients / customers . Segmentation preference . To assess individual preferences for segmentation , we used Kreiner ’ s ( 2006 ) Q : 3 four - item scale . A sample item is “ I don ’ t like work issues creeping into my home life , ” with higher scores indicating a stronger segmentation preference . The response scale was 1 ( “ strongly disagree ” ) to 5 ( “ strongly agree ” ) . Coefficient a was . 91 . Control variables . Age , gender , marital status , parental status , work hours , and workplace seg - mentation were treated as individual - level variables and used as controls in all analyses . We included age , gender ( 0 5 “ female ” , 1 5 “ male ” ) , marital status ( 0 5 “ not married ” , 1 5 “ married or living with partner ” ) , and parental status to be consistent with previous work – family research ( e . g . , Ford , Heinen , & Langkamer , 2007 ) . Age was measured as a categorical variable with five - year bins Q : 4 ranging from 25 to 60 . Parental status was coded as 1 if there were children under 18 living with the respondent , or otherwise 0 . We included average weekly work hours as a control to ensure that the observed rela - tionships for time required were not an artifact of long work hours , which have often been linked to work – family conflict ( Byron , 2005 ) . Workplace expectations for work - nonwork segmentation were included as a control to account for organizational norms regarding electronic communication acces - sibility and responsiveness by their employees ( Matusik & Mickel , 2011 ) . Workplace segmentation was measured with two items adapted from Kreiner ( 2006 ) : “ At my company it is expected that people will read and act on work - related electronic com - munication outside of working hours ” ( reverse - coded ) and “ My company lets people forget about work when they ’ re home . ” Participants responded using a scale ranging from 1 ( “ strongly disagree ” ) to 5 ( “ strongly agree ” ) , and coefficient a was . 81 . RESULTS Analytical Strategy Our data contained a hierarchical structure in which daily responses were nested within individ - uals . To account for these dependencies in the data , we used random coefficient modeling with HLM 6 ( Bryk & Raudenbush , 1996 ) to test our hypotheses . To separate Level 1 and Level 2 effects and remove between - person variance in order to appropriately test the within - person relationships , we centered Level 1 predictors around individuals ’ means and Level 2 predictors around their grand means ( Hof - mann , Griffin , & Gavin , 2000 ) . The within - ( Level 1 ) and between - person ( Level 2 ) intercorrelations among the study variables are provided in Table 1 . Before testing our hypotheses , we ran a series of unconditional models in HLM to examine whether there was sufficient within - person variance . Results indicated that 78 % of the variance in affective tone and 73 % of the variance in time required resided at the within - person level . Also , 74 % of the variance in anger and 61 % of the variance in happiness was within - person . Finally , 54 % of the variance in work - to - nonwork conflict was within - person . Alto - gether , these results confirm the appropriateness of using multilevel modeling for hypotheses testing . Hypotheses Tests Within - person results . Table 2 presents the results for the effects of electronic communication 12 June Academy of Management Journal T A B L E 1 M e a n s , S t a nd a r d D e v i a ti o n s , a nd C o rr e l a ti o n s a m o n g S t ud y V a r i a b l e s a V a r i ab l e M S D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 L e v e l 1 ( w i t h i n - p e r s o n ) 1 . E C a ff ec ti v e t o n e 2 . 54 . 96 2 . E C ti m e r e q u i r e d . 38 . 55 . 07 * * 3 . A n ge r 1 . 45 . 76 . 45 * * . 26 * * ( . 90 ) 4 . H a pp i n e ss 1 . 71 . 96 – . 54 * * . 02 – . 25 * * ( . 89 ) 5 . W o r k - t o - n o n w o r k c o n fli c t 2 . 37 1 . 04 . 14 * * . 22 * * . 29 * * – . 13 * * ( . 93 ) 6 . E C s e nd e r . 21 . 41 – . 01 . 02 . 09 * * – . 03 . 07 * * L e v e l 2 ( b e t w ee n - p e r s o n ) 7 . A ge 4 . 38 2 . 08 – . 12 * * – . 02 – . 05 * . 10 * * – . 05 * – . 12 * * 8 . G e nd e r . 63 . 48 – . 04 – . 02 – . 05 * . 11 * * – . 07 * * . 00 . 11 * 9 . M a r it a l s t a t u s . 70 . 46 – . 04 . 05 – . 01 – . 02 – . 03 – . 04 . 29 * * . 17 * * 10 . P a r e n t a l s t a t u s . 52 . 50 . 01 . 01 – . 01 – . 01 – . 03 – . 05 . 20 * * . 17 * * . 44 * * 11 . W o r k h o u r s 47 . 49 9 . 20 . 00 . 10 * * . 00 . 01 . 11 * * – . 01 – . 04 . 12 * . 01 . 05 12 . W o r k p l ace s eg m e n t a ti o n 2 . 28 . 95 . 00 – . 10 * * – . 10 * * – . 02 – . 19 * * – . 04 – . 01 – . 02 – . 01 – . 04 – . 17 * * ( . 81 ) 13 . S eg m e n t a ti o n p r e f e r e n ce 3 . 58 . 97 . 13 * * . 09 * * . 17 * * – . 20 * * . 20 * * . 09 * * – . 26 * * – . 15 * * – . 10 – . 08 . 07 – . 09 ( . 91 ) 14 . A b u s i v e s u p e r v i s i o n 1 . 62 . 60 . 10 * * . 02 . 17 * * – . 06 * . 15 * * . 10 * * . 00 – . 01 – . 03 – . 04 . 02 – . 20 * * . 25 * * ( . 89 ) a N ( L e v e l 1 ) 5 1 , 530 – 1 , 572 . N ( L e v e l 2 ) 5 341 . C o e ffi c i e n t a i s p r ov i d e d a l o n g t h e d i ag o n a l . E C a ff ec ti v e t o n e w a s c o d e d 1 5 p o s iti v e , 5 5 n ega ti v e . E C s e nd e r w a s c o d e d 0 5 n o n - s up e r v i s o r , 1 5 s up e r v i s o r . G e nd e r w a s c o d e d 0 5 f e m a l e , 1 5 m a l e . M a r it a l s t a t u s w a s c o d e d 0 5 n o t m a rr i e d , 1 5 m a rr i e d o r li v i n g w it h p a r t n e r . P a r e n t a l s t a t u s w a s c o d e d 0 5 n o c h il d r e n li v i n g a t h o m e , 1 5 c h il d r e n li v i n g a t h o m e . E C 5 e l ec t r o n i c c o mm un i ca ti o n . * * p , . 01 * p , . 05 2015 13 Butts , Becker , and Boswell affective tone and time required on within - person emotional reactions of anger and happiness . Sup - porting Hypothesis 1 , affective tone was positively related to anger ( b 5 . 29 , p , . 01 ) and negatively re - lated to happiness ( b 5 - . 45 , p , . 01 ) . As Hypothesis 2a predicts , time required to read and comply with electronic communication was positively related to within - person anger ( b 5 . 15 , p , . 01 ) . However , Hypothesis 2b was not supported ; there was not a significant relationship between time required and happiness ( b 5 . 02 , n . s . ) . Our next set of findings concern the total and in - direct effects on work - to - nonwork conflict ( see Table 3 ) . Regarding total effects on within - person work - to - nonwork conflict , results revealed no relationship between affective tone and work - to - nonwork conflict ( b 5 . 04 , n . s . ) and a positive relationship between time required and work - to - nonwork conflict ( b 5 . 34 , p , . 01 ) . Thus , support was found for Hypothesis 3a but not Hypothesis 4a . Hypothesis 3b and 3c predict that the within - person relationship between affective tone and work - to - nonwork conflict is mediated by anger and happi - ness , respectively . As the indirect effects model in Table 3 shows , anger was significantly related to work - to - nonwork conflict ( b 5 . 15 , p , . 01 ) but happiness was not ( b 5 . 03 , n . s . ) , and the coefficient for affective tone decreased slightly when control - ling for the effects of anger and happiness . To formally test our proposed indirect effects , we con - ducted Sobel ( 1982 ) tests and then employed Tofighi and MacKinnon ’ s ( 2011 ) distribution - of - products method in the RMediation package to es - timate a 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) around the indirect effects . Results of the Sobel tests showed a significant indirect effect of affective tone on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger ( z 5 3 . 15 , p , . 01 ) but not happiness ( z 5 - . 88 , n . s . ) . The RMediation results indicated that the indirect effect through anger was . 042 , which was statistically significant ( p , . 05 ) because zero was not contained in the CI ( 95 % CI 5 . 017 , . 070 ) . In contrast , the in - direct effect through happiness was – . 012 and not significant ( 95 % CI 5 – . 039 , . 015 ) . Thus , Hypothe - sis 3b , but not 3c , was supported . Hypothesis 4b and 4c predict that the within - person relationship between time required and work - to - nonwork conflict is mediated by anger and happiness , respectively . As the indirect effects model in Table 3 shows , the coefficient for time required decreased slightly when including the effects of anger and happiness . Supporting Hy - pothesis 4b , Sobel tests showed a significant in - direct effect of time required on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger ( z 5 2 . 41 , p , . 05 ) . In addi - tion , the RMediation results indicated that the in - direct effect through anger was . 022 and statistically significant ( 95 % CI 5 . 007 , . 043 ) . However , TABLE 2 HLM Results for Effects on Anger and Happiness a Outcome : Anger Outcome : Happiness Variable b SE t b SE t Intercept ( b 00 ) 1 . 45 . 03 51 . 33 * * 1 . 70 . 04 44 . 06 * * Level 1 EC affective tone ( b 10 ) . 29 . 02 11 . 74 * * – . 45 . 03 2 16 . 06 * * EC time required ( b 20 ) . 15 . 04 3 . 57 * * . 02 . 04 . 38 Level 2 Age ( b 01 ) – . 02 . 01 2 1 . 87 . 05 . 02 2 . 22 * Gender ( b 02 ) – . 07 . 05 2 1 . 44 . 13 . 07 1 . 89 Marital status ( b 03 ) . 05 . 05 1 . 00 – . 09 . 09 2 1 . 04 Parental status ( b 04 ) . 04 . 05 . 93 . 02 . 08 . 20 Work hours ( b 05 ) . 00 . 00 . 10 – . 00 . 01 – . 07 Workplace segmentation ( b 06 ) – . 05 . 02 2 2 . 14 * . 00 . 04 . 07 s 2 . 22 . 38 Pseudo - R 2 . 48 . 32 a N Level 1 5 1 , 530 . N Level 2 5 341 . EC affective tone was coded 1 5 positive , 5 5 negative . Gender was coded 0 5 female , 1 5 male . Marital status was coded 0 5 not married , 1 5 married or living with partner . Parental status was coded 0 5 no children living at home , 1 5 children living at home . EC 5 electronic communication . All Level 1 variables were centered at individuals ’ means and Level 2 variables were grand - mean centered . b 5 unstandardized regression coefficient obtained from HLM . * * p , . 01 * p , . 05 14 June Academy of Management Journal Hypothesis 4c was not supported , as the Sobel test showed no indirect effect through happiness ( z 5 . 35 , n . s . ) and the RMediation results indicated an indirect effect of . 000 ( 95 % CI 5 – . 003 , . 005 ) . Hypothesis 5 predicts that the within - person in - direct effects of affective tone and time required on work - to - nonwork conflict are stronger through an - ger than through happiness . As reported above , our findings demonstrated significant indirect effects for both affective tone and time required through anger , but no indirect effects operated through happiness . To formally test Hypothesis 5 , we employed a z - test for the magnitude of the differ - ence in indirect effects obtained from the RMedia - tion results . Supporting Hypothesis 5a and 5b , we found that the indirect effects through anger were stronger than the indirect effects through happiness for both affective tone ( z 5 2 . 53 , p , . 05 ) and time required ( z 5 2 . 39 , p , . 05 ) . Moderation results . Hypothesis 6a , 6b , and 6c predict that the within - person relationships between affective tone with anger , happiness , and work - to - nonwork conflict are strongest when employees perceive higher ( versus lower ) abusive supervision and electronic communications origi - nate from supervisors ( versus non - supervisors ) and the relationships are weakest when employees perceive lower ( versus higher ) abusive supervision and electronic communications originate from supervisors ( versus non - supervisors ) . Testing these hypotheses entailed estimating cross - level , three - way interactions with slopes - as - outcomes HLM models that incorporated moderating effects for communication sender at Level 1 and abusive supervision at Level 2 . As shown in Table 4 , results revealed a significant three - way in - teraction for anger ( b 5 . 24 , p , . 01 ) , but not hap - piness ( b 5 – . 01 , n . s . ) or work - to - nonwork conflict ( b 5 . 09 , n . s . ) . Thus , Hypothesis 6b and 6c were not supported . The graphical plot of the signifi - cant three - way interaction between affective tone , abusive supervision , and communication sender is shown in Figure 2 . Supporting Hypothesis 6a , simple slopes tests following Preacher , Curran , and Bauer ’ s ( 2006 ) guidelines indicated that the relationship between affective tone and anger was significant when abusive supervision was high and communications were from supervisors ( t 5 9 . 30 , p , . 01 ) , and tests of simple slopes differ - ences suggested the strength of this relationship was stronger than it was under the other three conditions ( t 5 4 . 09 , 6 . 82 , 4 . 87 ; all p , . 01 ) . Also , the relationship between affective tone and anger was not significant when abusive supervision was TABLE 3 HLM Results for Effects on Work - to - Nonwork Conflict a Total Effects Model Indirect Effects Model Variable b SE t b SE t Intercept ( b 00 ) 2 . 35 . 04 55 . 42 * * 2 . 34 . 04 55 . 35 * * Level 1 EC affective tone ( b 10 ) . 05 . 03 1 . 73 . 01 . 03 . 24 EC time required ( b 20 ) . 34 . 06 6 . 12 * * . 31 . 06 5 . 45 * * Anger ( b 30 ) . 15 . 04 3 . 27 * * Happiness ( b 40 ) . 03 . 03 . 82 Level 2 Age ( b 01 ) – . 03 . 02 2 1 . 35 – . 03 . 02 2 1 . 47 Gender ( b 02 ) – . 11 . 09 2 1 . 18 – . 10 . 09 2 1 . 15 Marital status ( b 03 ) . 08 . 11 . 76 . 08 . 11 . 78 Parental status ( b 04 ) – . 02 . 10 – . 16 – . 02 . 10 – . 23 Work hours ( b 05 ) . 01 . 00 1 . 65 . 01 . 00 1 . 48 Workplace segmentation ( b 06 ) – . 20 . 04 2 4 . 21 * * – . 20 . 05 2 4 . 31 * * s 2 . 51 . 48 Pseudo - R 2 . 10 . 16 a N Level 1 5 1 , 530 . N Level 2 5 341 . EC affective tone was coded 1 5 positive , 5 5 negative . Gender was coded 0 5 female , 1 5 male . Marital status was coded 0 5 not married , 1 5 married or living with partner . Parental status was coded 0 5 no children living at home , 1 5 children living at home . EC 5 electronic communication . All Level 1 variables were centered at individuals ’ means and Level 2 variables were grand - mean centered . b 5 unstandardized regression coefficient obtained from HLM . * * p , . 01 * Q : 19 p , . 05 2015 15 Butts , Becker , and Boswell low and communications were from supervisors ( t 5 . 57 , n . s . ) . Hypothesis 7a , 7b , and 7c predict that the within - person relationships between time required with anger , happiness , and work - to - nonwork conflict are stronger for employees with higher ( versus lower ) segmentation preference . As shown in Table 4 , HLM results indicated a significant two - way in - teraction for work - to - nonwork conflict ( b 5 . 19 , p , . 01 ) , but not anger ( b 5 . 03 , n . s . ) or happiness ( b 5 . 01 , n . s . ) . The plot of the significant interaction between time required and segmentation preference is depicted in Figure 3 . Simple slopes tests in - dicated that the relationship between time required and work - to - nonwork conflict was significant when segmentation preference was high ( t 5 6 . 05 , p , . 01 ) and this relationship was stronger than it was when segmentation preference was low ( t 5 4 . 81 , p , . 01 ) . Overall , Hypothesis 7c was supported , but Hy - pothesis 7a and 7b were not . 2 Moderated mediation results . Hypothesis 8a and 8b predict that the proposed moderation effects for affective tone and time required demonstrate indirect effects on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger and happiness . Because these hypotheses reflect tests of first - stage moderated mediation ( Edwards & Lambert , 2007 ) , only the observed three - way TABLE 4 HLM Results for Moderating Effects of Electronic Abusive Supervision , Communication Sender , and Segmentation Preference a Outcome : Anger Outcome : Happiness Outcome : Work - to - Nonwork Conflict Variable b SE t b SE t b SE t Intercept ( b 00 ) 1 . 44 . 03 54 . 93 * * 1 . 70 . 04 45 . 76 * * 2 . 34 . 04 58 . 16 * * Level 1 EC affective tone ( b 10 ) . 28 . 02 12 . 14 * * – . 45 . 03 2 16 . 25 * * . 01 . 03 . 19 EC time required ( b 20 ) . 15 . 04 3 . 91 * * . 02 . 04 . 55 . 29 . 05 5 . 69 * * Anger ( b 30 ) . 14 . 04 3 . 17 * * Happiness ( b 40 ) . 03 . 03 . 87 EC sender ( b 50 ) . 14 . 05 2 . 83 * * – . 03 . 05 – . 65 . 02 . 05 . 45 EC tone X EC sender ( b 60 ) . 02 . 06 . 78 . 05 . 08 . 66 – . 06 . 08 – . 75 Level 2 Age ( b 01 ) – . 01 . 01 – . 69 . 03 . 02 1 . 27 – . 00 . 02 – . 04 Gender ( b 02 ) – . 04 . 05 – . 87 . 09 . 07 1 . 29 – . 05 . 08 – . 61 Marital status ( b 03 ) . 05 . 05 1 . 07 – . 10 . 09 2 1 . 15 . 06 . 10 . 62 Parental status ( b 04 ) . 06 . 04 1 . 42 . 00 . 08 . 04 – . 01 . 10 – . 09 Work hours ( b 05 ) – . 00 . 00 – . 65 . 00 . 01 . 22 . 01 . 01 1 . 28 Workplace segmentation ( b 06 ) – . 05 . 02 2 2 . 38 * . 01 . 04 . 32 – . 19 . 04 2 4 . 27 * * Segmentation preference ( b 07 ) . 10 . 02 3 . 83 * * – . 17 . 05 2 3 . 32 * * . 22 . 04 4 . 95 * * Abusive supervision ( b 08 ) . 17 . 05 3 . 30 * * – . 03 . 05 – . 56 . 13 . 07 1 . 87 EC time X Segmentation preference ( b 21 ) . 03 . 04 . 78 . 01 . 05 . 31 . 19 . 04 4 . 26 * * EC tone X Abusive sup . ( b 11 ) . 09 . 04 2 . 53 * * . 05 . 03 1 . 60 . 00 . 04 . 03 Abusive sup . X EC sender ( b 51 ) . 25 . 07 3 . 38 * * – . 04 . 07 – . 53 . 15 . 09 1 . 65 Abusive sup . X EC tone X EC sender ( b 61 ) . 24 . 08 3 . 10 * * – . 01 . 09 – . 10 . 09 . 10 . 95 s 2 . 20 . 36 . 48 Pseudo - R 2 . 54 . 36 . 17 a N Level 1 5 1 , 530 . N Level 2 5 341 . EC affective tone was coded 1 5 positive , 5 5 negative . EC sender was coded 0 5 non - supervisor , 1 5 supervisor . Gender was coded 0 5 female , 1 5 male . Marital status was coded 0 5 not married , 1 5 married . Parental status was coded 0 5 no children living at home , 1 5 children living at home . EC 5 electronic communication , EC tone 5 EC affective tone , EC time 5 EC time required , abusive sup . 5 abusive supervision . All Level 1 variables were centered at individuals ’ means and Level 2 variables were grand - mean centered . b 5 unstandardized regression coefficient obtained from HLM . * * p , . 01 * p , . 05 2 In exploratory analyses , we also examined possible interactions between time required , abusive supervision , and communication sender as well as affective tone with segmentation preference . Results of these analyses showed no significant effects on anger , happiness , or work - to - nonwork conflict . 16 June Academy of Management Journal interaction between affective tone , abusive supervi - sion , and communication sender on anger was ex - amined to ascertain a possible indirect effect on work - to - nonwork conflict . Specifically , we employed Bauer , Preacher and Gil ’ s ( 2006 ) method for calculat - ing conditional indirect effects in multilevel re - gression to estimate the indirect effect of affect tone on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger at higher ( 1 1 SD ) and lower ( – 1 SD ) levels of abusive supervision and for electronic communications from supervisors versus non - supervisors . Partially supporting Hypoth - esis 8a , results indicated that the indirect effect of af - fective tone on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger varied as a function of abusive supervision and communication sender . That is , the indirect effect was significant when abusive supervision was high and communication was from supervisors ( estimate 5 . 11 , z 5 3 . 07 , p , . 01 ) as well as when communication was from non - supervisors and abusive supervision was high ( estimate 5 . 08 , z 5 2 . 98 , p , . 01 ) or low ( estimate 5 . 06 , z 5 2 . 54 , p , . 05 ) . However , the in - direct effect was not significant when abusive super - vision was low and communication was from supervisors ( estimate 5 . 04 , z 5 1 . 24 , n . s . ) . Supplemental Analyses In the daily surveys , participants were given the opportunity to voluntarily provide the full text of the focal electronic communication they received . Participants provided unedited text for 186 of the 1 , 530 ( 12 % ) electronic communications used in the primary analyses . This data allowed us to explore one of the fundamental tenets of appraisal theory of emotion in the context of electronic communica - tion — that it is how a person construes an event , rather than objective characteristics of the event itself , that shapes emotional responses ( Lazarus & Folkman , 1984 ; Siemer , Mauss , & Gross , 2007 ) . Further , little research has examined the extent to which misinterpretations of affective content in electronic communication are attributable to the receiver ( Byron , 2008 ) . As an initial test of this , we had five scholars who were well - versed in the emotions literature serve as experts to rate the af - fective tone for each of the 186 electronic commu - nication messages on the same rating scale used by the study participants ( and then we reversed - scored the measure so higher scores indicated more nega - tive tone ) . The inter - rater reliability for these ratings was good ( ICC 5 . 89 ) . There was also consistency between expert and participant ratings of affective tone , particularly for messages strongly affective in nature . For example , the most negatively toned message rated by experts was “ If shift is below 250 CSPH Q : 5 I would like for you to explain what you could have done differently . If you are above 250 explain that as well , ” which received a mean rating of 4 . 40 by experts and a similar rating of 4 . 00 by the study participant . One of the most positively toned messages was “ I just want to thank you all for your dedication in your work for inventory prep . All Sunday bulk and bin loads were completed in a timely manner . We did not have to push any loads out and inventory started on time with no issues . FIGURE 2 Three - Way Interaction Effect for Electronic Com - munication Affective Tone , Abusive Supervision , and Communication Sender on Anger FIGURE 3 Cross - Level Interaction Effect for Electronic Com - munication Time Required and Segmentation Preference on Work - to - Nonwork Conflict 2015 17 Butts , Becker , and Boswell Thank you for your efforts , ” which was rated 1 . 00 by experts and the study participant . We used average expert ratings as a measure of objective affective tone and ran HLM models ( in - cluding control variables ) to examine the effects of objective affective tone on within - person anger and happiness through perceived affective tone as rated by study participants . Despite the small sample size , the total effects models indicated signif - icant relationships for objective affective tone with anger ( b 5 . 20 , p , . 01 ) and happiness ( b 5 – . 27 , p , . 01 ) , and a significant relationship between ob - jective affective tone and perceived affective tone ( b 5 . 44 , p , . 01 ) . The indirect effects models revealed that perceived affective tone was signifi - cantly related to anger ( b 5 . 35 , p , . 01 ) and happi - ness ( b 5 – . 45 , p , . 01 ) , and the coefficients for objective affective tone predicting anger ( b 5 . 04 , n . s . ) and happiness ( b 5 – . 07 , n . s . ) decreased sub - stantially when controlling for the effects of per - ceived affective tone . Formal mediation tests indicated that the indirect effect of objective affec - tive tone on anger through perceived affective tone was . 155 and significant ( z 5 2 . 95 , p , . 01 ; 95 % CI 5 . 064 , . 271 ) . Results also indicated a significant in - direct effect of – . 198 on happiness ( z 5 – 3 . 28 , p , . 01 ; 95 % CI 5 – . 095 , – . 325 ) . Altogether , these results suggest that electronic communications are not completely ambiguous events , and they carry clear linguistic , affective cues for message recipients that are often inter - preted accurately . However , we also found some evidence to support appraisal theory as - sumptions that individuals differ in how they interpret the affective tone of electronic com - munications , as the correlation between expert and participant ratings of affective tone was moderate ( r 5 . 45 , p , . 01 ) and 80 % of the variance in this relationship remained unexplained . This also supports our contention that the in - terpretation of affective tone is likely shaped by social context factors . Further supporting this , in the sample of 30 electronic communications re - ceived from supervisors where full text of the mes - sage was provided , the correlation for abusive supervision with perceived affective tone ( r 5 . 20 ) was stronger than the correlation with objective af - fective tone ( r 5 – . 06 ) . We note that our supple - mental results should be interpreted with caution because of the small sample size and likelihood that participants may have been reluctant to share full texts of electronic communications that were overly negative in tone . DISCUSSION The use of electronic communication technolo - gies to stay connected to work at all times is one of the new realities of organizational life . However , research has shown that staying electronically con - nected has harmful consequences in the way of in - creased work - nonwork conflict . Our study extends this line of research and highlights the importance of treating electronic communications during non - work time as unique , within - person events com - prised of specific elements ( affective tone , time required ) that determine employees ’ negative and positive emotional responses and subsequent work - to - nonwork conflict . Partially supporting our pre - dictions , affective tone was associated with anger and happiness but time required was only associated with anger . Further , there were indirect effects on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger for both affective tone and time required . Finally , we found evidence that the indirect effect for affective tone through anger was stronger when abusive supervision was higher and communications were from supervisors , while the association between time required and work - to - nonwork conflict was stronger for those individuals higher on segmentation preference . Implications for Theory and Research The present research makes several key theoretical contributions . First , whereas past research shows that the frequency of electronic communication use during nonwork time is related to increased work - nonwork conflict ( Boswell & Olson - Buchanan , 2007 ; Fenner & Renn , 2010 ) , what has been missing is theory and research that moves beyond viewing electronic communications during nonwork time as purely benign occurrences without meaning and in - stead treats them as unique work events with their own properties , connotations , and interpretations . Our study addresses this shortcoming by examining how fluctuations in specific electronic communica - tion elements ( affective tone , time required ) serve as catalysts of the affective process underlying episodic work - to - nonwork conflict . Extending research on affective events and the cognitive appraisal process ( see Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) , we found that electronic communications represent distinct work events and convey differing affective tone that can elicit both anger and happiness in employees while they are away from the workplace . The finding for happiness is particularly important , as it shines a positive light on electronic communications during 18 June Academy of Management Journal nonwork time , expanding past studies focused on the negative aspects of electronic communication after work hours ( i . e . , Lanaj et al . , 2014 ) . Further , this finding challenges prior research suggesting that senders predominantly use electronic communi - cation to convey negative news and not as a means for providing positive information or praise ( i . e . , Markus , 1994 ) . Of the two electronic communication elements examined , only time required had an association with work - to - nonwork conflict , in that work - to - nonwork conflict increased on days when individ - uals spent more time reading and completing tasks required by a work - related communication . This finding is consistent with accumulated research demonstrating a relationship between work hours and work - nonwork conflict ( Byron , 2005 ) . How - ever , in our study we controlled for average work hours per week . Thus , our study extends research on work hours by articulating what type of time demands , beyond work hours , lead to daily fluctu - ations in work - to - nonwork conflict . Previous re - search by Barley et al . ( 2011 ) has shown that time spent on electronic communication serves as a sa - lient signal of stress and overload more so than time spent on other activities during the work day ( e . g . , meetings , phone calls ) , which may help to explain why time required was associated with anger but not happiness . Happiness is only possible when goal accomplishment is present during the ap - praisal process ( Lazarus , 1991 ) . Any time spent on electronic communication during nonwork may be viewed in terms of goal frustration , rather than goal accomplishment , and thus more applicable to anger because time required is regarded negatively by individuals no matter the length of time involved . The supported indirect effects of affective tone and time required on work - to - nonwork conflict through anger shed light on the affective process underlying electronic communication . Although research has shown that frequency of electronic communication use during nonwork time is related to work - nonwork conflict ( i . e . , Boswell & Olson - Buchanan , 2007 ; Derks & Bakker , 2014 ) , no studies to date have explored the mechanisms explaining how electronic communication impacts one ’ s work - nonwork experiences . Our study demonstrates that negative emotional responses , such as anger , play a critical role as mechanisms through which elec - tronic communications serve as work events that permeate across the work - nonwork boundary . The pattern of indirect effects we found also contributes to the growing literature on positive – negative asymmetry effects and confirms Lazarus ’ ( 1991 ) ar - gument regarding the strength of negative emotions relative to positive emotions . Even though affective tone was associated with happiness , only anger served as a mediating mechanism of the effects on work - to - nonwork conflict . Of course , it may be that anger matters more than happiness for certain types of outcomes . Previous work by Judge , Ilies , and Scott ( 2006 ) suggests that due to the valence con - gruency principle ( Ajzen & Fishbein , 1977 ) , nega - tive emotions are more relevant to negative phenomena , such as work - to - nonwork conflict , than positive phenomena . Thus , future research should examine electronic communication in re - lation to a range of both negative and positive out - comes , including work - nonwork enrichment , life satisfaction , and social functioning . Our study also contributes to the literature on relational dynamics at work by highlighting the important role that supervisors play in employees ’ affective reactions to electronic communications . Although not hypothesized , results showed that employees displayed more anger in response to supervisors ’ communications than in response to communications from others . Because they are motivated to seek approval and rewards from higher status others in the organization ( Coyle - Shapiro , Kessler , & Purcell , 2004 ) , employees may become angry when they receive communications from supervisors during nonwork time because they have no other course of action other than to acquiesce to their supervisor ’ s demands . Our three - way in - teraction results further highlight the important role of supervisors by showing that anger was more likely to occur in response to communications negative in affective tone when abusive supervision was high and the communication originated from supervisors . Although a weaker effect , employees also reacted with anger in response to negative af - fective tone when abusive supervision was high and communications were received from non - supervisors . Also , as expected , communication negative in affective tone from supervisors when abusive supervision was low showed the weakest effect on anger . These findings help bolster the lit - erature on relational schemas in that experienced abusive supervision establishes a script for an employee ’ s expected pattern of interactions not only with his / her supervisor but also with others he / she interacts with from work . Finally , our results expand the literature on boundary theory in a variety of ways . Challenging the prevailing suggestion that segmentation is 2015 19 Butts , Becker , and Boswell a universally beneficial buffer for employees ( e . g . , Kreiner , 2006 ; Liu , Kwan , Lee , & Hui , 2013 ) , the cross - level interaction results showed that employ - ees higher on segmentation preference were more likely to experience increased work - to - nonwork conflict when electronic communications required more time . Conversely , employees who preferred to integrate work and nonwork were largely unaffected by the time demands of electronic communications . Importantly , these findings were observed after taking into account organizational expectations for work - nonwork segmentation . Taken together , these findings add complexity to boundary theory by re - vealing how segmentation preferences operate in real - time when work events traverse the divide into the nonwork domain . Implications for Practice Our findings point to the importance of clearly expressing the affective intent and level of attention desired when communicating electronically after normal work hours . Kruger et al . ( 2005 ) argued that people are naturally overconfident in their ability to accurately convey ambiguous messages and emo - tion to others via electronic communication . This bias is likely exacerbated after work when senders are less precise and deliberate in their communi - cation because their physical and emotional resources are depleted . To help employees become aware of this problem , organizations may want to offer training on the appropriate use of electronic communication after regular business hours and include guidelines for proper communication style , suitable hours of use , appropriate recipients , and topics that are best discussed face - to - face . This may also be advantageous because training on electronic media can create desired organizational norms for use ( Orlikowski , Yates , Okamura , & Fujimoto , 1995 ) . Our findings also suggest that there are po - tential benefits to electronic communication during nonwork time in that employees experience more happiness when they receive communications that are positive in affective tone . Thus , organizations may benefit from emphasizing the importance of focusing on positive feedback and goal progress , rather than work deficiencies and corrective action , when communicating electronically after work . Just as some companies underscore celebrating em - ployee successes and having fun in the workplace , performance management systems could emphasize that managers should provide intermittent praise and encouragement to their employees in the evenings via electronic communication . Such actions may also go a long way toward repairing subordinates ’ perceptions of abusive supervision , limiting the deleterious effect of supervisors as cat - alysts for negative emotional reactions to electronic communications received during nonwork time . Our findings for segmentation preference suggest individuals need to be sensitive to the desired boundary management preferences of those they communicate with electronically . Although policies prohibiting electronic communication after regular business hours are improbable because they contra - dict organizational efforts to increase connectivity such as providing company laptops and smart - phones , work units may informally establish equi - table guidelines customized to the desires of each employee . Ultimately , the best solution for people with high segmentation preference may be to choose their employer wisely ( Methot & LePine , in press ) , going to work for a company that has clear organi - zational policies for electronic communication use during nonwork time that are personally acceptable . Strengths , Limitations , and Future Directions The current research has a number of strengths , including collecting data on electronic communica - tions and employee reactions shortly after they oc - curred , longitudinal data from a field setting , and the use of experience sampling methodology . Nonethe - less , there are several limitations . First , we did not employ a random population sampling methodology to acquire participants . Convenience sampling , such as we used in this study , is mostly a concern when wanting to generalize findings to a specific pop - ulation ( Highhouse & Gillespie , 2009 ) . Because our objective was to include a wide range of communi - cations , a large sampling of employees from diverse organizations was desirable . Despite this , future re - search should examine our hypothesized model in more controlled settings or a single organization . A second limitation is that our within - person measures were collected concurrently each day . Although this design feature was necessitated by our primary in - terest in reactions in the moment , a concern is that our results cannot eliminate alternative causal or - dering . For example , it is plausible that people ’ s an - ger ( happiness ) caused them to perceive the tone of electronic communications more negatively ( posi - tively ) . Our supplemental results provide some evi - dence that this was likely not the case , as there was a moderately strong correlation between third - party ratings of objective affective tone and participant 20 June Academy of Management Journal ratings of perceived affective tone . To better disen - tangle the causal ordering of relationships , future studies might measure emotions and work - nonwork conflict at the end of the workday , immediately after receiving electronic communication from work in the evening , and the next morning to examine changes across these periods . Another limitation is that we used single - item , self - report measures of affective tone and time re - quired . Although this is consistent with prior re - search on individuals ’ affective responses ( Mauss et al . , 2005 ) and time reporting ( Jones , O ’ Connor , Conner , McMillan , & Ferguson , 2007 ) , we acknowl - edge that our measures were susceptible to low re - liability , retrieval errors , and common method bias . However , these concerns may be minimized because before hypotheses testing we removed between - person variance through individual - mean centering , essentially controlling for common source effects such as recall bias , social desirability , response ten - dencies , and trait affectivity . Moreover , it is doubtful that the observed cross - level interactions were due to common method bias . Notwithstanding these points , future research might include multi - item measures of affective tone and features of time , as well as multi - source data from both employees and significant others in their personal life . The current study also provides several addi - tional avenues for future research . Although we fo - cused on affective tone and time required as important elements of electronic communication , future research could explore other verbalized and non - verbalized elements in electronic communica - tion suggested in the literature . These include such features as informal salutations and closings , capi - talization , response time between messages , and even emoticons ( Byron & Baldridge , 2005 ; Walther & Tidwell , 1995 ) . Time of day may also be an im - portant consideration as perhaps electronic com - munications received late in the evening produce less emotional response and less work - to - nonwork conflict than those earlier in the evening when people are likely focused on nonwork activities . Additionally , electronic communication received in the morning before work may serve as an “ affective prime ” that sets the stage for affective experiences throughout the workday ( Rothbard & Wilk , 2011 ) . Our findings confirm the value of exploring rele - vant social context and receiver factors as boundary conditions of electronic communication effects . Although we positioned abusive supervision as a central aspect of “ bad ” relational dynamics that can exacerbate negative emotions and diminish positive emotions , “ good ” relational dynamics may also play a role . There is clear evidence that LMX can compensate for employees ’ negative experi - ences in the workplace ( Kimura , 2013 ; Loi , Ngo , Zhang , & Lau , 2011 ) . Integrating our findings with the LMX literature suggests a fruitful opportunity for future research is to explore the relative impor - tance of abusive supervision and LMX as moder - ators of the effects on emotions . Receiver factors such as career ambition and empowerment may also affect one ’ s reactions and should be examined . On a day - by - day basis , people may also possess an ex - pectation to work at home after regular business hours , which may simultaneously enhance the effects of affective tone on emotional reactions and weaken perceived work - to - nonwork conflict . Because of this potential paradox , future studies might benefit from investigating daily “ work at home ” expectations . Finally , results from our supplemental analyses warrant further exploration . Byron ( 2008 ) contends that too little is known about the factors that in - fluence the perceptual accuracy of perceived emo - tional content in electronic communication , but our results suggest that perceptual accuracy may not be a concern as it pertains to detecting affective tone . Unlike previous studies that have shown people respond with a variety of different emotions to the same standardized situation ( Siemer , et al . , 2007 ) , electronic communications may exhibit a high de - gree of situational strength and provide clear signals regarding the appropriate emotional response ( Meyer , Dalal , & Hermida , 2010 ) . To explore this possibility , future research might use an experi - mental design to manipulate elements of electronic communication and measure the differences in re - ceiver perceptions of affective tone as well as dif - ferences in emotional reactions . CONCLUSION Our study highlights the importance of examining electronic communications during nonwork time as event - by - event occurrences comprised of elements that employees appraise favorably or unfavorably and react emotionally to accordingly . In turn , we show that resulting anger relates to episodic work - to - nonwork conflict . We also show how relational dynamics ( abusive supervision , communication sender ) and segmentation preference influence these within - person relationships . As a whole , our results extend research on electronic communica - tion during nonwork time in new directions and suggest a number of promising areas for future work 2015 21 Butts , Becker , and Boswell that are highly relevant in an era when communi - cation technologies connect employees ’ work and nonwork domains ever so tightly . REFERENCES Adams , R . B . , Jr . , Ambady , N . , Macrae , C . N . , & Kleck , R . E . 2006 . Emotional expressions forecast approach - avoidance behavior . Motivation and Emotion , 30 : 177 – 186 . Q : 6 Ajzen , I . , & Fishbein , M . 1977 . Attitude - behavior rela - tions : A theoretical analysis and review of empirical research . Psychological Bulletin , 84 : 888 – 918 . Andersen , S . M . , & Chen , S . 2002 . The relational self : An interpersonal social - cognitive theory . Psychological Review , 109 : 619 – 645 . Ashforth , B . E . , Kreiner , G . E . , & Fugate , M . 2000 . All in a day ’ s work : Boundaries and micro role transitions . Academy of Management Review , 25 ( 3 ) : 472 – 491 . Averill , J . R . 1983 . Studies on anger and aggression : Implications for theories of emotion . The American Psychologist , 38 : 1145 – 1160 . Baldwin , M . W . 1992 . Relational schemas and the pro - cessing of social information . Psychological Bulletin , 112 : 461 – 484 . Baralou , E . , & McInnes , P . 2013 . Emotions and the spati - alisation of social relations in text – based computer – mediated communication . New Technology , Work and Employment , 28 : 160 – 175 . Barley , S . R . , Meyerson , D . E . , & Grodal , S . 2011 . E - mail as a source and symbol of stress . Organization Science , 22 : 887 – 906 . Barling , J . , Rogers , A . G . , & Kelloway , E . K . 2001 . Behind closed doors : In - home workers ’ experience of sexual harassment and workplace violence . Journal of Oc - cupational Health Psychology , 6 : 255 – 269 . Barr - Zisowitz , C . 2000Sadness — Is there such a thing . In M . Lewis & J . M . Haviland - Jones ( Eds . ) , Handbook of emotions ( 2nd ed . ) : 607 – 622 . New York : Guilford Press . Barsade , S . G . , & Gibson , D . E . 2007 . Why does affect matter in organizations ? The Academy of Manage - ment Perspectives , 21 : 36 – 59 . Bauer , D . J . , Preacher , K . J . , & Gil , K . M . 2006 . Conceptu - alizing and testing random indirect effects and mod - erated mediation in multilevel models : New procedures and recommendations . Psychological Methods , 11 : 142 – 163 . Baumeister , R . F . , & Heatherton , T . F . 1996 . Self - regulation failure : An overview . Psychological In - quiry , 7 : 1 – 15 . Baumeister , R . F . , Bratslavsky , E . , Finkenauer , C . , & Vohs , K . D . 2001 . Bad is stronger than good . Review of General Psychology , 5 : 323 – 370 . Berkowitz , L . 1989 . Frustration - aggression hypothesis : Examination and reformulation . Psychological Bul - letin , 106 : 59 – 73 . Berlo , D . K . 1960 . The process of communication . New York : Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Bledow , R . , Schmitt , A . , Frese , M . , & K¨uhnel , J . 2011 . The affective shift model of work engagement . The Jour - nal of Applied Psychology , 96 : 1246 – 1257 . Boswell , W . R . , & Olson - Buchanan , J . B . 2007 . The use of communication technologies after hours : The role of work attitudes and work - life conflict . Journal of Management , 33 : 592 – 610 . Boudens , C . J . 2005 . The story of work : A narrative anal - ysis of workplace emotion . Organization Studies , 26 : 1285 – 1306 . Brickman , P . , Coates , D . , & Janoff - Bulman , R . 1978 . Lot - tery winners and accident victims : Is happiness rel - ative ? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 36 : 917 – 927 . Bryk , A . S . , & Raudenbush , S . W . 1996 . HLM : Hierar - chical linear and nonlinear modeling with the HLM / 2L and HLM / 3L programs . Chicago , IL : SSI , Inc . Burgoon , J . K . , & Saine , T . 1978 . The unspoken dialogue : An introduction to nonverbal communication . Houghton Mifflin Boston . Q : 7 Byron , K . 2005 . A meta - analytic review of work – family conflict and its antecedents . Journal of Vocational Behavior , 67 : 169 – 198 . Byron , K . 2008 . Carrying too heavy a load ? The commu - nication and miscommunication of emotion by email . Academy of Management Review , 33 : 309 – 327 . Byron , K . , & Baldridge , D . C . 2005Toward a model of nonverbal cues and emotion in emailK . M . Weaver ( Ed . ) , Academy of management best paper pro - ceedings : OCIS B1 - B6 . Q : 8 Byron , K . , & Baldridge , D . C . 2007 . E - mail recipients ’ impressions of senders ’ likability : The interactive effect of nonverbal cues and recipients ’ personality . Journal of Business Communication , 44 : 137 – 160 . Cantor , J . R . , Bryant , J . , & Zillmann , D . 1974 . Enhancement of humor appreciation by transferred excitation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 30 : 812 – 821 . Carlson , D . , Ferguson , M . , Hunter , E . , & Whitten , D . 2012 . Abusive supervision and work – family conflict : The path through emotional labor and burnout . The Leadership Quarterly , 23 : 849 – 859 . Carlson , D . , Kacmar , K . M . , Zivnuska , S . , Ferguson , M . , & Whitten , D . 2011 . Work - family enrichment and job 22 June Academy of Management Journal performance : A constructive replication of affective events theory . Journal of Occupational Health Psy - chology , 16 : 297 – 312 . Carver , C . S . , & Harmon - Jones , E . 2009 . Anger is an approach - related affect : evidence and implications . Psychological Bulletin , 135 : 183 – 204 . Chesley , N . 2005 . Blurring boundaries ? Linking technol - ogy use , spillover , individual distress , and family satisfaction . Journal of Marriage and the Family , 67 : 1237 – 1248 . Coyle – Shapiro , J . A . M . , Kessler , I . , & Purcell , J . 2004 . Exploring organizationally directed citizenship be - haviour : Reciprocity or ‘ It ’ s my job ’ ? Journal of Management Studies , 41 : 85 – 106 . Dabbish , L . A . , & Kraut , R . E . 2006 . Email overload at work : An analysis of factors associated with email strain . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . New York , 431 – 440 . Demerouti , E . , Bakker , A . B . , & Bulters , A . J . 2004 . The loss spiral of work pressure , work – home interference and exhaustion : Reciprocal relations in a three - wave study . Journal of Vocational Behavior , 64 : 131 – 149 . Derks , D . , & Bakker , A . B . 2014 . Smartphone use , work – home interference , and burnout : A diary study on the role of recovery . Applied Psychology , 63 : 411 – 440 . Derks , D . , van Mierlo , H . , & Schmitz , E . B . 2014 . A diary study on work - related smartphone use , psychological detachment and exhaustion : Examining the role of the perceived segmentation norm . Journal of Occu - pational Health Psychology , 19 : 74 – 84 . Diaz , I . , Chiaburu , D . S . , Zimmerman , R . D . , & Boswell , W . R . 2012 . Communication technology : Pros and cons of constant connection to work . Journal of Voca - tional Behavior , 80 : 500 – 508 . Duxbury , L . , Towers , I . , Higgins , C . A . , & Thomas , J . 2006 . From 9 to 5 to 24 / 7 : How technology redefined the work day . Hershey , PA : Idea Group Publishing . Eby , L . T . , Butts , M . M . , Durley , J . , & Ragins , B . R . 2010a . Are bad experiences stronger than good ones in mentoring relationships ? Evidence from the prot´eg´e and mentor perspective . Journal of Vocational Be - havior , 77 : 81 – 92 . Eby , L . T . , Maher , C . P . , & Butts , M . M . 2010b . The in - tersection of work and family life : The role of affect . Annual Review of Psychology , 61 : 599 – 622 . Edwards , J . R . , & Lambert , L . S . 2007 . Methods for in - tegrating moderation and mediation : A general ana - lytical framework using moderated path analysis . Psychological Methods , 12 : 1 – 22 . Elfenbein , H . A . , & Ambady , N . 2002 . On the universality and cultural specificity of emotion recognition : A meta - analysis . Psychological Bulletin , 128 : 203 – 235 . Fenner , G . H . , & Renn , R . W . 2010 . Technology - assisted supplemental work and work - to - family conflict : The role of instrumentality beliefs , organizational expect - ations and time management . Human Relations , 63 : 63 – 82 . Ford , M . T . , Heinen , B . A . , & Langkamer , K . L . 2007 . Work and family satisfaction and conflict : A meta - analysis of cross - domain relations . The Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 : 57 – 80 . Fragale , A . R . , Sumanth , J . J . , Tiedens , L . Z . , & Northcraft , G . B . 2012 . Appeasing equals : Lateral deference in organizational communication . Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 57 : 373 – 406 . Fredrickson , B . L . 1998 . What good are positive emotions ? Review of General Psychology , 2 : 300 – 319 . Fredrickson , B . L . 2001 . The role of positive emotions in positive psychology : The broaden - and - build theory of positive emotions . The American Psychologist , 56 : 218 – 226 . Frijda , N . H . 1988 . The laws of emotion . The American Psychologist , 43 : 349 – 358 . Frijda , N . H . 1994 . Varieties of affect : Emotions and episodes , moods , and sentiments . In P . Ekman & R . J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of emotions : Fundamental ques - tions : 59 – 67 . New York : Oxford University Press . Frijda , N . H . 2007 . The laws of emotion . Mahwah , NJ : Ehrlbaum . Graen , G . B . , & Uhl - Bien , M . 1995 . Relationship - based approach to leadership : Development of leader - member exchange ( LMX ) theory of leadership over 25 years : Applying a multi - level multi - domain per - spective . The Leadership Quarterly , 6 : 219 – 247 . Grant , A . M . , & Mayer , D . M . 2009 . Good soldiers and good actors : Prosocial and impression management motives as interactive predictors of affiliative citi - zenship behaviors . The Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 94 : 900 – 912 . Greenhaus , J . H . , & Beutell , N . J . 1985 . Sources of conflict between work and family roles . Academy of Man - agement Review , 10 : 76 – 88 . Greenhaus , J . H . , & Powell , G . N . 2006 . When work and family are allies : A theory of work – family enrich - ment . Academy of Management Review , 31 : 72 – 92 . Q : 9 Hahn , V . , & Dormann , C . 2013 . The role of partners and children for employees ’ psychological detachment from work and well - being . The Journal of Applied Psychology , 98 : 26 – 36 . Higgins , E . T . 1987 . Self - discrepancy : A theory relating self and affect . Psychological Review , 94 : 319 – 340 . Highhouse , S . , & Gillespie , J . Z . 2009 . Do samples really matter that much ? In C . E . Lance & R . J . Vandenberg ( Eds . ) , Statistical and methodological myths and urban 2015 23 Butts , Becker , and Boswell legends : Doctrine , verity and fable in organizational and social sciences : 247 – 265 . New York : Routledge . Hofmann , D . A . , Griffin , M . A . , & Gavin , M . B . 2000 . The application of hierarchical linear modeling to orga - nizational research . In K . J . Klein & S . W . J . Kozlowski ( Eds . ) , Multilevel theory , research , and methods in organizations : 423 – 468 . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Horowitz , M . J . 1989 . Relationship schema formulation : Role - relationship models and intrapsychic conflict . Psychiatry , 52 : 260 – 274 . Q : 10 Horowitz , M . J . 1991 . Person schemas and maladaptive interpersonal patterns . Chicago : University of Chi - cago Press . Izard , C . E . 2007 . Basic emotions , natural kinds , emotion schemas , and a new paradigm . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 2 : 260 – 280 . Jones , F . , O ’ Connor , D . B . , Conner , M . , McMillan , B . , & Ferguson , E . 2007 . Impact of daily mood , work hours , and iso - strain variables on self - reported health behaviors . The Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 : 1731 – 1740 . Judge , T . A . , Ilies , R . , & Scott , B . A . 2006 . Work – family conflict and emotions : Effects at work and at home . Personnel Psychology , 59 : 779 – 814 . Kennedy , T . , Wellman , B . , & Amoroso , J . 2011 . Can you take it with you ? Mobility , ICTs and work - life bal - ance . In J . E . Katz ( Ed . ) , Mobile communication : Dimensions of social policy : 191 – 210 . New Bruns - wick , NJ : Transaction Publishers . Kimura , T . 2013 . The moderating effects of political skill and leader – member exchange on the relationship between organizational politics and affective com - mitment . Journal of Business Ethics , 116 : 587 – 599 . Kreiner , G . E . 2006 . Consequences of work – home seg - mentation or integration : a person – environment fit perspective . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 27 : 485 – 507 . Kreiner , G . E . , Hollensbe , E . C . , & Sheep , M . L . 2009 . Balancing borders and bridges : Negotiating the work – home interface via boundary work tactics . Academy of Management Journal , 52 : 704 – 730 . Kruger , J . , Epley , N . , Parker , J . , & Ng , Z . - W . 2005 . Ego - centrism over e - mail : Can we communicate as well as we think ? Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 89 : 925 – 936 . Labianca , G . , & Brass , D . J . 2006 . Exploring the social ledger : Negative relationships and negative asym - metry in social networks in organizations . Academy of Management Review , 31 : 596 – 614 . Lanaj , K . , Johnson , R . E . , & Barnes , C . M . 2014 . Beginning the workday yet already depleted ? Consequences of late - night smartphone use and sleep . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 124 : 11 – 23 . Lazarus , R . S . 1991 . Cognition and motivation in emotion . The American Psychologist , 46 : 352 – 367 . Lazarus , R . S . 1999 . The cognition - emotion debate : A bit of history . Handbook of cognition and emotion : 3 – 19 . Q : 11 Lazarus , R . S . , & Folkman , S . 1984 . Stress . New York : Springer . LeBlanc , M . M . , & Kelloway , E . K . 2002 . Predictors and outcomes of workplace violence and aggression . The Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 : 444 – 453 . Lerner , J . , & Keltner , D . 2001 . Fear , anger , and risk . Jour - nal of Personality and Social Psychology : 146 – 159 . Q : 12 Liu , J . , Kwan , H . K . , Lee , C . , & Hui , C . 2013 . Work - to - family spillover effects of workplace ostracism : The role of work - home segmentation preferences . Human Resource Management , 52 : 75 – 93 . Loi , R . , Ngo , H . Y . , Zhang , L . , & Lau , V . P . 2011 . The interaction between leader – member exchange and perceived job security in predicting employee altru - ism and work performance . Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 84 : 669 – 685 . Madden , M . , & Jones , S . 2008 . Networked workers , Pew Internet & American Life Project . Washington , DC : Pew Research Center . Maertz , C . P . , & Boyar , S . L . 2011 . Work – family conflict , enrichment , and balance under “ levels ” and “ epi - sodes ” approaches . Journal of Management , 37 : 68 – 98 . Markus , M . L . 1994 . Electronic mail as the medium of managerial choice . Organization Science , 5 : 502 – 527 . Martin , L . L . , & Tesser , A . 1989 . Toward a motivational and structural theory of ruminative thought . In J . S . Uleman & J . A . Bargh ( Eds . ) , Unintended thought : The limits of intention , awareness , and control : 306 – 326 . New York : Guilford Press . Matusik , S . F . , & Mickel , A . E . 2011 . Embracing or em - battled by converged mobile devices ? Users ’ experi - ences with a contemporary connectivity technology . Human Relations , 64 : 1001 – 1030 . Mauss , I . B . , Levenson , R . W . , McCarter , L . , Wilhelm , F . H . , & Gross , J . J . 2005 . The tie that binds ? Coherence among emotion experience , behavior , and physiol - ogy . Emotion ( Washington , D . C . ) , 5 : 175 – 190 . Methot , J . R . , & LePine , J . A . Too close for comfort ? In - vestigating the nature and functioning of work and non - work role segmentation preferences . Journal of Business and Psychology , in press . Q : 13 Meyer , R . D . , Dalal , R . S . , & Hermida , R . 2010 . A review and synthesis of situational strength in the organiza - tional sciences . Journal of Management , 36 : 121 – 140 . 24 June Academy of Management Journal Mignonac , K . , & Herrbach , O . 2004 . Linking work events , affective states , and attitudes : An empirical study of managers ’ emotions . Journal of Business and Psy - chology , 19 : 221 – 240 . Mitchell , M . S . , & Ambrose , M . L . 2007 . Abusive super - vision and workplace deviance and the moderating effects of negative reciprocity beliefs . The Journal of Applied Psychology , 92 : 1159 – 1168 . Netemeyer , R . G . , Boles , J . S . , & McMurrian , R . 1996 . De - velopment and validation of work – family conflict and family work conflict scales . The Journal of Ap - plied Psychology , 81 : 400 – 410 . Orlikowski , W . J . , Yates , J . , Okamura , K . , & Fujimoto , M . 1995 . Shaping electronic communication : The meta - structuring of technology in the context of use . Or - ganization Science , 6 : 423 – 444 . Park , Y . , Fritz , C . , & Jex , S . M . 2011 . Relationships be - tween work – home segmentation and psychological detachment from work : The role of communication technology use at home . Journal of Occupational Health Psychology , 16 : 457 – 467 . Q : 14 Peeters , G . 1971 . The positive – negative assymetry : On cognitive consistency and positivity bias . European Journal of Social Psychology , 1 : 455 – 474 . Peeters , G . , & Czapinski , J . 1990 . Positive – negative asymmetry in evaluations : The distinction between affective and informational negativity effects . Euro - pean Review of Social Psychology , 1 : 33 – 60 . Perlow , L . A . 2012 . Sleeping with your smartphone : How to break the 24 / 7 habit and change the way you work . Harvard Business Press . Q : 15 Piccolo , R . F . , & Greenbaum , R . Den Hartog , D . N . , & Folger , R . 2010 . The relationship between ethical leadership and core job characteristics . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 31 : 259 – 278 . Potegal , M . 2010 . The temporal dynamics of anger : Phe - nomena , processes , and perplexities . In M . Potegal & G . Stemmler & C . Speilberger ( Eds . ) , International handbook of anger : 385 – 401 . New York : Springer . Powell , G . N . , & Greenhaus , J . H . 2010 . Sex , gender , and the work - to - family interface : Exploring negative and positive interdependencies . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 53 : 513 – 534 . Prasopoulou , E . , Pouloudi , A . , & Panteli , N . 2006 . Enact - ing new temporal boundaries : The role of mobile phones . European Journal of Information Systems , 15 : 277 – 284 . Preacher , K . J . , Curran , P . J . , & Bauer , D . J . 2006 . Compu - tational tools for probing interactions in multiple linear regression , multilevel modeling , and latent curve analysis . Journal of Educational and Behav - ioral Statistics , 31 : 437 – 448 . Rothbard , N . P . , & Wilk , S . L . 2011 . Waking up on the right or wrong side of the bed : Start - of - workday mood , work events , employee affect , and performance . Academy of Management Journal , 54 : 959 – 980 . Scandura , T . A . , & Graen , G . B . 1984 . Moderating effects of initial leader - member exchange status on the effects of a leadership intervention . The Journal of Applied Psychology , 69 : 428 – 436 . Schmitz , J . , & Fulk , J . 1991 . Organizational colleagues , media richness , and electronic email : A test of the social influence model of technology use . Commu - nication Research , 18 : 487 – 523 . Schwarz , N . , & Clore , G . L . 1996Feelings and phenomenal experiencesE . T . Higgins & A . Kruglanski ( Eds . ) , So - cial psychology : Handbook of basic principles , vol . 2 : 385 – 407 . New York : Guilford . Q : 16 Scott , B . A . , & Judge , T . A . 2006 . Insomnia , emotions , and job satisfaction : A multilevel study . Journal of Management , 32 : 622 – 645 . Shaver , P . , Schwartz , J . , Kirson , D . , & O ’ Connor , C . 1987 . Emotion knowledge : Further exploration of a pro - totype approach . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 : 1061 – 1086 . Siemer , M . , Mauss , I . , & Gross , J . J . 2007 . Same situation – different emotions : How appraisals shape our emotions . Emotion ( Washington , D . C . ) , 7 : 592 – 600 . Slepian , M . L . , Weisbuch , M . , Adams , R . B . , Jr . , & Ambady , N . 2011 . Gender moderates the relationship between emotion and perceived gaze . Emotion ( Washington , D . C . ) , 11 : 1439 – 1444 . Smith , C . A . , Haynes , K . N . , Lazarus , R . S . , & Pope , L . K . 1993 . In search of the ” hot ” cognitions : Attributions , appraisals , and their relation to emotion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 : 916 – 929 . Sobel , M . E . 1982 . Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural equations models . So - ciological Methodology , 13 : 290 – 312 . Stone , B . 2014 . Work - life balance and the new night shift . Bloomberg Businessweek . Q : 17 Tepper , B . J . 2000 . Consequences of abusive supervision . Academy of Management Journal , 43 : 178 – 190 . Tofighi , D . , & MacKinnon , D . P . 2011 . RMediation : An R package for mediation analysis confidence intervals . Behavior Research Methods , 43 : 692 – 700 . Tomlinson , J . 2007 . Employment regulation , welfare and gender regimes : A comparative analysis of women ’ s working - time patterns and work – life balance in the UK and the US . International Journal of Human Resource Management , 18 : 401 – 415 . Towers , I . , Duxbury , L . , Higgins , C . , & Thomas , J . 2006 . Time thieves and space invaders : Technology , work 2015 25 Butts , Becker , and Boswell and the organization . Journal of Organizational Change Management , 19 : 593 – 618 . Walther , J . B . 1996 . Computer - mediated communication impersonal , interpersonal , and hyperpersonal in - teraction . Communication Research , 23 : 3 – 43 . Walther , J . B . , & D ’ Addario , K . P . 2001 . The impacts of emoticons on message interpretation in computer - mediated communication . Social Science Computer Review , 19 : 324 – 347 . Walther , J . B . , & Tidwell , L . C . 1995 . Nonverbal cues in computer - mediated communication , and the effect of chronemics on relational communication . Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Com - merce , 5 : 355 – 378 . Weiss , H . M . , & Cropanzano , R . 1996Affective events the - ory : A theoretical discussion of the structure , causes and consequences of affective experiences at workB . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior , vol . 18 : 1 – 74 . Greenwich : JAI Press . Weiss , H . M . , Suckow , K . , & Cropanzano , R . 1999 . Effects of justice conditions on discrete emotions . The Journal of Applied Psychology , 84 : 786 – 794 . Williams , K . J . , & Alliger , G . M . 1994 . Role stressors , mood spillover , and perceptions of work – family conflict in employed parents . Academy of Management Jour - nal , 37 : 837 – 868 . Zellars , K . L . , Tepper , B . J . , & Duffy , M . K . 2002 . Abu - sive supervision and subordinates ’ organizational citizenship behavior . The Journal Q : 18 of Applied Psychology , 87 : 1068 . Marcus M . Butts ( mbutts @ uta . edu ) is an associate pro - fessor of management at the University of Texas at Arlington . He received his PhD from the University of Georgia . His research interests include the work - nonwork interface , relational dynamics , and careers . William J . Becker ( w . becker @ tcu . edu ) is an assistant pro - fessor of management , entrepreneurship , and leadership at the Neeley School of Business , Texas Christian University . He received his PhD in management from the University of Arizona . His research interests include emotions in the workplace , organizational neuroscience , and turnover . Wendy R . Boswell ( wboswell @ mays . tamu . edu ) is the Jerry and Kay Cox Professor of Management in the Mays Business School , Texas A & M University . She received her PhD from the School of Industrial and Labor Relations at Cornell University . Her research focuses on employee attachment , job search behavior , and the work - nonwork interface . 26 June Academy of Management Journal Q : 1 _ The citation " Eby et al . , 2010 " matches multiple references . Please advise whether this should be 2010a or 2010b as per the amended reference list . Q : 2 _ Please note , cf . has been changed to see as cf . means to compare with . Q : 3 _ A word was missing before Kreiner ’ s so ‘ used ’ was added – is this correct ? Q : 4 _ Please con ﬁ rm ‘ bins ’ is the correct word here . Q : 5 _ Please de ﬁ ne the abbreviations ICC and CSPH if possible . Q : 6 _ Reference " Adams , Ambady , Macrae , Kleck , 2006 " is not cited in the text . Please add an in - text citation or delete the reference . Q : 7 _ Could not ﬁ nd a publisher location in a book reference ( in reference " Burgoon , Saine , 1978 " ) . Please provide details . Q : 8 _ Could not ﬁ nd a publisher , publisher location and page range in a book chapter reference ( in reference " Byron , Baldridge , 2005 " ) . Please provide details . Q : 9 _ Reference " Greenhaus , Powell , 2006 " is not cited in the text . Please add an in - text citation or delete the reference . Q : 10 _ In reference " Horowitz , 1989 " please clarify which journal this relates to as there is no Psychiatry journal . Q : 11 _ For " Lazarus , 1999 " please provide full reference details – editors , publisher and publisher location . Q : 12 _ Please provide the missing volume number in this journal reference . ( in reference " Lerner , Keltner , 2001 " ) . Q : 13 _ In reference " Methot , LePine , in press " , please provide full reference details if now available . Q : 14 _ Reference " Park , Fritz , Jex , 2011 " is not cited in the text . Please add an in - text citation or delete the reference . Q : 15 _ Could not ﬁ nd a publisher location in a book reference ( in reference " Perlow , 2012 " ) . Please provide details . Q : 16 _ Reference " Schwarz , Clore , 1996 " is not cited in the text . Please add an in - text citation or delete the reference . Q : 17 _ Could not ﬁ nd a publisher location in a book reference ( in reference " Stone , 2014 " ) . Please provide details . Q : 18 _ Reference has only ﬁ rst page number . Please provide the last page number if article is longer than one page . ( in reference " Zellars , Tepper , Duffy , 2002 " ) . AUTHOR QUERIES PLEASE ANSWER ALL QUERIES Q : 19 _ The Table footnote with a " p " symbol does not have a matching callout in the table . Please add to the table or delete the footnote . AUTHOR QUERIES PLEASE ANSWER ALL QUERIES