Organization Science Vol . 20 , No . 4 , July – August 2009 , pp . 740 – 758 issn 1047 - 7039 (cid:1) eissn 1526 - 5455 (cid:1) 09 (cid:1) 2004 (cid:1) 0740 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1090 . 0430 ©2009 INFORMS Hiring Stars and Their Colleagues : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Boris Groysberg Harvard Business School , Boston , Massachusetts 02163 , bgroysbegr @ hbs . edu Linda - Eling Lee RiskMetrics Group , New York , New York 10005 , lindaeling . lee @ riskmetrics . com T his paper examines exploration and exploitation in professional service ﬁrms by focusing on the individuals who carry out the exploration and exploitation activities . Speciﬁcally , we examine the performance of star security analysts who join new ﬁrms in exploration versus exploitation roles . We ﬁnd that stars hired to explore ( initiate new activities ) experience a short - and long - term performance decline ; by contrast , stars who join new ﬁrms to exploit ( reinforce existing activities ) suffer only a short - term drop in performance . Stars hired in exploration roles can preserve some of their performance by moving with a group of colleagues from the originating ﬁrm . Investors view the hiring of a star analyst as value - destroying for the hiring ﬁrm regardless of whether the ﬁrm is hiring to exploit or explore , but the negative reactions are economically more extreme for exploration hires . These ﬁndings indicate that , even at the individual level , probabilities of success in exploration activities are lower than in exploitation activities , thereby reinforcing the tendency toward exploitation . Key words : individual performance ; ﬁrm performance ; mobility ; teams ; exploitation and exploration ; knowledge workers History : Published online in Articles in Advance June 10 , 2009 . Over the last few decades , a considerable and inﬂu - ential body of literature has developed around how ﬁrms change and innovate , particularly the choices and trade - offs that ﬁrms make between exploration and exploitation ( March 1991 , Benner and Tushman 2003 , Tushman and Smith 2002 , Teece et al . 1997 ) . Exploration—seeking change in response to internal strategy or external constraints—contrasts with exploita - tion , or improving the efﬁciency , delivery , or proﬁtabil - ity of the existing business model . Although exploiting existing advantages and exploring future opportunities are both necessary ( March 1991 ) , researchers have found that ﬁrms have difﬁculty succeeding in being “ambidex - terous , ” or doing both ( Tushman and O’Reilly 1996 ) . Firms have a strong bias toward exploitation because of greater certainty of short - term gains and the positive feedbacks from pursuing and reﬁning current ways of doing things ( Gupta et al . 2006 , Benner and Tushman 2003 , Levinthal and March 1993 ) . This bias may be shortsighted , however , as ﬁrms become locked into exist - ing competencies and fail to adapt to future environmen - tal changes ( March 2003 ) . Explaining ﬁrms’ strategic decisions around prod - uct innovation has served as the focal point in both the theoretical and empirical developments in this ﬁeld ( e . g . , Thomke 2003 , Burgelman 1991 , Henderson and Clark 1990 ) . Relatively less attention has been paid to how the challenges of exploration versus exploita - tion have characterized service innovations more broadly and innovations in the professional service ﬁrms more speciﬁcally . Furthermore , the literature has heretofore neglected the performance of the particular individu - als within ﬁrms who are charged with exploring or exploiting . How do the dynamics of exploration ver - sus exploitation that researchers have investigated at the level of ﬁrm strategy play out at the level of individual performance ? In what ways might individual - level per - formance in exploration or exploitation activities play a role in generating ﬁrm value ? In this paper , we propose that for professional ser - vice ﬁrms in which knowledge is the primary product , exploration and exploitation activities occur at the level of individuals who create and deliver that product to clients . In particular , building on a study by Groysberg et al . ( 2008 ) , we focus on the practice of hiring individ - uals , typically star performers , away from a competitor to enhance or expand the hiring ﬁrm’s capabilities . Do stars perform differently in exploitation as opposed to exploration roles in the hiring ﬁrm ? We test this poten - tial difference in performance using a data set that cap - tures the performance and mobility of 799 star equity analysts and 254 star ﬁxed - income analysts across 78 ﬁrms over a period of nine years , a longitudinal data set that allows us to capture changes in performance when analysts move . All of the star analysts in our sam - ple who leave for a competitor ﬁrm perform the same duties , cover the same sector or companies , and serve the same institutional investor clients at their hiring ﬁrm as they did at their originating ﬁrm . The primary dif - ference among the analysts who leave for a competitor 740 Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 741 is the strategic context in which they do their job in their new ﬁrm ( Groysberg et al . 2004 ) : whether they will analyze a sector in which the hiring ﬁrm has already established research ( exploitation ) or whether their sec - tor has never been researched by the hiring ﬁrm in the past ( exploration ) . This study contributes to several areas of research . First , it contributes to human capital theory by demon - strating the effect of organizational context on individual performance . Although previous research has suggested that organizational factors affect individual performance , not much empirical research has been able to demon - strate this component in determining individual perfor - mance . Our study suggests limitations to the portability of individual performance , even among star workers in a market characterized by high mobility . Second , our study contributes to research on professional service ﬁrms . In particular , our research presents evidence that a popular strategy among these ﬁrms—the acquisition of star individuals—may not be particularly successful . Because professional service ﬁrms may feel they have little choice but to innovate partly through hiring out - side stars , distinguishing between the strategic contexts of hiring—for exploration or exploitation—and demon - strating the conditions under which group hires can inﬂuence future performance are both important con - tributions of our study . This study also contributes to the literature on exploration and exploitation by examin - ing the tension at the individual level , where the actual work of exploring and exploiting occurs , especially in professional service or other knowledge - intensive con - texts ( Starbuck 1992 ) . Previous research has established a tendency toward exploitation at the level of ﬁrm activ - ities . We ﬁnd that individuals , much as ﬁrms , experi - ence greater performance difﬁculty when they explore a market that is new to a ﬁrm than when they exploit an established market . Our research suggests that if individ - ual workers come to perceive these differences between performing in an exploration or an exploitation context , they may increase the already heavy tendency toward exploitation activities at the ﬁrm level by refusing to take on exploration roles . Professional Service Firms Most of the research to date on exploration , exploita - tion , and ambidextrous organizations has been conducted on innovation at product - based ﬁrms . With the excep - tion of some case studies of innovation - oriented busi - ness services ( e . g . , Andersen et al . 2000 ) , little research has been conducted to investigate the dynamics of explo - ration and exploitation in service ﬁrms . In this paper , we focus on professional service ﬁrms , which Greenwood et al . ( 2006 , p . 1 ) have deﬁned as “organizations com - prised primarily of professionals that facilitate economic and commercial exchange by providing advice to busi - ness . ” These ﬁrms include accounting ﬁrms , law ﬁrms , engineering and management consulting ﬁrms , archi - tectural service ﬁrms , advertising agencies , investment banks , and , increasingly , computer software develop - ment and technology integration ﬁrms . Greenwood et al . ( 2006 ) also characterize professional service ﬁrms as having outputs that are intangible and encoded with com - plex knowledge and customized to the circumstances of each client . These ﬁrms employ professionals as the pri - mary carriers , interpreters , and appliers of knowledge . Sundbo ( 1997 ) points out that innovation is riskier for service ﬁrms than for manufacturing ones because it is much easier for a competitor to replicate a new service than it is to replicate a new technology or product . For example , a law ﬁrm that realizes the growing importance of intellectual property ( IP ) law may hire a team of IP lawyers to take advantage of the new market . However , they may ﬁnd their strategic advantage undercut if their competitors can , just as easily , hire their own team of IP lawyers . Worse yet , the competitor could poach the target ﬁrm’s new team away from them , because a team that has moved from another ﬁrm may be more likely to move yet again to a new ﬁrm ( Groysberg and Abrahams 2006 , McGregor 2006 ) . There are several potential ways that professional ser - vice ﬁrms can innovate their practice or services . For example , they could produce innovation from within the organization—such as through entrepreneurial indi - viduals and teams within the ﬁrm . Or they could acquire innovation externally through mergers , acquisi - tions , alliances , or partnerships , or by hiring individu - als or teams with speciﬁc expertise . We focus on how professional service ﬁrms explore or exploit by hiring star performers from their competitors . If knowledge is the product in professional service ﬁrms , people are the product provider . Hence , when a ﬁrm hires a star in a specialty that the ﬁrm currently lacks , it is exploring a new market and / or new “product . ” In contrast , hiring someone to improve performance of existing competen - cies helps exploit the ﬁrm’s existing capabilities . Hiring stars as a means of exploration or exploita - tion may have similar problems as those experienced in corporate acquisitions . In both cases , ﬁrms would like to hire strategic , knowledge - based resources . But exploiting those resources , once acquired , can be difﬁ - cult because of internal boundaries and defenses prevent - ing acceptance of new capabilities ( Song et al . 2003 ) . These difﬁculties lead to acquisitions’ depressing effect on productivity ( Ernst and Vitt 2000 ) . Nearly all the research on mergers and acquisitions in knowledge - based industries is unanimous that integration is best accomplished in phases slowly ( Chaudhuri and Tabrizi 1999 , Haspeslagh and Jemison 1991 ) , implying a high cost in both time and effort . Hiring talent as a means of transferring knowledge , whether that knowledge is novel for the hiring ﬁrm or reinforces its existing knowledge base , rests on the Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 742 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS assumption that the performance of professionals is portable across ﬁrms . The prevailing , popular belief is that professionals’ expertise is portable because it is based on standardized training , a common knowl - edge base , and shared approaches to problem solving ( Woodruffe 1999 ) . High - proﬁle stories in the business section about stars who leave for competing ﬁrms , tak - ing both their innovative ideas and their client lists with them , promote this idea ( e . g . , see Sessa 1999 ) . The belief that performance is easily transferred across ﬁrms has affected key legal and regulatory decisions , the business and human resource strategies of ﬁrms , and the career - management strategies of individuals ( Phillips 1997 ) . Portability of Individual Performance In professional service ﬁrms , the extent to which hir - ing talented individuals from competitors can enhance a ﬁrm’s capability depends on whether the stars’ human capital is ﬁrm - speciﬁc or general ( Becker 1962 ) . Firm - speciﬁc human capital includes knowledge about unique routines and procedures , tacit knowledge of interper - sonal relationships and corporate culture , special skills developed in connection with internal networks ( team production ) , in - house training programs , and on - the - job experience , all of which have no value outside the ﬁrm . Theories that emphasize the role of the ﬁrm - speciﬁc component of workers’ human capital argue that switch - ing employers leads to a short - term decline in perfor - mance until employees develop skills speciﬁc to their new ﬁrms . Theories that discount the role of ﬁrm - speciﬁc human capital assume that a worker is equally productive in all possible worker – ﬁrm combinations . Hence , if workers’ human capital is general , then switching ﬁrms should not inﬂuence their performance in the short or long term . Human capital is portable if workers’ performance is predominantly a function of their individual talent ( Rees 1973 , Rosen 1981 ) and non - ﬁrm - speciﬁc skills acquired through education and on - the - job general skill training ( Mincer 1974 ) . Because individuals in professional service organiza - tions follow a predeﬁned set of methodologies and stan - dards to perform their work , it is believed that their skills are highly portable across ﬁrms in an industry . As Drucker ( 1998 , p . ix ) explained , “knowledge workers , unlike manual workers in manufacturing , own the means of production : they carry that knowledge in their heads and can therefore take it with them . ” Furthermore , much of the knowledge and capabilities of individuals in pro - fessional service ﬁrms lie in their external networks to clients and professional colleagues . To the extent that a worker’s network is external , it is transferable to a rival ﬁrm . In particular , personal relationships with customers are highly portable ; a number of researchers have noted that clients’ loyalties may be more tied to speciﬁc per - sons who perform the services than to the ﬁrms in which these individuals work ( e . g . , Greenwood et al . 1990 , Seabright et al . 1992 , Broschak 2004 ) . For instance , in law , Kordana ( 1995 ) argues that providing services directly to clients , rather than to the ﬁrm , gives lawyers highly transferable skills—general human capital—that can be employed in a variety of settings . Because pro - fessionals also develop collegial ties to other profession - als outside of their ﬁrm through their formal training or other professional interactions ( e . g . , litigation lawyers’ relationships with prosecutors and judges ) , they possess a set of external networks that are independent of the ﬁrm in which they work . The mobility of these types of professionals exempli - ﬁes the “boundaryless career” perspective . Research on boundaryless careers has emphasized the individual as the locus of learning , social networks , enterprise , and reputation building , all activities that can occur within but also transcend a particular job or series of jobs with any single organization ( Arthur 1994 ) . Although activi - ties such as learning enhance a ﬁrm’s capability , learning at the individual level over the course of a career con - stitutes an investment in and upgrading of a person’s human capital and labor market value . Perhaps more so than in many other types of work , individuals in profes - sional service ﬁrms incorporate the boundaryless career perspective into their own conceptions of career devel - opment . As DeFillippi and Arthur ( 1994 ) have pointed out , occupations and occupational communities ( Van Maanen and Barley 1984 ) constitute an important basis for developing individual - level career competencies . In many types of professional service and “knowledge - intensive” ﬁrms ( Starbuck 1992 ) , knowledge is embod - ied in individuals whose performance is highly visible to clients , who can in turn easily identify and attract these individuals to their own organizations ( DeFillippi and Arthur 1994 ) . Despite the characterization of knowledge workers as free agents , however , they rarely work as indepen - dent contractors ( for further work on the boundedness of boundaryless careers , see King et al . 2005 , Bagdadli et al . 2003 ) . Hence , over the years , human capital the - ory has generated many theoretical models and empirical tests to afﬁrm the importance of ﬁrm - speciﬁcity to work - ers’ performance ( e . g . , Strober 1990 , Topel 1991 , Veum 1995 ) . In a recent study , for example , Huckman and Pisano ( 2006 ) found that although a cardiac surgeon’s performance improves with his or her experience at a given hospital , this performance effect does not carry over to other hospitals at which the surgeon simulta - neously practices . The authors noted that the surgeons themselves did not perceive that their performance ﬂuc - tuated between hospitals . When some of an employee’s skills are ﬁrm - speciﬁc , changing jobs leads to a decline in performance until the employee develops skills speciﬁc to his or her new ﬁrm ( Groysberg et al . 2008 , 2004 ) . Over the long term , the Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 743 success of workers who change ﬁrms depends on their ability to acquire new ﬁrm - speciﬁc skills . The acquisi - tion of skills , rules , and attitudes should eventually result in improved performance for these newcomers . How - ever , Gabarro ( 1985 ) notes that it takes as long as two to three years for newcomers to become effective as they develop new ﬁrm - speciﬁc skills . This leads us to Hypothesis 1 . Hypothesis 1 . Individuals suffer a performance de - cline when they move to another ﬁrm for either explo - ration or exploitation roles . The hiring of a superstar is similar to the acquisition of a company . In fact , such stars are often referred to as a “franchise” and thought of as having the charac - teristics of small enterprises , suggesting that the exist - ing acquisition literature may be applicable in examining the dynamics of acquiring stars . Research on corporate takeovers in the ﬁnancial and industrial organizations literature has found some evidence of negative returns to the acquiring ﬁrms . In fact , a substantial number of studies have found that mergers and acquisitions have a negative impact on the acquiring ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial per - formance ( Sirower 1997 , Scherer and Ross 1990 , Porter 1987 , Morck et al . 1990 , Varaiya and Ferris 1987 ) . More speciﬁcally , Cosh et al . ( 1993 ) found that acquisition failures are more likely to occur when the target com - pany had above - industry - average performance . Researchers who have examined mergers and acqui - sitions through the lens of agency theory have shown that shareholders of the acquirers tend to beneﬁt only marginally if at all ( e . g . , Jensen and Ruback 1983 ) . Man - agers are willing to sacriﬁce shareholder value if acqui - sitions provide them with large personal beneﬁts , such as investing in projects that improve their job security ( Shleifer and Vishny 1990 ) . If hiring a star from a com - petitor is arguably similar to acquiring a top - performing ﬁrm , it suggests that the hiring ﬁrm might be punished by the market because value is destroyed through over - payment for the star ( Groysberg et al . 2008 ) . In fact , Ravid’s ( 1999 ) study of ﬁrms hiring “bankable stars” to open movies found that stars’ ability to generate rev - enue did not lead to greater proﬁts , and may in fact lead to losses . However , revenues ( empire building and sales maximization ) are part of the movie executives’ objec - tives : proﬁts are either less important or more unpre - dictable , or both . Moreover , executives hire stars because they want to " be covered " if the project fails , in the attempt to improve their job security and to protect themselves from industry uncertainty . Thus , we hypoth - esize that acquisition of “stars” is more likely to destroy rather than create value for the hiring ﬁrm . Hypothesis 2 . Hiring a star for either exploration or exploitation destroys value for the hiring ﬁrm . Hiring Firm Capabilities : Exploration vs . Exploitation Change in performance upon switching employers may be attributable partially to the employee’s loss of ﬁrm - speciﬁc skills . However , it could also result from the dif - ference between the hiring ﬁrms’ capabilities . Research has shown that individual performance is a function of both individual and organizational factors ( Pfeffer 1994 ) . Firms hiring for exploitation would have systems and structures in place to support a newly hired worker , com - pared to ﬁrms hiring for exploration , which would have to create capabilities in a new area . For example , when Morgan Stanley’s management identiﬁed Internet stocks as a major area to explore in the late 1990s , the ﬁrm had a difﬁcult time dealing with new valuation models and new ways of analysis that this industry required . The investment committee had trouble approving ana - lysts’ recommendations that some of these stocks might be worth several hundred dollars , given the ﬁrm’s his - torical focus on value stocks with price valuations well below this valuation . Furthermore , sales and traders had to develop new expertise in the sector to deliver value to the ﬁrm’s clients . 1 Firms that hire for exploitation have some speciﬁc advantages in helping support the performance of a new hire . First , the work practices and processes that ﬁrms already have in place can play an important role in the performance of a new hire . Research has shown that existing complementary work practices can lead to higher productivity ( Ichniowski et al . 1997 ) . In partic - ular , at professional service ﬁrms , organizational units differ in quality of systems , resource support , and man - agement attention based on the perceived value of the product or an area ( Eccles and Crane 1988 ) . Second , the quality of the internal network plays an important role in supporting the performance of a new hire ( Groysberg et al . 2008 ) . To perform well at work , professional workers need access to information , knowl - edge , capabilities , resources , and colleagues ( Cummings and Oldham 1997 , Tampoe 1996 ) . In particular , the qual - ity of coworkers on a team has been shown to affect individual performance ( Hackman 2002 ) . Factors such as the productivity of one’s peers ( Allison and Long 1990 ) as well as the motivation to maintain informal esteem among highly productive colleagues ( Zuckerman 1967 ) positively affect the productivity of academic sci - entists . In fact , close contact with one’s peers in the specialty may provide ideas that stimulate a talented sci - entist’s own productivity ( Allison and Long 1990 ) . Sim - ilar effects have been identiﬁed in the analyst market . Jacob et al . ( 1999 ) found that analysts’ forecast accuracy improves as the percentage of analysts who follow the same industry sector increases . Joining an existing sector with colleagues of similar expertise allows the analysts to achieve a higher level of performance compared to their counterparts who are joining a new sector . Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 744 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS Finally , local ofﬁces , sector teams / groups , depart - ments , and product specialties at professional service ﬁrms develop their own reputation in their specialty area ( Eccles and Crane 1988 ) . Knowledge workers’ reputa - tions are based in part on the reputation of the depart - ments and ﬁrms in which they work ( Friedson 1986 , Useem and Karabel 1986 ) . Working for a unit with an established reputation in a specialty allows profes - sionals to gain greater access to clients and resources , enabling the employees at more established groups / ﬁrms to outperform their counterparts at less established groups / ﬁrms . Any newly hired star would miss the ﬁrm - speciﬁc human capital as well as the organizational capabili - ties of his or her previous ﬁrm . In the course of inter - views , we learned that very few research departments had devised systematic strategies for integrating star newcomers into their cultures and modes of operation . Typically , their strategies began and ended with oppor - tunistic or gap - ﬁlling hiring , and consisted essentially of signing up a promising candidate , making the neces - sary introductions , and hoping for the best . One research director whose ﬁrm made only pro forma efforts at posthiring integration spoke for many of his counter - parts : “Obviously , you work to try to get them comfort - able with your people and make them feel welcome in the ﬁrm , but we probably had about 80 research profes - sionals and we had one research manager . So there just isn’t a lot of time for a lot of team building . ” 2 Stars who are hired for an exploration role , however , also lack an established reservoir of resources in their new ﬁrm that would be offered to their counterparts in exploitation roles . These individuals cannot leverage their ﬁrm - speciﬁc human capital , nor can they beneﬁt from the ﬁrm’s existing systems , colleagues , and repu - tations given that the ﬁrms are new to their respective areas of specialization . On the other hand , individuals hired to exploit—i . e . , to add quality or quantity to exist - ing operations—can quickly take advantage of the ﬁrm’s existing capabilities , despite being handicapped initially by a lack of internal relationships and tacit knowledge about routines and culture . Hence , individuals who join ﬁrms in exploration roles should experience a steeper decline in performance , leading to our third hypothesis . Hypothesis 3 . Individuals suffer a more severe de - cline in performance when they join a hiring ﬁrm in an exploration role than when they join a hiring ﬁrm in an exploitation role . Continuing with the assumption that a high - proﬁle hire is in many ways equivalent to an acquisition , research on the relatedness of acquisitions suggests how hiring for exploration or exploiting could impact ﬁrm value . Healy et al . ( 1992 , 1997 ) have found that related mergers perform better than unrelated ones . Morck et al . ( 1990 ) also found related acquisitions to have a positive impact on postmerger performance , albeit an insigniﬁ - cant one . Research on strategy in services suggests a more nuanced view speciﬁc to service ﬁrms . Nayyar ( 1993 ) found that market reactions to diversiﬁcation differ depending on the characteristics of the services and the nature of diversiﬁcation . Market reactions are less favor - able when service ﬁrms diversify to take advantage of “economy of scope” in delivering varied services , for example . When professional service ﬁrms hire a star to pioneer a new area of service , or for exploration , they may be aiming to beneﬁt from economy of scope . Invest - ment banks , advertising ﬁrms , and management consul - tants , for example , may expand into new services and economize on the cost of sharing the same marketing and sales infrastructure . A ﬁrm that hires a star for an exploration role pro - vides some evidence of building dynamic capabilities , speciﬁcally in allocating some resources for exploring new markets ( Eisenhardt and Martin 2000 , Teece 2007 ) . Although both exploration and exploitation are neces - sary for a ﬁrm to be successful , balancing the two activities introduces a host of organizational problems . As O’Reilly and Tushman ( 2008 , p . 23 ) noted , “The operation of two separate organizational alignments ( for exploration and exploitation ) with different competen - cies , incentives , and cultures increases the chances for conﬂict , disagreement , and poor coordination . ” In fact , researchers have found that many ﬁrms that ultimately fail had exhibited some exploration behavior , such as reallocating resources to develop new technologies or markets to adapt to new environments ( e . g . , Christensen 1997 , Sobel 1999 , Tripsas and Gavetti 2000 ) . How - ever , allocating resources is one thing , mobilizing them is another . Firms have a much harder time develop - ing new routines and processes that would allow their new resource conﬁgurations to succeed ( Gilbert 2005 ) . Although a ﬁrm that hires a star to explore a new mar - ket may be overcoming what Gilbert ( 2005 ) has called “resource rigidity , ” it is likely to have a difﬁcult time overcoming “routine rigidity , ” which is a much more dif - ﬁcult hurdle to overcome for a ﬁrm attempting to both exploit and explore ( Gilbert 2005 ) . In contrast , the beneﬁts for a ﬁrm that hires a star for an exploitation role are clearer and more certain in the short run . Such a move does not require changes in established routines or values . Despite the efforts of socializing and integrating a new hire , a new hire who is slotted into a well - established set of processes and routines is less likely to cause serious disruptions and conﬂicts within the organization . In fact , hiring stars for an exploitation role can be regarded as competence - enhancing for a ﬁrm . According to research on innovation , such competence - enhancing “innovation” can help to sustain the current customers and markets versus competence - destroying innovations Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 745 that can disrupt a ﬁrm’s established relationships and market ( Christensen 1997 ) . The potential disruption of established markets and the difﬁculty of integration mean that exploration activities represent greater risk and uncertainty . Hypothesis 4 . Hiring a star for exploration destroys more value for the hiring ﬁrm than hiring a star for exploitation . Exploration and Colleague Capabilities Stars who are hired in exploration roles might attempt to compensate for the lack of relevant resources in the hir - ing ﬁrm by moving with colleagues who possess those capabilities . The movement of work groups or teams from one company to another has been known as “lift outs . ” Lift outs have been deﬁned as the movement of more than one person simultaneously ( Groysberg and Abrahams 2006 ) , and their frequency suggests that no matter how much the ideology of the “free agent nation” has taken hold , at least some individuals believe in the value embedded in longstanding relationships ( e . g . , McGregor 2006 , Weisman 2006 ) . In professional service ﬁrms , colleagues act as an important source of knowledge input for star performers . Because work in professional services is often organized by project teams , cooperation and teamwork are impor - tant ( e . g . , Kordana 1995 , Maister 1993 ) . Coworkers’ knowledge can be utilized by professionals to facilitate the framing of their own problems and solutions in more effective ways ( Weick 1995 , Lave 1988 ) . In many professional services , colleagues in differ - ent functional areas who are familiar with speciﬁc expertise areas are also invaluable sources of infor - mation and knowledge . For example , in many profes - sional services ( e . g . , advertising , consulting , investment banks , and engineering ﬁrms ) , client service is also a specialized role within the organization . In this case , client - facing colleagues are important in delivering the “product . ” In investment research , for example , the insti - tutional sales force must be knowledgeable about spe - ciﬁc product areas to keep clients updated on changes in research fundamentals , and communicate buy and sell recommendations . As Steve Galbraith , formerly a star analyst at Sanford C . Bernstein , stated , “Salespeople’s inﬂuence is huge on whether or not a research analyst’s message gets out . ” 3 Having a knowledgeable conduit to clients who understands a particular product area can also provide an additional source of valuable informa - tion and insight in developing the product . For profes - sional service ﬁrms , individuals in these client - facing roles have enormous inﬂuence in developing speciﬁc ser - vice areas precisely because the client - facing individ - ual must display some expertise to generate interest and conﬁdence among clients for those service areas . In the process of gaining this expertise , they help to shape the “product . ” Stars who move to an exploitation role can , over time , build new sources of social and human capi - tal by collaborating with a new group of colleagues with similar expertise . They will eventually establish strong knowledge - sharing routines with their colleagues in similar expertise areas and develop relationships with client - facing colleagues who already possess a high level of knowledge about their “product” area . For a star explorer , however , no such resources are available in the new ﬁrm . Although a star explorer will also develop close working relationships with colleagues , those col - leagues lack the knowledge base necessary to explore new markets . A star explorer who moves with a group of colleagues , however , brings with him or her that reser - voir of knowledge that is currently lacking in the new ﬁrm . Hence , he or she mitigates some of the disadvan - tages of moving to an exploration role by bringing some of the critical knowledge sources along . This leads us to our ﬁfth hypothesis . Hypothesis 5 . Individuals who move to hiring ﬁrms in exploration roles suffer a less severe performance decline when they move with a team than if they move solo . Hiring stars and their colleagues in an exploration role could enhance ﬁrm value because , much as we argued in the previous section about individual performance , the increased level of expertise and support for the star increases the likelihood of success . Because stars are likely to require less time to transition when they move with their colleagues , the hiring ﬁrm should beneﬁt from the stars’ expertise more quickly . Furthermore , hiring a group increases the visibility of the ﬁrm’s investment in a new service area . The increased visibility can help ﬁrms establish credibility with potential clients for the new services and serve as a positive signal of the ﬁrm’s commitment to developing the new service area . Our ﬁnal hypothesis follows . Hypothesis 6 . Firms hiring for exploration suffer less value destruction when they hire a star and his / her colleagues than when they hire a star solo . Research Design We examined performance records of Wall Street’s star security analysts to test our hypotheses . In particular , we tested star analysts’ short - and long - term performance consequences of joining a ﬁrm in exploitation or explo - ration roles . We compared the performance of the “stay - ers” ( our control group , the star analysts who did not move ) to the performance changes of the “movers” ( for exploitation or exploration ) . Workers do not move at ran - dom , which means that our econometric methodology needed to consider the self - selection process by which Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 746 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS individual workers become movers or stayers . We fol - lowed the approach used by Groysberg et al . ( 2008 ) . Finally , the event - study methodology was used to deter - mine whether acquiring ﬁrms gain or lose value when they hire a star analyst , for either exploitation or explo - ration . Stock - market movement is an established proxy for how much value is created or lost for a given ﬁrm in reaction to a speciﬁc event ( Dyckman et al . 1984 , Asquith and Mullins 1986 , Mitchell and Netter 1994 , Brindisi 1985 , Warner et al . 1988 ) . Security Analyst Labor Market Investment banks employ security analysts who ana - lyze companies in a particular industry . These analysts primarily serve money - management ﬁrms ( also known as institutional investors ) , including pension funds and mutual funds . Analysts make stock recommendations , write detailed company research reports , issue earnings forecasts , and do other pertinent investment analyses . On Wall Street , investment banks are known as “sell side” ﬁrms , and money - management ﬁrms as “the buy side . ” Sell - side equity and ﬁxed - income analysts , employed at investment banks , are the exclusive focus of this study . Analysts may commonly have more than 800 institu - tional clients who receive their reports and seek their advice . These clients pay for sell - side research through trading commissions . The sell - side research department helps generate commission trading business ( and , at the time of our data set , to help with market underwriting services ) . In 1972 , the trade journal Institutional Investor (cid:1)II(cid:3) began an annual survey of equities analysts , which changed the landscape of the profession . Since then , an analyst’s compensation and visibility depend on being ranked in Institutional Investor ’s All - America Research Team . 4 Every year the magazine surveys sell - side analysts’ clients ( portfolio managers and analysts at buy - side money - management ﬁrms , mutual funds , and pension funds ) for data on analysts’ effectiveness , thereby enabling securities ﬁrms to determine how their most important clients rate the service of their ana - lysts ( Siconolﬁ 1992 ) . The II survey reaches institu - tional investment - management institutions like Fidelity Investments , Putnam Investments , and Wellington Man - agement Company . For example , in October 1996 , some 1 , 300 individuals representing approximately 68 % of the 300 largest institutional investors in the United States ranked analysts in each of 80 industry sectors and invest - ment specialties . For each industry sector , analysts with the highest aggregate ratings are ranked ﬁrst , second , third , and runner - up . ( More than four analysts may be ranked in a given sector , because II allows ties . ) Less than 3 % of all U . S . analysts were ranked in 1996 . The II survey rating is a major part of an analyst’s performance evaluation , and being ranked by II wins an analyst enhanced cred - ibility , greater power , and substantially higher compen - sation ( Dorfman 1991 , Laderman 1998 ) . Prior research also found the relationship between rankings and fore - cast accuracy ( e . g . , Brown and Chen 1991 ) . The security analysts’ market is ideal to test our hypotheses . The II rankings represent observable and industry - accepted performance measures that are com - parable across analysts and ﬁrms on a yearly basis . Thorough data on each analyst’s performance and career history are available . Security analysts and the people who manage them see them as highly portable : the abil - ities of top - performing analysts are attributed to innate qualities that transcend organizational support ( Howard 1967 , Lurie 1967 , Institutional Investor 1991 ) . Finally , the job conditions of research analysts are held remark - ably steady after they move . At a new ﬁrm , they will continue to run the same ﬁnancial models , follow the same sectors and companies , and maintain the same client lists . Unlike clients in industries such as law or accounting , institutional investors do not have exclu - sive relationships with particular investment banks ; they receive research reports from more than a dozen banks at the same time . Hence , analysts do not maintain exclu - sive trading client ties that they then “take with them” to the hiring ﬁrm when they move . Whether they remain in their current ﬁrm or move to a new ﬁrm , analysts con - tinue to see the same trading clients—their success is not measured by their ability to be a “rainmaker” who brings new trading business on board . The lack of exclu - sive client ties is unusual in professional service ﬁrms and allows us to naturally control for any future perfor - mance success due to analysts’ external trading client relationships . That is , whether a star performs well in an exploration or exploitation role does not depend on the extent to which they are able to bring new clients into their hiring ﬁrm , as would be the case in professional contexts such as law or accounting . Certain regulatory changes have gone into effect since the period that our data covers . Although the analyst market did suffer from media criticism and regulatory investigations , the basic structure of the analyst mar - ket remains remarkably similar to that under the period of our study . During the late 1990s , ﬁnancial analysts were criticized for their optimistic reports , for failure to detect the accounting and overvaluation problems at major ﬁrms , and for having publicly recommended stocks that they were privately skeptical about . Analysts’ failure to serve as unbiased ﬁnancial intermediaries is commonly attributed to their undue optimism stemming from incentives provided by their ﬁrm’s underwriting activities . In 2003 , in a ruling called the “Global Settle - ment , ” 10 of the largest U . S . investment banks addressed these concerns by agreeing to implement a series of ana - lyst reforms and to pay ﬁnes . On the assumption that ﬁrms without investment banking operations were less Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 747 biased , one such reform required the 10 banks to dis - tribute , along with their own reports , research reports from three independent research providers—brokerage and research ﬁrms that had no such operations . In con - trast to popular belief , Cowen et al . ( 2006 ) demon - strate that analysts at ﬁrms with underwriting business are actually less optimistic than those at pure brokerage houses , who perform no underwriting . In fact , analysts at pure brokerage houses tend to make the most opti - mistic forecasts , which suggests that trading incentives ( generating commissions ) underlies analysts’ excessive optimism . There continues to be a debate on whether the government acted correctly and whether it punished the “right” ﬁrms . Data We collected our data from the annual All - America Team issues of Institutional Investor published between 1988 and 1996 . Equity analysts are ranked in October and ﬁxed - income analysts are ranked in August . For both groups we gathered each ranked analyst’s name , industry specialty / sector , type ( equity or ﬁxed income ) , rank , year of ranking , and company afﬁliation . Over this nine - year period , 799 individual equity analysts and 254 individual ﬁxed - income analysts were ranked , producing a total of 4 , 200 analyst - year combinations ( 3 , 514 in equity and 686 in ﬁxed income ) . Ranked analysts were employed by 78 investment banks , with the 24 ﬁrms employing the greatest number of ranked analysts accounting for 96 % of all ranked analyst - year combinations . The average annual turnover of analysts in this sample was 11 . 9 % . Analysts’ afﬁliations in the year subsequent to being ranked , and the speciﬁc dates of their moves , were identiﬁed using Nelson’s Directory of Investment Research , Lexis - Nexis , and Dow Jones News Service . We identiﬁed 546 analyst - year moves : 500 from one ﬁrm to another , and 46 promotions or transfers to nonresearch positions within the same investment bank . Of the 500 ﬁrm exits , 134 were exits from research altogether . 5 The remaining 366 moves ( made by 316 individual analysts ) were exits to competitors’ research departments . Of the 366 exits to competitors , 100 were lift outs in which the analysts moved in teams ( other ranked analysts , junior analysts , institutional salespeople , and / or traders ) . Variables Dependent Variable The analyst’s performance , this study’s dependent vari - able , is operationalized as rank in the Institutional Investor All - America Research Team poll , rank t + 1 . Each year the magazine’s editor sends a letter to major insti - tutional investors asking them to rank the analysts who “have been most helpful to you and your institution in researching U . S . equities over the past twelve months . ” The respondents assign a single overall numerical score to each analyst in each industry sector . The identities of the respondents and their institutions are kept con - ﬁdential , but votes are weighted based on the size of the voting institution . Some , but not all , stars in a given year will be ranked again in subsequent years . A small percentage of analysts get ranked in multiple sectors . In each sector , there are ﬁve levels of the dependent vari - able ( categorical ) : the ﬁrst , second , third , and runner - up ranks , and unranked . The distribution of this variable is as follows : 16 . 5 % of observations are unranked analysts , 24 . 1 % of observations are runner - ups , 23 . 4 % of obser - vations are third rank , 16 . 4 % of observations are second rank , and 19 . 6 % of observations are ﬁrst rank . Independent Variables Hired for Exploitation / Exploration . We test whether an analyst joining a new ﬁrm for exploitation or explo - ration has an effect on his or her Institutional Investor ranking . A study of news releases at the time of hirings of ranked analysts and Nelson’s Investment Research Database allows the identiﬁcation of whether analysts are hired for exploitation or exploration by their new ﬁrms . Of the stars hired by investment banks in the period we studied , 61 % of analysts were hired by new ﬁrms into existing sectors , and 39 % initiated new coverage . The hired for exploitation / exploration concept was coded by creating two dichotomous variables : hired for exploitation is 1 if the analyst was hired to work in a sector already covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise ; hired for exploration is 1 if the analyst was hired to begin coverage of a new sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise . Team Movement for Exploitation / Exploration . We also examine the effects of moving with one or more colleagues . Typically , analysts move with other secu - rity analysts who cover complementary sectors , who can beneﬁt mutually from information sharing and collabo - ration or with their junior analysts , who run data mod - els , help produce reports , and provide general backup . Analysts also form interdepartmental relationships with institutional salespeople and traders who cover the same sectors . They are important sources of information that beneﬁt analysts’ performance . If the performance of a ranked analyst to some degree depends on relationships with in - house colleagues , then moving with colleagues could protect performance . The effect of moving with coworkers was tested by creating four dichotomous variables : hired solo for exploitation is 1 if the analyst switches to another sell - side research department solo and if this analyst was hired to work in a sector already covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise ; hired as a team for exploitation is 1 if the analyst makes such a move with a team of colleagues and Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 748 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS if this analyst was hired to work in a sector already cov - ered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise ; hired solo for exploration is 1 if the analyst switches to another sell - side research department solo and if this analyst was hired to begin coverage of a new sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise ; and hired as a team for exploration is 1 if the analyst makes such a move with a team of colleagues and if this analyst was hired to begin cover - age of a new sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise . Control Variables We operationalized the variables into four categories : individual , ﬁrm , sector , and macroeconomic . Table 1 provides summary statistics for the speciﬁc individual - level variables used in the analysis . Individual Analyst Variables . When analyzing perfor - mance , it is important to control for ﬁrm tenure and over - all experience ( Becker 1962 , Topel 1991 ) . Analyst ﬁrm tenure is the number of years an analyst has worked at the ﬁrm at the end of each year , and analyst experience is the total number of years an analyst has worked as an analyst at the end of each year . Data on analysts’ tenure and experience were available for 87 % of analyst - year combinations . We also control for analyst type , because equity and ﬁxed - income analysts differ in their research activities . Table 1 Summary Statistics , Correlations , and Independent Variables Panel A : Summary statistics and correlations Number of Standard Variable observations Mean deviation Minimum Maximum 1 2 3 1 . Analyst type 4 (cid:1) 200 0 (cid:2) 837 0 (cid:2) 370 0 1 2 . Analyst ﬁrm tenure 3 (cid:1) 639 7 (cid:2) 190 5 (cid:2) 779 0 . 011 37 . 060 0 (cid:2) 124 ∗∗∗ 3 . Analyst experience 3 (cid:1) 653 10 (cid:2) 776 6 (cid:2) 018 2 . 174 44 . 966 0 (cid:2) 100 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:2) 595 ∗∗∗ 4 . Analyst star tenure 4 (cid:1) 200 6 (cid:2) 635 5 (cid:2) 604 1 26 0 (cid:2) 314 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:2) 499 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:2) 606 ∗∗∗ Panel B : Independent variables Independent variables Coded 1 Hired for exploitation / exploration Hired for exploitation 1 if the analyst was hired to work in a sector already covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise 225 Hired for exploration 1 if the analyst was hired to begin coverage of a new sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise 141 Coworker move for exploitation / explorationHiredsolo for exploitation 1 if the analyst was hired solo to work in a sector already covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise 167 Hired as a team for exploitation 1 if the analyst was hired with a team of colleagues to work in a sector already covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise 58 Hired solo for exploration 1 if the analyst was hired solo to begin coverage of a new sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise 99 Hired as a team for exploration 1 if the analyst was hired with a team of colleagues to begin coverage of a new sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm , 0 otherwise 42 Notes . Summary statistics for all of the variables used in the analysis are provided . ∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 10 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 05 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 01 . Analysts’ prior performance has been shown to have an effect on their future performance ( Sinha et al . 1997 , Groysberg and Lee 2008 ) . To control for prior perfor - mance , we created the analyst star tenure variable using the number of years an analyst had been ranked at the end of the year . The analyst rank dummy t = 0 variable , which represents an analyst’s rank in the year t = 0 , controls for rank - speciﬁc effects on analysts’ rankings . Firm Variables . The ﬁrm dummy variable is used to control for effects speciﬁc to ﬁrms , because research points to differences in forecasting performance across banks ( Jacob et al . 1999 , Sinha et al . 1997 , Cowen et al . 2006 ) . Sector Variables . The sector dummy variable controls for effects speciﬁc to the sectors that analysts cover , as sector membership is considered an important variable in examining an analyst’s performance ( Jacob et al . 1999 , Sinha et al . 1997 ) . We identiﬁed sectors using the it Nelson’s Investment Research Database . Macroeconomic Variables . The year dummy variable is used to control for intertemporal changes . Model Speciﬁcations Model An ordered probit model is estimated because the depen - dent variable , analysts’ Institutional Investor rankings , Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 749 is ordinal . Because there are multiple observations per analyst , observations for the same analyst are likely to be correlated . Standard errors are calculated using the robust clustered estimator ( Huber - White sandwich ; Huber 1967 , White 1982 ) because it produces consis - tent standard errors ( Froot 1989 , Williams 2000 ) . We use the hired for exploitation / exploration variable when we examine whether ranked analysts’ performance is inﬂu - enced by whether they are hired by new ﬁrms to exploit ( to work in sectors already covered by new ﬁrms ) or to explore ( to initiate coverage of sectors that ﬁrms had not previously covered ) . We utilize the coworker move for exploitation / exploration variable when we examine whether ranked analysts’ performance is affected by whether they are hired in teams or solo to exploit or explore . Event - Study Data Set The event - study methodology is used to examine how the stock market reacts to the unexpected news of a star ana - lyst’s hiring . We conduct a short window study of daily excess returns ( returns data was provided by the Center for Research in Security Prices ) over the event period of − 1 to + 1 days ( the actual announcement date of the ana - lyst hiring plus one day prior to and after the announce - ment date ) . The data set consists of 228 observations Table 2 Effect of Switching Firms for Exploitation or Exploration on Ranked Analyst’s Short - Term and Long - Term Performance 1988 – 1996 ordered probit regressions M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 Variable rank (cid:5)t + 1 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 2 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 3 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 4 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 5 (cid:7) Year dummy Included Included Included Included Included Sector dummy Included Included Included Included Included Firm dummy Included Included Included Included Included Analyst rank dummy t = 0 Included Included Included Included Included Analyst type 0 (cid:2) 174 ∗ 0 (cid:2) 086 0 (cid:2) 108 0 (cid:2) 270 ∗ 0 (cid:2) 342 ∗ (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 094 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 115 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 129 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 152 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 190 (cid:7) Analyst ﬁrm tenure − 0 (cid:2) 001 − 0 (cid:2) 006 − 0 (cid:2) 001 0 (cid:2) 000 − 0 (cid:2) 003 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 005 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 006 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 008 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 010 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 011 (cid:7) Analyst experience 0 (cid:2) 007 0 (cid:2) 007 0 (cid:2) 007 0 (cid:2) 007 0 (cid:2) 003 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 004 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 006 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 008 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 009 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 011 (cid:7) Analyst star tenure − 0 (cid:2) 024 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 031 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 041 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 048 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 051 ∗∗∗ (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 004 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 006 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 007 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 008 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 010 (cid:7) Hired for exploitation / exploration Hired for exploitation − 0 (cid:2) 280 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 117 − 0 (cid:2) 039 − 0 (cid:2) 014 − 0 (cid:2) 227 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 085 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 102 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 113 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 131 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 153 (cid:7) Hired for exploration − 0 (cid:2) 451 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 547 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 609 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 615 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 337 ∗ (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 140 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 144 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 150 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 162 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 200 (cid:7) Cut point 1 − 0 (cid:2) 966 − 1 (cid:2) 216 − 1 (cid:2) 252 − 0 (cid:2) 951 − 0 (cid:2) 638 Cut point 2 0 (cid:2) 024 − 0 (cid:2) 326 − 0 (cid:2) 447 − 0 (cid:2) 207 0 (cid:2) 092 Cut point 3 0 (cid:2) 949 0 (cid:2) 389 0 (cid:2) 159 0 (cid:2) 334 0 (cid:2) 589 Cut point 4 1 (cid:2) 785 1 (cid:2) 080 0 (cid:2) 800 0 (cid:2) 938 1 (cid:2) 198 Log ( likelihood ) − 4 (cid:1) 412 (cid:2) 921 − 4 (cid:1) 001 (cid:2) 388 − 3 (cid:1) 375 (cid:2) 158 − 2 (cid:1) 838 (cid:2) 173 − 2 (cid:1) 075 (cid:2) 084 No . of observations 3 , 511 2 , 966 2 , 451 2 , 033 1 , 501 Pseudo - R 2 0 (cid:2) 211 0 (cid:2) 158 0 (cid:2) 142 0 (cid:2) 127 0 (cid:2) 130 Notes . Robust standard errors are in parentheses . ∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 10 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 05 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 01 . of analysts joining publicly quoted ﬁrms , excluding sub - sidiaries of larger diversiﬁed ﬁrms that generated less than 50 % of those companies’ revenues . This leaves the data set with 156 observations for analysts joining invest - ment banks . Next , the data set was checked for con - founding announcements in the event window ( Brown and Warner 1980 ) . Forty - seven observations for analysts joining ﬁrms were deleted for confounded effects . We also excluded eight observations because they overlapped in time and involved identical companies . One hundred and one announcements constitute the ﬁnal data set . Empirical Tests and Results In this section , we ﬁrst determine whether , controlling for individual , ﬁrm , sector , and intertemporal variables , ranked analysts’ short - and long - term performance is affected by whether they are hired ( 1 ) to exploit or explore and ( 2 ) in teams or solo to exploit or explore . This section concludes with ﬁndings on stock - market reactions to announcements of hirings into ﬁrms by ranked analysts . Exploitation vs . Exploration and Ranked Analysts’ Performance Models M1 through M5 ( see Table 2 ) 6 examine the effects of switching ﬁrms for exploitation compared to Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 750 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS exploration on analysts’ performance . Coefﬁcients of the control variables in all of these models are similar , so the following comments apply to all models unless noted otherwise . In Model M1 , the hired for exploitation coefﬁcient is negative and signiﬁcant (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 01 (cid:3) , indicating that ranked analysts suffer a short - term performance decline after being hired to work in a sector covered by the ﬁrm . 7 Findings from Models M2 through M5 suggest that movement for exploitation ( i . e . , when a ranked analyst is hired to cover a sector already covered by the ﬁrm ) has an insigniﬁcant effect on analysts’ long - term performance . Similarly , in Model M1 , the hired for exploration coefﬁcient is negative and signiﬁcant (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 01 (cid:3) , suggesting that ranked analysts undergo a short - term performance decline after being hired to begin coverage of a sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm . The ﬁndings from Models M2 through M5 suggest that joining new ﬁrms in an exploration role also has a signiﬁcant negative effect on ranked analysts’ long - term performance . The hired for exploration coefﬁcient is negative and signiﬁcant (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 01 (cid:3) in Models M2 ( rank t + 2 (cid:3) , M3 ( rank t + 3 (cid:3) , and M4 ( rank t + 4 (cid:3) ; it is nega - tive but not signiﬁcant at the p < 0 (cid:7) 05 level in Model M5 ( rank t + 5 (cid:3) . Ranked analysts who are hired to explore are unable to recapture their premove performance levels even after four years at their new ﬁrm . Coefﬁcients for hired for exploitation and hired for exploration are sig - niﬁcantly different from each other at 1 % in four Models ( M1 through M4 in Table 2 ) . Thus , Hypotheses 1 and 3 are supported . Examining changes in the outcome probabilities helps to summarize the effects of the independent variable . A ranked analyst who does not move , for example , has a 0 . 100 probability of being ranked ﬁrst in year t + 1 . A ranked analyst hired to exploit has only a 0 (cid:7) 058 (cid:1) = 0 (cid:7) 100 − 0 (cid:7) 042 (cid:3) predicted probability of being ranked ﬁrst in year t + 1 . A ranked analyst hired to explore has a 0 (cid:7) 04 (cid:1) = 0 (cid:7) 100 − 0 (cid:7) 060 (cid:3) predicted proba - bility of being ranked ﬁrst in year t + 1 . A graphical interpretation of these results is provided in Figure 1 . Models M1 , M4 , and M5 also show that being an equity analyst , as opposed to a ﬁxed income analyst , has a weakly positive impact on performance (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 10 (cid:3) . The effect of analyst star tenure is signiﬁcant and neg - ative (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 01 (cid:3) . 8 The ﬁndings suggest that star analysts who join ﬁrms that already have capabilities in the analysts’ sectors suf - fer a one - year decline in performance . Because the ﬁrm can already operate in the sector an exploiting analyst is joining , a drop in performance cannot be accounted for by lack of ﬁrm resources . Hence , it appears that the loss of ﬁrm - speciﬁc skills accounts for the dimin - ished short - term performance of analysts who move into exploitation roles . During their ﬁrst year , those analysts are able to acquire new ﬁrm - speciﬁc skills , so that their Figure 1 Probability of Achieving First Rank (cid:5)t + 1 (cid:7) : Exploit vs . Explore 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 10 0 . 12 F i r s t r an k p r obab ili t y 1 Ranked analysts who did not change firms Hired for exploitation Hired for exploration long - term performance is not statistically different from the performance of ranked analysts who stay put . Star analysts who are hired to “explore” by moving to ﬁrms that do not specialize in their sectors suffer the biggest decline in performance . Relative to comparably ranked analysts who stay put , these analysts underper - form for ﬁve years . For analysts hired to explore , perfor - mance is hurt by their own loss of ﬁrm - speciﬁc skills and their new employers’ nonexistent capabilities in their sectors . These star analysts experienced the worst out - come among analysts who moved . Team Movement , Exploitation / Exploration , and Ranked Analysts’ Short - Term and Long - Term Performance Next we examine whether analysts’ postmove perfor - mance is affected by whether they moved to a new ﬁrm solo or with a team in exploration roles . Ranked analysts who are hired solo for exploration are the most vulner - able , experiencing short - and long - term declines in per - formance ( see Table 3 ) . Ranked analysts who move with teammates into exploration roles , on the other hand , suf - fered no decline in performance . Apparently , retaining some human capital in the form of colleagues mitigates the loss in ﬁrm capabilities . Coefﬁcients for hired solo for exploration and hired as a team for exploration are signiﬁcantly different from each other in four Models ( M1 through M4 in Table 3 ) , 9 supporting Hypothesis 5 . Stock - Market Reaction to Announcements of Hiring by Ranked Analysts Table 4 presents stock - market reactions to announce - ments of hirings of ranked analysts . Announcements of acquisitions of star analysts to establish brand new cov - erage of a sector ( hired to explore ) evoked a signiﬁcant negative stock - market reaction ( − 1 (cid:7) 10 % ) (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 01 (cid:3) . The market also reacts negatively to the news that ranked analysts had been hired to exploit ( − 0 (cid:7) 56 % ) (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 05 (cid:3) . Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 751 Table 3 Effect of Switching Firms for Exploitation / Exploration Solo or in Teams on Ranked Analyst’s Short - Term and Long - Term Performance 1988 – 1996 ordered probit regressions M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 Variable rank (cid:5)t + 1 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 2 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 3 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 4 (cid:7) rank (cid:5)t + 5 (cid:7) Year dummy Included Included Included Included Included Sector dummy Included Included Included Included Included Firm dummy Included Included Included Included Included Analyst rank dummy t = 0 Included Included Included Included Included Analyst type 0 (cid:2) 172 ∗ 0 (cid:2) 088 0 (cid:2) 107 0 (cid:2) 270 ∗ 0 (cid:2) 348 ∗ (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 094 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 115 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 128 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 152 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 190 (cid:7) Analyst ﬁrm tenure − 0 (cid:2) 002 − 0 (cid:2) 006 − 0 (cid:2) 001 0 (cid:2) 000 − 0 (cid:2) 003 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 005 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 006 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 008 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 010 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 011 (cid:7) Analyst experience 0 (cid:2) 008 0 (cid:2) 008 0 (cid:2) 007 0 (cid:2) 007 0 (cid:2) 004 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 004 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 006 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 008 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 009 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 011 (cid:7) Analyst star tenure − 0 (cid:2) 024 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 031 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 041 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 048 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 052 ∗∗∗ (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 004 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 006 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 007 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 008 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 010 (cid:7) Coworker move for exploitation / exploration Hired solo for exploitation − 0 (cid:2) 309 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 079 − 0 (cid:2) 052 − 0 (cid:2) 010 − 0 (cid:2) 175 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 097 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 114 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 122 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 145 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 177 (cid:7) Hired as a team for exploitation − 0 (cid:2) 174 − 0 (cid:2) 202 0 (cid:2) 031 − 0 (cid:2) 046 − 0 (cid:2) 399 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 160 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 192 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 229 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 242 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 248 (cid:7) Hired solo for exploration − 0 (cid:2) 705 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 668 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 710 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 534 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 381 ∗ (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 161 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 164 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 173 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 182 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 225 (cid:7) Hired as a team for exploration 0 (cid:2) 128 − 0 (cid:2) 263 − 0 (cid:2) 342 − 0 (cid:2) 853 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:2) 215 (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 251 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 286 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 293 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 305 (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) 394 (cid:7) Cut point 1 − 0 (cid:2) 922 − 1 (cid:2) 186 − 1 (cid:2) 215 − 1 (cid:2) 002 − 0 (cid:2) 602 Cut point 2 0 (cid:2) 071 − 0 (cid:2) 296 − 0 (cid:2) 410 − 0 (cid:2) 258 0 (cid:2) 128 Cut point 3 0 (cid:2) 997 0 (cid:2) 420 0 (cid:2) 196 0 (cid:2) 283 0 (cid:2) 624 Cut point 4 1 (cid:2) 836 1 (cid:2) 111 0 (cid:2) 837 0 (cid:2) 888 1 (cid:2) 234 Log ( likelihood ) − 4 (cid:1) 405 (cid:2) 833 − 3 (cid:1) 999 (cid:2) 774 − 3 (cid:1) 374 (cid:2) 231 − 2 (cid:1) 837 (cid:2) 645 − 2 (cid:1) 074 (cid:2) 659 No . of observations 3 , 511 2 , 966 2 , 451 2 , 033 1 , 501 Pseudo - R 2 0 (cid:2) 212 0 (cid:2) 159 0 (cid:2) 142 0 (cid:2) 127 0 (cid:2) 131 Notes . Robust standard errors are in parentheses . ∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 10 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 05 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0 (cid:2) 01 . Both reactions are signiﬁcantly different from zero , sup - porting Hypothesis 2 . These results for the hiring ﬁrm are consistent with studies of corporate takeovers , which suggest that acquirers suffer negative stock - market reac - tions during the announcement period ( Haspeslagh and Jemison 1991 ) . However , we do not ﬁnd support for Hypothesis 4 . There is no signiﬁcant difference between the market reactions to the news that ranked analysts had been hired to exploit compared to news that ranked analysts had been hired to explore . Finally , abnormal returns are subdivided into four cat - egories as hirings for either exploitation or exploration with solo or team entries by star analysts . News of the hiring of an individual analyst for exploitation generates insigniﬁcant negative abnormal returns ( − 0 (cid:7) 44 % ) . News of the hiring of an analyst with a team for exploitation is negative (cid:1) − 0 (cid:7) 81 (cid:3) and signiﬁcant (cid:1)p < 0 (cid:7) 05 (cid:3) . News of the hiring of an individual analyst for exploration is greeted with signiﬁcant negative abnormal returns ( − 0 (cid:7) 87 % ; p < 0 (cid:7) 10 ) , as is news of the hiring of an ana - lyst with a team for exploration ( − 1 (cid:7) 72 % ; p < 0 (cid:7) 05 ) . These results do not support Hypotheses 4 or 6 . Con - ducting a lift out appears to destroy more value ( eco - nomically though not statistically ) , as measured by share price , than hiring an individual star . Discussion We found that newly hired stars suffer a performance decline when they move to the hiring ﬁrms , due to the loss of ﬁrm - speciﬁc human capital and internal social capital . However , the strategic context into which they move differentiated those whose performance recovered from those who suffered a long - term decline . Stars hired to exploit existing sector capabilities had much less to lose in terms of individual performance . By enter - ing sectors that are already established at their hiring ﬁrm , stars hired to exploit had the luxury of drawing on well - established capabilities , most importantly those Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 752 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS Table 4 Event - Study Aggregate Result for Hiring and Abnormal Returns Around Date of Entry by Type of Hiring Abnormal returns Category Event window (cid:5) − 1 (cid:1) + 1 (cid:7) ( % ) t - statistic Sample size Hired for exploitation / exploration Hired for exploitation − 0 (cid:2) 56 b (cid:5) − 1 (cid:2) 93 (cid:7) 68 Hired for exploration − 1 (cid:2) 10 a (cid:5) − 2 (cid:2) 57 (cid:7) 33 Coworker move for exploitation / exploration Hired solo for exploitation − 0 (cid:2) 44 (cid:5) − 1 (cid:2) 16 (cid:7) 46 Hired as a team for exploitation − 0 (cid:2) 81 b (cid:5) − 1 (cid:2) 89 (cid:7) 22 Hired solo for exploration − 0 (cid:2) 87 c (cid:5) − 1 (cid:2) 71 (cid:7) 24 Hired as a team for exploration − 1 (cid:2) 72 b (cid:1) d (cid:5) − 2 (cid:2) 14 (cid:7) 9 a Different from 0 at the 1 % level of signiﬁcance . b Different from 0 at the 5 % level of signiﬁcance . c Different from 0 at the 5 % level of signiﬁcance . d Abnormal returns for hired as a team for exploration is different from abnormal returns for hired solo for exploitation at the 10 % level of signiﬁcance . of seasoned junior analysts , traders , and salespeople who had covered the same sector for the analysts they replaced . The picture was bleaker for stars hired to inau - gurate coverage of a sector that had not been previously covered at the hiring ﬁrm . These analysts’ performance declined sharply for several years . Until the hiring ﬁrm builds up its capabilities in the new sector—not just its information system but also competent and knowledge - able salespeople and traders—the new analyst operates essentially solo in all aspects of the job , from producing research reports to selling those reports to clients . These analysts’ performance continued to suffer over the long term . Firms are unable to provide the same level of support to analysts hired to explore as they do to those hired to exploit . Fred Fraenkel , formerly of Lehman Brothers , explained this phenomenon by describing the point of view of a salesman responsible for selling analysts’ research to clients . Fraenkel spelled out the sales force’s different attitudes toward accommodating a replacement and creating demand for research on a new sector . In the case of a replacement , he explained , the salesman is typically eager to pitch the new person to clients : As a salesman , I’ve done all that work already . I’ve made relationships ; I’ve tried to make them dependent on me for that information . Now the biotechnology ana - lyst leaves , and I have a void . I have to ﬁll that void , or else I look like an idiot as a salesman , because I’ve been saying “Depend on me for biotech , depend on me for biotech , ” and now I have nothing to say . So I want to believe the new person’s better than the one we lost , and I want to go out and ﬁll that void with this person . The trader has been trading the stocks ; he knows them . The salesman has been selling the stock . He knows the sales traders . Everyone’s all prepped for you when you make that replacement . 10 Steve Balog , also formerly of Lehman Brothers , paints a complementary picture of the hurdles facing an ana - lyst in an “explore” situation who initiates coverage of a sector not previously covered by the ﬁrm : A new guy has to do missionary work on a new group . You have to bring the entire sales force up to speed on what , say , pharmaceuticals are all about . Then you help them understand how your view of pharmaceuticals is different from other ﬁrms’ , and you have to teach them all the drug names and all the ﬁrm names . And then the sales force is going out there and making not very sophisticated calls , and the clients are thinking “Oh boy ! ” So all the leverage that you get from the sales force is not there , all the subtlety of your calls , your thought process , is lost until you get that group educated . And it can take a long time . It can take years . 11 We ﬁnd that stars hired into the more challenging exploration roles can preserve their performance to some extent when they bring the necessary support structure with them in the form of colleagues from the originating ﬁrm . Stars hired into exploration roles who move with colleagues to a hiring ﬁrm performed better than those who moved solo . The difference in predicted probabili - ties of being ranked ﬁrst in year t + 1 between ranked analysts hired solo for exploration compared to ranked analysts hired with a team for exploration is 0 . 103 . The difference of 0 . 028 persists through year t + 5 . Although moving with colleagues also beneﬁted star analysts who moved into an exploitation role , the advantage was not as pronounced . The difference suggests that the advan - tage of moving with colleagues stems only partly from preserving some of the ﬁrm - or group - speciﬁc human capital that would otherwise be lost when a star moves to the hiring ﬁrm . An important advantage of moving with colleagues is in fact their ability to provide supporting capabilities that , in the case of stars hired into explo - ration roles , a hiring ﬁrm would otherwise lack . Such Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 753 supporting capabilities are potentially underestimated by the hiring ﬁrm , which is focused more on the new exper - tise that the star brings than on what is required to help generate and disseminate that new expertise . In the lan - guage of innovation research , the hiring ﬁrm may fail to see that some architectural innovation ( Henderson and Clark 1990 ) or reconﬁguration is required to integrate the new expertise it has acquired . At the ﬁrm level , we also discover that investors view the announcement of star analyst hirings as a value - reducing event . Although we hypothesized that the mar - ket would punish hiring for exploration but not for exploitation , both types of hiring were in fact treated negatively by the market . The magnitude of share price loss appears to be larger in the case of hiring for explo - ration ( not statistically signiﬁcant ) , but hiring of any type led to a decline in share price . Finally , although the performance of the individual stars who are hired to explore improved when they moved with colleagues from their originating ﬁrm , markets punished a group hire more severely than a solo hire . We had hypothe - sized that , given the improved performance of stars when they move with colleagues from their originating ﬁrms , markets would not penalize ﬁrms as severely as when stars move solo to the hiring ﬁrm . In fact , for ﬁrms that hired a group for exploration , their estimated share price loss was 1 . 72 % , whereas ﬁrms that hired a star solo for exploration experienced a 0 . 87 % decline . One possible reason for the negative reaction may be the market’s fear that a ﬁrm may have overpaid to hire a star and his or her colleagues . In the acquisi - tions literature , Roll ( 1986 ) argues that acquiring ﬁrms tend to overpay for their acquisitions ( stars and their colleagues , in this case ) because acquiring ﬁrms’ man - agers are afﬂicted with hubris and systematically over - estimate their skills to create gains through acquisitions . Because stars and their colleagues tend to be highly vis - ible in the market , some have argued that hiring ﬁrms might overestimate the value of an “outside” star and suffer a “winner’s curse” ( Lazear 1986 , Ravid 1999 ) . 12 In the asymmetric information models in labor mar - kets , a worker’s current ﬁrm possesses an informa - tional advantage about that worker’s skill level over the other ﬁrms in the market ( Acemoglu and Pischke 1998 ) . Allowing the originating ﬁrm , which possesses an infor - mational advantage , to make counteroffers to its employ - ees creates a situation in which hiring ﬁrms might suffer a winner’s curse . Furthermore , hiring several individu - als simultaneously may signal the initiation of a hiring spree , which is likely to be costly . From the perspective of the exploration versus exploitation literature , our results are consistent with the ﬁndings that exploration is simply a more difﬁcult strat - egy than exploitation . Firms’ incentives to exploit their existing core competencies are well aligned with the incentives of the individuals who must carry out those strategies . Because our sample consists of the top per - formers in the market , we can be sure that these indi - viduals are highly skilled in their area of expertise and in their external proﬁle and networks . The only differ - ence among them is the strategic context in which they exercised their expertise . Our ﬁnding that individuals hired into exploration roles consistently faltered more so than individuals hired into exploitation roles adds an important dimension that underpins the strong tendency toward exploitation that previous researchers have found ( Levinthal and March 1993 ) . Furthermore , that exploration may be punished more so than exploitation by the markets is consistent with the idea that exploration is perceived to be a risky venture with uncertain returns . When ﬁrms hire an entire group to develop a new area of business , they send a strong signal of commitment to explore a new market . Judging by the market reaction in our analysis , however , these ﬁrms risk not only the short - term cost associated with hiring , but also bear the additional cost of an immedi - ate loss in market value . The market reaction appears to send a message of skepticism about a ﬁrm’s strat - egy to pursue unfamiliar territory by hiring outside tal - ent . These ﬁndings are consistent with the idea that the stock market punishes ﬁrms that depart from the exist - ing framework , such as from well - established market “categories” ( Zuckerman 1999 ) . Benner ( 2004 ) has also argued that when ﬁrms respond to technological change , a perceived “gap” in identity or capability can trigger negative stock market reactions . Although a ﬁrm’s effort to explore may yet turn out to be the better strategy in the long run , in the short - run , they face high hurdles in inspiring conﬁdence and support for their strategy in the markets as well as in executing the integration of their newly acquired human assets . Because the exploration activities are aimed at cap - turing value in the long run , analysis of short - term mar - ket reactions cannot completely address whether ﬁrms create or destroy value when they hire for exploration . We attempted to analyze the longer - term implications for ﬁrm value in hiring for exploitation versus explo - ration by examining share price movements beyond the “event” window . However , our results cannot be conclu - sive due to the inability to isolate “hiring” from the large number of factors that affect share price over a longer period . The advantage of isolating the analysis to our short - term “event” window is that we could pinpoint the one piece of news—hiring a star—that investors were reacting to on a given day . Beyond that speciﬁc win - dow , particularly over a longer period of time , all types of events and information , such as announcements of mergers , alliances , changes to senior leadership , and reg - ulatory decisions , can determine stock price movement . Given these problems , it is not possible with our data to suggest that hiring a star for either exploration or Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 754 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS exploitation roles has any discernible impact on long - term ﬁrm value . Despite these limitations , what we could do is follow the stock prices of the ﬁrms in our sam - ple over a ﬁve - year period . Whether or not their hiring decision had any impact , the ﬁrms in our sample that hired a star into an exploration role did not outperform ﬁrms that hired a star into an exploitation role in subse - quent years . Furthermore , we tested whether the hiring of stars for exploitation and exploration was associated with subsequent changes in the underwriting volume , market share , or a number of companies underwritten . We found no relationship between star hirings and these ﬁrms’ outcomes in Years 1 and 2 . We cannot conclude from these data that ﬁrms that hired for exploration do not in fact become better positioned strategically for disruptive changes in the future . In fact , understanding the longer - term dynamics of hiring for exploitation or exploration deserves greater attention in future research because it would help illuminate how professional ser - vice ﬁrms may be making a trade - off in their strategic hiring choices . Based on the results of this study , we can only conclude that any value captured in the future by the ﬁrms that explore may be too uncertain to be reﬂected in the ﬁrm’s current market value . Our ﬁndings also underline the importance of mak - ing serious , planned efforts at integrating new hires in exploration roles . Many ﬁrms deliberately hire stars in the expectation that they can simply “plug and play” an experienced professional . But , as our analysis shows , a new hire’s ability to perform depends crucially on the hiring ﬁrm’s ability to support his or her expertise . Sim - ply having a certain set of expertise—in this case , the superior knowledge of star hires—does not mean that a ﬁrm will be successful in exploring a new market . As research on ambidexterity suggests , exploration activi - ties cannot simply be isolated from the rest of the ﬁrm’s activities . To be successful , exploration must be inte - grated in some critical ways with the core competencies of the ﬁrm , which is extremely difﬁcult to accomplish . Tushman and O’Reilly ( 2009 ) have argued that orga - nizational structures and processes cannot address the many tensions when ﬁrms attempt to manage both explo - ration and exploitation strategies . Such problems are dif - ﬁcult to overcome unless the ﬁrm has a senior team with the rare ability to generate a common set of values and to actively manage the inevitable and constant conﬂicts throughout the organization ( e . g . , Tushman and O’Reilly 1996 , Jansen 2006 , Lubatkin et al . 2006 ) . Although our results show that hiring stars to explore is not likely to be successful , our analysis cannot distinguish between ﬁrms that are doing a better job managing their explo - ration hires from those that are doing a poor job . Future research should investigate whether the quality of the senior team at a ﬁrm can in fact mitigate the disadvan - tages of hiring stars to the individual recruit and / or to the ﬁrm . Although our study points out the importance of a ﬁrm’s existing capabilities in supporting new hires in exploration activities , its generalizability may be limited in part by the speciﬁc industry under investigation . As we discussed earlier , an advantage of studying security analysts is that their client ties are not exclusive . Hence , hiring ﬁrms are “acquiring” the star’s expertise and not necessarily new trading clients , which would be the case in most other professional services contexts , such as law , accounting , management consulting , or advertising . Future research should investigate whether stars hired into exploration roles in these industries may be less reliant on their ﬁrms in forging a “new” market given the nature of client ties . An additional limitation to the ability to generalize from these ﬁndings is that the data capture only a slice of the wider labor market for analysts . Because the data are focused on stars , it limits us from making general - izations about how less extraordinary individuals might be affected by the strategic roles they play in their hiring ﬁrm . In any given labor market , a key difference between stars and nonstars is the level of visibility the stars enjoy . The visibility may provide easier access to clients and resources . Hence , hiring nonstars into exploration roles could be more detrimental for individual performance . At the same time , the low proﬁle of hiring nonstars into exploration roles may allow a ﬁrm to escape the scrutiny and skepticism of the stock market . This study contributes to the literature on exploration and exploitation by examining the tension at the individ - ual level , where the actual work of exploring and exploit - ing occurs , especially in professional service or other knowledge - intensive contexts ( Starbuck 1992 ) . We ﬁnd that individuals , much as ﬁrms , experience greater difﬁ - culty in terms of their performance when they explore a new market than when they exploit an established one . However , the “new” market is not in fact new to the indi - viduals themselves—who , after all , became stars through their expertise in that particular market—but only to their hiring ﬁrm . Therefore , our results suggest that the lack of success at the level of individual performance is due primarily to the inability of ﬁrms to integrate and support an unfamiliar capability , regardless of the qual - ity of that capability . Individuals themselves probably do not perceive a difference in the likelihood of their own career success when they choose between working in an exploration context and in an exploitation context . How - ever , to the extent that individuals could or might come to perceive these differences—to recognize some poten - tial boundaries to their boundaryless careers ( e . g . , Arthur 1994 , Arthur and Rousseau 1996 , DeFillippi and Arthur 1994 , Littleton et al . 2000 , Sullivan and Arthur 2006 ) — they may spurn offers of exploration roles and hence increase the already heavy tendency toward exploitation activities in a ﬁrm . Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 755 Our study also contributes to research on professional service ﬁrms . In particular , our study presents evidence that a popular strategy among these ﬁrms—the acquisi - tion of star individuals—may not be particularly success - ful . Although the nature of work in professional services allows individual stars a great deal of independence in building their reputation , external networks , and their own “franchise , ” professionals continue to depend on their organizations and their capabilities to perform at a high level . Greenwood et al . ( 1994 ) demonstrated that merging two ﬁrms providing similar services is a pro - cess fraught with tensions and conﬂicts . Integrating new star hires and their colleagues to deliver capabilities that the hiring ﬁrm lacks is an additional challenge that is difﬁcult for most ﬁrms to overcome . Yet , because professional service ﬁrms do innovate partly through hiring outside stars , an important contribution of our study to research on professional services is to dis - tinguish between the strategic contexts of hiring—for exploration or exploitation—as well as to demonstrate the conditions under which group hires can inﬂuence future performance . Finally , our study contributes to human capital the - ory by providing strong evidence that ﬁrm - speciﬁc and team - speciﬁc human capital as well as organizational capabilities constitute important factors in determining individual performance . In particular , our ﬁnding that moving with a team of existing colleagues can miti - gate the loss of performance in a new ﬁrm highlights the difﬁculty of replicating an existing knowledge base that is crucial for individual performance . The team - speciﬁc human capital constitutes a valuable resource for the stars whose performance depends on it . This tacit knowledge can constitute a competitive advan - tage . Furthermore , our ﬁnding that a hiring ﬁrm’s exist - ing capabilities inﬂuence the success or failure of a star introduces limiting conditions to the idea that in knowledge - based industries workers are essentially free agents who can perform at will for the highest bidder . This idea also underlies the research on “boundaryless careers , ” which highlights the ability of individuals to move across multiple organizational contexts through - out their careers . Although stars and their hiring ﬁrm may tend to extrapolate their future prospects based on demonstrated individual capabilities , a star’s past per - formance may not in fact be a great indicator of future performance . The strategic context in which an individ - ual chooses to perform—whether his or her performance constitutes a new or existing capability for a ﬁrm—may be just as important a factor in career outcomes . Acknowledgments The authors thank George Baker , Peter Cappelli , Paul Healy , Will Mitchell , Ashish Nanda , Nitin Nohria , Joel Podolny , anonymous referees , and editors , as well as participants in seminars at Harvard Business School , London Business School , MIT , the University of Pennsylvania , and the Univer - sity of Washington . Some data used in this paper came from research by Groysberg and Nanda ( 2006 ) , Industrial Brokers’ Estimate System , Greenwich Associates , Institutional Investor , Nelson’s Investment Research Database , and First Call . This research was funded by the Division of Research at Harvard Business School . The authors are grateful for research assis - tance from Sarah Eriksen , Kathleen Ryan , and James Schorr . Endnotes 1 Interview with a global head of research director , May 5 , 2006 . 2 Interview with a research director , December 22 , 2005 . 3 Interview on September 24 , 2002 . 4 Ranked analysts and star analysts are used interchangeably to refer to sell - side analysts ranked by Institutional Investor . 5 One hundred and thirty - four analysts left sell - side research . Sixty - nine stars joined buy - side ﬁrms . Thirty star analysts founded new companies . Twenty stars retired . Eight star ana - lysts took nonresearch positions in the securities industry . Five stars joined a company that they had covered as analysts . One star died in a car accident , and another star died of a heart attack . 6 The number of observations decreases with each performance year for two reasons . First , if an analyst switches ﬁrms during the later years , his or her subsequent performance observations are not included . Second , analysts who leave the research busi - ness account for the decrease in the number of observation . 7 The problem of self - selection means that the hired for exploitation / exploration coefﬁcient might not measure the unbiased impact of analysts’ changing ﬁrms . Following the approach used by Groysberg et al . ( 2008 ) , we use Heckman’s ( 1979 ) two - stage estimation technique to control for the endogeneity of the self - selection of analysts who move to competing ﬁrms for exploitation and exploration using . The analyst’s decision to change ﬁrms is modeled as a function of the individual , ﬁrm , sector , and macroeconomic variables that are found to inﬂuence turnover . Because it generates sim - ilar coefﬁcients , we focus solely on the estimation of analysts’ performance using the one - stage ordered probit model . 8 Inability to move up in rankings affects the analyst star tenure coefﬁcient . We also examine whether being ranked for the ﬁrst time affects performance . The results are not statisti - cally signiﬁcant . Finally , to reject alternative explanations for our results , we test whether there are signiﬁcant interactions between hired for exploitation / exploration and analyst ﬁrm tenure , analyst experience , analyst star tenure , analyst per - formance , and analyst new star . None of the interactions are found to be important . 9 Coefﬁcients for hired solo for exploitation and hired as a team for exploitation are signiﬁcantly different from each other in year t + 1 only . 10 Interview on January 9 , 2006 . 11 Interview on January 26 , 2006 . 12 The winner’s curse phenomenon was ﬁrst identiﬁed in the context of ﬁrms submitting bids for oil drilling rights and gas leases to a parcel of land ( Capen et al . 1971 ) . Smith ( 1981 , pp . 383 – 384 ) explains the winner’s curse : “In the auction of any item whose value is uncertain , there is a possibility that the winning bidder is lead to that position because he has most overestimated the item’s value . In retrospect , the winner will Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 756 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS revalue the item in accordance with the revealed bids of rivals , all of whom bid lower than himself . Consequently , the win - ner’s appraisal may be diminished by the very act of winning . ” References Acemoglu , D . , J . S . Pischke . 1998 . Why do ﬁrms train ? Theory and evidence . Quart . J . Econom . 113 ( 1 ) 79 – 119 . Allison , P . D . , S . J . Long . 1990 . Departmental effects on scientiﬁc productivity . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 55 ( 4 ) 469 – 478 . Andersen , B . , J . Howells , R . Hull , I . Miles , J . Roberts , eds . 2000 . Knowledge and Innovation in the New Service Economy . Edward Elgar , Cheltenham , UK . Arthur , M . B . 1994 . The boundaryless career : A new perspective for organizational inquiry . J . Organ . Behav . 15 295 – 306 . Arthur , M . B . , D . M . Rousseau . 1996 . The Boundaryless Career : A New Employment Principle for a New Organizational Era . Oxford University Press , New York . Asquith , P . , D . Mullins . 1986 . Equity issues and offering dilution . J . Financial Econom . 15 ( 1 - 2 ) 61 – 89 . Bagdadli , S . , L . , Solari , A . Usai , A . Grandori . 2003 . The emergence of career boundaries in unbounded industries : Career odysseys in the Italian new economy . Internat . J . Human Resource Man - agement 14 788 – 808 . Becker , G . S . 1962 . Investment in human capital : A theoretical anal - ysis . J . Political Econom . 70 ( 5 ) 9 – 49 . Benner , M . 2004 . Incumbent discount : Stock market categories and response to radical technological change . Acad . Management Rev . 32 ( 3 ) 703 – 720 . Benner , M . J . , M . L . Tushman . 2003 . Exploitation , exploration , and process management : The productivity dilemma revisited . Acad . Management Rev . 28 238 – 256 . Brindisi , L . J . 1985 . Shareholder value and executive compensation . Planning Rev . 13 ( 5 ) 14 – 17 . Broschak , J . P . 2004 . Managers’ mobility and market interface : The effect of managers’ career mobility on the dissolution of market ties . Admin . Sci . Quart . 49 608 – 640 . Brown , L . , D . Chen . 1991 . How good is the All - America research team in forecast earnings ? J . Bus . Forecasting 9 14 – 18 . Brown , S . J . , J . B . Warner . 1980 . Measuring security price perfor - mance . J . Financial Econom . 8 ( 3 ) 205 – 258 . Burgelman , R . A . 1991 . Intraorganizational ecology of strategy mak - ing and organizational adaptation : Theory and ﬁeld research . Organ . Sci . 2 239 – 262 . Capen , E . C . , R . V . Clapp , W . M . Campbell . 1971 . Competitive bid - ding in high risk situations . J . Petroleum Technology 23 ( June ) 641 – 653 . Chaudhuri , S . , B . Tabrizi . 1999 . Capturing the real value in high - tech acquisitions . Harvard Bus . Rev . 77 ( 5 ) 123 – 130 . Christensen , C . M . 1997 . The Innovator’s Dilemma : When New Tech - nologies Cause Great Firms to Fail . Harvard Business School Press , Boston . Cosh , A . , A . Hughes , U . Kambhampati . 1993 . Take - over success or failure ? The experience of large and small UK Companies . Working paper , SBRC , Department of Applied Economics , Uni - versity of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK . Cowen , A . P . , B . Groysberg , P . Healy . 2006 . Which types of analyst ﬁrms are more optimistic ? J . Accounting Econom . 41 119 – 146 Cummings , A . , G . R . Oldham . 1997 . Enhancing creativity : Manag - ing work contexts for the high potential employee . California Management Rev . 40 ( 1 ) 22 – 38 . DeFillippi , R . , M . B . Arthur . 1994 . The boundaryless career : A competency - based perspective . J . Organ . Behav . 15 307 – 324 . Dorfman , J . 1991 . Analysts devote more time to selling as ﬁrms keep scorecard on performance . Wall Street Journal ( October 29 ) 1 . Drucker , P . F . 1998 . On the Profession of Management . Harvard Busi - ness School Press , Boston . Dyckman , T . , D . Philbrick , J . Stephan . 1984 . A comparison of event study methodologies using daily stock returns : A simulation approach . J . Accounting Res . 22 ( Supplement ) 1 – 30 . Eccles , R . G . , D . B . Crane . 1988 . Doing Deals : Investment Banks at Work . Harvard Business School Press , Boston . Eisenhardt , K . M . , J . A . Martin . 2000 . Dynamic capabilities : What are they ? Strategic Management J . 21 1105 – 1121 . Ernst , H . , J . Vitt . 2000 . The inﬂuence of corporate acquisitions on the behaviour of key inventors . R & D Management 30 105 – 119 . Friedson , E . 1986 . Professional Powers : A Study of the Institution - alization of Formal Knowledge . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Froot , K . A . 1989 . Consistent covariance matrix estimation with cross - sectional dependence and heteroskedasticity in ﬁnancial data . J . Financial Quant . Anal . 24 333 – 355 . Gabarro , J . J . 1985 . When a new manager takes charge . Harvard Bus . Rev . 63 ( 3 ) 110 – 123 . Gilbert , C . 2005 . Unbundling the structure of inertia : Resource versus routine rigidity . Acad . Management J . 48 741 – 763 . Greenwood , R . , C . R . Hinings , J . Brown . 1990 . “P2 - Form” strategic management : Corporate practices in professional partnerships . Acad . Management J . 33 ( 4 ) 725 – 755 . Greenwood , R . , C . R . Hinings , J . Brown . 1994 . Merging professional service ﬁrms . Organ . Sci . 5 ( 2 ) 239 – 257 . Greenwood , R . , R . Suddaby , M . McDougald . 2006 . Introduction . R . Greenwood , R . Suddaby , eds . Research in the Sociology of Organizations . Elsevier , Boston , 1 – 16 . Groysberg , B . , R . Abrahams . 2006 . Lift outs : How to acquire a high - functioning team . Harvard Bus . Rev . 84 ( December ) 133 – 140 . Groysberg , B . , L . Lee . 2008 . The effects of colleague quality on top performance : The case of security analysts . J . Organ . Behav . 29 1123 – 1144 . Groysberg , B . , L . Lee , A . Nanda . 2008 . Can they take it with them ? The portability of star knowledge workers’ performance . Man - agement Sci . 54 ( 7 ) 1213 – 1230 . Groysberg , B . , A . Nanda , N . Nohria . 2004 . The risky business of hiring stars . Harvard Bus . Rev . 82 ( 5 ) 92 – 100 . Gupta , A . K . , K . G . Smith , C . E . Shalley . 2006 . The interplay between exploration and exploitation . Acad . Management J . 49 693 – 706 . Hackman , J . R . 2002 . Leading Teams : Setting the Stage for Great Performances . Harvard Business School Press , Boston . Haspeslagh , P . , D . Jemison . 1991 . Managing Acquisitions . Free Press , New York . Healy , P . , K . Palepu , R . Ruback . 1992 . Does corporate performance improve after mergers ? J . Financial Econom . 31 ( 2 ) 135 – 175 . Healy , P . , K . Palepu , R . Ruback . 1997 . Which takeovers are prof - itable ? Strategic or ﬁnancial ? Sloan Management Rev . 38 ( Sum - mer ) 45 – 57 . Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS 757 Heckman , J . J . 1979 . Sample selection bias as a speciﬁcation error . Econometrica 47 ( 1 ) 153 – 161 . Henderson , R . M . , K . B . Clark . 1990 . Architectural innovation : The reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 ( 1 ) 9 – 30 . Howard , G . G . 1967 . What makes a good analyst ? Well (cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:7) (cid:7) Institu - tional Investor ( May ) 10 – 15 . Huber , P . J . 1967 . The behavior of maximum likelihood estimates under non - standard conditions . Proc . 5th Berkeley Sympos . Math . Statist . Probab . , Vol . 1 . University of California Press , Berkeley , 221 – 233 . Huckman , R . S . , G . P . Pisano . 2006 . The ﬁrm speciﬁcity of individual performance : Evidence from cardiac surgery . Management Sci . 52 ( 4 ) 473 – 488 . Ichniowski , C . , K . Shaw , G . Prennushi . 1997 . The effects of human resource management practices on productivity : A study of steel ﬁnishing lines . Amer . Econom . Rev . 87 ( 3 ) 291 – 313 . Institutional Investor . 1991 . The 1991 All - America ﬁxed income research team . Institutional Investor ( October ) 81 – 87 . Jacob , J . , T . Z . Lys , M . A . Neale . 1999 . Expertise in forecasting performance of security analysts . J . Accounting Econom . 28 ( 1 ) 51 – 82 . Jansen , J . J . 2006 . Senior teams and organizational ambidexterity : The moderating role of transformational leadership . Presentation , Annual Academy of Management Meeting , August , Academy of Management , Briarcliff Manor , NY . Jensen , M . C . , R . S . Ruback . 1983 . The market for corporate control : The scientiﬁc evidence . J . Financial Econom . 11 ( 1 – 4 ) 5 – 50 . King , Z . , S . Burke , J . Pemberton . 2005 . The “bounded” career : An empirical study of human capital , career mobility , and employ - ment outcomes in a mediated labour market . Human Relations 58 ( 8 ) 981 – 1008 . Kordana , K . A . 1995 . Law ﬁrms and associate careers : Tournament theory versus the production - imperative model . Yale Law J . 104 1907 – 1934 . Laderman , J . M . 1998 . Who can you trust ? Wall Street’s spin game . Bus . Week ( October 5 ) 148 – 156 . Lave , J . 1988 . Cognition in Practice : Mind , Mathematics , and Culture in Everyday Life . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Lazear , E . P . 1986 . Raids and offer matching . Research in Labor Econom . 8 ( A ) 141 – 165 . Levinthal , D . , J . March . 1993 . The myopia of learning . Strategic Man - agement J . 14 95 – 112 . Littleton , S . M . , M . B . Arthur , D . M . Rousseau . 2000 . The Future of Boundaryless Careers . Cambridge University Press , New York . Lubatkin , M . H . , Z . Simsek , Y . Ling , J . F . Veiga . 2006 . Ambidexterity and performance in small - to medium - sized ﬁrms : The pivotal role of TMT behavioral integration . J . Management 32 1 – 27 . Lurie , S . B . 1967 . What makes a good analyst ? Institutional Investor ( July ) 33 , 42 , 44 . Maister , D . H . 1993 . Managing the Professional Service Firm . Free Press , Boston . March , J . G . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organ . Sci . 2 71 – 87 . March , J . G . 2003 . Understanding organizational adaptation . Presen - tation , April 2 , Budapest University of Economics and Public Administration , Budapest University , Prague . McGregor , J . 2006 . I can’t believe they took the whole team . Bus . Week ( December 18 ) 120 – 122 . Mincer , J . 1974 . Schooling , Experience , and Earnings . Columbia Uni - versity Press , New York . Mitchell , M . L . , J . M . Netter . 1994 . The role of ﬁnancial economics in securities fraud cases : Applications at the securities and exchange commission . Bus . Lawyer 49 ( 2 ) 545 – 590 . Morck , R . , A . Shleifer , R . Vishny . 1990 . Do managerial objectives drive bad acquisitions ? J . Finance 45 ( 1 ) 31 – 48 . Nayyar , P . R . 1993 . Stock market reactions to related diversiﬁcation moves by service ﬁrms seeking beneﬁts from information asym - metry and economies of scope . Strategic Management J . 14 ( 8 ) 569 – 591 . O’Reilly , C . , M . Tushman . 2008 . Ambidexterity as a dynamic capa - bility : resolving the innovator’s dilemma . Res . Organ . Behav . 28 185 – 206 . Pfeffer , J . 1994 . Competitive Advantage Through People . Harvard Business School Publishing , Boston . Phillips , B . 1997 . Free at last ? Institutional Investor ( August ) 48 – 55 . Porter , M . 1987 . From competitive advantage to corporate strategy . Harvard Bus . Rev . 65 ( 3 ) 43 – 59 . Ravid , S . A . 1999 . Information , blockbusters , and stars : A study of the ﬁlm industry . J . Bus . 72 ( 4 ) 463 – 492 . Rees , A . 1973 . The Economics of Work and Pay . Harper and Row , New York . Roll , R . 1986 . The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers . J . Bus . 59 ( 2 ) 197 – 216 . Rosen , S . 1981 . The economics of superstars . Amer . Econom . Rev . 71 ( 5 ) 845 – 858 . Scherer , F . , D . Ross . 1990 . Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance , 3rd ed . Houghton Mifﬂin Company , Boston . Seabright , M . A . , D . A . Levinthal , M . Fichman . 1992 . Role of indi - vidual attachments in the dissolution of interorganizational rela - tionship . Acad . Management J . 35 122 – 160 . Sessa , D . 1999 . All - star analysts 1999 survey : Early mornings , late nights mark an analyst’s days . Wall Street Journal ( June 29 ) R13 . Shleifer , A . , R . W . Vishny . 1990 . Stock market driven acquisitions . J . Financial Econom . 70 ( 3 ) 295 – 311 . Siconolﬁ , M . 1992 . Shearson research analysts ﬁnish ﬁrst on “All - America Team” for third year . Wall Street Journal ( October 13 ) C18 . Sinha , P . , L . Brown , S . Das . 1997 . A re - examination of ﬁnancial analysts’ differential earnings forecast accuracy . Contemporary Accounting Res . 14 1 – 42 . Sirower , M . 1997 . The Synergy Trap : How Companies Lose the Acqui - sition Game . The Free Press , New York . Smith , J . L . 1981 . Non - aggressive bidding behavior and the “winner’s curse . ” Econom . Inquiry 19 ( 3 ) 380 – 388 . Sobel , R . 1999 . When Giants Stumble : Classic Business Blunders and How to Avoid Them . Prentice Hall , Paramus , NJ . Song , J . , P . Almeida , G . Wu . 2003 . Learning - by - hiring : When is mobility more likely to facilitate interﬁrm knowledge transfer ? Management Sci . 49 ( 4 ) 351 – 365 . Starbuck , W . H . 1992 . Learning by knowledge - intensive ﬁrms . J . Management Stud . 29 ( 6 ) 713 – 740 . Strober , M . H . 1990 . Human Capital Theory : Implications for HR Managers . Basil Blackwell , Oxford , UK . Groysberg and Lee : Exploration and Exploitation in Professional Service Firms 758 Organization Science 20 ( 4 ) , pp . 740 – 758 , ©2009 INFORMS Sullivan , S . E . , M . B . Arthur . 2006 . The evolution of the boundaryless career concept : Examining physical and psychological mobility . J . Vocational Behav . 69 19 – 29 . Sundbo , J . 1997 . Management of innovation in services . Service Indust . J . 17 432 – 456 . Tampoe , M . 1996 . Motivating Knowledge Workers—The Challenge for the 1990s . Butterworth - Heinemann , Oxford , UK . Teece , D . J . 2007 . Explicating dynamic capabilities : The nature and microfoundations of ( sustainable ) enterprise performance . Strategic Management J . 28 ( 13 ) 1319 – 1350 . Teece , D . J . , G . P . Pisano , A . Shuen . 1997 . Dynamic capabilities and strategic management . Strategic Management J . 18 509 – 533 . Thomke , S . 2003 . Experimentation Matters : Unlocking the Potential of New Technologies for Innovation . Harvard Business School Press , Boston . Topel , R . 1991 . Speciﬁc capital , mobility , and wages : Wages rise with job seniority . J . Political Econom . 99 ( 1 ) 145 – 176 . Tripsas , M . , G . Gavetti . 2000 . Capabilities , cognition , and inertia : Evidence from digital imaging . Strategic Management J . 21 1147 – 1161 . Tushman , M . L . , C . A . O’Reilly . 1996 . Ambidextrous organizations : Managing evolutionary and revolutionary change . California Management Rev . 38 8 – 31 . Tushman , M . L . , W . Smith . 2002 . Organizational technology . J . A . C . Baum , ed . Companion to Organizations . Blackwell , London , 286 – 414 . Useem , M . , J . Karabel . 1986 . Pathways to top corporate management . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 51 184 – 200 . Van Maanen , J . , S . R . Barley . 1984 . Occupational communities : Cul - ture and control in organizations . P . J . Frost , L . F . Moore , M . R . Louis , C . C . Lundberg , J . Martin , eds . Organizational Culture . Sage Publishing Company , Beverly Hills , CA , 31 – 54 . Varaiya , N . , K . Ferris . 1987 . Overpaying in corporate takeovers : The winners curse . Financial Anal . J . 43 ( 3 ) 64 – 72 . Veum , J . R . 1995 . Sources of training and their impact on wages . Industrial Labor Relations Rev . 48 812 – 826 . Warner , J . B . , R . L . Watts , K . H . Wruck . 1988 . Stock prices and top management changes . J . Financial Econom . 20 ( 1 ) 461 – 492 . Weick , E . 1995 . Sensemaking in Organizations . Sage Publishing , Thousand Oaks , CA . Weisman , R . 2006 . Once taboo , hiring away teams is getting popular . Boston Globe ( November 19 ) D1 . White , H . 1982 . Maximum likelihood estimation of misspeciﬁed mod - els . Econometrica 50 ( 1 ) 1 – 25 . Williams , R . L . 2000 . A note on robust variance estimation for cluster - correlated data . Biometrics 56 645 – 646 . Woodruffe , C . 1999 . Winning the Talent War . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Zuckerman , E . 1999 . The categorical imperative : Securities ana - lysts and the illegitimacy discount . Amer . J . Sociol . 104 ( 5 ) 1398 – 1439 . Zuckerman , H . 1967 . Nobel Laureates in science : Patterns of pro - ductivity , collaboration , and authorship . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 32 391 – 403 .