User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji Hidehiko Nishikawa a , 1 , Martin Schreier b , ⁎ , Susumu Ogawa c , 2 a Hosei University , Faculty of Business Administration , 2 - 17 - 1 Fujimi , Chiyoda - ku , Tokyo , 102 - 8160 Japan b WU Vienna University of Economics and Business , Marketing Department , Augasse 2 - 6 , Vienna , 1090 Austria c Kobe University , School of Business Administration , 2 - 1 Rokkodai - cho Nada - ku , Kobe Hyogo , 657 - 8501 Japan a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : First received in 6 , June 2012 and was under review for 5 months Available online xxxx Area Editor : John H . Roberts Keywords : User design User - generated products User innovation Co - creation Customer integration Crowdsourcing Market performance New product development Idea generation In recent years , more and more consumer goods ﬁ rms have started to tap into the creative potential of their user communities to fuel their new product development pipelines . Although many have hailed this para - digm shift as a highly promising development for ﬁ rms , hardly any research has systematically compared the actual market performance of user - generated products with designer - generated ones . We ﬁ ll this void by presenting a unique data set gathered from the Japanese consumer goods brand Muji , which has drawn on both sources of ideas in parallel in recent years . We demonstrate that user - generated products , which are found to generally contain higher novelty outperformed their designer - generated counterparts on key market performance metrics . Speci ﬁ cally , in the ﬁ rst year after introduction , sales revenues from user - generated products were three times higher and gross margins were four times greater than those of designer - generated products . These effects also increased over time : after three years , the aggregate sales revenues of user - generated products were , on average , 1 . 25 billion yen ( approximately 16 million dollars ) higher , or ﬁ ve times greater , than the sales of designer - generated products . The corresponding average mar - gin was an impressive 619 million yen ( approximately 8 million dollars ) higher , or six times greater , than the margin for designer - generated products . Finally , user - generated products were more likely to survive the three - year observation period than designer - generated products ( i . e . , were still on the market three years after introduction ) . These ﬁ ndings clearly favor the paradigm shift identi ﬁ ed in marketing research and ap - peal to managers considering the integration of user ideas into the process of new product development . We discuss our study ' s limitations and identify important avenues for future research . © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction For decades ( if not for much longer ) , professional marketers , designers , and engineers rather than consumers or users have been the dominant agents in the development of new consumer products . Although it has always been imperative to listen to customers to dis - cern emerging market trends and unmet consumer needs , design professionals employed by ﬁ rms ( or their subcontractors ) are usually responsible for translating the resulting opportunities into new prod - uct ideas and market offerings ( Cooper , 2001 ; Crawford & Di Benedetto , 2000 ; Ulrich & Eppinger , 1995 ; Urban & Hauser , 1993 ) . Until very recently , ﬁ rms did not consider user involvement in the process of generating ideas for new product development ( NPD ) to be particularly promising . For example , as Schulze and Hoegl ( 2008 , p . 1744 ) note , “ relying on the method of asking buyers to describe potential future products , big leaps to novel product ideas are generally not likely . ” One of the key assumptions underlying this dominant idea generation paradigm is that a ﬁ rm ' s professionals , unlike customers or users , have the requisite expertise to invent new and useful product concepts ( e . g . , Amabile , 1998 ; Weisberg , 1993 ) . A ﬁ rm ' s professionals “ have acquired skills and capabilities that allow them to perform most design tasks more effectively and at a higher level of quality ” ( Ulrich , 2007 , Chapter 3 , 5ff ) and they “ often have a signi ﬁ cant advantage [ … ] over consumers , in terms of their knowledge , training , and experience ” ( Moreau & Herd , 2010 , p . 807 ) . However , research on the sources of innovation ( Von Hippel , 1988 ) has long challenged this fundamental assumption and the related , widely held view that users are of little value to ﬁ rms in providing ideas to solve their unmet consumer problems ( as opposed to merely pointing out such problems to ﬁ rms in the ﬁ rst place ) . In particular , this line of research has found that many major and minor innovations across variousindustrieswereoriginally developed byusers rather than professionals in ﬁ rms ( cf . Von Hippel , 2005 ) . In their seminal work , International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 43 1 31336 4682 ; fax : + 43 1 31336 732 . E - mail addresses : hidehiko @ hosei . ac . jp ( H . Nishikawa ) , martin . schreier @ wu . ac . at ( M . Schreier ) , ogawa @ kobe - u . ac . jp ( S . Ogawa ) . 1 Tel . / fax : + 81 3 3264 9643 . 2 Tel . : + 81 78 8 3 6932 ; fax : + 81 78 803 6977 . IJRM - 00954 ; No of Pages 8 0167 - 8116 / $ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect International Journal of Research in Marketing journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / ijresmar Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 Lilien , Morrison , Searls , Sonnack , and vonHippel ( 2002 ) providefurther evidence that active user involvement in idea generation might bene ﬁ t a ﬁ rm ' s NPD efforts , at least in industrial markets . Speci ﬁ cally , Lilien et al . ( 2002 ) comparethepotentialvalueofseveralnewindustrialproduct concepts jointly developed by 3 M personnel and selected lead users to those developed by more conventional means ( i . e . , internal developers only ) . They found that the former outperformed the latter on key inno - vation indicators that were assessed by 3 M managers ( e . g . , the product concept ' s novelty compared to the competition or its potential to create an entire new product family ) . Furthermore , they found that the sales forecasts for concepts developed by lead users were eight times higher than those of internally developed ideas . One might plausibly argue that working with knowledgeable indus - trial users is one thing , while working with potential end consumers is another . However , in various consumer goods domains as well , users are frequently found to innovate for themselves , and many of their innovations are commercially attractive ( Franke , von Hippel , & Schreier , 2006 ) . Forexample , arecentsurveyofarepresentativesampleofUKcon - sumersrevealedthatsixpercent , ornearlythreemillionconsumers , inno - vated in the domain of household products . Similar national user innovation statistics have been reported for other countries , including the US ( 5 % , or almost 12 million consumers ) and Japan ( 4 % , or almost 4 million consumers ) ( Von Hippel , Ogawa , & de Jong , 2011 ) . Thus , user innovation has come of age as many consumer goods ﬁ rms are challenging the traditional paradigm and experimenting with new ways to more actively integrate users into the idea genera - tion process . In extreme cases , ﬁ rms like Threadless no longer employ designers but rely exclusively on their user communities to generate new products ( Ogawa & Piller , 2006 ) . Many established ﬁ rms and brands , such as LEGO , Dell , and Muji , have followed suit and now complement their in - house efforts with public idea contests known as “ crowdsourcing ” initiatives , where idea generation is outsourced to a potentially large , unknown population ( the crowd ) in the form of an open call ( Bayus , 2010 ; Howe , 2008 ; Surowiecki , 2004 ) . Thus , crowdsourcing relies on a self - selection process among users who are willing and able to respond to widely broadcast idea generation competitions ( Jeppesen & Lakhani , 2010 ; Piller & Walcher , 2006 ; Poetz & Schreier , 2012 ) . Conceptually , the key insight is that some ( but , of course , not all ) ideas generated by these self - selected users might outperform the ones generated by ﬁ rm designers ( Poetz & Schreier , 2012 ; Schreier , Fuchs , & Dahl , 2012 ) . Users may have a competitive edge in idea gen - eration over designers through their experience as consumers . Leading - edge users , in particular , may have tried to solve consump - tion problems themselves , and their ideas may be commercially attractivebecause they foreshadow what other consumers will demand in the future ( cf . Von Hippel , 2005 ) . The respective user population that might be activated via crowdsourcing is also naturally much larger and more diverse compared to the team of designers employed by a given ﬁ rm ; a ﬁ rm ' s user community may comprise thousands of talented users from highly diverse backgrounds . It follows that the generation of more ( and more diverse ) ideas increases the odds of generating a few truly exceptional ones ( e . g . , Gross , 1972 ; Schreier et al . , 2012 ; Surowiecki , 2004 ; Terwiesch & Ulrich , 2009 ) . Empirically , researchers have recently begun to address important questions like what motivates users to participate ( e . g . , Hertel , Niedner , & Herrmann , 2003 ) , how idea contests should be organized ( e . g . , Boudreau , Lacetera , & Lakhani , 2011 ) , how user ideas can be screened effectively ( e . g . , Toubia & Flores , 2007 ) , or how consumers perceive user - driven ﬁ rms ( e . g . , Fuchs & Schreier , 2011 ) . In a recent study , for example , Schreier et al . ( 2012 ) ﬁ nd that consumers associ - ate user - driven ﬁ rms with higher innovation abilities , that is , they perceive such ﬁ rms as being better able to generate innovative new products . In a series of experimental studies , they further ﬁ nd that this innovation inference prompts consumers to demand one and the same set of products more strongly . This ﬁ nding is especially interesting because objective product properties were kept constant between experimental conditions . From an NPD perspective , however , the important question is not if the design mode affects consumer perceptions of innovation ability , but rather if it affects the objective quality of new product ideas actu - ally generated . This question has recently been addressed by Poetz and Schreier ( 2012 ) , who compared the quality of ideas for new baby products generated by a ﬁ rm ' s designers to those generated by users in a public idea contest . Ideas from both sources were judged by company executives ( who were blind to the source of ideas ) , and the key ﬁ nding was that user ideas were characterized by higher nov - elty and higher customer bene ﬁ t , but also by lower feasibility . Although these ﬁ ndings are promising , it has yet to be explored whether the best of these user ideas , if realized , would eventually perform better on the market . There are several reasons that make this extrapolation non - obvious . First and foremost , it should be noted that in most cases ﬁ rms still have to translate user ideas into marketable products ; a process that demands much effort and involves many decisions that may or may not lead to ultimate market success . More speci ﬁ cally , lower feasibility scores of user ideas point to the possibility that the related promise might never be realized . Second , and on a related note , it could be that high innovativeness and low feasibility eventually boost development and production costs and thereby reduce any potential margin . Third , it is always an empirical question how well managers ' perceptions of ideas match consumer reactions to new products once they reach the shelves . Even if this match is strikingly high ( i . e . , no judgment and translation errors are involved ) , it remains unclear how a certain increment in innovativeness ( e . g . , 10 % ) willtranslateintoincrementalmarketperfor - mance ( e . g . , X % more sales ) . Finally , it is worth noting that ﬁ rms can only market a very limited number of new products at a given point in time . As such , what matters is not the entire distribution and the average idea quality , but rather the extreme values : the very best ideas available ( e . g . , Fleming , 2007 ; Singh & Fleming , 2010 ) . It remains unclear whether the very best ideas from both sources would differ to such an extent that one could observe managerially meaningful differ - ences in the ultimate consumer reactions . Against this backdrop , it is surprising that a systematic , empirical market performance assessment of user - vs . designer - generated con - sumer products is still missing in the literature , despite the broad and growing interest in this topical phenomenon . This is most likely due to the dif ﬁ culty of obtaining reliable quantitative market data from real - world practice . Such research is important because the market performance of user - driven initiatives will guide marketers in decid - ing whether to follow the paradigm shift and involve users in gener - ating new product ideas . Drawing on a unique data set gathered from the Japanese consumer goods brand Muji , we address this important gap in the literature . In short , our study reveals that user - generated products systematically outperform designer - generated ones in terms of important outcome variables , including actual sales revenues . Most importantly , we see our study as “ initial evidence ” in favor of user - generated products and as a contribution to a more critical re ﬂ ection on the dominant NPD paradigm . As such , this paper makes a second contribution in its conceptual discussion of the generalizability of our ﬁ ndings . 2 . Study method 2 . 1 . New product development at Muji Muji began experimenting with idea contests ten years ago ; thus , it is a forerunner among ﬁ rms that market user - generated products on a broad scale . Muji has also recently marketed a number of user - generated products alongside products generated by the ﬁ rm ' s designers , which allows us to empirically assess the performance of the two approaches . In addition to granting us access to sensitive 2 H . Nishikawa et al . / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 data ( e . g . , sales data , gross margins ) , the ﬁ rm provided us with substantial support to complement and validate performance data ( e . g . , interviews with executives , coding of ideas ) . Muji is an established Japanese manufacturer and retailer brand of a broad range of consumer goods of Ryohin Keikaku Co . , Ltd , with a par - ticular focus on interior and household products . Muji ' s products are sold in almost 500 Muji stores in 22 countries including Japan , China , the US , the UK , France , Italy , and Germany . In 2010 , Muji generated approximately 170 billion yen in sales revenue ( approximately 2 . 2 billion dollars ) , producing net pro ﬁ ts of almost 8 billion yen ( approximately 100 million dollars ) . Over the last few decades , Muji has become known for developing and marketing innovative consumer solutions , which is re ﬂ ected in their receipt of more than 90 design and innovation prizes ( e . g . , two international Design Oscars awarded by iF International Forum Design , two Good Design Award Gold awards from the Japan Institute of Design Promotion , one Michael E . Porter Prize for innovation ) . Their ability to generate successful innovations sets a high standard of performance for user - generated products . For the purposes of our research , we focus on Muji ' s furniture division . By focusing on one product type , we minimize the potential of confounding effects that arise from comparing different product categories . The furniture division is strategically important to Muji because it accounts for nearly 20 percent of their total sales . We also selected Muji ' s furniture division because it has experimented more with user - generated products in recent years than other divi - sions ; in other words , data for the furniture division contained the largest number of observations for user - generated products . One might argue that this method of sample selection may bias our results because the furniture division began to rely on user input due to the under performance of designers , thereby lowering the performance standard that user - generated products must exceed . In our inter - views at Muji , however , we found no evidence for such selection bias . In 2002 , Muji launched the ﬁ rst user - driven piece of furniture , the “ Floor Sofa , ” which is a large cushion that sits on the ﬂ oor and adjusts to the body . Because of the novelty and experimental nature of this project , Muji collected binding customer pre - orders before investing in ﬁ nal product development to minimize the risk of failure . The Floor Sofa was a great success . Within the ﬁ rst year , it generated almost 500 million yen in sales , a record that was not exceeded by any of Muji ' s designer - generated products until the beginning of our observation period ( 2005 ) . Prior to 2005 , the ﬁ rm carried out another crowdsourcing experiment that led to the production of a new piece of furniture in 2003 ( a small , movable wall shelf ) that gen - erated ﬁ rst - year sales of 71 million yen ( ranking it sixth among the 15 new furniture products introduced in 2003 ) . Based on the success of these products , the ﬁ rm decided to use crowdsourcing on a more systematic basis . During our observation period ( February 2005 to July 2009 ) , 43 new products were developed , produced , and introduced to the Japanese market . Thirty - seven prod - ucts were designer - generated , and six were user - generated . We excluded the two previous user - generated products from our analysis becausetheydifferedfromtheother productsintermsoftheideaselec - tionprocess ( bindingcustomerpre - orderscomparedtoselectionbythe ﬁ rm ) . However , the results do not change if the observation period is extended to include these two early user - generated products , as well as the respective designer - generated products ( results available from the authors upon request ) . In what follows , we describe the develop - ment of designer - and user - generated products in greater detail . 2 . 1 . 1 . Designer - generated new products Muji ' s conventional approach to NPD adheres closely to the recom - mendationsmadeinthetraditionalliteratureonmarketingandinnova - tion . The active agents in idea generation are the ﬁ rm ' s designers , engineers , and marketers , who work in teams organized around specif - ic , new product development projects . Based on established market research ( e . g . , market trend studies , focus groups with target con - sumers ) , the team identi ﬁ es and selects important consumption prob - lems to be addressed by a new product ( referred to as new product “ themes ” ) . In one product development project , for example , the theme was limited storage capacity in consumers ' bedrooms due to small room sizes . Based on insight from market research , members of the project team generate new product ideas ( e . g . , a ﬂ at - panel shelf matching the ﬁ rms ' line of beds ) . The best ideas enter the next phase of product development , where designers propose more detailed design concepts and product speci ﬁ cations based on the product ' s intended functionality ( e . g . , a speci ﬁ c design of a ﬂ at - panel shelf that is as thin as possible yet large enough to guarantee proper use and stabili - ty ) . Theteamthendecideswhatconcepttomovetothenextstage . Final - ly , a new product is introduced to the market . The key characteristic for our study is that it is the internal employees who generate new product ideas aimed to address the selected consumer problem ( i . e . , the new product theme ) . 2 . 1 . 2 . User - generated products In a second development track , Muji invites users to generate ideas for new products . Anyone who registers on their website can partici - pate . Similar to the internal development of designer - generated prod - ucts , idea generation follows a speci ﬁ c theme for which solutions can be proposed . Users can also strongly in ﬂ uence the selection of the theme by participating in online discussion boards ( as is the case in the designer - generated track ) . The theme “ Suwaru Seikatsu ” ( “ Sit Down Life ” ) , which aimed to generate ideas for better and more com - fortable sitting solutions in consumers ' homes , was one of the ﬁ rst themes tobesuccessfullyoutsourcedtousers . Thetheme wasbroadcast to users , who responded with many new product ideas , including the eventual winner : the Floor Sofa . After the ﬁ rst stage of idea generation , users can also comment , vote , and improve on each other ' s ideas . The best idea is adopted by a Muji project team , which de ﬁ nes the product characteristics in more detail ( e . g . , external fabrics , cushion ﬁ lling ) , seeks further feedback from the user community , and ﬁ nally moves the new product to the full production stage . Thus , Muji employees are also heavily involved in the development process for new products in this second track . In contrast to the ﬁ rst track , however , new product ideas are generated by users rather than the ﬁ rm ' s designers . Adopted user ideas in our observation period included the follow - ing : a sofa - bed ( a sofa that can easily be changed to a bed and vice versa ) ; a wooden cupboard with a movable wagon to increase ﬂ exi - bility of use ; a small sofa chair with slim arms to ﬁ t in small rooms ; a highly versatile stacking shelf ; a bed with a thin , yet robust , wooden frame to provide more storage space under the bed ; and a sofa with arm rests that are comfortable for both sitting ( arms ) and lying down ( head and legs ) . A series of in - depth interviews with senior managers and project membersrevealedthatthetwodesigntracksdidnotdiffersubstantially on other important dimensions . In particular , projects centered around designer - generated vs . user - generated products did not differ in terms of the human resources invested by the ﬁ rm ( e . g . , the quantity and quality of project staff ) . Furthermore , it is unlikely that employee moti - vation differed substantially between the two development processes because the ﬁ rm ' s employees usually work on several projects at once ( including designer - and user - generated products ) , and both individual and team incentives are identical across projects . Finally , the ﬁ rm ' s idea and concept selection criteria are identical in both tracks ; a minimum threshold of expected sales and gross margins must be met before a project moves to full production . Interviews with managers further refuted the argument that adopted user - generated ideas “ survived a tougher screening ” process . Therefore , it is unlikely that any differences in performance between designer - and user - generated products are attributable to these alternative factors . Nonetheless , the number of ideas generated differed systematically between the two processes , which is consistent with the theoretical 3 H . Nishikawa et al . / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 work on user involvement and crowdsourcing ( Poetz & Schreier , 2012 ; Schreier et al . , 2012 ) . The average estimated number of ideas per theme was approximately ten in the designer condition ( this number did not vary much across projects because teams are expected to come up withatleasttengood ideasbefore achoiceis made ) , whereasthe lowest number of ideas per theme was over 400 in the user condition ( the observed maximum was over 2000 ) . Any random user idea , therefore , has clearly lower odds of being selected , ceteris paribus . However , this does not bias our results . If both distributions empirically ended at the same right - hand point and these top ideas were selected , there should still be no difference in market performance , as there were no differ - ences in the selection criteria employed . If , however , extreme values of the user distribution stretched farther to the right ( e . g . , because having more ideas increases the likelihood of generating some extreme values ; e . g . , Gross , 1972 ; Terwiesch & Ulrich , 2009 ) , the best user - generatedideasmay verywell perform better . Such ascenario isconsis - tent with the theoretical arguments that favor user involvement . 2 . 2 . Measures 2 . 2 . 1 . Independent variable The independent variable is the source of idea generation : profes - sional designers vs . users ( i . e . , user - generated vs . designer - generated products ) . 2 . 2 . 2 . Dependent variables Our key outcome variable is the products ' actual market perfor - mance , measured as aggregate unit sales generated in the ﬁ rst year after market introduction . In addition , we capture pro ﬁ tability by measuring the products ' monetary value of sales and gross margins . Because the ﬁ rm does not allocate ﬁ xed costs to individual products , we cannot assess the ﬁ rst - year pro ﬁ ts of products , but only their gross margins . Data from the ﬁ rst year that a product is on the market form the most important basis for a product ' s performance assess - ment by Muji because furniture products are characterized by short product life cycles ( i . e . , the ﬁ rst year usually produces the highest sales ) . To check the robustness of our results , we also gathered aggre - gate sales data three years after a product was introduced to the mar - ket ( the average product life cycle of Muji products is approximately three years ) , as well as product survival information ( i . e . , information about which products survived our observation period and were still on the market three years after introduction ) . In addition to performance data , we coded all new products ( in random order ) based on important innovation indicators to gain in - sight into the nature of the underlying product ideas ( e . g . , Lilien et al . , 2002 ) . First , we asked the general manager of the furniture divi - sion and the person in charge of each new product development pro - ject to rate the products ' novelty relative to competing products and its novelty based on customer needs addressed ( measured on a 10 - point scale where 1 = low and 10 = high ) . Because both measures of novelty were highly correlated for both raters ( r Rater 1 = . 52 , p b . 001 , r Rater 2 = . 84 , p b . 001 ) , we averaged these measures to create a novelty index . The high correlation between raters ( r Between raters = . 51 , p b . 001 ) suggests that novelty is captured by this index in a valid way ( e . g . , Franke et al . , 2006 ) . We also captured the products ' strate - gic impact on the ﬁ rm ' s product portfolio , which we measured using two items : the strategic importance of the product to the business unit ' s future and the potential of the product to generate a new prod - uct line ( measured on a 10 - point scale where 1 = low and 10 = high ) . Becausebothmeasureswerehighlycorrelatedforbothraters ( r Rater1 = . 50 , p b . 01 , r Rater 2 = . 43 , p b . 01 ) , we averaged them to create a strategic impact index . The high correlation between raters ( r Between raters = . 47 , p b . 01 ) suggests that this variable captures a product ' s strategic impact in a valid way . 2 . 2 . 3 . Control variables We considered the products ' price and their year of market intro - duction as control variables . We re - ran our main analysis ( reported below ) and controlled for these variables in OLS regressions . As we ﬁ nd that neither price nor inter - year variations in sales , etc . account for our ﬁ ndings ( all reported effects remain signi ﬁ cant ) , we do not report the resulting statistics due to space constraints ( results are available upon request ) . 3 . Findings To compare the market performance of user - generated and designer - generated products , we compared the means of market per - formance measures for both types of products and tested their statis - tical signi ﬁ cance using t - tests . Given the small sample size of the user design condition ( n = 6 ) , we also performed Mann – Whitney U - tests to assess the robustness of our results . The results indicate that both tests lead to the same conclusions ( see Table 1A ) . 3 . 1 . Unit sales Inthe ﬁ rstyearafterintroduction , we ﬁ ndthatuser - generatedprod - ucts sell roughly twice as much as designer - generated products ( M User = 30 , 182 . 33 , M Designer = 14 , 191 . 76 , p t - test b . 08 ) . Similarly , we ﬁ nd that the distribution of the products ' ﬁ rst - year unit sales is signi ﬁ - cantly different between the two conditions ( p M - W - U b . 05 ) . Five out of six user - generated products are represented in the top third of the best sellers among all 43 products ( ranked 2 , 4 , 7 , 10 and 11 ) , and only one user - generated product had lower unit sales than the average designer - generated product ( see Fig . 1 ) . The results are even more pro - nounced using aggregate sales data across three years : units of user - generated products sold three times more frequently than designer - generated ones ( p t - test b . 12 ; p M - W - U b . 05 ) . 3 . 2 . Sales First - year sales revenues of user - generated products are more than three times higher than those of designer - generated products ( M User = 500 . 97 million yen , M Designer = 141 . 04 million yen , p t - test b . 05 ) . Similar - ly , the distribution of sales revenues differs signi ﬁ cantly between the two types of products ( p M - W - U = . 001 ) . Four of the top six products , in terms of sales , are user - generated ( ranked 1 , 2 , 3 and 6 ) , and the two remaining user - generated products generated higher sales revenues than the average designer - generated product ( greater than 147 . 80 mil - lion yen , see Fig . 2 ) . Aggregate sales data across three years suggests that the size of this effect increases over time : three years after intro - duction , user - generated products generated an average of 1250 million yen ( approximately 16 million dollars ) more in sales than designer - generated products , which is equal to over ﬁ ve times the sales of designer - generated products ( p t - test b . 05 ; p M - W - U = . 001 ) . 3 . 3 . Gross margin User - generated products yielded gross margins ( M User = 240 . 47 mil - lion yen ) that were approximately four times higher than designer - generated products ( M Designer = 56 . 22 million yen , p t - test b . 05 ) . The dis - tribution of gross margins is also signi ﬁ cantly different between the two conditions ( p M - W - U = . 001 ) . In particular , four of the top ﬁ ve prod - ucts , in terms of gross margins , are user - generated products ( ranked 1 , 2 , 3 and 5 ) and the remaining two user - generated products yielded higher gross margins than the average designer - generated product ( greater than 67 . 90 million yen ; see Fig . 3 ) . The results are more pro - nounced if we use three years of sales data : the average margin of user - generated products is 619 million yen ( approximately 8 million dollars ) higher , or six times greater , than designer - generated products 4 H . Nishikawa et al . / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 ( p t - test b . 05 ; p M - W - U = . 001 ) . These ﬁ ndings suggest that user - generated products demonstrate stronger market performance than their designer - generated counterparts . Because performance should be related to survival , we additionally analyzed how many designer - and user - generated products survived our observation period ( three years after introduction ) . Products that survived performed substantially better than those which were discontinued ( e . g . , ﬁ rst - year unit sales were approximately 60 % higher for products that survived the third year ) . Indeed , only 17 out of 37 designer - generated products were still on the shelves after three years . In contrast , ﬁ ve out of six user - generated products were still on the mar - ket ( p chi - square - difference - test b . 09 ) . User - generated products , therefore , have a substantially higher survival rate at Muji . 3 . 4 . Novelty and strategic impact The results with regard to the nature of each new product provide corroborating evidence for the ﬁ ndings reported above . In particular , we ﬁ nd that user - generated products are characterized by substan - tially higher novelty compared to designer - generated products ( M User = 7 . 29 , M Designer = 4 . 78 , p t - test b . 001 , p M - W - U b . 001 ) . Four of the top ﬁ ve products , in terms of novelty , are user - generated ( ranked 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 ) and the remaining two user - generated products are rated among the top 50 % of the sample on novelty and consistently exhibit higher novelty than the average designer - generated product ( greater than 5 . 90 , see Fig . 4 ) . The results for the products ' strategic impact are similar : user - generated products have a signi ﬁ cantly more pronounced strategic impact on the ﬁ rm ' s future product port - folio than designer - generated ones ( M User = 6 . 08 , M Designer = 4 . 25 , p t - test = . 001 , p M - W - U b . 01 ) . Three of the top ﬁ ve products , in terms of strategic impact , are user - generated ( ranked 1 , 3 and 4 ) , and the “ worst ” user - generated product has a strategic impact score ( 4 . 00 ) close to the average score of designer - generated products ( see Fig . 5 ) . 3 . 5 . Sensitivity analysis Although we only analyzed products within a single category ( furniture ) , the sample consists of different products ( e . g . , sofa , table , chair , bed , shelf ) . To assess whether different product types within the furniture category might partially account for the ﬁ ndings reported above ( beyond price considerations ) , we re - analyzed the data using a more homogeneous subsample of products . We matched the six user - generated products with similar designer - generated ones ( n = 15 ; sofa , bed , shelf ) . As Table 1B shows , the results remain robust ; user - generated products outperform designer - generated ones on all dimensions . Table 1 Summary of ﬁ ndings ( mean statistics ) . ( A ) Analysis of the full sample ( furniture division ) Designer - generated products ( n = 37 ) User - generated products ( n = 6 ) Signi ﬁ cance M M Unit sales ( after 1st year ) 14 , 191 . 76 30 , 182 . 33 p M - W - U b . 05 ; p t - test b . 08 Unit sales ( after 3rd year ) 29 , 959 . 65 91 , 120 . 50 p M - W - U b . 05 ; p t - test b . 12 Sales in yen ( after 1st year ) 141 . 04 million 500 . 97 million p M - W - U = . 001 ; p t - test b . 05 Sales in yen ( after 3rd year ) 276 . 46 million 1 , 525 . 63 million p M - W - U = . 001 ; p t - test b . 05 Gross margin in yen ( after 1st year ) 56 . 22 million 240 . 47 million p M - W - U = . 001 ; p t - test b . 05 Gross margin in yen ( after 3rd year ) 116 . 52 million 735 . 69 million p M - W - U = . 001 ; p t - test b . 05 Newness a 4 . 78 7 . 29 p M - W - U b . 001 ; p t - test b . 001 Strategic impact a 4 . 25 6 . 08 p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test = . 001 ( B ) Sensitivity analysis ( product - type matching of user - and designer - generated products ) Designer - generated products ( n = 15 ) User - generated products ( n = 6 ) M M Signi ﬁ cance Unit sales ( after 1st year ) 8905 . 93 30 , 182 . 33 p M - W - U b . 05 ; p t - test b . 08 Unit sales ( after 3rd year ) 18 , 305 . 53 91 , 720 . 50 p M - W - U b . 05 ; p t - test b . 08 Sales in yen ( after 1st year ) 174 . 43 million 500 . 97 million p M - W - U b . 05 ; p t - test b . 07 Sales in yen ( after 3rd year ) 313 . 03 million 1 , 525 . 63 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 05 Gross margin in yen ( after 1st year ) 69 . 23 million 240 . 47 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 06 Gross margin in yen ( after 3rd year ) 127 . 81 million 735 . 69 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 05 Newness a 4 . 93 7 . 29 p M - W - U b . 001 ; p t - test b . 001 Strategic impact a 4 . 47 6 . 08 p M - W - U b . 001 ; p t - test b . 01 a Measured on a 10 - point scale where 1 = low and 10 = high 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U n i t S a l e s i n F i r s t Y ea r ( i n t hou s and s o f un i t s ) Source of product design ( User : user - generated product , No label : designer - generated product ) Fig . 1 . Unit sales per product ( furniture ) . 5 H . Nishikawa et al . / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 In a second robustness check , we aimed to broaden the scope of our analysis . In particular , we sought market performance data from another category , namely health and beauty products . This category has brought about four user - generated products in recent years ( in the area of natural and homeopathic remedies and skin care ) where the respective product launch was far enough in the past in order to track aggregate performance data across three years . Table 2 shows that user - generated products once again demonstrate better market performance . Although we identi ﬁ ed several other Muji categories with user - generated products ( e . g . , kitchenware , stationery , garden - ing products , and clothing ) , user - generated products in these catego - ries were either too low in number ( e . g . , one or two products ) and / or market introduction had occurred too recently ( e . g . , in 2010 ) . 4 . Discussion There is broad and growing interest in understanding the topical phenomenon of more actively involving users in ﬁ rms ' idea generation processes . Yet and despite conceptual advancements ( Poetz & Schreier , 2012 ; Schreier et al . , 2012 ) it is surprising that an empiricalmarket per - formance assessment of user - driven products ( i . e . , products that are based on user - vs . designer - generated ideas ) is still missing in the liter - ature . This is most likely due to the dif ﬁ culty of obtaining reliable mar - ket datafromreal - world practice . Assuch , it remains unclear whether it will pay off for ﬁ rms to depart from the classic NPD paradigm anchored in the idea that ﬁ rm professionals – and not users – should generate the ideas for new products to be marketed to broader customer segments . By drawing on a unique data set gathered from the Japanese consumer goods brand Muji , which has drawn on both sources of ideas in parallel in recent years , we provide initial research to ﬁ ll this gap in the litera - ture . We demonstrate that user - generated products systematically and substantially outperform their designer - generated counterparts in terms of key market performance metrics . Of course , we do not see our study as the “ ﬁ nal battle ” that would once and for all relegate the “ loser ” to the history books . Rather , we see our study as initial evidence and as a contribution to a more crit - ical re ﬂ ection on the dominant NPD paradigm . In a nutshell , our ﬁ nd - ings suggest that it might pay for ﬁ rms to draw on user ideas in parallel to their established in - house efforts — not unlike what Muji seems to have identi ﬁ ed as their best practice . Furthermore , users were only the providers of ideas ; the overall NPD process entails many more stages , and it goes without saying that decisive in - house efforts and capabilities are needed to convert any promising idea into a successful new product . Bearing this in mind , we now discuss the generalizability of our ﬁ ndings and identify promising directions for future research . First , it is worth noting that the majority of winning user - designers in our sample were highly involved in the category , had 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 S a l e s i n F i r s t Y ea r ( i n m illi on s o f y en ) U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r Source of product design ( User : user - generated product , No label : designer - generated product ) Fig . 2 . Sales per product ( furniture ) . 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 G r o ss M a r g i n i n F i r s t Y ea r ( i n m illi on s o f y en ) U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r Source of product design ( User : user - generated product , No label : designer - generated product ) Fig . 3 . Gross margin per product ( furniture ) . 6 H . Nishikawa et al . / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 enduring past exposure to the problems for which ideas were sought , had relatively high levels of technical expertise , and thus generally matched the conceptual description of lead users ( cf . Von Hippel , 2005 ) . Clearly , if ﬁ rms are unable to activate this type of user , it is unlikely that the effects found in this study can be replicated . The notion of users ' leading - edge status is also conceptually important . Different types of users might account for the discrepancy between predictions made in the classical marketing and NPD literatures , on the one hand , and research on user innovation , on the other hand . Whereas the former might have “ average ” users in mind ( which would justify skepticism about user involvement because these users lack both technical and usage expertise ) , the latter typically constructs their arguments around leading - edge users . In other words , conventional marketing is concerned with the “ average user ” and research on user innovation targets only users with leading - edge status who represent “ extreme values ” on the right - hand side of the distribution of users . The consequence of involving the “ right ” vs . “ wrong ” users might loom even larger for more complex products than the ones studied in this paper ( Poetz & Schreier , 2012 ; Schreier et al . , 2012 ) . For complex products ( e . g . , cars ) , the expertise required for successful ideation might be too high , thereby preventing the vast majority of average users from contributing meaningful ideas . On a related note , all of the furniture themes studied were based on a clear “ usage problem ” ( e . g . , improving the sitting experience in the living room ) . We argue that such problems are well - suited for users because users have a competitive edge over designers in terms of the needs - based infor - mation necessary to solve the problem effectively . If , in contrast , the theme was based on technical details regarding technologies or mate - rials , company designers would be more likely than users to have the skills and expertise to solve these problems . These speculations offer promising avenues for future research . Furthermore , the openness of contests may favor user - based ideas . The userpopulation that isaccessed throughcrowdsourcingisnaturally much larger and more diverse compared with a team of designers employed by a given ﬁ rm . It follows that , if more ( and more diverse ) ideas are generated , the odds of generating a few truly exceptional ideas will increase ( e . g . , Gross , 1972 ; Schreier et al . , 2012 ; Surowiecki , 2004 ; Terwiesch & Ulrich , 2009 ) . Our data from Muji support this prediction : out of the many ideas submitted by users ( ranging from 400 to more than 2000 per theme ) , the best user ideas outperformed those generated by designers . Yet the relationship between the open - ness of contests , how the contest announcement is targeted , the activa - tion of effective self - selection mechanisms , and the ﬁ nal outcome is not well understood ; thus , it constitutes fruitful ground for future research . Interviews with managers at Muji further revealed that they have succeeded in building the speci ﬁ c capability to interact with users effectively . Nonetheless , each crowdsourcing initiative took substan - tial time to implement , is generally less controllable and manageable in the early stages , and it cannot easily be implemented on a large 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 N e w ne ss ( 1 = l o w , 10 = h i gh ) U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r Source of product design ( User : user - generated product , No label : designer - generated product ) Fig . 4 . Newness per product ( furniture ) . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 S t r a t e g i c I m pa c t ( 1 = l o w , 10 = h i gh ) U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r U s e r Source of product design ( User : user - generated product , No label : designer - generated product ) Fig . 5 . Strategic Impact per Product ( Furniture ) . 7 H . Nishikawa et al . / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002 scale ( as re ﬂ ected in the relatively small number of user - generated compared with designer - generated new products ) . Thus , our ﬁ ndings might not be easily replicated with data from “ old - school ” ﬁ rms with no prior experience in active user involvement . As a result , one important , but unanswered question remains : what are the speci ﬁ c capabilities that make user - driven ﬁ rms successful ? Finally , it is worth noting that Muji did not actively market user products as “ designed by users ” to the general public . We , therefore , only assessed the “ objective ” market performance of user - driven prod - ucts . As indicated above , however , recent research suggests that ﬁ rms might bene ﬁ t from a “ designed by users ” label over and above any objective product characteristics ( Schreier et al . , 2012 ) . To assess the full potential of marketing user - generated products , future research should examine this psychological effect on performance . In conclusion , we note that further research is required to fully understand the newly emerging paradigm of an active user involve - ment in NPD . Our study provides important initial evidence that such efforts might pay off . Acknowledgments The authors thank Muji , in particular Satoshi Shimizu , Tsunemi Kawana , Tetsu Takahashi , Tomisaburou Hagiwara , Yukie Saito and Ikuo Takusari , for their support in realizing this project . They further thank Pradeep K . Chintagunta , Berend Wierenga , and research seminar participants at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra Barcelona , Università di Bologna , and VU University Amsterdam for their feedback on earlier drafts of the manuscript as well as Marnik G . Dekimpe , the AE , and the IJRM reviewers for their helpful suggestions and guidance during the review process . Financial support is greatly acknowledged from JSPS KAKENHI ( Grant Numbers 22330130 , 24530535 ) and the Danish Strategic Research Council ( Grant Number 09 - 067157 ) . References Amabile , Teresa M . ( 1998 ) . How to kill creativity . Harvard Business Review , 76 ( 5 ) , 76 – 87 . Bayus , BarryL . ( 2010 ) . Crowdsourcingandindividualcreativityovertime : Thedetrimental effects of past success . Working paper ( August ) ( , http : / / papers . ssrn . com ) Boudreau , K . J . , Lacetera , N . , & Lakhani , K . R . ( 2011 ) . “ Incentivesand Problem Uncertainty in Innovation Contests : An Empirical Analysis ” , Management Science , in print . Cooper , Robert G . ( 2001 ) . Winning at new products : Accelerating the process from idea to launch ( 3rd edition ) . Cambridge : MA : Perseus Books . Crawford , C . Merle , & DiBenedetto , C . Anthony ( 2000 ) . Newproductsmanagement ( 6th edition ) . Burr Ridge : IL : Irwin - McGraw Hill . Fleming , Lee ( Fall ) . Breakthroughs and the ' long tail ' of innovation . Sloan Management Review , 49 ( 1 ) , 69 – 74 . Franke , Nikolaus , von Hippel , Eric , & Schreier , Martin ( 2006 ) . Finding commercially attractive user innovations : A test of lead user theory . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 23 ( 4 ) , 301 – 315 . Fuchs , Christoph , & Schreier , Martin ( 2011 ) . Customer empowerment in new product development . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 28 ( 1 ) , 17 – 32 . Gross , Irwin ( Fall ) . The creative aspects of advertising . Sloan Management Review , 14 ( 1 ) , 83 – 109 . Hertel , Guido , Niedner , Sven , & Herrmann , Stefanie ( 2003 ) . Motivation of software developers in open source projects : An internet - based survey of contributors to the Linux kernel . Research Policy , 32 ( 7 ) , 1159 – 1177 . Howe , Jeff ( 2008 ) . Crowdsourcing : Why the power of the crowd is driving the future of business . New York : Crown Business . Jeppesen , Lars Bo , & Lakhani , Karim R . ( 2010 ) . Marginality and problem - solving effectiveness in broad search . Organization Science , 21 ( 5 ) , 1016 – 1033 . Lilien , Gary L . , Morrison , Pamela D . , Searls , Kathleen K . , Sonnack , Mary , & von Hippel , Eric ( 2002 ) . Performance assessment of the lead user idea generation process . Management Science , 48 ( 8 ) , 1041 – 1059 . Moreau , C . Page , & Herd , Kelly B . ( 2010 ) . To each his own ? How comparisons with others in ﬂ uence consumers ' evaluations of their self - designed products . Journal of Consumer Research , 36 ( February ) , 806 – 819 . Ogawa , Susumu , & Piller , FrankT . ( 2006 ) . Reducingtherisksofnewproductdevelopment . MIT Sloan Management Review , 47 ( 2 ) , 65 – 71 . Piller , Frank T . , & Walcher , Dominik ( 2006 ) . Toolkits for idea competitions : A novel method to integrate users in new product development . R & D Management , 36 ( 3 ) , 307 – 318 . Poetz , Marion K . , & Schreier , Martin ( 2012 ) . The value of crowdsourcing : Can users really compete with professionals in generating new product ideas ? Journal of Product Innovation Management , 29 ( 2 ) , 245 – 256 . Schreier , Martin , Fuchs , Christoph , & Dahl , Darren ( 2012 ) . The innovation effect of user design : Exploring consumers ' innovation perceptions of ﬁ rms selling products designed by users . Journal of Marketing , 76 , 18 – 32 . Schulze , Anja , & Hoegl , Martin ( 2008 ) . Organizational knowledge creation and the generation of new product ideas : A behavioral approach . Research Policy , 37 ( 10 ) , 1742 – 1750 . Singh , Jasjit , & Fleming , Lee ( 2010 ) . Lone inventors as sources of technological breakthroughs : Myth or reality ? Management Science , 56 ( 1 ) , 41 – 56 . Surowiecki , James ( 2004 ) . The wisdom of crowds — Why the many are smarter than the few and how collective wisdom shapes business , economies , societies and nations . New York : Doubleday . Terwiesch , Christian , & Ulrich , Karl T . ( 2009 ) . Innovation tournaments : Creating and selecting exceptional opportunities . Boston : Harvard Business Press . Toubia , Olivier , & Flores , Laurent ( 2007 ) . Adaptive idea screening using consumers . Marketing Science , 26 ( 3 ) , 342 – 360 . Ulrich , Karl T . ( 2007 ) . Design : creation of artefacts in society . : Ponti ﬁ ca Press . Ulrich , KarlT . , & Eppinger , StevenD . ( 1995 ) . Productdesignanddevelopment ( 1stedition ) . New Jersey : McGraw - Hill . Urban , Glen L . , & Hauser , John R . ( 1993 ) . Design and marketing of new products ( 2nd edition ) . Englewood Cliffs : NJ : Prentice Hall . Von Hippel , Eric ( 1988 ) . The sources of innovation . New York : Oxford University Press . Von Hippel , Eric ( 2005 ) . Democratizing innovation . Boston : MIT Press . Von Hippel , Eric , Ogawa , Susumu , & de Jong , Jeroen P . J . ( 2011 ) . The age of the consumer - innovator . Susumu Ogawa , 53 ( 1 ) , 27 – 35 . Weisberg , Robert W . ( 1993 ) . Creativity : Beyond the myth of genius . New York : Freeman . Table 2 Sensitivity analysis ( health and beauty division ) . ( A ) Analysis of the full sample Designer - generated products ( n = 49 ) User - generated products ( n = 4 ) Signi ﬁ cance M M Unit sales ( after 1st year ) 45 , 527 . 76 74 , 787 . 50 p M - W - U b . 07 ; p t - test b . 25 Unit sales ( after 3rd year ) 106 , 452 . 61 170 , 995 . 25 p M - W - U b . 13 ; p t - test b . 38 Sales in yen ( after 1st year ) 13 . 00 million 69 . 10 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 09 Sales in yen ( after 3rd year ) 28 . 63 million 162 . 64 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 06 Gross margin in yen ( after 1st year ) 4 . 38 million 23 . 50 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 09 Gross margin in yen ( after 3rd year ) 9 . 97 million 57 . 50 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 06 ( B ) Sensitivity analysis ( product - type matching of user - and designer - generated products ) Designer - generated products ( n = 12 ) User - generated products ( n = 4 ) M M Signi ﬁ cance Unit sales ( after 1st year ) 38 , 428 . 50 74 , 787 . 50 p M - W - U b . 09 ; p t - test b . 15 Unit sales ( after 3rd year ) 74 , 878 . 50 170 , 995 . 25 p M - W - U b . 06 ; p t - test b . 13 Sales in yen ( after 1st year ) 7 . 20 million 69 . 10 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 08 Sales in yen ( after 3rd year ) 12 . 14 million 162 . 64 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 05 Gross margin in yen ( after 1st year ) 2 . 05 million 23 . 50 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 07 Gross margin in yen ( after 3rd year ) 3 . 99 million 57 . 50 million p M - W - U b . 01 ; p t - test b . 05 Note that we also analyzed survival in this category . Importantly , we again ﬁ nd that only 21 out of 49 designer - generated products were still on the shelves after three years . At the same time , however , all four user - generated products were still on the market ( p chi - square - difference - test b . 05 ) . User - generated products thus demonstrate a sub - stantially higher survival rate . ( Products that survived the three - year observation peri - od also performed substantially better than those that were discontinued , which con ﬁ rms that lower - performing products were eliminated ; e . g . , ﬁ rst - year unit sales were approximately 140 % higher for products that survived the third year . ) 8 H . Nishikawa et al . / International Journal of Research in Marketing xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Nishikawa , H . , et al . , User - generated versus designer - generated products : A performance assessment at Muji , Interna - tional Journal of Research in Marketing ( 2012 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijresmar . 2012 . 09 . 002