On the edge : modeling protrusion Alex Mogilner Actin - based protrusion is the ﬁrst step in cell crawling . In the last two decades , the studies of actin networks in the lamellipodium and Listeria ’s comet tail advanced so far that the last goal of the reductionist agenda — reconstitution of protrusion from puriﬁed components in vitro and in silico — became viable . Earlier models dealt with growth of and force generation by a single actin ﬁlament . Modern models of tethered ratchet , autocatalytic branching , end - tracking motor action and elastic - and nano - propulsion have recently helped to elucidate dynamics and forces in complex actin networks . By considering these models , their limitations and their relationships to recent biophysical data , progress is being made toward a uniﬁed model of protrusion . Addresses Department of Mathematics and Center for Genetics and Development , University of California , Davis , California , 95616 , USA Corresponding author : Mogilner , Alex ( mogilner @ math . ucdavis . edu ) Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 This review comes from a themed issue on Cell structure and dynamics Edited by J Victor Small and Michael Glotzer Available online 28th November 2005 0955 - 0674 / $ – see front matter # 2005 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 11 . 001 Introduction Cell crawling begins with protrusion — the process of actin - based extension of the cell’s leading edge [ 1 ] . Cell migration involving a ﬂat lamellipodium [ 2 ] and intracel - lular motility of Listeria [ 3 ] are two model systems that in the past two decades have added considerably to our understanding of how actin polymerization contributes to protrusion . These in vivo systems are now comple - mented by in vitro assays using plastic beads and lipid vesicles that , when coated with either ActA or WASP proteins , move much the same way as the pathogens . These systems have several advantages : the number of essential proteins is small ; their structures , concentrations and localizations are known ; the reaction rates of the actin dynamics have been measured [ 4 ] ; the actin - based moti - lity can be reconstituted from puriﬁed components in vitro [ 5 ] ; and the force generated by the actin comet has just been measured [ 6 (cid:1)(cid:1) , 7 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . Moreover , a ‘dendritic nucleation’ / ‘array treadmilling’ hypothesis has outlined a qualitative scenario describing how steady protrusion might occur [ 2 ] . Thus , we have a rare opportunity to make the ﬁnal step in the ‘reductionist agenda’ [ 2 ] and to test our understanding by reconstitution of the protrusion in silico . Here we review recent protrusion models and their relations to the data . Various aspects of protrusion have been reviewed recently in [ 2 , 3 , 8 , 9 ] . Early protrusion modeling The process of protrusion is based on the polymerization of actin into a two - stranded polar helix with barbed and pointed ends having fast and slow dynamics , respectively [ 4 ] . The monomers bind ATP , and ATP hydrolysis results in the ﬁlaments’ dynamic asymmetry and ‘treadmilling’ ( net depolymerization from the pointed end balanced by net polymerization onto the barbed end with monomers simply being recycled by diffusion ) . Protrusion is based on the treadmilling of the polar ( barbed ends are directed forward ) actin arrays , rather than of the individual ﬁla - ments . What determines the fast rate of treadmilling of these arrays and how do they self - organize ? What is the nature of the protrusive force ? Mathematical modeling was used to quantify equilibrium polymerization [ 10 ] and to predict treadmilling [ 11 ] . Then , T L Hill intuited several ideas , the most important of which was using thermodynamics to demonstrate that a polymerizing ﬁlament can generate a force in the pico - newton range [ 12 ] . A ‘Brownian ratchet’ theory [ 13 ] explained how such force can be generated : even when a resisting force is applied to the object in front of the ﬁlament’s tip , the object can still diffuse away , creating a gap sufﬁcient for monomers to intercalate and assemble onto the tip , thereby inhibiting the object from diffusing backward . Next , on the basis of observations that the actin ﬁlaments are ﬂexible rather than rigid , an ‘elastic ratchet’ model suggested that a ﬁlament’s own thermal undulations can create a gap between its tip and the load [ 14 ] . Subsequent monomer assembly increases the ﬁber’s length so that when the tip contacts the load the polymer is bent ; the resulting elastic force pushes on the load . In these models , the actin binding energy drives protrusion . ATP hydrolysis is not utilized in the force generation but is necessary for treadmilling . Modern models : from tethered ratchet to elastic propulsion As often happens , experiments soon revealed earlier models’ limitations . First , actin ﬁlaments responsible for protrusion are not independent , but are rather parts of the ‘dendritic’ network [ 2 ] . Second , one - ﬁlament models cannot adequately describe the complex geome - try of the actin network leading edge impinging on the Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 www . sciencedirect . com curved cell membrane or bacterial surface . Third , direct [ 15 ] and indirect [ 16 ] data indicated that the ﬁlaments are attached to the surface they push . How can ratchet models work if the ﬁlaments are attached to the surface ? The ‘tethered ratchet’ model answered this question by assuming that the ﬁlaments attach to the surface transiently [ 17 ] : nascent ﬁlaments are associated with protein complexes on the surface . However , they soon dissociate and grow until they lose contact with the surface after capping . The attached ﬁbers are in tension and resist the protrusion , whereas the dissociated ﬁbers are in compression and generate the force of propulsion ( Figure 1a ) . An alternative model proposed that all ﬁlaments are attached to the surface : all pushing barbed ends are clamped in an ATP - dependent fashion to an end - tracking protein ( see Box 1 ) associated with the surface [ 18 , 19 (cid:1) ] . One of the versions of this model is shown in Figure 1b : two protein subunits have a high afﬁnity for ATP – F - actin , and a low afﬁnity for ADP – F - actin or ADP – Pi – F - actin . Association of ATP – G - actin triggers hydrolysis of ATP on the clamped penultimate actin subunit , causing shifting of the end - tracking protein subunit forward and re - clamp - ing on the terminal ATP – actin subunit . This model suggests the existence of a peculiar ‘stepping motor’ coupling protrusion to ATP hydrolysis on the ﬁlament whose end the motor tracks . Because in this scenario hydrolysis energy is utilized , this model would be able to explain large forces in the range of tens of pN per ﬁlament if such forces are ever observed . These microscopic models did not address the problem of the surface curvature . A macroscopic ‘elastic propulsion’ model suggested that the curved surface is not merely On the edge : modeling protrusion Mogilner 33 Figure 1 Models of protrusion force generation . ( a ) Tethered ratchet model [ 17 ] : actin filaments are nucleated in the attached state , and then detach and push the surface according to the elastic polymerization ratchet mechanism until capped . The pushing ( solid red arrow ; compressed filaments ) and pulling ( dashed red arrow ; filaments under tension ) forces are balanced . The model predicts the biphasic force – velocity relation : the velocity decreases rapidly at low loads and slowly at greater loads . ( b ) End - tracking motor model [ 19 (cid:1) ] : in one of the implementations of this model , two end - tracking motor subunits associate with the filament’s tip ( shown schematically as two parallel strands ) . Assembly of ATP – actin monomer onto the tip triggers hydrolysis on the clamped penultimate actin subunit , causing shifting of the motor subunit forward . The forces at the surface are illustrated with solid and dashed red arrows . The end - tracking motor theory has many free parameters and predicts a few possible force – velocity relations ( dashed ) . ( c ) Elastic propulsion model [ 6 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] explains the curved objects’ propulsion as the balance between the elastic stress ‘squeezing’ the object forward ( solid red arrows ) and the effective actin – surface friction ( dashed red arrows ) . The elastic stress is generated by the actin polymerization near the surface and subsequent pushing of the actin shell radially outward . The model predicts a convex force – velocity curve . www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 pushed , but is rather ‘squeezed’ forward by an elastic stress [ 3 , 20 , 21 (cid:1) ] . This model treats the actin network as an isotropic elasticcontinuum anddoesnotconsiderexplicitly the microscopic mechanism of force generation at the surface . The squeezing stress develops when the growth of actin at the surface pushes the actin gel outward , stretching it and generating tangential tension balanced by radial compression at the surface ( Figure 1c ) . This model takes into account the actin – surface attachment by assuming an effective friction between the gel and surface . Similar to the microscopic models , the elastic propulsion model predicts a balance between the pushing elastic and pulling friction forces on the surface . A few models examined the dynamics and self - organiza - tion of the actin network [ 22 – 24 ] . The ‘autocatalytic branching’ theory [ 23 ] ( Figure 2a ) assumed that the rate of ﬁlament branching is proportional to the density of the existing leading edge ﬁlaments . An unexpected predic - tion of this model was that the protrusion rate should not depend on the load ( Figure 2a ) : effectively , greater load force causes faster branching , and therefore greater actin density , so the load per ﬁlament remains constant , leaving the growth rate unchanged . At the leading edge of the crawling cell , actin forms the ﬂat network in which the ﬁbers subtend a (cid:2) 55 8 angle to the front edge of the cell ( Figure 2b ) [ 2 ] . This angular order is important for effective protrusion , because ﬁla - ments at other angles do not generate either force or movement [ 13 ] . The sterically precise branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex imposes a 70 8 branching angle between the mother and daughter ﬁlaments , but does not explain the symmetric (cid:3) 55 8 orientation of the ﬁlaments relative to the leading edge . The model [ 22 ] explains this symmetry on the basis of the idea that the capping rate is very fast everywhere in the cytoplasm except at the leading edge ( Figure 2b ) . Mathematical arguments demonstrate that under this condition the angularly symmetric mother – daughter ﬁlament pairs ‘sur - vive’ , whereas the asymmetric ( relative to the leading edge ) pairs do not ( Figure 2b ) . At the same time , this model provides a plausible explanation for the actin polarization : barbed ends growing away from the leading edge are rapidly capped , whereas those growing forward are not . The mechanisms of F - actin self - organization and force generation are only parts of the whole process of protru - sion . Other important aspects are coupled cycles of F - actin hydrolysis , array treadmilling and G - actin recycling from the rear to the front . These processes have to be fast to maintain rapid protrusion . Two recent models exam - ined mathematically the conditions necessary to maintain the fast , steady protrusion [ 25 (cid:1) , 26 ] . By analyzing nucleo - tide proﬁles within actin ﬁlaments [ 25 (cid:1) ] and diffusion of G - actin and its reactions with actin - binding proteins [ 26 ] , the models predicted that a combination of enhanced Pi release , an increase in the ‘off rate’ of ADP - bound sub - units at pointed ends , fast G - actin diffusion and optimal levels of capping and proﬁlin function is necessary to accelerate the treadmilling to rates observed in vivo . The ‘nano - propulsion’ model [ 27 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] is the ﬁrst in silico reconstruction of Listeria ’s movement ( Figure 2c ) . In this model , the ﬁlaments propel the virtual bacterium by the tethered ratchet mechanism , and a realistic geometry and actin network architecture are also simulated stochasti - cally . The model also takes into account the reaction – diffusion process of actin recycling and vectorial hydrolysis of actin subunits . The simulations result in a vivid and realistic mimicking of Listeria ’s propulsion . The nano - propulsion model is a very promising step toward a com - prehensive mesoscopic protrusion model . Some of the assumptions used in the ﬁrst generation of this model are dubious : for example , the virtual ﬁlaments are rigid . Introducing elasticity and judiciously combining large - scale simulations with mathematical analysis will undoubt - edly lead towards the ultimate model of protrusion . Models versus data Protrusion models can be tested by comparing predicted force – velocity relations with those measured experimen - tally . Two groups used methylcellulose as a viscous 34 Cell structure and dynamics Box 1 Can formin be the ‘end - stepping motor’ ? The end - stepping motor remains but an interesting hypothesis until a protein complex playing this role is identiﬁed . Recently , formin — a ‘leakycapper’thatstaysonabarbedendduringgrowthprotectingtheﬁlamentfromcapping—attractedmuchattentioninthisrespect . Elegant experiments with growing and buckling ﬁlaments tethered to a cover slip at their pointed ends and attached to immobile formin molecules at their barbed ends demonstrated that these ﬁlaments generated forces in the pN range [ 47 (cid:1) ] . An interesting theory [ 48 (cid:1) ] explains this formin action by a stair - stepping mechanism , assuming that elastic deformations of forming F - actin complex are coupled to actin monomers’ assembly onto the tips of the actin helical strands . One still has to explain how the ﬁlaments can grow with their ends attached to the immobile formin’s subunits : helical pitch of the ﬁla - ments , in principle , has to super - coil them , but the ﬁlaments do not even twist [ 47 (cid:1) ] . One possible explanation is that from time to time the formin dimer rotates with respect to the ﬁlament in the direction opposite to the rotation generated by the stair - stepping mode , pre - venting persistent torsion strain accumulation [ 49 ] . Curiously , rotation of Listeria around its long axis during propulsion was observed [ 50 ] , and the only published quantitative explanation relies on the end - stepping motor translating the single ﬁlament twisting into the right - handed rotation of the actin comet [ 51 ] . Recent experimental study of formin - coated beads propelled by the actin comet attached to the bead argued that the proﬁlin – actin ATP hydrolysis cycle is coupled to the release of the formin subunit [ 52 ] , much like in the end - tracking motor model . This opens a tantalizing possibility that in ﬁlopodial protrusion based on growth of a tight ﬁlament bundle , which is hard to explain with the ratchet models [ 53 ] , formin ( implicated in the ﬁlopodial protrusion [ 54 ] ) is the end - tracking motor . Thus , it is possible that all existent theories are not mutually exclusive , but rather complement each other by describing redundant diverse protrusion mechanisms . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 www . sciencedirect . com medium in which to measure Listeria ’s force – velocity relations [ 28 , 29 ] . The details of the results obtained were different . The ﬁrst experiment showed that the bacter - ium’s velocity decreases rapidly at increasing load of tens of pN and then more slowly at a greater load [ 28 ] , in agreement with the tethered ratchet model ( Figure 1a ) . However , the second experiment showed that velocity is independent of the load [ 29 ] , which is consistent with the autocatalytic branching model . It is impossible to say which force – velocity relation is right until we have quan - titative data on concentrations of F - actin , Arp2 / 3 and capping protein at the leading edge of the actin tail to compare with the models . The ﬁrst direct measurement of the steady velocity of the actin ‘comet’ growing from a coated bead at constant loads [ 6 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] resulted in a convex force – velocity curve consistent with the predictions of the elastic propulsion theory On the edge : modeling protrusion Mogilner 35 Figure 2 Models of actin networks growing against a surface . ( a ) ‘Autocatalytic branching’ model [ 23 ] assumes that filaments branch off the sides or ends of existent filaments with the rate proportional to the number of the existent filaments . This model predicts that the protrusion velocity is independent of the load force . ( b ) Top : ‘mother and daughter’ filaments grow at 70 8 relative to each other as a result of the sterically precise Arp2 / 3 - mediated branching . Barbed ends of the pairs of filaments growing at approximately 35 8 relative to the protrusion direction stay close to the cell membrane and are protected from capping . On the other hand , if the mother filament is almost normal to the membrane , then the daughter filament growing almost normal to the protrusion direction lags behind the leading edge , is capped rapidly , and does not branch out the next generation ‘mother’ filament . Bottom : mathematical arguments [ 22 ] demonstrate that these processes cause angular selection of the filaments such that most of the filaments grow at (cid:4) (cid:3) 35 8 relative to the protrusion direction ( shadowed regions ) , while the mother - daughter filament pairs growing in the unshaded angular regions lose the competition for growth to the symmetric filament pairs and go to extinction . ( c ) Detailed computational model of Listeria propulsion [ 27 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] reconstitutes in silico a 3D treadmilling actin array . The growing filaments either attach elastically to the Listeria ’s surface ( 1 ) or collide with the surface generating pushing force ( 2 ) , or become so close to the surface that their assembly rate becomes inhibited ( 3 ) . The model takes into account the reaction - diffusion process of actin recycling and vectorial hydrolysis of actin subunits . www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 ( Figure 1c ) , hence differing from both other experiments and from the predictions of the microscopic theories . Astonishingly , another recent experiment in which force was applied to a transiently growing actin comet resulted in a concave force – velocity curve ( [ 7 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] ; the trapezoidal comet’s geometry in this experiment is different from the cylindrical one in [ 6 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] ) . Moreover , in the latter experi - ment the growth rate depends on the history of loading of the actin network , hinting at complex actin dynamics . Another test for the theories is provided by observations of nano - and micro - saltation of Listeria and coated beads . Listeria appeared to advance in discrete steps of 5 . 5 nm , similar to the size of an actin monomer [ 30 ] , suggesting some intrinsic molecular - scale mechanism at the interface between ﬁlaments and the surface , which is most easily explained by the stepping motor theory ; there are , how - ever , doubts about the observations of the nano - saltation [ 18 , 19 (cid:1) ] . The tethered ratchet theory also predicts move - ment in small yet irregular steps resulting from the breaking of individual actin - surface bonds [ 17 ] . Interest - ingly , the nano - propulsion model also predicts small and irregular stepping movement of Listeria originating from cooperative actin – surface bond breaking [ 27 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . Such cooperative de - adhesion seems to be the only explanation for the recently measured temperature dependence of the bacterial velocity [ 31 ] . On a very different scale , micron - size saltatory movements are most naturally explained by 36 Cell structure and dynamics Figure 3 Models of symmetry breaking . ( a ) Stochastic polymerization model [ 36 ] : stochastic fluctuations increasing one filament polymerization at one side of the bead cause the autocatalytic polymerization process , in which the filaments on that side assist each other by pushing the bead to the other side and creating gaps for other filaments to grow . At the other side , depolymerization of one filament increases the force on another catalyzing disassembly . ( b ) Autocatalytic crosslink - breaking model [ 17 ] : breaking of a crosslink stressed by actin growth at one side of the bead causes the autocatalytic breaking of other crosslinks at that side , because the same stress is distributed between lesser number of the crosslinks . ( c ) Elastic cracking model [ 37 (cid:1) ] : growth of the actin filaments at the actin - bead interface leads to radial compression of the inner layer of the actin gel and tangential stretching of its outer layer . An initial crack at the outer surface of the gel expands rapidly as a result of effective stress concentration in the crack’s vicinity leading to the symmetry breaking . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 www . sciencedirect . com the elastic propulsion theory [ 21 (cid:1) ] , assuming a nonlinear friction – velocity relation : elastic stress grows without propelling the surface attached to the actin tail until the stress exceeds a threshold friction , resulting in a ‘jump’ forward and stress relief , upon which the new propulsion cycle starts . Experiments with coated lipid vesicles demonstrated the separation of forces : pushing at the sides , pulling at the rear [ 32 , 33 ] . The tethered ratchet theory could explain this effect if the mobile actin – surface links are simply swept to the rear of the moving vesicle and the growing , pushing ﬁlaments are concentrated at the sides . The end - tracking motor model also can explain this behavior by taking into account a G - actin concentration gradient toward the tail center resulting from actin assembly at the actin – surface interface and subsequent force differ - ential accumulation between the outer pushing ﬁlaments and the inner pulling ﬁlaments ( R Dickinson , personal communication ) . Another experiment demonstrates that curved surfaces are propelled more slowly than ﬂat ones , which is another critical test for the role of actin gel elasticity in protrusion [ 34 ] . Finally , the protrusion models have to explain the ‘sym - metry breaking’ phenomenon [ 35 ] , in which a ‘cloud’ of actin growing around coated beads loses its symmetry by ‘melting’ away at one side of the bead . The actin comet then develops at the other side , and the bead’s motility ensues . The ratchet models explain this phenomenon as cooperative acts of ﬁlament growth at one side and dis - assembly at the other side of the bead assisted by sto - chastic ﬂuctuations [ 36 ] ( Figure 3a ) or as a similar process of breaking crosslinks in the rigid actin cloud [ 37 (cid:1) ] ( Figure 3b ) . Elastic models are more successful in describing the sequence of events for large beads where the stochastic ﬂuctuations are less signiﬁcant [ 38 ] ( Figure 3c ) : growth of actin at the bead’s surface pushes the outer actin layer outward , stretching it and generating growing tangential stress . When critical tangential stress is reached , a crack at the gel outer surface develops and propagates to the bead’s surface . None of the models can explain all the existent data . The tethered ratchet model , in its simple ( mathematical ) original [ 17 ] and advanced ( computational ) [ 27 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] forms , seems to ﬁt more data than other models , but so far there are not enough quantitative data , especially on the actin network structure and dynamics , to condense the multi - ple models to the extent of developing an ultimate protrusion model . However , detailed biophysical data [ 39 ] are rapidly accumulating and will soon ﬁne - tune the existent models into solid theories . Conclusions Understanding dendritic actin arrays will not be enough . We will have to clarify the role of other plausible force generation mechanisms , such as ﬁlament bundling [ 39 ] , myosin - driven hydrostatic pressure [ 40 ] , gel swelling [ 41 ] and processes involving non - dendritic actin structures [ 42 ] . More realistic actin rheology [ 43 ] and membrane adhesion [ 44 ] and regulation pathways [ 45 ] associated with protrusion have to be quantiﬁed and incorporated into a uniﬁed model of protrusion , which eventually will serve as a boundary condition for multi - scale models of migrating cells [ 46 ] . In the dictionary of idioms , ‘on the edge’ is deﬁned as being ‘in a precarious position’ or ‘in a state of keen excitement’ . In both senses , the life of a modeler trying to understand what is going on at the leading edge of the cell is truly on the edge : the models are short - lived , making a wrong turn once in a while inevitable , yet very few areas of biology are as exciting . Acknowledgements We thank J Theriot , R Dickinson , C Sykes and M Kozlov for fruitful discussions and sharing data and G Oster and K Larripa for help with writing . We apologize for not citing every colleague’s work due to space limitations of this article . The work was supported by National Institutes of Health GLUE grant ’Cell Migration Consortium’ ( NIGMS U54 GM64346 ) and National Science Foundation grant DMS - 0315782 . References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest , published within the annual period of review , have been highlighted as : (cid:1) of special interest (cid:1)(cid:1) of outstanding interest 1 . Bray D : Cell Movements . Garland ; 2002 . 2 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG : Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 2003 , 112 : 453 - 465 . 3 . Plastino J , Sykes C : The actin slingshot . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2005 , 17 : 62 - 66 . 4 . Pollard TD : Rate constants for the reactions of ATP – and ADP – actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Biol 1986 , 103 : 2747 - 2754 . 5 . Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF : Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 1999 , 401 : 613 - 616 . 6 . (cid:1)(cid:1) Marcy Y , Prost J , Carlier MF , Sykes C : Forces generated during actin - based propulsion : a direct measurement by micromanipulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004 , 101 : 5992 - 5997 . The authors use a ‘ﬂexible handle’ to measure the force – velocity relation for the actin comet growing from a coated bead held by a micropipette . The comet develops the nN - range forces . The convex force – velocity curve is explained theoretically by the elastic propulsion model . 7 . (cid:1)(cid:1) ParekhSH , ChaudhuriO , TheriotJA , FletcherDA : Loadinghistory determines the velocity of actin network growth . Nat Cell Biol 2005 , in press . Using atomic force microscopy , the authors measure the force – velocity relationship for a trapezoidal actin comet - like tail growing transiently in vitro . They ﬁnd that the growth velocity of a branched actin network against increasing forces is load - independent over a wide range of forces before a convex decline to stall . Surprisingly , two or more stable growth velocities can exist at a single load , hinting that a single force – velocity relationshipdoesnotcapturethecompletebehaviorofthissystemandthatthegrowthvelocitydependsonloadinghistoryratherthansolelytheinstantaneousload . It is likely that the discrepancy between the concave force – velocityrelationmeasuredinthisworkandtheconvexonemeasured in [ 6 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] is due to differences in techniques , geometries and time scales of these two experiments , in particular the inability to capture small forces in this work and to quantify the behavior of the mature comet in [ 6 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . On the edge : modeling protrusion Mogilner 37 www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 8 . Upadhyaya A , van Oudenaarden A : Biomimetic systems for studying actin - based motility . Curr Biol 2003 , 13 : R734 - R744 . 9 . Mogilner A , Oster G : Polymer motors : pushing out the front and pulling up the back . Curr Biol 2003 , 13 : R721 - R733 . 10 . Oosawa F , Asakura S : A theory of linear and helical aggregations of macromolecules . J Mol Biol 1962 , 4 : 10 - 21 . 11 . Wegner A : Head to tail polymerization of actin . J Mol Biol 1976 , 108 : 139 - 150 . 12 . Hill TL : Microﬁlament or microtubule assembly or disassembly against a force . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1981 , 78 : 5613 - 5617 . 13 . Peskin CS , Odell GM , Oster GF : Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys J 1993 , 65 : 316 - 324 . 14 . MogilnerA , OsterG : Cellmotilitydrivenbyactinpolymerisation . Biophys J 1996 , 71 : 3030 - 3045 . 15 . Cameron LA , Svitkina TM , Vignjevic D , Theriot JA , Borisy GG : Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr Biol 2001 , 11 : 130 - 135 . 16 . Kuo SC , McGrath JL : Steps and ﬂuctuations of Listeria monocytogenes during actin - based motility . Nature 2000 , 407 : 1026 - 1029 . 17 . Mogilner A , Oster G : Force generation by actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments . Biophys J 2003 , 84 : 1591 - 1605 . 18 . Dickinson RB , Purich DL : Clamped - ﬁlament elongation model for actin - based motors . Biophys J 2002 , 82 : 605 - 617 . 19 . (cid:1) Dickinson RB , Caro L , Purich DL : Force generation by cytoskeletal ﬁlament end - tracking proteins . Biophys J 2004 , 87 : 2838 - 2854 . The authors develop a model of ﬁlament end - tracking proteins that processively advance on ﬁlament ends and facilitate rapid elongation and substantial force generation by persistently tethered ﬁlaments . The motors advance by means of hydrolysis - driven afﬁnity - modulated inter - actions and are able to utilize a considerable energy . The authors discuss extensively the differences between their model and polymerization ratchet mechanisms . 20 . Gerbal F , Chaikin P , Rabin Y , Prost J : An elastic analysis of Listeria monocytogenes propulsion . Biophys J 2000 , 79 : 2259 - 2275 . 21 . (cid:1) Bernheim - Groswasser A , Prost J , Sykes C : Mechanism of actin - based motility : a dynamic state diagram . Biophys J 2005 , 89 : 1411 - 1419 . The authors use theoretical analysis of the balance between elastic and friction forces to predict smooth versus saltatory movement of a bead propelled by a comet - like actin tail . The results are presented in the form of a state diagram where the mode of propulsion is a function of the bead’s size and protein surface density . Experimental results conﬁrm the theoretical predictions . 22 . Maly IV , Borisy GG : Self - organization of a propulsive actin network as an evolutionary process . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 , 98 : 11324 - 11329 . 23 . Carlsson AE : Growth velocities of branched actin networks . Biophys J 2003 , 84 : 2907 - 2918 . 24 . Carlsson AE , Wear MA , Cooper JA : End versus side branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophys J 2004 , 86 : 1074 - 1081 . 25 . (cid:1) Bindschadler M , Osborn EA , Dewey CF Jr , McGrath JL : A mechanistic model of the actin cycle . Biophys J 2004 , 86 : 2720 - 2739 . Mathematical modeling yields the complete nucleotide proﬁle within treadmilling actin ﬁlaments . The authors demonstrate that to increase treadmilling to levels limited only by the amount of available actin , a combination of enhanced Pi release , an increased ‘off rate’ at pointed ends , and proﬁlin action is necessary . 26 . Mogilner A , Edelstein - Keshet L : Regulation of actin dynamics in rapidly moving cells : a quantitative analysis . Biophys J 2002 , 83 : 1237 - 1258 . 27 . (cid:1)(cid:1) Alberts JB , Odell GM : In silico reconstitution of Listeria propulsion exhibits nano - saltation . PLoS Biol 2004 , 2 : e412 . The authors model Listeria propulsion in realistic 3D geometry by numeri - cally simulating every ﬁlament and all microscopic mechanical interac - tions in the comet - like actin tail . This in silico reconstitution produces persistent bacterial motion and actin tail morphology and explains how the observed ‘runs - and - pauses’ movements can emerge from a coop - erative binding and breaking of attachments between actin ﬁlaments and the bacterium . 28 . McGrath JL , Eungdamrong NJ , Fisher CI , Peng F , Mahadevan L , Mitchison TJ , Kuo SC : The force - velocity relationship for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . Curr Biol 2003 , 13 : 329 - 332 . 29 . Wiesner S , Helfer E , Didry D , Ducouret G , Lafuma F , Carlier MF , Pantaloni D : A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 2003 , 160 : 387 - 398 . 30 . Kuo SC , McGrath JL : Steps and ﬂuctuations of Listeria monocytogenes during actin - based motility . Nature 2000 , 407 : 1026 - 1029 . 31 . Soo FS , Theriot JA : Adhesion controls bacterial actin polymerization - basedmovement . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 2005 , in press . 32 . Upadhyaya A , Chabot JR , Andreeva A , Samadani A , Van Oudenaarden A : Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 , 100 : 4521 - 4526 . 33 . Giardini PA , Fletcher DA , Theriot JA : Compression forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 , 100 : 6493 - 6498 . 34 . Schwartz IM , Ehrenberg M , Bindschadler M , McGrath JL : The role of substrate curvature in actin - based pushing forces . Curr Biol 2004 , 14 : 1094 - 1098 . 35 . Cameron LA , Footer MJ , van Oudenaarden A , Theriot JA : Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerisation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 , 96 : 4908 - 4913 . 36 . van Oudenaarden A , Theriot JA : Cooperative symmetry - breaking by actin polymerization in a model for cell motility . Nat Cell Biol 1999 , 1 : 493 - 499 . 37 . (cid:1) van der Gucht J , Paluch E , Plastino J , Sykes C : Stress release drives symmetry breaking for actin - based movement . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 , 102 : 7847 - 7852 . Combining theory and experiment , the authors demonstrate that the symmetry breaking in the actin gel growing around a spherical bead canbeexplainedby‘cracking’ oftheoutersurfaceofthegelbytheelastic tangential stress . Dependence of the mechanical parameters of the process on concentrations of essential proteins is studied exhaustively . 38 . Cameron LA , Robbins JR , Footer MJ , Theriot JA : Biophysical parameters inﬂuence actin - based movement , trajectory , and initiation in a cell - free system . Mol Biol Cell 2004 , 15 : 2312 - 2323 . 39 . Brieher WM , Coughlin M , Mitchison TJ : Fascin - mediated propulsion of Listeria monocytogenes independent of frequent nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 2004 , 165 : 233 - 242 . 40 . Charras GT , Yarrow JC , Horton MA , Mahadevan L , Mitchison TJ : Non - equilibration of hydrostatic pressure in blebbing cells . Nature 2005 , 435 : 365 - 369 . 41 . Herant M , Marganski WA , Dembo M : The mechanics of neutrophils : synthetic modeling of three experiments . Biophys J 2003 , 84 : 3389 - 3413 . 42 . Ponti A , Machacek M , Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G : Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 2004 , 305 : 1782 - 1786 . 43 . Gardel ML , Shin JH , MacKintosh FC , Mahadevan L , Matsudaira P , Weitz DA : Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 2004 , 304 : 1301 - 1305 . 44 . Weisswange I , Bretschneider T , Anderson KI : The leading edge is a lipid diffusion barrier . J Cell Sci 2005 , 118 : 4375 - 4380 . 38 Cell structure and dynamics Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39 www . sciencedirect . com 45 . Small JV , Stradal T , Vignal E , Rottner K : The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol 2002 , 12 : 112 - 120 . 46 . Mogilner A , Jacobson K , Rubinstein B : Multiscale two - dimensional modeling of a motile simple - shaped cell . SIAM J MMS 2005 , 3 : 413 - 439 . 47 . (cid:1) Kovar DR , Pollard TD : Insertional assembly of actin ﬁlament barbedendsinassociationwithforminsproducespiconewtonforces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004 , 101 : 14725 - 14730 . The authors observe assembly of actin ﬁlaments associated with formin immobilized on microscope slides . The ﬁlaments grow by insertion of subunits between their barbed ends and the formins . Elongation of a ﬁlament between an immobilized formin and a second anchor point results in buckling of short ﬁlament segments , demonstrating that poly - merization of single actin ﬁlaments produces forces of > 1 pN . Growing ﬁlaments do not rotate or supercoil . 48 . (cid:1) Kozlov MM , Bershadsky AD : Processive capping by formin suggests a force - driven mechanism of actin polymerization . J Cell Biol 2004 , 167 : 1011 - 1017 . The authors show how the mechanism underpinning the ‘leaky capping’ action of formin can be understood by coupling elastic deformations of the formin – barbed end complex to the assembly of actin subunits onto the ﬁlament’s tip . The model also predicts that a pulling force can accelerate the ﬁlament’s growth . 49 . Shemesh T , Otomo T , Rosen MK , Bershadsky AD , Kozlov MM : A novel mechanism of actin ﬁlament processive capping by formin : solution of the rotation paradox . J Cell Biol 2005 , 170 : 889 - 893 . 50 . Robbins JR , Theriot JA : Listeria monocytogenes rotates around its long axis during actin - based motility . Curr Biol 2003 , 13 : R754 - R756 . 51 . Zeile WL , Zhang F , Dickinson RB , Purich DL : Listeria ’s right - handed helical rocket - tail trajectories : mechanistic implications for force generation in actin - based motility . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2005 , 60 : 121 - 128 . 52 . RomeroS , LeClainche C , Didry D , EgileC , PantaloniD , Carlier MF : Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 2004 , 119 : 419 - 429 . 53 . Mogilner A , Rubinstein B : The physics of ﬁlopodial protrusion . Biophys J 2005 , 89 : 782 - 795 . 54 . Peng J , Wallar BJ , Flanders A , Swiatek PJ , Alberts , AS : Disruption of the Diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr Biol 13 : 534 - 545 . On the edge : modeling protrusion Mogilner 39 www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 32 – 39