On the Effect of Visual Refinement Upon User Feedback in the Context of Video Prototyping Miroslav Bojic , Areti Goulati , Dalila Szostak and Panos Markopoulos Eindhoven University of Technology Den Dolech 2 , 5612AZ Eindhoven , the Netherlands { m . bojic , a . goulati , d . szostak , p . markopoulos } @ tue . nl ABSTRACT There has been extensive discussion and research surrounding fidelity or refinement of prototypes in paper and software form , especially focusing on how the nature of prototypes influences the feedback that this prototype can help elicit during user testing . We extend this debate to the domain of video prototypes , where use scenarios are acted out on video . This study examines how the visual refinement ( a . k . a . visual fidelity ) of design representations presented in such videos impacts user feedback . An experiment was performed where two video prototypes were compared , one where the product is portrayed with high visual refinement and the other looking rough and sketchy . Our results could not identify any significant effects upon the number or type of comments returned by users . This finding contrasts widely held contentions relating to fidelity of software and paper prototypes , though it agrees with similar experiments done with non video prototypes . In practice our results support the validity of testing with low fidelity videos and suggest that the choice of visual fidelity in video prototypes should be based on pragmatic project concerns , e . g . , whether the video should be used also for communication and the resources that are available for prototyping . Categories and Subject Descriptors D2 . 1 [ Requirements / Specifications ] : Elicitation Methods – video prototyping General Terms Design , Human Factors Keywords Video prototyping , fidelity , visual refinement . 1 . INTRODUCTION Video prototyping is a widely used technique to prototype interaction design that can be used as means to visualize interaction and interactive experiences prior to the system implementation or even before availability of technology required to build such interaction [ 10 ] . This enables gathering of early feedback by user representatives and other stakeholders . Furthermore , it can be used as a participatory design technique , allowing stakeholders who are not very skilled in creating other types of prototypes to represent ideas , situations , and experiences [ 8 ] . When creating a video prototype , a designer stands before a number of important decisions that have strong influence on how the interaction is portrayed . Some of these refer to the general qualities of the filming and the video production more generally . Others refer to the representation of the designed artifact or system and correspond to the notion of prototype fidelity as discussed in the field of human computer interaction ( HC ) . McCurdy et al . [ 3 ] refined the concept of fidelity and identified five different prototype dimensions that can be varied , affecting the representation of the interaction . These are : 1 . Visual refinement ; realism and visual polish of the artifact being presented , 2 . Breadth of functionality ; number of different functions of the artifact in the video , 3 . Depth of functionality ; detail of functionalities presented in the video , 4 . Richness of interactivity ; detail of interaction between the artifact and the user including handling of errors and unusual situations , 5 . Richness of data model ; realism of the data utilized by the prototype , reality of situations and circumstances . While these have been typically used to discuss paper or software prototypes , they can be described to distinguish between video prototypes as well . For example , if a video portraits only a single functionality of the designed system , but does so in great detail , the prototype can be considered to be of low fidelity ( lo - fi ) in the dimension of breadth of functionality , but of high fidelity ( hi - fi ) in the dimension of depth of functionality . It is widely accepted in the field of HCI that lo - fi and hi - fi prototypes provoke different reactions from evaluators ; for example see standard textbooks [ 6 ] . A much stated argument by Rettig [ 5 ] is that lo - fi prototypes compel viewers to think about content rather than appearance . This favors iterative design and educates developers to have concern for usability and formative evaluation . Similarly , Nielsen [ 4 ] shows that user reactions to lo - Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . SIGDOC’11 , October 3 – 5 , 2011 , Pisa , Italy . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0936 - 3 / 11 / 10 . . . $ 10 . 00 . . 115 fi prototypes can give significant insights into usability . Mackay et al . [ 2 ] confirm this further , suggesting that lo - fi prototypes make viewers more comfortable in asking questions and pointing out weaknesses in the proposed design . Generally , lo - fi prototypes are faster , easier , and less expensive to produce , a contention that of course depends on the tools available and the skills of the team as well as the idiosyncrasies of the design context in question . On the other hand , hi - fi prototypes are said to be able to ‘set the rules’ in a way that is not possible with a lo - fi prototype , effectively narrowing the set of plausible interpretations [ 1 ] . When the prototyping medium is video , it is important to note that this comes with a risk of the video prototype being interpreted as rhetorical and persuasive [ 2 ] . While there are many publications covering advantages and disadvantages of hi - fi and lo - fi prototypes , there is so far no related methodological approach for designers creating video prototypes . Therefore , this study can be regarded as a first step in this direction . The study aims to confirm claims about effect of fidelity on prototype evaluation in a formal way . The following hypotheses were posed : H1 : Comments about lo - fi prototypes will be more focused on content than appearance , compared to comments about hi - fi prototypes . H2 : Users will be more positively disposed towards high fidelity prototypes ( higher scores for user acceptance , usefulness , and usability ) H3 : Viewers of lo - fi prototype will provide more comments than viewers of hi - fi prototype . H4 : Viewers of lo - fi prototype will provide comments that are more critical than viewers of hi - fi prototype . For this particular study all but one fidelity dimension , as identified by McCurdy et al . [ 3 ] , were kept constant . The dimension varied was visual refinement of the prototype , allowing relevance of the work to a broader body of research that has studied the impact of visual fidelity of prototypes . 2 . METHOD A case study was conducted where a conceptualized product was prototyped in two fidelities with respect to visual refinement . An experiment was set up to evaluate hypotheses H1 - H4 above . 2 . 1 Concept Product : P’eco A nonexistent , but believable future product was conceived to be the object represented through video prototypes : P’eco , an ecological office printer with a capability of ink and paper recycling by various means . The product was described as being a regular size office printer with all the common functionality of such devices but with the following added possibilities : a possibility to insert used paper for the printer to recycle , to store printed documents for reuse ( archiving ) , and to print with time sensitive fading ink , allowing the same paper to be reused for printing multiple times . After drafting the scenario involving two office workers going about their day and coming in touch with the printer , two video prototypes were filmed . Everything in the videos was kept consistent with the exception of how the printer was represented . In the lo - fi video , the printer was made out of cardboard , and all the interaction through the computer screen was represented with hand - drawn sketches . In the hi - fi version , an existing office printer was used , and the interaction was presented through Flash - based screen mock - ups / animations which were edited in the video . Images of the hi - fi and lo - fi representations of the printer are shown in Figure 1 . Both videos were about three and a half minutes in length . The videos consisted of a short introduction of two characters , followed by a showcase of printer’s recycling functions . The video concluded with the discussion of printer’s functions by the two office workers 2 . 2 Experiment Setup A within - subject design was adopted . Although we aimed primarily to compare the amount of comments between subjects after viewing a single video , we also decided to give the participants the opportunity to also view a second video prototype in a different fidelity in order to probe them directly as to whether their attitude towards the product changed after seeing the same product in a different fidelity . Upon welcoming the participants , the researchers explained the procedure of the experiment and both parties signed a consent form . Next , the participant viewed the first video . The order of the videos was counterbalanced ; half of the participants viewed lo - fi video first , while the other half viewed hi - fi video first . After the participants had just seen their first video , they were asked to fill in a UTAUT based questionnaire [ 9 ] . The questionnaire was adjusted to this specific study by taking out two sections : voluntariness and anxiety , because they were not considered relevant to the interaction shown in the videos . The adapted questionnaire included six constructs : attitude , performance Figure 1 : The printer , as it has been represented in the hi - fi ( above ) and lo - fi ( below ) video prototype . 116 expectancy , effort expectancy , social influence , and facilitating conditions and behavior influence . The order of the questions in the form was randomized . Additionally , the participants were asked to list as many keywords as possible to describe the prototype that they had just seen . After the participant completed the questionnaire , a short , semi - structured interview followed . The participant would then view the second video , and fill in the UTAUT questionnaire and key - word list for the second time . The second semi - structured interview assessed only if the participant changed his / her opinion or attitude about the printer . Finally , the participant was debriefed and given an opportunity to ask any additional questions about either the prototype or the study . Twenty participants were recruited for the study , 11 female and 9 male . The participants were recruited among university employees and students and were blind to the experimental hypotheses . The recruitment method was direct ; the researchers approached potential participants , introduced the study and inquired whether they would be interested in participation , either immediately or at a later time . Participation was voluntary . The experiments were conducted in an office setting . Two researchers were present , one guiding the participant through the procedure and another observing and taking notes . The equipment used in the experiment consisted of a laptop with the two videos and the questionnaires in paper form . On average , each experiment took about 45 minutes . 3 . RESULTS The answers that the participants provided to the UTAUT questionnaires were summed up per construct and standardized . The Mann - Whitney test was performed to evaluate if the scores were different for participants who have watched lo - fi video first versus the participants who have watched the hi - fi video first . No significant difference was found between these two populations . Next , a regression analysis was performed for each condition and each construct score in order to see whether there is a significant correlation between particular constructs depending on the fidelity of the video watched . For the hi - fi video , no significant correlations were found between the constructs . For the lo - fi video , significant correlations have been found between the scores assigned to performance ( P ) and attitude ( A ) ( p < 0 . 001 ; P = 0 . 782 * A ) , and social influence ( SI ) and self efficacy ( SE ) ( p = 0 . 007 ; SI = - 0 . 634 * SE ) . The UTAUT scores were compared within persons as well , using Wilcoxon signed pair test . Overall no effect of fidelity was found on the UTUAT scores . There was only one significant finding : the behavioral intention ( BI ) of participants who saw hi - fi video first and lo - fi video second increased significantly ( p = 0 . 026 , median lo - fi = 19 , mean lo - fi = 18 . 5 ; median hi - fi = 18 , mean hi - fi = 16 . 9 ) . The information gathered from the participants during the interviews was transcribed and coded by two independent coders . The comments made by the participants were subdivided into categories that were in line with the hypotheses : content ( behavior , interaction and concept ) , appearance ( size and color ) , usability insights ( ease of use and ease of learning ) , feasibility ( perceived credibility and possible problems in implementation ) , and functionality . The comments were further coded as either positive ( commending some aspect of the prototype ) , neutral ( pure observations without personal opinion attached ) , negative ( doubts or not being able to understand a particular aspect of the prototype ) or a suggestion ( recommendation on how to change or improve an aspect of the prototype ) . The coding of the comments to the lo - fi and hi - fi videos can be found in Table 1 and Table 2 respectively . These quantitative results were checked for significance with a two - tailed t - test . Significant difference was found for the total number of comments regarding content of the video ( p = 0 . 039 , lo - fi : 23 comments , hi - fi : 42 comments ) . There were no significant differences for the other types of comments provided by the participants . Table 1 : Coding of the comments provided by the participants after seeing the lo - fi video prototype . Comment Type Positive Neutral Negative Suggestion Total Content 15 3 4 1 23 Appearance 8 0 1 0 9 Usability 15 2 12 3 32 Feasibility 4 11 9 0 24 Functionality 13 13 25 13 64 Total 55 29 51 17 152 Table 2 : Coding of the comments provided by the participants after seeing the hi - fi video prototype . Comment Type Positive Neutral Negative Suggestion Total Content 30 4 3 5 42 Appearance 9 2 2 3 16 Usability 14 3 13 5 35 Feasibility 3 13 3 0 19 Functionality 15 9 18 5 47 Total 71 31 39 18 159 117 4 . DISCUSSION The study was motivated by the general aim to examine how fidelity or refinement of video prototypes impacts user perceptions and feedback regarding the concepts shown . In order to keep the study focused , only the visual refinement of the prototype , which is the fidelity dimension most extensively studied in non - video prototypes , was manipulated . The hypotheses of this experiment were not confirmed , something that is surprising considering the widely held and published views regarding prototype fidelity . Several notions about prototyping in other mediums such as paper vs . computer based make clear distinctions not only with regards to audience and funding , but also with regards to the extent of information that can be extracted from participants when using them for evaluations . It is suggested by this study that these might not apply to video . While this finding goes against literature , other fidelity dimensions need to be considered before a conclusive remark can be made as the results only display information regarding one of the five dimensions of fidelity . There is a chance that the fidelity dimension that was manipulated in the prototype does not have a high influence on how the specific prototype is perceived . An explanation for this might be that the participants , while watching the video , were able to suspend belief in such a way that the actual visuals of the artifact presented did not matter in its overall perception . Another reason could be that there was an interaction effect between different fidelity dimensions . While the video prototype presented quite a broad view of functionality , the depth of the presented functionality was quite shallow . It is possible that the effect of visual refinement fidelity on how the artifact is perceived only becomes apparent if depth of the presented functionality is substantial . On the other hand , several experimental studies such as those reviewed by Sauer [ 7 ] , also failed to find any effects on fidelity , suggesting that the widely held beliefs regarding the differences in outcomes from different fidelity prototypes may not be justified . On the basis of research until now one could argue that low fidelity video prototypes allow valid feedback to be elicited during user testing . Further , it can be argued that the choice of prototype refinement needs to be based on broader project constraints than just the expected feedback from user representatives in evaluation sessions . 5 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Kindborg , M . , 2001 . How Children Understand Concurrent Comics : Experiences from LOFI and HIFI Prototype . In : IEEE 2001 Symposium on Human Centric Computing Languages and Environments , Washington , DC ( 2001 ) [ 2 ] Mackay , W . , Ratzer , A . , Janecek , P . , 2000 . Video artifacts for design : Bridging the gap between abstraction and detail . In : DIS ' 00 Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , pp . 72 - - 82 . ACM , New York ( 2000 ) [ 3 ] McCurdy , M . , Connors , C . , Pyrzak , G . , Kanefsky , B . , Vera , A . , 2006 . Breaking the fidelity barrier : an examination of our current characterization of prototypes and an example of a mixed - fidelity success . In : CHI ' 06 Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems . ACM , New York ( 2006 ) [ 4 ] Nielsen , J . , 1995 . Using paper prototypes in home - page design . IEEE Software . Volume 12 Issue 4 pp . 88 - - 89 , 97 ( 1995 ) [ 5 ] Rettig , M . , 1994 . Prototyping for tiny fingers . Communications of the ACM . Volume 37 Issue 4 , pp . 21 - 27 ( 1994 ) [ 6 ] Rogers , Y . , Preece , J . , Sharp , H . , 2002 . Interaction Design : Beyond Human - Computer Interaction . John Wiley & Sons , New York ( 2002 ) [ 7 ] Sauer , J . , Sonderegger , A . , 2009 . The influence of prototype fidelity and aesthetics of design in usability tests : Effects on user behaviour , subjective evaluation and emotion . Applied Ergonomics , vol . 40 , no . 4 , pp . 670 - - 677 ( 2009 ) [ 8 ] Sefelin , R . , Tscheligi , M . , Giller , V . , 2003 Paper Prototyping - What is it good for ? A Comparison of Paper - and Computer - based Low - fidelity Prototyping . CHI ' 03 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . ACM New York ( 2003 ) [ 9 ] Sundaravej , T . , 2010 . Empirical Validation of Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology Model . Journal of Global Information Technology Management . Volume 13 Issue 1 , pp . 5 - - 27 ( 2010 ) [ 10 ] Tognazzini , B . , 1994 . The “Starfire” video prototype project : a case history . In : CHI ‘94 Human factors in computing systems : celebrating interdependence , Beth Adelson , Susan Dumais , and Judith Olson ( Eds . ) . ACM , New York , NY ( 1994 ) . 118