Information requisition is the core of guideline - based medical care : which information is needed for whom ? jep _ 15271 . . 9 Theresia Gschwandtner MSc 1 , Katharina Kaiser PhD 2 and Silvia Miksch PhD 3 1 Research Fellow , Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems , Vienna University of Technology , Vienna , Austria 2 Research Fellow , Center for Medical Statistics , Informatics and Intelligent Systems , Medical University of Vienna , Vienna , Austria and Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems , Vienna University of Technology , Vienna , Austria 3 Senior Research Fellow , Department of Information and Knowledge Engineering ( ike ) , Danube University Krems , Krems , Austria and Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems , Vienna University of Technology , Vienna , Austria Keywords clinical information needs , clinical practice guidelines , evidence - based medicine , guideline formalization , literature review , patients’ information needs Correspondence Ms Theresia Gschwandtner Institute of Software Technology & Interactive Systems Vienna University of Technology Favoritenstraße 9 - 11 / 188 1040 Vienna Austria E - mail : gschwandtner @ ifs . tuwien . ac . at Accepted for publication : 18 May 2010 doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2753 . 2010 . 01527 . x Abstract Rationale , aims and objectives It is mandatory for the design of an efﬁcient software product to know the different groups of users of a software tool , the tasks the users want to perform with it , and the information that is required for it . Our goal is to establish a comprehensive information source for the development of a consistent software environ - ment supporting all tasks emerging from the creation to the execution of a computerized clinical practice guideline ( CPG ) for different user groups . Methods We conducted a comprehensive literature review to investigate the different user groups of a computerized CPG as well as their speciﬁc information needs . Results We provide a complete catalogue of every single aspect that may be related to information needs of any party concerned . In particular , we give detailed information on the tasks of guideline modellers on the one hand , and clinical information needs ( i . e . informa - tion needs of physicians , nurses , nurse practitioners and patients ) on the other hand . Conclusion By providing categorized information from several studies and publications , we establish an exhaustive information basis for the design of a useful software tool facilitating the formalization and the execution of a CPG . 1 . Introduction Clinical practice guidelines ( CPGs ) [ 1 ] are powerful tools to improve the quality of health care [ 2 , 3 ] . However , existing guide - line formalization approaches [ 4 – 6 ] point out important beneﬁts of a consistent software environment supporting all tasks emerging from the creation of a computer - executable model of a CPG to its actual implementation in clinical care ( e . g . translating the medical knowledge of a textual CPG into a computer - interpretable model , applying a recommended therapy on a patient , or answer - ing clinical questions ) . Among others , these beneﬁts are [ 4 – 6 ] : • providing links between the different models of the guideline , that is the textual guideline , the intermediate representations in the modelling process , and the computer interpretable model ; • backtracking given recommendations to their source in the original text and vice versa , if any parts of the guideline text are to be changed ; and ﬁnally • facilitating maintenance and modiﬁcation of the guideline by applying corrections and changes in one model to all the other models as well . Hence , a guideline software system has to be designed to deal with all given tasks and different user groups ( knowledge engi - neers , physicians , and so on ) . Unfortunately , there is a lack of comprehensive information on ( 1 ) the different user groups of such a tool ; ( 2 ) what tasks a user wants to perform with the software product ; and ( 3 ) what information is required for it . This informa - tion is mandatory to make valid decisions on the design of a software product [ 7 ] . This paper therefore deals with a presentation and analysis of a number of representative research studies carried out in related ﬁelds – namely the formalization of a clinical practice guideline , information needs arising in clinical care , as well as information needs of patients – in order to establish a sound basis to meet the challenge of designing a software system supporting both the modelling process and the application of a CPG . To start with , we present an outline of our approach as to the review of literature in Section 2 . In Section 3 we describe the ﬁndings of the literature review ; in particular , we describe the information needs of guideline modellers in Section 3 . 1 , where we differentiate between the tasks involved in modelling a CPG Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice ISSN 1356 - 1294 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 1 in a model - centric way ( Section 3 . 1 . 1 ) and those of a document - centric approach ( Section 3 . 1 . 2 ) . We continue with a detailed description of the information needs that arise in clinical care in Section 3 . 2 . We have investigated the information need of physi - cians ( Section 3 . 2 . 1 ) , nurses and nurse practitioners ( Section 3 . 2 . 2 ) , and patients ( Section 3 . 2 . 3 ) separately . Finally , we discuss the main results of our work in Section 4 . 2 . Methods We conducted a comprehensive literature review to investigate the information needs of different user groups of a computerized CPG . As a ﬁrst step , we have examined the available literature to derive which user groups are actually involved in the development cycle of a CPG . Subsequently , we have focused our review on the different tasks involved in the modelling process of a clinical practice guideline as well as on the information needs of caregivers and patients . We have examined several Internet resources for relevant scientiﬁc papers . On the one hand , we have looked for papers of specialized organizations and journals focusing on medicine ( e . g . PubMed [ 8 ] , Medical Library Association [ 9 ] , British Medical Journal [ 10 ] ) and others focusing on medical informatics ( e . g . American Medical Informatics Association [ 11 ] , Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine [ 12 ] ) . On the other hand , we have used general search engines ( e . g . Google Scholar [ 13 ] ) looking for scientiﬁc papers matching terms such as ‘clinical practice guide - line’ , ‘nurse information needs’ , ‘clinical information needs’ , etc . In addition , we have checked the reference lists of relevant articles for additional information . 3 . Results In a ﬁrst step we have derived different user groups involved in the development of a computer - executable CPG or in the application of a CPG in clinical care [ 14 , 15 ] . Moreover , involving patients in decision making has shown to improve the effectiveness of care , to increase the efﬁciency with which the treatment is delivered , and to lead to a better acceptance as well as to improved outcomes [ 16 – 18 ] . This led us to focus on these four different user groups : • guideline modellers , • physicians , • nurses and nurse practitioners , and • patients . In the following subsections a detailed outline of tasks and information needs of the different user groups is given . 3 . 1 . Formalization of a CPG The main task of a guideline modeller – no matter which model - ling approach – is to create a formal guideline representation model of the original narrative guideline . To support a modellers task of creating a formal model , he / she needs to know ( 1 ) of which components the target representation format is composed and ( 2 ) in which way scheduling constraints are to be modelled [ 19 , 20 ] : ( 1 ) Components : the investigated guideline representation models are composed of plans ( sometimes also called guidelines , templates or maps ) . A plan can be decomposed into : • Actions : the modelling primitives that represent the actual tasks described by clinical guidelines ( e . g . medication prescriptions and clinical investigations ) . • Decisions : the investigated guideline representation lan - guages use different decision models to formalize the deci - sions intrinsic to the recommendations of a clinical guideline ( for a detailed comparison see [ 20 ] ) . • States : a plan component that deﬁnes speciﬁc scenarios , that is patient states and execution states . Patient states are char - acterized by a patient’s condition ( e . g . hypertension ) and are often used to facilitate the automatic entry into appropriate guidelines . Execution states are characterized by the current condition of a speciﬁc plan ( e . g . started , completed ) . • Sub - plans : usually guideline plans can be decomposed into sub - plans ( also called sub - guideline , task , protocol or com - posite action ) , which in turn may consist of various sub - plans . The nesting of plans and sub - plans leads to a hierarchical structure of guideline plans . • Branch and synchronization steps : are used to model paral - lel treatment options in the guideline . In some cases , parallel and sequential plan executions are modelled without branch and synchronization steps ( e . g . by plan characteristics ) . ( 2 ) Scheduling constraints : guidelines may involve sequential , parallel , iterative and concurrent care processes . Most guideline models use ﬂowchart - like representations to deﬁne the execution order of plans , that is , sequential , parallel and cyclical execution . Other models use more precise scheduling constraints or complex time annotations to manage the task execution . Decision models are also used to govern aspects of control ﬂow . There are two basic types of formalization : a model - centric approach and a document - centric approach . 3 . 1 . 1 . Model - centric formalization For model - centric formalization a medical domain expert for - mulates a conceptual model of a guideline , based on the original narrative document but without a direct relationship between the original text and the model . There are diverse guideline represen - tation languages as well as tools to facilitate the translation process ( for a detailed comparison we refer to [ 19 , 20 ] ) . However , only few descriptions allow the derivation of how to model a CPG in detail [ 21 , 22 ] : 1 Identiﬁcation of relevant guideline knowledge : medical experts with informatics training need to analyse the desired guideline recommendations and determine the knowledge and logic needed to generate these recommendations . 2 Disambiguation of guideline knowledge : for instance , the term ‘contraindication to Hep B’ is disambiguated by the deﬁnition ‘anaphylactic reaction to hepatitis B vaccine’ . 3 Identiﬁcation of clinical concepts , fundamental parameters and their interrelationships : clinical concepts and other funda - mental parameters are to be identiﬁed , extracted and recorded ( e . g . ‘hepatitis B vaccine’ and ‘anaphylactic reaction’ ) . Moreover , interrelationships have to be deﬁned . 4 Generation of detailed data models of the previously identiﬁed concepts and parameters : the previously identiﬁed concepts are instantiated as detailed data models . For instance , allergy informa - tion is modelled as an instance of the class Allergy , which has the attributes code , allergen , reaction and effective time . Hence , Information requisition for CPG - based care T . Gschwandtner et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2 ‘Anaphylactic reaction to hepatitis B vaccine’ is modelled as Allergy where ‘vaccines allergy’ is assigned to the code attri - bute , allergen is deﬁned as ‘hepatitis B vaccine’ and reaction is ‘anaphylaxis’ . 5 Generation of a mapping of the terms in the knowledge base to the terms of the speciﬁc institution : creation of a standard vocabulary . 6 Speciﬁcation of a logical and process structure of the guideline : generating a ﬂowchart - like model of the guideline knowledge corresponding with the recommendations . 7 Encoding the model in the speciﬁc XML format . However , literature provides more detailed descriptions on how to model clinical guidelines in a document - centric way . 3 . 1 . 2 . Document - centric formalization We have investigated various approaches [ 6 , 23 – 26 ] to formalize a clinical practice guideline in a document - centric way . These approaches use different ( and not always coherent ) methods to do so . Some formalization steps are part of each of the different modelling approaches , for instance , the marking up of relevant parts of the guideline text ; others are only mentioned once , for instance , replacing passive voice by active voice . This does not necessarily mean that these steps are not part of other approaches , too , but they are not explicitly mentioned in the description of these approaches . In order to arrive at a comprehensive represen - tation of the formalization process , we have categorized and listed all the steps mentioned . Based on the various ﬁndings of the literature review , we have generated an algorithmic repre - sentation giving a complete overview of every conceivable detail that might be considered important in transforming a textual CPG into a guideline representation model using a document - centric approach ( see Fig . 1 ) . This list serves as a checklist to improve existing methods and , even more importantly , as a comprehensive reference to decide about required functionality of a software tool to support the document - centric formalization process . 3 . 2 . Clinical information needs The preceding section of this paper ( Section 3 . 1 ) deals with tech - nical aspects of the guideline modelling process ; the following deal with user expectations and requirements that have to be con - sidered in creating a clinically useful software environment . An outline of categorized ﬁndings of clinical information needs derived from diverse studies is given in Figs 2 – 11 . 3 . 2 . 1 . Physicians’ information needs It is to be expected that physicians will be the ones who will most frequently work with such a tool . As regards the information sought by physicians , a number of studies have been conducted , mainly in the form of retrospective questionnaires , interviews , self - reports and observation [ 27 – 36 ] . Because of a lack of data and the heterogeneous categorizations of information of the different studies , the frequency of informa - tion categories can only be a rough estimate . Thus , a tentative conclusion is offered instead ; the information categories are listed according to their priorities : 1 Information about treatment ( e . g . recommended treatment , spe - ciﬁc procedures , effects and side effects ) ; of particular importance is information on medication ( e . g . recommended medication , effects and side effects , efﬁciency ) . 2 Information relevant for diagnosis ( e . g . possible causes of symptoms , relations between ﬁndings , indicated tests ) . 3 Information on patient data ( e . g . symptoms , medical history , test results ) . 4 Information about other health care providers ( e . g . contact data of colleagues and other specialties ) . 5 Information about a speciﬁc disease ( e . g . prognosis , aetiology ) . The majority of questions posed by physicians deal with therapy and especially with all sorts of aspects associated with medication . The physicians’ main interest seems to be the correct drug , its effectiveness , its side effects , dosage and how long it should be taken . Diagnostic questions also appear quite frequently , but ques - tions concerning the prognosis , the aetiology of disease and so on seem to be of comparatively little concern , if we are to believe the ﬁndings in Figs 2 – 11 . 3 . 2 . 2 . Nurses’ information needs When focusing on the information needs of nursing staff [ 34 , 35 , 37 – 41 ] , it is interesting to note that there is little difference between the questions posed by nurses and what the physicians want to know ( see Figs 2 – 11 ) . The only real difference seems to be their respective focus of attention : for instance , the nurse - patient relationship being of a more personal nature is reﬂected by the nurses’ interest in psycho - social support of patients whereas physicians have not formulated such questions in the studies investigated in this paper . As nurses and nurse practitioners’ differ in competence , we list their categories of major interest separately . These are for nurses ( sorted according to their priority ) : 1 Information about treatment ; of particular importance is infor - mation about institution speciﬁc procedures and information on medication . 2 Information on patient data ( e . g . ﬁndings , test results , allergies ) . 3 Educational material and information on instructions for the patient . 4 Information about a speciﬁc disease ( e . g . description , symp - toms , risk factors ) . 5 Information about other health care providers ( e . g . contact data , when to seek advice , information about specialties ) . 6 Information relevant for diagnosis ( e . g . possible causes of ﬁndings , calculation of ﬁndings ) . On the other hand , nurse practitioners require : 1 Information about treatment ; of particular importance are information on medication . 2 Information relevant for diagnosis ( e . g . indicated test , differen - tial diagnoses , relations between ﬁndings ) . 3 Information on patient data ( e . g . ﬁndings , test results , allergies ) . 4 Information about a speciﬁc disease ( e . g . aetiology , epidemiol - ogy , prognosis ) . 5 Information about other health care providers ( e . g . contact data , when to refer patients , information about specialties ) . 6 Information on psycho - social support for patients . 7 Educational material and information on instructions for the patient . T . Gschwandtner et al . Information requisition for CPG - based care © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 3 Figure 1 Tasks of document - centric guideline formalization . Information requisition for CPG - based care T . Gschwandtner et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 4 These lists show the different priorities of nurses and nurse practitioners . The main difference is that nurse practitioners are more concerned with diagnostic issues than nurses . In accordance with the results for physicians , nurses and nurse practitioners need most information about treatment and diagnosis , in which they require information about institution speciﬁc procedures and medication quite frequently . In contrast to the results for physi - cians , there is an obvious need for information on psycho - social support for patients . 3 . 2 . 3 . Patients’ information needs The information desired by patients [ 42 – 51 ] is more voluminous than either the questions formulated by physicians or those formu - lated by nurses , as they are not only worried about illness itself but also about the effects this illness has on family members , precise information on circumstances they are likely to expect when vis - iting other medical facilities and , last but not least , detailed infor - mation about available psycho - social support . The most important categories of information for patients are ( sorted according to priority ) : 1 Information about treatment ( e . g . therapeutic options , risks and beneﬁts , therapeutic procedures ) ; of particular importance is information on effects of the treatment ( e . g . on quality of life , physical and emotional effects ) . 2 Information about their disease ; of particular importance are information on individual prognosis , chances of recovery and information on their diagnostic stage . Figure 2 Information needed about patient data . PH , physician ; NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitioner ; PT , patient . Figure 3 Information needed for diagnosis . PH , physician ; NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitio - ner ; PT , patient . Figure 4 Information needed about the disease in general . PH , physician ; NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitioner ; PT , patient . T . Gschwandtner et al . Information requisition for CPG - based care © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 5 3 Information on available psycho - social support ( e . g . other peo - ples’ experiences , mental health workers , voluntary organizations ) . 4 Information regarding their family ( e . g . risks for family members and how to handle physical and emotional impact on family members ) . 5 Their patient data ( e . g . test ﬁndings ) . 6 Prevention of speciﬁc disease or recurrent illness . 7 Educational material and instructions ( e . g . information on treatment and disease , diet , exertion , pain relief , preparation for treatment ) . It is evident from our results that patients’ information needs differ qualitatively from physicians’ and nurses’ information needs . They Figure 5 Information needed about the management of the disease or condition . PH , physician ; NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitioner ; PT , patient . Figure 6 Information needed about the pro - phylaxis of a disease . NP , nurse practitioner ; PT , patient . Information requisition for CPG - based care T . Gschwandtner et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 6 require much more detailed information on emotional effects of their treatment and its effects on their quality of life . As is to be expected , prognosis and chances of recovery are also of major interest for patients , as is available support . Moreover , in contrast to the results for physicians and nurses , patients require detailed information about any effects their illness may have on family members . 4 . Discussion In this paper we have investigated the different user groups of a computerized clinical guideline , the process of formalizing such a guideline , as well as the clinical information that has to be integrated when executing the guideline . Based on the ﬁndings of a comprehensive literature research , we have focused on the information requirements of four different user groups . We have examined a number of relevant studies about the information needs in clinical care as well as the modellers’ tasks involved in the development of a computerized clinical guideline . From these studies , we have derived : 1 A complete catalogue of every single aspect that may be related to information needs of any party concerned . Thus , we provide : • A comprehensive information source of categorized clinical information needs ; because of the representation of uniform Figure 7 Information needed about available support for the patient . NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitioner ; PT , patient . Figure 8 Information needed about possible impact on family members . PT , patient . Figure 9 Information needed about institution speciﬁc procedures . NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitioner . Figure 10 Information needed about other health care providers . PH , physician ; NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitioner ; PT , patient . Figure 11 Information needed about where to ﬁnd further information . PH , physician ; NR , nurse ; NP , nurse practitioner ; PT , patient . T . Gschwandtner et al . Information requisition for CPG - based care © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 7 ﬁndings from a variety of studies conducted in different coun - tries , these ﬁndings are of general applicability . • A consistent representation of important aspects of the step - wise procedure of modelling a CPG ; this representation provides categorized ﬁndings of different studies and modelling approaches . 2 In particular , we provide detailed ﬁndings of speciﬁc informa - tion needs for each user group : • We give an overview of tasks of guideline modellers , includ - ing the identiﬁcation of knowledge elements and making them independent from the surrounding text , the modelling of clinical actions and the generation of vocabularies . • Moreover , we give a comprehensive list of any information needs of physicians – physicians mainly seek information about treatment and medication . • We give a comprehensive list of information needs of nurses ; besides information about treatment and medication , they show an obvious need for information on psycho - social support for patients . • Last but not least , we give a detailed outline of infor - mation that should be provided for patients ; for instance , they require detailed information about effects on their future quality of life , about their speciﬁc prognosis and about chances of recovery . By providing categorized information from several studies and publications , we establish an information basis necessary for the design of a useful software tool facilitating the formaliza - tion and the execution of a CPG . Depending on the potential and purpose of the individual tool , it may not be necessary ( nor always possible ) to include all of these tasks and information needs , but the decision as to which points to include and which to leave out can only be made on the basis of such an all - comprising list . We recommend that developers carefully con - sider every single aspect presented in this thesis , as all of these aspects have been formulated as modelling tasks or as actual information needs in clinical praxis . Acknowledgements The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007 - 13 ) under grant agreement no . 216134 . References 1 . Field , M . J . & Lohr , K . N . ( eds ) ( 1990 ) Clinical Practice Guidelines : Directions for A New Program . National Academies Press . Avai - lable at : http : / / www . nap . edu / books / 0309043468 / html / index . html ( last accessed 15 July 2009 ) . 2 . Twaddle , S . ( 2005 ) Clinical practice guidelines . Singapore Medical Journal , 46 , 681 – 687 . 3 . Elkin , P . L . , Peleg , M . , Lacson , R . , Bernstam , E . , Tu , S . W . , Boxwala , A . , Greenes , R . & Shortliffe , E . H . ( 2000 ) Toward standardiza - tion of electronic guideline representation . MD Computing , 17 , 39 – 44 . 4 . Votruba , P . , Miksch , S . & Kosara , R . ( 2004 ) Facilitating knowledge maintenance of clinical guidelines and protocols . In Proceedings from the Medinfo 2004 World Congress on Medical Informatics ( eds M . Fieschi , E . Coiera & Y . - C . J . Li ) , pp . 57 – 61 . Amsterdam : IOS Press . 5 . Ru˚žicˇka , M . & Svátek , V . ( 2004 ) Mark - up based analysis of narrative guidelines with the stepper tool . In Computer - based Support for Clinical Guidelines and Protocols . Proceedings of the Symposium on Computerized Guidelines and Protocols , Studies in Health Technol - ogy and Informatics , Prague , Czech Republic , Vol . 101 , pp . 132 – 136 . Amsterdam : IOS Press . 6 . Svátek , V . & Ru˚žicˇka , M . ( 2003 ) Step - by - step mark - up of medical guideline documents . International Journal of Medical Informatics , 70 , 329 – 335 . 7 . Nielsen , J . ( 1992 ) The usability engineering life cycle . Computer , 25 , 12 – 22 . 8 . PubMed – National Library of Medicine ( 2009 ) PubMed – home page . Available at : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / PubMed / ( last accessed 22 September 2009 ) . 9 . Medical Library Association ( 2009 ) MLA – home page . Available at : http : / / www . mlanet . org / ( last accessed 22 September 2009 ) . 10 . British Medical Journal ( 2009 ) BMJ – home page . Available at : http : / / www . bmj . com / ( last accessed 22 September 2009 ) . 11 . American Medical Informatics Association ( 2009 ) AMIA – home page . Available at : http : / / www . amia . org / ( last accessed 22 September 2009 ) . 12 . Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine ( 2009 ) AIIM – home page . Available at : http : / / www . aiimjournal . com / ( last accessed 22 Septem - ber 2009 ) . 13 . Google Scholar , Search Engine ( 2009 ) Available at : http : / / scholar . google . at / ( last accessed 22 September 2009 ) . 14 . Quaglini , S . , Dazzi , L . , Gatti , L . , Stefanelli , M . , Fassino , C . & Tondini , C . ( 1998 ) Supporting tools for guideline development and dissemina - tion . Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine , 14 , 119 – 137 . 15 . Greenes , R . A . , Sloan , W . N . , Ohno - Machado , L . & Deibel , S . R . A . ( 1999 ) A framework and tools for authoring , editing , documenting , sharing , searching , navigating , and executing computer - based clinical guidelines . In Proceedings of the American Medical Informatics Association Annual Fall Symposium , pp . 261 – 265 . Philadelphia , PA : Hanley and Belfus , Inc . 16 . Audit Commission for Local Authorities and the National Health Service in England and Wales ( 1993 ) What seems to be the matter : communication between hospitals and patients . Audit Commission National Health Service Report ; No . 12 , HMSO . 17 . Gillispie , M . A . & Ellis , L . B . M . ( 1993 ) Computer - based patient education revisited . Journal of Medical Systems , 17 , 119 – 125 . 18 . Seeman , M . & Seeman , T . E . ( 1983 ) Health behavior and personal autonomy : a longitudinal study of the sense of control in illness . Journal of Health and Social Behavior , 24 , 144 – 160 . 19 . Wang , D . , Peleg , M . , Tu , S . W . , Boxwala , A . A . , Greenes , R . A . , Patel , V . L . & Shortliffe , E . H . ( 2002 ) Representation primitives , process models and patient data in computer - interpretable clinical practice guidelines : a literature review of guideline representation models . International Journal of Medical Informatics , 68 , 59 – 70 . 20 . Peleg , M . , Samson , T . , Bury , J . , et al . ( 2003 ) Comparing computer - interpretable guideline models : a case - study approach . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 10 , 52 – 68 . 21 . Tu , S . W . , Husen , M . A . , Shankar , R . , et al . ( 2004 ) Modeling guide - lines for integration into clinical workﬂow . Studies in Health Technol - ogy and Informatics , 107 , 174 – 178 . 22 . Buchtela , D . , Peleška , J . , Veselý , A . , Zvárová , J . & Zvolský , M . ( 2008 ) Formalization of clinical practice guidelines . In eHealth Beyond the Horizon – Get IT There . Proceedings of the 21st International Con - gress of the European Federation of Medical Informatics ( MIE 2008 ) , Göteborg , Sweden , vol . 136 of Studies in Health Technology and Informatics , pp . 152 – 156 . Amsterdam : IOS Press . 23 . Shiffman , R . N . , Michel , G . , Essaihi , A . & Thornquist , E . ( 2004 ) Bridging the guideline implementation gap : a systematic , document - Information requisition for CPG - based care T . Gschwandtner et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 8