Medical Secretaries’ Care of Records : The Cooperative Work of a Non - clinical Group Claus Bossen 1 , Lotte Groth Jensen 2 , Flemming Witt 2 1 Information Studies , Aarhus University Helsingforsgade 14 , 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark imvcb @ hum . au . dk 2 Health Technology Assessment , Aarhus University Oluf Palmes Alle 15 , 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark { Lotte . Groth ; Flemming . Witt } @ stab . rm . dk ABSTRACT We describe the cooperative work of medical secretaries at two hospital departments , during the implementation of an electronic health record system . Medical secretaries’ core task is to take care of patient records by ensuring that information is complete , up to date , and correctly coded . Medical secretaries also do information gatekeeping and articulation work . The EHR implementation stressed their importance to the departments’ work arrangements , coupled their work more tightly to that of other staff , and led to task drift among professions . While medical secretaries have been relatively invisible to health informatics and CSCW , this case study identifies their importance , and suggests that they and other non - clinical groups should be considered , when developing health care IT . We propose the term ‘boundary - object trimming’ , to conceptualize their contributions to hospitals’ cooperative work arrangements . Author Keywords Electronic health records , health care , medical secretaries , invisible work , non - clinical groups . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization Interfaces – Computer supported cooperative work . General Terms Human Factors ; Theory INTRODUCTION In this paper , we describe the work of medical secretaries , and their role in the cooperative work arrangements of hospitals . Medical secretaries are part of any larger medical practice or hospital , and schedule patients , transcribe physicians’ notes , and ensure the completeness of records . The medical secretaries’ importance became evident during the study of the implementation of a comprehensive electronic health record system ( EHR ) at a Danish regional hospital . Among other things , implementing the EHR slowed medical secretaries’ writing - up of physicians’ notes , with repercussions for physicians and nurses in particular , in terms of their proceeding with their work . Consequently , the implementation plan changed radically : The first scheduled upgrade consisted almost entirely of upgrades that mitigated the challenges the EHR presented to the medical secretaries . The implementation of the EHR was part of ongoing efforts in Denmark , where , since the mid - 1990s , national IT strategies have set high goals for the development and implementation of cross - professional , structured records that enhance clinical work , planning , and research . Substantial capital and high expectations have also been , and continue to be invested in EHRs and health information systems in the USA [ 9 ] and in European countries , such as the UK [ 15 ] , Austria [ 16 ] , and Norway [ 18 ] . Greenhalgh et al . present a comprehensive overview of EHR studies [ 23 ] . CSCW has contributed to the efforts to develop IT systems for health care , with studies of emergency departments , surgical wards , inpatient wards , and laboratories [ 5 ; 10 ] , analyses of temporal and spatial aspects of cooperative work and awareness [ 4 ; 27 ] , discussions of the role of representation and categorization in developing EHRs , and the challenges involved in their implementation [ 3 ; 12 ; 31 ] . Most studies focus on the cooperative work of physicians and nurses , while non - clinical staff , such as pharmacists and hospital porters , receive less attention . We argue that medical secretaries have a central role in hospital work arrangements . Along with other non - clinical groups , they are likely to become increasingly relevant to the design and implementation of health care IT , in the shift from stand - alone systems to integrated infrastructures . We suggest the term ‘boundary - object trimming’ , to conceptualize their contributions to health care . BACKGROUND The focus on physicians and nurses in EHR - study design and implementation is understandable , considering the important and emblematic roles of these professions in health care . When browsing the ACM library portal and two medical informatics journals ( Int J Med Inform ; J Am Med Inform Assn ) , we found only one study that focused on medical secretaries : It describes the central role of the unit secretary in the information - seeking activities of a multidisciplinary team at an emergency department [ 40 ] . Medical secretaries are also mentioned in passing in other research on collaborative information - seeking [ 34 ; 37 ; 38 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted , without fee , provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage , and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers , or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CSCW’12 , February 11 – 15 , 2012 , Seattle , Washington , USA . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1086 - 4 / 12 / 02 . . . $ 10 . 00 . Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 921 We also found one study on patient transfers , which mentions an unspecified group of non - clinical staff [ 1 ] . Along with other non - clinical hospital staff , medical secretaries seem to be mostly invisible , a fate they share with secretaries and assistants more generally . Erickson et al . ( 2008 ) found that ‘There appear to be no studies that explicitly focus on the work of administrative assistants in the HCI or CSCW literature . ’ [ 19 : 610 ] . Erickson et al . describe the skills and knowledge required for administrative assistant work , and suggest the term ‘articulation workers’ for administrative assistants . One reason for the invisibility of secretaries and administrative assistants may be that their work , like that of technicians , is typically regarded as routine , unskilled , or not ‘knowledge work’ [ 7 ; 21 ] . Yet , as several studies in CSCW reveal , the work of telephone operators and copy machine technicians , for example , requires knowledge and skill , and is important to their organizations [ 11 ; 32 ; 33 ] . Since making work visible is pertinent to CSCW [ 42 ; 45 ] , the apparent invisibility of clerical work is something of an enigma . Occupations , Cooperative Work , and Tasks Medical secretaries are part of hospitals’ organizational orders , which may be understood as the result of the actors’ ongoing interactions and technologies , which facilitate and stabilize complex , cooperative work arrangements [ 39 ; 43 ] . Strauss’s interactional approach to action aims to make visible the efforts involved in the actions and interactions between actors [ 43 ] . Cooperative action and work emerge as accomplishments arising from actors’ alignment of their actions with those of co - actors , task articulation , and the coordination of work trajectories with the requirements of other co - actors’ work and recursive interdependencies . The effort of alignment and articulation may be minimized by routinizing interaction , and working out standard operating procedures ( SOP ) , which may stipulate courses of action and interaction . As cooperation becomes more complex and broader in scope , actors may work out arrangements : temporarily stabilized agreements that may include division of work and work roles , including , for example , descriptions of responsibilities , required skills , and accountability [ 43 ] . SOPs and arrangements are often formalized and inscribed on paper or in computers . As coordination mechanisms , they facilitate cooperative action , enable communication , and provide updated information on work status . Multiple coordination mechanisms may be organized into ordering systems : complexes of interrelated practices and artefacts . These enable cooperative , coordinated interactions of greater complexity and scope than otherwise possible [ 39 ] . The multiple actors or groups of actors involved in a cooperative effort often do not share the same work objects . The analytic advantage of keeping this in mind is evident in the case of pregnant women , who , during foetal surgery , become two work objects : To surgeons , the unborn child is the primary work object , while the mother is secondary , a practical and juridical barrier to be addressed ; on the other hand , nurses regard the mother as their primary work object , and concern themselves with her survival and well - being [ 14 ] . Similarly , cooperating groups of actors may be unfamiliar with the perspectives , aims , and scope of other actors’ work . Hence , the coordination mechanisms become boundary objects that facilitate and stabilize cooperation between different social worlds , whose actors relate differently to , but cooperate through these [ 41 ] . From this perspective , hospitals emerge as temporarily stabilized orderings of actors and technologies , in which roles , groups , divisions of work , and so forth , are established through cooperative work arrangements , enabled and stabilized by coordination mechanisms and ordering systems . Professions such as medicine and nursing , and occupations such as medical laboratory technician , hospital porter , and medical secretary , align their tasks and actions , and cooperate through SOPs and arrangements inscribed on whiteboards , paper , and in IT systems such as EHRs . As boundary objects , these enable cooperation across the various social worlds of professions and departments . Sustaining work arrangements requires ongoing effort , and they are under constant pressure for renegotiation . Since coordination mechanisms are constitutive of the complex arrangements , changes in technologies are likely to entail changes in work arrangements , including work roles , task distribution , and responsibilities . The outcome of the changes emerges from the interactional processes following the changes in technology , and may lead to the expanded or reduced role of a profession or group , with regard to responsibility , tasks , remuneration , and so on , depending , amongst other things , on the acumen and power of the various groups , including management [ 2 ; 6 ; 13 ] . RESEARCH SETTING , CONTEXT , AND METHODS We conducted qualitative and quantitative studies at the endocrinology and emergency departments at Regional Hospital in Central Region , one of five regions in Denmark . Regional Hospital has a staff of about 2000 , including 300 physicians , 970 nurses , 130 medical secretaries , and 80 physiotherapists . It is one of the most effective nationally , has 360 beds , and 30 , 000 admissions annually , of which 85 % are acute cases . Yearly , the outpatient clinics receive 110 , 000 patients . The endocrinology department has 167 beds , and about 12 , 500 admissions yearly , of which 90 % are acute cases . It has a staff of 65 physicians , 169 nurses , 8 physiotherapists , and 30 medical secretaries . It consists of eight wards : stroke services , dialysis , cardiology , rheumatology , gastroenterology , diabetes , outpatient cardiac care , respiratory medicine . Its outpatient clinic receives about 15 , 000 patients yearly . The emergency department treats 32 , 000 acute cases annually , and employs 40 nurses , 12 health - care workers , and 5 medical secretaries . Context : Implementation of a Comprehensive EHR The study of the medical secretaries was conducted in the context of the implementation of a ‘comprehensive’ EHR . Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 922 The EHR comprises modules for booking , test requisitions and results , administration of medication , patient administration , and clinical documentation . The Booking , Requisition / Results , and Medication modules had already been implemented at Regional Hospital some years earlier . A previous patient administrative system ( PAS ) called the G REEN S YSTEM was to be replaced by a new module , which we will henceforth call ‘PAS’ . The module for documenting clinical work , C LINICAL P ROCESS , was entirely new , and replaced all paper - based records kept by physicians , nurses , physiotherapists , midwives , and so on . It was the first time the Central Region implemented an EHR that included such a broad and integrated range of functionalities . The EHR did not integrate the picture archiving and communication systems or the microbiology system . Thus , the region described it as ‘comprehensive’ , and not ‘complete’ . Of special interest to this study is the PAS , since one of the core tasks of medical secretaries is patient administration . In the PAS , patient data ( name , social security number , address , relatives , etc . ) are registered along with admissions to , and discharges from departments at Regional Hospital , as are transfers to other hospitals . Of interest is also C LINICAL P ROCESS , in which clinicians were to document treatment and care in a structured manner , using a wide range of menus and fields shaped by staff at Regional Hospital . Where appropriate , codes for documenting treatment and care are linked to the menus and text fields . For example , the new EHR automatically reports codes for Diagnosis Related Groups ( DRG ) – used for reimbursing the hospital for its activities – to the National Board of Health . Registration and reporting of DRG codes was , and to some extent remains a core task of medical secretaries . The EHR was implemented in three phases in the spring of 2010 . The first and major phase involved the endocrinology and emergency departments , discussed here . Data Collection and Analysis This paper builds on data generated during a larger study conducted in the first half of 2010 . It was commissioned by the region , and aimed to evaluate the clinical applicability of the EHR and changes in work practices at the endocrinology and emergency departments at Regional Hospital . Because the region urgently needed to decide whether or not to implement the EHR at other hospitals , the study was conducted during the shakedown phase , just before and after implementation . It may take up to a year before an organization stabilizes , since further changes evolve , as work practices and arrangements are recursively aligned . However , evaluation studies during the shakedown phase are important , and may provide valuable insights [ 26 ] . The larger study was devised as a mixed - methods case study [ 47 ] , and focused on four professions ( physicians , nurses , physiotherapists , and medical secretaries ) . It combined qualitative interviews , ethnographic observation , and a quantitative survey . Observations of the four professional groups were mainly conducted before implementation , to learn about their work practices and organization ( in all , 64 hrs ; 42 hrs before , 22 hrs after implementation ) . Also included was observation of expert - user meetings ( 10 ) , and implementation management meetings ( 14 ) , following implementation . Observation notes were written up as extended text immediately afterwards . This data also informed interview guides and the design of the survey . All interviews were conducted after implementation , to obtain the staff’s evaluation of the EHR : 13 individual interviews were conducted before the survey , and were also used to inform its design ; 7 group interviews were conducted after the survey , and also used to validate survey results . The project was approved by the hospital directors and department heads , and presented at staff meetings , noting that participation was voluntary . Permission to observe and interview was obtained verbally , as research advanced . All interviews were transcribed and analysed by two of the authors . The quantitative survey was conducted six weeks after implementation ( n = 225 , 58 % response rate ) , and analysed for significant patterns . Nurses , therapists , physicians , and medical secretaries were generally satisfied with the EHR , though there was room , and at some points a need for improvements . The latter two groups were most critical . Not all data from the survey ( 40 + questions ) is relevant to this paper , and is only included where medical secretaries deviated from the general trend . The analysis of the medical secretaries’ responses draws on data generated by the larger study , as well as the data specifically concerning medical secretaries . This includes three individual interviews ( lasting between 54 and 67 min . ) and one group interview ( lasting 80 min . ; 4 participants ) , eleven hours of observation , and the survey data ( n = 6 medical secretaries , response rate 87 % ) . The latter sample is very small , and would be unreliable on its own . However , the medical secretaries’ relatively critical stance in the survey is supported by the interviews and observations of the expert - user and implementation management meetings , where they were very vocal . When possible , their concerns led to immediate software upgrades , as well as to a radical rescheduling of the first planned upgrade , three months after implementation . The generated data have been read and reanalysed , in order to understand the work of medical secretaries , their cooperation with other professions , use of various artefacts , and the changes the EHRs involved . MEDICAL SECRETARIES’ WORK PRECEDING THE EHR To become a medical secretary in Denmark , one must have a high school degree , followed by a certified , two - year vocational education that includes courses in medical terminology , office software , transcribing and information technology . In this section , we describe their work at Regional Hospital , prior to the implementation of the EHR . Maintaining Accurate Records Ruth arrives at her office in the Gastroenterology Department at 7 . 00 , and starts her computer . From a letter tray on her desk , she Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 923 takes printed discharge summaries for patients discharged the previous day . She transcribed the summaries yesterday , but could not enter them into the record until the nurse had finalized her notes , and left the record on Ruth’s desk . The discharge summary is filed under the appropriate tabs , first in the record , but also in the file for physicians’ ongoing notes , of which the summary is also part . She writes the discharge date on a table on the front page of the record , and places the record on one of two shelves . One shelf is for records with summaries dictated by junior physicians , which must be checked by a senior physician before an internal messenger takes them to the record archive . Another shelf is for records with summaries dictated by senior physicians , which the messenger may take directly to the archive . Ruth then turns to her computer , finds the data file for a given patient by entering her or his social security number , enters the discharge date , and closes the patient’s admission record . Medical secretaries participate in the cooperative work surrounding patients . Although they are only infrequently in contact with patients , they contribute to the maintenance of patient records , and do so in a way that is aligned with departmental work arrangements . In the case of discharged patients , the medical secretaries ‘tidy’ the records before they go into the archives . ‘Tidying’ includes a number of tasks : Medical secretaries ensure that all transcribed physicians’ notes and examination results are in the record folder . They enter the physicians’ final diagnoses into the G REEN S YSTEM as DRG codes , based on the discharge summaries . The system accumulates codes , and , on a monthly basis , reports them to the National Board of Health , which uses them to reimburse the hospital , thus , entering the codes in the G REEN S YSTEM is one of the medical secretaries’ crucial tasks , as far as the hospital administration is concerned . Tidying records also includes entering the status of a discharged patient in a table at the front of the paper - based record , and in the G REEN S YSTEM . Furthermore , records are sorted into two stacks , to facilitate a quality - control procedure between junior and senior physicians : Discharge summaries written by the former are read and evaluated by the latter . All records are kept in Ruth’s office for a week following discharge , in case test results arrive , and have to be added to the record . Ruth and her colleagues are also in charge of communication between her department and the archive , and of requesting and returning records on behalf of nurses and physicians . Ruth accomplishes her work by using several ordering systems . One comprises paper - based records , and consists of folders , drawers , binders , and trolleys sized for A4 paper . Another consists of digital systems , such as the G REEN S YSTEM , the database in which patients’ personal data , and admissions and diagnosis codes are registered . Whereas paper - based records are primarily used by clinicians when treating and caring for patients , the G REEN S YSTEM is mainly used by medical secretaries , to track patient admissions , discharges , and bookings , and store transcribed physicians’ notes . However , nurses may also use it , when the medical secretaries are busy . Locating Patient Records Continuing to go through the records , Ruth stops at one particular record . She enters the G REEN S YSTEM , and writes a message to the records archive , headed ‘Write on the bag’ : ‘Hey archive girls ! I’m sending this record to the outpatient clinic’ . ‘The bag’ is a record’s folder in the archives , whose staff Ruth addresses jocularly as ‘archive girls’ . Her message is intended to remind the archive staff to write the record’s destined location on the folder . It is quicker , and less work to send the record directly to the other department , instead of via the archive , which does , however , need to know the record’s location , should someone else need it . Locating patient records is often a challenge . Patients move between departments , and may have multiple admissions , and the location of the record is not always noted on ‘the bag’ . According to Ruth , there are generally two ways to locate a record whose location is unknown : look it up in the G REEN S YSTEM to see whether the patient has admissions or bookings at other departments , or contact the department to which the patient was last admitted . Transcribing Physicians’ Notes Having taken care of the records of discharged patients , Ruth returns to her computer , and enters the S PEECH D ICTATE S YSTEM , to see whether there are physicians’ notes that have not yet been transcribed . There are three sets . She listens to the first seconds of the first note , for the patient’s social security number , and enters the number in the G REEN S YSTEM , to find the patient’s file in the system . In the patient’s file , she clicks on a link to start the digital N OTE E DITOR , and begins writing . She puts on headphones , and starts and stops the S PEECH D ICTATE S YSTEM by pressing a pedal . Having finished the first dictation , she clicks on a button in the N OTE E DITOR , which sends the written text to the G REEN S YSTEM , from which Ruth prints it . She picks up the notes from the printer in the nurses’ office , and puts it into the patient’s record , in a letter tray on a shelf in the nurses’ office . One of the medical secretaries’ core tasks is writing out physicians’ notes . This is achieved by switching between three digital systems . The S PEECH D ICTATE S YSTEM stores sound files of physicians’ dictation , using recorders kept in the nurses’ office , where the patient records are kept , and rounds planned and finalized . The sound files are stored centrally in a common database , though sorted according to priority and by department . Hence , medical secretaries can take care of their own department’s dictation , and also help colleagues at other departments if they fall behind , and they have spare time . Hence , transcribing is shared among medical secretaries at different departments . On the recorder , physicians must enter numerical codes , to identify the kind of note they have made . In order of priority , these are : ‘11’ for new or acute patients , ‘12’ for ward round dictation , ‘22’ for outpatients , and ‘14’ for discharge summaries . The codes show up in the S PEECH D ICTATE S YSTEM , and allow medical secretaries to prioritize transcribing , though they also consider the work pressure on their own ward . Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 924 Transcribing is a Skilled Activity In her office at the at the haematology department , Karen repeatedly listens to the same sound bite . The physician states a treatment , but Karen can only distinguish the last part : ‘… [ incomprehensible ] manoeuvre…’ . She phones a colleague at another ward , who is better acquainted with the terminology of this medical specialty , and plays the sound bite into the receiver . However , the colleague cannot make out the term either , so Karen transcribes the rest of the note , prints it , marks the problematic term in red , and sends it by internal mail to the physician who dictated the note . Situations such as this abound , when medical secretaries transcribe . They have to check terms in medical dictionaries , or consult colleagues with more expertise in a particular medical area . Accuracy is crucial , since slight differences may completely alter a diagnosis . For example , as one physician explained : ‘encephalitis’ is an inflammation of the brain , whereas ‘ ( hepatic ) encephalopathy’ is caused by liver dysfunction , and the two diagnoses entail entirely different treatment . Hearing the difference between terms may be difficult , and requires a trained ear . As is typing in general [ 22 ] , transcribing notes is a skilled activity : Secretaries switch between digital systems , and simultaneously listen , type , and use the pedal , while differentiat ing between similar , sometimes unintelligible medical terms . Booking At about 9 . 00 , Ruth starts to book patients for enteroscopy . She goes through the small stack of requisitions on her desk , checks that each enteroscopy requisition is registered in the G REEN S YSTEM , searches for a time slot in the B OOKING M ODULE , and books the examination . Then she puts the requisitions into binders on one of the shelves in her office . Because Ruth is working on a ward that also has an outpatient clinic , one of her tasks is to book examinations . After booking an examination , she prints a patient notification letter , and sends it , together with informational folders about the examination , and dietary and fasting requirements , by ordinary post . Later , patients may phone to inquire about examinations , rescheduling , or cancellations . Information Gatekeepers During her transcribing of physicians’ notes , Karen is interrupted several times by phone calls . In one instance , a relative wants to hear more about what occurred when a now - discharged patient was on the ward . Karen puts the relative on hold , phones the nurses’ office , and is fortunate to be answered by a nurse who cared for that patient . She connects the relative and the nurse , and terminates the call at her end . In another instance , the local suicide prevention centre would like to see the summary for a newly discharged patient . Luckily , the record is still on a shelf in her office , and she can take the summary from the record , and fax it to the suicide prevention centre . Medical secretaries handle numerous inquiries by clinicians and other staff at the department , other departments , relatives , and other entities , external to the hospital . They are contacted about matters that concern the location of patient records , non - clinical data ( addresses , DRG codes , etc . ) , bookings , or more generally , connecting people with questions to people with answers . Thus , being information gatekeepers is one of their central tasks [ 40 ] . Miscellaneous Tasks Medical secretaries also take care of a range of other tasks , such as ordering and returning office equipment , or special mattresses for patients with bedsores , and guiding relatives and taxi - drivers bringing flowers to the patients’ rooms . The Cooperative Work of Medical Secretaries Medical secretaries may be said to handle the non - clinical aspects of patient treatment trajectories and patient records . They record and coordinate admissions , bookings , and discharges , register and report DRG codes to the National Board of Health , request and retrieve records from the archives , locate records , or pass them along to other staff . They transcribe physicians’ notes , act as intermediaries between relatives , patients , and staff , and carry out various other tasks . Their work is not mere routine , but requires skill and applied knowledge . They are information gatekeepers , as well as articulation workers [ 19 ; 40 ] . Since the 1980s , medical secretaries’ work has been undergoing computerization , to which the G REEN S YSTEM , S PEECH D ICTATE S YSTEM , and N OTE E DITOR testify . Though not integrated with the patient records , these systems are parts of the department’s ordering system . The secretaries’ primary work arrangement is that of the department and its physicians and nurses , with whom they align and coordinate their work . But they are also part of a cooperative arrangement of other medical secretaries , whom they help with transcribing and the handling of records . While patient records form an ordering system shared by medical secretaries , nurses , and physicians , their stance on it is different . The primary work object of physicians and nurses is the patient : The patient record , its information channels and formal aspects , merely document and record patient care . To medical secretaries , the records and the information channels themselves are the primary work objects , whose completeness , integrity , and formal aspects they take care of . Whereas clinicians are patient caretakers , medical secretaries are record caretakers . THE NEW WORK OF MEDICAL SECRETARIES The most apparent and immediate change for the medical secretaries was the replacement of the G REEN S YSTEM with the new PAS that was integrated into the EHR . The G REEN S YSTEM had been used at most hospitals in Denmark , including Regional Hospital , since the late 1980s . Thus , medical secretaries were very proficient in its use , and could manoeuvre about in it with optimal speed . Therefore , the implementation group and the secretaries themselves anticipated that deploying the EHR would cause frustration , since it was expected that it would take some time for the medical secretaries to recover their previous proficiency . Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 925 The implementation strategy was based on minimal instruction in the new system prior to implementation , with extensive local support during the first 14 days of use . Nevertheless , the medical secretaries received more training than any other group , because their learning curve was expected to be steeper . As it turned out , that prediction was correct , and , along with the physicians , the secretaries were the most critical group in the survey . Their difficulties had repercussions for the other groups , and included shifts in tasks and responsibilities , some being abolished , new ones emerging , and others shifting between occupations . Transcribing Becomes More Cumbersome One immediate effect of the new EHR was that transcribing notes took longer . Statistics from N OTE E DITOR reveal that during the first 12 weeks following implementation , the transcription ratio ( min . of writing / min . physician dictation ) rose from an average of 6 , preceding the implementation of the EHR , to 9 during the first week of use , then settled near an average of 7 , during weeks 5 to 12 after implementation ( Table 1 ) . The total number of untranscribed notes grew steadily to 813 during the first 12 weeks following implementation , compared to about 50 to 60 unwritten notes previously . Since the statistics from N OTE E DITOR also show that neither the number nor the length of notes grew ( Table 2 ) , the increase in untranscribed notes must be attributed to the rise in the transcription ratio caused by the PAS module . Hospital management initially asked the medical secretaries to work overtime , but later had to hire outside help . 0 2 4 6 8 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Table 1 . Transcription ratio ( min . of transcribing / min . of dictation ) . Weeks 1 – 4 before implementation , weeks 5 – 16 after During our interviews , and in the reports to the hospital’s implementation group , the medical secretaries identified a combination of HCI issues and slow functionality as the causes of their predicament . For example , when writing discharge summaries , they first had to enter the current date and the physician’s name in fields at the very bottom of the screen , and then write the actual note in a field at the very top of the screen . This meant scrolling up and down when writing each summary . They also complained of too many mouse - clicks , and a lack of keyboard short cuts . The new PAS also made some tasks more rigid . Previously , medical secretaries just wrote the name of a physician or a diagnosis code in a discharge summary , but they now had to upload these through a browser from a database . However , both the diagnosis and the physician identification browsers were frustratingly slow : ‘I start the browser , then I go to the shelves for records while I wait’ , Karen stated . The untranscribed notes were a major problem for physicians and nurses , since the notes are the primary means of communication about patients among staff and across shifts . Without notes , they lacked access to previous diagnoses , plans , and prescriptions , unless they could contact the physician responsible for these . Proceeding with treatment and care became difficult , a serious situation with critically ill patients . As the problem of untranscribed notes was not resolved , despite investing more resources and hours in transcribing , the implementation group and the system supplier renegotiated the next upgrade of the EHR , scheduled for a few months later , and designed functionality that addressed medical secretaries’ highest priorities , a move that stresses the importance of their work to the department . 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 X = weeks , Y : = length of notes ( sec . ) , = no . of notes per day Table 2 . Average number and length of notes Tighter Coupling to Other Professions The new EHR combined the G REEN S YSTEM and the paper - based physicians’ and nurses’ records into one integrated system . Medical secretaries , nurses , and physicians now shared the same artefact , and could respond immediately to updates . This also meant that their work practices became more tightly coordinated and interdependent . For example , previously , medical secretaries discharged patients via the G REEN S YSTEM , after having written up the physician’s discharge summary , while nurses finalized their documentation in parallel to , and independently of that . The new , cross - professional record integrated nurses’ and physicians’ notes in C LINICAL P ROCESS . Physicians often dictated their discharge summary before the nurses had completed their documentation of a patient’s care , and while the secretaries could write the summary , they could not send it until the nurses had finished their documentation , and the patient was registered in the PAS as discharged . Hence , they had to check patient records occasionally , to see whether this had occurred , which entailed a bit more work for them . This tighter coupling also affected physicians’ notes more generally . When dictating , physicians at the department Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 926 usually followed a recommended structure for going through diagnosis , treatment , prescriptions , and so on . In the EHR , the elements of this structure appear as separate fields , in order to structure data on patients , diagnoses , treatment , and so forth . For example , a note of a physician’s round must have the following structure : Record for < patient name > , < patient social security number > , by < physician name > , Objective observations , Conclusion ( e . g . diagnosis ) , Plan , and Prescriptions . If physicians follow this structure , transcribing is no more complicated than previously , since they can ‘jump’ down the screen in the same order as that in the dictated notes . If physicians do not follow the template , transcribing takes significantly longer , since medical secretaries have to scroll up and down to enter the information in the correct fields . Physicians may not follow the template , either out of habit or because they think it leads to notes of lesser quality : For patients with multiple diagnoses , the template requires that these be listed separately from the prescriptions ( diagnoses in one field , prescriptions in another ) , which means that the reasoning behind prescriptions is listed separately , and must be inferred , instead of being explicated in the case narrative . Medical secretaries’ and nurses’ tasks also became more tightly coupled . For example , nurses are responsible for initiating the plans to which care , examinations , and treatment are linked , and which are basic elements of the EHR . Since nurses are often busy , they do not always register activities in the EHR in real time . To nurses , this makes little difference , since they seldom document in real time . However , for the medical secretaries this means that they cannot register the actual time of admission when transcribing admission notes . They have to either use the start time indicated in the EHR , which may be three hours late , or correct the time of admission in the EHR . The former is incorrect ; the latter requires more effort and time . Organizing Records …as a medical secretary , you’ve been taught that your work must be in order . Times must be exact . It is really important . When a patient dies , you register the exact time that it happens . Now it happens that nurses do not have time to register a death until sometime during the night . Then we register a death at 23 . 00 , even though the patient died at 19 . 00 . It is not right . It is frustrating , when you have been taught to register when things happen . ( Head medical secretary ) The implementation of the EHR imposed changes that affected the work ethic of the medical secretaries , as described in the statement above . They regarded the maintenance of orderly and accurate records as one of their core tasks . Not registering data at the correct time was one challenge to this ethic , while finishing records following discharge was another . As mentioned , the EHR makes use of plans that health care staff activate on admission , and when commencing new treatment or care activities . These plans must be closed once completed , but , particularly when patients are discharged , this is not always done . Medical secretaries tried to close them , and tidy the records as part of the process of writing the discharge summary , as they had done previously with the paper - based records . However , this was not always possible , because some plans were ongoing , and might be part of a patient’s visits to the outpatient clinic , for example . Only physicians and nurses have the clinical insight to judge whether or not plans should be closed , and therefore the medical secretaries could not tidy the records as accurately as they wished . Task Drift among Professions The problems related to initiating and closing plans are linked to task drift , that is , tasks originally performed by one group being executed by another group . Usually , the trend is for routine tasks to move down the hierarchy . With the EHR , PAS functionality is no longer a separate system like the G REEN S YSTEM , but integrated with other functionalities . Hence , these functionalities are more easily accessible to others , as well as to secretaries . For example , nurses can now access the functionality for discharging patients , which poses the question of whether nurses should register discharges , which would make sense if real - time registration is pursued , or whether the secretaries should continue to do this , which might mean that they are not be registered until the next morning , when they write the discharge summary . Similar examples of task drift are physicians themselves writing ( short ) notes or registering diagnosis codes in the EHR , and nurses printing labels . Discarding Old Tasks and Acquiring New Ones A funny incident occurred the other day . We have medical secretaries who work at home . This raised the question : Who is going to tidy , take transcriptions from the printer , and put them into record binders ? And I said : ‘But there is nothing coming out of the printer’ . ( Head medical secretary ) An important effect of the EHR , almost overlooked in the interviews , is that medical secretaries no longer have to print and distribute notes into the ( paper - based ) records anymore : Transcriptions go directly into the EHR . Similarly , they do not have to spend as much time locating records as previously , though this still requires some of their attention , since paper records are still relevant for some patients . Another obsolete task is the registration of certain services by therapists and nurses , for which they previously had to register the codes , in order for the hospital to be reimbursed by the National Board of Health . Before , physiotherapists would document their work with patients in their own records , and leave a note in the nurses’ office . The medical secretary would pick it up , and register the service codes in the G REEN S YSTEM . Now , the therapists’ records are part of the EHR , and the codes are automatically reported . As already mentioned , nurses did some of the same administrative tasks as medical secretaries , and still do . Nurses now transfer patients between departments at the hospital , or to other hospitals , and discharge them from the hospital . However , this creates more work for the secretaries : Nurses sometimes transfer patients incorrectly , and since only the receiving department can correct the Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 927 error , medical secretaries have to wait for that to happen . Therefore , they maintain lists of incorrectly transferred or discharged patients , so that they can complete the administrative work on a patient , when the error has been corrected ( e . g . send a discharge summary to the general practitioner ) . Tidying has become more complicated , since the work arrangement surrounding it is more complex , and tasks and responsibilities drift between professions . Whether medical secretaries now have fewer or more tasks , and less or more work is difficult to assess , since the gains of not having to print , distribute print - outs , locate records , and request records and return them to the archives are currently overshadowed by the extra work needed for transcribing . As the only group surveyed , they did not think that EHR had reduced their work load . The New Cooperative Work Arrangement The problem of physicians’ untranscribed notes made clear the importance of the medical secretaries’ work to all at the two departments and to management , as evidenced by the revision of the first scheduled upgrade of the EHR . The EHR involved a systemic integration of medical secretaries’ work with that of physicians and nurses . The previous division of work had been partly effected and supported by the media used for patient administration . In the integrated , comprehensive EHR , the G REEN S YSTEM was replaced by the PAS , and physicians’ and nurses’ records were replaced by C LINICAL P ROCESS , which was accessible to all groups . This more tightly coupled tasks , which became more dependent on one another , with regard to accuracy and timeliness . Also , some tasks , such as registering discharges , entering diagnosis codes , and assuming responsibility for initiating the closing of plans in the EHR , tended to drift among groups of staff . While a major benefit of the EHR for the medical secretaries was that they no longer had to print and distribute physicians’ notes , or request , return , and locate patient records , they also acquired new tasks , such as keeping records of patient files that were not yet in order . The tighter coupling , task drift , and new tasks meant that they could no longer tidy records as thoroughly as before , which challenged their work ethic . The formal distinctions among occupations and professions remain , but the new work arrangements that had to be established created possibilities for desirable and undesirable expansion and reduction of roles . For example , some physicians regarded the option of writing notes themselves as a yet another effort on the part of management to delegate more tasks to them . Nurses did not reject the tasks of admitting and discharging patients in the PAS , because it integrates with the writing of care summaries . Medical secretaries , however , were more anxious during this process , since some of their tasks were now automated ( e . g . DRG coding ) or partly assumed by other groups ( e . g . note writing , admission , and discharge ) , and the extent of their new tasks was not entirely clear . The results remain to be seen , as the outcomes of implementing new technology are not givens [ 2 ; 6 ] . At the time of our study , shortly after implementation , a new arrangement had not yet stabilized . DISCUSSION Computerization of medical secretaries’ work has been ongoing since the late 1980s , though unnoticed by CSCW , CHI , and medical informatics . Yet , as efforts to develop health care IT move from stand - alone systems to integrated infrastructures such as EHRs , medical secretaries’ work may receive more attention . Moreover , as the information infrastructures in health care incorporate more groups , other non - clinical staff may also become increasingly relevant . The invisibility of medical secretaries to CSCW and related fields may have several explanations : Until recently , private and public efforts to digitize health care have focused on physicians and nurses , and research may have reflected that focus ; medical secretaries may appear to work alone in their offices , cut off from the hum of other staff activity by headphones ( Figure 1 ) ; or , they may have been perceived as holdovers from the field of Office Automation , which faded in the mid - 1980s , when the field of CSCW emerged [ 24 ] . Medical secretaries are unlikely to become obsolete . The skills of registering , transcribing medical terms , and information gatekeeping are unlikely to be fully replaceable by IT . Moreover , the emergence of infrastructures such as EHRs is part of an increasing demand for accountability to other parties , such as management and health care authorities [ 36 ] . This will demand continued effort , to ensure the accuracy , completeness , and integrity of data . Since clinicians are costly , on call , and prefer clinical tasks to administrative ones , medical secretaries’ care of records should continue to be in demand . The roles of clerical staff as intermediaries , information gatekeepers , and articulation workers should not be underestimated [ 17 ] . As studies have revealed , clerical work is rarely mere routine , but requires knowledge and skill . If this is disregarded , the development of IT may lose central functionalities . Archive staff may execute tasks important to hospitals’ work arrangements : As medical secretaries do not merely ‘transcribe notes’ ; archive staff may not just ‘archive records’ . There seem to be at least two ways to increase the visibility of medical secretaries and other non - clinical staff : one is to conduct studies with and of archive staff , pharmacists , porters , and so on , to describe their work , which may prove relevant to the development of health care IT ; another is to pursue a research strategy of ‘following the object’ , rather than following the actors [ 25 ; 28 ] . With patient records , this might have led researchers into the offices of the medical secretaries , and down to the cellar , to the records archives . It might also have led from the ward to hospital management , and to the National Board of Health : What kind of work relevant to the design of EHRs might be performed there ? Boundary - object Trimming The primary work object of the medical secretaries is the EHR , to which they attend in its formal aspects . They are Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 928 not concerned with the actual diagnoses and care plans , but with whether diagnoses have been entered , care and treatment properly coded , and with the completeness of information : Has all dictation been transcribed and entered into the EHR ? Are all examination and test results recorded ? Have appropriate plans been initiated and terminated ? Until now , we have informally called this work ‘tidying’ , and contrasted medical secretaries’ care of records with clinicians’ care of patients . In the interactional approach’s efforts to make visible the interaction and work [ 42 ; 45 ] , we propose defining this as boundary - object trimming . Originated by Star and Griesemer [ 41 ] , the concept of the boundary object has been widely used , and several studies have contributed to a nuanced understanding of it . Fujimura emphasizes the need to augment the robustness rather than the plasticity of boundary objects , when these have to travel between diverse social worlds , and suggested the term ‘standardized package’ [ 20 ] . Lee argues that not all objects that travel between social worlds are boundary objects : Non - standardized , temporary objects may be used to negotiate boundaries between groups [ 29 ; See also 35 ] . Finally , boundary objects should not be considered static . Lutters and Ackerman describe boundary objects that are in flux , as the work of which they are part changes . They are ‘punctuated crystallizations’ of information , interpreted in the context of their production [ 30 ] . Subrahmanian et al . describe how changes in organization threaten to make boundary objects useless , as their information becomes irrelevant , and interpretations in different social worlds diverge [ 44 ] . The two last - mentioned studies indicate the importance of the ongoing maintenance of boundary objects . To a large extent , this is what medical secretaries do , when they ‘tidy’ medical records . In the paper record , they wrote notes and inserted these , along with examination and test results , into the record folders . They added codes , ensured the completeness of the record before sending it to the archives or another department , and kept track of its location . Though somewhat differently executed , much of this tidying work continues with the EHR : Secretaries write notes , add codes , and try to ensure the completeness of the record by closing initiated plans . They maintain the records , so that they may function effectively as boundary objects . Strauss called actors’ reflexive monitoring of their own and other actors’ actions , and the projection of future ones , the ‘gyroscopic source’ for coordinating different courses of action for common goals [ 43 , p37 ] . Boundary objects have a similar stabilizing effect on the interactional courses of cooperative work , as long as they are useful and appropriate to that work : Their structural forms and informational content must be maintained and updated , which may be accomplished during use , but may also be delegated to a group of staff . In the same way , ‘articulation work’ may be an integral part of action , but may also be the main task of some ( e . g . secretaries and project managers ) . We suggest calling this ‘trimming’ , in the aeronautical sense of levelling an airplane to ensure smooth flight , or in the nautical sense of distributing the load and adjusting the sails of a ship , to reach optimal speed and stay on course . ‘Trimming’ stresses the dynamic and directional aspects of the work , in contrast to ‘upkeep’ or ‘maintenance’ , which suggest a more static extension of a given state . The concept of boundary - object trimming may be a third way of making visible the efforts of medical secretaries and other non - clinical groups . CONCLUSION We have described the cooperative work of medical secretaries , and their central role in the work arrangement at a hospital , based on a mixed - methods case study of the implementation of a comprehensive EHR . We propose the term ‘boundary - object trimming’ to characterize a central feature of their work ; they and other non - clinical groups have been relatively invisible to CSCW and medical informatics , but may require more attention , as health care IT moves from stand - alone systems to integrated health care infrastructures , and hence incorporates more groups of health care professionals . Figure 1 . Medical secretary doing cooperative work ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Our sincere thanks to the staff at Regional Hospital . REFERENCES 1 . Abraham , J . and Reddy , M . C . Moving patients around . In Proc . CSCW’08 , ACM ( 2008 ) , 225 - 228 . 2 . Aydin , C . E . and Rice , R . E . Bringing Social Worlds Together . Journ . Health and Social Behavior , 33 ( 2 ) ( 1996 ) , 168 - 185 . 3 . Balka , E . and Wagner , I . Making things work . In Proc . CSCW’06 , ACM ( 2008 ) , 229 - 238 . 4 . Bardram , J . and Bossen , C . Mobility Work . Journ . of CSCW , 14 , Springer ( 2005 ) , 131 - 160 . 5 . Bardram , J . , Hansen , T . R . , Søgaard , M . AwareMedia . In Proc . of CSCW’06 , ACM ( 2006 ) , 109 - 118 . 6 . Barley , S . R . The Alignment of Technology and Structure through Roles and Networks . Adm . Science Quarterly 35 ( 1 ) ( 1990 ) , 61 - 103 . Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 929 7 . Barley , S . R . Technicians in the Workplace . Adm . Science Quarterly 41 ( 3 ) ( 1996 ) , 404 - 441 . 8 . Berg , M . Accumulating and Coordinating . Journ . of CSCW . 8 ( 4 ) ( 1999 ) , 373 - 401 . 9 . Berner , E . S . , Detmer , D . E . , and Simborg , D . Will the Wave Finally Break ? Journ . of the American Medical Informatics Association , 12 ( 1 ) ( 2005 ) , 3 - 7 . 10 . Bjørn , P . and Rødje , K . Triage Drift . Journ . of CSCW , 1 ( 4 ) ( 2008 ) , 395 - 419 . 11 . Blomberg , J . , Suchman , L . , and Trigg . R . Reflections on a Work - Oriented Design Project . In Bowker , G . C . , Star , S . L . , Turner , W . , and Gasser , S . ( eds ) : Social Science , Technical Systems , and Cooperative Work . Mahwah , Lawrence Earlbaum ( 1997 ) , 189 - 215 . 12 . Bossen , C . Accounting and co - constructing . Journ . of CSCW , 20 ( 6 ) ( 2011 ) , 473 - 495 . 13 . Bowers , J . The Work to Make a Network Work . Proc . of CSCW´94 , ( 1994 ) , 287 - 98 . 14 . Casper , M . Working On and Around Human Fetuses . In Berg , M . and Mol , A . Differences in Medicine . Durham and London , Duke University Press ( 1998 ) , 28 - 52 . 15 . Comptroller and Auditor General . The National Programme for IT in the NHS . Department of Health , London , The Stationery Office ( 2011 ) 16 . Dorda , W . , Duftschmid , G . , Gerhold , L . , Gall , W . , and Gamball , J . Austria’s Path Towards Nationwide Electronic Health Records . Methods of Inf . in Medicine , 47 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 117 - 123 . 17 . Ehrlich , K . and Cash , D . The Invisible World of Intermediaries . Journ . of CSCW , 8 ( 1 ) ( 1999 ) , 147 - 167 . 18 . Ellingsen , G . and Røed , K . The Role of Integration in Health - Based Information Infrastructures . Journ . of CSCW , 19 ( 6 ) ( 2010 ) , 557 - 584 . 19 . Erickson , T . , Danis , C . M . , Kellogg , W . A . , and Helander , M . E . Assistance : the work practices of human administrative assistants and their implications for IT & organization . Proc . of CSCW’08 , ACM ( 2008 ) , 609 - 618 . 20 . Fujimura , J . Crafting Science : Standardized Packages , Boundary Objects , and ‘Translation’ . In Pickering , A . ( ed ) Science as Culture and Practice . Chicago & London , University of Chicago Press ( 1992 ) , 168 - 211 . 21 . Glenn , E . and . Feldberg , R . L . Degraded and Deskilled . Social Problems , 24 ( 1 ) ( 1997 ) , 52 - 64 . 22 . Goodman , S . E . and Perby , M - L . Computerization and the skill in women ' s work . In Olerup , A . , Schneider , L . and Monod , E ( eds ) Women , Work and Computerization . Amsterdam , North - Holland ( 1985 ) , 23 - 42 . 23 . Greenhalgh , T . , Potts , H . W . , Geoff , W . , Bark , P . and Swinglehurst , D . Tensions and Paradoxes in Electronic Patient Record Research . Milbank Quarterly , 87 ( 4 ) ( 2009 ) , 729 - 788 . 24 . Grudin , J . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : History and Focus . Computer , 27 ( 5 ) ( 1994 ) , 19 - 26 . 25 . Harper , R . P . Inside the IMF . Aca . Press , Orlando ( 1997 ) 26 . Häkkinen L . , Hilmola O . ERP evaluation during the shakedown phase : lessons from an after - sales division . Information Systems Journal , 18 ( 2008 ) , 73 - 100 . 27 . Heath , C . , Svensson , M . S . , Hindmarsh , J . , Luff , P . and Lehn , D . v . Configuring Awareness . Journ . of CSCW , 11 ( 2002 ) , 317 - 347 . 28 . Latour , B . Science in Action . Harvard UP ( 1987 ) 29 . Lee , C . P . Boundary Negotiating Artifacts . Journ . of CSSW , 16 ( 2007 ) , 307 - 339 . 30 . Lutters , W . G . and Ackerman , M . S . Beyond Boundary Objects . Journ . of CSCW , 19 ( 3 ) ( 2007 ) , 341 – 372 . 31 . Martin , D . , Hartswood , M . , Slack , R . and Voss , A . Achieving Dependability in the Configuration , Integration and Testing of Healthcare Technologies . Journ . of CSCW , 15 ( 5 - 6 ) ( 2006 ) , 467 - 499 . 32 . Muller , M . J . Invisible Work of Telephone Operators . Journ . of CSCW , 8 ( 1 - 2 ) , Springer ( 1999 ) , 31 - 61 . 33 . Orr , J . E . Talking about Machines . An Ethnography of a Modern Job . Ithaca , Cornell University Press ( 1996 ) . 34 . Paul , S . A . and Reddy , M . C . Understanding together . Proc . of CSCW´10 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 321 - 330 . 35 . Pennington , D . The Dynamics of Material Artifacts in Collaborative Research Teams . Journ . of CSCW , 19 ( 3 ) ( 2010 ) , 175 - 199 . 36 . Power , M . The Audit Society . Oxford , OUP ( 1997 ) . 37 . Reddy , M . , Dourish , P . and Pratt , W . Coordinating Heterogeneous Work . Proc . of ECSCW´01 , Klüver ( 2001 ) , 239 - 58 . 38 . Reddy , M . and Spence , P . R . Collaborative information seeking . Inf . Process Management , 44 ( 2008 ) , 242 - 255 . 39 . Schmidt , K . and Wagner , I . Ordering Systems . Journ . of CSCW , 13 ( 5 - 6 ) ( 2004 ) , 349 - 408 . 40 . Spence , P . R . and Reddy , M . C . The ‘active’ gatekeeper in collaborative information seeking activities . Proc . of GROUP’07 , ACM ( 2007 ) . : 277 - 280 . 41 . Star , S . L . and Griesemer , J . R . Institutional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects . Social Studies of Science 19 ( 3 ) ( 1989 ) , 387 - 420 . 42 . Star , S . L . and Strauss , A . Layers of Silence , Arenas of Voice . Journ . of CSCW , 8 ( 1999 ) , 9 - 30 . 43 . Strauss , A . The Continual Permutations of Action . New York , Aldine de Gruyter ( 1993 ) . 44 . Subrahmanian , E . , Monarch , I . Monarch , I . , Suresh , K . , Granger , H . , Milliken , R . and Westerberg , A . Boundary Objects and Prototypes at the Interfaces of Engineering Design . Journ . of CSCW , 12 ( 3 ) ( 2003 ) , 185 - 203 . 45 . Suchman , L . Making Work Visible . Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 9 ) , ( 1995 ) , 56 - 63 . 46 . Webster , J . Shaping Women’s Work . Gender , Employment and Information Technology . London & New York , Longman ( 1996 ) . 47 . Yin R . K . Case study research . Design and Methods . Newbury Park USA : Sage , ( 1991 ) . Session : eScience and eMedicine February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 930