International Journal of Molecular Sciences Review The Cytoskeleton of the Retinal Pigment Epithelium : from Normal Aging to Age - Related Macular Degeneration Ioana - Sandra Tarau 1 , † , Andreas Berlin 1 , † , Christine A . Curcio 2 and Thomas Ach 1 , * 1 Department of Ophthalmology , University Hospital Würzburg , 97080 Würzburg , Germany 2 Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences , University of Alabama at Birmingham , Birmingham , AL 35249 , USA * Correspondence : ach _ t @ ukw . de † These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co - ﬁrst authors . Received : 3 June 2019 ; Accepted : 18 July 2019 ; Published : 22 July 2019 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) Abstract : The retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) is a unique epithelium , with major roles which are essential in the visual cycle and homeostasis of the outer retina . The RPE is a monolayer of polygonal and pigmented cells strategically placed between the neuroretina and Bruch membrane , adjacent to the fenestrated capillaries of the choriocapillaris . It shows strong apical ( towards photoreceptors ) to basal / basolateral ( towards Bruch membrane ) polarization . Multiple functions are bound to a complex structure of highly organized and polarized intracellular components : the cytoskeleton . A strong connection between the intracellular cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix is indispensable to maintaining the function of the RPE and thus , the photoreceptors . Impairments of these intracellular structures and the regular architecture they maintain often result in a disrupted cytoskeleton , which can be found in many retinal diseases , including age - related macular degeneration ( AMD ) . This review article will give an overview of current knowledge on the molecules and proteins involved in cytoskeleton formation in cells , including RPE and how the cytoskeleton is a ﬀ ected under stress conditions—especially in AMD . Keywords : retinal pigment epithelium ; cytoskeleton ; aging ; age - related macular degeneration ; actin ; microﬁlament ; microtubules ; stress ﬁber 1 . Introduction The Retinal Pigment Epithelium The retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) is a cellular monolayer located between the photoreceptor outer segments ( apical ) and the choroidal vasculature ( basal ) . The RPE’s own basal lamina is historically considered to be one of the ﬁve layers of the Bruch membrane—the inner wall of the choroid [ 1 ] . The RPE has several functions including the transportation of ions , water and metabolic products from the subretinal space to the blood vessels of the choriocapillaris [ 2 ] ; on the other hand , it also takes up nutritional and metabolic essentials such as fatty acids , retinol and glucose from choriocapillaris and delivers these products to the photoreceptors [ 3 ] . It plays a central role in the visual cycle , i . e . , re - isomerization from all - trans - retinal to 11 - cis - retinal [ 4 ] . Another major RPE function is the daily phagocytosis of the shed photoreceptor outer - segment tips and intracellular processing and recycling of their constituents [ 5 , 6 ] . A hallmark of this monolayer is a strong apical to basal polarization , which enables the controlled tra ﬃ cking of proteins and molecules , nutrients , oxygen , and waste products from and into RPE cells [ 7 , 8 ] . This has been shown to be important for the RPE cellular metabolism , as well as maintaining Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms20143578 www . mdpi . com / journal / ijms Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 2 of 19 outer retina health . RPE cells are able to release molecules and proteins or exocytose material into the sub - RPE space ( on the basal aspect , between the basal membrane of the RPE cell and the inner collagenous layer of the Bruch membrane ) or into the inter - photoreceptor matrix of the subretinal space ( between apical processes of the RPE cells and outer segments of the photoreceptors ) [ 9 – 14 ] . Intracellularly , RPE cells accumulate di ﬀ erent types of organelles ( granules ) that are relevant in clinical retinal imaging : lipofuscin and melanolipofuscin granules , as well as melanosomes [ 15 , 16 ] . Lipofuscin and melanolipofuscin have autoﬂuorescent features and emit light after blue light excitation . This property has widely been used for in vivo imaging of ocular fundus autoﬂuorescence for more than two decades [ 17 , 18 ] . In addition , intracellular mitochondria exhibit a high reﬂectivity , which is clinically visible in spectral domain optical coherence tomography ( SD - OCT ) [ 19 , 20 ] . The macula of the human retina has sub - regions of distinctive photoreceptor composition ( all - cone fovea , rod - dominant perifovea ) that are expected to impact the structure and function of the underlying RPE [ 21 ] . Although a monolayer , the RPE cells of human retina show distinct phenotype di ﬀ erences in relation to their position relative to the fovea—RPE cells at the fovea are smaller in diameter , while intracellular lipofuscin granule deposition favors the perifovea [ 22 ] . Also , at the perifovea , the highest number of multinucleated RPE cells exist , while multinucleated RPE cells are nearly absent at the fovea [ 23 ] . These di ﬀ erences might represent an adaptation to di ﬀ erent needs in direct connection and communication with the overlying photoreceptors , supporting the concept that RPE cells and the overlying photoreceptors form a functional unit to sample visual space [ 21 ] . A pre - requisite for RPE polarization is the watertight outer blood – retinal barrier formed by a circumferential belt of RPE junctional complexes [ 8 ] . Some important intra - and extracellular structures in maintaining this barrier , and the RPE cell shape and morphology , are proteins and multimolecular complexes directly on RPE cells ( tight junction , zonula adherens , desmosomes ) , within RPE cells ( membrane cytoskeleton , membrane proteins ) , or external to the RPE ( extracellular matrix ) [ 24 – 26 ] . The purpose of this review is to summarize the composition , cellular localization , and function of RPE cytoskeletal constituents , with a special focus on changes in normal aging and in age - related macular degeneration ( AMD ) . 2 . Cytoskeleton of the Retinal Pigment Epithelium The cytoskeleton is one of the most multifaceted and complex structures in biological tissues . In addition to providing a structural sca ﬀ old for the cell , it also actively participates in a range of processes such as endocytosis , cell division , intracellular transport , adhesion , motility , force transmission , responding to external forces , and adapting cell shape and cell layer geometry to external and internal factors [ 27 – 29 ] . RPE cells exhibit most of these functions , which emphasizes the importance of the cytoskeleton in maintaining outer retinal homeostasis . As with other cell types , the RPE cytoskeleton ( Figure 1A ) is comprised of three classic ﬁlament types : actin , microtubules , and intermediate ﬁlaments ( Figure 1B ) [ 30 – 32 ] . By forming a distinctively structured , dynamic , and communicating network , the RPE cytoskeleton reacts and adapts to signals—both intra - or extracellularly—by a continuing re - organization of the network . In the following paragraphs , the major cytoskeleton proteins are explained in more detail . It is worth mentioning here that the knowledge of cytoskeleton composition , involved proteins , and changes in pathological conditions is based on ﬁndings in both RPE and mostly non - RPE cells . This is acknowledged whenever appropriate . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 3 of 19 Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 18 Figure 1 . The cytoskeleton of the retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) . ( A ) A cross - sectional view of the RPE and the adjacent photoreceptor outer segments ( apical ) and Bruch membrane ( basal ) highlights the intracellular network of cytoskeleton proteins : actin filaments , microtubules , and intermediate filaments . ( B ) The graph plots the dimension and protein structure of the above - mentioned cytoskeleton members : microfilaments consist of helical arranged polymers of actin proteins with an ATP - rich assembling ( + ) - end and a less energetic , ADP - rich disassembling ( - ) - end . Microtubules are hollow cylinders of tubulin proteins , also possessing an energetic , GTP - rich assembling ( + ) - end and a less energetic GDP - rich disassembling ( - ) - end . Intermediate filaments form rope - like fibers consisting of a large group of filament - organizing proteins . The regulating and associated proteins of each of the cytoskeleton substructures as mentioned in this review are listed ( for details and additional regulating proteins , see detailed reviews from Bonilha and Hohmann et al . [ 32 , 33 ] ) . Figure 1A : a reprint with permission from Elsevier ( via RightsLink ) and Vera Bonilha , PhD , and the Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography [ 32 ] . 2 . 1 . Actin and Non - Muscle Myosin Actin is a highly dynamic cytoskeletal protein , with a strong ability to adapt to structural changes , thus determining the shape of a cell . Actin microfilaments form a crosslinked grid network of polarized filaments supporting intracellular vesicle trafficking . These microfilaments also interact with several connecting proteins both intracellularly and at the cell border , providing support for focal adhesion , cell shape changes and cell movement [ 34 ] . Actin emerges as a branching network with viscoelastic behavior : mainly elastic on shorter time scales ( < 1 min ) and more viscous on longer time scales ( > 10 min ) [ 35 , 36 ] . Actin occurs either as monomeric G - actin or filamentous F - actin . In an ATP - dependent reaction , polarized G - actin polymerizes to asymmetric helical structures ( = the polarized filamentous actin ( F - actin ) [ 37 ] ) with a less dynamic ( - ) - end and the more dynamic ( + ) - end [ 38 – 41 ] . Every actin subunit is able to bind ATP and to hydrolyze it to ADP for filament growth , occurring at the ( + ) - end [ 42 ] . Actin polymerization is controlled by several cofactor - driven elements . Profilin , an actin - binding protein , catalyzes the transition from ADP - to ATP - actin and regulates actin formation [ 43 , 44 ] . Also , actin closely interacts with the motor - protein myosin [ 45 ] . Myosin affects both the retraction of a cell during movement and also transmits forces to the extracellular matrix . However , forces on actin filaments are feasible only when myosin II hexamers have a bipolar filament appearance [ 46 , 47 ] . Myosin activation is regulated by several kinases ( inter alia Rho - associated protein kinase , myosin light chain kinases ) and phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain or phosphorylation of the myosin heavy chain [ 48 – 54 ] . Myosin belongs to a group of intracellular cross - linker proteins , which connect single actin filaments either transiently / non - transiently and / or passively ( e . g . , via scruin , fascin , α - actinin , filamin , or fimbrin ) or actively ( myosin ) . Using ATP as an energy supply , myosin is responsible for the contractility of actin structures [ 55 , 56 ] . The interaction of actin with its cross - linkers largely controls shape , mechanical integrity , and contractility of cells [ 29 , 57 , 58 ] . Figure 1 . The cytoskeleton of the retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) . ( A ) A cross - sectional view of the RPE and the adjacent photoreceptor outer segments ( apical ) and Bruch membrane ( basal ) highlights the intracellular network of cytoskeleton proteins : actin ﬁlaments , microtubules , and intermediate ﬁlaments . ( B ) The graph plots the dimension and protein structure of the above - mentioned cytoskeleton members : microﬁlaments consist of helical arranged polymers of actin proteins with an ATP - rich assembling ( + ) - end and a less energetic , ADP - rich disassembling ( - ) - end . Microtubules are hollow cylinders of tubulin proteins , also possessing an energetic , GTP - rich assembling ( + ) - end and a less energetic GDP - rich disassembling ( - ) - end . Intermediate ﬁlaments form rope - like ﬁbers consisting of a large group of ﬁlament - organizing proteins . The regulating and associated proteins of each of the cytoskeleton substructures as mentioned in this review are listed ( for details and additional regulating proteins , see detailed reviews from Bonilha and Hohmann et al . [ 32 , 33 ] ) . Figure 1A : a reprint with permission from Elsevier ( via RightsLink ) and Vera Bonilha , PhD , and the Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography [ 32 ] . 2 . 1 . Actin and Non - Muscle Myosin Actin is a highly dynamic cytoskeletal protein , with a strong ability to adapt to structural changes , thus determining the shape of a cell . Actin microﬁlaments form a crosslinked grid network of polarized ﬁlaments supporting intracellular vesicle tra ﬃ cking . These microﬁlaments also interact with several connecting proteins both intracellularly and at the cell border , providing support for focal adhesion , cell shape changes and cell movement [ 34 ] . Actin emerges as a branching network with viscoelastic behavior : mainly elastic on shorter time scales ( < 1 min ) and more viscous on longer time scales ( > 10 min ) [ 35 , 36 ] . Actin occurs either as monomeric G - actin or ﬁlamentous F - actin . In an ATP - dependent reaction , polarized G - actin polymerizes to asymmetric helical structures ( = the polarized ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) [ 37 ] ) with a less dynamic ( - ) - end and the more dynamic ( + ) - end [ 38 – 41 ] . Every actin subunit is able to bind ATP and to hydrolyze it to ADP for ﬁlament growth , occurring at the ( + ) - end [ 42 ] . Actin polymerization is controlled by several cofactor - driven elements . Proﬁlin , an actin - binding protein , catalyzes the transition from ADP - to ATP - actin and regulates actin formation [ 43 , 44 ] . Also , actin closely interacts with the motor - protein myosin [ 45 ] . Myosin a ﬀ ects both the retraction of a cell during movement and also transmits forces to the extracellular matrix . However , forces on actin ﬁlaments are feasible only when myosin II hexamers have a bipolar ﬁlament appearance [ 46 , 47 ] . Myosin activation is regulated by several kinases ( inter alia Rho - associated protein kinase , myosin light chain kinases ) and phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain or phosphorylation of the myosin heavy chain [ 48 – 54 ] . Myosin belongs to a group of intracellular cross - linker proteins , which connect single actin ﬁlaments either transiently / non - transiently and / or passively ( e . g . , via scruin , fascin , α - actinin , ﬁlamin , or ﬁmbrin ) or actively ( myosin ) . Using ATP as an energy supply , myosin is responsible for the contractility of actin structures [ 55 , 56 ] . The interaction of actin with its cross - linkers largely controls shape , mechanical integrity , and contractility of cells [ 29 , 57 , 58 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 4 of 19 Most actin structures are stable over time . However , to adapt to external environmental factors , cells need a mechanism to induce actin disassembly and re - organization . Therefore , the actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin protein family binds to actin and is capable of disassembling and fragmenting actin ﬁlaments . ADF / coﬁlin does not alter the polymerization rate [ 59 , 60 ] . The e ﬃ ciency of ADF / coﬁlin fragmentation highly depends on its binding abundance to actin ﬁlaments . Filaments that are fully covered with ADF / coﬁlin molecules are stabilized robustly , while actin ﬁlaments that are only partially occupied fragment faster [ 43 , 61 , 62 ] . Destabilization and fragmentation of the F - actin cytoskeleton is an observable ﬁnding in AMD - a ﬀ ected RPE cells ( see below ) . 2 . 2 . Microtubules and Intermediate Filaments Microtubules consist of polymers originating from α / β - tubulin heterodimers . These tubular - shaped protein complexes have two different polymerization ends ( + and - ) . Microtubules play an important role in mitosis , cellular growth , cell shape control , and active intracellular transport [ 63 – 65 ] ( through kinesin and dynein proteins ) , facilitated by the microtubule’s polarity . GTP - dependent polymerization and depolymerization is also important during mitosis . In RPE cells , microtubules are involved in the phagocytosis of photoreceptor outer segment tips . Phagosomes use the microtubule network as a guide rail for intracellular travel : maintained by kinesin ( plus - end directed ) , dynein ( minus - end directed ) , and associated proteins ( e . g . , kinesin - 1 light chain 1 ( KLC1 ) ) . In mice , KLC1 deﬁciency impairs phagosome translocation in RPE cells and results in AMD - like pathologies [ 66 ] including thick basal laminar deposits and deposition of activated complement component C3b . Moreover , the microtubule - associated protein 1 light chain 3 ( LC3 ) family of proteins is essential for maintaining normal lipid homeostasis in RPE - cells . Dhingra et al . recently showed that the systemic deletion of LC3B in mice resulted in an increased phagosome accumulation , a reduced fatty acid oxidation , and intracellular RPE lipid deposition [ 67 ] . Furthermore , as demonstrated in non - RPE cells , oxidative stress ( also a major contributor to RPE cell disease ) a ﬀ ects microtubules and can lead to cytoskeleton re - arrangement [ 68 ] . Intermediate ﬁlaments are 10 nm in diameter , i . e . , they are intermediate in size between microtubules at 24 nm and microﬁlaments at 7 nm . Intermediate ﬁlaments are found in the nucleus and cytoplasm and consist of several proteins ( neuroﬁlaments , keratins , desmin , vimentin ) [ 69 ] . This robust intracellular dynamic network is connected to cell - adhesive structures such as desmosomes at cell – cell contacts and hemi - desmosomes at cell – cell or cell – extracellular matrix contacts . The loss of these contacts leads to a loss of adhesion forces between the cells . Intracellularly linked to the actin and microtubule networks , intermediate ﬁlaments are responsible for signal transduction from the extracellular to the intracellular space [ 70 ] and participate in cell division and cell migration . Intermediate ﬁlaments are highly ﬂexible and can be considered “shock absorbers , ” since they are capable of massive elongation or compression without irreversible damage [ 71 – 74 ] . Under physiological conditions , the intermediate ﬁlaments keratin , vimentin , and desmin interact with desmoplakin , a cytolinker associated with desmosomal proteins such as cadherin , desmoglein and desmocollin [ 69 ] . Vimentin [ 75 ] and actin ( among other proteins ) are connected to plectin . This interaction decreases mitochondrial motility and elevates the mitochondrial membrane potential . Under stress conditions , phosphorylation of vimentin impacts the vimentin - mitochondria complex and leads to a disassembly of intermediate ﬁlaments , with increased motility and reduced ATP production by mitochondria [ 76 , 77 ] . Endocytosis is mediated by the interaction of keratin with the receptor for activated c kinase 1 ( RACK1 ) , which controls protein kinase C α ( PKC α ) activity [ 78 ] . The alteration of keratin ﬁlaments a ﬀ ects endocytosis and impacts intercellular vesicle transport . In addition , an intact keratin network is essential for polarized membrane tra ﬃ c [ 79 ] . All forms of chemical , physical , or mechanical stress impact intermediate ﬁlaments and lead to an increased expression of these proteins [ 80 – 83 ] . It is worth mentioning that the RPE´s cytoskeleton comprises of keratins ( among others , cytokeratin 5 , 7 , 8 , 18 , 19 ) , Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 5 of 19 with cytokeratin 18 being speciﬁc for RPE cells [ 84 ] . Cytokeratin 18 can be used as a marker protein in immunostaining and di ﬀ erentiating RPE . 2 . 3 . Cytoskeleton at the Apical RPE Microvilli at the apical surface of RPE cells increase the surface area and closely connect to the photoreceptor’s outer segments . Together with microtubules , tightly packed actin ﬁlaments within the microvilli help guarantee the structure , polarization , and orientation of apical processes [ 85 , 86 ] . Several molecules are important for a normal villi buildup : ezrin , a regulator of actin ﬁlaments , and actin - binding proteins such as villin , ﬁmbrin and espin [ 87 , 88 ] . The daily phagocytosis of shed rod and cone photoreceptor outer segment tips requires ﬂexibility , re - arrangement , and the correct orientation of the cytoskeleton [ 89 ] . Early studies found that uptake and intracellular processing of extracellular material is mediated by both actin and myosin , as well as microtubules for the fusion of lysosomes and phagosomes [ 90 – 93 ] . Alterations of the actin cytoskeleton and the microtubule system can have a major impact on outer retina health status , leading to a defect in photoreceptor outer - segment uptake and abnormal phagocytosis of the distal membrane stack [ 94 ] ( of oldest membranes ) . The intracellular network of actin and microtubules is also considered important in the transport of pigment granules ( melanosomes ) . Pigment granules within RPE cells move bi - directionally between the apical portion of the cell body and the apical processes [ 95 , 96 ] . Numerous melanosomes are found within the apical processes of RPE cells , as ﬁrst discovered by single - section electron microscopy [ 97 ] and recently , quantiﬁed by volume electron microscopy [ 16 ] . The loss of melanosomes in the apical processes , or the inability of melanosomes to travel into the apical processes , is associated with severe degeneration of RPE cells and the outer retina [ 98 ] . Studies localized ezrin [ 87 ] and ERM ( ezrin , radixin , moesin ) - binding phosphoprotein 50 ( EBP50 ) along entire actin ﬁlaments of microvilli , implicating this complex as responsible for the dynamics and regulation of microvilli components [ 99 – 101 ] . EBP 50 , in direct interaction with the intracellular retinaldehyde binding protein ( IRBP ) [ 102 – 105 ] , is responsible for the transport of hydrophobic retinoids between the RPE and photoreceptors . It also plays a crucial role in retinoid processing and in the visual cycle . The IRBP protein is coded by the gene RBP3 ( retinol - binding protein 3 , on chromosome 10 in humans [ 106 ] ) . Mutations in or the absence of this gene are associated with retinal diseases including retinitis pigmentosa [ 107 ] and retinitis punctata albescens . 2 . 4 . Cytoskeleton at the Basolateral RPE At the basolateral site , the actin ﬁlament network is linked to zonula adherens and is responsible for cell - shape . In conjunction with ﬁlamin ( a binding protein ) , myosin , tropomyosin ( a structural protein ) , and α - actinin ( an anchorage protein ) , actin ﬁlaments are part of circumferential microﬁlament bundles ( CMB ) which are contractile [ 108 ] . In the non - contractile state , tropomyosin and actin have no solid connection . Gunning et al . described a “ﬂoating” of the tropomyosin polymer over the surface of the actin ﬁlaments , as van der Waals interactions are missing [ 109 ] . However , due to mechanical or oxidative stress , these two components become tightly linked [ 110 ] . The phosphorylation of regulatory myosin light chain ( RMLC ) stimulates myosin activity and leads to contractile forces [ 111 ] , which in turn , are a pre - requisite for the assembly of stress ﬁbers . The exact molecular pathway of stress ﬁber formation remains unclear ; however , numerous proteins such as calponin 3 , Rho - associated coiled - coil kinases ( ROCK ) and RMLC that maintain stress ﬁber formation , disassembly , and contractility have been described [ 112 – 114 ] . In general , stress ﬁbers are composed of bundles of multiple actin ﬁlaments [ 115 ] crosslinked by α - actinin [ 116 ] . They are connected to intermediate ﬁlaments and focal adhesions for signal transduction from the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) to the intracellular actin cytoskeleton [ 117 – 119 ] . Actin and myosin are two principal constituents of contractile stress ﬁbers and the main contributors to cell contractility in many animal cells [ 119 ] . Non - contractile cells do not contain Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 6 of 19 myosin [ 120 ] . Stress ﬁbers have been well investigated in motile cells , where they can be divided into di ﬀ erent categories based on their intracellular location , orientation , and contractility : the perinuclear actin cap , transverse ( forming an arc across the top of a cell opposite from its base on a substrate ) , dorsal ( connecting transverse and ventral ﬁbers ) , and ventral stress ﬁbers ( connecting to focal adhesions of the cells to a substrate ) . Contractility involves the ventral and transverse stress ﬁbers as well as the perinuclear actin cap . Myosin is present along these ﬁbers . Stress ﬁbers also contain actin ( which binds proteins and focal adhesion - associated proteins [ 120 – 123 ] ) , as well as cross - linkers such as α - actinin [ 116 ] , which stabilize the bundle and function as a signaling mediator . Transversal stress ﬁbers form when the dendritic ( branching ) network collapses and is restructured by myosin [ 124 , 125 ] . Ventral stress ﬁbers form from existing dorsal stress ﬁbers , as well as their fusion with attached transverse stress ﬁbers [ 120 , 126 ] . The presence of dorsal stress ﬁbers seems to be important for the assembly of the other stress ﬁber types and a link to focal adhesions [ 120 , 121 ] . Contractile stress ﬁber types are highly dependent on the presence and activity of myosin . As a result , myosin inhibition leads to the malfunction and degradation of stress ﬁbers [ 127 ] . The RPE in its native state has few stress ﬁbers . However , as AMD progresses and cells become dysmorphic , non - epithelioid , and even migratory , the processes described above for motile cells likely become operative [ 128 ] . Extracellular deposits ( e . g . , drusen in AMD , see below ) can lead to mechanical stress within RPE cells . Mechanical stress ( mechanosensing ) is likely not the only trigger for stress ﬁber formation : thermic and chemical stress have also been discussed . 2 . 5 . Extracellular Matrix ( ECM ) As mentioned earlier , RPE cells contact and interact with ECM via receptors such as integrins and cadherins [ 129 , 130 ] . The basal lamina of RPE cells has historically been considered as part of the 5 - layered Bruch membrane ( i . e . , the basal lamina of the RPE cell , the inner and outer collagenous layer , the elastic ﬁber band , and the basement membrane of the choriocapillaris ) . It consists of collagen type IV , ﬁbronectin , hyaluronic acid , and heparan and chondroitin sulfate [ 131 ] . Recently , the use of longitudinal eye - tracked clinical spectral domain optical coherence tomography ( SD - OCT ) has made it possible to appreciate the independent contributions of the RPE basal lamina to AMD progression , as it thickens into the basal laminar deposit [ 132 , 133 ] . Thus , an early suggestion that the Bruch membrane is better thought of as a three - layered structure ( inner and outer collagenous layers , elastic layer ) [ 134 ] is garnering a renewed interest [ 135 ] . The ECM is a dynamic structure with the ability to adapt to changes in the environment and is also important for cell adhesion and mechanical stability . The ECM also inﬂuences the polarity of the adjacent RPE [ 7 ] . ECM - RPE cell interactions play a key role in RPE cell adhesion to the Bruch membrane , as well as RPE cell di ﬀ erentiation , morphology , migration , and proliferation [ 136 ] . Furthermore , integrins seem to play an important role in the development of neovascular AMD , since altered integrin expression a ﬀ ects the RPE – ECM interaction [ 137 ] . Several RPE cell culture systems showed that an altered ECM also a ﬀ ects whole RPE cells , an important ﬁnding for the understanding of AMD changes including deposits both in the subretinal space ( subretinal drusenoid deposits ) and the sub - RPE space ( classical soft / hard drusen ; see below ) . 2 . 6 . RPE Geometry in Normal Aging Some of the above - mentioned cytoskeleton properties are necessary for meiosis and cell division . The RPE , however , is believed to be a non - dividing cell monolayer , with little or no signs of cell cycle activity under normal conditions [ 138 ] . Therefore , cytoskeleton responsibilities in RPE cells might be di ﬀ erent from other cell types . A seminal 1978 paper by Wing , Blanchard , and Weiter demonstrated the exquisite correlation of lipofuscin - attributable autoﬂuorescence with the topography of photoreceptors in human retina , which was known at the time [ 139 , 140 ] . The correlation of foveal cone and RPE topography was shown in horizontal tissue sections by Gao and Hollyﬁeld [ 141 ] . Using ﬂatmounts of human retina to produce Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 7 of 19 digitally aligned maps of photoreceptors and the RPE [ 21 , 22 ] , we demonstrated both a peak in RPE cell numbers under the fovea and the ring of high autoﬂuorescence related to the ring of high rod density in the perifovea and near - periphery . These two studies with accurate foveal centration showed a stability of foveal RPE cell density with aging [ 22 , 141 ] . Ach et al . additionally showed a stability of extrafoveal RPE cell numbers despite an increase of autoﬂuorescence [ 22 ] . In normal aging , the RPE monolayer undergoes apparent changes , as recently shown in histological studies of human RPE ﬂatmounts . In persons under 51 years , > 90 % of all RPE cells at the fovea are polygonal with sharp vertices and between 5 and 7 neighbors ( 59 % hexagonal ) . The proportion of hexagonal cells decreases with increasing distance from the fovea . In advanced age ( > 80 years ) , these numbers slightly change with a reduction of hexagonal cells ( 52 % at the fovea ) , resulting in a more irregular geometry ( Figure 2 ) . Interestingly , despite this change in geometry , the overall number of cells remains stable . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 18 fovea are polygonal with sharp vertices and between 5 and 7 neighbors ( 59 % hexagonal ) . The proportion of hexagonal cells decreases with increasing distance from the fovea . In advanced age ( > 80 years ) , these numbers slightly change with a reduction of hexagonal cells ( 52 % at the fovea ) , resulting in a more irregular geometry ( Figure 2 ) . Interestingly , despite this change in geometry , the overall number of cells remains stable . It is obvious that the RPE cytoskeleton is involved in this re - modeling of the cell layer and that structural changes in the ECM and the surrounding environment might be an initiator for cell layer responses . Age - related changes in the Bruch membrane ( including the cross - linking of collagens , the deposition of lipids , increases in thickness , and reductions in elasticity and permeability ) , as well as basal laminar and basal linear deposits ( lipids accumulated between the RPE basal lamina and inner collagenous layer of the Bruch membrane ) , might chemically and mechanically impact the RPE’s function and structure . Figure 2 . Age - related differences in the RPE cytoskeleton in normal eyes . In young humans ( 36 , 41 years ) , a uniform geometry of polygonal , mostly hexagonal RPE cells is present , both at the fovea and near periphery . At older ages ( 83 , 90 years ) the strict geometry loosens and shows some enlarged cells . This leads to an altered arrangement of the RPE cells . However , orderly packing and a stringent geometry can still be recognized , even at an advanced age . Despite these subtle changes in geometry , the total number of RPE cells at the posterior pole remains stable [ 22 , 141 , 142 ] . The use of human tissue has previously been approved by the Institutional Review Board at University of Alabama at Birmingham , AL , USA ( Protocol X900525013 ; September 11 , 2012 . 2 . 7 . RPE Cytoskeleton in AMD In addition to the previously mentioned age - related changes , the RPE cytoskeleton is impacted by several fundamental changes in AMD [ 143 ] . The geometry of the monolayer alters significantly at AMD - affected sites ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . These areas are patchy and are more likely to be focal than generally distributed across the posterior pole . Also , these areas seem to be associated with subretinal ( subretinal drusenoid deposits = reticular pseudodrusen [ 144 ] ) and sub - RPE - basal lamina deposits ( basal linear deposits and drusen ) . Oxidative stress in RPE cells leads to the release of free radicals . Figure 2 . Age - related di ﬀ erences in the RPE cytoskeleton in normal eyes . In young humans ( 36 , 41 years ) , a uniform geometry of polygonal , mostly hexagonal RPE cells is present , both at the fovea and near periphery . At older ages ( 83 , 90 years ) the strict geometry loosens and shows some enlarged cells . This leads to an altered arrangement of the RPE cells . However , orderly packing and a stringent geometry can still be recognized , even at an advanced age . Despite these subtle changes in geometry , the total number of RPE cells at the posterior pole remains stable [ 22 , 141 , 142 ] . The use of human tissue has previously been approved by the Institutional Review Board at University of Alabama at Birmingham , AL , USA ( Protocol X900525013 ; September 11 , 2012 . It is obvious that the RPE cytoskeleton is involved in this re - modeling of the cell layer and that structural changes in the ECM and the surrounding environment might be an initiator for cell layer responses . Age - related changes in the Bruch membrane ( including the cross - linking of collagens , the deposition of lipids , increases in thickness , and reductions in elasticity and permeability ) , as well as basal laminar and basal linear deposits ( lipids accumulated between the RPE basal lamina and Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 8 of 19 inner collagenous layer of the Bruch membrane ) , might chemically and mechanically impact the RPE’s function and structure . 2 . 7 . RPE Cytoskeleton in AMD In addition to the previously mentioned age - related changes , the RPE cytoskeleton is impacted by several fundamental changes in AMD [ 143 ] . The geometry of the monolayer alters signiﬁcantly at AMD - a ﬀ ected sites ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . These areas are patchy and are more likely to be focal than generally distributed across the posterior pole . Also , these areas seem to be associated with subretinal ( subretinal drusenoid deposits = reticular pseudodrusen [ 144 ] ) and sub - RPE - basal lamina deposits ( basal linear deposits and drusen ) . Oxidative stress in RPE cells leads to the release of free radicals . Peroxidized lipoproteins in drusen and basal linear deposits can initiate and promote inﬂammation , activated complement cascades , and the upregulation of cytokines and chemokines . As mentioned earlier , these factors external to the RPE could trigger cytoskeleton activation [ 145 ] . However , despite these subcellular and molecular changes in the surrounding environment of RPE cells , the RPE seems to be able to react and adapt by re - modeling its geometry , while still maintaining function . Deposits elevate overlying RPE ( drusen ) or squeeze underlying RPE ( subretinal drusenoid deposit ) , which results in mechanical stress within RPE cells and a ﬀ ects the cytoskeleton . Also , ﬂuid and / or blood ( sub RPE , subretinal ) in the course of neovascular AMD can signiﬁcantly mechanically impact retinal architecture and RPE morphology . In vitro studies found that protein expression linked to cell apoptosis ( Bcl2 , Bax , and p53 ) was elevated in RPE cells exposed to mechanical stress [ 146 – 148 ] . Continuous mechanical stress can lead to cytoskeleton and RPE phenotype changes [ 149 – 152 ] . Histological studies catalogued 15 di ﬀ erent RPE phenotypes associated with non - neovascular and neovascular AMD , with atrophy as the end stage [ 153 , 154 ] . Some phenotypes show a loss of cell contacts and a migration of RPE cells into the neurosensory retina [ 155 , 156 ] , where they are seen clinically as hyperreﬂective foci on SD - OCT . These activities are likely orchestrated by the cell´s cytoskeleton as actin ﬁlaments are the main contributors to cell migration in terms of force generation and contraction . In cell culture models , di ﬀ erent movement modalities have been described ( amoeboid versus mesenchymal ) , with the main di ﬀ erences in adhesion and contractility characteristics [ 157 – 159 ] . Both modalities might be possible for RPE cells in the transition from an epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype [ 160 ] . Still unclear , however , is the initiator for transition and movement : oxygen and nutritional attractant factors in the retina have been discussed , because some cells approach retinal capillaries [ 155 ] . Repellent factors in underlying AMD deposits are also a possibility . At AMD - a ﬀ ected sites , individual RPE cells lose their normal prism shape , enlarge or fuse , and the local spatial density of RPE cells decreases . In general , RPE cells in AMD - a ﬀ ected areas lose their sharp polygonal appearance and become round or even concave [ 143 ] . Further cytoskeleton changes in AMD include the thinning and thickening of F - actin , the splitting and fragmentation of F - actin , and the development of stress ﬁbers ( Figure 4 summarizes the cytoskeleton ﬁndings in AMD ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 9 of 19 Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 Peroxidized lipoproteins in drusen and basal linear deposits can initiate and promote inflammation , activated complement cascades , and the upregulation of cytokines and chemokines . As mentioned earlier , these factors external to the RPE could trigger cytoskeleton activation [ 145 ] . However , despite these subcellular and molecular changes in the surrounding environment of RPE cells , the RPE seems to be able to react and adapt by re - modeling its geometry , while still maintaining function . Figure 3 . RPE cytoskeleton alterations in age - related macular degeneration ( AMD ) . In contrast to the normal architecture and to age - related changes in RPE geometry ( Figure 1 ) , patchy areas with loss of the cells’ regular polygonal geometry and shape arise at AMD lesions ( A , B ) . Prima facie , especially enlarged cells with a partly roundish shape ( turquoise arrowheads ) and variable irregular phenotypes are present . The ‘railroad tracks’ - like arrangement of adjacent cells´ cytoskeleton bands is altered , showing separation ( white arrowheads ) and fragmentation or interruption ( pink arrowheads ) . A special separation is sporadically seen : a splitting of the cytoskeleton ( yellow arrowheads ) , which starts as small roundish lesions which then enlarge and finally might lead to a complete separation of two cells . A common finding in altered RPE cells is the presence of intracellular stress fibers ( in B , blue arrowheads ) . At the insertion sites of the stress fibers , the actin filament cytoskeleton appears frayed and thickened ( blue arrow ) . Donor : 83 years , female . RPE cells from the parafovea . F - actin labeled with AlexaFluor647 - Phalloidin . Scale bar : 50 µm . Figure 3 . RPE cytoskeleton alterations in age - related macular degeneration ( AMD ) . In contrast to the normal architecture and to age - related changes in RPE geometry ( Figure 1 ) , patchy areas with loss of the cells’ regular polygonal geometry and shape arise at AMD lesions ( A , B ) . Prima facie , especially enlarged cells with a partly roundish shape ( turquoise arrowheads ) and variable irregular phenotypes are present . The ‘railroad tracks’ - like arrangement of adjacent cells´ cytoskeleton bands is altered , showing separation ( white arrowheads ) and fragmentation or interruption ( pink arrowheads ) . A special separation is sporadically seen : a splitting of the cytoskeleton ( yellow arrowheads ) , which starts as small roundish lesions which then enlarge and ﬁnally might lead to a complete separation of two cells . A common ﬁnding in altered RPE cells is the presence of intracellular stress ﬁbers ( in B , blue arrowheads ) . At the insertion sites of the stress ﬁbers , the actin ﬁlament cytoskeleton appears frayed and thickened ( blue arrow ) . Donor : 83 years , female . RPE cells from the parafovea . F - actin labeled with AlexaFluor647 - Phalloidin . Scale bar : 50 µ m . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 10 of 19 Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 Figure 4 . Cytoskeleton changes in AMD - affected eyes . In AMD , RPE cells and the cytoskeleton undergo significant changes . Drawings and photomicrographs show different cells with similar characteristics . ( A ) The loss of the cytoskeletons’ regular polygonal geometry and shape : enlarged cells with partly roundish cell shape and very variable cell sizes . ( B ) The separation of adjacent cells’ cytoskeleton bands . ( C ) The focal splitting of the cytoskeleton of two adjacent cells . These alterations are tiny in the beginning , but progress over time and can lead to a complete separation of two RPE cells . ( D ) Cytoskeleton fragmentation with dislocated free ends . Noticeably , the cell shape of these cells appears to be only minimally affected . ( E ) Enlarged RPE cells with a partly or complete thinned F - actin . ( F ) A thickened and frayed F - Actin . ( G ) In affected RPE cells , multiple intracellular stress fibers may appear . At sites where stress fibers insert , the cytoskeleton also appears frayed and thickened . Scale bar : 20 µ m . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 11 of 19 The separation of the cytoskeleton between two adjacent RPE cells may result from mechanical forces from sub - retinal or sub - RPE deposits when cell - to - cell contacts su ﬀ er , weaken or disappear under permanent pressure . A similar fragmentation of the F - actin cytoskeleton has been reported in mouse models of di ﬀ erent retinopathies or chemically induced RPE degeneration—with basal deposits and a thickened Bruch membrane—as well as in ARPE - 19 cell culture models [ 161 , 162 ] . Besides maintaining cell shape and geometry , the cytoskeleton is also involved in the tra ﬃ c and transport of intracellular granules . Alterations in the cytoskeleton have been linked to poor phagocytosis , as shown in stem - cell - derived RPE cells [ 163 ] , and might indicate abnormality of other cell functions . An indispensable pre - requisite for any cell replacement therapy is to deliver intact and functioning RPE cells . As recently shown in a histological survey of > 29 , 000 RPE cells [ 164 ] , a remarkable sign of early AMD in human RPE cells is the re - organization of intracellular autoﬂuorescent lipofuscin granules into aggregates [ 143 ] , ﬁnally leading to a release of these granule aggregates into the sub - RPE space . This re - packing and ejection of granules might be orchestrated by the intracellular cytoskeleton beyond actin , since aggregate - associated changes in actin were not detected in that study . 3 . Conclusions The cytoskeleton is an important player in maintaining cell shape and geometry , transmitting signals from the extracellular to the intracellular space ( and vice versa ) , and the intracellular tra ﬃ cking of granules and proteins . Alterations of the cytoskeleton often result in a change in cell geometry and intracellular tra ﬃ cking . Age - related changes in the outer retina can be adapted to by the RPE cytoskeleton , while alterations in AMD ( splitting , fragmentation , and loss of cytoskeleton ) are often accompanied by the occurrence of stress ﬁbers . Because of the importance of polarized pathways for RPE function , these changes to the organizing cytoskeleton will have a major impact on the RPE’s ability to care for choriocapillaris and photoreceptors in aging and AMD . In the future , with the advent of new imaging modalities such as adaptive optics assisted scanning laser ophthalmoscopy , in vivo imaging of individual RPE cells might be available . These techniques enable comprehensive studies on RPE geometry in the aging and diseased eye—and thus , might also serve as an indicator of intracellular RPE cytoskeletal health [ 165 , 166 ] . Funding : The research was funded by NIH 1R01EY027948 ( T . A . , C . A . C . ) , 1R01EY06109 ( C . A . C . ) , Dr . Werner Jackstädt Foundation ( T . A . ) . The publication was funded by the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) and the University of Würzburg in the funding program Open Access Publishing . Acknowledgments : The authors thank Vera Bonilha , Cleveland Clinic , for providing Figure 1A . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . The funders had no role in the design of the study ; in the collection , analyses , or interpretation of data ; in the writing of the manuscript , or in the decision to publish the results . References 1 . Grierson , I . ; Hiscott , P . ; Hogg , P . ; Robey , H . ; Mazure , A . ; Larkin , G . Development , repair and regeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium . Eye 1994 , 8 Pt 2 , 255 – 262 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 2 . Lehmann , G . L . ; Benedicto , I . ; Philp , N . J . ; Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Plasma membrane protein polarity and tra ﬃ cking in RPE cells : Past , present and future . Exp . Eye Res . 2014 , 126 , 5 – 15 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 3 . Strauss , O . The Retinal Pigment Epithelium in Visual Function . Physiol . Rev . 2005 , 85 , 845 – 881 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 4 . Kiser , P . D . ; Palczewski , K . Retinoids and Retinal Diseases . Annu . Rev . Vis . Sci . 2016 , 2 , 197 – 234 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 5 . Kevany , B . M . ; Palczewski , K . Phagocytosis of Retinal Rod and Cone Photoreceptors . Physiology 2010 , 25 , 8 – 15 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 6 . Anderson , D . H . ; Fisher , S . K . ; Steinberg , R . H . Mammalian cones : Disc shedding , phagocytosis , and renewal . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1978 , 17 , 117 – 133 . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 12 of 19 7 . Marmorstein , A . D . The Polarity of the Retinal Pigment Epithelium . Tra ﬃ c 2001 , 2 , 867 – 872 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 8 . Rizzolo , L . J . Barrier properties of cultured retinal pigment epithelium . Exp . Eye Res . 2014 , 126 , 16 – 26 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 9 . Blaauwgeers , H . G . ; Holtkamp , G . M . ; Rutten , H . ; Witmer , A . N . ; Koolwijk , P . ; Partanen , T . A . ; Alitalo , K . ; Kroon , M . E . ; Kijlstra , A . ; van Hinsbergh , V . W . Polarized vascular endothelial growth factor secretion by human retinal pigment epithelium and localization of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors on the inner choriocapillaris : Evidence for a trophic paracrine relation . Am . J . Pathol . 1999 , 155 , 421 – 428 . [ CrossRef ] 10 . Adamis , A . ; Shima , D . ; Yeo , K . ; Yeo , T . ; Brown , L . ; Berse , B . ; Damore , P . ; Folkman , J . Synthesis and Secretion of Vascular Permeability Factor / Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor by Human Retinal Pigment Epithelial Cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 1993 , 193 , 631 – 638 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 11 . Holtkamp , G . ; Kijlstra , A . ; Peek , R . ; De Vos , A . Retinal Pigment Epithelium - immune System Interactions : Cytokine Production and Cytokine - induced Changes . Prog . Retin . Eye Res . 2001 , 20 , 29 – 48 . [ CrossRef ] 12 . Wang , A . L . ; Lukas , T . J . ; Yuan , M . ; Du , N . ; Tso , M . O . ; Neufeld , A . H . Autophagy and Exosomes in the Aged Retinal Pigment Epithelium : Possible Relevance to Drusen Formation and Age - Related Macular Degeneration . PLoS ONE 2009 , 4 , e4160 . [ CrossRef ] 13 . Holtkamp , G . M . ; Van Rossem , M . ; De Vos , A . F . ; Willekens , B . ; Peek , R . ; Kijlstra , A . Polarized secretion of IL - 6 and IL - 8 by human retinal pigment epithelial cells . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 1998 , 112 , 34 – 43 . [ CrossRef ] 14 . Ablonczy , Z . ; Dahrouj , M . ; Tang , P . H . ; Liu , Y . ; Sambamurti , K . ; Marmorstein , A . D . ; Crosson , C . E . Human Retinal Pigment Epithelium Cells as Functional Models for the RPE In Vivo . Investig . Opthalmology Vis . Sci . 2011 , 52 , 8614 – 8620 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 15 . Feeney , L . Lipofuscin and melanin of human retinal pigment epithelium . Fluorescence , enzyme cytochemical , and ultrastructural studies . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1978 , 17 , 583 – 600 . 16 . Pollreisz , A . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Sloan , K . R . ; Mittermueller , T . J . ; Weinhandl , A . S . ; Benson , E . K . ; Kidd , G . J . ; Schmidt - Erfurth , U . ; Curcio , C . A . Visualizing melanosomes , lipofuscin , and melanolipofuscin in human retinal pigment epithelium using serial block face scanning electron microscopy . Exp . Eye Res . 2018 , 166 , 131 – 139 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 17 . Delori , F . C . ; Dorey , C . K . ; Staurenghi , G . ; Arend , O . ; Goger , D . G . ; Weiter , J . J . In vivo ﬂuorescence of the ocular fundus exhibits retinal pigment epithelium lipofuscin characteristics . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1995 , 36 , 718 – 729 . 18 . Schmitz - Valckenberg , S . ; Holz , F . G . ; Bird , A . C . ; Spaide , R . F . Fundus autoﬂuorescence imaging : Review and perspectives . Retina 2008 , 28 , 385 – 409 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 19 . Spaide , R . F . ; Curcio , C . A . Anatomical correlates to the bands seen in the outer retina by optical coherence tomography : Literature review and model . Retina 2011 , 31 , 1609 . [ CrossRef ] 20 . Litts , K . M . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Dellatorre , K . ; Yannuzzi , L . A . ; Freund , K . B . ; Curcio , C . A . Clinicopathological Correlation of Outer Retinal Tubulation in Age - Related Macular Degeneration . JAMA Ophthalmol . 2015 , 133 , 609 . [ CrossRef ] 21 . Curcio , C . A . ; Sloan , K . R . ; Kalina , R . E . ; Hendrickson , A . E . Human photoreceptor topography . J . Comp . Neurol . 1990 , 292 , 497 – 523 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 22 . Ach , T . ; Huisingh , C . ; McGwin , G . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Zhang , T . ; Bentley , M . J . ; Gutierrez , D . B . ; Ablonczy , Z . ; Smith , R . T . ; Sloan , K . R . ; et al . Quantitative Autoﬂuorescence and Cell Density Maps of the Human Retinal Pigment Epithelium . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2014 , 55 , 4832 – 4841 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 23 . Starnes , A . C . ; Huisingh , C . ; McGwin , G . ; Sloan , K . R . ; Ablonczy , Z . ; Smith , R . T . ; Curcio , C . A . ; Ach , T . Multi - nucleate retinal pigment epithelium cells of the human macula exhibit a characteristic and highly speciﬁc distribution . Vis . Neurosci . 2016 , 33 , E001 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 24 . Rizzolo , L . J . Development and Role of Tight Junctions in the Retinal Pigment Epithelium . Adv . Appl . Microbiol . 2007 , 258 , 195 – 234 . 25 . Hudspeth , A . J . ; Yee , A . G . The intercellular junctional complexes of retinal pigment epithelia . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1973 , 12 , 354 – 365 . 26 . Rizzolo , L . J . ; Peng , S . ; Luo , Y . ; Xiao , W . Integration of tight junctions and claudins with the barrier functions of the retinal pigment epithelium . Prog . Retin . Eye Res . 2011 , 30 , 296 – 323 . [ CrossRef ] 27 . Stricker , J . ; Falzone , T . ; Gardel , M . L . Mechanics of the F - actin cytoskeleton . J . Biomech . 2010 , 43 , 9 – 14 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 13 of 19 28 . Pollard , T . D . ; Cooper , J . A . Actin , a Central Player in Cell Shape and Movement . Science 2009 , 326 , 1208 – 1212 . [ CrossRef ] 29 . Fletcher , D . A . ; Mullins , R . D . Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton . Nature 2010 , 463 , 485 – 492 . [ CrossRef ] 30 . McKechnie , N . M . ; Boulton , M . ; Robey , H . L . ; Savage , F . J . ; Grierson , I . The cytoskeletal elements of human retinal pigment epithelium : In vitro and in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 1988 , 91 , 303 – 312 . 31 . Owaribe , K . ; Franke , W . W . ; Kartenbeck , J . ; Rungger - Brändle , E . Cytoskeletons of retinal pigment epithelial cells : Interspecies di ﬀ erences of expression patterns indicate independence of cell function from the speciﬁc complement of cytoskeletal proteins . Cell Tissue Res . 1988 , 254 , 301 – 315 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 32 . Bonilha , V . L . Retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) cytoskeleton in vivo and in vitro . Exp . Eye Res . 2014 , 126 , 38 – 45 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 33 . Hohmann , T . ; Dehghani , F . The Cytoskeleton—A Complex Interacting Meshwork . Cells 2019 , 8 , 362 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 34 . Rotty , J . D . ; Bear , J . E . Competition and collaboration between di ﬀ erent actin assembly pathways allows for homeostatic control of the actin cytoskeleton . Bioarchitecture 2014 , 5 , 27 – 34 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 35 . Achard , V . ; Martiel , J . - L . ; Michelot , A . ; Gu é rin , C . ; Reymann , A . - C . ; Blanchoin , L . ; Boujemaa - Paterski , R . A “Primer” - Based Mechanism Underlies Branched Actin Filament Network Formation and Motility . Curr . Boil . 2010 , 20 , 423 – 428 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 36 . Kawska , A . ; Carvalho , K . ; Manzi , J . ; Boujemaa - Paterski , R . ; Blanchoin , L . ; Martiel , J . - L . ; Sykes , C . How actin network dynamics control the onset of actin - based motility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2012 , 109 , 14440 – 14445 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 37 . Sept , D . ; Xu , J . ; Pollard , T . D . ; McCammon , J . A . Annealing Accounts for the Length of Actin Filaments Formed by Spontaneous Polymerization . Biophys . J . 1999 , 77 , 2911 – 2919 . [ CrossRef ] 38 . Pollard , T . D . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect . Biol . 2016 , 8 . [ CrossRef ] 39 . Bretscher , A . ; Weber , K . Villin is a major protein of the microvillus cystoskeleton which binds both G and F actin in a calcium - dependent manner . Cell 1980 , 20 , 839 – 847 . [ CrossRef ] 40 . Vasioukhin , V . ; Bauer , C . ; Yin , M . ; Fuchs , E . Directed Actin Polymerization Is the Driving Force for Epithelial Cell – Cell Adhesion . Cell 2000 , 100 , 209 – 219 . [ CrossRef ] 41 . Mooseker , M . S . ; Kramer , M . F . ; Geuze , J . J . Organization of an actin ﬁlament - membrane complex . Filament polarity and membrane attachment in the microvilli of intestinal epithelial cells . J . Cell Boil . 1975 , 67 , 725 – 743 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 42 . Kovar , D . R . ; Harris , E . S . ; Maha ﬀ y , R . ; Higgs , H . N . ; Pollard , T . D . Control of the Assembly of ATP - and ADP - Actin by Formins and Proﬁlin . Cell 2006 , 124 , 423 – 435 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 43 . Andrianantoandro , E . ; Pollard , T . D . Mechanism of Actin Filament Turnover by Severing and Nucleation at Di ﬀ erent Concentrations of ADF / Coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 2006 , 24 , 13 – 23 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 44 . Kang , F . ; Purich , D . L . ; Southwick , F . S . Proﬁlin Promotes Barbed - end Actin Filament Assembly without Lowering the Critical Concentration . J . Boil . Chem . 1999 , 274 , 36963 – 36972 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 45 . Adelstein , R . S . ; Eisenberg , E . Regulation and Kinetics of the Actin - Myosin - ATP Interaction . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 1980 , 49 , 921 – 956 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 46 . Finer , J . T . ; Simmons , R . M . ; Spudich , J . A . Single myosin molecule mechanics : Piconewton forces and nanometre steps . Nature 1994 , 368 , 113 – 119 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 47 . Mahajan , R . K . ; Pardee , J . D . Assembly mechanism of Dictyostelium myosin II : Regulation by K + , Mg2 + , and actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 1996 , 35 , 15504 – 15514 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 48 . Murakami , N . ; Chauhan , V . P . S . ; Elzinga , M . Two Nonmuscle Myosin II Heavy Chain Isoforms Expressed in Rabbit Brains : Filament Forming Properties , the E ﬀ ects of Phosphorylation by Protein Kinase C and Casein Kinase II , and Location of the Phosphorylation Sites . Biochemistry 1998 , 37 , 1989 – 2003 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 49 . Yumura , S . ; Yoshida , M . ; Betapudi , V . ; Licate , L . S . ; Iwadate , Y . ; Nagasaki , A . ; Uyeda , T . Q . ; Egelho ﬀ , T . T . ; McIntosh , J . R . Multiple Myosin II Heavy Chain Kinases : Roles in Filament Assembly Control and Proper Cytokinesis in Dictyostelium . Mol . Boil . Cell 2005 , 16 , 4256 – 4266 . [ CrossRef ] 50 . Murakami , N . ; Kotula , L . ; Hwang , Y . - W . Two Distinct Mechanisms for Regulation of Nonmuscle Myosin Assembly via the Heavy Chain : Phosphorylation for MIIB and Mts 1 Binding for MIIA . Biochemistry 2000 , 39 , 11441 – 11451 . [ CrossRef ] 51 . Rosenberg , M . ; Ravid , S . ; Ridley , A . Protein Kinase C γ Regulates Myosin IIB Phosphorylation , Cellular Localization , and Filament Assembly . Mol . Boil . Cell 2006 , 17 , 1364 – 1374 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 14 of 19 52 . Scholey , J . M . ; Taylor , K . A . ; Kendrick - Jones , J . Regulation of non - muscle myosin assembly by calmodulin - dependent light chain kinase . Nature 1980 , 287 , 233 – 235 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 53 . E Kamm , K . ; Stull , J . T . The Function of Myosin and Myosin Light Chain Kinase Phosphorylation in Smooth Muscle . Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 1985 , 25 , 593 – 620 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 54 . Matsumura , F . Regulation of myosin II during cytokinesis in higher eukaryotes . Trends Cell Boil . 2005 , 15 , 371 – 377 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 55 . Bendix , P . M . ; Koenderink , G . H . ; Cuvelier , D . ; Dogic , Z . ; Koeleman , B . N . ; Brieher , W . M . ; Field , C . M . ; Mahadevan , L . ; Weitz , D . A . A Quantitative Analysis of Contractility in Active Cytoskeletal Protein Networks . Biophys . J . 2008 , 94 , 3126 – 3136 . [ CrossRef ] 56 . Koenderink , G . H . ; Dogic , Z . ; Nakamura , F . ; Bendix , P . M . ; MacKintosh , F . C . ; Hartwig , J . H . ; Stossel , T . P . ; Weitz , D . A . An active biopolymer network controlled by molecular motors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2009 , 106 , 15192 – 15197 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 57 . Wagner , B . ; Tharmann , R . ; Haase , I . ; Fischer , M . ; Bausch , A . R . Cytoskeletal polymer networks : The molecular structure of cross - linkers determines macroscopic properties . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2006 , 103 , 13974 – 13978 . [ CrossRef ] 58 . Kohler , S . ; Schaller , V . ; Bausch , A . R . Collective Dynamics of Active Cytoskeletal Networks . PLoS ONE 2011 , 6 , e23798 . [ CrossRef ] 59 . Ingerman , E . ; Hsiao , J . Y . ; Mullins , R . D . Arp2 / 3 complex ATP hydrolysis promotes lamellipodial actin network disassembly but is dispensable for assembly . J . Cell Boil . 2013 , 200 , 619 – 633 . [ CrossRef ] 60 . Reymann , A . - C . ; Suarez , C . ; Gu é rin , C . ; Martiel , J . - L . ; Staiger , C . J . ; Blanchoin , L . ; Boujemaa - Paterski , R . Turnover of branched actin ﬁlament networks by stochastic fragmentation with ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Boil . Cell 2011 , 22 , 2541 – 2550 . [ CrossRef ] 61 . Ngo , K . X . ; Kodera , N . ; Katayama , E . ; Ando , T . ; Uyeda , T . Q . Coﬁlin - induced unidirectional cooperative conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . eLife 2015 , 4 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 62 . Elam , W . A . ; Kang , H . ; De La Cruz , E . M . Biophysics of Actin Filament Severing by Coﬁlin . FEBS Lett . 2013 , 587 , 1215 – 1219 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 63 . Brown , R . A . ; Talas , G . ; Porter , R . A . ; McGrouther , D . A . ; Eastwood , M . Balanced mechanical forces and microtubule contribution to ﬁbroblast contraction . J . Cell . Physiol . 1996 , 169 , 439 – 447 . [ CrossRef ] 64 . Rudolph , R . ; Woodward , M . Spatial orientation of microtubules in contractile ﬁbroblasts in vivo . Anat . Rec . 1978 , 191 , 169 – 181 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 65 . Tomasek , J . J . Analysis of the role of microﬁlaments and microtubules in acquisition of bipolarity and elongation of ﬁbroblasts in hydrated collagen gels . J . Cell Boil . 1984 , 99 , 536 – 549 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 66 . Jiang , M . ; Esteve - Rudd , J . ; Lopes , V . S . ; Diemer , T . ; Lillo , C . ; Rump , A . ; Williams , D . S . Microtubule motors transport phagosomes in the RPE , and lack of KLC1 leads to AMD - like pathogenesis . J . Cell Boil . 2015 , 210 , 595 – 611 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 67 . Dhingra , A . ; Bell , B . ; Peachey , N . S . ; Daniele , L . L . ; Reyes - Reveles , J . ; Sharp , R . C . ; Jun , B . ; Bazan , N . G . ; Sparrow , J . R . ; Kim , H . J . Microtubule - Associated Protein 1 light Chain 3B , ( LC3B ) is Necessary to Maintain Lipid - Mediated Homeostasis in the Retinal Pigment Epithelium . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 2018 , 12 , 351 . [ CrossRef ] 68 . Lee , C . F . ; Liu , C . Y . ; Hsieh , R . H . ; Wei , Y . H . Oxidative stress - induced depolymerization of microtubules and alteration of mitochondrial mass in human cells . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 2005 , 1042 , 246 – 254 . [ CrossRef ] 69 . Etienne - Manneville , S . Cytoplasmic Intermediate Filaments in Cell Biology . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Boil . 2018 , 34 , 1 – 28 . [ CrossRef ] 70 . Chang , L . ; Goldman , R . D . Intermediate ﬁlaments mediate cytoskeletal crosstalk . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Boil . 2004 , 5 , 601 – 613 . [ CrossRef ] 71 . Herrmann , H . ; Aebi , U . Intermediate Filaments : Molecular Structure , Assembly Mechanism , and Integration Into Functionally Distinct Intracellular Sca ﬀ olds . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 2004 , 73 , 749 – 789 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 72 . Wang , N . ; Stamenovi´c , D . Contribution of intermediate ﬁlaments to cell sti ﬀ ness , sti ﬀ ening , and growth . Am . J . Physiol . Physiol . 2000 , 279 , C188 – C194 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 73 . Godsel , L . M . ; Hobbs , R . P . ; Green , K . J . Intermediate ﬁlament assembly : Dynamics to disease . Trends Cell Boil . 2008 , 18 , 28 – 37 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 15 of 19 74 . Sanghvi - Shah , R . ; Weber , G . F . Intermediate Filaments at the Junction of Mechanotransduction , Migration , and Development . Front . Cell Dev . Boil . 2017 , 5 , 81 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 75 . Favre , B . ; Schneider , Y . ; Lingasamy , P . ; Bouameur , J . - E . ; Begr é , N . ; Gontier , Y . ; Steiner - Champliaud , M . - F . ; Frias , M . A . ; Borradori , L . ; Fontao , L . Plectin interacts with the rod domain of type III intermediate ﬁlament proteins desmin and vimentin . Eur . J . Cell Boil . 2011 , 90 , 390 – 400 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 76 . Sripathi , S . R . ; He , W . ; Sylvester , O . ; Neksumi , M . ; Um , J . - Y . ; Dluya , T . ; Bernstein , P . S . ; Jahng , W . J . ; Sripathi , S . R . Altered Cytoskeleton as a Mitochondrial Decay Signature in the Retinal Pigment Epithelium . Protein J . 2016 , 35 , 179 – 192 . [ CrossRef ] 77 . Matveeva , E . A . ; Venkova , L . S . ; Chernoivanenko , I . S . ; Minin , A . A . Vimentin is involved in regulation of mitochondrial motility and membrane potential by Rac1 . Boil . Open 2015 , 4 , 1290 – 1297 . [ CrossRef ] 78 . Kröger , C . ; Loschke , F . ; Schwarz , N . ; Windo ﬀ er , R . ; Leube , R . E . ; Magin , T . M . Keratins control intercellular adhesion involving PKC - α – mediated desmoplakin phosphorylation . J . Cell Boil . 2013 , 201 , 681 – 692 . [ CrossRef ] 79 . Toivola , D . M . ; Tao , G . - Z . ; Habtezion , A . ; Liao , J . ; Omary , M . B . Cellular integrity plus : Organelle - related and protein - targeting functions of intermediate ﬁlaments . Trends Cell Boil . 2005 , 15 , 608 – 617 . [ CrossRef ] 80 . Geisler , F . ; Leube , R . E . Epithelial Intermediate Filaments : Guardians against Microbial Infection ? Cells 2016 , 5 , 29 . [ CrossRef ] 81 . Pekny , M . ; Lane , E . B . Intermediate ﬁlaments and stress . Exp . Cell Res . 2007 , 313 , 2244 – 2254 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 82 . Ramms , L . ; Fabris , G . ; Windo ﬀ er , R . ; Schwarz , N . ; Springer , R . ; Zhou , C . ; Lazar , J . ; Stiefel , S . ; Hersch , N . ; Schnakenberg , U . Keratins as the main component for the mechanical integrity of keratinocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2013 , 110 , 18513 – 18518 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 83 . Toivola , D . ; Strnad , P . ; Habtezion , A . ; Omary , M . Intermediate ﬁlaments take the heat as stress proteins . Trends Cell Boil . 2010 , 20 , 79 – 91 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 84 . Fuchs , U . ; Kivelä , T . ; Tarkkanen , A . Cytoskeleton in normal and reactive human retinal pigment epithelial cells . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1991 , 32 , 3178 – 3186 . 85 . Matsumoto , B . ; Gu é rin , C . J . ; Anderson , D . H . Cytoskeletal redi ﬀ erentiation of feline , monkey , and human RPE cells in culture . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1990 , 31 , 879 – 889 . 86 . Burnside , B . ; Laties , A . M . Actin ﬁlaments in apical projections of the primate pigmented epithelial cell . Investig . Ophthalmol . 1976 , 15 , 570 – 575 . 87 . Bretscher , A . ; Weber , K . Puriﬁcation of microvilli and an analysis of the protein components of the microﬁlament core bundle . Exp . Cell Res . 1978 , 116 , 397 – 407 . [ CrossRef ] 88 . Gungor - Ordueri , N . E . ; Celik - Ozenci , C . ; Cheng , C . Y . Ezrin : A regulator of actin microﬁlaments in cell junctions of the rat testis . Asian J . Androl . 2015 , 17 , 653 – 658 . 89 . Law , A . L . ; Parinot , C . ; Chatagnon , J . ; Gravez , B . ; Sahel , J . A . ; Bhattacharya , S . S . ; Nandrot , E . F . Cleavage of Mer tyrosine kinase ( MerTK ) from the cell surface contributes to the regulation of retinal phagocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 2015 , 290 , 4941 – 4952 . [ CrossRef ] 90 . Stossel , T . P . Phagocytosis . N . Engl . J . Med . 1974 , 290 , 717 – 723 . [ CrossRef ] 91 . Simson , J . V . ; Spicer , S . S . Activities of speciﬁc cell constituents in phagocytosis ( endocytosis ) . Int . Rev . Exp . Pathol . 1973 , 12 , 79 – 118 . [ PubMed ] 92 . Malawista , S . E . Microtubules and the mobilization of lysosomes in phagocytizing human leukocytes . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1975 , 253 , 738 – 749 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 93 . Weissmann , G . ; Goldstein , I . ; Ho ﬀ stein , S . ; Tsung , P . - K . Reciprocal e ﬀ ects of camp and cgmp on microtubule - dependent release of lysosomal enzymes . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1975 , 253 , 750 – 762 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 94 . Gibbs , D . ; Kitamoto , J . ; Williams , D . S . Abnormal phagocytosis by retinal pigmented epithelium that lacks myosin VIIa , the Usher syndrome 1B protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 6481 – 6486 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 95 . Barral , D . C . ; Seabra , M . C . The Melanosome as a Model to Study Organelle Motility in Mammals . Pigment . Cell Res . 2004 , 17 , 111 – 118 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 96 . Burgoyne , T . ; O’Connor , M . N . ; Seabra , M . C . ; Cutler , D . F . ; Futter , C . E . Regulation of melanosome number , shape and movement in the zebraﬁsh retinal pigment epithelium by OA1 and PMEL . J . Cell Sci . 2015 , 128 , 1400 – 1407 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 16 of 19 97 . Steinberg , R . H . ; Wood , I . ; Hogan , M . J . Pigment Epithelial Ensheathment and Phagocytosis of Extrafoveal Cones in Human Retina . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B Boil . Sci . 1977 , 277 , 459 – 471 . [ CrossRef ] 98 . Gibbs , D . ; Azarian , S . M . ; Lillo , C . ; Kitamoto , J . ; Klomp , A . E . ; Libby , R . T . ; Steel , K . P . ; Williams , D . S . Role of myosin VIIa and Rab27a in the motility and localization of RPE melanosomes . J . Cell Sci . 2004 , 117 , 6459 – 6471 . [ CrossRef ] 99 . Bonilha , V . L . ; Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Polarity and developmental regulation of two PDZ proteins in the retinal pigment epithelium . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2001 , 42 , 3274 – 3282 . 100 . Kivelä , T . ; Jääskeläine , J . ; Vaheri , A . ; Carp é n , O . Ezrin , a membrane - organizing protein , as a polarization marker of the retinal pigment epithelium in vertebrates . Cell Tissue Res . 2000 , 301 , 217 – 223 . [ CrossRef ] 101 . Bonilha , V . L . ; Finnemann , S . C . ; Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Ezrin Promotes Morphogenesis of Apical Microvilli and Basal Infoldings in Retinal Pigment Epithelium . J . Cell Boil . 1999 , 147 , 1533 – 1548 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 102 . Nawrot , M . ; West , K . ; Possin , D . E . ; Crabb , J . W . ; Huang , J . ; Bretscher , A . ; Saari , J . C . Cellular Retinaldehyde - BindingProteinInteractswithERM - BindingPhosphoprotein50inRetinalPigmentEpithelium . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2004 , 45 , 393 – 401 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 103 . Noa , N . Retinoid - binding proteins : Mediators of retinoid action . Biochem . J . 2000 , 348 , 481 – 495 . [ CrossRef ] 104 . Gonzalez - Fernandez , F . ; Kittredge , K . L . ; Rayborn , M . E . ; Hollyﬁeld , J . G . ; Landers , R . A . ; Saha , M . ; Grainger , R . M . Interphotoreceptor retinoid - binding protein ( IRBP ) , a major 124 kDa glycoprotein in the interphotoreceptor matrix of Xenopus laevis . Characterization , molecular cloning and biosynthesis . J . Cell Sci . 1993 , 105 , 7 – 21 . [ PubMed ] 105 . Gonzalez - Fernandez , F . ; Ghosh , D . Focus on Molecules : Interphotoreceptor retinoid - binding protein ( IRBP ) . Exp . Eye Res . 2008 , 86 , 169 – 170 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 106 . Carson , N . ; Simpson , N . A physical map of 13 markers on chromosome - 10 from dosage studies on abnormal - cell lines . In Cytogenetics and Cell Genetics ; Karger : Basel , Switzerlands , 1989 ; pp . 974 – 975 . 107 . Maw , M . A . ; Kennedy , B . ; Knight , A . ; Bridges , R . ; Roth , K . E . ; Mani , E . ; Mukkadan , J . ; Nancarrow , D . ; Crabb , J . W . ; Denton , M . J . Mutation of the gene encoding cellular retinaldehyde – binding protein in autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa . Nat . Genet . 1997 , 17 , 198 – 200 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 108 . Ruiz - Loredo , A . Y . ; Lopez - Colome , A . M . New Insights into the Regulation of Myosin Light Chain Phosphorylation in Retinal Pigment Epithelial Cells . In International Review of Cell and Molecular Biology ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 2012 ; Volume 293 , pp . 85 – 121 . 109 . Gunning , P . ; O’Neill , G . ; Hardeman , E . Tropomyosin - Based Regulation of the Actin Cytoskeleton in Time and Space . Physiol . Rev . 2008 , 88 , 1 – 35 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 110 . Ciuba , K . ; Hawkes , W . ; Tojkander , S . ; Kogan , K . ; Engel , U . ; Iskratsch , T . ; Lappalainen , P . Calponin - 3 is critical for coordinated contractility of actin stress ﬁbers . Sci . Rep . 2018 , 8 , 17670 . [ CrossRef ] 111 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . ; Ma , X . ; Adelstein , R . S . ; Horwitz , A . R . Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Boil . 2009 , 10 , 778 – 790 . [ CrossRef ] 112 . Totsukawa , G . ; Yamakita , Y . ; Yamashiro , S . ; Hartshorne , D . J . ; Sasaki , Y . ; Matsumura , F . Distinct Roles of Rock ( Rho - Kinase ) and Mlck in Spatial Regulation of Mlc Phosphorylation for Assembly of Stress Fibers and Focal Adhesions in 3t3 Fibroblasts . J . Cell Boil . 2000 , 150 , 797 – 806 . [ CrossRef ] 113 . Maekawa , M . Signaling from Rho to the Actin Cytoskeleton Through Protein Kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Sci . 1999 , 285 , 895 – 898 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 114 . Tojkander , S . ; Gateva , G . ; Lappalainen , P . Actin stress ﬁbers—Assembly , dynamics and biological roles . J . Cell Sci . 2012 , 125 , 1855 – 1864 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 115 . Cramer , L . P . Identiﬁcation of Novel Graded Polarity Actin Filament Bundles in Locomoting Heart Fibroblasts : Implications for the Generation of Motile Force . J . Cell Boil . 1997 , 136 , 1287 – 1305 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 116 . Lazarides , E . ; Burridge , K . α - Actinin : Immunoﬂuorescent localization of a muscle structural protein in nonmuscle cells . Cell 1975 , 6 , 289 – 298 . [ CrossRef ] 117 . Naumanen , P . ; Lappalainen , P . ; Hotulainen , P . Mechanisms of actin stress ﬁbre assembly . J . Microsc . 2008 , 231 , 446 – 454 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 118 . Sjöblom , B . ; Salmazo , A . ; Djinovic - Carugo , K . α - Actinin structure and regulation . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 2008 , 65 , 2688 – 2701 . [ CrossRef ] 119 . Koenderink , G . H . ; Paluch , E . K . Architecture shapes contractility in actomyosin networks . Curr . Opin . Cell Boil . 2018 , 50 , 79 – 85 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 17 of 19 120 . Hotulainen , P . ; Lappalainen , P . Stress ﬁbers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J . Cell Boil . 2006 , 173 , 383 – 394 . [ CrossRef ] 121 . Tojkander , S . ; Gateva , G . ; Schevzov , G . ; Hotulainen , P . ; Naumanen , P . ; Martin , C . ; Gunning , P . W . ; Lappalainen , P . A Molecular Pathway for Myosin II Recruitment to Stress Fibers . Curr . Boil . 2011 , 21 , 539 – 550 . [ CrossRef ] 122 . Endlich , N . ; Schordan , E . ; Cohen , C . D . ; Kretzler , M . ; Lewko , B . ; Welsch , T . ; Kriz , W . ; Otey , C . A . ; Endlich , K . Palladin is a dynamic actin - associated protein in podocytes . Kidney Int . 2009 , 75 , 214 – 226 . [ CrossRef ] 123 . Schmidt , K . ; Nichols , B . J . Functional interdependence between septin and actin cytoskeleton . BMC Cell Boil . 2004 , 5 , 43 . 124 . Burnette , D . T . ; Manley , S . ; Sengupta , P . ; Sougrat , R . ; Davidson , M . W . ; Kachar , B . ; Lippincott - Schwartz , J . A role for actin arcs in the leading - edge advance of migrating cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 2011 , 13 , 371 – 382 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 125 . Hu , S . ; Dasbiswas , K . ; Guo , Z . ; Tee , Y . - H . ; Thiagarajan , V . ; Hersen , P . ; Chew , T . - L . ; Safran , S . A . ; Zaidel - Bar , R . ; Bershadsky , A . D . Long - range self - organization of cytoskeletal myosin II ﬁlament stacks . Nat . Cell Biol . 2017 , 19 , 133 – 141 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 126 . Tojkander , S . ; Gateva , G . ; Husain , A . ; Krishnan , R . ; Lappalainen , P . Generation of contractile actomyosin bundles depends on mechanosensitive actin ﬁlament assembly and disassembly . eLife 2015 , 4 , e06126 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 127 . Burridge , K . ; Guilluy , C . Focal adhesions , stress ﬁbers and mechanical tension . Exp . Cell Res . 2016 , 343 , 14 – 20 . [ CrossRef ] 128 . Balaratnasingam , C . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Sloan , K . R . ; Yannuzzi , L . A . ; Freund , K . B . ; Curcio , C . A . Histology and optical coherence tomographic correlates in drusenoid pigment epithelium detachment in age - related macular degeneration . Ophthalmology 2017 , 124 , 644 – 656 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 129 . Elner , S . G . ; Elner , V . M . The integrin superfamily and the eye . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1996 , 37 , 696 – 701 . 130 . Yang , X . ; Chung , J . - Y . ; Rai , U . ; Esumi , N . Cadherins in the retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) revisited : P - cadherin is the highly dominant cadherin expressed in human and mouse RPE in vivo . PLoS ONE 2018 , 13 , e0191279 . [ CrossRef ] 131 . Sorkio , A . ; Hongisto , H . ; Kaarniranta , K . ; Uusitalo , H . ; Juuti - Uusitalo , K . ; Skottman , H . Structure and Barrier Properties of Human Embryonic Stem Cell – Derived Retinal Pigment Epithelial Cells Are A ﬀ ected by Extracellular Matrix Protein Coating . Tissue Eng . Part A 2014 , 20 , 622 – 634 . [ CrossRef ] 132 . Ooto , S . ; Vongkulsiri , S . ; Sato , T . ; Suzuki , M . ; Curcio , C . A . ; Spaide , R . F . Outer Retinal Corrugations in Age - Related Macular Degeneration . JAMA Ophthalmol . 2014 , 132 , 806 . [ CrossRef ] 133 . Tan , A . C . S . ; Astroz , P . ; Dansingani , K . K . ; Slakter , J . S . ; Yannuzzi , L . A . ; Curcio , C . A . ; Freund , K . B . The Evolution of the Plateau , an Optical Coherence Tomography Signature Seen in Geographic Atrophy . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2017 , 58 , 2349 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 134 . Bressler , S . B . ; Bressler , N . M . ; Sarks , S . H . ; Sarks , J . P . Age - related macular degeneration : Nonneovascular early AMD , intermediate AMD , and geographic atrophy . In Volume 2 : Medical Retina ; Elsevier Inc . : Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 2005 ; pp . 1041 – 1074 . 135 . Li , M . ; Huisingh , C . ; Messinger , J . ; Dolz - Marco , R . ; Ferrara , D . ; Freund , K . B . ; Curcio , C . A . Histology of geographic atrophy secondary to age - related macular degeneration : A multilayer approach . Retina 2018 , 38 , 1937 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 136 . Hiscott , P . ; Sheridan , C . ; Magee , R . M . ; Grierson , I . Matrix and the retinal pigment epithelium in proliferative retinal disease . Prog . Retin . Eye Res . 1999 , 18 , 167 – 190 . [ CrossRef ] 137 . Friedlander , M . ; Theesfeld , C . L . ; Sugita , M . ; Fruttiger , M . ; Thomas , M . A . ; Chang , S . ; Cheresh , D . A . Involvement of integrins alpha v beta 3 and alpha v beta 5 in ocular neovascular diseases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1996 , 93 , 9764 – 9769 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 138 . Ts’O , M . O . ; Friedman , E . The retinal pigment epithelium . I . Comparative histology . Arch . Ophthalmol . 1967 , 78 , 641 – 649 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 139 . Østerberg , C . Topography ofthe layer of rods and cones in the human retina . Acta Ophthalmol . 1935 , 13 , 1 – 102 . 140 . Wing , G . L . ; Blanchard , G . C . ; Weiter , J . J . The topography and age relationship of lipofuscin concentration in the retinal pigment epithelium . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1978 , 17 , 601 – 607 . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 18 of 19 141 . Gao , H . ; Hollyﬁeld , J . G . Aging of the human retina . Di ﬀ erential loss of neurons and retinal pigment epithelial cells . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1992 , 33 , 1 – 17 . 142 . Del Priore , L . V . ; Kuo , Y . - H . ; Tezel , T . H . Age - related changes in human RPE cell density and apoptosis proportion in situ . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2002 , 43 , 3312 – 3318 . 143 . Ach , T . ; Tolstik , E . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Zarubina , A . V . ; Heintzmann , R . ; Curcio , C . A . Lipofuscin Redistribution and Loss Accompanied by Cytoskeletal Stress in Retinal Pigment Epithelium of Eyes With Age - Related Macular Degeneration . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2015 , 56 , 3242 – 3252 . [ CrossRef ] 144 . Greferath , U . ; Guymer , R . H . ; Vessey , K . A . ; Brassington , K . ; Fletcher , E . L . Correlation of Histologic Features with In Vivo Imaging of Reticular Pseudodrusen . Ophthalmology 2016 , 123 , 1320 – 1331 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 145 . Girouard , M . - P . ; Pool , M . ; Alchini , R . ; Rambaldi , I . ; Fournier , A . E . RhoA Proteolysis Regulates the Actin Cytoskeleton in Response to Oxidative Stress . PLoS ONE 2016 , 11 , 0168641 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 146 . Leri , A . ; Claudio , P . P . ; Li , Q . ; Wang , X . ; Reiss , K . ; Wang , S . ; Malhotra , A . ; Kajstura , J . ; Anversa , P . Stretch - mediated release of angiotensin II induces myocyte apoptosis by activating p53 that enhances the local renin - angiotensin system and decreases the Bcl - 2 - to - Bax protein ratio in the cell . J . Clin . Investig . 1998 , 101 , 1326 – 1342 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 147 . Mazzitello , K . ; Zhang , Q . ; Chrenek , M . ; Family , F . ; Grossniklaus , H . ; Nickerson , J . ; Jiang , Y . Druse - Induced Morphology Evolution in Retinal Pigment Epithelium . arXiv 2016 , arXiv : 1609 . 04496 2016 . 148 . Wu , S . ; Lu , Q . ; Wang , N . ; Zhang , J . ; Liu , Q . ; Gao , M . ; Chen , J . ; Liu , W . ; Xu , L . Cyclic stretch induced - retinal pigment epithelial cell apoptosis and cytokine changes . BMC Ophthalmol . 2017 , 17 , 208 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 149 . Matthews , B . D . ; Overby , D . R . ; Mannix , R . ; Ingber , D . E . Cellular adaptation to mechanical stress : Role of integrins , Rho , cytoskeletal tension and mechanosensitive ion channels . J . Cell Sci . 2006 , 119 , 508 – 518 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 150 . Wang , N . ; Butler , J . ; Ingber , D . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 1993 , 260 , 1124 – 1127 . [ CrossRef ] 151 . Galbraith , C . ; Skalak , R . ; Chien , S . Shear stress induces spatial reorganization of the endothelial cell cytoskeleton . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 1998 , 40 , 317 – 330 . [ CrossRef ] 152 . Davies , P . F . ; Tripathi , S . C . Mechanical stress mechanisms and the cell . An endothelial paradigm . Circ . Res . 1993 , 72 , 239 – 245 . [ CrossRef ] 153 . Zanzottera , E . C . ; Ach , T . ; Huisingh , C . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Spaide , R . F . ; Curcio , C . A . Visualizing retinal pigment epithelium phenotypes in the transition to geographic atrophy in age - related macular degeneration . Retina 2016 , 36 , S12 . [ CrossRef ] 154 . Zanzottera , E . C . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Ach , T . ; Smith , R . T . ; Freund , K . B . ; Curcio , C . A . ; Smith , T . The Project MACULA Retinal Pigment Epithelium Grading System for Histology and Optical Coherence Tomography in Age - Related Macular Degeneration . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2015 , 56 , 3253 – 3268 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 155 . Curcio , C . A . ; Zanzottera , E . C . ; Ach , T . ; Balaratnasingam , C . ; Freund , K . B . Activated retinal pigment epithelium , an optical coherence tomography biomarker for progression in age - related macular degeneration . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2017 , 58 , BIO211 – BIO226 . 156 . Zanzottera , E . C . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Ach , T . ; Smith , R . T . ; Curcio , C . A . SubductedandMelanoticCellsinAdvanced Age - Related Macular Degeneration Are Derived From Retinal Pigment Epithelium . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2015 , 56 , 3269 – 3278 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 157 . Parri , M . ; Chiarugi , P . Rac and Rho GTPases in cancer cell motility control . Cell Commun . Signal . 2010 , 8 , 23 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 158 . Nguyen , L . K . ; Kholodenko , B . N . ; Von Kriegsheim , A . Rac1 and RhoA : Networks , loops and bistability . Small GTPases 2018 , 9 , 316 – 321 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 159 . Friedl , P . ; Wolf , K . Plasticity of cell migration : A multiscale tuning model . J . Exp . Med . 2010 , 207 , 11 – 19 . [ CrossRef ] 160 . Grisanti , S . ; Guidry , C . Transdi ﬀ erentiation of retinal pigment epithelial cells from epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype . Investig . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 1995 , 36 , 391 – 405 . 161 . Ding , J . - D . ; Johnson , L . V . ; Herrmann , R . ; Farsiu , S . ; Smith , S . G . ; Groelle , M . ; Mace , B . E . ; Sullivan , P . ; Jamison , J . A . ; Kelly , U . Anti - amyloid therapy protects against retinal pigmented epithelium damage and vision loss in a model of age - related macular degeneration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2011 , 108 , E279 – E287 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2019 , 20 , 3578 19 of 19 162 . Bruban , J . ; Glotin , A . - L . ; Dinet , V . ; Chalour , N . ; Sennlaub , F . ; Jonet , L . ; An , N . ; Faussat , A . M . ; Mascarelli , F . Amyloid - β ( 1 - 42 ) alters structure and function of retinal pigmented epithelial cells . Aging Cell 2009 , 8 , 162 – 177 . [ CrossRef ] 163 . Müller , C . ; Charniga , C . ; Temple , S . ; Finnemann , S . C . Quantiﬁed F - Actin Morphology Is Predictive of Phagocytic Capacity of Stem Cell - Derived Retinal Pigment Epithelium . Stem Cell Rep . 2018 , 10 , 1075 – 1087 . [ CrossRef ] 164 . Gambril , J . A . ; Sloan , K . R . ; Swain , T . A . ; Huisingh , C . ; Zarubina , A . V . ; Messinger , J . D . ; Ach , T . ; Curcio , C . A . Quantifying Retinal Pigment Epithelium Dysmorphia and Loss of Histologic Autoﬂuorescence in Age - Related Macular Degeneration . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2019 , 60 , 2481 – 2493 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 165 . Granger , C . E . ; Yang , Q . ; Song , H . ; Saito , K . ; Nozato , K . ; Latchney , L . R . ; Leonard , B . T . ; Chung , M . M . ; Williams , D . R . ; Rossi , E . A . Human Retinal Pigment Epithelium : In Vivo Cell Morphometry , Multispectral Autoﬂuorescence , and Relationship to Cone Mosaic . Investig . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 2018 , 59 , 5705 – 5716 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 166 . Liu , T . ; Jung , H . ; Liu , J . ; Droettboom , M . ; Tam , J . Noninvasive near infrared autoﬂuorescence imaging of retinal pigment epithelial cells in the human retina using adaptive optics . Biomed . Opt . Express 2017 , 8 , 4348 – 4360 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] © 2019 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .