The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment Gabriel A . Giménez Roche & Didier Calcei Accepted : 23 May 2019 # Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 Abstract One of the main problems in fully integrating uncertainty in entrepreneurship process theory is how to distinguish entrepreneurial competence from pure luck . We propose a routine - based approach where entrepre - neurs use their idiosyncratic knowledge to identify emergent demand routines — that is , standardized de - mand behavior lacking specifically adequate artifacts — that can serve as an objective reference point to their judgment of emergent opportunity situations and coordination of resources . Uncertainty is assessed from its structural nature to its endogenous origins in crea - tively reflexive market interactions . Routines reduce uncertainty when agents choose to adopt standardized behavior over ad hoc creative action . Thus , routines stabilize market interactions as they get increasingly more established , though emergent demand routines are volatile enough to allow for price divergences . En - trepreneurs can cohesively or generatively introduce products as specific artifacts for these routines , thus making profits by either consolidating or triggering ( or both ) emergent demand routines in the market . Entre - preneurial competence is thus a matter of convergence between entrepreneurial idiosyncratic judgment and emergent demand routines resulting in unique situa - tions , which explain differences among entrepreneurs , serial business creation , and business longevity . Keywords Creativity . Entrepreneurship . Reflexivity . Routines . Uncertainty JEL codes D02 . D81 . L26 . O43 1 Introduction The most distinguishing feature of entrepreneurship is its exposure to market uncertainty ( Alvarez 2007 ; Casson 2003 ; Foss and Klein 2012 ; Sarasvathy 2008 ; Shane 2003 ) . Indeed , B uncertainty rules the day ^ is a conditio sine qua non for the emergence of profit oppor - tunities ( Folta 2007 , p . 98 , emphasis in original ) — that is , situations where prices diverge between market agents . Price divergences arise because market process - es of production and exchange are open - ended , that is , information is not just dispersed , but is continuously and idiosyncratically generated by market agents ( Giménez Roche 2011 2016 ) . Therefore , future market conditions cannot be inferred from present ones , which limits the scope of learning and optimization , while emphasizing imagination and creativity ( Chick and Dow 2005 ; Davidson 1996 ) . This open - endedness manifests as un - certainty about alternative actions and possible out - comes , thus resulting in divergent assumptions of what should be done and what could happen ( Packard et al . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 019 - 00213 - 1 G . A . Giménez Roche ( * ) Finance Department , NEOMA Business School , 1 rue du Maréchal Juin , 76130 Mont - Saint - Aignan , France e - mail : gabriel . gimenez - roche @ neoma - bs . fr D . Calcei Innovation , Entrepreneurship , and Strategy Department , South Champagne Business School , 217 avenue Pierre Brossolette , 10002 Troyes , France e - mail : didier . calcei @ yschools . fr Small Bus Econ ( 2021 ) 56 : 209 – 235 / Published online : 18 June 2019 2017 ) . The problem of uncertainty is important for both theorists and practitioners , essentially for the same rea - son . Exposure to uncertainty makes it hard to tell good judgment from pure luck , and poses the problem of entrepreneurial competence in identifying , evaluating , and exploiting profit opportunities under uncertainty . 1 Indeed , pure luck can hardly provide an adequate and systematic explanation for successful portfolio and seri - al entrepreneurship ( Westhead et al . 2005a , b ) , nor can it explain enterprise longevity and survival ( Geroski et al . 2010 ; Napolitano et al . 2015 ) . Although entrepreneurship theories do recognize the problem of uncertainty , they bypass it when explaining entrepreneurial identification , evaluation , and exploita - tion of opportunities ( Davidsson 2003 ; Dimov 2011 ; McMullen et al . 2007 ) . However , recently , more atten - tion has been paid to the problem of uncertainty in entrepreneurship . McMullen and Shepherd ( 2006 ) and Shepherd et al . ( 2007 ) explain that uncertainty is behind the doubt that might prevent some people from becom - ing entrepreneurs and that overcoming this doubt is a matter of confidence based on idiosyncratic knowledge . Townsend et al . ( 2018 ) examine how uncertainty relates to other forms of unknowingness impacting entrepre - neurial judgment and action , and try to isolate the influence of each form of unknowingness on entrepreneurship . Bylund and McCaffrey ( 2017 ) distin - guish structural from purely cognitive uncertainty , and how entrepreneurs navigate between different institutional levels to successfully evaluate and exploit opportunities . In their turn , Packard et al . ( 2017 ) analyze how entrepreneurs confront structural and cognitive un - certainty , and how they reduce its impact by narrowing the range of potential actions and outcomes through recursively adjusting judgment . In this article , we follow the leads of idiosyncratic entrepreneurial judgment and recursive market interactions to offer a mechanism on how uncertainty can be reduced by means of emergent demand routines . We argue that recursive market interactions are a source of both uncertainty and stability in market processes : uncertainty because of their open - endedness and stabil - ity because market agents routinize part of their interac - tions as a response to that uncertainty . Our point is that in order to be meaningful , entrepreneurial judgment must have a stable reference point . Thus , in accordance with Ramoglou and Tsang ( 2016 ) , who consider that the market process features objective propensities that en - trepreneurs actualize through action , we argue that these propensities consist of emergent demand routines , and constitute the stable reference point for entrepreneurial judgment . Essentially , routines are rule - following be - havioral regularities with some degree of collective recognition and assimilation ( Becker 2005 , p . 818 ) . Moreover , routines involve the use of artifacts , that is , products embodying the functions associated with rou - tinized actions ( D ’ Adderio 2008 , 2011 ) . Established routines involve well - specified artifacts adequately fitting the standards of procedure ( SOPs ) underlying them . No uncertainty is involved with these artifacts and , consequently , no price divergences either . Howev - er , emergent routines lack specifically adequate fitting artifacts , and hence involve uncertainty and price diver - gences . Therefore , emergent routines are regular enough to provide an objective reference point for judgment , while still being uncertain enough to involve price divergences . Our central contribution is to provide an explana - tion on how entrepreneurs introduce innovative prod - ucts : their idiosyncratic judgment resonates with emer - gent demand routines serving as reference points to identify potentially specific and fitting artifacts to those routines . In this manner , entrepreneurship can be cohesive , when innovations consolidate existing emergent demand routines by clearly delineating the form and applications of their underlying SOPs . Or it can be generative , when innovations embodying new SOPs with the potential for novel applications trigger routine emergence . Therefore , diversity in entrepre - neurial competence is a matter of the degree of reso - nance between entrepreneurial idiosyncratic judgment and the emerging structure of demand routines . More - over , the interplay between cohesive and generative entrepreneurship explains the continuous emergence of opportunities , as the latter triggers emergent rou - tines that are then exploited by the former , which 1 As Knight ( 1921 , pp . 277 – 278 , emphasis added ) explained : B The character of the entrepreneur ’ s income is evidently complex , and the relations of its component elements subtle . It contains an element which is ordinary contractual income , received on the ground of routine services performed by the entrepreneur personally for the business ( wages ) or earned by property which belongs to him ( rent or capital return ) . And the differential element is again complex , for it is clear that there is an element of calculation and an element of luck in it . [ … ] The serious difficulty comes with the attempt to deal with the relation between judgment and luck in determining that part of the entrepreneur ’ s income which is associated with the performance of his peculiar twofold function of ( a ) exercising responsible control and ( b ) securing the owners of productive services against uncertainty and fluctuation in their incomes . ^ G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 210 stabilizes part of the market process economizing time and resources for further routine emergence . The rest of this article is structured as follows : Section 2 explains how the creative reflexivity in market interactions continuously generates information making the unfolding of the market process unknowable in both cognitive and structural terms . Section 3 describes the mechanism by which idiosyncratic judgment uses de - mand routines to reduce the uncertainty of the market process . In Section 4 , we show how entrepreneurs can make use of emergent demand routines to introduce innovations for profit , either cohesively or generatively . Finally , Section 5 concludes this article with a summary of our contributions to the literature and a discussion of future research applications . 2 The nature of fundamental uncertainty The link between entrepreneurship and uncertainty was first established by Knight ( 1921 ) and further assessed by Mises ( 1998 [ 1949 ] ) , and it went on to become generally accepted in entrepreneurship theo - ries . This uncertainty originates from the market ’ s unpredictable intertemporal change , which implies the impossibility of categorizing specific outcomes into classes of events allowing for any objective probabi - listic calculation — as is the case with risk ( Knight 1921 , pp . 224 – 225 , 233 ; Mises 1998 , pp . 108 – 113 ) . Although an industry might comprise apparently sim - ilar competitors , their corporate governance , culture , capital structure , strategies , political connections , and public relations , among other aspects of their busi - nesses , are not really similar . Thus , each company faces a unique situation without a clear equivalent . For instance , Google and Apple are two major actors in the mobile phone industry but with different strate - gies . Apple introduced both software ( iOS ) and hard - ware ( iPhone ) from the beginning ( January 2007 ) , while Google focused mainly on software ( Android and Chrome OS ) . While Apple controls both the hard - ware and the software of its iPhone line of products , Google ’ s strategy is more focused on licensing its software to other hardware producers in the industry like Samsung , Huawei , and Xiaomi . Although Google tried its hand in producing its own phones , it enjoyed less success than Apple and changed its strategy to acquiring participations in already existing hardware - developing companies like Motorola or HTC . Although an integral part of entrepreneurship the - ories , the uncertainty problem is secondary to anal - yses concentrated on the nature of entrepreneurial opportunities . In the discovery view ( Eckhardt and Shane 2010 ; Shane 2000 , 2003 ; Shane and Eckhardt 2003 ; Shane and Venkataraman 2000 ) , uncertainty is contingent only to the search process of profit op - portunities assumed to be ex ante objective . Once discovered , the opportunity is secured , and uncer - tainty fades away . The creation view ( Alvarez et al . 2013 , 2014 ; Alvarez and Barney 2007 ) also assumes price divergences in the market as the benchmark for analysis , but it considers that opportunities can only exist ex post with the full enactment of venture ideas as a reaction to those price divergences . Uncertainty is now contingent to enactment , but once enactment is complete uncertainty fades away . In both views , change and the resulting price divergences are ex - ogenous to the market process , so that uncertainty is totally structural ( cf . Buchanan and Di Pierro 1980 ) . Entrepreneurs face uncertainty because information is either dispersed or missing , but not because it is being continuously generated . Under these assump - tions , the entrepreneur is an agent for market adjust - ment , but not for continuous market change ( Buchanan and Vanberg 2007 ; Littlechild 1979 ) . The limitations of the discovery and creation views in explaining perennial uncertainty led some researchers to altogether reject the explanatory rele - vance of the opportunity concept ( Davidsson 2003 , 2015 ; Davidsson et al . 2018 ; Dimov 2011 ; Klein 2008 ) . Instead of concentrating on elusive entities , their emphasis is on the performance relationship between entrepreneurial imagination of venture ideas and specific structural aspects of the market . Nevertheless , a number of researchers consider that the opportunity concept remains relevant because of its academic ubiquity , commonsensical use by prac - titioners , and its importance as an umbrella construct comprising the entire range of actions underlying venture creation ( Wood 2017 ; Wood and McKinley 2018 ) . However , nothing prevents opportunities to eventu - ally emerge as market situations parallel to an entrepre - neur ’ s expectations ( Ramoglou and Zyglidopoulos 2015 ) . As Ramoglou and Tsang ( 2016 ) point out in their actualization approach , entrepreneurs can cope with uncertainty by identifying objective propensities in existing demand needs that can be actualized through The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 211 entrepreneurial action . 2 In our view , this insight holds the key to understand how entrepreneurs cope with uncertainty . If the market did not generate objective propensities , it would be impossible to enterprise based on competence rather than luck . Therefore , there must be some objective propensity that entrepreneurs can identify , evaluate , and exploit . In the following subsec - tions , we shall explain how the market process generates information in a continuous and recursive way , thus structurally affecting agency while also being affected by it . This will then allow us to explain in Section 3 how routines emerge in the market process providing entre - preneurs with stability and opportunities to introduce innovative products . 2 . 1 The creative reflexivity of the market process The market is a process of B interacting decisions of consumers , entrepreneur - producers , and resource owners ^ that determine what , how , and for whom to produce via the price system ( Kirzner 1973 , p . 9 ) . It is fair to assume that the information relevant for general - ized price convergence B never exists in concentrated or integrated form , but solely as the dispersed bits of in - complete and frequently contradictory knowledge which all the separate individuals possess ^ ( Hayek 1945 , p . 519 ) . The greater the number of market partic - ipants , the more extensive — i . e . , voluminous — and com - plex — i . e . , imbricated — information is ( Hayek 1969 , pp . 25 – 27 ; Hodgson 1997 , pp . 668 – 671 ) . At any given moment , this structural extensiveness and complexity pose a problem , because it is impossible to collect and process all available information under time constraints without sacrificing a part of it ( Gigerenzer 2008 ; Gigerenzer and Goldstein 1996 ; Todd 2001 ) . Paradoxi - cally , the scarcity of time makes extensive and detailed information not useful for decision - making ( cf . Hayek 1940 ) . For example , urban customers of a supermarket often forget to buy a product , buy whatever brand is more immediately visible , or simply stick to brand loy - alty despite having a much larger choice available . Another example is the case of highly competitive sec - tors like information technology or the fashion industry . Taking one ’ s time to adapt one ’ s supply optimally to competition can prove fatal , as the competition can launch new products making any previous attempt at adaptation obsolete . These considerations are at the core of strategies like B lean startup ^ where businesses do not wait to launch non - definitive versions of their products ( Ries 2011 ) , or like the B sell first , fix later ^ so common in the software industry ( Arora et al . 2006 ) . Even if one assumes that market agents do not suffer any type of innate competence gap , scarcity of time associated with the extensiveness and complexity of dispersed market information means that agents display bounded rationality , since under such conditions incom - plete information prevents optimization ( Hodgson 1997 ; Selten 2001 ; Simon 1955 , 1978 ) , as indicated in Fig . 1 . Uncertainty is thus substantive , since it B simply comes from lack of information about the occurrence of future events ^ ( Dosi and Egidi 1991 , pp . 147 – 148 ) , and not procedural because the competence gap here is structural in origin . In response to the extensiveness and complexity of the market , agents prioritize information according to one ’ s traits , skills , and motivations , resulting in idiosyn - cratic knowledge , so that people differ in how they interpret available information ( Perry - Smith and Shalley 2003 ; Runco 2004 ; Weisberg 2006 ) . The problem , how - ever , is that future information is not yet available . Therefore , market agents must complement existing information through creativity , which is B the result of the convergence of basic cognitive processes , core do - main knowledge , and environmental , personal , and mo - tivational factors which allow an individual to produce an object or behavior that is considered both novel and appropriate in a particular context ^ ( Ward and Saunders 2005 , p . 1 ) . In the context of the market , creativity manifests as the ideation of novel actions and products as solutions to price divergent situations ( Kier and McMullen 2018 ) . This occurs through imagination , which : On the one hand , the term may be used very generally to refer to the ability to conjure up images , stories , and projections of things not cur - rently present and the use of those projections for entertaining the self , planning for the future , and 2 For more on the ongoing opportunity debate in entrepreneurship process theory , see Shane ( 2012 ) , Venkataraman et al . ( 2012 ) , Alvarez andBarney ( 2013 ) , EckhardtandShane ( 2013 ) , andRamoglou ( 2013 ) . Although that debate is not the subject of this article , it is worth mentioning that the actualization approach of Ramoglou and Tsang ( 2016 ) is just another chapter in that discussion . Critics indicate the complexity of the actualization approach ( Foss and Klein 2017 ) , its failure to present a mechanism explaining the actualization of propen - sities ( Berglundand Korsgaard 2017 ) , its lackof empirical amenability ( Davidsson 2017 ) , and its tautological analysis ( Alvarez et al . 2017 ) . Ramoglou and Tsang ( 2017a , b ) address most of these critiques . G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 212 performing other basic tasks of self - regulation . On the other hand , the term imagination may be used quite specifically to refer to the mental activities that people engage in when they want to get from a current point in time and place to a subsequent one , having accomplished something in between , such as going on a trip or writing a paper . An activity fundamental to this task is mental simula - tion . ( Taylor et al . 1998 , p . 429 ) The basis of this mental simulation is the agent ’ s idio - syncratic knowledge , which is the source of counterfac - tual recombinatory analysis of different separate ideas , or of analogical reasoning where information from a familiar domain helps to understand a less familiar one ( Byrne 2005 ; Chiles et al . 2007 ; Ward 2004 ) . Of course , this creative imaginativeness does not necessarily in - volve absolutely novel products or actions , since much of what is recombined or analogized is not new to all market participants ( Boden 2004 ; Gardner 1993 ; Kier and McMullen 2018 ) . In large part , creativity is in the fact that prod - ucts and actions are novel to the particular context in which they are introduced ( Schumpeter 1983 ) , for instance , entrepreneurs adapting a product from one market to another ( e . g . , microwaves from the military to the cooking industry ) or introducing a mature product to a whole new consumer market ( e . g . , American fast - food chains entering China in the 1990s ) . This is also the case for consumers who adopt those innovations when they are still unknown to most , helping disseminate them to their environment , as when avant - garde music lovers introduce their friends to new performers or when foodies make their new recently inaugu - rated favorite restaurants known to others ( Bianchi 1998 ; Hippel 2005 ; Riddell 2013 ) . Moreover , con - sumers can take a more active role by triggering innovations from producers by adopting new ways of consuming ( Holt 1995 ) or by adapting existing products to novel , unforeseen uses ( Baldwin et al . 2006 ) . Consumers can also manifest their creativity by directly participating in the innovation process as lead - users ( Franke and Von Hippel 2006 ; Lüthje and Herstatt 2004 ) , co - creators ( Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004 ) , or open innovators ( Chesbrough 2006 ; Chesbrough et al . 2006 ) . In any case , in using their idiosyncratic knowl - edge as a foundation for their creativity , market agents generate information that was not previous - ly available ( Chiles et al . 2010 ) . Therefore , when - ever action is future - oriented , it involves creativity , Fig . 1 Generation of emergent information The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 213 information generation , and hence more extensive - ness and complexity — as shown in Fig . 1 . This information generation makes the market a non - ergodic process , where future market conditions are not predetermined in the present ( Davidson 1991 , 1996 ) . Furthermore , precisely because crea - tivity is based on idiosyncratic knowledge , and this in turn is the result of idiosyncratic interpre - tation of market information , bounded rationality in the market also entails reflexivity . Any new information generated in the market can sooner or later become the object of other agents ’ idio - syncratic knowledge and hence of their creativity and imagination , even before the original actions are completed , thus potentially affecting their issue ( Soros 2003 , 2013 ) . Whenever a market agent acts on both available and estimated information , she reveals information to which other agents react reflexively , thus positively , negatively , or neutrally affecting other actions in both intended and unin - tended ways . For instance , when Apple introduced the iPhone , it subcontracted parts of its production to Samsung , which used the new information to develop their own smartphones to compete against Apple ’ s . This in turn incited Apple to accelerate the launching of new iPhone models . This whole process of exposition to extensive and complex market information sets in motion a continuously recursive process of information gen - eration and reaction to it by market agents ( see Fig . 1 ) , which reinforces the extensiveness and complexity of the market structure ( Archer 2010 ; Soros 2003 , 2013 ) . This makes information incom - pleteness perennial , because structural change is endogenous to the market agents ’ idiosyncratic knowledge , creativity , and reflexivity . Thus , uncer - tainty has both structural and cognitive origins . 3 It impacts the individual market agent through the structure of the market . However , the individual market agent creatively reacts to it , generating an information feedback that recursively triggers structural change . Given the continuously changing nature of the market , uncertainty is not only sub - stantive , it is fundamental , that is , B the lack of knowledge that results from ^ non - predetermined structural change ( Dequech 2011 , p . 631 ) . 4 The main problem with fundamental uncertainty is that creative reflexivity makes information incomplete - ness persistent through time . As the agent copes with the uncertainty of one situation , she reflex - ively triggers the emergence of a new situation , and hence of a new uncertainty . 2 . 2 The emergence of the future The creative reflexivity of the market process entails fundamental uncertainty because it generates emergent future information ( see Fig . 1 ) . Emergence of future information implies that ( 1 ) information is novel ; ( 2 ) it is qualitatively different from its constituent parts ; ( 3 ) it is irreducible to these parts ; ( 4 ) it is systemic ; ( 5 ) it depends on the systemic but singular organization of its constituent parts ; and ( 6 ) it is subject to different conditions than these parts . 5 Emergent future information is novel because it does not exist in the present in any implicitly objective form ( Buchanan and Vanberg 2007 ; Harper 2003 ; O ’ Driscoll and Rizzo 1996 ) . This means that any situation involving emergent infor - mation is novel and unique ; consequently , future information is qualitatively different from its con - stituent parts . Present information exists , it is available for discovery , and it can be learned . Future information does not exist and hence can - not be discovered ; it can only be imagined , not learned ( cf . Chiles et al . 2007 , 2010 ; U . Witt 1998 , 2007 ) . Future information is irreducible to its constituents — that is , present information — because agents differ and specialize in their 3 Information incompleteness can be confused with ignorance of existing information , that is , ambiguity ( Dequech 2011 ; Ellsberg 1961 ) . This weaker form of uncertainty also implies the lack of an objective basis for decision - making , but it can be solved through learning , without any new information being creatively generated . 4 The unknowability pervading the market process also includes prob - lems of probabilistic risk , ambiguity — the ignorance of existing information — and equivocality — confusion of the meaning of existing information ( Townsend etal . 2018 ) . Nevertheless , in the absence of the creatively reflexive process resulting in fundamental uncertainty , these problems can be solved through learning , as they are based on igno - rance of predetermined information . Once one accounts for creative reflexivity , and hence fundamental uncertainty , learning becomes lim - ited as extensiveness and complexity increase , which can reinforce risk , ambiguity , and equivocality . 5 These six criteria for emergence were compiled by Humphreys ( 1997 , pp . S341 – S342 ) . Although there are other compilations of emergence criteria ( e . g . , Harper and Endres 2012 , pp . 354 – 356 ) , we have retained Humphreys ’ s criteria as they are common to all types of emergence : inferential , conceptual , and ontological ; diachronic or syn - chronic ; weakorstrong . These typologies arenot relevant to this paper , but an analysis of them can be found in Humphreys ( 2008 ) . G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 214 knowledge over time , so that they idiosyncratically interpret and reimagine the same present informa - tion ( Giménez Roche 2016 , pp . 698 – 704 ) . Conse - quently , future information is not an individual feature of its constituent parts , but the result of the system of reflexive interactions of those parts . Moreover , the uniqueness of future information implies that if the system of interactions from which it emerges were to differ , so would the uniqueness of future infor - mation , for reflexivity generates different results de - pending on how a system of interactions is organized . Finally , future information will be subject to totally different conditions than its constituent present informa - tion and estimations , because the knowledge of agents changes and their interpretation of the market also changes ( Chick and Dow 2005 ; Giménez Roche 2016 ) . As summed up by Archer ( 1995 , p . 9 , emphasis in original ) : Emergent properties are relational , arising out of combination ( e . g . the division of labour from which high productivity emerges ) , where the latter is capable of reacting back on the former ( e . g . producing monotonous work ) , has its own causal powers ( e . g . the differential wealth of nations ) , which are causally irreducible to the powers of its components ( individual workers ) . This signals the stratified nature of social reality where differ - ent strata possess different emergent properties and powers . Emergence is a structural phenomenon , in the sense that it impacts decision - making from the market structure . However , this does not mean it is exogenous . Since it is the result of creatively reflexive interactions between individual agents , it is endogenous in origin . It is a morphogenetic process , where B structure necessarily pre - dates the action ( s ) leading to its reproduction or transformation ^ and B structural elaboration necessarily post - dates the action sequences which gave rise to it ^ ( Archer 1995 , p . 16 ) . Confronted by the market struc - ture , each individual agent reacts by contributing infor - mation to the process , but no single individual agent can know ex ante what each other agent ’ s contribution will be . Nor do they know how each one ’ s contribution will combine structurally . Consequently , fundamental uncer - tainty is not just a matter of quantity of information ( i . e . , extensiveness and complexity ) , but also of its quality ( i . e . , emergence ) . 3 Judgment and routines Given the creatively reflexive nature of the market pro - cess with its continuously increasing extensiveness and complexity , optimization is specifically limited to closed processes where information is given , and emergent information precluded from within . Instead , market agents must exert judgment , that is : [ T ] he evaluation of one or more possibilities with respect to a specific set of evidence and goals . In decision making , we can judge whether to take an option or not , or we can judge its desirability relative to other options . In belief formation , we can judge whether to accept a belief as a basis of action , or we can judge the probability that the belief is true . In thinking about personal goals , we can judge whether or not to adopt a goal , or we can judge how strong it should be relative to other goals . The term B judgment , ^ therefore , refers to the process of inference . ^ ( Baron 2007 , p . 8 , emphasis in original ) . Therefore , judgment is a matter of applying one ’ s idiosyncratic knowledge to decisions about alterna - tive actions , beliefs , and goals ( Packard et al . 2017 ; Perry - Smith and Shalley 2003 ; Runco 2004 ; Weisberg 2006 ) . This application is based on some heuristic , that is , B a strategy that ignores part of the information , with the goal of making decisions more quickly , frugally , and / or accurately than more complex methods ^ ( Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier 2011 , p . 454 ) . Since this strategy con - centrates on partial information , it depends on a categorization process of information to determine how one interprets and acts upon the world ( Harnad 2017 ) . Information is interpreted and or - ganized into categories according to similarity of patterns in information . These categories can be concepts when they correspond to worded rules , classes of entities / events , and examples ( Mandler 2004 ; Thagard 2010 ) . Schemas , or templates , are categories that involve structuration of more than one concept in a hierarchical way , so that a gen - eral schema includes more specific ones ( Ghosh and Gilboa 2014 ; Heit 2005 ) . If a schema is struc - tured sequentially , as for an event , it is a script that describes what is to be done or to be expected sequentially , and which can contain subscripts . In The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 215 any case , heuristics are rules of action based on pattern similarities and regularities of partial mar - ket information as interpreted by the filter of idi - osyncratic knowledge . The more regular these patterns are , the stronger the incentive to use them as reference points for judgment , as the same successful heuristics can be more often called upon , resulting in the adoption of standardized rather than singular procedures ( Gigerenzer 2008 ; Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier 2011 ) . As this standardiza - tion becomes recurrent in social interactions , it eventu - ally gains a socially recognizable functional meaning to the agents involved . 6 In other words , it becomes a routine , that is , a repetitive and recognizable pattern of action , enacted and observed in social contexts like the market or an organization ( cf . Becker 2005 , p . 818 ; Feldman and Pentland 2003 , pp . 95 – 96 ) . Standardized behavior is not new in the literature . In new institutional economics , it takes the form of the set of rules or institutions embodied in contracts , corporate governance , polity , laws , and bureaucracy necessary to cope with the transaction costs emerging in socio - economic interactions ( Coase 1937 ; North 1990 , 1992 ; Williamson 1985 ) . Other institutional economists ( Hodgson 1997 ; Schotter 1981 ) highlight the role of standardized behavior like routines , habits , 7 conven - tions , and norms as both constraints and enablers of economic behavior that economize time and effort while reducing the scope of uncertainty . Evolutionary eco - nomics analyzes the role of organizational routines in structuring production and technical innovation within a firm , and how routines influence the evolution of tech - nology ( Dosi 1982 ; Nelson 2016 ; Nelson and Winter 1982 ) . Finally , Feldman and Pentland ’ s research ex - plains how routines work as a foundation of an open - ended repertoire of potential organizational actions ( Feldman 2000 ; Feldman and Pentland 2003 ; Pentland 1995 ; Pentland and Feldman 2005 ) . Here , we primarily concentrate on the role of demand routines , that is , standardized behavior displayed by intermediate and final consumers — although we do not neglect the role of organizational ( i . e . , supply ) routines , and social norms as constraints and enablers of demand routines . In the following sections , we explain that these demand routines are reference points for entrepreneurial judgment since they are standardized , and hence stable structural aspects of the market process . 3 . 1 Routines and the normative framework of the market process The generalized adoption of routines reduces the scope of fundamental uncertainty that market agents must deal within a limited amount of time ( Aldrich and Yang 2014 ; Feldman and Pentland 2003 ; Hodgson 1997 ) . This B stabilization ^ of the future occurs because in providing a pattern of action , routines constrain action to well - defined standards of procedure ( SOPs ) for accomplishing tasks , solving problems , and learning knowledge ( Cantner 2016 ; Nelson 2016 ) . Routines al - ways involve enforcement , that is , conformity to the SOP underlying the routine ( cf . Foss and Garzarelli 2007 , pp . 794 – 795 ) . The stronger the positive effects of simplification and reliable prediction in social inter - actions are , the more generalized becomes the enforce - ment of routines . If routines are socially disseminated through spontaneous self - enforcement , as in voluntary assimilation of cultural traits , they become conventions ( Lewis 1969 , pp . 36 – 51 ; Schotter 1981 , p . 10 ) . If they are socially disseminated through enforcement by an outside entity , like a legal authority over its citizens , a corporation over its employees , or an organized religion over its members , then routines become institutions ( Schotter 1981 , p . 11 ) . Conventions and institutions are established routines because of their generalized social dissemination . They constitute the normative framework of society that structurally influences , en - ables , and regulates individual action — among which non - generalized routines ( see Fig . 2 ) . Despite all con - ventions and institutions being established routines , not all routines are conventions or institutions since they lack generalized enforcement . Furthermore , the practice and dissemination of rou - tines imply the use of artifacts embodying the SOPs of routines ( D ’ Adderio 2008 ; Pinch and Bijker 2012 ; Preda 2001 ) . In the context of the market process , these artifacts are products and services embodying those SOPs . For example , monetary transactions are underlain by the functions of means of exchange , store of value , 6 Thisfunctionalmeaningismeantasalogicalstructureoftheform B X countsas Y ^ ( Searle1995 , pp . 14 – 23 , 2005 , p . 7 ) . Forexample , having food at noon counts as lunch ; using resources to produce goods counts as production ; using resources to satisfy immediate needs counts as consumption ; and so on . 7 Whenever routines become internalized by individual agents in an unexamined , unconscious manner , they become habits ( Hodgson 1997 , p . 664 , 2001 , p . 288 ff . ) . Nevertheless , we prefer the use of the term B routine ^ over B habit ^ forrule - basedreproducibleactions , sinceit refers to both conscious and unconscious reproducibility . G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 216 and unit of account . But these functions would remain purely abstract without the artifacts B paper money , ^ B credit card , ^ or B coins ^ to embody those functions and to which market agents could attribute these abstract functions in the first place ( Searle 1995 ) . Conspicuous consumption is another good example of how routinized functions are hard to dissociate from the artifacts em - bodying them , that is , luxury and cultural goods ( cf . Veblen 2007 [ 1899 ] ) . Artifacts are not routines but the B formal , explicit , synthetic , selective , partial representations of routines ^ so that is not B sufficient to design a procedure to achieve a certain performance ^ ( D ’ Adderio 2011 , p . 204 ) . Therefore , the fitness between artifacts and routines is crucial for the generalization of practice and dissemina - tion of routines , since the better the fitness , the better represented and intelligible the routine is to market agents . The social dissemination of routines makes them predictable . For instance , the general adoption and en - forcement of accounting conventions , financial account - ing , managerial accounting , and financial analysis tech - niques help reduce investor risk and simplify business procedures . Anyone with the appropriate standardized training ( another form of routine ) can understand and use the routinized information generated by this finan - cial information to make decisions without risking ma - jor communication problems . The artifacts involved are certified accounting counsel , accounting books , docu - ments , calculators , and software , among others . Stan - dardized marketing techniques like segmentation and marketing mix — artifactually represented by the ser - vices of professional experts , reports , statistical soft - ware , etc . — provide another example , enabling compa - nies to rapidly understand markets and determine pro - cedures to introduce a product . Indeed , it is much more efficient for an organization to adopt specific internal routines and their artifacts rather than ad hoc , non - routinized solutions for each particular market situation ( Helfat and Peteraf 2003 ; Teece 2007 ) . In this manner , action routinization provides economies of time and effort , thus liberating resources for other actions . Regardless of their degree of generalization , routines have both a regulative and a constitutive power over singular actions ( Hodgson 2001 , pp . 290 – 295 ; Searle 1995 , pp . 27 – 29 ) . In other words , routines have osten - sive and performative aspects ( Feldman 2000 ; Feldman and Pentland 2003 ) . The ostensive aspect concerns the general SOP of a routine for either self - or external enforcement ( see Table 1 ) . The performative aspect refers to the specific applications of a routine , when agents adapt its basic SOP to the specific socio - economic context they might face ( see Table 1 ) . The normative framework of the market exerts its constraints or influence on the ostensive aspect of routines — as depicted by the dotted lines flowing from the normative framework in Fig . 2 . For example , entrepreneurship is usually associated with innovation in final and interme - diary products , organization , markets , and industry ( Cantner 2016 ; Schumpeter 1983 ) , but it needs the predictability afforded by patent laws , labor legislation , industry regulation , and the court system to work out Fig . 2 Routinization process and the normative framework The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 217 smoothly ( Acemoglu and Robinson 2012 ; Baumol 2010 ; North 1990 ) . Laws and regulation provide a supporting structure for the ostensive routine B enterprising , ^ but the performance of B enterprising ^ proper takes more varied and specific forms , depending on entrepreneurial judgment and the specific organiza - tional routines adopted thereof ( Teece et al . 1997 ) . The structural stability of the market ’ s normative framework provides entrepreneurs with overall predictability by channeling most market interactions into easily recog - nizable market routines . The normative framework and routinization in gen - eral , despite their predictive and action - enabling advan - tages , can also have drawbacks . They can result in social and organizational inertia , deskilling , competency traps , and path dependency ( Arthur 1994 ; David 1985 ; Feldman and Pentland 2003 ; Liebowitz and Margolis 2000 ) . For instance , protectionist legislation , by elimi - nating foreign competition , is known to accustom do - mestic enterprises to less competitive investment than a more open institutional framework does ( Mankiw 2017 ) . Nepotistic organizational routines , typical in family businesses , can lead to bad management and hence losses ( Lwango et al . 2017 ) . Consequently , gen - eralized enforcement does not always entail an abiding response in market agents , who might be tempted to evade the constraints and influences of the normative framework , thus generating incentives to opportunisti - cally alter it and weaken its dissemination ( Elert and Henrekson 2016 ; Henrekson and Sanandaji 2011 ) . Nevertheless , the generality of the ostensive aspect of routines enables the specific adaptiveness of the perfor - mative aspect of routines and the emergence of an open - ended repertoire of potential subroutines ( cf . Feldman 2000 ; Pentland 1995 ; Pentland and Rueter 1994 ) . In fact , routines can be adapted to a myriad of different problems according to one ’ s judgment . Therefore , rou - tines might undergo creative change depending on the fit between the agents ’ goals , the routinized actions , and the outcomes of those actions ( Feldman 2000 , pp . 613 – 620 ) . This explains why companies differ from each other in their internal routines , as businesses aim at a convergence of the market environment with their own internal capabilities and comparative advantage , such as the specialized knowledge of their employees , their internal organization , and their specific technologies ( Eisenhardt and Martin 2000 ; Nelson and Winter 1982 ; Teece 2007 ) . It also explains the emergence of a variety of consumer routines . Just as enterprises specialize in their organizational routines , customers also specialize in their preferences and hence in their market routines ( Bianchi 1998 ; Earl and Potts 2004 ; Riddell 2013 ) . This is evident in differences in eating habits , clothing styles , musical tastes , and so on . More - over , there are specializations within specializations . For instance , people differ in their appreciation of different musical styles , which have different declinations , and that can be consumed in different manners like in live concerts , studio recordings , streaming , MP3 , CDs , videos , etc . Similarly , intermediary consumers in trans - formation sectors of the industry also specialize in their industrial needs . Farmers differ if they raise cattle , cul - tivate greens , plant legumes , harvest cereals , etc . Then , within these specializations , they differ in terms of con - ventional , organic , or responsible farming , each one of these with different and evolving needs in terms of fertilizers , herbicides , pesticides , medication , equip - ment , and installations . Although less established — i . e . , non - generalized — routines can change rapidly whenever their disadvan - tages exceed their advantages , the normatively established conventions and institutions change more slowly ( Lachmann 1971 ; Williamson 2000 ) . While the former displays a loose , spontaneously constrained os - tensive aspect , resulting in more unconstrained , open - ended performative subroutines , the latter ’ s ostensive aspect is more structurally rigid , resulting in less open - ended performative subroutines ( see Table 1 ) . Conse - quently , the more generally disseminated and enforced a routine is , the slower it changes . The reason is that generalized enforcement and dissemination involve hi - erarchies and embeddedness that generate more proce - durally extensive and complex systems . In order for these routines to change , the procedures in the hierar - chies and embeddedness must change first ( Baumol 2010 ; Granovetter 1985 ; North 1990 ) . This can result in structural divergence between more and less general - ly enforced routines ( Bylund and McCaffrey 2017 ; Henrekson and Sanandaji 2011 ; Lachmann 1971 ) . For instance , legislation on taxis took longer to adapt to the advent of Internet - based app services like Uber or Lyft than it took users to adopt such services . Less formally , photography giants Canon and Nikon , who dominate the DSLR ( digital single - lens reflex ) camera market , are taking much longer to fully embrace mirrorless inter - changeable lens cameras than their competitors Sony or Fuji . However , the difference in pace is necessary , be - cause routine emergence needs the normative G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 218 framework of the market to be stable ( Foss and Garzarelli 2007 ; Lachmann 1971 ) . Indeed , the underly - ing stability of the ostensive structure of the market ’ s normative framework enables economies of time and resources for novel routines , and hence innovation . Al - though more generally enforced routines tend to elimi - nate fundamental uncertainty , and hence the profit situ - ations related to those routines , the open - endedness of the performative aspect of routines allows for new profit situations to emerge . 3 . 2 Emergent routines Ramoglou and Tsang ( 2016 ) explain that opportunities for present entrepreneurial judgment are provided by future situations of price divergence , so that one cannot objectively discover or create profit opportunities in the present . However , they also explain that the market process displays present propensities toward price di - vergences that can be actualized in the future through entrepreneurial action . The question then shifts to the actual nature of those propensities and how can they become reference points for entrepreneurial judgment . A propensity implies a tendency , that is , regularity and stability . Routines display regularity and stability : regularity because of their SOPs and stability because of their eventual enforcement and dissemination . On the one hand , the normative framework includes all the established routines that secure the market process from widespread fundamental uncertainty . Then there are non - generally enforced routines , particularly emergent routines . These routines display regularity because of their SOPs . However , their emergent status implies nov - elty and systemic irreducibility to the actions from which they derive . Given their unanticipated nature , emergent routines lack specific market artifacts to dis - seminate their enforcement throughout the market ( see Table 1 ) . Consequently , market agents ignore or misun - derstand emergent routines , thus resulting in fundamen - tal uncertainty , and hence price divergences . Therefore , emergent routines lack stability despite their regularity . Established routines , like conventions and institu - tions , involve specifically adequate artifacts to the point of confusion . For instance , many people forget that money can take other forms beyond paper , coins , or cards . More extreme cases are sports and their equipment ( e . g . , tennis and rackets ) . The same is not true for emergent routines , because they are simply too recent and little disseminated to be associated with specific artifacts . The more disseminated these routines become throughout the market process , the more fitting artifacts will be introduced to them . In fact , the very introduction of specific artifacts can consoli - date those routines by B fixing their form , ^ or even trigger routine emergence as users find new applica - tions for them . It is this B propensity ^ for routines to gain performative shape through artifactual specifica - tion or to adopt a new ostensive shape through arti - factual innovation that constitutes the objective refer - ential for idiosyncratic judgment . Table 1 Routine typology Singular actions Emergent routines Established routines Conventions Institution Standardization No Yes Yes Yes Yes Enforcement No No No for market routines ; self - and hierarchical enforce - ment for organizational routines Self - enforcement Externalenforcement Artifacts None or non - specific Non - specific Specific Specific Specific Ostensiveaspect Loose spontaneous constraint Loose spontaneous constraint Loose spontaneous to rigid structural constraint Rigid structural constraint Rigid structural constraint Performativeaspect Unconstrainedopen - endedness Unconstrainedopen - endedness Unconstrained to constrainedopen - endedness Constrainedopen - endedness Constrainedopen - endedness Examples Any non - identifiable individual action Nascent fads , fashions , insider actions , niche actions , herd behavior Sales periods , holiday shopping , corporate rules , joint venture agreements Accountancy conventions , etiquette , standardizedcontracts Laws , regulations , interventions The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 219 When routines emerge , their lack of specifically adequate artifacts translates into the imperfect adapta - tion of existing products to these novel routines ( Baldwin et al . 2006 ; Riddell 2013 ) . On the other hand , producers might have or develop technologies for which they have no clear customer application yet , but which they are impatient to discover how to mon - etize through a B trial - and - error ^ process . In both cases , the unclear fitness between artifact and routine in - volves uncertainty because of a lack of dependable information . Consequently , routine emergence implies price divergences , since interpretations , when avail - able , of emergent routines differ , which affects the evaluation of any associated artifact , existent or poten - tial . These price divergences can be exploited by an entrepreneur , but with the advantage of routinized behavior being available to serve as a reference point for entrepreneurial judgment ( Agarwal and Shah 2014 ) . In brief , established routines allow actions to run smooth in the market process because of the predictabil - ity afforded by their regularity and stability . Meanwhile , emergent routines are the foundation of innovative ac - tion as entrepreneurs can integrate their regularity and their artifactual open - endedness as reference points in their profit - seeking judgment . 4 Entrepreneurial profit - seeking : consolidating and triggering routine emergence The fundamental uncertainty emerging from the crea - tively reflexive market process impacts entrepreneurial judgment by instilling doubt in it : doubt about the emergence of an actual price divergence , about one ’ s ability to exploit that divergence , and about one ’ s suc - cess in that exploitation ( cf . McMullen and Shepherd 2006 , p . 133 ) . To overcome this problem , the B entrepreneur must first escape ignorance that an op - portunity for someone exists within the environment and then overcome doubt about the feasibility and desirability of action ^ ( Shepherd et al . 2007 , p . 78 , emphasis in original ) . This is a matter of identifying the outcomes and options of entrepreneurial action that are behind the fitness between demand needs and entre - preneurial product innovation ( Packard et al . 2017 , pp . 8 – 10 ) . One way of doing this is blind trial and error , where one simply bets on pure luck and judgment plays no crucial role . However , this cannot explain entrepreneurial competence , because competence is about expertise , the consistent attainment of superior performance relative to others through different trials — as in serial entrepreneurship — or through time — as in entrepreneurial longevity ( Gobet 2015 ; Weisberg and Reeves 2013 ) . Therefore , the other way to estimate emergent price divergences , and the out - comes and options of action related to them , is for the entrepreneur to identify regular reference points on which to found one ’ s judgment . This is exactly what the synergy between idiosyncratic judgment and emer - gent routines implies . The more attuned entrepreneurial idiosyncratic knowledge is to customer practices , the better entrepreneurial judgment can identify the SOPs underlying emergent demand routines , and hence pro - pose more appropriately specific artifacts . Idiosyncratic , domain - attuned knowledge allows the entrepreneur to manifest her creativity through social imaginativeness , that is , the ability to B envision something that cannot be or is not currently being observed for the purposes of taking the perspective of others , seeing and feeling the world from another ’ s frame of reference , or reading the desires , intentions , beliefs , and emotions of others ^ ( Kier and McMullen 2018 , p . 14 ) . Entrepreneurial cre - ativity can also manifest through practical imaginative - ness , the ability to B envision something that cannot be or is not currently being observed for the purposes of planning , organizing , analyzing , or managing informa - tion , resources , or projects ^ ( Kier and McMullen 2018 , p . 16 ) . Indeed , the more an entrepreneur accumulates feedback from specific social interactions in the market , the more she gains in empathic accuracy in her judg - ment of emergent routines ( McMullen 2015 ) . Entrepre - neurial competence thus manifests as the judgment abil - ity of the entrepreneur in matching her idiosyncratic knowledge as embodied in her enterprise — through leadership and organizational routines ( Casson 2003 ; U . Witt 2007 , 2011 ) — to the emergent demand routines of her customers . If successful , it is the singular conver - gence between idiosyncratic judgment and emergent demand routines that makes profit situations unique and hence heterogeneous ( Chiles et al . 2007 , 2010 ) . This explains why some people become entrepreneurs and others do not , and why some entrepreneurs are more successful than others ( Ramoglou 2011 ; U . Witt 2007 ) . Profit opportunities are thus uniquely linked to specific entrepreneurs because their idiosyncratic judgment sim - ply dovetails better with customers ’ specific behavior than other people ’ s idiosyncratic judgment does . G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 220 In this manner , entrepreneurs exercise and demon - strate their competence by attuning their idiosyncratic judgment to structural changes in demand , that is , in demand routines . These structural changes occur be - cause of rearrangements in existing demand prefer - ences , of the emergence of new demand preferences , or of changes in the normative framework of the market or in the structure of supply . Following these changes in demand preferences , there will be structural changes in demand if established demand routines ( 1 ) fail to pro - duce intended outcomes , ( 2 ) produce undesirable out - comes , ( 3 ) produce unintended though positive out - comes , and ( 4 ) produce a noticeably improvable out - come ( cf . Feldman 2000 , p . 620 ) . Thus , given the inad - equacy of established demand routines to satisfy prefer - ence changes , new demand routines emerge . The problem is finding a new fitness between arti - facts and these emergent demand routines , as the latter are similar to tacit knowledge , which cannot be explic - itly transmitted for lack of an appropriate codification ( Polanyi 1966 ) . The artifacts linked to established rou - tines do not adequately manifest the functional mean - ings intended by the new preference setting . Hence , there is an opportunity for entrepreneurs to use their idiosyncratic judgment to introduce more adequate arti - facts to either consolidate or trigger the emergent SOPs underlying the ostensiveness and performativity of emergent demand routines ( see Table 2 and Figs . 3 and 4 ) . 4 . 1 Cohesive entrepreneurship : routine - consolidating innovation The lack of an appropriate artifact to embody the SOP of an emergent routine ’ s ostensive aspect means that it is hard to both disseminate and enforce the routine . On the demand side , many customers simply ignore or misunderstand the utility of the routine for them , and simply stick to established routines and their better specified artifacts . Practicing customers , however , adapt existing products to work as ersatz artifacts of the emerging routines . Meanwhile , on the supply side , many producers also ignore or misunderstand emergent routines , as they lack the idiosyncratic knowledge that enables them to identify the novel practices involved . The fact is , some demanders originate an emergent demand routine that needs consolidation through the introduction of a more specifically adequate artifact capable of more explicitly defining its performative aspects for dissemination and enforcement . This consol - idation is the exercise of cohesive entrepreneurship , where the entrepreneur uses demand - originated emer - gent routines as a reference point to introduce an artifact for profit ( see Table 2 and Fig . 3 ) . This could come from improved specifications in an existing product — as in incremental , architectural , or modular innovations ( Henderson and Clark 1990 ) . It could also come from the introduction of a radically more specific product ( Christensen 1997 ; Christensen and Raynor 2003 ) , an improved strategic adaptation of an existing good ( Markides and Geroski 2005 ) , or simply the transposi - tion of a product from one market to another that is more specific to the routine in question ( Schumpeter 1983 ) . The innovative introduction of the concerned product makes the ostensive aspect of the routine less tacit and more explicit , allowing for the specification of its per - formative applications . If the consolidating routine is deemed useful , consumers will practice it more regular - ly , and hence resort more often to the innovative product introduced by the entrepreneur . Moreover , the greater the fit between innovation and routine , the more explicit the routine becomes and the greater its dissemination throughout the market . Consequently , the reach of the entrepreneur ’ s product increases and so do her profits . Table 2 Entrepreneurship types , artifacts , and aspects Routine emergence Artifacts Ostensive structure Performative open - endedness Cohesiveentrepreneurship Consolidation through introduction of innovative products Greater specification of existing products ; introduction of more specific products ; transposition of existing products Modificationofroutine structures Improvement by consolidation of previously existing emergent performances Generativeentrepreneurship Triggering through introduction of innovative products Introduction of specific products ; re - specification of existing products Generation of routinestructures Expansion by triggering further emergent performances The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 221 Since the advent of supermarkets , the shopping ex - perience has involved the same routine time and time again . Customers go to the supermarket , load their shopping carts , go to the checkout , pay the cashier , and exit the supermarket . Urban development , easier access to private transport , and digitalization of daily life have generated several changes in the way people work and organize their free time . Many saw the old supermarket routine as a waste of time . An emergent routine was available to be exploited . Proximity markets near service stations were a first solution , but the range of products was limited , products were expensive , and the stores could be overcrowded at peak hours . The real solution came with B click & drive ^ systems consolidat - ing the novel routine sought by customers : clients do the shopping on a supermarket ’ s website using search en - gines and clicking on the products , they pay for their virtual carts online with no need to queue , then they drive to the supermarket ’ s warehouse to collect the shopping and drive back home . A similar solution , this time concentrating on carless routines , is the self - checkout system developed by David R . Humble and increasingly prevalent in stores around the world ( Bulmer et al . 2018 ) . Today , many types of self - checkout machines and self - service technologies are available in airports , supermarkets , and apparel stores ( Meuter et al . 2000 ) . Whatever the type of self - checkout system used , the routine is always the same : the cus - tomers scan their purchase , weigh items without barcodes ( e . g . , fruits and vegetables ) , place the items into a bagging area , pay for their shopping , and exit the supermarket . Nevertheless , the supermarket routines still had un - exploited performative aspects , and hence emergent aspects remained . Timesaving shopping routines could be improved . During shopping experiences , checking out is often an issue because of queueing . Self - checkout systems can also generate queues . Concerning this prob - lem , Amazon , the online retailer , cooperated with Whole Foods Market and launched a chain of grocery stores , Amazon Go . These stores are partially automat - ed : the customers purchase their products without being checked out either by a human cashier or a self - checkout machine . The role of employees in Amazon Go stores is Fig . 3 Cohesive entrepreneurship timing G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 222 transformed : they simply restock shelves and help cus - tomers with technical problems . The shopping experi - ence is also transformed : customers grab the products they want , and their Amazon account is automatically charged for what they take . Other companies are explor - ing checkout - free stores all round the world . Standard Cognition , a startup , has opened a demonstration store in San Francisco and signed a deal with Paltac Corpo - ration , a fast - moving consumer goods wholesaler in Japan . Microsoft is also working on a technology to provide checkout - free retail . Sainsbury opened a checkout - free store in London in July 2018 , where customers scan the products with their smartphone , place the products in their basket , and pay on their smartphone using Apple Pay . Checkout - free solutions using different technologies are in an emerging phase , and many companies are testing different solutions using different types of technologies . What began as a limited routine soon became widespread as specific artifacts were devised to consolidate it . It brought ad - vantages to both parties . Customers could now fully embrace a new routine that saved them time for other activities — and hence other routines . Retailers also gained from consolidating this routine , because it re - duced overheads while strengthening customer satisfac - tion and loyalty . The success of the compact disc in the 1980s and 1990s was not just a question of better , cheaper technol - ogy replacing older technology , but of how cheaper , better technology fitted customer routines better than what was available previously . Until 1982 , the year compact discs were launched , quality sound experience for music listening was limited to vinyl record players at home . This involved a cumbersome , expensive routine of buying and stocking precious vinyl records that were difficult to transport . Listening to the music where and when you wanted was impossible with vinyl records . The alternative was radio receivers or cassette tape players , but the former limited music lovers to predetermined broadcasts , while the latter deteriorated with use and were impractical for track searching . Three factors , the expansion of road networks , and hence lengthy car trips ; urban concentration , implying smaller homes ; and more commuter travel , led to people Fig . 4 Generative entrepreneurship timing The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 223 adopting more mobility - based routines . Vinyl records and tapes were not the best alternative despite the launch of tape - based portable players , which still suffered from track - searching problems . Thus , the advent of the com - pact disc responded to an existing emergent routine . Compact discs fitted well with mobility and urban music listening routines . Compact discs were cheaper , more durable , high - quality alternatives to both vinyl records and cassette tapes . Moreover , compact discs were easier to stock and transport , and their digital technology allowed for easier track searching . The fit between com - pact discs and music - related routines helped disseminate these routines . Cohesive entrepreneurship brings more cohesion to the market process , because it consolidates emergent routines that exist tacitly , but that lack specific artifacts to become more explicit . Cohesive entrepreneurship does not specifically imply incremental or radical , mod - ular or architectural innovation . These qualifiers refer mostly to the point of view of producers in a competitive environment . From the point of view of consumer rou - tines , they represent a consolidation of their existing routines . In this manner , cohesive entrepreneurship can be destructive for an entrepreneur ’ s competitors , while consolidating the routines of that same entrepreneur ’ s customers . Successful cohesive entrepreneurship thus entails an abiding response of customers to the emergent routines consolidated by the entrepreneur , while trans - lating into an evasive or even altering response of those customers to the cohesive entrepreneur ’ s less successful competitors ( cf . Bylund and McCaffrey 2017 ; Elert and Henrekson 2016 ; Henrekson and Sanandaji 2011 ) . One can consolidate routines with wholly new products , minimally modified ones , or products borrowed from other sectors of the market ( see Table 2 ) . The point is that such products consolidate emergent routines , mak - ing them more explicit and intelligible , and thus both actualizing and expanding profit opportunities . In terms of the architectural - modular innovation analysis ( Henderson and Clark 1990 ) , the B click & drive , ^ self - checkout systems , and the compact disc , though altering the architecture of existing routines ( i . e . , how one does them ) , did not change their modular aspects much ( i . e . , one still buys groceries , pays with cards or cash , buys CDs in music and retail stores ) . With regard to the sustaining - disruptive or incremental - radical analytical framework ( Christensen 1997 ; Christensen and Raynor 2003 ; Markides and Geroski 2005 ) , these systems are clearly sustaining / incremental , and are used to consolidate routines . But even more architecturally and modularly radical innovations , like Amazon Go , involve the consolidation of existing emer - gent routines . In all these examples , enterprises intro - duce innovations that better fit the routines targeted , making them more accessible to customers and dis - seminating them . Disruption of competition persisting in the ignorance or misunderstanding of emergent routines is thus a consequence of successful cohesive entrepreneurship . 4 . 2 Generative entrepreneurship : routine - triggering innovation As an emergent routine consolidates itself , it loses its emergent character , and becomes more and more struc - turally established . Indeed , specific artifacts bring about greater explicitness to the routine , and reveal informa - tion not only to other customers but also to competitors , suppliers , regulators , and opinion leaders . This sets off a Schumpeterian process of entrepreneurial imitation ( Schumpeter 1983 ) , but also a normative consolidation process or morphostasis ( cf . Archer 1995 , p . 166 ) . Sup - pliers discover the value of their services to the entre - preneur and negotiate their remunerations accordingly . Regulators can better identify the routine , and better constrain or promote it through legislation or interven - tion . Opinion leaders make all other stakeholders better aware of the routine and its artifacts . The routine be - comes so explicit that essentially anyone can replicate the entrepreneurial activity . The result is price conver - gence , as fundamental uncertainty fades into probabilis - tic risk . The entrepreneur , if successful in retaining his first - comer position , becomes a resource owner of sorts , specializing in intermediation and earning quasi - rents from it ( Alvarez 2007 ; Alvarez and Barney 2004 ) . En - trepreneurial judgment is increasingly less important , and management has all the information necessary to run the business as it is . The demand routine is now established as a generalized routine or a convention , maybe even an institution . However , this is not the end . Structural changes in demand might result in an altering response by entre - preneurs even before demanders can originate emergent routines ( Bylund and McCaffrey 2017 ; Henrekson and Sanandaji 2011 ) . Instead of waiting for demand - originated routine emergence , entrepreneurs , whose id - iosyncratic knowledge is well - attuned with the dynam - ics of demand preferences , can introduce an innovative G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 224 artifact to trigger demand routine emergence , thus exercising generative entrepreneurship ( see Fig . 4 ) . In this case , the entrepreneur uses customers ’ struggle with established demand routines as a reference point for her idiosyncratic judgment to deduce a routine emergence in which an artifact could fit . This can include both the introduction of radically new products and the re - specification of existing products to totally different uses ( see Table 2 ) — but without necessarily implying a radical innovation , as an architectural , modular , or even strategic innovation ( Henderson and Clark 1990 ; Markides and Geroski 2005 ) . The outcome is the gen - eration of new ostensive routine structures that can serve as the foundation for later routine consolidation into performative specification . Take for instance the advent of MP3 technology . Pioneering audio coding formats arrived in the 1980s , while MP3 itself first became available in the early 1990s , based on the seminal work of the German engi - neer Karlheinz Brandenburg and the Fraunhofer Society for the Advancement of Applied Research ( Sterne 2006 ; S . Witt 2015 ) . The freely available coding format en - abled high compression of audio files and easy repro - duction of those files on a massive scale . Combined with the Internet ’ s growing reach and connection speed , and advances in storage technology , MP3 made peer - to - peer ( P2P ) file sharing possible between customers , using P2P platforms like Napster , Kazaa , Freenet , and others ( Sterne 2006 ) . File sharing already existed through net - works such as IRC and Usenet , but Napster , founded by Shawn Fanning and Sean Parker in 1999 , was the first platform to specialize in P2P sharing of MP3 files with the possibility of monetizing the service somehow through ads or industry interest to promote their signed artists ( S . Witt 2015 ) . Although Napster failed , due to legal issues concerning piracy and copyright infringe - ment , its innovative market introduction of MP3 files triggered emergent routines related to those files . People downloaded music files instead of buying CDs in stores , completely changing the retail music industry , which would eventually evolve into the iTunes digital store , Google Play , Amazon Music , among others . The mas - sive reach of the Internet made it easier to reach a much greater number of people than before . Indeed , some artists even benefited from P2P , boosting promotion of their proprietary material , like rock - band Radiohead with its album Kid A and the hip hop band Public Enemy . Moreover , P2P sharing of audio files opened the way for P2P sharing of video files ( e . g . , MP4 , AVI ) , e - book files ( e . g . , PDF , DjVu , EPUB ) , and many other easy - to - reproduce file formats containing all kinds of cultural products that were monetized by platforms like Megaupload through ads and subscriptions . The selfie routine is another instance of generative entrepreneurship , though an unintended one . The selfie as a self - portrait photograph is not a modern phenome - non . A daguerreotype picture taken by Robert Cornelius in 1839 is considered the first selfie in history . Ever since , professionals and amateurs alike continued to take self - portrait photographs , but this never constituted a major consumer routine . The difficulty of taking self - portrait photos without tripod - mounted cameras , but above all else without a self - focusing system , prevented self - portrait photos from ever becoming a routine need - ing a specific artifact . Indeed , people did not even think of it in a market dominated by point - and - shoot cameras . However , the spread of camera - equipped mobile phones changed everything ( Murray 2015 ) . In 2003 , Sony Er - icsson was the first manufacturer to provide a device with a second , front - facing camera , initially intended for business video - conferencing . The same year , other man - ufacturers like Motorola and NEC also provided a front - facing camera on their phones . Soon , the front - facing camera was diverted from its intended use , and selfies became ubiquitous in customer routines , to the point that models without a front - facing camera became a rarity . In 2010 , Apple simultaneously introduced a front - facing camera on the iPhone 4 and the application FaceTime . This the front - face camera was intended to be used for FaceTime video conferences , not selfies . Later , in 2015 , Apple introduced a specific selfie folder in their application Photos . Although the front - facing camera was not introduced with the aim of triggering an emer - gent routine , customers soon did so , and smartphone producers almost immediately saw the opportunity to consolidate the triggered routine ( Quito 2017 ) . 4 . 3 Back and forth between cohesive and generative entrepreneurship Cohesive and generative entrepreneurship are not compartmented phenomena . They are complementa - ry to each other . Cohesive entrepreneurship needs emergent routines to continuously emerge either spontaneously ( as in the selfie example ) or inten - tionally ( as in the MP3 example ) . Generative entre - preneurship needs the continuous consolidation of emergent routines to repeatedly liberate time and The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 225 resources for further routine emergence . Just as cre - ative reflexivity continuously generates emergent information , cohesive and generative entrepreneur - ship continuously generate propensities for profit situations ( cf . Buenstorf 2007 ; Gupta et al . 2015 ; Holcombe 2003 , 2006 ) . Let us revisit the MP3 case . Alongside illegal plat - forms , firms outside the music industry launched legal Internet stores and platforms where music lovers could buy digital albums and singles . For instance , Apple launched the iTunes Music Store in 2003 and became the biggest music retailer in the market in 2010 . Legal digital music stores changed many aspects of music consumption routines . Because of digitalization , the store concept became centered on the song , not the album . Moreover , digitalization also celebrates B anyplace , anywhere , anytime . ^ When Apple launched iTunes Music Store , the firm invested in buyer educa - tion : the price of a song was $ 0 . 99 — then $ 1 . 29 — and the price of an album , $ 9 . 99 . This model was followed by other players like Amazon . The innovations intro - duced by Apple and Amazon helped consolidate the emergent routines triggered by Napster and other P2P platforms . Although they did not trigger the emergent routine of downloading and listening in MP3 format , they did consolidate it with their legal platforms and more streamlined checkout . Buying albums increasingly gave way to singles , and while home sound systems still exist , these have been largely replaced by laptops and MP3 devices ( S . Witt 2015 ) . In fact , the MP3 case fittingly illustrates Baumol ’ s ( 2010 ) , discussion of how established enterprises specialize in incrementally con - solidating radical innovations by startups . Furthermore , the passage back and forth between generative and cohesive illustrates an evolutionary pro - cess , whereby opportunities constantly build on previ - ous opportunities ( Buenstorf 2007 ; Holcombe 2003 , 2006 ) . For example , the consolidation of MP3 by Apple iTunes Music Store and Amazon Music led to further routine emergence . New music industry players , such as Deezer , Pandora , and Spotify , triggered new routines by innovatively introducing legal streaming to the market . Unlike the first generation of stores , where customers bought digital songs , music lovers listen on second - generation platforms for free or for a monthly subscrip - tion . These platforms have impacted both the business of labels , artists , and other platforms , and the way music lovers consume music . Rather than owning digital mu - sic , some customers now buy access to the music . While the store celebrated the song , this kind of platform celebrates playlists : music lovers listen to playlists made by other customers and the platform . Moreover , the platform makes new suggestions based on the cus - tomer ’ s preferences , providing a new way to discover music . The streaming revolution and the success of firms like Spotify and Deezer have had a dual impact on the music industry . First , the proportion of revenue gained through streaming by historical players like Uni - versal Music Group , Sony BMG , and Warner Music Group has increased steadily since 2010 . At the same time , the owners of legal first - generation MP3 platforms have launched music streaming services to complete their original offer — for instance , Apple launched Apple Music , a competitor to Spotify , Tidal , and other stream - ing services . Finally , cohesive and generative entrepreneurship can even coexist through the same venture , much like the knowledge spillovers resulting from introducing innovations to either consolidate or trigger routines ( cf . Acs et al . 2013 ; Audretsch and Keilbach 2007 ) . In 1984 , Sir Alec Jeffreys , a British geneticist , had the idea of using DNA testing to identify individuals ( Zagorski 2006 ) . The first practical applications of DNA testing were in immigration disputes and were driven by fam - ilies and lawyers : in 1985 , Sir Alec Jeffreys ’ method was used to prove the British nationality of a young man who claimed to be the son of a British woman , while the Home office claimed the opposite . This case was also the first paternity case to use DNA testing , and as Sir Alec Jeffreys said , B the flood gates opened ^ ( Zagorski 2006 ) . His team developed a variation of the original method called B genetic profiling . ^ This later method became very important in forensic science and in the medical testing of genetic disorders before birth . The method began to be commercialized in 1987 , triggering emergent routines in the market . In 1997 , Terrence Carmichael , holder of a master ’ s degree in molecular biology and genetics , founded GeneTree . This company was the first to provide direct - to - consumer genetic DNA testing . The company offered Y chromosome DNA testing ( male - specific test ) and mitochondrial DNA test - ing ( male and female test ) . GeneTree closed in 2013 and the company ’ s assets were transferred to ancestry . com , one of the world ’ s largest for - profit genealogy compa - nies . In this way , the generative entrepreneurship of forensic and medical genetic testing opened the way to generatively entrepreneurial direct - to - consumer genetic testing , which actually consolidated existing emergent G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 226 routines of genealogy adepts ( cf . Borry et al . 2010 ) . Bennett Greenspan , an entrepreneur and genealogy en - thusiast , founded Family Tree DNA in 2000 . Today , the company provides three products : autosomal DNA test - ing ( male and female test ) , Y chromosome DNA testing ( male - specific test of patrilineal DNA ) , and mitochon - drial DNA testing ( male and female test of matrilineal DNA ) . Although Family Tree DNA is now a consolida - tor of DNA testing , it also collaborated with National Geographic Society and its Genographic Project , which researches historical DNA patterns , to market the Geno 2 . 0 kit . This kit both consolidates the Genographic Project and triggers new routines for consumers of genealogical services . 5 Conclusion This article tackled the issue of uncertainty in entrepre - neurship , particularly how entrepreneurial competence can be distinguished from pure luck in exploiting so - called profit opportunities . The extensiveness and com - plexity of structural information in the market and the scarcity of time for optimal decision - making imply structural uncertainty that bounds agent rationality , while resulting in price divergences . Creativity is one response to this problem , as agents create missing infor - mation based on their accumulated idiosyncratic knowl - edge to complete their decision - making . However , this entails a reflexive process in social interactions that further extends and complicates structural information from within the market process , making price diver - gences persistent . Thus , we present demand routines as the response to the uncertainty problem . On the one hand , as demand routines become generally disseminat - ed and enforced throughout the market , they eliminate uncertainty by bringing regularity and stability to mar - ket evaluations and hence resulting in price conver - gences . On the other hand , not all routines are fully stable since they might lack artifactual products to clear - ly disseminate the SOPs underlying them . These emer - gent demand routines entail persistent price divergences , but entrepreneurs can objectively exploit them because of their regularity . The opportunity situation facing the entrepreneur is to introduce an artifact that can specify the SOPs of those emergent demand routines first or better than one ’ s competitors . Entrepreneurial compe - tence is thus a matter of convergence between entrepre - neurial idiosyncratic judgment and emergent demand routines , while the idiosyncratic judgment of one ’ s com - petitors diverges from those demand routines due to ignorance or misunderstanding . Cohesive entrepreneur - ship concerns the innovative introduction of artifacts to consolidate existing emergent demand routines , while generative entrepreneurship is about triggering demand routine emergence through artifactual innovation and specification . 5 . 1 The routine approach and current literature Our routine - based approach re - contextualizes current entrepreneurship theories . It gives greater depth to the actualization view of Ramoglou and Tsang ( 2016 ) , by assimilating propensities to emergent routines , and their actualization to the judgment - guided innovative intro - duction of artifacts . It also complements the judgment view of Foss and Klein ( 2012 ) , by describing entrepre - neurial judgment as creative and reflexive bounded rationality founded on idiosyncratic knowledge . We re - contextualize the discovery concept , dear to the ION approach ( Eckhardt and Shane 2010 ; Shane 2003 ; Shane and Eckhardt 2003 ; Shane and Venkataraman 2000 ) , as the B discovery ^ of existing emergent routines in cohesive entrepreneurship that results in the consoli - dation of these routines . Despite our approach discarding the discovery of objective opportunities , the discovery of emergent routines is essential to cohesive entrepreneurship . In turn , we re - contextualize the crea - tion concept of the eponymous approach ( Alvarez et al . 2013 ; Alvarez and Barney 2005 , 2007 , 2010 ) as the creative triggering of routine emergence through the innovative introduction of artifacts , thus disrupting price convergence trends in the market process . Again , though opportunity creation is meaningless in our ap - proach , the creation of applications of innovative arti - facts is not . Finally , our approach is compatible with the bricolage ( Baker and Nelson 2005 ; Garud and Karnøe 2003 ) and effectuation ( Sarasvathy 2001 , 2008 ) frame - works , since the innovative introduction of artifacts can be interpreted as construction of consolidation and trig - gering of emergent routines . Our routine approach offers another complementary research opportunity relative to the knowledge spillover theory of entrepreneurship . In this framework , knowl - edge incubators ( e . g . , private firms , universities , non - profits , government ) generate new technical knowledge , but only a part of it is exploited by them in new products and applications , the rest being exploited by startup The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 227 firms and organizations ( Acs et al . 2008 , 2013 ; Audretsch and Keilbach 2007 ) . The point is that while knowledge incubators bear the cost of knowledge de - velopment , they do not always estimate that the expect - ed value of that knowledge justifies further development because of uncertainty . But since knowledge is non - excludable and non - exhaustible , it spills over to startups that develop that knowledge into new products while bearing only the costs of application but not of knowl - edge development . Thus , B knowledge spillover entre - preneurship depends not only on the speed of knowl - edge creation , or the level of new knowledge , but also on entrepreneurial absorptive capacity ^ of this new knowledge ( Acs et al . 2013 , p . 768 ) . In our routine approach , this absorptive capacity depends on the idio - syncratic judgment of entrepreneurs in detecting emer - gent routines to which new knowledge can be applied . Indeed , if knowledge incubators do not estimate all knowledge they create as valuable , a reason for this could be the lack of idiosyncratic knowledge of emer - gent routines , which startups have . Routine - based , idi - osyncratic entrepreneurial judgment could thus be the missing pillar that endogenizes knowledge spillover from one set of companies to another ( cf . Acs et al . 2012 ; Audretsch and Belitski 2013 ) . The analysis of organizational routines attains anoth - er dimension with the present routine approach . In evo - lutionary economics and the resource - based view , orga - nizational routines are a manifestation of the identity and specificity of an individual firm . They constitute executable capabilities ( M . D . Cohen et al . 1996 ) , rep - ertoires of explicit and tacit technical knowledge ( Nelson and Sampat 2001 ; Nelson and Winter 1982 ) , corporate procedural memory ( M . D . Cohen and Bacdayan 1994 ) , all of which constitute aspects of the competitive advantages of an enterprise ( Barney 1991 ; Teece 2007 ; Teece et al . 1997 ) . In conjunction with the present routine analysis , entrepreneurship would thus amount to a functional bridge where organizational and demand routines converge . Entrepreneurial success is thus a matter of developing and introducing a product that materializes this routine convergence from within and outside the enterprise . This synthetic analysis confirms the view of Casson ( 2003 ) where the enterprise is a nexus of both product - making and market - making services . Another contribution of the routine approach is the detail it can provide to transformation processes be - tween structure and agency , back and forth . In explaining the role of entrepreneurship in introducing innovative artifacts that consolidate or trigger demand routines , the routine approach shows how entrepreneur - ship works as a medium for normative change that can consolidate or trigger demand routines as in agent - provoked structural morphostasis or morphogenesis ( Archer 1995 ) . Routine consolidation and triggering help explain the abiding , evasive , and altering responses of market agents to institutional constraints and changes ( Henrekson and Sanandaji 2011 ) . In fact , the mecha - nism of entrepreneurial consolidation and triggering of routines reinforces the explanation in Bylund and McCaffrey ( 2017 ) of how entrepreneurship eliminates misalignments in the institutional structure of the market by linking the artifactual nature of entrepreneurial inno - vations to emergent routines . 5 . 2 Empirical and pedagogical applications The routine approach provides an overarching frame - work for the empirical analysis of entrepreneurship . For instance , changes in preferences are hard to analyze empirically , as preferences are not objectively observ - able . However , changes in consumer behavior are ob - servable and can be categorized into routines by operationalizing these in terms of repeated action se - quences , fixed action rules , and sequencing of contents ( Becker 2005 ) . These can be tested against social , cul - tural , and economic events concerning as causal proxies for preference changes and emergences , and against political and institutional events concerning normative obsolescence of established demand routines ( cf . Kothari and Warner 2007 ) . If these proxies generate changes in the frequency of identified action sequences , fixed action rules , and the variety of sequences within a category of consumer action , this could be used as a measure for emergence . Then , judgment , which also suffers from the subjectivity problem , could be proxied through entrepreneurial profiling of social , education , economic , and experience traits of entrepreneurs ( Kerr et al . 2018 ) . Successful products could then be analyzed in terms of the B resonance ^ between entrepreneurial traits and the causal proxies for preference changes . The timing of this resonance in terms of product intro - duction following or not routine changes would play a major role in distinguishing cohesive from generative entrepreneurship . Temporally contextualized resonance can reveal the importance of punctual over continuous expertise , which could explain the prevalence of one - G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 228 time over serial entrepreneurship ( Carbonara et al . 2019 ; Westhead et al . 2005b ) . Moreover , our approach can give greater depth to empirical analyses of product development , customer needs , case studies narratives , and institutional influence on entrepreneurship . For instance , studies on product development demonstrate that there is a pre - marketing need for convergence between production lines and customer needs to secure successful product commer - cialization ( Caraça et al . 2009 ; Chen et al . 2009 ) . These studies often concentrate on technical aspects of product development and marketing , while neglecting the role of entrepreneurship . A routine - based analysis could con - tribute by emphasizing the role of idiosyncratic knowl - edge in reinforcing the convergence between product lines and customer needs . Analyses of customer satis - faction indexes , price information seeking behavior models , and marketing algorithms linked to entrepre - neurial coordination of production could indicate fitness between artifact development and routine identification . Furthermore , it is common knowledge today that the normative framework of a country — comprising legis - lation , regulation , but also culture — has an impact on business creation and economic development ( Rodrik 2007 ) . Consequently , policy - makers aim at providing an incentivizing environment to potential entrepreneurs ( Acs et al . 2009 ) . The routine approach herein can provide a mechanism of how entrepreneurship thrives in more flexible , less constraining normative frame - works because routine identification becomes easier and product innovation incentivized . Indeed , the easier it is for an entrepreneur to navigate through a country ’ s normative framework , the easier it is for her to accumu - late relevant idiosyncratic knowledge about local de - mand routines and business - making ( Chetty et al . 2006 ) . In this manner , the routine approach can be applied to studies linking normative flexibility — as mea - sured by indexes like the World Bank ’ s Doing Business scores , the World Economic Forum ’ s competitiveness index , or the Heritage Foundation ’ s economic freedom index — to idiosyncratic knowledge — which could be measured by entrepreneurial experience , for instance — and business creation . The present routine approach also has promising pedagogical applications . Typologies developed by Christensen ( 1997 ) , Henderson and Clark ( 1990 ) , and Markides and Geroski ( 2005 ) of disruptive ( radical ) , incremental , architectural , modular , and strategic inno - vations are often used to teach students about different types of innovation and their impact on consumers and firms . However , these typologies are not always practi - cal when teaching innovation as they encapsulate inno - vation in arbitrary categories that are hard to neatly identify in real life . For instance , the radical type of innovation is associated with wholly new business models and markets . However , this is not always true as proven by the case of the Dacia Logan , a radical innovation introduced by an incumbent firm , Renault , instead of a startup , because it fitted Renault ’ s existing business model . Indeed , it is hard to distinguish between types of innovation : is the smartphone an incremental telephone , an architecturally innovative computer , a modularly novel PDA , or a radical all - in - one product ? Was low - cost flying a strategic innovation from the producers ’ point of view or a whole new way of flying from the consumers ’ point of view ? The routine ap - proach proposed in this paper bypasses these problems by concentrating on how entrepreneurship converges with demand behavior that can be observed in real life , and in real time . Existing typologies of innovation clas - sify the nature of innovation according to their ex post impact on supply and demand . The routine approach , on the other hand , is about identifying structural regularities lacking explicitness that can be exploited by the entre - preneur according to her existing idiosyncratic capabil - ities . In this manner , it becomes easier to teach students on how entrepreneurship can have an ex ante impact on its market environment . Finally , stories , narratives ( stories about stories ) , bi - ographies , hagiographies , and novels about successful and / or unsuccessful entrepreneurs or fictional characters play a major role in entrepreneurship education ( Gartner 2007 ; Hjorth and Steyaert 2004 ) . Entrepreneurship ed - ucators use these different types of B stories ^ to teach case studies contextualized under different entrepre - neurship perspectives ( Garud et al . 2014 ) . By focusing on the role of demand routines in entrepreneurship , our routine approach could play a role in contextualizing customer segmentation of behavior to a better under - standing of these types of B stories ^ or to build new B stories . ^ Acknowledgments We thank two anonymous reviewers for theirinsightful andrelevantcomments andsuggestionsthatgreatly helped improve previous versions of this article . We would also like to thank associate editor Prof . Rui Baptista , who provided much helpful guidance throughout the whole reviewing process . The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 229 References Acemoglu , D . , & Robinson , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Why nations fail : the origins of power , prosperity , and poverty . New York , NY : Crown Publishing . Acs , Z . J . , Braunerhjelm , P . , Audretsch , D . B . , & Carlsson , B . ( 2008 ) . The knowledge spillover theory of entrepreneurship . Small Business Economics , 32 ( 1 ) , 15 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 008 - 9157 - 3 . Acs , Z . J . , Audretsch , D . B . , & Strom , R . J . ( Eds . ) . ( 2009 ) . Entrepreneurship , growth , and public policy . New York : Cambridge University Press . Acs , Z . J . , Audretsch , D . , Braunerhjelm , P . , & Carlsson , B . ( 2012 ) . Growth and entrepreneurship . Small Business Economics , 39 ( 2 ) , 289 – 300 . Acs , Z . J . , Audretsch , D . B . , & Lehmann , E . E . ( 2013 ) . The knowledge spillover theory of entrepreneurship . Small Business Economics , 41 ( 4 ) , 757 – 774 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 013 - 9505 - 9 . Agarwal , R . , & Shah , S . K . ( 2014 ) . Knowledge sources of entre - preneurship : firm formation by academic , user and employee innovators . Research Policy , 43 ( 7 ) , 1109 – 1133 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2014 . 04 . 012 . Aldrich , H . E . , & Yang , T . ( 2014 ) . How do entrepreneurs know what to do ? Learning and organizing in new ventures . Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 24 ( 1 ) , 59 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00191 - 013 - 0320 - x . Alvarez , S . A . ( 2007 ) . Entrepreneurial rents and the theory of the firm . Journal of Business Venturing , 22 ( 3 ) , 427 – 442 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2006 . 04 . 006 . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . ( 2004 ) . Organizing rent generation and appropriation : toward a theory of the entrepreneurial firm . Journal of Business Venturing , 19 ( 5 ) , 621 – 635 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2003 . 09 . 002 . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . ( 2005 ) . How do entrepreneurs organize firms under conditions of uncertainty ? Journal of Management , 31 ( 5 ) , 776 – 793 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0149206305279486 . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . ( 2007 ) . Discovery and creation : alternative theories of entrepreneurial action . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 1 ( 1 – 2 ) , 11 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sej . 4 . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . ( 2010 ) . Entrepreneurship and epistemology : the philosophical underpinnings of the study of entrepreneurial opportunities . The Academy of Management Annals , 4 ( 1 ) , 557 – 583 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 19416520 . 2010 . 495521 . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . ( 2013 ) . Epistemology , opportuni - ties , and entrepreneurship : comments on Venkataraman et al . ( 2012 ) and Shane ( 2012 ) . Academy of Management Review , 38 ( 1 ) , 154 – 157 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2012 . 0069 . Alvarez , S . A . , Barney , J . B . , & Anderson , P . ( 2013 ) . Forming and exploiting opportunities : the implications of discovery and creation processes for entrepreneurial and organizational re - search . Organization Science , 24 ( 1 ) , 301 – 317 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1110 . 0727 . Alvarez , S . A . , Barney , J . B . , McBride , R . , & Wuebker , R . ( 2014 ) . Realism in the study of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 39 ( 2 ) , 227 – 231 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2013 . 0244 . Alvarez , S . A . , Barney , J . B . , McBride , R . , & Wuebker , R . ( 2017 ) . On opportunities : philosophical and empirical implications . Academy of Management Review , 42 ( 4 ) , 726 – 730 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2016 . 0035 . Archer , M . S . ( 1995 ) . Realist social theory : the morphogenetic approach . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Archer , M . S . ( 2010 ) . Introduction : the reflexive re - turn . In M . S . Archer ( Ed . ) , Conversations about reflexivity ( pp . 1 – 13 ) . London : Routledge . Arora , A . , Caulkins , J . P . , & Telang , R . ( 2006 ) . Sell first , fix later : impact of patching on software quality . Management Science , 52 ( 3 ) , 465 – 471 . Arthur , W . B . ( 1994 ) . Increasing returns and path dependence in the economy . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press . Audretsch , D . B . , & Belitski , M . ( 2013 ) . The missing pillar : the creativity theory of knowledge spillover entrepreneurship . Small Business Economics , 41 ( 4 ) , 819 – 836 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 013 - 9508 - 6 . Audretsch , D . B . , & Keilbach , M . ( 2007 ) . The theory of knowl - edge spillover entrepreneurship . Journal of Management Studies , 44 ( 7 ) , 1242 – 1254 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 6486 . 2007 . 00722 . x . Baker , T . , & Nelson , R . E . ( 2005 ) . Creating something from nothing : resource construction through entrepreneurial brico - lage . Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 ( 3 ) , 329 – 366 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2189 / asqu . 2005 . 50 . 3 . 329 . Baldwin , C . , Hienerth , C . , & von Hippel , E . ( 2006 ) . How user innovations become commercial products : a theoretical in - vestigation and case study . Research Policy , 35 ( 9 ) , 1291 – 1313 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2006 . 04 . 012 . Barney , J . ( 1991 ) . Firm resources and sustained competitive ad - vantage . Journal of Management , 17 ( 1 ) , 99 – 120 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 014920639101700108 . Baron , J . ( 2007 ) . Thinking and deciding ( 4th ed . ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Baumol , W . J . ( 2010 ) . The microtheory of innovative entrepre - neurship . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Becker , M . C . ( 2005 ) . A framework for applying organizational routines in empirical research : linking antecedents , charac - teristics and performance outcomes of recurrent interaction patterns . Industrial and Corporate Change , 14 ( 5 ) , 817 – 846 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / icc / dth072 . Berglund , H . , & Korsgaard , S . ( 2017 ) . Opportunities , time , and mechanisms in entrepreneurship : on the practical irrelevance of propensities . Academy of Management Review , 42 ( 4 ) , 730 – 733 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2016 . 0168 . Bianchi , M . ( Ed . ) . ( 1998 ) . The active consumer : novelty and surprise in consumer choice . London : Routledge . Boden , M . A . ( 2004 ) . The creative mind : myths and mechanisms ( 2nd ed . ) . London : Routledge . Borry , P . , Cornel , M . C . , & Howard , H . C . ( 2010 ) . Where are you going , where have you been : a recent history of the direct - to - consumer genetic testing market . Journal of Community Genetics , 1 ( 3 ) , 101 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12687 - 010 - 0023 - z . Buchanan , J . M . , & Di Pierro , A . ( 1980 ) . Cognition , choice , and entrepreneurship . Southern Economic Journal , 46 ( 3 ) , 693 – 701 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1057139 . Buchanan , J . M . , & Vanberg , V . J . ( 2007 ) . The market as a creative process . In D . M . Hausman ( Ed . ) , The philosophy of G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 230 economics : an anthology ( 3rd ed . , pp . 101 – 113 ) . London : Routledge . Buenstorf , G . ( 2007 ) . Creation and pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunities : an evolutionary economics perspective . Small Business Economics , 28 ( 4 ) , 323 – 337 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 006 - 9039 - 5 . Bulmer , S . , Elms , J . , & Moore , S . ( 2018 ) . Exploring the adoption ofself - servicecheckouts andthe associatedsocialobligations of shopping practices . Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services , 42 , 107 – 116 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jretconser . 2018 . 01 . 016 . Bylund , P . L . , & McCaffrey , M . ( 2017 ) . A theory of entrepreneur - ship and institutional uncertainty . Journal of Business Venturing , 32 ( 5 ) , 461 – 475 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2017 . 05 . 006 . Byrne , R . M . J . ( 2005 ) . The rational imagination : how people create alternatives to reality . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Cantner , U . ( 2016 ) . Foundations of economic change — an extend - ed Schumpeterian approach . Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 26 ( 4 ) , 701 – 736 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00191 - 016 - 0479 - z . Caraça , J . , Lundvall , B . - Å . , & Mendonça , S . ( 2009 ) . The changing role of science in the innovation process : from queen to Cinderella ? Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 76 ( 6 ) , 861 – 867 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2008 . 08 . 003 . Carbonara , E . , Tran , H . T . , & Santarelli , E . ( 2019 ) . Determinants of novice , portfolio , and serial entrepreneurship : an occupa - tional choice approach . Small Business Economics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 019 - 00138 - 9 . Casson , M . ( 2003 ) . The entrepreneur : an economic theory ( 2nd ed . ) . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar . Chen , S . L . , Jiao , R . J . , & Tseng , M . M . ( 2009 ) . Evolutionary product line design balancing customer needs and product commonality . CIRP Annals , 58 ( 1 ) , 123 – 126 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cirp . 2009 . 03 . 014 . Chesbrough , H . W . ( 2006 ) . Open innovation : the new imperative for creating and profiting from technology . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Chesbrough , H . W . , Vanhaverbeke , W . , & West , J . ( Eds . ) . ( 2006 ) . Open innovation : researching a new paradigm . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Chetty , S . , Eriksson , K . , & Lindbergh , J . ( 2006 ) . The effect of specificity of experience on a firm ’ s perceived importance of institutional knowledge in an ongoing business . Journal of International Business Studies , 37 ( 5 ) , 699 – 712 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / palgrave . jibs . 8400214 . Chick , V . , & Dow , S . ( 2005 ) . The meaning of open systems . Journal of Economic Methodology , 12 ( 3 ) , 363 – 381 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13501780500223585 . Chiles , T . H . , Bluedorn , A . C . , & Gupta , V . K . ( 2007 ) . Beyond creative destruction and entrepreneurial discovery : a radical Austrian approachtoentrepreneurship . OrganizationStudies , 2 8 ( 4 ) , 4 6 7 – 4 9 3 . h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 11 7 7 / 0170840606067996 . Chiles , T . H . , Vultee , D . M . , Gupta , V . K . , Greening , D . W . , & Tuggle , C . S . ( 2010 ) . The philosophical foundations of a radical Austrian approach to entrepreneurship . Journal of Management Inquiry , 19 ( 2 ) , 138 – 164 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1056492609337833 . Christensen , C . M . ( 1997 ) . The innovator ’ s dilemma : when new technologies cause great firms to fail . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Christensen , C . M . , & Raynor , M . E . ( 2003 ) . The innovator ’ s solution : creating and sustaining successful growth . Boston , Mass : Harvard Business School Press . Coase , R . H . ( 1937 ) . The nature of the firm . Economica , 4 ( 16 ) , 386 – 405 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2626876 . Cohen , M . D . , & Bacdayan , P . ( 1994 ) . Organizational routines are stored as procedural memory : evidence from a laboratory study . Organization Science , 5 ( 4 ) , 554 – 568 . Cohen , M . D . , Burkhart , R . , Dosi , G . , Egidi , M . , Marengo , L . , Warglien , M . , & Winter , S . G . ( 1996 ) . Routines and other recurring action patterns of organizations : contemporary re - search issues . Industrial and Corporate Change , 5 ( 3 ) , 653 – 698 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / icc / 5 . 3 . 653 . D ’ Adderio , L . ( 2008 ) . The performativity of routines : theorising the influence of artefacts and distributed agencies on routines dynamics . Research Policy , 37 ( 5 ) , 769 – 789 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2007 . 12 . 012 . D ’ Adderio , L . ( 2011 ) . Artifacts at the centre of routines : performing the material turn in routines theory . Journal of Institutional Economics , 7 ( Special Issue 02 ) , 197 – 230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S174413741000024X . David , P . A . ( 1985 ) . Clio and the economics of QWERTY . The American Economic Review , 75 ( 2 ) , 332 – 337 . Davidson , P . ( 1991 ) . Is probability theory relevant for uncertainty ? A post Keynesian perspective . The Journal of Economic Perspectives , 5 ( 1 ) , 129 – 143 . Davidson , P . ( 1996 ) . Reality and economic theory . Journal of Post Keynesian Economics , 18 ( 4 ) , 479 – 508 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01603477 . 1996 . 11490083 . Davidsson , P . ( 2003 ) . The domain of entrepreneurship research : some suggestions . In J . Katz & D . Shepherd ( Eds . ) , Advances in entrepreneurship , firm emergence and growth ( Vol . 6 , pp . 315 – 372 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Davidsson , P . ( 2015 ) . Entrepreneurial opportunities and the entre - preneurship nexus : a re - conceptualization . Journal of Business Venturing , 30 ( 5 ) , 674 – 695 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 01 . 002 . Davidsson , P . ( 2017 ) . Entrepreneurial opportunities as propensi - ties : do Ramoglou & Tsang move the field forward ? Journal of Business Venturing Insights , 7 ( Supplement C ) , 82 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbvi . 2016 . 02 . 002 . Davidsson , P . , Recker , J . , & von Briel , F . ( 2018 ) . External enablement of new venture creation : a framework . Academy of Management Perspectives . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amp . 2017 . 0163 . Dequech , D . ( 2011 ) . Uncertainty : a typology and refinements of existing concepts . Journal of Economic Issues , 45 ( 3 ) , 621 – 640 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2753 / JEI0021 - 3624450306 . Dimov , D . ( 2011 ) . Grappling with the unbearable elusiveness of entrepreneurial opportunities . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35 ( 1 ) , 57 – 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2010 . 00423 . x . Dosi , G . ( 1982 ) . Technological paradigms and technological tra - jectories : a suggested interpretation of the determinants and directions of technical change . Research Policy , 11 ( 3 ) , 147 – 162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0048 - 7333 ( 82 ) 90016 - 6 . The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 231 Dosi , G . , & Egidi , M . ( 1991 ) . Substantive and procedural uncer - tainty . Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 1 ( 2 ) , 145 – 168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01224917 . Earl , P . E . , & Potts , J . ( 2004 ) . The market for preferences . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 28 ( 4 ) , 619 – 633 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cje / 28 . 4 . 619 . Eckhardt , J . T . , & Shane , S . ( 2010 ) . An update to the individual - opportunity Nexus . In Z . J . Acs & D . B . Audretsch ( Eds . ) , Handbook of entrepreneurship research : an interdisciplinary survey and introduction ( pp . 47 – 76 ) . New York , NY : Springer New York . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4419 - 1191 - 9 _ 3 . Eckhardt , J . T . , & Shane , S . ( 2013 ) . Response to the commentar - ies : The Individual - Opportunity ( IO ) Nexus integrates objec - tive and subjective aspects of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 38 ( 1 ) , 160 – 163 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2012 . 0192 . Eisenhardt , K . M . , & Martin , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Dynamic capabilities : what are they ? Strategic Management Journal , 21 ( 10 / 11 ) , 1105 – 1121 . Elert , N . , & Henrekson , M . ( 2016 ) . Evasive entrepreneurship . Small Business Economics , 47 ( 1 ) , 95 – 113 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 016 - 9725 - x . Ellsberg , D . ( 1961 ) . Risk , ambiguity , and the savage axioms . The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 75 ( 4 ) , 643 – 669 . Feldman , M . S . ( 2000 ) . Organizational routines as a source of continuous change . Organization Science , 11 ( 6 ) , 611 – 629 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 11 . 6 . 611 . 12529 . Feldman , M . S . , & Pentland , B . T . ( 2003 ) . Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a source of flexibility and change . Administrative Science Quarterly , 48 ( 1 ) , 94 – 118 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3556620 . Folta , T . B . ( 2007 ) . Uncertainty rules the day . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 1 ( 1 – 2 ) , 97 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sej . 7 . Foss , N . J . , & Garzarelli , G . ( 2007 ) . Institutions as knowledge capital : Ludwig M . Lachmann ’ s interpretative institutional - ism . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 31 ( 5 ) , 789 – 804 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cje / bem003 . Foss , N . J . , & Klein , P . G . ( 2012 ) . Organizing entrepreneurial judgment : a new approach to the firm . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Foss , N . J . , & Klein , P . G . ( 2017 ) . Entrepreneurial discovery or creation ? In search of the middle ground . Academy of Management Review , 42 ( 4 ) , 733 – 736 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2016 . 0046 . Franke , N . , & Von Hippel , E . ( 2006 ) . Finding commercially attractive user innovations : a test of lead - user theory . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 23 ( 4 ) , 301 – 315 . Gardner , H . ( 1993 ) . Creating minds : an anatomy of creativity seen through the lives of Freud , Einstein , Picasso , Stravinsky , Eliot , Graham , and Gandhi . New York , NY : BasicBooks . Gartner , W . B . ( 2007 ) . Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination . Entrepreneurial Narrative , 22 ( 5 ) , 613 – 627 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2006 . 10 . 003 . Garud , R . , & Karnøe , P . ( 2003 ) . Bricolage versus breakthrough : distributed and embedded agency in technology entrepre - neurship . Research Policy , 32 ( 2 ) , 277 – 300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0048 - 7333 ( 02 ) 00100 - 2 . Garud , R . , Gehman , J . , & Giuliani , A . P . ( 2014 ) . Contextualizing entrepreneurial innovation : a narrative perspective . Research Policy , 43 ( 7 ) , 1177 – 1188 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2014 . 04 . 015 . Geroski , P . A . , Mata , J . , & Portugal , P . ( 2010 ) . Founding condi - tions and the survival of new firms . Strategic Management Journal , 31 ( 5 ) , 510 – 529 . Ghosh , V . E . , & Gilboa , A . ( 2014 ) . What is a memory schema ? A historical perspective on current neuroscience literature . Neuropsychologia , 53 , 104 – 114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2013 . 11 . 010 . Gigerenzer , G . ( 2008 ) . Rationality for mortals : how people cope with uncertainty . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Gigerenzer , G . , & Gaissmaier , W . ( 2011 ) . Heuristic decision mak - ing . Annual Review of Psychology , 62 ( 1 ) , 451 – 482 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 120709 - 145346 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Goldstein , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Reasoning the fast and frugal way : models of bounded rationality . Psychological Review , 103 ( 4 ) , 650 – 669 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295 X . 103 . 4 . 650 . Giménez Roche , G . A . ( 2011 ) . A socially situated praxeo - logical approach to entrepreneurship . Journal of Entrepreneurship , 20 ( 2 ) , 159 – 187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 097135571102000201 . Giménez Roche , G . A . ( 2016 ) . The impossibility of entrepreneur - ship under the Neoclassical framework : open vs . closed - ended processes . Journal of Economic Issues , 50 ( 3 ) , 695 – 715 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00213624 . 2016 . 1210378 . Gobet , F . ( 2015 ) . Understanding expertise : a multi - disciplinary approach . New York , NY : Palgrave Macmillan . Granovetter , M . S . ( 1985 ) . Economic action and social structure : the problem of embeddedness . American Journal of Sociology , 91 ( 3 ) , 481 – 510 . Gupta , A . , Streb , C . , Gupta , V . K . , & Markin , E . ( 2015 ) . Entrepreneurial behavior during industry emergence : an un - conventional study of discovery and creation in the early PC industry . New England Journal of Entrepreneurship , 18 ( 2 ) , 61 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / NEJE - 18 - 02 - 2015 - B005 . Harnad , S . ( 2017 ) . Chapter 2 - To cognize is to categorize : cogni - tion is categorization . In H . Cohen & C . Lefebvre ( Eds . ) , Handbook of categorization in cognitive science ( Second ed . , pp . 21 – 54 ) . San Diego : Elsevier . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 08 - 101107 - 2 . 00002 - 6 . Harper , D . A . ( 2003 ) . Foundations of entrepreneurship and eco - nomic development . London : Routledge . Harper , D . A . , & Endres , A . M . ( 2012 ) . The anatomy of emer - gence , with a focus upon capital formation . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 82 ( 2 – 3 ) , 352 – 367 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jebo . 2011 . 03 . 013 . Hayek , F . A . ( 1940 ) . Socialist calculation : the competitive B solution ^ . Economica , 7 ( 26 ) , 125 – 149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2548692 . Hayek , F . A . ( 1945 ) . The use of knowledge in society . The American Economic Review , 35 ( 4 ) , 519 – 530 . Hayek , F . A . ( 1969 ) . The theory of complex phenomena . In Studies in philosophy , politics , and economics ( pp . 22 – 42 ) . New York , NY : Simon and Schuster . Heit , E . ( 2005 ) . Schemas in psychology . In L . Nadel ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of cognitive science ( pp . 1 – 3 ) . Chichester : John Wiley . G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 232 Helfat , C . E . , & Peteraf , M . A . ( 2003 ) . The dynamic resource - based view : capability lifecycles . Strategic Management Journal , 24 ( 10 ) , 997 – 1010 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 332 . Henderson , R . M . , & Clark , K . B . ( 1990 ) . Architectural innova - tion : the reconfiguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , 9 – 30 . Henrekson , M . , & Sanandaji , T . ( 2011 ) . The interaction of entre - preneurship and institutions . Journal of Institutional Economics , 7 ( 1 ) , 47 – 75 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1744137410000342 . Hippel , E . v . ( 2005 ) . Democratizing innovation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hjorth , D . , & Steyaert , C . ( Eds . ) . ( 2004 ) . Narrative and discursive approaches in entrepreneurship : a second movements in entrepreneurship book . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar . Hodgson , G . M . ( 1997 ) . The ubiquity of habits and rules . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 21 ( 6 ) , 663 – 684 . Hodgson , G . M . ( 2001 ) . How economics forgot history : the prob - lem of historical specificity in social science . London , New York : Routledge . Holcombe , R . G . ( 2003 ) . The origins of entrepreneurial opportu - nities . The Review of Austrian Economics , 16 ( 1 ) , 25 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1022953123111 . Holcombe , R . G . ( 2006 ) . Does the invisible hand hold or lead ? Market adjustment in an entrepreneurial economy . The Review of Austrian Economics , 19 ( 2 ) , 189 – 201 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11138 - 006 - 7347 - 2 . Holt , D . B . ( 1995 ) . How consumers consume : a typology of consumption practices . Journal of Consumer Research , 22 ( 1 ) , 1 – 16 . Humphreys , P . ( 1997 ) . Emergence , not supervenience . Philosophy of Science , 64 , S337 – S345 . Humphreys , P . ( 2008 ) . Computational and conceptual emergence . Philosophy of Science , 75 ( 5 ) , 584 – 594 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 596776 . Kerr , S . P . , Kerr , W . R . , & Xu , T . ( 2018 ) . Personality traits of entrepreneurs : a review of recent literature . Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship , 14 ( 3 ) , 279 – 356 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1561 / 0300000080 . Kier , A . S . , & McMullen , J . S . ( 2018 ) . Entrepreneurial imagina - tiveness in new venture ideation . Academy of Management Journal . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2017 . 0395 . Kirzner , I . M . ( 1973 ) . Competition and entrepreneurship . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Klein , P . G . ( 2008 ) . Opportunity discovery , entrepreneurial action , and economic organization . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 2 ( 3 ) , 175 – 190 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sej . 50 . Knight , F . H . ( 1921 ) . Risk , uncertainty and profit . Boston , MA : Houghton Mifflin . Kothari , S . P . , & Warner , J . B . ( 2007 ) . Chapter 1 - Econometrics of event studies . In B . E . Eckbo ( Ed . ) , Handbook of empirical corporate finance ( pp . 3 – 36 ) . San Diego : Elsevier . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 444 - 53265 - 7 . 50015 - 9 . Lachmann , L . M . ( 1971 ) . The legacyof Max Weber . Berkeley , CA : The Glendessary Press . Lewis , D . ( 1969 ) . Convention : a philosophical study . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Liebowitz , S . J . , & Margolis , S . E . ( 2000 ) . Path dependence . In Encyclopaedia of law and economics volume i : The history and methodology of law and economics ( pp . 981 – 998 ) . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar . Littlechild , S . C . ( 1979 ) . Comment : Radical subjectivism or rad - ical subversion ? In M . J . Rizzo ( Ed . ) , Time , uncertainty , and disequilibrium : exploration of Austrian themes ( pp . 32 – 50 ) . Lexington , MA : Lexington Books . Lüthje , C . , & Herstatt , C . ( 2004 ) . The lead user method : an outline of empirical findings and issues for future research . R & D Management , 34 ( 5 ) , 553 – 568 . Lwango , A . , Coeurderoy , R . , & Giménez Roche , G . A . ( 2017 ) . Family influence and SME performance under conditions of firm size and age . Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development , 24 ( 3 ) , 629 – 648 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JSBED - 11 - 2016 - 0174 . Mandler , J . M . ( 2004 ) . The foundations of mind : origins of con - ceptual thought . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Mankiw , N . G . ( 2017 ) . Economists actually agree on this : the wisdom of free trade . The New York Times . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2015 / 04 / 26 / upshot / economists - actually - agree - on - this - point - the - wisdom - of - free - trade . html . Accessed 17 September 2018 . Markides , C . , & Geroski , P . ( 2005 ) . Fast second : how smart companies bypass radical innovation to enter and dominate new markets . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . McMullen , J . S . ( 2015 ) . Entrepreneurial judgment as empathic accuracy : a sequential decision - making approach to entrepre - neurial action . Journal of Institutional Economics , 11 ( 3 ) , 651 – 681 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1744137413000386 . McMullen , J . S . , & Shepherd , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the theory of the entrepreneur . Academy of Management Review , 31 ( 1 ) , 132 – 152 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / AMR . 2006 . 19379628 . McMullen , J . S . , Plummer , L . A . , & Acs , Z . J . ( 2007 ) . What is an entrepreneurial opportunity ? Small Business Economics , 28 ( 4 ) , 273 – 283 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 006 - 9040 - z . Meuter , M . L . , Ostrom , A . L . , Roundtree , R . I . , & Bitner , M . J . ( 2000 ) . Self - service technologies : understanding customer satisfaction with technology - based service encounters . Journal of Marketing , 64 ( 3 ) , 50 – 64 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1509 / jmkg . 64 . 3 . 50 . 18024 . Mises , L . v . ( 1998 ) . Human action : a treatise on economics ( Scholar ’ s ed . ) . Auburn , AL : Ludwig Von Mises Institute . Murray , D . C . ( 2015 ) . Notes to self : the visual culture of selfies in the age of social media . Consumption Markets & Culture , 18 ( 6 ) , 490 – 516 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10253866 . 2015 . 1052967 . Napolitano , M . R . , Marino , V . , & Ojala , J . ( 2015 ) . In search of an integrated framework of business longevity . Business History , 57 ( 7 ) , 955 – 969 . Nelson , R . R . ( 2016 ) . Behavior and cognition of economic actors in evolutionary economics . Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 26 ( 4 ) , 737 – 751 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00191 - 015 - 0431 - 7 . Nelson , R . R . , & Sampat , B . N . ( 2001 ) . Making sense of institu - tions as a factor shaping economic performance . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 44 ( 1 ) , 31 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 2681 ( 00 ) 00152 - 9 . Nelson , R . R . , & Winter , S . G . ( 1982 ) . An evolutionary theory of economic change . Cambridge , MA : The Belknap Press of Harvard Univ . Press . The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 233 North , D . C . ( 1990 ) . Institutions , institutional change , and eco - nomic performance . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . North , D . C . ( 1992 ) . Transaction costs , institutions , and economic performance . San Francisco , CA : ICS Press . O ’ Driscoll , G . P . , & Rizzo , M . J . ( 1996 ) . The economics of time and ignorance . New York , NY : Routledge . Packard , M . D . , Clark , B . B . , & Klein , P . G . ( 2017 ) . Uncertainty types and transitions in the entrepreneurial process . Organization Science , 28 ( 5 ) , 840 – 856 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2017 . 1143 . Pentland , B . T . ( 1995 ) . Grammatical models of organizational processes . Organization Science , 6 ( 5 ) , 541 – 556 . Pentland , B . T . , & Feldman , M . S . ( 2005 ) . Organizational routines as a unit of analysis . Industrial and Corporate Change , 14 ( 5 ) , 793 – 815 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / icc / dth070 . Pentland , B . T . , & Rueter , H . H . ( 1994 ) . Organizational routines as grammars of action . Administrative Science Quarterly , 39 ( 3 ) , 484 – 510 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2393300 . Perry - Smith , J . E . , & Shalley , C . E . ( 2003 ) . The social side of creativity : a static and dynamic social network perspective . The Academy of Management Review , 28 ( 1 ) , 89 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 30040691 . Pinch , T . J . , & Bijker , W . E . ( 2012 ) . The social construction of facts and artifacts : or how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each other . In W . E . Bijker , T . P . Hughes , & T . J . Pinch ( Eds . ) , The social con - struction of technological systems : new directions in the sociology and history of technology ( Anniversary ed . ( pp . 11 – 44 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Polanyi , M . ( 1966 ) . The tacit dimension . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Prahalad , C . K . , & Ramaswamy , V . ( 2004 ) . The future of compe - tition : co - creating unique value with customers . Boston , Mass : Harvard Business School Pub . . Preda , A . ( 2001 ) . Order with things ? Humans , artifacts , and the sociological problem of rule - following . Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour , 30 ( 3 ) , 269 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1468 - 5914 . 00130 . Quito , A . ( 2017 ) . Front - facing cameras were never intended for selfies . Quartz . https : / / qz . com / 1104742 / front - facing - cameras - were - never - intended - for - selfies / . Accessed 22 September 2018 . Ramoglou , S . ( 2011 ) . Who is a ‘ non - entrepreneur ’ ? : Taking the ‘ others ’ of entrepreneurship seriously . International Small Business Journal , 31 ( 4 ) , 432 – 453 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0266242611425838 . Ramoglou , S . ( 2013 ) . On the misuse of realism in the study of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 38 ( 3 ) , 463 – 465 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2012 . 0371 . Ramoglou , S . , & Tsang , E . W . K . ( 2016 ) . A realist perspective of entrepreneurship : opportunities as propensities . Academy of Management Review , 41 ( 3 ) , 410 – 434 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2014 . 0281 . Ramoglou , S . , & Tsang , E . W . K . ( 2017a ) . In defense of common sense in entrepreneurship theory : beyond philosophical ex - tremities and linguistic abuses . Academy of Management Review , 42 ( 4 ) , 736 – 744 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2017 . 0169 . Ramoglou , S . , & Tsang , E . W . K . ( 2017b ) . Accepting the unknow - ables of entrepreneurship and overcoming philosophical obstacles to scientific progress . Journal of Business Venturing Insights , 8 , 71 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbvi . 2017 . 07 . 001 . Ramoglou , S . , & Zyglidopoulos , S . C . ( 2015 ) . The constructivist view of entrepreneurial opportunities : a critical analysis . Small Business Economics , 44 ( 1 ) , 71 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 014 - 9590 - 4 . Riddell , O . P . ( 2013 ) . Who is the active consumer ? Insight into contemporary innovation and marketing practices . Uppsala : Uppsala Universiteit Retrieved from http : / / www . diva - portal . org / smash / get / diva2 : 617683 / FULLTEXT01 . pdf . Ries , E . ( 2011 ) . The lean startup : how today ’ s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create radically successful busi - nesses . New York : Crown Business . Rodrik , D . ( 2007 ) . One economics , many recipes : globalization , institutions , and economic growth . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Runco , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology , 55 ( 1 ) , 657 – 687 . Sarasvathy , S . D . ( 2001 ) . Causation and effectuation : toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to entrepreneur - ial contingency . Academy of Management Review , 26 ( 2 ) , 243 – 263 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / AMR . 2001 . 4378020 . Sarasvathy , S . D . ( 2008 ) . Effectuation : elements ofentrepreneurial expertise . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar . Schotter , A . ( 1981 ) . The economic theory of social institutions . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Schumpeter , J . A . ( 1983 ) . The theory of economic development : an inquiry into profits , capital , credit , interest , and the busi - ness cycle . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction Books . Searle , J . R . ( 1995 ) . The construction of social reality . New York : Free Press . Searle , J . R . ( 2005 ) . What is an institution ? Journal of Institutional Economics , 1 ( 01 ) , 1 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1744137405000020 . Selten , R . ( 2001 ) . What is bounded rationality ? In G . Gigerenzer & R . Selten ( Eds . ) , Bounded rationality : the adaptive toolbox ( pp . 13 – 36 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Shane , S . ( 2000 ) . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepre - neurial opportunities . Organization Science , 11 ( 4 ) , 448 – 469 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 11 . 4 . 448 . 14602 . Shane , S . ( 2003 ) . A general theory of entrepreneurship : the individual - opportunity nexus . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar . Shane , S . ( 2012 ) . Reflections on the 2010 AMR Decade Award : delivering on the promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research . Academy of Management Review , 37 ( 1 ) , 10 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2011 . 0078 . Shane , S . , & Eckhardt , J . T . ( 2003 ) . The individual - opportunity nexus . In Z . J . Acs & D . B . Audretsch ( Eds . ) , Handbook of entrepreneurship research : an interdisciplinary survey and introduction ( pp . 161 – 191 ) . Boston , MA : Kluwer . Shane , S . , & Venkataraman , S . ( 2000 ) . The promise of entrepre - neurship as a field of research . Academy of Management Review , 25 ( 1 ) , 217 – 226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / AMR . 2000 . 2791611 . Shepherd , D . A . , McMullen , J . S . , & Jennings , P . D . ( 2007 ) . The formation of opportunity beliefs : overcoming ignorance and reducing doubt . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 1 ( 1 – 2 ) , 75 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sej . 3 . G . A . Giménez Roche , D . Calcei 234 Simon , H . A . ( 1955 ) . A behavioral model of rational choice . The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 69 ( 1 ) , 99 – 118 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1884852 . Simon , H . A . ( 1978 ) . Rationality as process and as product of thought . The American Economic Review , 68 ( 2 ) , 1 – 16 . Soros , G . ( 2003 ) . The alchemy of finance . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Soros , G . ( 2013 ) . Fallibility , reflexivity , and the human uncertainty principle . Journal of Economic Methodology , 20 ( 4 ) , 309 – 329 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1350178X . 2013 . 859415 . Sterne , J . ( 2006 ) . The mp3 as cultural artifact . New Media & Society , 8 ( 5 ) , 825 – 842 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444806067737 . Taylor , S . E . , Pham , L . B . , Rivkin , I . D . , & Armor , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Harnessing the imagination : mental simulation , self - regula - tion , and coping . American Psychologist , 53 ( 4 ) , 429 – 439 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 53 . 4 . 429 . Teece , D . J . ( 2007 ) . Explicating dynamic capabilities : the nature and microfoundations of ( sustainable ) enterprise perfor - mance . Strategic Management Journal , 28 ( 13 ) , 1319 – 1350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 640 . Teece , D . J . , Pisano , G . , & Shuen , A . ( 1997 ) . Dynamic capabilities and strategic management . Strategic Management Journal , 18 ( 7 ) , 509 – 533 . Thagard , P . ( 2010 ) . The brain and the meaning of life . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Todd , P . M . ( 2001 ) . Fast and frugal heuristics for environmentally bounded minds . In Bounded rationality : the adaptive toolbox ( pp . 51 – 70 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Townsend , D . M . , Hunt , R . A . , McMullen , J . S . , & Sarasvathy , S . D . ( 2018 ) . Uncertainty , knowledge problems , and entrepre - neurial action . Academy of Management Annals , 12 ( 2 ) , 659 – 687 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / annals . 2016 . 0109 . Veblen , T . ( 2007 ) . The theory of the leisure class . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Venkataraman , S . , Sarasvathy , S . D . , Dew , N . , & Forster , W . R . ( 2012 ) . Reflections on the 2010 AMR Decade Award : whith - er the promise ? Moving forward with entrepreneurship as a science of the artificial . Academy of Management Review , 37 ( 1 ) , 21 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2011 . 0079 . Ward , T . B . ( 2004 ) . Cognition , creativity , and entrepreneurship . Journal of Business Venturing , 19 ( 2 ) , 173 – 188 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0883 - 9026 ( 03 ) 00005 - 3 . Ward , T . B . , & Saunders , K . N . ( 2005 ) . Creativity . In L . Nadel ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of cognitive science ( Vol . 1 , pp . 1 – 8 ) . Chichester : John Wiley . Weisberg , R . W . ( 2006 ) . Creativity : understanding innovation in problem solving , science , invention , and the arts . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Weisberg , R . W . , & Reeves , L . M . ( 2013 ) . Cognition : from mem - ory to creativity . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . Westhead , P . , Ucbasaran , D . , & Wright , M . ( 2005a ) . Decisions , actions , and performance : do novice , serial , and portfolio entrepreneurs differ ? Journal of Small Business Management , 43 ( 4 ) , 393 – 417 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 627X . 2005 . 00144 . x . Westhead , P . , Ucbasaran , D . , Wright , M . , & Binks , M . ( 2005b ) . Novice , serial and portfolio entrepreneur behaviour and con - tributions . Small Business Economics , 25 ( 2 ) , 109 – 132 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 003 - 6461 - 9 . Williamson , O . E . ( 1985 ) . The economic institutions of capitalism . New York , NY : Free Press . Williamson , O . E . ( 2000 ) . The new institutional economics : taking stock , looking ahead . Journal of Economic Literature , 38 ( 3 ) , 595 – 613 . Witt , U . ( 1998 ) . Imagination and leadership – the neglected di - mension of an evolutionary theory of the firm . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 35 ( 2 ) , 161 – 177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 2681 ( 98 ) 00058 - 4 . Witt , U . ( 2007 ) . Firms as realizations of entrepreneurial visions . Journal of Management Studies , 44 ( 7 ) , 1125 – 1140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 6486 . 2007 . 00731 . x . Witt , U . ( 2011 ) . Emergence and functionality of organizational routines : an individualistic approach . Journal of Institutional Economics , 7 ( 2 ) , 157 – 174 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1744137410000226 . Witt , S . ( 2015 ) . How music got free : the end of an industry , the turn of the century , and the patient zero of piracy . New York : Viking . Wood , M . S . ( 2017 ) . Misgivings about dismantling the opportu - nity construct . Journal of Business Venturing Insights , 7 , 21 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbvi . 2017 . 01 . 001 . Wood , M . S . , & McKinley , W . ( 2018 ) . The entrepreneurial oppor - tunity construct : dislodge or leverage ? Academy of Management Perspectives . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amp . 2017 . 0162 . Zagorski , N . ( 2006 ) . Profile of Alec J . Jeffreys . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 103 ( 24 ) , 8918 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0603953103 . Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . The role of demand routines in entrepreneurial judgment 235