Unraveling the impact of subsurface and surface properties of a material on biological adhesion—a multi - scale approach Dissertation zur Erlangung des Grades des Doktors der Naturwissenschaften der Naturwissenschaftlich - Technischen Fakultät II - Physik und Mechatronik - der Universität des Saarlandes von Peter Moritz Loskill Saarbrücken 2012 Tag des Kolloquiums : 29 . 10 . 2012 Dekan : Univ . - Prof . Dr . rer . nat . Ch . Wagner Mitglieder des Prüfungsausschusses : Vorsitzender : Univ . - Prof . Dr . rer . nat . L . Santen Gutachter : Univ . - Prof . Dr . rer . nat . K . Jacobs Univ . - Prof . Dr . med . M . Herrmann Univ . - Prof . Dr . rer . nat . Ch . Ziegler , TU Kaiserslautern Akademischer Beisitzer : Dr . J . - B . Fleury Kurzzusammenfassung Das Verständnis der Adhäsion biologischer Objekte an anorganischen Materialien ist ein wichtiges Forschungsziel in der Physik und den Lebenswissenschaften . Um biologische Adhäsion zu beschreiben , berücksichtigen viele Studien lediglich die Eigenschaften der Oberﬂäche ; die Materialzusammensetzung unterhalb der Oberﬂäche wird häuﬁg überse - hen . Langreichweitige Van der Waals ( VdW ) - Kräfte werden somit vernachlässigt . Die vorliegende Arbeit zeigt , dass Unterschiede im Grenzﬂächenpotential einen Einﬂuss auf biologische Objekte ( Proteine , Bakterien , Geckos ) haben . Mithilfe von Siliziumwafern mit unterschiedlich dicken Oxidschichten wird der VdW - Anteil des Grenzﬂächenpotentials un - abhängig von den Oberﬂächeneigenschaften variiert . Durch Funktionalisierung der Wafer mit einer Silan - Monolage wird auch die Oberﬂächenchemie gesondert verändert . Auf diesen Modelloberﬂächen wurden Adhäsions - und Adsorptionsexperimente durchgeführt . Dabei wurde die Proteinadsorption mittels in situ Röntgenreﬂektometrie , die Bakterien - adhäsion mittels AFM - Kraftspektroskopie mit Bakteriensonden und die Geckoadhäsion mittels einer mechanischen Testplattform charakterisiert . Zudem wurde in der vorliegen - den Arbeit ermittelt , inwiefern Veränderungen der Oberﬂäche , wie die Fluorierung von künstlichen Zähnen oder Umordnungen in der bakteriellen Zellwand , die Bakterienadhä - sion beeinﬂussen und inwiefern eine verringerte Quervernetzung der bakteriellen Zellwand deren Elastizität verändert . III IV Abstract Understanding the adhesion of biological objects to inorganic surfaces is an important research objective in physics and the life sciences . To characterize biological adhesion , most studies describe a substrate solely by its surface properties ; the composition of the material beneath the surface is frequently overlooked . That way , long - range van der Waals ( vdW ) interactions are disregarded . This work reveals that biological objects of all scales—nanoscopic proteins , microscopic bacteria , and macroscopic geckos—are inﬂu - enced by nanoscale diﬀerences in the interface potential . By using tailored silicon wafers with a variable silicon oxide layer thickness , the vdW part of the interface potential is tuned independently from the surface properties . By modifying the wafers with silane monolay - ers , the surface chemistry can be varied separately as well . On these model substrates , adsorption and adhesion experiments were performed . Protein adsorption was investigated by in situ X - ray reﬂectometry , bacterial adhesion was explored via AFM force spectroscopy with bacterial probes , and gecko adhesion was characterized using a mechanical testing platform . Moreover , this work investigates whether or not bacterial adhesion is inﬂuenced by changes in surface properties such as the ﬂuoridation of artiﬁcial teeth or contact - induced rearrangements in the bacterial cell wall and whether or not a reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking aﬀects the elasticity of the bacterial cell wall . V VI Contents 1 Introduction 1 2 Overview and Connectivity 3 3 Context and State of the Art 5 3 . 1 Surface Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 3 . 1 . 1 Van der Waals Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3 . 1 . 2 Electrostatic Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 3 . 1 . 3 Hydrogen Bonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3 . 1 . 4 Hydration and Hydrophobic Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3 . 1 . 5 Steric Repulsion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 3 . 1 . 6 A Thermodynamical Approach : Work of Adhesion , Interfacial Energy , and Surface Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3 . 1 . 7 Covalent and Chemical bonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3 . 1 . 8 Capillary Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3 . 2 Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 3 . 2 . 1 Protein Adsorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 3 . 3 Bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 3 . 3 . 1 Cell Wall of Gram - positive Bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 3 . 3 . 2 Bacterial Adhesion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 3 . 3 . 3 Staphylococci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3 . 3 . 4 Streptococci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 3 . 4 Geckos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 3 . 4 . 1 Gecko Adhesion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 3 . 5 Friction and Contact Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 4 Materials and Methods 35 4 . 1 Substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 4 . 1 . 1 Silicon wafers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 4 . 1 . 2 ‘Everyday Substrates’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 4 . 2 Atomic Force Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 4 . 2 . 1 Force Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 4 . 2 . 2 Bacterial Probes for AFM Force Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . 44 4 . 2 . 3 Implementation of Force Spectroscopy Experiments . . . . . . . 47 4 . 2 . 4 PeakForce QNM ® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 VII 4 . 3 Parallel Plate Flow Chambers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 5 Inﬂuence of Substrate Properties on Surface Processes 53 5 . 1 The “Subsurface Energy” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 5 . 1 . 1 Impact on Protein Adsorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 5 . 1 . 2 Impact on Bacterial Adhesion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 5 . 1 . 3 Impact on Gecko Adhesion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 5 . 2 Inﬂuence of the Fluoridation of Hydroxyapatite on Bacterial Adhesion . 55 5 . 3 Bacterial Adhesion to ‘Everyday Surfaces’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 6 Surface Properties of Bacteria 59 6 . 1 Dynamic Adhesion of Diﬀerent Staphylococci Species . . . . . . . . . . 59 6 . 2 Dependence of the Cell Wall Elasticity on the Degree of Peptidoglycan Crosslinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 7 Summary and Outlook 67 Bibliography 69 Publications 99 Addendum I - Is adhesion superﬁcial ? ! Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101 Addendum II - Subsurface Inﬂuence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Reﬂectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121 Addendum IV - Adhesion of gecko setae reﬂects nanoscale diﬀerences in subsurface energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129 Addendum V - Fluoridation of hydroxyapatite leads to a reduced adhesion of oral bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 Addendum VI - Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a de - crease in stiﬀness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope . . . . . . . 149 Abbreviations AFM atomic force microscope BSA bovine serum albumin CW cell wall DLVO Derjaguin - Landau - Verwey - Overbeek DMT Derjaguin - Muller - Toporov JKR Johnson - Kendall - Roberts MD Maugis - Dugdale MRSA methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus OTS octadecyltrichlorosilane PBP4 penicillin - binding protein 4 PBS phosphate buﬀered saline PDA poly ( dopamine ) PG peptidoglycan PLL poly - L - lysine QCM quartz crystal microbalance QCM - D quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation QNM quantitative nanomechanical property mapping SAM self assembled monolayer SD surface delay SERAMs secretable expanded repertoire adhesive molecules TM tapping mode ™ vdW van der Waals IX X 1 Introduction The adhesion of biological objects to artiﬁcial materials , also referred to as bioadhe - sion , is a process that is of major importance in many diﬀerent areas : Primarily in medical research , the investigation of bioadhesion is crucial for the performance of im - plants and catheters or the development of biosensors and biological glues . Yet , many other branches of industry are also aﬀected : In oil or gas pipelines , in the shipping industry , and in the food production , for instance , the adhesion of bioﬁlms ( bacteria , proteins ) or mussels is a major concern [ Kum1998 , Zhu2003 , Ner2006 , Sch2011 ] . Con - sequently , it is the objective of various studies to prevent or control the adhesion of biological objects such as proteins , bacteria and eukariotic cells . Moreover , the capability of organisms , such as mussels , insects , frogs , or geckos , to ad - here extremely strong to all kinds of surfaces inspired engineers to mimic the respective responsible structure [ Fed2001 , Gei2003 , Lee2007b , Bar2011 ] . The hunt for gecko - like adhesives , for instance , enjoys great popularity nowadays , especially because gecko adhesion is self - cleaning and completely reversible [ Han2005 , Lee2008 , Boe2010 ] . For both purposes , the control and the mimicry of bioadhesion , a comprehensive understanding of the interface between the artiﬁcial materials and biological objects is necessary . To gain this understanding , researchers from various ﬁelds tackle this topic , situated at the border of physics , chemistry , and biology . Unfortunately , however , bioadhesion is usually an interplay of multiple diﬀerent interactions . Hence , the only way to gain a comprehensive picture of the involved players is to unravel the various responsible parameters . The main objective of this thesis is to study single parameters or interactions in terms of their impact on the adhesion of biological objects . Thereto , selected parameters of the surface and the subsurface of substrates are independently examined . To cover a wide range of length scales , diﬀerent types of biological objects featuring a broad variety of dimensions were studied : nanoscopic proteins , microscopic bacteria , and macroscopic geckos . Proteins and bacteria account for the principal components of most bioﬁlms . Geckos are , as mentioned above , one of the most prominent examples of nature that engineers try to mimic . The major focus of this thesis lies on van der Waals ( vdW ) interactions , especially on those arising from a material that is hidden by the topmost surface layer . VdW forces 1 1 Introduction are the sole type of intermolecular forces that are present in every system and arise— unlike most other interactions—not only from the surface , but from the complete material of which the substrate is constituted . Particularly in the presence of thin surface coatings , the overall vdW interactions can depend strongly on the underlying material , a fact that is frequently overlooked . The main objective of the here presented work is to determine whether a variation in the subsurface characteristics of a substrate aﬀects the adhesion of biological objects and whether an eﬀect is limited to a speciﬁc scale . A further parameter focussed on in this thesis is the impact of the ﬂuoridation of artiﬁcial tooth surfaces on bacterial adhesion . It is well known that the application of ﬂuoride compounds has a cariostatic eﬀect . The origin of this eﬀect , however , is usually solely attributed to a decreased demineralization of the teeth . Hence , another objective of the here presented work is to determine whether the ﬂuoridation aﬀects the strength of the force by which oral bacteria adhere to the tooth surfaces . Such an eﬀect would account for an additional source of the cariostatic character of ﬂuoridation . Besides the modiﬁcation of substrate properties , the characteristics of the interacting biological objects can be altered . In the case of bacteria , this can be done on diﬀerent levels of separation of single characteristics : It is either possible to study • alive and dead examples of the same type of bacteria , • diﬀerent species of one speciﬁc bacterial genus , • diﬀerent strains of one species , or • genetically modiﬁed bacteria together with the respective wild - type strain . A combination of the ﬁrst two options is utilized in this thesis to compare the time dependence of alive and dead bacteria of the two Staphylococcal species S . aureus and S . carnosus . The objective , thereby , is to gain insight in the adhesion process and to examine possible diﬀerences for pathogenic and non - pathogenic Staphylococci . The other two options are also applied in the here presented work , with the aim to investigate the impact of a reduction in the crosslinking of the cell wall of S . aureus on the stiﬀness of the bacterial cell envelope . To determine if the stiﬀness or a change in it is correlated with the resistance against antimicrobials , two S . aureus strains featuring diﬀerent degrees of resistance and the respective mutants are investigated . 2 2 Overview and Connectivity The work at hand engulfs six publications , three of them already published in and three submitted to peer reviewed journals . Although emerged from multiple projects , the publications are closely connected : In all of them , one parameter of the ( sub ) surface of materials is separately studied with respect to their impact on biological adhesion . In the publications in Addenda II - IV , the van der Waals forces that arise from interac - tions with the subsurface material are studied . These studies are preluded by a review of the state of the art in the ﬁeld of vdW interactions in general and in multilayer sys - tems in particular in Addendum I . The study presented in Addendum V focusses on the eﬀect of a ﬂuoridation of tooth surfaces and the publication in Addendum VI concentrates on the surface properties of bacteria , namely the elasticity of the cell envelope . The biological objects studied cover a wide range of length scales ; the publication in Addendum II focusses on nanocopic proteins , the ones in Addenda III , V , VI on microscopic bacteria , and the one in Addendum IV on macroscopic geckos . Overall , the thesis is organized in ﬁve chapters : • In the ‘Context and State of the Art’ chapter , the studied objects and applied concepts are introduced and a general literature review is given . A detailed and project - tailored overview of the theoretical concepts and the state of the art is then given in the respective publications . • The ‘Materials and Methods’ chapter elucidates the primarily utilized meth - ods and materials that are obligatory for the understanding of the presented unpublished results . Project speciﬁc applied methods and used materials are accounted for in the respective publications . • In the two result chapters ‘Inﬂuence of Substrate Properties on Surface Pro - cesses’ and ‘Surface Properties of Bacteria’ , a brief review of each attached pub - lication is given and further unpublished results are presented and discussed . • The thesis is concluded by the ‘Summary and Outlook’ chapter , comprising a summary of the presented results and an outlook on possible future and already ongoing follow - up projects . 3 4 3 Context and State of the Art 3 . 1 Surface Forces In principle , solely the four fundamental forces , namely • strong and weak interactions , acting between elementary particles , and • gravitational and electromagnetic interactions , acting between atoms and molecules , are suﬃcient to describe all processes in nature . Thereby , the ﬁrst two interactions may be classiﬁed as ‘sub - atomar’ forces and the latter two as ‘super - atomar’ . The role of the two ‘super - atomar’ interactions , gravitation and electromagnetism , depends on the scale of the described system . On a macroscopic scale ( stellar systems , tides , and falling bodies ) , gravitation is the major factor . On a microscopic scale , electromag - netism plays a key role and is therefore often referred to as the ‘true’ intermolecular force . Although all forces between objects on a microscopic scale are essentially of electro - magnetic origin , it is useful to further classify these forces into distinct categories of intermolecular forces . Individually , all of these forces are theoretically described , yet an overall solution for the theoretical description of all electromagnetic interactions in arbitrary systems ( from single atoms to multi atom bodies ) has not been achieved so far . Due to this classiﬁcation , an interaction ( e . g . adhesion or cohesion ) between two objects is the interplay of many diﬀerent intermolecular forces . In the following sections , some of the major ‘players’ in the adhesion process are reviewed . A more comprehensive description of intermolecular forces is given , in general by the textbooks of Israelachvili [ Isr1992 ] and Lyklema [ Lyk1991 ] , focused on biology by Leckband & Israelachvili [ Lec2001 ] , and on nanotechnology by French et al . [ Fre2010 ] . 5 3 Context and State of the Art Figure 3 . 1 : Van der Waals potentials for diﬀerent geometries . Adapted from [ Isr1992 ] . 3 . 1 . 1 Van der Waals Interactions Van der Waals ( vdW ) forces describe the interactions between permanent and in - duced dipoles . Usually , three types of interactions contribute to the vdW interac - tions [ Isr1992 ] : Keesom interactions : Dipol - dipol interactions of freely rotating molecules that carry permanent dipoles . Debye interactions : Forces between a freely rotating permanent dipole and a non - polar molecule , wherein a dipole moment is induced by the permanent dipole . London interactions , also referred to as dispersion interactions : Electrodynamic forces between instantaneously induced dipoles . They are of quantum mechan - ical origin [ Lon1937 ] . The common characteristic of all three types of vdW interactions is the scaling with x − 6 . Due to this , vdW forces in general are often considered to be of short - range . Yet , this is only true for molecular systems , since the exponent − 6 persists only on 6 3 . 1 Surface Forces Table 3 . 1 : Hamakerconstants A 123 = A 12 − 32 describing various systems that are of relevance in this thesis . Material 1 Material 2 Material 3 Hamaker constant [ k B T ] a Source SiO 2 b vacuum SiO 2 b 17 . 4 [ Tan2005 ] c water SiO 2 b 1 . 9 [ Tan2005 ] c Si vacuum Si 51 . 7 [ Fre1995 ] c α − Al 2 O 3 40 . 4 [ Fre1995 ] c Protein d water Protein d 3 . 1 [ Rot1996 ] c Quartz 1 . 65 [ Rot1996 ] e a at room temperature 10 − 20 J = 2 . 4 k B T b amorphous c Full spectral method d BSA e Hough and White method [ Hou1980 ] this scale . On a macroscopic scale , however , vdW forces are of long - range and the exponent of the scaling law increases up to − 1 depending on the geometry as depicted in Figure 3 . 1 . Between two semi - inﬁnite half slabs , for instance , the interactions scale with x − 2 [ Isr1992 ] . The strength of the vdW interactions is determined by the Hamaker constant of the system , which depends on the polarizabilties of the involved materials ( cf . Table 3 . 1 ) . Van der Waals forces are the only other interactions—besides gravitation—that exist in every system . They can never be completely shielded and are always attractive 1 . Moreover , vdW forces act not only with the surface but with all atoms in the bulk . This is especially of interest for multilayer systems , since in these , layers below the surface can interact with a probe object via vdW forces . A more comprehensive review of the theory and history of vdW interactions in general and in multilayer systems is given in the publication in Addendum I . 3 . 1 . 2 Electrostatic Interactions Two charged atoms , ions , or surfaces interact by ‘classical’ electrostatic forces . The Coulomb force can be both attractive or repulsive . It is commonly considered as both 1 A repulsion due to vdW forces is indeed also possible . Yet , this repulsive interaction is a result of a stronger attractive interaction with the medium than between the interacting objects . 7 3 Context and State of the Art Figure 3 . 2 : Schematic illustration of the electrokinetic double layer overlaid with a typical potential : Adjacent to the surface , a layer of bound counterions forms the Helmholtz or Stern layer , followed by the shear layer and the diﬀuse layer . The potential is usually described by the ζ - potential . Adapted from [ Hof2012 ] . the strongest and the longest ranging intermolecular force , since , in simple systems , its potential scales with x − 1 . In liquids , however , electrolytes strongly aﬀect the electrostatic interactions . Due to the ionization or dissociation of surface groups ( e . g . carboxylic or amino groups ) and the adsorption of ions , virtually all natural surfaces carry a charge if immersed into water or any liquid of high dielectric constant [ Isr1992 ] . As described by the Gouy - Chapman - Stern model [ Gou1910 , Cha1913 , Ste1924 ] , counterions from the solution—if existent—form an oppositely charged region in the vicinity of the surface to oppose the surface charge . This layer , often referred to as the Helmholtz or Stern layer , is bound to the surface . In addition to the bound ions , a diﬀuse layer , the so - called Gouy - Chapman layer , is formed by a cloud of further counterions . Both layers together compose the electrokinetic double layer depicted in Figure 3 . 2 . The transition layer in - between Stern and diﬀuse layer is often also referred to as the shear layer . The electrokinetic potential at a distance x away from a surface immersed in liquid can be approximated 2 by V ED ( x ) ≈ ψ 0 e xκ , ( 3 . 1 ) with the surface potential ψ 0 and the Debye length λ D = κ − 1 . This characteristic length depends only on the type ( monovalent , divalent ) and concentration of elec - trolytes present , and on the temperature via λ D = (cid:114) ε ε 0 k B T e 2 I , ( 3 . 2 ) 2 This approximation is only valid for the case of low potentials . 8 3 . 1 Surface Forces Figure 3 . 3 : The interaction energies of the double layer interaction between two similarly charged objects for diﬀerent geometries . The interaction constant Z is dependent on the involved materials and κ = λ − 1 D the inverse Debye length . Adapted from [ Lec2001 ] . whereby I = (cid:80) i c i z 2 i is the ionic strength , which depends on the concentration c i and valence z i of a speciﬁc type of ions i . The surface potential ψ 0 can be expressed in terms of the surface charge density σ via ψ 0 = λ D σ ε ε 0 , ( 3 . 3 ) the simpliﬁed Grahame equation for low potentials . To characterize the electrokinetic potential , the ζ - potential is commonly employed . It describes the potential at the shear ( slipping ) plane , the plane where hydrodynamic motion becomes possible . It depends on the ion concentration , the pH value , and the temperature [ Kir2004 ] . If two surfaces are close to each other , their electrokinetic double layers start to overlap and they interact via the so - called ‘double layer force’ . The potential of this interaction depends on the geometry of the system ( cf . Figure 3 . 3 ) —similar to the vdW potentials in section 3 . 1 . 1 . The potential between two similarly charged ﬂat 9 3 Context and State of the Art surfaces in an electrolyte of valence z , for instance , is V ED ( x ) = κ 2 π Z e − κx ( 3 . 4 ) per unit area , with the interaction constant Z and the inverse Debye length κ = λ − 1 D . Similar to the Hamaker constant , the constant Z depends on the properties of the surfaces ( ψ 0 ) and the solvent ( ε , z ) via Z = 64 π ε ε 0 ( k b T ) 2 e − 2 tanh 2 ( z e ψ 0 4 k b T ) . ( 3 . 5 ) 3 . 1 . 3 Hydrogen Bonds The strong electropositive nature of hydrogen atoms is the origin of a very strong 3 , short - range interaction , the so - called hydrogen bonds . This bonding occurs if asym - metric molecules—or parts of molecules—such as - OH , - NH , HF , or HCL are involved . Whenever these groups come into contact with a strong electronegative atom in an - other molecule , such as oxygen , nitrogen , ﬂuorine , or chlorine , the two molecules attract each other . Hydrogen bonds are especially important for the properties of water , since a water molecule possesses two hydrogen as well as an oxygen atom and is thereby capable of forming a total of three hydrogen bonds . 3 . 1 . 4 Hydration and Hydrophobic Forces Between two objects immersed in water , a further type of interactions is induced due to the dipole nature of water molecules and their aﬃnity to build hydrogen bonds . These interactions can be either attractive or repulsive , depending on the hydrophobicity of the surface : Two hydrophobic ( nonpolar ) surfaces immersed in water attract each other because of the hydrophobic eﬀect . This—purely entropic—eﬀect arises from the lacking ability of the surfaces to develop hydrogen bonds . Consequently , the water molecules have to align themselves so as to maintain the maximal possible amount of hydrogen bonds . Thereby , the mobility of the molecules is constrained , which leads to an increase in entropy . This produces the hydrophobic force , which can be strong at short sepa - rations and whose magnitude decreases with decreasing hydrophobicity . The range of the hydrophobic interaction is a controversial subject [ Mey2006 ] . About twenty years ago , Israelachvili and Pashley observed hydrophobic forces reaching far into 3 The bond enthalpy of a single hydrogen bond is in the range of 10 − 40 kJ mol − 1 [ Lyk1991 ] . 10 3 . 1 Surface Forces the liquid [ Isr1982 , Isr1984 ] . Since then , various possible explanations for this ’long - range’ hydrophobic interaction were published , most of them only indirectly related to the hydrophobicity of the surfaces . Among them were , for instance , the interaction between patchy bilayers [ Mey2005 ] or the coalescence of nano bubbles [ Ish2000 ] . Two hydrophilic ( polar ) surfaces immersed in water repel each other because of the hydration forces . Caused by the polarity of the surface , the water molecules in the vicinity of the surface are ordered . Whenever the ’ﬁxed’ water layers of two surfaces adjacent to each other start to overlap , a repulsive force is induced . This hydration interaction causes , in the case of perfectly smooth and hard surfaces , an oscillatory force proﬁle and , in the case of soft—biological—surfaces , an exponential decaying force that ranges a few nanometers [ Pas1982 , Isr1996 ] . In nonpolar liquids , forces exist that are similar to the hydration forces in water . The so - called repulsive ‘structural forces’ arise due to the conﬁnement of the liquid molecules at very small separations ( ≈ 1 nm ) . 3 . 1 . 5 Steric Repulsion Two atoms brought into ‘close contact’ are subject to a strong repulsive force . This steric repulsion—also referred to as hard core or Born repulsion—arises from the overlap of the electron clouds of the two atoms . Due to the Pauli exclusion principle , this overlap is restricted . A—mathematically convenient—theoretical description of this interaction in form of a potential , however , is not intuitive . On a molecular scale , the famous Lennard - Jones - potential [ Jon1924 ] is commonly used . It features a repulsive power - law term in addition to the attractive vdW term : V LJ ( x ) = C 1 x 12 − C 1 x 6 . ( 3 . 6 ) Between larger bodies , various approximations exist . The hard - sphere potential , for instance , is described by V HS ( x ) = (cid:40) ∞ x ≤ σ 0 x > σ , ( 3 . 7 ) with the hard sphere diameter σ . Along the same line as the molecular Lennard - Jones - potential , a combination of a repulsive power - law potential and the geometry speciﬁc vdW term is feasible , leading to a total interaction energy of V LJ ( x ) = C x n − A x m , ( 3 . 8 ) whereby n is often adjusted so that n − m = 6 preserving the diﬀerence in exponents . 11 3 Context and State of the Art 3 . 1 . 6 A Thermodynamical Approach : Work of Adhesion , Interfacial Energy , and Surface Energy The typical way—as introduced in the preceding sections—to characterize the ad - hesion between two objects is to describe the involved interactions by potentials . A diﬀerent way to describe the adhesion of surfaces is to employ a thermodynamic approach : This approach characterizes the strength of an adhesive contact by the so - called ‘work of adhesion’ . It is deﬁned as the energy necessary to separate two objects of material 1 and 2 in medium 3 and can be calculated by ∆ G Adh = γ 1 , 3 , 2 = γ 13 + γ 23 − γ 12 , ( 3 . 9 ) with the interfacial energies γ ij . The interfacial energy is the free energy change per unit area if two materials increase their interfacial area . It can be calculated , analogous to the work of adhesion , by the Dupré equation γ 12 = γ 1 + γ 2 − W 12 , ( 3 . 10 ) with the surface energies 4 γ i . Similar to the interfacial energy , the surface energy is deﬁned as the free energy change per unit area if the surface area of a material is increased—basically , the interfacial energy with vacuum . It can also be understood as half of the work of adhesion γ 11 = 12 ∆ G 11 needed to separate two alike materials in vacuum ( cohesion ) . The major challenge in the thermodynamical approach , however , is to determine the involved interfacial energies . Usually , they are derived from measured contact angles of liquids . To do so , multiple diﬀerent methods exist : • an equation of state approach [ Neu1974 ] ; • a geometric - mean equation that separates the surface energies into a dispersion and a polar component , neglecting spreading pressures [ Owe1969 ] ; • a geometric - mean equation that separates the surface energies into a dispersion and a polar component and accounts for spreading pressures but assumes them to be independent of the type of liquid employed [ Bus1983 ] ; • an approach 5 that splits surface energies into two parts γ Total = γ LW + γ SR , repre - senting Lifshitz - vdW ( LW ) and short - range ( SR ) —also referred to as acid - base— interactions , whereby the latter term is further split into hydrogen - accepting and - denoting parts γ SR = 2 √ γ + γ − [ VanOss1986 ] . Depending on the system , these methods are more or less successful . A further restric - tion of the thermodynamical approach in general is that it is basically only appropriate 4 For both surface and interfacial energy , the terms surface and interfacial ‘tension’ are also frequently used , especially for liquids . 5 This approach neglects spreading pressures as well . 12 3 . 1 Surface Forces Figure 3 . 4 : Schematic illustration of a liquid bridge between two ﬂat objects—hydrophilic or hydrophobic—with equal contact angles . R 1 and R 2 are the principal radii of a liquid bridge . for zero separation contact , since the equations lack any kind of separation depen - dence . Due to these limitations , the thermodynamical approach is strictly speaking only applicable for the interactions of liquids . 3 . 1 . 7 Covalent and Chemical bonds Besides the ‘physical’ interactions introduced in the sections above , covalent or chem - ical bonds exist . In principle , these bonds are produced by two or more atoms sharing electrons , an eﬀect that arises from the endeavor of atoms to minimize the energy . Covalent bonds are of very short - range and extremely strong . 3 . 1 . 8 Capillary Forces Systems that are not completely immersed in water can be nevertheless dominated by a water - induced interaction , the capillary force . This force can play a key role , even if the system is seemingly ‘dry’ , owing to the fact that at ambient conditions virtually all surfaces are covered by a layer of water . The thickness of this water layer depends , inter alia , on the wettability of the surface and the humidity ; silicon oxide , for instance , is usually covered by 1 - 2 nm of water [ Asa2005 ] . When two bodies are brought into contact , these water layers can form a capillary bridge , resulting in a capillary force that is directed normally to the planes of the contact lines on the objects . These capillary bridge forces can be either attractive or repulsive , depending on whether the capillary bridge is convex or concave . The strength of a single capillary bridge is 13 3 Context and State of the Art determined by the sum of the forces arising from the surface tension F Tension ( x ) and the Laplace pressure F Laplace ( x ) . In the case of two homogeneous ﬂat objects with equal contact angles Θ separated by a distance x , the capillary bridge force can be calculated by F Capillary ( x ) = F Tension ( x ) + F Laplace ( x ) = 2 πR ( x ) γ LV sin ( Θ ) + πR ( x ) 2 ∆ P Laplace , ( 3 . 11 ) with the radius R ( x ) of the interface between solid and liquid , the surface tension γ LV of the liquid - vapor interface , and the Laplace pressure ∆ P Laplace [ For1982 ] . This pressure is given by ∆ P Laplace = γ LV (cid:18) 1 R 1 + 1 R 2 (cid:19) , ( 3 . 12 ) whereby R 1 and R 2 are the two principal radii of a liquid bridge [ Lap1806 ] ( cf . Fig - ure 3 . 4 ) . In the case of two chemically diﬀerent substrates , the calculation of the capillary bridge force is not possible without further ado [ DeSou2008 ] . Capillary bridge forces play an important role in many biological and nanotechnolog - ical systems that are exposed to humid environments 6 [ Jan2004 , Min2008 ] . 3 . 2 Proteins Proteins are macromolecules consisting of one or more polypeptides—linear polymers composed of amino acids . Each amino acid is build up of a central carbon ( and a hydrogen atom ) , an amino group ( NH 2 ) , a carboxylic acid group ( COOH ) , and a speciﬁc side chain . A total of twenty diﬀerent amino acids—featuring diﬀerent side chains—are the building blocks for all naturally found proteins . The amino acids are linked to each other by peptide bonds that form between the carboxyl and amino groups . The sequence of the amino acids is referred to as the primary structure of a protein , which unambiguously identiﬁes it . The secondary structure describes the spatial folding of the polypeptides . Due to hydrogen bonds , the amino acids form characteristic structures , such as α - helices or β - sheets . Finally , the overall shape of a protein that usually deﬁnes its function is called the tertiary structure . The shape is mostly stabilized by the hydrophobic eﬀect and can undergo changes if the protein interacts with another object or if the external conditions ( e . g . pH or temperature ) are changed . These so - called conformational changes can be described as transitions between metastable conformations , visualized by minima in the energy landscape 7 . 6 Obviously , capillary bridge forces do not play a role if the ‘humid environment’ is a complete immersion into liquid . 7 Due to the importance of both the entropy and the potential energy , the free energy is a good measure for protein folding . It can be visualized in high dimensional free energy landscapes— similar to geographic landscapes in two dimensions [ Abk1994 , Din2000 ] . 14 3 . 2 Proteins 3 . 2 . 1 Protein Adsorption If a solution that contains proteins is ﬂushed over a surface , the proteins start to adsorb onto it . This adsorption of proteins is often the initial step in the forma - tion of bioﬁlms . Once adsorbed to a surface , the proteins are part of a conditioning layer , which is the foundation for the evolving bioﬁlm [ Cha1983 , Bry2008 , Gar2008 ] . If strongly bound to the surface , the proteins can provide a link for bacteria to at - tach . The adsorption can be both physisorption 8 ( viz . reversible ) or chemisorption 9 ( viz . irreversible ) . Both adsorption processes are driven by an interplay of the inter - actions described in section 3 . 1 . Which interactions dominate , however , depends on the type of protein , the surface , and the external conditions ( e . g . temperature , pH , ionic strength , and buﬀer composition ) [ Rab2011 ] . In general , the adsorption process of a single protein is composed of three steps , namely 1 . transport ( convective or diﬀusive ) towards the surface , 2 . attachment , and 3 . spreading , whereby interrupting desorption events can occur in between the second and third step . Usually , it is not an individual protein that adsorbs , but a collective process of many proteins . Since not all proteins adsorb simultaneously , it is a continuous process . During this process , important parameters such as the surface properties and the concentration change due to already adsorbed proteins , leading to a time - dependent rate of adsorption . Hence , protein adsorption is commonly characterized by the adsorption kinetics—the time - dependent increase of the amount of proteins on the surface . In the last 40 years , many groups investigated the adsorption of proteins experi - mentally , theoretically , and via simulations [ Rab2011 ] . The experimental studies applied a wide range of diﬀerent methods [ Ram1994 ] : Popular choices are ellip - sometry [ Elw1998 ] , surface plasmon resonance ( SPR ) [ Gre2000 ] , quartz crystal mi - crobalance ( QCM ) [ Laa1988 ] , and reﬂectometry methods ( Neutron [ Lu2007 ] and X - ray [ Eve2008 ] ) . This way , most studies determined the adsorption kinetics . To follow the adsorption process on a single protein level remains a very diﬃcult task . An indi - rect way , however , is the use of theoretical models . By assuming rate equations , the macroscopic results of the experimental works can be traced back to events on the molecular scale . Rate equations of various degrees of complexity are used . The most simple and popular model is the Langmuir model , which incorporates only an on - rate and an oﬀ - rate [ Lam1916 , Lan1918 ] . Other models include various further rates such as 8 Physisorption is adsorption due to classical physical interactions , whereby the chemical nature of neither the adsorbate nor the surface is changed [ Bru1983 ] . 9 Chemisorption is a class of adsorption , whereby a chemical bond is formed and the chemical nature of both the adsorbate and the surface can change [ Nor1990 ] . 15 3 Context and State of the Art exchange or transition rates [ Wah1995 , Wah1997 , Wer2002 ] . Besides the classical the - oretical approaches , computational approaches enjoy great popularity in recent years . Simulations of various complexity are performed to complement experimental studies . The simulation programmers thereby have to trade oﬀ structural detail and precision against computational costs and simulated timespans . The options range , for instance , from highly precise quantum mechanical simulations [ Cos2008 , Rim2008 ] to molecu - lar dynamics simulations [ Kar2002 ] to Monte Carlo simulations [ Bel2008 , Rab2010 ] or combinations of those [ Zho2004 ] . Ab initio quantum mechanical simulations al - low the access of the adsorbate state , the binding mechanisms , or the energies at the atomic level , but are highly time and scale restricted due to the computational ex - penses [ Eus2004 , Lat2008 ] . Hence , molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations often apply force ﬁelds instead of ab initio theory . In classical molecular dynamics simulations , all single atoms of the proteins and the solvent are considered . Again , the drawback is that only a limited time frame can be modeled . On the contrary , Monte Carlo simulations model single proteins as—spherical—particles . Thereby they can model processes on large timescales , but have to cut back on detail and precision . Compromises are made by using groups of atoms as the basic unit , so - called coarse - grained models , or by the implicit treatment of solvent molecules . A more comprehensive introduction of proteins and protein adsorption is given in the thesis and textbook in the references [ Mal2003 , Häh2011 , Bel2012 ] 3 . 3 Bacteria Bacteria exist on pretty much every place on earth . Their total population is esti - mated to roughly 10 30 cells . In one cubic centimeter of near - surface soil , approxi - mately 200 million single bacteria can be found [ Whi1998 ] and in the human body , the total number of bacteria is about ten times larger than the number of eukaryotic cells [ Tan1992 ] . Taxonomically , the domain Bacteria constitutes one of the three domains 10 —along with Archaea and Eucarya —in which the life on our planet can be classiﬁed [ Woe1990 ] . In principle , the domain Bacteria 11 comprises single - celled microorganisms that con - tain no real cell nucleus . Their genetic material is contained in a speciﬁc region in the cytoplasm , the nucleoid [ Tha2005 ] . Moreover , they lack organelles such as mitochon - dria and the endoplasmic reticulum . 10 Whether or not the domains Bacteria and Archaea may be combined to Procarya is a controversial topic [ May1998 , Woe1998 ] . 11 In microbiology , the term bacterium ( - a ) is still employed in diﬀerent contexts . In this work , it stands for representatives of the domain Bacteria . 16 3 . 3 Bacteria Figure 3 . 5 : Structure of the cell wall of A ) Gram - positive and B ) Gram - negative bacteria . The morphology of bacteria is diverse . They vary widely in shape and in size . Their typical diameter is in the range of 0 . 2 µm to 2 µm [ Jos2009 ] . Morphologically , bacteria can be categorized in three basic shapes : spherical ( cocci ) , rod - shaped ( bacilli ) , and spiral - shaped ( spirilla ) . Yet , a more practical classiﬁcation , especially in medical mi - crobiology , is given by the Gram method [ Gra1884 ] . The Gram staining reveals two distinct possibilities of the cell wall ( CW ) structure . Thereby , bacteria can be classi - ﬁed as either Gram - positive or Gram - negative . Gram - negative bacteria feature a CW that is composed of an outer and an inner membrane ( cf . Figure 3 . 5 B ) . In between the membranes is the periplasmic space that contains a thin oligomolecular layer of peptidoglycan ( PG ) . The outer membrane is typically covered with lipopolysaccha - rides . On the contrary , the CW of Gram - positive bacteria consists of a much thicker PG layer but lacks an outer membrane ( cf . Figure 3 . 5 A ) . Since the bacterial CW is the structure of preeminent importance for all interactions of bacteria with their environment and acts as a mediator for adhesion , a more detailed description of its composition is given in the following section . Moreover , as in this thesis the two Gram - positive genera Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are investigated , the focus lays on the CW of Gram - positive bacteria 12 . 12 For a more comprehensive overview of the deﬁnition and the structure of bacteria , the reader shall be referred to the corresponding chapter in the established textbooks ( cf . [ Jos2009 ] ) . 17 3 Context and State of the Art 3 . 3 . 1 Cell Wall of Gram - positive Bacteria The major component of the CW of Gram - positive bacteria is peptidoglycan . This complex polymer is—similar to chitin—composed of long glycan chains of alternat - ing β - 1 , 4 - linked N - acetylglucosamine and N - acetylmuramic acid subunits . The glycan chains are further crosslinked via peptide bridges to form a strong , but ﬂexible struc - ture [ Sch1972 , Vol2008 ] . The main function of the PG layer is to preserve the cell integrity by withstanding the turgor pressure and to maintain a deﬁned cell shape . Moreover , it serves as a scaﬀold for anchoring other CW components such as proteins and teichoic acids ( cf . Figure 3 . 5 A ) . These CW compounds are responsible for all kind of interactions of the bacterium with the environment . Teichoic acids are strongly negatively charged and thereby deﬁne the electromechanical properties of the cell wall [ Neu2003 ] . Moreover , they play a key role in the bacterial adhesion process [ Gro2001 , Hus2001 ] . CW proteins feature a wide variety of diﬀerent functions [ Nav1999 , Sco2006 ] , including • the protection of the bacteria from environmental challenges , such as toxic con - ditions or host immune defense system , • the maintenance of the CW , • the contribution to the cell division process ( e . g . autolysins ) , and • the attachment to diﬀerent type of environmental components ( e . g . adhesins ) . The immobilization of the cell wall compounds , however , can vary signiﬁcantly . Pro - teins are attached either by covalent binding to the PG or by noncovalent binding to ei - ther the PG or secondary wall polymers such as teichoic acids . [ Nav1999 , Sco2006 ] . Te - ichoic acids can be further classiﬁed into wall teichoic and lipoteichoic acids [ Neu2003 , Rei2011 ] , whereby wall teichoic acids are covalently bound to the PG layer and lipote - ichoic acids are anchored in the membrane . Whether lipoteichoic acids also always extend into the peptidoglycan layer—strongly aﬀecting their mobility—was recently challenged [ Rei2011 ] . Furthermore , polymeric cell - surface organelles such as ﬂagella and pili ( or ﬁmbriae ) are also frequently found on and in the CW of Gram - positive bacteria [ Tel2006 , Des2006 ] . 3 . 3 . 2 Bacterial Adhesion Nowadays , bacterial adhesion is a very active ﬁeld of research as it is of importance for various topics concerning nature and human life , such as marine science , plant and soil ecology , the food industry , and most importantly , the biomedical ﬁeld [ An1998 ] . 18 3 . 3 Bacteria Figure 3 . 6 : Two diﬀerent theoretical concepts for the description of unspeciﬁc bacterial adhe - sion : A ) The classical DLVO theory incorporates the electrostatic interaction W electrostatic and vdW interactions W vdW . The strength of the electrostatic interaction is strongly dependent on the salt , viz . ion , concentration ( cf . inset ) . The DLVO theory takes only long - range interactions into account . B ) Schematic representation of the thermodynamic ansatz , whereby the free energy of the interface is calculated . The adhesion of bacteria is the initial step in the formation of a bioﬁlm [ Cos1987 ] . If the respective substrate is human tissue or an implanted material , however , it is frequently also the onset of an inﬂammation [ Don2002 ] . Generally , bacterial adhesion can be classiﬁed into speciﬁc and unspeciﬁc adhesion . Speciﬁc adhesion , also referred to as biological adhesion , combines all kinds of receptor - ligand bonding [ Jon1982 ] . It usually describes adhesion events of very short - range that are based on the lock - and - key principle . Unspeciﬁc adhesion , also referred to as physical adhesion , denotes the global inter - action between a bacterial cell and a substrate . It is usually an interplay of the interactions described in section 3 . 1 . Speciﬁc adhesion processes are important for intercellular adhesion , both bacterial cell / bacterial cell and bacterial cell / host interactions [ Bea1981 , Sha1989 ] . The re - sponsible adhesion proteins are either anchored in the CW or anchorless and can be classiﬁed into adhesins and invasins [ Kle2000 , Chh2002 ] . Unspeciﬁc adhesion plays a major role in the adhesion to inorganic materials . Further - more , unspeciﬁc adhesion prevalently precedes speciﬁc adhesion [ Gri1987 ] : In these cases , the ﬁrst part—the reversible bacterial attachment— is dominated by unspeciﬁc adhesion . The second part—the irreversible bond strengthening—is due to speciﬁc 19 3 Context and State of the Art bonding . Since this thesis mainly focuses on unspeciﬁc adhesion , a brief review of theoretical concepts and experimental studies is given in the following paragraphs . To theoretically describe bacterial adhesion , two diﬀerent physicochemical approaches are available [ vanLoo1990 , Her1999 ] : A popular ansatz is the application of the DLVO theory [ Mar1971 , Her1999 , Dor2009 ] . This theory—initally introduced by Derjaguin and Landau [ Der1941 ] , and Verwey and Overbeek [ Ver1948 ] to describe the interaction between rigid colloids and interfaces— incorporates electrostatic and vdW interactions ( cf . Figure 3 . 6 A ) . The practicability of the DLVO theory for bacterial adhesion , however , is limited and failed in many studies [ Cam2000 , Poo2002 ] , as it neglects many essential properties of the system ; it basically takes only long - range interactions into account . Hence , to account for the steric repulsion at small separations ( cf . section 3 . 1 . 5 ) , either cut - oﬀ radii or hard sphere potentials are commonly used . A second , very common ansatz is based on surface thermodynamics [ Abs1983 , Bus1984 ] : The strength of the adhesive contact is determined by calculating the free energy of adhesion ∆ G Adh introduced in section 3 . 1 . 6 using ∆ G Adh = γ BS − γ BL − γ SL , ( 3 . 13 ) with the involved interfaces bacterium / substrate ( BS ) , bacterium / liquid ( BL ) , and substrate / liquid ( SL ) ( cf . Figure 3 . 6 B ) . Although this approach is also frequently applied [ Vij2005 , Liu2007 ] , it has severe limitations : • Since it is essentially an equilibrium model , it does not allow any kinetic inter - pretations [ Rij1995 ] . • It is a stringent contact model . That means , any distance dependence of ∆ G Adh is ignored . The question how much of the cell actually makes contact with the substrate is thereby especially critical . • As discussed in section 3 . 1 . 6 , multiple diﬀerent methods exist to calculate in - terfacial energies 13 . The suitability for bacterial adhesion , however , diﬀers sub - stantially [ Bel1990 ] . • Moreover , contact angles of bacteria are hardly accessible . They depend , inter alia , on drying [ Bus1990 ] and growth conditions [ Mam1987 ] . In other words , supposed all necessary parameters are known , this ansatz is still only valid if the system is in equilibrium and dominated by short - range forces . A combination of these two approaches is the extended DLVO theory , called XDLVO . Therein , the classical DLVO interactions are supplemented by short - range interac - 13 All of them commonly rely on contact angles of various liquids that are not involved in the actual adhesion process . 20 3 . 3 Bacteria tions , namely electron - acceptor / electron - donor ( also referred to as Lewis acid - base ) and osmotic interactions [ VanOss1989 , VanOss1990 , vanOss2006 ] . Although the appli - cations of the XDLVO theory revealed better agreements with experiments as com - pared to the ‘classical’ DLVO theory [ Mei1995 , Bay2009 ] , it is still a limited approach , since it treats bacteria as inert , rigid , and homogeneous solids . In recent years , how - ever , promising theories were introduced such as the model by Gaboriaud et al . de - scribing bacteria as soft particles composed of a hard core and a permeable charged gel - like layer [ Gab2008 ] . To experimentally access the adhesion of bacteria , various methods were applied : Typically , parallel plate ﬂow chambers were utilized [ vanKoo1992 , Har2006 ] . This macroscopic technique is made up of a ﬂow chamber , which is integrated in a ﬂow system and in which a laminar ﬂow is assured [ vanWag1980 ] . Usually , one side of the chamber is sealed by the material of interest and the other side is transparent to ensure the accessibility by optical means . By ﬂushing bacterial solution through the ﬂow chamber while monitoring the amount of adsorbed bacteria , the adsorption kinetics is revealed . A more technical introduction to parallel plate ﬂow chambers is given in section 4 . 3 . In recent years , a quartz crystal microbalance ( QCM ) was frequently applied to replace optical microscopy for the determination of the adsorbed amount of bac - teria [ Olo2005 , Ols2009 , Str2009 , Ols2010 ] . In principle , a QCM is composed of an oscillating quartz crystal on which the substrate is mounted . By tracking the oscil - lation frequency , a change in the adsorbed mass can be detected . Unfortunately , it is not possible to access the total number of adsorbed bacteria without further ado , since the frequency depends on multiple parameters , such as viscosity , ﬂow rate , and elasticity . This problem , however , is reduced by more advanced QCMs , which allow for a simultaneous determination of the energy dissipation ( QCM - D ) . Both ﬂow chambers and QCMs are macroscopic and indirect approaches to charac - terize bacterial adhesion , since the determined kinetics emerge from an interplay of adsorption and desorption . Experimental methods to directly determine the adhe - sion forces exerted by bacteria , are , for instance , optical tweezers and atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . Optical tweezers are based on the formation of an optical trap by a focused laser beam [ Ash1970 , Ash1986 , Blo1992 ] . Inside the optical trap , small objects are conﬁned by the radiation pressure , arising from the refractive index mismatch . Optical tweezers enable the manipulation and exertion of forces onto biological objects such as bacteria and viruses [ Ash1987 , Svo1994 , Lia2000 , Zha2008 , Mof2008 ] . Yet , since the strength of the applied forces is limited to the pN - range , optical tweezers are better suited to study single molecule interactions than to characterize global bacterial adhesion . 21 3 Context and State of the Art The AFM emerged as a very promising tool to study biological interactions in the last decade [ Duf2002 , Duf2008 , Wri2010 ] . The so - called ‘force spectroscopy mode’ allows for a direct measurement of forces . By employing suitable AFM - probes , the adhesion of biological objects such as bacteria can be studied [ Mer1999 , Bow2001 , Yon2006 , Lee2006 , Hel2008 ] . Since the force ranges of an AFM ( 10 − 10 4 pN ) and optical tweezers ( 0 . 1 − 100 pN ) are mostly distinct , these two methods are not competing but complementary techniques [ Neu2008 ] . In this work , the AFM is the method of choice . Hence , a detailed technical description is given in section 4 . 2 . The investigated parameters in the experimental studies are diverse . Many studies ex - amined the impact of the hydrophobicity and surface energy of the substrate [ Dij1987 , Bru2001 , Vij2005 , Eme2006 , Bok2008b , Liu2011 ] or the bacteria [ vanLoo1987 ] on the adhesion forces . Other studies concentrated on electrostatic interactions [ Cam2000 , Poo2002 , Kal2010 ] or surface parameters such as roughness and topography [ Tay1998 , Eme2006 , Whi2006 , Ans2010 , Sin2011 ] . Yet , only little work has been performed to investigate the inﬂuence of vdW interactions on the adhesion of bacteria [ Ste2009 ] . Moreover , most studies have in common that they did not separate parameters inﬂu - encing the diﬀerent interactions independently . For a comprehensive understanding of the bacterial adhesion process , however , it is necessary to seek quantitative infor - mation about the single contributions of all involved interactions . 3 . 3 . 3 Staphylococci Staphylococci are Gram - positive cocci that are prevalently found in the microﬂora of mammals . They are catalase - positive and usually 0 . 8 − 1 µm in diameter . The Staphy - lococcal genus enfolds various—pathogenic as well as apathogenic—species . In this work , the species of interest are Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus carnosus , two of the most commonly found Staphylococcal species in human , which will be de - scribed in the following paragraphs 14 . Staphylococcus aureus was ﬁrst described by Rosenbach in 1884 [ Ros1884 ] and named after the golden ( latin ‘aureus’ ) color of their colonies . They inhibit the nares of nearly 40 % of the human population 15 [ Klu1997 ] . Yet , S . aureus are opportunistic bacteria : They are non - pathogenic , as long as the host immune system is intact , but highly pathogenic if the immune system is lowered . Hence , infections especially occur in hospitals : S . aureus is the most common cause of nosocomial ( hospital acquired ; 14 A more comprehensive description of the genus Staphylococcus is given in the respective chapters of textbooks [ Mad2006 , Gat2009 ] . 15 Yet , only 20 % of the human population are persistent carriers , that means almost always carry a S . aureus strain . 22 3 . 3 Bacteria HA ) infections and causes high treatment expenses and economical damages . More - over , community acquired ( CA ) infections are increasingly often observed , especially in nursing homes and long - term care facilities [ Rub1999 ] . The biggest threat , however , arises from the resistance against antimicrobial agents . Today , more than 95 % of S . aureus infections are resistant to ﬁrst - line antibiotics , e . g . penicillin , ampicillin , and the antipseudomonas penicilins [ Neu1992 ] . Moreover , methicillin - resistance occurs to an increasing extent . Methicillin - resistant S . aureus ( MRSA ) were ﬁrst reported in 1968 in a hospital in Boston [ Bar1968 ] . In the 1980s , an upsurge of the frequency of occurrence of MRSA took place , which led to the occurrence of a resistance in 30 % of all S . aureus infections in the beginning of the 1990s [ Boy1990 , Pan1992 ] . Nowadays , MRSA is endemic or even epidemic in many hospitals ; Methicillin - resistant S . aureus infections in some US intensive care units reached nearly 65 % [ Kle2006 ] . Yet , even without any resistance , the treatment of S . aureus diseases can be compli - cated , since it is a multifaceted pathogen [ Low1998 , Arc1998 , Fre2006 ] . Various types of diseases—from minor to life - threatening infections—can be caused by S . aureus , such as skin and soft tissue infections [ Fra2005 ] , endocarditis [ Mil2008 ] , pneumo - nia [ Chi1919 ] , and the toxic shock syndrome [ Ber1981 ] . The high level of pathogenicity of S . aureus is due to their abilities to produce multiple toxins , to evade the host immune system , to adhere to—abiotic and biotic—surfaces , and to form bioﬁlms . For the latter three properties , the cell wall plays a key role : As typical for Gram - positive bacteria ( cf . section 3 . 3 . 1 ) , the cell wall of S . aureus is mostly composed of peptidoglycan ( 50 % by weight [ Low1998 ] ) . The S . aureus peptidoglycan is strongly crosslinked ( 74 % − 92 % ) and composed of glycan strands , showing a bimodal length distribution of many ( 85 % − 90 % ) short ( ≈ 6 nm ) and fewer ( 10 % − 15 % ) long ( (cid:28) 26 nm ) strands [ deJon1992 , Bon2000 , Vol2010 ] . Overall , the S . aureus cell wall comprises three layers ( cf . Figure 3 . 5 ) : The typical inner plasma membrane of 5 . 4 nm thickness , a 15 . 8 ( 25 ) nm thick inner wall zone ( IWZ ) of low density ( periplasmic space ) , and a 19 ( 4 ) nm thick outer wall zone ( OWZ ) of high density [ Mat2006 , Mat2007 , Vol2010 ] . The peptidoglycan in the OWZ is compressed by the high turgor pressure , as revealed by the ﬁnding that , if isolated , it is about 1 . 7 - fold thicker ( 33 . 8 ( 54 ) nm ) than in intact cells [ Vol2010 ] . Besides peptidoglycan , proteins are another major compound of the cell wall . Wolﬀ et al . identiﬁed a total of 271 integral membrane proteins in S . aureus [ Wol2008 ] . These proteins have various functions , such as immune evasion [ Fos2005 ] and adhe - sion [ Fos1998 ] . Cell wall proteins can also be classiﬁed by the type of anchoring ( cf . Figure 3 . 7 ) , ranging from ‘covalently integrated in the peptidoglycan’ to ‘secreted’ [ Dre2011 ] , which leads to diﬀerent degrees of mobility . The proteins of major interest for this 23 3 Context and State of the Art Figure 3 . 7 : Schematic illustration of diﬀerent classes of proteins integrated on or in the cell wall of S . aureus . The grade of anchoring ranges from completely unbound to covalently bound . Adapted from [ Dre2011 ] . study are those which are exposed on the cell surface—also referred to as the ‘surfa - come’ [ Dre2011 ] —and especially those which are involved in the adhesion process ( ad - hesins ) . S . aureus expresses a wide range of surface adhesins . More than twenty diﬀer - ent covalently bound adhesins are known . Most of them feature a characteristic Leu - Pro - X - Thr - Gly ( LPXTG ) motif that anchors them to the cell surface and belong to the MSCRAMM ( microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules ) family , e . g . Cna , Spa , ClfA , ClfB , FnBPA and FnBPB [ Fos1998 , Maz1999 , Cla2006 ] . These proteins bind to various host factors—such as ﬁbronectin , collagen , von Wille - brand factor , or ﬁbrinogen—and thereby enable the bacterium to adhere to the ex - tracellular matrix and foster bioﬁlm formation . Further covalently bound proteins promote the attachment to abiotic surfaces ( e . g . Bap [ Cuc2001 ] , SasC [ Sch2009 ] ) . In addition to the covalently bound adhesins , S . aureus produces several non - covalently bound surface adhesins called secretable expanded repertoire adhesive molecules ( SER - AMs ) . Important members of this adhesin family are , for instance , Eap ( extracellular adhesive protein ) , Efb ( extracellular ﬁbrinogen - binding protein ) , and Emp ( extracel - lular matrix protein ) [ Bod1992 , Bod1994 , Pal1998 , Pal1999 ] . Although SERAMs are secreted and released by the bacterial cell , they are often subsequently rebound to the cell wall surface and thereby serve as a linkage between host factors and S . aureus . Apart from their contribution to the bacterial attachment , many SERAMs have ad - ditional functions such as the interference with the host defense and the immune 24 3 . 3 Bacteria system [ Cha2002 , Har2003 , Cha2005 ] . Besides the SERAMS , S . aureus features var - ious other mechanisms to evade the host immune system [ Fos2005 ] : The covalently bound protein A is able to bind antibodies and thereby inhibits phagocytic engulf - ment [ Kes1975 , Sjö1977 ] ) . Further mechanisms to ‘hide’ from the immune systems are , for instance , the formation of a polysaccharide capsule [ Wil1979 ] , the clumping of ﬁbrinogen [ Bod1989 ] , and the invasion of host cells [ Bay1998 ] . Additionally to these ‘single bacterial defense mechanisms’ , the formation of bioﬁlms provides a protection from antibiotics and from the immune system [ Don2002 , Lew2008 , Ott2008 , Göt2002 , And2008 ] . Staphylococcus carnosus is an apathogenic member of the Staphylococcus genus . It is the predominant bacterial species in fermented meat [ Sch1982 ] . Industrially , S . carnosus is of importance since they are commonly used in the ripening process of dry sausages and as a starter culture for the fermentation of meat products . For scientiﬁc research , S . carnosus is also of relevance although it produces no toxins , haemolysins , protein A , coagulase , or clumping factors . Yet , it serves as a host organ - ism for gene cloning and protein production [ Göt1990 , Bru1997 ] . 3 . 3 . 4 Streptococci Another genus of Gram - positive bacteria studied in this work is the Streptococcus genus . Streptococci are easily distinguishable from Staphylococci , because they form chain - like structures 16 . These characteristic structures are due to their ability to divide only along one axis . A further distinguishing feature is the lacking catalase production of most Streptococci species . As they usually are facultative anaerobes , Streptococci can survive independent of the oxygen concentration . Although most species are nonpathogenic , Streptococci can cause a wide range of diseases , such as meningitis [ Sch1996 ] , endocarditis [ Rob1979 ] , and pneumonia [ Tet2001 ] . In this work , the species of interest are Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus oralis , which are both found in the oral cavity [ Kro1999 ] : Streptococcus mutans [ Cla1924 ] is one of the major organisms responsible for dental caries [ Ham1980 , Loe1986 ] . S . mutans adheres strongly to surfaces , due to their capacity to synthesize glucan from sucrose [ Gib1975 ] . Glucan is a sticky ex - tracellular polysaccharide that binds speciﬁcally to cell wall proteins of oral Strep - tococci [ Ban2003 ] . Thereby , a slime layer is produced that fosters the formation of 16 The structures from which the name is derived ; Greek ‘ streptos ’ . 25 3 Context and State of the Art bioﬁlms [ Gib1973 , Lyn2007 ] . The actual tooth decaying capacity of S . mutans , how - ever , arises from the production of lactic acid , which causes the demineralization of the tooth material [ Loe1986 , Mad2006 ] . Streptococcus oralis [ Bri1982 ] is an opportunistic pathogen that belongs to the mitis phylogenetic group . It is a commensal of the human oral cavity , but can also be the cause for bacterial endocarditis [ Wha2000 ] . 3 . 4 Geckos Gekkonoidae , better known under their nontechnical name ‘Geckos’ , are a type of lizards belonging to the Reptilia class . Geckos can be found nearly everywhere in the world , mostly in warm climates . Their size varies ranging from 16 mm ( Sphaerodacty - lus ariasae and Sphaerodactylus parthenopion [ Hed2001 ] ) up to 60 cm ( Hoplodactylus delcourti [ Bau1986 ] ) . Geckos are best recognized by their lack of an eyelid . Moreover , many Gecko species feature a variety of extraordinary characteristics , such as the ability to make chirping cries 17 and the occurrence of parthenogenesis 18 [ Mor1983 ] . Their most outstanding skill , however , is their climbing capability . Geckos are the largest animal that can walk on the ceiling and are able to stick to almost any surface . This adhesion skill , which raised the interest of researchers of various ﬁelds , shall be explored in more detail in the following section . 3 . 4 . 1 Gecko Adhesion Initially , the adhesion skill of the gecko was attributed to the sharp points of its claws taking a hold on slight irregularities of the surface [ Mah1941 ] . Later on , since geckos are able to stick to almost any—rough as well as extremely smooth—surface , the claw theory was contested and a remarkable property of the geckos toe was suggested to be the key adaptation that provides the sticking ability : the hierarchical struc - ture [ Mad1964 , Rui1965 , Ern1966 , Hil1968 ] . The underside of each toe is divided into lamellar structures that terminate in arrays of densely packed hair - like protrusions , called seta ( Figure 3 . 8 A ) . Individual setae are bundles of β - keratin ﬁbrils several hun - dred µm long [ Riz2005 ] . These ﬁbrils terminate in triangular , wedge - shaped pads about 150 nm wide at the tip , called spatulae ( Figure 3 . 8 B ) . As a consequence of this hierarchical structure , the setal arrays have an overall compliance that allows them to 17 The sound ( Malayan imitation g¯ekoq ) prompted the term ‘gecko’ . 18 Parthenogenesis is a type of asexual reproduction . 26 3 . 4 Geckos Figure 3 . 8 : Helium ion microscope [ Mor2006 ] images of the adhesive structure of Gekko gecko , namely A , B ) an array of multiple setae , C ) single setae subdividing further into spatulae , and D ) the small pads that terminate each spatula . Images taken by Dr . Jijin Yang at Carl Zeiss Microscopy and courtesy of Dr . Jonathan Puthoﬀ . Preparation details are described in Ref . [ Yan2011 ] closely conform to rough surfaces [ Aut2006b ] . The large number of nanoscopic con - tacts that are established at the spatular tips produce considerable overall adhesion on virtually any surface . This adhesion mechanism is also employed by other animals such as bugs , spiders , and ﬂies [ Arz2003 ] . Yet , the gecko—the largest and heavi - est of the mentioned examples—possesses the highest - developed system featuring the smallest and most densely packed hairs . 27 3 Context and State of the Art Therefore , the gecko adhesion system provoked not only the interest of researchers in natural science but also of engineers . Since Autumn et al . [ Aut2002b ] published the proof of principle that artiﬁcial ﬁbrillar arrays reminiscent of setae can gener - ate high adhesion , multiple promising designs of gecko adhesives have been intro - duced [ Gei2003 , Mur2007 , Mah2008 , Lee2009b ] . While the structure of gecko setae is mostly well documented , the mechanisms and interactions leading to the strong adhesive forces are not yet fully understood . As the gecko is able to stick even to atomically smooth surfaces [ Aut2002b ] , a mechan - ical origin of the adhesion , namely a jamming of the appendages in crevices on the surface , can be ruled out . Due to the very intimate contacts between the terminal end of the spatulae and a surface , intermolecular forces are relevant . First tries to describe the Gecko adhesion were based on water contact angles [ Hil1968 , Hil1969 ] . In the last decade , however , van der Waals forces were shown to be a main fac - tor [ Aut2002b , Aut2002a , Hub2005 ] . Furthermore , the impact of humidity on the adhesion forces was discussed extensively . Several studies showed an increase in adhe - sion force with increasing humidity [ Hub2005 , Sun2005 , Nie2008 , Put2010 ] . Yet , The molecular mechanisms leading to this behavior are explained controversially . Sun et al . concluded only capillary forces to be responsible for gecko adhesion [ Sun2005 ] . By measuring the same trends on hydrophilic and hydrophobic substrates , Huber et al . and Puthoﬀ et al . disproved this assumption and gave explanations based on modiﬁed vdW forces [ Hub2005 ] and changes in material properties [ Nie2008 , Put2010 ] . 3 . 5 Friction and Contact Mechanics At the macroscopic scale , the friction force F Friction on an object dragged over a surface is generally regarded to be independent of the contact area and to scale linearly with the applied load L ( Amonton’s Law ) F Friction = µ · L , ( 3 . 14 ) where µ is the coeﬃcient of friction . Yet , this assumption is only valid owing to the fact that the real contact area is usually unknown due to surface roughness and the in - ﬂuence of other eﬀects , such as wear and tribochemistry . On a microscopic / nanoscopic scale , viz . in the case of only one or a few single asperities , the friction force is pro - portional to the contact area A and given by F Friction = τ · A , ( 3 . 15 ) where τ is the interfacial shear strength , which corresponds to the shear force per unit area required to shear the interface [ Bow1964 , Car1997 , Mo2009 ] . 28 3 . 5 Friction and Contact Mechanics (cid:3) (cid:8) (cid:9) (cid:11) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:15) (cid:17) (cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:10) (cid:12) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:10) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:18)(cid:19) (cid:13) (cid:16)(cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:10) (cid:1) Figure 3 . 9 : Overview of contact mechanic models . Assumed conﬁgurations ( insets ) and the resultant interaction potentials of A ) the Hertz model , B ) the JKR model , C ) the DMT model , and D ) the MD model . E ) ‘Actual’ ( Lennard - Jones like ) interaction potential as a comparison . Equation 3 . 15 connects issues of microscale / nanoscale friction with the topic of contact mechanic and the question of the ‘actual’ contact area of a probe and a surface 19 . This question was addressed by Heinrich Hertz already more than a century ago . In his famous Hertz theory 20 , the real contact area of a sphere ( radius R ) pressed against a surface with a load L is calculated [ Her1882 ] . The contact radius a is given by a Hertz = (cid:18) R K (cid:19) 13 · L 13 , ( 3 . 16 ) with the contact modulus K = (cid:16) 1 − ν 21 E 1 + 1 − ν 22 E 2 (cid:17) − 1 , whereby ν i and E i are the Poisson’s ratios and the elastic moduli of the involved materials ( 1 , 2 ) . The major shortcoming 19 Equation 3 . 15 transforms into Equation 3 . 14 if the ‘real contact area’ is proportional to the applied load , which is often the case for ‘rough’ , macroscopic surfaces . 20 J . Boussinesq independently presented the same calculations in 1882 as well . 29 3 Context and State of the Art (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:13) (cid:15) (cid:16)(cid:17) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:9) (cid:1)(cid:3) (cid:8) (cid:10) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:9) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:9)(cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:8) (cid:5) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:14) (cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:2) Figure 3 . 10 : The contact area vs . load curves for the Hertz - , JKR - , and DMT - model and an MD intermediate case . Axes are scaled with the MD prefactors β and ˆ a . Figure adapted from [ Car1999 ] . of the Hertzian theory , however , is that all kinds of adhesive forces are disregarded ( Figure 3 . 9 A ) . Therefore , in the presence of an adhesive interaction , the real contact radius is always larger than the one given by the Hertz theory . To account for the underestimated contact radius , Johnson et al . incorporated the eﬀect of adhesion into the Hertzian theory [ Joh1971 ] . In the Johnson - Kendall - Roberts ( JKR ) theory , elastic energy , potential energy ( of the external load ) , and surface energy are balanced and the contact radius is calculated to a JKR = (cid:18) R K (cid:19) 13 · (cid:20) L + 3 πγ 1 , 3 , 2 R + (cid:113) 6 πγRL + ( 3 πγ 1 , 3 , 2 R ) 2 (cid:21) 13 , ( 3 . 17 ) where γ 1 , 3 , 2 is the thermodynamic work of adhesion . This is the energy obtained by a change in contact area of the two surfaces ( 1 , 2 ) surrounded by the medium 3 ( cf . section 3 . 1 . 6 ) . In this way , the JKR theory only includes short - range forces that act at a ‘contact distance’ z = z 0 and can be represented by a delta function F JKR = γ 1 , 3 , 2 δ ( z − z 0 ) ( Figure 3 . 9 B ) . This assumption is valid for systems featuring • elastic materials , • strong adhesion , • and a ‘larger scale’ . 30 3 . 5 Friction and Contact Mechanics A huge advantage of the JKR theory was that it explained ﬁnite contact radii at negative loads . A critical load of F JKR = − 3 2 πγR ( 3 . 18 ) has to be applied to separate the sphere from the surface . The limitation , however , is that long - range forces are neglected . To account for long - range forces , Derjaguin et al . introduced a completely diﬀerent extension of the Hertzian theory , the Derjaguin - Muller - Toporov ( DMT ) the - ory [ Der1975 ] . The basic idea was that long - range forces act in a ring - shaped region outside of the contact area , but do not deform the Hertzian contact proﬁle ( Fig - ure 3 . 9 C ) . By superposing these additional forces on the applied load , the contact radius is modiﬁed to a DMT = (cid:18) R K (cid:19) 13 · [ L + 2 πγR ] 13 ( 3 . 19 ) and the critical load is F DMT = − 2 πγR . ( 3 . 20 ) This model , however , is only valid for systems with • stiﬀ materials , • weak adhesion , • and a ‘smaller scale’ . Hence , the JKR and the DMT model can be seen as two limiting cases of the interac - tion spectrum . To describe the intermediate regime , Maugis approximated the ‘actual’ potential by a square well Dugdale potential ( cf . Figure 3 . 9 D ) [ Dug1960 , Mau1992 ] . In the Maugis - Dugdale ( MD ) theory , a transition parameter λ = 2 σ 0 (cid:18) R πγK 2 (cid:19) 13 ( 3 . 21 ) is deﬁned , where σ 0 matches the minimum adhesive force per unit area in the ‘actual’ potential . In the case of λ −→ 0 the JKR model applies , and in the case of λ −→ ∞ , the DMT model applies . To predict values for the transition regime , Maugis introduced three dimensionless prefactors : β , ˆ a , and α . Thus , the critical load is given by F MD = − βπγR , ( 3 . 22 ) the contact radius at zero load by a MD , 0 = ˆ a (cid:18) πγR 2 K (cid:19) 13 , ( 3 . 23 ) 31 3 Context and State of the Art (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:2)(cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:7) (cid:9) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:4) (cid:7) (cid:9) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:4) (cid:7) (cid:9) Figure 3 . 11 : Correlation between the Maugis transition parameter λ and the dimensionless MD prefactors : A ) β , B ) ˆ a , and C ) α . and the general contact radius as a function of the applied load by a MD = a MD , 0 ·   α + (cid:113) 1 − LF MD 1 + α   23 . ( 3 . 24 ) The prefactors β , ˆ a , and α are related to the transition parameter λ . Unfortunately , there are no analytic expressions for these relations . Carpick et al . , however , pro - vided approximate empirical relations that ﬁt the experimentally determined values reasonably well ( within 1 % accuracy or better ) [ Car1999 ] : β = 1 4 · (cid:18) 4 . 04 · λ 1 . 4 − 1 4 . 04 · λ 1 . 4 + 1 (cid:19) − 7 4 , ( 3 . 25 ) ˆ a = 1 . 54 + 0 . 279 · (cid:18) 2 . 28 · λ 1 . 3 − 1 2 . 28 · λ 1 . 3 + 1 (cid:19) , ( 3 . 26 ) α = 1 1 . 02 · (cid:20) 1 − exp (cid:18) λ − 0 . 924 (cid:19)(cid:21) . ( 3 . 27 ) As shown in Figure 3 . 11 , in the DMT - limit ( roughly λ < 0 . 1 ) the prefactors approach β −→ − 2 , ˆ a −→ 3 √ 2 , and α −→ 0 and the Equations 3 . 22 - 3 . 24 resemble the DMT case ( Equations 3 . 19 and 3 . 20 ) . Contrariwise , in the JKR - limit ( roughly λ > 5 ) , the prefactors become β −→ − 32 , ˆ a −→ 3 √ 6 , and α −→ 1 and the Equations 3 . 22 - 3 . 24 resemble the JKR case ( Equations 3 . 17 and 3 . 18 ) . 32 3 . 5 Friction and Contact Mechanics A more detailed overview of the theory of contact mechanics and single - asperity nan - otribology is given by the references [ Mau1999 , Nos2007 , Szl2008 ] . Contact mechanic theories are of relevance for multiple topics in this thesis . On the one hand , the DMT theory is used to model the nanoscale contact between AFM tips and samples : Thus , by ﬁtting the force distance curves acquired in PeakForce QNM ® with the DMT model , the local elasticity of the sample , for instance , can be extracted ( cf . section 4 . 2 . 4 and section 6 . 2 ) . On the other hand , the MD model is applied to model the adhesive contact of the gecko spatulae with a sample ( cf . section 5 . 1 . 3 ) . 33 34 4 Materials and Methods 4 . 1 Substrates 4 . 1 . 1 Silicon wafers To allow for a separate variation of surface properties and subsurface composition , a set of model substrates was utilized ( cf . Figure 4 . 1 ) . The model substrates are based on silicon wafers 1 with two diﬀerent types of oxide layers : ‘type N’ wafers with a native silicon oxide layer of 1 . 7 ( 3 ) nm ( Wacker Siltronic AG , Burghausen , Germany and Si - Mat , Landsberg , Germany ) and ‘type T’ wafers with a thick thermally grown silicon oxide layer with a thickness of 150 ( 1 ) nm ( Silchem , Freiberg , Germany and Si - Mat , Landsberg , Germany ) . The surfaces of both wafer types are identical as shown by a thorough characterization using AFM , ellipsometry , contact angle and ζ - potential measurements ( cf . Table 4 . 1 and Figure 4 . 2 ) . Furthermore , X - ray reﬂectivity and XPS data provided in the publication in Addendum I corroborate that the native oxide layers do not diﬀer in their density from the thermally grown layers and that the stochiometry of the uppermost layer is indeed SiO 2 . Thus , the two types of silicon wafers in combination feature the targeted characteristics : They diﬀer in the subsurface composition but resemble each other in terms of their surface properties . Immediately prior to use , the substrates were cleaned by immersing them for 30 min in freshly prepared ‘piranha solution’ , a 1 : 1 mixture of sulfuric acid H 2 SO 4 ( conc . ) and unstabilized hydrogen - peroxide H 2 O 2 ( 30 % ) . To remove residues of the acids , the wafers were put in boiling deionized water for 90 min , changing the water four times in between . In addition to the chemical cleaning process , a mechanical cleaning step was employed , during which the wafers were exposed to a ‘Snow - Jet’—a focused jet of CO 2 crystals that removes micro - and macroscopic particles [ She1994 ] . A second pair of substrates linked by the same characteristics was obtained by hy - drophobizing both wafers—immediately after the cleaning procedure—using a self - assembled monolayer of silane molecules with a CH 3 tailgroup ( octadecyltrichlorosi - 1 The silicon wafers are polished and feature a 1 - 0 - 0 crystal orientation , a thickness of 525 ( 20 ) µm , a speciﬁc resistance of 10 − 20 Ω cm − 1 , and a boron ( p ) doping . 35 4 Materials and Methods differentsubsurfacecomposition Si SiO 2 1 . 7 nm Si SiO 2 1 . 7 nm Si SiO 2 150 nm Si SiO 2 150 nm differentsurfaceproperties hydro - philic hydro - phobic native SiO 2 thick SiO 2 Figure 4 . 1 : Model substrates based on silicon wafers with diﬀerent thicknesses of oxide layers that allow for a separation of interactions depending on surface parameters and interactions arising from subsurface materials . The surface chemistry is tuned by a silanization of the wafers that renders them hydrophobic . The blue droplets illustrate the diﬀerent water contact angles . (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:9) (cid:1)(cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:9) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:12) (cid:18) (cid:11) (cid:17)(cid:15) (cid:2) (cid:16) (cid:12) (cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:13)(cid:10) z (cid:2) (cid:13) (cid:12) (cid:14) (cid:7) (cid:11) (cid:14) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:9) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:10) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13)(cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13)(cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:16) (cid:4) (cid:12) (cid:18) (cid:11) (cid:17)(cid:15) (cid:2) (cid:16) (cid:12) (cid:15) (cid:9) (cid:13)(cid:10) Figure 4 . 2 : ζ potentials of hydrophobic ( OTS ) and hydrophilic ( SiO 2 ) type T and type N wafers as function of pH , giving insight into the strength of electrostatic interactions . 36 4 . 1 Substrates Table 4 . 1 : Surface properties of the set of tailored Si wafers : root mean square ( rms ) rough - ness , advancing ( adv ) and receding ( rec ) water contact angles , and Lifshitz - van der Waals ( LW ) as well as Lewis acid - base ( AB ) components of the surface energy γ obtained from contact angles of three diﬀerent liquids [ Myk2003 ] . d oxide ( nm ) rms ( nm ) γ LW ( mJm − 2 ) γ AB ( mJm − 2 ) Θ adv ( ◦ ) Θ rec ( ◦ ) OTS T 150 ( 1 ) 0 . 19 ( 3 ) 24 ( 1 ) 0 111 ( 3 ) 103 ( 4 ) OTS N 1 . 7 ( 3 ) 0 . 17 ( 0 ) 24 ( 1 ) 0 111 ( 2 ) 103 ( 2 ) SiO 2 T 150 ( 1 ) 0 . 13 ( 3 ) 43 ( 1 ) 20 ( 1 ) 5 ( 2 ) compl . wetting SiO 2 N 1 . 7 ( 3 ) 0 . 09 ( 2 ) 43 ( 1 ) 21 ( 1 ) 7 ( 2 ) compl . wetting lane , OTS , Sigma - Aldrich , Germany ) following a modiﬁed recipe [ Les2012 ] based on standard procedures [ Brz1994 , Was1989 ] . The produced OTS surfaces were also characterized using AFM , ellipsometry , contact angle and ζ - potential measurements ( cf . Table 4 . 1 and Figure 4 . 2 ) . Additionally , the high quality of the achieved OTS monolayers was aﬃrmed by X - ray reﬂectivity measurements : The obtained values of the measurements shown in the publication in Addendum II agree well with literature values [ Mez2006 ] . Altogether , the characterization shows that the OTS layers feature a thickness of approximately 2 . 6 nm , an rms roughness below 0 . 2 nm , and a uniform coverage , whereby a homogenous , dense , almost upright ( tilt angles of 4 ◦ − 5 ◦ [ Ger2012 ] ) all - trans conﬁguration of the molecules is indicated . In preparation for experiments , the hydrophobic wafers were cleaned by immersing them subsequently into ethanol and acetone ( 5 min each ) in an ultrasonic bath . Afterwards , the wafers were in some cases—if speciﬁcally noted in the respective study—rinsed for 30 min in boiling deionized water in order to remove residues of the solvents . In summary , the set of tailored Si wafers contains combinations of two diﬀerent sur - face chemistries—hydrophilic ‘SiO 2 ’ and hydrophobic ‘OTS’ wafers—and two diﬀerent subsurface compositions—‘type N’ wafers with a native thin oxide layer and ‘type T’ wafers with a thick oxide layer . Hence , the set allows for a separate study of in - teractions depending on surface parameters and interactions arising from subsurface material . 37 4 Materials and Methods Figure 4 . 3 : AFM topography images of 1 m × 1 m sections of the ‘everyday substrates’ A ) polished stainless steel , B ) aluminum , C ) copper , D ) gold , and E ) a part of a yoghurt cup ( PP ) . Note the diﬀerent height scales . Table 4 . 2 : Root mean square ( rms ) roughness and advancing water contact angles of the selection of ‘everyday substrates’ : stainless steel , aluminum ( Al ) , copper ( Cu ) , gold ( Au ) , and a part of a yoghurt cup ( PP ) . stainless steel Al Cu Au yoghurt cup ( PP ) rms ( nm ) 2 . 20 ( 4 ) 4 ( 1 ) 9 ( 2 ) 5 . 13 ( 1 ) 16 ( 1 ) Θ adv ( ◦ ) < 10 < 10 < 10 < 10 65 < Θ < 110 4 . 1 . 2 ‘Everyday Substrates’ Besides the systematic studies using the set of tailored Si wafers , this thesis includes an applied study on a selection of ‘everyday substrates’ 2 : Stainless steel , aluminum , copper , and a part of a yoghurt cup ( PP ) were chosen as ‘everyday substrates’ ( cf . Fig - ure 4 . 3 ) . To achieve comparable smooth surfaces with a nanometer scale roughness ( cf . Ta - ble 4 . 2 ) , diﬀerent preparation and polishing techniques were applied : 2 The preparation and characterization of the substrates in this section were performed by Sebastian Hümbert during his work as a diploma student tutored by Peter Loskill ( cf . [ Hue2010 ] ) . 38 4 . 2 Atomic Force Microscopy The stainless steel , aluminum , and copper samples were treated using abrasive paper with four diﬀerent grits . Following the abrasion process , the samples were cleaned by immersing them subsequently into toluol , acetone , and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath ( 5 min each ) . In between the cleaning steps , the samples were carefully dried in a nitrogen stream . The gold surfaces were prepared by a vapor deposition process ( UNIVEX , Leybold - Heraeus GmbH , Cologne , Germany ) . Silicon wafers—cleaned as described in section 4 . 1 . 1—were coated with a roughly 4 nm thick chromium layer that en - ables a strong adhesion between the subsequent gold layer and the underlaying wafer . To prevent any inﬂuence of the underlying material on the investigated surface processes , the gold layer was prepared to achieve a thickness of roughly 100 nm . The thickness of the deposited layer was thereby monitored using a quartz crystal microbalance ( XTM / 2 Deposition Monitor , Inﬁcon , New York , USA ) . A yoghurt cup consisting of polypropylene ( PP ) was selected as a real everyday sample . The oﬀ - the - shelf yoghurt cup was cut up in millimeter sized pieces . The pieces were then cleaned by immersing them in deionized water and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath ( 5 min each ) and subsequently dried in a nitrogen stream . 4 . 2 Atomic Force Microscopy The ﬁrst atomic force microscope ( AFM ) was introduced already more than two decades ago by Gerd Binnig [ Bin1986a , Bin1986b ] . Since then , AFMs have developed to one of the most important microscopy techniques in nanoscience . The fundamental principle of an AFM is based on the scanning of a small pyramidal tip across a surface . Since the actual contact between the tip and the surface is made by only a few atoms , it is possible to achieve atomic resolution with an AFM . The tip itself is placed at the end of a cantilever , which is moved by piezo motors relative 3 to a sample in x , y , and z direction , whereby the deﬂection of the cantilever is monitored . The monitor - ing is commonly achieved using the beam - bounce method : A laser is focused on the backside of the cantilever and the reﬂection detected by a four - quadrant photodiode . Besides , there are several other detection methods available such as interferometry or scanning tunneling microscopy 4 . Based on the deﬂection data , the AFM is operated using a feedback loop . As feedback signal , several parameters can be used , depending on the targeted application . In general , two fundamental modi of operation exist : static AFM and dynamic AFM . The most common static AFM mode is the contact mode with constant force : While the tip scans across the sample , the feedback loop keeps the applied force , viz . the 3 Depending on the AFM model , either the cantilever , the sample or both are moved . 4 In the original design by Binnig , a scanning tunneling microscopy was used . 39 4 Materials and Methods deﬂection of the cantilever , constant . To achieve this , the z - position of the cantilever is varied by a piezo motor . This variation directly reﬂects the topography of the sample and is used as the output signal . The disadvantage of static AFM in general is that while scanning , a normal and a lateral force are applied to the sample . Thus , deformations of the sample can occur , possibly inducing imaging artifacts , and both tip and sample can get damaged . In dynamic AFM , the cantilever is oscillated close to its resonance frequency . Inter - actions between tip and sample impose an additional spring and therefore modify the resonance frequency of the system . Since these interactions , viz . the spring constant of the ‘extra spring’ , are dependent on the distance between the tip and the surface , the resonance frequency shift 5 can be utilized as well to maintain a constant height above the sample surface . In the most common dynamic AFM mode 6 , the tapping mode ™ ( TM ) , also referred to as intermittent contact mode or amplitude modulation atomic force microscopy ( AM - AFM ) , the excitation frequency is kept constant and the separation between cantilever and substrate decreased until a speciﬁed setpoint for the oscillation amplitude is reached . While scanning , the z - position of the can - tilever is varied—in an analogous manner as in the contact mode—to maintain the speciﬁed amplitude setpoint . In principle , the z - movement again corresponds to the topography of the sample 7 . Beneﬁts of TM - AFM are that no lateral forces are ap - plied and that normal forces are exerted only when ‘tapping’ onto the sample in the reversal points of the oscillations 8 . Thereby , the risk of a deformation or alteration of the sample is reduced . For this reason , TM - AFM is commonly used to study soft and damageable samples . Yet , the biggest advantage of dynamic AFM is the so - called phase image . The energy dissipated while oscillating induces a phase shift relative to the driving force . Hence , the phase image is a map of the dissipated energy at the respective point on the sample . The dissipated energy , however , is inﬂuenced inter alia by the properties of the imaged material ( e . g . adhesion , elasticity ) . Consequently , the phase image reﬂects a map of the material properties of the sample—if the setpoint is kept constant throughout the imaging . This ability to not only image the topography of the sample , but also to probe its properties provides an unique selling point to AFM that distinguishes it from other microscopy techniques . Today , AFM is not only employed in physics or material science ; in microbiological research , AFM has emerged as a very powerful tool in recent years [ Duf2002 , Duf2004 , 5 The resonance frequency shift results in a shift in the oscillation amplitude if the excitation fre - quency is not changed . 6 An introduction in dynamic AFM modi in general is given in the reference [ Gar2002 ] . 7 Yet , this is strictly speaking only true for chemically homogenous samples . Otherwise , if the tip ‘taps’ on the surface , diﬀerences in mechanical properties can cause a change in the amplitude as well and thereby induce an apparent topography . 8 Dynamic AFM enables pure non - contact modes as well , preventing even these ‘tapping’ forces . 40 4 . 2 Atomic Force Microscopy Duf2008 , Kas2008 , Wri2010 ] . Due to its high - resolution paired with the possibility to work in buﬀers and to map material properties , AFM provides considerable advantages over conventional microscopy techniques . It is , for instance , possible to quantitatively study the elasticity of bacterial and eukaryotic cells [ Mat2001 , Tou2003b , Duf2004 , Ric2005 ] or to image DNA in - situ [ Han1992 , Mou1995 , Lyu1997 ] . A more comprehensive introduction in AFM is given in the references [ Gie2003 , Los2009 ] . In this work , AFMs of the types BioScope Catalyst ™ and Dimension ® Icon ® ( both Bruker , Santa Barbara , USA ) were employed . 4 . 2 . 1 Force Spectroscopy As mentioned above , it is possible to extract data on mechanical properties from the phase image in TM - AFM . Yet , the informative value of these data is restricted . The knowledge of the dissipated energy is not directly transferable into quantitative data on , for instance , elasticity or adhesion . Hence , to gain quantitative data on the mechanical properties of a sample , the force spectroscopy mode is commonly used . In this mode , the AFM cantilever is moved solely along the vertical axis and is not scanned over the sample surface . Thereby , the vertical force ﬁeld is characterized and quantitative data on the maximum adhesion force between the tip and the sample can be extracted ( cf . Figure 4 . 4 ) : The maximum negative deﬂection 9 , also referred to as the adhesion peak , can directly be converted to the maximum adhesion force by means of the cantilever spring constant [ Car2007 ] . Moreover , by pressing the AFM tip onto the sample up to a speciﬁed force threshold , additional information about the mechanical properties such as the elasticity of the sample are gained [ Wei1993 , Heu1995 , Vin1998 , Nor2006 , Den2011 ] . The drawback of the force spectroscopy mode , however , is that it lacks any lateral resolution . A straightforward improvement is provided by the force volume mode , in which multiple force / distance curves are performed on a grid with adjustable spacing . Thereby , the force ﬁeld is mapped in three dimensions and hence some kind of lateral resolution as well as an image of the topography 10 are gained . A more comprehensive disquisition on AFM force spectroscopy is given in the references [ But2005 , Car2007 , Seo2008 ] . 9 The maximum negative deﬂection is usually obtained at the moment of the breakaway of the tip from the surface . 10 The point of contact in each force / distance curve provides information of the sample height in this point . 41 4 Materials and Methods Figure 4 . 4 : A ) Scheme of a force / distance curve , whereby the cantilever deﬂection S is plot - ted against the distance d between sample and mounting of the cantilever . B ) Typical plot of the force F acting between the AFM tip and a sample against their separation z . The blue dashed lines represent the force / deﬂection relations of an AFM cantilever for selected ( (cid:192) - (cid:196) ) distances d between sample and mounting of the cantilever . For typical deﬂections , an AFM cantilever can be described by Hooke’s law ( with cantilever spring constant k ; cf . inset ) . Since the mounting of the cantilever is moved along the z - axis , the zero - point of its force / deﬂection relation is shifted as well . At any time , the deﬂection S can be obtained from the point of intersection of the respective cantilever force / deﬂection relation and the interaction force curve ( balance of forces ) . Usually , two discontinuities exist : During the approach phase ( at a distance d a ) , the deﬂection of the cantilever increases suddenly ( up to S a ) when the slope of the interaction force curve exceeds the cantilever spring constant ( (cid:193) , ‘snap - in contact’ ) . During the retract phase exists a bistable point as well : Often , an adhesion keeps the tip in contact with the surface until the cantilever force exceeds the adhesion force . There ( at a distance d b ) , the cantilever snaps oﬀ the sample , resulting in the so - called adhesion peak in the force / distance curve ( (cid:196) , ‘snap - oﬀ contact’ ) . The transition between approach and retract phase occurs when a speciﬁed force threshold , viz . a maximum positive deﬂection S M , is reached ( (cid:194) ) . Force Spectroscopy with Surface Delay In the course of a force / distance curve , the actual time during which the tip is in contact with the surface is in the range of a few hundreds of milliseconds—in the case of usual ramp rates of a few Hz . To investigate if the adhesion force is contact time dependent , measurements with an adjustable surface delay ( SD ) can be performed . In this thesis , SDs in the range of 0 s to 10 s are used . 0 s SD thereby stands for a standard force / distance curve with no break at the trigger threshold , viz . no additional contact time . In order to compare diﬀerent experiments that comprise multiple series of measurements with increasing SD , Boks et al . used F ( t SD ) = F 0 + ( F ∞ − F 0 ) (cid:18) 1 − exp − t SD τ (cid:19) ( 4 . 1 ) 42 4 . 2 Atomic Force Microscopy to ﬁt their data , whereby F 0 is the adhesion force in the case of 0 s SD , F ∞ is the maxi - mum adhesion force after strengthening , and τ is the characteristic time needed for the adhesion to strengthen [ Bok2008a , Mei2009 ] . However , in the case of force / distance curves , these parameters have no speciﬁc physical or biological meaning and serve only as a tool for comparison . Force Spectroscopy with Functionalized Tips The adhesion forces usually determined in the force spectroscopy mode arise from the interaction of the sample and the AFM tip , which is typically made of SiO 2 [ Wol1991 , Ran1994 ] or Si 3 N 4 [ Alb1990 ] . Yet , in many cases it is necessary to determine the adhesion between a selected probe material and a sample . Thereto , functionalized AFM cantilevers are necessary . The most straightforward type of functionalization is the modiﬁcation of the sur - face chemistry of the entire tip : This is usually achieved by the application of self assembled monolayers ( SAMs ) of thiols or silanes with deﬁned tail group such as hy - droxyl ( - OH ) , carboxyl ( - COOH ) , or amino ( - NH 2 ) groups [ Fri1994 , Noy1995 , Noy1997 , Cle1999 , Dag2007 , Dor2008 ] . A more complicated kind of functionalization is the immobilization of single macro - molecules on the apex of an AFM tip . By using these types of tips , single molecule force spectroscopy can be performed and the forces between single molecules can be measured [ Hin2006 , Neu2008 ] . Since the pioneering work of Merkel et al . , where they studied receptor ligand interactions [ Mer1999 ] , a wide variety of molecules have been investigated in terms of their adhesion properties : The adhesion of , for instance , ﬁ - bronectin to surfaces , cells , or integrins has been studied extensively [ Li2003 , Vel2008 , Ver2009 , Yon2007 , Buc2010 ] . Other studies investigated the adhesion of molecules such as single amino acids [ Lee2006 ] , antigens [ Ber2005 ] , antibiotics [ Gil2007 ] , or further proteins [ Tou2003a , Dup2005 ] . Besides measuring adhesion forces , however , the AFM can also be used to stretch or unfold a protein—or a macromolecule in genera : By attaching the macromolecule not only to the tip , but also to the substrate , its intrinsic energy landscape can be explored [ Rie1997 , Car1999 , Car2000 , Fis2000 ] . The complexity of the functionalization , however , is not limited to single molecules . Complex microscopic objects can also be attached to AFM cantilevers ; for instance , nano - and microparticles of arbitrary material [ Yon2006 , Ong2007 , Gan2007 , Bus2008 ] , air bubbles [ Tab2011 ] , and gecko [ Hub2005 ] or abalone setae [ Lin2009 ] . It is even possi - ble to immobilize alive organisms such as eukariotic cells [ Ben2000 , Bow2001 , Hel2008 ] or bacteria [ Ong1999 , Low2000 , Eme2004 ] . In this thesis , AFM force spectroscopy ex - periments with bacterial probes play a major role . Hence , the design and preparation of bacterial probes are described in more detail in the following section . 43 4 Materials and Methods Figure 4 . 5 : Examples of typical AFM cantilevers featuring diﬀerent tip geometries . All types of cantilevers can be used for the preparation of bacterial probes , thereby displaying diﬀer - ent advantages and disadvantages . Optical microscopy of A ) a bare tipless cantilever and B ) a tipless cantilever coated with S . carnosus , C ) SEM image of a spherical probe can - tilever and D ) optical microscopy of a spherical probe cantilever coated with S . carnosus , E ) SEM image of a standard pyramidal tip cantilever and F ) confocal ﬂuorescence mi - croscopy image of a pyramidal tip cantilever coated with ﬂuorescently labeled S . carnosus . 4 . 2 . 2 Bacterial Probes for AFM Force Spectroscopy To perform AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes , single bacteria or clusters of bacteria have to be immobilized onto the AFM cantilever . For the immobilization , two parameters are of major importance , namely the geometry of the AFM tip and the selection of an appropriate glue . The geometry of the tip aﬀects the size of the contact area and—closely related—the amount of bacteria that makes contact with the sample under study . Various tip geometries are possible . In the studies in the references [ Los2009 , Hue2010 ] , the ap - plicability of multiple diﬀerent geometries and preparation procedures is investigated . Figure 4 . 5 shows some typical examples with standard geometries . The most common tip geometry is the absence of a tip ( cf . Figure 4 . 5 A , B ) [ Bow2001 , Bok2008a , Mei2009 , Kan2009 , Zha2011 ] . These so - called tipless cantilevers feature a large and accessible contact area . Thereby , they have the advantages of an easy 44 4 . 2 Atomic Force Microscopy Figure 4 . 6 : Speciﬁcally designed tip geometries that are especially suitable for the prepa - ration of bacterial probes : A ) SEM image of a cantilever featuring a plateau tip , B ) SEM image of a cantilever featuring a ‘bacteria saddle’ tip , achieved by modiﬁcation of a standard pyramidal tip using a focused ion beam ( FIB ) , and C ) confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy image of a single bacterium immobilized in the ‘bacteria saddle’ tip . functionalization with a glue and of a straightforward ﬁxation of bacteria at suitable positions . The disadvantage , however , is that the number of bacteria that are in con - tact with the substrate’s surface is uncertain due to the large contact area . Therefore , it is not possible to compare measurements with diﬀerent cantilevers . Measurements with the same cantilever on diﬀerent substrates , however , are comparable . Further common tip geometries utilized as basis for bacterial probes are spherical probes ( cf . Figure 4 . 5 C , D ) [ Low2000 , Low2001 ] and pyramidal tips ( cf . Figure 4 . 5 E , F ) [ Raz1998 , Eme2006 , Cao2006 ] . Both have the beneﬁt of a controlled contact area and an accessible and hence controlled number of bacteria that are in contact with the substrate’s surface . Thus , measurements with diﬀerent cantilevers are comparable 11 . The preparation of bacterial probes based on these types of cantilevers , however , is much more complicated compared to tipless cantilevers . Both—spherical probes and pyramidal tips—oﬀer only a small contact area to the bacteria due to the respective— curved or pointed—geometry . Therefore , a high adhesive strength of the glue holding the bacteria onto the cantilevers is necessary . Moreover , it is harder to place single bacteria at the respective spot , the apex of the tip or the topmost part of the sphere ( cf . Figure 4 . 5 D , F ) . A compromise between controlled contact area and straightforward preparation is to employ speciﬁcally designed geometries . Commercially available are plateau can - tilevers ( e . g . PL2 - CONTR - 10 , NANOSENSORS ™ , Neuchâtel , Switzerland ) , which provide a ﬂat contact area to a small number of bacteria ( cf . Figure 4 . 6 A ) . An even more controlled contact area that enables the immobilization of a single bacterium can be achieved by a modiﬁcation of standard pyramidal tips . Using a focused ion beam ( FIB ) , it is possible to remove the apex of the tip and to generate a ‘saddle’ - like 11 Results from measurements with spherical probes have to be scaled with the probe radius . 45 4 Materials and Methods structure ( cf . Figure 4 . 6 B ) . By choosing an adequate 12 diameter of the saddle , a single bacterium can be immobilized in it ( cf . Figure 4 . 6 C ) . Unfortunately , these ‘special’ types of cantilevers are costly in terms of either labor or money . Hence , they are only restrictedly suitable for experiments that require a certain amount of statistics , such as AFM force spectroscopy . The glue selection is especially challenging due to two major requirements : On the one hand , the bacteria must be ﬁrmly attached to the cantilever by a force that exceeds the adhesion force to the substrate under study . On the other hand , the viability and the properties of the bacterial cell wall that is not in contact with the cantilever must not be aﬀected . Various types of glues based on diﬀerent binding mechanisms have been presented in the literature 13 : • Positively charged polymer coatings such as polyethyleneimine ( PEI ) [ Raz1998 , Ong1999 ] and poly - L - lysine ( PLL ) [ Bok2008a , Qu2011 ] can be used , since the surfaces of both , the bacterium and the cantilever , are negatively charged at a physiological pH . • By using aminosilanes , - thiols [ Low2001 , Nea2005 ] , or poly ( dopamine ) ( PDA ) [ Lee2009a , Kan2009 ] , the cantilevers can be functionalized with amino groups that form strong , unspeciﬁc , covalent bonds with the carboxyl groups in the bacterial cell wall . • Speciﬁc linkage can be achieved by coating the cantilevers with proteins such as ﬁbronectin [ Kuu1978 , Buc2010 ] . Although approaches such as the use of regular glue have also been reported in the literature [ Bow2001 , Bow2002 ] , the general satisfaction of the second requirement—the prevention of any alteration of the bacterium—is highly doubtful . The same is true for procedures involving the crosslinking via glutaraldehyde [ Raz1998 , Ong1999 ] , which is known to have an eﬀect on the surface properties of the entire bacterium [ Vel2002 , Bur2003 ] . In the experiments presented in this thesis , the employed bacterial probes are all based on triangular shaped tipless cantilevers ( PNP - TR - TL , Nanoworld , Neuchâtel , Switzerland and NP - 0 , Bruker , Santa Barbara , USA ) . The ﬁxation of the bacteria was achieved primarily using PLL , a polymer with positively charged side chains that is known to form adhesive interlayers [ Voe1995 , Wes1997 ] . In some studies 14 , however , PDA was utilized . PDA is produced by the self - polymerization of dopamine [ Lee2007a , 12 Saddle diameters that are equal to the diameter of the respective type of bacteria or slightly above give the best chances of success . 13 An extensive disquisition on the advantages and disadvantages of various types of glues can be found in the refs . [ Los2009 , Hue2010 ] . 14 The applied coating is always mentioned in the respective studies . 46 4 . 2 Atomic Force Microscopy Lee2007b ] . Dopamine is closely related to the catecholic amino acid 3 , 4 - dihydroxy - L - phenylalanine ( DOPA ) , which is secreted by mussels and is capable to form strong coordination bonds with inorganic materials and covalent bonds with organic sur - faces [ Lee2006 ] . The preparation procedures for both glues were preceded by a cleaning step , during which the cantilevers were treated with an air plasma . The PLL coating was then applied by immersing the AFM cantilever in a droplet of PLL ( MP Biomedicals , Solon , USA ) solution ( 0 . 1 mg / ml ) for 1 h . Subsequently , the cantilever was carefully rinsed with phosphate buﬀered saline ( PBS ) . The PDA coating was achieved by immersing the cantilever vertically into a solu - tion of dopamine hydrochloride ( Sigma - Aldrich , Steinheim , Germany ) in 10 mM tris ( hydroxymethyl ) aminomethane ( TRIS ) / HCl - buﬀer ( pH 8 . 3 at 23 ◦ C ) for 1 h at 4 ◦ C . Following this , the cantilever was rinsed with deionised water and dried in vacuum for 10 min . Immediately after the preparation of the respective adhesive interlayer , the cantilevers were placed in a droplet of bacteria solution for 1 h at 4 ◦ C . To remove unbound bacteria , the probes were then rinsed with PBS . In general , bacterial probes were freshly prepared prior to the experiments . 4 . 2 . 3 Implementation of Force Spectroscopy Experiments The AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes in this work consist of multiple series of force measurements on each substrate under study . Each series usually 15 consists of 50 - 100 single force / distance curves . In order to avoid inaccuracy due to local irregularities in the substrate , every single force / distance curve was carried out at a diﬀerent spot 16 on the surface . If not indicated otherwise , single force / distance curves were carried out with a ramp size of 1 µm , a ramping speed of 1 Hz and a maximal force trigger threshold of 1 nN . To convert the measured photodiode signal ﬁrst into cantilever deﬂection and then into force , the deﬂection sensitivity and the cantilever spring constant of the system have to be quantiﬁed . The deﬂection sensitivity was determined by a force / distance curve on a hard substrate : After the tip makes contact with such a surface , the engaged distance directly translates into a deﬂection of the cantilever . The cantilever spring constant is obtained by the thermal tune method [ Hut1993 , Ser2005 ] . Since the 15 Some series in the SD experiments consist of 30 - 40 single measurements to decrease the stress on the bacterial probe . 16 The probed surface spots are arranged along a grid with 0 . 5 µm to 5 µm spacing . 47 4 Materials and Methods bacterial probe could get damaged in the course of these two calibration steps , the entire procedure was carried out subsequent to the experiment . Hence , typical values for the respective system were used as calibration constants prior to the experiment and afterwards replaced by the obtained values . An essential task when working with bacterial probes is to ensure the integrity of the bacterial probe throughout the entire experiment—irrespective of the glue or the type of cantilever used for the bacterial probes . Therefore , a detaching of bacteria or any other probe alteration must be detected . In this work , the integrity of the bacterial probes was controlled either by optical microscopy prior and after the experiment or by control measurements : Consecutive series of force / distance measurements were taken alternately on the substrates under study , ending always on the substrate and with the respective parameters ( e . g . surface delay ) that had been probed ﬁrst . 4 . 2 . 4 PeakForce QNM ® As can be inferred from the preceding sections , the AFM modes commonly used to study physical properties of the surface have severe limitations : • TM - AFM provides a high spatial resolution , but is limited in terms of quanti - tative analysis . • The force spectroscopy mode allows for a quantitative analysis , but lacks any spatial resolution . • The force volume mode seems to be a good compromise : It produces quantitative data and enables spatial resolution . The achieved resolution , however , is usually very low and the imaging time very long . PeakForce tapping mode with quantitative nanomechanical property mapping ( Peak - Force QNM ® ) is a recently introduced mode that combines the advantages of the three classical modes mentioned : It allows for simultaneous quantitative mapping of topography and multiple mechanical properties ( e . g . elasticity , adhesion , deforma - tion ) , featuring the typical resolution and scan speed of the tapping mode [ Ple2010 , Pit2010 , Ber2011 ] . PeakForce QNM ® can be employed for various types of biological or artiﬁcial samples [ Ber2010 , Ada2011 , Su2012 , Ple2012 , Trt2012 , Bit2012 ] . From a technical point of view , PeakForce QNM ® is basically a combination of force volume mapping and TM - AFM . In contrast to the latter , the drive frequency is far below the resonance frequency of the cantilever and the feedback loop keeps the max - imum cantilever deﬂection and thereby the maximum applied force constant instead of the vibration amplitude . Thereby , a force / distance curve is produced each time the tip taps on the surface . By analyzing the force / distance curve in each point 48 4 . 3 Parallel Plate Flow Chambers Figure 4 . 7 : In PeakForce QNM ® mode , each time the tip taps on the surface , a force / distance curve is acquired . Thereby , information about multiple mechanical prop - erties in each point can be collected . The adhesion force can be extracted as the height diﬀerence between the negative adhesion peak and the zero force baseline . The peak force is deﬁned as the vertical distance between the baseline and the turn - away point . The Young’s modulus is obtained by a DMT ﬁt [ Der1975 , Mau1999 ] of the retract part of the force / distance curve ( Scheme adapted from [ Pit2010 ] ) . ( cf . Figure 4 . 7 ) , a map of mechanical properties such as elasticity ( Young’s modu - lus ) or adhesion force is achieved . The adhesion forces between tip and sample are thereby gained the same way as in classical force spectroscopy : The height diﬀer - ences between the negative adhesion peaks and the respective zero force baselines are determined for each single force / distance curve . The Young’s moduli are obtained by a DMT ﬁt [ Der1975 , Mau1999 ] of the retract part 17 of the force / distance curves described by F − F Adh = 4 3 E ( 1 − ν 2 ) √ R ( d − d 0 ) 3 / 2 , ( 4 . 2 ) with the determined force relative to the adhesion force F − F Adh , the Poisson’s ratio ν , the radius R of the tip , the deformation d − d 0 of the sample , and the targeted Young’s modulus E . 4 . 3 Parallel Plate Flow Chambers In order to study bacterial adhesion on bacteria in a free swimming ( planctonic ) state as well , parallel plate ﬂow chamber experiments were conducted in addition to the 17 In contrast to typical simple Hertz ﬁts , the DMT ﬁt takes long - range attractive forces into account . Thus , the reference point is the point of maximum adhesion—in the retract part—and not the point of zero indentation—in the approach part . The correct determination of the latter is often delicate . 49 4 Materials and Methods Figure 4 . 8 : Custom build parallel plate ﬂow chamber used in this work : A ) Side view scheme showing the chamber embedded in the cleanable holder system ( 1 ) , sealed on the upper side with a cover slide ( 2 ) , and pressed with the lower side on the substrate ( 3 ) ; B ) optical top view image of the chamber ; C ) photograph of the ﬂow chamber and the holder system . AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes . Parallel plate ﬂow cham - bers are a classical microbiological method commonly employed to investigate the adhesion of ( bacterial ) cells on a macroscopic scale [ vanKoo1992 , Mei1992 , Mei1995 , Tho2002 , Har2006 , Ros2008 ] . The analysis of ﬂow chamber experiments usually com - prises solely the counting of the number of bacteria on the substrate . Therefore , strictly speaking , not the adhesion , but the adsorption process is investigated . The main requirement on a ﬂow chamber is that an area of constant shear force , viz . a uniform ﬂow proﬁle , exists . Such a proﬁle is gained if the ﬂow is steady , incompress - ible , laminar and established , which depends on the geometry of the chamber [ van - Wag1980 , Bow1985 , vanKoo1992 , Usa1993 , Mun1994 , Bak2003 ] : A rectangular cham - ber can be described by the characteristic length Le = a h Re ( 4 . 3 ) with a proportionality constant a , the chamber height h , and the Reynolds number Re . The latter is given by Re = ρ Q η ( w + h ) ( 4 . 4 ) with the ﬂuid density ρ , the viscosity η , the ﬂow rate Q , and the chamber width w . The value of the proportionality constant a is reported diﬀerently to 0 . 013 [ vanWag1980 ] 50 4 . 3 Parallel Plate Flow Chambers Figure 4 . 9 : Scheme of the ﬂow system in which the ﬂow chamber is embedded . A step motor ( 1 ) pumps the bacteria solution at an adjustable constant ﬂow rate from one syringe ( 2 ) through the chamber ( 4 ) into the second syringe ( 3 ) . The sample in the ﬂow chamber is thereby monitored by means of an optical microscope ( 5 ) . and 0 . 044 [ Bow1985 ] . In general , an adequate uniform ﬂow proﬁle is achieved if Le is small enough compared to the chamber length l , described by Le ≤ b l ( 4 . 5 ) whereby b is a further proportionality constant . Equation 4 . 5 , however , can also be interpreted diﬀerently in terms of strictness , since diﬀerent values for b were introduced in the literature ( b = 0 . 1 [ Bow1985 ] and b = 0 . 025 [ vanWag1980 ] ) . To sum up , the maximum ﬂow rate for which a uniform ﬂow proﬁle is achieved depends on the dimensions of the ﬂow chamber—for a speciﬁed liquid . The ﬂow chamber system used in this thesis is a custom build parallel plate ﬂow chamber ( cf . Figure 4 . 8 ) . It features a 1 . 6 × 1 . 6 cm 2 base area and an eﬀective height of 0 . 2 cm . Due to these dimensions , a uniform ﬂow proﬁle is achieved for ﬂow rates 18 , Q ≤ 81 . 9 µl s − 1 ( viz . Re ≤ 4 . 55 ) , according 19 to Equation 4 . 3 and Equation 4 . 5 . The chamber itself is based on a disposable skeletal structure made of acrylic glass ( poly ( methyl methacrylate ) , PMMA ) , which is pressed on the sample substrate by a cleanable holder system made of stainless steel and aluminum . The lower side of the chamber—the connection with the substrate—is sealed with a standard sealing band . The upper side of the chamber is covered with a cover slip , which is glued to the chamber using a biocompatible rubber glue ( Reprorubber Thin Pour , Flexbar Machine Corporation , Islandia , USA ) . The chamber is incorporated in a ﬂow system ( cf . Figure 4 . 9 ) consisting of two sy - ringes ( d = 16 . 22 mm , V max = 12 ml , type Omnifex ® , B | BRAUN Melsungen AG , 18 For the calculations , η = 1 mPa s and ρ = 1 kg l − 1 are used as solution properties , similar to the properties of water at room temperature . This is a reasonably safe assumption , since the bacteria solution is dilute . 19 Thereby , the most rigorous combination of the proportionality constants is used . Using the weakest combination , the limit increases up to Q ≤ 1 . 1 ml s − 1 ( viz . Re ≤ 61 . 1 ) . 51 4 Materials and Methods Melsungen , Germany ) that are connected with the chamber via polytetraﬂuorethy - lene ( PTFE ) tubes ( d interior = 1 mm , d exterior = 1 . 6 mm , Bohlender GmbH , Grünsfeld , Germany ) . A stepper motor ( KDS Model 200 Serie S , KD Scientiﬁc Inc . , Holliston , USA ) pumps the bacteria solution with an adjustable constant ﬂow rate through the system . Measurements on the substrates under study are always carried out using the same bacteria solution and in random order of the substrates . During an experiment , the surface of the studied substrate was monitored by optical microscopy using a 10 × objective and images taken at a frame rate of 0 . 1 Hz . Two diﬀerent combinations of camera and microscope were employed in this study : a Pix - elﬂy CCD - camera ( PCO , Kelheim , Germany ) on an Axiophot light microscope ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) and a Cool SNAP ™ - Pro Digital Kit ( Media Cybernetics ® Inc . , Bethesda , USA ) on a Laborlux 12 ME S light microscope ( Leica Camera AG , Solms , Germany ) . The number of adhering bacteria was determined using an image analysis software ( Image Pro Plus , Media Cybernetics , Bethesda , MD ) . To circumvent problems arising from deviations in brightness and contrast close to the edges of the images , an area of interest ( AOI ) in the center was chosen . The position and size of the AOI were kept constant over one experiment . 52 5 Inﬂuence of Substrate Properties on Surface Processes 5 . 1 The “Subsurface Energy” As reviewed in the publication in Addendum I , the potential of the vdW in - teractions between a probe object and a stratiﬁed material is composed of a term describing the interaction with the surface and terms arising from interactions with the interfaces below the surface . The latter terms will in the following be referred to as the ‘subsurface energy’ . This interaction property features an important character - istic , namely that two superﬁcially alike samples with the same surface chemistry may diﬀer strongly in their subsurface energy . Moreover , this disparity can have a notable inﬂuence on the interactions with probe objects , as will be revealed in the following sections . An elegant way to independently study the impact of the subsurface energy is the set of tailored Si wafers introduced in section 4 . 1 . 1 ( cf . the publication in Addendum I ) . Especially in biological systems , researchers predominantly focused on coatings and surfaces so far . Thus , it is a crucial question to determine the role of the subsurface energy in these systems . In this thesis , three diﬀerent types of biological objects were studied with regard to their adhesion / adsorption behavior onto the set of tailored Si wafers . By choosing ( nanoscopic ) proteins , ( microscopic ) bacteria , and ( macroscopic ) geckos , a wide range of scales is covered . 5 . 1 . 1 Impact on Protein Adsorption First , the inﬂuence of the subsurface energy of the substrate on the adsorption of pro - teins was investigated . Previous studies have already shown that changes in the sub - surface energy aﬀect the kinetics of the protein adsorption process [ Bel2008 , Qui2008 , Sch2010 ] . To determine whether these diﬀerent kinetics implicate diﬀerences in the ﬁ - nal structure of the adsorbed protein ﬁlms , in situ X - ray reﬂectivity experiments were performed . Thereby , the adsorption of three diﬀerent globular proteins ( α - amylase , 53 5 Inﬂuence of Substrate Properties on Surface Processes lysozyme , and BSA ) onto the set of tailored Si wafers was investigated . The ex - periments described in the publication in Addendum II reveal that the electron density proﬁle of the adsorbate—i . e . its structure—varies , dependent on the thickness of the oxide layer : A diﬀerent adsorbate structure on the type N and the type T wafer was observed , regardless of the studied protein and whether or not the substrates were hydrophobized . That is to say , irrespective of the surface chemistry , the subsurface energy impacts the protein adsorbate . 5 . 1 . 2 Impact on Bacterial Adhesion Since bacterial adhesion is mediated by proteins , an analogous inﬂuence of the subsur - face energy is conceivable . To probe the adhesion of model bacteria ( S . carnosus ) onto the set of tailored Si wafers on a single cell level , AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes were performed . The ﬁndings presented in the publication in Addendum III show that the bacteria adhere stronger to the substrates with the thin oxide layers . In both cases—hydrophilic and hydrophobic—the adhesion forces on the type N wafers are roughly twice as high as on the type T wafers . By us - ing a qualitative theoretical model based on considerations of the diﬀerent Hamaker constants , the experimental results were backed up . Moreover , the publication in Addendum III addressed the question whether the diﬀerences in adhesion forces on a single cell level measurably aﬀect the adsorption process on a macroscale . Ad - sorption experiments performed with a custom - built parallel plate ﬂow chamber setup corroborated the AFM experiments : The number of adsorbed bacteria grows faster on the SiO 2 type N than on the SiO 2 type T wafers , independent of the concentration of the bacterial solution . In short , not only nanoscopic proteins but also microscopic bacteria are aﬀected by variations in the subsurface energy . 5 . 1 . 3 Impact on Gecko Adhesion To test if the subsurface properties of the substrate are relevant for macroscopic ob - jects as well , isolated gecko setal arrays were used as an adhesion probe . Using the ‘Robotoe’ testing platform [ Aut2006a , Gra2010 ] , the setal arrays were dragged across the surfaces of the model substrates , mimicking a gecko’s footfall . As shown in the publication in Addendum IV , the adhesion forces are signiﬁcantly higher on type N than on type T wafers . Even when the setal array and the oxide layer are sepa - rated by a hydrophobic OTS monolayer , the adhesion is stronger on the OTS type N substrates . This trend is independent of humidity , drag speed , and array size . To support the experimental ﬁndings , theoretical approximations were performed . By incorporating oxide thickness dependent vdW potentials into the MD friction model ( cf . section 3 . 5 ) an extensive MD model was developed . Therewith , it was shown that 54 5 . 2 Inﬂuence of the Fluoridation of Hydroxyapatite on Bacterial Adhesion the ( vdW ) pull - oﬀ force on Si wafers with oxide layers of thicknesses d in the range of 0 . 5 nm ≤ d ≤ 5 nm is remarkably higher in comparison to type T wafers . Hence , also on a macroscopic scale , the subsurface properties have an inﬂuence on the adhesion forces . 5 . 2 Inﬂuence of the Fluoridation of Hydroxyapatite on Bacterial Adhesion In the publication in Addendum V the inﬂuence of the ﬂuoridation of dental material on bacterial adhesion was characterized . As therein reviewed , it is known since many decades that the application of ﬂuoride compounds to dental material has a cariostatic eﬀect , which is mostly traced back to a change in the demineralization characteristics of the teeth . However , to address the question whether bacterial ad - hesion is also aﬀected by the ﬂuoridation , the adhesion forces between bacteria and hydroxyapatite surfaces—treated and untreated with ﬂuoride solution—were deter - mined on a single bacterial level . AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes were performed to study the adhesion of the cariogenic pathogens Strepto - coccus mutans and Streptococcus oralis , and the apathogenic species Staphylococcus carnosus . As revealed in the publication in Addendum V , all bacterial species exhibit lower adhesion forces after ﬂuoridation of the surfaces . These ﬁndings show that the adhesion of bacteria is indeed directly aﬀected by the ﬂuoridation of dental material . Consequently , it seems likely that this decrease of adhesion properties is another origin of the cariostatic eﬀect of ﬂuoride . 5 . 3 Bacterial Adhesion to ‘Everyday Surfaces’ The studies presented in the preceding sections investigated surface interactions on a fundamental level by changing single parameters of model substrates separately . In this section , however , a more applied work 1 is presented : The characterization of the adhesion of bacteria to various ‘everyday substrates’ . For this purpose , AFM force spectroscopy experiments were performed using bacterial probes based on tipless cantilevers ( PNP - TR - TL ) coated with poly ( dopamine ) and covered with S . carnosus . As ‘everyday substrates’ , stainless steel , aluminum , copper , and a part of a yoghurt cup ( PP ) were chosen ( details for surface roughness and contact angle cf . section 4 . 1 . 2 ) and supplemented by the model substrates SiO 2 type N and OTS type N . 1 The AFM force spectroscopy experiments in this section were performed by Sebastian Hümbert during his work as a diploma student tutored by Peter Loskill ( cf . [ Hue2010 ] ) . 55 5 Inﬂuence of Substrate Properties on Surface Processes (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:10) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:7) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:13) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:4)(cid:8) (cid:2)(cid:6) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:18) ! (cid:24) (cid:24) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:4)(cid:10) (cid:2)(cid:7) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:10) (cid:9) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:13) (cid:23) (cid:26) (cid:24) (cid:27)(cid:30) (cid:29) (cid:1)(cid:25)(cid:30) (cid:31)(cid:22) (cid:24) (cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:21) (cid:1)(cid:18) ! (cid:24) (cid:24) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:18) ! (cid:24) (cid:24) (cid:28) (cid:31)(cid:24) (cid:25)(cid:24) (cid:31)(cid:24) (cid:29) (cid:22)(cid:24) (cid:1)(cid:13) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:14) " (cid:1)(cid:18) (cid:27) (cid:1)(cid:16) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:1)(cid:17) (cid:17) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:10) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:7) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:7) (cid:5) (cid:4) (cid:1) (cid:14) " (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4)(cid:6) (cid:2)(cid:10) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:18) ! (cid:24) (cid:24) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:4)(cid:10) (cid:2)(cid:8) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:13) (cid:23) (cid:26) (cid:24) (cid:27)(cid:30) (cid:29) (cid:1)(cid:25)(cid:30) (cid:31)(cid:22) (cid:24) (cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:21) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:10) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:9) (cid:2) (cid:10) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:18) (cid:27) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:4)(cid:8) (cid:2)(cid:7) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:13) (cid:23) (cid:26) (cid:24) (cid:27)(cid:30) (cid:29) (cid:1)(cid:25)(cid:30) (cid:31)(cid:22) (cid:24) (cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:18) ! (cid:24) (cid:24) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:4)(cid:8) (cid:2)(cid:6) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:10) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:9) (cid:2) (cid:10) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:16) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:10) (cid:2)(cid:7) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:18) ! (cid:24) (cid:24) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4)(cid:7) (cid:2)(cid:9) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:10) (cid:9) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:13) (cid:23) (cid:26) (cid:24) (cid:27)(cid:30) (cid:29) (cid:1)(cid:25)(cid:30) (cid:31)(cid:22) (cid:24) (cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:21) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:10) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:17) (cid:17) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:11) (cid:2)(cid:8) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:13) (cid:23) (cid:26) (cid:24) (cid:27)(cid:30) (cid:29) (cid:1)(cid:25)(cid:30) (cid:31)(cid:22) (cid:24) (cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:29) (cid:15) (cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:18) ! (cid:24) (cid:24) (cid:28) (cid:1)(cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4)(cid:5) (cid:2)(cid:8) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:29) (cid:15) Figure 5 . 1 : Results of AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes ( S . carnosus ) on various ‘everyday substrates’ . The experiments consist of two series of measurements on stainless steel separated by a series of measurement on A ) Al , B ) Cu , C ) SiO 2 type N , D ) OTS type N , or E ) PP . Since the ﬁrst and last series of the experiments are comparable , the integrity of the bacterial probes can be granted . Each experiment consisted of two series of measurements on stainless steel separated by a series of measurement on one of the other substrates . Thereby , the ratio of the adhesion forces on stainless steel and all other substrates was determined ( cf . Fig - ure 5 . 1 ) . By normalizing the force values with respect to the corresponding value on stainless steel , the results of the diﬀerent experiments—with diﬀerent cantilevers—can be compared . The combination of the normalized values of all characterized ‘every - day substrates’ in Figure 5 . 2 clearly shows that the bacteria adhere stronger to the hydrophobic substrates ( OTS type N wafer and the yoghurt cup ) than to the hy - drophilic substrates : F OTS N ≈ 6 · F Steel and F PP ≈ 7 · F Steel . Within the hydrophilic substrates , the variations in adhesion forces are smaller : F Al ≈ 0 . 5 · F Steel , F Si ≈ F Steel and F Cu ≈ 2 · F Steel . An explanation for the strong diﬀerence between hydrophobic and hydrophilic sub - strates is given by the hydrophobic eﬀect . Although the hydrophobicity of bacteria varies strongly , even for the same strain [ Mam1987 ] , a diﬀerence in the wettability of the substrate can change the interaction energy signiﬁcantly . Within the hydrophilic and hydrophobic substrates , it is hardly possible to isolate the origin for the diﬀer - 56 5 . 3 Bacterial Adhesion to ‘Everyday Surfaces’ (cid:10) (cid:15)(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:14) (cid:6) (cid:14) (cid:7) (cid:16) (cid:10) (cid:13) (cid:8) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:9) (cid:9) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:11) (cid:3) (cid:10)(cid:9) (cid:16) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:15) (cid:9) (cid:13) (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:4) (cid:6) Figure 5 . 2 : Average adhesion force values between S . carnosus and all characterized ‘every - day substrates’ normalized with respect to the corresponding value on stainless steel . ent adhesion forces . The substrates diﬀer in multiple properties such as roughness , isoelectric point , polarizability , and surface energy ( cf . section 4 . 1 . 2 ) —properties that can all inﬂuence bacterial adhesion ( cf . section 3 . 3 . 2 ) [ Plo2010 , An1998 ] . While this type of study is a demonstrative and straightforward procedure often ap - plied to compare a limited amount of substrates , the gain of scientiﬁc insight is re - stricted . Moreover , this section highlights the importance of the type of studies pre - sented in the preceding sections : To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the involved interactions , single parameters have to be studied independently . 57 58 6 Surface Properties of Bacteria 6 . 1 Dynamic Adhesion of Diﬀerent Staphylococci Species As soon as a bacterium makes contact with a surface , various processes in - and outside the cell are initiated ( cf . section 3 . 3 . 2 ) . Some of these processes directly aﬀect the ad - hesion force leading to dynamics in the adhesion process . Here , the dynamic adhesion of bacteria of the genus Staphylococcus was investigated by carrying out AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes using diﬀerent surface delays ( SDs ) . The main focus thereby was the comparison of the apathogenic S . carnosus with the highly pathogenic species S . aureus . AFM experiments 1 with viable S . carnosus , viable S . aureus , and by formaldehyde inactivated S . aureus on OTS type T substrates were performed under physiological conditions . Each experiment consisted of series of measurements with a SD of 0 s , 1 s , 5 s , and 10 s , whereby in the course of the experiment , the SD was ﬁrst gradually increased from 0 s to 10 s and subsequently decreased to 0 s again . For a better com - parability , the mean adhesion forces of each experiment were normalized with respect to the value of the corresponding initial 0 s SD series . Moreover , to allow for a quan - titative interpretation , the change in the mean adhesion force while increasing the SD was ﬁtted with a function introduced by Boks et al . [ Bok2008a ] ( cf . section 4 . 2 . 1 ) , hereinafter called ‘Boks - function’ . At ﬁrst , the dynamic adhesion of viable S . carnosus was investigated . The determined average force values demonstrate that the adhesion strengthens with increasing SD ( Figure 6 . 1 A ) . The ﬁt with the Boks - function reveals a saturation value of the adhe - sion force of F ∞ S . carnosus / F 0 S . carnosus = 2 . 30 ( 8 ) and a characteristic time of the adhesion strengthening of τ S . carnosus = 1 . 8 ( 3 ) s . Moreover , the corresponding values in the two parts of the experiments—the SD increasing and the SD decreasing part—are compa - rable within the experimental error , inducing a symmetrical shape of the results . 1 The SD experiments in this paragraph were performed by Nicolas Thewes during his work as a diploma student tutored by Peter Loskill ( cf . [ The2012 ] ) . 59 6 Surface Properties of Bacteria (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:9) (cid:1) (cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:9) (cid:1) (cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:9) (cid:1) (cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:15) (cid:30) (cid:27)(cid:23)(cid:18) (cid:20) (cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:21) (cid:22) (cid:25)(cid:18) (cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:28) (cid:17) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:10) (cid:8) (cid:9) (cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:11) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:31) (cid:24)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:25)(cid:22) (cid:3) (cid:3) ¥ (cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:6) (cid:14) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:4)(cid:9) (cid:6) (cid:2)(cid:13) (cid:3)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:14) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:4)(cid:13) (cid:2)(cid:9) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:28) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:11) (cid:3) (cid:10)(cid:9) (cid:16) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:15) (cid:9) (cid:13) (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:11) (cid:3) (cid:10)(cid:9) (cid:16) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:15) (cid:9) (cid:13) (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:12) (cid:10) (cid:7) (cid:12) (cid:11) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:31) (cid:24)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:25)(cid:22) (cid:3) (cid:3) ¥ (cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:6) (cid:14) (cid:1)(cid:11) (cid:4)(cid:7) (cid:2)(cid:12) (cid:3)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:14) (cid:1)(cid:10) (cid:2)(cid:8) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:28) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:15) (cid:30) (cid:27)(cid:23)(cid:18) (cid:20) (cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:21) (cid:22) (cid:25)(cid:18) (cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:28) (cid:17) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:12) (cid:10) (cid:7) (cid:12) (cid:11) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:24)(cid:26) (cid:18) (cid:20) (cid:29)(cid:24)(cid:31) (cid:22) (cid:3) (cid:3) ¥ (cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:6) (cid:14) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:4)(cid:12) (cid:6) (cid:2)(cid:8) (cid:3)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:14) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:4)(cid:8) (cid:2)(cid:8) (cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:28) Figure 6 . 1 : Results of AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes on OTS type T substrates . The experiments consist of series of measurements with diﬀerent SDs , whereby in the ﬁrst part of the experiment , the SD was gradually increased and in the second part decreased again . The adhesion dynamics of A ) viable S . carnosus , B ) viable S . aureus , and C ) by formaldehyde inactivated S . aureus were characterized . The numbers on the data points denote the order of the measurements taken . 60 6 . 1 Dynamic Adhesion of Diﬀerent Staphylococci Species Species F ∞ / F 0 τ [ s ] S . carnosus ( viable ) 2 . 30 ( 8 ) 1 . 8 ( 3 ) S . aureus ( viable ) 6 . 1 ( 7 ) 5 ( 2 ) S . aureus ( inactive ) 1 . 70 ( 2 ) 1 . 2 ( 2 ) Table 6 . 1 : Summary of the resulting ﬁt parameters of the Boks - function . Next , viable S . aureus were characterized in terms of the adhesion dynamics . Analo - gous to the results for S . carnosus , the adhesion of S . aureus strengthens with increas - ing SD ( Figure 6 . 1 B ) , with a saturation force value of F ∞ S . aureus ; viable / F 0 S . aureus ; viable = 6 . 1 ( 7 ) and a characteristic time of τ S . aureus ; viable = 5 ( 2 ) s . Yet , for 10 s SD , the de - termined adhesion force F 10 s S . aureus ; viable = 5 . 4 ( 8 ) is still lower than the saturation force value . Hence , the adhesion never reaches saturation during the measurement . More - over , combining the ﬁrst—SD increasing—and the second—SD decreasing—part of the experiment reveals a major diﬀerence between the viable S . aureus and S . carnosus . The adhesion force of S . aureus in the second part , is always stronger than the corre - sponding value in the ﬁrst part , giving the results an asymmetrical shape . Inactivating the S . aureus with formaldehyde changes the adhesion dynamics notably . The adhesion still strengthens with increasing SD ( Figure 6 . 1 C ) . The saturation force , however , dropped down to F ∞ S . aureus ; inactive / F 0 S . aureus ; inactive = 1 . 70 ( 2 ) and the charac - teristic time down to τ S . aureus ; inactive = 1 . 2 ( 2 ) s . Moreover , the combination of both parts of the experiment is redolent of the S . carnosus results and diﬀers from the viable S . aureus results : The corresponding force values in both parts are comparable within the experimental error ; the shape of the results is symmetrical . Discussion Comparing the results of the experiments with the diﬀerent species , the following conclusions can be drawn : • The adhesion forces for viable S . carnosus and inactive S . aureus are roughly doubled by increasing SD . The adhesion force for viable S . aureus , however , increases to a much larger extend , to a factor between 5 and 6 . • The characteristic time needed for the adhesion of viable S . aureus to strengthen is considerably longer than for the adhesion of viable S . carnosus and inactive S . aureus . A ﬁnding that is especially emphasized by the fact that no indications for a saturation of the force values were observed , in the case of viable S . aureus . 61 6 Surface Properties of Bacteria • The adhesion dynamics of S . aureus reveal a kind of ‘memory eﬀect’ : As earlier noticed , the combination of SD increasing and SD decreasing part is asym - metrical for the experiments with viable S . aureus : The force values in the second—SD decreasing—part are always higher than their corresponding values in the ﬁrst—SD increasing—part ( cf . Figure 6 . 2 B ) . In the adhesion dynamics of viable S . carnosus and inactive S . aureus , no such eﬀect was observed : The experiments resulted in symmetrical dynamics ( cf . Figure 6 . 2 A and C ) . To sum up , the adhesion dynamics of viable S . carnosus , viable S . aureus , and by formaldehyde inactivated S . aureus on OTS type T substrates were investigated and signiﬁcant diﬀerences were observed ( cf . Table 6 . 1 ) : Experiments with viable S . aureus revealed a strong increase of the adhesion for longer contact times indicating some kind of adaption of the bacterial cell . Moreover , the existence of a ‘memory eﬀect’ in S . aureus indicates that this adaption process is not instantly reversible . Treating the S . aureus with formaldehyde changed the results signiﬁcantly . Similar to S . carnosus , the adhesion of inactive S . aureus increased only weakly and no ‘memory eﬀect’ was observed . In fact , the increase was just slightly stronger than observed for bare AFM probes ( roughly 50 % [ Los2009 ] ) suggesting that the dynamics do not arise from a ‘real’ biological origin , but most likely from hydrodynamic and equilibration eﬀects . To give a possible explanation for the diﬀerent adhesion dynamics , the structure of the apathogenic S . carnosus and the highly pathogenic species S . aureus have to be taken into account . As reviewed in section 3 . 3 . 3 , S . aureus possess various adhesive molecules , bound and unbound to the cell wall , which S . carnosus are lacking and which are inactivated due to the formaldehyde treatment . Based on this , feasible types of adaption processes are 1 . conformational changes of membrane proteins , 2 . the secretion of SERAMs by the bacterial cells , or 3 . the migration of adhesion ‘amplifying’ cell wall compounds to the contact region . As the time scale of conformational changes of proteins is typically very fast—usually in the range of a few ns 2 [ Bon2004 , Hen2007 ] —these changes would most likely already occur during the measurements with 0 s SD 3 . Yet , since protein relaxation processes on time scales of several minutes have been reported previously as well [ Wer1999 , Häh2011 , Hof2012 ] , a contribution to the adhesion dynamics can not be ruled out completely . 2 Large scale conformational changes can take ‘longer times’—up to ms [ Hen2007 ] . Yet , this is still magnitudes below the used SDs in the experiments . 3 Even during the 0 s SD measurements , the bacteria are in contact with the surface for a ﬁnite time ( range of ms ) until the force trigger is reached . 62 6 . 1 Dynamic Adhesion of Diﬀerent Staphylococci Species (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:11) (cid:9) (cid:6) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:11) (cid:13) (cid:23)(cid:18)(cid:25) (cid:15) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:13) (cid:21)(cid:15) (cid:11) (cid:22) (cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:17) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1)(cid:14) (cid:15) (cid:13) (cid:21)(cid:15) (cid:11) (cid:22) (cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:17) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:4) (cid:9) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:25) (cid:18)(cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:19)(cid:15) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:11) (cid:3) (cid:10)(cid:9) (cid:16) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:15) (cid:9) (cid:13) (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:11) (cid:3) (cid:10)(cid:9) (cid:16) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:15) (cid:9) (cid:13) (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:5) (cid:4) (cid:1)(cid:22) (cid:1)(cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:11) (cid:9) (cid:6) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:25) (cid:18)(cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:19)(cid:15) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5) (cid:4) (cid:9) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:25) (cid:18)(cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:19)(cid:15) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:11) (cid:9) (cid:6) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:25) (cid:18)(cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:19)(cid:15) (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:4) (cid:11) (cid:9) (cid:6) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:11) (cid:13) (cid:23)(cid:18)(cid:25) (cid:15) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:11) (cid:3) (cid:10)(cid:9) (cid:16) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:5) (cid:8) (cid:6) (cid:15) (cid:9) (cid:13) (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:9) (cid:7)(cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:14) (cid:6) (cid:12) (cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8) (cid:24) (cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:11) (cid:13) (cid:15) (cid:1)(cid:14) (cid:15) (cid:19)(cid:11) (cid:26) (cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:22) (cid:10) Figure 6 . 2 : Alternative arrangement of the results of the AFM force spectroscopy exper - iments presented in Figure 6 . 1 . Corresponding adhesion force values for the same SD from both parts—the SD increasing ( left , solid symbol ) and the decreasing ( right , open symbol ) part—of the experiment are combined . A dissimilarity in the ‘memory eﬀect’ of A ) viable S . carnosus , B ) viable S . aureus , and C ) by formaldehyde inactivated S . aureus can be observed . This dissimilarity becomes especially evident in D ) the absolute value of the diﬀerence between the corresponding adhesion force values . All values are normalized with the respective ﬁrst 0 s SD value . 63 6 Surface Properties of Bacteria The secretion of SERAMs can be excluded as a major factor for the dynamic adhe - sion studied in this section . Although this process would lead to increased adhesion forces , it usually occurs on a diﬀerent ( much slower ) time scale and cannot explain the ‘memory eﬀect’ , since every single measurement is carried out on a diﬀerent spot of the surface . The time scale of the migration of adhesion ‘amplifying’ cell wall compounds to the contact region , however , can be in the same order of magnitude as the applied SDs [ Cus1997 , Til2003 ] . Moreover , these processes would also explain both the strong increase in adhesion forces as well as the ‘memory eﬀect’ . As reviewed in section 3 . 3 . 1 , the bacterial cell wall features relatively mobile compounds such as covalently unbound proteins and Lipoteichoic acids . Both of these could act as adhesion ‘amplifying’ molecules . Hence , the possibility of cell wall compounds migrating 4 to the contact re - gion should be considered as a factor boosting the adhesion of the highly pathogenic S . aureus . 6 . 2 Dependence of the Cell Wall Elasticity on the Degree of Peptidoglycan Crosslinking In the publication in Addendum VI , the eﬀect of a reduction in the crosslinking of the PG on the elasticity of the cell wall of highly virulent and resistant prototype strains of S . aureus was investigated . Using AFM PeakForce tapping under physio - logical conditions , the cell wall elasticity of viable , genetically deﬁned cells and their isogenic mutants was characterized . The mutants lack the non - essential transpepti - dase PBP4 and thereby feature a modiﬁed secondary PG crosslinking , as detected by high - performance liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) and ﬂuorescence microscopy . Asso - ciating these ﬁndings with the AFM results reveals that alterations in the secondary PG crosslinking trigger changes in the mechanical properties of the S . aureus cell wall : More precisely , the absence of PBP4 , and the concomitant reduction of the PG crosslinking leads to a reduced stiﬀness of the cell wall . Furthermore , the publication in Addendum VI compares the eﬀect on community acquired - MRSA ( CA - MRSA ) and on hospital acquired - MRSA ( HA - MRSA ) strains . PBP4 is essential for beta - lactam resistance in CA - MRSA but not in HA - MRSA . The reduction in cell wall stiﬀness due to the absence of PBP4 , however , was observed both in CA - and HA - MRSA strains . This indicates that the requirement of PBP4 for beta - lactam resistance—as solely observed in CA - MRSA—is not directly related to 4 Whether this process is an active cell response or whether it is due to physical long - range in - teractions cannot be determined based on the herein presented results . Yet , follow - up projects investigating the dynamic adhesion of S . aureus inactivated by diﬀerent means ( metabolic or structural ) could answer this question . 64 6 . 2 Dependence of the Cell Wall Elasticity on the Degree of Peptidoglycan Crosslinking changes in the mechanical properties of the PG . Still , a correlation is conceivable , since the eﬀect of the reduction of the secondary crosslinking on the mechanical properties of the cell wall in CA - MRSA strains is stronger than in HA - MRSA strains . 65 66 7 Summary and Outlook The goal of this thesis is to unravel the inﬂuence of diﬀerent—subsurface and surface— parameters of a material on biological surface processes . The major focus , thereby , lies on the impact of vdW forces arising from subsurface layers . Therefore , various biolog - ical objects covering a wide - range of scales are studied . It is shown that , independent of the scale , the adhesion process is always aﬀected by diﬀerences in the vdW forces arising from subsurface layers—viz . the subsurface composition of the substrate . Experimentally , the unravelling of vdW forces arising from subsurface layers from all other types of interactions is possible by using a set of tailored Si wafers consist - ing of four diﬀerent types of substrates that can be classiﬁed in a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic pair . As hydrophilic substrates , silicon wafers with ( thin ) native and ( thick ) thermally grown oxide layers are selected and as hydrophobic substrates , the same pair of silicon wafers functionalized with an OTS monolayer . As a result , the sur - face chemistry and the subsurface composition of the substrates are varied separately in a well - deﬁned manner . By performing in situ X - ray reﬂectometry , the structure of protein ﬁlms adsorbed on the set of tailored Si wafers is analyzed . The results reveal an inﬂuence of the subsurface material on the protein adsorbates . More precisely , a distinct inﬂuence of the topmost surface layer and the subsurface material is observed . The topmost surface layer is responsible for the level of denaturation of the proteins and determines the protein layer thickness . The subsurface material inﬂuences the density of the protein layer and thereby the ﬁnal adsorbed amount of protein . The trends in the density and the ﬁnal adsorbed amount are the same for all studied proteins ( BSA , lysozyme , and α - amylase ) and for all pH values tested . AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes in conjunction with ﬂow chamber experiments demonstrate that bacterial adhesion and adsorption is also in - ﬂuenced by the subsurface composition of a substrate . The results of the AFM experi - ments show that the adhesion force of S . carnosus is about a factor of two stronger on the wafers with the thin oxide layer , irrespective if covered by a molecular - sized hydrophobic layer or not . The AFM results are corroborated by ﬂow chamber exper - iments displaying a higher adsorption rate on the wafers with the thin oxide layer . 67 7 Summary and Outlook Using a custom mechanical testing platform ( ‘Robotoe’ ) , the adhesion of setal arrays from alive tropical geckos ( Gekko gecko ) onto the set of tailored Si wafers is tested . Again , the adhesion force is higher on the wafers with the thinner oxide layer for both—hydrophilic and hydrophobic—pairs of substrates . The measured trend in ad - hesion force agrees with theoretical predictions from a modiﬁed MD model , in which vdW potentials with a oxide layer thickness dependency are integrated . Besides the inﬂuence of vdW interactions , the impact of the ﬂuoridation of artiﬁcial tooth material on the attachment of bacteria is studied . The results of AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes show that the adhesion force of oral bacteria is lowered due to the ﬂuoridation . This ﬁnding suggests that the decrease of bacterial adhesion is another origin of the cariostatic eﬀect of ﬂuoride . In addition to the properties of the artiﬁcial , inorganic substrate , the properties of the interacting biological objects are investigated : AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes and varied contact times reveal that the dynamics of the adhesion forces are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for pathogenic and nonpathogenic Staphylococcal species . Pathogenic S . aureus display a strong increase in adhesion and a memory eﬀect . Both is absent in the case of nonpathogenic S . carnosus and dead S . aureus . These ﬁndings indicate that during the attachment of S . aureus a rearrangement process of cell wall compounds takes place that S . carnosus is lacking . By employing AFM in peak force tapping mode , the topography and elasticity of live S . aureus cells is mapped . The results indicate that the mechanical properties of the S . aureus cell wall are changed due to alterations in the secondary PG crosslinking . The overall elasticity of both HA and CA - MRSA bacteria is enhanced when lacking the non - essential transpeptidase PBP4 . The eﬀect of the reduction of the secondary crosslinking on the elasticity of the cell wall is stronger in CA - MRSA strains than in HA - MRSA strains . Interestingly , this correlates with β - lactam resistance ; CA - MRSA strains require PBP4 for the resistance . In short , this thesis reveals that the material hidden below the topmost surface layer can have an inﬂuence on biological surface processes , that the ﬂuoridation of artiﬁcial teeth decreases the initial bacterial attachment , that rearrangement processes occur in bacteria triggered by surface contact , and that a reduced crosslinking of the peptiodg - lycan results in an increased elasticity of the bacterial cell wall . Furthermore , it is also demonstrated why a thorough separation of parameters is important to achieve a comprehensive understanding of biological adhesion . For the future , this thesis opens up a variety of possible follow - up studies ; some of which are already ongoing . Concerning the inﬂuence of vdW interactions on biological systems , a thorough the - oretical description is necessary . Full spectral methods for complete Lifshitz calcu - 68 lations are challenging in the case of biological materials which are too complex to include all necessary parameters . Yet , a promising starting point could be the use of spectral data for ﬁxed model proteins ( e . g . keratin ) representing the gecko sys - tem . Based on this , the more complex system of mobile single proteins could be tackled . Finally , a mixture of proteins and polysaccharides , representing the bacterial cell wall could be addressed . From an experimental point of view , various follow - up experiments are conceivable : In general , intermediate thicknesses of silicon oxide layers could be studied to determine a ‘critical’ thickness , necessary to ‘shield’ the subsurface compound of the vdW interactions . Moreover , diﬀerent tailored systems featuring , for instance , a higher clinical relevance are of interest . For the studied bio - logical systems , follow - up questions arise as well : In the case of the protein adsorption , a direct observation of the surface mobility on the hydrophilic surfaces is intriguing . In the case of bacteria , a very applied experiment could be the coating of diﬀerent materials ( e . g . gold , polymers , ceramics ) with thin layers that are reputed to have antifouling properties and study their eﬃciency . Additionally , the mixture of protein adsorption and bacterial adhesion exposes important questions , such as the eﬀect of diﬀerent conformations of adsorbed proteins on subsequently adhering bacteria . Regarding the consequence of the ﬂuoridation of hydroxyapatite surfaces , a necessary follow - up study should investigate the adsorption of proteins , followed by a combina - tion with the bacterial adhesion . The nanoscale mapping of the local elasticity of the bacterial cell wall is a powerful and novel tool that can be used to tackle many signiﬁcant questions . Similar to the herein presented study , the comparison of further mutant / wild - type system could help answering various questions of microbiology and medicine . As a direct follow - up of the presented ﬁndings , an in - depth analysis of the correlation of cell wall crosslinking , elasticity and resistance to antimicrobial agents is highly interesting . In general , the combination of physical tools with biological objects is very promising and has the potential to help tackling many important questions in microbiology and medicine . 69 70 Bibliography [ Abk1994 ] V . I . Abkevich , A . M . Gutin , and E . I . Shakhnovich , Free Energy Landscape for Protein Folding Kinetics : Intermediates , Traps , and Multiple Pathways in Theory and Lattice Model Simulations , J Chem Phys 101 ( 1994 ) 6052 – 6062 . ↑ 7 [ Abs1983 ] D . R . Absolom , F . V . Lamberti , Z . Policova , W . Zingg , C . J . van Oss , and A . W . Neumann , Surface Thermodynamics of Bacterial Adhesion , Appl Environ Microbiol 46 ( 1983 ) 90 – 97 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Ada2011 ] J . Adamcik , A . Berquand , and R . Mezzenga , Single - Step Direct Measurement of Amy - loid Fibrils Stiﬀness by Peak Force Quantitative Nanomechanical Atomic Force Mi - croscopy , Appl Phys Lett 98 ( 2011 ) 193701 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 [ Alb1990 ] T . R . Albrecht , S . Akamine , T . E . Carver , and C . F . Quate , Microfabrication of Cantilever Styli for the Atomic Force Microscope , J Vac Sci Technol A 8 ( 1990 ) 3386 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ An1998 ] Y . H . An and R . J . Friedman , Concise Review of Mechanisms of Bacterial Adhesion to Biomaterial Surfaces , J Biomed Mater Res , Part A 43 ( 1998 ) 338 – 348 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 5 . 3 [ And2008 ] G . G . Anderson and G . A . O’Toole , Innate and Induced Resistance Mechanisms of Bacterial Bioﬁlms , Curr Top Microbiol 322 ( 2008 ) 85 – 105 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Ans2010 ] K . Anselme , P . Davidson , A . M . Popa , M . Giazzon , M . Liley , and L . Ploux , The Interaction of Cells and Bacteria with Surfaces Structured at the Nanometre Scale , Acta Biomater 6 ( 2010 ) 3824 – 3846 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Arc1998 ] G . L . Archer , Staphylococcus aureus : a Well - Armed Pathogen , Clin infect dis , 1998 , pp . 1179 – 1181 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Arz2003 ] E . Arzt , S . N . Gorb , and R . Spolenak , From Micro to Nano Contacts in Biological Attachment Devices , Proc Natl Acad Sci 100 ( 2003 ) 10603 – 10606 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Asa2005 ] D . B . Asay and S . H . Kim , Evolution of the Adsorbed Water Layer Structure on Silicon Oxide at Room Temperature , J Phys Chem B 109 ( 2005 ) 16760 – 16763 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 8 [ Ash1970 ] A . Ashkin , Acceleration and Trapping of Particles by Radiation Pressure , Phys Rev Lett 24 ( 1970 ) 156 – 159 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 71 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Ash1986 ] A . Ashkin , J . M . Dziedzic , J . E . Bjorkholm , and S . Chu , Observation of a Single - Beam Gradient Force Optical Trap for Dielectric Particles , Opt Lett 11 ( 1986 ) 288 – 290 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Ash1987 ] A . Ashkin and J . M . Dziedzic , Optical Trapping and Manipulation of Viruses and Bacteria , Science 235 ( 1987 ) 1517 – 1520 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Aut2002a ] K . Autumn and A . M . Peattie , Mechanisms of Adhesion in Geckos , Integr Comp Biol 42 ( 2002 ) 1081 – 1090 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Aut2002b ] K . Autumn , M . Sitti , Y . A . Liang , A . M . Peattie , W . R . Hansen , S . Sponberg , T . W . Kenny , R . S . Fearing , J . N . Israelachvili , and R . J . Full , Evidence for Van Der Waals Adhesion in Gecko Setae , Proc Natl Acad Sci 99 ( 2002 ) 12252 – 12256 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Aut2006a ] K . Autumn , A . Dittmore , D . Santos , M . Spenko , and M . Cutkosky , Frictional Adhe - sion : a New Angle on Gecko Attachment , J Exp Biol 209 ( 2006 ) 3569 – 3579 . ↑ 5 . 1 . 3 [ Aut2006b ] K . Autumn , C . Majidi , R . E . Groﬀ , A . Dittmore , and R . S . Fearing , Eﬀective Elastic Modulus of Isolated Gecko Setal Arrays , J Exp Biol 209 ( 2006 ) 3558 – 3568 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Bak2003 ] D . P . Bakker , A . van der Mats , G . J . Verkerke , H . J . Busscher , and H . C . van der Mei , Comparison of Velocity Proﬁles for Diﬀerent Flow Chamber Designs Used in Studies of Microbial Adhesion to Surfaces , Appl Environ Microbiol 69 ( 2003 ) 6280 – 6287 . ↑ 4 . 3 [ Ban2003 ] J . A . Banas and M . M . Vickerman , Glucan - Binding Proteins of the Oral Streptococci , Crit Rev Oral Biol M 14 ( 2003 ) 89 – 99 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Bar1968 ] F . F . Barrett , R . F . McGehee , and M . Finland , Methicillin - Resistant Staphylococcus aureus at Boston City Hospital : Bacteriologic and Epidemiologic Observations , New Engl J Med 279 ( 1968 ) 441 – 448 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Bar2011 ] W . J . P . Barnes , P . J . P . Goodwyn , M . Nokhbatolfoghahai , and S . N . Gorb , Elastic Modulus of Tree Frog Adhesive Toe Pads , J Comp Physiol A ( 2011 ) . ↑ 1 [ Bau1986 ] A . M . Bauer and A . P . Russell , Hoplodactylus delcourti n . sp . ( Reptilia : Gekkonidae ) , the Largest Known Gecko , New Zeal J Zool 13 ( 1986 ) 141 – 148 . ↑ 3 . 4 [ Bay1998 ] K . W . W . Bayles , C . A . Wesson , L . E . Liou , L . K . Fox , G . A . Bohach , and W . R . Trum - ble , Intracellular Staphylococcus aureus Escapes the Endosome and Induces Apoptosis in Epithelial Cells , Infect Immun 66 ( 1998 ) 336 – 342 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Bay2009 ] S . Bayoudh , A . Othmane , L . Mora , and H . Ben Ouada , Assessing Bacterial Adhesion Using DLVO and XDLVO Theories and the Jet Impingement Technique , Colloids Surf B 73 ( 2009 ) 1 – 9 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Bea1981 ] E . H . Beachey , Bacterial Adherence : Adhesion - Receptor Interactions Mediating the Attachment of Bacteria to Mucosal Surfaces , J Infect Dis 143 ( 1981 ) 325 – 345 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 72 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Bel2008 ] M . Bellion , L . Santen , H . Mantz , H . Hähl , A . Quinn , A . M . Nagel , C . Gilow , C . Weitenberg , Y . Schmitt , and K . Jacobs , Protein Adsorption on Tailored Substrates : Long - Range Forces and Conformational Changes , J Phys : Condens Matter 20 ( 2008 ) 404226 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 , 5 . 1 . 1 [ Bel2012 ] M . Bellion , Die Monte Carlo Methode für komplexe Fluide - Adsorptionsphänomene und Cluster Algorithmen , Dissertation , 2012 , Saarbrücken . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Ben2000 ] M . Benoit , D . Gabriel , G . Gerisch , and H . E . Gaub , Discrete Interactions in Cell Adhesion Measured by Single - Molecule Force Spectroscopy , Nat Cell Biol 2 ( 2000 ) 313 – 317 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Ber1981 ] M . S . Bergdoll , B . A . Crass , R . F . Reiser , R . N . Robbins , and J . P . Davis , A New Staphylococcal Enterotoxin , Enterotoxin F , Associated with Toxic - Shock - Syndrome Staphylococcus aureus Isolates , Lancet 1 ( 1981 ) 1017 – 1021 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Ber2005 ] A . Berquand , N . Xia , D . G . Castner , B . H . Clare , N . L . Abbott , V . Dupres , Y . Adri - aensen , and Y . F . Dufrene , Antigen Binding Forces of Single Antilysozyme Fv Frag - ments Explored by Atomic Force Microscopy , Langmuir 21 ( 2005 ) 5517 – 5523 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Ber2010 ] A . Berquand , C . Roduit , S . Kasas , A . Holloschi , L . Ponce , and M . Hafner , Atomic Force Microscopy Imaging of Living Cells , Micros Today 18 ( 2010 ) 8 – 14 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 [ Ber2011 ] A . Berquand , Quantitative Imaging of Living Biological Samples by PeakForce QNM Atomic Force Microscopy , Bruker Corporation Application Note AN135 , 2011 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 [ Bel1990 ] M . - N . Bellon - Fontaine , N . Mozes , H . C . van der Mei , J . Sjollema , O . Cerf , P . G . Rouxhet , and H . J . Busscher , A Comparison of Thermodynamic Approaches to Predict the Adhesion of Dairy Microorganisms to Solid Substrata , Cell Biophys 17 ( 1990 ) 93 – 106 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Bin1986a ] G . Binnig , Atomic Force Microscope and Method for Imaging Surfaces with Atomic Resolution ( 1986 ) . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Bin1986b ] G . Binnig , C . F . Quate , and C . Gerber , Atomic Force Microscope , Phys Rev Lett 56 ( 1986 ) 930 – 933 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Bit2012 ] A . Bitler , R . Dover , and Y . Shai , Fractal Properties of Macrophage Membrane Studied by AFM , Micron ( 2012 ) . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 [ Blo1992 ] S . M . Block , Making Light Work with Optical Tweezers , Nature 360 ( 1992 ) 493 – 495 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Bod1989 ] M . K . Bodén and J . - I . Flock , Fibrinogen - Binding Protein / Clumping Factor from Staphylococcus aureus , Infect Immun 57 ( 1989 ) 2358 – 2363 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Bod1992 ] M . K . Bodén and J . - I . Flock , Evidence for Three Diﬀerent Fibrinogen - Binding Pro - teins with Unique Properties from Staphylococcus aureus Strain Newman . , Microb Pathogenesis 12 ( 1992 ) 289 – 298 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 73 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Bod1994 ] M . K . Bodén and J . - I . Flock , Cloning and Characterization of a Gene for a 19kDa Fibrinogen - Binding Protein from Staphylococcus aureus , Mol Microbiol 12 ( 1994 ) 599 – 606 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Boe2010 ] L . F . Boesel , C . Greiner , E . Arzt , and A . del Campo , Gecko - Inspired Surfaces : A Path to Strong and Reversible Dry Adhesives , Adv Mater 22 ( 2010 ) 2125 – 2137 . ↑ 1 [ Bok2008a ] N . P . Boks , H . J . Busscher , H . C . van der Mei , and W . Norde , Bond - Strengthening in Staphylococcal Adhesion to Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Surfaces Using Atomic Force Microscopy , Langmuir 24 ( 2008 ) 12990 – 12994 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 , 6 . 1 [ Bok2008b ] N . P . Boks , W . Norde , H . C . van der Mei , and H . J . Busscher , Forces Involved in Bacterial Adhesion to Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Surfaces , Microbiology 154 ( 2008 ) 3122 – 3133 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Bon2000 ] I . G . Boneca , Z . - H . Huang , D . A . Gage , and A . Tomasz , Characterization of Staphylococcus aureus Cell Wall Glycan Strands , Evidence for a New β - N - Acetylglucosaminidase Activity , J Biol Chem 275 ( 2000 ) 9910 – 9918 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Bon2004 ] P . J . Bond and M . S . P . Sansom , The Simulation Approach to Bacterial Outer Mem - brane Proteins ( Review ) , Mol Membr Biol 21 ( 2004 ) 151 – 161 . ↑ 6 . 1 [ Bow1964 ] F . P . Bowden and D . Tabor , Friction and Lubrication of Solids : Part 2 , Oxford Uni - versity Press , Oxford , USA , 1964 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Bow1985 ] B . D . Bowen , Streaming Potential in the Hydrodynamic Entrance Region of Cylindrical and Rectangular Capillaries , J Colloid Interface Sci 106 ( 1985 ) 367 – 376 . ↑ 4 . 3 , 4 . 3 , 4 . 3 [ Bow2001 ] W . R . Bowen , R . W . Lovitt , and C . J . Wright , Atomic Force Microscopy Study of the Adhesion of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , J Colloid Interface Sci 237 ( 2001 ) 54 – 61 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Bow2002 ] W . R . Bowen , A . S . Fenton , R . W . Lovitt , and C . J . Wright , The Measurement of Bacillus mycoides Spore Adhesion using Atomic Force Microscopy , Simple Counting Methods , and a Spinning Disk Technique , Biotechnol Bioeng 79 ( 2002 ) 170 – 179 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Boy1990 ] J . M . Boyce , Increasing Prevalence of Methicillin - resistant Staphylococcus aureus in the United States , Infect Cont Hosp Ep 11 ( 1990 ) 639 – 642 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Bri1982 ] P . D . Bridge and P . H . A . Sneath , Streptococcus gallinarum sp . nov . and Streptococcus oralis sp . nov . , Int J Syst Bacteriol 32 ( 1982 ) 410 – 415 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Bru1983 ] L . W . Bruch , Theory of Physisorption Interactions , Surf Sci 125 ( 1983 ) 194 – 217 . ↑ 8 [ Bru1997 ] R . Bruckner , Gene Replacement in Staphylococcus carnosus and Staphylococcus xylo - sus , FEMS Microbiol Lett 151 ( 1997 ) 1 – 8 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Bru2001 ] G . M . Bruinsma , H . C . van der Mei , and H . J . Busscher , Bacterial Adhesion to Sur - face Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Contact Lenses , Biomaterials 22 ( 2001 ) 3217 – 3224 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 74 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Bry2008 ] J . D . Bryers , Medical Bioﬁlms , Biotechnol Bioeng 100 ( 2008 ) 1 – 18 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Brz1994 ] J . B . Brzoska , I . B . Azouz , and F . Rondelez , Silanization of Solid Substrates : A Step toward Reproducibility , Langmuir 10 ( 1994 ) 4367 – 4373 . ↑ 4 . 1 . 1 [ Buc2010 ] A . W . Buck , V . G . Fowler Jr , R . Yongsunthon , J . Liu , A . C . DiBartola , Y . - A . Que , P . Moreillon , and S . K . Lower , Bonds between Fibronectin and Fibronectin - Binding Proteins on Staphylococcus aureus and Lactococcus lactis , Langmuir 26 ( 2010 ) 10764 – 10770 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Bur2003 ] G . A . Burks , S . B . Velegol , E . Paramonova , B . E . Lindenmuth , J . D . Feick , and B . E . Logan , Macroscopic and Nanoscale Measurements of the Adhesion of Bacteria with Varying Outer Layer Surface Composition , Langmuir 19 ( 2003 ) 2366 – 2371 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Bus1983 ] H . J . Busscher , A . W . J . van Pelt , H . P . de Jong , and J . Arends , Eﬀect of Spreading Pressure on Surface Free Energy Determinations by Means of Contact Angle Measure - ments , J Colloid Interface Sci 95 ( 1983 ) 23 – 27 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 6 [ Bus1984 ] H . J . Busscher , A . H . Weerkamp , H . C . van der Mei , A . W . J . van Pelt , H . P . de Jong , and J . Arends , Measurement of the Surface Free Energy of Bacterial Cell Surfaces and Its Relevance for Adhesion , Appl Environ Microbiol 48 ( 1984 ) 980 – 983 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Bus1990 ] H . J . Busscher , M . - N . Bellon - Fontaine , N . Mozes , H . C . van der Mei , J . Sjollema , A . J . Leonard , P . G . Rouxhet , and O . Cerf , An Interlaboratory Comparison of Physico - Chemical Methods for Studying the Surface Properties of Microorganisms - Application to Streptococcus thermophilus and Leuconostoc mesenteroides , J Microbiol Meth 12 ( 1990 ) 101 – 115 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Bus2008 ] H . J . Busscher , R . J . B . Dijkstra , D . E . Langworthy , D . I . Collias , D . W . Bjorkquist , M . D . Mitchell , and H . C . van der Mei , Interaction Forces Between Waterborne Bac - teria and Activated Carbon Particles , J Colloid Interface Sci 322 ( 2008 ) 351 – 357 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ But2005 ] H . J . Butt , B . Cappella , and M . Kappl , Force Measurements with the Atomic Force Microscope : Technique , Interpretation and Applications , Surf Sci Rep 59 ( 2005 ) 1 – 152 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Cam2000 ] T . A . Camesano and B . E . Logan , Probing Bacterial Electrosteric Interactions Using Atomic Force Microscopy , Environ Sci Technol 34 ( 2000 ) 3354 – 3362 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 3 . 3 . 2 [ Cao2006 ] T . Cao , H . Tang , X . Liang , A . Wang , G . W . Auner , S . O . Salley , and K . Y . S . Ng , Nanoscale Investigation on Adhesion of E . coli Surface Modiﬁed Silicone Using Atomic Force Microscopy , Biotechnol Bioeng 94 ( 2006 ) 167 – 176 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Car1997 ] R . W . Carpick and M . Salmeron , Scratching the Surface : Fundamental Investigations of Tribology with Atomic Force Microscopy , Chem Rev 97 ( 1997 ) 1163 – 1194 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Car1999 ] R . W . Carpick , D . F . Ogletree , and M . Salmeron , A General Equation for Fitting Contact Area and Friction vs Load Measurements , J Colloid Interface Sci 211 ( 1999 ) 395 – 400 . ↑ 3 . 10 , 3 . 5 75 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Car2007 ] R . W . Carpick , J . Batteas , and M . P . de Boer , Scanning Probe Studies of Nanoscale Adhesion Between Solids in the Presence of Liquids and Monolayer Films , Handbook of nanotechnology , 2007 , pp . 951 – 979 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 1 [ Cha1913 ] D . L . Chapman , LI . A Contribution to the Theory of Electrocapillarity , Phil Mag 25 ( 1913 ) 475 – 481 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 2 [ Cha1983 ] W . G . Characklis and K . E . Cooksey , Bioﬁlms and Microbial Fouling , Adv Appl Microbiol 29 ( 1983 ) 93 – 138 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Cha2002 ] T . Chavakis , M . Hussain , S . M . Kanse , G . Peters , R . G . Bretzel , J . I . Flock , M . Herrmann , and K . T . Preissner , Staphylococcus aureus Extracellular Adherence Protein Serves as Anti - Inﬂammatory Factor by Inhibiting the Recruitment of Host Leukocytes , Nat Med 8 ( 2002 ) 687 – 693 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Cha2005 ] T . Chavakis , K . Wiechmann , K . T . Preissner , and M . Herrmann , Staphylococcus aureus Interactions with the Endothelium - the Role of Bacterial " Secretable Expanded Reper - toire Adhesive Molecules " ( SERAM ) in Disturbing Host Defense Systems , Thromb Haemostasis 94 ( 2005 ) 278 – 285 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Chh2002 ] G . S . Chhatwal , Anchorless Adhesins and Invasins of Gram - Positive Bacteria : a New Class of Virulence Factors , Trends Microbiol 10 ( 2002 ) 205 – 208 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Chi1919 ] H . T . Chickering and J . H . Park , Staphylococcus aureus Pneumonia , JAMA 72 ( 1919 ) 617 – 626 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Cla1924 ] J . K . Clarke , On the Bacterial Factor in the Aetiology of Dental Caries , British journal of experimental pathology 5 ( 1924 ) 141 – 147 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Cla2006 ] S . R . Clarke and S . J . Foster , Surface Adhesins of Staphylococcus aureus , Advances in Microbial Physiology 51 ( 2006 ) 187 – 224 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Cle1999 ] S . C . Clear and P . F . Nealey , Chemical Force Microscopy Study of Adhesion and Fric - tion Between Surfaces Functionalized with Self - Assembled Monolayers and Immersed in Solvents , J Colloid Interface Sci 213 ( 1999 ) 238 – 250 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Cos1987 ] J . W . Costerton , K . J . Cheng , G . G . Geesey , T . I . Ladd , J . C . Nickel , M . Dasgupta , and T . J . Marrie , Bacterial Bioﬁlms in Nature and Disease , Annu Rev Microbiol 41 ( 1987 ) 435 – 464 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Cos2008 ] D . Costa , A . Tougerti , F . Tielens , C . Gervais , L . Stievano , and J . F . Lambert , DFT Study of the Adsorption of Microsolvated Glycine on a Hydrophilic Amorphous Silica Surface , Phys Chem Chem Phys 10 ( 2008 ) 6360 – 6368 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Cuc2001 ] C . Cucarella , C . Solano , J . Valle , B . Amorena , I . Lasa , and J . R . Penades , Bap , a Staphylococcus aureus Surface Protein Involved in Bioﬁlm Formation , J Bacteriol 183 ( 2001 ) 2888 – 2896 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Cus1997 ] E . L . Cussler , Diﬀusion , Mass Transfer in Fluid Systems , 2 . Auﬂ . , Cambridge Uni - versity Press , New York , 1997 . ↑ 6 . 1 76 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Car1999 ] M . Carrion - Vazquez , A . F . Oberhauser , S . B . Fowler , P . E . Marszalek , S . E . Broedel , J . Clarke , and J . M . Fernandez , Mechanical and Chemical Unfolding of a Single Protein : a Comparison , Proc Natl Acad Sci 96 ( 1999 ) 3694 – 3699 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Car2000 ] M . Carrion - Vazquez , A . F . Oberhauser , T . E . Fisher , P . E . Marszalek , H . Li , and J . M . Fernandez , Mechanical Design of Proteins Studied by Single - Molecule Force Spectroscopy and Protein Engineering , Prog Biophys Mol Bio 74 ( 2000 ) 63 – 91 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Dag2007 ] E . Dague , D . Alsteens , J . - P . Latge , C . Verbelen , D . Raze , A . R . Baulard , and Y . F . Dufrene , Chemical Force Microscopy of Single Live Cells , Nano Lett 7 ( 2007 ) 3026 – 3030 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Den2011 ] Y . Deng , M . Sun , and J . Shaevitz , Direct Measurement of Cell Wall Stress Stiﬀening and Turgor Pressure in Live Bacterial Cells , Phys Rev Lett 107 ( 2011 ) . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Der1941 ] B . V . Derjaguin and L . Landau , Theory of the Stability of Strongly Charged Lyophobic Sols and of the Adhesion of Strongly Charged Particles in Solutions of Electrolytes , Acta Physicochim URS 14 ( 1941 ) 633 – 662 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Der1975 ] B . V . Derjaguin , V . M . Muller , and Yu . P . Toporov , Eﬀect of Contact Deformations on the Adhesion of Particles , J Colloid Interface Sci 53 ( 1975 ) 314 – 326 . ↑ 3 . 5 , 4 . 7 , 4 . 2 . 4 [ Des2006 ] M . Desvaux , E . Dumas , I . Chafsey , and M . Hebraud , Protein Cell Surface Display in Gram - Positive Bacteria : from Single Protein to Macromolecular Protein Structure , FEMS Microbiol Lett 256 ( 2006 ) 1 – 15 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Dij1987 ] J . Dijk , F . Herkstroter , H . J . Busscher , A . H . Weerkamp , H . Jansen , and J . Arends , Surface - Free Energy and Bacterial Adhesion — An in Vivo Study in Beagle Dogs , J Clin Periodontol 14 ( 1987 ) 300 – 304 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Din2000 ] A . R . Dinner , A . Šali , L . J . Smith , C . M . Dobson , and M . Karplus , Understanding Pro - tein Folding via Free - Energy Surfaces from Theory and Experiment , TiBS 25 ( 2000 ) 331 – 339 . ↑ 7 [ deJon1992 ] B . L . M . de Jonge , Y . - S . Chang , D . A . Gage , and A . Tomasz , Peptidoglycan Com - position of a Highly Methicillin - Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Strain—the Role of Penicillin Binding Protein - 2a , J Biol Chem 267 ( 1992 ) 11248 – 11254 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Don2002 ] R . M . Donlan and J . W . Costerton , Bioﬁlms : Survival Mechanisms of Clinically Rel - evant Microorganisms , Clin Microbiol Rev 15 ( 2002 ) 167 – 193 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 3 . 3 . 3 [ Dor2008 ] L . S . Dorobantu , S . Bhattacharjee , J . M . Foght , and M . R . Gray , Atomic Force Mi - croscopy Measurement of Heterogeneity in Bacterial Surface Hydrophobicity , Lang - muir 24 ( 2008 ) 4944 – 4951 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Dor2009 ] L . S . Dorobantu , S . Bhattacharjee , J . M . Foght , and M . R . Gray , Analysis of Force Interactions between AFM Tips and Hydrophobic Bacteria Using DLVO Theory , Lang - muir 25 ( 2009 ) 6968 – 6976 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 77 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Dre2011 ] A . Dreisbach , J . M . van Dijl , and G . Buist , The Cell Surface Proteome of Staphylo - coccus aureus , Proteomics 11 ( 2011 ) 3154 – 3168 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 , 3 . 7 [ DeSou2008 ] E . J . De Souza , M . Brinkmann , C . Mohrdieck , A . J . Crosby , and E . Arzt , Capillary Forces between Chemically Diﬀerent Substrates , Langmuir 24 ( 2008 ) 10161 – 10168 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 8 [ Duf2002 ] Y . F . Dufrene , Atomic Force Microscopy , a Powerful Tool in Microbiology , J Bacteriol 184 ( 2002 ) 5205 – 5213 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 [ Duf2004 ] Y . F . Dufrene , Using Nanotechniques to Explore Microbial Surfaces , Nat Rev Microbiol 2 ( 2004 ) 451 – 460 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Duf2008 ] Y . F . Dufrene , Towards Nanomicrobiology Using Atomic Force Microscopy , Nat Rev Microbiol 6 ( 2008 ) 674 – 680 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 [ Dug1960 ] D . S . Dugdale , Yielding of Steel Sheets Containing Slits , J Mech Phys Solids 8 ( 1960 ) 100 – 104 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Dup2005 ] V . Dupres , F . D . Menozzi , C . Locht , B . H . Clare , N . L . Abbott , S . Cuenot , C . Bom - pard , D . Raze , and Y . F . Dufrene , Nanoscale Mapping and Functional Analysis of Individual Adhesins on Living Bacteria , Nat Methods 2 ( 2005 ) 515 – 520 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Elw1998 ] H . Elwing , Protein Absorption and Ellipsometry in Biomaterial Research , Biomaterials 19 ( 1998 ) 397 – 406 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Eme2004 ] R . J . Emerson and T . A . Camesano , Nanoscale Investigation of Pathogenic Microbial Adhesion to a Biomaterial , Appl Environ Microbiol 70 ( 2004 ) 6012 – 6022 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Eme2006 ] R . J . Emerson , T . S . Bergstrom , Y . Liu , E . R . Soto , C . A . Brown , W . G . McGimpsey , and T . A . Camesano , Microscale Correlation Between Surface Chemistry , Texture , and the Adhesive Strength of Staphylococcus epidermidis , Langmuir 22 ( 2006 ) 11311 – 11321 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Ern1966 ] V . Ernst and R . Ruibal , Structure and Development of Digital Lamellae of Lizards , J Morphol 120 ( 1966 ) 233 – 265 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Eus2004 ] S . R . Euston , Computer Simulation of Proteins : Adsorption , Gelation and Self - Association , Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci 9 ( 2004 ) 321 – 327 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Eve2008 ] F . Evers , K . Shokuie , M . Paulus , C . Sternemann , C . Czeslik , and M . Tolan , Exploring the Interfacial Structure of Protein Adsorbates and the Kinetics of Protein Adsorption : an in Situ High - Energy X - Ray Reﬂectivity Study , Langmuir 24 ( 2008 ) 10216 – 10221 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Fre2006 ] L . Freeman - Cook and K . D . Freeman - Cook , Staphylococcus aureus Infections , 2006 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 78 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Fed2001 ] W . Federle , E . L . Brainerd , T . A . McMahon , and B . Hölldobler , Biomechanics of the Movable Pretarsal Adhesive Organ in Ants and Bees , Proc Natl Acad Sci 98 ( 2001 ) 6215 – 6220 . ↑ 1 [ Fis2000 ] T . E . Fisher , P . E . Marszalek , and J . M . Fernandez , Stretching Single Molecules Into Novel Conformations Using the Atomic Force Microscope , Nat Struct Biol 7 ( 2000 ) 719 – 724 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ For1982 ] M . A . Fortes , Axisymmetric Liquid Bridges Between Parallel Plates , J Colloid Interface Sci 88 ( 1982 ) 338 – 352 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 8 [ Fos1998 ] T . J . Foster and M . Hook , Surface Protein Adhesins of Staphylococcus aureus , Trends Microbiol 6 ( 1998 ) 484 – 488 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 , 3 . 3 . 3 [ Fos2005 ] T . J . Foster , Immune Evasion by Staphylococci , Nat Rev Microbiol 3 ( 2005 ) 948 – 958 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 , 3 . 3 . 3 [ Fra2005 ] B . W . Frazee , J . Lynn , E . D . Charlebois , L . Lambert , D . Lowery , and F . Perdreau - Remington , High Prevalence of Methicillin - Resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Emer - gency Department Skin and Soft Tissue Infections , Annals of emergency medicine 45 ( 2005 ) 311 – 320 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Fre1995 ] R . H . French , R . M . Cannon , L . K . Denoyer , and Y . - m . Chiang , Full Spectral Calcu - lation of Nonretarded Hamaker Constants for Ceramic Systems from Interband Tran - sition Strengths , Solid State Ionics 75 ( 1995 ) 13 – 33 . ↑ 3 . 1 [ Fre2010 ] R . H . French , V . A . Parsegian , R . Podgornik , R . F . Rajter , A . Jagota , J . Luo , D . Asthagiri , M . K . Chaudhury , Y . - m . Chiang , S . Granick , S . Kalinin , M . Kardar , R . Kjellander , D . C . Langreth , J . Lewis , S . Lustig , D . Wesolowski , J . S . Wettlaufer , W . - Y . Ching , M . Finnis , F . Houlihan , O . A . von Lilienfeld , C . J . Van Oss , and T . Zemb , Long Range Interactions in Nanoscale Science , Rev Mod Phys 82 ( 2010 ) 1887 – 1944 . ↑ 3 . 1 [ Fri1994 ] C . D . Frisbie , L . F . Rozsnyai , A . Noy , M . S . Wrighton , and C . M . Lieber , Functional Group Imaging by Chemical Force Microscopy , Science 265 ( 1994 ) 2071 – 2074 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Gab2008 ] F . Gaboriaud , M . L . Gee , R . A . Strugnell , and J . F . L . Duval , Coupled Electrostatic , Hydrodynamic , and Mechanical Properties of Bacterial Interfaces in Aqueous Media , Langmuir 24 ( 2008 ) 10988 – 10995 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Gan2007 ] Y . Gan , A Review of Techniques for Attaching Micro - and Nanoparticles to a Probe’s Tip for Surface Force and Near - ﬁeld Optical Measurements , Rev Sci Instrum 78 ( 2007 ) 081101 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Gar2002 ] R . Garcia and R . Perez , Dynamic Atomic Force Microscopy Methods , Surf Sci Rep 47 ( 2002 ) 197 – 301 . ↑ 6 [ Gar2008 ] T . R . Garrett , M . Bhakoo , and Z . Zhang , Bacterial Adhesion and Bioﬁlms on Surfaces , Prog Nat Sci 18 ( 2008 ) 1049 – 1056 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 79 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Gat2009 ] S . Gatermann and K . Miksits , Staphylokokken , Medizinische mikrobiologie und infek - tiologie , 2009 , pp . 191 – 202 . ↑ 14 [ Gei2003 ] A . K . Geim , S . V . Dubonos , I . V . Grigorieva , K . S . Novoselov , A . A . Zhukov , and S . Y . Shapoval , Microfabricated Adhesive Mimicking Gecko Foot - Hair , Nature Mater 2 ( 2003 ) 461 – 463 . ↑ 1 , 3 . 4 . 1 [ Ger2012 ] S . Gerth , M . Lessel , O . Bäumchen , M . Klimczak , H . G . Steinrück , K . Jacobs , and A . Magerl , On The Structure of Self - Assembled Silane Coatings , submitted ( 2012 ) . ↑ 4 . 1 . 1 [ Gib1973 ] R . J . Gibbons and J . van Houte , On the Formation of Dental Plaques , Journal of Periodontology 44 ( 1973 ) 347 – 360 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Gib1975 ] R . J . Gibbons and J . van Houte , Bacterial Adherence in Oral Microbial Ecology , Annu Rev Microbiol 29 ( 1975 ) 19 – 44 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Gie2003 ] F . J . Giessibl , Advances in Atomic Force Microscopy , Rev Mod Phys 75 ( 2003 ) 949 – 983 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Gil2007 ] Y . Gilbert , M . Deghorain , L . Wang , B . Xu , P . D . Pollheimer , H . J . Gruber , J . Erring - ton , B . Hallet , X . Haulot , C . Verbelen , P . Hols , and Y . F . Dufrene , Single - Molecule Force Spectroscopy and Imaging of the Vancomycin / D - Ala - D - Ala Interaction , Nano Lett 7 ( 2007 ) 796 – 801 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Göt1990 ] F . Götz , Staphylococcus carnosus : a New Host Organism for Gene Cloning and Protein Production , J Appl Bacteriol 69 ( 1990 ) S49 – S53 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Göt2002 ] F . Götz , Staphylococcus and Bioﬁlms , Mol Microbiol 43 ( 2002 ) 1367 – 1378 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Gou1910 ] M . Gouy , Sur La Constitution De La Charge Electrique a La Surface D’un Electrolyte , J Phys Theor Appl 9 ( 1910 ) 457 – 468 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 2 [ Gra1884 ] C . Gram , Ueber die isolierte Faerbung der Schizomyceten : In Schnitt - und Trocken - praeparaten , Fortschritte der Medizin 2 ( 1884 ) 185 . ↑ 3 . 3 [ Gra2010 ] N . Gravish , M . Wilkinson , S . Sponberg , A . Parness , N . Esparza , D . Soto , T . Yam - aguchi , M . Broide , M . Cutkosky , C . Creton , and K . Autumn , Rate - Dependent Fric - tional Adhesion in Natural and Synthetic Gecko Setae , J R Soc Interface 7 ( 2010 ) 259 – 269 . ↑ 5 . 1 . 3 [ Gre2000 ] R . J . Green , R . A . Frazier , K . M . Shakesheﬀ , M . C . Davies , C . J . Roberts , and S . J . B . Tendler , Surface Plasmon Resonance Analysis of Dynamic Biological Interactions with Biomaterials , Biomaterials 21 ( 2000 ) 1823 – 1835 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Gri1987 ] A . G . Gristina , Biomaterial - Centered Infection : Microbial Adhesion Versus Tissue Integration , Science 237 ( 1987 ) 1588 – 1595 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Gro2001 ] M . Gross , S . E . Cramton , F . Götz , and A . Peschel , Key Role of Teichoic Acid Net Charge in Staphylococcus aureus Colonization of Artiﬁcial Surfaces , Infect Immun 69 ( 2001 ) 3423 – 34233426 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 80 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Häh2011 ] H . Hähl , Proteinadsorption an Grenzﬂaechen : Bestimmung von Adsorptionskinetik und Adsorbatstruktur mittels Reﬂexionsmethoden , Dissertation , 2011 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 , 6 . 1 [ Ham1980 ] S . Hamada and H . D . Slade , Biology , Immunology , and Cariogenicity of Streptococcus mutans , Microbiol Rev 44 ( 1980 ) 331 – 384 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Han1992 ] H . G . Hansma , J . Vesenka , C . Siegerist , G . Kelderman , H . Morrett , R . L . Sinsheimer , V . Elings , C . Bustamante , and P . K . Hansma , Reproducible Imaging and Dissection of Plasmid DNA Under Liquid with the Atomic Force Microscope , Science 256 ( 1992 ) 1180 – 1184 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Han2005 ] W . R . Hansen and K . Autumn , Evidence for Self - Cleaning in Gecko Setae , Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 ( 2005 ) 385 – 389 . ↑ 1 [ Har2003 ] N . Harraghy , M . Hussain , A . Haggar , T . Chavakis , B . Sinha , M . Herrmann , and J . - I . Flock , The Adhesive and Immunomodulating Properties of the Multifunctional Staphylococcus aureus Protein Eap , Microbiology 149 ( 2003 ) 2701 – 2707 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Har2006 ] N . Harraghy , S . Seiler , K . Jacobs , M . Hannig , M . D . Menger , and M . Herrmann , Ad - vances in in vitro and in vivo Models for Studying the Staphylococcal Factors Involved in Implant Infections , Int J Artif Organs 29 ( 2006 ) 368 – 378 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 3 [ Hed2001 ] S . B . Hedges and R . Thomas , At the Lower Size Limit in Amniote Vertebrates : a New Diminutive Lizard from the West Indies , Caribb J Sci 37 ( 2001 ) 168 – 173 . ↑ 3 . 4 [ Hel2008 ] J . Helenius , C . - P . Heisenberg , H . E . Gaub , and D . J . Muller , Single - Cell Force Spec - troscopy , J Cell Sci 121 ( 2008 ) 1785 – 1791 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 1 [ Her1882 ] H . Hertz , Ueber die Berührung fester elastischer Körper . , Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik ( Crelles Journal ) 1882 ( 1882 ) 156 – 171 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Her1999 ] M . Hermansson , The DLVO Theory in Microbial Adhesion , Colloids Surf B 14 ( 1999 ) 105 – 119 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Heu1995 ] M . Heuberger , G . Dietler , and L . Schlapbach , Mapping the Local Young’s Modulus by Analysis of the Elastic Deformations Occurring in Atomic Force Microscopy , Nan - otechnology 6 ( 1995 ) 12 – 23 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Hil1968 ] U . Hiller , Untersuchungen zum Feinbau und zur Funktion der Haftborsten von Rep - tilien , Zoomorphology 62 ( 1968 ) 307 – 362 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 , 3 . 4 . 1 [ Hil1969 ] U . Hiller , Correlation Between Corona - Discharge of Polyethylene - Films and the Ad - hering Power of Tarentola M . mauritanica ( Rept . ) , Forma et functio 1 ( 1969 ) 350 – 352 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Hin2006 ] P . Hinterdorfer and Y . F . Dufrene , Detection and Localization of Single Molecular Recognition Events Using Atomic Force Microscopy , Nat Methods 3 ( 2006 ) 347 – 355 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 81 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Hof2012 ] A . M . G . Hoﬀmann , Proteinadsorption auf hydrophobisierten Oberﬂächen : Bes - timmung und Modellierung von Adsorptionskinetiken und deren Abhängigkeit von Prozessparametern , Diplomarbeit , 2012 . ↑ 3 . 2 , 6 . 1 [ Hou1980 ] D . B . Hough and L . R . White , The Calculation of Hamaker Constants from Liftshitz Theory with Applications to Wetting Phenomena , Adv Colloid Interface Sci 14 ( 1980 ) 3 – 41 . ↑ e [ Hub2005 ] G . Huber , H . Mantz , R . Spolenak , K . Mecke , K . Jacobs , S . N . Gorb , and E . Arzt , Ev - idence for Capillarity Contributions to Gecko Adhesion from Single Spatula Nanome - chanical Measurements , Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 ( 2005 ) 16293 – 16296 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 1 [ Hue2010 ] S . Huembert , Herstellung und Erprobung von AFM - Bakteriensonden auf deﬁnierten Oberﬂächen , Diplomarbeit , 2010 . ↑ 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 , 13 , 1 [ Hus2001 ] M . Hussain , C . Heilmann , G . Peters , and M . Herrmann , Teichoic Acid Enhances Ad - hesion of Staphylococcus epidermidis to Immobilized Fibronectin , Microb Pathogenesis 31 ( 2001 ) 261 – 270 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Hut1993 ] J . L . Hutter and J . Bechhoefer , Calibration of Atomic - Force Microscope Tips , Rev Sci Instrum 64 ( 1993 ) 1868 – 1873 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 3 [ Hen2007 ] K . Henzler - Wildman and D . Kern , Dynamic Personalities of Proteins , Nature 450 ( 2007 ) 964 – 972 . ↑ 6 . 1 , 2 [ Ish2000 ] N . Ishida , T . Inoue , M . Miyahara , and K . Higashitani , Nano Bubbles on a Hydrophobic Surface in Water Observed by Tapping - Mode Atomic Force Microscopy , Langmuir 16 ( 2000 ) 6377 – 6380 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 4 [ Isr1982 ] J . N . Israelachvili and R . M . Pashley , The Hydrophobic Interaction Is Long - Range , Decaying Exponentially with Distance , Nature 300 ( 1982 ) 341 – 342 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 4 [ Isr1984 ] J . N . Israelachvili and R . M . Pashley , Measurement of the Hydrophobic Interaction Be - tween Two Hydrophobic Surfaces in Aqueous Electrolyte Solutions , J Colloid Interface Sci 98 ( 1984 ) 500 – 514 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 4 [ Isr1992 ] J . N . Israelachvili , Intermolecular and Surface Forces , 2 . Auﬂ . , Academic Press , San Diego , 1992 . ↑ 3 . 1 , 3 . 1 , 3 . 1 . 1 , 3 . 1 . 2 [ Isr1996 ] J . N . Israelachvili and H . Wennerström , Role of Hydration and Water Structure in Biological and Colloidal Interactions , Nature 379 ( 1996 ) 219 – 225 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 4 [ Jan2004 ] J . Jang , G . C . Schatz , and M . A . Ratner , Capillary Force in Atomic Force Microscopy , J Chem Phys 120 ( 2004 ) 1157 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 8 [ Joh1971 ] K . L . Johnson , K . Kendall , and A . D . Roberts , Surface Energy and the Contact of Elastic Solids , Proc R Soc Lond A 324 ( 1971 ) 301 – 313 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Jon1924 ] J . E . Jones , On the Determination of Molecular Fields . —II . From the Equation of State of a Gas , Proc R Soc Lond A 106 ( 1924 ) 463 – 477 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 5 82 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Jon1982 ] G . W . Jones and R . E . Isaacson , Proteinaceous Bacterial Adhesins and Their Recep - tors , CRC Critical Reviews in Microbiology 10 ( 1982 ) 229 – 260 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Jos2009 ] C . Josenhans , H . Hahn , and R . E . Streeck , Bakterien : Deﬁnition und Aufbau , Medi - zinische mikrobiologie und infektiologie , 2009 , pp . 175 – 185 . ↑ 3 . 3 , 12 [ Kal2010 ] S . Kalasin , J . Dabkowski , K . Nuesslein , and M . M . Santore , The Role of Nano - Scale Heterogeneous Electrostatic Interactions in Initial Bacterial Adhesion from Flow : a Case Study with Staphylococcus aureus , Colloids Surf B 76 ( 2010 ) 489 – 495 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Kan2009 ] S . Kang and M . Elimelech , Bioinspired Single Bacterial Cell Force Spectroscopy , Lang - muir 25 ( 2009 ) 9656 – 9659 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Kar2002 ] M . Karplus and J . A . McCammon , Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Biomolecules , Nat Struct Biol 9 ( 2002 ) 646 – 652 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Kas2008 ] S . Kasas and G . Dietler , Probing Nanomechanical Properties from Biomolecules to Living Cells , Pﬂug Arch Eur J Phy 456 ( 2008 ) 13 – 27 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Kes1975 ] S . W . Kessler , Rapid Isolation of Antigens from Cells with a Staphylococcal Protein A - Antibody Adsorbent : Parameters of Interaction of Antibody - Antigen Complexes with Protein A , J Immunol 115 ( 1975 ) 1617 – 1624 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Kir2004 ] B . J . Kirby and E . F . Hasselbrink , Zeta Potential of Microﬂuidic Substrates : 1 . Theory , Experimental Techniques , and Eﬀects on Separations , Electrophoresis 25 ( 2004 ) 187 – 202 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 2 [ Kle2000 ] P . Klemm and M . A . Schembri , Bacterial Adhesins : Function and Structure , Int J Med Microbiol 290 ( 2000 ) 27 – 35 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Kle2006 ] R . M . Klevens , J . R . Edwards , F . C . Tenover , L . C . McDonald , T . Horan , R . P . Gaynes , and National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System , Changes in the Epidemiology of Methicillin - Resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Intensive Care Units in US Hospi - tals , 1992 - 2003 , Clinical Infectious Diseases 42 ( 2006 ) 389 – 391 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Klu1997 ] J . Kluytmans , A . van Belkum , and H . Verbrugh , Nasal Carriage of Staphylococcus aureus : Epidemiology , Underlying Mechanisms , and Associated Risks , Clin Microbiol Rev 10 ( 1997 ) 505 – & . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Kro1999 ] I . Kroes , P . W . Lepp , and D . A . Relman , Bacterial Diversity Within the Human Subgingival Crevice , Proc Natl Acad Sci 96 ( 1999 ) 14547 – 14552 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Kum1998 ] C . G . Kumar and S . K . Anand , Signiﬁcance of Microbial Bioﬁlms in Food Industry : a Review , Int J Food Microbiol 42 ( 1998 ) 9 – 27 . ↑ 1 [ Kuu1978 ] P . Kuusela , Fibronectin Binds to Staphylococcus aureus , Nature 276 ( 1978 ) 718 – 720 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 83 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Laa1988 ] M . Laatikainen and M . Lindström , Determination of Adsorption Isotherms with Quartz Crystal Microbalance in Liquid Phase , J Colloid Interface Sci 125 ( 1988 ) 610 – 614 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Lam1916 ] I . Lamgmuir , The Constitution and Fundamental Properties of Solids and Liquids . Part 1 , J Am Chem Soc 38 ( 1916 ) 2221 – 2295 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Lan1918 ] I . Langmuir , The Adsorption of Gases on Plane Surfaces of Glass , Mica and Platinum . , J Am Chem Soc 40 ( 1918 ) 1361 – 1403 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Lap1806 ] P . S . Laplace , Supplement Au Dixieme Livre Du Traite De Mecaniqe Celeste Sur L’Action Capillaire , Courcier , Paris , 1806 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 8 [ Lat2008 ] R . A . Latour , Molecular Simulation of Protein - Surface Interactions : Beneﬁts , Prob - lems , Solutions , and Future Directions ( Review ) , Biointerphases 3 ( 2008 ) FC2 – FC12 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Lec2001 ] D . Leckband and J . N . Israelachvili , Intermolecular Forces in Biology , Q Rev Biophys 34 ( 2001 ) 105 – 267 . ↑ 3 . 1 , 3 . 3 [ Lee2006 ] H . Lee , Single - Molecule Mechanics of Mussel Adhesion , Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 ( 2006 ) 12999 – 13003 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Lee2007a ] H . Lee , S . M . Dellatore , W . M . Miller , and P . B . Messersmith , Mussel - Inspired Surface Chemistry for Multifunctional Coatings , Science 318 ( 2007 ) 426 – 430 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Lee2007b ] H . Lee , B . P . Lee , and P . B . Messersmith , A Reversible Wet / Dry Adhesive Inspired by Mussels and Geckos , Nature 448 ( 2007 ) 338 – U4 . ↑ 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Lee2008 ] J . Lee and R . S . Fearing , Contact Self - Cleaning of Synthetic Gecko Adhesive from Polymer Microﬁbers , Langmuir 24 ( 2008 ) 10587 – 10591 . ↑ 1 [ Lee2009a ] H . Lee , J . Rho , and P . B . Messersmith , Facile Conjugation of Biomolecules onto Surfaces via Mussel Adhesive Protein Inspired Coatings , Adv Mater 21 ( 2009 ) 431 – + . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Lee2009b ] J . Lee , B . G . Bush , R . Maboudian , and R . S . Fearing , Gecko - Inspired Combined Lamel - lar and Nanoﬁbrillar Array for Adhesion on Nonplanar Surface , Langmuir 25 ( 2009 ) 12449 – 12453 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Les2012 ] M . Lessel , O . Bäumchen , M . Klos , H . Hähl , R . Fetzer , and K . Jacobs , Self - Assembled Silane Monolayers : a Step - by - Step Recipe for High - Quality , Low Energy Surfaces , in preparation ( 2012 ) . ↑ 4 . 1 . 1 [ Lew2008 ] K . Lewis , Multidrug Tolerance of Bioﬁlms and Persister Cells , Curr Top Microbiol 322 ( 2008 ) 107 – 131 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Li2003 ] F . Li , S . D . Redick , H . P . Erickson , and V . T . Moy , Force Measurements of the α ( 5 ) β ( 1 ) Integrin - Fibronectin Interaction , Biophys J 84 ( 2003 ) 1252 – 1262 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 84 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Lia2000 ] M . N . Liang , S . P . Smith , S . J . Metallo , I . S . Choi , M . Prentiss , and G . M . Whitesides , Measuring the Forces Involved in Polyvalent Adhesion of Uropathogenic Escherichia coli to Mannose - Presenting Surfaces , Proc Natl Acad Sci 97 ( 2000 ) 13092 – 13096 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Lin2009 ] A . Y . M . Lin , R . Brunner , P . Y . Chen , F . E . Talke , and M . A . Meyers , Underwater Adhesion of Abalone : the Role of Van der Waals and Capillary Forces , Acta Mater 57 ( 2009 ) 4178 – 4185 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Liu2007 ] Y . Liu , J . Strauss , and T . A . Camesano , Thermodynamic Investigation of Staphylo - coccus epidermidis Interactions with Protein - Coated Substrata , Langmuir 23 ( 2007 ) 7134 – 7142 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Liu2011 ] C . Liu and Q . Zhao , Inﬂuence of Surface - Energy Components of Ni - P - TiO 2 - PTFE Nanocomposite Coatings on Bacterial Adhesion , Langmuir 27 ( 2011 ) 9512 – 9519 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Loe1986 ] W . J . Loesche , Role of Streptococcus mutans in Human Dental Decay , Microbiol Rev 50 ( 1986 ) 353 – 380 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Lon1937 ] F . London , The General Theory of Molecular Forces , T Faraday Soc 33 ( 1937 ) 8 – 26 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 1 [ Los2009 ] P . Loskill , Einﬂuss langreichweitiger Van der Waals - Wechselwirkungen auf die Adhä - sion von Bakterien—Eine AFM Studie , Diplomarbeit , 2009 . ↑ 4 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 , 13 , 6 . 1 [ Low1998 ] F . D . Lowy , Medical Progress - Staphylococcus aureus Infections , New Engl J Med 339 ( 1998 ) 520 – 532 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Low2000 ] S . K . Lower , C . J . Tadanier , and M . F . Hochella Jr , Measuring Interfacial and Adhe - sion Forces Between Bacteria and Mineral Surfaces with Biological Force Microscopy , Geochim Cosmochim Acta 64 ( 2000 ) 3133 – 3139 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Low2001 ] S . K . Lower , M . F . Hochella Jr , and T . J . Beveridge , Bacterial Recognition of Min - eral Surfaces : Nanoscale Interactions Between Shewanella and α - FeOOH , Science 292 ( 2001 ) 1360 – 1363 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Lu2007 ] J . R . Lu , X . Zhao , and M . Yaseen , Protein Adsorption Studied by Neutron Reﬂection , Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci 12 ( 2007 ) 9 – 16 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Lyk1991 ] J . Lyklema , Fundamentals of Interface and Colloid Science , 1 . Auﬂ . , Fundamentals , Band 1 , Academic Press , Cornwall , 1991 . ↑ 3 . 1 , 3 [ Lyn2007 ] D . J . Lynch , T . L . Fountain , J . E . Mazurkiewicz , and J . A . Banas , Glucan - Binding Proteins Are Essential for Shaping Streptococcus mutans Bioﬁlm Architecture , FEMS Microbiol Lett 268 ( 2007 ) 158 – 165 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Lyu1997 ] Y . L . Lyubchenko and L . S . Shlyakhtenko , Visualization of Supercoiled DNA with Atomic Force Microscopy in situ . , Proc Natl Acad Sci 94 ( 1997 ) 496 – 501 . ↑ 4 . 2 85 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Mad1964 ] P . F . A . Maderson , Keratinized Epidermal Derivatives as Aid to Climbing in Gekkonid Lizards , Nature 203 ( 1964 ) 780 – & . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Mad2006 ] M . T . Madigan and J . M . Martinko , Brock Mikrobiologie , 11 . Auﬂ . , Pearson Studium , München , 2006 . ↑ 14 , 3 . 3 . 4 [ Mah1941 ] B . C . Mahendra , Contributions to the Bionomics , Anatomy , Reproduction and De - velopment of the Indian House - Gecko , Hemidactylus ﬂaviviridis Rüppel , Proceedings : Plant Sciences 13 ( 1941 ) 288 – 306 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Mah2008 ] A . Mahdavi , L . Ferreira , C . Sundback , J . W . Nichol , E . P . Chan , D . J . D . Carter , C . J . Bettinger , S . Patanavanich , L . Chignozha , E . Ben - Joseph , A . Galakatos , H . Pryor , I . Pomerantseva , P . T . Masiakos , W . Faquin , A . Zumbuehl , S . Hong , J . Borenstein , J . Vacanti , R . Langer , and J . M . Karp , A Biodegradable and Biocompatible Gecko - Inspired Tissue Adhesive , Proc Natl Acad Sci 105 ( 2008 ) 2307 – 2312 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Mal2003 ] M . Malmsteen , Biopolymers at Interfaces , 2 . Auﬂ . , Marcel Dekker , Inc , New York , 2003 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Mam1987 ] W . Mamo , F . Rozgonyi , A . Brown , S . Hjerten , and T . Wadstrom , Cell Surface Hy - drophobicity and Charge of Staphylococcus aureus and Coagulase - Negative Staphylo - cocci from Bovine Mastitis , J Appl Bacteriol 62 ( 1987 ) 241 – 249 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 5 . 3 [ Mar1971 ] K . C . Marshall , R . Stout , and R . Mitchell , Mechanism of Initial Events in Sorption of Marine Bacteria to Surfaces , J Gen Microbiol 68 ( 1971 ) 337 – 348 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Mat2001 ] R . Matzke , K . Jacobson , and M . Radmacher , Direct , High - Resolution Measurement of Furrow Stiﬀening During Division of Adherent Cells , Nat Cell Biol 3 ( 2001 ) 607 – 610 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Mat2006 ] V . R . F . Matias and T . J . Beveridge , Native Cell Wall Organization Shown by Cryo - Electron Microscopy Conﬁrms the Existence of a Periplasmic Space in Staphylococcus aureus , J Bacteriol 188 ( 2006 ) 1011 – 1021 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Mat2007 ] V . R . F . Matias and T . J . Beveridge , Cryo - Electron Microscopy of Cell Division in Staphylococcus aureus Reveals a Mid - Zone Between Nascent Cross Walls , Mol Micro - biol 64 ( 2007 ) 195 – 206 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Mau1992 ] D . Maugis , Adhesion of Spheres : The JKR - DMT Transition Using a Dugdale Model , J Colloid Interface Sci 150 ( 1992 ) 243 – 269 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Mau1999 ] D . Maugis , Contact , Adhesion and Rupture of Elastic Solids , 1 . Auﬂ . , Springer , Berlin , 1999 . ↑ 3 . 5 , 4 . 7 , 4 . 2 . 4 [ May1998 ] E . Mayr , Two Empires or Three ? , Proc Natl Acad Sci 95 ( 1998 ) 9720 – 9723 . ↑ 10 [ Maz1999 ] S . K . Mazmanian , G . Liu , H . Ton - That , and O . Schneewind , Staphylococcus aureus Sortase , an Enzyme That Anchors Surface Proteins to the Cell Wall , Science 285 ( 1999 ) 760 – 763 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 86 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Mei1992 ] J . M . Meinders , J . Noordmans , and H . J . Busscher , Simultaneous Monitoring of the Adsorption and Desorption of Colloidal Particles During Deposition in a Parallel Plate Flow Chamber , J Colloid Interface Sci 152 ( 1992 ) 265 – 280 . ↑ 4 . 3 [ Mei1995 ] J . M . Meinders , H . C . van der Mei , and H . J . Busscher , Deposition Eﬃciency and Reversibility of Bacterial Adhesion Under Flow , J Colloid Interface Sci 176 ( 1995 ) 329 – 341 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 3 [ Mei2009 ] L . Mei , H . C . van der Mei , Y . Ren , W . Norde , and H . J . Busscher , Poisson Analysis of Streptococcal Bond Strengthening on Stainless Steel with and without a Salivary Conditioning Film , Langmuir 25 ( 2009 ) 6227 – 6231 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Mer1999 ] R . Merkel , P . Nassoy , A . Leung , K . Ritchie , and E . Evans , Energy Landscapes of Receptor - Ligand Bonds Explored with Dynamic Force Spectroscopy , Nature 397 ( 1999 ) 50 – 53 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 1 [ Mey2005 ] E . E . Meyer , Q . Lin , T . Hassenkam , E . Oroudjev , and J . N . Israelachvili , Origin of the Long - Range Attraction Between Surfactant - Coated Surfaces , Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 ( 2005 ) 6839 – 6842 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 4 [ Mey2006 ] E . E . Meyer , K . J . Rosenberg , and J . N . Israelachvili , Recent Progress in Understanding Hydrophobic Interactions , Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 ( 2006 ) 15736 – 15738 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 4 [ Mez2006 ] M . Mezger , H . Reichert , S . Schoder , J . Okasinski , H . Schroder , H . Dosch , D . Palms , J . Ralston , and V . Honkimaki , High - Resolution in situ X - ray Study of the Hydrophobic Gap at the Water - Octadecyl - Trichlorosilane Interface , Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 ( 2006 ) 18401 – 18404 . ↑ 4 . 1 . 1 [ Mil2008 ] B . C . Millar , B . D . Prendergast , and J . E . Moore , Community - Associated MRSA ( CA - MRSA ) : an Emerging Pathogen in Infective Endocarditis , Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 61 ( 2008 ) 1 – 7 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Min2008 ] Y . Min , M . Akbulut , K . Kristiansen , Y . Golan , and J . N . Israelachvili , The Role of Interparticle and External Forces in Nanoparticle Assembly , Nature Mater 7 ( 2008 ) 527 – 538 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 8 [ Mo2009 ] Y . Mo , K . T . Turner , and I . Szlufarska , Friction Laws at the Nanoscale , Nature 457 ( 2009 ) 1116 – 1119 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Mof2008 ] J . R . Moﬃtt , Y . R . Chemla , S . B . Smith , and C . Bustamante , Recent Advances in Optical Tweezers , Annu Rev Biochem 77 ( 2008 ) 205 – 228 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Mor1983 ] C . Moritz , Parthenogenesis in the Endemic Australian Lizard Heteronotia binoei ( Gekkonidae ) , Science 220 ( 1983 ) 735 – 737 . ↑ 3 . 4 [ Mor2006 ] J . Morgan , J . Notte , R . Hill , and B . Ward , An Introduction to the Helium Ion Micro - scope , Micros Today 14 ( 2006 ) 24 – 31 . ↑ 3 . 8 [ Mou1995 ] J . Mou , D . M . Czajkowsky , Y . Zhang , and Z . Shao , High - Resolution Atomic - Force 87 BIBLIOGRAPHY Microscopy of DNA : the Pitch of the Double Helix , FEBS Lett 371 ( 1995 ) 279 – 282 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Mun1994 ] L . L . Munn , R . J . Melder , and R . K . Jain , Analysis of Cell Flux in the Parallel - Plate Flow Chamber - Implications for Cell Capture Studies , Biophys J 67 ( 1994 ) 889 – 895 . ↑ 4 . 3 [ Mur2007 ] M . P . Murphy , B . Aksak , and M . Sitti , Adhesion and Anisotropic Friction Enhance - ments of Angled Heterogeneous Micro - Fiber Arrays with Spherical and Spatula Tips , J Adhes Sci Technol 21 ( 2007 ) 1281 – 1296 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Myk2003 ] T . A . Mykhaylyk , S . D . Evans , C . M . Fernyhough , I . W . Hamley , and J . R . Hen - derson , Surface Energy of Ethylene - co - 1 - butene Copolymers Determined by Contact Angle Methods , J Colloid Interface Sci 260 ( 2003 ) 234 – 239 . ↑ 4 . 1 [ Nav1999 ] W . W . Navarre and O . Schneewind , Surface Proteins of Gram - Positive Bacteria and Mechanisms of Their Targeting to the Cell Wall Envelope , Microbiol Mol Biol R 63 ( 1999 ) 174 – 229 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Nea2005 ] A . L . Neal , T . L . Bank , M . F . Hochella Jr , and K . M . Rosso , Cell Adhesion of She - wanella oneidensis to Iron Oxide Minerals : Eﬀect of Diﬀerent Single Crystal Faces , Geochem T 6 ( 2005 ) 77 – 84 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Neu1974 ] A . W . Neumann , R . J . Good , C . J . Hope , and M . Sejpal , An Equation - of - State Ap - proach to Determine Surface Tensions of Low - Energy Solids from Contact Angles , J Colloid Interface Sci 49 ( 1974 ) 291 – 304 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 6 [ Neu1992 ] H . C . Neu , The Crisis in Antibiotic Resistance , Science 257 ( 1992 ) 1064 – 1073 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Neu2003 ] F . C . Neuhaus and J . Baddiley , A Continuum of Anionic Charge : Structures and Functions of D - Alanyl - Teichoic Acids in Gram - Positive Bacteria , Microbiol Mol Biol R 67 ( 2003 ) 686 – 723 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Neu2008 ] K . C . Neuman and A . Nagy , Single - Molecule Force Spectroscopy : Optical Tweezers , Magnetic Tweezers and Atomic Force Microscopy , Nat Methods 5 ( 2008 ) 491 – 505 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 1 [ Ner2006 ] I . Neria - González , E . T . Wang , F . Ramírez , J . M . Romero , and C . Hernández - Rodríguez , Characterization of Bacterial Community Associated to Bioﬁlms of Cor - roded Oil Pipelines from the Southeast of Mexico , Anaerobe 12 ( 2006 ) 122 – 133 . ↑ 1 [ Nie2008 ] P . H . Niewiarowski , S . Lopez , L . Ge , E . Hagan , and A . Dhinojwala , Sticky Gecko Feet : The Role of Temperature and Humidity , PLoS ONE 3 ( 2008 ) e2192 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Nor1990 ] J . K . Norskov , Chemisorption on Metal Surfaces , Rep Prog Phys 53 ( 1990 ) 1253 – 1295 . ↑ 9 [ Nor2006 ] D . Norouzi , M . M . Mueller , and M . Deserno , How to Determine Local Elastic Prop - erties of Lipid Bilayer Membranes from Atomic - Force - Microscope Measurements : a Theoretical Analysis , Phys Rev E 74 ( 2006 ) 061914 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 88 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Nos2007 ] M . Nosonovsky and B . Bhushan , Multiscale Friction Mechanisms and Hierarchical Surfaces in Nano - and Bio - Tribology , Mat Sci Eng R 58 ( 2007 ) 162 – 193 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Noy1995 ] A . Noy , C . D . Frisbie , L . F . Rozsnyai , M . S . Wrighton , and C . M . Lieber , Chemical Force Microscopy : Exploiting Chemically - Modiﬁed Tips to Quantify Adhesion , Fric - tion , and Functional Group Distributions in Molecular Assemblies , J Am Chem Soc 117 ( 1995 ) 7943 – 7951 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Noy1997 ] A . Noy , D . V . Vezenov , and C . M . Lieber , Chemical Force Microscopy , Annu Rev Mater Sci 27 ( 1997 ) 381 – 421 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Olo2005 ] A . - C . Olofsson , M . Hermansson , and H . Elwing , Use of a Quartz Crystal Microbal - ance to Investigate the Antiadhesive Potential of N - acetyl - L - cysteine , Appl Environ Microbiol 71 ( 2005 ) 2705 – 2712 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Ols2009 ] A . L . J . Olsson , H . C . van der Mei , H . J . Busscher , and P . K . Sharma , Inﬂuence of Cell Surface Appendages on the Bacterium - Substratum Interface Measured Real - Time Using QCM - D , Langmuir 25 ( 2009 ) 1627 – 1632 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Ols2010 ] A . L . J . Olsson , H . C . van der Mei , H . J . Busscher , and P . K . Sharma , Novel Analysis of Bacterium - Substratum Bond Maturation Measured Using a Quartz Crystal Microbal - ance , Langmuir 26 ( 2010 ) 11113 – 11117 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Ong1999 ] Y . - L . Ong , A . Razatos , G . Georgiou , and M . M . Sharma , Adhesion Forces Between E . coli Bacteria and Biomaterial Surfaces , Langmuir 15 ( 1999 ) 2719 – 2725 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Ong2007 ] Q . K . Ong and I . Sokojov , Attachment of Nanoparticles to the AFM Tips for Direct Measurements of Interaction Between a Single Nanoparticle and Surfaces , J Colloid Interface Sci 310 ( 2007 ) 385 – 390 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Ott2008 ] M . Otto , Staphylococcal Bioﬁlms , Curr Top Microbiol 322 ( 2008 ) 207 – 228 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Owe1969 ] D . K . Owens and R . C . Wendt , Estimation of Surface Free Energy of Polymers , J Appl Polym Sci 13 ( 1969 ) 1741 – 1747 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 6 [ Pal1998 ] M . Palma , D . Wade , M . Flock , and J . - I . Flock , Multiple Binding Sites in the Interac - tion Between an Extracellular Fibrinogen - binding Protein from Staphylococcus aureus and Fibrinogen , J Biol Chem 273 ( 1998 ) 13177 – 13181 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Pal1999 ] M . Palma , A . Haggar , and J . - I . Flock , Adherence of Staphylococcus aureus Is En - hanced by an Endogenous Secreted Protein with Broad Binding Activity , J Bacteriol 181 ( 1999 ) 2840 – 2845 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Pan1992 ] A . L . Panlilio , D . H . Culver , R . P . Gaynes , S . Banerjee , T . S . Henderson , J . S . Tolson , W . J . Martone , and t . N . N . I . S . System , Methicillin - Resistant Staphylococcus aureus in U . S . Hospitals , 1975 - 1991 , Infect Cont Hosp Ep 13 ( 1992 ) 582 – 586 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Pas1982 ] R . M . Pashley , Hydration Forces Between Mica Surfaces in Electrolyte Solutions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci 16 ( 1982 ) . ↑ 3 . 1 . 4 89 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Pit2010 ] B . Pittenger , N . Erina , and C . Su , Quantitative Mechanical Property Mapping at the Nanoscale with PeakForce QNM , Bruker Corporation Application Note AN128 , 2010 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 , 4 . 7 [ Ple2010 ] G . Pletikapić , A . Berquand , and S . Vesna , Peak Force Tapping AFM , State of the Art Tool for Quantitative Nanomechanical Mapping , Charge density waves : small scales and ultrashort time , 2010 , pp . 1 – 1 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 [ Ple2012 ] G . Pletikapić , A . Berquand , T . M . Radić , and V . Svetličić , Quantitative Nanomechan - ical Mapping of Marine Diatom in Seawater Using Peak Force Tapping Atomic Force Microscopy , J Phycol 48 ( 2012 ) 174 – 185 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 [ Plo2010 ] L . Ploux , A . Ponche , and K . Anselme , Bacteria / Material Interfaces : Role of the Ma - terial and Cell Wall Properties , J Adhes Sci Technol 24 ( 2010 ) 2165 – 2201 . ↑ 5 . 3 [ Poo2002 ] A . T . Poortinga , R . Bos , W . Norde , and H . J . Busscher , Electric Double Layer In - teractions in Bacterial Adhesion to Surfaces , Surf Sci Rep 47 ( 2002 ) 3 – 32 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 3 . 3 . 2 [ Put2010 ] J . B . Puthoﬀ , M . S . Prowse , M . Wilkinson , and K . Autumn , Changes in Materials Properties Explain the Eﬀects of Humidity on Gecko Adhesion , J Exp Biol 213 ( 2010 ) 3699 – 3704 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Qu2011 ] W . Qu , H . J . Busscher , J . M . M . Hooymans , and H . C . van der Mei , Surface Ther - modynamics and Adhesion Forces Governing Bacterial Transmission in Contact Lens Related Microbial Keratitis , J Colloid Interface Sci 358 ( 2011 ) 430 – 436 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Qui2008 ] A . Quinn , H . Mantz , K . Jacobs , M . Bellion , and L . Santen , Protein Adsorption Ki - netics in Diﬀerent Surface Potentials , EPL 81 ( 2008 ) 56003 . ↑ 5 . 1 . 1 [ Rab2010 ] M . Rabe , D . Verdes , and S . Seeger , Understanding Cooperative Protein Adsorption Events at the Microscopic Scale : A Comparison between Experimental Data and Monte Carlo Simulations , J Phys Chem B 114 ( 2010 ) 5862 – 5869 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Rab2011 ] M . Rabe , D . Verdes , and S . Seeger , Understanding Protein Adsorption Phenomena at Solid Surfaces , Adv Colloid Interface Sci 162 ( 2011 ) 87 – 106 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 , 3 . 2 . 1 [ Ram1994 ] J . J . Ramsden , Experimental Methods for Investigating Protein Adsorption - Kinetics at Surfaces , Q Rev Biophys 27 ( 1994 ) 41 – 105 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Ran1994 ] I . W . Rangelow , Sharp Silicon Tips for AFM and Field Emission , Microelectron Eng 23 ( 1994 ) 369 – 372 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Raz1998 ] A . Razatos , Y . - L . Ong , M . M . Sharma , and G . Georgiou , Molecular Determinants of Bacterial Adhesion Monitored by Atomic Force Microscopy , Proc Natl Acad Sci 95 ( 1998 ) 11059 – 11064 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 2 [ Rei2011 ] N . T . Reichmann and A . Grundling , Location , Synthesis and Function of Glycolipids and Polyglycerolphosphate Lipoteichoic Acid in Gram - Positive Bacteria of the Phylum Firmicutes , FEMS Microbiol Lett 319 ( 2011 ) 97 – 105 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 90 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Ric2005 ] F . Rico , P . Roca - Cusachs , N . Gavara , R . Farre , M . Rotger , and D . Navajas , Prob - ing Mechanical Properties of Living Cells by Atomic Force Microscopy with Blunted Pyramidal Cantilever Tips , Phys Rev E 72 ( 2005 ) 021914 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Rie1997 ] M . Rief , M . Gautel , F . Oesterhelt , J . M . Fernandez , and H . E . Gaub , Reversible Unfolding of Individual Titin Immunoglobulin Domains by AFM , Science 276 ( 1997 ) 1109 – 1112 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Rij1995 ] H . H . M . Rijnaarts , W . Norde , E . J . Bouwer , J . Lyklema , and A . J . B . Zehnder , Reversibility and Mechanism of Bacterial Adhesion , Colloids Surf B 4 ( 1995 ) 5 – 22 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Rim2008 ] A . Rimola , M . Corno , C . M . Zicovich - Wilson , and P . Ugliengo , Ab Initio Modeling of Protein / Biomaterial Interactions : Glycine Adsorption at Hydroxyapatite Surfaces , J Am Chem Soc 130 ( 2008 ) 16181 – 16183 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Riz2005 ] N . W . Rizzo , K . H . Gardner , D . J . Walls , N . M . Keiper - Hrynko , T . S . Ganzke , and D . L . Hallahan , Characterization of the Structure and Composition of Gecko Adhesive Setae , J R Soc Interface 3 ( 2005 ) 441 – 451 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Rob1979 ] R . B . Roberts , A . G . Krieger , N . L . Schiller , and K . C . Gross , Viridans Streptococcal Endocarditis : The Role of Various Species , Including Pyridoxal - Dependent Strepto - cocci , Clin Infect Dis 1 ( 1979 ) 955 – 966 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Ros1884 ] F . J . Rosenbach , Mikro - organismen bei den Wund - Infections - Krankheiten des Men - schen , J . F . Bergmann , 1884 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Ros2008 ] M . Rosentritt , S . Hahnel , G . Groeger , B . Muehlfriedel , R . Buergers , and G . Handel , Adhesion of Streptococcus mutans to Various Dental Materials in a Laminar Flow Chamber System , J Biomed Mater Res , Part B 86B ( 2008 ) 36 – 44 . ↑ 4 . 3 [ Rot1996 ] C . M . Roth , B . L . Neal , and A . M . Lenhoﬀ , Van der Waals Interactions Involving Proteins , Biophys J 70 ( 1996 ) 977 – 987 . ↑ 3 . 1 [ Rub1999 ] R . J . Rubin , C . A . Harrington , A . Poon , K . Dietrich , J . A . Greene , and A . Moiduddin , The Economic Impact of Staphylococcus aureus Infection in New York City Hospitals , Emerg Infect Dis 5 ( 1999 ) 9 – 17 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Rui1965 ] R . Ruibal and V . Ernst , The Structure of the Digital Setae of Lizards , J Morphol 117 ( 1965 ) 271 – 293 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Sch1972 ] K . H . Schleifer and O . Kandler , Peptidoglycan Types of Bacterial Cell Walls and Their Taxonomic Implications , Bacteriol Rev 36 ( 1972 ) 407 – 477 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Sch1982 ] K . H . Schleifer and U . Fischer , Description of a New Species of the Genus Staphylo - coccus : Staphylococcus carnosus , Int J Syst Bacteriol 32 ( 1982 ) 153 – 156 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Sch1996 ] P . M . Schneeberger , M . Janssen , and A . Voss , α - Hemolytic Streptococci : a Major Pathogen of Iatrogenic Meningitis Following Lumbar Puncture . Case Reports and a Review of the Literature , Infection 24 ( 1996 ) 29 – 33 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 91 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Sch2009 ] K . Schroeder , M . Jularic , S . M . Horsburgh , N . Hirschhausen , C . Neumann , A . Bertling , A . Schulte , S . J . Foster , B . E . Kehrel , G . Peters , and C . Heilmann , Molecular Char - acterization of a Novel Staphylococcus aureus Surface Protein ( SasC ) Involved in Cell Aggregation and Bioﬁlm Accumulation , PLoS ONE 4 ( 2009 ) e7567 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Sch2010 ] Y . Schmitt , H . Hähl , C . Gilow , H . Mantz , K . Jacobs , O . Leidinger , M . Bellion , and L . Santen , Structural Evolution of Protein - Bioﬁlms : Simulations and Experiments , Biomicroﬂuidics 4 ( 2010 ) 032201 . ↑ 5 . 1 . 1 [ Sch2011 ] M . P . Schultz , J . A . Bendick , E . R . Holm , and W . M . Hertel , Economic Impact of Biofouling on a Naval Surface Ship , Biofouling 27 ( 2011 ) 87 – 98 . ↑ 1 [ Sco2006 ] J . R . Scott and T . C . Barnett , Surface Proteins of Gram - Positive Bacteria and How They Get There , Annu Rev Microbiol 60 ( 2006 ) 397 – 423 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Seo2008 ] Y . Seo and W . Jhe , Atomic Force Microscopy and Spectroscopy , Rep Prog Phys 71 ( 2008 ) 016101 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Ser2005 ] F . M . Serry , The Thermal Tune Solution to the Cantilever Spring Constant Problem , Bruker Corporation Application Note AN90 , 2005 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 3 [ Sha1989 ] N . Sharon and H . Lis , Lectins as Cell Recognition Molecules , Science 246 ( 1989 ) 227 – 234 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ She1994 ] R . Sherman , D . Hirt , and R . Vane , Surface Cleaning with the Carbon Dioxide Snow Jet , J Vac Sci Technol A 12 ( 1994 ) 1876 . ↑ 4 . 1 . 1 [ Sin2011 ] A . V . Singh , V . Vyas , R . Patil , V . Sharma , P . E . Scopelliti , G . Bongiorno , A . Podestà , C . Lenardi , W . N . Gade , and P . Milani , Quantitative Characterization of the Inﬂuence of the Nanoscale Morphology of Nanostructured Surfaces on Bacterial Adhesion and Bioﬁlm Formation , PLoS ONE 6 ( 2011 ) e25029 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Sjö1977 ] J . Sjödahl , Repetitive Sequences in Protein A from Staphylococcus aureus . Arrange - ment of Five Regions within the Protein , Four being Highly Homologous and Fc - Binding , Eur J Biochem 73 ( 1977 ) 343 – 351 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Ste1924 ] O . Stern , Zur Theorie der Elektrolytischen Doppelschicht , Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie und angewandte physikalische Chemie 30 ( 1924 ) 508 – 516 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 2 [ Ste2009 ] M . J . Stevens , L . J . Donato , S . K . Lower , and N . Sahai , Oxide - Dependent Adhesion of the Jurkat Line of T Lymphocytes , Langmuir 25 ( 2009 ) 6270 – 6278 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Str2009 ] J . Strauss , Y . Liu , and T . A . Camesano , Bacterial Adhesion to Protein - Coated Sur - faces : an AFM and QCM - D Study , Jom - Us 61 ( 2009 ) 71 – 74 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Su2012 ] H . - N . Su , Z . - H . Chen , S . - B . Liu , L . - P . Qiao , X . - L . Chen , H . - L . He , X . Zhao , B . - C . Zhou , and Y . - Z . Zhang , Bacterial Capsules under Atomic Force Microscopy : Charac - terization of the Bacterial Polysaccharide Capsules and Detection of the Capsules in the Presence of Deliquescent Water , Appl Environ Microbiol ( 2012 ) . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 92 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Sun2005 ] W . Sun , P . Neuzil , T . S . Kustandi , S . Oh , and V . D . Samper , The Nature of the Gecko Lizard Adhesive Force , Biophys J 89 ( 2005 ) L14 – L17 . ↑ 3 . 4 . 1 [ Svo1994 ] K . Svoboda and S . M . Block , Biological Applications of Optical Forces , Annu Rev Bioph Biom 23 ( 1994 ) 247 – 285 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Szl2008 ] I . Szlufarska , M . Chandross , and R . W . Carpick , Recent Advances in Single - Asperity Nanotribology , J Phys D : Appl Phys 41 ( 2008 ) 123001 . ↑ 3 . 5 [ Tab2011 ] R . F . Tabor , R . Manica , D . Y . C . Chan , F . Grieser , and R . R . Dagastine , Repulsive van der Waals Forces in Soft Matter : Why Bubbles Do Not Stick to Walls , Phys Rev Lett 106 ( 2011 ) . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Tan1992 ] C . Tancrede , Role of Human Microﬂora in Health and Disease , Eur J Clin Microbiol 11 ( 1992 ) 1012 – 1015 . ↑ 3 . 3 [ Tan2005 ] G . L . Tan , M . F . Lemon , D . J . Jones , and R . H . French , Optical Properties and London Dispersion Interaction of Amorphous and Crystalline SiO 2 Determined by Vacuum Ultraviolet Spectroscopy and Spectroscopic Ellipsometry , Phys Rev B 72 ( 2005 ) 205117 . ↑ 3 . 1 [ Tay1998 ] R . L . Taylor , J . Verran , G . C . Lees , and A . J . P . Ward , The Inﬂuence of Substratum Topography on Bacterial Adhesion to Polymethyl Methacrylate , J Mater Sci Mater Med 9 ( 1998 ) 17 – 22 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Tel2006 ] J . L . Telford , M . A . Barocchi , I . Margarit , R . Rappuoli , and G . Grandi , Pili in Gram - Positive Pathogens , Nat Rev Microbiol 4 ( 2006 ) 509 – 519 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Tet2001 ] H . Tettelin , K . E . Nelson , I . T . Paulsen , J . A . Eisen , T . D . Read , S . Peterson , J . Heidelberg , R . T . DeBoy , D . H . Haft , R . J . Dodson , A . S . Durkin , M . Gwinn , J . F . Kolonay , W . C . Nelson , J . D . Peterson , L . A . Umayam , O . White , S . L . Salzberg , M . R . Lewis , D . Radune , E . Holtzapple , H . Khouri , A . M . Wolf , T . R . Utterback , C . L . Hansen , L . A . McDonald , T . V . Feldblyum , S . Angiuoli , T . Dickinson , E . K . Hickey , I . E . Holt , B . J . Loftus , F . Yang , H . O . Smith , J . C . Venter , B . A . Dougherty , D . A . Morrison , S . K . Hollingshead , and C . M . Fraser , Complete Genome Sequence of a Virulent Isolate of Streptococcus pneumoniae , Science 293 ( 2001 ) 498 – 506 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Tha2005 ] M . Thanbichler , S . C . Wang , and L . Shapiro , The Bacterial Nucleoid : a Highly Orga - nized and Dynamic Structure , J Cell Biochem 96 ( 2005 ) 506 – 521 . ↑ 3 . 3 [ The2012 ] N . Thewes , Kraftspektroskopie zur bakteriellen Adhäsion : Was unterscheidet pathogene von apathogenen Staphylokokken ? , Diplomarbeit , 2012 . ↑ 1 [ Tho2002 ] W . E . Thomas , E . Trintchina , M . Forero , V . Vogel , and E . V . Sokurenko , Bacterial Adhesion to Target Cells Enhanced by Shear Force , Cell 109 ( 2002 ) 913 – 923 . ↑ 4 . 3 [ Til2003 ] R . D . Tilton , Mobility of Biomolecules at Interfaces , Biopolymers at interfaces , 2003 , pp . 221 – 258 . ↑ 6 . 1 93 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Tou2003a ] A . Touhami , B . Hoﬀmann , A . Vasella , F . A . Denis , and Y . F . Dufrene , Probing Speciﬁc Lectin - Carbohydrate Interactions Using Atomic Force Microscopy Imaging and Force Measurements , Langmuir 19 ( 2003 ) 1745 – 1751 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Tou2003b ] A . Touhami , B . Nysten , and Y . F . Dufrene , Nanoscale Mapping of the Elasticity of Microbial Cells by Atomic Force Microscopy , Langmuir 19 ( 2003 ) 4539 – 4543 . ↑ 4 . 2 [ Trt2012 ] P . Trtik , J . Kaufmann , and U . Volz , On the Use of Peak - Force Tapping Atomic Force Microscopy for Quantiﬁcation of the Local Elastic Modulus in Hardened Cement Paste , Cem Concr Res 42 ( 2012 ) 215 – 221 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 4 [ Usa1993 ] S . Usami , Y . H . Zhao , H . - H . Chen , S . Chien , and R . Skalak , Design and Construction of a Linear Shear - Stress Flow Chamber , Ann Biomed Eng 21 ( 1993 ) 77 – 83 . ↑ 4 . 3 [ Vel2002 ] S . B . Velegol and B . E . Logan , Contributions of Bacterial Surface Polymers , Electro - statics , and Cell Elasticity to the Shape of AFM Force Curves , Langmuir 18 ( 2002 ) 5256 – 5262 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Vel2008 ] E . Velzenberger , I . Pezron , G . Legeay , M . - D . Nagel , and K . el Kirat , Probing Fibronectin - Surface Interactions : A Multitechnique Approach , Langmuir 24 ( 2008 ) 11734 – 11742 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Ver1948 ] E . J . W . Verwey and J . T . G . Overbeek , Theory of the Stability of Lyophobic Colloids , 1 . Auﬂ . , Elsevier Publishing Co , Amsterdam , 1948 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Ver2009 ] C . Verbelen and Y . F . Dufrene , Direct Measurement of Mycobacterium - Fibronectin Interactions , Integr Biol 1 ( 2009 ) 296 – 300 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Vij2005 ] K . Vijayanand , D . K . Pattanayak , T . R . Rama Mohan , and R . Banerjee , Interpret - ing Blood - Biomaterial Interactions from Surface Free Energy and Work of Adhesion , Trends Biomater Artif Organs 18 ( 2005 ) 1873 – 1881 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Vin1998 ] A . Vinckier and G . Semenza , Measuring Elasticity of Biological Materials by Atomic Force Microscopy , FEBS Lett 430 ( 1998 ) 12 – 16 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ vanKoo1992 ] T . G . van Kooten , J . M . Schakenraad , H . C . van der Mei , and H . J . Busscher , Devel - opment and Use of a Parallel - Plate Flow Chamber for Studying Cellular Adhesion to Solid - Surfaces , J Biomed Mater Res , Part A 26 ( 1992 ) 725 – 738 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 3 [ vanLoo1987 ] M . C . M . van Loosdrecht , J . Lyklema , W . Norde , G . Schraa , and A . J . B . Zehnder , The Role of Bacterial Cell Wall Hydrophobicity in Adhesion , Appl Environ Microbiol 53 ( 1987 ) 1893 – 1897 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ vanLoo1990 ] M . C . M . van Loosdrecht , W . Norde , and A . J . B . Zehnder , Physical Chemical De - scription of Bacterial Adhesion , J Biomater Appl 5 ( 1990 ) 91 – 106 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ VanOss1986 ] C . J . Van Oss , R . J . Good , and M . K . Chaudhury , The Role of van der Waals Forces and Hydrogen Bonds in " Hydrophobic Interactions " between Biopolymers and Low Energy Surfaces , J Colloid Interface Sci 111 ( 1986 ) 378 – 390 . ↑ 3 . 1 . 6 94 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ VanOss1989 ] C . J . Van Oss , Energetics of Cell - Cell and Cell - Biopolymer Interactions , Cell Biochem Biophys 14 ( 1989 ) 1 – 116 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ VanOss1990 ] C . J . Van Oss , R . F . Giese , and P . M . Costanzo , DLVO and Non - DLVO Interactions in Hectorite , Clay Clay Miner 38 ( 1990 ) 151 – 159 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ vanOss2006 ] C . J . van Oss , Interfacial Forces in Aqueous Media , 2 . Auﬂ . , Taylor & Francis , Boca Raton , 2006 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Voe1995 ] D . Voet and J . Voet , Biochemistry , John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1995 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Vol2008 ] W . Vollmer , D . Blanot , and M . A . de Pedro , Peptidoglycan Structure and Architecture , FEMS Microbiol Rev 32 ( 2008 ) 149 – 167 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 1 [ Vol2010 ] W . Vollmer and S . J . Seligman , Architecture of Peptidoglycan : More Data and More Models , Trends Microbiol 18 ( 2010 ) 59 – 66 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ vanWag1980 ] R . A . van Wagenen and J . D . Andrade , Flat Plate Streaming Potential Investigations : Hydrodynamics and Electrokinetic Equivalency , J Colloid Interface Sci 76 ( 1980 ) 305 – 314 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 3 , 4 . 3 , 4 . 3 [ Wah1995 ] M . Wahlgren , T . Arnebrant , and I . Lundström , The Adsorption of Lysozyme to Hy - drophilic Silicon Oxide Surfaces : Comparison Between Experimental Data and Models for Adsorption Kinetics , J Colloid Interface Sci 175 ( 1995 ) 506 – 514 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Wah1997 ] M . Wahlgren and U . Elofsson , Simple Models for Adsorption Kinetics and Their Cor - relation to the Adsorption of β - Lactoglobulin A and B , J Colloid Interface Sci 188 ( 1997 ) 121 – 129 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Was1989 ] S . R . Wasserman , G . M . Whitesides , I . M . Tidswell , B . M . Ocko , P . S . Pershan , and J . D . Axe , The Structure of Self - Assembled Monolayers of Alkylsiloxanes on Silicon : A Comparison of Results from Ellipsometry and Low - Angle X - ray Reﬂectivity , J Am Chem Soc 111 ( 1989 ) 5852 – 5861 . ↑ 4 . 1 . 1 [ Wei1993 ] A . L . Weisenhorn , M . Khorsandi , S . Kasas , V . Gotzos , and H . J . Butt , Deformation and Height Anomaly of Soft Surfaces Studied with an AFM , Nanotechnology 4 ( 1993 ) 106 – 113 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Wer1999 ] C . F . Wertz and M . M . Santore , Adsorption and Relaxation Kinetics of Albumin and Fibrinogen on Hydrophobic Surfaces : Single - Species and Competitive Behavior , Langmuir 15 ( 1999 ) 8884 – 8894 . ↑ 6 . 1 [ Wer2002 ] C . F . Wertz and M . M . Santore , Adsorption and Reorientation Kinetics of Lysozyme on Hydrophobic Surfaces , Langmuir 18 ( 2002 ) 1190 – 1199 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Wes1997 ] J . K . West , R . A . Latour , and L . L . Hench , Molecular Modeling Study of Adsorption of Poly - L - lysine onto Silica Glass , J Biomed Mater Res , Part A 37 ( 1997 ) 585 – 591 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 95 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Wha2000 ] A . M . Whatmore , A . Efstratiou , A . P . Pickerill , K . Broughton , G . Woodard , D . Stur - geon , R . George , and C . G . Dowson , Genetic Relationships Between Clinical Isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae , Streptococcus oralis , and Streptococcus mitis : Charac - terization of " Atypical " Pneumococci and Organisms Allied to S . mitis Harboring S . pneumoniae Virulence Factor - encoding Genes , Infect Immun 68 ( 2000 ) 1374 – 1382 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 4 [ Whi1998 ] W . B . Whitman , D . C . Coleman , and W . J . Wiebe , Prokaryotes : the Unseen Majority , Proc Natl Acad Sci 95 ( 1998 ) 6578 – 6583 . ↑ 3 . 3 [ Whi2006 ] K . A . Whitehead , D . Rogers , J . Colligon , C . J . Wright , and J . Verran , Use of the Atomic Force Microscope to Determine the Eﬀect of Substratum Surface Topography on the Ease of Bacterial Removal , Colloids Surf B 51 ( 2006 ) 44 – 53 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 [ Wil1979 ] B . J . Wilkinson , P . K . Peterson , and P . G . Quie , Cryptic Peptidoglycan and the An - tiphagocytic Eﬀect of the Staphylococcus aureus Capsule : Model for the Antiphagocytic Eﬀect of Bacterial Cell Surface Polymers , Infect Immun 23 ( 1979 ) 502 – 508 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Woe1990 ] C . R . Woese , O . Kandler , and M . L . Wheelis , Towards a Natural System of Organisms : Proposal for the Domains Archaea , Bacteria , and Eucarya , Proc Natl Acad Sci 87 ( 1990 ) 4576 – 4579 . ↑ 3 . 3 [ Woe1998 ] C . R . Woese , Default Taxonomy : Ernst Mayr’s View of the Microbial World , Proc Natl Acad Sci 95 ( 1998 ) 11043 – 11046 . ↑ 10 [ Wol1991 ] O . Wolter , T . Bayer , and J . Greschner , Micromachined Silicon Sensors for Scanning Force Microscopy , J Vac Sci Technol B 9 ( 1991 ) 1353 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Wol2008 ] S . Wolﬀ , H . Hahne , M . Hecker , and D . Becher , Complementary Analysis of the Vege - tative Membrane Proteome of the Human Pathogen Staphylococcus aureus , Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 7 ( 2008 ) 1460 – 1468 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 3 [ Wri2010 ] C . J . Wright , M . K . Shah , L . C . Powell , and I . Armstrong , Application of AFM from Microbial Cell to Bioﬁlm , Scanning 32 ( 2010 ) 134 – 149 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 [ Yan2011 ] J . Yang , J . B . Puthoﬀ , and K . Autumn , HIM Imaging of Uncoated Adhesive Foot Structures of Gecko and Spider , Carl Zeiss NTS GmbH , 2011 . ↑ 3 . 8 [ Yon2006 ] R . Yongsunthon and S . K . Lower , Force Spectroscopy of Bonds That Form Between a Staphylococcus Bacterium and Silica or Polystyrene Substrates , J Electron Spectrosc 150 ( 2006 ) 228 – 234 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 , 4 . 2 . 1 [ Yon2007 ] R . Yongsunthon , V . G . Fowler Jr , B . H . Lower , F . P . Vellano , E . Alexander , L . B . Reller , G . R . Corey , and S . K . Lower , Correlation Between Fundamental Binding Forces and Clinical Prognosis of Staphylococcus aureus Infections of Medical Implants , Langmuir 23 ( 2007 ) 2289 – 2292 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 1 [ Zha2008 ] H . Zhang and K . - K . Liu , Optical Tweezers for Single Cells , J R Soc Interface 5 ( 2008 ) 671 – 690 . ↑ 3 . 3 . 2 96 BIBLIOGRAPHY [ Zha2011 ] W . Zhang , A . G . Stack , and Y . Chen , Interaction Force Measurement Between E . coli Cells and Nanoparticles Immobilized Surfaces by Using AFM , Colloids Surf B 82 ( 2011 ) 316 – 324 . ↑ 4 . 2 . 2 [ Zho2004 ] J . Zhou , H . - K . Tsao , Y . - J . Sheng , and S . Jiang , Monte Carlo Simulations of Antibody Adsorption and Orientation on Charged Surfaces , J Chem Phys 121 ( 2004 ) 1050 . ↑ 3 . 2 . 1 [ Zhu2003 ] X . Y . Zhu , J . Lubeck , and J . J . Kilbane II , Characterization of Microbial Communities in Gas Industry Pipelines , Appl Environ Microbiol 69 ( 2003 ) 5354 – 5363 . ↑ 1 97 98 Publications 99 100 Addendum I - Is adhesion superﬁcial ? ! Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions Authors : P . Loskill , H . Hähl , T . Faidt , S . Grandthyll , F . Müller , and K . Jacobs Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Ger - many . Advances in Colloid and Interface Sciences 179 – 182 , 107 – 113 ( 2012 ) . ( http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 ) Author contributions : Experiments were performed by P . Loskill , H . Hähl , T . Faidt , S . Grandthyll , and F . Müller . The article was written by P . Loskill , F . Müller , and K . Jacobs . Research was directed by K . Jacobs . Abstract - Adhesion is a key issue for researchers of various ﬁelds , it is therefore of uppermost importance to understand the parameters that are involved . Commonly , only surface parameters are employed to determine the adhesive forces between ma - terials . Yet , van der Waals forces act not only between atoms in the vicinity of the surface , but also between atoms in the bulk material . In this review , we describe the principles of van der Waals interactions and outline experimental and theoretical stud - ies investigating the inﬂuence of the subsurface material on adhesion . In addition , we present a collection of data indicating that silicon wafers with native oxide layers are a good model substrate to study van der Waals interactions with coated materials . 101 Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions Peter Loskill , Hendrik Hähl , Thomas Faidt , Samuel Grandthyll , Frank Müller , Karin Jacobs ⁎ Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Germany a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Available online xxxx Keywords : AdhesionMultilayervanderWaals - interactions Silicon oxide layer Adhesion is a key issue for researchers of various ﬁ elds , it is therefore of uppermost importance to under - stand the parameters that are involved . Commonly , only surface parameters are employed to determine the adhesive forces between materials . Yet , van der Waals forces act not only between atoms in the vicinity of the surface , but also between atoms in the bulk material . In this review , we describe the principles of van der Waals interactions and outline experimental and theoretical studies investigating the in ﬂ uence of the subsurface material on adhesion . In addition , we present a collection of data indicating that silicon wafers with native oxide layers are a good model substrate to study van der Waals interactions with coated materials . © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 2 . Van der Waals interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 3 . Van der Waals interactions with coated substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 3 . 1 . Interactions in biological systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 3 . 2 . Theoretical description of multilayer systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . Silicon wafers as a model system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . 1 . Properties of thin native oxide layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 Appendix A . Calculation of Hamaker constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 1 . Introduction Stimulating or preventing adhesion is a key issue for researchers of various ﬁ elds . To solve these problems , a comprehensive under - standing of the prevailing adhesion mechanism is indispensable . Yet , not only various adhesion mechanisms , but also plenty of param - eters that can affect adhesion exist : nanoscale or microscale rough - ness [ 1 , 2 ] , static charges or the zeta - potential at the interface [ 3 , 4 ] , surface energies [ 5 , 6 ] , and contact shapes [ 7 ] are a few frequently - studied examples . All these parameters , however , have in common that they are describing the surface of a material . Hence , the question arises whether adhesion is really only ‘ super ﬁ cial ’ . This question is of great importance since commonly used photoresists , coatings , adhe - sion promoters or other functionalized surface layers are often in the range of just a few nanometers . These dimensions are smaller than the range of interactions such as van der Waals ( vdW ) interac - tions . Hence , the material right underneath the surface might in - deed have an effect on adhesion mediated by vdW interactions . In this paper , we review experimental and theoretical studies investi - gating the in ﬂ uence of subsurface material on vdW forces . Addition - ally , we provide a collection of experimental data highlighting the suitability of strati ﬁ ed substrates based on silicon wafers to study vdW interactions . 2 . Van der Waals interactions Already more than hundred years ago van der Waals introduced his theory of an attraction between neutral atoms in order to explain non - ideal gases [ 8 ] . Later , three types of interactions were identi ﬁ ed to contribute to the vdW interactions : • Keesom interactions characterize dipol – dipol interactions of mole - cules that carry permanent dipoles [ 9 ] . Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx ⁎ Corresponding author . Fax : + 49 681 302 70499 . E - mail address : k . jacobs @ physik . uni - saarland . de ( K . Jacobs ) . CIS - 01235 ; No of Pages 7 0001 - 8686 / $ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Advances in Colloid and Interface Science journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cis Please cite this article as : Loskill P , et al , Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2012 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Publications 102 • Debye interactions describe forces between a permanent dipole that induces a dipole moment in an otherwise unpolar molecule [ 9 ] . • London interactions , also called dispersion interactions , describe forces between instantaneously induced dipoles [ 10 ] . All three types have in common that the interaction energy scales with − 1 = d 6 . Hence , the vdW potentials ϕ for the interactions between two single atoms separated by a distance d can be written as ϕ d ð Þ ¼ − C = d 6 : ð 1 Þ Due to this scaling , vdW interactions are often considered as short - range . Hamaker , however , calculated energy – distance relations for mac - roscopic objects by pairwise summation over all atoms , continuing the work of Bradley and DeBoer [ 11 – 13 ] . Dependingon the geometry , different scaling laws apply ( cf . Fig . 1 ) . To account for the properties of the involved materials , Hamaker introduced a coef ﬁ cient A , also called ‘ Hamaker constant ’ , which he de ﬁ ned to A ¼ π 2 C ρ 1 ρ 2 ð 2 Þ where ρ i are the number of atoms per unit volume of the two mate - rials . The controversial subject of Hamaker ' s theory was that he assumes a pairwise additivity of the vdW interactions , which is gen - erally speaking not valid . A few years later , Casimir used a completely different ansatz to calculate the force between two ideally conducting semi - in ﬁ nite half - spaces in vacuum [ 14 ] . On the basis of Planck ' s fa - mous theory , he summed up the allowed electromagnetic modes be - tween two conducting plates . Lifshitz extended Casimir ' s idea and presented a theory for arbitrary materials , based on quantum ﬁ eld theory [ 15 ] . In principle , althoughmany studiesdifferentiate between Lifshitz - vdW and Casimir interactions , Lifshitz and Casimir essentially described the same effect , but with different foci [ 16 , 17 ] . By treating the interacting objects as continuous media , Casimir ' s and Lifshitz ' theories circumvent the question of pairwise additivity . Interestingly , Lifshitz ' ansatz led to the same scaling laws as the classical Hamaker ansatz ( cf . Fig . 1 ) . Only the way the Hamaker constants are derived is different . Following Lifshitz ' theory , they are calculated from the optical properties of the involved materials . Thereto , the full optical spectraover anin ﬁ niterangeof frequencies arenecessary . Nowadays , suitable datasets are available for many different materials , obtained both experimentally and from ab initio theory [ 18 – 23 ] . Still , in some systems – especially in biological systems – the full spectra of all in - volved materials are hardly accessible . In these cases , the Hamaker constants can be approximated ( see Appendix A ) by A 12 − 32 ≈ 3 4 k B T ε 1 − ε 2 ε 1 þ ε 2 (cid:1) (cid:3) ε 3 − ε 2 ε 3 þ ε 2 (cid:1) (cid:3) þ 3 ℏ ω e 8 ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p n 21 − n 22 (cid:5) (cid:6) n 23 − n 22 (cid:5) (cid:6) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n 21 þ n 22 (cid:7) (cid:8) q ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n 23 þ n 22 (cid:7) (cid:8) q ⋅ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n 21 þ n 22 (cid:7) (cid:8) q þ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n 23 þ n 22 (cid:7) (cid:8) q (cid:9) (cid:10) ð 3 Þ with the dielectric constants ε i , the refractive indices in the visible re - gime n i , and the main electronic absorption frequency ω e . TheworksofHamaker , CasimirandLifshitzdemonstratethatvdW – Casimir interactions can indeed be regarded as long - range , since for mesoscopic and macroscopic objects , the absolute value of the expo - nent of the scaling law is decreased ( the interaction between two semi - in ﬁ nite half slabs scales with − 1 = d 2 , for instance ) . Yet , the long - range character is restricted due to the ﬁ nite speed of light [ 24 ] . This retardation effect increases the absolute value of the exponent of the scaling law by up to one ( for d ≫ 20 nm ) . For separations smaller than 10 nm , however , the retardation can usually be neglected [ 25 , 26 ] . 3 . Van der Waals interactions with coated substrates Using the equations given by the theories mentioned above , it is usually possible to predict the potentials for the interactions of two uniformobjects . Yet , manysystemsconsistofcoatedsubstrates . How - ever , vdW interactions act not only between atoms in the vicinity of the surface , but also between atoms in the bulk material . Early exper - iments of Israelachvili and Tabor showed that in the case of mica sub - strates covered with a monomolecular layer of stearic acids , both the acids and the mica contribute to the vdW interactions [ 27 ] . These experimental studies were in agreement with theoretical predictions of Langbein , who postulated that the interactions with the surface layer dominate for separations d smaller than the layer thickness D ( D ≫ d ) and the interactions with the bulk material dominate in the opposing limit ( D ≪ d ) [ 28 , 29 ] . More recent studies showed that var - iations in the thickness of a surface layer induce differences in the vdW potentials and in ﬂ uence e . g . the stability of thin liquid coatings [ 30 – 33 ] . These thin ﬁ lm dewetting studies moreover demonstrated quantitatively the impact of the subsurface composition to the effec - tive interface potential [ 34 ] : the impact was measured experimen - tally by determining the differences in the preferred wavelength of spinodally dewetting thin ﬁ lms with variable subsurface composition [ 30 , 35 ] . 3 . 1 . Interactions in biological systems VdW interactions also play a major role in biological systems [ 36 ] . Particularly non speci ﬁ c adhesion is governed by vdW interactions in conjunction with electric double layer interactions , usually described using the DLVO - theory [ 3 , 37 ] or extended DLVO - theory [ 38 ] . Many biological processes , such as the aggregation of proteins [ 39 ] , the unspeci ﬁ c adhesion of cells and bacteria [ 40 – 42 ] , the adherence of abalones [ 43 ] , and the sticking of geckos [ 44 – 46 ] are in ﬂ uenced and sometimes dominated by vdW interactions . Moreover , in the case of biological objects – just as for rough objects , in general – adhesion does not occur at ‘ zero separation ’ . As a logical consequence , these processes are also not ‘ purely super ﬁ cial ’ , viz . not solely dependent on the properties of the surface . It could be shown that , when inter - actingwitha coatedsubstrate , proteinsindeedsenseboth , thesurface Fig . 1 . VdW potentials ϕ ( d ) for different geometries . Adapted from [ 9 ] . 2 P . Loskill et al . / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Loskill P , et al , Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2012 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Addendum I - Is adhesion superﬁcial ? ! Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions 103 layer and the underlying material : Adsorption experiments on tai - lored silicon wafers with differences in the thickness of the oxide layer on top of the wafers revealed qualitatively different adsorption kinetics of multiple types of proteins [ 47 , 48 ] . Based on Monte - Carlo simulations featuring surface processes such as surface mobility and conformational changes , the distinctions were invoked by the in ﬂ u - ence of the vdW - interactions on the time scale of these processes [ 49 ] . X - ray re ﬂ ectivity experiments corroborated these ﬁ ndings [ 50 ] . Recent studies discovered that the in ﬂ uence of the subsurface ma - terial on adhesion is sensed by larger biological objects , too : the unspeci ﬁ c adhesion of bacteria from the Staphylococcus genus is affected by the properties of the subsurface material , as could be shown by AFM force spectroscopy measurements [ 51 ] . Moreover , ad - hesion experiments with setal arrays of live geckos revealed that the adhesion force was signi ﬁ cantly varied by a change in the substrates subsurface composition [ 52 ] . 3 . 2 . Theoretical description of multilayer systems For a comprehensive theoretical description of the vdW potentials for systemsinvolvingmultilayerstructures , notonlythe surfacelayer , but also the composition of the entire substrate has to be taken into account . Substantial theoretical work has been done in recent years con - cerning the description of van der Waals interactions in multilayer systems [ 53 – 56 ] and graded interfaces [ 57 , 58 ] . Still , often experimen - talists of various ﬁ elds do not take into consideration that the interac - tions with coated materials may be affected by the subsurface and characterize substrates only by their surface properties . Moreover , by using strict cutoff radii for vdW interactions , most MD simulations also do not account for interactions with strati ﬁ ed substrates . In general , the drawback of tailored systems is that the applying scaling laws are not as simple as the ones in Fig . 1 , since the Hamaker constants depend on the separation . The vdW potential for the inter - action of two layered semi - in ﬁ nite half slabs , for instance , must be modi ﬁ ed to ϕ d ð Þ ¼ − A d ð Þ 12 π d 2 ð 4 Þ per unit area . For the case of non - retarded interactions between in ﬁ - nite planar coated substrates , however , straightforward approxima - tions are available that ( qualitatively ) describe many systems quite well . For instance , combining rules ( geometric mean ) may be used to calculate ‘ effective ’ Hamaker constants for a multilayer system . These relations , that are derived from the combining rules for surface energies , are a common way to ﬁ nd out unknown Hamaker constants [ 59 ] . Yet , theserelationsbreakdownwhenevertheKeesomandDebye parts ( thezerofrequencyterms ) cannotbeneglected [ 9 ] . Especiallyin multilayersystems , wheremultiple Hamakerconstantsarenecessary , combining rules are not applicable . On the basis of the Lifshitz theory , Ninham and Parsegian approx - imated the potentials for the interactions of symmetrical triple layer ﬁ lms ( cf . Fig . 2A ) by [ 60 – 62 ] ϕ vdW d ð Þ ¼ − 1 12 π ⋅ A 23 − 23 d 2 þ 2 A 23 − 12 d þ D ð Þ 2 þ A 12 − 12 d þ 2 D ð Þ 2 ! ð 5 Þ with A ij − kl the constants for the interactions of the two different in - terfaces . Using the same ansatz , the vdW potential of the interactions betweena probematerial anda substratecoatedwitha layerof thick - ness D ( cf . Fig . 2B ) is given by [ 61 , 17 ] ϕ vdW d ð Þ ¼ − 1 12 π ⋅ A 12 − 32 d 2 þ A 12 − 43 d þ D ð Þ 2 ! : ð 6 Þ For larger separations D ≪ d , however , Eq . ( 6 ) is no longer valid . For the description of an experimental system with a variable D ( e . g . the thickness of a coating ) , we have previously chosen an alter - native approximation [ 30 , 32 ] : By assuming a scaling of the interaction with C a d 2 þ C b d þ D 2 ð Þ and a continuous transition between the boundary cases D ≪ d and D ≫ d , we gained ϕ d ð Þ ¼ − 1 12 π ⋅ A 12 − 32 d 2 þ A 12 − 42 − A 12 − 32 d þ D ð Þ 2 ! ; ð 7 Þ where A 12 − 42 standsfortheinteractionofmaterial1viamedium2with material 4 in the case that D = 0 , viz . medium 3 is nonexistent . 4 . Silicon wafers as a model system Most of the studies mentioned above used silicon wafers as a model system to study vdW interactions with coated materials . This model system has the advantage of the feasibility to manufacture sil - icon wafers with de ﬁ ned oxide layer thicknesses that feature all the same surface properties . Hence , silicon wafers provide the possibility to tune the composition of the subsurface – viz . the vdW interactions arising from the subsurface – independent of all other interactions . As described earlier , vdW interactions are essentially dependent on the optical properties of the involved materials ( Eq . ( 3 ) ) . In the case of pure SiO 2 , these properties are well - known for various atomic struc - tures [ 21 ] . The properties of thin silicon oxide ﬁ lms , however , have been discussed controversially for decades , e . g . in terms of the oxi - dation state of the silicon atoms . In the following , the term “ silicon oxide ” stands for SiO x . The use of SiO 2 bulk values for oxide ﬁ lms A B Fig . 2 . Schemes of two multilayer con ﬁ gurations : A ) symmetrical triple layers and B ) interaction between a uniform material and a coated material . 3 P . Loskill et al . / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Loskill P , et al , Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2012 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Publications 104 thicker than 100 nm is generally accepted . Yet , the validity of these values for thin ﬁ lm has been questioned numerous times and espe - cially the optical properties , such as the refractive index , are disputed . In general , thin silicon oxide layers may be described by two different models : • Single layer model : by assuming a sharp transition between the bulk Si and the oxide , the latter can be described by a single layer ( cf . Fig . 3A ) . In this case , the oxide layer may have the same refrac - tive index as bulk SiO 2 or an increased refractive index . • Double layer model : since a sharp transition between the materials is highly unphysical , a continuous transition or an interface rough - ness is very likely . As the thickness of this transition region is of the same order of magnitude as the oxide layer thickness , a double layer con ﬁ guration is an obvious approximation ( cf . Fig . 3B ) . The van der Waals interactions sensed by a probe object should differ strongly for these different model con ﬁ gurations ( cf . Fig . 3C ) . By applying the single layer model , 1 Jellison observed an increase in the refractive index of the whole oxide layer [ 64 ] . Using spec - troscopic polarization modulation ellipsometry , the refractive index of very thin layers was determined to be 1 . 5 − 1 . 8 ( at λ = 800 nm ) . These ﬁ ndings were later on con ﬁ rmed by other studies [ 65 , 66 ] . Experimental support for the double layer model , viz . the observa - tion of an interfacial transition layer , is also given by previous studies . Experimental studies noticed a thin ( ≈ 6 − 7 Å ) region of atomically mixed Si and O with a refractive index of n ≈ 2 . 8 − 3 . 2 ( at 546 . 1 nm ) [ 67 , 68 ] . High - resolution core - level and XPS spectroscopy [ 69 , 70 ] also con ﬁ rmed that “ the interface is not abrupt , as evidenced by the high density of intermediate - oxidation states ( about two monolayers of Si ) and by their nonideal distribution ” [ 71 ] . These ﬁ ndings were mat - ched by predictions of theoretical models [ 72 , 73 ] . The results of these studies , however , are not contradictory , but arise from the different methods applied . A problem of optical re ﬂ ec - tivity methods , such as ellipsometry , is that they are not able to determine the density and the thickness of thin ﬁ lms ( ≤ 5 nm ) inde - pendently ( not to mention to distinguish between two of such ﬁ lms ) . Thus , theusageof thesinglelayermodelfor thesemethodsis theonly possible way . Yet , for thinner silicon oxide ﬁ lms , the transition layer fraction of the total oxide layer is increased resulting in an observa - tion of a higher overall refractive index . Another limitation of all of the mentioned studies is , that they are performed on silicon wafers with thermally grown silicon oxide layers . Especiallyforthin ( ≤ 10 nm ) ﬁ lms , theprocessparametersofthearti ﬁ - cialgrowingprocesscanhaveasigni ﬁ cantin ﬂ uenceonthedensityand the optical properties of the silicon oxide ( decreased vs . increased re - fractive index ) [ 74 , 75 ] . Yet , already without any pretreatment , silicon wafers are covered with a native oxide layer of 1 . 5 nm to 2 nm thick - ness . Sinceonlylimiteddataisavailablefortheopticalpropertiesofna - tive oxide layers , we presenta briefsummaryof thepropertiesofthese layers containing previously unpublished data . 4 . 1 . Properties of thin native oxide layers The increase in refractive index to values up to n = 1 . 8 , as pre - dicted by several studies [ 64 – 66 ] , is highly unlikely for native oxide layers as polymer dewetting studies have shown via an indirect way A B C Fig . 3 . Properties ofthinoxidelayers : A ) Theoreticallyexpected transitionofthe refractiveindex ( shortdashes ) andaproposeddouble layeroxidemodel ( longdashes ) . B ) Single layeroxidemodelswherebytheoxidelayerhasi ) SiO 2 bulk - likeproperties ( solidline ) orii ) propertiesexpectedbyopticalstudieswithlimitedresolution ( dottedline ) . C ) Calcu - lated potentials of the van der Waals interactions between a semi - in ﬁ nite half - space of polystyrene ( n vis = 1 . 585 , (cid:2) 0 = 2 . 6 ) and a silicon wafer with a thin oxide layer for the three model con ﬁ gurations ( cf . AandB ) anda bulksilicon dioxide substrate ( n vis = 1 . 46 , (cid:2) 0 = 3 . 9 [ 63 ] ) as acomparison ( dash - dotted line ) . To include theshort - range repulsive interac - tion a second term C = d 8 ( maintaining the difference in exponents of the Lennard – Jones potential ) was added . The parameter C was kept constant for all con ﬁ gurations , since the surface is essentially the same . 1 Jellison indeed assumed a transition layer . Yet , at some point ( for thin ﬁ lms ) he started to neglect this layer , whereby the increase in refractive index began exactly around this point . Table 1 Surfacepropertiesofanativeoxidelayerandofathermallygrownthickoxidelayerasacomparison : thickness ( d ) , root mean square ( rms ) roughness ( by 1 μ m 2 AFM scan ) , advancing ( adv ) and receding ( rec ) water contact angle , and surface energy γ ( obtained from contact angle measurements of three different liquids [ 77 ] ) . Oxide layer d [ nm ] rms [ nm ] Θ adv [ ∘ ] Θ rec [ ∘ ] γ [ mJ / m 2 ] Native 1 . 7 ( 3 ) 0 . 13 ( 3 ) 5 ( 2 ) Compl . wetting 63 ( 1 ) Thick 150 ( 1 ) 0 . 09 ( 2 ) 7 ( 2 ) Compl . wetting 64 ( 1 ) 4 P . Loskill et al . / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Loskill P , et al , Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2012 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Addendum I - Is adhesion superﬁcial ? ! Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions 105 [ 30 ] : thin liquid polystyrene ( PS ) ﬁ lms prepared on Si wafers with native oxide layers ( D SiO = 2 . 4 nm ) were unstable and dewetted spinodally . Since this process is driven by the minimization of the free energy determined by the vdW potential [ 76 , 9 ] the refractive index of the oxide cannot be higher than the one of PS ( ≈ 1 . 59 ) , as shown by Eq . ( 3 ) . Amoredirectansatzistocomparenativeoxidelayerstothickoxide layers in terms of the material properties , such as surface roughness , surface chemistry , homogeneity , electron density and stoichiometry : the surface characterization via atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) and contact angle ( CA ) measurements shows that – within the experimen - tal error – the roughness and chemical homogeneity of the surface of a native oxide layer on Si wafers does not differ from the properties of a thickSiO 2 layer ( cf . Table1 ) . TheanalysisofhighenergyX - rayre ﬂ ectiv - ity measurements on native and thick oxide layers leads to electron densities that are again similar ( Fig . 4 ) . Especially the topmost part ( 0 – 5 Å ) of the native oxide layer resembles the density of the thicker layer . The stoichiometry of the native oxide layer was studied by X - ray photoelectron spectroscopy ( XPS ) combined with Ar ion etching in ordertorevealthedepthpro ﬁ lesfordifferentoxidationstates / valencies Si k + ( k = 0 , … , 4 ) . Fig . 5A shows the Si - 2p spectra recorded in normal emission mode ( take - off angle 0 ∘ along the surface normal ) with two components representing Si 0 and Si 4 + atlower and higher binding en - ergy , respectively . Contributions from Si 1 + , Si 2 + and Si 3 + could not be resolved , but have to be treated as a third peak in the background be - tween the Si 0 and Si 4 + signals . For stepwise ablation of the surface , theintensityoftheSi 4 + peakdecreasesasymmetrically , i . e . , itisshifted towardsthe Si 0 signal , forminga shoulder in the intermediate state be - fore vanishing ( for calibration of ablation see , e . g . , Ref . [ 78 ] ) . For abla - tion of about 1 . 5 nm , contributions from oxide species can no longer be observed , which is in accordance with the thickness of the native oxide measured by other methods ( Fig . 4 and Table 1 ) . The asymmetry in the Si oxide related part of the spectra is characteristic for intensity contributions from Si 4 + and ( Si 1 + , Si 2 + , Si 3 + ) when distributed in a double layer model as depicted in Fig . 5B . For this type of stacking , the simulation of intensity distributions within the Si - 2p spectra in Fig . 5C shows the same characteristics , namely the asymmetric decrease of the intensity from the oxide species as the experimental data in A D E B C Fig . 5 . A ) XPScorelevelspectraforSi - 2p ( Al – K α radiation , ℏ ω = 1486 . 6 eV , normalemission ) fordifferentstagesofsurfaceablationbyArionetchingwithasymmetricdecreaseof intensity contributions from oxide species . B ) Double layer oxide model with Si 0 – ( Si 1 + , Si 2 + , Si 3 + ) – Si 4 + stacking ( from bulk to surface ) . C ) Simulation of spectra for the double layer model from B ) with the same asymmetric decrease of oxide intensities as observed in the experiment . D ) Simulation of spectra for the single layer model depicted in E ) with uniform decrease of oxide intensities . E ) Single layer model with a homogeneous ( Si 1 + , Si 2 + , Si 3 + , Si 4 + ) surface layer . Fig . 4 . Electron density pro ﬁ les of a native ( dashed line ) and a thick oxide layer ( solid line ) determined by high energy X - ray re ﬂ ectivity . The z - coordinate has been set to zero at the center of the transition between Si and its oxide . Data from [ 50 ] . 5 P . Loskill et al . / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Loskill P , et al , Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2012 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Publications 106 Fig . 5A . A similar asymmetry was reported in previous studies on ther - mally grown oxide layers [ 70 ] . For comparison , Fig . 5E shows a second model with a homogeneous distribution of the oxidation states within the oxide layer . For this scenario , the simulation in Fig . 5D predicts a uniformdisappearanceoftheoxidecontributions , incontrasttotheex - perimental observations in Fig . 5A . Insummary , theseresultsshowthatnativesiliconoxidelayerscan be approximated by a double layer system as depicted in Figs . 3A and 5B , whereadjacenttothebulkSiatransitionlayerandthenabulk - like SiO 2 layer follows . Since all characterized material properties of the SiO 2 part are similar to the properties of thick oxide layers , there are no hints to assume different optical properties . The transition layer , however , will most likely display increased polarizability [ 67 , 68 , 73 ] . That means , differences in the vdW potentials of wafers featuring nativeandthick oxidelayersarouse indeedfromsubsurface contribu - tions , since the uppermost material is the same , namely SiO 2 . Hence , silicon wafers with native oxide layers are indeed good model substrates to study van der Waals interactions with coated materials . Acknowledgement This work was supported by the graduate college GRK 1276 of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG , the DAAD PROMOS , Saarland University and Saarland Ministry of Economy . K . J . thanksJohn Ralston for his encouragement to pursue an academic career and for intense discussions of soft matter problems , e . g . the physics of skiing . Appendix A . Calculation of Hamaker constants Based on the Lifshitz theory , the Hamaker constant can be calcu - lated by 2 A 12 − 32 ¼ 3 2 kT X ∞ n ¼ 0 ′ Δ 1 ; 2 i ξ n ð Þ Δ 3 ; 2 i ξ n ð Þ ð A : 1 Þ with Δ a ; b i ξ ð Þ ¼ ε a i ξ ð Þ − ε b i ξ ð Þ ε a i ξ ð Þ þ ε b i ξ ð Þ ð A : 2 Þ whereby ε a ( i ξ ) arethevalues of the dielectric functionof material a at the imaginary ( Matsubara ) frequencies ξ n ¼ n ⋅ 2 π k B T = h : ð A : 3 Þ Using the Ninham – Parsegian approximation it is possible to ob - tain the ε ( i ξ ) from the adsorption spectrum [ 79 , 60 ] , more precisely the relative strengths and the frequencies of the peaks , by ε i ξ ð Þ ¼ 1 þ X N j ¼ 0 C j 1 þ ξ = ω j (cid:5) (cid:6) 2 ð A : 4 Þ with C j ¼ 2 f j πω j ð A : 5 Þ where f j is the strength of an oscillator , ω j its relaxation frequency , and N is the total number of oscillators . For dielectric materials Eq . ( A . 4 ) reduces to [ 80 , 81 ] ε i ξ ð Þ ≈ 1 þ ε 0 ð Þ − ε ð ω vis Þ 1 þð ξ = ω rot Þ 2 þ ε ð ω vis Þ − 1 1 þ ξ = ω e ð Þ 2 ð A : 6 Þ with ω rot the molecular rotational relaxation frequency ( typically in the IR regime ) , ω e the main electronic absorption frequency ( typi - cally ≈ 3 ⋅ 10 15 s − 1 , in the UV regime ) , and ε ( ω vis ) = n vis2 the refrac - tive index in the visible regime . As usually ξ 1 ≫ ω rot ( cf . Eq . ( A . 3 ) ) the ﬁ rst term in Eq . ( A . 6 ) can be neglected and Eq . ( A . 1 ) may be ap - proximated by Eq . ( 3 ) if the adsorption frequencies of the three ma - terials are similar [ 9 ] . References [ 1 ] Fuller KNG , Tabor D . The effectof surface roughness onadhesion ofelastic solids . Proc R Soc Lond A 1975 ; 345 : 327 – 42 . [ 2 ] Persson BNJ , Tosatti E . The effect of surface roughness on the adhesion of elastic solids . J Chem Phys 2001 ; 115 : 5597 – 610 . [ 3 ] Derjaguin BV , LandauL . Theory ofthe stability ofstrongly charged lyophobicsols andoftheadhesionofstronglychargedparticlesinsolutions ofelectrolytes . Acta Physicochim URS 1941 ; 14 : 633 – 62 . [ 4 ] YoonBJ , LenhoffAM . Computationoftheelectrostaticinteractionenergybetween a protein and a charged surface . J Phys Chem - Us 1992 ; 96 : 3130 – 4 . [ 5 ] JohnsonKL , KendallK , RobertsAD . Surfaceenergyandthecontactofelasticsolids . Proc R Soc A 1971 ; 324 : 301 – 13 . [ 6 ] Good RJ . Contact angle , wetting , and adhesion : a critical review . J Adhes Sci Technol 1992 ; 6 : 1269 – 302 . [ 7 ] Spolenak R , Gorb SN , GaoH , Arzt E . Effects of contact shape onthe scaling of bio - logical attachments . Proc R Soc A 2005 ; 461 : 305 – 19 . [ 8 ] VanderWaals , J . D . DieKontinuität des gasformigen unddes ﬂ üssigen Zustandes . Ph . D . thesis ; Leiden ; 1873 . [ 9 ] Israelachvili JN . Intermolecular and surface forces . 2 ed . San Diego : Academic Press ; 1992 . [ 10 ] London F . The general theory of molecular forces . T Faraday Soc 1937 ; 33 : 8 – 26 . [ 11 ] de Boer JH . The in ﬂ uence of van der Waals ' forces and primary bonds on binding energy , strengthandorientation , withspecialreferencetosomearti ﬁ cialresins . T Faraday Soc 1936 ; 32 : 10 – 37 . [ 12 ] Bradley RS . The cohesive force between solid surfaces and the surface energy of solids . LXXIXPhil Mag 1932 ; 13 : 853 – 62 . [ 13 ] Hamaker HC . The London - van der Waals attraction between spherical particles . Physica 1937 ; 4 : 1058 – 72 . [ 14 ] Casimir HBG . On the attraction between two perfectly conducting plates . Proc K Ned Akad Wet 1948 ; 51 : 793 . [ 15 ] Dzyaloshinskii IE , Lifshitz EM , Pitaevskii LP . The general theory of van der Waals forces . Adv Phys 1961 ; 10 : 165 – 209 . [ 16 ] French RH , Parsegian VA , Podgornik R , Rajter RF , Jagota A , Luo J , et al . Long range interactions in nanoscale science . Rev Mod Phys 2010 ; 82 : 1887 – 944 . [ 17 ] Parsegian VA . Van der Waals forces . A handbook for biologists , chemists , engi - neers , and physicists1 ed . . New York : Cambridge University Press ; 2006 . [ 18 ] French RH , Cannon RM , Denoyer LK , Chiang Ym . Full spectral calculation of non - retarded Hamaker constants for ceramic systems from interband transition strengths . Solid State Ionics 1995 ; 75 : 13 – 33 . [ 19 ] FrenchRH , MullejansH , JonesDJ , DuscherG , CannonRM , RuhleM . Dispersionforces and Hamaker constants for intergranular ﬁ lms in silicon nitride from spatially resolved - valence electron energy loss spectrum imaging . Acta Mater 1998 ; 46 : 2271 – 87 . [ 20 ] Ahuja R , Osorio - Guillen JM , de Almeida JS , Holm B , Ching WY , Johansson B . Elec - tronicandopticalpropertiesof γ - Al 2 O 3 fromabinitiotheory . JPhysCondensMat - ter 2004 ; 16 : 2891 – 900 . [ 21 ] TanGL , LemonMF , JonesDJ , FrenchRH . OpticalpropertiesandLondondispersion interaction of amorphous and crystalline SiO2 determined by vacuum ultraviolet spectroscopy and spectroscopic ellipsometry . Phys Rev B 2005 ; 72 : 205117 . [ 22 ] Rajter RF , Podgornik R , Parsegian VA , French RH , Ching WY . van der Waals – London dispersion interactions for optically anisotropic cylinders : Metallic and semiconducting single - wall carbon nanotubes . Phys Rev B 2007 ; 76 : 045417 . [ 23 ] MasudaT , MatsukiY , ShimodaT . SpectralparametersandHamakerconstantsofsil - icon hydride compounds and organic solvents . J Colloid Interface Sci 2009 ; 340 : 298 – 305 . [ 24 ] CasimirHBG , PolderD . TheIn ﬂ uenceofRetardationontheLondon – vanderWaals Forces . Phys Rev 1948 ; 73 : 360 – 72 . [ 25 ] TaborD , WintertonRHS . Thedirectmeasurementofnormalandretardedvander Waals forces . Proc Roy Soc A 1969 ; 312 : 435 – 50 . [ 26 ] Israelachvili JN , Tabor D . Measurement of van der Waals dispersion forces in the range 1 . 4 to 130 nm . Nature 1972 ; 236 : 106 . [ 27 ] Israelachvili JN , Tabor D . The measurement of van der Waals dispersion forces in the range 1 . 5 to 130 nm . Proc R Soc A 1972 ; 331 : 19 – 38 . [ 28 ] LangbeinD . Non - retardeddispersionenergybetweenmacroscopicspheres . JPhys Chem Solids 1971 ; 32 : 1657 – 67 . [ 29 ] LangbeinD . VanderWaalsattractioninmultilayerstructures . JAdhes1972 ; 3 : 213 – 35 . [ 30 ] SeemannR , HerminghausS , JacobsK . Dewettingpatternsandmolecularforces : a reconciliation . Phys Rev Lett 2001 ; 86 : 5534 – 7 . [ 31 ] Seemann R , Herminghaus S , Jacobs K . Gaining control of pattern formation of dewetting liquid ﬁ lms . J Phys Condens Matter 2001 ; 13 : 4925 – 38 . [ 32 ] Jacobs K , Seemann R , Herminghaus S . Stability and dewetting ofthin liquid ﬁ lms . In : Tsui OKC , Russel TP , editors . Polymer thin ﬁ lms . Singapore : World Scienti ﬁ c ; 2008 . p . 243 – 66 . 2 The prime denotes that the zero term has to be multiplied with 12 . 6 P . Loskill et al . / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Loskill P , et al , Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2012 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Addendum I - Is adhesion superﬁcial ? ! Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions 107 [ 33 ] Bäumchen O , Jacobs K . Slip effects in polymer thin ﬁ lms . J Phys Condens Matter 2010 ; 22 : 033102 . [ 34 ] Vrij A . Possible mechanism for the spontaneous rupture of thin , free liquid ﬁ lms . Discuss Faraday Soc 1966 ; 42 : 23 – 33 . [ 35 ] Herminghaus S , Jacobs K , Mecke K , Bischof J , Fery A , Ibn - Elhaj M , et al . Spinodal dewetting in liquid crystal and liquid metal ﬁ lms . Science 1998 ; 282 : 916 – 9 . [ 36 ] Leckband D , Israelachvili JN . Intermolecular forces in biology . Q Rev Biophys 2001 ; 34 : 105 – 267 . [ 37 ] Verwey EJW , Overbeek JTG . Theory of the stability of lyophobic colloids . 1 ed . Amsterdam : Elsevier Publishing Co . ; 1948 . [ 38 ] VanOss CJ . Energetics ofcell – cell andcell – biopolymer interactions . Cell Biochem Biophys 1989 ; 14 : 1 – 116 . [ 39 ] Leckband D , Schmitt F , Israelachvili JN , Knoll W . Direct force measurements of speci ﬁ c and nonspeci ﬁ c protein interactions . Biochemistry - Us 1994 ; 33 : 4611 – 24 . [ 40 ] NirS , AndersenM . VanderWaalsinteractionsbetweencellsurfaces . JMembrane Biol 1977 ; 31 : 1 – 18 . [ 41 ] NirS . VanderWaalsinteractionsbetweensurfacesofbiologicalinterest . ProgSurf Sci 1977 ; 8 : 1 – 58 . [ 42 ] Ploux L , Ponche A , Anselme K . Bacteria / material interfaces : role of the material and cell wall properties . J Adhes Sci Technol 2010 ; 24 : 2165 – 201 . [ 43 ] Lin AYM , Brunner R , Chen PY , Talke FE , Meyers MA . Underwater adhesion of abalone : the role of van der Waals and capillary forces . Acta Mater 2009 ; 57 : 4178 – 85 . [ 44 ] Autumn K , Sitti M , Liang YCA , Peattie AM , Hansen WR , Sponberg S , et al . Evi - dence for van der Waals adhesion in gecko setae . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2002 ; 99 : 12252 – 6 . [ 45 ] Autumn K , Peattie AM . Mechanisms of adhesion in geckos . Integr Comp Biol 2002 ; 42 : 1081 – 90 . [ 46 ] HuberG , MantzH , SpolenakR , MeckeK , JacobsK , GorbSN , etal . Evidenceforcap - illaritycontributionstogeckoadhesionfromsinglespatulananomechanicalmea - surements . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2005 ; 102 : 16293 – 6 . [ 47 ] QuinnA , MantzH , JacobsK , BellionM , SantenL . Proteinadsorptionkineticsindif - ferent surface potentials . Europhys Lett 2008 ; 81 : 56003 . [ 48 ] SchmittY , HählH , GilowC , MantzH , JacobsK , LeidingerO , etal . Structuralevolu - tion of protein - bio ﬁ lms : simulations and experiments . Biomicro ﬂ uidics 2010 ; 4 : 032201 . [ 49 ] BellionM , SantenL , MantzH , HählH , QuinnA , NagelAM , etal . Proteinadsorption ontailoredsubstrates : long - rangeforcesandconformationalchanges . JPhysCon - dens Matter 2008 ; 20 : 404226 . [ 50 ] Hähl H , Evers F , Grandthyll S , Paulus M , SternemannC , Loskill P , et al . Subsurface in ﬂ uence on the structure of protein adsorbates revealed by in situ X - ray re ﬂ ec - tivity . Langmuir 2012 ; 28 : 7747 – 56 . [ 51 ] LoskillP , HählH , KreisCT , ThewesN , BischoffM , HerrmannM , etal . Thein ﬂ uence of the subsurface composition of a material on the adhesion of Staphylococci . Langmuir 2012 ; 28 : 7242 – 8 . [ 52 ] Loskill , P . , Puthoff , J . B . , Wilkinson , M . , Mecke , K . , Jacobs , K . , Autumn , K . Adhesionof gecko setae re ﬂ ects nanoscale differences in subsurface energy . submitted for publication . [ 53 ] Toma š M . Casimir force in absorbing multilayers . Phys Rev A 2002 ; 66 : 052103 . [ 54 ] PodgornikR , HansenPL , ParsegianVA . OnareformulationofthetheoryofLifshitz – van derWaalsinteractionsinmultilayeredsystems . JChemPhys2003 ; 119 : 1070 . [ 55 ] Podgornik R , Parsegian VA . van der Waals interactions across strati ﬁ ed media . J Chem Phys 2004 ; 120 : 3401 . [ 56 ] Podgornik R , French RH , Parsegian VA . Nonadditivity in van der Waals interac - tions within multilayers . J Chem Phys 2006 ; 124 : 044709 . [ 57 ] vanBenthem K , Tan G , DeNoyer LK , FrenchRH , RuhleM . Local optical properties , electron densities , andLondon dispersion energies of atomically structured grain boundaries . Phys Rev Lett 2004 ; 93 : 227201 . [ 58 ] van Benthem K , Tan G , French R , DeNoyer L , Podgornik R , Parsegian VA . Graded interface models for more accurate determination of van der Waals – London dis - persion interactions across grain boundaries . Phys Rev B 2006 ; 74 : 205110 . [ 59 ] Van Oss CJ , Chaudhury MK . Interfacial Lifshitz - van der Waals and polar interac - tions in macroscopic systems . Chem Rev 1988 ; 88 : 927 – 41 . [ 60 ] Ninham BW , Parsegian VA . Vander Waals forces across triple - layer ﬁ lms . JChem Phys 1970 ; 52 : 4578 – 87 . [ 61 ] ParsegianVA , vanderNinhamBW . Waalsforcesinmany - layeredstructures : gen - eralizations of the Lifshitz result for two semi - in ﬁ nite media . J Theor Biol 1973 ; 38 : 101 – 9 . [ 62 ] Parsegian VA . Reconciliation of Van - Der - Waals force measurements between phosphatidylcholine bilayers in waterandbetween bilayer - coated mica surfaces . Langmuir 1993 ; 9 : 3625 – 8 . [ 63 ] Sze SM , Ng KK . Physics of semiconductor devices . 3 ed . New York : John Wiley & Sons ; 2006 . [ 64 ] Jellison Jr GE . Examination of thin SiO 2 - ﬁ lms on si using spectroscopic polariza - tion modulation ellipsometry . J Appl Phys 1991 ; 69 : 7627 – 34 . [ 65 ] WangY , IreneEA . Consistent refractive indexparametersforultrathin SiO 2 ﬁ lms . J Vac Sci Technol B 2000 ; 18 : 279 – 82 . [ 66 ] HebertKJ , ZafarS , IreneEA , KuehnR , McCarthyTE , DemirliogluEK . Measurement of the refractive index of thin SiO 2 ﬁ lms using tunneling current oscillations and ellipsometry . Appl Phys Lett 1996 ; 68 : 266 – 8 . [ 67 ] Taft E , Cordes L . Optical evidence for a silicon – silicon oxide interlayer . J Electro - chem Soc 1979 ; 126 : 131 – 4 . [ 68 ] AspnesDE , TheetenJB . Optical - propertiesoftheinterfacebetweenSianditsther - mally grown oxide . Phys Rev Lett 1979 ; 43 : 1046 – 50 . [ 69 ] HollingerG , HimpselFJ . Probingthetransition layerattheSiO 2 - Siinterfaceusing core level photoemission . Appl Phys Lett 1984 ; 44 : 93 – 5 . [ 70 ] Grunthaner FJ , Grunthaner PJ , Vasquez RP , Lewis BF , Maserjian J , Madhukar A . Local atomic and electronic - structure of oxide - GaAs and SiO 2 – Si interfaces using high - resolution XPS . J Vac Sci Technol 1979 ; 16 : 1443 – 53 . [ 71 ] HimpselFJ , McFeelyFR , Taleb - Ibrahimi A . MicroscopicstructureoftheSiO 2 / Siin - terface . Phys Rev B Condens Matter 1988 ; 38 : 6084 – 96 . [ 72 ] OhdomariI , AkatsuH , YamakoshiY , KishimotoK . Studyoftheinterfacialstructure betweenSi ( 100 ) andthermally grownSiO 2 usingaball - and - spokemodel . JAppl Phys 1987 ; 62 : 3751 – 4 . [ 73 ] Giustino F , Bongiorno A , Pasquarello A . Atomistic models of the Si ( 100 ) – SiO 2 in - terface : structural , electronic and dielectric properties . J Phys Condens Matter 2005 ; 17 : S2065 – 74 . [ 74 ] Irene E , Tierney E , Angilello J . A viscous - ﬂ ow model to explain the appearance of high - density thermal SiO 2 at low oxidation temperatures . J Electrochem Soc 1982 ; 129 : 2594 – 7 . [ 75 ] CaiQY , ZhengYX , MaoPH , ZhangRJ , ZhangDX , LiuMH , etal . Evolution ofoptical constantsofsilicondioxideonsiliconfromultrathin ﬁ lmstothick ﬁ lms . JPhysD : Appl Phys 2010 ; 43 : 445302 . [ 76 ] GeogheganM , KrauschG . Wettingatpolymersurfacesandinterfaces . ProgPolym Sci 2003 ; 28 : 261 – 302 . [ 77 ] Mykhaylyk TA , Evans SD , Fernyhough CM , Hamley IW , HendersonJR . Surface en - ergy of ethylene - co - 1 - butene copolymers determined by contact angle methods . J Colloid Interface Sci 2003 ; 260 : 234 – 9 . [ 78 ] MüllerF , ZeitzC , MantzH , EhsesKH , SolderaF , SchmauchJ , etal . Elementaldepth pro ﬁ ling of ﬂ uoridated hydroxyapatite : saving your dentition by the skin of your teeth ? Langmuir 2010 ; 26 : 18750 – 9 . [ 79 ] Parsegian VA , Ninham BW . Application of the Lifshitz theory to the calculation of Van der Waals forces across thin lipid ﬁ lms . Nature 1969 ; 224 : 1197 – 8 . [ 80 ] Mahanty J , Ninham BW . Dispersion forces . 1 ed . London : Academic Press ; 1976 . [ 81 ] Hough DB , White LR . The calculation of Hamaker constants from Liftshitz theory withapplicationstowettingphenomena . AdvColloidInterfaceSci1980 ; 14 : 3 – 41 . 7 P . Loskill et al . / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2012 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Loskill P , et al , Is adhesion super ﬁ cial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2012 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2012 . 06 . 006 Publications 108 Addendum II - Subsurface Inﬂuence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Reﬂectivity Authors : H . Hähl 1 , F . Evers 2 , S . Grandthyll 1 , M . Paulus 2 , C . Sternemann 2 , P . Loskill 1 , M . Lessel 1 , A . K . Hüsecken 2 , T . Brenner 2 , M . Tolan 2 , and K . Jacobs 1 1 Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Ger - many . 2 Fakultät Physik / DELTA , TU Dortmund , 44221 Dortmund , Germany Langmuir 28 , 7747 – 7756 ( 2012 ) . ( http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g ) Author contributions : Experiments were conceived and designed by H . Hähl and K . Jacobs . Experiments were performed by H . Hähl , F . Evers , S . Grandthyll , M . Paulus , C . Sternemann , P . Loskill , M . Lessel , A . K . Hüsecken , and T . Brenner . Data was analyzed by F . Evers . The article was written by H . Hähl and F . Evers . Research was directed by K . Jacobs and M . Tolan . Abstract - The adsorption process of proteins to surfaces is governed by the mutual interactions between proteins , solution and substrate . Interactions arising from the substrate are usually attributed to the uppermost atomic layer . This ‘actual surface’ deﬁnes the surface chemistry and hence steric and electrostatic interactions . For a comprehensive understanding , however , also the interactions arising from the bulk material have to be considered . Our protein adsorption experiments with globular proteins ( α - amylase , bovine serum albumin , and lysozyme ) clearly reveal the inﬂu - ence of the subsurface material via van der Waals forces . Thereby , the used set of functionalized silicon wafers enables a distinction between eﬀects of the surface chem - istry and the subsurface composition of the substrate : Whereas the surface chemistry controls whether or not the individual proteins are denatured , the strength of the van der Waals forces aﬀects the ﬁnal layer density and hence the adsorbed amount of proteins . The results imply that van der Waals forces mainly inﬂuence surface pro - cesses , which govern the structure formation of the protein adsorbates , such as surface diﬀusion or spreading . 109 Subsurface In ﬂ uence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Re ﬂ ectivity Hendrik Ha ̈ hl , † Florian Evers , ‡ , § Samuel Grandthyll , † Michael Paulus , ‡ Christian Sternemann , ‡ Peter Loskill , † Matthias Lessel , † Anne K . Hu ̈ secken , ‡ Thorsten Brenner , ‡ Metin Tolan , ‡ and Karin Jacobs * , † † Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbru ̈ cken , Germany ‡ Fakulta ̈ t Physik / DELTA , TU Dortmund , 44221 Dortmund , Germany * S Supporting Information ABSTRACT : The adsorption process of proteins to surfaces is governed by the mutual interactions among proteins , the solution , and the substrate . Interactions arising from the substrate are usually attributed to the uppermost atomic layer . This actual surface de ﬁ nes the surface chemistry and hence steric and electrostatic interactions . For a comprehensive understanding , however , the interactions arising from the bulk material also have to be considered . Our protein adsorption experiments with globular proteins ( α - amylase , bovine serum albumin , and lysozyme ) clearly reveal the in ﬂ uence of the subsurface material via van der Waals forces . Here , a set of functionalized silicon wafers enables a distinction between the e ﬀ ects of surface chemistry and the subsurface composition of the substrate . Whereas the surface chemistry controls whether the individual proteins are denatured , the strength of the van der Waals forces a ﬀ ects the ﬁ nal layer density and hence the adsorbed amount of proteins . The results imply that van der Waals forces mainly in ﬂ uence surface processes , which govern the structure formation of the protein adsorbates , such as surface di ﬀ usion and spreading . ■ INTRODUCTION The unspeci ﬁ c adsorption of proteins on solid / liquid interfaces is a well - known and often studied phenomenon . 1 − 4 Its importance in and in ﬂ uence on clinical , biological , and technical applications is enormous . For instance , bio ﬁ lm formation on surfaces adherent to biological solutions ( saliva , blood , etc . ) begins with and depends on the primary adsorption by the proteins . Therefore , to control the bio ﬁ lm development , it is desirable to gain control of the protein adsorption process . Recent studies have shown that the substrate strongly in ﬂ uences the enzymatic activity of adsorbed proteins , 5 their orientation on the surface , 6 , 7 and the kinetics of the adsorption process . 5 , 8 , 9 The latter studies have shown that slight changes in the substrate ’ s subsurface composition ( i . e . , the material composition below the uppermost surface layer ) in ﬂ uence the kinetics of adsorption . It is the aim of our study to yield structural information about the adsorption process and the in ﬂ uence of the subsurface composition of the substrate and connect the results to kinematical studies . 8 − 10 Parameters that in ﬂ uence protein adsorption are numerous : the pH value , ionic strength , temperature , protein concen - tration , and the concentration of cosolvents and additives are the most prominent properties of the solution . 2 − 4 , 11 − 13 The in ﬂ uence of the substrate on adsorption is in most studies described by and restricted to the sign and value of the surface charge , the roughness of the surface , and the surface free energy ( i . e . , the chemical composition of the surface ) . 4 , 14 − 16 The above - named substrate properties belong to the actual surface of the o ﬀ ered substrate . Nevertheless , the in ﬂ uence of the bulk substrate should not be neglected because van der Waals forces range over tens of nanometers , depending mainly on the geometry of the interacting objects . 17 , 18 It could already be shown that van der Waals forces govern the stability of thin ﬁ lms . 19 , 20 Furthermore , they in ﬂ uence the adhesion strength even in wet surroundings . 21 , 22 Thus , their in ﬂ uence on protein adsorbates is expected . In recent studies , it was shown that the adsorption kinetics of large , deformable proteins such as α - amylase and bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) are a ﬀ ected by di ﬀ erent van der Waals forces . 8 , 9 By using silicon wafers with di ﬀ erent silicon oxide thicknesses , the van der Waals forces can be varied while keeping the surface free energy constant . On thick silicon oxide wafers , regardless of whether they were hydrophilic or hydrophobic , the proteins showed Langmuir - like kinetics , whereas on thin silicon oxide “ stepped ” kinetics was observed with a distinct change in the adsorption rate at low coverage . Such behavior was not recorded for the lysozyme , 8 which is generally regarded as a sti ﬀ Received : February 28 , 2012 Revised : April 25 , 2012 Published : April 25 , 2012 Article pubs . acs . org / Langmuir © 2012 American Chemical Society 7747 dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 Reprinted with permission from Hähl et al . Langmuir 28 , 7747 – 7756 ( 2012 ) . Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society . ( http : / / dx . doi . org / / 10 . 1021 / la300850g ) Publications 110 protein ( Gibbs energy for unfolding : 60 kJ / mol ) . 2 On the basis of this fact , it is expected that the ﬁ nal state of the protein ﬁ lms also diversi ﬁ es ( e . g . , in protein orientation or conformation ) with di ﬀ erent subsurface compositions . There are only a few techniques , however , that allow us to resolve in situ the structure of ﬁ lms with thicknesses of only a few nanometers . In this study , we applied X - ray re ﬂ ectometry at high X - ray energies to analyze the ﬁ lm structure with angstro ̈ m resolution . In former studies , 23 − 25 this technique has proven to be able to resolve the ﬁ lm structure of similar protein ﬁ lms . ■ EXPERIMENTAL SECTION Materials and Setup . As substrates for protein adsorption , two types of silicon wafers were used : wafers with a natural silicon oxide layer of 1 . 7 ( 3 ) nm ( Wacker Siltronic AG , Burghausen , Germany ) and wafers with a thermally grown amorphous silicon oxide layer with a thickness of 150 ( 3 ) nm ( Silchem , Freiberg , Germany ) , as charac - terized by ellipsometry . Prior to use , the wafers were cleaned for 30 min in a fresh 1 : 1 H 2 SO 4 ( conc ) / H 2 O 2 ( 30 % ) solution and subsequently rinsed in hot deionized water to remove hydrocarbon residues from the polishing process . After this procedure , the wafers were hydrophilic with a water contact angle of < 5 ° . The wafers were stored in deionized water until they were used . Additionally , both types of wafers could be covered with a self - assembled monolayer of octadecyltrichlorosilane ( OTS , Sigma - Aldrich , Germany ) using stand - ard procedures . 26 , 27 After this treatment , the substrates exhibit hydrophobic surfaces with water contact angles of 107 to 112 ° with a contact angle hysteresis of < 5 ° . The quality of the achieved hydrophobic layers could additionally be a ﬃ rmed by X - ray re ﬂ ectivity measurements . The obtained values agree well with the literature , 28 , 29 indicating densely packed and homogeneous layers . As the cleaning procedure for these wafers , sonication in ethanol and acetone turned out to be fully su ﬃ cient . Thus , a set of four di ﬀ erent substrates was obtained : hydrophilic and hydrophobic wafers ( abbreviated as “ phil ” and “ phob ” , respectively ) with either a natively thin ( called “ N ” ) or a thick ( called “ T ” ) silicon oxide layer . In previous studies , it could be shown by streaming potential measurements that substrates from this set with the same surface chemistry also showed the same zeta potential regardless of their silicon oxide thickness 9 and thus have the same surface charge . The isoelectric points ( IEP ) of these surfaces are 1 . 9 ( 2 ) for the hydrophilic and 3 . 0 ( 2 ) for the hydrophobic surfaces . The roughness , as measured via atomic force microscopy in a 0 . 5 × 0 . 5 μ m 2 area , was below 0 . 2 nm for all types of wafers . This set of four wafer types allows for a separate variation of short - and long - range forces ( i . e . , by providing the same surface chemistry , as indicated by identical zeta potentials , 9 but di ﬀ erent silicon oxide thicknesses , where only long - range forces arising from the di ﬀ erent subsurface compositions are varied ) . The hydrophobization process changes only the short - range forces , as a molecularly thick silane layer a ﬀ ects the van der Waals interaction only marginally . 30 The proteins used in this study were α - amylase from human saliva ( prod . no . A0521 ) , bovine serum albumin ( BSA , prod . no . A3059 ) , and lysozyme from hen egg white ( prod . no . 62971 , all purchased from Sigma - Aldrich , Steinheim , Germany ) . The proteins were received as a lyophilized powder and used without further treatment . ( The α - amylase powder , however , contains only approximately 10 % protein . The rest of the mass consists , as shown by a crude precipitation test , mainly of stabilizing salts such as sulfates . This results in ﬁ nal protein solutions with a consequently decreased protein content and marginally increased ionic strength of the solution . ) BSA and lysozyme were stored at 2 ° C and α - amylase was stored at − 20 ° C until used . Their molecular masses and other properties are listed in Table 2 . All are globular proteins and can roughly be described as prolate or , in the case of BSA , as oblate ellipsoids . 31 − 33 The length of the shortest axis is thereby similar for BSA and α - amylase and coincides with the long axis of lysozyme ( Table 2 ) . Because of their respective IEP values , the electric properties of these proteins di ﬀ er greatly : at pH 7 , α - amylase carries a close to zero net charge , whereas the net charge is negative for BSA and positive for lysozyme . As a solution for the proteins , a 10 mM phosphate bu ﬀ er solution with a pH of 7 was prepared using ultrapure water . No salt was added , resulting in a calculated ionic strength of I = 20 mM because of the bu ﬀ er components . Additionally , di ﬀ erent bu ﬀ er systems were used to achieve stable pH values at the respective IEP of the proteins : an acetate bu ﬀ er system at pH 4 . 7 was used for BSA , and CAPS ( 3 - ( cyclohexylamino ) - 1 - propanesulfonic acid ) adjusted with NaOH to pH 11 was utilized for lysozyme . Appropriate amounts of NaCl were added to obtain the same ionic strength as for the phosphate bu ﬀ er solutions . For the X - ray measurements , the substrates were put into a closed Te ﬂ on sample cell with Kapton windows . Prior to the measurement , the cell was rinsed and ﬂ ooded with bu ﬀ er solution . Subsequently , the cell was connected to a ﬂ ow system containing a syringe pump and a switch with a sample loop ( Rheodyne Manual Sample Injector ) prior to the cell . The protein solution was injected into the sample loop , which could be inserted into the ﬂ ow system at a speci ﬁ c time by using the switch . This system allowed for an injection of the protein solution with a minimum disturbance of the system . The protein concentration of the solution in the sample loop was chosen to result in a ﬁ nal concentration inside the sample cell of 0 . 1 g / L ( with a smaller concentration in the case of α - amylase , see above ) . To achieve stable protein ﬁ lm conditions during the measurements , the ﬁ lms were allowed to equilibrate for at least 1 h before starting the re ﬂ ectivity scans . By comparing subsequent scans of the same system , these stable conditions were a ﬃ rmed . X - ray Re ﬂ ectivity Technique . The X - ray scattering experiments were conducted at beamline BL9 at synchrotron light source DELTA ( Dortmund , Germany ) . 23 The sample cell was illuminated with a monochromatic X - ray beam with a wavelength λ of 0 . 459 Å ( corresponding to a photon energy of 27 keV ) . The wavelength was chosen to balance between a high transmission signal through water and minimal radiation damage on the biological samples . 38 − 40 Specular re ﬂ ectivity scans are performed in θ − 2 θ geometry . The wave vector transfer is directed perpendicular to the surface and is given by π λ θ = q 4 sin z ( 1 ) The angle between the surface and the X - ray beam is denoted as θ . To obtain the true specular re ﬂ ectivity , the di ﬀ use scattering has been measured by longitudinal , di ﬀ use scans with a constant angular Table 1 . Characteristics of the Substrates N ’ phob T ’ phob N ’ phil T ’ phil surface material OTS OTS SiO 2 SiO 2 surface energy / mJ / m 2 24 ( 1 ) 24 ( 1 ) 64 ( 1 ) 64 ( 1 ) roughness ( rms ) / nm 0 . 12 ( 2 ) 0 . 15 ( 2 ) 0 . 09 ( 2 ) 0 . 13 ( 2 ) SiO 2 layer thickness / nm 1 . 7 ( 3 ) 150 ( 3 ) 1 . 7 ( 3 ) 150 ( 3 ) isoelectric point ( IEP ) 3 . 0 ( 2 ) 3 . 0 ( 2 ) 1 . 9 ( 2 ) 1 . 9 ( 2 ) Table 2 . Characteristics of the Proteins Studied α - amylase 31 BSA 34 lysozyme 32 molar mass / kg / mol 56 . 0 66 . 3 14 . 3 molar volume / cm 3 / mol 38071 48600 10057 electron density / e / Å 3 0 . 47125 a 0 . 43866 34 0 . 45582 24 isoelectric point ( IEP ) 6 . 9 35 4 . 7 36 11 37 diameters / Å 3 80 ( 2 ) × 48 ( 2 ) × 47 ( 2 ) 83 ( 2 ) × 81 ( 2 ) × 45 ( 2 ) 48 ( 2 ) × 30 ( 2 ) × 28 ( 2 ) a Calculated from the protein structure . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7748 Addendum II - Subsurface Inﬂuence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Reﬂectivity 111 detector o ﬀ set of 0 . 1 ° . A typical X - ray re ﬂ ectivity measurement was recorded within 0 . 5 h , including an o ﬀ set scan reaching a maximum q z value of 0 . 5 Å − 1 and covering a dynamic range of 6 to 7 orders of magnitude . The re ﬂ ectivity , R ( q z ) , is in the Born approximation given by ∫ ρ ρ = ⎛ ⎝⎜ ⎞ ⎠⎟ R q R q z z z ( ) ( ) 1 d ( ) d e d z z q z F ref i 2 z ( 2 ) R F , ρ ( z ) , and ρ ref denote the Fresnel re ﬂ ectivity of a sharp interface , the electron density pro ﬁ le ( EDP ) , and the electron density of the subphase ( bu ﬀ er solution ) , respectively . Hence , X - ray re ﬂ ectivity measurements probe the EDP of the sample averaged over the illuminated area . 41 , 42 Analysis of the X - ray Re ﬂ ectivity Data . The raw data were background - corrected , normalized , and scaled as a function of q z . Because of the rapid decay of the re ﬂ ected X - ray intensity , it is common to present re ﬂ ectivity data in the form R / R F versus q z ( cf . Figure 1 ) in order to increase the visibility of features stemming from the molecularly thin layers at the surface ( i . e . , from the adsorbed protein ﬁ lms or the OTS structure ) . To obtain the EDP from the re ﬂ ectivity data , a model of the vertical structure of the studied system is proposed from which a re ﬂ ectivity is calculated by Parratt ’ s recursive method . 43 The proposed EDP is varied in such a way that the mean square variation , χ 2 , between calculated and observed re ﬂ ectivity curves is minimized using a least - squares ﬁ tting routine . The EDP is described in terms of the e ﬀ ective density model , which guarantees for continuous pro ﬁ les even if the roughness is not small compared to the layer thickness . 41 In general , the EDP can be described by a stack of homogeneous layers each with a distinct electron density , ρ , layer thickness , d , and interfacial roughness , σ . In our study , one layer is su ﬃ cient to explain the structure of the protein adsorbate ﬁ lm adequately . The EDP structure of the hydrophilic substrates is described as “ silicon / silicon oxide / aqueous bu ﬀ er solution ” . For the hydrophobic substrates , two layers are introduced into the model representing the head and the tail of the OTS ﬁ lm . 28 , 44 Moreover , for the characterization of an OTS / water interface , an additional layer accounting for the electron density depletion at the hydrophobic gap has to be introduced , 28 yielding an EDP structure described as “ silicon / silicon oxide / OTS head / OTS tail / gap / aqueous bu ﬀ er solution ” ( Figure 2 ) . To minimize the number of ﬁ tting parameters , the following strategies are applied . First , each substrate is characterized under pure bu ﬀ er without protein . Because no changes in the substrate ’ s properties are expected during the subsequent protein adsorption , the EDP structure obtained for the substrate is kept constant when ﬁ tting the data after protein adsorption . Thus , only the parameters of the adsorbed protein layer and , in the case of hydrophobic substrates , the parameters of the hydrophobic gap have to be varied when re ﬁ ning the corresponding re ﬂ ectivity curves . Furthermore , the electron density of the silicon substrate , the silicon oxide layer , and the water subphase are set to the theoretical values of 0 . 702 , 0 . 663 , and 0 . 334 e − / Å 3 , respectively . 45 To model the structure of the OTS ﬁ lms , values from the literature 28 are used as starting values and varied over a narrow range . The thickness of the silicon oxide layer is varied between 10 and 15 Å for native SiO 2 , and a value of 1500 Å is used as a starting value for the thickness of the thermally grown SiO 2 layer , as was obtained by ellipsometry . Typically , when studying protein adsorption phenomena , only the amount of adsorbed protein per unit area , Γ , is determined . However , from the X - ray re ﬂ ectivity data , not only Γ can be obtained but also the volume fraction pro ﬁ le along the surface normal 25 , 46 ϕ ( z ) is de ﬁ ned by subtracting the EDP without protein adsorbate , ρ ref ( z ) , from the EDP with protein adsorbate , ρ ( z ) , and dividing this di ﬀ erence by the contrast between the protein and reference medium ϕ ρ ρ ρ ρ = − − z z z ( ) ( ) ( ) ref protein sub ( 3 ) where ρ sub is the electron density of the aqueous bu ﬀ er solution ( subphase , 0 . 334 e − / Å 3 ) and ρ protein is the electron density of the protein ( Table 2 ) . Thus , the adsorbed amount is given by ∫ ϕ Γ = m v z z ( ) d ( 4 ) with the molar mass , m , and the molar volume , v , of the proteins as listed in Table 2 . It is important to note that the roughness between the adsorbed layer ( with thickness d ads ) and the subphase , σ sub , contributes to the e ﬀ ective layer thickness , d e ﬀ , of the adsorbed protein ﬁ lm , 24 , 46 which is given by σ = + d d eff ads sub ( 5 ) In the following text , we will use d e ﬀ for the characterization of the adsorbate thickness . Error bars of each ﬁ tting parameter are determined by allowing a variation of 5 % from the χ 2 of the best ﬁ t . 24 The error in Γ is assessed by setting each ﬁ tting parameter equal to the value that increases χ 2 by 5 % and combining these values to the EDP of maximum χ 2 . ■ RESULTS Protein Adsorbates in Di ﬀ erent Surface Potentials . The adsorption of α - amylase , BSA , and lysozyme has been studied on four di ﬀ erent types of substrates . Therefore , Figure 1 . X - ray re ﬂ ectivity data of BSA adsorbates presented as R / R F vs q z on the four di ﬀ erent types of substrates ( from top to bottom ) : N ’ phil ( blue ) , T ’ phil ( cyan ) , N ’ phob ( red ) , and T ’ phob ( purple ) . Open circles represent the reference measurements , and solid symbols represent the ﬁ nal state with the adsorbed protein layer . The lines show the calculated re ﬂ ectivity values as obtained from the respective model ﬁ ts . The curves were shifted for clarity . Figure 2 . Electron density pro ﬁ le of an N ’ phob substrate in bu ﬀ er without ( red line ) and with ( black line ) an adsorbed lysozyme layer . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7749 Publications 112 re ﬂ ectivity measurements of the substrates without and with an adsorbed protein layer have been performed . The reference measurements ( i . e . , scans of a substrate in pure bu ﬀ er solution ) display the speci ﬁ c features of the di ﬀ erent substrates ( Figure 1 and Supporting Information , SI ) : The hydrophobic substrates in solution exhibit oscillations in the re ﬂ ectivity curves ( Kiessig fringes ) that can be related to the OTS layer and a depletion layer in the electron density above the OTS coating . 28 Furthermore , high - frequency oscillations are observed in the re ﬂ ectivities of the thick oxide wafers , which could be reproduced in the re ﬁ nement procedure of the model ( SI ) , yielding the actual layer thickness of the silicon oxide . When we compare the raw reference data ( open symbols ) and ﬁ nal measurements ( solid symbols , see Figure 1 ) , the e ﬀ ect of an additional protein layer is visible on all types of substrates . On the hydrophilic surfaces , this e ﬀ ect is mainly a reduction of the re ﬂ ectivity . On the hydrophobized silicon wafers , however , measurements before and after adsorption di ﬀ er more drastically : the Kiessig fringes are enhanced and the positions of the extrema are shifted by adsorption . A detailed analysis and modeling of the data yield the respective EDPs . The contributions of the respective protein layers to the ﬁ nal EDPs are depicted in Figures 3 and 4 . ( The re ﬂ ectivity data corresponding to these pro ﬁ les are shown in the SI . ) Several trends can immediately be extracted from these volume fraction pro ﬁ les and hold true for all three studied proteins : by comparing protein layers on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces , one notices that the volume fraction pro ﬁ les on the hydrophilic surfaces extend to higher z values , representing higher ﬁ lm thicknesses than on the hydrophobic surfaces ( cf . Figure 5 ) . Additionally , these pro ﬁ les also decay more gradually to the bu ﬀ er phase ( Figures 3 and 4 ) , which indicates a high interfacial roughness . On the hydrophobic surfaces , the thickness of any of the protein ﬁ lms does not exceed 25 Å . When comparing this value with the dimensions of the proteins used , one notices that the Figure 3 . Volume fraction pro ﬁ les ϕ ( z ) as given by eq 3 for ( a ) α - amylase , ( b ) BSA , and ( c ) lysozyme on the four di ﬀ erent types of substrates at pH 7 as received from the ﬁ tting procedure . Figure 4 . Protein volume fraction ϕ ( z ) of lysozyme on ( a ) hydrophilic and ( b ) hydrophobic substrates at its IEP ( pH 11 ) ( thick lines ) . For comparison , the pro ﬁ les at pH 7 on the respective substrates are also shown ( thin lines ) . Figure 5 . Adsorbed amount , Γ , ( left ) and e ﬀ ective ﬁ lm thickness , d e ﬀ , ( right ) as obtained from X - ray re ﬂ ectometry . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7750 Addendum II - Subsurface Inﬂuence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Reﬂectivity 113 ﬁ lm thicknesses on the hydrophobic surfaces are noticeably smaller than even the smallest diameter of every protein in this study , therefore implying changes in the protein structure due to adsorption . Furthermore , the pro ﬁ les are nearly symmetrical with steep ﬂ anks and high maximum protein volume fractions . When we calculate the adsorbed amount Γ ( Figure 5 ) , another tendency becomes visible : in contrasting the values for Γ of the protein layers on thin and thick silicon oxide wafers , we notice that trends in the data of hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces di ﬀ er signi ﬁ cantly . On the hydrophobic surfaces , the adsorbed amount Γ is higher on substrates with a thin SiO 2 layer . This trend in Γ ( Figure 5 ) is inverted when changing the surface chemistry from hydrophobic to hydro - philic . On the hydrophilic substrates , thin oxide layers are covered by less adsorbed proteins compared to the thick oxide samples . Upon comparing the di ﬀ erent proteins , we ﬁ nd that the above - described trends exist in every case , although the surface coverage di ﬀ ers . This fact may be attributed to the di ﬀ erent IEPs of the proteins ( Table 2 ) and surfaces used ( pH 1 . 9 ( 2 ) for bare SiO 2 and pH 3 . 0 ( 2 ) for the OTS surface . 9 ) Thus , interprotein as well as protein − surface Coulomb forces di ﬀ er for every combination of protein and surface . To adjust at least the interprotein Coulomb interactions , the measurements for BSA and lysozyme have been repeated at their respective IEPs . The results of these experiments reveal that the di ﬀ erences between layers on thin and thick oxide wafers are also conserved when changing the pH value to the IEP of the protein . ■ DISCUSSION The presented results reveal clear trends indicating that the subsurface composition a ﬀ ects the adsorbing proteins and the structure of the formed adsorbate . The data moreover contains a wealth of information that will be discussed in the following text . In ﬂ uence of the Surface Chemistry . The e ﬀ ect of di ﬀ erent surface chemistry is most obvious in the values for the protein layer thickness : on the hydrophobic surfaces in this study , we reproducibly observe protein ﬁ lm thicknesses smaller than 30 Å , whereas on the hydrophilic ones the ﬁ lms are thicker . The very low ﬁ lm thickness on hydrophobic surfaces indicates a substantial variation of the shape ( i . e . , conforma - tion ) of the proteins . For every protein studied , the smallest diameter of the protein is still larger than the respective layer thickness of the adsorbate . Furthermore , on the hydrophobic samples , the protein layers are characterized by a low roughness for both interfaces as well as a high protein fraction , which characterizes a dense protein ﬁ lm with little water content . Both a low ﬁ lm thickness and a high density indicate a strong denaturation of the proteins adsorbed on the OTS surfaces . Additionally , the low interfacial roughness , indicated by the steep slope in the pro ﬁ les , can be accomplished only by nearly complete denaturation and proteins that interdigitate into each other . A similar drastic denaturation was found in neutron re ﬂ ectivity studies and in simulations concerning the adsorption of lysozyme on OTS . 47 , 48 In discussing the leading forces , two aspects can be extracted from Figures 3 − 5 : ( i ) Despite the di ﬀ erent size , geometry , and conformational stability of α - amylase , BSA and lysozyme , their adsorbates on hydrophobic surfaces have remarkably similar , low ﬁ lm thicknesses . ( ii ) At pH 7 , a similar mass of adsorbed protein per area is observed for all used proteins , though at this pH value BSA and lysozyme carry opposing net charges and α - amylase possesses a net charge that is close to zero . Both aspects together imply only a secondary role of Coulomb forces in the adsorption process on the hydrophobic surfaces . Instead , the hydrophobic e ﬀ ect governs the structure formation of the protein ﬁ lms . The level of denaturation and hence the deduced in ﬂ uence of the hydrophobic e ﬀ ect seem to be determined by the interfacial energy of the surface . This hypothesis is also supported by a study in which polystyrene ( interfacial energy in between those of hydrophilic and hydrophobic wafers in this study ) was used as a surface material . 25 On the hydrophilic surfaces , however , the degree of conformational changes that can be deduced from the relatively high ﬁ lm thickness values is much lower than on hydrophobic surfaces . The thicknesses of BSA and α - amylase ﬁ lms are roughly twice as high as on hydrophobic samples yet are still thinner than the smallest diameter of the respective protein ( ca . 45 Å ) . Additionally , the pro ﬁ les in ϕ ( z ) are highly asymmetric for all proteins , re ﬂ ecting a much higher roughness for the protein / bu ﬀ er interface than for the substrate / protein interface . The pro ﬁ les can be interpreted by assuming adsorbed protein molecules that are ﬂ attened on the adsorption side and retain a more native , globular con ﬁ guration to the solution side . This interpretation is further corroborated by contrasting the maximum protein content on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces . On hydrophilic surfaces , a maximum of ϕ = 0 . 6 is observed ( lysozyme on T ’ phil at pH 11 ) , whereas on hydrophobic surfaces , with denatured proteins , up to ϕ = 0 . 9 could be recorded ( lysozyme on N ’ phob at pH 11 ) . What does a measured protein fraction of ϕ = 0 . 6 mean ? Because in the measurements the hydration shell is indistinguishable from the surrounding free water molecules , we consider densely packed ( i . e . , a surface coverage of ≳ 90 % ) , side - on - adsorbed colloids with the typical dimension of native lysozyme including its hydration shell . To allow for a measured protein fraction of only 60 % , the resulting hydration shell must be assumed to be only about 2 Å thick . This is below the thickness of the native hydration shell ( up to 10 Å 49 ) and even below the thickness of a water monolayer ( ∼ 3 Å ) . Thus , the hydration shells of individual proteins have to overlap . Assumptions of less - perfect ordering even reduce the calculated hydration shell thickness , which justi ﬁ es the above - made assumption of ordering . It remains open whether this ordering stems from clustering 50 , 51 or collective e ﬀ ects 10 , 52 on the surface . Furthermore , the lysozyme ﬁ lm thickness at pH 11 ( at its IEP ) is a few angstro ̈ ms larger than even the largest diameter of the protein ( cf . Figure 4 ) . This large ﬁ lm thickness permits the assumption of bilayer adsorption , which was also found in other studies ( Figure 6 ) . 24 , 53 − 55 An end - on adsorption of the lysozyme molecules should not result in a ﬁ lm thickness above ca . 50 Å , which is the protein ’ s largest diameter . Additionally , end - on adsorbed proteins would exhibit a lower protein fraction because of the lower protein / hydration shell area fraction of their surface projection compared to that of side - on adsorbed proteins . At the lower pH value of 7 , where a net electrostatic attraction between a surface and a protein and a net repulsion between individual proteins exist , thinner ﬁ lms and lower adsorbed amounts are recorded ( cf . Figure 5 ) . BSA exhibits a much lower protein fraction in the layer than does lysozyme ( Figure 3 ) on hydrophilic samples . When we consult the colloidal picture once more , the low maximum values of ϕ ( z ) of BSA on hydrophilic surfaces indicate higher interprotein distances ( 41 Å if one assumes hexagonal Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7751 Publications 114 ordering ) than in the case of lysozyme . This is most probably due to the repulsive electrostatic forces between the highly negatively charged BSA molecules . 56 In the case of α - amylase , the overall adsorbed amount on the hydrophilic surfaces is very low in comparison to the cases of BSA and lysozyme . In combination with the low electron density contrast , it renders the electron density pro ﬁ le hard to interpret . Therefore , the thickness values for the α - amylase adsorbates on N ’ phil and T ’ phil have been omitted in Figure 5 . The pro ﬁ les , however , are presented because their integral gives the adsorbed amount of protein , which is , although small , a reliable value . The reason for the low adsorbed amount is most probably due to the aforementioned composition of the protein powder . The salts contained in this powder increase the ionic strength and hence the screening of the electrostatic forces between the protein and substrate . Moreover , sulfate ions have kosmotropic character , stabilizing the native structure of proteins , 57 and it has recently been reported that kosmotropic salts can lead to reduced protein adsorption . 58 Additionally , the protein concentration in the solution is reduced by about 1 order of magnitude . When we assume partially reversible adsorption , this reduction of dissolved proteins reduces the adsorbed amount . However , because the adsorbed amount is lowered only on the hydrophilic substrates , it hints at the conclusion that the adsorption on the hydrophobic substrates is not a ﬀ ected by dissolved ions and is also completely irreversible . Nevertheless , the trends in the adsorbed amount resemble the trends for BSA and lysozyme and are discussed in the next section . So far we have reported on the impact of surface chemistry on protein adsorption . The results for the adsorbed mass and ﬁ lm thickness are in accordance with recent studies , 24 , 47 , 48 , 53 − 55 yet with the in - layer characterization by the protein fraction ϕ ( z ) , we are able to obtain further insight into the protein layer structure . Therefore , it is now possible to go one step further and probe the e ﬀ ect of subsurface composition , a factor that is neglected by most recent studies and will be discussed in the following section . In ﬂ uence of the Subsurface Composition . The in ﬂ uence of the subsurface material on protein adsorbates is elucidated in this study by contrasting protein layers on samples with the same surface energy but di ﬀ erent silica layer thicknesses . Thereby , the used set of substrates provides the possibility to test the in ﬂ uence of long - range forces in combination with di ﬀ erent surface chemistry . The e ﬀ ect of di ﬀ erent subsurface composition is revealed by the ﬁ nal adsorbed amounts of protein . Figure 5 ( left ) presents the adsorbed amount Γ , calculated via eq 4 , of all measurements in this study . This overview exposes clear trends in the value of the adsorbed amount for every protein species used . On hydrophobic surfaces , the adsorbed amount on substrates with thin silica layers ( N ’ phob ) is higher than on substrates with thick silica layers ( T ’ phob ) , whereas this tendency is inverted on the hydrophilic , bare silica substrates . Because the experimental conditions for adsorption on substrates with thin and thick SiO 2 layers , either hydrophilic or hydrophobic , were identical , the only di ﬀ erence lies in the di ﬀ erent subsurface composition of the substrate . From these subsurface di ﬀ erences , varied dispersion forces arise . On thin SiO 2 - layer samples , an interaction with the silicon beneath is possible , at least for molecules in direct contact with the surface . Here , the screening of the dispersion interactions by ionic solutes is weakest ( if not zero ) . On samples with a thick silicon oxide layer , however , the distance to the silicon is too large for the interaction with the silicon to have a signi ﬁ cant in ﬂ uence . These samples may be regarded as being solely composed of silicon oxide ( with a silane layer in the case of the hydrophobic samples ) , thus resembling simple ( hydrophob - ized ) glass substrates . Because the polarizability ( or relevant parts of the dielectric function ε ( i ξ ) ) 59 is higher for silicon than for silica , the strength of the interaction of molecules the size of proteins with the sample substrate is higher for composite substrates N ’ phil and N ’ phob than for their respective counterparts T ’ phil and T ’ phob . The calculation of the correct van der Waals interaction constant ( i . e . , the Hamaker constant ) , however , is already di ﬃ cult for proteins in solution . 60 Additionally , the strength of the interaction also depends strongly on the geometry of the interacting objects . 59 However , the protein geometry in the adsorbed state is not known and can only be assumed , which produces large errors in the estimation of the interaction energy , especially at short distances . This means in sum that it is presently not possible to give numbers for the di ﬀ erences in the protein / substrate interaction between substrates with thin and thick oxide layers . Instead , a more qualitative approach to the e ﬀ ect of the variation of dispersion forces is chosen . Because the variation in the dispersion force has the opposite e ﬀ ect on the adsorbed amount Γ on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces , it is clear that di ﬀ erent subprocesses of the entire adsorption process are a ﬀ ected . In ellipsometry studies , 10 qualitatively di ﬀ erent adsorption kinetics were observed on the thin and thick oxide wafers , especially for large proteins like α - amylase and BSA . These measurements indicated that the variation in the subsurface composition changes the time scale of a surface process such that its in ﬂ uence on the adsorption rate could be seen . With the data from the present study , however , it becomes obvious that , although not clearly resolved in the kinetics , the lysozyme adsorption is also a ﬀ ected and , even more importantly , that the a ﬀ ected surface processes are of a di ﬀ erent type on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces . The restriction to surface processes is motivated by the fact that the initial adsorption rate showed no variation due to subsurfaces changes 9 and by the notion that the dispersion forces and hence their di ﬀ erences are strongest in direct contact with the surface . Currently , however , we cannot exclude additional variations in the possibly nonzero desorption rate by the dispersion forces because these Figure 6 . Schematic representation of the lysozyme molecules in the adsorbate at pH 7 and 11 according to the interpretation of the re ﬂ ectivity data ( cf . Su et al . 55 and Evers et al . 24 ) . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7752 Addendum II - Subsurface Inﬂuence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Reﬂectivity 115 variations are hardly distinguishable from surface di ﬀ usion by a mere inspection of the determined protein adsorbates . The surface processes in question are the surface di ﬀ usion of the proteins 61 and surface spreading or conformational changes . 48 , 62 In the case of the latter process , there is even direct evidence from the data , especially on the hydrophobic surfaces . On the hydrophilic surfaces in this study , however , where only small conformational changes in the proteins can be deduced from the data , we assume the surface di ﬀ usivity to be the relevant process that is a ﬀ ected by changing the substrate ’ s subsurface composition . Nonzero surface di ﬀ usivities for proteins are reported in the literature ( Tilton 61 and references therein ) and are a necessary condition allowing for high packing densities ( e . g . , lysozymes on hydrophilic samples ) , where protein surface concentrations that re ﬂ ect a nearly hexagonal close packing are reached . 61 , 63 Even BSA , which in our study is the protein with the largest interfacial contact area as a result of its oblate shape , shows measurable surface di ﬀ usion on glassy surfaces . 64 , 65 However , in most experiments mobile and immobile proteins are found . The reason for the coexistence of mobile and immobile protein species is believed to result from di ﬀ erent conformations or orientations of the adsorbed proteins . 66 These ﬁ ndings stimulate the following hypothesis for the explanation of the subsurface in ﬂ uence on the adsorbed amount on the hydrophilic surfaces : higher attractive forces to the substrate ( as on the N ’ phil substrate compared to on T ’ phil ) result in stronger binding to the surface and may also trigger an augmented ﬂ attening of the proteins at the solid surface . This stronger binding and the small conformational di ﬀ erences then lead to a reduced surface di ﬀ usivity and / or a higher nonmobile protein fraction . Eventually , higher attractive surface forces would result in reduced desorption , slower and less ordering , and hence a higher occupied space per protein ( Figure 7 ) . Thus , the higher amount on T ’ phil in comparison to that on N ’ phil can be understood . Ellipsometry studies 9 support this hypothesis because a faster saturation of the adsorbed layer is reported on the thick oxide . On the hydrophobic surfaces , conformational changes ( we propose spreading ) of the proteins seem to be the dominating surface process . Protein layers of the same protein on thin and thick oxide samples di ﬀ er only in their maximum protein fraction ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . These di ﬀ erences appear for every protein studied but are most pronounced for the lysozyme . From the adsorbed amounts and the ﬁ lm thickness values , a surface coverage can be calculated , which the adsorbed proteins would have had in their native state ( i . e . , before spreading ) . For BSA and lysozyme on T ’ phob , values of about 20 % can be calculated , whereas on N ’ phob values of 30 % for BSA and 55 % for lysozyme are found ( 12 and 20 % for α - amylase ) . Because these values do not exceed the jamming limit of a random sequential adsorption model ( ca . 55 % ) , 67 the assumption of surface di ﬀ usion is not necessary . However , they encourage the following hypothesis : in the course of the spreading of the proteins , the interprotein distances will be reduced . Thus , the repulsive forces between the charged protein molecules increase and hence promote the desorption of less spread or later adsorbed proteins . A higher attractive force between the proteins and substrate would decrease this tendency because of higher adhesion and by enhancing and accelerating the spreading process , 62 thereby leading to a higher adsorbed amount ( Figure 7 ) . Remarks on the Behavior of the Hydrophobic Gap . The hydrophobic gap above an OTS layer submerged in water has become a topic of many recent studies . 28 , 68 , 69 Because this gap is a layer with a low - density contrast , it requires re ﬂ ectivity curves up to higher q z values than reached in this study to draw valid conclusions . However , because it is expected that proteins tend to expose their hydrophobic residues to the OTS layer , induced by the hydrophobic e ﬀ ect , we note the following interesting observation : the depth and width of the depletion zone seem to be in ﬂ uenced by the quality of the OTS layer , as was inferred from measurements with a batch of OTS - covered samples exhibiting a slightly higher water contact angle hysteresis than usual . The adsorption of proteins can decrease or increase this depletion zone , depending again on the layer quality . Thus , the interfacial roughness between the protein and substrate is also in ﬂ uenced ; however , the adsorbed amount is not , as could be shown in repeated measurements ( Figure 5 and SI ) . In this section , we have put forward several hypotheses concerning processes involved in adsorbate formation . To support these , further experiments are highly desirable ( e . g . , a time - resolved characterization of the buildup of the ﬁ lm ) . In the Figure 7 . Schematic representation of the adsorbates on the four di ﬀ erent wafer types according to the interpretation of the re ﬂ ectivity data : ﬂ attened proteins on hydrophobic wafers and proteins with only slight changes in their conformation on hydrophilic wafers . A higher density is recorded on T ’ phil compared to that on N ’ phil and on N ’ phob compared to that on T ’ phob , yielding a higher adsorbed amount on the respective substrates . The interprotein distances vary with the protein species ( not shown ) . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7753 Publications 116 SI , a brief outlook is given as to how this may be achieved in the future with X - ray re ﬂ ectivity measurements . ■ CONCLUSIONS This study analyzed the interfacial structure of adsorbed protein ﬁ lms by in situ X - ray re ﬂ ectometry . From the analysis of the scattering curves , the ﬁ lm structure and the adsorbed amounts of α - amylase , BSA , and lysozyme on four di ﬀ erent types of substrates are retrieved at high resolution . Silicon wafers with native and thermally grown oxide layers are chosen as hydrophilic substrates and coated with an OTS layer to gain hydrophobic substrates . Thus , the surface chemistry and subsurface composition of the substrates can be varied separately in a well - de ﬁ ned manner . The in ﬂ uence of the van der Waals forces between the substrate and proteins can be tested by varying the silicon oxide thickness . Irrespective of the actual surface chemistry , the results clearly exhibit evidence of the in ﬂ uence of the subsurface material on the protein adsorbates up to several nanometers below the solid / liquid interface . More precisely , the properties of the uppermost surface layer are responsible for the extent of denaturation of the proteins determining the protein layer thickness ; the subsurface composition , however , in ﬂ uences the density of the layer and thereby the ﬁ nal adsorbed amount of protein . When we compare the di ﬀ erent surfaces , the trends in the adsorbed amount are sustained for every protein species ( re ﬂ ecting di ﬀ erent charges , geometries , sizes , and conforma - tional stabilities ) and for all pH values tested . These trends are inverse on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces and therefore indicate that surface processes after the initial adsorption are involved in the structure formation of the protein ﬁ lms . 61 , 62 To conclude , surface processes after the initial adsorption may vary with the surface chemistry , yet surface processes and their time constant are sensitive to van der Waals forces arising from buried layers . A future challenge will be to directly identify the involved surface processes and measure and simulate the respective in ﬂ uence of the attractive surface potential . ■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT * S Supporting Information Re ﬂ ectivity data corresponding to the presented volume fraction pro ﬁ les . Electron density pro ﬁ les addressing the behavior of the electron depletion zone . X - ray re ﬂ ectivity measurements of the adsorption kinetics together with corresponding ellipsometric studies and considerations con - cerning the strength of the van der Waals forces between proteins and strati ﬁ ed substrates . This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http : / / pubs . acs . org . ■ AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author * E - mail : k . jacobs @ physik . uni - saarland . de . Present Address § Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory , Heinrich Heine University Du ̈ sseldorf , 40225 Du ̈ sseldorf , Germany . Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge ﬁ nancial support from the German Science Foundation under grant numbers GRK 1276 and GRK 532 and technical support by Wacker Siltronic AG ( Burghausen , Germany ) . The DELTA machine group is gratefully acknowl - edged for providing synchrotron radiation and technical support . A . K . H . and T . B . thank the NRW Forschungsschule “ Forschung mit Synchrotronstrahlung in den Nano - und Biowissenschaften ” for ﬁ nancial support . ■ REFERENCES ( 1 ) Norde , W . My voyage of discovery to proteins in ﬂ atland . . . and beyond . Colloids Surf . , B 2008 , 61 , 1 − 9 . ( 2 ) Czeslik , C . Factors ruling protein adsorption . Z . Phys . Chem . 2004 , 218 , 771 − 801 . ( 3 ) Wahlgren , M . ; Arnebrant , T . Protein adsorption to solid - surfaces . Trends Biotechnol . 1991 , 9 , 201 − 208 . ( 4 ) Malmsten , M . , Ed . Biopolymers at Interfaces , 2nd ed . ; Surfactant Science Series ; Marcel Dekker : New York , 2003 ; Vol . 110 . ( 5 ) Michael , K . ; Vernekar , V . ; Keselowsky , B . ; Meredith , J . ; Latour , R . A . ; Garcia , A . Adsorption - induced conformational changes in ﬁ bronectin due to interactions with well - de ﬁ ned surface chemistries . Langmuir 2003 , 19 , 8033 − 8040 . ( 6 ) Anand , G . ; Sharma , S . ; Dutta , A . K . ; Kumar , S . K . ; Belfort , G . Conformational transitions of adsorbed proteins on surfaces of varying polarity . Langmuir 2010 , 26 , 10803 − 10811 . ( 7 ) Wertz , C . ; Santore , M . Adsorption and reorientation kinetics of lysozyme on hydrophobic surfaces . Langmuir 2002 , 18 , 1190 − 1199 . ( 8 ) Quinn , A . ; Mantz , H . ; Jacobs , K . ; Bellion , M . ; Santen , L . Protein adsorption kinetics in di ﬀ erent surface potentials . Europhys . Lett . 2008 , 81 , 56003 . ( 9 ) Bellion , M . ; Santen , L . ; Mantz , H . ; Haehl , H . A . ; Quinn , A . ; Nagel , A . ; Gilow , C . ; Weitenberg , C . ; Schmitt , Y . ; Jacobs , K . Protein adsorption on tailored substrates : long - range forces and conforma - tional changes . J . Phys . : Condens . Matter 2008 , 20 , 404226 . ( 10 ) Schmitt , Y . ; Haehl , H . ; Gilow , C . ; Mantz , H . ; Jacobs , K . ; Leidinger , O . ; Bellion , M . ; Santen , L . Structural evolution of proteinbio ﬁ lms : simulations and experiments . Biomicro ﬂ uidics 2010 , 4 , 032201 . ( 11 ) De ́ jardin , P . , Ed . Proteins at Solid - Liquid Interfaces : Principles and Practice ; Springer : Heidelberg , Germany , 2006 . ( 12 ) Koo , J . ; Gutberlet , T . ; Czeslik , C . Control of protein interfacial a ﬃ nity by nonionic cosolvents . J . Phys . Chem . B 2008 , 112 , 6292 − 6295 . ( 13 ) Evers , F . ; Steitz , R . ; Tolan , M . ; Czeslik , C . Reduced protein adsorption by osmolytes . Langmuir 2011 , 27 , 6995 − 7001 . ( 14 ) Sharp , J . ; Forrest , J . ; Jones , R . Surface denaturation and amyloid ﬁ bril formation of insulin at model lipid - water interfaces . Biochemistry 2002 , 41 , 15810 − 15819 . ( 15 ) Roach , P . ; Farrar , D . ; Perry , C . Interpretation of protein adsorption : surface - induced conformational changes . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2005 , 127 , 8168 − 8173 . ( 16 ) Roach , P . ; Farrar , D . ; Perry , C . Surface tailoring for controlled protein adsorption : e ﬀ ect of topography at the nanometer scale and chemistry . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2006 , 128 , 3939 − 3945 . ( 17 ) Munday , J . N . ; Capasso , F . ; Parsegian , V . A . Measured long - range repulsive Casimir - Lifshitz forces . Nature 2009 , 457 , 170 − 173 . ( 18 ) Israelachvili , J . N . Intermolecular and Surface Forces , 2nd ed . ; Academic Press : London , 1991 ; p 480 . ( 19 ) Seemann , R . ; Herminghaus , S . ; Jacobs , K . Dewetting patterns and molecular forces : a reconciliation . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2001 , 86 , 5534 − 5537 . ( 20 ) Herminghaus , S . ; Jacobs , K . ; Mecke , K . R . ; Bischof , J . ; Fery , A . ; Ibn - Elhaj , M . ; Schlagowski , S . Spinodal dewetting in liquid crystal and liquid metal ﬁ lms . Science 1998 , 282 , 916 − 919 . ( 21 ) Loskill , P . ; Ha ̈ hl , H . ; Thewes , N . ; Kreis , C . T . ; Bischo ﬀ , M . ; Herrmann , M . ; Jacobs , K . In ﬂ uence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci . Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 . ( 22 ) Huber , G . ; Mantz , H . ; Spolenak , R . ; Mecke , K . R . ; Jacobs , K . ; Gorb , S . ; Arzt , E . Evidence for capillarity contributions to gecko Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7754 Addendum II - Subsurface Inﬂuence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Reﬂectivity 117 adhesion from single spatula nanomechanical measurements . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2005 , 102 , 16293 − 16296 . ( 23 ) Paulus , M . ; Lietz , D . ; Sternemann , C . ; Shokuie , K . ; Evers , F . ; Tolan , M . ; Czeslik , C . ; Winter , R . An access to buried interfaces : the X - ray re ﬂ ectivity set - up of BL9 at DELTA . J Synchrotron Radiat . 2008 , 15 , 600 − 605 . ( 24 ) Evers , F . ; Shokuie , K . ; Paulus , M . ; Sternemann , C . ; Czeslik , C . ; Tolan , M . Exploring the interfacial structure of protein adsorbates and the kinetics of protein adsorption : an in situ high - energy X - ray re ﬂ ectivity study . Langmuir 2008 , 24 , 10216 − 10221 . ( 25 ) Evers , F . ; Shokuie , K . ; Paulus , M . ; Tiemeyer , S . ; Sternemann , C . ; Czeslik , C . ; Tolan , M . Characterizing the structure of protein layers adsorbed onto functionalized surfaces by means of in - situ X - ray re ﬂ ectivity . Eur . Phys . J . Spec . Top . 2009 , 167 , 185 − 189 . ( 26 ) Brzoska , J . ; Benazouz , I . ; Rondelez , F . Silanization of solid substrates - a step toward reproducibility . Langmuir 1994 , 10 , 4367 − 4373 . ( 27 ) Wassermann , S . ; Whitesides , G . ; Tidswell , I . ; Ocko , B . M . ; Pershan , P . ; Axe , J . The structure of self - assembled monolayers of alkylsiloxanes on silicon - a comparison of results from ellipsometry and low - angle X - ray re ﬂ ectivity . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1989 , 111 , 5852 − 5861 . ( 28 ) Mezger , M . ; Reichert , H . ; Schoeder , S . ; Okasinski , J . ; Schroeder , H . ; Dosch , H . ; Palms , D . ; Ralston , J . ; Honkimaeki , V . High - resolution in situ X - ray study of the hydrophobic gap at the water - octadecyltrichlorosilane interface . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2006 , 103 , 18401 − 18404 . ( 29 ) Tidswell , I . ; Rabedeau , T . ; Pershan , P . ; Kosowsky , S . ; Folkers , J . ; Whitesides , G . X - ray grazing - incidence di ﬀ raction from alkylsiloxane monolayers on silicon - wafers . J . Chem . Phys . 1991 , 95 , 2854 − 2861 . ( 30 ) Jacobs , K . ; Seemann , R . ; Herminghaus , S . In Polymer Thin Films ; Tsui , O . K . , Russell , T . P . , Eds . ; Soft Condensed Matter ; World Scienti ﬁ c : Singapore , 2008 ; Vol . 1 , Chapter 10 . ( 31 ) Ramasubbu , N . ; Paloth , V . ; Luo , Y . ; Brayer , G . ; Levine , M . Structure of human salivary alpha - amylase at 1 . 6 angstrom resolution : implications for its role in the oral cavity . Acta Crystallogr . , Sect . D 1996 , 52 , 435 − 446 . ( 32 ) Diamond , R . Real - space re ﬁ nement of structure of hen egg - white lysozyme . J . Mol . Biol . 1974 , 82 , 371 − 391 . ( 33 ) Zhang , F . ; Skoda , M . W . A . ; Jacobs , R . M . J . ; Martin , R . A . ; Martin , C . M . ; Schreiber , F . Protein interactions studied by SAXS : e ﬀ ect of ionic strength and protein concentration for BSA in aqueous solutions . J . Phys . Chem . B 2007 , 111 , 251 − 259 . ( 34 ) Hollmann , O . ; Gutberlet , T . ; Czeslik , C . Structure and protein binding capacity of a planar PAA brush . Langmuir 2007 , 23 , 1347 − 1353 . ( 35 ) Hu , S . ; Xie , Y . ; Ramachandran , P . ; Loo , R . ; Li , Y . ; Loo , J . ; Wong , D . Large - scale identi ﬁ cation of proteins in human salivary proteome by liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry and two - dimensional gel electrophoresis - mass spectrometry . Proteomics 2005 , 5 , 1714 − 1728 . ( 36 ) Arnebrant , T . In Biopolymers at Interfaces , 2nd ed . ; Malmsten , M . , Ed . ; Surfactant Science Series ; Marcel Dekker : New York , 2003 ; Vol . 110 , Chapter 29 , pp 811 − 855 . ( 37 ) Roth , C . M . ; Lenho ﬀ , A . M . Electrostatic and van der Waals contributions to protein adsorption : comparison of theory and experiment . Langmuir 1995 , 11 , 3500 − 3509 . ( 38 ) Miller , C . ; Majewski , J . ; Gog , T . ; Kuhl , T . Characterization of biological thin ﬁ lms at the solid - liquid interface by X - ray re ﬂ ectivity . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2005 , 94 , 238104 . ( 39 ) Reich , C . ; Hochrein , M . ; Krause , B . ; Nickel , B . A micro ﬂ uidic setup for studies of solid - liquid interfaces using X - ray re ﬂ ectivity and ﬂ uorescence microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 2005 , 76 , 095103 . ( 40 ) Taking the energy and ﬂ ux of the beam into account , radiation damage is expected to occur only for exposure times exceeding 4 h . Subsequent scans ( each recorded in ca . 0 . 5 h ) showed no changes due to radiation damage , for example , in the increased electron density of the protein ﬁ lm near the surface . ( 41 ) Tolan , M . X - ray Scattering from Soft - Matter Thin Films ; Springer Tracts in Modern Physics 148 ; Springer : Heidelberg , Germany , 1999 . ( 42 ) Russell , T . P . X - ray and neutron re ﬂ ectivity for the investigation of polymers . Mater . Sci . Rep . 1990 , 5 , 171 − 271 . ( 43 ) Parratt , L . G . Surface studies of solids by total re ﬂ ection of X - rays . Phys . Rev . 1954 , 95 , 359 − 369 . ( 44 ) Richter , A . ; Yu , C . ; Datta , A . ; Kmetko , J . ; Dutta , P . In situ and interrupted - growth studies of the self - assembly of octadecyltrichlor - osilane monolayers . Phys . Rev . E 2000 , 61 , 607 − 615 . ( 45 ) The Center for X - Ray Optics . http : / / www . cxro . lbl . gov / . ( 46 ) Hu ̈ secken , A . K . ; Evers , F . ; Czeslik , C . ; Tolan , M . E ﬀ ect of urea and glycerol on the adsorption of ribonuclease A at the air − water interface . Langmuir 2010 , 26 , 13429 − 13435 . ( 47 ) Lu , J . ; Su , T . ; Thirtle , P . ; Thomas , R . ; Rennie , A . ; Cubitt , R . The denaturation of lysozyme layers adsorbed at the hydrophobic solid / liquid surface studied by neutron re ﬂ ection . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1998 , 206 , 212 − 223 . ( 48 ) Ra ﬀ aini , G . ; Ganazzoli , F . Protein adsorption on a hydrophobic surface : a molecular dynamics study of lysozyme on graphite . Langmuir 2010 , 26 , 5679 − 5689 . ( 49 ) Ebbinghaus , S . ; Kim , S . J . ; Heyden , M . ; Yu , X . ; Heugen , U . ; Gruebele , M . ; Leitner , D . M . ; Havenith , M . An extended dynamical hydration shell around proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2007 , 104 , 20749 − 20752 . ( 50 ) Ramsden , J . J . ; Bachmanova , G . ; Archakov , A . Kinetic evidence for protein clustering at a surface . Phys . Rev . E 1994 , 50 , 5072 − 5076 . ( 51 ) Mulheran , P . A . ; Pellenc , D . ; Bennett , R . A . ; Green , R . J . ; Sperrin , M . Mechanisms and dynamics of protein clustering on a solid surface . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2008 , 100 , 068102 . ( 52 ) Rabe , M . ; Verdes , D . ; Seeger , S . Understanding cooperative protein adsorption events at the microscopic scale : a comparison between experimental data and monte carlo simulations . J . Phys . Chem . B 2010 , 114 , 5862 − 5869 . ( 53 ) Jackler , G . ; Steitz , R . ; Czeslik , C . E ﬀ ect of temperature on the adsorption of lysozyme at the silica / water interface studied by optical and neutron re ﬂ ectometry . Langmuir 2002 , 18 , 6565 − 6570 . ( 54 ) Wahlgren , M . ; Arnebrant , T . ; Lundstrom , I . The adsorption of lysozyme to hydrophilic silicon - oxide surfaces : comparison between experimental - data and models for adsorption - kinetics . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1995 , 175 , 506 − 514 . ( 55 ) Su , T . ; Lu , J . ; Thomas , R . ; Cui , Z . ; Penfold , J . The e ﬀ ect of solution pH on the structure of lysozyme layers adsorbed at the silica − water interface studied by neutron re ﬂ ection . Langmuir 1998 , 14 , 438 − 445 . ( 56 ) Peters , T . , Jr . Adv . Protein Chem . 1985 , 37 , 161 − 245 . ( 57 ) Zhang , Y . ; Cremer , P . S . Chemistry of Hofmeister anions and osmolytes . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 2010 , 61 , 63 − 83 . ( 58 ) Evers , F . ; Steitz , R . ; Tolan , M . ; Czeslik , C . Analysis of Hofmeister e ﬀ ects on the density pro ﬁ le of protein adsorbates : a neutron re ﬂ ectivity study . J . Phys . Chem . B 2009 , 113 , 8462 − 8465 . ( 59 ) Parsegian , V . A . Van der Waals Forces ; Cambridge University Press : New York , 2006 . ( 60 ) Roth , C . M . ; Neal , B . ; Lenho ﬀ , A . M . Van der Waals interactions involving proteins . Biophys . J . 1996 , 70 , 977 − 987 . ( 61 ) Tilton , R . D . In Biopolymers at Interfaces , 2nd ed . ; Malmsten , M . , Ed . ; Surfactant Science Series ; Marcel Dekker : New York , 2003 ; Vol . 110 , Chapter 9 , pp 221 − 257 . ( 62 ) Wertz , C . ; Santore , M . Adsorption and relaxation kinetics of albumin and ﬁ brinogen on hydrophobic surfaces : Single - species and competitive behavior . Langmuir 1999 , 15 , 8884 − 8894 . ( 63 ) Haggerty , L . ; Lenho ﬀ , A . Analysis of ordered arrays of adsorbed lysozyme by scanning tunneling microscopy . Biophys . J . 1993 , 64 , 886 − 895 . ( 64 ) Burghardt , T . ; Axelrod , D . Total internal re ﬂ ection - ﬂ uorescence photobleaching recovery study of serum - albumin adsorption dynamics . Biophys . J . 1981 , 33 , 455 − 467 . ( 65 ) Tilton , R . ; Robertson , C . ; Gast , A . Lateral di ﬀ usion of bovine serum albumin adsorbed at the solid - liquid interface . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1990 , 137 , 192 − 203 . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7755 Publications 118 ( 66 ) Tilton , R . ; Gast , A . ; Robertson , C . Surface di ﬀ usion of interacting proteins : e ﬀ ect of concentration on the lateral mobility of adsorbed bovine serum - albumin . Biophys . J . 1990 , 58 , 1321 − 1326 . ( 67 ) Hinrichsen , E . ; Feder , J . ; Jøssang , T . Geometry of random sequential adsorption . J . Stat . Phys . 1986 , 44 , 793 − 827 . ( 68 ) Poynor , A . ; Hong , L . ; Robinson , I . K . ; Granick , S . ; Zhang , Z . ; Fenter , P . A . How water meets a hydrophobic surface . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2006 , 97 , 266101 . ( 69 ) Mezger , M . ; Sedlmeier , F . ; Horinek , D . ; Reichert , H . ; Pontoni , D . ; Dosch , H . On the origin of the hydrophobic water gap : an X - ray re ﬂ ectivity and MD simulation study . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2010 , 132 , 6735 − 6741 . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la300850g | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7747 − 7756 7756 Addendum II - Subsurface Inﬂuence on the Structure of Protein Adsorbates as Revealed by in Situ X - ray Reﬂectivity 119 120 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci Authors : P . Loskill 1 , H . Hähl 1 , N . Thewes 1 , C . T . Kreis 1 , M . Bischoff 2 , M . Herrmann 2 , and K . Jacobs 1 1 Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Ger - many . 2 The Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene , Saarland University , 66421 Homburg / Saar , Germany . Langmuir 28 , 7242 – 7248 ( 2012 ) . ( http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 ) Author contributions : Experiments were conceived and designed by P . Loskill , H . Hähl , M . Bischoﬀ , M . Herrmann , and K . Jacobs . AFM experiments were performed by P . Loskill and N . Thewes . Flow chamber experiments were performed by C . T . Kreis . Data was ana - lyzed by P . Loskill . The article was written by P . Loskill and K . Jacobs . Research was directed by M . Herrmann and K . Jacobs . Abstract - Controlling the interface between bacteria and solid materials has be - come an important task in biomedical science . For a fundamental and comprehensive understanding of adhesion it is necessary to seek quantitative information about the involved interactions . Most studies concentrate on the modiﬁcation of the surface ( chemical composition , hydrophobicity or topography ) , neglecting , however , the in - ﬂuence of the bulk material , which always contributes to the overall interaction via van der Waals forces . In this study , we applied AFM force spectroscopy and ﬂow cham - ber experiments to probe the adhesion of S . carnosus to a set of tailored Si wafers , allowing for a separation of short - and long - range forces . We provide experimental ev - idence that the subsurface composition of a substrate inﬂuences bacterial adhesion . A coarse estimation of the strength of the van der Waals forces via the involved Hamaker constants substantiates the experimental results . The results demonstrate that the uppermost layer is not solely responsible for the strength of adhesion . Rather , for all kinds of adhesion studies , it is equally important to consider the contribution of the subsurface . 121 In ﬂ uence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci Peter Loskill , † Hendrik Ha ̈ hl , † Nicolas Thewes , † Christian Titus Kreis , † Markus Bischo ﬀ , ‡ Mathias Herrmann , ‡ and Karin Jacobs * , † † Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , Saarbru ̈ cken , 66041 , Germany ‡ The Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene , Saarland University , Homburg / Saar , 66421 , Germany ABSTRACT : Controlling the interface between bacteria and solid materials has become an important task in biomedical science . For a fundamental and comprehensive understanding of adhesion it is necessary to seek quantitative information about the involved interactions . Most studies concentrate on the modi ﬁ cation of the surface ( chemical composition , hydrophobicity , or topography ) neglecting , however , the in ﬂ uence of the bulk material , which always contributes to the overall interaction via van der Waals forces . In this study , we applied AFM force spectroscopy and ﬂ ow chamber experiments to probe the adhesion of Staphylococcus carnosus to a set of tailored Si wafers , allowing for a separation of short - and long - range forces . We provide experimental evidence that the subsurface composition of a substrate in ﬂ uences bacterial adhesion . A coarse estimation of the strength of the van der Waals forces via the involved Hamaker constants substantiates the experimental results . The results demonstrate that the uppermost layer is not solely responsible for the strength of adhesion . Rather , for all kinds of adhesion studies , it is equally important to consider the contribution of the subsurface . ■ INTRODUCTION Adhesion and adsorption of proteins and bacteria onto inorganic surfaces is crucial in various biomedical ﬁ elds , such as bio ﬁ lm formation or DNA arrays . 1 , 2 Thus , it has become an important task to control the interface between organic ( macro ) molecules and solid materials . The relevant interactions can be tuned by modifying the substrates : Most studies concentrate on the modi ﬁ cation of the surface chemistry , the hydrophobicity , or the topography . That way , the short - range interactions are tuned . 3 , 4 The composition beneath the surface , however , is mostly overlooked and thereby long - range interactions are disregarded . Previous studies focusing on polymer dewetting 5 , 6 and liquid nanodroplets 7 showed an e ﬀ ect of di ﬀ erences in long - range van der Waals ( vdW ) interactions . These di ﬀ erences had been provoked by a variation of the subsurface composition . Similar observations have been reported for biological systems such as the adhesion of geckos 8 and the adsorption of proteins . 9 Bacterial adhesion is mediated by proteins . 10 Hence , an in ﬂ uence of van der Waals interactions on the bacterial adhesion is also expected . Previous studies , however , were not able to separate parameters in ﬂ uencing short - range , electro - static , and van der Waals interactions independently . 11 , 12 Yet , for a comprehensive understanding of the bacterial adhesion process it is necessary to seek quantitative information about the contributions of the involved interactions . In this study , we are able to tune van der Waals forces separately from other forces by using a set of tailored silicon wafers ( Figure 1A ) : The set consists of wafers with a native oxide layer [ “ type N ” , d = 1 . 7 ( 2 ) nm ] and wafers with a thermally grown thick oxide layer [ “ type T ” , d = 150 ( 2 ) nm ] . Another pair of wafers with di ﬀ erent surface properties was obtained by hydrophobizing the naturally hydrophilic wafers . Short - range interactions do not depend on the thickness of the silicon dioxide layer , whereas long - range vdW interactions do . 13 , 14 The adhesion onto synthetic surfaces and the formation of bio ﬁ lms is a key factor for the pathogenesis of bacteria from multiple di ﬀ erent species . 1 , 15 Some species of the Staphylococcus genus , for instance , are known to adhere strongly to surfaces and are capable of forming bio ﬁ lms 16 that are extremely resistant to removal and to antimicrobial drugs . 17 Here , we were interested in the unspeci ﬁ c interactions acting between a bacterium and a surface . Therefore , we concentrated on Staphylococcus carnosus strain TM300 , an apathogenic member of the genus Staphylococcus and an important organism in food manufacturing , which usually serves as host organism for gene cloning . 18 To characterize the adsorption of microorganisms to surfaces , typically parallel plate ﬂ ow chambers are used . 19 In this macroscopic approach , adsorption , adhesion , and desorp - tion e ﬀ ects are indistinguishable . In the past decades , some new tools have been introduced that allow for a quantitative study of bacterial adhesion , e . g . , atomic force microscope ( AFM ) . 20 Using the force spectroscopy mode of an AFM it is possible to Received : January 30 , 2012 Revised : March 2 , 2012 Published : April 4 , 2012 Article pubs . acs . org / Langmuir © 2012 American Chemical Society 7242 dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 Reprinted with permission from Loskill et al . Langmuir 28 , 7242 – 7248 ( 2012 ) . Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society . ( http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 ) Publications 122 probe a wide range of forces in a biologically relevant magnitude ( pN to μ N ) . A direct method to characterize bacterial adhesion onto various substrates is to use AFM probes that are covered with bacteria ( “ bacterial probes ” ) . 4 , 11 , 21 In this study , we used AFM force spectroscopy with bacterial probes to investigate the adhesion of S . carnosus ( TM300 ) to the set of tailored silicon wafers . Since bacteria in an already adhered state ( bacterial probes ) might react di ﬀ erently as compared to bacteria in planktonic state , we also performed macroscopic ﬂ ow chamber experiments with the same set of Si wafers . ■ MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation of the Substrates . The silicon wafers with the native [ type N , d = 1 . 7 ( 2 ) nm ] silicon oxide layer were purchased from Wacker Siltronic AG ( Burghausen , Germany ) and the ones with the thick thermally grown layer [ type T , d = 150 ( 2 ) nm ] were from Silchem ( Freiberg , Germany ) . The substrates were cleaned by immersing them for 30 min in fresh 1 : 1 H 2 SO 4 ( conc ) / H 2 O 2 ( 30 % ) solution . To remove residues of the acids , the wafers were put in boiling deionized water for 90 min , the water being changed four times in between . The hydrophobic substrates were obtained by functionalizing the cleaned wafers using a liquid phase preparation of self - assembling silane molecules with a CH 3 tailgroup ( octadecyltri - chlorosilane , OTS , purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ) following standard procedures . 22 The produced OTS surfaces feature a thickness of ≈ 2 . 6 nm , an rms roughness below 0 . 2 nm , and an uniform coverage , indicating a homogeneous , dense , upright , all - trans con ﬁ guration of the molecules . All types of substrates were characterized by AFM , ellipsometry , zeta potential , and contact angle measurements ( Figure 1B and Table 1 ) . Bacteria . We took stationary phase cells for the experiments . S . carnosus strain TM300 was cultured from blood agar plates in 5 mL of Mueller Hinton broth for 24 h at 37 ° C . To remove extracellular material , bacteria were washed once with 1 mL of NaCl solution ( 0 . 9 % w / v ) and twice with phosphate - bu ﬀ ered saline ( PBS , pH 7 . 3 ) , each with 1 mL . Finally , the bacteria were resuspended in 300 μ L of PBS and stored at 4 ° C ( for typically 2 h and a maximum of 48 h ) . Preparation of Bacterial Probes . To immobilize bacteria onto tipless cantilevers we used poly - L - lysine , PLL ( MP Biomedicals , Solon , OH ) , a polymer with positively charged side chains . Since the surfaces of both the bacterium and the cantilever are negatively charged in bu ﬀ er ( pH 7 . 3 ) , PLL forms an adhesive interlayer . 23 Prior to the preparation procedure , the cantilevers were cleaned by treating them with an air plasma . The PLL coating was then applied by immersing the AFM cantilever in a droplet of poly - L - lysine solution ( 0 . 1 mg / mL ) for 1 h . Subsequently , the cantilevers were carefully rinsed with PBS and placed in a droplet of bacteria solution for 1 h at 4 ° C . To remove unbound bacteria , the probes were rinsed with PBS bu ﬀ er . All probes used in this study were prepared immediately before the experiments . AFM - Force Measurements . Experiments were conducted in PBS ( pH 7 . 3 ) at room temperature with a Bioscope Catalyst ( Bruker , Santa Barbara , CA ) . Each experiment consists of at least ﬁ ve series of 100 single force / distance curves . Every cantilever was calibrated using the thermal tune technique . 24 To avoid systematic errors due to local irregularities of the surface , every measurement was done on a di ﬀ erent spot on a grid with separations of 5 μ m . Single force measurements were carried out using a z - range of 1 μ m , a scan rate of 1 Hz , and a relative force trigger of 1 nN . Adhesion forces were evaluated with the Nanoscope software ( Bruker , Santa Barbara , CA ) by calculating the di ﬀ erence between the adhesion peak 25 and the baseline for every single curve . 26 All single values on each substrate were ﬁ tted using a Gaussian curve . Displayed error bars describe the standard deviation . Bacterial Probes . The bacterial probes were based on tipless cantilevers ( PNP - TR - TL , Nanoworld , NeuchA ̃ c ́ tel , Switzerland ) onto which bacteria were allowed to adsorb ( Figure 2 ) . The restricting issue of this type of probe is the comparability of serial measurements due to the uncertainty of the number of bacteria that are in contact with the substrate ’ s surface . Therefore , it is not possible to compare measurements with di ﬀ erent cantilevers . Measurements with the same cantilever on di ﬀ erent substrates , however , are comparable as long as the integrity of the bacterial probe can be granted by , for example , an optical control or control measurements . We therefore always carried out the experiments on a type T and a type N wafer with the identical AFM probe . Within one experiment , consecutive series of force / distance measurements were taken alternately on the type N and T substrates , ending always on the substrate that has been probed ﬁ rst . Flow Chamber Measurements . Bacteria solution of di ﬀ erent concentrations was pumped through a custom parallel ﬂ ow chamber system with dimensions 2 × 1 . 6 × 3 cm 3 , chosen to guarantee a Figure 1 . ( A ) Model substrates based on silicon wafers with di ﬀ erent thicknesses of oxide layers that allow for a separation of e ﬀ ects due to short - and long - range forces . Short - range interactions are tuned by a silanization of the wafers that renders them hydrophobic . The blue droplet illustrates the di ﬀ erent water contact angles . ( B ) Zeta potentials of hydrophobic and hydrophilic type T and N wafers as function of pH , giving insight into the strength of electrostatic interactions . Since the zeta potentials are indistinguishable for type T and N wafers with the same surface chemistry , di ﬀ erences in SiO 2 layer thickness are irrelevant for the electrostatic interactions . Table 1 . Parameters of the Model Substrates : Root Mean Square ( rms ) Roughness , Advancing ( adv ) and Receding ( rec ) Contact Angles Θ of Water , and the Surface Energy γ d SiO 2 ( nm ) surface rms ( nm ) Θ adv ( deg ) Θ rec ( deg ) γ ( mJ / m 2 ) 151 ( 1 ) hydrophobic 0 . 15 ( 2 ) 112 ( 1 ) 108 ( 4 ) 24 ( 1 ) 1 . 7 ( 3 ) hydrophobic 0 . 12 ( 2 ) 111 ( 1 ) 107 ( 2 ) 24 ( 1 ) 151 ( 1 ) hydrophilic 0 . 13 ( 3 ) 5 ( 2 ) complwetting 63 ( 1 ) 1 . 7 ( 3 ) hydrophilic 0 . 09 ( 2 ) 7 ( 2 ) complwetting 64 ( 1 ) Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 7243 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 123 uniform ﬂ ow pro ﬁ le . 27 Measurements on type T and N substrates were always carried out using the same bacteria solution and in random order . The images were taken with a CCD - camera ( Pixel ﬂ y , PCO , Kelheim , Germany ) , through a light microscope ( Axiophot , Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) at a frame rate of 0 . 1 Hz . The number of adhering bacteria was determined using image analysis software ( Image Pro Plus , Media Cybernetics , Bethesda , MD ) . ■ RESULTS To determine whether the subsurface composition has an e ﬀ ect on bacterial adhesion , AFM force spectroscopy experiments with bacterial probes were carried out on all four wafer types . To distinguish from e ﬀ ects due to the surface chemistry , we compare the results of the two hydrophilic substrates and of the two hydrophobic substrates separately . AFM Force Spectroscopy on Hydrophilic Substrates . Force / distance measurements on the two hydrophilic wafer types ( Figure 3A ) reveal a higher adhesion force on the type N than on the type T wafers . The distribution of the determined adhesion forces on the hydrophilic SiO 2 surfaces is shown in Figure 3B in the form of a histogram . We determined an average adhesion force on the hydrophilic type N wafer of F N = 0 . 65 ( 18 ) 28 nN and on the type T wafer of F T = 0 . 30 ( 10 ) nN . The integrity of the bacterial probes ( detaching bacteria or other probe alteration ) is controlled by two means : ( i ) optical microscopy prior to and after the experiment ; ( ii ) control measurements , where consecutive series of force / distance measurements were taken alternately on the type N and type T substrates , ending always on the substrate that has been probed ﬁ rst . In this case , ( i ) no detaching of bacteria was observed and ( ii ) the comparison of the force distribution of the di ﬀ erent series is shown in Figure 3C , D . The means of each single series on type T wafers ( I , III , V ) and on type N wafers ( II , IV ) are identical within the experimental error . AFM Force Spectroscopy on Hydrophobic Substrates . The determined adhesion forces on the hydrophobic substrates exhibit the same trend . The identical type of measurements including the test of the integrity of the bacterial probes was performed on the hydrophobic OTS - coated wafers . The force / distance curves ( Figure 4A ) resemble the ones on the hydrophilic wafers , whereby the bacterial probes stayed also intact . The average adhesion force ( Figure 4B ) on the hydrophobic type N wafer is F N = 5 . 2 ( 10 ) nN and on the type T wafer is F T = 3 . 2 ( 12 ) nN . Experiments with di ﬀ erent bacterial probes lead to di ﬀ erent absolute values ( due to di ﬀ erent densities of the bacterial layer ) , but the ratio is always similar ( Figure 4C ) . The average forces on the hydrophobic substrates , however , are about one magnitude higher than the corresponding forces on the hydrophilic wafers . This Figure 2 . Optical microscopy image of S . carnosus immobilized by poly - L - lysine on a tipless cantilever . Figure 3 . Results of AFM force spectroscopy experiments on bare hydrophilic substrates : ( A ) Retract parts of two typical force / distance measurements between a bacterial probe and a type N and a type T wafer , respectively . For a clearer display , the curve on the type N wafer is shifted by − 1 nN . ( B ) Distribution of the determined adhesion forces . ( C , D ) Data of part B are shown as separated series . Odd series were performed on type T ( C ) and even series on type N wafers ( D ) . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 7244 Publications 124 comparison supports the ﬁ ndings of previous studies , namely that increased hydrophobicity typically boosts adhesion . Flow Chamber Experiments . Macroscopic adsorption experiments corroborate the results of the microscopic adhesion measurements . Using a custom - built parallel plate ﬂ ow chamber setup , the growth of the number of bacteria adsorbed to the set of substrates was determined for multiple concentrations . The number of adsorbed bacteria grows faster on the type N than on the type T wafers ( Figure 5A ) . The adsorption rates , i . e . , the slopes of linear ﬁ ts , are always higher on the type N than on the type T substrates independent of the concentration ( Figure 5B ) . ■ DISCUSSION The force spectroscopy results show that on both the hydrophilic and the hydrophobic wafers the bacterial adhesion force to the native SiO 2 layer is about twice as high as to the thick SiO 2 layer . Since the measurements were taken with the identical cantilever , the determined forces are reliable . This di ﬀ erence in adhesion forces is also observed for the adsorption of planktonic bacteria , as shown by the parallel plate ﬂ ow chamber experiments . The surface properties that speci ﬁ cally in ﬂ uence the short - range interactions , e . g . , hydrophobicity , roughness , and surface energy ( Table 1 ) , are independent of the thickness of the oxide layer . Hence , the di ﬀ erence in adhesion cannot be attributed to short - range forces . Also an e ﬀ ect of electrostatic interactions can be excluded for the explanation of the di ﬀ erent adhesion forces , since the zeta potentials ( Figure 1B ) are identical within the experimental error on type T and N wafers . Therefore , only di ﬀ erences in van der Waals forces can explain the results . van der Waals forces are present in every system and cannot be completely shielded . 13 , 14 , 29 Often , vdW interactions are disregarded since they decrease proportional to d − 6 with distance d , which yet is only correct for two interacting pointlike objects such as single atoms or molecules . For two macroscopic bodies , however , one obtains a lower exponent : 13 , 14 the nonretarded free energy between , for example , a sphere of radius R and a semi ﬁ nite half - space is Figure 4 . Results of AFM force spectroscopy experiments on hydrophobic substrates : ( A ) Retract parts of two typical force / distance measurements between a bacterial probe and a type N and a type T wafer , respectively . For a clearer display , the curve on the type N wafer is shifted by − 4 nN . ( B ) Distribution of the determined adhesion forces . ( C ) Average force values ( scaled with F T ) of multiple experiments with di ﬀ erent cantilevers . Figure 5 . Results of the ﬂ ow chamber experiments on the hydrophilic substrates : ( A ) number of the adsorbed bacteria in the ﬁ eld of view on type N and on type T wafers . ( B ) Adsorption rates of multiple experiments with di ﬀ erent concentrations of the bacteria solution . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 7245 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 125 = − W R A d 6 vdW ( 1 ) and between two semi ﬁ nite half - spaces ( Figure 6A ) is π = − w A d 12 vdW 2 ( 2 ) per unit area , where A is the Hamaker constant of the system . It can be derived from the optical properties of the involved materials using the Lifschitz approach . 30 In the following we present a rough theoretical description of the system under study . In principle , a bacterium can be described as a sphere of radius R consisting of two main components : the cytoplasm and the cell wall . Since the cytoplasm consists mainly of water , it has almost the same optical properties as the medium . The cell wall merely di ﬀ ers in its composition and consequently in its optical properties from the surrounding medium . 31 For small separations d ≪ R , we use eq 2 and describe the system by three layers , namely , the cell wall , medium ( bu ﬀ er ) , and the substrate . In this study , the substrate is not a uniform bulk material but consists of multiple layers . In general , the vdW energy for a system ( Figure 6B ) consisting of a uniform half - space ( M1 ) , a medium ( M2 ) , and a half - space ( M4 ) coated with a layer ( M3 ) of thickness D can be calculated by 14 , 32 π = − + + − − ⎛ ⎝⎜ ⎞ ⎠⎟ w A d A d D 1 12 ( ) vdW 12 32 2 12 43 2 ( 3 ) where A 12 − 32 ( as well as A 12 − 43 ) are the Hamaker constants describing the interactions between the two interfaces M1 / M2 and M2 / M3 ( as well as M1 / M2 and M3 / M4 ) . In the system under study , the interacting interfaces are cell wall / bu ﬀ er and bu ﬀ er / silicon dioxide as well as cell wall / bu ﬀ er and silicon dioxide / silicon . Since the cell wall features a nonuniform composition and barely accessible optical properties , we are not able to give exact theoretical values for the Hamaker constants . Nevertheless , as the polarizability of silicon dioxide ( n = 1 . 46 , ε = 3 . 9 ) is smaller than that of silicon ( n = 4 . 13 , ε = 11 . 8 ) , we expect A 12 − 43 > 0 . 33 For this case , the second term in eq 3 increases the strength of the overall vdW interactions yet converges to zero for high layer thicknesses D ( as on the type T substrates ) . Hence , even without a comprehensive quantitative calcu - lation , the experimental results can already be qualitatively explained by the fact that the bacterium on the type N wafer is “ closer ” to the strongly attractive Si bulk than if placed on a type T wafer . In other words , due to the stronger van der Waals attraction of the silicon , the bacteria experience higher adhesion forces on the wafers with a thin oxide layer . On the hydrophobic set of silicon wafers , the identical argumentation holds true , yet the contribution of an additional layer ( the silane monolayer ) has to be taken into account in a similar way as presented above for the oxide layer . Moreover , the results can be applied to clinical situations , where bacterial adhesion is preceded or accompanied by an adsorption of proteins , which may form a so - called conditioning layer . 34 This layer changes the surface properties of the substrate . Yet , since the thickness of the layer is usually on a nanometer scale , the unspeci ﬁ c adhesion forces will still be a ﬀ ected by the composition of the subsurface material . ( The condition layer then acts like the OTS layer on the type N and T wafers . ) ■ CONCLUSIONS We have demonstrated that bacterial adhesion is in ﬂ uenced by the subsurface composition of a substrate . The reason for this is the strength of the vdW forces , which is given by ( a ) the type of geometry of two interacting objects ( atom / atom or sphere / sphere ) , ( b ) their separation , ( c ) the composition of a strati ﬁ ed substrate , and ( d ) the polarizabilities of the involved materials . Keeping surface properties of the substrates constant , the in ﬂ uence of the van der Waals forces were probed by varying the subsurface composition . On Si wafers with di ﬀ erent oxide layer thicknesses , the adhesion of S . carnosus was found to be about a factor of 2 stronger on the wafers with the thin oxide layer , no matter if covered by a molecular - sized hydrophobic layer or not . Consequently , for all types of adhesion studies , e . g . , for the development of antibacterial substrates , it is important to characterize not only the surface properties but also the subsurface composition and to consider this in the analysis of the data . Particularly , thin coatings that promise to be antibacterial will have di ﬀ erent e ﬀ ects depending on the underlying substrate ! The e ﬀ ects could also explain inconsistent results of previous studies due to the di ﬀ erent bulk substrates used . ■ AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author * E - mail : k . jacobs @ physik . uni - saarland . de . Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the German Science Foundation under grant numbers GRK 1276 and INST 256 / 305 - 1 FUGG , by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Science grant 01 KI 1009E ( Skin Staph ) , and by funds of the Federal Figure 6 . Schemes of two model systems : ( A ) interaction between two semi ﬁ nite half - spaces and ( B ) interaction between a uniform material and a coated material . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 7246 Publications 126 State of Saarland . We thank K . Hilgert for the help with handling the bacteria and R . Zimmermann for the zeta potential measurements . ■ REFERENCES ( 1 ) ( a ) Costerton , J . W . ; Stewart , P . S . ; Greenberg , E . P . Bacterial bio ﬁ lms : A common cause of persistent infections . Science 1999 , 284 , 1318 − 1322 . ( b ) Costerton , J . W . ; Cheng , K . J . ; Geesey , G . G . ; Ladd , T . I . ; Nickel , J . C . ; Dasgupta , M . ; Marrie , T . J . Bacterial bio ﬁ lms in nature and disease . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . 1987 , 41 , 435 − 464 . ( 2 ) Ramsay , G . DNA chips : State - of - the - art . Nat . Biotechnol . 1998 , 16 , 40 − 44 . ( 3 ) ( a ) Bowen , W . R . ; Fenton , A . S . ; Lovitt , R . W . ; Wright , C . J . The measurement of Bacillus mycoides spore adhesion using atomic force microscopy , simple counting methods , and a spinning disk technique . Biotechnol . Bioeng . 2002 , 79 , 170 − 179 . ( b ) Speranza , G . ; Gottardi , G . ; Pederzolli , C . ; Lunelli , L . ; Canteri , R . ; Pasquardini , L . ; Carli , E . ; Lui , A . ; Maniglio , D . ; Brugnara , M . ; Anderle , M . Role of chemical interactions in bacterial adhesion to polymer surfaces . Biomaterials 2004 , 25 , 2029 − 2037 . ( c ) Tang , H . ; Cao , T . ; Liang , X . ; Wang , A . ; Salley , S . O . ; Mcallister , J . ; Ng , K . Y . S . In ﬂ uence of silicone surface roughness and hydrophobicity on adhesion and colonization of Staphylococcus epidermidis . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , Part A 2009 , 88A , 454 − 463 . ( d ) Lamour , G . ; Eftekhari - Bafrooei , A . ; Borguet , E . ; Soues , S . ; Hamraoui , A . Neuronal adhesion and di ﬀ erentiation driven by nanoscale surface free - energy gradients . Biomaterials 2010 , 31 , 3762 − 3771 . ( 4 ) Emerson , R . J . ; Bergstrom , T . S . ; Liu , Y . ; Soto , E . R . ; Brown , C . A . ; McGimpsey , W . G . ; Camesano , T . A . Microscale correlation between surface chemistry , texture , and the adhesive strength of Staphylococcus epidermidis . Langmuir 2006 , 22 , 11311 − 11321 . ( 5 ) ( a ) Herminghaus , S . ; Jacobs , K . ; Mecke , K . ; Bischof , J . ; Fery , A . ; Ibn - Elhaj , M . ; Schlagowski , S . Spinodal dewetting in liquid crystal and liquid metal ﬁ lms . Science 1998 , 282 , 916 − 919 . ( b ) Oron , A . Three - dimensional nonlinear dynamics of thin liquid ﬁ lms . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2000 , 85 , 2108 − 2111 . ( 6 ) Seemann , R . ; Herminghaus , S . ; Jacobs , K . Dewetting patterns and molecular forces : A reconciliation . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2001 , 86 , 5534 − 5537 . ( 7 ) Rauscher , M . ; Dietrich , S . Nano - droplets on structured substrates . Soft Matter 2009 , 5 , 2997 − 3001 . ( 8 ) Loskill , P . ; Putho ﬀ , J . B . ; Wilkinson , M . ; Mecke , K . ; Jacobs , K . ; Autumn , K . Adhesion of gecko setae re ﬂ ects nanoscale di ﬀ erences in subsurface energy . Submitted ( 9 ) ( a ) Quinn , A . ; Mantz , H . ; Jacobs , K . ; Bellion , M . ; Santen , L . Protein adsorption kinetics in di ﬀ erent surface potentials . EPL 2008 , 81 , 56003 . ( b ) Bellion , M . ; Santen , L . ; Mantz , H . ; Ha ̈ hl , H . ; Quinn , A . ; Nagel , A . M . ; Gilow , C . ; Weitenberg , C . ; Schmitt , Y . ; Jacobs , K . Protein adsorption on tailored substrates : Long - range forces and conformational changes . J . Phys . : Condens . Matter 2008 , 20 , 404226 . ( c ) Ha ̈ hl , H . ; Evers , F . ; Grandthyll , S . ; Paulus , M . ; Sternemann , C . ; Loskill , P . ; Lessel , M . ; Hu ̈ secken , A . K . ; Brenner , T . ; Tolan , M . ; Jacobs , K . Subsurface in ﬂ uence on the structure of protein adsorbates revealed by in situ X - ray re ﬂ ectivity . Submitted ( 10 ) Koebnik , R . ; Locher , K . P . ; van Gelder , P . Structure and function of bacterial outer membrane proteins : Barrels in a nutshell . Mol . Microbiol . 2000 , 37 , 239 − 253 . ( 11 ) ( a ) Ong , Y . - L . ; Razatos , A . ; Georgiou , G . ; Sharma , M . M . Adhesion forces between E . coli bacteria and biomaterial surfaces . Langmuir 1999 , 15 , 2719 − 2725 . ( b ) Stevens , M . J . ; Donato , L . J . ; Lower , S . K . ; Sahai , N . Oxide - dependent adhesion of the Jurkat line of T lymphocytes . Langmuir 2009 , 25 , 6270 − 6278 . ( 12 ) Liu , C . ; Zhao , Q . In ﬂ uence of surface - energy components of Ni − P − TiO 2 − PTFE nanocomposite coatings on bacterial adhesion . Langmuir 2011 , 27 , 9512 − 9519 . ( 13 ) Israelachvili , J . N . Intermolecular and Surface Forces , 2nd ed . ; Academic Press : London , 1991 . ( 14 ) Parsegian , V . A . Van der Waals forces , 1st ed . ; Cambridge University Press : New York , 2006 . ( 15 ) ( a ) Gristina , A . G . Biomaterial - centered infection : Microbial adhesion versus tissue integration . Science 1987 , 237 , 1588 − 1595 . ( b ) Gristina , A . G . ; Hobgood , C . D . ; Webb , L . X . ; Myrvik , Q . N . Adhesive colonization of biomaterials and antibiotic resistance . Biomaterials 1987 , 8 , 423 − 426 . ( 16 ) Go ̈ tz , F . Staphylococcus and bio ﬁ lms . Mol . Microbiol . 2002 , 43 , 1367 − 1378 . ( 17 ) ( a ) Lewis , K . Persister cells , dormancy and infectious disease . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 2007 , 5 , 48 − 56 . ( b ) Fux , C . A . ; Costerton , J . W . ; Stewart , P . S . ; Stoodley , P . Survival strategies of infectious bio ﬁ lms . Trends Microbiol . 2005 , 13 , 34 − 40 . ( 18 ) ( a ) Schleifer , K . H . ; Fischer , U . Description of a New Species of the Genus Staphylococcus : Staphylococcus carnosus . Int . J . Syst . Bacteriol . 1982 , 32 , 153 − 156 . ( b ) Go ̈ tz , F . Staphylococcus carnosus : A new host organism for gene cloning and protein production . J . Appl . Bacteriol . 1990 , 69 , S49 − S53 . ( 19 ) Harraghy , N . ; Seiler , S . ; Jacobs , K . ; Hannig , M . ; Menger , M . ; Herrmann , M . Advances in in vitro and in vivo models for studying the staphylococcal factors involved in implant infections . Int . J . Artif . Organs 2006 , 29 , 368 − 378 . ( 20 ) Dufrene , Y . F . Atomic force microscopy , a powerful tool in microbiology . J . Bacteriol . 2002 , 184 , 5205 − 5213 . ( 21 ) ( a ) Razatos , A . ; Ong , Y . - L . ; Sharma , M . M . ; Georgiou , G . Molecular determinants of bacterial adhesion monitored by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1998 , 95 , 11059 − 11064 . ( b ) Lower , S . K . ; Tadanier , C . J . ; Hochella , M . F . Measuring interfacial and adhesion forces between bacteria and mineral surfaces with biological force microscopy . Geochim . Cosmochim . Acta 2000 , 64 , 3133 − 3139 . ( 22 ) ( a ) Brzoska , J . B . ; Azouz , I . B . ; Rondelez , F . Silanization of solid substrates : A step toward reproducibility . Langmuir 1994 , 10 , 4367 − 4373 . ( b ) Wasserman , S . R . ; Whitesides , G . M . ; Tidswell , I . M . ; Ocko , B . M . ; Pershan , P . S . Axe , J . D . The structure of self - assembled monolayers of alkylsiloxanes on silicon : A comparison of results from ellipsometry and low - angle X - ray re ﬂ ectivity . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1989 , 111 , 5852 − 5861 . ( 23 ) ( a ) Voet , D . ; Voet , J . Biochemistry ; John Wiley & Sons : New York , 1995 . ( b ) West , J . K . ; Latour , R . A . ; Hench , L . L . Molecular modeling study of adsorption of poly - L - lysine onto silica glass . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , Part A 1997 , 37 , 585 − 591 . ( 24 ) Hutter , J . L . ; Bechhoefer , J . Calibration of atomic - force microscope tips . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 1993 , 64 , 1868 − 1873 . ( 25 ) In the event of multiple adhesion peaks , the most pronounced one was evaluated . ( 26 ) Carpick , R . W . ; Batteas , J . ; de Boer , M . P . Scanning probe studies of nanoscale adhesion between solids in the presence of liquids and monolayer ﬁ lms . In Handbook of Nanotechnology ; Bhushan , B . , Ed . ; Springer Verlag : Berlin , 2007 ; pp 951 − 979 . ( 27 ) ( a ) van Wagenen , R . A . ; Andrade , J . D . Flat plate streaming potential investigations : Hydrodynamics and electrokinetic equiva - lency . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1980 , 76 , 305 − 314 . ( b ) Bowen , B . D . Streaming potential in the hydrodynamic entrance region of cylindrical and rectangular capillaries . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1985 , 106 , 367 − 376 . ( 28 ) The number in brackets gives the error bar of the last digit . ( 29 ) French , R . H . Long range interactions in nanoscale science . Rev . Mod . Phys . 2010 , 82 , 1887 − 1944 . ( 30 ) Dzyaloshinskii , I . E . ; Lifshitz , E . M . ; Pitaevskii , L . P . The general theory of van der Waals forces . Adv . Phys . 1961 , 10 , 165 − 209 . ( 31 ) Nir , S . ; Andersen , M . Van der Waals interactions between cell surfaces . J . Membr . Biol . 1977 , 31 , 1 − 18 . ( 32 ) Parsegian , V . A . ; Ninham , B . W . Van der Waals forces in many - layered structures : Generalizations of the Lifshitz result for two semi - in ﬁ nite media . J . Theor . Biol . 1973 , 38 , 101 − 109 . ( 33 ) Technically , the sign of A 12 − 43 also depends on the polarizabilities of the cell wall and the bu ﬀ er . Yet , a probe object featuring a lower polarizability than the medium would experience a repulsive vdW interaction . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 7247 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 127 ( 34 ) Characklis , W . G . ; Cooksey , K . E . Bio ﬁ lms and microbial fouling . Adv . Appl . Microbiol . 1983 , 29 , 93 − 138 . Langmuir Article dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la3004323 | Langmuir 2012 , 28 , 7242 − 7248 7248 Publications 128 Addendum IV - Adhesion of gecko setae reﬂects nanoscale diﬀerences in subsurface energy Authors : P . Loskill 1 , J . Puthoff 2 , M . Wilkinson 2 , K . Mecke 3 , K . Jacobs 1 , and K . Autumn 2 1 Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Ger - many . 2 Department of Biology , Lewis & Clark College , Portland , OR 97219 , USA . 3 Institute for Theoretical Physics , Universität Erlangen - Nürnberg , D - 91058 Erlangen , Germany submitted to Journal of the Royal Society Interface ( 2012 ) . Author contributions : P . Loskill and J . Puthoﬀ contributed equally to this work . Experiments were performed by P . Loskill , J . Puthoﬀ , and M . Wilkinson . Data were analysed by P . Loskill and J . Puthoﬀ . Theoretical advice was given by K . Mecke . Article was written by P . Loskill , J . Puthoﬀ , K . Jacobs , and K . Autumn . Research was directed by K . Jacobs and K . Autumn Abstract - Surface energies are commonly employed to determine the adhesive forces between materials . However , the component of surface energy derived from long - range forces , such as van der Waals forces , depends on the material’s structure below the outermost atomic layers . Prior theoretical results and indirect experimental evidence suggest that the van der Waals energies of subsurface layers will inﬂuence interfa - cial adhesion forces . We discovered that nanometerscale diﬀerences in the oxide layer thickness of silicon wafers result in signiﬁcant macroscale diﬀerences in the adhesion of isolated gecko setal arrays . Si / SiO 2 bilayer materials exhibited stronger adhesion when the SiO 2 layer is thin ( approx . 2 nm ) . To further explore how layered materials inﬂuence adhesion , we functionalized similar substrates with an octadecyltrichlorosi - lane ( OTS ) monolayer and again identiﬁed a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of silicon dioxide layer thickness on adhesion . Our theoretical calculations describe how variation in the silicon dioxide layer thickness produces diﬀerences in the van der Waals interac - tion potential , and these diﬀerences are reﬂected in the adhesion mechanics . Setal arrays employed as tribological probes provide evidence that the ‘subsurface energy’ of inhomogeneous materials inﬂuences the macroscopic surface forces . 129 Macroscale adhesion of gecko setae reﬂects nanoscale differences in subsurface composition Peter Loskill , † Jonathan Puthoff , ‡ Matt Wilkinson , ‡ Klaus Mecke , ¶ Karin Jacobs , ∗ , † and Kellar Autumn ∗ , ‡ Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Germany , Department of Biology , Lewis & Clark College , Portland , OR 97219 , USA , and Institute for Theoretical Physics , Universität Erlangen - Nürnberg , D - 91058 Erlangen , Germany E - mail : k . jacobs @ physik . uni - saarland . de ; gekkolab @ gmail . com Abstract Surface energies are commonly employed to deter - mine the adhesive forces between materials . How - ever , the component of surface energy derived from long - range forces , such as van der Waals forces , depends on the material’s structure below the outermost atomic layers . Prior theoretical re - sults and indirect experimental evidence suggest that the van der Waals energies of subsurface lay - ers will inﬂuence interfacial adhesion forces . We discovered that nanometer - scale differences in the oxide layer thickness of silicon wafers result in signiﬁcant macroscale differences in the adhesion of isolated gecko setal arrays . Si / SiO 2 bilayer materials exhibited stronger adhesion when the SiO 2 layer is thin ( approx . 2 nm ) . To further ex - plore how layered materials inﬂuence adhesion , we functionalized similar substrates with an oc - tadecyltrichlorosilane ( OTS ) monolayer and again identiﬁed a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of silicon dioxide layer thickness on adhesion . Our theoretical calcu - lations describe how variation in the silicon diox - ide layer thickness produces differences in the van der Waals interaction potential , and these differ - ences are reﬂected in the adhesion mechanics . Se - tal arrays employed as tribological probes provide evidence that the ‘subsurface energy’ of inhomo - ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed † Saarland University ‡ Lewis & Clark College ¶ Universität Erlangen - Nürnberg geneous materials inﬂuences the macroscopic sur - face forces . Introduction When describing adhesion between two materials , it is common to refer to the strength of the con - tribution of each material using their surface en - ergies γ 1 and γ 2 , which are the extra free energies ( per unit area ) possessed by atoms at a surface rel - ative to atoms in the bulk . 1 The well - known Dupré equation gives the work of adhesion ∆ γ , the en - ergy required to separate the dissimilar materials , as ∆ γ = γ 1 + γ 2 − γ 1 , 2 , where γ 1 , 2 is the interfa - cial energy of the two contacting surfaces . The surface energy of solids typically cannot be mea - sured directly and is usually estimated from liq - uid drop contact angle measurements . 2 The sur - face energy is largely a property of the outermost atomic layers ( . 1 nm deep ) , yet van der Waals ( vdW ) forces act over distances greater than 1 nm in many cases . 3 – 5 Thin industrial coatings like ad - hesion promotors , self - assembled monolayers of thiols or silanes as well as photoresists are also in the range of a few nanometers . The van der Waals forces of the underlying material should— theoretically—reach through the thin layer and in - ﬂuence adhesion . Previous experiments indeed identiﬁed a signiﬁ - cant inﬂuence of the long - range component of the interaction potential on the dewetting of thin liq - 1 Publications 130 uid ﬁlms , 6 , 7 their liquid front proﬁles , 8 , 9 and the mesoscopic organization of magnetic nanocrys - tals . 10 Recently , a similar inﬂuence was detected on the adsorption kinetics of proteins 11 – 13 and the adhesion of bacteria . 14 These experiments em - ployed materials whose contribution to the poten - tial had been tuned by means of surface stratiﬁca - tion . In layered systems , the contributions of the different materials can be tuned by modifying the layer thicknesses . 15 Early work by Israelachvili and Tabor 16 measured the forces between crossed cylinders , one of which was covered with a mono - layer of stearic acid , and found that the resulting dispersion forces were sensitive to the presence of the surface layer at small separations , on the order of the layer thickness . An analogous effect will apply when two materials are brought into con - tact , and the layer thickness is varied . The question presents itself : can stratiﬁcation be used to modify the macroscopic adhesion of materials ? To tackle this question , we employed the gecko to probe adhesion and the underlying surface forces . Although the gecko is essentially a macro - scopic ‘object’ 1 , it makes use of intermolecu - lar forces . The outstanding climbing ability of the gecko has impressed observers for hundreds of years and a technical replication is a active area of research nowadays . 18 The key adaptation that provides this ability is the hierarchical struc - ture of a gecko foot . The underside of each toe is divided into lamellar structures that terminate in arrays of densely - packed hair - like protrusions , called seta . 19 , 20 Individual setae are bundles of β - keratin ﬁbrils several hundred µ m long . 21 These ﬁbrils terminate in triangular , wedge - shaped pads about 150 nm wide at the tip , called spatulae . As a consequence of this hierarchical structure , the setal arrays have an overall compliance that al - lows them to closely conform to rough surfaces . 22 The nanoscopic contacts that are established at the spatular tips produce considerable overall ad - hesion on virtually any surface by vdW interac - tions . 23 – 25 These structures are positioned at the correct scale to establish uniform , single - asperity contacts on substrates with limited roughness be - low 100 nm . 1 Tokay geckos ( Gekko gecko ) can produce an adhesion force of roughly 20 N . 17 Mounted array 220 µm ( a ) Engage Retract Drag 2 Axis force sensor F lateral F normal ( b ) Figure 1 : ( a ) Scanning electron microscope image of a mounted setal array . ( b ) A schematic diagram of the test setup for determining the adhesion ( normal ) forces and friction ( lateral ) forces between an array and a sub - strate . In this study , we measured the adhesion of iso - lated gecko setal arrays to substrates that differed only in their subsurface composition : We used a Si wafer surface with a native ( ‘N’ , 1 . 7 ( 3 ) nm thick ) oxide layer and surfaces with a thermally grown ( ‘T’ , 151 ( 1 ) nm thick ) amorphous SiO 2 layer . In addition , we functionalized T - and N - type wafers with an octadecyltrichlorosilane ( OTS ) self - assembled monolayer . The OTS mono - layer has optical properties that are similar to those of SiO 2 , but is strongly hydrophobic . Using this set of substrates , we characterize the inﬂuence of the subsurface composition independent of surface interactions , since the latter are identical within the substrate pairs featuring the same surface chem - istry . 26 A comparison between the substrates fea - turing different chemistries , however , is not the aim of this study , since hydrophilic and hydropho - bic substrates differ in short range interactions , the characterization of which is not simply covered by one parameter ( e . g . the surface energy ) . Compar - ing , however , pairs of wafers with identical short range forces , yet different thicknesses of the sur - face layers , will reveal the impact of van der Waals interaction and allow for a theoretical description . Our tribological probe was an isolated setal array 2 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 131 from a species of tropical gecko ( Gekko gecko ; Figure 1 ) . Although the forces between each nano - hair and the surface are slight , the scaling of forces implied by the ‘contact - splitting effect’ 24 , 27 yields considerable adhesion when the number of hairs packed on the array is large . Surface forces for layered media We address the question of whether or not sub - surface differences inﬂuence the adhesion between bodies by calculating the surface interaction po - tential and the resulting effect on adhesion in a simple model system . Qualitatively , we expect a larger adhesive force between a probe object and a wafer with a thin oxide layer : Since Si possesses a higher index of refraction and a higher polariz - ability than SiO 2 , the van der Waals interactions between a probe object and Si are stronger than between a probe object and SiO 2 . 3 The probe will ‘feel’ the subsurface bulk silicon more in a type N wafer than in a type T wafer . The interaction φ between two bodies at a distance x can be de - scribed by a modiﬁed Lennard - Jones - type poten - tial consisting of a short - range ( SR ) part and an long - range ( LR ) part φ ( x ) = φ SR ( x ) + φ LR ( x ) = C SR x m − C C , E · Θ ( x 0 − x ) − C LR x n , ( 1 ) where C SR and C LR are constants and m is typically chosen to be n + 6 to represent the powerful repul - sion between overlapping electron clouds . Short range chemical or entropic forces that act only at some separation x 0 are approximated by a Heav - iside step function Θ ( x ) with constant strength C C , E . In the absence of charges , the LR part is deter - mined exclusively by the vdW interactions φ vdW . For two inﬁnite planes interacting 2 through a medium M , the exponent n = 2 and the interac - tion energy per unit area is given by φ LR ( x ) = φ vdW ( x ) = − A i / M / j 12 π x 2 , where A i / M / j is the Hamaker constant for the interaction of two materials i and j through a medium ( M ) and can be derived from the optical properties of the materials using the Lifs - 2 In this study only separations of a few nanometers are of interest . Hence , retardation can be neglected . chitz approach . 3 , 28 , 29 In the case of a probe ma - terial ( P ) interacting with a substrate that consists of a bulk material ( L2 ) and a thin coating ( L1 ) of thickness d , the vdW part of the interface potential can be modiﬁed as 6 , 7 φ vdW ( x ) = − 1 12 π (cid:20) A P / M / L1 x 2 + A P / M / L2 − A P / M / L1 ( x + d ) 2 (cid:21) . ( 2 ) Hence , the relative contribution of different lay - ers of an inhomogeneous substrate to the total LR vdW potential can be tuned by varying the thickness d of the layer L1 . The second term in Eq . ( 2 ) , incorporating the contribution from the lower layer , might be thought of as the ‘subsurface energy’ of the system . In the following , we use this term for energies that arise from vdW contri - butions to the interface potential due to a variable subsurface composition . Material and Methods Adhesion Performance Testing We measured the tribological performance of the mounted setal arrays using a custom mechani - cal testing platform ( ‘Robotoe’ ) . 30 Robotoe in - corporates a 2 - axis positioning stage ( Aerotech , Pittsburg , PA , USA ) and a piezoelectric load cell ( Kistler , Amherst , NY , USA ) ( with a resolution of 1 . 3 and 2 . 6 mN in shear and normal forces , respec - tively ) . The mounted array is attached to the ter - minal end of the force sensor assembly , and the layered Si / SiO 2 / OTS substrates are held rigidly in a mount on the motion stage opposite the setal ar - ray specimen chuck . All of the components are en - closed in a controlled - environment chamber . Dur - ing a test , the tips of the setal arrays are dragged across the substrate in a displacement - controlled motion designed to resemble a gecko’s footfall 30 ( cf . Figure 1 ) . Reported adhesion and friction val - ues are taken from the force sensor readout dur - ing the steady - state portion of each test . 31 We can specify parameters such as the drag velocity v and approach distance during the experiment , as well as the temperature and humidity in the chamber . 3 Publications 132 Table 1 : Surface properties of the substrates used in this study : root mean square ( rms ) roughness , advancing ( adv ) and receding ( rec ) water contact angle , surface energy γ and Lifshitz - van der Waals γ LW and Lewis acid - base γ AB components obtained from contact angles of three different liquids . 39 The number in brackets gives the error bar of the last digit . rms ( nm ) γ ( mJ m − 2 ) γ LW ( mJ m − 2 ) γ AB ( mJ m − 2 ) Θ adv ( ◦ ) Θ rec ( ◦ ) OTS T 0 . 19 ( 3 ) 24 ( 1 ) 24 ( 1 ) 0 111 ( 3 ) 103 ( 4 ) OTS N 0 . 17 ( 0 ) 24 ( 1 ) 24 ( 1 ) 0 111 ( 2 ) 103 ( 2 ) SiO 2 T 0 . 13 ( 3 ) 63 ( 1 ) 43 ( 1 ) 20 ( 1 ) 5 ( 2 ) complete wetting SiO 2 N 0 . 09 ( 2 ) 64 ( 1 ) 43 ( 1 ) 21 ( 1 ) 7 ( 2 ) complete wetting Preparation and cleaning of substrates The silicon wafers were purchased from Si - Mat ( Landsberg , Germany ) . We removed residues leftover from the polishing process , as well as contaminants deposited by the atmosphere , by submerging the as - received wafers for 30 min in fresh 1 : 1 H 2 SO 4 ( conc . ) / H 2 O 2 ( 30 % ) solution . The wafers were subsequently rinsed in boil - ing deionized water for 90 min , which was ex - changed three times within that time . We pro - duced a second pair of type T / type N substrates with different surface properties by hydropho - bizing a series of cleaned wafers using self - assembling silane molecules with a CH 3 tail - group ( octadecyl - trichlorosilane , OTS , purchased from Sigma - Aldrich , Germany ) following stan - dard procedures . 32 , 33 All wafer types were char - acterized using atomic force microscopy , ellip - sometry and water contact angle measurements ( cf . Table 1 , further characterization data avail - able in refs . 13 , 34 ) . Immediately prior to the ex - periments , the substrates were cleaned by immers - ing them subsequently into ethanol and acetone ( 5 min each ) in a ultrasonic bath and rinsing them for 30 min in boiling DI water . Setal Array Collection and Preparation The setal arrays of Gekko gecko grow from lamel - lar strips of tissue on the ventral side of each toe . We collected entire arrays from live , unanaes - thetized animals following the methods described in ; 24 the keratin backing layer to which the hairs are attached can be peeled from the lamella easily . ( The animal’s loss of adhesive function in this digit is recovered at the next molt . ) After some trim - ming , we afﬁx the detached arrays to aluminum Table 2 : Optical properties of the relevant materi - als 35 – 38 n ε β - keratin 1 . 56 20 SiO 2 1 . 46 3 . 9 Si 4 . 1 11 . 8 OTS 1 . 46 2 stubs , hairs facing upward at their natural resting angle , with a thin layer of cyanoacrylate glue ( cf . Figure 1 ) . These stubs are then mounted on the force sensor in Robotoe , the setal arrays facing the substrates mounted on the translation stage . The size of the arrays varies in the range of a few mil - limetres . The larger arrays were chosen for the ex - periments on the hydrophobic samples , the smaller ones for experiments on hydrophilic samples re - spectively . Results Calculation of microscopic van der Waals potentials The optical properties of Si and SiO 2 are well - known , but only limited data on the optical prop - erties of β - keratin is available , and , to the au - thors’ knowledge , no studies have been done on β - keratin from geckos . Furthermore , the constant C SR in the repulsive part of Eq . ( 1 ) is hardly acces - sible , so we cannot give rigorous theoretical values for the forces without some assumptions . We take the optical constants of β - keratin as those deter - mined for horn keratin 35 , 36 ( cf . Table 2 ) . We also assume that the repulsive constant C SR and C C , E are independent of oxide layer thickness ; this is 4 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 133 Figure 2 : ( a ) Calculated effective interface potentials for the interaction between a keratin layer and a silicon wafer ( type T and type N ) . The short - range constant was assumed as C SR = 1 · 10 − 77 J m 6 resulting in maximal forces of F max ≈ 10 − 2 nN nm − 2 . ( b ) Relative difference in van der Waals forces on type T and type N wafers as determined using Eq . ( 4 ) . ( c ) Estimated pull - off forces for a β - keratin sphere of radius R = 150 nm on a Si / SiO 2 bilayer material with layer thickness d making use of Eq . ( 6 ) . a safe assumption since the surface properties of the substrates do not differ signiﬁcantly ( Table 1 ) . Using the indices of reﬂection and the dielectric constants of the involved materials ( cf . refTabOptProp ) the Hamaker constants were cal - culated to A Si = 61 . 5 k B T and A SiO 2 = 17 . 8 k B T , confer chapter 11 , Eq . 11 . 13 of Ref . 3 Inserting these values into Eq . ( 1 ) and Eq . ( 2 ) produces the potentials φ N and φ T in Figure 2 a . As ex - pected from the qualitative considerations before , the global minimum in the interaction potential is lower for the type N than for the type T sample . For these potentials we used C SR = 10 − 77 J m 6 , a value that reﬂects the typical magnitude given in other experiments . 6 The term C C , E , i . e . the chem - ical and entropic forces can be neglected in force differences because they would contribute—if sig - niﬁcantly present at all—in the same way for type N and type T samples due to their identical sur - face properties . Altogether , this results in maximal forces comparable to previous experimental stud - ies . 23 The work of adhesion for these potentials is given by ∆ γ = φ ( ∞ ) − φ ( x 0 ) . Avoiding all of the above assumption that espe - cially concern the SR forces , it is instructive to evaluate the system in terms of LR vdW forces only . Of signiﬁcant interest is the manner in which the vdW forces differ between the N and T sub - strates . This difference , on a per unit area basis , is ∆ F ( x ) = F N ( x ) − F T ( x ) ∝ A P / M / Si − A P / M / SiO2 ( x + d ) 3 . ( 3 ) This leads to a relative difference in vdW forces of ∆ F Rel . ( x ) = ∆ F ( x ) F T ( x ) = R A ( dx + 1 ) 3 , ( 4 ) where R A = A P / M / Si A P / M / SiO2 − 1 is the shifted ratio of the Hamaker constants . The parameter R A is useful for comparing vdW force differences between sub - strates with different materials or structure . The relative difference in van der Waals forces on type T and type N wafers for different separations is shown in Figure 2 b whereby R A = 2 . 5 . Variation in the values of the refractive index and dielectric constant of β - keratin does not change these ratios signiﬁcantly ( c . f . supplementary material ) . Inﬂuence of the potentials φ N and φ T on adhesion forces Adhesion between bodies involves more phenom - ena than just those represented by the interaction potential . For instance , the separation of adhered structures is also inﬂuenced by the mechanical properties of the materials involved . More inclu - sive mechanical pictures of contact and adhesion include the Johnson - Kendall - Roberts ( JKR ) the - ory 40 and the Derjaguin - Muller - Toparov ( DMT ) theory 41 of contacting spheres . These models 5 Publications 134 Figure 3 : Results of multiple different experiments on the hydrophobic samples with different setal arrays and substrate pairs : Mean adhesion forces are plotted as a function of ( a ) the drag speed ( at 75 % RH ) and ( b ) the humidity ( with v = 50 mm s − 1 ) . By convention , adhesive forces are negative . The stars indicate the level of signiﬁcance . make speciﬁc predictions of the contact areas and pull - off forces for a number of different simple contact geometries ( sphere / sphere , sphere / plane ) based on materials properties and surface interac - tions . We investigate the inﬂuence of the interaction potential of Eq . ( 2 ) on the adhesion of a sphere of radius R to a plane using the same approach as these theories , but it is important to note that ( i ) Eq . ( 2 ) was derived for two facing half - spaces of material and ( ii ) the scaling of the adhesion forces will not be exactly linear with the changes in γ or F . We address these issues by transform - ing the interaction potential φ to a new form V amenable for contact between curved bodies us - ing the Derjaguin approximation . 42 For contact between a body of principal curvatures κ 1 , κ 2 and a plane , this gives V ( l ) = − α ( λ ) π √ κ 1 κ 2 Z ∞ l φ ( x ) dx ( 5 ) where l is the minimum approach distance be - tween the sphere and the plane , κ 1 = κ 2 = 1 R for the sphere , and 32 ≤ α ≤ 2 . The Maugis param - eter λ = 2 σ 0 (cid:16) R π ∆ γ K 2 (cid:17) 1 / 3 describes the transition between the JKR and DMT limiting behaviors us - ing an approximate , square force - separation curve of depth σ 0 and integrated area ∆ γ . 43 Use of this parameter makes the adhesion properties respon - sive to changes in the shape of the potential V in a manner that neither the JKR or DMT solutions can capture individually . The parameter λ also in - troduces the elastic constants E i , ν i of the sphere ( 1 ) and surface ( 2 ) into the problem through the contact modulus K = 3 4 (cid:16) 1 − ν 21 E 1 + 1 − ν 22 E 2 (cid:17) − 1 . While there is no analytical expression that relates the prefactor α to λ , there is a simple ﬁt developed by Carpick 44 that sufﬁces . From Eq . ( 5 ) , we can ﬁnd the adhesive or ‘pull - off’ force for the sphere on the layered substrate . Since F ( l ) = − dVdl = − απ R φ ( l ) and the bodies are in contact at l ≈ x 0 , we have F pull - off ( d ) = − α ( λ ( d ) ) π R φ ( x 0 , d ) = − α ( λ ( d ) ) π R ∆ γ ( d ) . ( 6 ) This is the typical form for pull - off forces in ad - 6 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 135 Figure 4 : Results of multiple experiments ( drag speed : 0 . 5 mm s − 1 ; humidities : 10 , 30 , 50 , 70 % RH ) on the hy - drophilic samples with different setal arrays and substrate pairs : ( a ) Mean adhesion forces of the single experiments . ( b ) Aggregation of the experiments on the hydrophilic samples : Mean differences in adhesion forces of ‘concurrent’ single tests on the type N and type T wafers ∆ F = F N − F T are plotted as a function of the humidity . hesion problems , but all of the information about the potential in Eq . ( 1 ) and Eq . ( 2 ) , such as the layer thickness d , is included in a consistent man - ner . The d - dependence enters into Eq . ( 6 ) not only in ∆ γ , but also in λ as well . Figure 2 c shows how the pull - off forces will vary with layer thickness d . For large layer thicknesses , the inﬂuence of the second term in Eq . ( 2 ) on adhesion is negligible and the forces asymptote to the value F ∞ . How - ever , in the range 0 . 5 nm ≤ d ≤ 5 nm , the force is signiﬁcantly higher . Adhesion forces on hydrophobic OTS - Surfaces The predicted inﬂuence of differences in the thick - ness of the SiO 2 layer on adhesion forces was ob - servable in drag experiments of setal arrays on the hydrophobic wafers . We performed multiple experiments , consisting of hundreds of individual drag tests , at ﬁve different speeds ( 5 , 8 . 9 , 15 . 8 , 28 . 1 , 50 mm s − 1 ) and three humidities ( 30 , 50 , 75 % RH ) , incorporating a number of different ar - rays and substrate pairs . The order of individual tests in an experiment were randomized within the constant - humidity groups . The results of typical experiments are shown in Figure 3 : The mean ad - hesion forces of multiple different measurements at 75 % RH with different setal arrays and substrate pairs are plotted as a function of drag speed ( Fig - ure 3 a ) and as a function of humidity ( Figure 3 b ) . The data demonstrate a clear inﬂuence of the oxide layer thickness on the adhesion force ; the force on the type N substrate is always larger than the force on the type T substrate . The trend is independent of humidity and drag speed . Because of the dif - ferent specimen sizes and slight variations in setal organization between individuals , absolute force values in different experiments depend on the setal array used . Adhesion forces on hydrophilic SiO 2 Surfaces Next , we examined whether the adhesion forces on the bare SiO 2 surfaces are also affected by 7 Publications 136 the SiO 2 layer thickness . Slow drag speeds of 0 . 5 mm s − 1 were used to avoid damage to the gecko arrays from the high overall forces on the hydrophilic surfaces 3 . The experiments were per - formed at four different humidities ( 10 , 30 , 50 , 70 % RH ) . Similar to the results on the hydropho - bic surfaces , the adhesion force on type N wafers is consistently larger than on type T wafers ( Fig - ure 4 a ) . In spite of the slow drag speed , it was not entirely possible to prevent degradation of the ar - ray performance during an experiment ( no degra - dation was observed on the hydrophobic samples ) . To minimize the inﬂuence of this effect in our N / T comparisons , we always carried out tests on both substrates in pairs ( in a randomized order ) and calculated the difference between ‘concurrent’ N and T measurements . The means of these differ - ences ∆ F in various experiments across multiple arrays and substrate pairs are always negative ( Fig - ure 4 b ) . Therefore , the adhesion forces on the bare SiO 2 surfaces are also affected by the SiO 2 layer thickness . Discussion The experiments demonstrate that the subsurface energy inﬂuences macroscopic adhesion . Varia - tion in oxide layer thickness , which causes subtle differences in the subsurface energy - distance rela - tionship , signiﬁcantly affects the force of adhesion between gecko setal arrays and Si wafers . By using two pairs of tailored substrates , we were able to vary subsurface and surface proper - ties independently . On the bare Si / SiO 2 substrates , the adhesion force is higher on the wafers with the thinner SiO 2 layer . This trend in adhesion force agrees with the theoretical predictions presented in Figure 2 . Comparing the F pull - off ( d ) at d = 1 . 7 nm for the hydrophilic N - type wafer with the value at d = 151 nm for the T - type wafer , the pull - off force is - in absolute values - higher on the N - type sam - ple . On the hydrophobic Si / SiO 2 / OTS materials , the overall adhesion force is lower , but the trend cor - roborates the results on the hydrophilic substrates . To plot F pull - off ( d ) for the hydrophobic wafers , 3 On the hydrophobic samples , an effect of wear was not observed . it is not necessary to reformulate Eq . ( 2 ) with a third layer , rather , the thickness of the OTS layer ( d OTS ≈ 2 . 6 nm ) 4 is added to that of the SiO 2 layer , since both layers feature similar indexes of refrac - tion and polarizabilities . As the top layer is still on a nanometer scale , the difference in F pull - off is still resolvable . It is signiﬁcant that we can distinguish these slight force differences in an essentially macro - scopic experiment with the gecko material . The contact splitting effect implies that if we replace a large contact with N smaller ones , 45 the overall contact force will be multiplied by a factor of ∼ √ N . 27 Applying this principle magniﬁes the slight force differences between the N and T substrates to the point that they can be resolved macroscopi - cally . Tokay geckos possess ≈ 14000 seta / mm 246 and there are ≈ 100 terminal spatulae on each seta . 21 Furthermore , our data clearly show that adhe - sion is enforced with increasing drag speed and increasing humidities—on hydrophilic as well as on hydrophobic substrates—corroborating previ - ous studies . 25 , 47 , 48 A comparison of the adhesion forces on the hydrophobic and the hydrophilic sub - strates is not the objective of this study ; there are too many variables involved to make any speciﬁc inferences . The correlation between water contact angles and gecko adhesion was the focus of previ - ous studies . 19 , 24 , 49 – 51 Our theoretical approximations have two limita - tions : First , the small size , the internal structure and the unknown optical properties of the wedge - shaped β - keratin pads limit the calculations via the Lifshitz theory , which is based on continuum prop - erties of semi - inﬁnite parallel slabs . However , a more comprehensive and detailed theory will be able to predict more exact values for the subsur - face energies of type N and type T wafers , but will not differ from our approximations in the predicted sign of the difference between the surface poten - tials . Second , the gecko adhesive system does not obey the idealized mechanics of the sphere - plane system . Nevertheless , the JKR / DMT solution in - cludes all of the relevant physical concepts . The variation in the force values in Figure 2 c derives from the difference between the surface potentials 4 determined by ellipsometry and X - Ray reﬂectometry . 8 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 137 φ N and φ T rather than geometrical considerations , so we expect an analogous response in the gecko system . Thus , we are not able to theoretically match the absolute force values , but we were able to explain the measured differences in adhesion force on type N and type T wafers . Conclusions By using gecko setae as a macroscopic adhesion probe , we found evidence that differences in the interaction potential associated with the subsur - face energy can produce macroscale differences in surface forces . Hence , it is indeed possible to modify the adhesion of materials by stratiﬁcation . As a consequence , ( i ) for adhesion and adsorption experiments and simulations , van der Waals forces have to be considered and ( ii ) in stratiﬁed systems , subsurface and surface energies must be included accordingly . Acknowledgement We are grateful to Jacob Israelachvili for theo - retical discussion . We thank Hendrik Hähl and Matthias Lessel for assistance with the substrates as well as Andrew Schnell and Madisen Holbrook for the gecko handling . This work was supported in part by the DAAD PROMOS and the NSF BIO awards NBM 0900723 and IOS 0847953 . References ( 1 ) Bhushan , B . 2002 Introduction to Tribology , 1st edn . New York : John Wiley & Sons . ( 2 ) Good , R . J . & Girifalco , L . A . 1960 A theory for estimation of surface and interfacial en - ergies . III Estimation of surface energies of solids from contact angle data . J Phys Chem - Us 64 , 561 - 565 . ( 3 ) Israelachvili , J . 1991 Intermolecular and Surface Forces , 2nd edn . San Diego : Aca - demic Press . ( 4 ) Parsegian , V . A . 2006 Van der Waals forces , 1st edn . New York : Cambridge University Press . ( 5 ) Delrio , F . W . , de Boer , M . P . , Knapp , J . A . , Reedy , E . D . , Clews , P . J . & Dunn , M . L . 2005 The role of van der Waals forces in adhesion of micromachined surfaces . Nature Mater 4 , 629 - 634 . ( 6 ) Seemann , R . , Herminghaus , S . & Jacobs , K . 2001 Dewetting patterns and molecular forces : a reconciliation . Phys Rev Lett 86 , 5534 - 5537 . ( 7 ) Jacobs , K . , Seemann , R . & Herminghaus , S . 2008 Stability and dewetting of thin liquid ﬁlms . In Polymer Thin Films ( eds . Tsui , O . K . C . & Russell , T . P . ) , pp . 243 - 265 . Singa - pore : World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company . ( 8 ) Indekeu , J . 1992 Line tension near the wet - ting transition - results from an interface dis - placement model . Physica A 183 , 439 - 461 . ( 9 ) Seemann , R . , Herminghaus , S . , Neto , C . , Schlagowski , S . , Podzimek , D . , Konrad , R . , Mantz , H . & Jacobs , K . 2005 Dynamics and structure formation in thin polymer melt ﬁlms . J Phys - Condens Mat 17 , S267 - S290 . ( 10 ) Lalatonne , Y . , Richardi , J . & Pileni , M . 2004 Van der Waals versus dipolar forces control - ling mesoscopic organizations of magnetic nanocrystals . Nature Mater 3 , 121 - 125 . ( 11 ) Quinn , A . , Mantz , H . , Jacobs , K . , Bellion , M . & Santen , L . 2008 Protein adsorption kinetics in different surface potentials . Epl - Europhys Lett 81 , 56003 . ( 12 ) Bellion , M . , Santen , L . , Mantz , H . , Hähl , H . , Nagel , A . M . , Gilow , C . , Weitenberg , C . , Schmitt , Y . & Jacobs , K . 2008 Protein ad - sorption on tailored substrates : long - range forces and conformational changes . J Phys : Condens Matter 20 , 404226 . ( 13 ) Hähl , H . , Evers , F . , Grandthyll , S . , Paulus , M . , Sternemann , C . , Loskill , P . , Lessel , M . , Hüsecken , A . K . , Brenner , T . , Tolan , M . & Jacobs , K . 2012 Subsurface inﬂuence on the structure of protein adsorbates revealed by in situ X - ray reﬂectivity . Langmuir 28 , 7747 – 7756 . 9 Publications 138 ( 14 ) Loskill , P . , HÃd’hl , H . , Kreis , C . T . , Thewes , N . , Bischoff , M . , Herrmann , M . & Jacobs , K . 2012 The inﬂuence of the subsurface com - position of a material on the adhesion of Staphylococci . Langmuir 28 , 7242 - 7248 . ( 15 ) Parsegian , V . A . 1993 Reconciliation of van - der - Waals force measurements between phosphatidylcholine bilayers in water and between bilayer - coated mica surfaces Lang - muir 9 , 3625 - 3628 . ( 16 ) Israelachvili , J . N . & Tabor , D . 1972 The measurement of van der Waals dispersion forces in the range 1 . 5 to 130 nm . Proc R Soc A 331 , 19 - 38 . ( 17 ) Irschick , D . J . , Austin , C . C . , Petren , K . , Fisher , R . N . , Losos , J . B . & Ellers , O . 1996 A comparative analysis of clinging ability among pad - bearing lizards . Biol J Linn Soc 59 , 21 - 35 . ( 18 ) Geim , A . K . , Dubonos , S . V . , Grigorieva , I . V . , Novoselov , K . S . , Zhukov , A . A . & Shapoval , S . Y . 2003 Microfabricated ad - hesive mimicking gecko foot - hair . Nature Mater 2 , 461 - 463 . ( 19 ) Hiller , U . 1968 Untersuchungen zum Fein - bau und zur Funktion der Haftborsten von Reptilien . Z Morph Tiere 62 , 307 - 362 . ( 20 ) Ruibal , R . & Ernst , V . 1965 The structure of the digital setae of lizards . J Morphol 117 , 271 - 293 . ( 21 ) Rizzo , N . W . , Gardner , K . H . , Walls , D . J . , Keiper - Hrynko , N . M . , Ganzke , T . S . & Hal - lahan , D . L . 2006 Characterization of the structure and composition of gecko adhesive setae . J R Soc Interface 3 , 441 - 451 . ( 22 ) Autumn , K . , Majidi , C . , Groff , R . E . , Dittmore , A . & Fearing , R . 2006 Effective elastic modulus of isolated gecko setal ar - rays . J Exp Biol 209 , 3558 - 3568 . ( 23 ) Autumn , K . , Liang , Y . , Hsieh , S . T . , Zesch , W . , Chan , W . , Kenny , T . , Fearing , R . S . & Full , R . 2000 Adhesive force of a single gecko foot - hair . Nature 405 , 681 - 685 . ( 24 ) Autumn , K . & Peattie , A . M . 2002 Mech - anisms of adhesion in geckos . Integr Comp Biol 42 , 1081 - 1090 . ( 25 ) Huber , G . , Mantz , H . , Spolenak , R . , Mecke , K . , Jacobs , K . , Gorb , S . N . & Arzt , E . 2005 Evidence for capillarity contributions to gecko adhesion from single spatula nanome - chanical measurements . Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 , 16293 - 16296 . ( 26 ) Loskill , P . , Hähl , H . , Faidt , T . , Grandthyll , S . , Müller , F . & Jacobs , K . 2012 Is adhesion su - perﬁcial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions . submit - ted , arXiv : 1202 . 6304 . ( 27 ) Arzt , E . , Gorb , S . & Spolenak , R . 2003 From micro to nano contacts in biological at - tachment devices . Proc Natl Acad Sci 100 , 10603 - 10606 . ( 28 ) Lifshitz , E . M . 1956 The theory of molecu - lar attractive forces between solids . Sov Phys JETP 2 , 73 - 83 . ( 29 ) Dzyaloshinskii , I . E . , Lifshitz , E . M . & Pitaevskii , L . P . 1961 The general theory of van der Waals forces . Adv Phys 10 , 165 – 209 . ( 30 ) Gravish , N . , Wilikinson , M . & Autumn , K . 2008 Frictional and elastic energy in gecko adhesive detachment . J R Soc Interface 5 , 339 - 348 . ( 31 ) Autumn , K . , Dittmore , A . , Santos , D . , Spenko , M . & Cutkosky , M . 2006 Frictional adhesion : a new angle on gecko attachment . J Exp Biol 209 , 3569 - 3579 . ( 32 ) Brzoska , J . B . , Ben Azouz , I . & Rondelez , F . 1994 Silanization of solid substrates : a step toward reproducibility . Langmuir 10 , 4367 - 4373 . ( 33 ) Wasserman , S . R . , Whitesides , G . M . , Tidswell , I . M . , Ocko , B . M . , Pershan , P . S . & Axe , J . D . 1989 The structure of self - assembled monolayers of alkylsiloxanes on silicon : a comparison of results from ellip - sometry and low - angle x - ray reﬂectivity . Int J Biol Macromol 111 , 5852 - 5861 . 10 Addendum III - The Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Material on the Adhesion of Staphylococci 139 ( 34 ) Gutfreund , P . , Bäumchen , O . , van der Grin - ten , D . , Fetzer , R . , Maccarini , M . , Jacobs , K . , Zabel , H . & Wolff , M . 2012 Surface Correla - tion Affects Liquid Order and Slip in a New - tonian Liquid . submitted , arXiv : 1104 . 0868 . ( 35 ) Rizvi , T . Z . & Khan , M . A . 2008 Temperature - dependent dielectric properties of slightly hydrated horn keratin . Int J Biol Macromol 42 , 292 - 297 . ( 36 ) Maeda , H . 1989 Water in keratin . piezoelec - tric , dielectric , and elastic experiments . Bio - physical journal 56 , 861 - 868 . ( 37 ) Sze , S . M . & Ng , K . K . 2006 Physics of Semi - conductor Devices , 3rd edn . New York : John Wiley & Sons . ( 38 ) Finklea , H . , Robinson , L . , Blackburn , A . , Richter , B . , Allara , D . & Bright , T . 1986 Formation of an organized monolayer by solution adsorption of octadecyltrichlorosi - lane on gold : electrochemical properties and structural characterization . Langmuir 2 , 239 - 244 . ( 39 ) Mykhaylyk , T . A . , Evans , S . D . , Ferny - hough , C . M . , Hamley , I . W . & Henderson , J . R . 2003 Surface energy of ethylene - co - 1 - butene copolymers determined by contact angle methods . J Colloid Interface Sci 260 , 234 - 239 . ( 40 ) Johnson , K . L . , Kendall , K . & Roberts , A . D . 1971 Surface energy and the contact of elastic solids . Proc R Soc Lond A 324 , 301 - 313 . ( 41 ) Derjaguin , B . V . , Muller , V . M . & Toporov , Y . P . 1975 Effect of contact deformations on the adhesion of particles . J Colloid Interface Sci 53 , 314 - 326 . ( 42 ) Maugis , D . 2000 Contact , Adhesion and Rupture of Solids , 1st edn . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . ( 43 ) Maugis , D . 1992 Adhesion of spheres : the JKR - DMT transition using a Dugdale model . J Colloid Interface Sci 150 , 243 - 269 . ( 44 ) Carpick , R . W . , Ogletree , D . F . & Salmeron , M . 1999 A general equation for ﬁtting con - tact area and friction vs load measurements . J Colloid Interface Sci 211 , 395 - 400 . ( 45 ) Autumn , K . , Sitti , M . , Liang , Y . , Peattie , A . , Hansen , W . R . , Sponberg , S . , Kenny , T . , Fearing , R . S . , Israelachvili , J . N . , & Full , R . 2002 Evidence for van der Waals adhesion in gecko setae . Proc Natl Acad Sci 99 , 12252 - 12256 . ( 46 ) Schleich , H . & Kästle , W . 1986 Ultrastruk - turen an Gecko - Zehen ( Reptilia : Sauria : Gekkonidae ) Amphibia - Reptilia 7 , 141 - 166 ( 47 ) Gravish , N . , Wilkinson , M . , Sponberg , S . , Parness , A . , Esparza , N . , Soto , D . , Yam - aguchi , T . , Broide , M . , Cutkosky , M . , Cre - ton , C . & Autumn , K . 2010 Rate - dependent frictional adhesion in natural and synthetic gecko setae . J R Soc Interface 7 , 259 - 269 . ( 48 ) Niewiarowski , P . H . , Lopez , S . , Ge , L . , Ha - gan , E . & Dhinojwala , A . 2008 Sticky gecko feet : the role of temperature and humidity PLoS ONE 3 , e2192 . ( 49 ) Puthoff , J . B . , Prowse , M . S . , Wilkinson , M . & Autumn , K . 2010 Changes in materials properties explain the effects of humidity on gecko adhesion . J Exp Biol 213 , 3699 - 3704 . ( 50 ) Chen , B . & Gao , H . 2010 An alternative ex - planation of the effect of humidity in gecko adhesion : Stiffness reduction enhances adhe - sion on a rough surface . Int J Appl Mech 2 , 1 - 9 . ( 51 ) Kim , Y . , Limanto , F . , Lee , D . H . , Fearing , R . S . & Maboudian , R . 2012 Role of Counter - substrate Surface Energy in Macroscale Fric - tion of Nanoﬁber Arrays . Langmuir 28 , 2922 - 2927 . 11 Publications 140 Addendum V - Fluoridation of hydroxyapatite leads to a reduced adhesion of oral bacteria Authors : P . Loskill 1 , C . Zeitz 1 , M . Bischoff 2 , M . Herrmann 2 , and K . Ja - cobs 1 1 Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Ger - many . 2 The Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene , Saarland University , 66421 Homburg / Saar , Germany . submitted to Langmuir ( 2012 ) . Author contributions : Experiments were performed by P . Loskill . Substrates were prepared by C . Zeitz . Data was analyzed by P . Loskill . Article was written by P . Loskill , C . Zeitz , and K . Jacobs . Research was directed by M . Bischoﬀ , M . Herrmann , and K . Jacobs . Abstract - The mechanisms of action of ﬂuoride have been discussed controversially for decades . The caries - preventive eﬀect is often traced back to eﬀects on demineraliza - tion . However , an eﬀect on bacterial adhesion was indicated by indirect macroscopic studies . To characterize adhesion on ﬂuoridated samples on a single bacterial level , we used AFM force - spectroscopy with bacterial probes to measure adhesion forces directly . We tested the adhesion of Streptococcus mutans , Streptococcus oralis and Staphylococcus carnosus onto smooth , high density hydroxyapatite surfaces , treated and untreated with ﬂuoride solution . All bacteria species exhibit lower adhesion forces after ﬂuoridation of the surfaces . These ﬁndings suggest that the decrease of adhesion properties is another origin of the cariostatic eﬀect of ﬂuoride . 141 Fluoridation of hydroxyapatite leads to a reduced adhesion of oral bacteria Peter Loskill , † Christian Zeitz , † Markus Bischoff , ‡ Mathias Herrmann , ‡ and Karin Jacobs ∗ , † Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Germany , and Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene , Saarland University , 66421 Homburg / Saar , Germany E - mail : k . jacobs @ physik . uni - saarland . de Abstract The mechanisms of action of ﬂuoride have been discussed controversially for decades . The caries - preventive effect is often traced back to effects on demineralization . However , an effect on bac - terial adhesion was indicated by indirect macro - scopic studies . To characterize adhesion on ﬂuori - dated samples on a single bacterial level , we used AFM force - spectroscopy with bacterial probes to measure adhesion forces directly . We tested the adhesion of Streptococcus mutans , Streptococcus oralis and Staphylococcus carnosus onto smooth , high density hydroxyapatite surfaces , treated and untreated with ﬂuoride solution . All bacteria species exhibit lower adhesion forces after ﬂuori - dation of the surfaces . These ﬁndings suggest that the decrease of adhesion properties is another ori - gin of the cariostatic effect of ﬂuoride . Introduction The campaign against caries is an always highly topical issue . Since more than seven decades it is known that the application of ﬂuoride compounds has an cariostatic effect . 1 However , the underly - ing mechanisms of action of ﬂuoride have been discussed controversially for decades and are not yet completely revealed . 2 The cariostatic impact ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed † Saarland University ‡ Saarland University of ﬂuoridation is often traced back to a decreased demineralization of the teeth : Compared to hy - droxyapatite ( HAP ) , ﬂuoroapatite ( FAP ) exhibits a higher resistance to acids leading to a lower dem - ineralization ( demineralization of HAP and FAP starts at pH 5 . 5 and pH 4 . 6 , respectively 3 ) . New studies , however , showed that in the course of the ﬂuoridation of HAP , the penetration depth of F is much lower than the previously reported micron range : FAP layer thicknesses are in the range of 10 nm . 4 In the oral cavity , chewing can shortly remove such nanometer - sized layers , which ques - tions the explanation of the cariostatic effect of ﬂu - oridation by a decreased demineralization . Bac - teria , however , are also inﬂuenced by ﬂuorida - tion : The release of ﬂuoride ions affects the bac - terial metabolism , 5 the development of bioﬁlms 6 and the behaviour of osteoplastic cells . 7 Further - more , an effect on bacterial adhesion has been in - dicated by indirect macroscopic studies : Fluorap - atite cement as compared to natural enamel , 8 ﬂu - oridated hydroxyapatite beads , 9 and ﬂuoroapatite coatings 10 displayed a reduced number of adher - ing cells . Since ﬂuoroapatite coatings showed to be biocompatible , 11 their antibacterial effects are not only of interest for the dental science but for all kind of implant science . To study bacterial adhesion , classically paral - lel plate ﬂow chambers are used . 12 In the past decade , however , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has been established as a powerful tool in bacterial research . 13 By means of AFM force spectroscopy with bacterial probes it is possible to study the 1 Publications 142 adhesion force between bacteria and surfaces on a single bacterium level . 14 This microscopic ap - proach is direct and quantitative in contrast to the classical macroscopic ﬂow chamber studies . The application of AFM force spectroscopy on enamel is problematic due to the rough and inac - cessible surface . As the main compound of enamel is hydroxyapatite , we use high - density HAP pel - lets that feature smooth surfaces with micrometer sized patches of nanoscale roughness . To determine whether the indicated effect of ﬂu - oridation on bacterial adhesion can be observed on a single bacterial level , we used AFM force - spectroscopy with bacterial probes to measure ad - hesion forces directly . We tested the adhesion of the cariogenic pathogens Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus oralis , and of the apathogenic Staphylococcal species S . carnosus onto hydroxy - apatite surfaces , treated and untreated with ﬂuo - ride solution . Experimental section HAP and ﬂuoridation Using a ﬁeld assisted sintering technique ( FAST ) , commercially available hydroxyapatite ( Sigma - Aldrich , Steinheim , Germany ) was pressed into HAP pellets of a diameter of about 20 mm , a thickness of 5 mm and an overall density of 96 % compared to a single crystal . In order to get a smooth sample surface , one side of the pellet was repeatedly treated with wet abrasive paper of in - creasing grain size ( Struers , Willich , Germany ) . Subsequently , the surface was polished with dia - mond suspensions ( DiaPro - 3 µ m ; Struers , Willich , Germany and MSY0 - 0 . 03 ; Microdiamant , Leng - wil , Switzerland ) containing grains of 3 and 0 . 03 µ m diameter . The procedure was performed until an RMS roughness of below 5 nm was achieved , which was determined by ( 1 µ m ) 2 AFM topogra - phy scans . The pellet was then etched in a dilute acetic acid solution for 5 s with a pH of 4 in order to remove the residuals of the polishing procedure . By this step , the RMS roughness is slightly in - creased to 10 nm , yet the achieved surface is clean of foreign particles . 4 Fluoridation took place at pH 9 , which is achieved by a ﬂuoride solution ( NaF in in de - inoized water ) of 1000 ppm F − . By thermal evaporation of Au through a mask , a strip of about 4 mm width and 100 nm thickness was prepared on the polished HAP pellet , separating it in two halves . One half was immersed into the ﬂuoride solution for 5 min . Subsequently , the pellet was rinsed and then sonicated for 5 min in de - inoized water , in order to remove remainders of the ﬂuo - ride solution . Bacterial strains and culture conditions The Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus oralis clinical isolates used in this study were obtained from the Clinic of Operative Dentistry , Periodontology and Preventive Dentistry ( Saar - land University Hospital , Homburg / Saar , Ger - many ) . Staphylococcus carnosus strain TM300 , used in this study as a non - pathogenic control , was obtained from the German Resource Centre for Biological Material ( DSMZ , Braunschweig , Germany ) . The bacteria were maintained at - 80 ◦ C in tryptone soy broth ( TSB ; BD Biosciences , Heidelberg , Germany ) containing 15 % glycerol . For culturing , strains were incubated on TSB - sheep blood agar plates overnight at 37 ◦ C . Sub - sequently , bacterial colonies were precultured in 5 - ml MÃijller - Hinton ( MH ; BD Biosciences , Hei - delberg , Germany ) batch cultures for 6 h at 150 rpm and 37 ◦ C . 300 µ l of each preculture was used to inoculate a main culture in 10 ml MH . After 16 h of growth at 150 rpm and 37 ◦ C , bac - teria were harvested by centrifugation at 1900 g for 10 min at 20 ◦ C and washed twice with 10 ml of phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) ( 10 mM potas - sium phosphate , 0 . 15 M NaCl ; pH 7 ) . The bacteria were subsequently resuspended in PBS to obtain a concentration of 1x10 9 cells per ml . Preparation of bacterial probes The bacteria were immobilized onto tipless can - tilevers ( PNP - TR _ TL ; Nanoworld , NeuchÃ´ctel , Switzerland ) by means of poly - L - lysine , PLL ( MP Biomedicals , Solon , USA ) . Prior to the prepara - tion procedure , the cantilevers were cleaned by treating them with an air plasma . The PLL coat - ing was then applied by immersing the AFM cantilever in a droplet of poly - L - lysine solution 2 Addendum V - Fluoridation of hydroxyapatite leads to a reduced adhesion of oral bacteria 143 Figure 1 : Results of an AFM force spectroscopy experiment with Streptococcus oralis and untreated or ﬂuoridated hydroxyapatite substrates : A ) Distribution of the measured adhesion forces . B ) Mean adhesion forces of three subsequent series of measurements , each consisting of 50 - 100 force / distance curves . To assure the integrity of the bacterial probes , experiments were always started and terminated with a series of measurements on the same substrate . ( 0 . 1 mg / ml ) for 1 hour . Subsequently , the can - tilevers were carefully rinsed with PBS and placed in a droplet of bacteria solution for 1 hour at 4 ◦ C . To remove unbound bacteria , the probes were rinsed with PBS buffer . All probes used in this study were prepared immediately before the exper - iments . Force spectroscopy AFM force spectroscopy experiments were per - formed in PBS buffer using a Bioscope Catalyst and a Dimension Icon ( both : Bruker , Santa Bar - bara , USA ) . The force measurements were per - formed using a z - range of 1 µ m , a scan rate of 1 Hz and a relative force trigger of 1 nN . An en - tire experiment consists of at least 100 single mea - surements per substrate type . Thereby , every mea - surement was performed on a different spot . To control for an alteration of the bacterial probe , ev - ery experiment was terminated and started with a series of measurements on the same type of substrate . Adhesion forces were evaluated with the Nanoscope software ( Bruker , Santa Barbara , USA ) by calculating the difference between the adhesion peak and the baseline for every single curve . 15 Results and discussion To determine whether the adhesion force is inﬂu - enced by ﬂuoridation of the hydroxyapatite sub - strates , we carried out AFM force spectroscopy experiments with three different bacterial species . In the case of Streptococcus oralis , the deter - mined adhesion forces are lower on the ﬂuori - dated than on the untreated part of the sample ( Fig - ure 1A ) . The integrity of the bacterial probe can be guaranteed , since the ﬁrst and the last series of measurements were performed on the same type of substrate ( in this case the untreated part , cf . Fig - ure 1B ) and the respective adhesion forces were identical within the experimental error . Further experiments with Streptococcus mutans and Staphylococcus carnosus reveal the same trend ( cf . Figure 2 ) . All bacteria species exhibit lower adhesion forces on the ﬂuoridated part of the hydroxyapatite substrate . That is to say , ﬂuori - dation reduces the adhesion between bacteria and hydroxyapatite pellets by a factor of two , indepen - dent of the studied species and the amount of bac - teria in contact . 16 Our ﬁndings corroborate the results of sim - ple , macroscopic counting experiments in previous studies : 8 – 10 Moreover , the macroscopic difference in the amount of adhering bacteria on ﬂuoridated and untreated surfaces can now be traced back to microscopic differences in the adhesion force of 3 Publications 144 Figure 2 : Aggregation of the mean adhesion forces of multiple experiments with different cantilevers and bacterial species . Consistently , the mean ad - hesion force is reduced by roughly 50 % . Due to a different amount of bacteria in contact , indepen - dent experiments with the same species show dif - ferent absolute values . The ratios , however , are consistent . single bacteria . The advantage of AFM force spectroscopy with bacterial probes is the possibility to directly mea - sure adhesion forces on a microscopic scale . A restricting issue , however , is the susceptibility to local heterogeneities in the surface . By using nanoscopically smooth substrates , we circumvent problems due to topography . To account for the heterogeneity in crystallite orientation , every sin - gle measurement is carried out on a different spot on the surface . By this , we gain orientation - averaged mean adhesion forces but have to accept larger error bars . However , the observed trend is consistent and reproducible over multiple various experiments . As all three bacterial species show the same ad - hesion reduction , we do not expect a speciﬁc adhe - sion effect or an active response of the bacterium . Especially the results for S . carnosus , corroborate this assumption , due to the fact that this bacterial species lacks adhesins . Furthermore , since ﬂuoridation only affects the outermost layer , 4 the origin of the adhesion - reducing effect of ﬂuoride must be due to surface properties . Topography or the roughness cannot be responsible for the change in adhesion : AFM scans reveal that there are no signiﬁcant differ - ences in RMS roughness due to the ﬂuoridation Figure 3 : AFM images of a hydroxyapatite surface spot ( A ) before and ( B ) after ﬂuoridation . The to - pography and RMS roughness are not affected by the ﬂuoridation . process ( Figure 3 ) . The zeta - potential , however , is very likely af - fected by the ﬂuoridation . At a physiological pH , the zeta - potential of HAP is negative , 17 just like the potential of most bacteria . 18 Since bacterial adsorption takes place despite this electrostatic re - pulsion , the adhesion process cannot be governed by the electrostatic interaction . 19 Rather , long - range attractive van der Waals forces are domi - nating . The overall adhesion , however , could still be reduced by a stronger electrostatic repulsion caused by a decreased zeta - potential of the sub - strate . Previous studies showed that the applica - tion of ﬂuoride ions can decrease the zeta - potential of HAP 19 , 20 and reported an increase in the ad - sorbed amount of positively charged proteins . 21 Furthermore , it was shown that the adhesion of S . mutans to HAP was reduced by the adsorption of proteins causing an increase in surface net nega - tive charge . 22 Consequently , a reduced zeta poten - tial due to ﬂuoridation should lead to a reduced adhesion force of the bacteria , since the electro - 4 Addendum V - Fluoridation of hydroxyapatite leads to a reduced adhesion of oral bacteria 145 static repulsion between bacteria and substrate is increased . Another apparent reason for the reduction in ad - hesion force is a change in surface energy . The lit - erature values for surface energies of apatites dif - fer strongly dependent on the used methods 23 and the crystallite plane . 24 Nevertheless , since the sur - face energy is correlated with the zeta - potential , a change due to ﬂuoridation is expected and has been reported previously . 7 , 23 , 24 Consequently , the determined reduce in adhesion forces could also be an effect of a ﬂuoridation induced variation in surface energy . Conclusions AFM force spectroscopy with bacterial probes revealed that ﬂuoridation of hydroxyapatite sub - strates reduces the adhesion force of S . oralis , S . mutans and S . carnosus by a factor of two . Since S . carnosus lacks adhesins , the origin for this general trend is likely due to an unspeciﬁc , yet surface - related effect . Fluoridation changes surface en - ergy as well as zeta potential , which both could cause lower adhesion forces . In accordance with other studies , we expect the zeta potential and / or the surface energy to be the origin of the adhesion - reducing effect of ﬂuoride . These ﬁndings suggest that the decrease of bacterial adhesion is another origin of the caries - preventive effect of ﬂuoride . As a consequence , this effect could be utilized in the design of implants , potentially exceeding the oral cavity . Acknowledgement This work was supported by the German Science Foundation under grant numbers GRK 1276 and INST 256 / 305 - 1 FUGG , and by funds of the Fed - eral State of Saarland . We thank K . Hilgert for the help with handling the bacteria and M . Hannig for donating the bacteria . Notes and References ( 1 ) Dean , H . T . Pub . Health Rep . 1938 , 53 , 1443 – 1452 . ( 2 ) ( a ) Ten Cate , J . M . Acta Odontol . Scand . 1999 , 57 , 325 – 329 ; ( b ) Featherstone , J . D . B . Community Dent . Oral . Epidemiol . 1999 , 27 , 31 – 40 ; ( c ) Van Loveren , C . Caries Res . 2001 , 35 , 65 – 70 ; ( d ) Buzalaf , M . A . R . ; Pes - san , J . P . ; Honório , H . M . ; Ten Cate , J . M . Monogr . Oral Sci . 2011 , 22 , 97 – 114 . ( 3 ) Featherstone , J . D . B . ; Ten Cate , J . M . In Fluoride in Dentistry ; Ekstrand , J . , Fejer - skov , O . , Silverstone , L . , Eds . ; Munskgaard International Publishers : Copenhagen , 1988 ; pp 125 – 149 . ( 4 ) Müller , F . ; Zeitz , C . ; Mantz , H . ; Ehses , K . - H . ; Soldera , F . ; Schmauch , J . ; Hannig , M . ; Hüfner , S . ; Jacobs , K . Langmuir 2010 , 26 , 18750 – 18759 . ( 5 ) ( a ) Bibby , B . G . ; Van Kesteren , M . J . Dent . Res . 1940 , 19 , 391 – 402 ; ( b ) Hamil - ton , I . R . J . Dent . Res . 1990 , 69 , 660 – 7 [ special issue ] ; ( c ) Marquis , R . E . Can . J . Microbiol . 1995 , 41 , 955 – 964 ; ( d ) Guha - Chowdhury , N . ; Clark , A . G . ; Sissons , C . H . Oral . Microbiol . Immun . 1997 , 12 , 91 – 97 . ( 6 ) Li , Y . H . ; Bowden , G . H . J . Dent . Res . 1994 , 73 , 1615 – 1626 . ( 7 ) Qu , H . ; Wei , M . Acta Biomater . 2006 , 2 , 113 – 119 . ( 8 ) Wei , J . ; Wang , J . ; Shan , W . ; Liu , X . ; Ma , J . ; Liu , C . ; Fang , J . ; Wei , S . J . Mater . Sci . : Mater . Med . 2011 , 22 , 1607 – 1614 . ( 9 ) Eifert , R . ; Rosan , B . ; Golub , E . Infect . Im - mun . 1984 , 44 , 287 – 291 . ( 10 ) Ge , X . ; Leng , Y . ; Bao , C . ; Xu , S . L . ; Wang , R . ; Ren , F . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , Part A 2010 , 95A , 588 – 599 . ( 11 ) ( a ) Dhert , W . J . A . ; Klein , C . P . A . T . ; Jansen , J . A . ; van der Velde , E . A . ; Vriesde , R . C . ; Rozing , P . M . ; de Groot , K . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , Part A 1993 , 27 , 127 – 138 ; ( b ) Lee , E . - J . ; Kim , H . - W . ; Kim , H . - E . J . Am . Ceram . Soc . 2005 , 88 , 1309 – 1311 . 5 Publications 146 ( 12 ) Harraghy , N . ; Seiler , S . ; Jacobs , K . ; Han - nig , M . ; Menger , M . ; Herrmann , M . Int . J . Artif . Organs 2006 , 29 , 368 – 378 . ( 13 ) ( a ) Dufrene , Y . F . J . Bacteriol . 2002 , 184 , 5205 – 5213 ; ( b ) Dorobantu , L . S . ; Gray , M . R . Scanning 2010 , 32 , 74 – 96 . ( 14 ) ( a ) Razatos , A . ; Ong , Y . - L . ; Sharma , M . M . ; Georgiou , G . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 1998 , 95 , 11059 – 11064 ; ( b ) Lower , S . K . ; Tadanier , C . J . ; Hochella , M . F . Geochim . Cosmochim . Acta 2000 , 64 , 3133 – 3139 ; ( c ) Boks , N . P . ; Busscher , H . J . ; van der Mei , H . C . ; Norde , W . Langmuir 2008 , 24 , 12990 – 12994 . ( 15 ) Carpick , R . W . ; Batteas , J . ; de Boer , M . P . In Handbook of Nanotechnology ; Bhushan , B . , Ed . ; Springer Verlag : Berlin , 2007 ; pp 951 – 979 . ( 16 ) The restricting issue of bacterial probes based on tipless cantilevers is the uncertainty of the number of bacteria that are in contact with the substrate’s surface . Therefore , it is not possible to compare measurements with different cantilevers . Measurements with the same cantilever on different substrates , how - ever , are comparable as long as the integrity of the bacterial probe can be granted . ( 17 ) ( a ) Arends , J . J . Dent . 1979 , 7 , 246 – 253 ; ( b ) Lopes , M . A . ; Monteiro , F . J . ; Santos , J . D . ; Serro , A . P . ; Saramago , B . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , Part A 1999 , 45 , 370 – 375 . ( 18 ) Mozes , N . ; Leonard , A . J . ; Rouxhet , P . G . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1988 , 945 , 324 – 334 . ( 19 ) Rao , M . K . Y . ; Somasundaran , P . ; Schilling , K . M . ; Carson , B . ; Anantha - padmanabhan , K . P . Colloids Surf . A 1993 , 79 , 293 – 300 . ( 20 ) Somasundaran , P . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1968 , 27 , 659 – 666 . ( 21 ) Barroug , A . ; Rouxhet , P . G . ; Lemaitre , J . Colloids Surfaces 1989 , 37 , 339 – 355 . ( 22 ) ( a ) Reynolds , E . C . ; Wong , A . Infect . Immun . 1983 , 39 , 1285 – 1290 ; ( b ) Weerkamp , A . H . ; Uyen , H . M . ; Busscher , H . J . J . Dent . Res . 1988 , 67 , 1483 – 1487 . ( 23 ) Wu , W . J . ; Nancollas , G . H . Adv . Colloid In - terface Sci . 1999 , 79 , 229 – 279 . ( 24 ) Busscher , H . J . ; Dejong , H . ; Arends , J . Mater . Chem . Phys . 1987 , 17 , 553 – 558 . 6 Addendum V - Fluoridation of hydroxyapatite leads to a reduced adhesion of oral bacteria 147 148 Addendum VI - Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a decrease in stiﬀness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope Authors : P . M . Pereira 1 , P . Loskill 2 , P . Jung 3 , M . Bischoff 3 , M . Her - rmann 3 , M . G . Pinho 3 , and K . Jacobs 2 1 Instituto de Tecnologia Quimica e Biologica , Universidade Nova de Lisboa , 2780 - 157 Oeiras , Portugal 2 Department of Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Germany . 3 The Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene , Saarland University , 66421 Homburg / Saar , Germany . submitted to PLoS ONE ( 2012 ) . Author contributions : P . M . Pereira and P . Loskill contributed equally to this work . Experiments were con - ceived and designed by P . M . Pereira , P . Loskill , M . Herrmann , M . G . Pinho , and K . Jacobs . Experiments were performed by P . M . Pereira , P . Loskill , and P . Jung . Data were analyzed by P . M . Pereira and P . Loskill . Article was written by P . M . Pereira , P . Loskill , M . Herrmann , M . G . Pinho , and K . Jacobs . Research was directed by M . Bischoﬀ , M . Herrmann , M . G . Pinho , and K . Jacobs . Abstract - We have used atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) to probe the eﬀect of pep - tidoglycan crosslinking reduction on the elasticity of the Staphylococcus aureus cell wall . PBP4 is a non - essential transpeptidase , required for the high levels of peptido - glycan crosslinking characteristic of S . aureus . Importantly , this protein is essential for beta - lactam resistance in community acquired - methicillin resistant S . aureus ( CA - MRSA ) strains but not in hospital acquired - MRSA ( HA - MRSA ) strains . Using peak force tapping AFM we observed that the absence of PBP4 , and the concomitant re - duction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking , resulted in a reduction in stiﬀness of the S . aureus cell wall . Importantly , the reduction in cell wall stiﬀness in the absence of PBP4 was observed both in CA - and HA - MRSA strains indicating that high levels of PG crosslinking modulate the overall structure and mechanical properties of the S . aureus cell envelope in both types of clinically relevant strains . 149 1 Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a decrease in stiffness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope Pedro M . Pereira 1 , Peter Loskill 2 , Philipp Jung 3 , Markus Bischoff 3 , Mathias Herrmann 3 , Mariana G . Pinho 1 , * and Karin Jacobs 2 , * 1 Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica , Universidade Nova de Lisboa , 2780 - 157 Oeiras , Portugal 2 Experimental Physics , Saarland University , 66041 Saarbrücken , Germany 3 Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene , Saarland University , 66421 Homburg / Saar , Germany * To whom correspondence should be addressed : mgpinho @ itqb . unl . pt and k . jacobs @ physik . uni - saarland . de We have used atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) to probe the effect of peptidoglycan crosslinking reduction on the elasticity of the Staphylococcus aureus cell wall . PBP4 is a non - essential transpeptidase , required for the high levels of peptidoglycan crosslinking characteristic of S . aureus . Importantly , this protein is essential for beta - lactam resistance in community acquired - methicillin resistant S . aureus ( CA - MRSA ) strains but not in hospital acquired - MRSA ( HA - MRSA ) strains . Using peak force tapping AFM we observed that the absence of PBP4 , and the concomitant reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking , resulted in a reduction in stiffness of the S . aureus cell wall . Importantly , the reduction in cell wall stiffness in the absence of PBP4 was observed both in CA - and HA - MRSA strains indicating that high levels of PG crosslinking modulate the overall structure and mechanical properties of the S . aureus cell envelope in both types of clinically relevant strains . Introduction The cell wall ( CW ) is critical for cell survival in most bacteria ; it functions as a protection against mechanical and osmotic lysis in addition to maintaining cell shape [ 1 ] . Furthermore , the CW controls the tactile response of bacteria , influencing a wide range of behaviours such as cell adhesion , environmental sensing or host defence evasion [ 2 , 3 , 4 ] . The major component of the CW is peptidoglycan ( PG ) , a complex polymer composed of long glycan chains of alternating ß - 1 , 4 - linked N - acetylglucosamine ( NAG ) and N - acetylmuramic acid ( NAM ) subunits , that are cross - linked via peptide bridges to form a strong but flexible structure [ 5 ] . The last stages of PG biosynthesis are catalysed by a group of proteins called penicillin - binding proteins ( PBPs ) , which have both transglycosylase and transpeptidase activities , required for the elongation of the glycan chains and the formation of peptide bonds , respectively [ 6 ] . As the name suggests , PBPs are the target of beta - lactam antibiotics , molecules that block the transpeptidase active site . Bacterial pathogens have evolved different mechanisms to resist the action of beta - lactams , mainly by destroying the antibiotic molecule , through the action of beta - lactamases , or by modifying its target , i . e . , the PBPs . Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram - positive clinical pathogen which has developed a remarkable ability to resist the action of virtually all beta - lactam antibiotics . Methicillin - Resistant S . aureus ( MRSA ) strains are currently one of the major causes of antibiotic - resistant hospital acquired infections , and can also cause infections among healthy individuals in the community . Therefore the study of the S . aureus cell envelope is of particular importance for the development of new strategies for antimicrobial chemotherapy [ 7 ] . The CW of S . aureus contains not only a thick layer of PG ( around 20 nm ) , but also other polymers like the anionic wall teichoic acids ( WTA ) and lipoteichoic acids ( LTA ) , secondary modifications such as O - acetylation and several proteins attached to the PG , resulting in a structure with a total width of approximately 35 nm [ 3 , 8 , 9 ] . Studies over the last decades have focused on the biochemistry of PG biosynthesis and most steps in this pathway are now well characterized [ 5 , 10 ] . However , much less is known about the 3D architecture and mechanical properties of this complex polymer . In recent years , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has provided valuable information on the structure and mechanical properties of the CW in numerous biological samples [ 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] . AFM can be used not only to obtain topological information on the cell surface and the organization of the PG [ 13 , 15 , 16 , 17 ] , but it is also a powerful tool for quantitative studies of physical properties of the surface , such as the elasticity of the bacterial CW Publications 150 2 [ 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 ] . Classical AFM modes , such as tapping or force volume mode are limited in terms of either spatial resolution , imaging time or quantitative analysis . The recently introduced PeakForce tapping mode with its quantitative nanomechanical property mapping ( PeakForce QNM ) , however , allows for simultaneous mapping of topography and multiple mechanical properties , featuring the typical resolution and scan speed of the tapping mode [ 25 , 26 , 27 ] . We are interested in studying the mechanical properties of the PG of live S . aureus cells and in identifying key enzymes essential for the final structure of this polymer . One of the characteristics of the staphylococcal PG is its very high degree of crosslinking , as up to 90 % of its muropeptides are linked to adjacent glycan chains in the PG mesh . This crosslinking can be classified as ( i ) primary crosslinking , responsible for the first level of cross - links between different glycan chains , which is necessary in most bacteria to preserve cell integrity , and includes muropeptide species with a polymerization degree lower or equal than pentamers ( see Figure 1B , peaks I to V in the HPLC chromatogram ) [ 5 ] ; ( ii ) secondary crosslinking , which is the result of same transpeptidase chemical reaction , but leads to higher levels of linkage of the PG layers , and includes muropeptide species with a polymerization degree higher than pentamers ( Figure 1B , arrow ) [ 5 ] . This secondary crosslinking is mainly the result of the action of S . aureus PBP4 , a non - essential transpeptidase [ 28 , 29 ] . We therefore hypothesized that PBP4 could have a major role in defining the mechanical properties of S . aureus PG . Interestingly , although it is not essential for normal cell growth , PBP4 has been associated with resistance mechanisms against two major classes of antibiotics : glycopeptides , considered the last resort antibiotic to treat MRSA infections , where its absence was associated with low level resistance in vancomycin intermediate ( VISA ) S . aureus strains [ 30 ] ; and beta - lactams , where PBP4 was shown to be required for expression of high level beta(cid:0)lactam resistance in community - acquired MRSA ( CA - MRSA ) strains but not in hospital - acquired ( HA - MRSA ) strains [ 31 ] . In this work we employed AFM PeakForce QNM with viable , genetically defined prototypes of HA - and CA - MRSA strains and their pbp4 mutants to show that the absence of PBP4 and the concomitant decrease in PG crosslinking has an effect on the overall structure and mechanical properties of the S . aureus CW . This effect was observed both in HA - and CA - MRSA , suggesting that the requirement of PBP4 for beta - lactam resistance - as solely observed in CA - MRSA - is not related to changes in the mechanical properties of the PG that would occur exclusively in these strains . Results and Discussion PBP4 localization and function is conserved in both CA - MRSA and HA - MRSA strains The aim of this work is to study the change of the mechanical properties of the PG of live S . aureus cells , namely its elasticity , upon reduction of secondary PG crosslinking that results from pbp4 deletion . Given that deletion of pbp4 results in loss of beta - lactam resistance in CA - MRSA strains , such as MW2 , but not in HA - MRSA backgrounds , such as COL , we wanted to test if lack of PBP4 had more influence on the structure of the cell surface of MW2 than of COL . One possible source of variation in studies of PG elasticity may result from obtaining measurements on newly synthesized cell wall as well as on mature cell wall , which may have different levels of crosslinking . In the rod - shaped gram - positive model organism B . subtilis , cell wall synthesis occurs both at the septum , for cell division , and at the lateral wall , for cell elongation [ 5 , 6 ] . Although , the septum of live cells is not accessible to the AFM cantilever before separation of daughter cells , , in B . subtilis , measurements made at the lateral wall ( side of the cylindrical cell ) would include the mature PG as well as helical bands of newly synthesized PG [ 32 ] . The use of S . aureus as a model organism avoids this source of variation in PG composition , as round S . aureus cells do not elongate and therefore only synthesize cell wall at the division septum . In accordance , we determined the localization of the PG synthetic enzyme PBP4 fused to yellow fluorescent protein ( YFP ) , expressed from its native chromosomal locus , in both MW2 and COL strains , and showed that it is localized specifically at the division septum ( Figure 1A ) , similarly to what was previously shown for other S . aureus strains [ 33 ] . It follows that elasticity measurements in S . aureus cell surface reflect the structure of the mature CW , away from the sites of PBPs localization , i . e . , the sites of synthesis of new PG . Importantly , PBP4 localization was identical in CA - MRSA and HA - MRSA backgrounds , despite its different role in beta - lactam resistance . Addendum VI - Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a decrease in stiﬀness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope 151 3 Figure 1 : Localization and function of PBP4 are conserved in CA - MRSA and HA - MRSA strains . A ) PBP4 is recruited to the division septa of COL and MW2 strains . Microscopy images of BCBPM161 ( MW2 ) and BCBPM162 ( COL ) strains , expressing a C - terminal YFP fusion to PBP4 from its native chromosomal locus and under the control of its native promoter , show that PBP4 is recruited to the division septa in these MRSA strains . The protein can be seen as a line corresponding to a septum perpendicular to the plane of the slide , or as a ring when the septum is forming at different angles relatively to the plane of the slide ( Scale bar : 1 µm ) . B ) Chromatogram of HPLC of the muropeptide composition of PG in MW2 , MW2 Δ pbp4 , COL and COL Δ pbp4 , showing that deletion of pbp4 reduces the secondary crosslinking of the PG . Arrow points to highly cross - linked muropeptide species present in MW2 and COL strains but reduced in pbp4 mutants ( MW2 Δ pbp4 and COL Δ pbp4 respectively ) ; I – V muropeptide species from monomers to pentamers . After cell separation , the mature septum of S . aureus becomes one hemisphere of each daughter cell [ 34 ] . Therefore , in this organism , the entire cell surface should correspond to mature PG ( although of different ages ) with the possible exception of a single band around the division site corresponding to the outer edge of the septum , which can be identified on the AFM height images of dividing S . aureus cells [ 20 , 35 ] and has been shown to have different mechanical properties , such as adhesion [ 35 ] . Thus , our experimental set up enables us to map the elasticity of mature CW , in order to assess the effect of the reduction of secondary crosslinking on the mechanical properties of the S . aureus CW . In order to correlate the AFM elasticity measurements with the CW structure of the S . aureus CA - MRSA and HA - MRSA strains , we purified the PG from parental strains COL and MW2 and their respective pbp4 deletion mutants and analysed its composition by HPLC . We confirmed that , as previously shown [ 31 ] , pbp4 gene deletion results in significant decrease of the highly cross - linked muropeptide species that typically elute as a broad peak at the end of the HPLC chromatogram ( Fig . 1B , arrow ) . We therefore used these isogenic pairs of bacterial strains differing in the PG crosslinking degree for AFM analysis . Absence of secondary crosslinking contributes to a reduction in CW stiffness Although the S . aureus CW is a complex heterogeneous structure composed of several polymers and proteins [ 3 , 9 ] , it is its main component , the PG , that is thought to provide rigidity to bacterial cells , crucial for the cell to withstand the high internal osmotic pressure ( 20 to 30 bar ) [ 5 , 8 ] . As stated above , PBP4 is responsible for the secondary crosslinking of the S . aureus PG [ 5 ] . Thus we used PBP4 mutants to test if highly cross - linked PG was in fact required for increased mechanical resistance of live S . aureus cells . For this purpose , we used AFM in PeakForce QNM , a method that detects material variations ( such as elasticity or adhesion ) at high resolution across a topographic image [ 25 , 26 , 27 ] . We used experimental conditions in which the cantilever indentation was in the range of 5 - 10 nm during the elasticity measurements , and therefore less than the proposed thickness of the cell wall , which is in the range of 35 nm [ 8 ] . Using this methodology , we mapped the elasticity profiles of the cell envelope of two MRSA strains , the HA - MRSA COL and the CA - MRSA MW2 , as well as of the respective pbp4 mutants COL Δ pbp4 and MW2 Δ pbp4 . Live cells of these strains were immobilized in porous membranes ( Figure 2 , Panels A and C ) , and Young’s modulus values ( which reflect cell surface elasticity , and are lower for material with greater elasticity ) were then measured in individual cells and mapped onto the height image . Only the top of each bacterium was analysed to avoid additional influence of a change in topography . The first conclusion that can be obtained from our data is that the Young modulus of the cell envelope is homogeneous throughout the analysed cell surface in all strains , a finding expected given our experimental setting designed to analyse solely the mature CW and not the septal CW undergoing division . Publications 152 4 Figure 2 : Young’s modulus is reduced upon a reduction of secondary crosslinking . A ) Height images overlaid with the distribution map of the Young’s modulus values of a single COL ( Top ) and COL Δ pbp4 ( Bottom ) cell trapped in a membrane pore . The increase in elasticity of the CW is homogeneous throughout the cell surface of the COL Δ pbp4 mutant in comparison with the wt COL strain . B ) Histogram with all the single values from each force curve obtained from all bacteria analysed . This shows that the COL Δ pbp4 mutant is more elastic than the COL wt strain . Approximately 50000 single elasticity values were obtained from measurements on 11 - 13 single cells per strain . C ) Height images with the distribution map of the Young’s modulus values of a single MW2 ( Top ) and MW2 Δ pbp4 ( Bottom ) bacterium trapped in a membrane pore . The increase in elasticity of the MW2 Δ pbp4 mutant CW is homogeneous throughout the cell surface . D ) Histogram with all the single values from each force curve obtained from all bacteria analysed . The MW2 wt strain is less elastic than the MW2 Δ pbp4 strain . Approximately 70000 to 130000 single elasticity values were obtained from measurements on 11 - 24 single bacteria per strain . E ) All single values for each strain were fitted using a Gaussian curve and averages , with the respective errors , were calculated for each group of values , showing that the CW of mutants lacking PBP4 is more elastic than the CW of the parental strains . To avoid artifacts due to topography , only the topmost part ( about 300 nm x 300 nm ) of each bacterium was analysed . The second and main conclusion of the AFM measurements relates to the significant reduction in the Young modulus of the CW in both CA - MRSA and HA - MRSA strains lacking PBP4 , compared to the parental strains ( MW2 4 . 49±2 . 01 MPa Vs MW2 Δ pbp4 1 . 30±0 . 54 MPa ; and COL 5 . 93±2 . 47 MPa Vs COL Δ pbp4 2 . 98±0 . 92 MPa ; Figure 2 ) . As the Young modulus is lower for material with greater elasticity , this data suggests that a decrease in secondary crosslinking results in increased CW elasticity ( or reduced CW stiffness ) both in COL and in MW2 backgrounds . This is consistent with the idea that a reduction of the number of bonds linking adjacent glycan chains results in a more pliable CW / PG structure . Accordingly , when Francius and coworkers used AFM to study the effect of lysostaphin in live S . aureus cells , they observed a 9 . 3 fold decrease in CW stiffness of lysostaphin treated cells [ 20 ] . Lysostaphin cleaves all pentaglycine bridges that crosslink S . aureus PG , effectively destroying both primary and secondary PG crosslinking [ 20 ] . As seen in figure 1B , the pbp4 deletion mutants show a reduction in the levels of secondary crosslinking , but maintain PG primary crosslinking , due to the action of the other PBPs present in the cell , which justifies the fact that we observed a smaller decrease in CW stiffness ( 3 . 5 fold and 2 . 5 fold for MW2 and COL , respectively ) compared to the action of lysostaphin . However , we cannot formally exclude the possibility that the alterations in CW stiffness are due to additional changes in the CW surface ( in addition to secondary crosslinking reduction ) that might result from the absence of PBP4 . Interestingly , although PG is not a rigid structure and it can withstand severe changes without compromising the overall cell envelope integrity [ 8 , 36 ] , our data also suggest that there is a lack of a compensatory mechanism able to maintain the overall stiffness of the CW in the absence of PBP4 . Concluding remarks We have used AFM , namely the recently introduced peak force tapping mode , to image live S . aureus cells , showing that alterations in the secondary PG crosslinking , caused by a lack of the non - essential transpeptidase PBP4 , trigger changes in the mechanical properties of the S . aureus CW , enhancing the overall elasticity of staphylococcal cells both in HA and CA - MRSA strains . Interestingly , we observed a stronger Addendum VI - Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a decrease in stiﬀness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope 153 5 effect of the reduction of the secondary crosslinking on the mechanical properties of the CW in CA - MRSA strains ( which require PBP4 for beta - lactam resistance ) than in HA - MRSA strains . Thus , it might be interesting to investigate the role that these properties might play in the context of beta - lactam resistance . Material and Methods Staphylococcus aureus strains and growth conditions S . aureus strains used in this study are listed in table 1 . S . aureus strains were grown on tryptic soy agar ( TSA , Difco ) at 37ºC or in tryptic soy broth ( TSB , Difco ) at 37ºC with aeration . The medium was supplemented , when necessary , with 50 µ g / ml of Kanamycin and 50 µ g / ml of Neomycin ( Sigma ) . Table 1 : S . aureus strains used in this study . S . aureus s train Relevant characteristics Origin COL HA - MRSA strain , wild - type [ 37 ] COL Δ pbp4 HA - MRSA strain ; pbp4 null mutant [ 31 ] MW2 CA - MRSA strain , wild - type [ 38 ] MW2 Δ pbp4 CA - MRSA strain ; pbp4 null mutant [ 31 ] RNPBP4YFP RN4220 expressing PBP4 - YFP C - terminal fusion ; Kan r [ 33 ] BCBPM161 MW2 expressing PBP4 - YFP C - terminal fusion ; Kan r This study BCBPM162 COL expressing PBP4 - YFP C - terminal fusion Kan r This study Construction of S . aureus strains For localization studies of PBP4 in HA - MRSA and CA - MRSA backgrounds , the gene encoding a PBP4 - YFP fusion was transduced , using phage 80 α , from strain RNPBP4YFP [ 33 ] into MW2 and COL strains , as previously described [ 39 ] . Fluorescence Microscopy S . aureus strains were grown to mid - exponential phase , placed on a thin layer of 1 % agarose in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ; 137 mM NaCl , 10 mM phosphate , 2 . 7 mM KCl , pH 7 . 4 ) and analysed by fluorescence microscopy . Images were acquired using a Zeiss Axio Observer . Z1 microscope equipped with a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 camera ( Roper Scientific ) and using Metamorph software ( Meta Imaging series 7 . 5 ) . Peptidoglycan purification and HPLC Analysis Peptidoglycan was prepared from exponentially growing cultures of COL and MW2 parental strains and corresponding pbp4 deletion mutants , as previously described [ 40 ] . Muropeptides were obtained from purified PG digested with the muramidase mutanolysin M1 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , an N - acetylmuramidase that cuts glycan strands between the N - acetylmuramic and N - acetylglucosamine residues of both O - acetylated and unmodified peptidoglycan , as previously described [ 40 ] . The resulting muropeptides were reduced with sodium borohydride ( Sigma ) and analysed by reversed - phase HPLC using a HypersilODS column ( Thermo Electron ) . The eluted muropeptides were detected and quantified by determination of their UV absorption at 206 nm , using the Shimadzu LC Solution software . AFM Elasticity mapping Figure 3 : A single value of elasticity is obtained from each force curve acquired . By eliminating the time variable , one can plot the force versus the tip - sample distance , from which much information can be obtained . The maximum adhesion force between the tip and the sample can be extracted as the step height between the base line and the pull - off point . The peak force is defined as the vertical distance between the base line and the turn - away point . By analysing the retraction of each single force / distance curve , the Young’s modulus can be determined using a DMT fit [ 42 , 43 ] ( adapted from Pittenger , B et al . ; 2010 [ 44 ] ) . For AFM experiments , S . aureus strains were grown in 12 ml of TSB at 37ºC with aeration until mid - exponential phase ( optical density OD 600nm = 0 . 6 ) . Cells were harvested and concentrated in one third of the initial volume in fresh media . After concentration , the cell suspension was gently filtered , so that cells were immobilized by mechanical trapping into porous polycarbonate membranes with a pore size of 1 . 2 µ m ( Millipore ) [ 41 ] . The filter was gently rinsed with PBS , the excess of cells was removed by gently cleaning Publications 154 6 with powder free tissue , the filter was inverted and attached to a glass slide with double - face adhesive tape . A silicone cover was used to create a hydrophobic area around the filter , which was then filled with 1 : 10 TSB / PBS solution . AFM measurements were performed in the TSB / PBS solution at room temperature using a Bioscope Catalyst ( Bruker , Santa Barbara , USA ) in Peak Force QNM mode . The bacterial samples were freshly prepared for each series of measurements . Immediately prior to each experiment , the AFM probes ( Scanasyst - Fluid + , Bruker , Santa Barbara , USA ) were calibrated . Single measurements were carried out with a scan rate of 0 . 5 Hz , amplitude of 100 - 200 nm , a gain of 0 . 1 , and a peak force threshold of 1 nN . Young’s modulus mapping was obtained by a Derjaguin - Muller - Toporov ( DMT ) fit [ 42 , 43 ] of the retract part of each single force / distance curve ( Figure 3 ) described by , where is the determined force relative to the adhesion force , ν is the Poisson’s ratio ( for bacteria usually 0 . 5 [ 18 , 19 ] ) , R is the tip - radius ( ≈ 10 nm ) , is the deformation of the sample , and E is the Young’s modulus . To avoid artifacts due to topography , only the topmost part ( about 300 nm x 300 nm ) of each bacterium was taken into account . A total of 50000 - 150000 single elasticity values were obtained from measurements on 10 - 25 single bacteria per strain . Multiple experiments using different bacterial cultures and AFM probes were performed for each strain . Acknowledgments This work was supported by grants PEst - OE / EQB / LA0004 / 2011 ( from Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia ) and PTDC / BIA - MIC / 099151 / 2008 ( from FCT , to M . G . P . ) and fellowships SFRH / BD / 41119 / 2007 ( to P . M . P . ) , EMBO ASTF 427 - 2011 ( to P . M . P ) and by the German Science Foundation under grant numbers GRK 1276 and INST 256 / 305 - 1 FUGG . We thank Ambrose Cheung for the generous gift of the pbp4 mutant strains and Alexandre Berquand for the help with the Peak Force QNM mode . 1 . Cabeen MT , Jacobs-­‐Wagner C ( 2005 ) Bacterial cell shape . Nat Rev Microbiol 3 : 601-­‐610 . 2 . Beveridge TJ , Makin SA , Kadurugamuwa JL , Li Z ( 1997 ) Interactions between biofilms and the environment . FEMS Microbiol Rev 20 : 291-­‐303 . 3 . Foster TJ , McDevitt D ( 1994 ) Surface-­‐ associated proteins of Staphylococcus aureus : their possible roles in virulence . FEMS Microbiol Lett 118 : 199-­‐205 . 4 . Chavakis T , Wiechmann K , Preissner KT , Herrmann M ( 2005 ) Staphylococcus aureus interactions with the endothelium : the role of bacterial " secretable expanded repertoire adhesive molecules " ( SERAM ) in disturbing host defense systems . Thromb Haemost 94 : 278-­‐285 . 5 . Vollmer W , Blanot D , De Pedro MA ( 2008 ) Peptidoglycan structure and architecture . FEMS microbiology reviews 32 : 149-­‐167 . 6 . Scheffers DJ , Pinho MG ( 2005 ) Bacterial Cell Wall Synthesis : New Insights from Localization Studies . Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 69 : 585-­‐607 . 7 . Chambers HF , DeLeo FR ( 2009 ) Waves of resistance : Staphylococcus aureus in the antibiotic era . Nature Reviews Microbiology 7 : 629-­‐641 . 8 . Matias VRF , Beveridge TJ ( 2006 ) Native Cell Wall Organization Shown by Cryo-­‐ Electron Microscopy Confirms the Existence of a Periplasmic Space in Staphylococcus aureus . Journal of Bacteriology 188 : 1011-­‐1021 . 9 . Weidenmaier C , Peschel A ( 2008 ) Teichoic acids and related cell-­‐wall glycopolymers in Gram-­‐positive physiology and host interactions . Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 : 276-­‐287 . 10 . Typas A , Banzhaf M , Gross CA , Vollmer W ( 2011 ) From the regulation of peptidoglycan synthesis to bacterial growth and morphology . Nature Reviews Microbiology 10 : 123-­‐136 . 11 . Andre G , Deghorain M , Bron P , van Swam I , Kleerebezem M , et al . ( 2011 ) Fluorescence and atomic force microscopy imaging of wall teichoic acids Addendum VI - Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a decrease in stiﬀness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope 155 7 in Lactobacillus plantarum . ACS chemical biology 6 : 366 – 376 . 12 . Scheuring S , Dufrêne YF ( 2010 ) Atomic force microscopy : probing the spatial organization , interactions and elasticity of microbial cell envelopes at molecular resolution . Molecular Microbiology 75 : 1327-­‐1336 . 13 . Guillaume A , Kulakauskas S , Chapot-­‐Chartier M-­‐P , Navet B , Deghorain M , et al . ( 2010 ) Imaging the nanoscale organization of peptidoglycan in living Lactococcus lactis cells . Nature Communications 1 : 1-­‐8 . 14 . Alsteens D , Dupres V , Mc Evoy K , Wildling L , Gruber HJ , et al . ( 2008 ) Structure , cell wall elasticity and polysaccharide properties of living yeast cells , as probed by AFM . Nanotechnology 19 : 384005-­‐ 384014 . 15 . Wheeler R , Mesnage S , Boneca IG , Hobbs JK , Foster SJ ( 2011 ) Super-­‐resolution microscopy reveals cell wall dynamics and peptidoglycan architecture in ovococcal bacteria . Molecular Microbiology 82 : 1096-­‐1109 . 16 . Hayhurst EJ , Kailas L , Hobbs JK , Foster SJ ( 2008 ) Cell wall peptidoglycan architecture in Bacillus subtilis . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 : 14603-­‐14608 . 17 . Turner RD , Ratcliffe EC , Wheeler R , Golestanian R , Hobbs JK , et al . ( 2010 ) Peptidoglycan architecture can specify division planes in Staphylococcus aureus . Nature Communications 1 : 1-­‐9 . 18 . Touhami A , Nysten B , Dufrêne Y ( 2003 ) Nanoscale Mapping of the Elasticity of Microbial Cells by Atomic Force Microscopy . Langmuir 19 : 4539-­‐4543 . 19 . Gaboriauda F , Parchab BS , Geeb ML , Holdenc JA , Strugnellc RA ( 2008 ) Spatially resolved force spectroscopy of bacterial surfaces using force-­‐volume imaging . Colloids and Surfaces B : Biointerfaces 62 : 206 – 213 . 20 . Francius G , Domenech O , Mingeot-­‐Leclercq MP , Dufrene YF ( 2008 ) Direct Observation of Staphylococcus aureus Cell Wall Digestion by Lysostaphin . Journal of Bacteriology 190 : 7904-­‐7909 . 21 . Dufrene YF ( 2004 ) Using nanotechniques to explore microbial surfaces . Nat Rev Microbiol 2 : 451-­‐460 . 22 . Cerf A , Cau JC , Vieu C , Dague E ( 2009 ) Nanomechanical properties of dead or alive single-­‐patterned bacteria . Langmuir 25 : 5731-­‐5736 . 23 . Gaboriaud F , Dufrene YF ( 2007 ) Atomic force microscopy of microbial cells : Application to nanomechanical properties , surface forces and molecular recognition forces . Colloids and Surfaces B : Biointerfaces 54 : 10-­‐19 . 24 . Yao X , Jericho M , Pink D , Beveridge T ( 1999 ) Thickness and elasticity of gram-­‐negative murein sacculi measured by atomic force microscopy . Journal of Bacteriology 181 : 6865 – 6875 . 25 . Adamcik J , Berquand A , Mezzenga R ( 2011 ) Single-­‐step direct measurement of amyloid fibrils stiffness by peak force quantitative nanomechanical atomic force microscopy . Applied Physics Letters 98 : 193701-­‐193704 . 26 . Berquand A ( 2011 ) Quantitative Imaging of Living Biological Samples by PeakForce QNM Atomic Force Microscopy . . http : / / wwwbruker-­‐axscom : Bruker Nano Surfaces Divison . pp . 1 – 10 . 27 . Berquanda A , Roduita C , Kasasa S , Holloschia A , Poncea L , et al . ( 2010 ) Atomic Force Microscopy Imaging of Living Cells . Microscopy Today 18 8-­‐14 28 . Wyke AW , Ward JB , Hayes MV , Curtis NA ( 1981 ) A role in vivo for penicillin-­‐binding protein-­‐4 of Staphylococcus aureus . Eur J Biochem 119 : 389-­‐393 . 29 . Kozarich JW , Strominger JL ( 1978 ) A membrane enzyme from Staphylococcus aureus which catalyzes transpeptidase , carboxypeptidase , and penicillinase activities . J Biol Chem 253 : 1272-­‐1278 . 30 . Sieradzki K , Pinho MG , Tomasz A ( 1999 ) Inactivated pbp4 in highly glycopeptide-­‐ resistant laboratory mutants of Staphylococcus aureus . J Biol Chem 274 : 18942-­‐18946 . 31 . Memmi G , Filipe SR , Pinho MG , Fu Z , Cheung A ( 2008 ) Staphylococcus aureus PBP4 is Essential for β-­‐lactam Resistance in Community-­‐Acquired Methicillin Resistant Strains . Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 52 : 3955-­‐3966 . 32 . Daniel RA , Errington J ( 2003 ) Control of cell morphogenesis in bacteria : two distinct Publications 156 8 ways to make a rod-­‐shaped cell . Cell 113 : 767-­‐776 . 33 . Atilano ML , Pereira PM , Yates J , Reed P , Veiga H , et al . ( 2010 ) Teichoic acids are temporal and spatial regulators of peptidoglycan cross-­‐linking in Staphylococcus aureus . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America : 2-­‐7 . 34 . Pinho MG , Errington J ( 2003 ) Dispersed mode of Staphylococcus aureus cell wall synthesis in the absence of the division machinery . Molecular Microbiology 50 : 871-­‐881 . 35 . Touhami A , Jericho MH , Beveridge TJ ( 2004 ) Atomic force microscopy of cell growth and division in Staphylococcus aureus . J Bacteriol 186 : 3286-­‐3295 . 36 . Ou LT , Marquis RE ( 1970 ) Electromechanical interactions in cell walls of gram-­‐positive cocci . J Bacteriol 101 : 92-­‐101 . 37 . Gill SR , Fouts DE , Archer GL , Mongodin EF , Deboy RT , et al . ( 2005 ) Insights on evolution of virulence and resistance from the complete genome analysis of an early methicillin-­‐resistant Staphylococcus aureus strain and a biofilm-­‐producing methicillin-­‐resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis strain . J Bacteriol 187 : 2426-­‐ 2438 . 38 . Baba T , Takeuchi F , Kuroda M , Yuzawa H , Aoki K , et al . ( 2002 ) Genome and virulence determinants of high virulence community-­‐acquired MRSA . Lancet 359 : 1819-­‐1827 . 39 . Veiga H , Pinho MG ( 2009 ) Inactivation of the SauI type I restriction-­‐modification system is not sufficient to generate Staphylococcus aureus strains capable of efficiently accepting foreign DNA . Appl Environ Microbiol 75 : 3034-­‐3038 . 40 . Filipe SR , Tomasz A , Ligoxygakis P ( 2005 ) Requirements of peptidoglycan structure that allow detection by the Drosophila Toll pathway . EMBO reports 6 : 327-­‐333 . 41 . Kasas S , Ikai A ( 1995 ) A method for anchoring round shaped cells for atomic force microscope imaging . Biophysical journal 68 : 1678-­‐1680 . 42 . Derjaguin BV , Muller VM , Toporov YP ( 1975 ) Effect of contact deformations on the adhesion of particles . Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 53 : 314-­‐326 . 43 . Maugis D , editor ( 2000 ) Contact , Adhesion and Rupture of Elastic Solids Springer-­‐ Verlag . 44 . Pittenger B , Erina N , Su C ( 2010 ) Quantitative Mechanical Property Mapping at the Nanoscale with PeakForce QNM . In : Bruker , editor : Bruker Corporation . Addendum VI - Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a decrease in stiﬀness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope 157 9 Publications 158 Publications and Conference Contributions Publications • P . Loskill , H . Hähl , N . Thewes , C . T . Kreis , M . Bischoff , M . Her - rmann , and K . Jacobs . ‘Inﬂuence of the Subsurface Composition of a Mate - rial on the Adhesion of Staphylococci’ , Langmuir 28 , 7242 – 7248 ( 2012 ) . • H . Hähl , F . Evers , S . Grandthyll , M . Paulus , C . Sternemann , P . Loskill , M . Lessel , A . K . Hüsecken , T . Brenner , M . Tolan , and K . Jacobs . ‘Subsurface inﬂuence on the structure of protein adsorbates revealed by in situ X - ray reﬂectivity’ , Langmuir 28 , 7747 – 7756 ( 2012 ) . • P . Loskill , H . Hähl , T . Faidt , S . Grandthyll , F . Müller , and K . Jacobs . ‘Is adhesion superﬁcial ? Silicon wafers as a model system to study van der Waals interactions’ , Adv . Colloid Interface Sci . 179 – 182 , 107 – 113 ( 2012 ) . • P . Loskill , J . Puthoff , M . Wilkinson , K . Mecke , K . Jacobs , and K . Autumn . ‘Macroscale adhesion of gecko setae reﬂects nanoscale diﬀerences in subsurface composition’ , J . R . Soc . Interface submitted ( 2012 ) . • P . Loskill , C . Zeitz , M . Bischoff , M . Herrmann , and K . Jacobs . ‘Fluoridation of hydroxyapatite leads to a reduced adhesion of oral bacteria’ , Langmuir submitted ( 2012 ) . • P . Pereira , P . Loskill , P . Jung , M . Bischoff , M . Herrmann , M . Pinho , and K . Jacobs . ‘Reduction of the peptidoglycan crosslinking causes a decrease in stiﬀness of the Staphylococcus aureus cell envelope’ , PLoS one submitted ( 2012 ) . 159 Scientiﬁc Talks • AFM - Force Spectroscopy : A new approach for the investigation of bioﬁlms Feldberg Winter School , Feldberg ( D ) 12 / 2008 • AFM - Force Spectroscopy : A new approach for the investigation of bioﬁlms PhD Students’ Day , Saarbrücken ( D ) 02 / 2009 • AFM as a chance for studying in situ protein adsorption and bacterial adhesion DPG Spring - Meeting , Dresden ( D ) 03 / 2009 • Inﬂuence of substrate composition on the adhesion of bacteria—an AFM study Feldberg Winter School , Feldberg ( D ) 12 / 2009 • Macroscale adhesion of the gecko is inﬂuenced by diﬀerences in microscopic van der Waals potentials PhD Students’ Day , Saarbrücken ( D ) 02 / 2011 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition Circle Meeting on Biological Physics , Saarbrücken ( D ) 04 / 2011 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition Seminar of the Graduate College 1276 , Saarbrücken ( D ) 09 / 2011 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition Seminar Talk at the TU Kaiserslautern , Kaiserslautern ( D ) 11 / 2011 • Inﬂuence of van der Waals forces on the adhesion of bacteria and geckos Nanobubbles and Micropancakes , Les Houches ( F ) 02 / 2012 • Adhesion of gecko setae reﬂects nanoscale diﬀerences in subsurface energy DPG Spring - Meeting , Berlin ( D ) 03 / 2012 • Is adhesion superﬁcial ? Silicon wafers as model system to study van der Waals interactions Seminar Talk at the TU Chemnitz , Chemnitz ( D ) 04 / 2012 • Are thin polymer ﬁlms , proteins , bacteria , and geckos superﬁcial ? PhD Students’ Day , Saarbrücken ( D ) 06 / 2012 160 Poster • Protein adsorption and bacterial adhesion explored by AFM : Interplay of local and global properties 3rd International Workshop on Approaches to Single - Cell Analysis , Zürich ( CH ) 09 / 2008 . • Protein adsorption and bacterial adhesion explored by AFM : Interplay of local and global properties Atomic Force Microscopy of Biological Interfaces , Nancy ( F ) 10 / 2008 • The inﬂuence of Van - der - Waals - forces on bacterial adhesion Seminar of the Graduate College 1276 , Saarbrücken ( D ) 10 / 2009 • Inﬂuence of subsurface composition on the adhesion of bacteria and the adsorp - tion of proteins DPG Spring - Meeting , Regensburg ( D ) 03 / 2010 • AFM force spectroscopy with gecko probes and bacterial probes Topical workshop - Bioinspired adhesion : from geckos to new products ? , Saar - brücken ( D ) 07 / 2010 • Inﬂuence of subsurface composition on the adhesion of bacteria and the adsorp - tion of proteins Bioﬁlms4 , Winchester ( GB ) 09 / 2010 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition Gordon Research Seminar : Science of Adhesion , Lewiston ( USA ) 07 / 2011 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition Gordon Research Conference : Science of Adhesion , Lewiston ( USA ) 07 / 2011 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition BioMicroWorld2011 , Torremolinos ( E ) 09 / 2011 • Inﬂuence of subsurface properties on proteins , bacteria and geckos : Is adhesion superﬁcial ? DPG Spring - Meeting , Berlin ( D ) 03 / 2012 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition Gordon Research Seminar : Biointerfaces , Les Diablerets ( CH ) 05 / 2012 161 • Inﬂuence of long - range van der Waals forces on biological adhesion : The impor - tance of the subsurface composition Gordon Research Conference : Biointerfaces , Les Diablerets ( CH ) 05 / 2012 • Inﬂuence of subsurface properties on proteins , bacteria and geckos : Is adhesion superﬁcial ? Physics of the Extracellular Matrix , Bad Honnef ( D ) 06 / 2012 Selected further Conference ( Poster ) Contributions • AFM as a chance for studying protein adsorption and bacterial adhesion DPG Spring - Meeting , Dresden ( D ) 03 / 2009 • Bacterial probes with deﬁned contact area for force spectroscopy DPG Spring - Meeting , Regensburg ( D ) 03 / 2010 • Inﬂuence of subsurface composition on the adhesion of bacteria and the adsorp - tion of proteins AFM BioMed Rovinj ( HR ) 05 / 2010 • Inﬂuence of subsurface composition on the adhesion of bacteria and the adsorp - tion of proteins Gordon Research Conference : Biointerfaces , Les Diablerets ( CH ) 09 / 2010 • The role of van der Waals forces on the dynamic adhesion of bacteria BioMicroWorld2011 , Torremolinos ( E ) 09 / 2011 • Measurement of adhesion forces of bacteria on controlled hydroxyapatite surfaces DPG Spring - Meeting , Berlin ( D ) 03 / 2012 • Subsurface inﬂuence on the structure of protein adsorbates revealed by in situ X - ray reﬂectivity DPG Spring - Meeting , Berlin ( D ) 03 / 2012 • Static and dynamic adhesion of Staphylococci on model substrates , studied by AFM DPG Spring - Meeting , Berlin ( D ) 03 / 2012 • Static and dynamic Adhesion of Staphylococci on model substrates , studied by AFM Physics of the Extracellular Matrix , Bad Honnef ( D ) 06 / 2012 162 Danke . . . an alle , die mich während meiner Promotion in jedweder Form unterstützt haben . Zuallererst gebührt dieser Dank Prof . Dr . Karin Jacobs , die mir die Möglichkeit gab , nach meiner Diplomarbeit auch meine Doktorarbeit in ihrer Gruppe anzufertigen . Da sie mir zum einen die Freiheit gab , jederzeit meine eigene Ideen zu realisieren und zum anderen stets einen Rat , eine Idee oder eine Anregung parat hatte , habe ich die Entscheidung , in ihrer AG zu bleiben , nie bereut . Vielen Dank für die stete und engagierte Unterstützung ! Des Weiteren bedanke ich mich bei der gesamten AG Jacobs . An erster Stelle möchte ich Judith Rech und Monika Schuck , den guten Seelen der Gruppe , meinen Dank für die Hilfe bei organisatorischen Angelegenheiten jeder Art aussprechen . Außerdem danke ich meinem Bürokollegen Dr . Hendrik Hähl für die vielen interessanten Diskus - sionen , Frage - sowie Nachhilfestunden zu wichtigen Themen wie Nanotypographie , Dr . Oliver Bäumchen , der immer für Tipps und Anregungen zur Verfügung stand , Ludo Marquant für die vielen außerwissenschaftlichen Diskussionen , Matthias Lessel , Nicolas Thewes , Christian Zeitz , Samuel Grandthyll und Dr . Frank Müller für die gute Zusammenarbeit bei gemeinsamen Projekten , Mischa Klos für die Hilfe bei allen IT - Problemen , Sabrina Haefner für die kooperative Kaﬀeeversorgung , und generell allen Mitgliedern der AG für die tolle Arbeitsatmosphäre , die Hilfsbereitschaft und die schöne Zeit ! Dankbar bin ich speziell auch Nicolas Thewes , Christian Kreis , Chris - tian Spengler und Sebastian Hümbert , deren Bachelor - , Master - oder Diplomarbeit ich betreuen durfte und von denen einige Messungen auch Eingang in diese Arbeit fanden . Als nächstes möchte ich mich bedanken bei Prof . Dr . Mathias Herrmann für die mikro - biologische Betreuung meiner Arbeit und die Begeisterung für die interdisziplinäre Ar - beit . Ein großer Dank geht auch an Dr . Markus Bischoﬀ für die Hilfsbereitschaft bei medizinischen bzw . mikrobiologischen Fragestellungen , an Karin Hilgert für das En - gagement und die Unmengen an Bakterienlieferungen , sowie an Pedro Matos Pereira aus der AG Pinho in Lissabon , von dem ich viel über mikrobiologische Arbeitsweisen gelernt habe . Moreover , I would like to thank Prof . Dr . Kellar Autumn from the Lewis & Clark College in Portland , OR , for giving me the opportunity to spend a research period 163 in his laboratory ! I beneﬁted a lot from the vivid discussions and the constructive criticism . Many thanks also to Dr . Jon Puthoﬀ , Matt Wilkinson and Andrew Schnell— the other members of the Gecko lab . Vielen Dank auch an Prof . Dr . Ludger Santen für die vielen Diskussionen und die An - leitung bei der Entwicklung einer Bioﬁlm - Simulation , welche im Endeﬀekt leider noch keinen Eingang in diese Arbeit fand . Für weitere Hilfestellungen bei theoretischen Fragestellungen danke ich auch Prof . Dr . Klaus Mecke von der Universität Erlangen - Nürnberg und Prof . Dr . Jacob Israelachvili von der University of California , Santa Barbara . Außerdem danke ich Prof . Dr . Ralf Seemann und Prof . Dr . Stefan Hüfner , die jederzeit für Ratschläge und Antworten bereitstanden . Darüber hinaus möchte ich denjenigen danken , die dafür gesorgt haben , die Recht - schreibfehler dieser Arbeit um einiges zu minimieren . Danke Viola , Flo , Ralf , Helge , Helge und Norbert für das Korrekturlesen . Ein sehr großer Dank gebührt meiner Familie , die mir während meiner Promotion und auch schon während meines Studiums Halt gegeben und mich in jedweder Art unterstützt hat . Ohne euch wäre ich sicher nie so weit gekommen ! Zum Schluss möchte ich diejenigen nicht vergessen , die mich immer wieder daran erinnert haben , dass es im Leben Wichtigeres als promovieren und arbeiten gibt und auf die ich immer zählen konnte ! Mein Dank gilt meinen Freunden und ganz besonders Viola . Danke ! 164 Erklärung Hiermit versichere ich an Eides statt , dass ich die vorliegende Arbeit selbstständig und ohne Benutzung anderer als der angegebenen Hilfsmittel angefertigt habe . Die aus anderen Quellen oder indirekt übernommenen Daten und Konzepte sind unter Angabe der Quelle gekennzeichnet . Die Arbeit wurde bisher weder im In - noch im Ausland in gleicher oder ähnlicher Form in einem Verfahren zur Erlangung eines akademischen Grades vorgelegt . Saarbrücken , den 16 . August 2012 Peter Moritz Loskill