The Social Efficiency of Fairness : An Information Economics Approach to Innovation Gavin Clarkson Marshall Van Alstyne University of Michigan Boston University & MIT Ann Arbor , MI 48130 Boston , MA 02215 gsmc @ umich . edu mva @ bu . edu , marshall @ mit . edu Abstract Certain default rules for adjudicating property rights disputes retard innovation by discouraging information sharing . Reasons , identified as far back as Arrow 1962 , include inspecting the value of information and uncertainty over future contingent claims . In response , we propose a solution based on a simple definition of “fairness . ” This unblocks innovation by increasing willingness to share private information . 1 . Introduction A primary goal of the patent system is disclosure . Patent rights are exclusive , however , and unless a specific contractual alliance leads to patent filing , typical all - or - nothing default rules can discourage information sharing . Society benefits from knowledge disclosure , but is such sharing rational for the parties being asked to share their knowledge capital ? This article seeks to prove that a default rule of fairness in innovative endeavors not only provides incentives to the innovating parties but is also socially efficient . When one person’s asset could benefit another’s innovative enterprise , the inherent uncertainties surrounding both asset value and the ultimate prospects of success present tremendous obstacles to cooperation . Neither party can be certain how or to what degree the asset will facilitate the creation of a new asset . Particularly in the case of intangibles , the value of the asset to be contributed is difficult to determine . The dilemma facing the parties is paradoxical : they cannot achieve the desired outcome until they agree to contribute their assets , but they are unlikely to contribute their assets until they agree on dividing an outcome that is unknown . Higher uncertainty over asset values increases chances of deadlock . This situation leads individuals to withhold their assets , resulting in a reduced dissemination of existing knowledge and an overall reduction in innovation either because the knowledge is unavailable or because organizations must waste resources rediscovering it . Further , nonrivalry of information creates the potential for leakage among the developing participants and with it the potential for competitive supply . The result of Bertrand price competition among the players is to destroy profits . Realizing this risk beforehand , valuable participants may shun the opportunity and avoid its associated costs . In order to promote welfare enhancing innovative activities , a default rule is needed that will maximize the willingness to contribute an asset ex ante that can be used to create new knowledge and encourage participation . We propose such a default rule by requiring a mechanism guarantee a fair ex post division of surplus . A commitment to fairness not only mitigates risk , it also prompts early disclosure . An increase in feasible agreements then increases potential innovation . More precisely , a commitment to a fair allocation mechanism ex ante reduces “opportunism risk” in a transaction cost and ownership sense ex post . Further , this mechanism permits new information to be gathered that , by increasing the convergence of beliefs , increases the range of feasible transactions . Our key argument is that commitment to a fair mechanism is socially efficient . The capacity for innovation rises as parties with complementary resources , particularly information , find ways to agree to combine their resources . Traditional mechanisms that focus on ownership and control as a means to eliminating opportunism overlook this form of efficiency gain . We show this proposition formally both for individual two - party transactions and more generally for repeated and multi - party interactions . The remainder of this extended abstract provides motivating cases in Section 2 . We review relevant literature in Section 3 and provide definitions . Sections 4 and 5 show the basic claims in a formal model . The final sections provide context and conclusions . Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 1 © 1530 - 1605 / 07 $ 20 . 00 2007 IEEE Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 2 . Motivation The current default rules that award property rights in an all - or - nothing fashion can lead to inefficiently modest innovation , and the following three examples provide motivation for our proposal . In each case , asset owners contributed assets to an innovative activity without an agreement specifying the ex post divisions of surplus . In each instance , the asset owner feels cheated , even if they did not make their contribution with an expectation of compensation . Under these conditions , neither the original asset owner nor an analogous third party would be willing to execute a similar agreement , chilling innovation . 2 . 1 . Examples of Unfortunate Outcomes In 1976 a patient named John Moore began treatment at the University of California Medical Center for a condition known as hairy - cell leukemia . 1 During treatment , his doctors identified elements of his blood that had significant commercial potential . They proceeded to conduct several tests without disclosing their commercial interests to Moore . The University of California ultimately patented a cell - line derived from Moore’s T - lymphocytes , the value of which was estimated in 1990 to be worth $ 3 billion . The value to those patients who were successfully treated by the resulting therapies , however , is incalculable . Moore ultimately sued his doctors , and the California Supreme Court determined that the doctors had breached their duty of disclosure and did not properly disclose potential financial interests in Moore’s cells before operating on him . As to the monetary value generated by the research on Moore’s cells , however , the court established a default rule that led them to conclude that Moore did not retain ownership interest in his cells after they left his body . Our next example involves commercializing traditional knowledge obtained from indigenous populations . Pharmaceutical firms looking for blockbuster drugs have sent researchers to the Amazon to befriend tribal shamans [ 6 ] . After learning from one or more of the shamans about plants with potentially interesting properties , and after several years of lab work , firms have developed new drugs with commercial value . The tribes , however , earn nothing under current intellectual property default rules . By current standards , the knowledge is not “new” and therefore not protectable . An implication is that 1 Details of this case can be found in Moore v . Regents of the University of California et . al . , 51 Cal . 3d 120 ( 1990 ) . shamans , once burned , can become reluctant to share further knowledge with the same or even similar firms . Our final example involves the development of HIV blood tests by three labs : the National Cancer Institute ( NCI ) , the Institut Pasteur ( IP ) , and the Institute of Cancer Research ( ICR ) in London . NCI and IP each filed for patents , but the USPTO issued NCI the patent in 1985 . An IP suit in 1987 led to a royalty sharing settlement . Later , information emerged that raised questions about the relative contributions of NCI and IP , particularly in light of contributions that ICL made to IP’s efforts [ 1 ] as well as questions as to whether the NCI used a copy of the IP version of the virus to develop the blood test [ 2 ] . IP felt that its contribution was being undervalued and threatened additional litigation , however ICL complained that IP had broken its promise to share profits . Thus the French were upset with the Americans , and the British were upset with the French . Although the dispute was ultimately settled with a reallocation of royalties , the acrimony prompted the director of IP to proclaim at one point that without a proper resolution , “I’m afraid that the cooperation which has existed between our two institutions , and more generally between scientists , will be greatly damaged . ” The lead researcher involved with ICR’s efforts similarly expressed “little appetite to enter into new negotiations [ as ] Institut Pasteur has not honoured a previous cooperative agreement . ” 2 . 2 . Allocations Based on Fairness Our main point is not without precedent . Although historically , an agreement to pay an employee “a fair share” of the profits , without specifying the precise fraction , was too indefinite to be enforced , the UCC’s “contract with open terms” approach allows such gaps to be filled subsequently , including price terms . 2 Even under the revised approach , however , the problem of indefiniteness is resolved with an all - or - nothing methodology : a contract can either be completed using gap - fillers , or no contract exists [ 5 ] . In the copyright context , existing defaults rules have considered fairness in allocating profits in infringement cases . In one case , Frank Music v . MGM , 772 F . 2d 505 ( 1985 ) , MGM accidentally infringed on one song in a nine song musical review . The courts allocated profits accordingly between the parties . Other cases had similar outcomes , including Universal Pictures v . Harold Lloyd Corp . , 162 F . 2d 354 ( 1947 ) and MCA v . Wilson , 677 F . 2d 180 ( 2d Cir . 1981 ) . Courts have similarly allocated proportional profits , 2 See e . g . Uniform Commercial Code § 2 - 305 Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 2 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 even if the infringement is based on a derivative work , Sheldon v . Metro - Goldwyn Pictures , 106 F . 2d 45 ( 1939 ) . 3 . Relevant Literature 3 . 1 . Negotiations Literature Broadly speaking , negotiation is best understood as a process of potentially opportunistic interaction aimed at advancing the full set of one’s interests by jointly decided action [ 16 ] . Each party tries to advance his or her full interests , either by improving and accepting the available deal or by opting for the best no - deal alternative , also known as its BATNA , or B est A lternative T o N egotiated A greement . This choice arises in the context of opportunism risk grounded in the self - interested choices of one’s partners . The BATNA reflects the default choice a party would make if the proposed deal were not possible . Depending on the situation , one party’s BATNA may involve walking away with no agreement or going to court rather than settling . Regarding a specific deal , assessing the BATNA sharpens the decision by asking “as compared to what” ? Doing “better” in terms of each party’s interests compared to the BATNA is a necessary condition for an agreement . If there is room for mutual gain , this is the Z one O f P ossible A greement ( ZOPA ) [ 17 ] . Of course , each side typically knows only its own limits and must continually assess and update its assessment of the other side’s BATNA . In the case of intangible assets , many negotiators have only a hazy sense of their own BATNAs [ 7 ] . The concepts of BATNAs and ZOPAs play roles within a negotiations process of creating and claiming value on a sustainable basis . “Creating value” means “expanding the pie” or increasing the worth of the agreement to each side beyond what was otherwise available [ 4 ] . “Claiming value” means dividing that value among the parties [ 17 ] . By “on a sustainable basis , ” an agreement is normally more valuable to the extent it endures and remains healthy over time [ 16 ] . Moreover , the bargaining techniques employed should not damage the party’s reputation or undercut its capacity to negotiate in the future . When the negotiation involves intellectual asset transfers , specific terms are preferable but not always possible [ 7 ] . The negotiations literature suggests a strong theoretical basis for using contingent contracts for transactions with high degrees of uncertainty [ 4 ] , and empirical explorations of technology licensing agreements have found a high incidence of contingent contracts [ 7 ] . As is well known , however , complete contracts that specify contingent claims in every possible future state of nature do not exist [ 3 , 11 , 13 ] . 3 . 2 . Empirical Findings Substantial experimental evidence now documents routine violations of the standard axiom of “self - interest . ” Instead , people typically divide resources more equitably [ 9 , 14 ] . The classic test is the Ultimatum Game in which one person , the proposer , has power to divide $ 1 in two amounts , one for himself , the other for an agent who only has power to accept or reject the offer . If accepted , both parties get the proposed amounts , but if rejected , both parties get nothing and negotiation halts . The standard theory of self - interest argues that agents should accept any offer > 0 . Knowing this , proposers should offer a ( $ . 99 , $ . 01 ) split . Empirically , however , 40 - 60 % of agents reject offers below $ . 20 . Knowing this , a majority of proposers offer enough to maximize their expected gains [ 9 ] . A literature survey finds that dozens of experimental variations confirm a basic result : people’s internal preferences weigh some measure of equity . Interestingly , the literature offers no axiomatic reason why this should occur , and instead revises utility functions to explicitly weight fairness [ 9 ] . Research on live organizations confirms similar results . Organizational staff evaluate collaborations in terms of outcome fairness and also future expectations for engaging in like endeavors [ 14 ] – concerns we revisit in Section 5 . If agents behave opportunistically in the short run , they can develop reputations that limit their collaborations in the long run . Indeed , reputations have served this function for centuries [ 10 ] . 3 . 3 Information and Innovation Arrow’s seminal 1962 article examines whether the market will allocate the socially optimal level of resources to inventive activities . Arrow identifies three factors that cause innovation markets to fail , all based on information . First , utility and production functions must be well - defined functions of a market’s commodities . The absence of complete contingent claims markets , however , rules out the possibility of hedging against uncertainty . Among risk averters , underinvestment necessarily follows . In fact , the “value of information for use in developing further information is much more conjectural than the value of its use in production and therefore much more likely to be underestimated” [ 3 , p . 618 ] . Second , innovators cannot always fully capture Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 3 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 returns to innovation . As in the case of most public goods , the problem of non - excludability deters the production of assets by private investors who cannot recover their costs . If investors could contractually capture the future value of such investments , the non - excludability problem would disappear , but this is generally infeasible . Third , is the problem of “demand determination , ” which is more easily understood as the “inspection paradox” [ 21 ] . A prospective buyer frequently cannot assess information’s value without possessing the information . After receiving it , however , the buyer no longer needs it . In the usual sense of things , it cannot be returned . Being less able to sell it , inventors are less likely to create it . With respect to the inspection paradox , one contribution of our proposal is that a buyer need not commit to an understood price beforehand , only to a price determination method . Verification of the value ex post then permits an agreement resulting in an allocation that will turn out to have been fair ex ante . 3 . 4 Property Rights and Principal Agents To the extent that non - excludability produces externalities , the Coase Theorem [ 8 ] suggests that who has control ought not matter so long as transaction costs are negligible , contracts enforceable , and property rights well defined . The question of who can produce a positive benefit ( or avoid a negative benefit ) at lowest cost can , in theory , be solved by markets . The Coase Theorem , however breaks down in this context . First , it does not resolve the Inspection Paradox , which limits information trading . Second , it has little to say about externalities that have yet to be produced and whose trading value has yet to be determined . Resolution in the current context will focus not on the assignment of property rights but on the assignment of processes . In response , the incomplete contracts branch of the property rights literature [ 12 , 13 ] argues for ownership transfers to motivate effort when unforeseen contingencies create risk . The most indispensable party should wield sole residual claim ex post in order to align investment incentives ex ante . A divided claim would result in divided incentives . Further , complementary assets should have one owner , also to align incentives . Conflicting principles , such as two or more indispensable owners , lead to inevitable inefficiencies . While the property rights literature argues persuasively for optimality of a given ownership structure , it remains silent on how to convince owners in a sub - optimal structure to part with their assets . Instead , it assumes that efficiency gains are sufficient to acquire complementary assets . This focuses on tangible assets and neglects information revelation problems . If an information asset resides only in the head of the person conceiving it , then neither a social planner nor higher value investor can base decisions on it . Rather , a default mechanism must offer enough reward to prompt disclosure but not so much as to over pay . In balancing disclosure versus waste , it must be efficient . In terms of a neutral party’s choices , it must be fair . In a manner somewhat analogous to Ben - Shahar’s suggestions of processes for gap - filling to enable agreements to proceed in instances of incomplete contracts [ 5 ] , we move the weight of contract negotiations from haggling over anticipatory contingency enumeration and asset ownership to ex post verification of contributed value . Those who add more will receive more . We also provide the means to avoid the revelation problems that hamstring contract negotiations when at least one party is ill - informed . We turn to more precise definitions below . 3 . 5 Definitions and Mechanism Choice Rather than assign property rights , our proposal takes the following form . Defer allocating claims on the value of an innovation until that value is known . Instead of a claim , commit to a claim mechanism . If , after learning his ex post allocation , a neutral third party would accept the offer in exchange for contributed ideas , then the mechanism will encourage innovation . Solving the disclosure problem implies providing this mechanism as a default rule . The mechanism must be a default rule because only the inventor has knowledge of her idea – the inspection paradox limits disclosure . Communicating the default rule is far less costly than extracting and pricing her idea ex ante . By default , the mechanism does not require committing to a specific allocation before knowing the value of contributed resources – in advance this approach can be impossible . Rather , exercise of the mechanism leads to a fair allocation once information is revealed . If the mechanism is demonstrably fair , 3 it reduces the risk to individual contributors regarding equitable compensation ex post . It also lets participants shelve disagreement over each other’s relative contribution so that all may proceed and learn more . Beforehand , each may not know precisely what compensation will be received , but , weighing the evidence , each can be confident of receiving a fair 3 Examples include Shapley Value , Nucleolus , and the Core . Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 4 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 share proportional to contributed value . Thus , we define “fair” to be reward in proportion to one’s contribution . Of several interpretations of fairness , this is the most economic [ 18 ] . 4 While we will use the reward definition of fairness together with the axiom of self - interest , we do not require that a mechanism be perfectly fair . Such a strict criterion can well be untenable : transaction costs can be excessive ; perfect information can be unknowable ; and the color of perfectly “fair” – seen through shaded eyes – can be unverifiable . Rather , we require that a mechanism approximate fairness in the sense that an allocation induces the broadest possible participation in actuarially positive entrepreneurial activity both before and after the allocation is realized . The reward principle and axiom of self - interest can , as we will show , achieve this . But , of the properties that they induce , two criteria are paramount : ( 1 ) Individuals and coalitions are motivated to contribute useful resources in order that new and more valuable resources can be created . ( 2 ) All active participants are compensated sufficiently on conclusion of the activity that neutral third parties , with analogous resources and opportunities , would likewise have agreed to participate . So long as each party’s notion of fairness conforms to these attributes , they need not have the exact same definition of fairness . Thus one party could be guided by Rawlsian notions of justice [ 19 ] while the other party’s notions of fairness could be influenced by conceptions of morality [ 12 ] or principles of human welfare [ 15 ] . Judged in terms of total social welfare , we assert that no allocation mechanism can do better . We provide a syllogistic proof . Consider the contradiction implied by any mechanism that violates either criterion . First , if any person or coalition is motivated to withhold useful project resources , then some level of innovation is blocked . Total welfare will be inferior . Second , if on project conclusion any analogous party is motivated to withhold useful resources to any analogous or subsequent opportunity , then the potential for at least some further innovation is likewise blocked . Total social welfare can never be greater . If an inferior mechanism is one that violates either criterion , then an optimal mechanism must have both . These criteria do not by themselves address the question of relative innovation value . Given limited 4 The others are exogenous rights ( e . g . “one person , one vote ) , compensation ( e . g . providing shelter after a natural disaster ) , and fitness ( e . g . giving the flute to the floutist ) . resources in a space of less limited opportunities , they do not select for which projects members of a society should choose . As a first cut , these criteria are simpler than that . From among the pool of possible mechanisms , they select and discard those that preclude innovation by discouraging participation . As we shall see , however , the ordinal ranking of projects also emerges , implying further gains in efficiency . Still , of particular interest , is the fact these criteria show certain widely used mechanisms to be suboptimal . This includes , for example , the Coase Theorem , which encourages the use of property rights as a means to social efficiency . Under the new proposal , efficiency gains result from ( 1 ) unblocking innovation due to information hold - up and ( 2 ) improving the sort order of projects in which people invest . 4 . Chain of Uncertainty This section illustrates the ubiquitous nature of the problem caused by a lack of information : uncertainty prevents mutually beneficial agreements . Uncertainty may arise because the future is unknown . Or , perhaps discovery requires effort . Or , perhaps one person knows a fact another does not . Whatever the cause , when at least one party has imperfect information , welfare positive transactions can fail to occur . By shedding light the problem and its causes , this section shows how resolving uncertainty improves opportunities for combining resources in useful ways . Basically , we establish the following claim with two proofs , one for an individual acting alone , the other for people acting in concert . Proposition 1 : Ex ante payoff uncertainty reduces the space of incentive compatible transactions . To show how welfare improves , we seek to develop a simple model that allows for single and two party investment , opportunity costs , different asset combinations , and different levels of risk . From measures of welfare , we then show effects of intervention . 4 . 1 . Model Consider a simple innovation opportunity . Let standalone value of an asset be v independent of other resources . Let agent utility u ( x ) be increasing in wealth but with diminishing margins – a second copy of a favorite book or wrist watch confers less gain than the first – implying that u ' > 0 but u " < 0 . If the owner pursues the innovation , the project creates some expected incremental delta á . For simplicity , let á Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 5 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 represent net value after accounting for costs of pursuing development ( otherwise we would need to carry forward an additional parameter á - c ) . Since á is only an expected value , the possibility exists that the realized innovation value actually has range ± ï with probability of the best outcome á + ï being p and probability of the worst outcome á - ï being ( 1 – p ) . If á > 0 , the expected value is positive so that , in an actuarial sense , the innovation should always be pursued . We structure the model in this way to show that agents can fail to invest in welfare enhancing projects . The owner’s utility for the best outcome is simply u ( v + á + ï ) , with utility for the worst outcome calculated similarly ( see Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Risk aversion leads to underinvestment despite positive expected rewards . Any level of risk aversion is sufficient to cause a person to value an opportunity at less than its expected value . In Figure 1 , this gap is C < B but more generally we have : Proposition 1a : ( Individual Level ) Despite positive expected returns , a risk averse individual will only innovate if the risks and rewards are such that : p õ u ( v + 4 + ï ) à u ( v + 4à ï ) u ( v ) à u ( v + (cid:103) à ï ) or , alternatively where the probability of the best outcome is at least equal to the ratio of the utility loss from the worst outcome over the difference between utility extremes . Proof 1a : Only if utility from investing is at least as great as doing nothing will the individual innovate . The constraint is given by : ( p ) u ( v + á + ï ) + ( 1 - p ) u ( v + á - ï ) (cid:116) u ( v ) . Algebraic simplification provides the test result . Note that while this test holds for the two discrete outcomes x 1 = v + á + ï and x 2 = v + á – ï , the property itself is extremely general , based on Jensen’s inequality . Corollary 1 . a : Holding payoff á constant , increasing risk , as measured by a mean preserving spread , causes a risk averter to require a higher probability p before investing . Proof : let p ï solve the above constraint with equality , then increase the range of uncertainty from ï to ï + î . By virtue of concavity u " < 0 , utility falls faster at u ( v + á – ï – î ) than it rises at u ( v + á + ï + î ) . But this implies ( p ï ) u ( v + á + ï + î ) + ( 1 - p ï ) u ( v + á - ï - î ) < u ( v ) and so the risk averter no longer innovates . Thus investment requires p ï + î > p ï . Intuition for this result is that as risk increases , C falls farther below B so that the outcome must increasingly favor D to be worthwhile . The implication is that uncertainty over future outcomes causes a risk averse individual to forgo valuable investment opportunities . Innovation suffers as a result . Note that with no change in expected value á , reducing uncertainty , by reducing opportunism risk , reduces the severity of this problem . Although we have not shown it , welfare is also suboptimal for risk lovers . A parallel analysis , where u " > 0 ( instead of u " < 0 ) , demonstrates that a risk lover overinvests in actuarially risky projects . Although problems arise from too much activity rather than too little , total welfare again drops below the optimum . Further , this analysis actually assumes that the project returns not just á but v + á , which is reasonable given that the owner can contribute v and will still have it by virtue of the fact that an information resource is nonrivalrous and is therefore recoverable ex post . But if another party to the project learns this information and becomes a competitor , also because it is nonrivalrous , then by Bertrand price competition this value can fall to zero . If a person risks losing the asset entirely , then subtracting v from her total wealth can leave point E below point F and even the best case , point D , can fall below starting point A . If this were possible , then a project that generates positive benefit á for society leaves the investor worse off than before she started , and she never rationally invests . This possibility holds true regardless of her risk profile . While the above illustration highlights the problem for a single individual , the problem becomes more complex for two or more parties in negotiation . In fact , even if agents are risk neutral or risk loving , have correct expectations about the value of an asset v and the incremental wealth á created by using it to innovate , they can still fail to reach agreement if uncertainty about the range of values for ï is large enough . To illustrate this problem more specifically , let there be prospective partners i and j and , as before , let each have an asset with true value v i and v j respectively . The first agent can invest on his own and create value á i but if both parties combine assets , then together they can create incremental value á i + á i + j . Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 6 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 To make the problem simpler and also establish conditions favoring a negotiated agreement , let agent j have no outside investment option so á j = 0 and let both parties agree that E [ á i + j ] > 0 so that investing is always rational . Further , let there be no uncertainty over jointly created value such that û i + j = 0 implies E [ á i + j ] = á i + j , providing no cause for disagreement . But then let there be private information over i ’s relative contribution . Specifically , let agents have independent beliefs x i and x j both drawn from the distribution x (cid:97) [ á i - (cid:127) , á i + (cid:127) ] . Since the true value is yet indeterminate , no one knows realized value (cid:103) for certain prior to investment . Rather each has an imperfect impression that is actually unbiased but since the range is - (cid:127) to + (cid:127) , the variance is not zero . We explore ways to relax these assumptions below . For reference , a Nash bargaining or “fair” economic price would split the jointly created value , giving i an amount à i v i + (cid:103) à i + 2 (cid:103) i + j and j an amount v j + 2 (cid:103) i + j , but parties do not know this in advance . For the moment , our question is simply : If the prospective partners are required to decide on an allocation ex ante , is there sufficient reason to believe that they will fail to agree . In its simplest form , if i were to sell his asset to j , is there positive probability that seller i thinks the asset is worth more than buyer j is willing to pay ? Even with a generous seller allowing the buyer to capture all incremental surplus , the answer is yes . Figure 2 . Threshold between the Zone of Possible Agreement and choosing the best alternative instead . Proposition 1b : ( Group Level ) Despite sure positive returns á i + j > 0 with favorable E [ á i ] > 0 and unbiased E [ (cid:127) ] = 0 beliefs x i and x j (cid:97) [ á i - (cid:127) , á i + (cid:127) ] , there is positive probability that two agents cannot reach agreement due to non - overlapping expectations over project value . Proof 1b : We show that a positive probability exists that the buyer thinks the asset is worth less than the seller does , even after accounting for value creation . Initially , the line defining equal beliefs is the 45 (cid:113) line x j = x i . As shown in Figure 2 , all points northwest of this line are the zone of possible agreement ( ZOPA ) where the buyer believes the project to be worth at least as much as the seller does . Southeast of this line , the seller believes it to be more valuable than the buyer believes he should rationally pay . The seller’s BATNA is then to walk . If the buyer receives the marginal investment value of the seller’s asset á i , then he only needs to believe the project is worth x j - á i . This belief shifts the boundary down , increasing the ZOPA . More precisely , if the probability of no agreement is the ratio of the lower right triangle ( BATNA ) to the total area , then agreement is reached with probability : p ( ZOPA ) = 1 à p ( BATNA ) = 1 à ( 2 (cid:127) ) ( 2 (cid:127) ) 21 ( 2 (cid:127) à (cid:103) i ) ( 2 (cid:127) à (cid:103) i ) = 1 à 8 (cid:127) 2 ( 2 (cid:127) à (cid:103) i ) 2 If 2 (cid:127) > á i , failure results simply from divergent private beliefs over the contribution from i ' s assets . Several additional observations follow regarding group level investment failure . First , if i ' s marginal contribution á i is sure enough , agreement always occurs . Graphically , for á i (cid:149) 2 (cid:127) , large payoffs expand the zone of possible agreement in Figure 2 past the boundary for even the worst possible outcome . BATNA shrinks to zero . Reward not only outweighs the risk , it is so great relative to agents’ diverging beliefs that even their opposing views leave room for exchange . Second , in contrast to the previous result , this proof has nothing to do with the risk profile of either agent . Either can be risk loving , risk neutral , or risk averse , and this condition can hold . We state the third observation more formally as a corollary . Corollary 1 . b – When investment is not a sure bet 2 (cid:127) > á i , rising uncertainty decreases the chances of agreement and rising innovation value increases the chances of agreement , i . e . derivatives are respectively (cid:32)(cid:127) (cid:32) p ( ZOPA ) = 4 (cid:127) 3 (cid:103) i ( (cid:103) i à 2 (cid:127) ) < 0 and (cid:32) (cid:103) (cid:32) p ( ZOPA ) = 4 (cid:127) 2 2 (cid:127) à (cid:103) i > 0 . Proposition 1 . b and its Corollary show that even though the asset could always be contributed to the research project at a fair price , transfer can fail to occur because beliefs of both parties permit no room for negotiation . Increasing the number of investors , each with different beliefs over their relative contributions , can increase problem difficulty . Reducing contractual uncertainty has the potential to increase social surplus . For individuals , this contractual uncertainty is the range between when an investment yields positive expected value and when it Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 7 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 yields positive expected utility . Let p 0 minimally solve the expected value condition ( p 0 ) ( á + ï ) + ( 1 - p 0 ) ( á - ï ) (cid:116) 0 , which gives p 0 = 2 (cid:127) (cid:127) à (cid:103) , and let p (cid:127) minimally solve the expected utility condition as given in Proposition 1 . a . Since the probability of deal failure due to opportunism risk is given by p ( BATNA ) in the group case , we have the following . Proposition 2 : ( Social Welfare Gains ) At the individual level , the potential increase in expected gains is ( while at the group level it is p (cid:127) à p 0 ) (cid:103) i p ( BATNA ) ( (cid:103) i + (cid:103) i + j ) = 8 (cid:127) 2 ( 2 (cid:127) à (cid:103) i ) 2 ( (cid:103) i + (cid:103) i + j ) . By Corollaries 1 . a and 1 . b , these gains increase in risk ï . Interpretation of these gains is that they represent expected increments to social surplus , i . e . the potential change in beliefs times the average innovation value . 5 . Social Interest versus Self - Interest The fact that unforeseen contingencies create opportunism risk does not imply that parties advantaged by new developments will necessarily exploit those placed at a disadvantage after project completion . A reputation for self - restraint can tip the willingness of others with similar projects in favor of consummating a deal . What conditions cause rational agents to avoid exploiting their partners when given the chance to do so ? Suppose that exploiting a partner now implies that new partners will , on margin , avoid you in the future despite the existence of deals within the ZOPA . If among the population there are at least N other similar projects , then the expected gain of sharing half of the future surplus from lost projects discounted to the present time is 2 1 P i = 1 N î i p i ( BATNA ) (cid:103) i where î i is the discount applied to the i th project having investment value á i . This expression can easily adjust for sorting higher value projects first . Then , to make exploitation as attractive as possible and stress voluntary fairness as much as possible , we imagine that unforeseen contingencies arise giving one party all the residual surplus on the first deal . Given multiple projects , let subscript ij refer to a project between i and j . Then , a self - interested agent will voluntarily forgo exploiting a partner when á 12 < 2 1 P j = 3 N î j à 1 1 p 1 j ( BATNA ) (cid:103) 1 j . In effect , this inequality establishes the following observation . Proposition 3 ( Voluntary Self - Restraint ) : Given the chance to exploit a partner by seizing all project gains from the current project , high future project values á i , highly diverging i and j beliefs p ij ( BATNA ) , and high levels of patience î can each provide sufficient reason for self - interested parties to exercise self - restraint . In this proposition , we claim no novel insight , merely a framework from which to draw comparisons . The test provided for voluntary self - restraint becomes interesting when it fails . Frequently , the value of a just - completed innovation exceeds the expected future value of other projects available to an investing agent . If a patent is worth billions , a centuries old theorem is finally proven , or private knowledge was unprotected and need not by law be compensated , then one - time exploitation can be rational . Beyond an independent moral imperative , does society have an innovation interest in ensuring fairness when self - interest alone is insufficient and after innovative gains on one project have already been realized ? Measured in terms of innovation value , the answer is often yes . If the lesson that independent parties learn from the experience of the exploited is the prospect of sharing similar fates , then they will choose non - participation . In such cases , the status quo is Pareto inferior to an investing alternative . Society is better served by ensuring an equitable division in order that in the future there is more to divide . In terms of a model , it is easy to construct cases where the self - interest of individuals costs a society dearly in terms of innovation . Apart from the two parties involved in the concluded project , if we simply account for the opportunities available to the N - 2 other agent pairs , then where the test formerly failed on a value proportional to N for an individual , it now fails on a value proportional to N 2 for a society . Since the total social interest is the gains to both parties , the forgone social surplus is P . This opportunity loss worsens as we account for projects involving three , four , and more participants . This complexity leads us to observe : i = 1 N P j > i N î j à 1 i p ij ( BATNA ) (cid:103) ij Proposition 4 ( Social Interest in Allocative Efficiency ) : Measured in terms of innovation , society’s interest in fair allocations exceeds that of the individual . Further , under fairly general assumptions , the opportunity cost to society of permitting unfair allocations ex post can arbitrarily exceed the realized gains of the unscrupulous investor or > á P i = 2 N P j > i N î j à 1 i p ij ( BATNA ) (cid:103) ij 12 . In other words , the social surplus not realized by the population due to investment not undertaken is at least that forgone by the individual . It cannot be less by virtue of the fact that the social total includes the individual total . While this logic seems obvious once stated , it is non - obvious in accounting . In standard accounting practice , investments not made are investments not counted . Rather than intervene , the alternative is a facile status quo where none other than Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 8 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 a single aggrieved party experiences any misappropriation , an alternative that occurs only after innovation has , in fact , already happened . An inherent risk in exploiting an innovation partner is loss of agreement for repeated interactions with the same participant , or even with similarly situated participants who may communicate with each other . This notion can be generalized with a reference to the aphorism , “fool me once , shame on you ; fool me twice , shame on me . ” The exploitative innovator will quickly find that the pool of potential collaborators quickly diminishes , and society ultimately pays the price in the form of lost innovation opportunities . 6 . Advantages of a Fair Mechanism Separately , we demonstrate that committing ex ante to apply the Shapley Value ex post has the desired properties . We omit details here since this is an off - the - shelf mechanism for which others have proven that efficient Nash bargaining results [ 20 ] . Shapley is one of several mechanism , including Nucleolus and the Core , with similar properties . It should be clear that not only is the expected allocation proportional to expected contribution , but also that realized allocation is proportional to realized contribution . These need not be the same , in general , implying that any predetermined allocation introduces risk that allocation differs from contributed value . Divergence in turn implies at least a potential desire to defect with a concomitant loss in innovation . A mechanism that aligns allocation with contributed value should then correct this inefficiency . If this opportunity dominates alternative uses for this resource , then the person or coalition possessing it should rationally participate . The marginal value of the resource on this project exceeds the marginal value on its next best use , that is its opportunity cost . Conversely , consider an allocation in which an entity with resource control receives more than proportional value . While this entity has reason to participate , project partners necessarily receive less than their proportional value . They therefore have reason to defect to other opportunities , on potentially inferior projects , so long as their allocation is at least as great . Deviation in either direction from a proportional allocation thus implies the potential to select inferior projects . A property rights mechanism , in contrast , does not guarantee the best choice of projects in total welfare terms . Rather , it encourages property rights owners to choose highest private gains that can be secured by the threat of project defection . In cases where anticipated gains are unambiguous , property rights and low cost negotiation lead to an optimal choice of projects , consistent with the Coase Theorem . But , if due to the inspection paradox , the author of an idea risks losing it merely through attempting to communicate its value , then relying on property rights for a nonrival good can lead to failed or inferior investments . Authors of ideas that do not rise to the level of patents or copyrights can rationally choose to withhold them in an effort to pursue other opportunities with greater private expected gains . Thus fair mechanisms , as distinguished by reward proportional to contribution and thus bias free participation , offer two forms of efficiency gain . First , projects can be undertaken that might otherwise fail due to breakdowns in negotiation ( on best available information ) . Second , alternate mechanisms lead to badly sorted projects . Individuals can rationally choose inferior projects because their personal share exceeds gains on superior projects for which their private share holds greater risk . 7 . Conclusions In this article we have specified how a mechanism other than ownership can be used to mitigate risk , facilitate agreement , and encourage participation . Specifying the process rather than the claim frees contracting parties from having to specify the myriad unknown and frequently unknowable contingencies that affect an allocation of value . Instead , the allocation depends on realized contributions using a procedure that is provably fair and socially efficient as measured by market prices . A commitment to fairness mitigates risk of misappropriation , prompts early disclosure , and improves the social sort order of project investments . These factors increase innovation . More precisely , a commitment to an equitable allocation mechanism ex ante reduces “opportunism risk” in a transaction cost and ownership sense ex post . Further , a willingness to assign due credit affords agents the time to gather new information , which by increasing the convergence of subsequent beliefs increases the range of feasible transactions . The mechanism does not , however , merely mitigate risk . It also serves to foster agreement among parties whose beliefs diverge by allowing them to “agree to disagree . ” In fact , one or more parties may remain ignorant of the underlying proposition at the outset and yet collectively move forward under contract . So long as the party has sufficient reason to believe the proposal is a good use of his or her assets , Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 9 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007 an ability to verify value upon conclusion facilitates agreement before commencing . This benefit helps resolve both the monopsony problem and inspection paradox . Each problem limits one party’s willingness to divulge information at a time when the other party can quit negotiations and leave with critical value . Investment , effort , and the passing of time permit them to seek new information or disclose it in stages , revealing the true value of an investment . We have demonstrated that a commitment to fairness is socially efficient , particularly since the capacity for innovation rises as parties with complementary resources , especially information , find ways to agree to combine their resources . Fairness and cooperation aid the creation of wealth . But we also showed that society’s interest in fair allocations following innovative activity exceeds that of the individual since projects exist for which opportunism makes sense , even for far sighted individuals . Although one innovation has itself occurred , potential innovators , who can see themselves in a position analogous to that of an aggrieved party , will avoid similar projects . In this sense , commitments to fair allocations call forth investments that were otherwise avoided and these raise welfare overall . These results have diverse applications , applying when ( 1 ) inspection problems prevent prior disclosure due to fear of loss of ideas , ( 2 ) parties cannot agree ex ante on relative contributed value due to divergent beliefs , and ( 3 ) private incentives to defect in unforeseen contingencies chill investments in analogous opportunities . References 1 . British say Pasteur Institute slighted their help on AIDS test . Nature , 1992 . 358 ( 6385 ) : p . 358 . 2 . U . S . - French patent dispute heads for a showdown . Science , 1994 . 265 ( 5168 ) : p . 23 . 3 . Arrow , K . J . , Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for innovation , in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity , R . R . Nelson , Editor . 1962 . 4 . Bazerman , M . H . and M . A . Neale , Negotiating rationally . 1992 . 5 . Ben - Shahar , O . , " Agreeing to Disagree " : Filling Gaps in Deliberately Incomplete Contracts . Wisconsin Law Review , 2004 . 2004 : p . 389 . 6 . Brown , M . F . , Who owns native culture ? 2003 . 7 . Clarkson , G . , Avoiding Suboptimal Behavior in Intellectual Asset Transactons : Economic and Organizational Perspectives on the Sale of Knowledge . Harvard Journal of Law & Technology , 2001 . 14 : p . 711 . 8 . Coase , R . H . , The Problem of Social Cost . Journal of Law and Economics , 1960 . 3 : p . 1 - 44 . 9 . Fehr , E . and K . Schmidt , Theories of Fairness and Reciprocity - Evidence and Economic Applications , in Advances in economics and econometrics : theory and applications , M . Dewatripont , Editor . 2003 . 10 . Greif , A . , Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade : The Maghribi Traders ' Coalition . The American Economic Review , 1993 . 83 ( 3 ) : p . 525 . 11 . Grossman , S . and O . Hart , The Costs and Benefits of Ownership : A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration . Journal of Political Economy , 1986 . 94 ( 4 ) : p . 691 - 719 . 12 . Habermas , J . , Justification and application : remarks on discourse ethics . Studies in contemporary German social thought . 1993 . 13 . Hart , O . and J . Moore , Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm . Journal of Political Economy , 1990 . 98 ( 6 ) : p . 1119 - 1158 . 14 . Jap , S . D . , " Pie sharing " in complex collaboration contexts . Journal of Marketing Research , 2001 . 38 ( 1 ) : p . 86 . 15 . Kaplow , L . and S . Shavell , Fairness versus welfare . Harvard Law Review , 2001 . 114 ( 4 ) : p . 961 . 16 . Lax , D . A . and J . K . Sebenius , 3 - D Negotiation : Setup , Deal Design , and Tactics . 2004 : Harvard Business School . 17 . Mnookin , R . H . , S . R . Peppet , and A . S . Tulumello , Beyond winning : negotiating to create value in deals and disputes . 2000 . 18 . Moulin , H . , Fair division and collective welfare . 2003 , Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . 19 . Rawls , J . , A theory of justice . 1971 . 20 . Shapley , L . S . , A Value for N - Person Games , in Contributions to the Theory of Games , H . W . Kuhn and A . W . Tucker , Editors . 1953 . 21 . Van Alstyne , M . , A Proposal for Valuing Information and Instrumental Goods . 1997 , MIT Ph . D . Thesis . Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 10 Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ' 07 ) 0 - 7695 - 2755 - 8 / 07 $ 20 . 00 © 2007