Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . Wdr - 1 is essential for F - actin interaction with focal adhesions in platelets Swapan K . Dasgupta a and Perumal Thiagarajan a , b Wdr - 1 , an actin interacting protein , enhances coﬁlin’s capacity to accelerate depolymerization of F - actin ﬁlaments . Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mice have impaired hemostasis due to defective inside - out integrin signaling in platelets . Here , we studied the role of Wdr - 1 on outside - in signaling necessary for retraction of the clot and platelet spreading . Outside - in signaling was assessed by ﬁbrin clot retraction assay and by adhesion and spreading of unstimulated platelets on ﬁbrinogen substrate . The spatial distribution of actin , coﬁlin - 1 and Wdr - 1 were determined by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Interaction of F - actin with focal adhesion kinase was assessed in dual - color confocal images and by immunoblotting of F - actin ﬁlaments . Clot retraction is markedly impaired in Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient platelets . Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient platelets adhere and spread poorly on ﬁbrinogen substrate compared with wild - type controls . In resting platelets , Wdr - 1 is colocalized with coﬁlin - 1 in cortical actin . Following platelets spreading on ﬁbrinogen substrate , Wdr - 1 translocates to the cytoskeleton in association with coﬁlin - 1 . In Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient platelets , coﬁlin - 1 is aberrantly localized throughout the cytoplasm and there is no signiﬁcant change following adhesion to ﬁbrinogen substrate . The actin ﬁlaments formed upon spreading on ﬁbrinogen are mostly in the periphery of the platelets and does not traverse the cytoplasm . Furthermore , there is diminished colocalization of actin ﬁlaments with focal adhesion kinase . These studies show that Wdr - 1 is essential for the localization of coﬁlin - 1 to the platelet membrane skeleton . F - actin fails to attach to focal adhesions resulting in defective reorganization of actin ﬁlaments necessary for platelet spreading and clot retraction . Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 29 : 540 – 545 Copyright (cid:2) 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolysis 2018 , 29 : 540 – 545 Keywords : actin reorganization , coﬁlin , focal adhesions , Wdr - 1 a Department of Pathology , Center for Translational Research on Inﬂammatory Diseases , Michael E . DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center and b Department of Medicine , Baylor College of Medicine , Houston , Texas , USA Correspondence to Perumal Thiagarajan , Department of Pathology , Center for Translational Research on Inﬂammatory Diseases , Michael E . DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Mail Stop # 113 , 2002 Holcombe Blvd , Houston , TX 77030 , USA Tel : + 1 713 794 7873 ; fax : + 1 713 794 7657 ; e - mail : perumalt @ bcm . edu , swapand @ bcm . edu Received 13 March 2018 Revised 16 June 2018 Accepted 26 June 2018 Introduction The actin cytoskeleton plays a central role in the hemo - static function of platelets [ 1 ] . In resting unstimulated platelets , the actin ﬁlaments are located in the submem - branous zone and provides a framework for discoid plate - let shape and structure [ 2 ] . During activation and spreading , there is extensive dismantling and reorganiza - tion of the actin ﬁlaments [ 3 ] . The signals for the reorga - nization of actin network are derived from platelet integrin a IIb b 3 , following binding to ﬁbrinogen ( out - side - in signaling ) . Spreading is maintained by myosin - driven contractile force on newly formed actin network and the resistance generated by integrin binding to the matrix substrates . The contractile force also mediates the clot retraction . The actin reorganization is orchestrated by a large number of actin - binding proteins [ 4 ] . Wdr - 1 is the mammalian homolog of actin interacting protein 1 in the yeast [ 5 ] . In yeast and in mammalian cells , it enhances coﬁlin - 1’s capacity to accelerate depolymerization of existing actin ﬁlaments and promotes formation of barbed ends and reorganization . Wdr - 1 deﬁciency in human causes an auto - inﬂammatory disease characterized by periodic fevers , immunodeﬁciency , and intermittent thrombocytopenia [ 6 ] . A hypomorphic allele of Wdr - 1 has been described in mice which have spontaneous autoinﬂammatory disease and thrombocytopenia , similar to humans [ 7 ] . We previ - ously described that Wdr - 1 deﬁciency leads to defective platelet aggregation due to impaired inside - out signaling [ 8 ] . Here , we present evidence the Wdr - 1 plays a signiﬁ - cant role in outside - in signaling necessary for platelet spreading and clot retraction . Methods Reagents Goat antibody to Wdr - 1 and rabbit antibody to focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , whereas rabbit anticoﬁlin - 1 antibody was from Cell Signaling Technology . Alexa 488 - labeled sheep antirabbit antibody , Alexa 647 - labeled donkey antigoat antibodyandAlexa 488 - labeled phalloidin were purchased from Invitrogen . Apyrase , polylysine , andprostaglandin E 1 ( PGE 1 ) were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . Fibrinogen was isolated as described before [ 9 ] . The hypomorphic allele of Wdr - 1 mice has been described before [ 7 ] . The mutant mouse ( Wdr - 1 rd / rd ) has a T > A transversion in the second dinucleotide of the intron 9 splice donor and it produces a mutant transcript containing a 6 - bp in - frame 540 Original article 0957 - 5235 Copyright (cid:2) 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . DOI : 10 . 1097 / MBC . 0000000000000756 Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . deletion that results in a incorrectly folded , nonfunctional protein [ 7 ] . A small amount of normal splicing produces some wild - type protein , resulting in a hypomorphic allele ( Fig . 1a andb ) . All animals were treated in accordance with the protocol approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Baylor College of Medicine . Isolation of murine platelets To isolate mouse platelets , blood was obtained from the inferior vena cava into a 1 / 10th volume of citrate from at least 4 - month - old mice under isoﬂurane anesthesia . Blood was diluted with an equal volume of modiﬁed Tyrode’s buffer ( 137 - mmol / l NaCl , 2 . 7 - mmol / l KCl , 5 - mmol / l HEPES , 1 - mmol / l MgCl 2 , 3 - mmol / l NaH 2 PO 4 , and 5 . 5 - mmol / l dextrose , pH , 7 . 4 ) containing 0 . 5 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) . Platelet - rich plasma was obtained by centrifugation at 75 (cid:2) g for 15min . PGE 1 ( 1 m mol / l ) and apyrase ( 0 . 5 U ) were added , andplateletswere sedimented by centrifugation at 600 (cid:2) g for 10min , washed once in Tyrode’s buffer containing apyrase and suspended in Tyrode’s buffer . Clot retraction assay For the ﬁbrin clot retraction assays , platelet rich plasma ( PRP ) was isolated as described before . The platelet count was adjusted to 2 (cid:2) 10 8 / ml with addition of plate - let - poor plasma . To visualize the clot , 5 m l of washed red blood cells was added to 1 ml of PRP . An aliquot ( 400 m l ) of this mix was placed into a glass cuvette . Thrombin ( 0 . 5 U / ml ) was added and mixed with and clot retraction was allowed to proceed at 37 8 C for 1 h . After 30 min , the clot was pulled out and the amount of liquid not incor - porated into the clot was subtracted from the initial volume to determine the volume of clot . It is expressed as percentage of the initial volume . Platelet adhesion and spreading Foradhesionassays , wellsof96 - wellplateswerecoatedwith ﬁbrinogen ( 100 m l of 10 m g / ml ) and blocked with 0 . 5 % denatured BSA . Washed murine platelets were added and incubated for 30min at 37 8 C . After washing , adhesion was quantiﬁed by assaying for acid phosphatase activity at 405nmol / l . Percentage adhesion was calculated as number of ﬁbrinogen adhered platelets divided by the total number of platelets added to the well and multiplied by 100 as previously reported [ 10 ] . For spreading assays , coverslips were coated with ﬁbrinogen ( 10 m g / ml ) overnight at 4 8 C . Surfaces were washed and then blocked with denatured BSA ( 5mg / ml ) for 1h at room temperature followed by subsequent washing with PBS before use in spreading assays . Washed platelets ( 2 (cid:2) 10 7 / ml ) were allowed to spread on immobilized ﬁbrinogen for 30min at 37 8 C . Unbound platelets were removed by washing with PBS and differential interference contrast images of bound pla - telets were captured by Olympus UPlanSApo 100 (cid:2) / 1 . 4NA ( Olympus Corporation , Tokyo Japan ) oil objective on a GE HealthcareDVLivemicroscope , UPLAN - GEHeathCare , Chicago , IL . To compute the surface area , spread platelets were ﬁxed , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 5min , washed thrice in PBS and then stained with Alexa 488 - phalloidin ( 1 in 500 ) for 60min and ﬂuorescent images were obtained . ImageJ software , ImageJ - NIH , Bethesda , MD was used to measure area of spread platelets . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy Washedplateletswereimmobilizedonapolylysine - coated or ﬁbrinogen - coated cover slip ﬁxed , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and incubated with anticoﬁlin - 1 and anti - Wdr - 1 overnight at 4 8 C temperature . Cells were washed and incubated with Alexa ﬂuor conjugated appro - priate secondary antibodies for one hour . For the analysis of F - actin - focal adhesion interaction , platelets adherent on ﬁbrinogen - coated surface were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformal - dehyde , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and stained for FAK ( red ) and actin ( green ) . Images are taken in a DeltaVision OMX microscope ( GE Healthcare , Little Chalfont , UK ) at 1000 (cid:2) magniﬁcation with oil immersion and deconvolved using SoftWoRX 6 . 5 . 2 , GE Health Care , Wdr - 1 - mediated platelet spreading Dasgupta and Thiagarajan 541 Fig . 1 Wildtype Wdr - 1 deficient Wdr - 1 deficient Wildtype 0 25 50 75 100 V o l u m e o f t he c l o t ( % o f i n i t i a l v o l u m e ) * Wdr - 1 deficient Wildtype Wdr - 1 - GAPDH - Wdr - 1 deficient Wildtype 0 25 50 75 100 R e l a t i v e B and I n t en s i t y * ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Clot retraction in Wdr - 1 - deficient mice . ( a ) Platelets from wild - type and Wdr - 1 - deficient mice were isolated , solubilized in 1 % SDS and subjected to PAGE followed by immunoblot with antibodies to Wdr - 1 or GAPDH . ( b ) A representative ratios of relative band intensities of Wdr - 1 ( means and SD ) of three independent experiments are shown in which the relative intensity to the corresponding wild type was considered as 1 for comparison . ( c ) A representative image of clot retraction by platelets at 30min after stimulation with 0 . 5U / ml of thrombin . ( d ) The volume of clot expressed as percentage of the initial volume . (cid:3) P value of less than 0 . 05 compared with wild type . GAPDH , glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase . Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . Chicago , IL that applies a three - dimensional iterative constrained deconvolution algorithm . Analysis of platelet cytoskeleton Washed platelets ( 2 (cid:2) 10 8 / ml ) from wild - type and Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mice were incubated on ﬁbrinogen - coated surface on a petri dish . The adherent platelets were lysed with an equal volume 2 (cid:2) lysis buffer [ 100mmol / l Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 2 % Triton X - 100 containing ‘Halt protease and phos - phatase inhibitor cocktail’ ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , Waltham , Massachusetts , USA ) ] and kept on ice for 15min . Lysates were centrifuged at 100000 (cid:2) g for 1h to sediment Triton - X - 100 - insoluble F - actin . The F - actin pellets were washed twiceincoldlysisbufferandsolubilizedin8 - mol / lurea . The pellets were reconstituted to the same initial volume . Equal fractions were loaded onto SDS - polyacrylamide gels , elec - trophoresed , transferred onto Polyvinyl diﬂuoride mem - brane and probed with antibodies to FAK , or actin followed by peroxidase - labeled secondary antibody . The bands were analyzed and quantiﬁed in Odyssey Fc Dual - Mode Imaging System ( LI - COR Biosciences , Lincoln , Nebraska , USA ) as described before [ 11 ] . The ratio of the densitometric value of actin to FAK was determined in each separate experiment the values for wild - type plate - lets was arbitrarily normalized to 1 for comparison . Statistical analysis All data were expressed as mean (cid:4) SD of triplicate experiments . Comparisons between individual groups were performed using the Student t test with paired and unpaired samples . A probability value ( P ) of 0 . 05 or below was considered statistically signiﬁcant . Results Impaired clot retraction in Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mouse platelets Fibrin - bound activated platelets mediate clot retraction by transducing contractile forces onto the ﬁbrin network , resulting in a more compact tensile clot . Clot retraction is markedly impaired in Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mice compared with their littermate controls ( Fig . 1c and d ) . Impaired clot retraction implies a major defect in outside - in signaling . Defective adhesion and spreading of Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mouse platelets Outside - in signaling cascades generated by platelet a IIb b 3 binding to immobilized ﬁbrin ( ogen ) support adhesion and spreading . We measured platelet adhesion and spreading of platelets to immobilized ﬁbrinogen . Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mouse platelets show decreased adhe - sion on ﬁbrinogen compared wild - type mouse platelets ( Fig . 2a ) . Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient platelets exhibit a more rounded morphology compared with their wild - type lit - termate control platelets as shown by differential inter - ference contrast images ( Fig . 2b and c ) . The surface area of spreading showed signiﬁcant decrease in Wdr - 1 - deﬁ - cient platelets compared with wild - type mouse platelets ( Fig . 2d ) . Distribution of Wdr - 1 and coﬁlin - 1 in platelets We examined the distribution of Wdr - 1 by immunoﬂuo - rescence microscopy in permeabilized mouse platelets under resting condition and following spreading on ﬁbrin - ogen - coated surfaces . In resting platelets , Wdr - 1 is seen in distinct patches in the plasma membrane ( Fig . 3a ) . As Wdr - 1 antibodies do not bind to intact nonpermeabilized platelets ( data not shown ) , these results show that Wdr - 1 is localized to the submembranous cortical region . In addition , Wdr - 1 colocalizes with coﬁlin - 1 in the submem - branous region in resting platelets ( Fig . 3b and c ) . Fol - lowing spreading on ﬁbrinogen - coated surfaces , Wdr - 1 redistributes in a discrete granular pattern throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig . 3e ) in association with coﬁlin - 1 ( Fig . 3f and g ) . These ﬁndings are consistent with translocation of Wdr - 1 in a complex with coﬁlin - 1 from the cortical actin 542 Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolysis 2018 , Vol 29 No 6 Fig . 2 Wildtype Wdr - 1 deficient Wdr - 1 deficient Wildtype 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 P l a t e l e t S p r ead i ng S u r f a c e A r ea ( A r b i t r a r y U n i t s ) Wdr - 1 deficient Wildtype 0 20 40 60 P l a t e l e t A dhe s i on ( % o f c on t r o l ) * * ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Adhesion and spreading of Wdr - 1 - deficient platelets on fibrinogen substrate . ( a ) Washed platelets were incubated for 30min at room temperature in microtitre wells coated with fibrinogen , and the adherent platelets solubilized . The supernatants were aspirated , the wells washed and platelets bound to each well was measured as described before [ 10 ] . Washed platelets from wild - type littermate controls ( b ) and Wdr - 1 - deficient ( c ) mice were allowed to adhere and spread on fibrinogen - coated surface and examined by differential interference contrast microscopy . ( d ) The platelet surface area was quantified using ImageJ software and the mean and SD of three independent experiments were plotted . (cid:3) P value of less than 0 . 01 compared with wild type . Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . Wdr - 1 - mediated platelet spreading Dasgupta and Thiagarajan 543 Fig . 3 Cofilin - 1 Wdr - 1 Merge DIC Cofilin - 1 Wild type resting plateles Wild type activated plateles Wdr - 1 deficient resting platelets Wdr - 1 deficient activated plateles Wdr - 1 Merge DIC Cofilin - 1 DIC Cofilin - 1 DIC 5 µ 5 µ 5 µ 5 µ ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) ( g ) ( h ) ( i ) ( j ) ( k ) ( l ) Cofilin - 1 and Wdr - 1 distribution and in wild - type platelets . ( a – h ) Washed mouse platelets were immobilized on a polylysine - coated ( a – e ) or fibrinogen - coated cover slips ( e – h ) , fixed , permeabilized , and incubated with anti - Wdr - 1 ( a and d ) or anticofilin - 1 ( b and f ) antibodies followed by appropriately - labeled secondary antibody . The merge of images is shown in ( c ) and ( g ) . Images were taken on a deconvolution microscope with 1000 (cid:2) magnification and the corresponding DIC images are shown in ( d ) and ( h ) . Cofilin - 1 distribution in Wdr - 1 - deficient mouse platelets . ( i – l ) Washed platelets from Wdr - 1 - deficient mice were immobilized on a polylysine - coated ( i and j ) or fibrinogen - coated cover slips ( k and l ) , fixed , permeabilized , cofilin - 1 distribution was analyzed by deconvolution microscopy in ( i ) and ( k ) and the corresponding DIC image are shown in ( j ) and ( l ) . DIC , differential interference contrast . Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . to the cytoskeleton following outside - in signaling . In resting Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mouse platelets , coﬁlin - 1 is abnormally distributed throughout out the cytoplasm ( Fig . 3i and j ) compared with platelets from wild - type littermate controls ( Fig . 3a ) and there is no signiﬁcant alteration in the distribution following adhesion to ﬁbrin - ogen ( Fig . 3k and l ) . These ﬁndings show that Wdr - 1 - coﬁlin - 1 interaction is essential for the cortical localiza - tion of coﬁlin - 1 in resting platelets and Wdr - 1 is necessary for the cortical reorganization of actin that occurs during platelet spreading on ﬁbrinogen . Defective adhesion and abnormal actin ﬁlaments – focal adhesion interaction in Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient mouse platelets When platelets adhere to ﬁbrinogen , integrin a IIb b 3 clusters and recruits a number of adapter proteins to the integrin cytoplasmic tails to form focal adhesions [ 12 – 16 ] . In wild - type platelets , spreading on ﬁbrinogen is associated with formation of long actin ﬁlaments that traverse through the cytoplasm and well formed focal adhesions ( Fig . 4a ) . In Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient platelets , the F - actin ﬁlaments are conﬁned to the periphery of platelets ( Fig . 4b ) . There is impaired colocalization of actin with FAK in focal adhesions as indicated by the enhanced intensity of red ﬂuorescence due to decreased colocaliza - tion of FAK and F - actin compared with wild - type plate - lets ( Fig . 4b ) . Consistent with these results , despite an increase in F - actin content in Wdr - 1 - deﬁcient platelets , there is decreased incorporation of FAK to the actin ﬁlaments as measured by ratio of actin to FAK by densi - tometry of immunoblots of ﬁbrinogen adherent platelets ( Fig . 4c and d ) . These results show that F - actins do not make the optimal contact with the focal adhesions , pre - cluding the formation of an adequate mechanical and functional link between intraplatelet actin ﬁlaments and the extracellular matrix components through integrin a IIb b 3 in the absence of Wdr - 1 . Discussion When endothelial continuity is disrupted , platelets rap - idly adhere to the subendothelial matrix to seal the breach in the vessel wall . The initial platelet activation occurs as a result of soluble agonists binding to platelet receptors , which initiates a cascade of signal transduction events ( inside out signaling ) that causes integrin activa - tion [ 17 ] . Integrin a IIb b 3 , the major integrin in platelets , undergoes activation induced conformational changes and binds to several cell adhesion molecules to mediate platelet adhesion and aggregation and ﬁbrinogen is the most abundant ligand [ 18 ] . Upon engagement with its ligands , integrins cluster and recruit various signaling and adaptor proteins to form focal adhesions , which function as transmembrane mechanical link between extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton inside platelets . Integrins in focal adhesion plaques can sense the matrix environmen - tal cues and transmit signals to the cytoskeleton ( outside in signaling ) , resulting in platelet spreading [ 12 , 13 , 19 ] . Platelet spreading is maintained by the tension is gener - ated f by the actomyosin motors transmitted externally through integrins . Clot retraction is a critical event in thrombus consolida - tion and is dependent the integrity of properly aligned platelet actin ﬁber assembly . It almost entirely depends on outside - in signaling by the integrin a IIb b 3 , following binding to ﬁbrin ( ogen ) . During clot retraction , the plate - let - rich thrombus contract to a more compact clot due to actin ﬁlaments pulling inward the attached ﬁbrin through the integrins in focal adhesions . Our ﬁnding shows Wdr - 1 - mediated coﬁlin - 1 plays a cru - cial role in spreading on ﬁbrinogen substrate and in clot retraction – the two functions in which outside - in signal - ing plays a signiﬁcant role . Coﬁlin - 1 changes the twist of F - actin ﬁlament and leads to its fragmentation . Coﬁlin1 then depolymerizes ﬁlamentous F - actin without capping 544 Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolysis 2018 , Vol 29 No 6 Fig . 4 Wildtype 5 µm 5 µm FAK Actin W d r - 1 D e f i c i en t W il d - t y pe F AK / F - a c t i n Wild - type 0 1 . 0 0 . 5 N o r m a li z ed R a t i o Wdr - 1 deficient * ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Defective interaction of F - actin with focal adhesion . Wild - type ( a ) and Wdr - 1 - deficient ( b ) platelets were allowed to spread on fibrinogen , fixed and permeabilized and the F - actin fibers in which visualized with Alexa 488 phalloidin ( light grey fluorescence ) and focal adhesions were visualized with antifocal adhesion kinase antibody ( dark grey fluorescence ) . Impaired colocalization was indicated by enhanced red fluorescence in Wdr - 1 - deficient mouse platelets . ( c ) F - actin filaments were isolated from wild - type and Wdr - 1 - deficient mice and the incorporation of focal adhesion kinase to actin filaments was determined by immunoblots . The ratio of the densitometry value of actin to focal adhesion kinase ( d ) was determined in each separate experiment and the values for wild - type platelets were arbitrarily normalized to 1 for comparison . A representative blot of means and SDs of the ratios from three independent experiments are shown . (cid:3) P value of less than 0 . 01 compared with wild type . Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . it . This depolymerization facilitates new actin ﬁber for - mation via the newly exposed barbed ends . Wdr - 1 , by binding to the coﬁlin – F - actin complex and strongly enhances the severing activity of coﬁlin - 1 [ 20 ] . Aberrant spatial localization of coﬁlin - 1 in Wdr - 1 deﬁcient platelets may not allow proper attachment to focal adhesions resulting in defective reorganization of actin ﬁlaments necessary for development mechanical strength neces - sary for spreading and clot retraction , resulting in an impaired hemostasis in Wdr - 1 deﬁciency . Acknowledgements We thank Dr Monica Justice for providing the Wdr - 1 hypomorphic mutant mice . The contents of this article are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States Government . Compliance with ethical standards : The investigation involving mice was conformed to the Guide for The Care and Use of Laboratory Animals as published by the US National Institutes of Health . All animals were treated in accordance with the protocol approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC ) of Baylor College of Medicine . Blood was obtained from human volunteers after an informed written consent under a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board of Baylor College of Medicine . The current study was supported in part by a grant from the Department of Veterans Affairs , Veterans Health Administration , Ofﬁce of Research and Development , Biomedical Laboratory Research and Development award ( to P . T . ) , a Grant - in Aid from American Heart Association to S . K . D . Conﬂicts of interest There are no conﬂicts of interest . References 1 Fox JE . Cytoskeletal proteins and platelet signaling . Thromb Haemost 2001 ; 86 : 198 – 213 . 2 Thon JN , Italiano JE . Platelets : production , morphology and ultrastructure . Handb Exp Pharmacol 2012 ; 210 : 3 – 22 . 3 Hartwig JH . The platelet : form and function . Semin Hematol 2006 ; 43 ( 1 Suppl 1 ) : S94 – S100 . 4 Lappalainen P . Actin - binding proteins : the long road to understanding the dynamic landscape of cellular actin networks . Mol Biol Cell 2016 ; 27 : 2519 – 2522 . 5 Rodal AA , Tetreault JW , Lappalainen P , Drubin DG , Amberg DC . Aip1p interacts with coﬁlin to disassemble actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 145 : 1251 – 1264 . 6 StandingAS , MalinovaD , HongY , RecordJ , MouldingD , BlundellMP , etal . Autoinﬂammatoryperiodicfever , immunodeﬁciency , andthrombocytopenia ( PFIT ) caused by mutation in actin - regulatory gene WDR1 . J Exp Med 2017 ; 214 : 59 – 71 . 7 Kile BT , Panopoulos AD , Stirzaker RA , Hacking DF , Tahtamouni LH , Willson TA , et al . Mutations in the coﬁlin partner Aip1 / Wdr1 cause autoinﬂammatory disease and macrothrombocytopenia . Blood 2007 ; 110 : 2371 – 2380 . 8 Dasgupta SK , Le A , Da Q , Cruz M , Rumbaut RE , Thiagarajan P . Wdr1 - dependent actin reorganization in platelet activation . PLoS One 2016 ; 11 : e0162897 . 9 Martinez J , Holburn RR , Shapiro SS , Erslev AJ . Fibrinogen Philadelphia . A hereditary hypodysﬁbrinogenemia characterized by ﬁbrinogen hypercatabolism . J Clin Invest 1974 ; 53 : 600 – 611 . 10 Khatlani T , Pradhan S , Da Q , Gushiken FC , Bergeron AL , Langlois KW , et al . The beta isoform of the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 2B restrainsplateletfunctionbysuppressingoutside - inalphaIIbbeta3integrin signaling . J Thromb Haemost 2014 ; 12 : 2089 – 2101 . 11 Hartig SM . Basic image analysis and manipulation in ImageJ . Curr Protoc Mol Biol 2013 ; Chapter 14 : Unit14 . 15 . 12 Sandmann R , Koster S . Topographic cues reveal two distinct spreading mechanisms in blood platelets . Sci Rep 2016 ; 6 : 22357 . 13 Arias - Salgado EG , Lizano S , Sarkar S , Brugge JS , Ginsberg MH , Shattil SJ . Src kinase activation by direct interaction with the integrin beta cytoplasmic domain . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 ; 100 : 13298 – 13302 . 14 Podolnikova NP , Yermolenko IS , Fuhrmann A , Lishko VK , Magonov S , Bowen B , et al . Control of integrin alphaIIb beta3 outside - in signaling and platelet adhesion by sensing the physical properties of ﬁbrin ( ogen ) substrates . Biochemistry 2010 ; 49 : 68 – 77 . 15 Kasirer - Friede A , Kang J , Kahner B , Ye F , Ginsberg MH , Shattil SJ . ADAP interactions with talin and kindlin promote platelet integrin alphaIIbbeta3 activation and stable ﬁbrinogen binding . Blood 2014 ; 123 : 3156 – 3165 . 16 Gorbatyuk V , Nguyen K , Podolnikova NP , Deshmukh L , Lin X , Ugarova TP , et al . Skelemin association with alphaIIbbeta3 integrin : a structural model . Biochemistry 2014 ; 53 : 6766 – 6775 . 17 Ginsberg MH . Integrin activation . BMB Rep 2014 ; 47 : 655 – 659 . 18 CollerBS . alphaIIbbeta3 : structureandfunction . JThromb Haemost 2015 ; 13 ( Suppl 1 ) : S17 – S25 . 19 Oakes PW , Banerjee S , Marchetti MC , Gardel ML . Geometry regulates traction stresses in adherent cells . Biophys J 2014 ; 107 : 825 – 833 . 20 Ono S . Regulation of actin ﬁlament dynamics by actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin and actin - interacting protein 1 : new blades for twisted ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 2003 ; 42 : 13363 – 13370 . Wdr - 1 - mediated platelet spreading Dasgupta and Thiagarajan 545