Bridging Distances for Global Participation : Conducting and Theorizing Participatory Design and Research in Hybrid Contexts Conducting and Theorizing Participatory Design and Research in Hybrid Contexts Aale Luusua Oulu School of Architecture & INTERACT Research Unit , University of Oulu aale . luusua @ oulu . fi Johanna Ylipulli Department of Computer Science , Aalto University johanna . ylipulli @ aalto . fi Dani Kalarikalayil Raju Studio Hasi , Mumbai daniel @ studiohasi . com Emilia Rönkkö Oulu School of Architecture , University of Oulu aale . luusua @ oulu . fi ABSTRACT Participatory Design ( PD ) must increasingly be able to serve various global contexts . Overall , a fundamental need has been identified in the PD community to raise previously unheard global voices in de - sign and development work , and to bring various underrepresented stakeholders together . On the other hand , the rapid adoption of various synchronous and asynchronous communication methods through collaborative online tools offers opportunities for more dispersed and more diverse PD research teams , settings and pro - cesses . This raises new possibilities for bridging global distances and bringing various stakeholders together for the purposes of conducting multicultural , multi - site PD . Importantly , while there exists extensive research literatures both on PD , on remote ethnog - raphy and on Computer - Supported Collaborative Work , we posit that these literatures have not been brought together ; nor have the practices and methodologies of these communities been sufficiently jointly explored to support the goals of multisite , multicultural PD . In this workshop , we strive to bridge this gap in knowledge through exploring the opportunities of conducting hybrid multi - site Participatory Design ( HMPD ) research through synchronous and asynchronous present – telepresent participatory methods , and to share issues , challenges , opportunities , methods and empirical examples pertaining to this as a goal . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Interaction design ; Interaction design process and methods ; Participatory design . KEYWORDS Participatory design , Participatory methodology , Hybrid research settings , Distance work , Remote ethnography , Global South , Global North Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9422 - 2 / 23 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3573823 ACM Reference Format : Aale Luusua , Johanna Ylipulli , Dani Kalarikalayil Raju , and Emilia Rönkkö . 2023 . Bridging Distances for Global Participation : Conducting and Theo - rizing Participatory Design and Research in Hybrid Contexts : Conducting and Theorizing Participatory Design and Research in Hybrid Contexts . In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems ( CHI EA ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3573823 1 BACKGROUND In this workshop , we explore the opportunities of conducting multi - site participatory design ( PD ) and research through hybrid present – telepresent participatory methods , and share issues , challenges , methods and empirical examples pertaining to this as a goal . Par - ticipatory Design ( PD ) must increasingly be able to serve various global contexts . A fundamental need has been identified in the PD community to raise previously unheard global voices in design and development work , and to bring various underrepresented stake - holders together [ e . g . 11 ] . Overall , there is a common creed to work towards a PD that is post - colonial [ 9 ] , culturally hybrid [ 8 , 10 ] and which combines various identities [ 6 , 14 ] and voices from the Global South and North [ 11 ] . The overall purpose of PD is to enable the participation of future users and other stakeholders in the design processes of new tech - nologies , in order to both democratize the design process and to co - create new knowledge from various areas of expertise [ 8 , 10 , 11 ] . Owing to the qualitative and context specific nature of PD , the bread and butter of participatory methodology has been physically co - located creative work with participants , with the aim to immerse the practitioners in the use context , and to learn about the practices , needs and values relevant for the stakeholders in this context [ e . g . 12 ] . This embedded , hands - on work is crucial and arguably forms the basis of PD practice . Often , this has also meant that PD research team members have been mostly physically co - located , at least for the duration of the PD process . This approach has fundamental validity , as PD requires an in - depth understanding of the cultural context in which it is performed [ 8 , 10 , 11 ] . Therefore , PD bears many similarities with the ethnographic approach that also has heavily relied on ‘being there’ [ 13 ] , and these two have been used together and inspired each other [ e . g . 12 ] . Nevertheless , this approach also has its drawbacks , as collocated work means both geographical and financial limitations to the type CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Aale Luusua et al . of work that can be accomplished . Conducting multi - site co - located work may be prohibitively time - consuming and expensive , and may also require extensive physical capabilities from both practitioners and participants , leaving many voices unheard . Thus , it could be argued that the traditional co - located methods of PD could be usefully amended with remote methods , and that existing remote methods could be molded to suit the needs of PD . During the world - wide social distancing efforts of 2020 – 2022 , an enormous leap was made seemingly overnight in adopting novel modalities of distance collaboration , as teams and workplaces be - came forcibly physically disconnected [ 1 ] . This physical separation necessitated distanced virtual team collaboration [ 1 – 4 ] . As we have since moved into a post social distancing world , it is important and timely to seize the lessons learned from this pandemic - induced forced hybridization of collaboration . Furthermore , there is an op - portunity to keep developing the potentialities that emerged from the experience . This rapid adoption of various synchronous and asynchronous communication methods through collaborative on - line tools offers opportunities for more dispersed and more diverse PD research teams , settings and processes . This raises new potential - ities for novel spaces for participation [ 5 ] , bridging global distances and bringing stakeholders of various identities and abilities together for the purposes of conducting multicultural , multi - site PD . However , this opportunity also raises several questions , includ - ing : How can we enable various global stakeholders to take part in global hybrid PD ? How can PD practitioners work across cul - tural spheres in distant settings , and how can we perform culturally aware and immersed work without ‘being there’ ? What is the role of ‘cultural agents’ in PD processes that span various cultures ? What values , competences and awareness do PD practitioners need when conducting PD work in culturally diverse hybrid settings ? What can a partly technology - mediated PD process consist of , what knowl - edge can it produce , and what limitations does it have ? What novel challenges and opportunities pertaining to accessibility emerge in a technology - mediated PD process ? What PD processes or meth - ods are not suited to hybrid work and best left for the “nonline” world ? What theories , methods and lessons from the decades of computer - supported work could be applied to PD ? Importantly , while there exists extensive research literatures on PD , on Computer - Supported Collaborative Work and on remote ethnography [ 13 ] , we recognize a gap at the intersection of these research communities and areas . We posit that these literatures regarding distance work have not been sufficiently brought together with PD research ; nor have the practices and methodologies of these communities been sufficiently jointly explored to support the goals of multisite , multicultural PD . In this workshop , we strive to bridge this gap in knowledge and create a novel paradigm of PD through exploring the opportunities of conducting hybrid multi - site Participatory Design ( HMPD ) research through synchronous and asynchronous present – telepresent participatory methods , and to share issues , challenges , opportunities , methods and empirical examples pertaining to this as a goal . 2 ORGANIZERS Aale Luusua , D . Sc . ( Tech ) , is an architect , researcher and Univer - sity Lecturer positioned at the Oulu School of Architecture and INTERACT Research Unit at the University of Oulu , Finland . With a general research focus on urban environments , citizen participa - tion , digitalization , design theory and interdisciplinary research , Dr . Luusua led the Academy of Finland postdoctoral project Experienc - ing Artificial Intelligence in the Smart City ( AICity ) . Dr . Luusua’s works have been published in leading international scientific books and journals published by SAGE , Routledge and Springer , and in leading scientific conference proceedings , such as the ACM Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems and the ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . Dr . Luusua has also co - led international workshops e . g . in the Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference , Critical Alternatives 2015 , at Designing Interactive Systems 2020 , and at IndiaHCI2020 . Johanna Ylipulli , Ph . D . , is a cultural anthropologist and adjunct professor ( docent ) in digital culture . She currently works at Aalto University’s Department of Computer Science , where she is the PI of the Academy of Finland Research Fellow project Digital Inequal - ity in Smart Cities ( DISC ) and subproject PI in the project Designing Inclusive & Trustworthy Digital Public Services for Migrants in Fin - land . Her research has focused on cultural and social implications of new digital technologies in urban contexts . Dr . Ylipulli has worked in exceptionally interdisciplinary research environments in lead - ing Finnish Universities , and published broadly , in fora spanning from prominent social scientific journals to flagship conferences of human - computer interaction . These include International Com - munication Gazette , Technological Forecasting and Social Change and Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) , and publishers such as Routledge and SAGE . Dr . Ylipulli has co - led international workshops e . g . in the Fifth Decennial Aarhus Confer - ence , Critical Alternatives 2015 , at Designing Interactive Systems 2020 , and at CHI 2021 . Dani Kalarikalayil Raju is co - founder of Studio Hasi , a startup with a mission to diversify future making . He is an alumnus of IDC School of Design , IIT Bombay and has been working with resource constrained user groups ( Emergent Users ) in India for the past 7 years in collaboration with Computational Foundry at Swansea University . The consistent theme in his work is that of exploring futures with users having constraints such as low literacy , lack of technology experience and low self - efficacy , by engaging them in workshops and deployment studies to re - imagine forward looking technologies for the world . Working with emergent users in two of Mumbai’s slums , his recent work explored the value and uses of photovoltaic ( PV ) self - powered deformable digital materials for interhome connections . He was awarded Gary Marsden Travel Awards for presenting this work at CHI 2021 . Docent , Dr . Emilia Rönkkö , D . Sc . ( Tech ) , is an adjunct pro - fessor , architect and docent of urban planning at the Oulu School of Architecture , University of Oulu , Finland . Her expertise covers a wide range of interdisciplinary research topics related to urban health , resiliency strategies and technological innovations support - ing smart urban governance . Her primary branch of research work is focusing on evidence - informed urban planning approaches and data - driven tools supporting anticipatory and participatory prac - tices . She currently works as a subproject PI in the Academy of Finland‘s Strategic Research project RECIPE ( Resistant Cities : Ur - ban Planning as Means for Pandemic Prevention ) . Amongst its objectives , the project studies virtual collaboration platforms and Bridging Distances for Global Participation : Conducting and Theorizing Participatory Design and Research in Hybrid Contexts CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany their role in knowledge co - creation , knowledge transfer across dif - ferent boundaries , and overcoming silos in urban planning . In the private sector , Dr . Rönkkö has been involved in the design and development of digital tools for the use of urban planning . 3 WEBSITE The workshop website is located at : https : / / sites . google . com / view / urbanai / conducting - hybrid - pd 4 PRE - WORKSHOP PLANS All prospective participants are invited to send the workshop orga - nizers their 2 – 4 page workshop papers in the ACM Single Column format . The organizers will allow a maximum of 16 papers into the workshop to ensure an engaging , interactive workshop , and a high quality of contributions . For accepted papers , we will seek publi - cation in the INTERACT publications series ( cf . 7 Post - Workshop plans ) . To further activate the chosen participants prior to the workshop , participants will be asked to submit their introductions on a Miro board in advance . In these introductions , participants are asked to describe their relevant experience and expertise in 5 - 10 words , and to answer two questions : ”What motivates you to conduct Hybrid & Multi - site Participatory design / research ? ” and “What is the most burning issue related to Hybrid & Multi - site PD for you right now in your research ? ” These answers are not circulated outside the workshop . Participant introductions are shared before the workshop day on a Miro board , and all participants are requested to go through others presentations ( slides and / or videos ) . In this way , participants are familiar with each other already before the workshop day . 5 HYBRID WORKSHOP AND ASYNCHRONOUS ENGAGEMENT The workshop will be conducted in hybrid format , with participants presenting and working in mixed present – telepresent teams . This approach helps participants to also empathize with the topic at hand : conducting participatory work globally in a hybrid multi - site context . Participants will use online documents and Zoom ( or similar ) to discuss the group assignments . During the workshop , the groups will build a common Miro board that identifies opportunities and challenges of conducting hybrid , multi - site PD . This workshop employs asynchronous methods in addition to the typical workshop paper . The aforementioned pre - workshop Miro board will help participants get to know each other beforehand . It will also help participants consider why they want to take part in this workshop , and what are issues of importance to the research community . After the workshop , participants will continue to have access to the board . Analysis and report of the workshop results will be shared on the workshop website in accessible audio - video format as well as in textual form . 6 WORKSHOP STRUCTURE On the day of the workshop , we begin with an informal round of brief introductions before we settle into the mini - lecture part of the workshop . The hosts will briefly introduce the idea of hybrid and multi - site PD , and a further mini - lecture on the topic of developing asynchronous and synchronous digital tools for participation in urban planning . These lectures will prepare the participants for the group work . During work session 1 , workshop participants will also present their topics of interest . Presentation slides will be collected prior to the workshop to assure a smooth workflow . For work session 2 , we will formulate groups thematically , se - lected by participants themselves or us , if need be . Groups will receive an assignment to reflect on and discuss relevant theories , case studies , methods , contexts , etc . for the development of the concept of hybrid and multi - site PD . Different groups will get a different assignment , depending on their papers and interests , and all of them will complement each other . The idea is to chart oppor - tunities , challenges , and practical methods to conduct PD in hybrid and in multi - site research settings . The results will be presented on a joint Miro board which will serve as the roadmap to hybrid multi - site Participatory Design . Finally , for work session 3 , groups will present their contribu - tions . To cap the workshop , we will have a closing roundtable discussion to draft a common understanding of the day’s results . Furthermore , we will discuss plans for the future . Our main immedi - ate target is to edit a special issue for INTERACT publication series ( cf . Post - workshop plans ) and to draft an agenda for developing hybrid and multi - site Participatory Design and research . We will also discuss whether there is interest to edit a Handbook of Hybrid Multi - site Participatory Design . This is a one - day workshop , with the following preliminary schedule . All times in Central European Time ( CET ) . Session 1 : 10 : 00am Welcome and hosts’ introductions 10 : 15am Mini - Lecture on Experiences , Opportunities and Chal - lenges of Hybrid Multi - site Participatory Design and Research : Case India – Finland 10 : 30am Mini - Lecture on Developing Digital Tools for Participa - tory Work in Urban Planning 10 : 45am Participants’ presentations : Recounting experiences , reflecting on methods and building theory 12 : 30am Lunch break Session 2 : 01 : 30pm Identifying opportunities and challenges of Multi - site , Multi - cultural Participatory Design in Hybrid Environments ( groups ) 02 : 15pm Identifying tools , methods and theories of Multi - site , Multi - cultural Participatory Design in Hybrid Environments ( groups ) 03 : 00pm Coffee break Session 3 : 03 : 15pm Session 3 : Group presentations , Combining the results 04 : 00pm Session 4 : Roundtable discussion ; Next steps for the workshop group 05 : 00pm Closing the workshop 06 : 00pm Dinner reservation for in - person participants Light refreshments during breaks are included for in - person partic - ipants ; however , lunch and dinner are not covered . 7 POST - WORKSHOP PLANS After the workshop , Workshop participants will be invited to sub - mit a paper to a special issue of the INTERACT publication series ( https : / / interact . oulu . fi / interact ) . Further , opportunities for future CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Aale Luusua et al . collaborations , co - authoring papers , and editing a Handbook for Hybrid and Multi - site Participatory Design will be planned and discussed at the workshop . Analysis and report of the workshop results will be later shared on the workshop website in accessible audio - video format as well as in textual form . 8 ACCESSIBILITY The workshop papers will be published on the conference website as accessible Word documents . Moreover , the participants are required to provide a short , accessible audio - video presentation of their paper . The workshop results are similarly shared on the workshop website as text and in accessible audio - video format . Fittingly , the workshop itself will be a hybrid event , taking place both in - person and in online environments , which will support accessibility . Some of the hosts will be physically present and some remotely . Due to the hybrid format , participants may use several modalities in the Zoom ( or similar ) sessions , including verbal dis - cussion , chat function , shared documents , and shared online boards to participate . Importantly , the hybrid nature of the event will also make the workshop financially accessible globally . To this end , we will also only employ free - to - use online tools . Post - workshop plans also include several accessibility options and modalities . The workshop papers will be published on the workshop website as accessible Word documents . Moreover , the participants are required to provide a short , accessible audio - video presentation of their paper . The workshop results are similarly shared on the workshop website in accessible audio - video format , as well as in textual form . 9 CALL FOR PARTICIPATION In this workshop , we explore the opportunities of conducting multi - site participatory design ( PD ) and research through hybrid present – telepresent participatory methods , and share issues , challenges , methods and empirical examples pertaining to this as a goal . PD must increasingly be able to address and serve various global contexts . Overall , then , there is a fundamental need to raise previ - ously unheard global voices in technology design and development , and to bring various stakeholders together . The bread and butter of participatory methodology has been physically co - located creative work with participants , with the aim to immerse the practitioners in the use context , and to learn about the practices , needs and val - ues relevant for the stakeholders in this context . This embedded , hands - on work is crucial and arguably forms the basis of PD prac - tice . Often , this has also meant that PD research teams have been mostly physically co - located , at least for the duration of the PD process . This approach has fundamental validity , as PD requires an in - depth understanding of the cultural context in which it is performed . Nevertheless , this approach also has its drawbacks , as collocated work means both geographical and financial limitations to the type of work that can be accomplished . Conducting multi - site co - located work may be prohibitively time - consuming and expensive , and may also require extensive physical capabilities from both practitioners and participants , leaving many voices unheard . Furthermore , the rapid adoption of various synchronous and asynchronous commu - nication methods through online collaborative tools offer opportu - nities for more continuous , more dispersed , and more diverse PD research settings and processes . During the world - wide social distancing efforts of 2020 – 2022 , an enormous leap forward was made seemingly overnight in adopting novel modalities of participation and collaboration . As we have since moved into a post social distancing world , it is important and timely to both seize the lessons learned from the pandemic - induced forced hybridization of PD , and to keep developing the potentialities that emerged from the experience . However , this opportunity also raises several questions , including : How can we enable various global stakeholders to take part in global hybrid PD ? How can PD practitioners work across cultural spheres in distant settings , and how can we perform culturally aware and sensitive work withot ‘being there’ ? What can a partly technology - mediated PD process consist of , what knowledge can it produce , and what limitations does it have ? What novel challenges and opportunities pertaining to accessibility emerge in a technology - mediated PD process ? What values , competences and awareness do PD practitioners need when conducting PD work in culturally diverse hybrid settings ? What PD processes or methods are not suited to hybrid work and best left for the “nonline” world ? What theories , methods and lessons from other fields of research , e , g , from remote ethnography or Computer - Supported Collaborative Work , could be applied ? We invite those interested to submit a position paper ( 3 – 4 pages ) in the SIGCHI Single column paper format . These contributions may address , for example : • Theoretical considerations : e . g . , utilising key theoretical con - cepts from various fields to build understanding of how to conduct hybrid participatory design and research in various global contexts • Case studies : empirical works that analyze experiences of hybrid participatory design and research in various global contexts • Design - based explorations in real - world settings : e . g . imple - mentation of participatory design and research approaches in different global contexts in hybrid environments • Methods : Methodologies that can contribute towards better implementation of participation in various global contexts and in hybrid environments • Thematic issues ; e . g . ethical issues ; various user or stake - holder groups , various areas of design , global perspectives , etc . pertaining to conducting hybrid PD in multi - side , multi - cultural contexts Deadline : Feb 8 , 2023 ( 23 : 59 AoE ) Notifications : Mar 1 , 2023 ( 23 : 59 AoE ) Workshop Duration : One day Papers should be sent to : aale . luusua ( at ) oulu . fi ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable input of co - design and research participants in Finland and India . This work was supported by the Academy of Finland funded project Digital Inequality in Smart Cities , DISC , ( 332143 ) . Bridging Distances for Global Participation : Conducting and Theorizing Participatory Design and Research in Hybrid Contexts CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany REFERENCES [ 1 ] Christoffer Bagger and Stine Lomborg . 2021 . Overcoming Forced Disconnection : Disentangling the Professional and the Personal in Pandemic Times . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers , United States , 167 – 188 . [ 2 ] Pernille Bjørn , Morten Esbensen , Rasmus Eskild Jensen , and Stina Matthiesen . 2014 . Does Distance Still Matter ? Revisiting the CSCW Fundamentals on Dis - tributed Collaboration . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 21 , 5 , Article 27 ( nov 2014 ) , 26 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2670534 [ 3 ] Pernille Bjørn and Ojelanki Ngwenyama . 2009 . Virtual team collaboration : build - ing shared meaning , resolving breakdowns and creating translucence . Infor - mation Systems Journal 19 , 3 ( 2009 ) , 227 – 253 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2575 . 2007 . 00281 . x [ 4 ] Erin Bradner and Gloria Mark . 2002 . Why Distance Matters : Effects on Coop - eration , Persuasion and Deception . In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Confer - ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( New Orleans , Louisiana , USA ) ( CSCW’02 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 226 – 235 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 587078 . 587110 [ 5 ] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner . 2010 . Spaces for participatory creativity . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 51 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900449 [ 6 ] Emeline Brulé and Katta Spiel . 2019 . Negotiating Gender and Disability Iden - tities in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 9th International Con - ference on Communities & Technologies - Transforming Communities ( C & T ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 218 – 227 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328320 . 3328369 [ 7 ] Håkan Edeholt and Henry Nsaiszeka Mainsah . 2014 . Glocal participatory design : designerly approaches for trans - local climate change initiatives . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Work - shop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 ( PDC ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 75 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662186 [ 8 ] DavidHakkenandPaulaMaté . 2014 . Theculturequestioninparticipatorydesign . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Indus - try Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 ( PDC ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 87 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662197 [ 9 ] Henry Mainsah and Andrew Morrison . 2014 . Participatory design through a cultural lens : insights from postcolonial theory . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop De - scriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 ( PDC ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 83 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662195 [ 10 ] Samantha Merritt and Erik Stolterman . 2012 . Cultural hybridity in participatory design . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Exploratory Papers , WorkshopDescriptions , IndustryCases - Volume2 ( PDC’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 73 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2348144 . 2348168 [ 11 ] Bárbara Szaniecki , Bibiana Serpa , Imaíra Portela , Marina Sirito , Mariana Costard , and Sâmia Batista . 2020 . Participation otherwise : Practices by / from the Global South . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Partici - pation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 2 ( PDC ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 203 – 205 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3384772 . 3385171 [ 12 ] J . Ylipulli , A . Luusua , and T . Ojala . 2017 . On Creative Metaphors in Technology Design : Case " Magic " . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on CommunitiesandTechnologies ( C & T’17 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , New York , NY , USA , 280 – 289 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3083671 . 3083691 [ 13 ] Postill , John . 2016 . Doing remote ethnography . The Routledge Companion to Digital Ethnography , London , Routledge . [ 14 ] Dani Kalarikalayil Raju , Krishna Seunarine , Thomas Reitmaier , Gethin Thomas , Yogesh Kumar Meena , Chi Zhang , Adam Pockett , Jennifer Pearson , Simon Robin - son , Matt Carnie , Deepak Ranjan Sahoo , and Matt Jones . 2021 . PV - Pix : Slum Community Co - design of Self - Powered Deformable Smart Messaging Materials . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 304 , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445661