Augmenting Real - World Objects : A Paper - Based Audio Notebook Lisa J . Stifelman Speech Research Group , MIT Media Laboratory 20 Ames Street , Cambridge , MA 02139 617 - 253 - 8026 , lisa @ media . mit . edu ABSTRACT The Audio Notebook allows a user to capture and access an audio recording of a lecture or meeting in conjunction with notes written on paper . The audio recording is synchronized with the user’s handwritten notes and page turns . As a user flips through physical pages of notes , the audio scans to the start of each page . Audio is also accessed by pointing with a pen to a location in the notes or using an audio scrollbar . A small observational study of users in real settings was performed . The prototype did not interfere with the user’s normal interactions yet gave reassurance that key ideas could be accessed later . In future work , automatic segmentation of the recorded speech using acoustic cues will be combined with user activity to structure the audio . KEYWORDS : Speech interfaces , speech as data . INTRODUCTION While attending a lecture or meeting , a listener cannot write down a complete transcript of what is said . Oftentimes users may be missing critical information from their notes , want more detail for a particular topic , or need the ability to review the original material . While a cassette recorder can be used to capture a verbatim record , it is difficult to find the desired portions of speech , skim the recording , or correlate it with one’s written notes . The Audio Notebook augments a paper notebook , synchronizing the user’s handwritten notes with an audio recording of the material . The user ’ s natural activity ( i . e . , writing and page turns ) serves as an implicit index into the audio . Time is mapped to space —the spatial layout of writing in the physical notebook enables rapid navigation in a time - dependent medium . Familiar objects like paper and pen are used for interacting with the audio rather than artifacts left over from analog devices , such as fast forward and rewind controls . The ultimate goal is to allow the user to skim both the written notes and audio recording . APPROACH : WHY PAPER ? Previous systems for accessing time - based media from notes used computer - based input rather than actual paper and pen . NoTime linked notes written with a stylus on a notepad computer to an analog video recording [ 1 ] ; Filochat linked writing on an LCD tablet to an audio recording [ 4 ] . The KeyRecorder 1 indexed an audio recording using typewritten notes on a laptop computer . A goal of the Audio Notebook is to augment rather than replace the user’s current notetaking tools . Paper and pen provide a portable , tangible , and ubiquitous way of capturing information [ 2 ] . The primary notetaking strategy for students and professionals attending lectures and meetings remains paper and pen . Paper documents have many advantages over digital ones—a sheet of paper can be quickly torn from a notebook , stuffed in one’s pocket for easy access , or handed to a friend . Users often remember a mapping of physical locations in their notes to the desired information . AUDIO NOTEBOOK PROTOTYPE As the user writes in an ordinary paper notebook , the audio of a lecture or meeting is recorded digitally . Button controls for starting and stopping recording are activated by dipping the pen inside them ( figure 1 ) . After recording , audio can be accessed by space or by time . Playback can be started by pointing to a location in the notebook with the pen . Dragging the pen along an audio scrollbar navigates a time - line of the audio associated with each page . PageDetector AudioScrollbar Record Controls StatusDisplay Fig . 1 . Audio Notebook prototype . The paper notebook is placed on top of a digitizing tablet ; a U - shaped cover creates a slot for the notebook over the tablet’s active area . The user takes notes using a cordless digitizing pen with an ink cartridge . The prototype can sense through a notebook of about 60 pages . Playback is triggered by the location and pressure of the pen . Playback begins a few seconds prior to the time offset of the user’s selection . The current page number and state of interaction ( e . g . , playback time ) are shown on a small LCD display . 1I developed this prototype in June of 1993 . LEDs are used to indicate when the device is recording or paused . The prototype is connected to a Macintosh Duo which handles recording , playback , and storage of pen data . Page Detection The prototype automatically detects the current page of the notebook during recording and playback . Bar codes were considered , but the readers are large and require manual input by pointing or swiping . Instead , a specialized page detector was developed ( figure 2 ) . Page numbers are printed in a six bit binary code along the side of each page using black and white squares . The code is read using six optical sensors angled down at the page . Fig . 2 . Audio Notebook page detector . USER STUDY A small study was performed to observe use of the audio notebook prototype in real settings . Users were selected who had a need to take notes and were strongly motivated to review them . The study had two parts—profiles of user’s current notetaking habits , and use of the audio notebook for taking and reviewing notes . User Notetaking Profiles To learn about the notetaking habits of different users and determine if their notetaking style changed when using the Audio Notebook , the following types of users were interviewed : a language student , a computer science student , a user studies professional , and a lawyer . The lawyer and technical students needed very detailed notes . The lawyer often attempted to capture a verbatim account ; obtaining missing information from a client is usually not possible or advisable . The user studies professional recorded all his interviews on cassette tape and manually transcribed them . He took few notes , jotting down his own thoughts , rather than what subjects said . The language student also took few notes ; the classroom sessions involved mostly speaking and interacting with others . Taking Notes with the Audio Notebook Three of the users interviewed participated in the second part of the study—use of the audio notebook in real settings . Two subjects used the prototype during one of their class sessions , and one during a group meeting . Prior to the notetaking session , each user was only told “the device synchronizes your notes with an audio recording . ” Given only these brief instructions and no prior experience with the device , it was surprising that users’ notetaking was affected . The language student wrote larger and took more notes , “almost unconsciously” annotating points for later access . The user studies professional tried to anticipate whenever something important was said by constantly pausing and restarting recording . Part way through the meeting , he changed his strategy , keeping recording on at all times and using the notes to mark indices . A social implication of his original strategy was that others noticed his actions and said “why are you pausing me ! ” Reviewing Notes with the Audio Notebook Playback by selection with the pen was intuitive . However , users did not like the way playback started automatically whenever they turned a page . Users , at least inexperienced ones , tend to want tight control over starting and stopping audio playback [ 3 ] . The purpose of the audio scrollbar was not immediately apparent . The scrollbar is intended for fine - grained control in cases when notes are sparse . A slot in the middle of the scrollbar provided an obvious place to slide the pen , but users thought its function was redundant with the ability to play directly from the page . However , after using the scrollbar for a short period , it was noted as a good way to quickly “run down a page . ” Displaying a correlation between time and space , such as lighting up a point in the scrollbar whenever the user selects on the page , could enable the user to adjust the starting point of playback . Another means of playback was suggested by the language student . She wanted to distill a “key note” audio summary from writing that was circled or underlined in her notebook . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK When asked what she liked the best about the audio notebook one user said “it doesn’t alter the fundamental way I take notes , or my interactions in class” yet she found it reassuring that key ideas would be accessible later on . This goes back to the assumptions about using paper and pen and why this is so important . Rather than simply replacing real world artifacts , we can augment them , providing computational capabilities not previously possible . Perhaps the Audio Notebook is more than just an augmentation of existing paper media , but the creation of a new artifact through the seemless integration of paper and audio . This paper has presented an approach for “user structured” audio . Future work will attempt to combine user activity with acoustic cues ( e . g . , changes in pitch and pauses ) for automatically segmenting a speech recording . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to Wayne Burdick , Jacob Tuft , and Tai Mai for hardware development . Thanks also to Chris Schmandt , Barry Arons , David Reed , Debby Hindus , Andrew Singer , Hiroshi Ishii , and everyone at Interval Research Corp . REFERENCES 1 . Lamming , M . G . Towards a Human Memory Prosthesis . Tech Report # EPC - 91 - 116 . Rank Xerox EuroPARC , 1991 . 2 . Newman , W . and Wellner , P . A Desk Supporting Computer - Based Interaction with Paper Documents . In Proc . CHI ’92 , pp . 587 – 592 . ACM , 1992 . 3 . Stifelman , L . J . , Arons , B . , Schmandt , C . and Hulteen , E . A . VoiceNotes : A Speech Interface for a Hand - Held Voice Notetaker . In INTERCHI ’93 , pp . 179 - 186 . ACM , 1993 . 4 . Whittaker , S . , Hyland , P . and Wiley , M . Filochat : Handwritten Notes Provide Access to Recorded Conversations . In CHI ’94 , pp . 271 – 277 . ACM , 1994 .