D E V E L O P M E N T 2027 RESEARCH ARTICLE INTRODUCTION Embryonic development is remarkable – individual cells , by coordinated action , shape the body plan during morphogenesis . One challenge is to identify the molecular machinery involved and how it is used in different ways to perform a remarkably diverse set of behaviors . The actin cytoskeleton provides force for cell movement and shape change ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Roles of many actin regulators were defined through studies in vitro , or in relatively simple systems such as budding yeast or fibroblasts . Even single cells deploy different actin modulators in different contexts , to construct actin structures required for each event : for example , one subset mediating cytokinesis while an overlapping but non - identical set regulates cell migration . One key choice is whether to continue actin polymerization or to cap barbed ends with Capping protein . Enabled ( Ena ) / VASP family proteins bind barbed ends and prevent Capping protein binding , allowing continued filament elongation ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ; Bear et al . , 2002 ) ( see also Samarin et al . , 2003 ) . Ena / VASP proteins regulate cell migration in cultured mammalian fibroblasts , which predominantly produce lamellipodia ( Bear et al . , 2000 ; Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Inactivating Ena / VASP proteins triggered production of short , highly branched actin filaments within lamellipodia , driving more persistent lamellipodial protrusion that allowed cells to migrate faster than controls . Concentrating Ena / VASP proteins at the plasma membrane triggered production of long , sparsely branched actin filaments presumably lacking the strength to provide sustained force . Cells extended rapid but unstable lamellipodia and migrated more slowly than controls . Ena / VASP proteins also influence filopodia ( Mejillano et al . , 2004 ) , as was extensively studied in growth cones in culture ( Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) , Caenorhabditis elegans axons ( Chang et al . , 2006 ) and Dictyostelium ( Han et al . , 2002 ) . Growth cone motility shares features with cell migration ( Dent and Gertler , 2003 ) . Inactivating Ena / VASP in cultured neurons reduces growth cone filopodia , whereas concentrating Ena / VASP at the plasma membrane promotes filopodia ( Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) . Interestingly , axon guidance defects are seen in zygotic loss - of - function Ena / VASP mutants in Drosophila ( Bashaw et al . , 2000 ; Gertler et al . , 1995 ; Wills et al . , 1999 ) , C . elegans ( Chang et al . , 2006 ; Gitai et al . , 2003 ; Shakir et al . , 2006 ; Withee et al . , 2004 ; Yu et al . , 2002 ) and mice ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Menzies et al . , 2004 ) . Dictyostelium DdVASP also promotes filopodia ( Han et al . , 2002 ) . Ena / VASP proteins also localize to cell - cell adherens junctions ( AJs ) in flies ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ; Grevengoed et al . , 2001 ) and mammals , and are implicated in AJ formation in cultured keratinocytes ( Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ) and mammary cells ( Scott et al . , 2006 ) . This suggests that Ena / VASP proteins may play essential roles in cell adhesion . Finally , Ena / VASP proteins localize to cell - matrix junctions , perhaps underlying the role of VASP in platelet adhesion ( reviewed by Krause et al . , 2003 ) . As yet , no one has assessed the consequences of completely eliminating Ena / VASP function in mammals or flies . The three mammalian proteins ( Mena , VASP and Evl ) complicate analysis . Mena mutants have relatively subtle defects in forebrain commissures whereas VASP mutants have altered platelet aggregation ( reviewed by Krause et al . , 2003 ) . Mena ; VASP double mutants have more severe central nervous system ( CNS ) and craniofacial defects ( Menzies et al . , 2004 ) . In Drosophila , loss of zygotic Ena disrupts axon guidance , but no one has removed maternal and zygotic Ena . Surprisingly , C . elegans Ena ( unc - 34 ) - null mutants are viable , without obvious effects in morphogenesis , Enabled plays key roles in embryonic epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila Julie Gates 1 , 2 , James P . Mahaffey 1 , Stephen L . Rogers 1 , Mark Emerson 3 , Edward M . Rogers 1 , Stephanie L . Sottile 2 , David Van Vactor 3 , Frank B . Gertler 4 and Mark Peifer 1 , * Studies in cultured cells and in vitro have identified many actin regulators and begun to define their mechanisms of action . Among these are Enabled ( Ena ) / VASP proteins , anti - Capping proteins that influence fibroblast migration , growth cone motility , and keratinocyte cell adhesion in vitro . However , partially redundant family members in mammals and maternal Ena contribution in Drosophila previously prevented assessment of the roles of Ena / VASP proteins in embryonic morphogenesis in flies or mammals . We used several approaches to remove maternal and zygotic Ena function , allowing us to address this question . We found that inactivating Ena does not disrupt cell adhesion or epithelial organization , suggesting its role in these processes is cell type - specific . However , Ena plays an important role in many morphogenetic events , including germband retraction , segmental groove retraction and head involution , whereas it is dispensable for other morphogenetic movements . We focused on dorsal closure , analyzing mechanisms by which Ena acts . Ena modulates filopodial number and length , thus influencing the speed of epithelial zippering and the ability of cells to match with correct neighbors . We also explored filopodial regulation in cultured Drosophila cells and embryos . These data provide new insights into developmental and mechanistic roles of this important actin regulator . KEY WORDS : Ena / VASP , Epithelial morphogenesis , Cytoplasmic transport , Adhesion , Drosophila melanogaster Development 134 , 2027 - 2039 ( 2007 ) doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 02849 1 Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Biology , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill , NC 27599 , USA . 2 Department of Biology , Bucknell University , Lewisburg , PA 17837 , USA . 3 Department of Cell Biology and Program in Neuroscience , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 , USA . 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Department of Biology , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA . * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : peifer @ unc . edu ) Accepted 12 March 2007 D E V E L O P M E N T 2028 but embryos double mutant for unc - 34 and the actin - regulator WASP have severe morphogenesis defects ( Withee et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting that C . elegans Ena / VASP is important but alternate actin regulatory mechanisms can compensate . Ena / VASP proteins share several regions important for actin regulation ( reviewed by Krause et al . , 2003 ) . The N - terminal EVH1 domain recognizes the sequence D / EFPPPPXD / E ( FP4 ) ( Ball et al . , 2002 ) in Ena / VASP partners including zyxin , Robo receptors and Lamellipodin / RIAM , positioning Ena / VASP proteins at sites where their actin - regulatory activities are needed . The high affinity of EVH1 for its ligands allowed the Gertler laboratory to design a novel strategy to manipulate Ena / VASP function . They fused four FP4 motifs to a mitochondrial localization signal ( FP4mito ) . This recruits Ena / VASP proteins from their normal cellular locations to mitochondria , effectively inactivating them and mimicking phenotypes of Ena / VASP - deficient fibroblasts and neurons ( Bear et al . , 2000 ; Bear et al . , 2002 ; Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) . The C - terminal EVH2 domain binds G - and F - actin and mediates tetramerization . The central proline - rich region binds Profilin and SH3 / WW - domain proteins , including Src and Abelson ( Abl ) kinases . Two point mutations affecting the CNS function of Ena in Drosophila were characterized ( Ahern - Djamali et al . , 1998 ) . ena 210 encodes a missense change in the EVH1 domain ( A97V ) , blocking interaction with zyxin in vitro . ena 23 truncates Ena in the EVH2 domain , blocking tetramerization but not G - or F - actin binding . We seek to understand how cells use different tools in the actin regulatory toolkit to perform the diverse behaviors of development . We present the first assessment outside C . elegans of embryonic morphogenesis in the total absence of Ena / VASP function . MATERIALS AND METHODS Fly work Mutations are described at flybase . bio . indiana . edu . DNAs encoding FP4mito - , AP4mito - , FP4CAAX - or AP4CAAX - EGFP fusion proteins were cut from the retroviral vector pMSCV ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) using Eco RI and Hin dIII , subcloned into pSTBlue - 1 , cut out with Bam HI and Xba I and subcloned into the P - element vector pUASg under the control of a Gal4 - driven UAS promoter ( Brand and Perrimon , 1993 ) . The ena open reading frame ( ORF ) with an N - terminal green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) - fusion was also subcloned into pUASg . Stocks to generate ena germline clones and GAL4 drivers were from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center . UAS - GFPactin or RFPactin were from P . Martin ( University College London , UK ) . ena germline clones were generated by heat - shocking 48 - 72 hour hsflp 12 ; FRT42B ena / FRT42B ovo D1 larvae for 3 hours at 37°C . Cuticle preparations were as in Wieschaus and Nüsslein - Volhard ( Wieschaus and Nüsslein - Volhard , 1986 ) . Immunolocalization and microscopy S2 and D16 - C3 cells were cultured and plated as in Rogers et al . ( Rogers et al . , 2002 ) ( with 10 (cid:2) g / mL human insulin added for D16 - C3 ) , transfected , fixed and stained by the actin protocol in Rogers et al . ( Rogers et al . , 2004 ) . For RNA interference ( RNAi ) , D16 - C3 cells were plated in six - well plates to 75 % confluency and treated with 0 . 5 mL 20 (cid:2) g / mL dsRNA for 30 minutes , followed by 1 . 5 mL growth medium on days 1 and 4 ; on day 7 cells were resuspended by pipetting and applied to acid - washed coverslips for 5 minutes . Embryos were fixed as in Grevengoed et al . ( Grevengoed et al . , 2001 ) . Wing discs were fixed for 20 minutes in 4 % formaldehyde on ice . All were blocked / stained in PBS / 1 % goat serum / 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and mounted in Aqua - Polymount ( Polysciences ) . Antibodies : mouse anti - Ena5G2 ( 1 : 500 ) , anti - BP102 ( 1 : 200 ) ; anti - ArmN27A1 ( 1 : 200 ) and rat anti - DE - cadherin ( DE - cad ) ( DCAD2 , 1 : 200 ; all from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) . Mitochondria were visualized by 45 minutes of incubation in 100 nm MitoTracker ® Deep Red 633 ( Invitrogen ) , and actin with Alexa Fluor - 568 - phalloidin . Secondary antibodies : Alexa Fluor - 488 , Alexa Fluor - 568 and Alexa Fluor - 647 ( Invitrogen ) . Most images were acquired with an LSM510 confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) , LSM510AIM acquisition software and 40 (cid:3) ( 1 . 3 NA ) or 63 (cid:3) ( 1 . 4 NA ) objectives . D16 - C3 cell images were acquired using a 100 (cid:3) ( 1 . 45 NA ) objective , a TE2000 - E inverted microscope ( Nikon ) and a CoolsnapHQ CCD camera ( Roper Scientific ) . Brightness and contrast were adjusted in Adobe Photoshop ® 7 . 0 ; alterations were performed identically on comparable wild - type and mutant images . Time - lapse imaging was as in Grevengoed et al . ( Grevengoed et al . , 2001 ) . Images were captured every 5 seconds or 15 seconds . MetaMorph 6 . 1 ( Molecular Devices , Union City , CA ) was used to enhance brightness and contrast . Modifications were made on entire panels . RESULTSFP4mito sequesters Ena at mitochondria , phenocopying ena loss - of - function To examine how loss and gain of Ena function affects morphogenesis , we developed tools to manipulate Ena function at particular times and places . This built on the Gertler laboratory sequestration strategy , using FP4 Ena - binding sequences to recruit Ena / VASP to mitochondria , effectively blocking function . We adapted this to Drosophila , generating an FP4mito fusion protein ( Fig . 1A ) controlled by a Gal4 - driven UAS promoter . When introduced into cultured Drosophila S2 cells or used to generate transgenic flies , FP4mito dramatically alters endogenous Ena localization ( Fig . 1B - C ) . In normal S2 cells ( Fig . 1B (cid:4) , asterisk ) , Ena is diffusely cytoplasmic , and concentrates at the leading edge ( arrowhead ) , cell contacts ( white arrow ) and in punctate perinuclear structures . GFP - FP4mito colocalizes with a mitochondrial marker ( Fig . 1B (cid:5) - B (cid:6) , yellow arrows ) , and completely relocalizes Ena to mitochondria ( Fig . 1B (cid:4) , yellow arrow ) . In embryonic epidermis , Ena is diffusely cytoplasmic and concentrated at the amnioserosal cell cortex ( Fig . 2L (cid:4) , white arrow ) and leading - edge AJs ( Fig . 2L (cid:4) , arrowhead ) . In embryos FP4mito recruits all detectable Ena to mitochondria , as judged by Ena / GFP - FP4mito colocalization ( Fig . 2L , L (cid:4) , blue arrows ) . As a specificity control we generated flies expressing a mito construct with the conserved phenylalanine in each FP4 motif replaced by alanine ( AP4mito ) . AP4mito recruited significantly less Ena ( Fig . 2M , M (cid:4) ) , although we saw occasional weak Ena recruitment ( data not shown ) . As a second specificity control we expressed FP4mito throughout the epidermis in ena loss - of - function mutants . This did not change the severity or frequency of embryonic phenotypes ( data not shown ) , suggesting that FP4mito does not have substantial off - target effects . Finally , we examined whether FP4mito alters WASP localization ( WASP has an EVH1 - like WH1 domain ) – as expected , it does not ( Fig . 1C - C (cid:5) ) , consistent with known differences in binding specificities of WASP WH1 and Ena / VASP EVH1 ( Volkman et al . , 2002 ; Zettl and Way , 2002 ) . Other EVH1 - domain proteins such as Homer / VESL are similarly unlikely to bind as they recognize sequences in which the aromatic residue follows the prolines ( Beneken et al . , 2000 ; Barzik et al . , 2001 ) . To verify that FP4mito inactivates Drosophila Ena , we expressed FP4mito in the CNS and peripheral nervous system ( PNS ) where the function of Ena is clear ( reviewed by Krause et al . , 2003 ) . CNS longitudinal axons extend parallel to the midline ( Fig . 1D , arrowhead ) and commissural axons cross it ( Fig . 1D , arrow ) . FP4mito - expressing embryos have reduced longitudinal axons ( Fig . 1E , G , arrowheads ) , resembling zygotic ena mutants in the range and severity of defects ( Fig . 1F , H ; see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) ( Bashaw et al . , 2000 ) . To further assess FP4mito specificity we expressed it zygotically in ena zygotic mutants – this RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 134 ( 11 ) D E V E L O P M E N T did not increase severity of CNS defects ( see Table S1 in the supplementary material ) , consistent with FP4mito specifically affecting Ena . We also sequestered Ena at mitochondria in the PNS . Motor axon projections of intersegmental nerve b ( ISNb ) normally turn toward their muscle targets ( Fig . 1I , left ; Fig . 1J ) . In zygotic ena mutants ISNb axons fail to turn , continuing toward inappropriate targets ( Fig . 1I , right ) ( Wills et al . , 1999 ) . This bypass phenotype is seen in 88 % of segments when FP4mito is expressed using elav - Gal4 ( n = 86 ; Fig . 1K , L ) ; this is quantitatively comparable to zygotic ena loss - of - function ( 79 - 96 % ) ( Wills et al . , 1999 ) . AP4mito expression using elav - Gal4 ( Fig . 1J ) did not cause significant ISNb bypass ( 2 % of segments , n = 150 ; like wild type ) . Thus , removing Ena from its normal location and sequestering it at mitochondria effectively blocks Ena function in intact animals . By contrast , FP4CAAX , which in cultured fibroblasts activates Ena by recruitment to the plasma membrane ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) , had no effect on CNS axons ( data not shown ) or ISNb guidance ( Fig . 1N ) , consistent with previous analysis of Ena overexpression ( Wills et al . , 1999 ) . Expressing the control AP4CAAX in the PNS also had no effect ( Fig . 1M ) . Dynamic localization of Ena Ena localizes to AJs and the cytoplasm , from after cellularization ( Fig . 2A , inset ) , through gastrulation ( Fig . 2A ) and into the extended germband stage ( Fig . 2B , C ) . After germband extension , Ena remains at AJs and concentrates at epidermal tricellular junctions ( Fig . 2C , arrowheads ) ; it is uniformly localized around the amnioserosal cell cortex ( Fig . 2C , D , arrows ; Fig . 2G ) . During dorsal closure Ena becomes concentrated along the front of leading - edge cells ( Fig . 2D (cid:4) , arrowhead ) , becoming strongly enriched in spots at leading - edge AJs ( Fig . 2E - G , arrowheads ) , but remaining at tricellular junctions ( Fig . 2D (cid:4) , E , G , blue arrowheads ) . Ena is especially enriched in the single row of cells per segment that initiate segmental grooves ( Larsen et al . , 2003 ) ( Fig . 2F , G , arrows ) and in cells at the anterior edge of the dorsal - fold ( Fig . 2H , I , arrows ) that lead during head involution . Ena plays several roles during morphogenesis To determine whether Ena is required for epithelial architecture or morphogenesis , we inactivated maternal and zygotic ( M / Z ) Ena using two approaches that each should cause strong loss - of - function . First , we expressed FP4mito in the germline using mat (cid:7) 4 - Gal4 - VP16 ( matGal4 ; mat - FP4mito ) , so that FP4mito was loaded into eggs [ only 8 % of mat - FP4mito eggs are fertilizable ( n = 400 ) , because of the roles of Ena during oogenesis ; our unpublished data ] . Although no zygotic Gal4 is produced , maternal FP4mito remained throughout embryogenesis , effectively sequestering zygotic and maternal Ena from cellularization ( see Fig . S1J , K in the supplementary material ) through dorsal closure and later ( Fig . 3A versus Fig . 3B , C ) . No Ena was detectable at its usual locations , even in places in which it accumulates to high levels , such as leading - edge cell AJs ( Fig . 3A versus Fig . 3C , arrows ) , so this should be a very strong to complete loss of maternal and zygotic function . Second , we generated females with germlines mutant for the very strong loss - of - function ena 23 allele or the strong ena 210 allele ( allele strength assessed in the PNS ) ( Wills et al . , 1999 ) , and crossed them to males heterozygous for the null allele ena GC1 ; half the embryos are M / Z ena mutant . In M / Z ena 23 mutants selected using a GFP - marked balancer , Ena protein levels were significantly reduced and no localized protein was seen ( Fig . 3D (cid:5) versus Fig . 3E (cid:5) ) . Neither ena 23 nor ena 210 is protein null ( Ahern - Djamali et al . , 1998 ) , but attempts to generate germline clones with the protein - null allele ena GC1 failed , perhaps because it results from a chromosomal inversion . The cuticle secreted by epidermal cells provides a simple means to assess morphogenesis defects . More than 70 % of zygotic ena mutants are wild type , whereas ~ 20 % display misalignment / puckering along the dorsal midline , indicating late dorsal closure defects . Ubiquitous zygotic FP4mito expression has similar effects ( Fig . 4A , J versus Fig . 4B , K , arrowheads ) . By contrast , 79 % of mat - FP4mito embryos die , and both mat - FP4mito embryos and M / Z ena 23 mutants disrupt several morphogenetic processes [ the control matGal4 - AP4mito is not embryonic lethal ( 1 % , n = 586 ) ] . Eighty to ninety per cent of mat - FP4mito or M / Z ena 23 mutants have 2029 RESEARCH ARTICLE Roles of Ena during morphogenesis Fig . 1 . FP4mito alters Ena localization and phenocopies ena loss - of - function . ( A ) FP4mito . ( B - C (cid:5) ) S2 cells , antigens indicated . ( B ) In wild - type cells ( asterisk ) , Ena is diffusely cytoplasmic and enriched at leading edge ( arrowhead ) and cell contacts ( white arrow ) . In FP4mito - expressing cells , GFP - FP4mito colocalizes with MitoTracker and Ena ( yellow arrow ) . ( C ) FP4mito does not recruit WASP . ( D - H ) Embryonic CNS , BP102 antibody . ( D ) Control . ( E , G ) FP4mito (cid:3) e22c - Gal4 . ( F ) ena 23 / ena GC1 . ( H ) ena 210 / ena GC1 . Longitudinal ( arrowhead ) and commissural axons ( arrow ) . ( I ) ISNb motor axon projections ; wild type ( left ) , ena mutants ( right ) . ( J - N ) Projections of ISNb ( arrows , anti - Fasciclin II ) in embryos expressing indicated constructs ( elav - Gal4 ) . Scale bars : 10 (cid:2) m . D E V E L O P M E N T 2030 defects in head involution , disrupting head cuticle ( Fig . 4D , arrow ) . To our surprise , dorsal closure was completed , but embryos have dorsal midline defects like those of ena zygotic nulls ( Fig . 4B , D , G , arrowheads ) . A subset of embryos exhibited ventral epidermal defects ( Fig . 4H ) . Two differences were apparent between mat - FP4mito and M / Z ena 23 . M / Z ena 23 mutants did not exhibit germband retraction defects , but their ventral epidermal defects were more frequent . M / Z ena 210 mutants were similar to , but significantly less severe , than M / Z ena 23 ( Fig . 4 ) . Disrupting Ena function does not affect cellularization or epithelial integrity We next examined the cell biological consequences of Ena inactivation . Flies initiate embryogenesis with 13 syncytial nuclear divisions ; during interphase actin forms microvillar caps over nuclei , whereas during mitosis it lines transient pseudocleavage furrows separating spindles . Inappropriate apical Ena triggered by inactivating Abl kinase disrupts furrows , increasing microvillar actin and reducing actin in pseudocleavage furrows ( Grevengoed et al . , 2003 ) . By contrast , maternal ena 23 mutants form a normal cellular blastoderm without large - scale defects in pseudocleavage furrows or cellularization ( see Fig . S1C , D , L in the supplementary material ) . Many mat - FP4mito early embryos were also roughly normal ( see Fig . S1E , F in the supplementary material ) , although some embryos had elevated nuclear loss ( see Fig . S1G , H , arrows , in the supplementary material ) , a defect we also saw in some maternal ena 23 mutants . This may be because of loss of maternal Ena , or may result from oogenesis defects . A subset of mat - FP4mito embryos had major defects in nuclear distribution and actin at the anterior end ( see Fig . S1I in the supplementary material ) . We observed similar defects in arm XP33 maternal mutants that disrupt nurse cell dumping during oogenesis ( Cox et al . , 1996 ) . We thus think it likely that these defects are indirect consequences of oogenesis defects in mat - FP4mito mothers . mat - FP4mito embryos are also smaller than wild type , probably because of defects in nurse cell dumping ( data not shown ) . Ena plays an important role in adhesion and cortical actin in cultured keratinocytes , mammary cells and Drosophila follicle cells ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ; Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ; Scott et al . , 2006 ) . We thus examined epithelial integrity in M / Z ena 23 and mat - FP4mito embryos . Both proceed through gastrulation normally ( Fig . 5A - D ) . Epithelial integrity is normal with no detectable change in Drosophila E - cadherin ( DE - cad ) , Armadillo , alpha - catenin ( Fig . 2O ; Fig . 5I versus Fig . 5J ; data not shown ) or cortical actin ( Fig . 2N , Fig . 5E - H ) . Thus , disrupting Ena function does not disrupt AJs or RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 134 ( 11 ) Fig . 2 . Ena localization . Wild - type embryos , anterior left , antigens indicated . ( A , inset ) Cellularization , surface view . ( A ) Gastrulation , ventral view . ( B - D ) Stages 10 and 12 . Arrows , amnioserosa ; blue arrowheads , tricellular junctions . White arrowhead in D (cid:4) , leading edge . ( E , H ) Onset of dorsal closure , ( F , G , I ) mid - late dorsal closure : arrowheads , Ena at leading - edge AJs ; blue arrowheads , tricellular junctions . Arrows in F , G , segmental groove cells ; arrows in H , I , dorsal - fold . ( J , K ) Live embryos . GFP - Ena at filopodial tips ( J , arrowhead ) and leading - edge AJs ( K , arrowhead ) . ( L , L (cid:4) ) FP4mito ( paired - Gal4 ) . FP4mito recruits Ena from cytoplasm and AJs to punctate structures ( blue arrows ) . Adjacent wild - type cells retain Ena at amnioserosal cell cortex ( white arrow ) and leading edge AJs ( arrowhead ) . ( M ) AP4mito ( engrailed - Gal4 ) does not recruit Ena . ( N , O ) FP4mito ( green , paired - Gal4 ) . ( N (cid:4) , O (cid:4) ) Expression boundaries ( arrowheads ) . Unaltered cortical actin and actin / myosin cable ( N ) , DE - cad ( O ) . ( P ) UAS - Ena ( engrailed - Gal4 ) elevates Ena levels ( P (cid:5) ) without altering cable or cortical actin ( P (cid:4) ) . Scale bars : 20 (cid:2) m . D E V E L O P M E N T epithelial integrity . To assess whether embryonic epithelia are the exception , we disrupted Ena function in posterior cells of larval imaginal discs ( FP4mito (cid:3) engrailed - Gal4 ) , a polarized , folded epithelium with actin and DE - cad at apical AJs ( see Fig . S1N , O in the supplementary material ) . FP4mito relocalized Ena to presumptive mitochondria ( see Fig . S1M , arrowheads , in the supplementary material ) , with no detectable effect on epithelial architecture , cortical actin or DE - cad ( see Fig . S1N , O in the supplementary material ) . We also generated clones of ena 23 mutant cells , which did not affect actin or epithelial architecture ( data not shown ) . Thus , Ena is not essential for epithelial architecture or actin organization in embryos or imaginal discs . Ena plays important roles in morphogenesis Germband extension , ventral furrow formation and posterior midgut invagination occurred normally in M / Z ena 23 mutants and mat - FP4mito embryos . The first defects occurred during germband retraction , when epidermal and amnioserosal cells move together as a coherent sheet . This movement is thought to be driven by a dramatic shortening of amnioserosal cells along their dorsal / ventral axis , assisted by extension of epidermal cells along their dorsal / ventral axis ( Schock and Perrimon , 2002 ) . This requires stable connections between amnioserosa and epidermis , achieved in part by large amnioserosal lamellipodia extending over the posterior - most epidermal cells . (cid:8) PS - integrin mutants fail to form stable lamellipodia ; when amnioserosal cells change shape , they detach from posterior epidermal cells , disrupting germband retraction ( Schock and Perrimon , 2003 ) . Approximately 40 % of mat - FP4mito embryos failed to complete germband retraction ( Fig . 4E ) , and had defects in attachment of amnioserosa and epidermal cells . Although amnioserosal detachment is most obvious after retraction begins ( Fig . 5O , P versus Fig . 5M , N , arrows ) , prior to germband retraction there is less overlap of amnioserosal cells and posterior epidermis ( Fig . 5K versus Fig . 5L , brackets ) . As a result , while amnioserosal cells change shape , germband retraction fails ( Fig . 5O , P ) . M / Z ena 23 and mat - FP4mito embryos also have major defects in segmental furrow retraction . Ena has a striking localization in segmental groove cells ( Fig . 2F , G ) , which apically constrict at the onset of germband retraction and migrate inwards , pulling in neighbors on either side ( Larsen et al . , 2003 ) . Segmental grooves persist ventrally and dorsally through early dorsal closure , regressing by its completion ; grooves remain longest laterally ( Fig . 6E , arrowheads ) . M / Z ena 23 ( Fig . 6B , D , H , arrowheads ) and FP4mito segmental grooves ( Fig . 6F , M , arrowheads ) are deeper than wild type and persist long after they should have regressed ( Fig . 6T , U , arrowheads ; Fig . 6S ) . The leading edge during dorsal closure is often uneven in M / Z ena 23 and FP4mito ( Fig . 6B , M ) , perhaps in part because of overly deep grooves . Shortly after germband retraction , head involution begins , with ectoderm migrating anteriorly driven by coordinated cell shape changes . Most M / Z ena 23 mutants and mat - FP4mito embryos fail in this process ( Fig . 6S , T , X , brackets ) , leading to the head holes seen in cuticles ( Fig . 4C , D , arrows ) . Cells that should lead head involution appear to constrict far more than in wild type , nearly severing the head from the thorax ( Fig . 6S , X ) . Ena localization in filopodia Among the most dramatic morphogenetic events is dorsal closure , in which lateral epidermal sheets move toward one another , meet and fuse at the dorsal midline , enclosing embryos in epidermis . This is driven by several forces , including leading - edge actin / myosin cable contraction , amnioserosal cell apical constriction and dorsal / ventral elongation of epidermal cells ( Kiehart et al . , 2000 ; Hutson et al . , 2003 ) . Ena is concentrated at leading - edge AJs ( Fig . 2E - G , arrowheads ) , where the actin cable is anchored , and leading - edge cells exhibit highly dynamic actin protrusions while migrating ( Jacinto et al . , 2000 ) . This suggested that Ena might play a key role in dorsal closure . As dorsal closure begins , leading - edge cells produce lamellipodia and filopodia ( Jacinto et al . , 2000 ) . In live embryos , GFP - Ena concentrated at tips of leading - edge filopodia ( Fig . 2J , arrowhead ) and at leading - edge AJs ( Fig . 2K , arrowhead ) . Although filopodia are not generally preserved after fixation , they were easily visualized in fixed embryos overexpressing Ena ( Fig . 2P ) . We did not observe GFP - Ena concentration at the lamellipodial leading edge , but high levels of GFP - Ena in AJs may obscure this . GFP - Ena also accumulated in intracellular puncta that may be overexpression aggregates , but these do not substantially disrupt cell function as pan - epidermal GFP - Ena expression is not embryonic lethal ( e22c - GAL4 ; 1 % lethality , n = 294 ) . GFP - Ena allowed us to examine the localization of Ena within leading - edge filopodia as they extend and retract . Consistent with the anti - capping role of Ena , GFP - Ena concentrated at tips of extending filopodia ( Fig . 7A , arrow ) . Remarkably , GFP - Ena is retained at filopodial tips as they retract ( Fig . 7B , arrow ; see Movie 1 in the supplementary material ) . GFP - Ena particles move away from filopodial tips before they retract ( Fig . 7B , arrowhead ; see Movie 1 and Fig . S2 in the supplementary material ) , with some 2031 RESEARCH ARTICLE Roles of Ena during morphogenesis Fig . 3 . Both FP4mito and ena 23 disrupt Ena localization . ( A ) Wild - type Ena , stage 13 . ( B - C (cid:5) ) mat - FP4mito , stages 10 and 13 . Mislocalized Ena . ( D - E (cid:5) ) Stage 13 wild type and M / Z ena 23 . Arrows , AJs of leading - edge cells . Scale bars : 10 (cid:2) m . D E V E L O P M E N T 2032 GFP - Ena remaining at tips during initial retraction . Rearward movement of GFP - Ena continues as retraction proceeds and tip - associated GFP - Ena usually eventually disappears . During dorsal closure , filopodia usually form from lamellipodia , but what triggers filopodial formation is not clear . Insight came from embryos expressing both GFP - actin and GFP - Ena , in which leading - edge cells produce large lamellipodia containing numerous actin microspikes ( Fig . 7C ) . Over time a subset of microspikes merge at their distal ends to produce filopodia ( Fig . 7C ; see Movie 2 in the supplementary material ) . Similar events were observed in embryos overexpressing untagged Ena ( Fig . 9D , 5 : 04 - 7 : 04 , arrow ) . Inactivating Ena slows epithelial zippering and impedes cell matching We hypothesized that Ena would play a key role in dorsal closure , modulating actin cables or helping drive migration . However , both mat - FP4mito and M / Z ena 23 mutants complete dorsal closure with levels and localization of DE - cad ( data not shown ) and cortical actin ( Fig . 6I - L ) in amnioserosa and epidermis indistinguishable from wild type , and with a largely normal actin / myosin cable ( Fig . 6I versus Fig . 6J , L , arrows ) . Amnioserosal apical constriction and epidermal cell elongation ( Fig . 6J - L , arrowheads ; Fig . 6O versus Fig . 6P ) are usually normal , although occasional cells have splayed open ( Fig . 6J , L , brackets ) or hyperconstricted leading edges . In a few embryos many epidermal cells fail to change shape ( Fig . 6N , arrowheads ) . These defects do not block completion of dorsal closure , but Ena inactivation disrupts cell matching along the dorsal midline ( Fig . 6W versus Fig . 6V ) . FP4mito expression in stripes in each segment ( engrailed - or paired - Gal4 ) also did not affect cortical actin or the actin / myosin cable ( Fig . 2N (cid:4) , between arrowheads ) . To examine the role of Ena during dorsal closure more closely , we inactivated it throughout the epidermis and amnioserosa ( FP4 - mito (cid:3) e22c - Gal4 ) . This caused embryonic lethality ( 85 % , n = 163 ; versus AP4mito lethality = 1 % , n = 147 ) , and disrupted cell matching at the midline ( Fig . 4A , J versus Fig . 4B , K , arrowheads ) , similar to ena zygotic mutants . In fixed embryos we observed deep segmental grooves and an uneven leading edge ( data not shown ) , as in M / Z ena 23 mutants . We examined dorsal closure in real time in embryos expressing FP4mito and GFP - actin using e22c - Gal4 . This revealed severe abnormalities in epithelial zippering ; dorsal openings were oval rather than almond - shaped ( Fig . 8A versus Fig . 8B ) and leading edges sometimes met in the middle before zippering occurred ( Fig . 8B , 62 : 42 , arrow ) . As a result , migration was 2 . 2 - fold slower than wild type ( P = 2 (cid:3) 10 – 7 ) , with much of the delay in late epithelial zippering ( Fig . 8 ; see Movies 3 , 4 in the supplementary material ) . RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 134 ( 11 ) Fig . 4 . Ena is essential for morphogenesis . Cuticles . Wild - type ( A , J ) and representative ena mutant ( C , H , I ) or FP4mito - expressing ( B , D - G , K ) embryos illustrating phenotypic classes . ( J , K ) Close - ups of A , B . Arrowheads , wild type ( A , J ) or defective dorsal midline ( B , D , G , K ) . Arrows in A , C , D , wild type ( A ) or failed head involution ( C , D ) . Arrow in E , germband retraction failure . Arrows in F , H , small or large ventral holes . Bottom , frequency of defects for each genotype . Scale bars : 100 (cid:2) m . D E V E L O P M E N T Inactivating Ena disrupts filopodia We next examined how Ena inactivation affects actin - based protrusions . Wild - type leading - edge cells produce protrusions resembling growth cones , with filopodia arising from lamellipodia ( Fig . 9A , arrows ; see Movie 5 in the supplementary material ) . We expressed GFP - actin and FP4mito together , using engrailed - Gal4 , allowing us to monitor leading - edge protrusions when Ena is inactivated . The results were striking . FP4mito - expressing leading - edge cells produce lamellipodia ( Fig . 9B ; see Movie 6 in the supplementary material ) , but produce only rare , very short filopodia ( Fig . 9B , 4 : 00 , arrow ) . We measured the number and maximum length of filopodia ( any thin protrusion extending beyond the lamellipodium or leading edge within one - half of an engrailed stripe in 3 - 4 embryos / genotype as leading edges moved from 23 . 6 (cid:2) m to 10 . 9 (cid:2) m apart , using a defined distance rather than a defined time as FP4mito - expressing embryos close more slowly ) . Wild - type cells produce an average of 58 filopodia , with maximum length averaging 2 . 18 (cid:2) m . FP4mito expression reduces both filopodial number and length ( average filopodia number reduced from 58 to 20 ; average maximum length reduced from 2 . 18 (cid:2) m to 1 . 16 (cid:2) m ; P < 0 . 0001 for length and P = 0 . 013 for number ; these and other P values are via Student’s t - test ; Table 1 ; Fig . 9F ) , paralleling effects of inactivating Ena / VASP proteins in cultured neurons ( Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) or Dictyostelium ( Han et al . , 2002 ) . In fibroblasts FP4mito decreases rates of lamellipodial protrusion and retraction ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . We did not observe obvious effects of Ena inactivation on lamellipodia . Because wild - type protrusions combine lamellipodia and filopodia and new protrusions often form adjacent to or on top of existing ones , it is difficult to accurately follow a single lamellipodium through its lifecycle . Although lamellipodia of FP4mito - expressing cells can remain extended for several minutes ( Fig . 9C ) , this is not substantially different from wild type . Ena promotes filopodial formation and elongation Given the ability of Ena to promote filament elongation , we hypothesized that increasing Ena activity would increase filopodial number and / or length . Embryos overexpressing Ena produce longer filopodia than wild type ( Fig . 9D ; see Movie 7 in the supplementary material ; average maximum length = 2 . 52 (cid:2) m versus 2 . 18 (cid:2) m for 2033 RESEARCH ARTICLE Roles of Ena during morphogenesis Fig . 5 . Inactivating M / Z Ena does not disrupt cell adhesion . F - actin ( except I , J , DE - cad ) . ( A - J ) Extended germband . mat - FP4mito and M / Z ena 23 . Morphology ( A - D ) , cortical actin ( E - H ) and DE - cad ( I , J ) normal . ( K , L ) Early germband retraction . mat - FP4mito ( L ) amnioserosal cells ( brackets ) do not overlap posterior epidermis ( arrows ) to the same extent as wild type ( K ) . Smaller cell size in mat - FP4mito is probably because of overall smaller size of embryos , because of defects in nurse cell dumping . ( M - P ) Germband retraction . ( M , N ) Wild - type . Amnioserosa and epidermis maintain close contact throughout ( arrows ) . ( O , P ) mat - FP4mito . Arrows , amnioserosa detached from epidermis . Arrowheads in P , deep segmental grooves . Scale bars : 20 (cid:2) m . Table 1 . Number and maximum average length of filopodia produced over a fixed interval Average maximum Number of length ( (cid:2) m ) filopodia Control embryo 1 2 . 08 67 Control embryo 2 2 . 12 32 Control embryo 3 2 . 85 51 Control embryo 4 1 . 86 81 Control embryos combined * 2 . 18 58 FP4mito embryo 1 1 . 34 12 FP4mito embryo 2 1 . 33 19 FP4mito embryo 3 0 . 92 25 FP4mito embryo 4 1 . 06 23 FP4mito embryos combined * 1 . 12 20 Ena overexpression embryo 1 2 . 51 120 Ena overexpression embryo 2 2 . 52 62 Ena overexpression embryo 3 2 . 55 90 Ena overexpression embryos 2 . 52 91 combined * FP4CAAX embryo 1 2 . 76 43 FP4CAAX embryo 2 2 . 94 73 FP4CAAX embryo 3 2 . 24 93 FP4CAAX embryos combined * 2 . 60 70 * Combined average lengths were calculated by adding the lengths of all filopodia from all embryos of a given genotype and dividing by the total number of filopodia . Combined average numbers were calculated by adding the number of filopodia for each embryo of a given genotype and dividing by the total number of embryos . D E V E L O P M E N T 2034 wild type ; P = 0 . 0024 ; Table 1 ; Fig . 9F ) . Overexpressing Ena may also increase filopodial number : it increased to 91 filopodia versus 58 filopodia in wild type ( Table 1 ) , although this difference did not reach statistical significance in the sample size we quantitated . FP4CAAX , which should increase plasma membrane Ena activity , also promoted longer filopodia ( average maximum length = 3 . 00 (cid:2) m versus 2 . 18 (cid:2) m for wild type ; P = 0 . 0014 ; Table 1 ; Fig . 9E , F ) . Normally , filopodia are only produced by leading - edge cells , whereas lateral epithelial cells do not produce obvious protrusions . Interestingly , lateral epithelial cells overexpressing Ena produce many filopodia ( Fig . 9G ) on their lateral and apical surfaces . Thus , overexpressing Ena or concentrating it at the membrane both trigger longer filopodia and may promote de novo filopodial formation . Despite the dramatic effect on filopodia , dorsal closure is completed normally , and animals overexpressing Ena or expressing FP4CAAX ubiquitously ( e22c - Gal4 ) complete embryogenesis and survive to adulthood . Abl regulates Ena localization and filopodial formation Multiple actin regulators play roles in filopodia , and in turn are regulated by signal transduction pathways . To begin to assess how Ena fits into this scheme , we examined proteins thought to antagonize or regulate Ena . Ena is thought to oppose Capping protein , and the tyrosine kinase Abl is an important Ena regulator . We first assessed Ena , Capping protein and Abl function in a model Drosophila cell line , D16 - C3 , derived from larval wing imaginal discs . When sparsely plated on polylysine , D16 - C3 cells attach and assemble a halo of fine protrusions around their circumference ( Fig . 10A ) . We believe these to be bona fide filopodia because : ( 1 ) they are actin - rich and morphologically resemble filopodia in their uniform diameter ( Fig . 10A ) ; ( 2 ) time - lapse imaging of cells expressing GFP - actin revealed cycles of protrusion , lateral movement and retraction ( data not shown ) ; and ( 3 ) they contain RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 134 ( 11 ) Fig . 6 . Inactivating M / Z Ena disrupts morphogenesis . F - actin . ( A - D ) M / Z ena 23 . Late germband retraction . Arrowheads , deep segmental grooves ; arrow , uneven leading edge . ( E - N ) Onset of dorsal closure . ( E - H ) Deep segmental grooves ( E - H , arrowheads ) . Arrows , failure of epidermal - zipping relative to wild type ( E ) or paternally rescued mutant ( G ) . ( I - L ) Close - ups . Arrows , actin cable ; arrowhead , cells elongating ; brackets , occasional cells with disrupted actin cable and splayed - open leading edges . ( M , N ) More severely affected mat - FP4mito embryo . Note deep segmental grooves ( M , arrowheads ) and defects in cell - shape changes ( N , arrowheads ) . Actin cable is largely normal ( N , arrow ) . ( O - U ) Mid - late dorsal closure . Wild - type ( Q ) , paternally rescued mutants ( O , R ) , mat - FP4mito ( T , U , close - up ) and M / Z ena 23 mutant ( P , S ) . Note head involution failure ( S , T , brackets ) , persistent deep grooves ( T , U , arrowheads ) and slow epidermal - zipping ( Q - S , arrows ) . ( V , W ) End of dorsal closure . Arrows , dorsal midline . ( X ) Terminal - stage mat - FP4mito . Bracket , severe head defects . Scale bars : 20 (cid:2) m . D E V E L O P M E N T molecules enriched in filopodia such as Ena ( localized to tips ; see below ) and the actin cross - linker fascin ( present along the length ; data not shown ) . We depleted Ena , Capping protein beta ( CPB ) and Abl from D16 - C3 cells using RNAi and assessed filopodia formation and actin organization . In D16 - C3 cells treated with control dsRNA ( pBluescript ) , 91 . 5 % of cells ( n = 320 ) elaborated filopodia . Following 7 - day treatment with dsRNA to deplete Ena or CPB , staining with antibodies to each protein revealed significant reductions in protein levels ( data not shown ) , consistent with our work in S2 cells in which these same reagents reduced protein levels to < 5 % relative to controls ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Ena depletion dramatically altered D16 - C3 cell morphology , with most cells ( 94 . 5 % , n = 540 cells ) lacking any detectable filopodia . Instead , Ena RNAi - treated cells exhibited a morphology dominated by lamellipodial protrusions ( Fig . 10B ) . By contrast , CPB RNAi produced D16 - C3 cells ( 91 . 3 % , n = 470 cells ) with more numerous and longer filopodia ( Fig . 10C ) . In addition , fluorimetric analysis revealed that , relative to control - treated cells ( n > 5000 cells ) , CPB RNAi increased mean F - actin levels by > 160 % ( n > 5000 cells ) whereas in Ena - depleted cells F - actin remained unchanged . Therefore , CPB is a key regulator of actin polymer levels in these cells . To test the role of Abl in filopodia , we performed Abl RNAi . Consistent with a role for Abl as an Ena negative regulator ( Gertler et al . , 1995 ) , Abl depletion resulted in a dramatic increase in filopodial length and number ( Fig . 10D ) , and increased mean F - actin levels to 120 % ( n > 5000 cells ) over controls . We next assessed whether this occurred via effects on Ena localization . Filopodia in Abl RNAi - treated cells accumulated qualitatively higher Ena levels at filopodial tips than did control RNAi cells ( Fig . 10E , F ) . We next turned to embryos to examine whether Abl regulation was relevant to filopodia during dorsal closure . Wild - type filopodia are poorly preserved after fixation , and thus we are not often able to visualize them in wild - type embryos . However , Ena overexpression produced filopodia that were robust to fixation ( Fig . 2P ) . To assess the role of Abl in filopodial regulation , we examined embryos maternally and zygotically mutant for the null allele abl 4 ( M / Z abl ) , focusing on the leading edge during dorsal closure . In wild - type controls we saw strong Ena localization to leading - edge AJs as well as the amnioserosal cell cortex , but did not see obvious Ena localization at filopodial tips ( Fig . 10I , J ) . By contrast , in M / Z abl mutants we saw numerous filopodia at the leading - edge terminating in prominent Ena dots ( Fig . 10K , L , arrows ) . Furthermore , reducing Abl levels via abl heterozygosity reduced the phenotypic severity of zygotic Ena inactivation ( FP4mito (cid:3) e22c - Gal4 ; see Table S2 in the supplementary material ) . These data suggest that Abl negatively regulates filopodial formation by preventing Ena recruitment to forming filopodia . This is consistent with effects of overexpressing Abl in embryos , in which filopodia are significantly reduced ( T . Stevens and M . P . , unpublished ) . 2035 RESEARCH ARTICLE Roles of Ena during morphogenesis Fig . 7 . GFP - Ena in filopodia . Movie stills showing embryos expressing GFP - Ena alone ( A , B ) or with GFP - actin ( C ) using engrailed - Gal4 . Time , minutes : seconds . ( A ) GFP - Ena at filopodial tip as it extends ( arrows ) . ( B ) See Movie 1 in thesupplementary material . Arrows , GFP - Ena remains at filopodial tip during retraction ; arrowheads , GFP - Ena spots move rearward . ( C ) See Movie 2 in the supplementary material . Arrowheads and arrows , large lamellipodial fan with actin microspikes that fuse at distal tips to form filopodia . Scale bars : 5 (cid:2) m . Fig . 8 . Ena inactivation slows epithelial zippering . Movie stills showing ( A ) embryos expressing GFP - actin ( see Movie 3 in the supplementary material ) or ( B ) FP4mito + GFP - actin using e22c - Gal4 ( see Movie 4 in the supplementary material ) . Time , minutes : seconds . D E V E L O P M E N T 2036 DISCUSSION Cell behavior is controlled by regulated cytoskeletal polymerization / depolymerization and by motor proteins interacting with it . Work in cultured cells and in vitro revealed many cytoskeletal regulators and is clarifying their mechanisms of action . A key challenge is to determine how cells utilize this molecular toolkit to drive diverse cell behaviors in a living animal . Ena / VASP proteins are thought to be key parts of this toolkit – work in cell culture suggests important roles in cell migration , actin dynamics and cadherin - based adhesion . However , genetic redundancy in mammals and maternal contribution in flies limited previous analysis of Ena / VASP roles in morphogenesis to C . elegans . We inactivated Ena during Drosophila embryogenesis , where a dazzling array of cell behaviors allowed us to assess which require Ena . Assessing the roles of Ena in adhesion and morphogenesis Drosophila Ena localizes to AJs and regulates cortical actin assembly in follicle cells ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) , and Ena / VASP proteins help establish cell adhesion in keratinocytes ( Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ) and mammary epithelial cells ( Scott et al . , 2006 ) . We first tested the hypothesis that Ena / VASP proteins play key roles in cell - cell adhesion . We were surprised to find that Ena inactivation or mutation did not disrupt AJs or epithelial integrity in embryos or imaginal discs , suggesting that they do not play general roles in these processes . Of course , Ena / VASP proteins may play cell type - specific roles ; e . g . filopodial zippers initiating keratinocyte adhesion may require Ena , whereas other mechanisms of establishing epithelial architecture may not . Our data also reveal morphogenetic events in which Ena is nonessential ; e . g . there were RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 134 ( 11 ) Fig . 9 . Altering Ena levels or localization alters membrane protrusions . ( A - E , G ) Movie stills showing embryos expressing GFP - actin alone ( A ) or with FP4mito ( B , C ) , UAS - Ena ( Ena overexpression ; D , G ) or FP4CAAX ( E ) using engrailed - Gal4 . Asterisk , engrailed stripe in high - magnification series . Time , minutes : seconds . ( A ) See Movie 5 in the supplementary material . Wild - type . Arrow , lifecycle of lamellipodial - based protrusion . ( B ) See Movie 5 in the supplementary material . FP4mito . Lamellipodia and rare , short filopodia ( arrow , 4 : 00 ) . ( C ) FP4mito . Arrow , lamellipodia extended for several minutes ; arrowhead , second lamellipodium emerging as first retracts . ( D ) See Movie 7 in the supplementary material . Ena overexpression . Arrows , fusion of microspikes to form filopodia . ( E ) FP4CAAX . Longer filopodia . ( F ) Box and whisker plot , maximum filopodial length in leading - edge cells , genotypes indicated . Box , 25th - 75th quartile ; line across middle , median ; diamond , mean±s . d . ; broken lines , 10th and 90th percentiles ; dots , outliers . P values , Student’s t - test . ( G ) Ena overexpression induces filopodia on lateral cells . Scale bars : 5 (cid:2) m . D E V E L O P M E N T no apparent defects in ventral furrows or germband extension . Consistent with this , Mena / VASP / Evl triple mutant mice complete many morphogenetic processes without major defects ( F . B . G . , unpublished ) . Our data did reveal key roles for Ena in many morphogenetic events : germband retraction , head involution , segmental groove retraction and dorsal closure . These build upon previously documented roles for Ena in axon guidance ( reviewed by Krause et al . , 2003 ) and actin regulation in follicle cells ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) , providing a view of the spectrum of biological events requiring Ena . We hypothesize that Ena acts in a mechanistically similar manner in each process , as an actin anti - Capping protein promoting filament elongation . Flies use this tool in many different ways , promoting distinct cell behaviors . Some events can be linked fairly directly to known Ena / VASP functions . The role of Ena in axon guidance fits its actin regulatory role well . During dorsal closure , Ena inactivation reduces filopodia , consistent with its biochemical function . Our data reveal that this slows epithelial zippering and disrupts precise alignment between the two sheets . Leading - edge filopodia were proposed to function both as sensors directing proper cell matching , and to facilitate adhesion of cells from opposing edges in Drosophila ( Jacinto et al . , 2000 ) and C . elegans ( Williams - Masson et al . , 1997 ) . Although our data support a sensory role for filopodia , we did not observe disrupted epithelial adhesion / fusion . Our data support and contrast with work on embryos expressing dominant - negative Cdc42 ( Cdc42DN ) , which produce rudimentary protrusions ( Jacinto et al . , 2000 ) . Like ena mutants , Cdc42DN embryos display mismatching of cells from opposing edges , but , unlike ena mutants , Cdc42DN embryos have gaps between cells along the midline . Although Cdc42DN - expressing leading - edge cells produce only rudimentary protrusions , FP4mito - expressing cells produce robust lamellipodia . Because AJ formation in cultured mammalian cells can be mediated either by filopodia ( Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ) or lamellipodia ( Ehrlich et al . , 2002 ) , lamellipodia may mediate adhesion in the absence of filopodia . Ena is also essential for morphogenetic events in which its cell biological role is more speculative . Germband retraction requires integrin - mediated adhesion of amnioserosa and epidermis to couple cell - shape changes in the two tissues ( Schock and Perrimon , 2002 ; Schock and Perrimon , 2003 ) . Ena inactivation mimics integrin loss . Ena / VASP proteins localize to focal adhesions , and Drosophila Ena colocalizes with integrins at ends of planar - polarized actin bundles in follicle cells ( Bateman et al . , 2001 ) . Ena / VASP inactivation does not disrupt focal adhesions ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) , but may modulate their size and stress fiber robustness under mechanical stress ( Galler et al . , 2005 ; Yoshigi et al . , 2005 ) . Drosophila Ena may strengthen the cytoskeleton during germband retraction , promote amnioserosal lamellipodia or regulate extracellular matrix ( ECM ) adhesion more directly , as VASP does in platelets ( reviewed by Krause et al . , 2003 ) and as Ena / VASP proteins may do in Xenopus somitogenesis ( Kragtorp and Miller , 2006 ) . Less is known about mechanisms by which segmental grooves form and retract ( Larsen et al . , 2003 ) . However , Ena is planar - polarized to dorsal - ventral cell boundaries in these cells ; perhaps it stabilizes actin attachment at borders where it is enriched . Defects in head involution result from alterations in dorsal - fold cell shape change , which may share mechanistic similarities with segmental groove formation . Ena and filopodia in vivo One key challenge is to identify machinery required to generate filopodia and lamellipodia . We found a striking correlation between Ena activity and filopodial length and number . Inactivating Ena significantly decreased filopodial length and number , whereas increasing Ena activity increased filopodial length . Interestingly , maximum filopodial length was not substantially altered , and thus is probably not limited by Ena levels . However , Ena can be rate - limiting in filopodial formation as Ena overexpression generated filopodia on lateral epithelial cells that normally do not produce them . Together , these data suggest that Ena promotes both initiation and elongation of leading - edge filopodia . Ena is concentrated at the tips of elongating filopodia , consistent with its influence on filopodial length and its biochemical function . Interestingly , GFP - Ena particles move rearward prior to retraction , presumably by retrograde flow , and some GFP - Ena is retained at filopodial tips as they retract . We had not expected this , as the anti - capping function of Ena / VASP suggested that Ena at filopodial tips would promote extension . Although this could be an artifact of GFP - Ena , it may indicate complexity in the control of filopodial dynamics . For example , whether filopodia continue extending or retract may be determined not only by actin polymerization rates at the tip , but also by depolymerization and / or retrograde flow rates at its base . In addition , filopodial dynamics may be regulated at 2037 RESEARCH ARTICLE Roles of Ena during morphogenesis Fig . 10 . Filopodial regulation . ( A - D ) Upper panels : F - actin in D16 - C3 cells treated for 7 days with indicated dsRNAs ; lower panels : histograms showing total F - actin ( fluorescent phalloidin ) in arbitrary units versus total cell number . Red line , mean actin levels in control cells . ( E - L ) Actin ( green ) ; Ena ( red ) . ( E , F ) Control and abl dsRNA . ( G - L ) M / Z abl 4 and wild type stained in parallel : frames in G and H show areas enlarged in I - L . Scale bars : 5 (cid:2) m . D E V E L O P M E N T 2038 individual filaments within filopodia rather than the structure as a whole . GFP - Ena particles may be locally inactivated Ena on individual filaments moving away from the tip by retrograde flow . One unanswered question is whether different filopodial regulators act additively or in series . Mammalian Ena / VASP can act downstream of Cdc42 together with IRSp53 ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ) , but IRSp53 can promote Ena / VASP - independent filopodia ( Nakagawa et al . , 2003 ) . Formins also promote filopodia , but whereas Dictyostelium dDia2 and VASP directly interact , Ena / VASP : formin relationships remain unclear ( reviewed by Faix and Rottner , 2006 ) . The reduced number of short filopodia formed when Ena is inactivated is consistent with multiple mechanisms acting additively / synergistically to produce the appropriate filopodial number / length . Our data also test in vivo one aspect of the convergent elongation model ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . This proposes that tip complex proteins bind filaments and protect them from capping , allowing continued elongation , and then interact laterally , bundling filaments and forming filopodia . Ena / VASP proteins may supply anti - capping activity , and could also help mediate lateral association via tetramerization . GFP - Ena overexpression promoted large lamellipodia containing numerous actin microspikes ; these often converged at their distal ends to form filopodia , supporting the convergent elongation model . We also examined filopodial regulation . Our data demonstrate that Abl is a key negative regulator of filopodial extension in cultured cells and in vivo , inhibiting Ena accumulation at nascent filopodial tips . This idea is further supported by our parallel analysis of embryos expressing activated Bcr - Abl or excess wild - type Abl ; both reduce filopodia on leading - edge and amnioserosal cells ( T . Stevens and M . P . , unpublished ) . This provides a means for signal transduction pathways to regulate cell behavior . We thank P . Martin , the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center and the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for reagents , and T . Harris , D . Fox and R . Cheney for helpful comments . This work was supported by NIHGM47857 to M . P . J . G . is a Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Special Fellow . J . G . was supported by NIH5F32GM068337 , J . P . M . by the Smallwood Foundation and a Goldwater Scholarship , M . E . by an HHMI Predoctoral Fellowship , D . V . V . by a Leukemia and Lymphoma Scholarship and grants from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke , and F . B . G . by NIHGM58801 . Supplementary material Supplementary material for this article is available at http : / / dev . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 134 / 11 / 2027 / DC1 ReferencesAhern - Djamali , S . M . , Comer , A . R . , Bachmann , C . , Kastenmeier , A . S . , Reddy , S . K . , Beckerle , M . C . , Walter , U . and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1998 ) . Mutations in Drosophila enabled and rescue by human vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) indicate important functional roles for Ena / VASP homology domain 1 ( EVH1 ) and EVH2 domains . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2157 - 2171 . Ball , L . J . , Jarchau , T . , Oschkinat , H . and Walter , U . ( 2002 ) . EVH1 domains : structure , function and interactions . FEBS Lett . 513 , 45 - 52 . Barzik , M . , Carl , U . D . , Schubert , W . D . , Frank , R . , Wehland , J . and Heinz , D . W . ( 2001 ) . The N - terminal domain of Homer / Vesl is a new class II EVH1 domain . J . Mol . Biol . 309 , 155 - 169 . Barzik , M . , Kotova , T . I . , Higgs , H . N . , Hazelwood , L . , Hanein , D . , Gertler , F . B . and Schafer , D . A . ( 2005 ) . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 28653 - 28662 . Bashaw , G . J . , Kidd , T . , Murray , D . , Pawson , T . and Goodman , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Repulsive axon guidance : Abelson and Enabled play opposing roles downstream of the roundabout receptor . Cell 101 , 703 - 715 . Bateman , J . , Reddy , R . S . , Saito , H . and Van Vactor , D . ( 2001 ) . The receptor tyrosine phosphatase Dlar and integrins organize actin filaments in the Drosophila follicular epithelium . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1317 - 1327 . Baum , B . and Perrimon , N . ( 2001 ) . Spatial control of the actin cytoskeleton in Drosophila epithelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 883 - 890 . Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fassler , R . , Wehland , J . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . Negative regulation of fibroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 - 728 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 - 521 . Beneken , J . , Tu , J . C . , Xiao , B . , Nuriya , M . , Yuan , J . P . , Worley , P . F . and Leahy , D . J . ( 2000 ) . Structure of the Homer EVH1 domain - peptide complex reveals a new twist in polyproline recognition . Neuron 26 , 143 - 154 . Brand , A . H . and Perrimon , N . ( 1993 ) . Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes . Development 118 , 401 - 415 . Chang , C . , Adler , C . E . , Krause , M . , Clark , S . G . , Gertler , F . B . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . and Bargmann , C . I . ( 2006 ) . MIG - 10 / lamellipodin and AGE - 1 / PI3K promote axon guidance and outgrowth in response to slit and netrin . Curr . Biol . 16 , 854 - 862 . Cox , R . T . , Kirkpatrick , C . and Peifer , M . ( 1996 ) . Armadillo is required for adherens junction assembly , cell polarity , and morphogenesis during Drosophila embryogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 133 - 148 . Dent , E . W . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2003 ) . Cytoskeletal dynamics and transport in growth cone motility and axon guidance . Neuron 40 , 209 - 227 . Ehrlich , J . S . , Hansen , M . D . and Nelson , W . J . ( 2002 ) . Spatio - temporal regulation of Rac1 localization and lamellipodia dynamics during epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Dev . Cell 3 , 259 - 270 . Faix , J . and Rottner , K . ( 2006 ) . The making of filopodia . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 18 - 25 . Galler , A . B . , Garcia Arguinzonis , M . I . , Baumgartner , W . , Kuhn , M . , Smolenski , A . , Simm , A . and Reinhard , M . ( 2005 ) . VASP - dependent regulation of actin cytoskeleton rigidity , cell adhesion , and detachment . Histochem . Cell Biol . 115 , 457 - 474 . Gertler , F . B . , Comer , A . R . , Juang , J . , Ahern , S . M . , Clark , M . J . , Liebl , E . C . and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1995 ) . enabled , a dosage - sensitive suppressor of mutations in the Drosophila Abl tyrosine kinase , encodes an Abl substrate with SH3 domain - binding properties . Genes Dev . 9 , 521 - 533 . Gitai , Z . , Yu , T . W . , Lundquist , E . A . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . and Bargmann , C . I . . ( 2003 ) . The netrin receptor UNC - 40 / DCC stimulates axon attraction and outgrowth through enabled and , in parallel , Rac and UNC - 115 / AbLIM . Neuron 37 , 53 - 65 . Grevengoed , E . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Jesse , T . L . and Peifer , M . ( 2001 ) . Abelson kinase regulates epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 1185 - 1198 . Grevengoed , E . E . , Fox , D . T . , Gates , J . and Peifer , M . ( 2003 ) . Balancing different types of actin polymerization at distinct sites : roles for Abelson kinase and Enabled . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1267 - 1279 . Han , Y . H . , Chung , C . Y . , Wessels , D . , Stephens , S . , Titus , M . A . , Soll , D . R . and Firtel , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Requirement of a vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein family member for cell adhesion , the formation of filopodia , and chemotaxis in dictyostelium . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 49877 - 49887 . Hutson , M . S . , Tokutake , Y . , Chang , M . S . , Bloor , J . W . , Venakides , S . , Kiehart , D . P . and Edwards , G . S . ( 2003 ) . Forces for morphogenesis investigated with laser microsurgery and quantitative modeling . Science 300 , 145 - 149 . Jacinto , A . , Wood , W . , Balayo , T . , Turmaine , M . , Martinez - Arias , A . and Martin , P . ( 2000 ) . Dynamic actin - based epithelial adhesion and cell matching during Drosophila dorsal closure . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1420 - 1426 . Kiehart , D . P . , Galbraith , C . G . , Edwards , K . A . , Rickoll , W . L . and Montague , R . A . ( 2000 ) . Multiple forces contribute to cell sheet morphogenesis for dorsal closure in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 471 - 490 . Kragtorp , K . A . and Miller , J . R . ( 2006 ) . Regulation of somitogenesis by Ena / VASP proteins and FAK during Xenopus development . Development 133 , 685 - 695 . Krause , M . , Dent , E . W . , Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2003 ) . Ena / VASP proteins : regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and cell migration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 541 - 564 . Krugmann , S . , Jordens , I . , Gevaert , K . , Driessens , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . and Hall , A . ( 2001 ) . Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1645 - 1655 . Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , A . S . , Wehman , A . M . , Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron 22 , 313 - 325 . Larsen , C . W . , Hirst , E . , Alexandre , C . and Vincent , J . P . ( 2003 ) . Segment boundary formation in Drosophila embryos . Development 130 , 5625 - 5635 . Lebrand , C . , Dent , E . W . , Strasser , G . A . , Lanier , L . M . , Krause , M . , Svitkina , T . M . , Borisy , G . G . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2004 ) . Critical role of Ena / VASP proteins for filopodia formation in neurons and in function downstream of netrin - 1 . Neuron 42 , 37 - 49 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svitkina , T . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Lamellipodial versus filopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery : pivotal role of the filament barbed end . Cell 118 , 363 - 373 . RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 134 ( 11 ) D E V E L O P M E N T Menzies , A . S . , Aszodi , A . , Williams , S . E . , Pfeifer , A . , Wehman , A . M . , Goh , K . L . , Mason , C . A . , Fassler , R . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2004 ) . Mena and vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein are required for multiple actin - dependent processes that shape the vertebrate nervous system . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8029 - 8038 . Nakagawa , H . , Miki , H . , Nozumi , M . , Takenawa , T . , Miyamoto , S . , Wehland , J . and Small , J . V . ( 2003 ) . IRSp53 is colocalised with WAVE2 at the tips of protruding lamellipodia and filopodia independently of Mena . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 2577 - 2583 . Pollard , T . D . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . Rogers , S . L . , Rogers , G . C . , Sharp , D . J . and Vale , R . D . ( 2002 ) . Drosophila EB1 is important for proper assembly , dynamics , and positioning of the mitotic spindle . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 873 - 884 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 - 1088 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Hacker , U . , Turck , C . and Vale , R . D . ( 2004 ) . Drosophila RhoGEF2 associates with microtubule plus ends in an EB1 - dependent manner . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1827 - 1833 . Samarin , S . , Romero , S . , Kocks , C . , Didry , D . , Pantaloni , D . and Carlier , M . F . ( 2003 ) . How VASP enhances actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 131 - 142 . Schock , F . and Perrimon , N . ( 2002 ) . Cellular processes associated with germ band retraction in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 248 , 29 - 39 . Schock , F . and Perrimon , N . ( 2003 ) . Retraction of the Drosophila germ band requires cell - matrix interaction . Genes Dev . 17 , 597 - 602 . Scott , J . A . , Shewan , A . M . , den Elzen , N . R . , Loureiro , J . J . , Gertler , F . B . and Yap , A . S . ( 2006 ) . Ena / VASP proteins can regulate distinct modes of actin organization at cadherin - adhesive contacts . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 1085 - 1095 . Shakir , M . A . , Gill , J . S . and Lundquist , E . A . ( 2006 ) . Interactions of UNC - 34 Enabled with Rac GTPases and the NIK kinase MIG - 15 in C . elegans axon pathfinding and neuronal migration . Genetics 172 , 893 - 913 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 - 421 . Vasioukhin , V . , Bauer , C . , Yin , M . and Fuchs , E . ( 2000 ) . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell 100 , 209 - 219 . Volkman , B . F . , Prehoda , K . E . , Scott , J . A . , Peterson , F . C . and Lim , W . A . ( 2002 ) . Structure of the N - WASP EVH1 domain - WIP complex : insight into the molecular basis of Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome . Cell 111 , 565 - 576 . Wieschaus , E . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1986 ) . Looking at embryos . In Drosophila , A Practical Approach ( ed . D . B . Roberts ) , pp . 199 - 228 . Oxford : IRL Press . Williams - Masson , E . M . , Malik , A . N . and Hardin , J . ( 1997 ) . An actin - mediated two - step mechanism is required for ventral enclosure of the C . elegans hypodermis . Development 124 , 2889 - 2901 . Wills , Z . , Bateman , J . , Korey , C . A . , Comer , A . and Van Vactor , D . ( 1999 ) . The tyrosine kinase Abl and its substrate enabled collaborate with the receptor phosphatase Dlar to control motor axon guidance . Neuron 22 , 301 - 312 . Withee , J . , Galligan , B . , Hawkins , N . and Garriga , G . ( 2004 ) . Caenorhabditis elegans WASP and Ena / VASP proteins play compensatory roles in morphogenesis and neuronal cell migration . Genetics 167 , 1165 - 1176 . Yoshigi , M . , Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Yost , H . J . and Beckerle , M . C . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical force mobilizes zyxin from focal adhesions to actin filaments and regulates cytoskeletal reinforcement . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 209 - 215 . Yu , T . W . , Hao , J . C . , Lim , W . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . and Bargmann , C . I . ( 2002 ) . Shared receptors in axon guidance : SAX - 3 / Robo signals via UNC - 34 / Enabled and a Netrin - independent UNC - 40 / DCC function . Nat . Neurosci . 5 , 1147 - 1154 . Zettl , M . and Way , M . ( 2002 ) . The WH1 and EVH1 domains of WASP and Ena / VASP family members bind distinct sequence motifs . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1617 - 1622 . 2039 RESEARCH ARTICLE Roles of Ena during morphogenesis