Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) The Journal of Technology Transfer ( 2021 ) 46 : 431 – 458 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10961 - 020 - 09777 - 7 1 3 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance of R & D projects : evidence from Singapore Sarah Cheah 1 · Cristiano Bellavitis 2 , 3 · Alessandro Muscio 4 Published online : 13 February 2020 © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2020 Abstract Prior empirical research is inconclusive in determining whether technology complexity influences the financial performance of research commercialization projects and how vari - ous types of organizational resources contribute to performance . We analyse research com - mercialization projects involving the collaboration between public research institutes and private firms in Singapore . We examine how the technology complexity of these collabora - tive projects impacts their financial performance , measured by the licensing fees generated . In addition , we determine how human , financial , network and senior management resources moderate the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance of the projects . Our results indicate that the relationship is inverted U - shaped and moderated by project resources . We find that PRI - firm projects with higher human , network and senior management resources are better positioned to cope with complex technologies . However , investing abundant resources in low complexity technologies reduces the financial perfor - mance of projects . Surprisingly , financial resources do not have any significant moderating effect . Our findings are relevant to scholars investigating research commercialization and academic entrepreneurship . Keywords Technology complexity · Performance · Singapore · Public research institution · Academic entrepreneurship JEL Classification M10 · O31 · O32 · O34 * Cristiano Bellavitis c . bellavitis @ auckland . ac . nz Sarah Cheah sarahcheah @ nus . edu . sg Alessandro Muscio alessandro . muscio @ unifg . it 1 Department of Management and Organisation , NUS Business School , Singapore , Singapore 2 Auckland Business School , University of Auckland , Auckland , New Zealand 3 Entrepreneurship and Emerging Enterprises , Syracuse University , Syracuse , NY , USA 4 Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie , degli Alimenti e dell’Ambiente , Università di Foggia , Foggia , Italy 432 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 1 Introduction Technology complexity can be defined in terms of the level of interdependence among the physical components of a technology ( Fleming and Sorenson 2001 ; Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing 2016 ; Ulrich 1995 ) . While technology complexity is gaining increasing research attention ( Amsden and Tschang 2003 ) , scholars have proposed contradicting theoretical and empirical evidence on the effects of technology complexity on various measures of firms’ performance such as productivity ( Galbraith 1990 ) or patents ( Wang et al . 2013 ) . Yet there is little knowledge outside the realm of the engineering field ( Amsden and Tschang 2003 ) about how the technology complexity of a collaborative research commercializa - tion project—a project where externally acquired technology is developed to enhance its readiness level so as to be integrated into a firm’s new product or service offerings—influ - ences its financial performance . While it is almost a commonplace to state that businesses are facing conditions of increasing operational complexity ( Wang and von Tunzelmann 2000 ) , prior research is inconclusive in determining whether technology complexity leads to higher or lower financial performance . These differences largely stem from the different theoretical foundations . Transaction cost economics ( TCE ) researchers consider technol - ogy complexity as a negative factor because it increases transaction costs . On the other hand , scholars using resource - based theory ( RBT ) consider technology complexity as a source of competitive advantage arising from rarity and inimitability . Although there is limited research on the relationship between technology complex - ity and financial performance , authors inspired by a TCE framework have found a nega - tive relationship between technology complexity and business performance intended more generally ( Singh 1997 ) . Although firms acquire external technologies to complement their internal knowledge , complex technologies are difficult to be integrated into the firms ( Kogut and Zander 1992 ) . As complex technologies require more time to be understood ( Edmondson et al . 2003 ) and demand greater coordination and communication efforts ( Terwiesch and Bohn 2001 ) , it takes longer time to deploy them in new production pro - cesses at the expense of yield ( Salomon and Martin 2008 ) . Technology complexity has also been found to be associated with productivity performance loss and time for loss recovery in manufacturing firms ( Galbraith 1990 ) . In technology licensing , more complex technol - ogy implies higher transfer costs and additional transaction costs ( Arora et al . 2001 ) that can lead to lower profits . Researchers using an RBT perspective , on the other hand , advocate the acquisition of complex technologies to enhance business performance . Wang et al . ( 2013 ) establish that the complexity of in - licensed technology positively moderates the relationship between technology in - licensing and the performance of the licensee firm in the Chinese electron - ics industry , measured by the cumulative number of patents filed within five years of in - licensing . García - Muiña and Pelechano - Barahona ( 2008 ) provide evidence that technology complexity is positively associated with imperfect imitability , thereby sustaining a firm’s competitive advantage in the context of Spanish biotechnology firms . Lin ( 2003 ) posits positive indirect association between the complexity of external technology sourced from another organization and a firm’s internal organizational learning in the Taiwan manufac - turing industry . Therefore , considering that previous research has so far reached contradicting conclu - sions in relation to the effect of technology complexity on performance , intended at large , and that it has overlooked financial considerations as a measure of performance , our paper has two important objectives : we investigate the effect of technology complexity on the 433 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 financial performance of projects between firms and public research institutes ( PRIs ) and , in doing so , we try to reconcile seemingly contradictory findings encountered in previ - ous studies . We propose that the impact of technology complexity on financial perfor - mance is contingent on the level of resources controlled by the firm and PRIs . To bet - ter understand how these resources shape the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance of the PRI - firm research commercialization project ( measured in terms of licensing fees paid by firms as licensees to PRIs as licensors as an indicator of the commercial value of underlying technology ) , we adopt Madhok’s ( 2002 ) transac - tion – resource – governance framework . Madhok advocated a triangular framework to align inter - organization transaction , resource particulars and governance skills . The author argues that optimal performance is achieved when transaction particulars are aligned with resource and governance particu - lars . In this context , we investigate whether and to what extent human , financial and net - work resources ( resource particulars ) as well as senior management resources ( governance particulars ) moderate the relationship between technology complexity ( transaction particu - lars ) and performance , creating cost – benefit trade - offs at different levels . We posit that the alignment of resources , governance and technology complexity leads to higher financial performance ( i . e . licensing fees paid to the PRI ) . With this research we aim to answer two research questions “What is the effect of technology complexity on the financial perfor - mance of R & D commercialization projects” and “Which contingency factors affect this relationship” ? We test our hypotheses in the context of Singapore PRIs . PRIs are research institutes funded by the government to conduct science - based research and collaborate with the pri - vate sector to foster innovation and entrepreneurship . Depending on the funding sources and governing agencies , PRIs can operate as standalone institutes or as part of universities . In this light , PRIs are often studied as part of academic entrepreneurship . Like universities , PRIs started playing an increasingly significant role in innovation - driven economies that adopt public policies to transform firms to become more knowledge - intensive with public incentives and programs . Publicly funded programs have been put in place in innovation - driven economies to encourage PRIs to participate in collaborative research commerciali - zation projects with firms to co - develop PRIs’ technologies to improve firm’s commercial readiness . Many countries have implemented such programs where government grants are awarded to researchers of universities or PRIs to improve the readiness of their research for com - mercialization with firms . Examples include the Idea to Innovation program by the Natural Science and Engineering Research of Canada ( Rasmussen 2008 ) , the grant program by the Dutch Technology Foundation STW ( Raesfeld et al . 2012 ) , as well as the ER - Biotek Fund and Techno Fund by Malaysia’s Ministry of Science , Technology and Innovation ( Adham et al . 2011 ) . As the purpose of these technology commercialization programs is to improve the commercialization readiness of academic research , the target grant recipients are uni - versities and PRIs . These programs are therefore different from those that use public pro - curement to encourage firms to create and commercialize new technologies , such as the US - based Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) program that award grants to small businesses to propose innovative technologies to meet the R & D requirements of govern - ment agencies ( Thurbon 2015 ) . In the case of technology commercialization programs , when PRIs’ technologies are enhanced to levels that meet industry requirements , firms can in - license ( as licensees ) from PRIs ( as licensors ) their technologies to be embodied into the firms’ new or existing products and service offerings . Unlike research projects that aim to generate and convert knowledge into patents , research commercialization projects focus on 434 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 developing patents into innovative products or processes . Surprisingly , despite their impor - tance in enhancing firms’ technological innovation , PRIs have received limited scholarly attention ( West et al . 2014 ) . The Singaporean context is relevant for this research for at least two reasons . First , PRIs are regarded to play a major role in the development of the country as an innovation - driven economy as these public - funded institutions focus on producing scientific and technologi - cal knowledge that can be transferred to the private sector to enhance the latter’s innovation and competitive advantage . In this respect , since 2000 , the Singaporean government has been intensifying its public R & D and related commercialization activities with the goal of simulating similar response in the private sector . Singapore’s public expenditure on R & D reached a new high of S $ 3 . 3 billion in 2014 from S $ 1 . 1 billion in 2000 , while business expenditure on R & D , an indicator of private sector spending in research , rose in tandem to S $ 5 . 2 billion in 2014 from S $ 1 . 9 billion in 2000 . 1 Adding public and private R & D together , Singapore’s gross expenditure on R & D grew at a compound annual growth rate ( CAGR ) of 7 . 7 per cent from S $ 3 billion at 1 . 8 per cent of its gross domestic product in 2000 to S $ 8 . 5 billion at 2 . 16 per cent in 2014 . Second , concerns over the lack of technol - ogy - based firms was prevalent across many countries that saw innovation as an impetus for economic growth ( Shapira et al . 2011 ) . Policymakers have been paying attention to such firms that are deemed to have high potential for innovation , but lack internal resources , therefore benefiting from government intervention . Public policy in Singapore also sub - scribes to this view . The government has introduced various policy instruments such as a 2006 public – private research commercialization program to encourage PRIs to collaborate with firms . These PRIs comprise both independent public research organizations and uni - versities that would apply for the Singapore government’s technology commercialization grant to improve the commercialization readiness of PRIs’ technologies to be integrated into innovative products of existing or new firms , as part of academic entrepreneurship ( Wright et al . 2007 ) . Our study makes several contributions to the existing literature on technology complex - ity and public – private research collaborations . Our results indicate that the relationship between the technology complexity of PRI - firm collaborative research commercializa - tion projects and their financial performance is inverted U - shaped and moderated by pro - ject resources . These results demonstrate that TCE and RBT theories can be integrated in relation to technology complexity . In order to do so , it is important to consider the align - ment between technology complexity and firm’s resources . In fact , we empirically estab - lish that projects with higher human , network and senior management resources are better positioned to cope with complex technologies . However , investing abundant human and network resources in low - complexity technologies reduces the financial performance of projects . This research also highlights that , financial resources do not have any significant moderating effect on the financial performance of the projects . Considering that some of the most important PRIs are universities , we also contribute to the literature on academic entrepreneurship ( Dooley and Kenny 2015 ; Horta et al . 2016 ; Meoli and Vismara 2016 ; Wright et al . 2007 ; Siegel et al . 2003 ) . In recent years , univer - sities have significantly increased their technology - based initiatives to stimulate entre - preneurship through spin - offs , licensing , patenting and university – industry partnerships ( Grimaldi et al . 2011 ) . However , two gaps in the literature exist . First , our paper is one 1 Data retrieved from https : / / data . gov . sg / datas et / publi c - secto r - resea rch - and - devel opmen t - expen ditur e . 435 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 of the first to investigate how technology complexity of university - based initiatives affects the potential to earn licensing fees . Second , “while the academic research on university encouragement of entrepreneurship has largely been quantitative , the micro - level qualita - tive literature and anecdotal evidence show the importance of intangible factors in the suc - cessful encouragement of entrepreneurship” ( Grimaldi et al . 2011 : 1049 ) . Our paper is one of the first to investigate ( a ) the role of technology complexity on financial performance of the commercialization project , and ( b ) investing the moderating effects of intangible fac - tors such as senior management commitment and human resources’ quality . 2 Theory and hypotheses 2 . 1 PRI‑firm collaboration and research commercialization While it is acknowledged that patenting activities enhance firms’ ability to engage in col - laborative research and licensing of innovations ( Hertzfeld et al . 2006 ) , the departure from the in - house R & D model and the diffusion of an open approach to innovation suggests that licensing outcomes have now become an important determinant of organizations’ ( such as universities and PRIs ) performance for measuring the commercial value of innovation ( RIETI 2004 ; Motohashi 2008 ) . Licensing activity is increasingly used as an indicator of firm’s performance as higher levels of technological opportunity entailed in licenses reflect a powerful incentive to conduct innovative activities ( Lee et al . 2017 ) . Universities and PRIs are one of the beneficiaries of this trend . Recent years have seen a dramatic increase in university technology transfer through licensing as academic institutions attempt to appropriate the returns from faculty research ( Thursby and Thursby 2002 ) and firms open their boundaries , increasingly tapping into external knowledge sources ( Berchicci 2013 ; Hagedoorn and Duysters 2002 ) . However , licensing is difficult to sustain on a commercial basis due to the complexities involved in the commercialization process of highly technological products ( Andries and Faems 2013 ; Cockburn 2009 ) . While technologies of PRIs are available for out - licensing , they are still in developmental stage , complex in terms of codifiability , specific as assets and uncertain in success probability . Therefore , their diffusion is not a straightforward pro - cess . To promote industry adoption of public - funded research , PRIs and their technology transfer organizations ( TTO ) have learned to collaborate with industry partners to de - risk early - stage technologies of good commercial potential by further developing these tech - nologies to meet industry specifications . As firms’ innovation activity becomes more open and increasingly dependent on the need to manage efficiently complex sets of knowledge inflows and outflows within the boundaries of their organization ( Amesse and Cohendet 2001 ; Chesbrough et al . 2006 ; Laursen and Salter 2006 ) , PRIs are turning into a valuable source of scientific and technological knowledge and technology transfer is increasingly seen as a key driver of firms’ competitiveness and growth ( Cheah and Yu 2016 ) . 2 . 2 Technology complexity and financial performance R & D projects can differ in many respects , such as the type of technologies that are being developed , the resources that are available and the way projects are managed ( Du et al . 2014 ) . R & D activity can be associated with different degrees of technology complexity which , in turn , can affect its commercial potential and financial performance . As noted 436 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 in Amsden and Tschang ( 2003 : 554 ) , the classification of R & D consists of two aspects : “The actual types of R & D categories and the complexity characteristics of those catego - ries” . Complex technologies are characterized by components with “multiple interactions” and by “a non - decomposable” system ( Singh 1997 : 340 ) . Technology complexity can be defined in terms of the level of interdependence and interaction between the subparts of a technological system ( Griffin 1997 ; Fleming and Sorenson 2001 ; Mastrogiorgio and Gils - ing 2016 ) . In particular , we define the technology complexity of the R & D projects as the degree to which the technology is systemic , has multiple interactions and low codifiabil - ity . Technology complexity can be considered as a proxy for appropriability and a form of organizational technological resource ( Barney 1991 ) . In an era of unprecedented technological change ( Cooper 2000 ) , the introduction of new and unproven technologies , products and processes can lead to undesirable project out - comes ( Kim and Wilemon 2003 ) . Innovative companies choose to employ new technolo - gies to advance their technological competencies and grant them a competitive advantage . However , in order to reduce the risk associated with complexity , firms can complement their resources with those of other specialists , accessing external skills and knowledge , which can increase their internal capabilities ( Madhok 2002 ) . Previous studies provide mixed results on the role of technology complexity in firms’ performance ( e . g . patents ) suggesting that complexity has the potential to both increase and decrease financial perfor - mance . It is important to note that our study focuses on financial performance , an area that has been overlooked by previous studies . So far , researchers have focused on alternative types of performance . On one hand , complex technologies have the potential to improve financial perfor - mance because they are tacit and difficult to imitate . Wang et al . ( 2013 ) established that the complexity of the in - licensed technology from the licensor was positively associated with the licensee firm’s performance , measured by the cumulative number of patents it applied within five years of in - licensing . Supporting this , using RBT , García - Muiña and Pelechano - Barahona ( 2008 ) found that technology complexity is positively associated with imperfect imitability , thereby sustaining the competitive advantage of a firm . Along these lines , Lhuillery and Pfister ( 2009 ) found that R & D intensity associated with complex tech - nologies mitigate risks of failure of partnerships between PRIs and other firms . Lin ( 2003 ) theorized a positive indirect association between technology complexity and organizational learning . On the other hand , using a TCE perspective , complex technologies involve higher risks , require more time to understand , demand greater efforts to integrate into the firms and hence negatively impact performance . Scholars from the RBT of the firm argued against external R & D processes when the external knowledge flow slows down learning - by - doing ( Bettis et al . 1992 ) . Salomon and Martin ( 2008 ) showed that complex technologies take longer time to be deployed in new production processes at the expense of yield , while Gal - braith ( 1990 ) found that they are associated with productivity performance loss and time for loss recovery . According to Chuma ( 2006 ) , as the level of complexity surpasses a cer - tain threshold , organizations face the limit of relying on a handful of individuals , whose specialized and integrated knowledge are suddenly exposed . This need to expand the range of competencies is not limited to the various divisions within a corporation , but it extends beyond corporate boundaries permanently ( Chesbrough 2003 ) . Therefore , according to Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing ( 2016 ) , while high levels of technology complexity will limit the possibility of decomposing and modifying a technology ( Baldwin and Clark 2000 ) , lower levels of complexity “will allow inventors and designers to eliminate cycling traps 437 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 and loops in the design process and to explore augmenting configurations more easily” ( Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing 2016 : 1422 ) . In this line of thinking , we hypothesize that when technology complexity increases from a low to a moderate level , the financial performance of the PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization project increases due to imperfect imitability and uniqueness of the innovation . However , once a moderate level of complexity has been reached , further increasing complexity may soon start to offer diminishing returns in terms of performance . If complexity increases further , transaction costs associated with complex technologies , such as difficulties in managing , understanding , decoding and integrating the innovation , will outweigh the benefits sustained by resource uniqueness . This causes the financial per - formance to start declining . Therefore , we propose that the relationship between technol - ogy complexity and financial performance of the PRI - firm collaborative research commer - cialization project is an inverted U - shaped curve . Hypothesis 1 The extent of research projects’ technology complexity has an inverse U - shaped relationship with financial performance . 2 . 3 The moderating effects of project resources on financial performance Besides the mixed findings on the technology complexity - financial performance relation - ship , it is unclear how various types of organizational resources shape the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance . The challenges of out - licens - ing and transferring complex technologies have been widely acknowledged . To enhance the productive outcome of inter - organization collaboration , Madhok ( 2002 ) postulated the alignment of transaction , resource and governance characteristics . It is therefore important for firms to be well - equipped with the necessary resources to increase the success of tech - nology transfer ( Wang et al . 2013 ) . In technology transfer literature ( O’Shea et al . 2005 ) , several resources critical to the collaborative performance have been identified . In project portfolio management research , studies have also shown the critical relation between senior management resources and the strategic fit of project portfolio ( Unger et al . 2012 ) . Applying Madhok’s ( 2002 ) trian - gular alignment framework in this paper , we focus on how human , financial and network resources ( which can be considered among the most important resources available to an organization ) , as well as senior management resources ( as a form of governance capability ) affect the relationship between technology complexity ( regarded as PRI - firm transaction ) and the financial performance of the innovation ( measured by the licensing fees generated ) . Since licensing fees are computed based on a small percentage of the sales of the firms’ products embodying the PRI’s licensed technologies , higher product sales will translate proportionately into higher licensing fees and hence higher financial performance , while lower product sales into lower fees and in turn lower financial performance ( Cheah 2016 ) . Although licensing fees are cost payments incurred by firms in exchange for the right to commercialize PRIs’ technologies , their computation as a percentage of sales provides an objective indication of the technology’s commercial value to the firms , that is , the benefit net of cost . In other words , the financial performance of PRIs is aligned to that of the firms . 438 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 2 . 3 . 1 Human resources In this study , we posit that human resources moderate the relationship between technol - ogy complexity and financial performance . In line with the framework developed by Mad - hok ( 2002 ) , we argue that the optimal financial performance is achieved when the level of human resources is aligned with technology complexity levels . We define human resources as PRI’s research scientists and engineers ( RSE ) in the project team . RSEs are technol - ogy experts with the relevant competencies to transform the aforementioned complex tech - nologies into new products and processes . RSEs have been indicated as a proxy for firms’ internal capability ( Giuliani and Bell 2005 ) and a driver of learning processes ( Zahra and George 2002 ) . In projects with highly complex technologies , human resources will help to achieve bet - ter financial performance . High quality human resources will help PRIs to reduce commer - cialization risks , find new commercial application opportunities , facilitate the integration of the technology and will be able to understand the implication of the high complexity technology . These arguments are well established in the literature on absorptive capacity ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ; Zahra and George 2002 ) , according to which firms’ access to highly skilled personnel increases the chances of successful interaction with PRIs ( Bishop et al . 2011 ; Muscio 2007 ) and the effort they put into innovation activity ( Nieto and Quevedo 2005 ) . In fact , the extent to which firms make use of their technological oppor - tunities will depend for the most part on the knowledge and capacities businesses have at their disposal ( Teece et al . 1997 ) . Supporting this , Escribano et al . ( 2009 ) investigate the moderating role played by absorptive capacity on new product sales , showing that firms endowed with more absorptive capacity are better equipped to identify the presence of external knowledge flows and exploit them efficiently ( Lane et al . 2006 ) . Moreover , Gomez and Vargas ( 2009 ) show that firms’ capacity to absorb and manage new technology plays a significant role at explaining adoption patterns of multiple process technologies . Therefore , firms equipped with high quality human resources will experience better financial perfor - mance in the form of higher product sales for firms and hence higher licensing fees for PRIs in commercializing complex technologies . However , over - qualified human resources involved in projects of low - complexity tech - nologies will be problematic because poor person - job fit could lead to low levels of job satisfaction , work motivation and individual performance , thereby impacting a firm’s per - formance ( Kristof - Brown et al . 2005 ) . In projects involving low complexity technologies , PRIs should therefore select RSEs whose competencies are commensurate with , rather than exceed , the low levels of technology complexity involved , so that these personnel will experience engagement in their roles and focus on their performance . According to Kahn ( 1990 : 700 ) , engagement is defined as “the simultaneous employment and expression of a person’s ‘preferred self’ in task behaviours that promote connections to work and to others , personal presence ( physical , cognitive and emotional ) and active , full performance” . Dis - engagement , on the other hand , is defined as “the simultaneous withdrawal and defense of a person’s preferred self in behaviors that promote a lack of connections , physical , cogni - tive and emotional absence , and passive , incomplete role performances” ( Kahn 1990 : 701 ) . In their study of firefighters and their supervisors , Rich et al . ( 2010 ) found a significant positive relationship between engagement and job performance . In sum , to optimize the financial performance of PRI - firm collaborative research com - mercialization projects , the quality of human capital resources should be aligned with the complexity of the technology at hand ( Madhok 2002 ) . Therefore , high quality human 439 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 resources should be employed when the complexity of the technology is high , while low quality human resources should be deployed with low complexity technologies . This means that we expect high quality human resources’ performance to increase as technology complexity increases , while we expect the performance of low quality human resources to increase as technology complexity decreases . Hypothesis 2 Human resources moderate the relationship between technology com - plexity and financial performance : higher ( lower ) human resources increase the financial performance of PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects as technology complexity increases ( decreases ) . 2 . 3 . 2 Financial resources We postulate that financial resources , defined as both the amount and timeliness of funds , moderate the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance . In line with the framework developed by Madhok ( 2002 ) we argue that the optimal finan - cial performance is achieved when financial resources are aligned with complexity levels . A widespread notion in the literature is that availability of financial resources supports firms’ survival and growth ( Cooper et al . 1994 ) , creativity and innovation ( see Hoegl et al . 2008 for a review ) . Firms need to ensure sufficient funds and timely fund disbursement for smooth project ramp - up and implementation . Earlier works have shown that access to financial resources is positively associated with the university commercialization outcome ( O’Shea et al . 2005 ) . More complex technologies need state - of - the - art equipment , facilities and talent for development , testing and integration into new or enhanced products and services . In fact , Goossen and Bradonjic ( 2014 ) found that “non - necessary” financial resources are required to engage slack resources for experimenting with new technologies . In projects involving high complexity technologies , higher levels of financial resources are therefore required to develop and integrate such technologies within external firm’s existing products and pro - cesses and reduce risks , so as to increase the performance of these projects . However , the current literature suggests the relationship between financial resources and project performance is not a linear one . Works exploring the effects of firms’ financial resources show that they are hardly relevant for the purpose of R & D activity ( Del Canto and Gonzalez 1999 ) , while hampering innovation diffusion and financial performance ( Gomez and Vargas 2009 ) . To explain the conflicting research findings of prior works , we argue that for projects involving low complexity technologies , investing too much finan - cial resources can be detrimental to performance for two main reasons . First , low com - plexity technologies will not need much financial resources for development and excessive financial investment could therefore give rise to inefficient capital allocation . Second , if a project receives too much financial resources vis - à - vis its complexity , expectations of the project may be disproportionately higher and lead to inefficient decision making and unnecessary pressure . In sum , to optimize the financial performance of PRI - firm collaborative research com - mercialization projects , the level of financial resources should be aligned with the com - plexity of the technology at hand ( Madhok 2002 ) . In other words , PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects equipped with high levels of financial resources expe - rience higher financial performance in the form of higher product sales for firms and hence 440 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 higher licensing fees for PRIs as technology complexity increases , while projects with low levels of financial resources achieve higher financial performance as complexity decreases . Hypothesis 3 Financial resources moderate the relationship between technology com - plexity and financial performance : higher ( lower ) financial resources increase the financial performance of PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects as technology complexity increases ( decreases ) . 2 . 3 . 3 Network resources Our previous arguments suggest that to successfully commercialize complex technologies , a large number of internal resources is necessary . We argue that network resources moder - ate the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance . In our con - text , resources are required to help to identify potential applications , gain knowledge about future technology trajectories and target market viability . However , firms usually do not possess all necessary resources within their boundaries . Organizations rely on their profes - sional networks to locate part of the resources they need in the larger innovation ecosystem that they operate in ( Cheah et al . 2016 ) . Recent studies have found that a firm leverages its networks to enhance its new product development performance through the processes of opportunity discovery , resource acquisition , market knowledge generation and technology knowledge generation ( Cheah and Ho 2019 ; Mu and Di Benedetto 2012 ) . Hence , networks can provide the necessary resources to deal with complex technologies , especially when these resources do not exist within the firm boundaries . In line with our previous argu - ments based on the framework of Madhok ( 2002 ) we argue that the optimal financial per - formance is achieved when network resources are aligned with complexity levels . Although networks can provide valuable resources , they are not cost - free . As high - lighted in Bellavitis et al . ( 2017 ) , networks can constrain the firm’s strategic alternatives and reduce its flexibility . Network partners may also demand future reciprocation , there - fore reducing the long - term resources available to invest in the focal project ( Gargiulo and Benassi 2000 ) . Hence , although firms can access network resources necessary to commer - cialize complex technologies , and consequently boost their performance , they should not do so unless these resources are necessary . The costs of acquiring these resources through networks , in situations of low technology complexity , may outweigh the benefits gained from these resources . Therefore , it is important to match the level of network resources to the level of technology complexity ( Madhok 2002 ) . In other words , PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects equipped with high levels of network resources expe - rience higher financial performance in the form of higher product sales for firms and hence higher licensing fees for PRIs as technology complexity increases , while projects with low levels of network resources achieve higher financial performance as complexity decreases . Hypothesis 4 Network resources moderate the relationship between technology com - plexity and financial performance : higher ( lower ) network resources increase the financial performance of PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects as technology complexity increases ( decreases ) . 441 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 2 . 3 . 4 Senior management resources Several conceptual syntheses of the literature on senior management influence on firm’s performance conclude that the evidence remains equivocal at best ( e . g . Certo et al . 2006 ) . We propose that senior management resources , intended as both managers’ quality and involvement , moderate the relationship between technology complexity and financial per - formance . In line with the framework developed by Madhok ( 2002 ) we argue that the opti - mal financial performance is achieved when governance characteristics , in our case senior management resources , are aligned with technology complexity levels . In recent research , senior management resources , intended either as experience or involvement , have shown to be associated with organizational performance . Augier and Teece ( 2009 ) argue that managers set the strategic direction of a firm , and can shape the evolution of technologies of markets . Simsek ( 2007 ) found that CEO experience has an inverse U - shape relationship with risk taking . Risk taking , in turn , is associated with the firm’s pursuit of entrepreneurial activities and performance . Managers’ involvement in overseeing projects is also relevant ( Cooper and Kleinschmidt 1995 ) . According to Bli - chfeldt and Eskerod ( 2008 ) , senior management involvement comprises decision - making relating to project selection , prioritization and re - prioritization , resource allocation and re - allocation throughout the project lifecycle . Du et al . ( 2014 ) found that the relationship between a firm’s R & D collaboration projects with its science - based partners and the finan - cial performance of these projects is negatively moderated by formal project management . These R & D projects perform better when RSEs are allowed to pursue experimentation in an environment that is subject to less formal management . Therefore , in low complexity projects , highly skilled and involved senior managers might lead to lower financial perfor - mance . Lower complexity technology requires less experience , risk taking , and pose less challenges in terms of coordination and integration to achieve commercialization goals . RSEs are motivated by the autonomy to explore and experiment ( Badawy 2007 ) , they are more engaged on a project and achieve better project performance when there is less for - mal management from the senior management , especially if the senior management sup - port and experience is not required due the low complexity of the project . On the other hand , in projects involving high complexity technologies , there is a greater risk of failure and hence they require more experienced managers who are able to offer strong support to ensure adequate and timely approval and deployment of resources . Sen - ior managers’ commitment , strategic decision - making and astute portfolio management of such high technology complexity projects are crucial to their commercialization success . To effectively manage these projects , the senior management must have deep professional knowledge and extensive market orientation to establish structures and processes to govern the project portfolio . The senior management should also be cognizant of the needs and motivational styles of the RSEs . Therefore , it is important to match the level of network resources to the level of tech - nology complexity ( Madhok 2002 ) . For projects involving high complexity technologies , to increase the likelihood of the project financial success , senior managers should have a higher level of involvement to steer the project direction , secure and manage resources , as well as the experience necessary monitor the progress of the project . In other words , PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects equipped with high levels of sen - ior management resources experience higher financial performance in the form of higher product sales for firms and hence higher licensing fees for PRIs as technology complexity 442 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 increases , while projects with low levels of senior management resources achieve higher financial performance as complexity decreases . Hypothesis 5 Senior management resources moderate the relationship between technol - ogy complexity and financial performance : higher ( lower ) senior management resources increase the financial performance of PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects as technology complexity increases ( decreases ) . 3 Data and methods Our empirical analysis is based on unique data from the national science and technol - ogy research agency of Singapore . Established in 2002 , the agency has a specific mission of funding and commercializing technologies developed by its 14 PRIs and two universi - ties with the view to fuelling innovation - driven economic growth for the country . By 2010 , it had a portfolio of more than 3500 patents and was ranked second globally by the flagship journal of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) Spectrum in the Pat - ent Power 2012 Scorecards under the government agency category . The agency was set up to perform and commercialize mission - oriented research in two broad areas : ( a ) physical sciences and engineering ( S & E ) and ( b ) biomedical sciences ( BMS ) . Technologies in the S & E area are developed by seven PRIs and two universities to support key industry clus - ters in communications , data storage , materials , chemicals , computational sciences , micro - electronics , process manufacturing and metrology . The BMS research , on the other hand , is conducted by other seven PRIs and the same two universities to enable key industry clus - ters such as pharmaceuticals , medical technology , biotechnology and healthcare services . In this study , we focus on the S & E area for two reasons . First , prior studies have found that different industries respond differently to public research ( Chai and Shih 2016 ) . As the industry R & D intensity of new industries influences the effect of public research on public – private project performance differently from that of mature industries , we minimize this effect by excluding BMS projects . The biomedical industry is relatively new in Sin - gapore , as it started only in 2000 ( Cohen et al . 2002 ) . Second , the technology readiness level of S & E projects is generally higher with a shorter R & D commercialization lead time compared to BMS projects that typically require longer time to market for data collection and testing to ensure the products meet the requirements ( e . g . safety and efficacy ) of dif - ferent regulations including Good Laboratory Practices ( GLP ) and Good Manufacturing Practices ( GMP ) . In 2006 , the research agency launched the public - funded program to encourage research commercialization project collaboration between PRIs and firms . Since then , the agency has seen a critical mass of its S & E research commercialization projects being success - fully translated into innovative products and services . From 2006 to 2013 , the seven S & E PRIs as well as the two universities that had received technology commercialization fund - ing from the national research agency completed a total of 82 research commercialization projects with 59 private firms operating in the physical sciences and engineering industry sectors , with some firms conducting multiple but distinct research projects with the PRIs . 443 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 Before the start of these projects , the technologies are generally in the early , pre - revenue phases of development , ranging between proof - of - concept and prototype . For every pro - ject , the senior management of PRIs approves the deployment of a certain amount of fund - ing and RSEs to develop the technologies further to meet the industry requirements speci - fied by firms that are interested in embodying these technologies into their new or existing products or processes . The RSEs of the PRIs typically work with the product development teams of firms to incorporate the PRI technologies into the firms’ products and services . Although more than 90 per cent of the firms are small and medium enterprises with 200 or less employees , our sample also covers four large firms with up to 74 , 000 employees . This distribution is representative of the Singaporean economy where , in 2018 , 262 , 000 firms were classified as small and medium firms and 1300 as large firms . 2 Upon completion of these projects , the firms will in - license these technologies from the technology trans - fer office ( TTO ) that centrally manages the commercial matters of all intellectual property generated by the PRIs under the jurisdiction of the national public research agency . The commercial terms typically comprise the quantum of the licensing fees , the countries in which the licensed technologies will be commercialized , and the scope and duration of commercial rights . Although the licensing terms are negotiated between the TTO and the firms , they generally follow the nine - point commercial framework accepted by many uni - versities and public research institutes worldwide to license technologies in the public and for the benefit of the society ( AUTM 2010 ) . In this study , we collected data from multiple sources . Financial performance data , namely the licensing fees payable from the firms ( licensee ) to the PRI ( licensor ) , were available from the database of the PRIs . The licensing fees were computed based on the periodic sales revenues provided by the firms of their new or improved products embody - ing the licensed technologies . Data on resources ( e . g . network ) for each project were collected with the help of the national science and technology research agency in 2014 using online survey questionnaires from the PRIs’ technology transfer officers and licensee firm representatives . The PRIs’ technology transfer officers were key informants as they were deeply involved in the PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects they managed and could therefore provide the necessary information for technology complexity , financial resources , senior management resources , network resources required in the survey questionnaires . The licen - see firm representatives who had been the firm’s management responsible for the PRI - firm collaborative research commercialization projects were invited to provide their responses on the human resources ( PRIs’ researchers ) involved in the project . As the research agency was supportive of the study , in 2014 we were able to collect data on the entire population of 82 research commercialization projects that took place between seven Singapore PRIs / two universities that were awarded technology commercialization grant from the national research agency and 59 private firms from 2006 to 2013 in the S & E industry sectors . We started the data collection in 2006 because at that time the research agency launched the public - funded program to encourage research commercialization . 3 The unit of analysis is the PRI - firm research commercialization collaboration project . Since our sample covers projects with firms in all main S & E industry sectors developed by the PRIs and managed by the TTO under a single national science and technology research agency that follows a 2 Data retrieved on the 26th of June 2019 from www . sings tat . gov . sg / . 3 Our main analyses only cover 81 projects due to a missing variable on one of the projects . 444 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 common technology commercialization framework adopted by other PRIs and universities worldwide , our findings should not be regarded as peculiar to our sample only but , at least to some degree , generalizable to other PRIs’ research commercialization efforts in S & E - related industry sectors . To test our hypotheses , we standardize all our independent variables and moderators ( technology complexity , human resources , financial resources , network resources and sen - ior management resources ) around the Z - score to avoid high inter - item correlations among the interaction terms ( Gao et al . 2010 ) . After this standardization we created two - way inter - action terms to test our hypotheses following Friedrich ( 1982 ) . Subsequently , we imple - ment two empirical models . First , considering that our dependent variable is continuous , we use a linear regression with robust standard errors clustered around the in - licensing firm . Second , we run a tobit model that accounts for left censoring of our data ( i . e . rev - enues cannot be negative ) . 3 . 1 Measures The dependent variable , financial performance , is operationalized as the natural logarith - mic value of licensing fees ( expressed in Singapore Dollars ) payable from the firms to the TTO for in - licensing technologies developed by the PRIs . Therefore , this variable accounts for the cumulative sum that firms involved in the commercialization process paid to the PRI and represents a proxy for PRIs’ financial performance . The licensing fees are gener - ally made up of upfront fees and royalty payments that are a percentage of the sales rev - enue of the licensed technologies . These fees have been widely used and accepted as a performance measure of innovation financial success between academic research institu - tions and businesses ( AUTM 2010 ) . This measure has the advantage of being objective , so it does not have the weaknesses of subjective measures of performance . This measure has been collected from the PRIs’ database , so it does not suffer from common method bias . The main variables are multi - item constructs . We ask respondents , through an online questionnaire supported by the national science and technology research agency , to state to what extent they agree with our statements using a five - point Likert scale anchored at 1 = Strongly Disagree , 2 = Disagree , 3 = Neutral , 4 = Agree to 5 = Strongly Agree . The technology complexity measure captures the extent to which the technology is systemic , has multiple interactions and low codifiability ( Lin 2003 ; Singh 1997 ) . The moderating variables , human resources , financial resources , network resources , senior management resources capture the quality and depth of each type of resource controlled by the PRI . In particular , human resources refers to the quality of human resources related to the PRI researchers involved in the project . The variable financial resources captures the amount and timeliness of PRI financial resources available to develop and commercialize the innovation . The variable network resources refers to the quality and quantity of resources available through the network of the PRI . Senior management resources captures both the experience and involvement of the PRI senior management . Higher values of each measure refer to a higher amount and quality of resources . To measure the reliability of our multi - item constructs , we measured the Cronbach alpha . This test shows that our measures are reliable . The Cronbach alpha of all the above - mentioned constructs ranged from 0 . 65 to 0 . 90 , satisfying Nunnally’s ( 1967 : 226 ) guide - lines of inter - item consistency item . In particular , Cronbach Alpha is 0 . 71 for technology complexity , 0 . 87 for financial resources , 0 . 68 for senior management resources , 0 . 90 for 445 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 Table 1 Details about measurements Measures Survey questions Innovation financial performance Logarithmic value of licensing fees payable from the firms to TTO for in - licensing technologies devel - oped by the PRIs Technology complexity ( responses on a 5 - point Likert scale , averaged ) To what extent you agree with the following state - ments The technology involved cannot be easily written into blueprints , instructions , formulas The technology is the product of many interdepend - ent techniques and routines For the technology to be used effectively , people of different background or specialty have to come together Human resources ( responses on a 5 - point Likert scale , averaged ) To what extent you agree with the following state - ments The researchers are knowledgeable and competent to develop the technology and achieve project deliverables The researchers are committed to accomplish project tasks assigned to them The researchers actively look for solutions in case of problems Financial resources ( responses on a 5 - point Likert scale , averaged ) To what extent you agree with the following state - ments We received the full amount of money we applied for The funds were enough to achieve the goals of the project The overall cycle time of the project approval process ( from the time of application to the time funding was received ) was appropriate Senior management resources ( responses on a 5 - point Likert scale , averaged ) To what extent you agree with the following state - ments Our senior management had expert knowledge in project portfolio management Our senior management provided adequate resources to ensure project success Our senior management delivered timely decisions when problems arose or escalation was required 446 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 human resources , 0 . 65 for network resources ( see Table 1 for more details about all meas - ures and sources ) . 4 The econometric model includes several control factors . To control for variances in the performance due to industry factors , we control for technology barriers . This meas - ure accounts for competing technologies that can limit the success of the focal technol - ogy ( Cassiman and Veugelers 2006 ) . In line with previous studies that argue that firm size has an effect on commercialization performance ( e . g . Moon 2019 ) , we control for firm size ( natural logarithm of number of employees ) . We also control for the project manag - er’s prior experience ( Project manager experience ) measured by the number of projects Table 1 ( continued ) Measures Survey questions Network resources ( responses on a 5 - point Likert scale , averaged ) To what extent you agree with the following state - ments We were able to take advantage of new product development opportunities with the assistance of our partners in this project We were able to develop new products to catch market opportunities with the assistance of our partners in this project Our interaction with our partners alerted us to new business opportunities Our partners helped us acquire the required resources for our project The resources that our partners provided us in this project are unique The resources that our partners provided us in this project are valuable Number of firms Number of firms involved in the focal project Firm size Logarithmic value of firm’s number of employees Project manager experience Number of projects previously managed by the project manager Technology barriers ( responses on a 5 - point Likert scale , averaged ) What do you think are the barriers to commercializa - tion ? To what extent you agree with the following statements There are competing technologies and standards in our industry The value of the patent is hard to achieve because there are many patents held by other companies in the same area The technology in our industry changes rapidly The technological developments in our industry are highly unpredictable 4 Some scholars ( e . g . Kaplan and Saccuzzo 1982 : 106 ) recommend a Cronbach’s Alpha above . 7 . Although the value for senior management and network resources is only marginally below this limit , some cautious - ness should be applied when interpreting the results associated with these variables . 447 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 previously managed . The technology transfer officers played an active role in managing PRI - firm collaboration projects and project managers were responsible for the commercial - ization and transfer of PRIs’ IP to the firm . The officers who had managed similar projects before would have more experience with commercialization than those who were new to such projects . Finally , we control for the number of firms involved in the project ( Number of firms ) . The number of controls that we can include in our model is limited due to the relatively small sample size at our disposal . One of the major concerns arising from research involving survey is the common method bias . In order to minimize common method bias and check that it does not drive our results , we follow the methodology suggested by Podsakoff et al . ( 2003 ) . First , as highlighted by Chang et al . ( 2010 : 179 ) “the best way to avoid or minimize any potential common method variance bias is to collect measures for different constructs from differ - ent sources . Ideally , the dependent variable ( s ) are collected from a different source than the independent variables are collected from” . As previously mentioned , we obtain the dependent variable from a different source ( i . e . archival data ) compared to the independent variables ( i . e . online survey ) . Second , we have tried our best to improve the scale items by being concise , precise and avoiding double - barrelled questions . Third , the use of interac - tions reduces the chances that respondents could predict the variables of interest and there - fore adjust their responses accordingly . In other words , the use of interaction specifies rela - tionships among the dependent and independent variables that are not so simple that these relationships are likely to be part of the individuals’ cognitive maps ( Chang et al . 2010 ) . In addition , we have performed a Harman’s single - factor test to assess whether our research is pervasively affected by common method bias . This method has been criticized but it is still widely adopted and provide an indication of whether common method variance is an issue . This method loads all items from each of the constructs into an exploratory factor analysis to see whether one single factor does emerge or whether one general factor does account for a majority of the covariance between the measures . We obtain a total variance explained of 34 per cent which is below the acceptable level of 50 per cent ( Chang et al . 2010 ) . 4 Results Table 2 reports the summary statistics and correlations among our first order variables . Our dependent variable , financial performance , ranges from 5 . 08 to 13 . 14 , which is between S $ 160 and S $ 509 , 000 , with the average of S $ 11 , 271 . Technology complexity ranges from low ( 1 ) to moderately high ( 3 . 3 ) . On the other hand , most projects seem to have a satisfactory amount of resources available , especially human resources . On correla - tions , performance is negatively associated with human resources and the number of firms involved in the project . Further , technology complexity is associated with lower human , financial and network resources , but with more senior management resources . We also find that complex technologies are associated with higher technological barriers . Not surpris - ingly we find that larger firms are associated with more financial resources . Table 3 reports the results of the regression analysis . We run a linear regression analysis with robust standard errors clustered around the in - licensing firm . To determine whether the size and statistical significance of any of the results might depend on the inclu - sion or exclusion of some of the variables from the regression , we added the independent variables step by step in the model , in blocks of indicators . In model 1 we include the 448 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 T a b l e 2 D e s c r i p ti v e s t a ti s ti c s a nd P ea r s on c o rr e l a ti on s D e s c r i p ti v e s t a ti s ti c s h a v e b ee n e x t r ac t e d u s i ng non - s t a nd a r d i ze d m ea s u r e s , w h il e c o rr e l a ti on c on s i d e r t h e s t a nd a r d i ze d m ea s u r e s * p < . 05 M ea n ( S D ) M i n . M a x . O b s . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 . F i n a n c i a l p e rf o r m a n ce 9 . 33 ( 1 . 39 ) 5 . 08 13 . 14 82 2 . T ec hno l ogy c o m p l e x it y ( Z ) 2 . 32 ( . 72 ) 1 3 . 33 82 . 19 3 . H u m a n r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) 4 . 15 ( . 65 ) 3 5 82 − . 22 * − . 44 * 4 . F i n a n c i a l r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) 4 . 11 ( . 66 ) 2 . 33 5 82 − . 01 − . 49 * . 20 5 . N e t w o r k r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) 3 . 53 ( . 52 ) 2 . 33 4 . 5 82 . 22 * − . 00 − . 00 . 06 6 . S e n i o r m a n a g e m e n t r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) 3 . 48 ( . 82 ) 2 5 82 . 04 . 37 * . 00 − . 47 * . 18 7 . N u m b e r o f fi r m s 4 . 87 ( 4 . 76 ) 1 13 82 − . 36 * − . 10 . 29 * . 03 − . 36 * − . 15 8 . F i r m s i ze 4 . 16 ( 1 . 70 ) . 69 11 . 22 82 . 14 − . 00 . 00 . 40 * − . 03 − . 14 − . 01 9 . P r o j ec t m a n a g e r e xp e r i e n ce 3 . 18 ( 1 . 84 ) 0 8 81 − . 10 . 09 − . 14 − . 17 . 28 * . 21 − . 12 − . 09 10 . T ec hno l og i ca l b a rr i e r s 3 . 40 ( . 72 ) 2 4 . 67 82 − . 02 . 61 * − . 20 − . 42 * . 34 * − . 68 * − . 15 − . 07 . 29 * 449 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 T a b l e 3 L i n ea r r e g r e ss i o n on t h e e ff ec t o f t ec hno l ogy c o m p l e x it y a nd it s m od e r a t o r s on fi n a n c i a l p e rf o r m a n ce C on t r o l s / m od e l s 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 N u m b e r o f fi r m s − . 11 * * * ( . 03 ) − . 08 * * ( . 04 ) − . 06 ( . 04 ) − . 06 ( . 04 ) − . 06 ( . 04 ) − . 0 8 * ( . 04 ) − . 08 * ( . 04 ) F i r m s i ze . 10 ( . 07 ) . 09 ( . 06 ) . 10 ( . 07 ) . 08 ( . 07 ) . 07 ( . 07 ) . 03 ( . 07 ) . 07 ( . 08 ) P r o j ec t m a n a g e r e xp e r i e n ce − . 09 ( . 08 ) − . 12 ( . 07 ) − . 13 * ( . 07 ) − . 14 * ( . 08 ) − . 13 * ( . 07 ) − . 1 5 * * ( . 07 ) − . 14 * ( . 07 ) T ec h n o l og i ca l b a rr i e r s − . 07 ( . 25 ) − 1 . 00 * * * ( . 33 ) − 1 . 21 * * * ( . 33 ) − . 1 . 19 * * * ( . 35 ) − 1 . 47 * * * ( . 37 ) − 1 . 5 2 * * * ( . 34 ) − 1 . 09 * * * ( . 36 ) T ec h n o l ogy c o m p l e x it y T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y ( Z ) . 31 * * ( . 15 ) . 44 * * ( . 20 ) . 48 * * ( . 22 ) . 29 ( . 20 ) . 80 * * * ( . 21 ) . 55 * * ( . 27 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y s qu a r e d ( Z ) − . 62 * * * ( . 22 ) − . 41 ( . 28 ) − . 30 ( . 28 ) − . 36 ( . 26 ) − . 4 0 * ( . 23 ) − . 13 ( . 30 ) M od e r a t o r s H u m a n r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) − . 02 ( . 19 ) − . 17 ( . 33 ) . 03 ( . 21 ) − . 25 ( . 21 ) − . 39 ( . 28 ) F i n a n c i a l r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) − . 01 ( . 22 ) . 11 ( . 22 ) . 51 ( . 64 ) . 00 ( . 20 ) . 02 ( . 22 ) N e t w o r k r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) . 31 ( . 21 ) . 33 ( . 24 ) . 25 ( . 23 ) . 78 * * ( . 38 ) . 72 * * ( . 29 ) S e n i o r m a n a g e m e n t r e s ou r ce s ( Z ) . 22 ( . 22 ) . 07 ( . 22 ) . 17 ( . 20 ) . 89 * * * ( . 28 ) . 16 ( . 61 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y × hu m a n r e s ou r ce s . 44 * * ( . 18 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y s qu a r e d × hu m a n r e s ou r ce s . 13 ( . 20 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y × fi n a n c i a l r e s ou r ce s − . 14 ( . 34 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y s qu a r e d × fi n a n c i a l r e s ou r ce s − . 49 ( . 47 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y × n e t w o r k r e s ou r ce s . 55 * * * ( . 16 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y s qu a r e d × n e t w o r k r e s ou r ce s − . 50 * * ( . 21 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y × s e n i o r m a n a g e m e n t r e s ou r ce s . 61 * * ( . 24 ) T ec h no l ogy c o m p l e x it y s qu a r e d × s e n i o r m a n a g e m e n t r e s ou r ce s . 20 ( . 27 ) C on s t a n t 10 . 01 * * * ( 1 . 04 ) 13 . 74 * * * ( 1 . 39 ) 14 . 13 * * * ( 1 . 35 ) 14 . 18 * * * ( 1 . 42 ) 15 . 20 * * * ( 1 . 54 ) 15 . 3 6 * * * ( 1 . 28 ) 13 . 59 * * * ( 1 . 40 ) O b s e r v a ti on s ( c l u s t e r s ) 81 ( 58 ) 81 ( 58 ) 81 ( 58 ) 81 ( 58 ) 81 ( 58 ) 81 ( 5 8 ) 81 ( 58 ) F 4 . 64 * * * 7 . 59 * * * 6 . 41 * * * 7 . 21 * * * 4 . 79 * * * 9 . 16 * * * 8 . 58 * * * R - s q u a r e d . 16 . 29 . 32 . 35 . 34 . 40 . 38 T h e v a r i a b l e s r e l a t e d t o t ec hno l ogy c o m p l e x it y a nd r e s ou r ce s a r e s t a nd a r d i ze d t o a vo i d c o lli n ea r it y i ss u e s . S t a nd a r d e rr o r s c l u s t e r e d a r ound t h e fi r m a r e r e po r t e d i n p a r e n t h e - s i s * p < . 1 ; * * p < . 05 ; * * * p < . 01 450 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 control variables . The number of firms involved in the project and technology barriers the innovation is facing negatively impact financial performance . In model 2 we add the two measures of technology complexity . For Hypothesis 1 to be supported , the linear term is expected to have a positive sign , while the quadratic meas - ure is expected to have a negative coefficient . We find that the first order coefficient is positive and significant ( b = 0 . 31 ; p < 0 . 05 ) while the second order is negative and signifi - cant ( b = − 0 . 62 ; p < 0 . 01 ) . We note that the explanatory power of the model significantly increased from 16 to 29 per cent , supporting the relevance of technology complexity for financial performance . Further , we test for the inverted U - shaped effect of prior co - invest - ments following the procedures laid out in Haans et al . ( 2016 ) . Specifically , we estimate the turning point at which the relationship between prior technology complexity and finan - cial performance inverts , and we assess if the turning point is within our sample range by conducting a U - test ( also see Lind and Mehlum 2010 ) . The U - test confirms the inverse U - shape relationship between technology complexity and financial performance with a t - value of 2 . 14 ( p = 0 . 018 ) . The inversion point is at technology complexity of 0 . 24 , well within our range of observations . Therefore , the inversion point arises 24 per cent of one standard deviation above the mean . Results indicate that financial performance increases when technology complexity increases , but only up to a certain point , slightly above aver - age , after which the negative aspects of complexity outweigh the positive aspects . In other words , the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance is curvi - linear ( inverted U - shape ) . Hence , we find strong support for Hypothesis 1 . In the following models we test Hypotheses 2 to 5 . For these to be supported , the interaction between the resources’ variables and the linear term of technology complex - ity is expected to have a positive coefficient , while the interaction with the quadratic term is expected to have a non - significant coefficient . This would suggest a linear moderat - ing effect of each resource on the relationship between technology complexity and each resource . High quality resources’ positive impact on performance increases alongside technology complexity , while low resources’ impact on performance decreases alongside technology complexity . The combination of these two linear relationships intersecting each other leads to the inverse U - shape relationship described in Hypothesis 1 . In model 3 we include the resource - related moderators . From model 4 to model 7 we add interactions between technology complexity and each of the moderators . In model 4 we test Hypothesis 2 . The interaction between the first order term of technology complexity and human resources is positive and significant ( b = 0 . 44 ; p < 0 . 05 ) , while the interaction with the second order term is positive but not significant . Our results suggest that lower human resources lead to better financial performance at lower levels of technology com - plexity , but that at higher levels of complexity higher quality human resources are required . Therefore , we find full support for Hypothesis 2 . In model 5 we add the interactions with financial resources . Both terms are not signifi - cant . Therefore , we do not find support for Hypothesis 3 . Financial resources do not mod - erate the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance . In model 6 we include the interactions with network resources . Both interactions are significant , and the first order term is positive ( b = 0 . 55 ; p < 0 . 01 ) , while the second order term is negative ( b = − 0 . 50 ; p < 0 . 05 ) . This means that network resources increase the ben - efits of technology complexity but only up to a certain point , after which these benefits peak and start to decline . These results lend partial support to Hypothesis 4 . Finally , in model 7 we include the variable related to senior management resources . In line with our predictions we find that the first order term is positive and significant ( b = 0 . 61 ; p < 0 . 05 ) and the interaction with the second order term is not significant . Our 451 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 results suggest that lower senior management resources lead to better financial perfor - mance at lower levels of technology complexity , but that at higher levels of complexity higher levels of senior management resources are required . Hence , we find full support for our Hypothesis 5 . As a robustness test we run a tobit regression . Results and coefficients’ directions are consistent with those reported in Table 3 . To help interpret our findings , we follow Bellavitis et al . ( 2019 ) methodology for report - ing and testing interaction effects . In particular , to complement interaction effects’ regres - sions , we plot graphs at meaningful values of our key independent variable and moderators ( Wiersema and Bowen 2009 ) . We run and graph marginal effects one standard deviation above and below the mean for our variables of interest . 5 Figure 1a illustrates the effect of technology complexity on financial performance . The graph shows that performance increases up to a level of complexity equal to 0 . 24 standard deviation above the mean , after which performance starts to decline . Figure 1b illustrates the moderation of human resources . The graph shows that at low levels of technology complexity , low levels of human resources achieve better performance . However , as soon as complexity increases , having higher quality human resources becomes beneficial up to a point where it helps to offset the negative effects of very high levels of technology complexity . Figure 1c shows a strong moderating effect of network resources . At low levels of technology complexity , we find that network resources do not have a strong differentiating factor . However , at higher levels of technology complexity , high levels of network resources are conducive to stronger Fig . 1 The impact of technology complexity on financial performance 5 We do not report marginal effects for the moderation of financial resources due to the lack of significance of the main results . 452 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 performance . Finally , Fig . 1d illustrates the moderation of senior management resources . Results show a pattern similar to network resources . Research commercialization projects that involve high senior management resources are better equipped to cope with high lev - els of technology complexity . Senior management resources compensate for the negative aspects of high technology complexity . 5 Discussion Prior studies have been inconclusive in determining whether the technology complex - ity of research collaboration projects leads to higher or lower financial performance . It is also unclear how various types of project resources and governance factors inter - act to contribute to financial performance . To fill this gap in the literature , our study investigated the relationship between the technology complexity of PRI - firm collabo - rative research commercialization projects and their financial performance . In line with our expectations , the extent of research projects’ technology complexity has an inverse U - shaped relationship with financial performance . When the level of technol - ogy complexity increases from a low to a moderate level , the financial performance of the research commercialization project benefits due to imperfect imitability and unique - ness of the innovation . However , once a moderate level of complexity has been reached , further increasing complexity may lead to diminishing returns . If complexity reaches a high level , transaction costs associated with complex technologies , such as difficulties in managing , understanding , decoding and integrating the innovation , will outweigh the benefits sustained by resource uniqueness , leading to a decline in financial performance . In addition , we found that the relationship between technology complexity and finan - cial performance is contingent on the levels of human , network and senior management resources . In summary , our findings established that high quality human , network and senior management resources will increase the performance for high technology com - plexity projects but reduce the performance of low technology complexity projects . In other words , it is important to align resources and senior management to the level of technology complexity . 5 . 1 Theoretical contributions The empirical evidence has shown that the relationship between the degree of diversity in project portfolios and financial performance is not as straightforward as expected because of a number of factors such as direct cost - increasing effects ( Belderbos et al . 2010 ; Faems et al . 2010 ) . While the support to open innovation strategies is overwhelming , there is little evidence on how the technology complexity of innovation strategies influences the finan - cial performance of research projects , especially in the context of PRIs . In this respect , the results of our study contribute to the existing literature in several ways . First , we reconcile previous findings that argued for a positive ( e . g . Wang et al . 2013 ) as well as negative ( e . g . Salomon and Martin 2008 ) relationship between technology complexity and perfor - mance . Differences in findings mostly stemmed from the theoretical starting point where RBT scholars argued the benefits of technology complexity and TCE researchers focused on the negative aspects of complexity . Building on Madhok ( 2002 ) , we develop a concep - tual framework that clarifies the relationship between technology complexity and project 453 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 financial performance . Our findings shed further light on existing research intersecting transaction costs and resource - based theories . The strategy theory of the firm advocated a triangular alignment among the particulars of transaction , resource and governance fac - tors , in order to effect simultaneous achievement of transaction efficiency and competitive advantage ( Madhok 2002 ) . Our study illustrates a type of triangular alignment by demon - strating how the technology complexity associated with PRI - firm technology transfer trans - action interacts with internal and external resources , as well as how PRIs’ senior manage - ment chooses to govern it to increase their financial performance . Second , the cost – benefit trade - off associated with technology complexity indicates the significance of resource factors that further influence how technology complexity affects performance . We contribute to RBT by showing that PRI - specific resources in the form of qualified human and network resources can concur in moderating the relationship between technology complexity and financial performance . Our findings also established that the level of these resources has to be commensurate with the level of technology complexity at the project level to increase the likelihood of project success . Third , our research extends to the academic entrepreneurship literature . It is well known that academic entrepreneurship can be a powerful engine of growth for a country’s eco - nomic development through commercializing university science - based research ( Grimaldi et al . 2011 ) . However , our understanding of what affects the financial success of univer - sities’ commercialization efforts is still limited . Our paper shows that universities should collaborate closely with firms to commercialize their technologies to achieve superior financial performance together . However , the level of financial success depends on how complex these technologies are . This finding informs the debate surrounding the reasons universities are more selective about the research projects they embark on to ensure indus - try relevance and enhance commercialization readiness ( Thursby and Thursby 2011 ) . We also show that universities should align the level of resources they invest in each project to the level of technology complexity they are dealing with . Finally , our paper is also of interest to scholars in the open innovation field . While the support to open innovation strategies is overwhelming , there is little evidence on how the technology complexity of innovation strategies influences the financial performance of research commercialization projects , especially in the context of PRIs and when project - level performance indicators are considered ( Du et al . 2014 ; Hobday 2000 ) . Our paper sheds light on how technology complexity has the potential to influence the financial per - formance of open innovation projects . 5 . 2 Practical and policy implications This study offers valuable practical implications for managers and policy makers . First , organizations should note that investing in complex technologies can lead to better finan - cial performance , but only up to a certain level . Technologies that are too complex pose some challenges because of the difficulties in commercializing them . Second , PRI manag - ers should be aware that their ability to harness the commercial potential of these tech - nologies is contingent on the availability of not only internal resources , but also external ones through their networks . Third , larger and better resources do not always translate into better financial performance . The level of resources apportioned to each project should be proportionate to the complexity level . At low technology complexity projects , for exam - ple , managers are better off being less involved by granting high level of autonomy to pro - ject teams comprising low levels of qualified human and network resources . However , as 454 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 soon as complexity increases , projects should be given more attention and allocated more resources to achieve stronger performance . In particular , at very high levels of technology complexity , managers should be more involved in ensuring that strong resources in terms of higher qualified human capital and network resources are available as they are crucial to deal with the problems associated with technology complexity . Interestingly , our study found that financial resources have no significant moderating effect , supporting recent evi - dence ( Ramaciotti et al . 2017 ) on the importance of hard and soft policy measures on new technology - based firms . These results have relevant implications for policymakers . In order to increase the impact and returns of policy schemes supporting research commercialization and technol - ogy transfer , the evaluation criteria of public calls for project proposals should take into account the technology complexity , the financial and operational capacity of applicants as well as other factors that this paper demonstrates are associated to financial performance . The evaluation of project proposals and assessment of applications should consider with special caution firms’ human and managerial resources , extent and composition of partner - ship agreements and the complexity of licensed technologies , often proxied by their tech - nology readiness level ( TRL ) . These aspects are especially relevant when promoting aca - demic entrepreneurship , in which case , establishing simple and clear institutional rules to research commercialization can have dramatic effects in driving technology transfer ( Mus - cio et al . 2016 ) . 5 . 3 Limitation and future research Our paper has some limitations that , in turn , open pathways to future research . First , our results are based on a relatively small sample . Although , our extensive data collection involved just 82 research commercialization projects in Singapore ( we could only include 81 projects in our analyses ) , our results may be generalizable to only to S & E - related indus - try sectors in innovation - driven economies . Nevertheless , we encourage future empirical research to test whether our results hold in other contexts , such as BMS industries , and explore cross - country effects . Secondly , our data have some limitations . Our results may be driven by a relatively small number of observations . However , smaller sample sizes reduce the significance of the effects . Further , our data capture technologies with a moderately high level of tech - nology complexity . This means that our results are conservatively stated . Therefore , if our results hold within our sample , in theory they should hold within a larger sample that includes highly complex technologies . Researchers that have the capacity to access a larger sample that includes highly complex technologies , could investigate whether our results remain constant . Relatedly , we measure financial performance at one point in time which also coincides with the same time the predictor is measured . Considering that innova - tion’s technology complexity and performance might vary with time , researchers with data on technologies with time - varying degrees of complexity could investigate performance fluctuations . Finally , we focus on financial performance , measured as the licensing fees generated by a project . Although this measure is a sound proxy for financial performance , it might be that certain institutions or governments do not have financial success as their primary goal . For example , governments usually invest to promote employment and entrepreneurship ( rather than economic profits ) . Incubators sometimes have non - profit goals such as gender equality or environmental protection . Future studies could investigate whether technology 455 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 complexity and our moderators have a different effect on different dependent variables . It might happen that different managers or human resources decide to be involved with a cer - tain project depending on its final goal . Acknowledgements We would like to acknowledge Mr Philip Lim , the Chief Executive Officer of Acceler - ate Technologies Pte Ltd , for his support of the study . References Adham , K . A . , Kasimin , H . , & Said , M . F . ( 2011 ) . Biotechnology policy implementation from a systems perspective . International Journal of Economics and Management , 5 ( 1 ) , 53 – 97 . Amesse , F . , & Cohendet , P . ( 2001 ) . Technology transfer revisited from the perspective of the knowl - edge - based economy . Research Policy , 30 ( 9 ) , 1459 – 1478 . Amsden , A . H . , & Tschang , F . T . ( 2003 ) . A new approach to assessing the technological complexity of different categories of R & D ( with examples from Singapore ) . Research Policy , 32 ( 4 ) , 553 – 572 . Andries , P . , & Faems , D . ( 2013 ) . Patenting activities and firm performance : Does firm size matter ? Jour - nal of Product Innovation Management , 30 ( 6 ) , 1089 – 1098 . Arora , A . , Fosfuri , A . , & Gambardella , A . ( 2001 ) . Markets for technology and their implications for cor - porate strategy . Industrial and Corporate Change , 10 ( 2 ) , 419 – 451 . Augier , M . , & Teece , D . J . ( 2009 ) . Dynamic capabilities and the role of managers in business strategy and economic performance . Organization Science , 20 ( 2 ) , 410 – 421 . AUTM . ( 2010 ) . The AUTM licensing survey : Fiscal year 2010 . Norwalk , CT : Association of University Technology Managers . Badawy , M . K . ( 2007 ) . Managing human resources . Research - Technology Management , 50 ( 4 ) , 56 – 74 . Baldwin , C . Y . , & Clark , K . B . ( 2000 ) . Design rules : The power of modularity ( Vol . 1 ) . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Barney , J . ( 1991 ) . Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage . Journal of Management , 17 ( 1 ) , 99 – 120 . Belderbos , R . , Faems , D . , Leten , B . , & Van Looy , B . ( 2010 ) . Technological activities and their impact on the financial performance of the firm : Exploitation and exploration within and between firms ? Journal of Product Innovation Management , 27 , 869 – 882 . Bellavitis , C . , Filatotchev , I . , & Souitaris , V . ( 2017 ) . The impact of investment networks on venture capi - tal firm performance : A contingency framework . British Journal of Management , 28 ( 1 ) , 102 – 119 . Bellavitis , C . , Rietveld , J . , & Filatotchev , I . ( 2019 ) . The Effects of prior co - investments on the perfor - mance of VC syndicates : A relational agency perspective . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sej . 1320 . Berchicci , L . ( 2013 ) . Towards an open R & D system : Internal R & D investment , external knowledge acquisition and innovative performance . Research Policy , 42 ( 1 ) , 117 – 127 . Bettis , R . A . , Bradley , S . P . , & Hamel , G . ( 1992 ) . Outsourcing and industrial decline . Academy of Man - agement Executive , 6 ( 1 ) , 7 – 22 . Bishop , K . , D’Este , P . , & Neely , A . ( 2011 ) . Gaining from interactions with universities : Multiple meth - ods for nurturing absorptive capacity . Research Policy , 40 ( 1 ) , 30 – 40 . Blichfeldt , B . S . , & Eskerod , P . ( 2008 ) . Project portfolio management—There’s more to it than what management enacts . International Journal of Project Management , 26 ( 4 ) , 357 – 365 . Cassiman , B . , & Veugelers , R . ( 2006 ) . In search of complementarity in innovation strategy : Internal R & D and external knowledge acquisition . Management Science , 52 ( 1 ) , 68 – 82 . Certo , S . T . , Lester , R . H . , Dalton , C . M . , & Dalton , D . R . ( 2006 ) . Top management teams , strategy and financial performance : A meta - analytic examination . Management Studies , 43 , 813 – 839 . Chai , S . , & Shih , W . ( 2016 ) . Bridging science and technology through academic – industry partnerships . Research Policy , 45 ( 1 ) , 148 – 158 . Chang , S . J . , van Witteloostuijn , A . , & Eden , L . ( 2010 ) . From the editors : Common method variance in international business research . Journal of International Business Studies , 41 ( 2 ) , 178 – 184 . Cheah , S . ( 2016 ) . Framework for measuring research and innovation impact . Innovation , 18 ( 2 ) , 212 – 232 . Cheah , S . , & Ho , Y . P . ( 2019 ) . Coworking and sustainable business model innovation in young firms . Sustainability , 11 ( 10 ) , 2959 . Cheah , S . , Ho , Y . P . , & Lim , P . ( 2016 ) . Role of public science in fostering the innovation and startup ecosystem in Singapore . Asian Research Policy , 7 ( 1 ) , 78 – 93 . 456 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 Cheah , S . , & Yu , C . ( 2016 ) . Assessing economic impact of research and innovation originating from public research institutions and universities—Case of Singapore PRIs . Triple Helix , 3 ( 6 ) , 1 – 36 . Chesbrough , H . W . ( 2003 ) . Open innovation : The new imperative for creating and profiting from tech - nology . Boston , MA : Harvard Business Review Press . Chesbrough , H . , Vanhaverbeke , W . , & West , J . ( 2006 ) . Open innovation : Researching a new paradigm . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Chuma , H . ( 2006 ) . Increasing complexity and limits of organization in the microlithography industry : Implications for science - based industries . Research Policy , 35 ( 3 ) , 394 – 411 . Cockburn , I . M . ( 2009 ) . Intellectual property rights and pharmaceuticals : Challenges and opportunities for economic research . In R . Towse & R . Holzhauer ( Eds . ) , The economics of intellectual property ( pp . 150 – 173 ) . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar . Cohen , W . M . , & Levinthal , D . A . ( 1990 ) . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective of learning and innova - tion . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , 128 – 152 . Cohen , W . M . , Nelson , R . R . , & Walsh , J . P . ( 2002 ) . Links and impacts : The influence of public research on industrial R & D . Management Science , 48 ( 1 ) , 1 – 23 . Cooper , L . G . ( 2000 ) . Strategic marketing planning for radically new products . Journal of Marketing , 64 ( 1 ) , 1 – 16 . Cooper , A . C . , Gimeno - Gascon , F . J . , & Woo , C . Y . ( 1994 ) . Initial human and financial capital as predictors of new venture performance . Journal of Business Venturing , 9 ( 5 ) , 371 – 395 . Cooper , R . G . , & Kleinschmidt , E . J . ( 1995 ) . Benchmarking the firm’s critical success factors in new prod - uct development . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 12 ( 5 ) , 374 – 391 . Del Canto , J . G . , & Gonzalez , I . S . ( 1999 ) . A resource - based analysis of the factors determining a firm’s R & D activities . Research Policy , 28 ( 8 ) , 891 – 905 . Dooley , L . , & Kenny , B . ( 2015 ) . Research collaboration and commercialization : The Ph . D . candidate per - spective . Industry and Higher Education , 29 , 93 – 110 . Du , J . , Leten , B . , & Vanhaverbeke , W . ( 2014 ) . Managing open innovation projects with science - based and market - based partners . Research Policy , 43 ( 5 ) , 828 – 840 . Edmondson , A . C . , Winslow , A . B . , Bohmer , R . M . , & Pisano , G . P . ( 2003 ) . Learning how and learning what : Effects of tacit and codified knowledge on performance improvement following technology adoption . Decision Sciences , 34 ( 2 ) , 197 – 224 . Escribano , A . , Fosfuri , A . , & Tribó , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Managing external knowledge flows : The moderating role of absorptive capacity . Research Policy , 38 ( 1 ) , 96 – 105 . Faems , D . , De Visser , M . , Andries , P . , & Van Looy , B . ( 2010 ) . Technology alliance portfolios and finan - cial performance : Value - enhancing and cost - increasing effects of open innovation . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 27 , 785 – 796 . Fleming , L . , & Sorenson , O . ( 2001 ) . Technology as a complex adaptive system : Evidence from patent data . Research Policy , 30 ( 7 ) , 1019 – 1039 . Friedrich , R . ( 1982 ) . In defense of multiplicative terms in multiple regression equations . American Journal of Political Science , 26 ( 4 ) , 797 – 833 . Galbraith , C . S . ( 1990 ) . Transferring core manufacturing technologies in high - technology firms . California Management Review , 32 ( 4 ) , 56 – 70 . Gao , G . , Gopal , A . , & Agarwal , R . ( 2010 ) . Contingent effects of quality signaling : Evidence from the Indian offshore IT services industry . Management Science , 56 ( 6 ) , 1012 – 1029 . García - Muiña , F . E . , & Pelechano - Barahona , E . ( 2008 ) . The complexity of technological capital and legal protection mechanisms . Journal of Intellectual Capital , 9 ( 1 ) , 86 – 104 . Gargiulo , M . , & Benassi , M . ( 2000 ) . Trapped in your own net ? Network cohesion , structural holes , and the adaptation of social capital . Organization Science , 11 ( 2 ) , 183 – 196 . Giuliani , E . , & Bell , M . ( 2005 ) . The micro - determinants of meso - level learning and innovation : Evidence from a Chilean wine cluster . Research Policy , 34 ( 1 ) , 47 – 68 . Gomez , J . , & Vargas , P . ( 2009 ) . The effect of financial constraints , absorptive capacity and complementari - ties on the adoption of multiple process technologies . Research Policy , 38 ( 1 ) , 106 – 119 . Goossen , M . C . , & Bradonjic , P . T . ( 2014 ) . Asymmetric knowledge transfer in R & D alliances . Academy of Management Proceedings , 2014 ( 1 ) , 12547 . Griffin , A . ( 1997 ) . The effect of project and process characteristics on product development cycle time . Journal of Marketing Research , 34 ( 1 ) , 24 – 35 . Grimaldi , R . , Kenney , M . , Siegel , D . S . , & Wright , M . ( 2011 ) . 30 Years after Bayh – Dole : Reassessing aca - demic entrepreneurship . Research Policy , 40 ( 8 ) , 1045 – 1057 . Haans , R . F . J . , Pieters , C . , & Zi - Lin , H . ( 2016 ) . Thinking about U : Theorizing and testing U - and inverted U - shaped relationships in strategy research . Strategic Management Journal , 37 ( 7 ) , 1177 – 1195 . 457 The impact of technology complexity on the financial performance… 1 3 Hagedoorn , J . , & Duysters , G . ( 2002 ) . External sources of innovative capabilities : The preferences for stra - tegic alliances or mergers and acquisitions . Journal of Management Studies , 39 ( 2 ) , 167 – 188 . Hertzfeld , H . R . , Link , A . N . , & Vonortas , N . S . ( 2006 ) . Intellectual property mechanisms in research part - nerships . Research Policy , 35 ( 6 ) , 825 – 838 . Hobday , M . ( 2000 ) . The project - based organization : An ideal form for managing complex products and sys - tems ? Research Policy , 29 , 871 – 893 . Hoegl , M . , Gibbert , M . , & Mazursky , D . ( 2008 ) . Financial constraints in innovation projects : When is less more ? Research Policy , 37 ( 8 ) , 1382 – 1391 . Horta , H . , Meoli , M . , & Vismara , S . ( 2016 ) . Skilled unemployment and the creation of academic spin - offs : A recession - push hypothesis . Journal of Technology Transfer , 41 ( 4 ) , 798 – 817 . Kahn , W . A . ( 1990 ) . Psychological conditions of personal engagement and disengagement at work . Academy of Management Journal , 33 ( 4 ) , 692 – 724 . Kaplan , R . M . , & Saccuzzo , D . P . ( 1982 ) . Psychological testing : Principles , applications and issues . Monterey , CA : Brooks / Cole Publishing Co . Kim , J . , & Wilemon , D . ( 2003 ) . Sources and assessment of complexity in NPD projects . R & D Manage - ment , 33 ( 1 ) , 15 – 30 . Kogut , B . , & Zander , U . ( 1992 ) . Knowledge of the firm , combinative capabilities , and the replication of technology . Organization Science , 3 ( 3 ) , 383 – 397 . Kristof - Brown , A . L . , Zimmerman , R . D . , & Johnson , E . C . ( 2005 ) . Consequences of individuals’ fit at work : A meta - analysis of person – job , person – organization , person – group , and person – supervisor fit . Personnel Psychology , 58 ( 2 ) , 281 – 342 . Lane , P . J . , Koka , B . R . , & Pathak , S . ( 2006 ) . The reification of absorptive capacity : A critical review and rejuvenation of the construct . Academy of Management Review , 31 ( 4 ) , 833 – 863 . Laursen , K . , & Salter , A . ( 2006 ) . Open for innovation : The role of openness in explaining innovation performance among UK manufacturing firms . Strategic Management Journal , 27 ( 2 ) , 131 – 150 . Lee , J . S . , Park , J . H . , & Bae , Z . T . ( 2017 ) . The effects of licensing - in on innovative performance in dif - ferent technological regimes . Research Policy , 46 ( 2 ) , 485 – 496 . Lhuillery , S . , & Pfister , E . ( 2009 ) . R & D cooperation and failures in innovation projects : Empirical evi - dence from French CIS data . Research Policy , 38 ( 1 ) , 45 – 57 . Lin , B . ( 2003 ) . Technology transfer as technological learning : A source of competitive advantage for firms with limited R & D resources . R & D Management , 33 ( 3 ) , 327 – 341 . Lind , J . T . , & Mehlum , H . ( 2010 ) . With or without U ? The appropriate test for a U shaped relationship . Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics , 72 ( 1 ) , 109 – 118 . Madhok , A . ( 2002 ) . Reassessing the fundamentals and beyond : Ronald Coase , the transaction cost and resource - based theories of the firm and the institutional structure of production . Strategic Man - agement Journal , 23 ( 6 ) , 535 – 550 . Mastrogiorgio , M . , & Gilsing , V . ( 2016 ) . Innovation through exaptation and its determinants : The role of technological complexity , analogy making & patent scope . Research Policy , 45 ( 7 ) , 1419 – 1435 . Meoli , M . , & Vismara , S . ( 2016 ) . University support and the creation of technology and non - technology academic spin - offs . Small Business Economics , 47 ( 2 ) , 345 – 362 . Moon , B . ( 2019 ) . Strategic R & D projects choice of the firm : Theory and evidence from Korea . Technol - ogy Analysis and Strategic Management . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09537 325 . 2019 . 16443 10 . Motohashi , K . ( 2008 ) . Licensing or not licensing ? An empirical analysis of the strategic use of patents by Japanese firms . Research Policy , 37 ( 9 ) , 1548 – 1555 . Mu , J . , & Di Benedetto , A . ( 2012 ) . Networking capability and new product development . IEEE Transac - tions on Engineering Management , 59 ( 1 ) , 4 – 19 . Muscio , A . ( 2007 ) . The impact of absorptive capacity on SMEs’ collaboration . Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 16 ( 8 ) , 653 – 668 . Muscio , A . , Quaglione , D . , & Ramaciotti , L . ( 2016 ) . The effects of university rules on spinoff creation : The case of academia in Italy . Research Policy , 45 , 1386 – 1396 . Nieto , M . , & Quevedo , P . ( 2005 ) . Absorptive capacity , technological opportunity , knowledge spillovers , and innovative effort . Technovation , 25 ( 10 ) , 1141 – 1157 . Nunnally , J . C . ( 1967 ) . Psychometric theory . New York : McGraw - Hill . O’Shea , R . P . , Allen , T . J . , Chevalier , A . , & Roche , F . ( 2005 ) . Entrepreneurial orientation , technology transfer and spinoff performance of US universities . Research Policy , 34 ( 7 ) , 994 – 1009 . Podsakoff , P . M . , MacKenzie , S . B . , Lee , J . Y . , & Podsakoff , N . P . ( 2003 ) . Common method biases in behavioral research : A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies . Journal of Applied Psychology , 88 ( 5 ) , 879 – 903 . 458 S . Cheah et al . 1 3 Raesfeld , A . V . , Geurts , P . , Jansen , M . , Boshuizen , J . , & Luttge , R . ( 2012 ) . Influence of partner diversity on collaborative public R & D project outcomes : A study of application and commercialization of nanotechnologies in the Netherlands . Technovation , 32 ( 3 ) , 227 – 233 . Ramaciotti , L . , Muscio , A . , & Rizzo , U . ( 2017 ) . The impact of hard and soft policy measures on new technology - based firms . Regional Studies , 51 ( 4 ) , 629 – 642 . Rasmussen , E . ( 2008 ) . Government instruments to support the commercialization of university research : Lessons from Canada . Technovation , 28 ( 8 ) , 506 – 517 . Rich , B . L . , Lepine , J . A . , & Crawford , E . R . ( 2010 ) . Job engagement : Antecedents and effects on job performance . Academy of Management Journal , 53 ( 3 ) , 617 – 635 . RIETI ( Research Institute of Economy , Trade and Industry ) . ( 2004 ) . Report on RIETI’s survey on external collaboration in R & D for Japanese firms ( in Japanese ) . Salomon , R . , & Martin , X . ( 2008 ) . Learning , knowledge transfer , and technology implementation perfor - mance : A study of time - to - build in the global semiconductor industry . Management Science , 54 ( 7 ) , 1266 – 1280 . Shapira , P . , Youtie , J . , & Kay , L . ( 2011 ) . Building capabilities for innovation in SMEs : A cross - country comparison of technology extension policies and programmes . International Journal of Innovation and Regional Development , 3 ( 3 – 4 ) , 254 – 272 . Siegel , D . S . , Waldman , D . A . , & Link , A . N . ( 2003 ) . Assessing the impact of organizational practices on the relative productivity of university technology transfer offices : An exploratory study . Research Policy , 32 , 27 – 48 . Simsek , Z . ( 2007 ) . CEO tenure and organizational performance : An intervening model . Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 28 , 653 – 662 . Singh , K . ( 1997 ) . The impact of technological complexity and interfirm cooperation on business survival . Academy of Management Journal , 40 ( 2 ) , 339 – 367 . Teece , D . J . , Pisano , G . , & Shuen , A . ( 1997 ) . Dynamic capabilities and strategic management . Strategic Management Journal , 18 ( 7 ) , 509 – 533 . Terwiesch , C . , & Bohn , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Learning and process improvement during production ramp - up . Inter - national Journal of Production Economics , 70 ( 1 ) , 1 – 19 . Thurbon , E . ( 2015 ) . The abandonment of procurement - linked strategic activism in Australia : Standing still with room to move . Australian Journal of International Affairs , 69 ( 5 ) , 577 – 594 . Thursby , J . G . , & Thursby , M . C . ( 2002 ) . Who is selling the ivory tower ? Sources of growth in university licensing . Management Science , 48 ( 1 ) , 90 – 104 . Thursby , J . G . , & Thursby , M . C . ( 2011 ) . Has the Bayh – Dole act compromised basic research ? Research Policy , 40 ( 8 ) , 1077 – 1083 . Ulrich , K . ( 1995 ) . The role of product architecture in the manufacturing firm . Research Policy , 24 ( 3 ) , 419 – 440 . Unger , B . N . , Kock , A . , Gemünden , H . G . , & Jonas , D . ( 2012 ) . Enforcing strategic fit of project portfolios by project termination : An empirical study on senior management involvement . International Journal of Project Management , 30 ( 6 ) , 675 – 685 . Wang , Q . , & von Tunzelmann , N . ( 2000 ) . Complexity and the functions of the firm : Breadth and depth . Research Policy , 29 ( 7 – 8 ) , 805 – 818 . Wang , Y . , Zhou , Z . , & Li - Ying , J . ( 2013 ) . The impact of licensed - knowledge attributes on the innovation performance of licensee firms : Evidence from the Chinese electronic industry . Journal of Technology Transfer , 38 ( 5 ) , 699 – 715 . West , J . , Salter , A . , Vanhaverbeke , W . , & Chesbrough , H . ( 2014 ) . Open innovation : The next decade . Research Policy , 43 ( 5 ) , 805 – 811 . Wiersema , M . F . , & Bowen , H . P . ( 2009 ) . The use of limited dependent variable techniques in strategy research : Issues and methods . Strategic Management Journal , 30 ( 6 ) , 679 – 692 . Wright , M . , Clarysse , B . , Mustar , P . , & Lockett , A . ( 2007 ) . Academic entrepreneurship in Europe . Chelten - ham : Edward Elgar . Zahra , S . A . , & George , G . ( 2002 ) . Absorptive capacity : A review , reconceptualization , and extension . Academy of Management Review , 27 , 185 – 203 . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .