UvA - DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam ( http : / / dare . uva . nl ) UvA - DARE ( Digital Academic Repository ) Motivated creativity : A conservation of energy approach Roskes , M . Link to publication Citation for published version ( APA ) : Roskes , M . ( 2013 ) . Motivated creativity : A conservation of energy approach General rights It is not permitted to download or to forward / distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author ( s ) and / or copyright holder ( s ) , other than for strictly personal , individual use , unless the work is under an open content license ( like Creative Commons ) . Disclaimer / Complaints regulations If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or ( privacy ) interests , please let the Library know , stating your reasons . In case of a legitimate complaint , the Library will make the material inaccessible and / or remove it from the website . Please Ask the Library : http : / / uba . uva . nl / en / contact , or a letter to : Library of the University of Amsterdam , Secretariat , Singel 425 , 1012 WP Amsterdam , The Netherlands . You will be contacted as soon as possible . Download date : 28 Dec 2018 7 Chapter One Motivated Creativity : An Introduction Motivated Creativity 8 When making a financial investment , one can consider the chance of a company flourishing and growing and giving a great return on the investment , or the risk of the company failing and losing one’s investment . When deciding what to study after finishing high school , one can consider how interesting the topic of a particular study is and how fun the jobs are that the study prepares for , or how difficult the study is and how unlikely it is to get a job afterwards . When searching for a nice date , one can focus on finding someone with great qualities , or on avoiding people with negative qualities . These examples illustrate how people sometimes strive to achieve success or positive outcomes and at other times strive to avoid failure or negative outcomes . Does it matter which goals people strive for ? Does striving for success lead to better performance than striving to avoid failure ? Does striving for positive or avoiding negative outcomes improve performance on different types of tasks ? How does working under pressure influence people striving for these different types of goals ? Is goal - striving more difficult when striving to avoid negative outcomes than when striving for positive outcomes ? This dissertation addresses these and related questions , and advocates a novel conservation of energy principle to explain when striving for positive outcomes ( approach motivation ) and striving to avoid negative outcomes ( avoidance motivation ) stimulate performance . This conservation of energy principle predicts that performance under avoidance motivation is more fragile and can be undermined more easily than performance under approach motivation , because performance under avoidance motivation relies more heavily on the recruitment of cognitive resources and cognitive control . Or , as put by Johan Cruijff , who used to be one of the greatest soccer players in the world and is known for his philosophical and often oracular one - liners ; “Het is veel makkelijker om goed te spelen dan om te voorkomen dat je slecht speelt” ( It is much easier to play well than to prevent playing badly ; Winsemius , 2012 ) . The introduction of this dissertation first discusses the concepts of approach and avoidance motivation and the functions and biological foundation of these motivational orientations . Then , research on the consequences of these motivational orientations for behavior and cognition is reviewed , with a special emphasis on creative performance which is particularly difficult when people are avoidance motivated . Because approach motivation evokes flexible and associative thinking , and avoidance motivation evokes systematic and persistent thinking , avoidance motivation is often associated with inhibited creativity . However , we expect that avoidance motivated people can compensate for their systematic way of thinking by investing energy and effort , and Introduction 9 achieve equally high levels of creative performance as approach motivated people . The dual pathway to creativity model is introduced , which explains how creative performance can result from two distinct types of cognitive processes evoked by approach and avoidance motivation . Then , the conservation of energy principle predicting when and how approach and avoidance motivation enhance performance is introduced . The introduction ends with a brief overview of the subsequent chapters in this dissertation . Defining Approach and Avoidance Motivation Goals that people strive for guide behavior towards positive outcomes ( approach motivation ) or away from negative outcomes ( avoidance motivation ) . This distinction of approach and avoidance motivation is fundamental and basic . As put by Elliot ( 2008 , p5 ) : “Both approach and avoidance motivation are integral to successful adaptation ; avoidance motivation facilitates surviving , while approach motivation facilitates thriving” . Approach and avoidance goals automatically evoke strategies related to approaching or avoiding ( un ) desired outcomes . People differ in the extent to which they are sensitive for cues signaling potential positive outcomes or negative outcomes ( for a reviews see Carver , Sutton , & Scheier , 2000 ; Larsen & Augustine , 2008 ) , and in the extent to which they tend to strive for approach or avoidance goals ( i . e . , approach and avoidance temperament , Elliot & Thrash , 2002 ; 2010 ) . For example , people high in extraversion are more sensitive to positive feedback , whereas people high in neuroticism are more sensitive for negative feedback ( Larsen & Ketelaar , 1989 ; Smillie , Cooper , Wilt , & Revelle , 2012 ) , and some people are stimulated to perform better by promising monetary rewards , whereas others are more sensitive to threatening with monetary punishments ( Savine , Beck , Edwards , Chiew , & Braver , 2010 ) . Along similar lines , when people are asked to list the goals that they are currently striving for , some people are more likely to report striving for approach goals , such as “make my parents proud of me” , or “learn new things” , whereas others are more likely to report striving for avoidance goals , such as “avoid looking inferior to others” , or “not get behind in my work” ( Elliot & Sheldon , 1997 ) . Individual differences thus predict approach and avoidance goal striving , but the onset of approach and avoidance goals can also be the result of characteristics of specific situations . For example , seeing things that one would want to approach , such as cute puppies or tasty cookies , can evoke approach motivation ( Gable & Harmon - Jones , 2008 ) . Also instructing people explicitly to strive for approach goals ( e . g . , to improve Motivated Creativity 10 performance , or to do better than others ) , or avoidance goals ( e . g . , to not deteriorate in performance , or to not do worse than others ) can evoke the different motivational orientations ( Van Yperen , 2003 ; Van Yperen , Hamstra , & van der Klauw , 2011 ) . Even very subtle cues , such as seeing the color red which is associated with danger , can evoke avoidance motivation ( Elliot , Maier , Binser , Friedman , & Pekrun , 2009 ; Mehta & Zhu , 2009 ) . Approach and avoidance motivation thus can be the result of both stable individual differences ( trait ) , and of fluctuating situational influences ( state ) , and provide direction to behavior toward positive , or away from negative outcomes . Sometimes actual approaching or avoiding behavior is needed to achieve these goals ( move closer to the fireplace to get warm , or stay away from a bakery to avoid yielding to unhealthy temptations ) . At other times more indirect measures are needed that do not encompass physically moving toward or away from something ( study hard to get a good grade for an exam , or closely monitor the time to avoid being late ) . Sometimes achieving approach goals may even involve avoiding behavior , or avoidance goals approaching behavior ( stop smoking to improve one’s condition , go to the gym to avoid gaining weight ) . Approach and avoidance thus can be distinguished on both the level of outcomes or end - states ( system level ) , and on the level of means or processes of moving towards desired outcomes or away from negative outcomes ( strategic level , Scholer & Higgins , 2008 ) . In this dissertation approach and avoidance are conceptualized as desired , or undesired , end - states or outcomes . In the General Discussion I will return to these different levels of approach and avoidance within the theory of regulatory focus ( Higgins , 1997 ) . Functions of Approach and Avoidance Motivation The distinct functions of approach and avoidance motivation , guiding behavior toward positive outcomes and away from negative outcomes , presumably have such a fundamental role in survival that many species developed a lateralized brain in which one hemisphere specializes in avoidance related matters and the other in approach related matters . An advantage of such lateralization of the brain is that it enhances cognitive capacity because specializing one hemisphere for a particular function leaves the other hemisphere free to perform other functions ( Levy , 1977 ) . This specialization of different brain hemispheres for approach and avoidance has been observed in many different species , such as birds , fish , toads , lizards , monkeys , and humans ( for extensive reviews see Vallortigara , 2000 ; Vallortigara & Rogers , 2005 ) . Introduction 11 Another advantage of specializing different hemispheres in approach and avoidance related functions , besides heightened brain efficiency , is that it allows for enhanced group coordination when group members share the same directionality of this lateralization . For example , among humans , approach motivation is mostly associated with activation in the left hemisphere ( Davidson , Ekman , Saron , Senulis , & Friesen , 1990 ; Harmon - Jones , 2003 ; Harmon - Jones & Allen , 1998 ) . Because the left hemisphere controls the right side of the body , this left hemispheric activation enhances attention to the right visual field and readiness to move towards the right ( Harmon - Jones , 2003 ; Nash , McGregor , & Inzlicht , 2010 ; Vallortigara & Rogers , 2005 ) . Indeed , approach motivated humans show a right - oriented bias . For example , when humans kiss their romantic partners , they tend to turn their heads to the right ( Güntürkün , 2003 ) , when attempting to save a penalty during soccer games , approach motivated goalkeepers tend to dive towards the right ( Roskes , Sligte , Shalvi , & De Dreu , 2011 ) , and when quickly dividing lines into two equal parts , approach motivated humans show a rightward bias ( Friedman & Förster , 2005a ; Nash et al . , 2010 ; Roskes et al . , 2011 ) . Sharing the same directional bias within groups under approach ( or avoidance ) motivation , allows for enhanced coordinated action , which increases a group’s likelihood of survival ( Ghirlanda & Vallortigara , 2004 ; Vallortigara & Rogers , 2005 ) . Examples of such coordinated behavior can be observed among African hunting dogs , which move together and hunt in coordinated groups to overpower large prey ( Courchamp , Rasmussen , & Macdonald , 2002 ) . An avoidance - related example of such coordinated behavior can be observed among butterflies trying to escape from predators . Also they benefit from moving as a group , because larger group - size decreases the likelihood that a certain individual is caught ( Burger & Gochfeld , 2001 ) . The evolutionary embedded tendency to move in a synchronized way reduces effort required for coordinating actions and increases the likelihood of success . Because of the survival - advantage of efficient coordination , the directionality of lateralization in the brain and the accompanying behavioral tendencies became evolutionary stable ( Ghirlanda & Vallortigara , 2004 ) . An example of such biased directional tendency among humans that could potentially be exploited , has been observed among goalkeepers during penalty shoot - outs in the FIFA World Cup of soccer ( Roskes et al . , 2011 ) . Penalty shoot - outs are used to decide knockout - stage matches ending in a tie . Five players from each team alternate in shooting penalties from an 11 meter distance toward the goal defended by the other team’s goalkeeper . Successful defense of the goal has heroic connotations , and is a Motivated Creativity 12 relatively rare event in World Cup penalty shoot - outs ( only 20 % of the shots is saved ) . As German goalkeeper Oliver Kahn put it “Kickers are the ones that can lose in a penalty shoot - out ; goalkeepers are the ones that can win and ultimately become the heroes” ( quoted in “Goalkeepers Give Shoot - Out Tips” , 2010 ) . This approach motivation among goalkeepers is especially strong when their team is behind , making their role crucial in regaining the possibility to win the game ( this situation occurs on 12 % of all penalties in the history of the World Cup ) . Indeed , when their team is behind , goalkeepers were twice more likely to dive to the right than to the left . When their team was ahead or when the score was tied , no such bias was observed , see Figure 1 . 1 ( Roskes et al . , 2011 ) . Figure 1 . 1 . Percentage of goalkeepers’ dives and penalty takers’ shots that were to the left , middle , and right as a function of whether the goalkeeper’s team was behind , tied with , or ahead of the penalty taker’s team ( from Roskes et al . , 2011 ) . Clearly there are great advantages in shared directionality of the lateralization of approach and avoidance tendencies , as it assists in group coordination . However , there is a drawback : group level behavioral tendencies make behavior predictable ( Vallortigara & Rogers , 2005 ) . For example , some types of toads are more responsive to predators appearing on their left side ( Vallortigara , Rogers , Bisazza , Lippolis , & Robins , 1998 ) . Predators could potentially exploit this left - oriented bias and approach their prey from the right side . Although this has not yet been extensively studied ( see Vallortigara & Rogers , 2005 ) , there is evidence from the scale - eater fish of Lake Tanganika of such exploitation . These fish eat the scales of other fish , and to do so they exhibit asymmetry of the mouth favoring the side with higher chance of success ( Hori , 1993 ) . Similarly , in penalty shoot - outs during soccer games , knowledge of the right - Introduction 13 oriented bias among goalkeepers whose teams are behind could be exploited by penalty takers , although there is no evidence to date that this occurs . The behavioral biases described above , arguably occur automatically and outside of conscious awareness . Does this mean that that nothing can be done to avoid exploitation ? Research on overcoming automatic biases provides a ray of hope . People can calibrate their responses , however , incorporating situational cues and overriding automatic reactions requires time and cognitive resources ( Bargh & Ferguson , 2000 ; Schneider & Chein , 2003 ) . When people are acting under a high time pressure , and thus have little time to adjust their behavior , they are more likely to act on their initial automatic impulses ( Gray , 2001 ; Tomarken & Keener , 1998 ) . However , when sufficient time is available , people are able to overcome automatic tendencies . For example , given sufficient time , people can override the automatic tendency to think in stereotypical ways ( Sassenberg & Moskowitz , 2005 ; Stewart & Payne , 2008 ) , or the automatic tendency to lie if this serves self - interest ( Shalvi , Eldar , & Bereby - Meyer , 2012 ) . Similarly , the automatic right - oriented bias under approach motivation can be overruled by taking sufficient time . When asked to quickly divide lines into two equal parts , approach motivated people show a small bias towards the right ( i . e . , draw the center line more towards the right than avoidance motivated people or people in neutral control conditions ; Friedman & Förster , 2005a ; Nash et al . , 2010 ; Roskes et al . , 2011 ) . This line - bisection task is typically presented as a paper - and - pencil task in which , after bisecting each line , participants can directly move on to the next line , finishing the task rather quickly . Roskes et al . ( 2011 ) used a computerized version of the line - bisection task in which the time frame for dividing each line could be manipulated . Participants were given either 4000 ms for dividing each line ( low time pressure condition ) or 1500 ms ( high time pressure condition ) . In the high time pressure condition , approach motivated participants showed a right - oriented bias . However , when they had 4000 ms they were able to override this automatic tendency and did not show a right - oriented bias . Thus , approach motivated people show the right - oriented bias , which potentially can be exploited , only when they have to act under a high time pressure . Approach and avoidance motivation fulfill important roles in guiding behavior towards potential success and positive outcomes and away from potential harm and negative outcomes . As evidenced in directional biases , approach and avoidance motivation can influence performance . This influence , however , is not limited to direct effects on physical performance . The different functions of approach and avoidance Motivated Creativity 14 motivation often require different strategies . Whereas eager and explorative strategies may be more useful when striving for positive outcomes , vigilant and careful strategies may be more useful when striving to avoid negative outcomes . For this reason , it may not be surprising that approach and avoidance motivation have been found to distinctively influence a range of cognitive processes . Motivational Orientation and Cognitive Performance Because approach motivation is associated with safe environments , and the presence of potential positive outcomes , approach motivation evokes more explorative behavior and a broader focus compared to avoidance motivation . An extensive body of research has associated approach motivation with attentional flexibility ( Friedman & Förster , 2005b ) , a relatively global focus ( Förster , Friedman , Özelsel , & Denzler , 2006 ; Förster & Higgins , 2005 ) , explorative behavior and higher risk tolerance ( Friedman & Förster , 2002 ; 2005a ; 2005b ) , and abstract and higher order thinking ( Kuschel , Förster , & Denzler , 2010 ; Semin , Higgins , de Montes , Estourget , & Valencia , 2005 ) . This flexible style of processing information can enhance performance on tasks that require insight and creativity , and indeed approach motivation has often been associated with higher levels of creativity ( Cretenet & Dru , 2009 ; Lichtenfeld , Elliot , Maier , & Pekrun , 2012 ; Friedman & Förster , 2000 ; 2001 ; 2002 ; Mehta & Zhu , 2009 ) . For example , in one study Friedman & Förster ( 2005a ) asked people to complete a paper - and - pencil maze . A mouse was depicted in the center of the maze , trying to find its way out . In one condition there was a tasty piece of cheese at the end of the maze ( something the mouse would want to approach ) , and in the other condition there was a dangerous owl hovering over the maze ( something the mouse would want to avoid ) . After finishing the maze , the participants of this study were asked to list as many creative uses for a brick as they could think of within a 1 minute limit . People in the approach condition , who had led the mouse to the piece of cheese , generated more creative ideas of how to use a brick than people in the avoidance condition , who had helped the mouse to escape the owl . Avoidance motivation , on the other hand , is associated with potentially threatening environments and , compared to approach motivation , evokes more focused and vigilant behavior . Indeed , avoidance motivation has been associated with a more risk - averse , persevering processing style ( Friedman & Elliot , 2008 ; Friedman & Förster , 2002 ) , a relatively local focus and narrow attention scope ( Derryberry & Reed , 1998 ; Maier , Elliot , & Lichtenfeld , 2008 ; Mehta & Zhu , 2009 ; Mikulincer , Kedem , & Paz , 1990 ) , vigilant reasoning ( Elliot , 2006 ; Friedman & Förster , 2005b ) , recruitment of cognitive Introduction 15 control ( Koch , Holland , Hengstler , & van Knippenberg , 2009 ; Koch , Holland , & van Knippenberg , 2008 ; Miron - Spektor , Efrat - Treister , Rafaeli , & Schwarz - Cohen , 2011 ) , and persistence on problem solving ( Friedman & Elliot , 2008 ) . This systematic and persistent style of processing information can enhance performance on tasks that require vigilance , cognitive control , and attention to detail ( Friedman & Förster , 2000 ; 2005a ; Koch et al . , 2008 ; 2009 ) . For example , Koch and colleagues ( 2008 ) asked people to either flex their arm , a movement associated with approach and bringing things closer to oneself , or to extend their arm , a movement associated with avoidance and pushing things away . People in the avoidance condition performed better on the ( cognitively taxing ) Stroop task , in which they had to indicate the color in which color - words were presented while ignoring the content of the words . Summarizing , approach motivation evokes cognitive flexibility which stimulates creativity , and avoidance motivation evokes cognitive persistence which may enhance performance on detail - oriented tasks but undermines creativity . Motivational Orientation and Creativity Throughout this dissertation we conceptualize creativity not as a process ( i . e . , creative versus noncreative thinking ) but as outputs that can be evaluated on creativity ( see Goldenberg , Mazursky , & Solomon , 1999 ) . The level of creativity of outputs ( e . g . , ideas or paintings ) depends on the extent to which these products are both original and appropriate ( the commonly accepted definition of creativity , see Amabile , 1983 ; Guilford , 1967 ; Hennessey & Amabile , 2010 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1999 ) . Avoidance motivation has often been associated with the production of less creative products and ideas than approach motivation . However , does avoidance motivation always undermine creativity ? Does cognitive persistence render high levels of creative performance impossible ? Indeed , creativity is primarily associated with flexible rather than systematic thinking ( Ansburg & Hill , 2003 ; Förster , Epstude , & Özelsel , 2009 ; Förster , Friedman , & Liberman , 2004 ; Razoumnikova , 2000 ) , and many researchers have proposed that to be creative people have to think flexibly and associatively ( e . g . , Duncker , 1945 ; Eysenck , 1993 ; Simonton , 1997 ; Smith & Blankenship , 1991 ; Smith , Ward , & Schumacher , 1993 ) . However , a growing body of literature shows that creative outcomes can be the result of two distinct cognitive processes - people are able to come up with ideas that are equally creative by objective standards by ( 1 ) engaging in flexible thinking and exploring many different cognitive categories and approaches ( e . g . , Duncker , 1945 ; Oppenheimer , 2008 ; Simonton , 1997 ; Winkielman , Schwarz , Fazendeiro , & Reber , Motivated Creativity 16 2003 ) , as well as ( 2 ) systematic thinking and exploring a few cognitive categories or approaches systematically and in - depth ( e . g . , De Dreu , Baas , & Nijstad , 2008 ; Dietrich & Kanso , 2010 ; Goldenberg & Mazursky , 2000 ; 2002 ; Roskes , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2012a ; Sagiv , Arieli , Goldenberg , & Goldschmidt , 2010 ) . To deal with these seemingly conflicting findings , De Dreu and colleagues ( 2008 ) developed the Dual Pathway to Creativity Model , describing two alternative pathways to creative performance . Dual pathway to creativity model The Dual Pathway to Creativity Model ( Baas , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2008 ; De Dreu et al . , 2008 ; Nijstad , De Dreu , Rietzschel , & Baas , 2010 ; Rietzschel , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2007 ) describes two ways of achieving creative outputs : Cognitive flexibility and cognitive persistence . Cognitive flexibility enables accessibility to multiple and broad cognitive categories , flexible switching between these categories , and a global processing style ( i . e . , a focus on the big picture rather than the details ; Förster et al . , 2009 ) . A vast body of research has shown that creative performance can be achieved through a flexible , fluent , and divergent way of thinking ( e . g . , Duncker , 1945 ; Oppenheimer , 2008 ; Simonton , 1997 ; Winkielman et al . , 2003 ) . Cognitive persistence , on the other hand , enables focused and systematic effort , in - depth exploration of a relatively small number of cognitive categories , and a local processing style ( De Dreu et al . , 2008 ; De Dreu , Nijstad , Baas , Wolsink , & Roskes , 2012 ) . Creative performance can also be achieved through such a persistent and systematic way of thinking , and exploring only a limited number of perspectives in - depth ( Dietrich , 2004 ; Dietrich & Kanso , 2010 ; Finke , 1996 ; Rietzschel , Nijstad , & Stroebe , 2007 ; Sagiv et al . , 2010 ; Simonton , 1997 ) . According to the Dual Pathway to Creativity Model , certain traits , states , and situational cues , can evoke either a flexible or a persistent processing style , and high levels of creative performance can be achieved through both flexibility and persistence . Initial support for this idea is based on the finding that both positively and negatively valenced moods can evoke creativity . A prerequisite for moods , whether positive or negative , to lead to creative performance is that the mood is activating rather than de - activating . Happiness and fear , for example , activate more than relaxation and sadness , and thus evoke higher levels of creativity ( Baas et al . , 2008 ; De Dreu et al . , 2008 ) . However , happiness ( like approach motivation ) evokes cognitive flexibility , associative thinking , and a global processing style , and leads to creativity through the flexibility pathway . Fear ( like avoidance motivation ) , on the other hand , evokes cognitive persistence , systematic thinking , and a local processing style , and leads to creativity through the persistence pathway ( Baas et al . , 2008 ; Hirt , Devers , & McCrea , 2008 ) . Introduction 17 Thus , according to the Dual Pathway to Creativity Model , creative performance can be the result of flexible processing , but also of persistent processing . These different cognitive processing styles can be evoked by a variety of factors ( such as mood ) . Following this line of reasoning , both approach motivation ( evoking cognitive flexibility ) and avoidance motivation ( evoking cognitive persistence ) could potentially lead to creative outputs . The prediction that approach motivation facilitates creativity because it evokes global and flexible processing , has recently received support . In four studies , De Dreu , Nijstad , and Baas ( 2011 ) found that people with higher levels of behavioral activation ( as measured with the Behavioral Inhibition System / Behavioral Activation System scales , Carver & White , 1994 ) were more creative when flexible and global thinking was possible then when flexible thinking was less likely or impossible . Furthermore , people with higher levels of behavioral activation demonstrated more cognitive flexibility than people lower in behavioral activation – i . e . , when asked to brainstorm about improving education in the Psychology department , they generated ideas in more different categories ( such as ‘ideas having to do with student facilities such as extracurricular activities , library access , classroom interiors’ , for more information see De Dreu et al . , 2008 ) . Avoidance motivation and creativity The set of studies by De Dreu and colleagues ( 2011 ) described above , supports the idea that approach motivation leads to creativity through cognitive flexibility . The idea that avoidance motivation can lead to creativity through cognitive persistence , however , seems to be at odds with the vast body of research showing detrimental effects of avoidance motivation on creativity and insight performance . Yet , recent work reveals that people striving to prevent negative outcomes can achieve the same levels of creativity as people striving for positive outcomes , as long as their goals are unfulfilled ( Baas , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2011a ) . Baas and colleagues asked participants to complete the task developed by Friedman and Förster ( 2005a ) in which they had to lead a mouse out of a maze towards a piece of cheese , or away from an owl . Participants either successfully completed the maze , or were interrupted during the task by a ‘technical error’ . Interestingly , the participants who were trying to lead the mouse away from the owl ( prevention - focus ) solved more creative insight problems and generated more original ideas when they had not completed the maze task , and thus had not yet completed their avoidance - goal , than when they had completed the maze task . Moreover , their level of creativity did not differ from participants trying to lead the mouse towards the piece of cheese ( promotion - focus ) . Motivated Creativity 18 The work by Baas and colleagues ( 2011a ) demonstrates that people striving to avoid negative outcomes can be exactly as creative as people striving for positive outcomes . However , it does not provide information about the cognitive processes leading to creative performance among avoidance motivated individuals . One the one hand , it is possible that active or unfulfilled avoidance goals evoke more flexibility , and thus change the persistent and systematic processing style of avoidance motivated individuals in a more flexible and divergent processing style . On the other hand , it is possible that active or unfulfilled avoidance goals do not change the ‘default’ persistent processing style of avoidance motivated individuals , but stimulate them to compensate for their inefficient ( for creativity ) processing style by investing more cognitive resources . The latter prediction seems most viable , because we know that avoidance motivation evokes a persistent and systematic processing style ( Friedman & Elliot , 2008 ; Friedman & Förster , 2002 , 2005a , 2005b ; Koch et al . , 2008 ; 2009 ) , and we know that persistent and systematic thinking can result in creative output just like flexible and associative thinking ( Baas et al . , 2008 ; Dietrich , 2004 ; Dietrich & Kanso , 2010 ; De Dreu et al . , 2008 ; Finke , 1996 ; Rietzschel , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2007 ; Sagiv et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , if avoidance motivated people achieve creative performance through persistent processing , this may explain why avoidance motivation is usually associated with reduced creativity , and what the circumstances are under which avoidance motivation leads to high levels of creativity . The Present Dissertation : Conservation of Energy In this dissertation I propose a Conservation of Energy Principle to explain when and how approach and avoidance motivation stimulate or impede performance , and what are the consequences of approach and avoidance goal striving . As described earlier , approach motivation evokes cognitive flexibility , whereas avoidance motivation evokes cognitive persistence . The flexible and associative cognitive style evoked by approach motivation , is associated with low effort , low resource demands , high speed , and efficient processing ( De Dreu et al . , 2008 ; Dietrich , 2004 ; Evans , 2003 ; Oppenheimer , 2008 ; Winkielman et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast to cognitive flexibility , the persistent cognitive style evoked by avoidance motivation is associated with high effort , perseverance and a slower speed of operation ( De Dreu et al . , 2008 ; Evans , 2003 ; Winkielman et al . , 2003 ) . Because it relies more on executive control , it is more constrained by working memory capacity ( De Dreu et al . , 2012 ; Evans , 2003 ; Süss , Oberauer , Wittmann , & Schulze , 2002 ) . Introduction 19 The relatively persistent , systematic , and controlled information processing that is evoked by avoidance motivation requires executive control , and taxes working memory capacity , cognitive resources , and energy – in other words : it is costly ( Bohner , Moskowitz , & Chaiken , 1995 ; Chaiken & Trope , 1999 ; Evans , 2003 ; Koch et al . , 2008 ; Winkielman et al . , 2003 ) . In general , people ( as well as non - human organisms ) are reluctant to spend energy unless the benefits of expending this energy outweigh the costs ( Tooby & Cosmides , 1990 ) . From this conservation of energy perspective , it follows that people would be reluctant to engage in this kind of effortful cognitive processing evoked by avoidance motivation . In Chapter 2 the implications of this conservation of energy principle are discussed in detail , and directions for future research are presented to test predictions with regard to performance under approach and avoidance motivation that follow from this perspective . In this dissertation it is proposed that performance under avoidance motivation is particularly demanding compared with performance under approach motivation . This should especially be the case for tasks that require creativity and insight , because creative and insight performance is more difficult with a persistent processing style . In Chapter 3 the effects of approach and avoidance motivation on creativity and insight performance are examined in five experiments . This chapter provides a direct test of the idea that approach motivation evokes a flexible and associative way of thinking , whereas avoidance motivation evokes a systematic and persistent way of thinking , but that both can lead to creativity . Furthermore , the circumstances under which avoidance motivation results in equal levels of creative performance as approach motivation are examined , and the consequences of creative performance in terms of cognitive depletion . Chapter 4 studies another implication of the conservation of energy principle . Because performance under avoidance motivation relies more heavily on the recruitment of cognitive control and resources , stressors or other distracters should undermine performance under avoidance motivation more than performance under approach motivation . In Chapter 4 the consequences of working under time pressure are studied , to test the prediction that working under a high time pressure undermines performance more under avoidance rather than approach motivation . Chapter 5 discusses the consequences of thinking in a flexible and associative way versus in a systematic and persistent way from a different perspective . This chapter addresses how products that result from the two different processes are evaluated differently . Finally , Chapter 6 discusses implications of the findings presented in this dissertation , and suggests directions for future research . Motivated Creativity 20 Overview of the Chapters Chapter 2 : Avoidance motivation and conservation of energy . Chapter two puts forward a conservation of energy account to explain how and when approach and avoidance motivation facilitate performance , and what are the consequences of striving for approach and avoidance goals . We review relevant literature and propose directions for future research . Compared to approach motivation , avoidance motivation evokes vigilance , attention to detail , systematic information processing , and recruitment of cognitive resources . From a conservation of energy perspective it follows that people would be reluctant to engage in the kind of effortful cognitive processing evoked by avoidance motivation , unless the benefits of expending this energy outweigh the costs . We put forward three empirically testable propositions concerning approach and avoidance motivation , investment of energy , and the consequences of such investments . Specifically , we propose that compared to approach - motivated people , avoidance - motivated people ( 1 ) carefully select situations in which they exert such cognitive effort , ( 2 ) are only be able to perform well in the absence of distracters that occupy cognitive resources , and ( 3 ) become depleted after exerting such cognitive effort . Chapter 3 : Necessity is the mother of invention : Avoidance motivation stimulates creativity through cognitive effort Chapter three systematically examines the effects of approach and avoidance motivation on creative performance , and the consequences of such performance on depletion . In accordance to the Dual Pathway to Creativity Model , this chapter tests the idea that approach motivation evokes a flexible processing style , and avoidance motivation a persistent processing style , and that both can result in equal levels of creative performance . Following the theoretical framework presented in Chapter two , we hypothesized that avoidance - motivated individuals are not unable to be creative , but they have to compensate for their inflexible processing style by effortful and controlled processing . Results of 5 experiments revealed that when individuals are avoidance motivated , they can be as creative as when they are approach motivated , but only when creativity is functional for goal achievement , motivating them to exert the extra effort ( Experiments 1 – 4 ) . We found that approach motivation was associated with cognitive flexibility and avoidance motivation with cognitive persistence ( Experiment 1 ) , that creative tasks are perceived to be more difficult by avoidance - than by approach - motivated individuals , and that avoidance - motivated individuals felt more depleted after creative performance ( Experiment 2a , 2b , and 3 ) . Finally , creative Introduction 21 performance of avoidance - motivated individuals suffered more from a load on working memory ( Study 4 ) . The results suggest that for people focusing on avoiding negative outcomes , creative performance is difficult and depleting , and they only pay these high cognitive costs when creativity helps achieving their goals . Chapter 4 : Avoidance motivation and choking under time pressure Chapter four focuses on how working under a high time pressure influences the performance of approach and avoidance motivated individuals . Results of five experiments reveal that performance on a variety of cognitive tasks under avoidance motivation is fragile and can be easily undermined . Performance under avoidance motivation relies more heavily on cognitive control and the availability of cognitive resources than approach motivation . When working under a high time pressure , avoidance motivated individuals become overloaded and their performance level drops . The performance of approach motivated individuals in contrast , is relatively mildly impeded by working under a high time pressure . Chapter 5 : Understanding creative processes affects creativity judgments Whereas Chapter 2 - 4 focus on factors influencing creative performance , Chapter 5 focuses on how this creative performance in evaluated by others . The previous chapters describe and demonstrate how creativity can be the result of two different processes : Cognitive flexibility and cognitive persistence . In this chapter we examine how the evaluation of creative products is influenced by knowledge of the process through which it came about . Creativity judgments play an important role in determining which movies are awarded , which restaurants receive Michelin stars , and which business start - ups and research proposals are funded . Building on the hindsight bias literature , we propose that ideas which are generated through a flexible way of thinking or sudden insights are surprising and seem to come ‘out of the blue’ . When the exact same ideas are generated through a persistent and systematic way of thinking , it is easier to follow the reasoning and understand how someone came up with the ideas . In turn , this may make the idea seem more obvious and unsurprising , and therefore less creative . In three experiments we find support for this “knew - it - all - along” effect in creativity judgments : The exact same products were consistently judged as less creative when they were generated through a systematic rather than flexible process .