Jointly published by Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest Scientometrics , Vol . 68 , No . 1 ( 2006 ) 73 – 96 and Springer , Dordrecht Received November 10 , 2005 Address for correspondence : P AUL F . S KILTON Business Administration Faculty , East College , Arizona State University - Polytechnic 7001 E . Williams Field Road , Mesa , AZ , 85212 , USA E - mail : Paul . Skilton @ asu . edu 0138 – 9130 / US $ 20 . 00 Copyright © 2006 Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest All rights reserved A comparative study of communal practice : Assessing the effects of taken - for - granted - ness on citation practice in scientific communities P AUL F . S KILTON Business Administration Faculty , East College , Arizona State University – Polytechnic , Mesa AZ ( USA ) Building on the findings of recent ethnographic studies of scientific practice , I develop and test theory about the impact of taken - for - granted - ness on citation practice in scientific communities . Using data gathered from special issues of scientific journals I find support for the hypothesized differences in the practices of natural and social science communities . Post hoc analysis uncovers evidence of a third pattern of citation practice associated in part with engineering and technology research , and evidence that organization studies and strategic management communities tend to employ extreme versions of social science citation practices . I discuss the implications of the study for our understanding of communities of practice , for our beliefs about differences between the branches of science , and about science as a productive enterprise . “…William Harvey said that what Bacon said science was , was the science that a lord - chancellor would do . He [ Bacon ] spoke of making observations , but omitted the vital factor of judgment about what to observe and what to pay attention to… And that is what science is : the result of the discovery that it is worthwhile rechecking by new direct experience , and not necessarily trusting … experience from the past . ” Richard Feynman , ( 1966 ) . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 74 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) Introduction What to observe , what to pay attention to , how much and when to trust experience from the past , these are fundamental questions for scientific practice , and yet many observers of science have noted that scientists sometimes fail to ask them ( A BBOTT , 2001 , 2004 ; B ATESON , 1979 ; K UHN , 1962 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ; M ERTON , 1968 ; P OLANYI , 1966 ) . This paper compares practice across scientific communities in an effort to understand what differences it makes to practice if communities take for granted knowledge received from the past . In Feynman’s terms taken - for - granted - ness occurs when practitioners cease to re - check what they know . Taking knowledge for granted matters for the kinds of questions that are asked , and hence for the generation of new knowledge . How much scientists take things for granted also influences practices related to scientific communication . It is through analysis of the products of these communication practices that I attempt to understand differences between scientific communities in terms of the extent to which existing knowledge is taken for granted . My theory development relies heavily on prior work for a broad description of differences between scientific communities , which I refer to as communities of practice . I choose to use this term rather than epistemic culture ( K NORR - C ETINA , 1999 ) to indicate that I seek to identify community broadly , at the level of a type of practice , rather than in the details of a discipline specific epistemology . The point is that while disciplines have distinct epistemic cultures , consisting of artifacts and ways of knowing and behaving , some practices are common across cultures ( P ALMER , 2005 ; P RICE , 1970 ) . Taking knowledge for granted is one of these . Examples of other trans - disciplinary practices are whether communities treat knowledge as abstracted or situated , whether large or small groups to do science , and whether science involves experiment or field work . By specifying this level of analysis , based on the commonality of practice , I alert the reader that I take a more general approach than would be usual in a comparison at the level of disciplines . In order to make comparisons between the natural and social sciences , it is necessary to identify specific behaviors that depend on the level of taken - for - granted - ness enacted by scientific communities . In the sciences several communication practices are nearly universal . Among these , formal citation practice leaves an archival trace that makes it an ideal candidate for detecting differences in the extent to which knowledge is taken for granted . In contrast to the more direct take on science as local practice that comes via ethnomethodological work , this study relies on citation analysis to study the outcomes of a particular practice that is shared across scientific communities . Because of the universality of citations , citation analysis can inform us about differences in practice between communities , and allow us to make inferences about why these differences in practice occur . If we compare studies of how natural science is made ( K NORR - C ETINA , 1998 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ; VAN G IGCH , 2002a ) to studies of P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 75 how social science is made ( A BBOTT , 2001 ; VAN G IGCH , 2002b ) , it is easy to infer that taken - for - granted - ness is more common in the natural sciences , an inference that is also supported by earlier work in citation analysis ( M ERTON , 1968 ; P ALMER , 2005 ; P RICE , 1970 ) . This paper moves beyond the foundational work in this area by introducing an alternative explanation for phenomena that have long been recognized . Rather than proposing alternative modes to explain variation in the behavior of scientists , this paper proposes a single set of mechanisms to explain variations in citation behavior across a wide range of disciplines . The contribution of this paper is to develop theory about the impact of taken - for - granted - ness on citation practice and to test it at a fairly general level . This study also contributes by developing a method for comparing local expressions of a universal practice across a wide range of scientific communities . This comparative method , pioneered by U SKIDEN & P ASADEOS ( 1995 ) , is a different use of citation analysis than the more usual attempts to understand the influence of highly cited papers or authors or to map domains or the structure of science . I find evidence of the expected differences between the natural and social sciences , as well as evidence of an unexpected cluster of domains that falls outside my theory . This cluster appears to reflect a difference in practice between basic science and engineering \ technology oriented domains . Bodies of knowledge and communities of practice My assumptions imply a division between scientific communities and the bodies of knowledge they sustain . This division occurs in part because bodies of scientific knowledge are not enacted by single communities . Because the propagation of scientific bodies of knowledge involves publication , bodies of knowledge can escape the control of the communities where they originate . Bodies of knowledge can be merged , re - interpreted and revised elsewhere without the consent or participation of the communities they originate in . There can be many to one or many to many relationships . Several communities can make claims on a body of knowledge , and interstitial communities ( A BBOT , 2001 ; L EYDESDORFF , 1998 ) can make claims on many . Communities and their knowledge are intermingled , but they are not the same . Scientific communities don’t treat all knowledge received from the past in the same way . Some knowledge is codified in curricula and textbooks and is important primarily for apprenticeship participation , as K UHN ( 1962 ) and others have pointed out ( A BBOTT , 2001 ; C RONIN , 1984 ; F EYNMAN , 1966 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ; L AVE & W ENGER , 1991 ; M ERTON , 1968 ) . I call this core knowledge , and by it mean knowledge that is generally acknowledged to be important to the domain , that all participants should learn . Note that in labeling some part of a domain as core knowledge , I make no P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 76 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) assertion as to whether the community takes that knowledge for granted . Key oppositions , such as between realism and constructionism within sociology ( A BBOTT , 2001 ) are core , but not taken for granted . Core knowledge is not always taken for granted , but when knowledge is taken for granted it is usually core . In many communities core knowledge is seemingly ignored by experts , particularly when they engage in the production of scientific communication . The ubiquity of such omissions seems to indicate that such knowledge is viewed as foundational , that it is what current practice is built on rather than something to be questioned or even mentioned ( C OZZENS , 1985 ; K UHN , 1962 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ) . This phenomenon was long ago recognized as ‘obliteration by incorporation’ by M ERTON ( 1968 ) , a happy phrase that suggests the absorption of knowledge into the canon . Formal reference is obliterated once knowledge has become “what every schoolboy knows” ( B ATESON , 1979 ) . This is not a sudden or absolute process , as S ZÁVA - K OVÁTS ( 1994 ) showed in his study of non - indexed epynomal citations . Individuals and their discoveries are often referred to informally , in ways that escape citation indexing , such as a reference to Planck’s constant in physics . This is an acknowledgement of priority by using an informal token – exactly the kind of thing a novice learns . Not all science is like this , as is indicated by A BBOTT ’s ( 2001 ) vision of the social sciences as playing out fractal cycles of revision and challenge , where core knowledge is repeatedly re - labeled , re - framed and re - positioned . Taken - for - granted - ness varies across domains . P ALMER ( 2005 ) recognized different modes of scientific practice in the humanities and natural sciences , arguing that humanities research is a centrifugal process that is essential individual in nature . Scholars move out from an idiosyncratic center on unique collecting journeys . While I agree with the fundamental distinction , this analysis does not take into account the common practices and shared knowledge acquired by scholars in training , or the collective gate - keeping process that characterizes publication ( C RONIN , 1984 ) . Because my analysis addresses features of final publication while Palmer addresses the features of the research process , we naturally come to different conclusions . These differences can be reconciled by extending Palmer’s core materials to include a communal core body of knowledge , which becomes more salient in practices oriented toward publication and which therefore also leaves its mark on outcomes . Assessing the impact of taken - for - granted - ness on local enactments of universal practice The level of taken - for - granted - ness enacted by scientific communities can be used to connect these apparently disparate visions of science . It is possible to do so in an archival study of scientific communities because the architecture , if not the detail , of P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 77 scientific communication practice is remarkably homogenous across the natural and social sciences . In most domains scientists are rewarded either materially or with social capital ( L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ) for publishing novel contributions . Scientists also rely widely on specialized journals , stylized citation practice and peer review ( A BBOTT , 2001 ; C RONIN , 1984 ; K UHN , 1962 ; L EYDESDORFF , 1998 ; M ERTON , 1968 ; S MALL , 1999 , 2003 ; S TARBUCK , 2005 ) . These practices distinguish scientific production from other ways that knowledge becomes public , such as through instruction , journalism , patents and technologies ( A LLEN , 1997 ) . While the details of the discovery and construction of knowledge depend in large part on disparate practices in specific communities , the homogeneity of publication processes imposes a certain unity on science as an occupation . These unifying practices also serve to make scientific communication a very social process . In many domains research programs and the publications that result from them are collaborative . Even when publications are single - authored , peer review and journal standards inject the community and its norms into the research project . The peer review system ensures that what is published conforms to communal practice . The claims authors make with respect to existing knowledge have to conform to communal practice ( C RONIN , 1984 ; L ATOUR , 1987 ; L EYDESDORFF , 1998 ; H YLAND , 2003 ) . It is through the locally controlled enactment of these relatively universal social processes in each community that differences in the level of taken - for - granted - ness leave a trace in the products of scientific publication . The extent of taken - for - granted - ness in scientific communities seems to be associated with formally causal explanation and replicable forms of evidence , which in turn are associated with the natural sciences ( E LSTER , 1983 ; VAN G IGCH , 2002a , 2002b ; P ALMER , 2005 ) . L ATOUR & W OOLGAR ( 1986 ) describe natural science as a process in which scientists attempt to move their ideas toward acceptance as facts , in the face of resistance from the community . This process can be generalized to cover the social sciences as well , although many social scientists would reject the notion that they deal with facts . The difference is that in the natural sciences causal explanation and experimental replication play a much stronger role ( E LSTER , 1983 ; L ATOUR , 1987 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ; K NORR - C ETINA , 1998 ; VAN G IGCH , 2002a , 2002b ) . Natural science has no problem with facts – instead , it strives to take them for granted . If experiments are replicated in many labs , the community ceases to resist the factuality of the ideas behind them and finally comes to take knowledge of them for granted ( C OZZENS , 1985 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ; L AVE & W ENGER , 1991 ; M ERTON , 1968 ) . As this process of acceptance occurs , the ideas are incorporated into references to subsequent works , and fall out of the citation record ( S ZÁVA - K OVÁTS , 1994 ; M ERTON , 1968 ) . Individuals may continue to resist , but if they do , they are likely to be marginalized as the paradigm moves on ( K UHN , 1962 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ) . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 78 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) In the social sciences , where the strongest explanations are functional at best ( A BBOTT , 2004 ; E LSTER , 1983 ) , and where replication is seldom possible , it is much harder for communities to come to agreement on and cease resistance to any set of ideas . Ideas may be accepted as candidates for factualness , but the acceptance is always provisional , which means that taken - for - granted - ness plays a minimal role . Resistance never quite ceases ; those who continue to resist often form factions or new communities ( A BBOT , 2001 ) . When sustained resistance is dominant , scholars must stake out explicit positions with respect to the body or bodies of knowledge they seek to extend or control . This is one of the things that differentiates an interpretivist or critical stance from a positivist one : scholars learn to confront the taken for granted . They also learn to bring into the open the biases inherent in specific methods , and to do so while maintaining an active stance toward competing views . The openness of conflict and the multitude of competing certainties contribute to the familiar image of the social sciences as pluralistic at best , and chaotic and introverted at worst . Citation analysis as a method for detecting taken - for - granted - ness in science As outlined above , citation is an important and nearly universal element of scientific publication practice . It is very important here to emphasize that in nearly every scientific community there are pressures that make citation patterns highly individual . Citations become idiosyncratic as a result of the pressure on scientists to make novel contributions ( C RONIN , 1984 ; P RICE , 1970 ; M ERTON , 1968 ) . To become full participants in their communities scientists generally need to stake out unique areas of specialization . Because contributions and specializations are pushed toward uniqueness , the claims and references authors make to connect their work to the domain tend to be idiosyncratic . In practice , one way to make a novel contribution is to invent novel sets of claims that recombine and connect chunks of knowledge in new ways . For comparative citation analysis to be useful , we have to anticipate finding patterns in a complicated tangle of idiosyncratic claims . Taken - for - granted - ness has direct implications for finding patterns in citation because it determines whether particular citations play an explicit communal role in the struggle for establishing meaning . When taken - for - granted - ness is the norm , general agreement that a particular reference contains core knowledge means that the reference will be cited less often ( C OZZENS , 1985 ; L ATOUR & W OOLGAR , 1986 ; M ERTON , 1968 ; S ZÁVA - K OVÁTS , 1994 ) . In domains where taken - for - granted - ness is the norm , there should be fewer citations to items of core knowledge , and as a result , less overlap between shorter reference lists . The rate at which citations are absorbed into the canon or are rejected and drop out of reference lists is partially governed by the speed of the process of establishing factualness ( P RICE , 1970 ) . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 79 When taken - for - granted - ness is not the norm , authors need to establish an explicit position with respect to the core ( rather than taking a position for granted ) . To do so they will cite accepted core references more frequently , creating greater overlap between reference lists and making more references overall . Core items will tend to stay in view longer , creating less immediacy and a more apparent attachment to archival sources ( P RICE , 1970 ; P ALMER , 2005 ) . For example , in the course of reviews for the present study , the reviewers unanimously pointed out that I had omitted several core citations , omissions that marked me , if not as a novice , at least as an outsider . One of the things citation is used for is to establish the legitimacy of the contribution a new publication makes ( C RONIN , 1984 ; L EYDESDORFF , 1999 ; M ERTON , 1968 ; S MALL , 1999 ) . If a paper makes the ‘right’ references , it may be seen as more ‘right’ itself . When taken - for - granted - ness is not the norm , authors can do this directly by citing canonical texts and appropriating their legitimacy . Where a reference comes from matters less than its being a core reference . When taken - for - granted - ness is the norm , this strategy is not available because only novices cite the core . To avoid being treated as novices or outsiders , authors working in a taken - for - granted - ness culture establish legitimacy by making reference not to core works , but to works that bear directly on the current research . To the extent that authors working in this culture seek legitimacy , they do so by ensuring that their references come from sources that are recognized as legitimate . This usually means referring to articles published in a domain’s top journals . When taken - for - granted - ness is the norm , authors will be more likely to cite different items from a limited set of prestigious sources as a way to establish legitimacy . In some domains it is also common to enhance the legitimacy of an article by citing the work of particular individuals rather than by citing particular works . Authors sometimes make citations to works that do not bear directly on the issue at hand , in order to draw legitimacy from theories or positions associated with well known authors . Because these citations are oriented toward things ‘everyone knows’ , citations to core authors should be more common when core knowledge is not taken for granted . When a particular author’s ideas have become core knowledge in a community operating in a taken - for - granted - ness culture , it will become a mark of inexperience to try to earn legitimacy by making reference to the author even if the work cited is not precisely relevant . Thus figures from earlier generations in physics or chemistry are seldom formally cited today for other than historical reasons ( A HMED et al . , 2004 ) while Foucault , Habermas , and earlier sociologists such as Weber and Durkheim are cited frequently . Note that this distinction does not consider non indexed epynomal citations ( i . e . Planck’s constant ) , which are a form of shorthand for underlying knowledge and are more common in the natural than in the social sciences ( S ZÁVA - K OVÁTS , 1994 ) . This leaves us with four related indicators of the level of taken - for - granted - ness enacted in domains : the number of references , the level of overlap between reference lists , the homogeneity of the sources from which references are drawn , and the overlap P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 80 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) between references to authors . Larger lists have the potential for more frequent overlap and offer more occasions for the same articles , authors and sources to be referred to . The number of references and levels of overlap between reference and author lists are negatively related to taken - for - granted - ness while the homogeneity of sources is positively related to it . The natural sciences are generally conceived of as a context where taken - for - granted - ness is the norm , while the opposite is thought to be true of the social sciences . Proposition 1 : Articles published in natural science special issues will have shorter reference lists than articles published in social science special issues . Proposition 2 : Articles published in natural science special issues will have lower levels of reference list overlap with each other than articles published in social science special issues when the size of reference lists is controlled for . Proposition 3 : Articles published in natural science special issues will have higher levels of source homogeneity with each other than articles published in social science special issues when the size of reference lists is controlled for . Proposition 4 : Articles published in natural science special issues will have lower levels of author overlap with each other than articles published in social science special issues when the size of reference lists is controlled for . Data and methods In order to understand how differences in patterns of citation reflect taken - for - granted - ness in scientific communities of practice , I collected data from special issues of specialized scientific journals . I chose to examine special issues rather than whole journals because the domains that support journals may include a variety of sub domains . In many domains , prestigious journals are seen as ‘generalist’ outlets by their communities , where to an outsider the journal charter seems incredibly narrow . It is because prestigious journals are generalist that citing work published in them can provide legitimacy cover without leading to high overlap between reference lists . Authors with very different agendas can find something to cite and therefore gain legitimacy from citation . Special issues cater to sub domains , and thus correspond more closely to the specialized communities where scientists develop knowledge . The unit of analysis is the collection of citations referred to in the articles published in each special issue . Data were collected from the ISI Web of Science citation indices for the years 1999 – 2004 ; special issues were identified through text searches designed to detect the relevant words in editorials . I collected data on 166 special issues . I made an effort to collect data from a wide range of disciplines and journals , including many I am not personally familiar with . Natural and social sciences are represented , as are European , North American and Asian journals , in about the proportions they appear in the overall database . I also tried to collect roughly equal numbers of special issues in the P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 81 natural and social sciences , and to have balanced representation of the different types of special issues described below . The list of 128 journals with special issues in the data appears as Appendix A . For each article in each special issue I downloaded the cited reference list from the appropriate citation index and used the data to construct special issue level variables , some based on analysis of co - citation networks . A co - citation network treats the cited references as nodes connected by the papers in which they appear ( L EYDESDORFF , 1998 ; S MALL , 1999 , 2003 ) . The first dependent variable is the average number of cited references per paper in each special issue . I calculated the average number of cited references per paper as the average number entries in the reference lists of papers . Citations referred to more than once in a paper are counted only once per paper . I measured overlap between reference lists as the average number of references shared between lists in each special issue . To do so I constructed a co - citation network for each special issue , and then counted the references common to each pair of articles . Overlap between reference lists in a collection depends on four things . The first is how many references authors cite . In domains where the norm is few citations , there are fewer opportunities for authors of different papers to cite the same work or outlet ( M OED & G ARFIELD , 2004 ) . The second factor is the number of papers published in a special issue . When more papers are published , there are more opportunities for a given citation or source to re - occur . The third is the extent to which the journal and domain are interdisciplinary . Some domains are interstitial , which would lead authors working in them to draw on a variety of source domains , which increases the number of possible core citations . The final factor is the extent to which community members take core knowledge for granted . This last factor is not directly observable , but can be inferred if the other factors are controlled for . Homogeneity of sources is obviously related to reference list overlap – identical citations obviously have identical sources . This would present a problem if levels of reference list overlap were even moderately high , but as discussed below , they are not . In order to avoid any definitional dependence of source homogeneity on reference list overlap I removed references that were cited more than once in a special issue from the calculation of source homogeneity . I then constructed source co - citation networks for each special issue using only non - overlapping references . I measured the homogeneity of sources as the percentage of references drawn from sources that appeared more than once in the special issue collection , excluding directly overlapping references . Omitting overlapping references made very little difference ; the correlation coefficient between reference list overlap and source homogeneity changed from 0 . 04 to – 0 . 10 , neither one significant , when I changed the way the measure is constructed . I prefer this to a measure based on the influence of a single citation source ( i . e . , the dominant journal ) because many sub - domains draw on more than one body of P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 82 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) knowledge . My measure includes all sources that may provide legitimacy to authors , an approach that is consistent with S TARBUCK ’s ( 2005 ) findings that more journals are being cited over time . My measure is significantly correlated ( r = 0 . 33 , p < 0 . 01 ) with the percentage of citations from the top journal in each collection . To provide a better sense of the source homogeneity measure , I include Figure 1 . Figure 1 shows the distribution of references to the top 12 journals cited in two special issues . The examples were chosen because they have similar low levels of reference list overlap and different levels of source homogeneity . On the right of Figure 1 , source homogeneity is low because not only does the most frequent source not occur very often , the next most common sources are even more infrequently cited . Authors make a lot of references , but not to the same sources . Even though this special issue had fewer papers than its counterpart on the left of the figure ( 15 vs . 36 ) , it had more citations ( 240 vs . 236 ) . Figure 1 . Illustration of source homogeneity In contrast , on the left of Figure 1 is an example of a special issue where the most frequently cited journal is frequently cited , and is accompanied by other journals that are also frequently cited . In this domain , authors cite relatively few references per paper , which come primarily from a small set of sources . This complex of differences is what my measure of source homogeneity detects . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 83 Estimating the overlap between reference lists in terms of authors is problematic for this data because cited reference lists include only the name of the first author . This means that articles co - authored by an individual where that individual is not first author will not be detected . Despite this problem , I felt that the measure should be included because it could support or contradict the logic associated with the other measures . I calculated co - citation networks based on first author for each special issue and then counted the author references common to each pair of articles , excluding directly overlapping references . The number of directly overlapping references is always less than or equal to the number of overlapping first authors . Once again , leaving out directly overlapping citations made little difference in the correlation coefficients . The three types of special issues included in the data are conference based , special topic and festschriften . Differences in how articles are selected for these three types of special issues may lead to differences in citation practices . Because of these differences it is useful to control for special issue type . The most common type of special issue is conference based , where a journal publishes a collection of articles as a form of proceedings from a conference . Conferences are an opportunity for scientists to come together as a community and a mechanism for socializing newcomers . Conferences papers are thus a place where it is more acceptable than usual to make newcomer errors , like making explicit references to taken for granted knowledge . I defined special topic special issues as collections of articles on a selected topic that occupy an entire issue , solicited without an accompanying conference . Special topic special issues are less inclusive – they are less likely to include the work of novices . Festschriften are special issues of journals issues designed to celebrate the lifetime contributions of prominent scholars . Contributions to a festschrift may be more likely to cite the work of the honoree , increasing author overlap . Festschrift special issues are more common in the natural than the social sciences , and in the social sciences seldom occur in North American journals . I collected data on only 4 social science festschriften ; the small number of social science festschrift special issues makes useful comparisons to this category difficult . The dummy variable distinguishing between natural science and social science is based on which citation index ( Science Citation Index or Social Sciences Citation Index ) the journal is included in by ISI . The Science Citation Index indexes natural science engineering and technology journals . Where the indices overlap , journals were assigned to the Science Citation Index . I created dummy variables applying the division between natural and social sciences to the categories of special issue described above ; I also included as controls the number of papers in each special issue and a measure of the interdisciplinarity of the journal , the number of ISI Web of Science subject areas for each journal . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 84 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) Analysis and results Correlations and standard deviations are given in Table 1 . It is interesting to note that the average overlap between reference lists is significantly correlated with the average number of citations per paper but not with the number of papers in a special issue , while the reverse is true for source homogeneity . Articles in special issues with more papers tend to have fewer citations , which is partly associated with conference special issue type and partly associated with natural science special issues ( M OED & G ARFIELD , 2004 ) . The details of the distribution of special issues , with accompanying statistics are given in Table 2 . There are significant differences between natural and social sciences for most of the variables in Table 2 . Natural science special issues tend to include more papers , which make fewer citations ( except for the festschrift category ) . Sources are more homogenous in the natural sciences , and the difference is significant . There is significantly more citation and author overlap in social science special issues : social science reference lists tend to have on average one citation and more than 5 authors in common with other articles in a special issue , while natural science articles share one reference with every third paper and fewer than 2 authors per paper . As expected , references are highly idiosyncratic . The propositions are formally tested using a series of ordinary least squares regression models , with the special issue reference collection as the unit of analysis , and with dummy variables linked to the categories given in Table 2 . The omitted category , represented by the intercept in each of the models shown in Table 3 , is Natural Science Special Topic special issues . I included the number of papers in each special issue and the measure of the interdisciplinarity of the journal as controls . For the regressions on reference list overlap and source homogeneity , I also included the average number of citations per paper as a control , since it is potential contributing factor . The table entries are un - standardized regression coefficients ( b’s ) , with standard deviations in parentheses . As shown in Model 1 of Table 3 , the number of citations per paper is significantly higher for social science special topic issues than natural science special topics . Proposition 1 is only supported for special topic special issues ; social science conference special issues tend to have shorter reference lists than social science special topics . Conference based special issue papers in general have fewer references , perhaps because they are in early stages of development , and perhaps because conference based special issues restrict article length . Proposition 2 , that reference list overlap would be higher in social than natural sciences , is supported , as reflected in Models 2 and 3 . Proposition 3 , that source homogeneity would be higher in the natural sciences , is supported ( Models 4 and 5 ) . The citations per paper variable has the expected effect of increasing reference list overlap and source homogeneity . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 85 P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 86 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) Table 2 . Special issue type comparisons Natural science Social science Specialtopic Conference Festschrift Specialtopic Conference Festschrift Total Conferences 31 28 34 31 38 4 166 Avg . papers 14 . 97 45 . 14 18 . 41 9 . 00 11 . 39 11 . 75 18 . 75 Avg . cites per paper 28 . 91 23 . 36 34 . 94 40 . 22 34 . 56 15 . 58 32 . 29 Average overlap between reference lists 0 . 35 0 . 23 0 . 30 1 . 19 1 . 11 0 . 61 0 . 66 Avg . source homogeneity 0 . 24 0 . 25 0 . 26 0 . 16 0 . 18 0 . 20 0 . 22 Average author overlap 1 . 69 1 . 22 2 . 02 4 . 76 5 . 84 5 . 69 3 . 30 Table 3 . Regression models a Cites per paper Average overlap between reference lists Source homogeneity Author overlap between reference lists Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Intercept Special Topic NS 22 . 746 * * * ( 4 . 887 ) – 0 . 261 ( 0 . 252 ) – 0 . 582 * ( 0 . 292 ) 0 . 20 * * * ( 0 . 019 ) 0 . 23 * * * ( 0 . 019 ) – 2 . 07 ( 1 . 19 ) – 3 . 91 * * ( 1 . 14 ) Number of papers – 0 . 056 ( 0 . 041 ) – 0 . 001 ( 0 . 002 ) 0 . 001 ( 0 . 002 ) 0 . 477E - 003 * * ( 0 . 0002 ) 0 . 263E - 003 ( 0 . 0002 ) 0 . 002 ( 0 . 01 ) 0 . 005 ( 0 . 01 ) Cites per paper – 0 . 030 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) 0 . 029 * * * ( 0 . 004 ) 0 . 001 ( 0 . 000 ) 0 . 001 * * * ( 0 . 000 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) Interdisciplinarity 4 . 435 ( 2 . 264 ) – 0 . 032 ( 0 . 129 ) 0 . 063 ( 0 . 129 ) 0 . 005 ( 0 . 009 ) – 0 . 009 ( 0 . 008 ) 0 . 16 ( 0 . 61 ) 0 . 58 ( 0 . 60 ) Conference NS – 4 . 446 ( 4 . 792 ) – 0 . 007 ( 0 . 269 ) – 0 . 01 ( 0 . 02 ) – 0 . 19 ( 1 . 27 ) Festschrift NS 6 . 319 ( 4 . 394 ) – - 0 . 227 ( 0 . 248 ) – 0 . 01 ( 0 . 02 ) – – 0 . 63 ( 1 . 19 ) Special Topic SS 11 . 969 * * ( 4 . 531 ) – 0 . 528 * ( 0 . 260 ) – – 0 . 09 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) – 1 . 43 ( 1 . 22 ) Conference SS 5 . 921 ( 4 . 291 ) – 0 . 605 * ( 0 . 242 ) – – 0 . 07 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) – 3 . 33 * * ( 1 . 14 ) Festschrift SS – 10 . 940 ( 9 . 491 ) – 0 . 676 ( 0 . 534 ) – – 0 . 03 ( 0 . 04 ) – 6 . 48 * ( 2 . 51 ) R 2 change – – 0 . 05 * * – 0 . 31 * * * – 0 . 06 * * Model R 2 0 . 10 * * * 0 . 23 * * * 0 . 28 * * * 0 . 03 * 0 . 34 * * * 0 . 27 * * * 0 . 33 * * * a n = 166 * p < 0 . 05 * * p < 0 . 01 * * * p < 0 . 001 As shown in Model 6 of Table 3 , Proposition 4 , that author overlap would be lower in the natural sciences , is partially supported ( Models 6 and 7 ) . Author overlap for social science special topics is not significantly greater than author overlap in natural science special topics , but it is greater for social science conference based and festschrift special issues . This may reflect a selection for greater seniority in special topics authors . Authors who have their own legitimacy may be less likely to try to P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 87 appropriate the legitimacy of their peers or competitors , while novices may be more likely to do so . Social science conference special issues , which I expect to include more novices , show a marked increase in author overlap . The citations per paper variable has the expected effect of increasing author overlap . The number of papers and interdisciplinarity of the journal did not exhibit significant effects with respect to author overlap . All propositions are strongly supported when the conference type categories are collapsed into a simple comparison of natural versus social sciences ( analysis omitted for reasons of space ) . Social science authors are more likely to cite the same works and different works by the same first authors , and less likely to cite a homogenous set of sources . The number of papers and interdisciplinarity of the journal did not exhibit significant effects in the fully specified models or in the simple comparison of natural and social science special issues . Figure 2 shows graphically how reference lists in the social sciences are more likely to overlap , while simultaneously referring to less homogenous sets of sources than natural science reference lists . ( The relationship between source homogeneity and author overlap mirrors that between source homogeneity and citation overlap , so I don’t discuss it directly for reasons of space . ) In Figure 2 I was interested to note the long social science tail to the right of the figure , which is consistent with the theory , and the cluster of special issues in the lower left quadrant with very low levels of overlap and source homogeneity , which is not consistent with my theory . Figure 2 . Distribution of natural versus social science special issues P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 88 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) To see how much the right hand tail for social sciences mattered I analyzed the models without the 13 special issues that have citation overlap values of greater than 2 . Of these 12 come from the social sciences , of which 7 are special issues in strategic management and organization studies journals ( Strategic Management Journal , Organization Studies , Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes ) . With these special issues removed , all propositions continue to be supported at conventional significance levels when using only the natural science - social science dummy . When the special issue category dummy variables are added to the model , Propositions 2 and 4 are weakly supported . Conference and festschrift social science special issues have greater citation and author overlap than natural science special topics , p < 0 . 10 . Propositions 1 and 3 continue to be supported at conventional levels . A significant number of special issues have low levels of citation overlap and low source homogeneity , a combination that is not anticipated by my theory . To better understand this , I examined all special issues that had article overlap of less than 0 . 35 , and source homogeneity less than 0 . 20 . Forty three special issues , approximately a quarter of the total , met these criteria . Of these 43 special issues 24 belonged to domains concerned with engineering , statistics and technology . This subset included 14 of the 16 computer science related special issues in the data set . Three special issues come from statistics and econometrics journals . The 7 remaining special issues represent various engineering disciplines . The low overlap – low homogeneity quadrant includes multiple special issues from 5 information science and engineering journals , suggesting that this is the normal pattern for these kinds of journals . Of the remaining 19 special issues from the low - low quadrant 15 proved to have a regional or global emphasis , drawing papers from scholars working in different countries and traditions . Because the articles in these special issues are intentionally drawn from diverse backgrounds , it is not surprising that they do not cite homogenous sources , overlapping references or the same authors . One of the purposes of this kind of special issue is to expose scholars to the traditions , methods and concerns of colleagues they would not ordinarily have contact with . Integrating different research traditions is an important step in developing a stronger scientific community . Where multiple special issues from these journals were present in the data , only the special issues with regional and global topics fell into the low overlap – low homogeneity quadrant . This suggests that this pattern is a deviation from the normal practice of the domains involved . Discussion and conclusion To recapitulate , the data support the propositions I offered , and therefore the idea that there are substantive differences between the natural and social sciences in terms of the level of taken - for - granted - ness enacted . First the data support my claim that core references and important authors will be cited less often in the natural sciences , where P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 89 core knowledge is presumably more frequently taken for granted . Second the data also support the proposition that these same communities will tend to cite references from a homogenous set of sources , assuming that this is a means of enhancing the legitimacy of their work . In combination these findings provide a stronger indication of the extent to which knowledge is taken for granted in different communities . Controlling for differences in the size of the reference collection and making sure that the indicators are independent further constrains the range of alternative explanations . While I can’t assert positively that this study detects differences in taken - for - granted - ness , it seems certain that it detects the fossil record of some norm that varies across communities , with taken - for - granted - ness a leading candidate . In conceptual terms this study continues the process begun by U SKIDEN & P ASADEOS ( 1995 ) by extending the use of bibliometric analysis to examine the practices of communities , rather than the structure of knowledge . A comparative orientation allows the detection of further differences in patterns of citation , as I discussed in terms of the low overlap – low homogeneity cases . Engineering and technology oriented publications are different from the publications of basic science , a difference that may not be the simple product of the taking knowledge for granted . Publications by engineers and technologists are less concerned with establishing factuality than they are with demonstrating the utility of a method , application or system . Because there is no limit to the number of possibly useful methods or systems , and because innovation is valuable , engineers and technologists are less concerned with establishing legitimacy through ties to existing knowledge and more concerned with establishing uniqueness . This may make their motives for citation more like motives for citation in patent applications , which establish ownership of intellectual property ( A LLEN , 1997 ; G ITTELMAN & K OGUT , 2003 ; P RICE , 1970 ; T IJSSEN , 2004 ) . Engineers and technologists may take knowledge for granted , but it would take a much more narrowly focused study to establish where and when they do so . One area where this may be possible is in sponsored bio - medical research , where sponsors are known restrict the right of authors to publish results , and would also have incentives to restrict citations that might establish prior rights ( T IJSSEN , 2004 ) . The method also encourages us to recognize that practice within communities is not constant , as in the case of special issues with a global and regional theme . This kind of special issue is relatively common , which suggests the presence of fads and fashions in the practices of publishing organizations . It is also possible to discover other temporary deviations from the norms of practice . One example I uncovered in this data is contained in 3 special issues of the journal Prenatal Diagnosis , all dealing with pre - implantation genetic diagnosis in cases of in vitro fertilization . Two of the special issues conformed to the normal natural science pattern , having a few weak clusters of overlapping citations and strong source homogeneity . The third issue had an unusually high level of overlap , which turned out to be the result of two comprehensive review P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 90 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) articles , one addressing the prior state of knowledge , and the other addressing the state of knowledge after the publication of the special issues . It is also possible to use this method to detect communities and clusters of communities that appear to be extreme in their communication practices . The four special issues from Strategic Management Journal had the highest levels of citation overlap in the sample . It is interesting to note that while Strategic Management Journal is an extreme case , special issues from related journals show a similar pattern of high citation overlap ( Organization Studies , Organization Science and Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes ) . Is there something about strategic management and organization studies that compels authors make so many references to core citations ? Perhaps business research , with its emphasis on normative prescription , has a greater need to establish the legitimacy of its claims . With the diffusion of scholarly ideas to managers , particularly through the MBA degree ( G HOSHAL , 2005 ) , researchers may benefit from citing work managers are familiar with . Another possibility is that there are ideological pressures to take a position in this domain . This is a set of domains where scholars have been publicly debating the pluralistic nature of the paradigm for many years ( C ANNELLA & P AETZOLD , 1994 ; G HOSHAL , 2005 ; P FEFFER , 1993 ; S TARBUCK , 1993 ) . U SKIDEN & P ASADEOS ( 1995 ) found that organization studies scholars from Europe and North America cited different articles , authors and sources , roughly corresponding to an interpretivist - positivist split . It is possible that paradigm conflict around this split could account for the high level of overlap in reference lists . Reviewers and editors with entrenched positions can encourage authors to cite particular works , which would increase overlap in cited authors and references ( C RONIN , 1984 ) . It is worth noting that this story of paradigm splits is a familiar one in the social sciences ( A BBOT , 2001 ) , and that I may have detected this trend simply because the sub - domain has a tradition of special issues that is not shared with most social science journals . Another interesting finding of this study is the nearly universal idiosyncrasy of references . Nearly 91 % of all citations in special issues occur in only one paper . This indicates the predominance of narrow specialization in scientific publication . Scientists learn core knowledge – and then move beyond it on individual journeys . Rather than an image of science as founded on communal bodies of knowledge , this analysis creates an impression of scientific domains as congeries of monologues . If shared knowledge matters in most scientific domains , its importance is not revealed through unity of explicit claims on the past . L AVE & W ENGER ( 1991 : 91 ) famously identified legitimate peripheral participation as critical to learning and knowing for novices : “Peripherality suggests that there are multiple , varied , more - or less - engaged and - inclusive ways of being located in the fields of participation defined by a community . ” In this study we can see that in science what the participant is engaged with can be core or peripheral knowledge . The extent of P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 91 engagement or inclusion determines the legitimacy of participation . With respect to bodies of scientific knowledge , I think Lave and Wenger’s language , if not their logic , should be reversed , and that what characterizes fully engaged , inclusive learning by novices is legitimate central participation . Novices being inducted into a community work in the center of the knowledge base , learning to know and do the core . Full participants work at the edge of the knowledge base , developing new practice and new knowledge . This suggests that as people move toward full participation their knowing becomes more idiosyncratic . Full participation in the development of scientific knowledge could well be described as all periphery , all the time . This study faces some limitations imposed by its method and data . It does not make direct contact with practice , and thus can’t make direct inferences about taken - for - granted - ness . I control for enough alternative causes to think the indirect case is strong . This limitation points up the difficulty of establishing general facts in the social sciences : participant observation might produce direct contact with practice , but would be difficult to generalize , while my approach generalizes well , but does not make direct measurement or observation of its object ( C RONIN , 1984 ) . Taken in combination with the ethnographic studies it draws on , the present study provides a very useful triangulation on the concept of taken - for - granted - ness as a key to practice . It may be difficult to generalize this study beyond science , although it is clear that taken - for - granted - ness plays a role in most communities of practice . In the absence of the formal practice of making explicit claims on past knowledge , finding systematic traces of practice in archival data will be difficult . Moving beyond the particulars of data , the idea that full participation in a community of practice means taking the core for granted while contributing on the periphery is very generalizable . W ENGER ( 1998 ) provides an example of this kind of full participation in his case description of insurance claims clerks who devise work - arounds . Orr’s classic study of copier repair technicians who are able to discover novel failure modes is another example ( B ROWN & D UGUID , 1991 ; O RR , 1990 ) . Full participation expands the periphery of the community’s practice , knowing and knowledge What this paper does is exploit variations in a universal practice to make inference about communal stances toward knowledge across a wide variety of scientific domains . Doing so permits me to bring together seemingly disparate accounts of practice in the natural and social sciences by linking the differences to variation in taken - for - granted - ness . A social science community that accepts a dominant model based on causal reasoning may come to look like a natural science , as economics sometimes does . A natural science domain where taken - for - granted - ness has been challenged may come to look more like the social sciences . Most importantly , this paper makes a contribution to the comparative study of practice across communities . While it exploits structural similarities in communication practices unique to science , it should alert researchers to the possibility of finding and P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 92 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) exploiting similarities in the artifacts of practice produced by communities in other professions , occupations and systems of production . Only by pursuing such a strategy can studies of practice reach beyond the limitations of the single organization case study . That learning , knowing and practice matter is not news . For the study of practice to advance we must start to understand whether and how communities of practice are systematically similar and different . References A BBOTT , A . ( 2001 ) , Chaos of Disciplines . Chicago , University of Chicago Press . A BBOTT , A . ( 2004 ) , Methods of Discovery : Heuristics for the Social Sciences . W . W . Norton , New York . A HMED , T . , B . J OHNSON , C . O PPENHEIM , C . P ECK ( 2004 ) , Highly cited old papers and the reasons why they continue to be cited . Part II . The Watson and Crick article on the structure of DNA . Scientometrics , 61 : 147 – 156 . A LLEN , T . J . ( 1997 ) , Distinguishing science from technology . In : R . K ATZ ( Ed . ) , The Human Side of Managing Technological Innovation . New York , Oxford University Press . B ATESON , G . ( 1979 ) , Mind and Nature : A Necessary Unity . New York , Doubleday . B ROWN , J . S . , P . D UGUID ( 1991 ) , Organizational learning and communities of practice : Toward a unified view of working , learning and innovation . Organization Science , 2 : 40 – 57 . C ANNELLA , A . A . , R . L . P AETZOLD ( 1994 ) , Pfeffer’s barriers to the advance of organization science : A rejoinder . Academy of Management Review , 19 : 331 – 341 . C OZZENS , S . E . ( 1984 ) , Using the archive : Derek Price’s theory of differences among the sciences . Scientometrics , 7 : 431 – 441 . C RONIN , B . ( 1984 ) , The Citation Process : The Role and Significance of Citations in Scientific Communication . London , Taylor Graham . E LSTER , J . ( 1983 ) , Explaining Technical Change . Cambridge , Cambridge University Press . F EYNMAN , R . ( 1966 ) , What is Science ? Presented at the fifteenth annual meeting of the National Science Teachers Association , New York City . G HOSHAL , S . ( 2005 ) , Bad management theories are destroying good management practices . Academy of Management Learning & Education , 4 : 75 – 91 . G ITTELMAN , M . , B . K OGUT ( 2003 ) , Does good science lead to valuable knowledge ? Biotechnology firms and the evolutionary logic of citation patterns . Management Science , 49 : 366 – 382 . H YLAND , K . ( 2003 ) Self - citation and self - reference : Credibility and promotion in academic publication . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 54 : 251 – 259 . ISI W EB OF S CIENCE , http : / / www . isinet . com / products / citation / wos / K NORR - C ETINA , K . ( 1999 ) , Epistemic Cultures : How the Sciences Make Knowledge , Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . K UHN , T . S . ( 1962 ) , The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Chicago , University of Chicago Press . L ATOUR , B . ( 1987 ) , Science in Action . Cambridge , Harvard University Press . L ATOUR , B . , S . W OOLGAR ( 1986 ) , Laboratory Life : The Construction of Scientific Facts . Princeton ; Princeton University Press . L AVE , J . , E . W ENGER ( 1991 ) , Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation . New York : Cambridge University Press . L EYDESDORFF , L . ( 1998 ) , Theories of citation ? Scientometrics , 43 : 5 – 25 . M ERTON , R . K . ( 1968 ) , Social Theory and Social Structure , 3 rd edition . The Free Press , New York . M OED , H . F . , E . G ARFIELD ( 2004 ) , In basic science the percentage of authoritative citations decreases as bibliographies become shorter . Scientometrics , 60 : 295 – 303 . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 93 O RR , J . ( 1990 ) , Sharing knowledge , celebrating identity : War stories and community memory in a service culture . In : D . M IDDLETON , D . E DWARDS ( Eds ) , Collective Remembering : Memory in Society . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications . P ALMER , C . ( 2005 ) , Scholarly work and the shaping of digital access . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 56 : 1140 – 1153 . P FEFFER , J . ( 1993 ) , Barriers to the advance of organization science : Paradigm development as a dependent variable . Academy of Management Review , 18 : 599 – 620 . P OLANYI , M . ( 1966 ) , The Tacit Dimension . Garden City , New York : Doubleday & Company , Inc . P RICE , D . DE S OLLA ( 1970 ) , Citation measures of hard science , soft science , technology and nonscience . In : C . E . N ELSON , D . K . P OLLOCK ( Eds ) , Communication among Scientists and Engineers . Heath , Lexington MA . S MALL , H . ( 1999 ) , Visualizing science by citation mapping . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 50 : 799 – 813 . S MALL , H . ( 2003 ) , Paradigms , citations , and maps of science : A personal history . Journal Of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 54 : 395 – 399 . S TARBUCK , W . ( 1993 ) , Shouldn’t organization theory emerge from adolescence ? Organization , 10 : 439 – 453 . S TARBUCK , W . ( 2005 ) , How much better are the most - prestigious journals ? The statistics of academic publication . Organization Science , 16 : 180 – 200 . S ZÁVA - K OVÁTS , E . ( 1994 ) , Non - indexed eponymal citations ( NIEC ) : First fact finding examination of a phenomenon of scientific literature . Journal of Information Science , 20 : 55 – 70 . T IJSSEN , R . J . W . ( 2004 ) , Is the commercialization of scientific research affecting the production of public knowledge ? Global trends in the output of corporate research articles . Research Policy , 33 : 709 – 733 . T SOUKAS , H . ( 1996 ) , The firm as a distributed knowledge system : A constructionist approach . Strategic Management Journal , 17 ( Winter Special Issue ) : 11 – 25 . U SKIDEN , B . , Y . P ASADEOS ( 1995 ) , Organizational analysis in North America and Europe : A comparison of co - citation networks . Organization Studies , 16 : 503 – 519 . VAN G IGCH , J . P . ( 2002a ) , Comparing the epistemologies of scientific disciplines in two distinct domains : Modern physics vs . social sciences I . The epistemology and knowledge characteristics of the physical sciences . Systems Research and Behavioral Science , 19 : 199 – 209 . VAN G IGCH , J . P . ( 2002b ) , Comparing the epistemologies of scientific disciplines in two distinct domains : Modern physics vs . social sciences II . The epistemology and knowledge characteristics of the “new’ social sciences . Systems Research and Behavioral Science , 19 : 552 – 562 . W ENGER , E . ( 1998 ) , Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning and Identity . New York : Cambridge University Press . P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 94 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) Appendix A : Special issue journal titles Addiction Research & Theory Aging Neuropsychology and Cognition American Economic Review American Journal of Economics and Sociology American Journal of Public Health Annales de l’ Institut Henri Poincare – Probabilites Et Statistiques Anziam Journal Applied Linguistics Applied Psychology - An International Review / Psychologie Appliquee – Revue Internationale Aquatic Botany Aquatic Living Resources Archives Italiennes de Biologie Australasian Journal of Philosophy Australian & New Zealand Journal of Statistics Biological Conservation Bioresource Technology British Journal of Psychology Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences Cement & Concrete Composites Chemical Engineering Journal Chemical Engineering Research & Design Chemical Engineering Science Child Maltreatment ChromatographiaClinica Chimica Acta Clinical Journal of Pain Communication Theory Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics Computers & Chemical Engineering Contributions to Plasma Physics Counseling Psychologist Designs Codes and Cryptography Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift Disability and Rehabilitation Discrete & Computational Geometry DNA and Cell Biology Economic Journal Economic Modeling Educational Psychologist Entrepreneurship – Theory and Practice Environment and Development Economics European Addiction Research P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) 95 European Economic Review European Planning Studies Fatigue & Fracture of Engineering Materials & Structures Fortschritte der Physik – Progress of Physics Harvard Review of Psychiatry History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences Humor - International Journal of Humor Research IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering Industrial Marketing Management Information Research – An International Electronic Journal Information Retrieval International Journal of Educational Development International Journal of Manpower International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology International Journal of Plasticity International Journal of Technology Management Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology Journal of Applied Gerontology Journal of Applied Physics B – Lasers and Optics Journal of Biomaterials Science – Polymer Edition Journal of Business Research Journal of Clinical Psychology Journal of Econometrics Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies Journal of Information Technology Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures Journal of Language and Social Psychology Journal of Marriage and the Family Journal of Molecular Liquids Journal of Non - Crystalline Solids Journal of Optical Technology Journal of Personality Assessment Journal of Physical Chemistry B Journal of Physics D – Applied Physics Journal of Physics G – Nuclear and Particle Physics Journal of Psychology and Theology Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra Journal of Structural Geology Journal of the American Society for Information Science Journal of the Chinese Institute of Chemical Engineers Journal of the Indian Chemical Society LithosMaterials Science and Engineering A – Structural Materials Properties Microstructure and Processing MicronMolecular and Biological Evolution P . F . S KILTON : Citation practice in scientific communities 96 Scientometrics 68 ( 2006 ) New Astronomy Reviews Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly Nucleosides Nucleotides & Nucleic Acids OrganizationOrganization Science Organization Studies Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes Organizational Dynamics Perspectives In Education PhilosophyPhysica A – Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications Physica C – Superconductivity and Its Applications Physics and Chemistry of Glasses Physics in Medicine and Biology Polymer Degradation and Stability Prenatal Diagnosis Presence – Teleoperators and Virtual Environments Progress in Neurobiology Psychiatric Quarterly Psychology & Marketing Pure and Applied Chemistry Regional Science and Urban Economics Research on Social Work Practice Review of Industrial Organization Rheologica Acta Sensors and Actuators A – Physical Small Business Economics Social Research Sociology of Education Solid State Ionics Solid State Sciences Statistica Neerlandica Strategic Management Journal Surface and Interface Analysis TectonophysicsThermochimica Acta Toxicology Letters Urban Studies Vie et Milieu – Life and Environment Violence Against Women