Nanoclusters of GPI - Anchored Proteins Are Formed by Cortical Actin - Driven Activity Debanjan Goswami , 1 , 4 Kripa Gowrishankar , 2 , 4 Sameera Bilgrami , 1 , 4 Subhasri Ghosh , 1 Riya Raghupathy , 1 Rahul Chadda , 1 Ram Vishwakarma , 3 Madan Rao , 1 , 2 , * and Satyajit Mayor 1 , * 1 National Centre for Biological Sciences ( TIFR ) , Bellary Road , Bangalore 560 065 , India 2 Raman Research Institute , CV Raman Avenue , Bangalore 560 080 , India 3 National Institute of Immunology , Aruna Asaf Ali Marg , New Delhi 110 067 , India 4 These authors contributed equally to this work * Correspondence : madan @ ncbs . res . in ( M . R . ) , mayor @ ncbs . res . in ( S . M . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 11 . 032 SUMMARY Several cell - surface lipid - tethered proteins exhibit a concentration - independent , cholesterol - sensitive organization of nanoscale clusters and monomers . To understand the mechanism of formation of these clusters , we investigate the spatial distribution and steady - state dynamics of ﬂuorescently tagged GPI - anchored protein nanoclusters using high - spatial and temporal resolution FRET microscopy . These studies reveal a nonrandom spatial distribution of nanoclusters , concentrated in optically resolvable domains . Monitoring the dynamics of recovery of ﬂuorescence intensity and anisotropy , we ﬁnd that nanoclusters are immobile , and the dynamics of inter - conversion between nanoclusters and monomers , over a range of temperatures , is spatially heteroge - neous and non - Arrhenius , with a sharp crossover coinciding with a reduction in the activity of cortical actin . Cholesterol depletion perturbs cortical actin and the spatial scale and interconversion dynamics of nanoclusters . Direct perturbations of cortical actin activity also affect the construction , dynamics , and spatial organization of nanoclusters . These results suggest a unique mechanism of complexation of cell - surface molecules regulated by cortical actin activity . INTRODUCTION Functional lipid - tethered molecules at the cell surface , such as outer - leaﬂet glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) , the inner - leaﬂet Ras family of GTPases , and some glycolipids , are organized as cholesterol - sensitive nanoscale clusters and monomers ( Fujita et al . , 2007 ; Plowman et al . , 2005 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ; Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . This nano - scale organization is necessary for the sorting of GPI - APs during endocytosis ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) and associated with signaling functions of the Ras family of proteins ( Plowman et al . , 2005 ) at the cell surface . It is likely that the elaboration of a sorting and or signaling function from the nanoscale structures requires the construction of a larger - scale domain ( Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . In this context , it is signiﬁcant that the ratio of nanoclusters to monomers is independent of concentration ( Fujita et al . , 2007 ; Plowman et al . , 2005 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . This characteristic , originally observed for GPI - APs ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , is evidence for a violation of mass action and suggests that the nanocluster distribution on the surface of living cells is maintained away from chemical equilibrium ( Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . This is difﬁcult to reconcile with these components passively partitioning into ‘‘rafts’’ conceptualized as phase - segregated liquid - ordered do - mains akin to the equilibrium liquid - liquid phase coexistence in artiﬁcial multicomponent membranes ( Edidin , 2003 ; Jacobson et al . , 2007 ) . Our earlier measurements of the steady - state and time - resolved ﬂuorescence - emission anisotropy arising from FRET between like ﬂuorophores ( homoFRET ) over the whole cell gave information regarding the average short - scale organization of ﬂuorescently tagged GPI - AP species ( Rao and Mayor , 2005 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ; Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . By modeling the variation in FRET efﬁciency between GPI - APs upon photo - bleaching , we had arrived at a unique picture—a mixture of monomers and a small fraction ( 20 % – 40 % ) of nanoscale clus - ters ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , whose ratio was independent of total levels of expression . We now make an extensive analysis of the surface distribution and the dynamics of remodeling of GPI - AP nanoclusters in the unperturbed cell , by measuring FRET at a higher spatiotemporal resolution and correlating it with the remodeling dynamics of cortical actin ( CA ) . We then study the effect of speciﬁc perturba - tions of the CA on the distribution and dynamics of nanoclusters . Finally we study the dynamics of recovery of the nanocluster distribution upon strong , localized perturbations of the CA in spontaneously blebbing cells . These studies suggest a model for lipid - tethered protein organization wherein the spatial organi - zation and dynamics of lipid - tethered proteins in the steady state are a result of being driven by the activity of the CA . RESULTS Spatial Distribution of Nanoclusters at Steady State To study the spatial distribution of nanoscale clusters of GPI - APs at the surface of living cells , we used a custom designed Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 1085 wide - ﬁeld or a line - scanning confocal microscope capable of measuring ﬂuorescence anisotropy in real time to construct high - resolution ( 300 3 300 nm 2 ) , homoFRET - based spatial maps of the anisotropy of ﬂuorescence emission of ﬂuorescently labeled GPI - APs , PLF - or PLB TMR - labeled folate receptors ( PLF - FR - GPI or PLB TMR - FR - GPI , respectively ) , or GFP tagged withaGPIanchor ( GFP - GPI ) inChinesehamsterovary ( CHO ) and numerous other cell types ( including NRK , 3T3 , CaCo - 2 cells ; data not shown ) ( Figures S1A and S1B available online ) . The images obtained consistently reveal two distinctive opti - cally resolvable regions ( Figure 1A ) . The ﬁrst are regions with low average ﬂuorescence anisotropy , most often associated with ﬂatter , relatively undifferentiated regions of the cell mem - brane ( Figure 1A ; boxes i – iii ) . As established in Sharma et al . ( 2004 ) by examination of the change in anisotropy upon photo - bleaching , the low anisotropy corresponds to high nanocluster density ( Figure S2C ) ; the bleaching proﬁles closely resemble that seen in Sharma et al . ( 2004 ) and retain the crucial qualitative features of being ﬂat initially and then increasing . From the images themselves , it is apparent that these low - anisotropy regions , highly enriched in nanoclusters , constitute a signiﬁcant fraction of the cell surface . The second are regions with high average anisotropy , associated with membrane protrusions ( Chhabra and Higgs , 2007 ) ( e . g . , microvilli ; Figure S2B ) or dy - namic cell edges ( e . g . , membrane rufﬂes or leading edges of lamellipodia [ Figure 1A ( iv ) ] ) . To understand the nature of pro - cesses giving rise to nanoclusters in the unperturbed state of the cell , we focus our study on the low - anisotropy regions . Analysis of the spatial FRET map in these ﬂat regions ( ﬂat - cell - scapes ) from a number of cells shows that the normalized anisot - ropy distributions overlap ( Figure 1B ) . This permits us to ascribe a typical anisotropy distribution to cells grown under standard conditions ( Figure 1B , red line ) . To check for correlations in the spatial distribution of nanoclusters , we compare the observed distribution of intensity and anisotropy with that expected by distributing thenanoclusters and monomers according to aPois - son process ( Experimental Procedures ) , with the same mean intensity and anisotropy ( Figure 1B , green line ) . We ﬁnd that a large fraction of pixels exhibit very low and high anisotropy compared to that expected for a Poisson distribution of clusters and monomers , demonstrating signiﬁcant spatial correlation of nanoclusters . Indeed , the observed distribution has a slower , ex - ponentially decaying tail ( Figure 1C , red dots ) compared to the distribution of anisotropy of a solution of GFP ( Figure 1C , blue Figure 1 . Quantitative Analysis of the Spa - tial Distribution of Nanoclusters CHO cells expressing FR - GPI were labeled with PLF ( A ) or PLB TMR ( E ) and ﬂuorescence intensity ( grayscale ) and anisotropy images ( pseudocol - ored according to the indicated LUT ) were recorded on a real - time wide - ﬁeld anisotropy set - up at RT ( A ) or at 37 (cid:2) C on a line - scanning con - focal system ( E ) . Anisotropy values from isolated monomericproteins ( A N ) areindicatedbyavertical line ( magenta ) at the right of the LUT bar . Note the presence of low - anisotropy regions in relatively constant intensity regions from ﬂat regions of the cell shown ( A , box i ) , and from different cells ( A , boxes ii and iii ) . High - anisotropy structures ( A , box iv ) correspond to tips of lamellipodium , whereas the lamellum exhibits a low anisotropy . Graph ( in panel B ) shows normalized anisotropy distribution P ( A ) of ﬂat regions of constant inten - sity from multiple FR - GPI - expressing cells ( n = 11 ) including the region in box i shown in Figure 1A describingatypicaldistribution ( redline ) . Compar - ison of P ( A ) with that expected by distributing the clusters and monomers according to a Poisson distribution ( green line in B ) shows signiﬁcantly greaterstatisticalweightinthelow - anisotropytails for the cell - derived distribution . Binary map ( A , box i’ ) shows pixels , from the region shown in box i , with anisotropy values less than the cutoff represented by the shaded region in ( B ) . Plots ( C , D , and F ) of ln ( P ( A ) ) versus ð A (cid:3) h A iÞ = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ h A 2 i p derived from anisotropy data from cells imaged in a wide - ﬁeld ( C and D ) or confocal ( F ) micro - scope show a slower , exponentially decaying tail for FR - GPI - expressing cells ( C and F , red dots ) , which appears as a linear decay ( C and F , black line ) . In contrast , the simulated Poisson distribu - tion ( C , green line ) , the measured distribution in a 25 uM solution of GFP at RT ( C , blue dots ) , or exogenously incorporated NBD - SM or BODIPY - SM ( D , pink and black dots , respectively ) , at levels that give rise to homoFRET , coincide with a quadratic decay proﬁle ( D , green line ) . Scale bar : 8 m m ( A ) , 4 m m ( boxes ii , iii , and iv ) , 8 m m ( E ) . 1086 Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . dots ) . To ascertain whether this distribution is a characteristic of any lipid - anchored ﬂuorophore , we examined the distribution of the anisotropy of ﬂuorescent short fatty - acyl chain - containing lipids , NBD - SM ( 6 - ( ( N - ( 7 - nitrobenz - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazol - 4 - yl ) amino ) hexanoyl ) sphingosyl phosphocholine ) or BODIPY - SM ( N - ( 4 , 4 - diﬂuoro - 5 , 7 - dimethyl - 4 - bora - 3a , 4a - diaza - s - indacene - 3 - penta - noyl ) sphingosyl phosphocholine ) , exogenously incorporated at the cell surface ( Figure 1D , pink and black dots , respectively ; images in Figure S3 ) . Identical to the solution of GFP , the anisot - ropy distribution of NBD - SM shows a Gaussian tail ( as expected from a random distribution ; Figures 1C and 1D , green line ) . These observations of the spatial distribution ( at a resolution of 300 nm ) were made at room temperature ( RT ) ; at 37 (cid:2) C we use a line - scanning confocal microscope ( Figure S1B ) to focus at the cell surface . This imaging modality also allows one to exclude contri - butions from endocytosed ﬂuorophores ( Figure S4 ) and obtain similar results ( Figures 1E and 1F ) . To study the statistics of clustering , we map out regions highly enriched in nanoclusters by selecting pixels with anisotropy less than a calculated cutoff ( corresponding to pixels where R 75 % of the proteins are in nanoclusters ; Figure 1B , shaded portion ) . These rare conﬁgurations occur in patches ( Figure 1A , box i’ ) , corresponding to a mean size of x 1 % 450 nm . Since our micro - scope resolution is 300 nm , this does not allow a lower bound on the size of these enriched domains . The pixels immediately sur - rounding these patches have high anisotropy . The regions of low anisotropy have a mean separation of order x 2 z 800 – 1250 nm ( Figure 1A , box i’ ) , as determined by computing the radial distri - bution function ( Chaikin and Lubensky , 1995 ) . The value of x 2 is smaller than that expected from uniformly distributing these patches over the same sample area of the cell ( data not shown ) . These observations suggest that nanoclusters of GPI - APs are highly enriched in speciﬁc domains of size x 1 % 450 nm and that these domains are in turn further clustered , giving rise to a distinct hierarchical distribution of the nanoscale clustering . Steady - State Dynamics of Nanoclusters : Diffusion and Interconversion We next explored the steady - state dynamics of the GPI - AP monomers and nanoclusters , at temperatures ranging from 15 (cid:2) C – 37 (cid:2) C , by a ﬂuorescence intensity - anisotropy recovery setup ( Figure S1C ) based on a microphotolysis - type experiment ( Peters et al . , 1981 ) . We locally perturbed the distribution of PLF - labeled folate receptor ( FR - GPI ) at the surface of CHO cells by multiphoton ( MP ) confocal excitation - induced photobleaching starting at time t = 0 up to t = t 1 ( ﬁrst illumination ) , when the laser is switched off for a waiting time , t w , before being switched on again ( second illumination ) . We follow the dynamical response both in homoFRET and ﬂuorescence intensity from the same volume . During the ﬁrst illumination period , the ﬂuorescence emission intensity shows an initial rapid loss followed by a slower decay and signiﬁcant recovery during t w ( Figure 2A , blue dots ) . The corresponding emission anisotropy trace , broadly , shows two kinds of behavior that signiﬁcantly correlate with tempera - ture . At 20 (cid:2) C , the anisotropy in the illuminated volume typically starts out at a depolarized value ( Figure 2A , red line ) , character - istic of a mixture of nanoclusters and monomers ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , and shows a sharp initial rise in ﬂuorescence anisotropy ( corresponding to rapid loss of homoFRET ) before saturating to a high value , characteristic of isolated monomers in the mem - brane ( A N ; Figure 2 , pink band ) . On the other hand , at 37 (cid:2) C ( Figure 2B , red line ) , the anisotropy rises during t 1 , as the ﬂuoro - phores in the confocal volume bleach , and saturates to a value signiﬁcantly lower than A N , obtained as described in Experimen - tal Procedures . Regardless of the temperature , at the start of the second illumination , the recovery of ﬂuorescence intensity in the obser - vation volume depends on the durations , t 1 and t w . If t 1 is small ( < 20 s ) and t w large ( > 30 s ) , the ﬂuorescence intensity recovers signiﬁcantly , implying that ﬂuorophores diffuse in from the surrounding regions . However , at 20 (cid:2) C , the ﬂuorescence anisot - ropy at the beginning of the second illumination starts out with the same saturation value obtained at the end of the ﬁrst illumi - nation and does not recover to that expected of the original mixture of nanoclusters and monomers ( Figure 2A , red line ) . This implies that nanoclusters neither reform within nor are re - plenished from the reservoir of unbleached ﬂuorophores present outside the illuminated volume . In contrast , at 37 (cid:2) C , there is an almost complete restoration of the original depolarized anisot - ropy value after t w , implying that there is substantial reassembly of nanoclusters from monomers at 37 (cid:2) C ( Figure 2B , red line ) . As a control , even at 20 (cid:2) C an exogenously added ﬂuorescent lipid , BODIPY - SM , at concentrations high enough to record signiﬁcant homoFRET recovers its intensity and depolarized anisotropy during an identical illumination sequence ( Figure S5 ) . The lack of replenishment of unbleached nanoclusters of GPI - APs at 20 (cid:2) C could arise either from the absence of nanoclusters in the reservoir or their immobilization . To address this issue we analyzed the spatial distribution of monomers and nanoclusters in the reservoir outside the illuminated region by simultaneously measuring the intensity and anisotropy of FR - GPI in an area of the cell surface , prior to and after bleaching a central region in the imaging ﬁeld ( a nisotropy r ecovery a fter p hoto - bleaching or ARAP ) . For this we labeled FR - GPI with a more photo - stable ﬂuorescent analog of folic acid , PLB TMR , and simultaneously imaged intensity and anisotropy in the line - scanning confocal anisotropy imaging set - up ( Figure S1B ) . Initially , we detected signiﬁcant depolarization in the whole illuminated area ( Fig - ure 2C ; Pre - Bleach ) , characteristic of the steady - state distribu - tion of nanoclusters and monomers . Following a bleaching of PLB TMR - FR - GPI at the center of the illuminated area ( Figure 2C ; Bleach , magenta box ) , we ﬁnd that while the ﬂuorescence inten - sity recovers ( Figure 2C ; Post - Bleach 1 and 4 min ) , the anisot - ropy in the bleached spot does not ( Figure 2C ; Post - Bleach 1 and 4 min ) . However , the average intensity and anisotropy in the regions surrounding the bleached areas remain relatively un - changed during this time ( Figure 2C ; brown and purple boxes ) . Although the exact pattern of anisotropy in each of the boxes is not completely conserved , quantitative analyses from multiple runs of the same experiment ( Figure 2E ) conﬁrm that only the monomeric species contribute to the replenishment of the intensity , whereas nanoclusters do not reform and are relatively immobile at this temperature . In contrast , the ARAP experiment at 37 (cid:2) C shows that in conjunction with the rapid recovery of ﬂuorescence intensity ( Figure 2D , magenta boxes ; bottom graph in F ) , the anisotropy Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 1087 Figure 2 . Intensity and Anisotropy Traces and Images from Cell - Surface - Labeled GPI - APs ( Aand B ) PLF - labeledFR - GPI - expressing cells ( A , inset ) , onamicroscopestage maintained at20 (cid:2) C ( A ) orat37 (cid:2) C ( B ) , wereilluminatedby multiphotonexcitation at 790 nm . Intensity ( blue line ) and anisotropy ( red line ) traces were obtained simultaneously from the resultant confocal volume ( e . g . , red crosshair , inset in A ) during the illumination sequence outlined at the top . The pink bands in the graphs are the range of A N values obtained for each experiment . ( C and D ) Fluorescence intensity ( grayscale ) and anisotropy ( pseudocolored ) images of PLB TMR - labeled cells were recorded on line - scanning confocal microscope at 20 (cid:2) C ( C ) or at 37 (cid:2) C ( D ) , prior to ( Pre - Bleach ) , immediately post ( Bleach , intensity only ) , or after 1 or 4 min of ( Post - Bleach , 1 or 4 min , respectively ) bleachingtheregionoutlined inthemagenta box . Average anisotropy valuesfrom thebleached ( magenta ) and unbleached ( blue , brown ) boxes areshownbelow pseudocolored anisotropy images from each colored box . Graphs ( E and F ) show normalized ﬂuorescence intensity ( lower panel ) and average ( and standard error ) anisotropy values ( upper panel ) from the respective colored boxes under the conditions indicated on the x axis , derived from measurements made on multiple cells ( n R 6 ) at 20 (cid:2) C ( E ) or at 37 (cid:2) C ( F ) in two indepen - dent experiments . Scale bar , 5 m m . 1088 Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . recovers to its original depolarized anisotropy value , albeit after a long delay ( Figure 2D , magenta boxes ; top graph in F ) . How - ever , we can halt the recovery of anisotropy at 37 (cid:2) C , if we perturb the formation of nanoclusters ( see below ) . These studies reinforce the claim that while monomers are free to diffuse , nano - clusters are relatively immobile and formed in situ . The dynamics of recovery of intensity and anisotropy cannot be accounted for by endocytic recycling of internalized labeled cell - surface GPI - APs . First , over the time of the experiment ( (cid:4) 300 s ) , less than 10 % of the cell - surface - labeled FR - GPI is endocytosed , and a smaller fraction recycled due to the slow kinetics of membrane recycling characterized previously ( Chat - terjee et al . , 2001 ) . Second , direct examination of the internalized fraction of FR - GPI by stripping away the cell - surface receptors shows no detectable ﬂuorescence in the confocal volume ( Figure S6 ) . We now systematically record the dynamical response to the sequence of local - pulsed illumination ( detailed in Figures 2A and 2B ) from different ﬂat regions of cells , at temperatures rang - ing from 15 (cid:2) C – 37 (cid:2) C . We theoretically model the time traces of ﬂuorescence intensity and anisotropy from the confocal volume by reaction - diffusion type equations ( Figure 3A ; see Experimen - tal Procedures and Supplemental Explanations A1 – A3 ) , incorpo - rating diffusion of monomers and nanoclusters ( diffusion coefﬁ - cients , D 1 and D c ) , bleaching of ﬂuorophores ( bleach rate , b ) , and the interconversion between monomers and nanoclusters ( aggregation and fragmentation rates , k a and k f ) . Knowing the monomer and nanocluster anisotropy , A m and A c ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , we obtain the intensity and anisotropy proﬁles by solving Equation 4 for C nm ( t ) ( Experimental Procedures ) , the fraction of nanoclusters having n proteins , m of which are un - bleached , present within the confocal volume at time t . Using the model ( Figure 3A ) , we ﬁt the calculated intensity and anisotropy proﬁles to the experimental data and extract the best ﬁt values for the parameters ( Figures 3C – 3F ; Supplemental Explanation A2 ) at different temperatures . The diffusion coefﬁ - cient of the nanoclusters , D c , obtained from the ﬁt , is vanishingly small ( D c z 0 ) at all temperatures ( Figures 3C – 3F and S7A ) — reasserting that while monomers are mobile , the nanoclusters are relatively immobile ( Figures 2E and 2F ) . We ﬁnd that while the ﬁt values of the interconversion rates show extensive variation at any given temperature ( Figure S7B ) , the data neatly cluster into four qualitatively distinct classes : full recovery ( FR ) , partial recovery ( PR ) , no recovery ( NR ) , and no interconversion ( NI ) ( schematic in Figure 3B ) . Interconversion dy - namics is typically absent at lower temperatures and present at higher temperatures ( Figure S7B ) . As depicted in Figure 3B , these recovery classes reﬂect the spatial heterogeneity in the surface organization of nanoclusters . As shown in Figure 3G , we can deﬁne a representative class for each temperature ( de - marcated in red ) . We construct an Arrhenius plot from the typical value ( Figure S8 ) in each representative class as a function of inversetemperature ( Figure3H ) . Thisplotisalmostﬂatattemper - atures above 24 (cid:2) C and changes sharply below this temperature , in a strongly non - Arrhenius manner , reafﬁrming the absence of interconversion below 24 (cid:2) C . From the near - horizontal curve above 28 (cid:2) C , one can extract a typical value for D E / k B T z 10 (cid:3) 2 from the slope of the curve above 24 (cid:2) C . This reﬂects the binding energy of nanoclusters ( Israelachvili , 1992 ) ; this is 2 – 3 orders of magnitude lower than the minimal ( van der Waals ) interactions between molecules on a membrane at a similar intermolecular distance . Inseparatestudies onthedisruptionofnanoclustersby crosslinking antibody binding ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , we estimate a maximum nanocluster binding energy z 10 k B T . These anomalous features in the spatial distribution and dynamics at steady state require explanation ; to arrive at this , we perturbed the organization of nanoclusters in a variety of ways . Interconversion Dynamics Is Sensitive to Cholesterol Perturbation We investigated the spatial distribution and dynamics of GPI - AP nanoclusters upon perturbing cholesterol levels using methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( m b CD ) . Treatment using high concentrations of m b CD completely abrogates nanoclusters ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . On the other hand , mild perturbation of cholesterol levels ( such that the overall fraction of nanoclusters remains unaltered ) using low concentrations of m b CD ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) has a measurable effect on the statistical distribution of nanoclus - ters . Both the net fraction of GPI - APs in the low - anisotropy region and the mean domain size ( x 1 ) reduce , while the mean separation between domains ( x 2 ) increases ( Figures 4A – 4E ) . Fur - ther , at 37 (cid:2) C , the interconversion rates of nanoclusters are dras - tically reduced ( Figure 4F ) ; cholesterol depletion also inhibits the recovery of anisotropy in ARAP experiments ( Figure 4G ) . Thus , cholesterol is a major player in maintaining the spatial organiza - tion of the nanocluster enriched regions . This graded effect of cholesterol depletion on the organization of GPI - APs at different scales suggests that the interactions of cholesterol with GPI - APs occur at multiple levels—directly via passive cholesterol - GPI - AP attractive forces or via a coupling to the CA . Indeed , at these low levels of cholesterol depletion , we have observed signiﬁcant reduction in the activity of CA ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ) . These obser - vations suggest that the perturbation of the spatial distribution and dynamics of nanoclusters by low levels of cholesterol removal may be mediated by alterations in the organization of CA , inﬂuencing CA - membrane interactions ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ; Kwik et al . , 2003 ; Niggli , 2005 ) . Interconversion Dynamics Is Sensitive to Perturbation of Actin Polymerization and Myosin Activity We perturbed the CA using Jasplakinolide ( Jas ) or Latrunculin ( Lat ) at 37 (cid:2) C to directly study the involvement of actin . Prolonged perturbations result in the generation of micron - sized blebs , de - void of CA ( Figure S9A ) . The fully formed blebs lack GPI - AP nanoclusters , as we evince from the high value of anisotropy of GFP - GPI ( Figures 5A and 5B ) and conﬁrm by time - resolved ﬂuorescence decay , time - resolved anisotropy measurements , and ﬂuorescence life - time imaging ( Figures 5C – 5F ; For detailed explanations see Supplemental Explanation A5 , Figures S10A – S10C , and Tables S1 and S2 ) . The GPI - APs in these blebs also do not exhibit interconversion dynamics ( Figures S9B and S9C ) . After removal of Lat , the Lat - generated blebs retract following re - establishment of local CA ; the anisotropy and hence nanocluster concentrations recover to their pretreatment values ( Movie S1 ) . Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 1089 To directly test the role of CA in the dynamics of GPI - AP - nanocluster construction , we perturbed actin - polymerization ac - tivity by treatment with Jas and Lat for short periods of time . These treatments do not affect the average concentration of nanoclusters in the membrane as measured by a lack of an effect of the average anisotropy values of labeled GPI - APs ( Figure 6A ) . At the same time these mild perturbations do not signiﬁcantly deplete levels of CA ( data not shown ) but affect the dynamics of polymerization / depolymerization of actin near the membrane ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure S11 ) . In such situations , whereas the nanocluster concentration recovers completely after a time t 1 + t w on control cells at 37 (cid:2) C ( Figure 2B , red line ) , application Figure 3 . Temperature - Dependent Steady - State Dynamics of Nanoclusters ( A ) Schematic of the expected dynamics ( bleach - ing , diffusion , and interconversion ) of monomers and nanoclusters ( depicted as dimers ) within a confocal volume ( inner circle ) . The colors of the circlesrepresentthebleachingstatusoftheﬂuoro - phores , green being active and black bleached . The arrows represent the transition rates between thespeciespresent . Whiletheﬂuorophoresdiffuse bothintoandoutoftheconfocalvolume , themodel assumes that the incoming ﬂuorophores are predominantly unbleached . The outer circle repre - sentsthepoolofunbleachedmonomersandnano - clusters that serves to replenish the confocal volume . The dynamics is modeled by reaction - diffusion equations , involving rates of bleaching ( b ) , diffusion ( monomer d 1 and cluster d c ) , and cluster aggregation ( k a ) and fragmentation ( k f ) as detailed in the text . ( B ) Schematic describes the relationship between the local organization of GPI - APs in a confocal volume and the type of ﬂuorescence intensity and anisotropy traces obtained . Full recovery ( FR ) and partial recovery ( PR ) types would be expected from a region where there are nanoclusters and relatively robust monomer - nanocluster intercon - version . No recovery type ( NR ) is expected from regions where there is signiﬁcant fragmentation but no formation of nanoclusters , and the non - interconversion ( NI ) occurs where there are no nanoclusters to begin with . ( C – F ) Typical time traces of intensity and anisot - ropy recovery of PLF - labeled FR - GPI during the illuminationsequenceindicated aboveeachpanel , recorded at different temperatures 37 (cid:2) C ( C ) , 24 (cid:2) C ( D ) , and 15 (cid:2) C ( E and F ) , are modeled as described in ( A ) . The ﬁts ( dark lines ) provide the values of the parameters appearing in each panel . Extractedvaluesofd c werefoundtolieintherange ( (cid:3) 10 (cid:3) 5 s (cid:3) 1 < d c < 10 (cid:3) 5 s (cid:3) 1 ) ; this being 4 orders of magnitudesmallerthand 1 , wemaysafelytakethis as indicating immobilized clusters ( consistent with Figure 2 ) . Pink band represents the permissible range of A N values . ( G ) Histogram shows the relative population of each class ( FR , PR , NR , and NI [ where the anisot - ropy stays at a highly polarized value A N at all times ] ) atdifferenttemperaturesbasedontheclas - siﬁcation scheme shown in ( B ) ; the representative class for each temperature is indicated by the red bar . ( H ) Ratio of typical interconversion rates of the most probable distribution extracted as described in the text is represented in an Arrhenius plot , as ln k a / k f versus T room / T . Thelineconnectingthetypical values of ln k a / k f in each representative class shows strong non - Arrhenius behavior and a sharp crossover at 24 (cid:2) C . 1090 Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . of Lat or Jas during the waiting period ( Figures 6A and 6B ) or be - fore the ﬁrst laser pulse ( Figure 6C ) prevents the restoration of the original depolarized anisotropy value ( Figures 6A – 6C , red lines ) , although the ﬂuorescence intensity recovers completely ( Figures 6A – 6C , blue lines ) . Furthermore , perturbation of myosin activity using Blebbistatin ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) inhibits the dy - namics of interconversion ( Figure 6D , red line ) . Mild treatment with Lat or Blebbistatin also prevents restoration of nanoclusters in the bleached area in the ARAP experiments ( Figures 6E and 6F ) . These results directly implicate CA activity in maintaining the dynamic organization of cell - surface GPI - APs as nanoclus - ters and monomers . Dynamics of Nanocluster Recovery toward Steady State To explore the connection between CA and the composition of nanoclusters in membranes associated with CA , we examined a system wherein the cell membrane undergoes cycles of attachment and detachment from the underlying CA . Freshly plated ﬁbroblasts ( diameter (cid:4) 30 m m ) with a dynamically unstable CA meshwork spontaneously generate blebs ( Charras et al . , 2005 ; Keller et al . , 2002 ) . This presents a convenient system to temporally monitor CA detachment and reformation ( Charras et al . , 2006 ) and consequently the dynamics of loss and recovery of nanoclusters in the bleb membrane . Blebs form from the cell edge and grow to a maximum size of about 1 – 5 m m , after which they retract completely into the cell over a timescale of minutes ( Figure 7A ; see Movies S2 – S4 ) . We followed the dynamics of CA and GPI - AP nanoclusters as the bleb grows and retracts by monitoring the distribution of polymerized actin - binding protein , C - terminal - Ezrin ( Bretscher et al . , 1997 ) , and GFP - GPI anisot - ropy , respectively ( Figures 7A and 7B ; Movie S4 ) . The anisotropy starts out at a low value ( due to the presence of nanoclusters ) ; as the bleb grows , the anisotropy in that region increases and ap - proaches a constant value close to that of isolated monomers , Figure4 . Inﬂuence ofCholesterolDepletion on Spatial Distribution and Nanocluster Formation at 37 (cid:2) C ( A – E ) Fluorescence intensity ( grayscale ) and anisotropy ( pseudocolor ) image ( A ) and graph ( B ) of normalized anisotropy distribution , P ( A ) , of mul - tiple FR - GPI - expressing cells ( n = 7 ) including the cell shown in ( A ) , obtained from cholesterol - depleted ( B , blue dots ; 10 mM m b CD , 30 min ) , show a lowering of the statistical weight , F , in the tails of P ( A ) derived from untreated cells ( B , red dots ; see right inset ) . Binary map ( left inset in B ) shows pixels from the region shown in box out - lined in ( A ) , with anisotropy values less than the cutoff represented by the shaded region in B ( inset ) . The relative statistical weight of the rare re - gions ( C , quantiﬁed as F , deﬁned by shaded edge in B ) and the cluster size x 1 ( D , in units of 1 pixel = 160nm ) show adecrease while x 2 ( E , inpixel units ) increases with m b CD concentration . ( F ) PLF - labeled FR - GPI - expressing cells incu - batedwithm b CD ( 10mM ; 30min ) onamicroscope stagemaintainedat37 (cid:2) Cwereilluminated bymul - tiphoton excitation at 790 nm . Intensity ( blue line ) and anisotropy ( red line ) traces were obtained simultaneouslyfromtheresultantconfocalvolume during the illumination sequence outlined at the top . Afterwaitingtime t w , thetraceswererecorded from the same area of the cell during t 2 . The pink band at the top indicates the range of A N values obtained in the experiment . ( G ) Graphs show normalized ﬂuorescence inten - sity ( lower panel ) and average ( and standard error ) of anisotropy values ( upper panel ) from an ARAP experiment as described in Figure 2D , carried out at 37 (cid:2) C on PLB TMR - labeled FR - GPI - express - ing cells pretreated with m b CD ( 10 mM ; 4 min ) . Magenta symbols represent data obtained from the area subject to photobleaching while blue and brown symbols are obtained from corre - sponding neighboring areas . Data were derived from measurements made on multiple cells ( n R 6 ) in two independent experiments . Scale bar = 10 m m . Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 1091 A N ( Figure S12 ) . Observation of C - terminal - Ezrin - RFP and GFP - GPI anisotropy simultaneously ( Movie S3 ) shows that the rim - located CA in the ﬂat cell membrane ﬁrst rapidly decreases so that the bleb grows and extends to its maximum diameter . CA then increases again at the rim of the bleb to retract the bleb ( Figure 7A , graph ; Figure S12B ) , as can be seen from the appear - ance of an enhanced rim staining of C - terminal - Ezrin - RFP ( Figure 7B ; compare also membrane outline [ GFP - GPI ﬂuores - cence ] and actin [ C - terminal - Ezrin - RFP ] in Movie S3 ) . Simulta - neous imaging of the C - terminal - Ezrin - RFP and the membrane rim during bleb formation and retraction conﬁrm the sequence of rim localization of CA prior to bleb retraction ( Movie S5 ) . Bleb retraction is a consequence of the repolymerization of actin and subsequent myosin - based contractility ( Charras et al . , 2007 ) . We conﬁrm this by showing recruitment of myosin regulatory light chain ( M - RLC ) to the retracting bleb ( Figures 7C , S12C , and S13 ) and inhibition of retraction by application of Blebbistatin ( Figure 7D ; Movie S6 ) . More interesting is the dynamics of the GFP - GPI anisotropy as the bleb retracts ; the decrease in anisotropy from A N ( value at maximal bleb extension ) follows the appearance of CA ( Fig - ure 7B ; Movies S4 and S5 ) until it attains its steady - state depo - larized value . This shows that the re - formation of nanoclusters is promoted by the presence of the CA . Inhibition of myosin activity with Blebbistatin slows down bleb retraction—many blebs fail to retract ( Figure 7D ; Movie S6 ) or retract with much slower kinetics ( data not shown ) . In blebs that do not retract , Blebbistatin treat - ment inhibits the recovery of GFP - GPI anisotropy to its original depolarized value ( Figure 7D ; Movie S6 ) , indicating that acto - myosin contractility is required for nanocluster formation . DISCUSSION Active Molecular Complexation Regulated by CA Activity The experimental evidence presented here suggests that the spatial distribution and dynamics of formation and break - up of nanoclusters are mediated by the local CA and its active remod - eling , driven by ( de ) polymerization and acto - myosin contractility . The statistical and dynamical characteristics of such molecular complexation in steady state are distinctive : ( 1 ) violation of mass action , ( 2 ) unusual nature of the probability distribution of anisotropy ( Figures 1C and 1F ) , ( 3 ) spatial characteristics of do - mains enriched in nanoclusters and their dependence on actin , ( 4 ) variations in the spatial distribution and interconversion dy - namics of nanoclusters arising from the spatial variation in levels of active CA ( Figures 3G and S7B ) , ( 5 ) the near - horizontal nature of the Arrhenius plot at temperatures above 24 (cid:2) C , followed by Figure 5 . Hetero - and HomoFRET Measurements Conﬁrm Spatial Heterogeneity of Nanocluster Distribution ; Actin Perturbation Generates Blebs Devoid of FRET Signals ( A and B ) Jas - treated ( 14 m M , 30 min at 37 (cid:2) C ) GFP - GPI - expressing cells were imaged as described in Figure 1A . Fluorescence intensity ( A ) and anisotropy images ( B ) , in grayscale and pseudocolor , respectively , show the formation of large - scale blebs ( B boxes i – iii ) that have high anisotropy values , approach - ing those of isolated monomers , A N , while ﬂat regions are depolarized ( blue areas in B ) . ( C and D ) GFP - GPI - expressing CHO cells ( C ) were treated with Lat A ( 25 m M , 30 min , 37 (cid:2) C ) to generate blebs , and at the indicated spot on a bleb ( green cross ) , single point - time resolved anisotropy decay measurements were carried out using confocal multiphoton excitation at 37 (cid:2) C . Graph in ( D ) shows anisotropy decay proﬁles ( green line ) obtained from this region ( green cross in panel C ) compared with the anisotropy decay ( blue line ) from ﬂat regions of cell in the same image ( blue arrow in panel C ) , or from cell membranes treated with saponin to remove all nanoclusters ( data not shown ) . Anisotropy decay proﬁles from blebs resemble those from saponin - treated membranes ( see Table S1 ) , conﬁrming that GFP - GPI in bleb membranes are devoid of nanoclusters . ( E and F ) Fluorescence intensity distribution obtained by multiphoton confocal imaging of donor ﬂuorophore PLF and acceptor ﬂuorophore PLR - labeled FR - GPI - expressing cells . These cells exhibit blebs ( bottom inset ) and ﬂat regions ( top inset ) after actin perturbation as in ( C ) . ( F ) Fluorescence decay traces ob - tainedfromthesamecellsbypositioningamultiphotonexcitation volumeover the bleb ( bottom inset in E ) exhibit a longer average donor lifetime ( t (cid:4) 2 . 3 ns , green line ) compared to that obtained in the ﬂat region ( top inset in E , blue trace ) , which is signiﬁcantly shorter ( t (cid:4) 2 . 0 ns , blue line ) . Residuals from the multicomponentﬁts ( detailedinTableS2 ) areshowninthetraceatthebottom . Scale bar , 5 m m . 1092 Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . a sharp crossover at 24 (cid:2) C ( Figure 3H ) , and ( 6 ) the immobilization of nanoclusters . It is difﬁcult to reconcile all these features with a molecular aggregation driven by lipid - lipid or protein - protein interactions based on models of membrane rafts formed by conventional thermodynamic forces ( Simons and Vaz , 2004 ) . Instead , these feature may be best reconciled if the mecha - nism governing the formation of the nanoclusters is active . The involvement of actin and myosin activity in regulating the dynam - ics of nanoclusters explains the sharp crossover seen in the Arrhenius plot ( Figure 3H ) : earlier studies have shown that acto - myosin activity exhibits a sharp crossover at (cid:4) 24 (cid:2) C ( Sheetz et al . , 1984 ) ; our own data on the temperature depen - dence of blebbing and retraction , a process that requires actin polymerization and acto - myosin contractility ( Charras et al . , 2007 ) , also suggest a crossover in the dynamics of the CA at (cid:4) 24 (cid:2) C ( Figure S14 ) . The violation of mass action , the exponential tails of the anisotropy distribution , and the spatial distribution can all be attributed to the activity of a dynamic cortical actin cortex inﬂuencing molecules in the membrane overlying it ( K . G . et al . , unpublished data ) . Molecular Players Involved in Nanocluster Formation A critical issue , both in the generation of the nanoclusters and in the nanocluster - enriched domains associated with CA , con - cerns a molecular mechanism for the coupling of membrane components and acto - myosin activity . Currently , we do not know the detailed molecular links between the CA and the exo - plasmic lipid - tethered protein that must exist in order to produce the effects we report here . However , cholesterol plays a key role in this process since levels of cholesterol in the membrane reg - ulate the activity of many molecular players involved in the spa - tial remodeling of CA ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ; Kwik et al . , 2003 ) and its removal disrupts these nanoclusters ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) or drastically affects interconversion and its spatial distribution . This link must also involve additional protein and lipid compo - nents that associate with actin and drive the transbilayer cluster - ing of GPI - APs . For example , long acyl - chain GPI - APs can dynamically interact with the CA via outer - leaﬂet components ( e . g . , long alkyl chain - containing sphingolipids ) , inner - leaﬂet membrane lipids ( e . g . , PIP2 ; Higgs and Pollard , 2000 ) , and pro - tein components involved in actin nucleation or binding ( e . g . , WASp and Arp2 / 3 ) , with cholesterol playing a central role both Figure 6 . Inﬂuence of Actin Cytoskeleton on Nanocluster Formation at 37 (cid:2) C ( AandB ) Multiphoton laser - excitedintensity ( blue ) and anisotropy ( red ) traces of PLF - labeled FR - GPI - expressing cells obtained at 37 (cid:2) C from the illuminationsequence indicated above eachtrace . After the ﬁrst illumination period , t 1 , Latrunculin ( Lat , 6 m M ; A ) or Jasplakinolide ( Jas , 5 m M ; B ) was added to cells on the stage . After waiting time t w , the traces were recorded from the same area of the cell during t 2 . ( C and D ) PLF - labeled FR - GPI - expressing cells were preincubated with Lat ( C ; 6 m M for 5 min ) or Blebistatin ( D ; 50 m M for 5 min ) on a microscope stage maintained at 37 (cid:2) C and illuminated by mul - tiphoton excitation at 790 nm . Intensity ( blue line ) and anisotropy ( red line ) traces were obtained simultaneouslyfromtheresultantconfocalvolume during the illumination sequence outlined at the top . The pink bands at the top of each panel indicate the range of A N values obtained in the experiment . ( E and F ) Graphs show normalized ﬂuorescence intensity ( lower panel ) and average ( and standard error ) anisotropy values ( upper panel ) from an ARAP experiment as described in Figures 2C – 2F , carried out at 37 (cid:2) C on PLB TMR - labeled FR - GPI - expressing cells , pretreated for 4 min with Lat ( E ; 6 m M ) or Blebbistatin ( F ; 50 m M ) at 37 (cid:2) C . Magenta symbols represent data obtained from the area subject to photobleaching while blue and brown symbols are obtained from corre - sponding neighboring areas . Data were derived from measurements made on multiple cells ( n R 8 ) in a single experiment and averaged over at least two independent experiments . The data show that recovery of nanoclusters in the bleached area depends on the integrity of actin as well as myosin activity . They also show that clusters formed outside the bleached area are relatively immobile at 37 (cid:2) C . Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 1093 in this coupling mechanism and in actin nucleation . Crosslinking extracellular GPI - APs induces transient anchoring and local re - modeling of intracellular actin ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Suzuki et al . , 2007 ) , suggesting that organization of speciﬁc membrane com - ponents regulates local CA and in turn is regulated by the same . Active ‘‘Rafts’’ The results presented here show that GPI - APs are organized on at least two length scales at steady state : at the nanoscale ( < 10 nm ) , and at optically resolvable scales ( % 450 nm ) wherein nanoclusters are further concentrated . The measurement of steady - state anisotropy probes structure at the nanometer scale , whereas the spatial map of anisotropy probes structure at the limits of optical resolution . Our measurements as such cannot rule out the possibility of a hierarchy of scales in between . For instance , there are at least two more scales : the distance be - tween nanoclusters in optically resolved regions highly enriched in nanoclusters of size x 1 and the interdomain distance , x 2 . Figure 7 . Dynamics of Nanocluster Distribution and CA in Blebs from Freshly Plated Fibroblasts ( A ) Freshly plated CHO cells coexpressing GFP - GPI and RFP - Ezrin develop spontaneousblebs before they spread outandacquireaﬂatmorphologyat37 (cid:2) C . GFP - GPIinten - sity ( i ) and RFP - ezrin distribution ( ii ) in the blebs were imaged on wide - ﬁeld dual - camera set - up where images werecollectedsequentiallyforGFPandRFPﬂuorescence every11s . Graphin ( iii ) showsbleb - area ( normalizedtothe maximum area ) , GFP - anisotropy ( normalized to the maxi - mum anisotropy valueat the bleb ) , and RFP - Ezrin staining ( normalized to the initial values ) as a function of bleb growth and retraction . ( B ) Montage taken from Movie S4 ; blebs appear sponta - neously from the cell edge and grow to their maximum size in (cid:4) 30 to 50 s and retract back in (cid:4) 1 min – 2 min . Note that blebs are initially devoid of rim staining for RFP - Ezrin and acquire it a few seconds ( red arrow ) after the bleb has reached its maximum size . Arrowheads and dashed line indicate regions of low and high anisotropy , respectively . Note that while RFP - ezrin staining is rapidly lost , the anisotropy ( low to begin with ) rapidly increases asthe bleb grows . After therecoveryof RFP - ezrin staining in the rim of the bleb , anisotropy reduces , as the bleb starts to shrink . ( C ) Graph shows time course of MRLC - GFP recruitment ( brown dots ) during bleb growth and retraction in cells expressing MRLC - GFP , coincident with bleb retraction . ( D ) Graph shows time course of bleb - area growth and re - traction , anisotropy , andactindistributionbefore ( leftside ) or after addition of Blebbistatin ( 50 m M ) for 10 min to the same cells . Scale bar , 3 . 2 m m . The large - scale domains may share some properties expected of ‘‘rafts’’ ( Simons and Vaz , 2004 ) . The graded response on both the size and distribution of these regions upon re - moval of membrane cholesterol suggests that these domains are cholesterol sensitive . Since nanoclusters composed of long alkyl - chain - containing GPI - APs are concentrated in these cholesterol - rich regions , it is likely that the local lipid composition is fairly specialized . Short - chain lipid - contain - ing molecules ( exogenously introduced lipids ; e . g . , NBD - SM ) do not exhibit similar distributions and are most likely excluded from these regions . At this time , a precise correlation of nanocluster enrichment and local ordering of lipid tails is technically complex , requiring simultaneous measurement of GPI - AP clustering and lipid - order reporters ( e . g . , laurdan ; Gaus et al . , 2006 ) . In spite of this possible resemblance of the local lipid conﬁguration with liquid - ordered phases , we emphasize that these membrane regions enriched in nanoclusters are not an equilibrium thermo - dynamic phase . They represent a completely different mecha - nism of molecular complexation . Since the dynamics of forma - tion and spatial distribution of nanoclusters is sensitive to perturbation of CA , actin must surely be involved . In addition , our observations with Blebbistatin application and in blebbing cells strongly suggest that myosin activity is required for the for - mation of nanoclusters . Thus , rafts of GPI - APs represent actively constructed domains ( Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . The ability to 1094 Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . actively construct domains of modiﬁed lipid composition in the cell membrane suggests regulatory control of domain formation by the cell . Spatial heterogeneity of the formation kinetics implies that speciﬁc sites may be chosen for generation of these domains . Consistent with this , we have shown that sites of cholesterol - sensitive cdc42 recruitment at the inner leaﬂet and its activation in the membrane are associated with a clustered distribution of GPI - APs on the outer leaﬂet ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ) . Although rules behind the selection of these sites are yet to be elucidated , it is conceivable that local activation of guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) and GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) that control GTPases involved in actin polymerization is an important component of this regulatory mechanism . Conclusion The formation and immobilization of native nanoclusters of GPI - APs represent a unique example of steady - state molecular com - plexation at the nanoscale regulated by the CA . The physical ba - sis for this molecular nano - complexation may be understood in terms of the framework of active hydrodynamics of the mem - brane cytoskeleton composite ( Hatwalne et al . , 2004 ; Kruse et al . , 2004 ; Ramaswamy and Rao , 2001 , 2007 ) , wherein cell - surface molecules , such as GPI - APs or transmembrane proteins , owing to their direct or indirect interactions with the CA , can transiently bind and unbind onto the CA . Such tran - siently bound molecules can be actively driven along the polar actin ﬁlaments resulting in local molecular clustering . The remodeling dynamics of the polar actin ﬁlaments induced by acto - myosin contractile forces and tread - milling can then dynamically reorganize this molecular clustering . A deeper understanding requires a detailed theoretical treatment ( K . G . et al . , unpublished data ) to arrive at the statistics of clustering and other quantiﬁable features of the GPI - AP distribution described here . These active complexes maybe a generic mechanism for local nanoclustering of a variety of cell - surface molecules such as GPI - APs ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) , Ras - isoforms , ( Plowman et al . , 2005 ) , and gangliosides ( Fujita et al . , 2007 ) . At the nanoscale ( % 10 nm ) , these complexes could greatly enhance the rates of chemical reactions in living cells ( Hancock , 2006 ) . The larger - scale ( R 100 nm ) organization of these nanoclusters , also coupled to CA , in turn will facilitate the induction of functional membrane domains responsible for signaling and sorting func - tions ( Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . Lateral segregation of speciﬁc molecules in the construction of signaling complexes and sorting platforms is the central idea be - hind rafts ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . Here we show that this may be achieved by active mechanisms where the cell ( via control of acto - myosin activity ) could specify sites and regulate the extent of domain formation . This has implications in understanding the role of rafts , especially as regulatable membrane microdomains as envisaged by recent studies in cell signaling networks involved in regulating cell shape ( Neves et al . , 2008 ) . It is also likely that such structures may exhibit distinct properties , quite distinct from those dictated by thermodynamic considerations as explored in artiﬁcial membranes . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture , Fluorescent Labeling , and Other Treatments CHO cells , stably transfected with human folate receptor , were maintained in folicacid - free Ham’sF12mediumandimagedasdescribedpreviously ( Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . Cells were labeled with ﬂuorescent analogs of folic acid N a - pteroyl - N 3 - ( 4 0 - ﬂuoresceinthiocarbamoyl ) - L - lysine ( PLF ) or N a - pteroyl - N 3 - Bodipy TMR - L - lysine ( PLB TMR ) or N a - pteroyl - N 3 - Alexa 546 - L - lysine ( PLA ) with emission between 510 – 30 nm and 560 – 610 nm , respectively , at the cell sur - face at saturating concentration ( 10 to 50 nM ) on ice for 1 hr and transferred to pre - warmed buffers ( 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM HEPES , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 2 – 7 . 4 ) before placing on a temperature - controlled microscope stage and imaged within 5 – 10 min . Cholesterol depletion was achieved by treatment with m b CD at indicated concentrations for 30 min ; at 2 mM this treatment resulted in a loss of 15 % of cell - surface ﬁllipin staining ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ) . Actin and myosin perturbation was carried out by incu - batingcells at37 (cid:2) Cforindicated lengths oftimewithLatrunculinAorBor Jas - plakinolide at indicated concentrations for actin perturbation and Blebbistatin ( 50 m M ) for myosin inhibition . Fluorescence Traces Fluorescence intensity and anisotropy traces were obtained from a parked multiphoton excitation ( 790 nm wavelength ) confocal volume using Zeiss LSM 510 Meta microscope ( Zeiss , Germany ) with a 20 3 , 0 . 7NA objective to steer a femtosecond 80 . 09 MHz ( 12 ns ) pulsed Tsunami Titanium : Sapphire ( Ti : S ) tunable laser ( Newport , Mountain View , CA , USA ) . Ti : S laser was parked at a single point for continuous illumination at or near the cell periphery at the center of the ﬁeld of observation . Time - correlated single - photon counting ( TCSPC ) statistics was maintained for acquisition of photons where binning time for photon collection was set to 0 . 5 s . TCSPC was accomplished using a Becker & Hickl 830 card ( Becker and Hickl , Berlin , Germany ) as described ( Becker , 2005 ) . Parallel ( I P ) and perpendicular ( I t ) emissionswerecollected si - multaneouslyintotwoHamamatsuR3809U multichannelplatephotomultiplier tubes ( PMTs ) using a polarizing beam splitter ( Melles Griot , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) at the non - descanned emission side . Total intensity ( I = I II + 2 I t ) and an - isotropy ( A = I P (cid:3) I t I P + 2 I t ) traces were calculated for each time point and plotted with respect to time . A N was determined independently in each experiment by treating cells with saponin to remove nanoclusters ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) and recording the resultant spread of anisotropy values obtained . These values have been indicated as a vertical line abutting the lut bar , or as a pink band in the anisotropy traces . Image Acquisition and Anisotropy Recovery after Photobleaching Cells were labeled with PLB TMR and were imaged using high NA objective ( 63 3 , 1 . 45NA ) mounted on a line - scanning LSM 5 Live Confocal system custom adapted for imaging emission anisotropy ( Figure S1A ) . Parallel and perpendicular polarization ﬂuorescence were collected simultaneously after resolvingviaapolarizing beamsplitter ( PBS ) ontolinearCCDdetectors incus - tom - designed LSM 5 live - confocal microscope . Pixel size was adjusted to 0 . 1 m m . For ARAP experiments , full - ﬁeld anisotropy images were taken before andafterrecoveryofﬂuorescenceinthebleachedarea ( 1 m m 2 ) . Bleachingwas carried out by scanning the indicated area using an external laser source ( 543nmHe - Ne ) untiltheﬂuorescencewasreducedto20 % oforiginalintensity . Fluorescence intensity images were recorded with 543 nm He - Ne laser in descannedmodebefore , rightafter , and1and4minpost - bleachingtocapture the recovery of intensity in the bleached area . 2 3 2 median ﬁltering was applied to all images to reduce the noise . Image processing , analysis , and quantiﬁcation were performed using Metamorph 7 . 0 software ( Molecular Devices Corporation , CA , USA ) . Comparison of Observed Statistical Distribution of Clusters with Poisson If N molecules are scattered randomly on a lattice of L sites , the probability of a site having n molecules is given by the Poisson distribution , P ð n Þ = e (cid:3)ð n Þ n ð n Þ n ! ; where h n i = N = L : We wish to compare the experimental distribution of anisot - ropy to one obtained when N m monomers and N c clusters ( of coordination number c ) are randomly scattered among the L pixels . We obtain an estimate Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 1095 of the mean intensity per pixel due to monomers and clusters , using the relations h I m i = ðh A i (cid:3) A c Þh I i ð A m (cid:3) A c Þ ( 1 ) h I c i = ðh A i (cid:3) A m Þh I i ð A c (cid:3) A m Þ ( 2 ) where h I i and h A i are the mean intensity and anisotropy , respectively . We generate strings { I m } , { I c } of intensity values due to monomers and clusters by drawing random numbers from a Poisson distribution with means given by h I m i and h I c i . These strings are then used to generate a string of anisotropy values using f A g = A m f I m g + A c f I c g f I m g + f I c g : ( 3 ) A large enough string provides a well - averaged anisotropy distribution , with which we compare the experimental data . In Figure 1A , we have taken the values of A m = 0 . 18 and A c = 0 . 04 ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . Dynamical Equations for Clusters and Monomers The dynamics of formation and breakup of the clusters is derived in terms of C nm ( t ) , the fraction of clusters having n proteins , m of which are unbleached , present within the confocal volume at time t ( Supplemental Data ) . For conve - nience , we will assume that the GPI - APs are distributed as monomers and di - mers alone ; our results will hold even if we relax this assumption to include higher - ordern - mers ( SupplementalData ) . Theclosedsetofordinarydifferential equations describing the dynamics of a mixture of dimers and monomers are dC 22 dt = (cid:3) 2 bC 22 (cid:3) k f C 22 + k a N 2 C 211 + ð C 22 ð 0 Þ (cid:3) C 22 Þ d c dC 21 dt = (cid:3) bC 21 (cid:3) k f C 21 + k a NC 10 C 11 + 2 bC 22 (cid:3) d c C 21 dC 20 dt = bC 21 (cid:3) k f C 20 + k a N 2 C 210 (cid:3) d c c 20 dC 11 dt = (cid:3) bC 11 (cid:3) k a NC 211 (cid:3) k a NC 11 C 10 + 2 k f C 22 + k f C 21 + ð C 11 ð 0 Þ (cid:3) C 11 Þ d 1 dC 10 dt = bC 11 (cid:3) k a NC 210 (cid:3) k a NC 11 C 10 + 2 k f C 20 + k f C 21 (cid:3) d 1 C 10 ( 4 ) The bleaching rate b , the diffusion rates of monomers and clusters d 1 f D 1 and d c f D c ( Supplemental Data ) , and the rates of aggregation ( k a ) and frag - mentation ( k f ) are parameters in the model . Implicit in the above equations are the boundary conditions ( Supplemental Data ) . Initial conditions are pro - vided by the values of intensity I ( 0 ) f N ( initial number of ﬂuorophores in the confocalvolume ) andanisotropyA ( 0 ) . Sinceat t = 0 , thedimersandmonomers are unbleached , we have , C 22 ð 0 Þ = ð A ð 0 Þ(cid:3) A m Þ 2 ð A c (cid:3) A m Þ ; C 11 ð 0 Þ = A ð 0 Þ(cid:3) A c A m (cid:3) A c , C 21 ( 0 ) = C 20 ( 0 ) = C 10 ( 0 ) = 0 , where A c and A m ( = A N ) are the anisotropies of the cluster and monomer , respectively . Theseequationsallow us tocompute thetime proﬁles of the intensity and anisotropy using the relations I = 2 C 22 + C 21 + C 11 and A = 2 A c C 22 + A m C 21 + A m C 11 2 C 22 + C 21 + C 11 . SUPPLEMENTAL DATA Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures , two tables , ﬁve Supplemental Explanations , 14 ﬁgures , and six movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / supplemental / S0092 - 8674 ( 08 ) 01507 - 9 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank M . Thattai , G . V . Shivashankar , and S . Ramaswamy for a critical reading , N . Periasami ( DCS , TIFR , Mumbai ) for the help with time - resolved anistropy analysis , and H . Krishnamurthy and the Central Imaging and Flow Facility at NCBS for their help and support . S . M . acknowledges DST for J C Bose fellowship . S . M . and M . R . acknowledge grants from HFSP ( RGP 0050 / 2005 ) / DST ( SR / S5 / NM - 36 / 2005 ) / DBT / Wellcome Trust ( NLO - 056727 / Z / 99 / B ) and HFSP ( RGP 26 / 2007 ) / IFCPAR , respectively . Received : May 24 , 2008 Revised : September 16 , 2008 Accepted : November 24 , 2008 Published : December 11 , 2008 REFERENCES Becker , W . ( 2005 ) . Advanced Time - Correlated Single Photon Counting Techniques ( Berlin : Springer - Verlag ) . Bretscher , A . , Reczek , D . , and Berryman , M . ( 1997 ) . Ezrin : a protein requiring conformational activation to link microﬁlaments to the plasma membrane in the assembly of cell surface structures . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 3011 – 3018 . Chadda , R . , Howes , M . T . , Plowman , S . J . , Hancock , J . F . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2007 ) . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Trafﬁc 8 , 702 – 717 . Chaikin , P . C . , and Lubensky , T . C . ( 1995 ) . Principles of Condensed Matter Physics ( Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press ) . Charras , G . T . , Yarrow , J . C . , Horton , M . A . , Mahadevan , L . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2005 ) . Non - equilibration ofhydrostaticpressureinblebbing cells . Nature 435 , 365 – 369 . Charras , G . T . , Hu , C . K . , Coughlin , M . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2006 ) . Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 477 – 490 . Charras , G . T . , Coughlin , M . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Mahadevan , L . ( 2007 ) . Life and times of a cellular bleb . Biophys . J . 94 , 1836 – 1853 . Chatterjee , S . , Smith , E . R . , Hanada , K . , Stevens , V . L . , and Mayor , S . ( 2001 ) . GPI anchoring leads to sphingolipid - dependent retention of endocytosed proteins in the recycling endosomal compartment . EMBO J . 20 , 1583 – 1592 . Chen , Y . , Thelin , W . R . , Yang , B . , Milgram , S . L . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2006 ) . Transient anchorage of cross - linked glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins depends on cholesterol , Src family kinases , caveolin , and phosphoi - nositides . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 169 – 178 . Chhabra , E . S . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2007 ) . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1110 – 1121 . Edidin , M . ( 2003 ) . The state of lipids rafts : From model membranes to cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 , 257 – 283 . Fujita , A . , Cheng , J . , Hirakawa , M . , Furukawa , K . , Kusunoki , S . , and Fujimoto , T . ( 2007 ) . GangliosidesGM1andGM3inthelivingcellmembraneformclusters susceptibletocholesteroldepletionandchilling . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 2112 – 2122 . Gaus , K . , Zech , T . , andHarder , T . ( 2006 ) . Visualizingmembranemicrodomains by Laurdan 2 - photon microscopy . Mol . Membr . Biol . 23 , 41 – 48 . Hancock , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Lipid rafts : contentious only from simplistic standpoints . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 456 – 462 . Hatwalne , Y . , Ramaswamy , S . , Rao , M . , and Simha , R . A . ( 2004 ) . Rheology of active - particle suspensions . Phys . Rev . Lett . 92 , 118101 . Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Activation by Cdc42 and PIP ( 2 ) of Wis - kott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) stimulates actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1311 – 1320 . Israelachvili , J . N . ( 1992 ) . Intermololecular Surface Forces ( London : Academic Press ) . Jacobson , K . , Mouritsen , O . G . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 2007 ) . Lipid rafts : at a crossroad between cell biology and physics . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 7 – 14 . Keller , H . , Rentsch , P . , and Hagmann , J . ( 2002 ) . Differences in cortical actin structure and dynamics document that different types of blebs are formed by distinct mechanisms . Exp . Cell Res . 277 , 161 – 172 . Kruse , K . , Joanny , J . F . , Ju¨licher , F . , Prost , J . , and Sekimoto , K . ( 2004 ) . Asters , vortices and rotating spirals in active gels of polar ﬁlaments . Phys . Rev . Lett . 92 , 078101 . 1096 Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Kwik , J . , Boyle , S . , Fooksman , D . , Margolis , L . , Sheetz , M . P . , and Edidin , M . ( 2003 ) . Membrane cholesterol , lateral mobility , and the phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate - dependent organization of cell actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13964 – 13969 . Mayor , S . , and Rao , M . ( 2004 ) . Rafts : scale - dependent , active lipid organiza - tion at the cell surface . Trafﬁc 5 , 231 – 240 . Neves , S . R . , Tsokas , P . , Sarkar , A . , Grace , E . A . , Rangamani , P . , Taubenfeld , S . M . , Alberini , C . M . , Schaff , J . C . , Blitzer , R . D . , Moraru , I . I . , and Iyengar , R . ( 2008 ) . Cell shape and negative links in regulatory motifs together control spatial information ﬂow in signaling networks . Cell 133 , 666 – 680 . Niggli , V . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of protein activities by phosphoinositide phos - phates . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 57 – 79 . Peters , R . , Brunger , A . , and Schulten , K . ( 1981 ) . Continuous ﬂuorescence mi - crophotolysis : A sensitive method for study of diffusion processes in single cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 78 , 962 – 966 . Plowman , S . J . , Muncke , C . , Parton , R . G . , and Hancock , J . F . ( 2005 ) . H - ras , K - ras , and inner plasma membrane raft proteins operate in nanoclusters with differential dependence on the actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 15500 – 15505 . Ramaswamy , S . , and Rao , M . ( 2001 ) . The physics of active membranes . C R Acad . Sci . IV 2 , 817 – 839 . Ramaswamy , S . , andRao , M . ( 2007 ) . Active - ﬁlament hydrodynamics : instabil - ities , boundary conditions and rheology . N . J . Phys . 9 , 423 . Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2005 ) . Use of Forster’s resonance energy transfer microscopy to study lipid rafts . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1746 , 221 – 233 . Sharma , P . , Varma , R . , Sarasij , R . C . , Ira , Gousset , K . , Krishnamoorthy , G . , Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2004 ) . Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell 116 , 577 – 589 . Sheetz , M . P . , Chasan , R . , and Spudich , J . A . ( 1984 ) . ATP - dependent movement of myosin in vitro : characterization of a quantitative assay . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 1867 – 1871 . Simons , K . , and Ikonen , E . ( 1997 ) . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 . Simons , K . , and Vaz , W . L . ( 2004 ) . Model systems , lipid rafts , and cell membranes . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 33 , 269 – 295 . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissectingtemporalandspatialcontrolofcytokine - sis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 – 1747 . Suzuki , K . G . , Fujiwara , T . K . , Sanematsu , F . , Iino , R . , Edidin , M . , andKusumi , A . ( 2007 ) . GPI - anchored receptor clusters transiently recruit Lyn and G alpha for temporary cluster immobilization and Lyn activation : single - molecule tracking study 1 . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 717 – 730 . Varma , R . , and Mayor , S . ( 1998 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell surface . Nature 394 , 798 – 801 . Cell 135 , 1085 – 1097 , December 12 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 1097