www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 343 28 MARCH 2014 1443 PERSPECTIVES The Resolution Revolution BIOCHEMISTRY Werner Kühlbrandt Advances in detector technology and image processing are yielding high - resolution electron cryo - microscopy structures of biomolecules . P recise knowledge of the structure of macromolecules in the cell is essen - tial for understanding how they func - tion . Structures of large macromolecules can now be obtained at near - atomic resolution by averaging thousands of electron microscope images recorded before radiation damage accumulates . This is what Amunts et al . have done in their research article on page 1485 of this issue ( 1 ) , reporting the structure of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome at 3 . 2 Å resolution by electron cryo - micros - copy ( cryo - EM ) . Together with other recent high - resolution cryo - EM structures ( 2 – 4 ) ( see the ﬁ gure ) , this achievement heralds the beginning of a new era in molecular biology , where structures at near - atomic resolution are no longer the prerogative of x - ray crys - tallography or nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy . Ribosomes are ancient , massive protein - RNA complexes that translate the linear genetic code into three - dimensional proteins . Mitochondria—semi - autonomous organelles that supply the cell with energy—have their own ribosomes , which closely resemble those of their bacterial ancestors . Many antibiotics , such as erythromycin , inhibit growth of bac - teria by blocking the translation machinery of bacterial ribosomes . When designing new antibiotics , it is essential that they do not also block the mitochondrial ribosomes . For this it is of great value to know the detailed struc - tures of both . The structures of other ribo - somes have been determined by x - ray crys - tallography ( 5 , 6 ) . In determining the high - resolution structure of the mitochondrial ribosome by cryo - EM , Amunts et al . achieve something that , less than a year ago , few would have thought possible . To be able to do this without crystals is nothing short of a revolution , made possi - ble by a new generation of electron detectors of unprecedented speed and sensitivity . The new sensors detect electrons directly , rather than ﬁ rst converting them into photons that are then reconverted into photoelectrons . The latter is what the widely used CCD ( charge - coupled device ) cameras do , but they do not perform well at high resolution . Photographic ﬁ lm works in principle much better for high - resolution imaging , but is incompatible with rapid electronic readout and high data throughput , which are increas - ingly essential . Some 10 years ago , Henderson and Faruqi realized that it should be possible to design a sensor that detects electrons directly and that combines the advantages of CCD cameras and ﬁ lm ( 7 ) . They and two competing teams ( 8 ) have since developed detectors that use essen - tially the same active pixel sensor technology as the camera chips in most cell phones . How - ever , cell phone chips cannot be used in the electron microscope because the intense elec - tron beam would destroy them instantly . The sensors therefore had to be made radiation - hard . Second , the pixels needed to be much larger to prevent the energy - rich electrons from exciting more than one pixel at a time . Third , the camera chip , complete with read - out electronics in each of its 1 . 6 million pixels , had to be very thin , otherwise electron scat - tering would blur the image and compromise resolution . Current sensors are about half as thick as a sheet of paper . Cryo - EM requires only small amounts of material . Samples that cannot be isolated in large enough quantities for x - ray crystallo - graphy can now yield high - resolution struc - tures . The same holds for heterogeneous sam - ples or ﬂ exible complexes that do not crys - tallize readily , because cryo - EM images of different particles or conformations are easily separated at the image processing stage . The new detectors offer another decisive advantage : Their fast readout makes it pos - sible to compensate small movements that inevitably happen when the electron beam strikes the thin , unsupported cryo - sample . Before the new cameras were developed , blurring by beam - induced movement was an insidious , seemingly insurmountable prob - lem . Now , dozens of images of one area are taken in rapid succession , and beam - induced movements are detected and reversed in the computer . The impact of this deblurring is similarly dramatic as that of the Hubble tele - scope in astronomy , although the blurring is caused by different effects in the two cases . The new cameras also promise a major breakthrough in electron cryo - tomography , which images three - dimensional volumes of whole cells , cell slices , or cellular compart - ments , such as mitochondria ( 9 ) . Averaging of recognizable molecular features in tomo - graphic volumes is already revealing sub - nanometer detail even with standard CCD cameras ( 10 ) . The new detectors are bound to make an enormous difference in this area . Department of Structural Biology , Max Planck Institute of Biophysics , 60538 Frankfurt , Germany . E - mail : werner . kuehlbrandt @ biophys . mpg . de A B C Near - atomic resolution with cryo - EM . ( A ) The large subunit of the yeast mitochondrial ribosome at 3 . 2 Å reported by Amunts et al . In the detailed view below , the base pairs of an RNA double helix and a magnesium ion ( blue ) are clearly resolved . ( B ) TRPV1 ion channel at 3 . 4 Å ( 2 ) , with a detailed view of residues lining the ion pore on the four - fold axis of the tetrameric channel . ( C ) F 420 - reducing [ NiFe ] hydrogenase at 3 . 36 Å ( 3 ) . The detail shows an α helix in the FrhA subunit with resolved side chains . The maps are not drawn to scale . C RE D I T : P A N E L B A D A P T E D W I T H P ER M I SS I O N F R O M ( 2 ) ; P A N E L C A D A P T E D F R O M ( 3 ) Published by AAAS 28 MARCH 2014 VOL 343 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1444 PERSPECTIVES Concurrently with the new cameras , pow - erful maximum likelihood image process - ing routines became available . These rou - tines define reliable and objective criteria for averaging tens or hundreds of thousands of single - particle images , as is necessary to achieve high resolution ( 11 ) . This combina - tion of advanced detectors and software now produces cryo - EM structures that look , in terms of clarity and map deﬁ nition , consider - ably better than x - ray structures at the same nominal resolution , owing to the high quality of the phase information contained in cryo - EM images . Does the resolution revolution in cryo - EM mean that the era of x - ray protein crystallog - raphy ( 12 ) is coming to an end ? Deﬁ nitely not . For the foreseeable future , small proteins—in cryo - EM , anything below 100 kD counts as small—and resolutions of 2 Å or better will remain the domain of x - rays . But for large , fragile , or ﬂ exible structures ( such as mem - brane protein complexes ) that are difﬁ cult to prepare yet hold the key to central biomedi - cal questions , the new technology is a major breakthrough . In the future , it may no longer be necessary to crystallize large , well - deﬁ ned complexes such as ribosomes . Instead , their structures can be determined elegantly and quickly by cryo - EM . These are exciting times . References and Notes 1 . A . Amunts et al . , Science 343 , 1485 ( 2014 ) . 2 . M . Liao , E . Cao , D . Julius , Y . Cheng , Nature 504 , 107 ( 2013 ) . 3 . M . Allegretti et al . , eLife 3 , e01963 ( 2014 ) . 4 . X . Li et al . , Nat . Methods 10 , 584 ( 2013 ) . 5 . N . Ban et al . , Science 289 , 905 ( 2000 ) . 6 . B . T . Wimberly et al . , Nature 407 , 327 ( 2000 ) . 7 . A . R . Faruqi , R . Henderson , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 17 , 549 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Henderson ( MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cam - bridge , UK ) formed a consortium with engineers at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory and scientists at the Max Planck Society to fund and develop a ﬁ rst prototype . The consortium then joined forces with the electron microscope manufacturer FEI to roll out and market the new design . At about the same time , Gatan Inc . of Pleasanton , California came out with a similar detector designed by Peter Denes ( Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ) and David Agard ( University of California , San Francisco ) . A third type of camera was developed by Nguyen - Huu Xuong at the Direct Electron company ( San Diego , California ) . 9 . B . Daum , A . Walter , A . Horst , H . D . Osiewacz , W . Kühl - brandt , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 15301 ( 2013 ) . 10 . F . K . Schur et al . , J . Struct . Biol . 184 , 394 ( 2013 ) . 11 . S . H . Scheres , J . Struct . Biol . 180 , 519 ( 2012 ) . 12 . Special section on Crystallography at 100 , Science ( 7 March 2014 ) . 10 . 1126 / science . 1251652 M etallic nanoparticles exhibit plasmon reso - nances , which are col - lective , coherent oscillations of their conduction electrons that can couple very efficiently to light . Originally a subﬁ eld of condensed - matter physics , the past decade has seen tremendous growth of plas - monics as an interdisciplinary ﬁ eld spanning chemistry , materi - als science , and biology . On page 1496 of this issue , Tan et al . ( 1 ) discuss an experiment that will almost certainly further fuel this growth—the coupling of plasmon excitations to molecular conduc - tion . The merging of plasmonics with molecular electronics prom - ises both novel fundamental dis - coveries and new applications . The energy of the plasmon resonances depends strongly on nanostructure shape and composition . Given the emergence of highly precise nanofabrication methods , it is possi - ble to design nanostructures that have plas - mon resonances ranging from the ultraviolet into the infrared . Among the many important applications of the light - harvesting proper - ties of plasmonic nanoparticles , perhaps the most mature is the use of the large plasmon - induced enhancements in local electromag - netic ﬁ elds near the surfaces of the nanoparti - cles for surface - enhanced spectroscopies ( 2 ) . Ampliﬁ ed local ﬁ elds can enhance the prob - abilities for molecular transitions by many orders of magnitude . In nonlinear spectros - copies such as Raman scattering , the signal scales as the fourth power of the local electric ﬁ eld across the molecule . Nanostructures with sharp protrusions naturally induce large local ﬁ eld enhance - ments , but the optimal structures for local ﬁ eld enhancements consist of a pair of metal - lic nanoparticles separated by a nanometer - scale gap ( a “plasmonic dimer” ) . Several studies have demonstrated that the local ﬁ eld enhancements in the “hot spots” in the gaps of dimers can be sufﬁ ciently strong that the Raman scattering from an individual mol - ecule can be detected ( 3 ) . Classical electro - Molecular Tuning of Quantum Plasmon Resonances APPLIED PHYSICS Peter Nordlander The tuning of nanostructure plasmon resonances with bridging molecules offers opportunities for both plasmonics and molecular electronics . D e – e – d g D d g E gap = E ext L F ( t ) ε R F ( t ’ ) ε R F ( t ) ε L F ( t ’ ) ε A C B Plasmon - induced electron tunneling . ( A ) The electric potential associated with the incident radiation ﬁ eld ( black dashed line ) is screened by the nanoparticles and creates an enhanced local ﬁ eld in the gap ( solid red line ) determined by the struc - tural parameters ( blue ) D and d g . ( B ) The ﬁ eld in the junction shifts the relative positions of the Fermi levels ε F of the left and right particles as a function of time t and enables electrons to transfer between nanoparticles in each cycle of the incident radiation . ( C ) A schematic of the molecular junction used in the present experiment shows the planar junction geometry and interrogation by a light beam ( green ) that allows a large number of molecules to serve as conduction channels for electrons . Department of Physics and Astronomy , Rice University , Houston , TX 77005 , USA . E - mail : nordland @ rice . edu Published by AAAS