The Online Disinhibition Effect JOHN SULER , Ph . D . ABSTRACT While online , some people self - disclose or act out more frequently or intensely than they would in person . This article explores six factors that interact with each other in creating this online disinhibition effect : dissociative anonymity , invisibility , asynchronicity , solipsistic in - trojection , dissociative imagination , and minimization of authority . Personality variables also will influence the extent of this disinhibition . Rather than thinking of disinhibition as the revealing of an underlying “true self , ” we can conceptualize it as a shift to a constellation within self - structure , involving clusters of affect and cognition that differ from the in - person constellation . 321 C YBER P SYCHOLOGY & B EHAVIOR Volume 7 , Number 3 , 2004 © Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . INTRODUCTION E VERYDAY USERS on the Internet—as well as clini - cians and researchers 1 – 7 —have noted how peo - ple say and do things in cyberspace that they wouldn’t ordinarily say and do in the face - to - face world . They loosen up , feel less restrained , and ex - press themselves more openly . So pervasive is the phenomenon that a term has surfaced for it : the on - line disinhibition effect . This disinhibition can work in two seemingly op - posing directions . Sometimes people share very personal things about themselves . They reveal se - cret emotions , fears , wishes . They show unusual acts of kindness and generosity , sometimes going out of their way to help others . We may call this be - nign disinhibition . However , the disinhibition is not always so salu - tary . We witness rude language , harsh criticisms , anger , hatred , even threats . Or people visit the dark underworld of the Internet—places of pornogra - phy , crime , and violence—territory they would never explore in the real world . We may call this toxic disinhibition . Some types of benign disinhibition indicate an attempt to better understand and develop oneself , to resolve interpersonal and intrapsychic problems or explore new emotional and experiential dimen - sions to one’s identity . 8 We could even consider it a process of “working through” as conceptualized in psychodynamic theory , or “self - actualization” as proposed in humanistic perspectives . By contrast , toxic disinhibition may simply be a blind catharsis , a fruitless repetition compulsion , and an acting out of unsavory needs without any personal growth at all . 9 , 10 As in all conceptual dichotomies , the distinction between benign and toxic disinhibition will be complex or ambiguous in some cases . For exam - ple , hostile words in a chat encounter could be a therapeutic breakthrough for some people . In an increasingly intimate e - mail relationship , people may quickly reveal personal information , then later regret their self - disclosures—feeling exposed , Department of Psychology , Rider University , Lawrenceville , New Jersey . 13658C03 . PGS 6 / 15 / 04 2 : 36 PM Page 321 vulnerable , or shameful . An excessively rapid , even false intimacy may develop , which later de - stroys the relationship when one or both people feel overwhelmed , anxious , or disappointed . Also , in the very wide variety of online subcultures , what is considered asocial behavior in one group may be very à propos in another . Cultural relativ - ity as well as the complexities of psychological dy - namics will blur any simple contrasts between disinhibition that is positive or negative . Whether benign , toxic , or a mixture of both , what causes this online disinhibition ? What elements of cyberspace lead to this weakening of the psycho - logical barriers that block hidden feelings and needs ? At least six factors are involved . For some peo - ple , one or two of them produces the lion’s share of the disinhibition effect . In most cases , however , these factors intersect and interact with each other , supplement each other , resulting in a more com - plex , amplified effect . DISSOCIATIVE ANONYMITY As people move around the Internet , others they encounter can’t easily determine who they are . Usernames and e - mail addresses may be visible , but this information may not reveal much about a person , especially if the username is contrived and the e - mail address derives from a large Internet ser - vice provider . Technologically savvy , motivated users may be able to detect a computer’s IP ad - dress , but for the most part others only know what a person tells them . If so desired , people can hide some or all of their identity . They also can alter their identities . As the word “anonymous” indi - cates , people can have no name or at least not their real name . This anonymity is one of the principle factors that creates the disinhibition effect . When people have the opportunity to separate their actions on - line from their in - person lifestyle and identity , they feel less vulnerable about self - disclosing and acting out . Whatever they say or do can’t be directly linked to the rest of their lives . In a process of disso - ciation , they don’t have to own their behavior by acknowledging it within the full context of an inte - grated online / offline identity . The online self be - comes a compartmentalized self . In the case of expressed hostilities or other deviant actions , the person can avert responsibility for those behaviors , almost as if superego restrictions and moral cogni - tive processes have been temporarily suspended from the online psyche . In fact , people might even convince themselves that those online behaviors “aren’t me at all . ” INVISIBILITY In many online environments , especially those that are text - driven , people cannot see each other . When people visit web sites , message boards , and even some chat rooms , other people may not even know they are present at all—with the possible ex - ception of web masters and other users who have access to software tools that can detect traffic through the environment , assuming they have the inclination to keep an eye on an individual person , who is one of maybe hundreds or thousands of users . This invisibility gives people the courage to go places and do things that they otherwise wouldn’t . Although this power to be concealed overlaps with anonymity—because anonymity is the conceal - ment of identity—there are some important differ - ences . In the text communication of e - mail , chat , instant messaging , and blogs , people may know a great deal about each other’s identities and lives . However , they still cannot see or hear each other . Even with everyone’s identity known , the oppor - tunity to be physically invisible amplifies the disin - hibition effect . People don’t have to worry about how they look or sound when they type a message . They don’t have to worry about how others look or sound in response to what they say . Seeing a frown , a shaking head , a sigh , a bored expression , and many other subtle and not so subtle signs of disap - proval or indifference can inhibit what people are willing to express . According to traditional psycho - analytic theory , the analyst sits behind the patient in order to remain a physically ambiguous figure , revealing no body language or facial expression , so that the patient has free range to discuss whatever he or she wants without feeling inhibited by how the analyst is physically reacting . In everyday rela - tionships , people sometimes avert their eyes when discussing something personal and emotional . Avoiding eye contact and face - to - face visibility dis - inhibits people . Text communication offers a built - in opportunity to keep one’s eyes averted . ASYNCHRONICITY In e - mail and message boards , communication is asynchronous . People don’t interact with each other in real time . Others may take minutes , hours , days , or even months to reply . Not having to cope 322 SULER 13658C03 . PGS 6 / 15 / 04 2 : 36 PM Page 322 with someone’s immediate reaction disinhibits people . In real life , the analogy might be speaking to someone , magically suspending time before that person can reply , and then returning to the conver - sation when one is willing and able to hear the response . In a continuous feedback loop that reinforces some behaviors and extinguishes others , moment - by - moment responses from others powerfully shapes the ongoing flow of self - disclosure and be - havioral expression , usually in the direction of con - forming to social norms . In e - mail and message boards , where there are delays in that feedback , people’s train of thought may progress more steadily and quickly towards deeper expressions of benign and toxic disinhibition that avert social norms . Some people may even experience asyn - chronous communication as “running away” after posting a message that is personal , emotional , or hostile . It feels safe putting it “out there” where it can be left behind . In some cases , as Kali Munro , an online psychotherapist , aptly describes it , the per - son may be participating in an “emotional hit and run” ( K . Munro , unpublished observations , 2003 ) . SOLIPSISTIC INTROJECTION Absent face - to - face cues combined with text communication can alter self - boundaries . People may feel that their mind has merged with the mind of the online companion . Reading another person’s message might be experienced as a voice within one’s head , as if that person’s psychological pres - ence and influence have been assimilated or intro - jected into one’s psyche . Of course , one may not know what the other per - son’s voice actually sounds like , so in one’s mind a voice is assigned to that person . In fact , consciously or unconsciously , a person may even assign a visual image to what he or she thinks the person looks and behaves like . The online companion then becomes a character within one’s intrapsychic world , a charac - ter shaped partly by how the person actually pre - sents him or herself via text communication , but also by one’s internal representational system based on personal expectations , wishes , and needs . Trans - ference reactions encourage the shaping of this per - ceived introjected character when similarities exist between the online companion and significant oth - ers in one’s life , and when one fills in ambiguities in the personality of the online companion with im - ages of past relationships , or from novels and film . As the introjected character becomes more elaborate and subjectively “real , ” a person may start to expe - rience the typed - text conversation as taking place inside one’s mind , within the imagination , within one’s intrapsychic world—not unlike authors typ - ing out a play or novel . Even when online relationships are not involved , many people carry on these kinds of conversations in their imagination throughout the day . People fan - tasize about flirting , arguing with a boss , or hon - estly confronting a friend about what they feel . In their imagination , where it’s safe , people feel free to say and do things they would not in reality . At that moment , reality is one’s imagination . Online text communication can evolve into an introjected psy - chological tapestry in which a person’s mind weaves these fantasy role plays , usually uncon - sciously and with considerable disinhibition . Cy - berspace may become a stage , and we are merely players . When reading another’s message , one might also “hear” the online companion’s voice using one’s own voice . People may subvocalize as they read , thereby projecting the sound of their voice into the other person’s text . This conversation may be expe - rienced unconsciously as talking to / with oneself , which encourages disinhibition because talking with oneself feels safer than talking with others . For some people , talking with oneself may feel like confronting oneself , which may unleash many powerful psychological issues . DISSOCIATIVE IMAGINATION If we combine the opportunity to easily escape or dissociate from what happens online with the psy - chological process of creating imaginary charac - ters , we get a somewhat different force that magnifies disinhibition . Consciously or uncon - sciously , people may feel that the imaginary char - acters they “created” exist in a different space , that one’s online persona along with the online others live in an make - believe dimension , separate and apart from the demands and responsibilities of the real world . They split or dissociate online fiction from offline fact . Emily Finch , an author and crimi - nal lawyer who studies identity theft in cyberspace , has suggested that some people see their online life as a kind of game with rules and norms that don’t apply to everyday living ( E . Finch , unpublished observations , 2002 ) . Once they turn off the com - puter and return to their daily routine , they believe they can leave behind that game and their game - identity . They relinquish their responsible for what happens in a make - believe play world that has nothing to do with reality . ONLINE DISINHIBITION EFFECT 323 13658C03 . PGS 6 / 15 / 04 2 : 36 PM Page 323 The effect of this dissociative imagination sur - faces clearly in fantasy game environments in which a user consciously creates an imaginary character , but it also can influence many dimen - sions of online living . For people with a predis - posed difficulty in distinguishing personal fantasy from social reality , the distinction between online fantasy environments and online social environ - ments may be blurred . In our modern media - dri - ven lifestyles , the power of computer and video game imagination can infiltrate reality testing . Although anonymity amplifies the effect of dis - sociative imagination , dissociative imagination and dissociative anonymity usually differ in the com - plexity of the dissociated sector of the self . Under the influence of anonymity , the person may at - tempt an invisible non - identity , resulting in a re - ducing , simplifying , or compartmentalizing of self - expression . In dissociative imagination , the ex - pressed but split - off self may evolve greatly in complexity . MINIMIZATION OF STATUS AND AUTHORITY While online a person’s status in the face - to - face world may not be known to others and may not have as much impact . Authority figures express their status and power in their dress , body lan - guage , and in the trappings of their environmental settings . The absence of those cues in the text envi - ronments of cyberspace reduces the impact of their authority . Even if people do know something about an au - thority figure’s offline status and power , that ele - vated position may have less of an effect on the person’s online presence and influence . In many environments on the Internet , everyone has an equal opportunity to voice him or herself . Every - one—regardless of status , wealth , race , or gender— starts off on a level playing field . Although one’s identity in the outside world ultimately may shape power in cyberspace , what mostly determines the influence on others is one’s skill in communicating ( including writing skills ) , persistence , the quality of one’s ideas , and technical know - how . People are reluctant to say what they really think as they stand before an authority figure . A fear of disapproval and punishment from on high damp - ens the spirit . But online , in what feels more like a peer relationship—with the appearances of author - ity minimized—people are much more willing to speak out and misbehave . The traditional Internet philosophy holds that everyone is an equal , that the purpose of the net is to share ideas and resources among peers . The net itself is designed with no centralized control , and as it grows , with seemingly no end to its potential for creating new environments , many of its inhabi - tants see themselves as innovative , independent - minded explorers and pioneers . This atmosphere and this philosophy contribute to the minimizing of authority . INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES AND PREDISPOSITIONS The online disinhibition effect is not the only fac - tor that determines how much people self - disclose or act out in cyberspace . Individual differences play an important role . For example , the intensity of a person’s underlying feelings , needs , and drive level affect susceptibility to disinhibition . Personality styles also vary greatly in the strength of defense mechanisms and tendencies towards inhibition or expression . People with histrionic styles tend to be very open and emotional , whereas compulsive peo - ple are more restrained . The online disinhibition ef - fect will interact with these personality variables , in some cases resulting in a small deviation from the person’s baseline ( offline ) behavior , while in other cases causing dramatic changes . Future research can focus on which people , under what circum - stances , are more predisposed to the various ele - ments of online disinhibition . SHIFTS AMONG INTRAPSYCHIC CONSTELLATIONS We may be tempted to conclude that the disinhi - bition effect releases deeper aspects of intrapsychic structure , that it unlocks the true needs , emotions , and self attributes that dwell beneath surface per - sonality presentations . A man with repressed anger unleashes his hostility online , thereby showing oth - ers how he really feels . A shy woman openly ex - presses her hidden affection for her cyberspace companion . The fact that some people report being more like their “true self” while online reinforces this conceptual temptation . Inspired by Freud’s archeological model of the mind , these ideas rest on the assumption that personality structure is con - structed in layers , that a core , true self exists be - neath various layers of defenses and the more superficial roles of everyday social interactions . 324 SULER 13658C03 . PGS 6 / 15 / 04 2 : 36 PM Page 324 However , personal and cultural values deter - mine what are considered the “true” aspects of one’s personality . People more readily accept as true those traits that are regarded as positive and productive . However , self - centered sexual and ag - gressive tendencies , as Freud noted , also are basic components of personality dynamics , as are the array of psychological defenses designed to control them . Similarly , the seeming superficial social roles of everyday living are necessary for functioning , thereby serving a fundamental purpose in the psy - chology of the individual . They are stable , valuable aspects of identity . The concept of disinhibition can lead us astray , into thinking that what is disinhibited is a more “true” aspect of identity than the processes of in - hibiting and disinhibiting . But who or what is it that does the inhibiting and disinhibiting ? It is a part or process within personality dynamics no less real or important than other parts or processes . This is why many psychoanalytic clinicians believe that working with defenses and resistance—the in - hibitors of the personality structure—is so crucial to the success of the therapy . Even when therapy reduces the intensity of these defenses , remnants of them remain within the personality structure , serv - ing an important regulatory function and some - times evolving into productive aspects of one’s personality independent of the affect or conflict originally defended against . The self does not exist separate from the environ - ment in which that self is expressed . If someone contains his aggression in face - to - face living , but expresses that aggression online , both behaviors reflect aspects of self : the self that acts non - aggressively under certain conditions , the self that acts aggressively under other conditions . When a person is shy in person while outgoing online , nei - ther self - presentation is more true . They are two di - mensions of that person , each revealed within a different situational context . Sometimes , as Jung noted , these different sides of the person operate in a dynamic polarity relative to each other . They are two sides of the same personality dimension . Instead of regarding the internal psychological world as constructed in layers and juxtaposed with an external environment , we can conceptualize it , following traditional associationist theory , as an in - trapsychic field containing clusters or constella - tions of emotion , memory , and thinking that are interconnected with certain environments . Some constellations overlap , others are more dissociated from each other , with environmental variables in - fluencing those levels of integration and dissocia - tion . Personality dynamics involve the complex in - teractions among these facets of self and environ - mental contexts . The disinhibition effect can then be understood as the person shifting , while online , to an intrapsy - chic constellation that may be , in varying degrees , dissociated from the in - person constellation , with inhibiting guilt , anxiety , and related affects as fea - tures of the in - person self but not as part of that online self . This constellations model—which is consistent with current clinical theories regarding dissociation and information processing—helps ex - plain the disinhibition effect as well as other online phenomena , like identity experimentation , role playing , multitasking , and other more subtle shifts in personality expression as someone moves from one online environment to another . In fact , a single disinhibited “online self” probably does not exist at all , but rather a collection of slightly different con - stellations of affect , memory , and thought that sur - face in and interact with different types of online environments . Different modalities of online communication ( e . g . , e - mail , chat , video ) and different environ - ments ( e . g . , social , vocational , fantasy ) may facili - tate diverse expressions of self . Each setting allows us to see a different perspective on identity . Neither one is necessarily more true than another . Based on a multidimensional analysis of the various psycho - logical features of online settings , a comprehensive theory on the psychotherapeutics of cyberspace can explore how computer - mediated environments can be designed to express , develop , and if necessary , restrain different constellations of self - structure . 11 , 12 REFERENCES 1 . Joinson , A . ( 1998 ) . Causes and implications of disin - hibited behavior on the Internet . In : Gackenbach , J . ( ed . ) , Psychology and the Internet : intrapersonal , inter - personal , and transpersonal implications . San Diego : Ac - ademic Press , pp . 43 – 60 . 2 . Joinson , A . N . ( 2001 ) . Self - disclosure in computer - mediated communication : the role of self - awareness and visual anonymity . European Journal of Social Psy - chology 31 : 177 – 192 . 3 . Leung , L . ( 2002 ) . Loneliness , self - disclosure , and ICQ ( “I seek you” ) use . CyberPsychology & Behavior 5 : 241 – 251 . 4 . Postmes , T . , Spears , R . , Sakhel , K . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Social influence in computer - mediated communication : The effects of anonymity on group behavior . Person - ality & Social Psychology Bulletin 27 : 1243 – 1254 . ONLINE DISINHIBITION EFFECT 325 13658C03 . PGS 6 / 15 / 04 2 : 36 PM Page 325 5 . Suler , J . R . ( 2003 ) . The psychology of cyberspace [ On - line ] . Available : www . rider . edu / suler / psycyber / psy - cyber . html . 6 . Fisher , W . A . , & Barak , A . ( 2001 ) . Internet pornogra - phy : a social psychological perspective on Internet sexuality . Journal of Sex Research 38 : 312 – 323 . 7 . King , S . A . , & Barak , A . ( 1999 ) . Compulsive Internet gambling : a new form of an old clinical pathology . CyberPsychology & Behavior 2 : 441 – 456 . 8 . Suler , J . R . ( 2002 ) . Identity management in cyber - space . Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies 4 : 455 – 460 . 9 . Suler , J . R . ( 1999 ) . To get what you need : healthy and pathological internet use . CyberPsychology & Behavior 2 : 385 – 394 . 10 . Suler , J . R . , and Phillips , W . ( 1998 ) . The bad boys of cyberspace : deviant behavior in multimedia chat communities . CyberPsychology & Behavior 1 : 275 – 294 . 11 . Suler , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Psychotherapy in cyberspace : a 5 - dimension model of online and computer - mediated psychotherapy . CyberPsychology & Behavior 3 : 151 – 160 . 12 . Suler , J . R . ( 2001 ) . The future of online clinical work . Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies 4 : 265 – 270 . Address reprint requests to : John Suler , Ph . D . Department of Psychology Rider University Lawrenceville , NJ 08648 E - mail : suler @ mindspring . com 326 SULER 13658C03 . PGS 6 / 15 / 04 2 : 36 PM Page 326