Membrane budding driven by intra - cellular ESCRT - III ﬁlaments Sk Ashif Akram , Gaurav Kumar , and Anirban Sain ∗ Physics Department , Indian Institute of Technology - Bombay , Powai , Mumbai , 400076 , India . Exocytosis is a common transport mechanism via which cells transport out non - essential macro - molecules ( cargo ) into the extra cellular space . ESCRT - III proteins are known to help in this . They polymerize into a conical spring like structure and help deform the cell membrane locally into a bud which wrapps the outgoing cargo . we model this process using a continuum energy functional . It consists of elastic energies of the membrane and the semi - rigid ESCRT - III ﬁlament , favorable adhe - sion energy between the cargo and the membrane , and aﬃnity among the ESCRT - III ﬁlaments . We take the free energy minimization route to identify the sequence of composite structures which form during the process . We show that membrane adhesion of the cargo is the driving force for this bud - ding process and not the buckling of ESCRT - III ﬁlaments from ﬂat spiral to conical spring shape . However ESCRT - III stabilizes the bud once it forms . Further we conclude that a nonequilibrium process is needed to pinch oﬀ / separate the stable bud ( containing the cargo ) from the cell body . I . INTRODUCTION Eukaryotic cells use various proteins , which deform the cell membrane , in order to allow transport of essential macromolecules ( cargo ) between the cell and its exte - rior . ESCRT - III is one such protein in the protein family Endosomal sorting complex required for transport or ES - CRT . It helps in the formation of a membrane bud and its detachment , carrying non - essential cargo out of the cell . One of the unique abilities of ESCRT - III ﬁlaments com - pared to other intracellular ﬁlaments is its ability to se - vere the membrane neck from inside the membrane bud . Dynamin ﬁlaments , for example wraps around the neck from outside in order to severe it . ESCRT - III are intra - cellular ﬁlamentous proteins which bind to the cell mem - brane from inside , around the cargo in the form of ﬂat spirals . In the absence of any direct visualisation of the process in vivo , various proposals have emerged about the dynamical process . It is not clear whether the ﬂat spiral grows after the cargo attaches to the already de - formed membrane or whether the ﬂat ESCRT - III spiral grows ﬁrst and the cargo expels the spiral and attaches itself to the membrane . Irrespective of the initiation of the spiral , it buckles into a helical shape and push the cargo out of the cell . Subsequently the spiral also retracts itself back to the cell and disintegrates . During this pro - cess the cargo gradually wraps itself around with the cell membrane in the form of a membrane bud and the bud eventually pinches oﬀ . It is not clear whether the process is driven by the energy gain due to the shape transfor - mation of the ESCRT - III coil [ 1 ] or due to the adhesion of the cargo molecule to the cell membrane [ 2 , 3 ] . The cargo , which is assumed to be a sphere here , ad - heres to the cell membrane from the cell - interior and deforms it , see Fig . 1 The angular extent of adhering membrane area is marked by the polar angle θ 0 . The amount of membrane area adhering with the cargo is ∗ Electronic address : asain @ phy . iitb . ac . in then A = 2 πR 2 ( 1 − cos θ 0 ) . The ESCRT - III ﬁlament grows around the cargo , initially as a ﬂat spiral ( not shown here ) . As the cargo wraps itself with more mem - brane area ( i . e . , increasing θ 0 ) , the ﬁlament lifts oﬀ as a helical spiral , shown in ( a and b ) . As θ 0 crosses π / 2 the spiral is pressed in the middle as a neck develops , shown in ( c ) . As θ 0 approaches π the conical spiral begins to retract from the neck and moves towards a pinch - oﬀ conﬁguration . From ( a ) through ( c ) the adhering area grows as A 0 → A 1 → A 2 → A 3 . The part of the sur - face not adhering to the sphere is parameterised [ 4 – 6 ] by the axisymmetric curve (cid:126)r ( s ) = [ X ( s ) , Z ( s ) ] which ex - tends from s = 0 to s = s max . The location of the point where the sphere looses contact with the membrane is X ( s = 0 ) = R sin θ 0 and Z ( s = 0 ) = Z 0 + R cos θ 0 , where ( X 0 , Z 0 ) is the center of the sphere . The shape of this surface is expressed using an angle ψ ( s ) , which is the an - gle between the local tangent to the curve and the X axis , see ﬁg ( a ) . Note that ψ ( s = 0 ) = θ 0 and we assume that ψ ( s max ) = 0 , i . e . , it joins smoothly with the cell surface which is assumed to be ﬂat . This is justiﬁed because the radius of the cell is much larger than the radius of the bud R . It is also not clear if the attachment of ﬂat spirals pre - cedes attachment of cargo to the membrane . Question arises if the membrane is already covered with dense ar - rays of ESCRT - III ﬂat spirals , then how does the cargo attach onto the membrane . On the other hand , if the cargo attaches to the membrane ﬁrst , the ESCRT - III spi - rals will be excluded from that patch of the membrane . However it is plausible that ESCRT - III can still polymer - ize around the patch forming bigger circles . Lenz et al had shown [ 1 ] that due to its intrinsic curvature and its favourable association with the mem - brane , the ESCRT - III ﬁlaments can undergo a buckling transition from a ﬂat spiral to a helical spiral , all the while keeping its contact with the membrane . They assumed an attractive interaction between the turns of the ESCRT - III spral and the membrane of strength − µ per unit area . In their model the tightly packed helical shaped membrane was approximated as a stack of circu - lar layers since the pitch is much smaller than the radius a r X i v : 2 1 12 . 12729v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 2 3 D ec 2021 2 Z θ ο Α ο ( d ) ( b ) X ( c ) ( a ) FIG . 1 : Schematic diagram showing progression of ESCRT - III mediated exocytosis in our model . The spherical cargo is partially wrapped by membrane ( in blue ) and unwrapped part of the membrane bud is covered by ESCRT - III ﬁlaments ( in red ) . Degree of wrapping of the cargo is parameterised by the angle θ 0 and the area of the bud gradually increases from left to right ( A 0 → A 3 ) . Unwrapped portion of the membrane is parameterised by the contour s , when s ∈ [ 0 , s max ] . of the helix . We essentially use a variant of their model to study the ESCRT - III mediated budding and exocy - tosis , which in addition to the ﬁlament instability also requires separation of the bud from the cell . In this con - text ref [ 3 ] has highlighted the role of the adhesion energy between the cargo and the cell membrane in the budding process . In our model below we include this adhesion en - ergy contribution which turns out to be the main driver of exocytosis . In Fig . 1 we show a schematic diagram for the process . Concerning the transition of the ﬂat ESCRT - III spiral into a helical spiral , a recent study has proposed a confor - mational change in the binding between the ESCRT - III molecules and the membrane [ 7 , 8 ] . They showed that this eﬀect causes successive helical turns in the spiral to have decreasing radii , thereby inducing the ﬂat spiral to become a conical helix . However there is no direct ex - perimental evidence for this conformational transition . The shape of the membrane bud during its develop - ment is not clear either . The portion of the membrane joining the neck to the basal surface of the cell has been argued to be cone shaped [ 3 ] rather than dome shaped [ 9 ] . Ref [ 3 ] , which has focused on the bud scission rather than development of the bud , has shown that a cone shaped neck requires lesser adhesion energy , between the ﬁla - ment and membrane , for scission compared to if it is dome shaped . Further , the process of ﬁssion of the neck has been proposed to be a non - equilibrium active process [ 7 ] which serves to cross a free - energy barrier . Ref [ 10 ] , motivated by in vitro experiments on mem - brane covered with an array of ﬂat ESCRT - III coils ( spi - rals ) , have proposed a compressed coil hypothesis . In this in vitro experiment array the coils seem to be in a compressed state . This is inferred from the observation that often the outer layers of the neighboring coils meet at straight lines exhibiting an approximate hexagonal ar - rangement of coils . At lower concentration the coils are circles touching each other . Ref [ 10 ] argues that beyond a threshold of compression level the coils buckle out of the plane . However , it is not evident whether the ﬂat spirals are in a compressed state in the in vivo situation [ 11 ] . As mentioned earlier , we work with an augmented ver - sion of the model by Lenz et al . [ 1 ] . We focus on the development of the bud rather than its scission . We mini - mize the equilibrium free energy to look for the optimum state where the bending energy of the deformed mem - brane , adhesion energy of the cargo and the bending en - ergy of the ﬁlament are jointly minimized . Description of the model is given below : II . MODEL As shown in ﬁgure 1 a spherical shaped outgoing cargo adheres to the dome shaped membrane at the top [ 2 – 7 , 10 , 12 – 14 ] . Our goal is to ﬁnd an optimized surface conﬁguration of the membrane and its evolution during buckling . Dense spiral ﬁlaments ( attached to the mem - brane ) are simpliﬁed to be concentric circular rings with uniform surface density throughout the evolution . The equilibrium shape of the membrane , with its ESCRT ﬁla - ments and the adhering cargo attached to it , is found by minimizing the free energy of the composite system . To describe the composite system consisting of a membrane and polymer , we use a model similar to that in [ 1 ] . We study the process using an equilibrium membrane elastic - ity based continuum model [ 1 ] ( below ) which includes the elasticity of the ESCTR - III ﬁlaments , lateral attraction between the ﬁlaments , adhesion between the ﬁlament and the membrane and adhesion between the membrane and the cargo . The bending energy cost of the membrane and the ESCRT ﬁlaments are given by the Helfrich energy and worm - like chain model , respectively . The adhesion energy of the cargo is an addition to the model . We take into account the membrane - ﬁlament attrac - 3 tion , but we do not go into the details of the molecular structure of ﬁlaments since we are only interested in their overall coarse - grained contribution to the total energy of the system . A spherical bud gets created and eventually leads to the scission from larger membrane at the neck ( the minimum radius region ) . The adhesion energy be - tween the cargo and the membrane works to overcome the potential barrier induced by rest of the terms , thus making buckling process energetically favourable . The expression of the free energy is given by , E T = E + E c . Here E c is proportional to the cap area of the membrane bud which partially wraps the cargo and it consists of fa - vorable adhesion energy between the cargo and the mem - brane , and the elastic bending energy cost of the mem - brane . E corresponds to the rest of the bud , below the cargo , which is covered by ESCRT - III ﬁlaments . E c = − 2 πR 2 ( σ 0 − κ 2 R 2 ) ( 1 − cos θ 0 ) ( 1 ) and , E = (cid:90) s max 0 ds (cid:34) 2 πX ( s ) (cid:40) k 2 (cid:18) 1 X ( s ) − 1 χ 0 (cid:19) 2 + κ 2 (cid:18) sin ψ ( s ) X ( s ) + ψ (cid:48) ( s ) (cid:19) 2 + ( σ 1 − µ ) (cid:41) + λ ( s ) (cid:110) X (cid:48) ( s ) − cos ψ ( s ) (cid:111) + η ( s ) (cid:110) Z (cid:48) ( s ) + sin ψ ( s ) (cid:111) (cid:35) + 2 πγ [ X ( 0 ) + X ( s max ) ] ( 2 ) Here , k is bending stiﬀness of the ﬁlament , κ the bend - ing modulus of the membrane , − µ the attractive chemical potential between the ﬁlaments and the membrane , σ 1 is the surface tension and σ 0 is the attractive adhesion co - eﬃcient between the membrane and the spherical shaped cargo . The ﬁrst term represents the bending energy of the protein ﬁlament ESCRT - III . The tightly wound spiral is approximated as a stack of circular coils of ﬁnite thick - ness with variable radii X ( s ) , while χ 0 is the intrinsic radius of curvature of these coils . The radius and the height variables X ( s ) and Z ( s ) represent the space curve ( X ( s ) , Z ( s ) ) parameterized by the contour length s , run - ning between 0 to s max . An azimuthally symmetric de - formed membrane ( the partial bud ) is the surface of rev - olution of this space curve ( X ( s ) , Z ( s ) ) . One important assumption implicit here is that the ﬁlaments are closely packed and dense enough to cover whole of the surface . We assume that the ﬁlament density per unit area of the membrane remains uniform during the process . Note that this term will favor a helix of radius χ 0 as opposed to a ﬂat coil where all the concentric layers , except the one with radius χ 0 will be strained and therefore have an energy cost . The second term denotes the Helfrich free energy of the deformed membrane represented by the space curve (cid:126)r ( s ) = [ X ( s ) , Z ( s ) ] . ψ ( s ) is the angle between the tan - gent and the X axis . All derivatives here are with respect to curve length s . The two ψ dependent terms are the local principal curvatures on the azimuthally symmetric surface Any sharp bending of the membrane , for example at the neck of the bud , costs high bending energy . The third term , proportional to the membrane area which is in contact with the ﬁlament , includes eﬀect of surface tension σ 1 of the membrane and the attractive interaction − µ between the ﬁlament and the membrane , also known as membrane aﬃnity of the ﬁlament . Since σ 1 − µ is what matters we deﬁne σ 1 − µ = − µ (cid:48) and look for variation of shapes with respect to µ (cid:48) . Note that higher µ (cid:48) will favor larger membrane area covered with the ﬁlament which requires longer ﬁlament length as well . This will promote the membrane bud to have a wider base rather than lifting oﬀ higher in the Z direction . Lagrange multipliers λ ( s ) and η ( s ) ensure the relations between X ( s ) , Z ( s ) and ψ [ 4 ] . The next term is crucial to include the attractive interactions between the ﬁlaments ( which are closely packed ) and characterized by the line tension γ . The second last term involving γ captures the lateral attraction between the ﬁlaments [ 1 ] which show up as line tensions at the two open edges of the helical coil . These open edges are essentially 1 - D interface between mem - brane covered with ﬁlaments and the bare membrane . Just as 2D surface tension at a liquid - air interface emerge from the fact that liquid molecules have greater attrac - tion among themselves ( cohesion ) than that with the air molecules , here the attraction between the ESCRT - III ﬁl - aments give rise to line tension which is positive deﬁnite like surface tension . This term can be rewritten as 2 πγ [ X ( 0 ) + X ( s max ) ] = 2 πγ (cid:104) (cid:90) s max 0 X (cid:48) ( s ) ds + 2 X ( 0 ) (cid:105) ( 3 ) Note that for a given θ 0 the term X ( s max ) is dependent on the shape which is unknown apriori , but X ( 0 ) is ﬁxed . The last term combines the adhesion interaction en - ergy between the surface of the cargo and the membrane wrapping around it , and bending energy of this part of the membrane with curvature 1 / R . Both the terms are proportional to the area of the partial sphere ( dependent on ψ ( 0 ) = θ 0 ) , which is covered by the membrane . Both σ 0 and κ / R 2 has the unit of energy per unit area . The adhesion energy is negative ( since attractive ) while the bending energy is positive . We deﬁne an eﬀective adhe - sion energy σ = σ 0 − κ 2 r 2 and assume σ > 0 . Note that this adheson energy term monotonically decreases as θ 0 increases and hence promotes complete wrapping of the cargo by the membrane . As Fig . 1 shows , the evolving bud can be parameterized by the angle θ 0 . Therefore θ 0 serves as a proxy for time in our investigation . For diﬀerent θ 0 values , we solve for the lowest free energy conﬁguration of the system . The path connecting these diﬀerent conﬁgurations represent the quasi - static evolution of the system in the conﬁgu - ration space . We track how the curve length s max and the area of the unwrapped portion of the bud A in the minimum energy conﬁguration change as θ 0 is varied . 4 Thereby we generate the potential energy proﬁles for the system as a function of θ 0 , for a given set of parameters . To simplify calculation , we use dimensionless parame - ters and variables . We use membrane bending modulus κ and the ﬁxed radius of the spherical cargo R , as the characteristic energy and length scales , respectively , to make everything ( including curve length s ) dimension - less . In units of κ ( = 20 k B T ) the relevant energy density E is now given by , E = 2 πX ( s ) (cid:104) k 2 (cid:16) 1 X ( s ) − 1 χ 0 (cid:17) 2 + 1 2 (cid:16) sin ψ ( s ) X ( s ) + ψ (cid:48) ( s ) (cid:17) 2 − µ (cid:48) (cid:105) + 2 πγX (cid:48) ( s ) + λ ( s ) [ X (cid:48) ( s ) − cos ψ ( s ) ] ( 4 ) Here we retained the same notations for the all the non - dimensionalised quantities . The corresponding Euler - Lagrange equations are : − k χ 2 0 + 2 µ (cid:48) − ψ (cid:48) 2 + (cid:0) k + sin 2 ψ (cid:1) X 2 + λ (cid:48) ( s ) π = 0 . ( 5 ) 2 X (cid:48) ψ (cid:48) + 2 Xψ (cid:48)(cid:48) − sin 2 ψ X − λ ( s ) π sin ψ = 0 . ( 6 ) cos ψ ( s ) − χ (cid:48) ( s ) = 0 . ( 7 ) The EL - equation that involves Z is the constraint Z (cid:48) = − sin ψ which is coupled with the above three equa - tions via ψ ( s ) . But ψ ( s ) can be obtained by solving the above three equations only . The constraint equa - tion Z (cid:48) = − sin ψ can be integrated later , with appropri - ate boundary conditions , to compute Z ( s ) , once ψ ( s ) is known . The boundary conditions on the membrane shape are set by demanding continuity of slope between the partial sphere part ( adhering to the cargo ) and the part below it ( attached to the ﬁlament ) , i . e . , ψ ( 0 ) = θ 0 . Also the base of the bud is assumed to smoothly join onto the ﬂat basal membrane , i . e . , ψ ( s max ) = 0 . The radius at the junction χ ( 0 ) , where the membrane loose contact with the cargo is computed as χ ( 0 ) = √ 4 πA − A 2 2 π , where the wrapped area A = 2 π ( 1 − cos θ 0 ) in units of R = 1 . Further , we assume λ ( 0 ) = 0 . After computing ψ ( s ) we compute the space curve by integrating the equations Z (cid:48) ( s ) = − sin ψ ( s ) and χ (cid:48) ( s ) = cos ψ ( s ) , where we use Z ( s max ) = 0 . Note that for a given θ 0 we do not know s max a priori . Instead of extremizing the energy density with respect to s max , which would increase number of equations to be solved by one we compute the lowest energy conﬁgurations for diﬀerent value of s max for a given θ 0 and choose the low - est energy conﬁguration among them . A . Phenomenological parameters We ﬁrst estimate the various parameters for which we solve our model equations . The membrane bending rigid - ity κ = 20 k B T is standard for bilayer phospholipid mem - branes . Radius of the cargo is taken as R = 50 nm , for most of the calculations . Intrinsic radius of curvature χ 0 for ESCRT - III ﬁla - ments have been estimated to be 25 − 30 nm by growing Snf7 ( main component of ESCRT - III ) ﬁlaments in vitro on supported membrane bilayers [ 10 ] . These ﬁlaments nucleate as rings which later grow many concentric ﬂat layers . Both electron microscopy ( EM ) and total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy measurements give similar results . Other studies ( see references in [ 10 ] ) also give similar estimates . In vivo measurements on cell membranes also show array of ﬂat Snf7 concentric rings , in cells where Snf7 is over expressed . Ref . [ 10 ] and references therein estimate ESCRT - III persistence length l p in the range 250 − 800 nm . The bending modulus k in our model , which has dimen - sion of energy , can be extracted from l p . In standard worm like chain ( WLC ) model ﬁlament bending energy E = l p . k B T 2 (cid:82) L 0 ds C 2 ( s ) , where the variable s is the con - tour length and C ( s ) is the local curvature along the con - tour of the ﬁlament . Introducing ﬁlament thickness ∆ in the expression for energy we rewrite E = l p . k B T 2∆ (cid:82) dAC 2 , where dA = ∆ ds is the area element covered by a seg - ment of the ﬁlament of length ds . This yields k = l p . k B T ∆ . Using ∆ ≈ 5 nm [ 10 , 11 ] for width of the ESCRT - III single strand we estimate the dimensionless parameter k / κ ≈ 2 . 5 − 8 . We note that ref [ 1 ] used k / κ = 2 . 5 . We explore a range k / κ = [ 2 . 5 − 10 ] . Adhesion strength of the cargo is not known precisely . We used the values of adhesion strength between the ESCRT - III ﬁlaments and the membrane , estimated in Ref . [ 3 ] . They had estimated for both conical shaped as well as dome shaped necks . We use the one for cone shaped neck , see Fig . 6B in Ref [ 3 ] , which in their no - tation W ≈ 0 . 05 mN / m . In our dimensionless units σ = WR 2 / κ ≈ 1 . 6 and we explore a small range [ 0 − 5 ] around this . Note that W in Ref . [ 3 ] is same as our µ which we had taken to be of order σ 1 = 10 − 5 N / m . Since the eﬀective adhesion energy σ = σ 0 − κ 2 R 2 is further re - duced by κ 2 R 2 which is of the same order , a low value 0 . 05 mN / m is justiﬁed . We use membrane surface tension σ 1 = 10 − 5 N / m from Ref . [ 1 ] . If we assume the membrane aﬃnity of ESCRT - III to be of similar order , then − µ (cid:48) = σ 1 − µ will also be of order ∼ 10 − 5 N / m . Thus in dimensionless units µ (cid:48) R 2 / κ ≈ 0 . 3 . Ref . [ 1 ] has estimated σ 1 − µ in a diﬀerent way . They deﬁne a dimensionless eﬀective surface tension Σ = ( σ 1 − µ ) χ 20 κ + k 2 κ and considered diﬀerent values of Σ . Taking Σ = 1 we get µ (cid:48) = 1 . We explore a range µ (cid:48) = [ − 0 . 5 , 0 . 5 ] . In the regime where surface tension σ 1 is stronger µ (cid:48) is negative and where membrane aﬃnity of ESCRT - III µ is stronger µ (cid:48) is positive . From Ref . [ 1 ] , we estimate γ to be 0 . 6 . We consider variation of γ ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] , to study its eﬀect on the buckling process . Speciﬁcally , we use γ = 0 , 0 . 5 and 1 . 5 FIG . 2 : a ) Curve length s max , b ) ﬁlament covered area A , and c ) energy E , shown as functions of θ 0 , at diﬀerent values of γ , at σ = 0 , for σ 1 < µ . d ) Shows the corresponding total energy E T versus θ 0 , at γ = 0 , and for diﬀerent values of σ 1 . Membrane binding of the cargo can pull down the second minimum and make the bud stable . Dimensionless parameters : k = 10 , χ 0 = 0 . 75 , µ (cid:48) = − 0 . 5 . ( a ) and ( b ) exhibits a 1st order jump , at γ < 1 . III . RESULTS We present below the solutions of the Euler - Lagrange’s equations obtained from this energy functional . We use experimentally relevant values for the parameters κ , k , χ 0 , γ and R , described above , and compute angu - lar dependence of contour length S max , ﬁlament covered area A and the Energies E and E T ( see Fig2 , 3 ) . We con - sidered two broadly diﬀerent scenarios : σ 1 < µ ( Fig . 2 ) and σ 1 > µ ( Fig . 3 ) . Note that , σ 1 < µ can promote polymerization of ESCRT - III on the membrane and is presumably the expermentally relevant case , but direct measurement of µ is not available . Therefore we exam - ine the σ 1 > µ case also . It may appear that , σ 1 < µ would promote uncontrolled polymerization at the base of the bud , however the consequent ﬁlament turns with progressively higher radius would cost higher energy due to the intrinsic curvature term and that would limit the outer radius of the coil . In Fig2 - d and 3 - d the total en - ergy ( E T ) of the system is shown for diﬀerent values of adhesion strength σ . The common feature evident in the energy landscapes for both the cases , shown in Fig2 and 3 , is the existence of two minima . The minima at small and large θ 0 s’ cor - respond to a nearly ﬂat pre - bud and a fully formed bud , respectively . Accordingly , the shape of the ESCRT - III spiral is nearly ﬂat at the ﬁrst minima and conical at the second minima . Plots of E in Fig2 , 3 - c reveals that without the contribution from the favorable adhesion en - ergy of the cargo ( E c ) the bud ( the second minima ) is metastable since it has higher energy compared to the 1st minima corresponding to the pre - bud state . Also since the 1st minima occurs at a ﬁnite θ 0 , it is attained via the buckling of the ﬂat membrane at θ 0 = 0 . But the energy of the ﬁlament and the membrane associated with it can - not drive this buckling , except for γ (cid:39) 0 in the σ 1 < µ case ( see Fig . 2 - c ) . Therefore favorable contribution from adhesion energy is crucial even for this initial buckling transition . Furthermore , comparison between ( c ) and ( d ) in both Fig2 , 3 shows that there is a barrier between the nominally buckled pre - bud state and the metastable bud , which can be overcome only by a strong adhesion energy . Formation of the pre - bud at small ﬁnite θ 0 shows qual - itative diﬀerence between the σ 1 < µ and σ 1 > µ cases . For the σ 1 < µ , the pre - bud is a well deﬁned minima of E T while for σ 1 > µ it is not . Although in both cases there is no jump in the energy E or E T around 6 FIG . 3 : a ) Curve length s max , b ) ﬁlament covered area A and c ) energy E , plotted as a function of θ 0 , at diﬀerent values of γ , at σ = 0 . d ) Shows the total energy E T versus θ 0 , at γ = 0 and for diﬀerent values of σ 1 . But the second minimum has higher energy in the absence of adhesion energy due to the cargo and therefore cannot form a stable bud . Membrane binding of the cargo can pull down the second minimum and make the bud stable . Dimensionless parameters : k = 2 . 5 , χ 0 = 0 . 5 , µ (cid:48) = 0 . 5 the pre - bud state , for σ 1 < µ there is a discontinuous jump in both s max and A , at γ < 1 . But physically , this region of small θ 0 corresponds to the nucleation of the ESCRT - III spiral , which could a more complicated activated process , not captured by our model . Never - theless , we analysed the origin of this jump in s max in Fig . 4 - a . The lowest minima at a given θ 0 correspond to the equlibrium value of s max ( shown in Fig . 2 ) . In Fig . 4 - a , we see that , as θ 0 is increased the boundary minima at θ 0 loose out to the developing minima at ﬁnite θ 0 in the range [ 0 . 3 − 0 . 35 ] , causing the system to jump to the new global minima , as it occurs for a 1st order transitition . For example , a mean ﬁeld theory with a cubic order pa - rameter term gives abrupt jump in magnetization , from zero to a nonzero value , although the free energy changes smoothly at the transition . The double minima structure in the elastic energy of the ﬁlament ( Fig . 4 - b ) is due to its intrinsic curvature . It can be understood by considering contribution coming from the top most part of the ﬁlament which has radius X ( 0 ) = R sin θ 0 . With χ 0 = 25 nm and R = 50 nm the el - stic energy contribution is proportional ( 1 sin θ − 2 ) 2 which has a double well structure with a maxima at θ = π / 2 . This is because as θ 0 increases from 0 to π , initailly X ( 0 ) is smaller than χ 0 , then it increases and goes past χ 0 and then again it decreases and falls below χ 0 . The energy is high whenever | X ( 0 ) − χ 0 | is high . The rest of the conical shaped ﬁlament also behave similarly . In Fig . 4 - b note that E − E c , the elastic energy contri - bution of the membrane , increases slowly as its curvature increases with θ 0 ( as the bud develops ) . Also note that the area associated with the ﬁlament ﬁrst increases and then later decreases ( see subﬁgure ( a ) in both Fig . 2 , 3 ) . This indicates that polymerization in the beginning and depolymerization near the end as we did not constrain the length of the ﬁlament in our model . We now discus how the diﬀerent features of the energy landscapes shown in Fig . 2 , 3 changes as we change the various parameters of the model . 1 . Line tension γ : Fig . 2 - a , b , show that , for the σ 1 < µ case , the jump associated with the contour length ( s max ) and the ﬁlament - covered membrane area ( A ) gradually disappear as γ is increased . However , for the σ 1 > µ case , s max and A do not change much , but the energy E changes sig - niﬁcantly with γ . In particular the barrier between the pre - bud and bud increases with γ and there - fore stronger adhesion ( σ ) is needed to cross this barrier . Althugh the position of the maxima ( in θ 0 ) does not change much with γ , the position of the second minima shifts right with increase in γ . . As mentioned before γ does not explicitly enter the Euler - Largarne equations ( Eq . 7 ) but it inﬂuences the energy E ( see Eq . 2 ) and thereby inﬂuences the 7 FIG . 4 : Origin of 1st order jump : ( a ) Energy as a function of s max for diﬀerent values of θ 0 ( in radian ) , for parameters corresponding to Fig . 2 , at γ = σ = 0 . For a given θ 0 , the equilibrium value of s max is the one that corresponds to the global minimum in energy . The ﬁgure shows a ﬁrst order jump in the location of the global minimum , from s max < 0 . 1 to s max ≥ 0 . 6 , in a narrow range of θ 0 around 0 . 3 rad . b ) Shows the contribution of the ESCRT - III ﬁlament ( solid line ) to the energy E ( σ = 0 ) ( dashed line ) , as a function of θ 0 seen in Fig . 2 - c and Fig . 3 - c . It implies that the double minima structure is due to the elastic energy of the ﬁlament . equilibrium value of s max for a given θ 0 . 2 . Filament stiﬀness k : Comparison between Fig . 2 ( with k = 10 ) and Fig . 3 ( with k = 2 . 5 ) shows that , as k decreases , the second minima shifts to larger θ 0 i . e . , closer to scission ( θ 0 = 180 o ) ( ﬁgure not shown ) . At the same time the energy barrier for scission of the bud also goes down . But note that our model does not address scisson which could be due to a nonequilibrium process . 3 . Intrinsic ﬁlament curvature χ 0 : Decrease in χ 0 reduces the jump associated with curve length and area , for the σ 1 < µ case ( ﬁgure not shown ) . Also the second minima shifts towards higher θ 0 helping the scission process . FIG . 5 : Evolution of surface with increasing initial surface angle for parameter set : k = 10 , L = 0 . 75 and µ (cid:48) = − 0 . 5 4 . Cargo size R : We checked that at larger cargo size ( eg . , R = 100 nm ) the jumps in s max and A disappear , and the second minima shifts rightward ( ﬁgure not shown ) . This is because the process gets completely dominated by the adhesion energy of the cargo . IV . DISCUSSION The common theme which emerges is that , a ) the tran - sition of ESCRT - III from ﬂat spiral to conical spiral is not driven by the intrinsic cirvature of ESCRT - III ﬁla - ments ( Fig . 4 - b ) . b ) The evolution of mildly deformed pre - bud like structure to a bud structure requires drive from adhesion energy . c ) This pre - bud structure and the ﬁnal complete bud structure constitute two energy min - ima separated by a barrier whose magnitude depends on the adhesion energy and at strong adhesion the barrier can even vanish clearing way for a smooth passage to complete bud like structure . However even in the pres - ence of a ﬁnite barrier energy , non - equilibrium processes [ 7 ] can help in the barrier crossing . We did not use any conformational transition in the orientation of the molec - ular bonds in the ﬁlaments , which can generate tilt in the turns of the ﬁlament promoting a helix , as proposed in Ref [ 7 ] . Note that the adhesion of the cargo to the cell mem - brane breaks the up - down symmetry of the membrane deformation and makes the ﬁlament buckle in the direc - tion away from the cell body ( convex ) instead of towards the interior of the cell body ( concave ) . However , without the adhesion , in our model the membrane is absolutely symmetric with respect to budding out or budding in . In case of inward budding the ESCRT - III ﬁlament would wrap on the neck of the bud on its outer surface which may not be possible in reality as ESCRT - III is always known to cut membrane necks from inside . But in our model we do not distinguish between ﬁlament wrapping the membrane from outside or inside . In our model the length of the ﬁlament is not ﬁxed . The ﬁlament has an aﬃnity for the membrane and it 8 is found to polymerize ﬁrst and then depolymerize near the completion of the process which is consistent with observations . A relevant question has been what promotes the ﬁla - ment to become a conical spiral instead of a helical spi - ral . Our model shows that the shape is neither a uniform cone nor a cylinder . It is worth noting that , i ) the ﬁla - ment starts out as a ﬂat spiral [ 11 ] , ii ) a helical spiral requires sharp membrane bending at the base , and iii ) as adhesion of the cargo increases the radius of the neck reduces below χ 0 promoting a conical structure . It is not evident from experiments whether the ﬁla - ment grows as a ﬂat spiral ﬁrst on the membrane and then it transits to a helical shape as the bud starts to grow or does it polymerize only when the budding starts , driven by cargo - membrane adhesion . Question arises , in the ﬁrst case if the membrane surface is already covered by a ﬂat spiral then how does the cargo adhere to the membrane . Our model assumes the second possibility that the polymerization starts with the budding . Note that our model does not answer how membrane scission takes place at the end of budding . After the second minima the total energy E starts to rise sharply ( see Fig . 2 ) due to the bending energy costs of both the membrane and the ﬁlament , making the minima stable at an angle θ 0 < π . This asks for a separate mechanism for scission of the bud . Also , we have implicitly assumed that the ﬁlament - spiral ends where the membrane touches the ﬂat surface at s max , which means the ﬁlament is not preferred on ﬂat surface . This is certainly true for σ 1 < µ , which is experimentally relevant . [ 1 ] Martin Lenz , Daniel JG Crow , and Jean - Fran¸cois Joanny . Membrane buckling induced by curved ﬁlaments . Physical review letters , 103 ( 3 ) : 038101 , 2009 . [ 2 ] Jaime Agudo - Canalejo and Reinhard Lipowsky . Stabi - lization of membrane necks by adhesive particles , sub - strate surfaces , and constriction forces . Soft Matter , 12 ( 39 ) : 8155 – 8166 , 2016 . [ 3 ] Jaime Agudo - Canalejo and Reinhard Lipowsky . Domes and cones : Adhesion - induced ﬁssion of membranes by escrt proteins . PLoS computational biology , 14 ( 8 ) : e1006422 , 2018 . [ 4 ] Udo Seifert , Karin Berndl , and Reinhard Lipowsky . Shape transformations of vesicles : Phase diagram for spontaneous - curvature and bilayer - coupling models . Phys . Rev . A , 44 : 1182 – 1202 , Jul 1991 . [ 5 ] Frank J¨ulicher and Udo Seifert . Shape equations for ax - isymmetric vesicles : a clariﬁcation . Physical Review E , 49 ( 5 ) : 4728 , 1994 . [ 6 ] Gaurav Kumar and Anirban Sain . Shape transitions during clathrin - induced endocytosis . Phys . Rev . E , 94 : 062404 , Dec 2016 . [ 7 ] Lena Harker - Kirschneck , Buzz Baum , and Andela ˇSari´c . Changes in escrt - iii ﬁlament geometry drive membrane remodelling and ﬁssion in silico . BMC biology , 17 ( 1 ) : 1 – 8 , 2019 . [ 8 ] Anna - Katharina Pﬁtzner , Vincent Mercier , Xiuyun Jiang , Joachim Moser von Filseck , Buzz Baum , Andela ˇSari´c , and Aur´elien Roux . An escrt - iii polymerization se - quence drives membrane deformation and ﬁssion . Cell , 182 ( 5 ) : 1140 – 1155 , 2020 . [ 9 ] Gur Fabrikant , Suman Lata , James D Riches , John AG Briggs , Winfried Weissenhorn , and Michael M Kozlov . Computational model of membrane ﬁssion catalyzed by escrt - iii . PLoS Comput Biol , 5 ( 11 ) : e1000575 , 2009 . [ 10 ] Nicolas Chiaruttini , Lorena Redondo - Morata , Adai Colom , Fr´ed´eric Humbert , Martin Lenz , Simon Scheur - ing , and Aur´elien Roux . Relaxation of loaded escrt - iii spiral springs drives membrane deformation . Cell , 163 ( 4 ) : 866 – 879 , 2015 . [ 11 ] Phyllis I Hanson , Robyn Roth , Yuan Lin , and John E Heuser . Plasma membrane deformation by circular ar - rays of escrt - iii protein ﬁlaments . The Journal of cell biology , 180 ( 2 ) : 389 – 402 , 2008 . [ 12 ] Gur Fabrikant , Suman Lata , James D Riches , John AG Briggs , Winfried Weissenhorn , and Michael M Kozlov . Computational model of membrane ﬁssion catalyzed by escrt - iii . PLoS Comput Biol , 5 ( 11 ) : e1000575 , 2009 . [ 13 ] Bartosz R´o˙zycki , Evzen Boura , James H Hurley , and Gerhard Hummer . Membrane - elasticity model of coat - less vesicle budding induced by escrt complexes . PLoS Comput Biol , 8 ( 10 ) : e1002736 , 2012 . [ 14 ] Sabyasachi Dasgupta , Thorsten Auth , and Gerhard Gompper . Wrapping of ellipsoidal nano - particles by ﬂuid membranes . Soft Matter , 9 ( 22 ) : 5473 – 5482 , 2013 .