ELSEVIER Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 Doe on Effects of GSS interface and task type on group interaction : An empirical study Choon - Ling Sia * , Bernard C . Y . Tan , Kwok - Kee Wei Department ~ f lnJbrmation Systems and Computer Science , National University of Singapore , 10 Kent Ridge Crescent , Singapore , 119260 , Singapore Abstract The effects of GSS interface and task type on group interaction are examined in this experimental study . A 2 × 2 factorial design is employed . Each treatment has eight groups . Two types of GSS interfaces are studied : icon - based and text - based . Two task types are investigated : intellective and preference . Three dependent variables are measured : efficiency of influence attempts , inequality of influence attempts , and dominance significance . Results of data analysis show that groups using icon - based interface achieve greater efficiency of influence attempts , greater equality of influence attempts , and less dominance significance than groups using text - based interface . Moreover , equality of influence attempts is greater for preference task groups than intellective task groups . These results suggest that an icon - based interface is a useful feature of a GSS , particularly when group members are novice computer users . GSS developers should , therefore , pay attention to interface design on top of the considerations for other GSS features . © 1997 Elsevier Science B . V . Keywords : Group support systems ; Group interaction ; User - interface ; Task types 1 . Introduction Modern societies are characterized by increasing knowledge , complexity , and turbulence 18 . Within organizations , these developments imply that indi - vidual decision makers may not be able to cope with demands imposed by the dynamic environment . To address the inadequacy of individuals as decision makers , organizations have increasingly relied on groups to carry out decision making tasks 12 . How - ever , groups often fail to perform to their maximal theoretical potential 31 . DeSanctis and Gallupe 10 attribute this group performance paradox to commu - nication barriers confronting groups during their * Corresponding author . Email : siacl @ iscs . nus . sg . meetings . They recommend group support systems ( GSS ) as a means of alleviating these barriers . They suggest that the extent to which GSS can address group interaction problems is likely to be contingent upon contextual variables . Two such variables are GSS design and task type . Gray and Olfman 16 argue that GSS design , particularly its interface , is a critical success factor for its continual usage by groups . A major difficulty in GSS design is the inability to rely solely on user inputs because users are likely to be unaware of their needs prior to using a GSS 10 . Instead , users need to have some learning experience with a GSS before they can specify the GSS capabilities needed . Thus , a GSS which provides a user - friendly interface that helps to minimize the learning effort of its users will be useful . When learning effort is reduced , users can 0167 - 9236 / 97 / $ 17 . 00 © 1997 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . PII S01 67 - 9236 ( 96 ) 00060 - 7 290 C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 quickly become proficient with the GSS 30 . They can attend to their tasks without worrying about how to invoke the GSS capabilities . A better understand - ing of the GSS and its capabilities , which can be achieved through a better user - interface , can also enhance its acceptance within organizations 24 . Based on conventional principles of interface design for individual applications 4 , a possible way of improving the interface of a GSS is to use an icon - based rather than a text - based interface . Neverthe - less , the relative merits of both these interface types are worthy of research in a GSS context for three reasons . First , an interface that is useful for individ - ual applications need not necessarily be good in a group environment 15 . Thus , systematic research on GSS interfaces is necessary 15 . Second , a single interface type may not suit all kinds of users 32 . Supporting this contention , Trumbly et al . 35 report that task performance was significantly better when the interface type was matched appropriately to the level of user computer literacy . Third , despite the growing popularity of icon - based interfaces , some studies found no advantage for icon - based interfaces over text - based interfaces ( e . g . , 3 ) . The preceding arguments suggest that it is beneficial to explore the relative impact of different interface types in a GSS context . However , the actual benefits that can be derived from a good user interface may also be dependent on the nature of the task carried out by users 2 . Therefore , any effects of GSS interface must be evaluated for robustness across different task types . Existing empirical research has focused mainly on measuring the impact of GSS capabilities on group meeting outcomes 8 . Exceptions are Lim et al . 23 and Zigurs et al . 39 , who assessed the impact of GSS capabilities on the group interaction process . Todd and Benbasat 34 suggest that analysis of the interaction process is critical in advancing our under - standing of the notion of decision support . Specifi - cally , the study of influence behavior during group interaction is important to our understanding of GSS effectiveness 39 . In this study , GSS interface ( icon - based versus text - based ) and task type ( intel - lective versus preference ) are varied and their effects are assessed using a micro - level analysis of the group interaction process . 2 . GSS interface Given the relative novelty of GSS technology in many organizations , it is critical that users are able to learn this technology quickly so that they can deploy it for effective use 19 . Thus , the amount of learning effort required is an important factor for assessing the effectiveness of GSS designs 10 . Learning ef - fects have been observed in GSS and related re - search . In their study on computer - mediated confer - encing , Hiltz and Turoff 17 found that user behav - ior evolved over time and repeated usage led to greater complexity , specialization , and diversity . Chidambaram et al . 5 conducted a longitudinal study on the impact of a GSS on group development . They found that the level of group cohesiveness and conflict changed over time with repeated GSS usage . These results suggest that the behavior of novice and expert GSS users are likely to differ . These differ - ences may be a result of the varying levels of syntactic and semantic knowledge 32 possessed by them . Syntactic knowledge refers to device - depen - dent details which users must remember before they can use a GSS . Semantic knowledge is concerned with cognitive concepts related to the group task to be performed . Novice and expert GSS users are likely to possess different levels of syntactic knowledge . When using a GSS , expert users who have already retained a substantial amount of syntactic knowledge are likely to have less cognitive load than novice users with little syntactic knowledge . They can focus their at - tention on applying semantic knowledge to accom - plish their group task . Conversely , novice users need to cope with both the demands of syntactic and semantic knowledge to complete their group task . To reduce the cognitive load of novice users , a GSS should have a user - friendly interface that facilitates learning and usage . In general , human - computer in - teraction research has found that icon - based inter - faces resulted in greater efficiency , fewer errors , less learning effort , and greater satisfaction , compared to text - based interfaces 4 , 13 . Hence , a GSS with an icon - based interface may help groups to attain better interaction and thereby carry out their task more effectively . This is especially true for group mem - bers who are novice GSS or computer users . C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 291 3 . Task type DeSanctis 9 contends that the interfaces of com - puter systems should not be evaluated without taking task characteristics into consideration . Benbasat and Dexter 2 concur with this observation . GSS re - searchers have also recognized task type as a key variable affecting group interaction 10 , 27 , 39 . Mc - Grath 25 offers a categorization of group task types . It is superior to previous categorization at - tempts for several reasons . First , its categories are mutually exclusive . Second , its categories are collec - tively exhaustive . Third , adjacent categories are logi - cally related to one another . Two of McGrath ' s 25 task types which commonly occur in organizations and are typically performed by groups are intellec - tive and preference tasks 33 . Intellective tasks have correct answers which may or may not be demonstrable 25 . When working on intellective tasks , group members tend to apply in - formational influence on each other by convincing each other with facts , judgments , and logical argu - ments 21 . They need to cooperate and share rele - vant task knowledge to arrive at the correct answers . In contrast , preference tasks do not have correct answers and require group members to arrive at decisions based on their values and norms 25 . Without a common basis for making decisions , group members tend to apply normative influence on each other by insisting on their own subjective views and preferences 21 . Group decisions are reached by resolving these conflicts to arrive at a consensus . 4 . Group interaction Group decisions are reached through a process of group interaction 25 . During their interaction , group members can attempt to influence each other through informational and normative influence 21 . Some group members are likely to exude a greater amount of influence than others . The balance of informa - tional and normative influence , and distribution of influence attempts among group members are mod - erated by both the group task type and the GSS used 23 , 39 . When using a GSS , group members can interact with and apply influence on each other through three communication channels : verbal , non - verbal , and electronic 39 . In many situations , the quality of group interaction is measured by the rapid - ity with which group members can exercise influ - ence attempts to resolve their group task ( efficiency of influence attempts ) , the extent to which all group members contribute to the influence attempts ( in - equality of influence attempts ) , or the lack of a specific group member who contributes a dispropor - tionate amount of influence attempts ( dominance significance ) . Thus , three critical aspects of influence behavior in a group are efficiency of influence at - tempts , inequality of influence attempts , and domi - nance significance 39 . Efficieno , of influence attempts is measured by the total amount of influence attempts from all group members in a given time period of group interaction . It includes all influence attempts applied through the verbal , non - verbal , and electronic channels . The higher the score , the greater the efficiency of influ - ence attempts . For a group with n members , which takes t min for their interaction during which each member i generates T ~ amounts of influence at - tempts : tl Efficiency of influence attempts = i = - - - - L - - - ' t Inequality of influence attempts is determined by the distribution of influence attempts among all group members throughout group interaction . It can be computed by taking the root - mean - square of the amounts of verbal , non - verbal , and electronic influ - ence attempts by each group member . The higher the score , the greater the inequality of influence at - tempts . Conversely , a low score indicates a more even distribution and a higher equality of influence attempts . For a group with n members where each member i generates T ~ amounts of influence at - tempts during their interaction : Inequality of influence attempts = ( i = , ~ ( T / - ~ ) 2 , where n 292 C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 Dominance significance is measured by compar - ing the amounts of verbal , non - verbal , and electronic influence attempts by the most dominant group member with those of others in the group during their interaction . It can be computed by taking the ratio of influence attempts by the most dominant group member to those by the average of other group members . The most dominant group member is the person with the greatest amount of influence at - tempts . The higher the score , the greater the domi - nance significance . For a group with n members , including a dominant member ' max ' who produces Tma x influence attempts and other members i who produce T , influence attempts : Tmax Dominance significance = n - 1 ( l / ( n - 1 ) ) × E r , i = 1 5 . Research hypotheses The two independent variables are GSS interface and task type . Two types of GSS interface are inves - tigated : text - based and icon - based . Two task types are examined : intellective and preference . The three dependent variables are efficiency of influence at - tempts , inequality of influence attempts , and domi - nance significance . 5 . 1 . Efficiency of influence attempts A GSS with an icon - based interface can help group members to quickly learn how to use its capabilities 4 , 13 . Thus , their lack of syntactic knowledge is less likely to hinder their ability to effectively use the GSS . Instead , they can concen - trate on applying their semantic knowledge to com - plete their task effectively . Conversely , when group members use a GSS with a text - based interface , they may require considerable effort to learn how to use its capabilities 4 , 13 . During their interaction , group members have to apply both syntactic and semantic knowledge in order to effectively use the GSS to assist them in their task . Hence , by freeing group members from the need to acquire substantial syntac - tic knowledge , an icon - based interface is likely to result in a lighter cognitive load on group members during their interaction . Group members may then capitalize on this lighter cognitive load to either effect a greater amount of influence attempts or make faster decisions . In either case , efficiency of influence attempts is increased . Hla . Efficiency of influence attempts will be higher in GSS groups with an icon - based interface than GSS groups with a text - based interface . A GSS can assist group members to evaluate information more objectively and analyze their task more completely . It can help to reduce conformance pressure and evaluation apprehension during group interaction , thereby encouraging group members to contribute more information 26 . As a whole , the use of a GSS seems to promote the rational aspects but suppress the normative aspects of group interac - tion 6 . An intellective task can best be solved by applying informational influence 21 . Thus , when undertaking an intellective task , a GSS is likely to provide group members with more opportunities to exercise informational influence . This leads to faster decisions and a greater efficiency of influence at - tempts . A preference task can best be completed using normative influence 21 . However , when working on a preference task , a GSS may hinder the ability of group members to apply normative influ - ence . This leads to slower decisions and reduces the efficiency of influence attempts . Hlb . Efficiency of influence attempts will be higher in GSS groups working on an intellective task than GSS groups working on a preference task . 5 . 2 . Inequality of influence attempts An icon - based interface helps all group members to quickly become proficient users of the GSS 4 , 13 . Therefore , regardless of whether they are novice or expert computer users , all group members are able to focus their attention on solving their task . This re - duces the possibility of some group members exer - cising disproportionate amounts of influence just be - cause they are more experienced computer users . It is likely to result in a greater equality of influence attempts among all group members . When using a C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 293 GSS with a text - based interface , group members who are expert computer users are likely to learn the GSS capabilities faster than others who are novice com - puter users . Therefore , the more experienced com - puter users can fully concentrate on their task while others have to cope with cognitive demands from both the GSS and their task . Consequently , group members who are more experienced computer users will be able to exercise considerably more influence than others . This reduces equality of influence at - tempts among all group members . H2a . Inequality of influence attempts will be higher in GSS groups with a text - based interface than GSS groups with an icon - based interface . A GSS can encourage group members to con - tribute more information and help them to evaluate this intbrmation more objectively 26 . By facilitat - ing the rational aspects of group interaction 6 , it allows more knowledgeable group members to apply greater amounts of intbrmational influence when working on an intellective task . Since some group members may be more knowledgeable than others , group members are likely to contribute unequal amounts of influence attempts during their interac - tion . A GSS can reduce conformance pressure and evaluation apprehension during group interaction 26 . By suppressing the normative aspects of group interaction 6 , it hinders dominant group members from applying disproportionate amounts of norma - tive influence when solving a preference task . Dur - ing their interaction , group members are likely to contribute more equal amounts of influence attempts . H2b . Inequality of influence attempts will be higher in GSS groups working on an intellective task than GSS groups working on a preference task . 5 . 3 . Dominance significance Group members using a GSS with an icon - based interface can quickly become proficient users regard - less of whether they are novice or expert computer users 4 , 13 . Hence , they can all focus their attention on solving their task . This reduces the likelihood of any group member being able to exercise a dispro - portionate amount of influence to dominate their interaction . It is likely to lead to lower dominance significance . Group members using a GSS with a text - based interface may require a substantial amount of learning effort if they are novice computer users . During their interaction , these group members have to divide their cognitive effort between learning GSS capabilities and solving their task . They cannot fully concentrate on their task . Hence , there is a greater likelihood that a specific group member , who is an expert computer user , may exercise a disproportion - ate amount of influence to dominate group interac - tion . This is likely to result in higher dominance significance . H3a . Dominance significance will be lower in GSS groups with an icon - based interface than GSS groups with a text - based interface . A GSS facilitates the rational aspects of group interaction 6 . When solving an intellective task , more knowledgeable group members can apply greater amounts of informational influence . A spe - cific group member who is more knowledgeable than others may generate a lot of influence attempts dur - ing group interaction . This is likely to lead to higher dominance significance . A GSS also suppresses the normative aspects of group interaction 6 . When working on a preference task , dominant group mem - bers are prevented from applying disproportionate amounts of normative influence . By preventing spe - cific group members from dominating their interac - tion , a lower dominance significance is a likely outcome . H3b . Dominance significance will be higher in GSS groups working on an intellective task than GSS groups working on a preference task . 6 . Research methodology A 2 X 2 factorial controlled laboratory experiment was carried out . All meetings were conducted with groups of five members in a face - to - face environ - ment ( see Fig . 1 ) . 6 . 1 . Measurement of influence attempts There were three types of influence attempts by group members : verbal , non - verbal , and electronic 294 C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 Video Camer Public Screen © Fig . 1 . The experimental setting . Fig . 2 . A sample screen of SAGE . 39 . Verbal behavior of individual group members during their meetings was captured on video tapes . It was coded using an interaction analysis scheme de - veloped by Putnam 28 . This scheme produced five categories of communication behavior which could be considered influence attempts 39 : initiation , goal - oriented , integrative , implementation , and pro - cess messages . Two coders viewed the video record - ings and classified verbal behavior in accordance with Putnam ' s 28 scheme . Their level of agreement exceeded 80 % , indicating adequate inter - rater relia - bility . Remaining differences were resolved through a discussion between the two coders . The diversity and complexity of non - verbal be - havior such as eye gaze , facial expression , and hand gestures rendered them inappropriate for detailed analysis . Thus , no attempt was made to code non - verbal influence attempts by group members . Elec - tronic influence attempts include behavior such as defining new items , deleting existing items , changing public screen display , and using the group communi - cation capability . An item may be any piece of data , including a problem statement , a decision criterion , or an alternative solution . Electronic influence at - tempts by group members were counted using print - outs of system log files on which they were captured . 6 . 2 . GSS interface Groups using the Macintosh - based SAGE system 37 worked with an icon - based interface ( see Fig . 2 ) . Groups using the UNIX - based SAMM system 11 had a text - based interface ( see Fig . 3 ) . SAGE is a derivative of SAMM . It has all the capabilities available in SAMM . Hence , besides their interface , both SAGE and SAMM were identical in many ways . These similarities were important controls . They helped to prevent confounding effects due to differences in GSS capabilities . Both SAMM and SAGE consist of two programs : public and private . The private program collected inputs from individual group members at their respective private terminals and sent them to the public program . The public program stored these inputs and displayed them on the shared public screen . 6 . 3 . Task type The intellective task was the International Studies Program task adapted from Zigurs et al . 39 . Groups solving this task had to score a list of competing applicants based on six applicant attributes : four personality test scores , gender , and prior travel expe - rience . This task could be regarded as an intellective SOFTWARE AIDED MEETING MANAGEMENT ( SAMM ) 1 . AGENDA 2 . IDEA GATHERING 3 . IDEA EVALUATION 4 . MEETING THOUGHTS 5 . DECISION AIDS 6 . UTILITIES 7 . CONCLUDE MEETING YOUR CHOICE : Fig . 3 . A sample screen of SAMM . C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 295 task because it had a correct answer that could be objectively predicted using applicant attributes . The preference task was the Personal Trust Foundation task adapted from Watson et al . 36 . Group mem - bers working on this task had to allocate funds to a list of competing programs according to their per - sonal values . This task could be considered a prefer - ence task because it had no correct answers . Instead , its answer must be reached subjectively using norms and values . 6 . 4 . Experimental procedure All groups began their experimental session with a warm - up task 36 . This helped to minimize prob - lems related to the use of zero - history groups 25 . Next , group members working on the intellective task were given applicant attributes and actual per - formance scores of 50 sample applicants for learning purposes . This provided group members with a com - mon decision basis for their task 39 . Group mem - bers solving the preference task omitted this step because their task was based on personal beliefs and norms . Thus , group members were likely to ap - proach their task with different decision bases . Group members were then given a 45 minute training on how to use their respective GSS . After training , they proceeded to solve their respective task using their respective GSS . All groups had to follow a common meeting agenda . This agenda was de - signed to facilitate group communication 19 , 20 . It consisted of the following activities : problem defini - tion , criteria definition , criteria evaluation , alterna - tives definition , alternatives evaluation , decision def - inition , and meeting conclusion . Group members could iterate among activities of the agenda . They could use verbal , non - verbal , and electronic commu - nication at any stage of their meeting . No time limit was imposed for the meeting . After the meeting , group members answered a questionnaire eliciting their age , gender , experience working in groups , and experience working with computers . 6 . 5 . Experimental subjects A total of 32 groups were involved . Each of the 4 experimental treatments had 8 groups . The subjects were first - year information systems undergraduates from a large university . Their average age was 20 . About half were males and half were females . Most subjects had some experience working in groups but little experience working with computers . They were randomly placed in groups , which were randomly assigned to experimental treatments . This helped to alleviate confounding effects of individual differ - ences during group interaction 14 . Course credit were given to subjects to motivate them to take their task seriously . 7 . Data analysis All statistical tests were carried out at a 5 % level of significance . ANOVA tests revealed no significant differences between subjects in different experimen - tal treatments in terms of their age , experience work - ing in groups , and experience working with comput - ers . Mann - Whitney tests found no significant differ - ences in the proportion of male to female subjects across experimental treatments . Thus , the random Table 1 Means ( standard deviations ) of dependent variables GSS interface Task type Efficiency of influence attempts Inequality of influence attempts Dominance significance Icon - based Intellective 5 . 41 5 . 56 1 . 64 ( 0 . 56 ) ( 1 . 20 ) ( 0 . 36 ) Preference 5 . l0 5 . 02 1 . 53 ( 0 . 81 ) ( 1 . 06 ) ( 0 . 25 ) Text - based lntellective 2 . 21 7 . 56 2 . 28 ( 0 . 93 ) ( 1 . 73 ) ( 0 . 38 ) Preference 1 . 66 6 . 21 2 . 26 ( 0 . 75 ) ( 1 . 03 ) 0 . 54 ) 296 C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 Table 2 Results of ANOVA tests on dependent variables Efficiency of influence attempts Inequality of influence attempts Dominance significance F = p < F = p < F = p < GSS interface ( G1 ) 176 . 01 0 . 01 * ° 12 . 28 0 . 01 * * 23 . 87 0 . 01 * * Task type ( TT ) 2 . 94 0 . 10 4 . 30 0 . 05 * 0 . 21 0 . 65 GI × TT 0 . 26 0 . 62 0 . 81 0 . 38 0 . 09 0 . 77 • p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . assignment of subjects to groups and groups to ex - perimental treatments appeared to be effective con - trois over possible confounding factors . The descrip - tive statistics for dependent variables are reported in Table 1 . The results of ANOVA tests on dependent variables are shown in Table 2 . No transformation 38 could be found to allow the data for efficiency of influence attempts to sat - isfy both the homogeneity and normality require - ments of the ANOVA test . However , the data could meet the more important homogeneity requirement 38 without transformation . An ANOVA test found a significant main effect for GSS interface ( F = 176 . 01 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Since the normality requirement was not met , this significant result was confirmed using the Mann - Whitney test . Efficiency of influ - ence attempts was higher in GSS groups with an icon - based interface than those with a text - based interface . Hla was supported but Hlb was not sup - ported . A square - root transformation 38 was applied on the data for inequality of influence attempts to allow it to satisfy both the homogeneity and normality requirements of the ANOVA test . An ANOVA test detected significant main effects due to both GSS interface ( F = 12 . 28 , p < 0 . 01 ) and task type ( F = 4 . 30 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Inequality of influence attempts was higher in GSS groups with a text - based interface than those with an icon - based interface . It was higher in GSS groups working on an intellective task than those working on a preference task . Both H2a and H2b were supported . The data for dominance significance could meet both the homogeneity and normality requirements of the ANOVA test . An ANOVA test detected a signifi - cant main effect for GSS interface ( F = 23 . 87 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Dominance significance was lower in GSS groups with an icon - based interface than those with a text - based interface . H3a was supported but H3b was not supported . 8 . Discussion 8 . 1 . Efficiency of influence attempts Efficiency of influence attempts was higher for GSS groups when an icon - based , rather than a text - based , interface was used ( see Table 1 ) . This finding might have arisen for two reasons . First , groups using an icon - based interface might have generated a greater amount of influence attempts than those us - ing a text - based interface . Second , the former groups might have taken a shorter period of time to arrive at their decisions compared to the latter . An examina - tion of the experimental data reveals that the total amount of influence attempts did not differ signifi - cantly between GSS groups with an icon - based inter - face and those with a text - based interface . However , the former groups took significantly less time than the latter to complete their task . These observations suggest that a task can only be completed with a specific amount of influence attempts , which does not depend on the GSS interface employed . How - ever , the use of a user - friendly icon - based GSS interface can reduce the cognitive load on group members by allowing them to become proficient GSS users quickly 4 , 13 . This permits them to focus their attention on their task and exercise influence attempts efficiently so as to complete their task promptly . Efficiency of influence attempts did not differ significantly for groups working on an intellective task and those working on a preference task . How - ever , the ANOVA test found a near significant main effect for task type ( F = 2 . 94 , p < 0 . 10 ) . The power C . - L . Sia et aL / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 297 of this test 7 was 0 . 38 , indicating that a larger sample size might have detected a significant main effect for task type . On average , the efficiency of influence attempts for groups working on an intellec - tive task was higher than that for groups working on a preference task ( see Table 1 ) . 8 . 2 . Inequality of influence attempts GSS groups with a text - based interface reported greater inequality of influence attempts than those with an icon - based interface ( see Table 1 ) . The user - friendly icon - based GSS interface might have allowed all group members to learn the GSS capabil - ities rapidly and become proficient GSS users . This might have prevented some group members , who were experienced computer users , from dominating group interaction , thereby leading to greater equality of influence attempts among all group members . Future research can test this assertion by replicating this study with group members who are all experi - enced GSS or computer users . If this assertion is true , equality of influence attempts should not differ significantly between GSS groups using an icon - based interface and those using a text - based inter - face . GSS groups solving an intellective task reported higher inequality of influence attempts than those solving a preference task ( see Table 1 ) . A GSS might have raised the proportion of informational influence relative to that of normative influence during group interaction 6 . This would permit the more knowl - edgeable group members to contribute more informa - tional influence attempts toward the solution of the intellective task . It would also hinder the dominant group members from applying more normative influ - ence attempts during the solution of the preference task . Thus , the higher inequality of influence at - tempts in the former compared to the latter groups was found . Future research can study this issue in greater detail by classifying influence attempts into informational and normative influence . The propor - tion of informational and normative influence at - tempts during group interaction can then be mea - sured for both task types . The equality of informa - tional and normative influence attempts for both task types can also be assessed . 8 . 3 . Dominance significance A GSS with an icon - based interface helped groups to attain less dominance significance than a GSS with a text - based interface ( see Table 1 ) . By provid - ing a user - friendly interface which helped all group members to employ the GSS capabilities profi - ciently , the GSS with an icon - based interface might have prevented any single group member , who was an expert computer user , from totally dominating group interaction . This alleviated dominance signifi - cance . As discussed above , future studies can ex - plore this observation by replicating this study using group members who are all experienced GSS or computer users . A result showing no significant dif - ferences between GSS groups using an icon - based interface and those using a text - based interface will provide support for this observation . Dominance significance did not differ signifi - cantly between GSS groups solving an intellective task and those completing a preference task ( see Table 1 ) . This result did not parallel that of inequal - ity of influence attempts . Hence , the higher inequal - ity of influence attempts in GSS groups solving the intellective task could be a result of not one but several knowledgeable group members contributing more towards the solution of their task . Given that the tasks used were relatively simple tasks , it was likely that not one but several group members would be conversant with such tasks . This assertion can be tested in future research by replicating this study using more difficult intellective and preference tasks . A difficult intellective task will increase the likeli - hood that only one group member is familiar with the task . If such members of each group contribute a large proportion of informational influence attempts compared to others during their interaction , domi - nance significance should be higher with an intellec - tive task than a preference task . 9 . Conclusion The findings of our research have limited general - izability for several reasons . First , group members with little experience using computers were em - ployed . Second , a laboratory setting and two artifi - 298 C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 cial tasks were used . Care should be exercised when generalizing these results to other settings . Neverthe - less , the earlier discussion suggests that these find - ings can be further explored and extended by repli - cating this study using more experienced GSS or computer users and more difficult tasks . Future stud - ies may also use repeated sessions , rather than a single session as in this study , to assess the relative impact of GSS interface and task type on the influ - ence behavior of group members over time . In summary , these findings indicate that the user - interface has an impact on how a GSS is used : greater decision - making efficiency can be achieved without impairing task accomplishment , in an envi - ronment where group members can contribute more equally during group discussion . Thus , the user - in - terface should be an important consideration for GSS developers , in addition to their concern for other GSS features . More specifically , the results illustrate the value of providing GSS groups with an icon - based interface , which have important implications for GSS developers . In a GSS environment , difficulties in learning the user - interface of a GSS should not be allowed to hinder group members from contributing to task accomplishment . By freeing group members from additional cognitive burdens , a user - friendly icon - based GSS interface helps them to raise the quality of their interaction . In an organizational set - ting where people attending meetings - typically managers with minimal experience as computer users - the provision of a user - friendly icon - based GSS interface may be particularly appropriate 15 . When solving intellective tasks , an icon - based interface may make it easier for knowledgeable managers with limited computer - literacy to contribute constructively to task completion . When solving preference tasks , an icon - based interface may help to encourage more even participation among managers . Results of this study are consistent with design principles on hu - man - computer interface , which propose that com - puter systems should be easy to learn and use 1 , 22 , 29 . Moreover , these results suggest that such design principles may be applicable to user - interface design in a GSS context across various task types . Having a user - interface which enables groups to quickly understand the functionalities of the GSS serves to facilitate its acceptance within organiza - tions 24 . References 1 S . L . Alter , Decision Support Systems : Current Practice and Continuing Challenges ( Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 1990 ) . 2 I . Benbasat and A . S . Dexter , An investigation of the effec - tiveness of color and graphical information presentation un - der varying time constraints , MIS Quarterly 10 ( 1 ) ( 1986 ) 59 - 83 . 3 I . Benbasat and P . Todd , An experimental investigation of interface design altematives : Icon versus text and direct manipulation versus menus , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 38 ( 3 ) ( 1993 ) 369 - 402 . 4 W . Buxton , There ' s more to interaction than meets the eye : Some issues in manual input , in : D . A . Norman and S . W . Draper , eds . , User Centered System Design : New Perspec - tives on Human - Computer Interaction ( Lawrence Edbaum Associates , Hillsdale , N J , 1985 ) 319 - 337 . 5 L . Chidambaram , R . P . Bostrom and B . E . Wynne , A longitu - dinal study of the impact of group decision support systems on group development , Journal of Management Information Systems 7 ( 3 ) ( 1991 ) 7 - 25 . 6 D . L . Clapper , E . R . McLean and R . T . Watson , An experimen - tal investigation of the effect of a group decision support system on normative influence in small groups , in : Proc . of the 12th Annual International Conference on Information Systems ( 1991 ) 273 - 282 . 7 J . Cohen , Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences ( Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1988 ) . 8 A . R . Dennis and RB . Gallupe , A history of group support systems empirical research : Lessons learned and future direc - tions , in : L . M . Jessup and J . S . Valacich , eds . , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives ( Macmillan , New York , NY , 1993 ) 59 - 77 . 9 G . DeSanctis , Computer graphics as decision aids : Directions for research , Decision Sciences 15 ( 4 ) ( 1984 ) 463 - 487 . 10 G . DeSanctis and R . B . Gallupe , A foundation for the study of group decision support systems , Management Science 33 ( 5 ) ( 1987 ) 589 - 609 . ll G . DeSanctis , J . R . Snyder and M . S . Poole , The meaning of the interface : A functional and holistic evaluation of a meet - ing software system , Decision Support Systems I 1 ( 4 ) ( 1994 ) 319 - 335 . 12 B . A . Fisher , Small Group Decision Making : Communication and the Group Process ( McGraw - Hill , New York , NY , 1989 ) . 13 J . D . Fodey , V . L . Wallace and P . Chan , The human factors of computer graphics interaction techniques , IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 4 ( 1 l ) ( 1984 ) 13 - 48 . 14 M . E . Gordon , L . A . Slade and N . Schmitt , The ' science of the sophomore " revisited : From conjecture to empiricism , Academy of Management Review ll ( l ) ( 1986 ) 191 - 207 . 15 P . Gray , M . Mandviwalla , L . OIfman and J . Satzinger , The user interface in group support systems , in : L . M . Jessup and J . S . Valacich , eds . , Group Support Systems : New Perspec - tives ( Macmillan , New York , NY , 1993 ) 192 - 213 . 16 P . Gray and L . Olfman , The user interface in group decision C . - L . Sia et al . / Decision Support Systems 19 ( 1997 ) 289 - 299 299 support systems , Decision Support Systems 5 ( 2 ) ( 1989 ) 119 - 137 . 17 S . R . Hiltz and M . Turoff , The evolution of user behavior in a computerized conferencing system , Communications of the ACM 24 ( 11 ) ( 1981 ) 739 - 751 . 18 G . P . Huber , The nature and design of post - industrial organi - zations , Management Science 30 ( 8 ) ( 1984 ) 928 - 951 . 19 G . P . Huber , Issues in the design of group decision support systems , MIS Quarterly 8 ( 3 ) ( 1984 ) 195 - 204 . 20 R . Joyner and K . Tunstall , Computer augmented organiza - tional problem solving , Management Science 17 ( 4 ) ( 1970 ) 212 - 225 . 21 M . F . Kaplan and C . E Miller , Group decision making and normative versus informational influence effects of type of issue and assigned decision rule , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53 ( 2 ) ( 1987 ) 306 - 313 . 22 P . G . W . Keen and M . S . Scott - Morton , Decision Support Sys - tems : An Organizational Perspective ( Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 1978 ) . 23 L . H . Lim , K . S . Raman and K . K . Wei , Interacting effects of GDSS and leadership , Decision Support Systems 12 ( 3 ) ( 1994 ) 199 - 211 . 24 H . Lou and R . W . Scamell , Acceptance of groupware : The relationships among use , satisfaction , and outcomes , Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce 6 ( 2 ) ( 1996 ) 173 - 190 . 25 J . E . McGrath , Groups : Interaction and Performance ( Pren - tice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1984 ) . 26 J . F . Nunamaker , A . R . Dennis , J . S . Valacich , D . R . Vogel and J . E George , Electronic meeting systems to support group work , Communications of the ACM 34 ( 7 ) ( 1991 ) 40 - 61 . 27 A . Pinsonneault and K . L . Kraemer , The impact of technolog - ical support on groups : An assessment of the empirical research , Decision Support Systems 5 ( 2 ) ( 1989 ) 197 - 216 . 28 L . L . Putnam , Procedural messages and small group work climates : A lag sequential analysis , in : M . Burgoon , ed . , Communication Yearbook 5 , Transaction Books ( New Brunswick , NJ , 1981 ) 331 - 350 . 29 . I . F . Rockart and D . W . DeLong , Executive Support Systems ( Irwin , Homewood , IL , 1988 ) . 30 C . Rutkowski , An introduction to the human applications standard computer interface , Part 1 : Theory and principles , Byte 7 ( 11 ) ( 1982 ) 291 - 310 . 31 M . Shaw , Group Dynamics : The Psychology of Small Group Behat , ior ( McGraw - Hill , New York , NY , 1981 ) . 32 B . Shneiderman , Designing the User Interface : Strategies for F ~ ffecti ~ , e Human - Computer Interaction ( Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 1987 ) . 33 B . C . Y . Tan , K . S . Raman and K . K . Wei , An empirical study of the task dimension of group support system , IEEE Trans - actions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics 24 ( 7 ) ( 1994 ) 1054 - - 1060 . 34 P . Todd and ! . Benbasat , Process tracing methods in decision support systems research : Exploring the black box , MIS Quarterly 11 ( 4 ) ( 1987 ) 493 - 512 . 351 36 37 38 39 J . E . Trumbly , K . P . Amett and M . P . Martin , Performance effect of matching computer interface characteristics and user skill level , International Journal of Mun - Machine Studies 38 ( 4 ) ( 1993 ) 713 - 724 . R . T . Watson , G . DeSanctis and M . S . Poole , Using a GDSS to facilitate group consensus : Some intended and unintended consequences , MIS Quarterly 12 ( 3 ) ( 1988 ) 463 - 478 . K . K . Wei , B . C . Y . Tan , C . L . Sia and K . S . Raman , Hypertext : A new approach to construct group support systems , Interna - tional Journal t ~ " lnfi ~ rmation Management 16 ( 3 ) ( 1996 ) 163 - 181 . S . Weisberg , Applied Linear Regression ( John Wiley , New York , NY , 1985 ) . I . Zigurs , M . S . Poole and G . DeSanctis , A study of influence in computer - mediated group decision making , MIS Quarterly 12 ( 4 ) ( 1988 ) 625 - 644 . Choon - Ling Sia is a Teaching Assistant at the National University of Singapore . He received his MSc . degree in Infor - mation Systems in 1994 from the Na - tional University of Singapore . He is currently pursuing his Ph . D . degree . His research interests include group support systems , business process re - engineer - ing , and virtual organizations . Q Bernard C . Y . Tan is a Teaching Fel - low at the National University of Singa - pore . He received his M . Sc . and Ph . D . degrees in Information Systems , in 1991 and 1995 respectively , from the Na - tional University of Singapore . He is currently a Visiting Scholar at the Stan - ford University . His research focuses on group support systems , electronic data interchange , and information systems management and development . Kwok - Kee Wei is a Senior Lecturer at the National University of Singapore . He received his D . Phil . degree in Com - puter Science in 1986 from the Univer - sity of York ( UK ) . He is in the editorial board of MIS Quarterly . His publica - tions include articles in MIS Quarterly , IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , ACM SIGMOD Records , Information and Management , Decision Support Systems , International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , and European Journal of Information Systems . His research fo - cuses on group support systems , human - computer interaction , and electronic data interchange .