An insight - related neural reward signal Yongtaek Oh * , Christine Chesebrough , Brian Erickson , Fengqing Zhang , John Kounios Department of Psychology , Drexel University , Philadelphia , PA , USA A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Brain oscillations Creativity EEG Insight Problem solving Reward signal A B S T R A C T Moments of insight , a phenomenon of creative cognition in which an idea suddenly emerges into awareness as an “ Aha ! ” are often reported to be affectively positive experiences . We tested the hypothesis that problem - solving by insight is accompanied by neural reward processing . We recorded high - density EEGs while participants solved a series of anagrams . For each solution , they reported whether the answer had occurred to them as a sudden insight or whether they had derived it deliberately and incrementally ( i . e . , “ analytically ’ ) . Afterwards , they ﬁ lled out a questionnaire that measures general dispositional reward sensitivity . We computed the time - frequency repre - sentations of the EEGs for trials with insight ( I ) solutions and trials with analytic ( A ) solutions and subtracted them to obtain an I - A time - frequency representation for each electrode . Statistical Parametric Mapping ( SPM ) analyses tested for signi ﬁ cant I - A and reward - sensitivity effects . SPM revealed the time , frequency , and scalp locations of several I > A effects . No A > I effect was observed . The primary neural correlate of insight was a burst of ( I > A ) gamma - band oscillatory activity over prefrontal cortex approximately 500 ms before participants pressed a button to indicate that they had solved the problem . We correlated the I - A time - frequency represen - tation with reward sensitivity to discover insight - related effects that were modulated by reward sensitivity . This revealed a separate anterior prefrontal burst of gamma - band activity , approximately 100 ms after the primary I - A insight effect , which we interpreted to be an insight - related reward signal . This interpretation was supported by source reconstruction showing that this signal was generated in part by orbitofrontal cortex , a region associated with reward learning and hedonically pleasurable experiences such as food , positive social experiences , addictive drugs , and orgasm . These ﬁ ndings support the notion that for many people insight is rewarding . Additionally , these results may explain why many people choose to engage in insight - generating recreational and vocational activities such as solving puzzles , reading murder mysteries , creating inventions , or doing research . This insight - related reward signal may be a manifestation of an evolutionarily adaptive mechanism for the reinforcement of exploration , problem solving , and creative cognition . 1 . Introduction Insight is a cognitive phenomenon in which a novel or nonobvious idea , perspective , realization , or problem solution emerges into con - sciousness suddenly and in a discrete , all - or - none fashion ( i . e . , an “ aha moment , ” Kounios and Beeman , 2014 ) . It is considered a form of creative cognition because insights can convey nonobvious solutions or ideas . This contrasts with analytic thinking which takes place in a conscious , deliberate , incremental fashion , often using familiar cognitive strategies . One aspect of insight that makes it an intriguing phenomenon with a long history of study in experimental psychology is that its cognitive component , the representational change ( Danek et al . , 2018 ; Ohlsson , 1984 ) , is often accompanied by sudden pleasurable affect ( Gick and Lockhart , 1995 ; Danek et al . , 2014 ) . Indeed , research shows that this affect distinguishes insight from other forms of cognition ( Metcalfe , 1986 ; Metcalfe and Weibe , 1987 ; Bowden and Grunewald , 2018 ) . For example , recent empirical investigations of the experiential correlates of insight have found pleasure , suddenness , and certainty , followed by surprise and relief , to be the most frequently mentioned experiences , in that order ( Danek et al . , 2014 ) . Similarly , Shen et al . ( 2016 ) found that the three main emotions identi ﬁ ed with insight are happiness , ease , and certainty . Although the functional signi ﬁ cance of insight ’ s pleasurable affect is unclear , several researchers have pointed out that it may act as a kind of intrinsic reward mechanism that reinforces creative cognition or moti - vates future behavior related to the content of the insight ( Gopnik , 2000 ; Kizilirmak et al . , 2019 ; Danek and Salvi , 2018 ) . This may help to explain why many people voluntarily engage in recreational problem - solving * Corresponding author . 3201 Chestnut St , Philadelphia , PA , 19104 , USA . E - mail address : ytoh2000 @ gmail . com ( Y . Oh ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect NeuroImage journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / neuroimage https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2020 . 116757 Received 31 August 2019 ; Received in revised form 10 February 2020 ; Accepted 14 March 2020 Available online 16 March 2020 1053 - 8119 / © 2020 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Inc . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 activities such as crossword puzzles , brain teasers , or reading murder mysteries . It may also help to explain why some people are highly motivated to pursue careers in creative domains that require dif ﬁ cult learning and problem solving , such as those in the arts , engineering , design , and scienti ﬁ c research . Despite these reasons for hypothesizing that the affect accompanying insight is functionally and theoretically important , little research into its neural basis has been done . Kizilirmak et al . ( 2019 ) measured partici - pants ’ neural responses to induced , possibly insight - like , sudden com - prehensions when the solutions to compound remote associates problems were revealed to them after a short delay . They found increased activity in the striatum , a part of the brain ’ s reward system , and in the amygdala , as well as in the hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex when solu - tions were presented , suggesting that insights involve a link between a hypothetical neural reward and its integration in memory . Another recent study by Tik et al . ( 2018 ) used an ultra - high magnetic ﬁ eld ( 7T ) to acquire high - resolution fMRI images in subcortical regions while participants solved compound remote associates problems . They found evidence suggestive of insight - related brain activity in dopami - nergic regions such as the nucleus accumbens and VTA implying that insight recruits neural reward mechanisms . However , features of that study ’ s procedure limited the scope of its ﬁ ndings . For example , rather than subjects being instructed to report whether each solution was derived by insight or analysis , they were instead instructed to “ rate the amount of insight and impasse they experienced during the task . ” This instruction confounded insight and impasse and did not separate insight from analysis ( cf . Kounios and Beeman , 2014 ) . Additionally , the study involved a very low number of solutions per condition raising the pos - sibility that what appear to be insight - related differences in dopami - nergic activity may have been due to ancillary characteristics of the problems or their solutions . A more general limitation of the use of fMRI to study putative insight - related neural reward mechanisms is its relatively low temporal resolu - tion . In order to determine that a brain response is integrated with or triggered by insight , a technique must be able to show that the brain response occurred concurrently with or after the insight . The relatively sluggish hemodynamic response measured by fMRI is not an ideal vehicle for determining whether a brain response occurs immediately before , during , or after an insight . This study relied on the high temporal resolution of electroencepha - lography ( EEG ) to assess the relationship between insight - related neural activity and possible reward - related activity . As in previous research , insight - related activity was isolated by comparing solutions which par - ticipants labeled as entering awareness suddenly and seemingly discon - nected from the ongoing stream of thought ( i . e . , insight ) to solutions derived by conscious , deliberate thought ( i . e . , analysis ; Bowden et al . , 2005 ; Kounios and Beeman , 2014 ) . To distinguish between insight - related activity associated with reward mechanisms and insight - related activity that was not associated with reward mechanisms , we included a questionnaire - based measure of general dispositional reward sensitivity as a covariate in the analyses of neural activity . Spe - ci ﬁ cally , we subtracted activity associated with analytic - solution trials from activity associated with insight - solution trials . We then correlated this difference with reward sensitivity to reveal insight - related activity associated with reward processing . People show consistent individual differences in sensitivity to reward and punishment ( Gray , 1976 , 1987 ) . These differences can be measured by questionnaire and are associated with characteristic neural activity patterns in response to rewarding or aversive stimuli ( Van den Berg et al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , highly reward - sensitive individuals show greater propensity towards activities that are hedonically pleasurable such as the use of addictive drugs and other forms of sensation seeking ( Davis et al . , 2007 ; Horvath and Zuckerman , 1993 ; O ’ Connor and Colder , 2005 ; Si - mons and Arens , 2007 ) . Other recent evidence shows a potential link between resting - state connectivity of dopaminergic networks in the brain and creative traits ( Schuler et al . , 2019 ) which supports the notion that individual differences in reward processing may be associated with in - dividual differences underlying creative cognition . We therefore hy - pothesized that the insights of highly reward - sensitive individuals are accompanied by activity in the brain ’ s reward system . We applied time - frequency analysis to EEGs recorded from each of 64 electrodes to delineate the time - course of neural activity in different frequency bands at different scalp locations . This was implemented by performing cluster - level inferences using the Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 ( SPM ) for M / EEG software to control for multiple compar - isons from voxel - wise hypothesis testing via the application of Random Field Theory ( Litvak et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , we used the Multiple Sparse Priors ( MSP ) algorithm in SPM to reconstruct the anatomical sources of the insight - related and reward - related activity . Because neuroimaging typically requires a number of repeated in - stances per participant , we tasked participants with solving a list of an - agrams that we have used in previous studies of insight and analytic problem solving ( Erickson et al . , 2018 ; Kounios et al . , 2008 ) . Following Kaplan and Simon ’ s ( 1990 ) observation that the primary de ﬁ ning char - acteristic of insight is its phenomenal experience of suddenness , we sorted insight and analytic solutions according to a procedure that has been used in dozens of prior studies ( Bowden et al . , 2005 ; Kounios and Beeman , 2014 ) . When a participant derives the solution to a problem , he or she immediately presses a button to signal solution occurrence and then verbalizes the solution after a prompt . Finally , he or she is prompted to press a button to indicate whether the solution emerged into aware - ness suddenly and seemingly disconnected from the ongoing stream of thought as an “ aha moment ” ( insight ) ; whether it was derived in a conscious , deliberate fashion ( analysis ) ; or “ not sure . ” Patterns of response times and errors show that these insight / analytic reports re ﬂ ect cognitive problem - solving strategies ( Kounios et al . , 2008 ) . This insight report procedure is similar to the “ remember - know ” technique in mem - ory research in which participants make recognition - memory judgments about individual items and then immediately report whether he or she actually recalled the prior occurrence of that item ( “ remember ” ) or whether he or she didn ’ t speci ﬁ cally recall its prior occurrence but just “ knew ” that it was presented earlier ( e . g . , Wixted and Mickes , 2010 ) . We tested three hypotheses . First , consistent with previous in - vestigations that showed distinct patterns of neural activity for insight versus analytic problem solving ( e . g . Jung - Beeman et al . , 2004 ; see re - views by Kounios and Beeman , 2014 ; Shen et al . , 2018 ) , we hypothesized that there would be a signi ﬁ cant difference in neural activity between insight ( I ) and analytic ( A ) solutions . Second , we hypothesized that by using reward - sensitivity scores as a covariate we would be able to identify reward - sensitivity - related neural activity that is correlated with the I - A difference in neural activity . Speci ﬁ cally , some I > A differences in neural activity might be enhanced in people with greater reward sensitivity while , in other cases , A > I differences might be enhanced by greater reward sensitivity . It should be noted that I - A differences that are correlated with reward sensitivity do not necessarily represent a subset of signi ﬁ cant I - A activity . For example , even if there is no signi ﬁ cant I - A difference for an entire group of par - ticipants , there could be a positive I - A difference for people who are high in reward sensitivity and negative difference for people who are low in reward sensitivity . Third , we hypothesized that I > A activity that is positively correlated with reward sensitivity would originate in one or more brain areas known to be a part of the brain ’ s reward system . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Participants The work was carried out in accordance with The Code of Ethics of the World ’ s Medical Association ( Declaration of Helsinki ) . All experi - mental protocols and procedures were approved by the Drexel University Institutional Review Board . Forty - four subjects ( 25 male , 19 female ; Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 2 mean age ¼ 22 . 6 , SD ¼ 3 . 81 ) were recruited through ﬂ yers posted in or near to Drexel University . Before participation , informed written consent was obtained . All participants were native English speakers and were right - handed based on the Edinburgh Handedness inventory ( Old ﬁ eld , 1971 ; M ¼ 4 . 52 , SD ¼ 0 . 36 ; a score near 5 indicates right handedness ) . Consistent with past studies ( e . g . , Jung - Beeman et al . , 2004 ; Aziz - - Zadeh et al . , 2009 ; Erickson et al . , 2018 ; Tik et al . , 2018 ) , 12 subjects who reported deriving 90 % or more of their solutions by insight or by analysis were omitted from the analyses to ensure a suf ﬁ cient number of solutions of each type ( insight and analysis ) to compute reliable time - frequency analyses and to exclude participants who may not have followed di - rections or who were true outliers in terms of their problem - solving styles . After EEG data cleaning and noisy - trial rejection , two additional subjects were removed for low solution rates , de ﬁ ned as fewer than 15 correct insight solutions or 15 correct analytic solutions . The remaining 30 participants ( 15 male , 15 female ; mean age ¼ 22 . 2 ) were included in the analysis . Their overall mean numbers of correct solutions were 62 . 7 insights and 41 . 7 analytic solutions . 2 . 2 . Experimental design Before the start of the experiment , participants watched a video that provided instructions for the anagram task and instructions on how to judge whether they derived a solution by insight or analysis . The in - structions , based on Jung - Beeman et al . ( 2004 ) , described insights as emerging into consciousness suddenly and unexpectedly and analytic solutions as the result of ongoing , conscious , deliberate thought . The experiment began after the subject con ﬁ rmed that he or she understood the task and how to discriminate between insight and analysis . The anagram task paradigm used in this study was adapted from a previous study ( Kounios et al . , 2008 ) . Subjects completed 9 practice problems before the start of the problem set . There were 185 experimental prob - lems divided into 5 blocks . The anagrams were either 4 - or 5 - letters long and were either words ( e . g . MAGMA , solution : GAMMA ) or non - words ( e . g . TAWER , solution : WATER ) which had only one correct solution ( see Kounios et al . , 2008 , for a detailed description of the anagram stimuli ) . All experimental stimuli and EEG event triggers were generated using E - Prime 2 . 0 ( Psychology Software Tools , Sharpsburg , PA ) . Subjects were asked to hold a mouse with both hands with their thumbs on the left and right buttons . Each trial had the following sequence of prompts displayed at the center of the screen : a ﬁ xation cross , followed by a “ Get Ready ” sign , another ﬁ xation cross , and the anagram stimulus ( “ absis ” in Fig . 1 ) . Participants were given a maximum of 16 s to solve the anagram . Par - ticipants made a speeded bimanual mouse - button press to indicate that they had solved the problem . They were instructed to press the button as quickly as possible when they had the solution to the problem without taking any time to verify its correctness . Then the screen message ( “ So - lution ? “ ) prompted them to verbalize the solution . The experimenter marked each trial as correct / incorrect based on the participant ’ s verbal response ; no feedback was given . After verbalizing the solution , partici - pants were prompted to click the left or right mouse button to indicate whether the solution was achieved through insight or analysis . When they were unsure of which strategy was used , they were instructed not to click the mouse button until the prompt disappeared . Trials that took more than 16 s were considered “ time - outs ” and were immediately fol - lowed by the next trial . 2 . 3 . EEG acquisition and pre - processing EEGs were recorded with 64 Ag / AgCl active electrodes ( Brain Prod - ucts , Morrisville , NC ) mounted in an elastic mesh fabric cap according to the extended International 10 – 20 System ( average mastoid reference ) . Before recording , impedances were checked and adjusted to below 15 k Ω . EEGs were recorded with the PyCorder acquisition program ( Brain Products , Morrisville , NC ) . The sampling rate was 1 , 000 Hz . EEG preprocessing followed the procedure of Erickson et al . ( 2018 ) and was performed with Matlab 2015b ( Mathworks , Inc . , Natick , Mas - sachusetts , USA ) using the EEGLAB toolbox ( Delorme and Makeig , 2004 ) . The EEGs were band - pass ﬁ ltered from 1 to 50 Hz and epoched into 1 - s intervals . Bad channels were visually inspected and removed . A semi - automatic artifact detection tool was used to identify epochs for exclusion . The variables used for semi - automatic detection were threshold ( (cid:2) 275 mV ) , joint - probability ( channel - limit ¼ 6 SD , global - - limit ¼ 3 SD ) , and kurtosis ( channel - limit ¼ 6 . 5 SD , global - limit ¼ 4 . 5 SD ) . Then , selected epochs were manually inspected and removed where appropriate . Independent Component Analysis ( ICA ) weights were calculated using the Infomax algorithm after which the ADJUST toolbox was used to detect and remove artifactual independent components based on stereotypical spatiotemporal features of blinks , eye movements , and generic discontinuities ( Mognon et al . , 2011 ) . The percentage of components removed with ADJUST was limited to 33 % in order to remove only highly reliable artifactual components unlikely to capture variance attributable to brain processes ( Groppe et al . , 2009 ) . Any remaining artifactual independent components were manually inspected and removed where appropriate . The time - frequency analyses focused on the 1 , 000 ms prior to , and ending with , the button - press signaling that a solution had been derived . Therefore , trials that were solved within 1 , 000 ms of stimulus onset were rejected in order to prevent data contamination from pre - stimulus ac - tivity . Out of 3 , 989 total correct trials that were labelled as insight or analytic , 99 short trials ( 2 . 5 % ) with response times less than 1 , 000 ms were omitted . The EEG time - series was then re - epoched to the 1 , 000 ms before the bimanual button - press . Semi - automated artifact detection and manual review were performed as a ﬁ nal clean up with more conserva - tive parameters : joint - probability ( channel - limit ¼ 4 SD , global - limit ¼ 3 SD ) and kurtosis ( channel - limit ¼ 6 . 5 SD , global - limit ¼ 2 SD ) . The ends of the epochs were padded to prevent potential edge artifacts in the subsequent wavelet transformation . 2 . 4 . Behavioral data Trial - wise response time , accuracy ( correct , incorrect , time - out ) , and strategy used ( insight , analysis ) were automatically generated from the E - Prime software during the session . Reward sensitivity and mood levels were measured via computerized questionnaires after completion of the Fig . 1 . Anagram procedure . Preparatory prompts included a 500 - ms ﬁ xation cross , a 2000 - ms “ Get Ready ” message , and another 500 - ms ﬁ xation cross . The anagram stimulus was then displayed for 16 s . When participants arrived at the solution , they made a bimanual button - press ( indicated by R – B in the ﬁ gure ) , and a “ Solution ? ” message was displayed to prompt subjects to verbalize the answer ( “ basis ” , indicated by R – S ) . The experimenter manually recorded the correctness of the solution without giving feedback to the subject . Then the “ Insight / Analytic ” message was displayed for 4 s to prompt subjects to press a button to indicate which strategy they had used ( indicated by R - IA ) ( Figure adapted from Erickson et al . , 2018 , by permission ) . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 3 anagram task . Reward sensitivity was measured using the Reward Responsiveness Scale ( RRS ; Van den Berg et al . , 2010 ) . The RRS is an 8 - item questionnaire that assesses sensitivity to reward . We selected the RRS scale to measure reward sensitivity because of its superior psycho - metric properties and because it is known to be a predictor of neural responses to reward stimuli ( Van den Berg et al . , 2010 ) . Participants ’ moods were assessed with the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule ( PANAS ; Watson et al . , 1988 ) . The PANAS consists of two 10 - item questionnaires which measure positive and negative affect , respec - tively . The behavioral data were analyzed at two levels : all - subjects and RRS - score median - split . 2 . 5 . Statistical Parametric Mapping ( SPM ) SPM 12 for M / EEG ( Litvak et al . , 2011 ) version 7487 was used to perform time - frequency transformations , topological inferences , and source reconstruction while controlling for multiple comparisons based on Random Field Theory ( RFT ) . RFT - based correction for multiple compari - sonsiseffectivewithEEGbecauseofthetemporalandspatialsmoothnessof EEG data . RFT models continuous statistical processes and characterizes topological features when controlling for false - positive rate to adjust p - values ( Kilner and Friston , 2010 ) . For each EEG channel , time - frequency decomposition was implemented by convolving a series of complex Morlet wavelets with each trial time - series after symmetrically padding both ends of the time series . A Morlet wavelet is a complex sine wave tapered by a Gaussian function that minimizes edge effects and retains the smoothness crucial to the analysis of electrophysiological data ( Cohen , 2018 ) . The wavelets had 9 cycles with a peak frequency of 1 – 50 Hz . The full - width at half - maximum ( FWHM ) ranged from332 to34ms withincreasingwavelet peak - frequency . The resulting time - frequency maps were rescaled using a log transform . Robust averaging was used to compute the mean time - frequency maps for all insight and all analytic trials while down - weighting the outliers until convergence was achieved . The time - frequency maps of averaged insight and analytic conditions were contrasted . We planned to analyze spectrotemporal characteristics of signi ﬁ cant activations in sensor space requiring four dimensions of data ( time , fre - quency , scalp - x , scalp - y ) . However , SPM can execute statistical tests involving at most three - dimensions . Therefore , we reduced the number of data dimensions simultaneously considered by performing a series of tests . Each analysis was performed in two dimensions of the transformed EEG data : time x frequency and scalp x time . Lastly , source reconstruction was employed to elucidate the underlying functional anatomy of the sensor - space activations . We posed three main research questions : ( 1 ) What are the neural dif - ferences between insight and analytic trials ( I - A contrast ) ? ( 2 ) What is the relationship between the I - A contrast and the RRS scores ? ( 3 ) What are the neural sources of I - A activity and I - A activity that correlate with RS scores ? 2 . 5 . 1 . Analysis in the time - frequency domain First , an exploratory analysis was performed in the time - frequency domain . Contrasted time - frequency maps from each electrode were converted to a 2 - dimensional NIFTI - 1 image format ( x ¼ time ; y ¼ fre - quency ) . For each electrode , a one - sample t - test was performed to determine the presence of signi ﬁ cant I - A differences in the time - frequency maps . In addition , contrasted activity from each electrode was correlated with RRS scores . These tests revealed spectral and tem - poral information regarding I - A and RRS - correlated I - A activity . Two - tailed F - tests were initially used to determine the presence of signi ﬁ - cant effects , and one - tailed t - tests were performed to determine the di - rection of the effects . All tests were conducted with a cluster - forming threshold of p < . 001 and the results were interpreted at the cluster - level after family - wise error correction ( P _ FWE < . 05 ; Cluster - level P _ FWE measures statistical signi ﬁ cance of the activity after family - wise error correction by thresholding the number of voxels that form a cluster ) to control for multiple comparisons ( Flandin and Friston , 2019 ) . 2 . 5 . 2 . Scalp - time analysis Using frequency information obtained from the time x frequency domain analysis , signi ﬁ cant activations were tested at the scalp level . Because our transformed data involves 4 - dimensions ( scalp space [ x , y ] , time , and frequency ) , 3 - Dimensional NIFTI - 1 images ( x , y ¼ space , z ¼ time ) were constructed by averaging the data over the frequency window obtained from the previous time x frequency analysis . Frequency win - dows of interest were determined by taking minimum and maximum frequency values from groups of adjacent electrodes that shared similar cluster information . Six frequency windows were examined : 4 Hz , 11 – 12 Hz , 15 – 17 Hz , 16 – 19 Hz , 30 – 37 Hz , and 38 – 42 Hz . For the correlation analysis , 3 frequency windows were examined : 8 Hz , 29 – 30 Hz , 30 – 33 Hz . To avoid statistical bias from using frequency windows obtained from a nonindependent dataset , the entire (cid:3) 1 , 000 to 0 ms epoch was used instead of selectively choosing the window of maximal effect ( Kilner , 2013 ) . Furthermore , an additional Bonferroni correction was applied on the cluster - level threshold of P _ FWE < 0 . 05 , adjusting the threshold of signi ﬁ cance based on the number of frequency bands tested . Six t - tests on I - A differences resulted in the corrected cluster - level threshold of P _ FWE < 0 . 008 , and 3 tests for RRS correlation analysis resulted in the corrected cluster - level threshold of P _ FWE < 0 . 017 . 2 . 5 . 3 . Source modeling using 3D source reconstruction Signi ﬁ cant sensor - level activations were projected onto a 3 - dimen - sional brain space using SPM ’ s 3 - D source reconstruction tool . The group - inversion approach was used because it compensates for individ - ual variability in head anatomy and sensor positioning by assuming the same underlying source generators for all subjects ( Litvak et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , group inversion allows the reconstruction process to tolerate sensor - level noise that varies across subjects ( Litvak and Friston , 2008 ) . We used the Multiple Sparse Priors method ( MSP ; Friston et al . , 2008 ) . In contrast to SPM ’ s single covariance matrix - based options ( Minimum norm and LORETA - like approach ) , MSP takes the weighted sum of multiple prior components that correspond to different locally smooth focal regions , allowing for data - driven optimization of distributed source modeling ( L (cid:1) opez et al . , 2014 ) . First , electrode locations were assigned using a template sensor location ﬁ le based on the extended International 10 – 20 System . Each EEG recording was re - referenced to the channel average because the forward modeling step in SPM source reconstruction assumes an average reference to prevent forward model error that may be introduced from pre - assigned reference channels ( Litvak et al . , 2010 ) . A template head model based on the MNI brain was used to construct the mesh . Data coregistration was performed based on ﬁ ducials at nasion and bilateral preauricular points . A forward model was created by selecting the “ EEG BEM ” ( Boundary Elements Model ) option . For the inversion step , the “ Imaging ” option was selected so that the reconstruction was performed based on the empirical Bayesian approach which is appropriate for analysis of induced power ( Litvak et al . , 2010 ) . Then the “ Custom ” option was used to specify parameters including prior type , time , and frequency window of interest . Multiple Sparse Priors ( MSP ) was chosen as the prior type . The Hanning taper was applied . Then , the frequency windows of interest were entered to ﬁ lter the signal before inversion . Time and fre - quency windows for inversion were based on the spectrotemporal in - formation obtained from the sensor - level analysis with time - padding added at the beginning and end of the window at 50 - ms scale and fre - quency padding of (cid:2) 2 Hz to the minimum and maximum values . For each inversion , two 3D NIfTI images were created corresponding to the insight and analytic conditions . To reveal the sources of I - A dif - ferences and the correlation between I - A and RRS scores tested at the sensor level , images for insight and analytic trials were contrasted and thresholded using GLM ( General Linear Model ) statistics with an un - corrected threshold of p < . 05 . Because the signi ﬁ cance of the effect was already observed at the sensor level , additional hypothesis testing at the source level posed a problem of circular analysis . Therefore , GLM sta - tistics using source images were performed in order to place condition - Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 4 speci ﬁ c constraints and subsequently visualize sources of I - A differences and correlations between I - A and RRS scores . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Behavioral data The RRS mean for 30 subjects was 25 . 60 ( SD ¼ 2 . 69 , range : 20 – 31 ) . Subjects were divided into two groups of 15 : High RRS ( M ¼ 23 . 47 , SD ¼ 1 . 64 ) and low RRS ( M ¼ 27 . 73 , SD ¼ 1 . 58 ) . A two - factor mixed ANOVA was conducted to examine the effect of solution type ( insight versus analytic ) and reward sensitivity ( high versus low ) on solution response times ( RTs ) . There was a signi ﬁ cant main effect of solution type on RT with insight solutions being faster than analytic solutions ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 13 . 75 , p < . 001 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 33 ) . There was no signi ﬁ cant main effect of reward sensitivity on reaction time ( F < 1 ) nor was there a signi ﬁ cant interaction between solution type and reward sensitivity on reaction time ( F < 1 ) . A two - factor mixed ANOVA examined the effect of solution type and reward sensitivity on solution accuracy . There was no signi ﬁ cant main effect of solution type on accuracy ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 2 . 88 , p ¼ . 10 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 09 ) , nor was there a signi ﬁ cant main effect of reward sensitivity on accuracy ( F < 1 ) . The interaction between solution type and reward sensitivity trended towards signi ﬁ cance ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 3 . 98 , p ¼ . 06 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 12 ) . A two - factor mixed ANOVA examined the effect of reward sensitivity on the proportion of solution types reported ( insight , analysis , and timeouts ) . There was a main effect of solution type ( F [ 1 , 27 ] ¼ 10 . 95 , p < . 001 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 45 ) but no signi ﬁ cant interaction between reward sensitivity and proportion of solution types reported ( F < 1 ; Table 2 ) . PANAS mood scores were calculated by subtracting the NA subscale from the PA subscale , resulting in a range of scores from (cid:3) 8 to 25 . The PANAS mean and standard deviation for 30 subjects was 11 . 13 ( SD ¼ 7 . 53 , range : 6 - 24 ) . Consistent with Subramaniam et al . ( 2009 ) , subjects were strati ﬁ ed into three groups with the top third representing partic - ipants in a high positive mood ( M ¼ 19 , SD ¼ 2 . 49 ) , the middle third representing participants in a moderate positive mood ( M ¼ 11 . 90 , SD ¼ 2 . 08 ) , and the bottom third representing participants in the low positive mood ( M ¼ 2 . 5 , SD ¼ 4 . 48 ) . There was no signi ﬁ cant relationship be - tween participants ’ mood and their reward sensitivity scores ( r [ 30 ] ¼ 0 . 05 , p ¼ . 77 ) . High positive mood was associated with marginally higher solution rates compared to low positive mood , t ( 18 ) ¼ 1 . 83 , p ¼ . 08 , d ¼ 0 . 81 . The numberoftrials reportedbeingsolvedbyinsightdidnotsigni ﬁ cantlydiffer across all three levels of mood , F ( 2 , 27 ) ¼ 0 . 957 , p ¼ . 39 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 06 . However , pair - wise comparison between top and bottom third groups showed that high positive mood participants solved signi ﬁ cantly more problems viainsight thanlowpositivemoodparticipants , t ( 18 ) ¼ 2 . 11 , p < . 048 , d ¼ 0 . 31 . The number of problems solved analytically did not differ acrossallthreelevelsofpositivemood , F ( 2 , 27 ) ¼ 0 . 856 , p ¼ . 44 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 06 , nor did a pairwise comparison show a signi ﬁ cant difference between high and low positive mood participants , t ( 18 ) ¼ 0 . 70 , p ¼ . 66 , ( Table 3 ) . 3 . 2 . Statistical Parametric Mapping 3 . 2 . 1 . Insight vs . analytic differences One - sample t - tests on the insight - analytic contrast scalp - time domain images revealed several signi ﬁ cant differences after applying an addi - tional Bonferroni correction on familywise error at the cluster - level threshold resulting in a threshold of P _ FWE < . 008 ( Fig . 3 , upper row ) . There were several signi ﬁ cant I > A differences : [ 1 ] Theta ( 4 Hz ) activity over left temporal cortex from (cid:3) 891 to (cid:3) 634 ms , ( P _ FWE < 0 . 001 , peak - voxel d ¼ 0 . 79 ) ; [ 2 ] Low - beta ( 16 – 19 Hz ) activity over central midline and left parietal cortex from (cid:3) 707 to (cid:3) 570 ms ( P _ FWE ¼ 0 . 001 , peak - voxel d ¼ 0 . 89 ) and over left frontal cortex from (cid:3) 643 to (cid:3) 508 ms with marginal signi ﬁ cance ( P _ FWE ¼ 0 . 032 , peak - voxel d ¼ 0 . 20 , omitted in Fig . 3 ) ; [ 3 ] gamma ( 30 – 37 Hz ) activity over frontal cortex from (cid:3) 540 to (cid:3) 428 ms ( P _ FWE < 0 . 001 , peak - voxel d ¼ 1 . 03 ) ; and [ 4 ] gamma ( 38 – 42 Hz ) activity over the frontal midline region from (cid:3) 142 to (cid:3) 79 ms ( P _ FWE ¼ 0 . 002 , peak - voxel d ¼ 1 . 32 ) . See Fig . 4 for the sensor - level effects near the respective peak voxels . To assess the possibility that these effects were due to insight solu - tions taking less time than analytic solutions ( see Table 1 and Fig . 2 ) , the SPM analysis was recomputed with participants ’ average I - A differences in RT as a covariate . The results were virtually identical , showing no evidence of response - time effects on I - A differences in brain activity . I - A contrasts for two other frequency windows ( alpha band , 11 – 12 Hz ; beta band , 15 – 17 Hz ) showed I > A differences below the Bonferroni - corrected threshold of P _ FWE < 0 . 008 . Alpha ( 11 – 12 Hz ) activity was observed over left parietal cortex from (cid:3) 247 to (cid:3) 155 ms ( P _ FWE ¼ 0 . 012 , peak - voxel d ¼ 0 . 19 ) . Low - beta ( 15 – 17 Hz ) activity was observed over right parietal cortex from (cid:3) 961 to (cid:3) 887 ms , ( P _ FWE ¼ 0 . 044 , peak - voxel d ¼ 0 . 78 ) . No signi ﬁ cant A > I activations were found . 3 . 2 . 2 . Reward - related brain activity during problem solving Correlation of I - A contrasted images with RRS revealed two clusters of activation that had p - values lower than the Bonferroni - corrected cluster - level threshold of P _ FWE < . 017 ( Fig . 3 , lower row ) . A signi ﬁ - cant positive correlation was observed in low - gamma ( 30 – 33 Hz ) activity over the right prefrontal cortex with peak activation from (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms ( P _ FWE ¼ 0 . 002 , peak - voxel d ¼ 1 . 07 ) . A signi ﬁ cant negative corre - lation was also observed in a cluster of high - beta ( 29 – 30 Hz ) activity over the right parietal cortex with peak activation from (cid:3) 969 to (cid:3) 901 ms ( P _ FWE ¼ 0 . 015 , peak - voxel d ¼ 0 . 85 ) . 3 . 2 . 3 . Interaction between reward sensitivity and cognitive strategy The correlation analysis identi ﬁ ed the scalp locations at which I - A power differences correlated with RRS scores . To further examine the relationships between RRS and signi ﬁ cant I - A differences , their interac - tion effect was tested using the electrodes closest to the peak voxel ( Fig . 5 ) . Right anterior - frontal electrode AF4 and right parietal electrode P6 were examined for the positive and negative correlations , respec - tively . Log - power values within the time - frequency window were extracted and averaged per subject . A two - way mixed ANOVA was con - ducted to investigate the interaction between problem - solving strategy and reward sensitivity scores . A signi ﬁ cant positive correlation of I - A differences with reward sensitivity was observed with a peak frequency of 30 – 33 Hz from (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms . A two - way mixed ANOVA showed no signi ﬁ cant main effect of reward sensitivity ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 1 . 253 , p ¼ . 292 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 040 ) or problem - solving strategy ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 3 . 867 , p ¼ . 059 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 121 ) on average gamma power . However , there was a signi ﬁ cant interaction effect be - tween reward sensitivity and solution type ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 5 . 172 , p ¼ . 031 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 156 ) . To further investigate this interaction effect , paired - samples t - tests were performed within each RRS group . The high reward - sensitivity group revealed a signi ﬁ cant I > A effect of solving strategy ( t [ 14 ] ¼ 2 . 970 , p ¼ . 010 , d ¼ 0 . 321 ) ; the low reward - sensitivity group showed no signi ﬁ cant difference ( t [ 14 ] ¼ (cid:3) 0 . 220 , p ¼ . 829 , d ¼ 0 . 024 ) . Thus , the Table 1 Mean response times ( RTs , in ms ) for correct responses and response accuracies ( mean proportion correct ) for insight and analytic solutions for all participants , low reward - sensitivity participants , and high reward - sensitivity participants ( based on median - split of reward - sensitivity scores ) . Standard errors are in parentheses . All Participants Low Reward Sensitivity High Reward Sensitivity RT Accuracy RT Accuracy RT Accuracy Insight 4 , 350 ( 273 ) . 98 ( . 01 ) 4 , 489 ( 426 ) . 99 ( . 01 ) 4 , 212 ( 353 ) . 97 ( . 01 ) Analytic 5 , 916 ( 257 ) . 96 ( . 01 ) 5 , 921 ( 373 ) . 94 ( . 02 ) 5 , 911 ( 368 ) . 97 ( . 02 ) Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 5 high reward - sensitivity group exhibited a greater I - A difference than the low reward - sensitivity group . A similar pattern was observed for the right - parietal P6 electrode where beta - gamma activity ( 29 – 30 Hz ) was negatively correlated with reward sensitivity at approximately (cid:3) 900 ms . There was no signi ﬁ cant main effect of solving strategy ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 0 . 079 , p ¼ . 781 , η p 2 ¼ 0 . 003 ) or reward sensitivity ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 0 . 100 , p ¼ . 754 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 004 ) , though there was a signi ﬁ cant interaction effect ( F [ 1 , 28 ] ¼ 9 . 909 , p ¼ . 004 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 261 ) . Paired - samples t - tests for each reward - sensitivity group revealed signi ﬁ cant differences in activity between solving strategies for the low reward - sensitivity group ( t [ 14 ] ¼ 3 . 156 , p ¼ . 007 , d ¼ 0 . 574 ) but not for the high reward - sensitivity group ( t [ 14 ] ¼ (cid:3) 1 . 924 , p ¼ . 075 , d ¼ 0 . 184 ) . To characterize the overall subthreshold power difference between high - RRS and low - RRS groups at electrode AF4 ( Fig . 5 , bottom right ) , three electrodes adjacent to AF4 were selected ( Fp2 , AF8 , AFz ) for comparison . Average pre - response gamma ( 30 – 33 Hz ) power was ob - tained by averaging insight - trial power and analytic - trial power over the entire 1 , 000 - ms epoch . This revealed participants ’ average level of frontal gamma power leading up to the button - press . Correlations be - tween RRS scores and average pre - response power were computed for each of these electrodes adjacent to AF4 ( Fig . 6 ) . Electrodes Fp2 and AF8 showed a signi ﬁ cant negative correlation with reward - sensitivity scores ( r [ 30 ] ¼ (cid:3) 0 . 324 , p ¼ . 040 , and r [ 30 ] ¼ (cid:3) 0 . 330 , p ¼ . 037 , respectively ) ; the AF4 and AFz electrodes showed weak negative trends ( r [ 30 ] ¼ (cid:3) 0 . 158 , p ¼ . 201 , and r [ 30 ] ¼ (cid:3) 0 . 155 , p ¼ . 207 , respectively ) . These results suggest that the observed difference in AF4 gamma power be - tween the high and low reward - sensitivity groups from (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms was due to volume conduction from adjacent regions that had a negative correlation with RRS scores . 3 . 2 . 4 . Source reconstruction The sources of signi ﬁ cant effects were localized for the time - frequency window obtained from the sensor - level analysis with the MSP method . The anatomical locations were identi ﬁ ed using a labeling tool based on the label data provided by Neuromorphometrics , Inc . ( http : / / Neuromorphometrics . com ) . The sources of the key gamma - band effects are shown in Fig . 7 . The I - A difference from (cid:3) 540 to (cid:3) 428 ms ( 30 – 37 Hz ) was localized to the left inferior temporal gyrus , right middle frontal gyrus , and right TriFG ( triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus ) . The positive correlation between the I - A difference and RRS scores from (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms ( 30 – 33 Hz ) was localized to the left su - perior frontal gyrus , left inferior temporal gyrus , right anterior orbital gyrus , right superior frontal gyrus , and right frontal pole . The negative correlation between the I - A difference and the RRS scores from (cid:3) 989 to (cid:3) 901 ms ( 29 – 30 Hz ) was localized to the right middle frontal gyrus and right TriFG . Additionally , the negative correlation between pre - response gamma ( 30 – 33 Hz ) activation averaged from (cid:3) 1 , 000 to 0 ms and RRS scores was localized to the left middle frontal gyrus , right frontal pole , right anterior orbital gyrus , right superior frontal gyrus , right medial orbital gyrus , right middle frontal gyrus , and right TriFG ( triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus ) . For sources of other I - A effects with their frequency and time - windows , see Table 4 . 3 . 2 . 5 . Power correlation In order to elucidate the relationship between the I - A effect at approximately (cid:3) 500 ms and the reward - sensitivity - related interaction effect at approximately (cid:3) 400 ms , a correlation analysis was performed between power values extracted from the source locations at corre - sponding time and frequency windows ( Fig . 8 ) . The analysis was per - formed at the source level in order to minimize volume conduction effects that may be present in the sensor - level data . First , source activity at the peak - voxel coordinates obtained from the source - domain SPM results were extracted as a time series . For the I - A effect , the right middle frontal gyrus and the left inferior temporal gyrus were used as source origins . For the reward - related effect , the right anterior orbital gyrus was selected for analysis among the four clusters identi ﬁ ed in the SPM results because of its well - studied role in reward processing ( Berridge and Kringelbach , 2015 ; O ’ Doherty , 2004 ; Rolls , 1996 ) . Extracted time series from the three locations were wavelet - transformed to generate time - frequency maps . The power values were log - scaled . The matrices of time - frequency maps were then averaged within - subject across Insight and Analytic trials and were contrasted between conditions . Then , the power values were averaged within the time and frequency windows from signi ﬁ cant scalp - time analysis results ( I - A effect at 30 – 37 Hz from (cid:3) 540 to (cid:3) 428 ms , and the reward - related effect at 30 – 33 Hz from (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms ) . Pearson correlations were computed between the power values at the two source locations . The correlation between right middle frontal gyrus ( I - A effect ) and right anterior orbital gyrus ( reward effect ) revealed no signi ﬁ cant relationship , r [ 30 ] ¼ 0 . 034 , p ¼ . 430 . However , the correlation between the left inferior temporal gyrus and right anterior orbital gyrus revealed a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation , r [ 30 ] ¼ 0 . 529 , p ¼ . 001 . Thus , the inferior temporal activity at approximately (cid:3) 500 ms predicts right anterior orbital activity approximately 100 ms later sug - gesting a causal relationship between the left temporal insight activity and the subsequent reward - related activity . 4 . Discussion We hypothesized that brain activity associated with insight during problem - solving would include activity related to reward processing . We Table 2 Mean proportion of trials ( with standard error ) that were timeouts ( no response provided within 16 s ) or that yielded responses that were reported as insight or analytic solutions for all , low , and high reward - sensitivity participants . All Participants Low Reward Sensitivity High Reward Sensitivity Insight . 43 ( . 03 ) . 41 ( . 04 ) . 46 ( . 04 ) Analytic . 30 ( . 03 ) . 33 ( . 04 ) . 29 ( . 03 ) Timeouts . 24 ( . 02 ) . 25 ( . 03 ) . 25 ( . 02 ) Table 3 Mean percentage of overall correct solutions ( including time - outs ) , insight so - lutions , and analytic solutions for all participants , high positive mood partici - pants , and least positive mood participants ( * indicates signi ﬁ cant contrast at p < . 05 ) . % Solved % Insight % Analytic All participants ( n ¼ 30 ) 72 . 05 43 . 60 30 . 81 High positive mood ( n ¼ 10 ) 75 . 19 50 . 54 * 28 . 86 Least positive mood ( n ¼ 10 ) 69 . 41 36 . 81 33 . 73 Fig . 2 . Mean response times ( in ms ) for correct responses by solution type . Each symbol ( circle and triangle ) represents results from one participant . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 6 tested this hypothesis by examining insight - related ( I - A ) differences in neural activity and their relationships to dispositional reward sensitivity . Before discussing these ﬁ ndings , we review other behavioral and EEG results . 4 . 1 . Behavioral differences There was a signi ﬁ cant main effect of solution type ( insight versus analytic ) on response times with insight solutions being faster than an - alytic solutions , replicating previous ﬁ ndings ( e . g . , Jung - Beeman et al . , 2004 ; Jarosz et al . , 2012 ) . Reward sensitivity did not have a signi ﬁ cant effect on response time . There were no signi ﬁ cant differences in solution accuracy between insight and analytic solutions or between high reward - sensitivity and low reward - sensitivity participants . These results therefore did not fully replicate previous studies that have shown an accuracy bene ﬁ t for insight solutions over analytic solutions ( Salvi et al . , 2016 ) , although it is likely that a ceiling effect on accuracy in the present study suppressed such an effect . The interaction between solution type and reward sensitivity trended towards signi ﬁ cance , with higher reward sensitivity being associated with marginally more problems solved with insight and fewer timeouts than lower reward sensitivity . It is possible that with a larger sample a signi ﬁ cant effect would have been evident . We were also interested in comparing the behavioral effects of reward sensitivity with past research that links positive mood to better creative problem - solving performance to ascertain whether individual differences in reward sensitivity in ﬂ uence creative problem - solving performance in a similar manner to positive mood . Evidence from previous research on insight has shown that positive mood can increase the number of prob - lems solved correctly as well as the number of problems solved with insight versus analysis ( Isen et al . , 1987 ; Amabile et al . , 2005 ; Sub - ramaniam et al . , 2009 ; Jarosz et al . , 2012 ) . More broadly , positive mood is associated with better creative performance on a variety of tasks ( see Davis , 2009 , for a meta - analysis ) . While higher reward sensitivity was not associated with greater problem - solving accuracy , by contrast , participants ’ level of positive mood had a marginal effect on the number of correctly solved problems . Further , participants with a high positive mood solved signi ﬁ cantly more problems via insight than participants with a low positive mood . Thus , the effect of positive mood on accuracy and solution type was consistent with previous research ( Isen et al . , 1987 ; Amabile et al . , 2005 ; Sub - ramaniam et al . , 2009 ; Jarosz et al . , 2012 ) . Overall , these results suggest that reward sensitivity and positive mood have somewhat different effects on creative problem - solving . This conclusion is underscored by the fact that there was no signi ﬁ cant rela - tionship between participants ’ reward sensitivity scores and their PANAS mood scores . Whereas a positive mood appears to enhance problem - solving accuracy and increase the number of trials solved via insight ( Subramaniam et al . , 2009 ; Jarosz et al . , 2012 ) , higher reward sensitivity has no reliable effect on accuracy and may only marginally increase the number of solutions reported as insight . Therefore , while greater reward sensitivity may not make insight more likely , it may in ﬂ uence the Fig . 3 . SPM time - frequency analysis of EEGs leading up to solution button - press . The timeline shows time ( in ms ) leading up to the button - press that participants made on each trial to signify that they had just solved a problem . Topographic maps ( in blue ) above the timeline show signi ﬁ cant Insight > Analytic differences . Topographic maps below the timeline show signi ﬁ cant correlations between the Reward Responsiveness Scale ( RRS ) measure of reward sensitivity and I - A differences . The red map shows a signi ﬁ cant ( I – A ) effect with a positive correlation between RRS and I - A , labelled as ( I – A ) x RRS þ . The green map shows a signi ﬁ cant effect with a negative correlation between RRS and I - A , labelled as ( I – A ) x RRS - . Each topographic map is accompanied by the signi ﬁ cant frequency - range ( Hz ) , time - range ( ms before button - press ) , and P _ FWE value . Given that several hundred ms are required for a subject to execute a button - press once the solution to a problem becomes available , we identify the signi ﬁ cant I - A difference at approximately 500 ms before the button - press as a neural correlate of an insight solution ’ s emergence into awareness and the signi ﬁ cant positive correlation between the I - A difference and RRS at approximately 400 ms prior to the button - press as a reward - related component of the insight response present in participants who are high in reward sensitivity . These two effects are shown in the yellow box and are displayed as a blow - up below the yel - low box . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 7 magnitude of the subjective pleasure individuals feel during insight experiences . 4 . 2 . EEG effects The time - frequency representations for insight and analytic solutions revealed several signi ﬁ cant effects . One general ﬁ nding is that all of the signi ﬁ cant I - A differences were I > A effects – there were no signi ﬁ cant A > I effects . One possible explanation for this ﬁ nding is that there is a characteristic pattern of neural activity for insight trials but activity during analytic trials may vary substantially across trials or participants and thus may be canceled out by averaging . Another possible explanation is that neural activity during analytic trials is a subset of activity during insight trials and is thus not observable with an A - I contrast . It should also be noted that scalp - recorded EEGs predominantly re ﬂ ect cortical activity . There may have been subcortical I - A and A - I differences that we could not detect with scalp electrodes . Due to the temporal , spatial , and oscillatory characteristics of the sequence of obtained I - A effects , we identify the gamma - band effect observed from (cid:3) 540 to (cid:3) 428 ms prior to button - press as the neural correlate of the conscious availability of solutions derived by insight . The timing of this burst of activity re ﬂ ects a plausible amount of time for a participant to become consciously aware of the solution and execute a button - press . With a different task ( compound remote associates problems ) , pool of participants , equipment , and laboratory space , Jung - Beeman et al . ( 2004 ) observed an insight - related gamma burst about 300 ms prior to the button - press . The 100 – 150 ms difference in timing may be due to these differences . These I - A differences in brain activity cannot be attributed to I - A differences in solution con ﬁ dence . Assuming that lower - con ﬁ dence re - sponses would be associated , on average , with longer response times than higher - con ﬁ dence responses , we performed an SPM analysis which included response time as a covariate . This analysis yielded no evidence that response time had an effect on I - A differences in brain activity . 4 . 2 . 1 . I - A activity prior to insight Two signi ﬁ cant clusters of activity were observed prior to insight : ( 1 ) theta - band ( 4 Hz ) from (cid:3) 891 to (cid:3) 634 ms and ( 2 ) beta - band ( 16 – 19 Hz ) from (cid:3) 643 to (cid:3) 508 ms prior to button - press . Source reconstruction of the 4 - Hz activity revealed that it originated in the bilateral fusiform gyrus , left precuneus , right parahippocampal gyrus , and right hippo - campus . The fusiform gyrus is involved in the recognition and processing of letter strings ( Nobre et al . , 1994 ; Cohen et al . , 2000 ; Thesen et al . , 2012 ) . The right hippocampal gyrus participates in the encoding and maintenance of information where binding of verbal and spatial infor - mation is necessary ( Luck et al . , 2010 ) . Using a different experimental task , an EEG - fMRI study by Hanslmayr et al . ( 2011 ) also reported source - reconstructed theta oscillations originating in the Fig . 4 . Time - frequency EEG power for insight and analytic conditions , I - A contrast , and SPM - thresholded t - values over time at the electrodes nearest the scalp - time domain peak voxels . For each I - A effect in the scalp - time domain , the electrodes nearest to the peak voxels were identi ﬁ ed ( FT7 for the 4 Hz effect ; Cz for the 16 – 19 Hz effect ; F3 for the 30 – 33 Hz effect ; AF4 for the 38 – 42 Hz effect ) . Then , power values in the frequency window of 1 – 50 Hz over the entire trial period were extracted , log - transformed , and plotted . Contrasting the two conditions provides spectrotemporal information about the differences . SPM - thresholded cluster map ( rightmost column ) shows the effect that exceeds correction for multiple comparisons in SPM . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 8 parahippocampal gyrus during item - context binding . Given its timing , the present theta activity may re ﬂ ect the processing of smaller bits of information and the maintenance of information in working memory . We do not assume that this activity is necessarily unique to insight trials as low - level visual and mnemonic processes would also be expected during analytic trials . However , it is possible that this activity could appear stronger for insight trials if analytic - trial processing is more variable across trials or participants . Source reconstruction of 16 – 19 Hz beta - band activity from (cid:3) 643 to (cid:3) 508 ms indicated that it originated in the left middle frontal gyrus , left lateral orbital gyrus , and right middle cingulate gyrus , with the strongest activity being observed in the right middle cingulate gyrus . The presence of neural activity originating in the anterior and posterior regions of the cingulate cortex prior to insight is noteworthy for its consistency with previous studies of insight problem solving ( Kounios et al . , 2006 ; Luo et al . , 2004 ; Subramaniam et al . , 2009 ; Shen et al . , 2018 ) . In a recent meta - analysis , Shen et al . ( 2018 ) identi ﬁ ed the anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) as one of the regions most commonly associated with insight problem - solving , particularly in the period immediately preceding insight ( Kounios et al . , 2006 ) . The functions most frequently attributed to cingulate cortex , in particular the anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) , are attention shifting and error detection and resolution ( Miller and Cohen , 2001 ; Shenhav et al . , 2014 ) . Researchers have interpreted cingulate ac - tivity preceding insight as re ﬂ ecting internally directed con ﬂ ict moni - toring , suppression of irrelevant thoughts , and preparation for attention switching ( Badre and Wagner , 2004 ; Kounios and Beeman , 2014 ; Kou - nios et al . , 2006 ; Subramaniam et al . , 2009 ; Zhan et al . , 2015 ) . This interpretation also ﬁ ts the data observed here in which beta oscillations originating in middle cingulate cortex persist continuously until they are subsumed by a burst of higher - frequency gamma - band activity beginning around (cid:3) 540 ms prior to button - press . Left inferior frontal activity dur - ing this period may re ﬂ ect the engagement of selection processes that enable successful retrieval of anagram word solutions ( Badre and Wag - ner , 2002 ; Jung - Beeman , 2005 ) . This inference is supported by the fact that insight - related activity was observed immediately afterwards in the left temporal lobe , suggesting successful retrieval of the solution from long - term verbal memory ( Badre and Wagner , 2002 ; Jung - Beeman , 2005 ) and by the fact that similar prefrontal activity in the left and bilateral IFG has been observed in other neuroimaging studies of insight problem - solving ( Jung - Beeman et al . , 2004 ; Jung - Beeman , 2005 ; Anderson et al . , 2009 ; Shen et al . , 2016 , 2018 ) . 4 . 2 . 2 . I - A activity at the moment of insight The presence of gamma - band activity in left temporal and right frontal regions from (cid:3) 540 to (cid:3) 428 ms places it temporally proximal to the moment of conscious realization of an insight . Gamma - band activity has been implicated in several EEG studies of insight ( Kounios and Beeman , 2014 ) . Notably , Jung - Beeman et al . ( 2004 ) observed a burst of gamma - band activity originating in the right anterior temporal gyrus that was temporally consistent with the moment of insight . This burst of high - frequency activity was interpreted as the sudden binding of remotely associated words into a coherent mental representation and the sudden emergence of the solution into conscious awareness . Oscillatory gamma - band activity in humans has been linked to Fig . 5 . Log EEG power values at electrodes nearest to peak voxels for signi ﬁ cant correlations between insight - minus - analytic ( I – A ) differences and Reward Responsiveness Scale ( RRS ) scores . Power values from right parietal electrode P6 ( left ) and right anterior frontal electrode AF4 ( right ) are shown averaged over the time and frequency windows of interest . Upper row : I - A EEG power values from electrode P6 ( left ) showed a signi ﬁ cant negative correlation with RRS scores , while electrode AF4 ( right ) showed a positive correlation . Both graphs include best - ﬁ t regression lines . Lower row : EEG power values are shown separately for I and A trials , separately for high - RRS and low - RRS groups . Error bars show standard errors . The topographic maps at the middle of the ﬁ gure show the spatial and temporal extent of these effects . Fig . 6 . Topographic display ( top view of the front of the head ) of selected correlations between averaged pre - solution ( (cid:3) 1000 to 0 ms ) EEG gamma power ( 30 – 33 Hz ) and Reward Responsiveness Scale ( RRS ) scores . Three electrodes adjacent to AF4 , including Fp2 , AF8 , and AFz are shown . These results show that electrodes Fp2 and AF8 had signi ﬁ cant negative correlations ( shown in the green boxes ) , while electrodes AFz and AF4 showed only nonsigni ﬁ cant nega - tive correlation trends ( shown in the red boxes ) . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 9 feature binding involved in perceptual object recognition , attention , and memory retrieval ( Jensen et al . , 2007 ; Osipova et al . , 2006 ; Pulvermüller , 2001 ; Tallon - Baudry and Bertrand , 1999 ) . It has been suggested that gamma - band activity re ﬂ ects the synchronization of oscillatory neuronal assemblies that underlie the formation of cortical object representations ( Engel and Singer , 2001 ; Herrmann et al . , 2004 ; Luo et al . , 2008 ; Singer et al . , 1997 ) . Increased frontal gamma activity in particular has been associated with the binding of multiple concepts into a coherent whole and with perceptual reorganization such as occurs between the two vi - sual interpretations of a Necker cube or the Rubin ’ s vase / face ﬁ gure ( Bas¸ar - Eroglu et al . , 1996 ; Keil et al . , 1999 ) . Gamma activity has also been associated with attentional orienting due to the salience or rewarding features of information in one ’ s environment or to the salience of internally generated information ( Marco - Pallar (cid:1) es et al . , 2015 ) . In sum , the proposed roles of gamma - band activity in binding , memory recog - nition , and attentional orienting are consistent with the observation that gamma - band activity marks the moment of insight . In the present study , source modeling of the frontal insight - related gamma - band activity localized it to the left inferior temporal gyrus and right middle frontal gyrus ( Fig . 7 ) . Although Jung - Beeman et al . ( 2004 ) observed insight - related gamma - band activity only in the right mid - dle / superior temporal gyrus when participants solved compound remote associates , insight - related neural activity has been observed in the left lateral temporal lobe and bilaterally in pre - stimulus activity ( Kounios et al . , 2006 ; Subramaniam et al . , 2009 ) and in studies using other types of problems ( Luo and Niki , 2003 ; Wu et al . , 2013 ; Zhao et al . , 2013 ) . The present observation of insight - related gamma - band activity in the left temporal gyrus likely re ﬂ ects differences in the tasks used to elicit insight . The solution of compound remote associates problems involves the retrieval of remote semantic or lexical associations thought to depend on coarse - coding in the right hemisphere ( Jung - Beeman , 2005 ) . In contrast , solving anagrams requires graphemic feature reorganization and integration and lexical memory retrieval which would be expected to depend on left - temporal language regions . As shown in Fig . 7 , there was a cluster of gamma - band activity in the right IFG and MFG during the time period that includes the transition of a solution into consciousness as an insight . Prior research suggests that these areas perform functions that plausibly involve insight such as right Fig . 7 . Source reconstruction of signi ﬁ cant sensor - level activations . ( A ) The gamma - band ( 30 – 37 Hz ) Insight - Analytic difference from (cid:3) 540 to (cid:3) 428 ms originated in the right middle - frontal and left inferior - temporal gyrus ( in red ) . ( B ) The positive correlation between the gamma - band ( 30 - 33 Hz ) Insight - Analytic difference and Reward Responsiveness Scale ( RRS ) scores from (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms originated in the left superior - temporal and inferior - temporal gyri , right anterior - orbital gyrus , right frontal pole , and right superior - frontal gyrus ( in yellow ) . ( C ) The negative correlation between average pre - response gamma power ( 30 – 33 Hz ) and RRS originated in the left middle - frontal gyrus , right frontal pole , right anterior - orbital and medial - orbital gyri , right superior - frontal and middle - frontal gyri , and right TriFG ( triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus ) ( in green ) . ( D ) The negative correlation between the gamma - band ( 30 - 33 Hz ) Insight - Analytic difference and RRS from (cid:3) 989 to (cid:3) 901 ms originated in the right middle - frontal gyrus and right TriFG ( in orange ) . “ ( I – A ) x RRS þ ” and “ ( I – A ) x RRS - ” indicate positive and negative interactions between solving strategy and reward sensitivity , respectively . The encircled letters “ L ” and “ A ” indicate left and anterior , respectively . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 10 IFG ’ s hypothesized role in organizing or integrating pieces of information ( Abraham et al . , 2012 ; Qiu et al . , 2010 ; Vartanian and Goel , 2005 ) and the elaboration and appreciation of suddenly illuminated solutions ( Shen et al . , 2018 ) . The right MFG has been implicated in a variety of relevant executive functions including working memory ( Leung et al . , 2002 ; Curtis & D ’ Esposito , 2003 ) and attention switching from exogenous to endogenous cues ( Japee et al . , 2015 ) . More generally , the right MFG ’ s anatomical and theorized functional role as a point of convergence be - tween the ventral and dorsal processing streams suggests its importance as a nexus for cognitive ﬂ exibility ( Corbetta et al . , 2008 ) and potentially for creative problem - solving requiring switching between mental sets ( Huang et al . , 2015 ; Vartanian and Goel , 2005 ; Wu et al . , 2013 ) . 4 . 2 . 3 . I - A activity following insight Due to the temporal and spatial location of a later burst of gamma - band activity in the bilateral middle and inferior frontal gyri from (cid:3) 142 to (cid:3) 79 ms prior to button - press , we speculatively interpret this activity as re ﬂ ecting working memory processes involved in veri ﬁ cation of the solution following insight ( Jung - Beeman , 2005 ; Shen et al . , 2018 ) . This activity occurs after the initiation of the button - press response . 4 . 3 . Insight and reward sensitivity 4 . 3 . 1 . I - A activity positively correlated with reward sensitivity We correlated the RRS measure of reward sensitivity ( Van den Berg et al . , 2010 ) with the time - frequency representation of the I - A difference in EEG power to identify solving - strategy effects modulated by reward sensitivity . This revealed a burst of gamma band activity from (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms before the button - press that was stronger for participants high in reward sensitivity than for participants low in reward sensitivity . The duration of this activation overlapped with the (cid:3) 540 to (cid:3) 428 ms epoch for the I - A gamma - band effect . The mid - points of the signi ﬁ cant intervals for the I - A effect and its interaction with reward sensitivity differed by less than 100 ms , indicating that these two effects occurred in close temporal proximity . Source modeling of the reward - related I - A effect revealed a signi ﬁ - cant beta - gamma activation originating bilaterally in anterior regions of the prefrontal cortex including the bilateral superior frontal gyri , right frontal pole ( orbitofrontal cortex ) , right anterior orbital gyrus , and left inferior temporal gyrus ( Fig . 6 and Table 4 ) . We interpret the cluster of high - beta / low - gamma activity originating in right anterior orbitofrontal cortex ( OFC ) as an insight - related reward signal due to its correlation with reward sensitivity , temporal overlap with the larger pattern of I - A activity , oscillatory frequency , and neuroanatomical location . OFC is innervated by dopaminergic projections from the striatum and other midbrain structures responsible for reward learning and goal - directed behavior and is considered a part of the reward network ( Ber - ridge and Kringelbach , 2015 ; O ’ Doherty , 2004 ; Rolls , 1996 ) . OFC is thought to encode associations between stimuli and reward values . Interplay between the striatum and OFC enables the updating of expected reward values and drives reward - oriented behavior ( Plassmann et al . , 2007 ) . The fact that this activity was in the frequency range of 30 – 33 Hz is consistent with the notion that it re ﬂ ects neural reward processing . Beta - gamma activity has been associated with reward processing from positive feedback , particularly from unexpected rewards ( Marco - Pallar (cid:1) es et al . , 2015 ) . It has been proposed that beta - gamma oscillations re ﬂ ect a mechanism that enables integration across distributed reward - related regions such as the ventral striatum , amygdala , insula , orbito - frontal / ventromedial PFC , anterior cingulate cortex , and so forth ( Marco - Pallar (cid:1) es et al . , 2015 ) . Further , the magnitude of frontal beta - gamma activity has been shown to be related to reward sensitivity ( Padr ~ ao et al . , 2013 ) and trait sensation - seeking ( Leicht et al . , 2013 ) . Various studies have observed beta - gamma activity upon receipt of an unexpected reward ( Marco - Pallar (cid:1) es et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , one interpreta - tion of the observed orbitofrontal gamma - band activity is that it re ﬂ ects a Table 4 SPM “ glass brain ” source - space maps and anatomical locations corresponding to signi ﬁ cant sensor - space effects . Tests Source Anatomical locations ( I - A ) x RRS þ 30 – 33 Hz Left : superior frontalgyrus , inferior temporal gyrus Right : anterior orbital gyrus , superior frontal gyrus , frontal pole ( I - A ) x RRS - 29 - 30 Hz Right : middle frontal gyrus , TriFG ( triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus ) I - A 4 Hz Left : fusiform gyrus , precuneus Right : fusiform gyrus , parahippocampal gyrus , hippocampus I - A 16 – 19 Hz Left : middle frontal gyrus , lateral orbital gyrus Right : middle cingulate gyrus I - A 30 – 37 Hz Left : inferior temporal gyrus Right : middle frontal gyrus , TriFG I - A 38 – 42 Hz Left and right : middle frontal gyrus , TriFG Full - epoch RRS - group differences Left : middle frontal gyrus Right : frontalpole , anterior orbital gyrus , medial orbital gyrus , superior frontal gyrus , middle frontal gyrus , TriFG Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 11 feedback response driven by frontrostriatal DA circuits whose function is to enable learning about the value of a stimuli , in this case , the solution to an anagram problem ( cf . Bress and Hajcak , 2013 ; Cooper et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , our ﬁ ndings suggest the possibility that this reward signal re ﬂ ects a Reward Prediction Error ( RPE ) mechanism ( Schultz , 2016 ) . A related interpretation of this reward - related gamma - band activity is that it does not necessarily re ﬂ ect dopamine - driven reward learning but rather activity in hedonic hotspots within the orbitofrontal cortex that are modulated by opioidergic systems that give rise to subjective feelings of pleasure . A growing body of evidence demonstrates overlapping , but dissociable , components of the brain ’ s reward circuitry involving “ wanting ” ( motivational processing of incentive salience ) , learning ( modulation of instrumental associations ) , and “ liking ” ( hedonic impact ) ( Berridge and Kringelbach , 2015 ; Berridge and Robinson , 2016 ) . Whereas dopaminergic activity appears to modulate appetitive wanting reactions to guide goal - directed behavior as well as learning of instru - mental associations , dopamine does not appear to play as central a role in the liking component of reward - related behavior ( Berridge and Rob - inson , 1998 ) . A number of animal and human studies have shown that wanting and liking are dissociable . For example , manipulating levels of available dopamine or changing the incentive motivation to acquire a reward does not always result in changes in subjective pleasure ( Berridge and Robinson , 1998 ; Robinson and Berridge , 1993 ) . Conversely , magnitude of hedonic liking is associated with neural activity in the mid - anterior region of the human orbitofrontal cortex and analogous cortical structures in rodents ( Berridge and Kringelbach , 2015 ; Gottfried et al . , 2003 ; Kringelbach et al . , 2003 ) . Orbitofrontal cortex is activated in response to a variety of basic hedonic experiences , such as food , orgasm , addictive drugs , and positive social interactions including shared laughter , looking at baby faces , and also more abstract pleasures such as music and aesthetic experiences ( Cacioppo et al . , 2012 ; Georgiadis and Kringelbach , 2012 ; Kringelbach et al . , 2012 ; Parsons et al . , 2010 ; Sal - impoor et al . , 2011 ; Vartanian and Skov , 2014 ; Veldhuizen et al . , 2010 ; Vuust and Kringelbach , 2010 ; Zeki and Romaya , 2010 ) . The reward - related insight effect localized to right OFC suggests that insight recruits the same brain regions as other hedonic pleasures and supports the idea that insight is rewarding . Importantly , this insight - related OFC activity was positively correlated with reward sensitivity , suggesting that insight is more rewarding for people high in reward sensitivity than those who are low in reward sensitivity . The current data do not allow us to adjudicate between the reward - learning and hedonic pleasure accounts . Indeed , given the overlap be - tween the neural circuitry involved in wanting and liking ( Berridge and Kringelbach , 2015 ) , both processes may be involved . Future work may determine whether one or both of these functions are involved . Regarding the timing , it is notable that the insight - related reward activity occurs within about 100 ms of the I - A activity . This indicates that the reward component is nearly contemporaneous with the insight and suggests that , for individuals high in reward sensitivity , the neural reward associated with an insight is not due to subsequent conscious appraisal of the solution but is integrated with , or triggered by , the insight . Correlation analyses between peak power levels of the I - A ac - tivity localized to the left inferior temporal gyrus and the reward - related activity localized to the right anterior orbital gyrus showed that these two sources were positively correlated , suggesting that the emergence of a solution in working memory as an insight may directly trigger a neural reward signal . In addition , we observed that the relationship was selec - tive : there was no signi ﬁ cant correlation between the left inferior tem - poral gyrus and right middle frontal gyrus sources . Though the scope of our experimental design does not allow strong claims about the pattern of causalities that underly these correlations , one possibility is the involvement of the uncinate fasciculus , a bidirec - tional white matter tract that connects the anterior temporal gyrus and lateral orbitofrontal gyrus . The uncinate fasciculus appears to play a role in enabling information about rewards and punishments to guide the formation of memory - based and language - based associations ( Von Der Heide et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , it is plausible that this white matter tract was responsible for the insight - related coactivation and correlation we observed between the left anterior temporal and orbitofrontal sources . It should be noted that high reward - sensitivity individuals may use the presence of reward - system activity or pleasure as part of their basis for making I / A judgments . The present study does not allow us to test this hypothesis . Nevertheless , it should be noted that the possible use of reward activity in making I / A judgments is not a complication for the insight - report procedure . 4 . 3 . 2 . I - A activity negatively correlated with reward sensitivity High beta ( 29 – 30 Hz ) I - A activity from (cid:3) 989 to (cid:3) 901 ms was nega - tively correlated with reward sensitivity . Source reconstruction indicates that this activity originated in the right middle frontal gyrus and right TriFG . This effect apparently occurred several hundred milliseconds prior to the emergence of a solution into awareness by insight . The fact that this I - A effect was larger for participants lower in reward sensitivity compared to those high in reward sensitivity shows that I - A correlations with reward sensitivity are not unidirectional . Beta - gamma oscillatory activity is associated with active maintenance of information in memory ( Roux and Uhlaas , 2014 ) . The right middle frontal gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus are part of the ventral attention network responsible for detecting behaviorally relevant stimuli ( Corbetta et al . , 2008 ; de Fockert et al . , 2001 ; Leung et al . , 2002 ; Miller and Cohen , 2001 ) and are also associated with working memory ( Curtis & D ’ Espo - sito , 2003 ; Leung et al . , 2002 ) . Speculatively , this suggests that in - dividuals lower in reward sensitivity may engage in greater executive processing involving attentional preparation and working memory - related activity compared to those higher in reward sensitivity during an epoch preceding insight . Fig . 8 . Correlation between Insight - minus - Analytic ( I – A ) effect power and reward - related interaction power at the moment of insight . For I - A at approximately (cid:3) 500 ms , the right middle frontal gyrus and left inferior temporal gyrus were identi - ﬁ ed as the sources . For the positive I - A correlation with reward sensitivity at approximately - 400 ms , the right anterior orbital gyrus was identi ﬁ ed as the main source of interest . Source power values were averaged within time and frequency windows from the scalp domain results . The correlation between the power at I - A effect and reward - related effect revealed a signi ﬁ cant relationship between the left inferior temporal gyrus and right anterior orbital gyrus , but no signi ﬁ cant relationship between right middle frontal gyrus and right anterior orbital gyrus . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 12 4 . 3 . 3 . Other RRS - related effects There were interacting effects of solving - strategy and reward sensi - tivity at the anterior right frontal AF4 electrode : insight and analytic gamma - band power was similar for participants low in reward sensi - tivity , while insight power was greater than analytic power for those high in reward sensitivity ( Fig . 5 , right panel ) . This suggests that individuals high in reward sensitivity may have stronger reward processing during insight compared to analytical solving , but that individuals low in reward sensitivity do not process insight and analytic solutions differently in terms of their respective neural rewards . Interestingly , low reward - sensitivity participants also showed marginally higher gamma power at this same electrode over the entire 1 , 000 ms pre - response epoch compared to high reward - sensitivity par - ticipants . Although this main effect of reward sensitivity on frontal gamma power was only a marginally signi ﬁ cant trend at electrode AF4 , Fig . 6 shows that it is statistically signi ﬁ cant at more anterior electrodes and thus is likely volume - conducted from a more anterior brain region . Source modeling revealed that this RRS - related group difference in gamma power originated in the right frontal pole in a cluster that over - laps with the site of the positive correlation between I - A and reward sensitivity ( Fig . 7 ) . This suggests that there are two separate effects of reward sensitivity at different peak locations : ( 1 ) an I - A x RRS interaction effect in which reward sensitivity magni ﬁ es the gamma - band I - A effect during the (cid:3) 438 to (cid:3) 355 ms epoch , and ( 2 ) an effect of reward sensi - tivity on gamma power during the entire (cid:3) 1 , 000 to 0 ms pre - response epoch in which higher gamma power is associated with lower levels of reward sensitivity . The negative relationship between reward sensitivity and frontal gamma activity originating in right orbitofrontal cortex , part of the brain ’ s reward system , suggests the possibility that high reward - sensitivity individuals may have lower levels of reward activity while working on a problem compared to low reward - sensitivity individuals prior to solution by insight . Recent evidence shows a negative relation - ship between reward sensitivity and inhibitory control in which in - dividuals with heightened sensitivity to reward have lower inhibitory control , and vice versa , and that this relationship is re ﬂ ected in neural activity in regions responsible for reward processing and executive control ( Weafer et al . , 2019 ) . Although the current study did not include a measure of executive control , the present ﬁ nding of a negative corre - lation between reward sensitivity and activity in the right middle frontal gyrus is suggestive of such a relationship . Thus , it may be that concen - trating on dif ﬁ cult problems may be less rewarding or more aversive for high reward - sensitivity individuals than for low reward - sensitivity in - dividuals . One interpretation is that for high reward sensitivity in - dividuals , affectively salient insight experiences may partly compensate for lower executive control by strongly orienting attention to the sudden recognition of a solution . Such an orienting response may not be neces - sary for individuals who are high in attentional control . 4 . 4 . Conclusions and implications This study revealed the existence of an insight - related reward signal thereby providing evidence that insight can be an inherently rewarding experience . This reward signal partly originated in orbitofrontal cortex , a region associated with reward learning ( O ’ Doherty , 2004 ; Marco - Pallar (cid:1) es et al . , 2015 ) and subjective experiences of hedonic pleasure ( Berridge and Kringelbach , 2015 ) . These results substantiate recent fMRI work suggesting the presence of reward - related subcortical activity during solving by insight ( Tik et al . , 2018 ) and other work that has implicated limbic structures , notably the amygdala , in the processing of insights ( Kizilirmak et al . , 2016 , 2019 ; Ludmer et al . , 2011 ; Shen et al . , 2018 ) as well as the more general link between individual differences in neural reward network characteristics and creative cognition ( Schuler et al . , 2019 ) . The present study extends this line of research by using the high temporal resolution of EEG to isolate the reward signal to the time of solution and by showing that its magnitude correlates with a general dispositional reward sensitivity . Thus , our ﬁ ndings suggest that in - dividuals who are high in reward sensitivity experience the sudden emergence of a solution into awareness as strongly rewarding whereas individuals who are low in reward sensitivity may still experience insight as sudden and attentionally salient but lacking in hedonic content . Thus , even though the insight - related reward signal occurred very close in time to the I - A insight response , a reward signal is apparently not a necessary feature of insight . Furthermore , the very short lag between an insight and its associated reward signal suggests that this reward - related activity is not a product of conscious appraisal of the insight but is , rather , triggered by it . This conclusion is further supported by the fact that the magnitude of insight - related activity in the left temporal lobe was positively corre - lated with reward - related activity in the right orbitofrontal gyrus at the source level . We also found that high and low reward - sensitivity individuals show different levels of high - frequency frontopolar activity preceding solution suggesting different levels of hedonic or motivational processing . This result suggests that individuals high in reward sensitivity , relative to low reward - sensitivity individuals , may ﬁ nd working on a problem to be less pleasurable until the moment of insight . Individual differences in reward sensitivity underlie differences in propensities towards sensation - seeking behaviors such as drug - taking , the hedonic consumption of food , and in impulsivity and attentional focus ( Davis et al . , 2007 ; Horvath and Zuckerman , 1993 ; O ’ Connor and Colder , 2005 ; Simons and Arens , 2007 ; Weafer et al . , 2019 ) . Individuals high in reward sensitivity are more likely to take drugs , develop substance - abuse disorders or eating disorders , and engage in risky be - haviors such as gambling . The fact that some people ﬁ nd insight expe - riences to be highly pleasurable reinforces the notion that insight can be an intrinsic reward for problem solving and comprehension that makes use of the same reward circuitry in the brain that processes rewards from addictive drugs , sugary foods , or love . These ﬁ ndings shed light on people ’ s motivations for engaging in challenging , often time - consuming , activities that potentially yield in - sights , such as solving puzzles or mysteries , creating inventions , or doing research . It also reinforces the notion that intrinsic motivation is important for sustained creative activity . The expectation of intrinsic rewards from comprehending and creating , rather than from an extrinsic source such as payment , is thought to be the most effective type of workplace motivation ( Amabile , 1983 ; Amabile et al . , 2005 ; Collins and Amabile , 1998 ) . On a broader level , the notion that humans obtain intrinsic rewards for experiencing insight – a key mechanism for achieving nonobvious understandings – may be regarded as an evolutionarily advantageous adaptation that motivates curiosity , exploration , learning , and creativity in the absence of immediate external rewards such as food or survival ( Gopnik , 2000 ) . Future work should expand on these ﬁ ndings by inves - tigating whether the experience of insight can act as a reinforcing mechanism that instigates people to engage in activities that are more likely to give rise to additional insights and whether reward sensitivity drives this process . Funding This research was funded by National Science Foundation grant 1144976 . Declaration of competing interest None . References Abraham , A . , Pieritz , K . , Thybusch , K . , Rutter , B . , Kr € oger , S . , Schweckendiek , J . , et al . , 2012 . Creativity and the brain : uncovering the neural signature of conceptual expansion . Neuropsychologia 50 ( 8 ) , 1906 – 1917 . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 13 Amabile , T . M . , 1983 . The social psychology of creativity : a componential conceptualization . J . Pers . Soc . Psychol . 45 ( 2 ) , 357 . Amabile , T . M . , Barsade , S . G . , Mueller , J . S . , Staw , B . M . , 2005 . Affect and creativity at work . Adm . Sci . Q . 50 , 367 – 403 . Anderson , J . R . , Anderson , J . F . , Ferris , J . L . , Fincham , J . M . , Jung , K . J . , 2009 . Lateral inferior prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex are engaged at different stages in the solution of insight problems . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . Unit . States Am . 106 ( 26 ) , 10799 – 10804 . Aziz - Zadeh , L . , Kaplan , J . T . , Iacoboni , M . , 2009 . “ Aha ! ” : the neural correlates of verbal insight solutions . Hum . Brain Mapp . 30 ( 3 ) , 908 – 916 . Badre , D . , Wagner , A . D . , 2002 . Semantic retrieval , mnemonic control , and prefrontal cortex . Behav . Cognit . Neurosci . Rev . 1 ( 3 ) , 206 – 218 . Badre , D . , Wagner , A . D . , 2004 . Selection , integration , and con ﬂ ict monitoring ; assessing the nature and generality of prefrontal cognitive control mechanisms . Neuron 41 ( 3 ) , 473 – 487 . Basar - Eroglu , C . , Struber , D . , Kruse , P . , Basar , E . , Stadler , M . , 1996 . Frontal gamma - band enhancement during multistable visual perception . Int . J . Psychophysiol . 24 ( 1 – 2 ) , 113 – 125 . Berridge , K . C . , Kringelbach , M . L . , 2015 . Pleasure systems in the brain . Neuron 86 ( 3 ) , 646 – 664 . Berridge , K . C . , Robinson , T . E . , 1998 . What is the role of dopamine in reward : hedonic impact , reward learning , or incentive salience ? Brain Res . Rev . 28 ( 3 ) , 309 – 369 . Berridge , K . C . , Robinson , T . E . , 2016 . Liking , wanting , and the incentive - sensitization theory of addiction . Am . Psychol . 71 ( 8 ) , 670 – 679 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / amp0000059 . Bowden , E . M . , Jung - Beeman , M . , Fleck , J . I . , Kounios , J . , 2005 . New approaches to demystifying insight . Trends Cognit . Sci . 9 ( 7 ) , 322 – 328 . Bowden , E . M . , Grunewald , K . , 2018 . Whose insight is it anyway ? In : Vale (cid:1) ee - Tourangeau , F . ( Ed . ) , Insight : on the Origins of New Ideas . Routledge , New York , NJ . Bress , J . N . , Hajcak , G . , 2013 . Self - report and behavioral measures of reward sensitivity predict the feedback negativity . Psychophysiology 50 ( 7 ) , 610 – 616 . Cacioppo , S . , Bianchi - Demicheli , F . , Frum , C . , Pfaus , J . G . , Lewis , J . W . , 2012 . The common neural bases between sexual desire and love : a multilevel kernel density fMRI analysis . J . Sex . Med . 9 , 1048 – 1054 . Cohen , L . , Dehaene , S . , Naccache , L . , Leh (cid:1) ericy , S . , Dehaene - Lambertz , G . , H (cid:1) enaff , M . A . , Michel , F . , 2000 . The visual word form area : spatial and temporal characterization of an initial stage of reading in normal subjects and posterior split - brain patients . Brain 123 ( 2 ) , 291 – 307 . Cohen , M . , 2018 . A better way to de ﬁ ne and describe Morlet wavelets for time - frequency analysis . Neuroimage . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2019 . 05 . 048 . Collins , M . , Amabile , T . , 1998 . Motivation and creativity . In : Sternberg , R . ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp . 297 – 312 . Cooper , A . J . , Duke , E . , Pickering , A . D . , Smillie , L . D . , 2014 . Individual differences in reward prediction error : contrasting relations between feedback - related negativity and trait measures of reward sensitivity , impulsivity and extraversion . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 , 248 . Corbetta , M . , Patel , G . , Shulman , G . L . , 2008 . The reorienting system of the human brain : from environment to theory of mind . Neuron 3 ( 8 ) , 306 – 324 . Curtis , C . E . , D ’ Esposito , M . D . , 2003 . Persistent activity in the prefrontal cortex during working memory . Trends Cognit . Sci . 7 ( 9 ) , 415 – 423 . Danek , A . H . , Fraps , T . , Von Müller , A . , Grothe , B . , Ollinger , M . , 2014 . It ’ s a kind of magic – what self - reports can reveal about the phenomenology of insight problem solving . Front . Psychol . 5 , 1048 . Danek , A . H . , Salvi , C . , 2018 . Moment of truth : why aha ! Experiences are correct . J . Creativ . Behav . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jocb . 380 . Danek , A . H . , Williams , J . , Wiley , J . , 2018 . Closing the gap : connecting sudden representational change to the subjective Aha ! experience in insightful problem solving . Psychol . Res . 1 – 9 . Davis , C . , Patte , K . , Levitan , R . , Reid , C . , Tweed , S . , Curtis , C . , 2007 . From motivation to behavior : a model of reward sensitivity , overeating , and food preferences in the risk pro ﬁ le for obesity . Appetite 48 ( 1 ) , 12 – 19 . Davis , M . A . , 2009 . Understanding the relationship between mood and creativity : a meta - analysis . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 108 ( 1 ) , 25 – 38 . de Fockert , J . W . , Rees , G . , Frith , C . D . , Lavie , N . , 2001 . The role of working memory in visual selective attention . Science 291 ( 5509 ) , 1803 – 1806 . Delorme , A . , Makeig , S . , 2004 . EEGLAB : an open source toolbox for analysis of single - trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis . J . Neurosci . Methods 134 ( 1 ) , 9 – 21 . Engel , A . K . , Singer , W . , 2001 . Temporal binding and the neural correlates of sensory awareness . Trends Cognit . Sci . 5 ( 1 ) , 16 – 25 . Erickson , B . , Truelove - Hill , M . , Oh , Y . , Anderson , J . , Zhang , F . Z . , Kounios , J . , 2018 . Resting - state brain oscillations predict trait - like cognitive styles . Neuropsychologia 120 , 1 – 8 . Flandin , G . , Friston , K . J . , 2019 . Analysis offamily - wise error rates in statistical parametric mapping using random ﬁ eld theory . Hum . Brain Mapp . 40 ( 7 ) , 2052 – 2054 . Friston , K . , Harrison , L . , Daunizeau , J . , Kiebel , S . , Phillips , C . , Trujillo - Barreto , N . , et al . , 2008 . Multiple sparse priors for the M / EEG inverse problem . Neuroimage 39 ( 3 ) , 1104 – 1120 . Georgiadis , J . R . , Kringelbach , M . L . , 2012 . The human sexual response cycle : brain imaging evidence linking sex to other pleasures . Prog . Neurobiol . 98 , 49 – 81 . Gick , M . L . , Lockhart , R . S . , 1995 . Cognitive and affective components of insight . In : Sternberg , R . J . , Davidson , J . E . ( Eds . ) , The Nature of Insight . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , US , pp . 197 – 228 . Gopnik , A . , 2000 . Explanation as orgasm and the drive for causal understanding : the evolution , function and phenomenology of the theory - formation system . In : Keil , F . , Wilson , R . ( Eds . ) , Cognition and Explanation . MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass , pp . 299 – 323 . Gottfried , J . A . , O ’ Doherty , J . , Dolan , R . J . , 2003 . Encoding predictive reward value in human amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex . Science 301 , 1104 – 1107 . Gray , J . A . , 1976 . The behavioral inhibition system : a possible substrate for anxiety . In : Feldman , M . P . , Broadhurst , A . M . ( Eds . ) , Theoretical and Experimental Bases of Behavior Modi ﬁ cation . Wiley , London . Gray , J . A . , 1987 . The Psychology of Fear and Stress . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Groppe , D . M . , Makeig , S . , Kutas , M . , 2009 . Identifying reliable independent components via split - half comparisons . Neuroimage 45 ( 4 ) , 1199 – 1211 . Hanslmayr , S . , Volberg , G . , Wimber , M . , Raabe , M . , Greenlee , M . W . , B € auml , K . H . T . , 2011 . The relationship between brain oscillations and BOLD signal during memory formation : a combined EEG – fMRI study . J . Neurosci . 31 ( 44 ) , 15674 – 15680 . Herrmann , C . S . , Munk , M . H . , Engel , A . K . , 2004 . Cognitive functions of gamma - band activity : memory match and utilization . Trends Cognit . Sci . 8 , 347 – 355 . Horvath , P . , Zuckerman , M . , 1993 . Sensation seeking , risk appraisal , and risky behavior . Pers . Indiv . Differ . 14 ( 1 ) , 41 – 52 . Huang , F . , Fan , J . , Luo , J . , 2015 . The neural basis of novelty and appropriateness in processing of creative chunk decomposition . Neuroimage 113 , 122 – 132 . Isen , A . M . , Daubman , K . A . , Nowicki , G . P . , 1987 . Positive affect facilitates creative problem solving . J . Pers . Soc . Psychol . 52 ( 6 ) , 1122 . Jarosz , A . F . , Col ﬂ esh , G . J . , Wiley , J . , 2012 . Uncorking the muse : alcohol intoxication facilitates creative problem solving . Conscious . Cognit . 21 ( 1 ) , 487 – 493 . Japee , S . , Holiday , K . , Satyshur , M . D . , Mukai , I . , Ungerleider , L . G . , 2015 . A role of right middle frontal gyrus in reorienting of attention : a case study . Front . Syst . Neurosci . 3 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnsys . 2015 . 00023 . Jensen , O . , Kaiser , J . , Lachaux , J . P . , 2007 . Human gamma - frequency oscillations associated with attention and memory . Trends Neurosci . 30 ( 7 ) , 317 – 324 . Jung - Beeman , M . , 2005 . Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural language . Trends Cognit . Sci . 9 ( 11 ) , 512 – 518 . Jung - Beeman , M . , Bowden , E . M . , Haberman , J . , Frymiare , J . L . , Arambel - Lui , S . , Greenblatt , R . , Kounios , J . , 2004 . Neural activity when people solve verbal problems with insight . PLoS Biol . 2 ( 4 ) , e97 . Kaplan , C . A . , Simon , H . A . , 1990 . In search of insight . Cognit . Psychol . 22 ( 3 ) , 374 – 419 . Keil , A . , Muller , M . M . , Ray , W . J . , Gruber , T . , Elbert , T . , 1999 . Human gamma band activity and perception of a gestalt . J . Neurosci . 19 , 7152 – 7161 . Kilner , J . M . , 2013 . Bias in a common EEG and MEG statistical analysis and how to avoid it . Clin . Neuropsychol . 124 ( 10 ) , 2062 – 2063 . Kilner , J . M . , Friston , K . J . , 2010 . Topological inference for EEG and MEG . Ann . Appl . Stat . 4 ( 3 ) , 1272 – 1290 . Kizilirmak , J . M . , Schott , B . H . , Theurich , H . , Sweeney - Reed , C . M . , Richter , A . , Folta - Schoofs , K . , Richardson - Klavehn , A . , 2019 . Learning of novel semantic relationships via sudden comprehension is associated with a hippocampus - independent network . Conscious . Cognit . 69 , 113 – 132 . Kizilirmak , J . M . , Thuerich , H . , Folta - Schoofs , K . , Schott , B . H . , Richardson - Klavehn , A . , 2016 . Neural correlates of learning from induced insight : a case for reward - based episodic encoding . Front . Psychol . 7 , 1693 . Kounios , J . , Beeman , M . , 2014 . Thecognitive neuroscience of insight . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 65 . Kounios , J . , Fleck , J . I . , Green , D . L . , Payne , L . , Stevenson , J . L . , Bowden , M . , Jung - Beeman , M . , 2008 . The origins of insight in resting - state brain activity . Neuropsychologia 46 , 281 – 291 . Kounios , J . , Frymiare , J . L . , Bowden , E . M . , Fleck , J . I . , Subramaniam , K . , Parrish , T . B . , Jung - Beeman , M . , 2006 . The prepared mind : neural activity prior to problem presentation predicts subsequent solution by sudden insight . Psychol . Sci . 17 ( 10 ) , 882 – 890 . Kringelbach , M . L . , O ’ Doherty , J . , Rolls , E . T . , Andrews , C . , 2003 . Activation of the human orbitofrontal cortex to a liquid food stimulus is correlated with its subjective pleasantness . Cerebr . Cortex 13 ( 10 ) , 1064 – 1071 . Kringelbach , M . L . , Stein , A . , van Hartevelt , T . J . , 2012 . The functional human neuroanatomy of food pleasure cycles . Physiol . Behav . 106 ( 3 ) , 307 – 316 . Leicht , G . , Troschütz , S . , Andreou , C . , Karamatskos , E . , Ertl , M . , Naber , D . , Mulert , C . , 2013 . Relationship between oscillatory neuronal activity during reward processing and trait impulsivity . and sensation seeking . PloS One 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0083414 . Leung , H . C . , Gore , J . C . , Goldman - Rakic , P . S . , 2002 . Sustained mnemonic response in the human middle frontal gyrus during on - line storage of spatial memoranda . J . Cognit . Neurosci . 14 ( 4 ) , 659 – 671 . Litvak , V . , Eusebio , A . , Jha , A . , Oostenveld , R . , Barnes , G . R . , Penny , W . D . , Zrinzo , L . , Hariz , M . I . , Limousin , P . , Friston , K . J . , Brown , P . , 2010 . Optimized beamforming for simultaneous MEG and intracranial local ﬁ eld potential recordings in deep brain stimulation patients . Neuroimage 50 ( 4 ) , 1578 – 1588 . Litvak , V . , Friston , K . , 2008 . Electromagnetic source reconstruction for group studies . Neuroimage 42 ( 4 ) , 1490 – 1498 . Litvak , V . , Mattout , J . , Kiebel , S . , Phillips , C . , Henson , R . , Kilner , J . , et al . , 2011 . EEG and MEG Data Analysis in SPM8 . Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience . 2011 . L (cid:1) opez , J . D . , Litvak , V . , Espinosa , J . J . , Friston , K . , Barnes , G . R . , 2014 . Algorithmic procedures for Bayesian MEG / EEG source reconstruction in SPM . Neuroimage 84 , 476 – 487 . Luck , D . , Danion , J . M . , Marrer , C . , Pham , B . T . , Gounot , D . , Foucher , J . , 2010 . The right parahippocampal gyrus contributes to the formation and maintenance of bound information in working memory . Brain Cognit . 72 ( 2 ) , 255 – 263 . Ludmer , R . , Dudai , Y . , Rubin , N . , 2011 . Uncovering camou ﬂ age : amygdala activation predicts long - term memory of induced perceptual insight . Neuron 69 ( 5 ) , 1002 – 1014 . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 14 Luo , Q . , Mitchell , D . , Cheng , X . , Mondillo , K . , Mccaffrey , D . , Holroyd , T . , Blair , J . , 2008 . Visual awareness , emotion , and gamma band synchronization . Cerebr . Cortex 19 ( 8 ) , 1896 – 1904 . Luo , J . , Niki , K . , 2003 . Function of hippocampus in “ insight ” of problem solving . Hippocampus 13 ( 3 ) , 316 – 323 . Luo , J . , Niki , K . , Phillips , S . , 2004 . The function of the anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) in the insightful solving of puzzles : the ACC is activated less when the structure of the puzzle is known . J . Psychol . Chin . Soc . 5 ( 2 ) , 195 – 213 . Marco - Pallar (cid:1) es , J . , Cucurell , D . , Cunillera , T . , García , R . , Andr (cid:1) es - Pueyo , A . , Münte , T . F . , Rodríguez - Fornells , A . , 2008 . Human oscillatory activity associated to reward processing in a gambling task . Neuropsychologia 46 ( 1 ) , 241 – 248 . Marco - Pallar (cid:1) es , J . , Muente , T . F . , Rodríguez - Fornells , A . , 2015 . The role of high - frequency oscillatory activity in reward processing and learning . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 49 , 1 – 7 . Metcalfe , J . , 1986 . Feeling of knowing in memory and problem solving . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cognit . 12 , 288 – 294 . Metcalfe , J . , Weibe , D . , 1987 . Intuition in insight and noninsight problem solving . Mem . Cognit . 15 ( 3 ) , 238 – 246 . Miller , E . K . , Cohen , J . D . , 2001 . An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 24 , 167 – 202 . Mognon , A . , Jovicich , J . , Bruzzone , L . , Buiatti , M . , 2011 . ADJUST : an automatic EEG artifact detector based on the joint use of spatial and temporal features . Psychophysiology 48 , 229 – 240 . Nobre , A . C . , Allison , T . , McCarthy , G . , 1994 . Word recognition in the human inferior temporal lobe . Nature 372 ( 6503 ) , 260 – 263 . O ’ Connor , R . M . , Colder , C . R . , 2005 . Predicting alcohol patterns in ﬁ rst - year college students through motivational systems and reasons for drinking . Psychol . Addict . Behav . 19 ( 1 ) , 10 – 20 . O ’ Doherty , J . P . , 2004 . Reward representations and reward - related learning in the human brain : insights from neuroimaging . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 14 ( 6 ) , 796 - 776 . Ohlsson , S . , 1984 . Restructuring revisited : I . Summary and critique of the Gestalt theory of problem solving . Scand . J . Psychol . 25 ( 1 ) , 65 – 78 . Old ﬁ eld , R . C . , 1971 . The assessment and analysis of handedness : the Edinburgh inventory . Neuropsychologia 9 ( 1 ) , 97 – 113 . Osipova , D . , Takashima , A . , Oostenveld , R . , Fern (cid:1) andez , G . , Maris , E . , Jensen , O . , 2006 . Theta and gamma oscillations predict encoding and retrieval of declarative memory . J . Neurosci . 26 ( 28 ) , 7523 – 7531 . Padr ~ ao , G . , Mallorquí , A . , Cucurell , D . , Marco - Pallares , G . , Rodriguez - Fornells , A . , 2013 . Neurophysiological differences in reward processing in anhedonics . Cognit . Affect Behav . Neurosci . 13 , 102 – 115 . Parsons , C . E . , Young , K . S . , Murray , L . , Stein , A . , Kringelbach , M . L . , 2010 . The functional neuroanatomy of the evolving parent – infant relationship . Prog . Neurobiol . 91 ( 3 ) , 220 – 241 . Plassmann , H . , O ’ Doherty , J . , Rangel , A . , 2007 . Orbitofrontal cortex encodes willingness to pay in everyday economic transactions . J . Neurosci . 27 ( 37 ) , 9984 – 9988 . Pulvermüller , F . , 2001 . Brain re ﬂ ections of words and their meaning . Trends Cognit . Sci . 5 ( 12 ) , 517 – 524 . Qiu , J . , Li , H . , Jou , J . , Liu , J . , Luo , Y . , Feng , T . , et al . , 2010 . Neural correlates of the “ Aha ” experiences : evidence from an fMRI study of insight problem solving . Cortex 46 ( 3 ) , 397 – 403 . Robinson , T . E . , Berridge , K . C . , 1993 . The neural basis of drug craving : an incentive - sensitization theory of addiction . Brain Res . Rev . 18 ( 3 ) , 247 – 291 . Rolls , E . T . , 1996 . The orbitofrontal cortex . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 351 , 1433 – 1443 discussion 1443 – 1434 . Roux , F . , Uhlhaas , P . J . , 2014 . Working memory and neural oscillations : α - γ versus θ - γ codes for distinct WM information ? Trends Cognit . Sci . 18 ( 1 ) , 16 – 25 . Salimpoor , V . N . , Benovoy , M . , Larcher , K . , Dagher , A . , Zatorre , R . J . , 2011 . Anatomically distinct dopamine release during anticipation and experience of peak emotion to music . Nat . Neurosci . 14 ( 2 ) , 257 . Salvi , C . , Bricolo , E . , Kounios , J . , Bowden , E . , Beeman , M . , 2016 . Insight solutions are correct more often than analytic solutions . Think . Reas . 22 ( 4 ) , 443 – 460 . Schuler , A . L . , Tik , M . , Sladky , R . , Luft , C . D . B . , Hoffmann , A . , Woletz , M . , et al . , 2019 . Modulations in resting state networks of subcortical structures linked to creativity . Neuroimage 195 , 311 – 319 . Schultz , W . , 2016 . Dopamine reward prediction error coding . Dialogues Clin . Neurosci . 18 ( 1 ) , 23 . Shen , W . , Tong , Y . , Li , F . , Hommel , B . , Liu , C . , Luo , J . , 2018 . Tracking the neurodynamics of insight : a meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies . Biol . Psychol . 138 , 189 – 198 . Shen , W . , Yuan , Y . , Liu , C . , Zhang , X . , Luo , J . , Gong , Z . , 2016 . Is creative insight task speci ﬁ c ? A coordinate - based meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies on insightful problem solving . Int . J . Psychophysiol . 110 , 81 – 90 . Shenhav , A . , Botnivik , M . M . , Cohen , J . D . , 2014 . The expected value of control : an integrative theory of anterior cingulate cortex function . Neuron 79 ( 2 ) , 217 – 240 . Simons , J . S . , Arens , A . M . , 2007 . Moderating effects of sensitivity to punishment and sensitivity to reward on associations between marijuana effect expectancies and use . Psychol . Addict . Behav . 21 ( 3 ) , 409 – 414 . Singer , W . , Engel , A . K . , Kreiter , A . K . , Munk , M . H . , Neuenschwander , S . , Roelfsema , P . R . , 1997 . Neuronal assemblies : necessity , signature and detectability . Trends in cognitive sciences 1 ( 7 ) , 252 – 261 . Subramaniam , K . , Kounios , J . , Parrish , T . B . , Jung - Beeman , M . , 2009 . A brain mechanism for facilitation of insight by positive affect . Journal of cognitive neuroscience 21 ( 3 ) , 415 – 432 . Tallon - Baudry , C . , Bertrand , O . , 1999 . Oscillatory gamma activity in humans and its role in object representation . Trends Cognit . Sci . 3 ( 4 ) , 151 – 162 . Thesen , T . , McDonald , C . R . , Carlson , C . , Doyle , W . , Cash , S . , Sherfey , J . , et al . , 2012 . Sequential then interactive processing of letters and words in the left fusiform gyrus . Nat . Commun . 3 , 1284 . Tik , M . , Sladky , R . , DiBernardi Luft , C . , Willinger , D . , Hoffmann , A . , Banissy , M . J . , Bhattacharya , J . , Windischberger , C . , 2018 . Ultra - high ﬁ eld fMRI insights on insight : neural correlates of the Aha ! - moment . Hum . Brain Mapp . 39 , 3241 – 3252 . Van den Berg , A . , Franken , I . H . A . , Muris , P . , 2010 . A new scale for measuring reward responsiveness . Front . Psychol . 1 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpysg . 2010 . 00239 . Vartanian , O . , Goel , V . , 2005 . Task constraints modulate activation in right ventral lateral prefrontal cortex . Neuroimage 27 ( 4 ) , 927 – 933 . Vartanian , O . , Skov , M . , 2014 . Neural correlates of viewing paintings : evidence from a quantitative meta - analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging data . Brain Cognit . 87 , 52 – 56 . Veldhuizen , M . G . , Rudenga , K . J . , Small , D . M . , 2010 . The pleasure of taste , ﬂ avor , and food . In : Kringelbach , M . L . , Berridge , K . C . ( Eds . ) , Pleasures of the Brain . Oxford University Press , New York , NY , US , pp . 146 – 168 . Von Der Heide , R . J . , Skipper , L . M . , Klobusicky , E . , Olson , I . R . , 2013 . Dissecting the uncinate fasciculus : disorders , controversies and a hypothesis . Brain 136 ( 6 ) , 1692 – 1707 . Vuust , P . , Kringelbach , M . L . , 2010 . The pleasure of music . In : Kringelbach , M . L . , Berridge , K . C . ( Eds . ) , Pleasures of the Brain . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK . Watson , D . , Clark , L . A . , Tellegen , A . , 1988 . Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect : the PANAS scales . J . Pers . Soc . Psychol . 54 ( 6 ) , 1063 . Weafer , J . , Crane , N . A . , Gorka , S . M . , Phan , K . L . , deWit , H . , 2019 . Neural correlates of inhibition and reward are negatively associated . Neuroimage 196 , 188 – 194 . Wixted , J . T . , Mickes , L . , 2010 . A continuous dual - process model of remember / know judgments . Psychol . Rev . 117 ( 4 ) , 1025 . Wu , L . , Knoblich , G . , Luo , J . , 2013 . The role of chunk tightness and chunk familiarity in problem solving : evidence from ERPs and FMRI . Hum . Brain Mapp . 34 ( 5 ) , 1173 – 1186 . Zeki , S . , Romaya , J . P . , 2010 . The brain reaction to viewing faces of opposite - and same - sex romantic partners . PloS One 5 ( 12 ) , e15802 . Zhan , H . , Liu , C . , Shen , W . , 2015 . Neural basis of creative thinking during four stages . Adv . Psychol . Sci . 23 , 213 – 224 . Zhao , Q . , Zhou , Z . , Xu , H . , Chen , S . , Xu , F . , Fan , W . , Han , L . , 2013 . Dynamic neural network of insight : a functional magnetic resonance imaging study on solving Chinese ‘ chengyu ’ riddles . PloS one 8 ( 3 ) . Y . Oh et al . NeuroImage 214 ( 2020 ) 116757 15