CH1 ' 89 PROCEEDINGS MAY 1989 Human - Computer Interaction Laboratory University of Maryland Center for Automation Research Ben Shneiderman Human - Computer Interaction Laboratory Department of Computer Science University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 GOALS There are grand opportunities for individual and group access to information , education , entertainment , exploration , and communication through effectively designed computer systems . Our goal is to research user interface designs that " serve human needs " while building feelings of competence , mastery , confidence , and satisfaction . When the user interface is well - designed , the users should be able to accomplish their goals with a sense of control or mastery over the technology and a feeling of respect for the designer . RESEARCH DIRECTIONS This rapidly expanding interdisciplinary topic combines the experimental methods and intellectual framework of cognitive psychology with the powerful and widely used tools developed from computer science . In these disciplines and certainly others , there is growing interest in the human factors issues of computer use with systems such as : text editors , electronic mail , hypertext , programming environments , computer conferencing , information and database search , personal and home applications , education , commercial systems such as inventory , personnel , and reservations , decision support systems , utility and air traffic control , and entertainment . Research topics include novice vs . expert differences , command language vs . menu selection , graphical approaches , speech input and output , response time and display rates , novel input and output devices , keyboard design , online assistance , tutorials , cognitive models of user behavior , organizational impact , and social issues . Our goal is to turn from the argumentative discussions about the " user friendliness " of a system , to a more scientific approach . We emphasize prototype development and controlled experimental techniques that yield more objective and reliable results . Once a specific user community and set of tasks are identified , measurable criteria for a human - computer interface include : - time to learn specific functions - speed of task performance - rate of human errors - subjective user satisfaction - human retention of functions over time ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION The 6 - ycar old Human - Computer Interaction Laboratory ( HClL ) has increased the contact and collaboration among faculty at the University of Maryland who share an interest in these topics . Results have included joint research projects , interdisciplinary seminars , an annual open house with presentation of research , cooperation in graduate programs , and coordination in developing experimental facilities . The Human - Computer Interaction Laboratory is one of the constituent laboratories in the Center for Automation Research under the direction of Prof . Azriel Rosenfeld . We draw on competent faculty in many disciplines , a good and growing reputation , free facilities , an excellent geographic location , and the support of administrators . Faculty Particinants : Computer Science : Christos Faloutsos , Richard Furuta , James Hendier , Nicholas Roussopoulos , Ben Shneiderman Psychology : Nancy Anderson , Kent Norman School of Education : Mark Gillingham , Charles MacArthur College of Business : Kay Bartol , Dan Powers College of Library and Information Services : Jerry Kidd , Gary Marchionini , Dagobert Soergel Computer Science Center : Glenn Ricart Center for Instructional Development and Evaluation : Janis Morariu Staff : Linda Weldon , Assistant Research Scientist Catherine Plaisant - Schwenn , Research Associate Yoram Kochavy , Faculty Research Assistant Mildred Johnson , Secretary FACILITIES HCIL has ample resources of Apple Macintosh and IBM PC computers as well as special displays and touchscreens . In addition SUN workstations and advanced hardware are available for projects . We also have excellent access to the Department of Computer Science research computing resources and connection to international networks . Special purpose machines such as image processing and graphics workstations , and supercomputers are conveniently available as are experimentation rooms and videotaping equipment . The major laboratory spaces are housed in the Compute Science and Psychology Departments . 3 0 9 CH1 ' 89 PROCEEDINGS MAY 1989 CURRENT PROJECTS Hvperties ( Hypertext based on Th ~ Interd¢fiv¢ Encyclopedin Svstem ( TIES ) ~ ; Since Fall 1983 we have been developing an interactive encyclopedia system to enable novice browsers and expert users to traverse textual , graphic , and videodisc databases . We have expanded from the original PC - based version ( available from Cognetics Corp . , Princeton Jct , NJ ) to produce a NeWS version on the SUN workstation . These implementations enabled us to explore novel strategies for multiple window browsing that reduce the user ' s cognitive load and facilitate concentration on the task domain . Strategies for touchable graphic embedded menus were tested with the Space Telescope demonstration for NASA . On March 22 , 1988 two computers with Hyperties software were installed in the Smithsonian ' s Natural History Museum in an archaeology exhibit entitled King Herod ' s Dream . The database provides information about opportunities for participating in archaeological digs at 180 sites around the world . That exhibit is touring at museums in Los Angeles , Boston , Denver , and elsewhere during 1988 - 1990 . We produced a Hyperties version of the July 1988 Special Section of the Communications of the ACM on hypertext systems , a guide for the EDUCOM ' 88 Conference , and a book for Addison - Wesley called Hypetext Hands - On ! ( Ben Shneiderman and Greg Kearsley ) . We developed a rapid string search feature based the signature file method . Users can type single words or words linked by AND , OR , and FOLLOWED - BY operators . An important requirement for success of hypertext systems is that they be integrated with other software . Therefore , we are working on strategies for conveniently importing existing databases . Exporting hypertext databases is also necessary to produce printed versions and enable distribution in an electronic environment . Empirical studies guide the design and we continue to investigate information density , color highlighting , index usage , graphic browsing strategies , and knowledge organization . We have recently begun to build a UNIX version and a portable touchscreen version . Precision Touchscreens : Traditional touchscreens always performed rapidly , but the lack of positional feedback consistently led to high error rates , especially with small targets . By providing positional feedback , in the form of a small plus sign cursor above the finger ' s center , and by delaying the initiation of action until the finger is lifted off the surface , it is possible to produce a highly accurate touchscreen strategy . The benefits were measured in three empirical tests . We received the Oustanding Innovation of 1987 Award from the University of Maryland Office of Technology Liaison . Ouestionnaire for User Interface Satisfacti9t ~ - Subjective evaluation is an important component in the evaluation of workstation usability . In this project we developed a general user evaluation instalment for interactive computer systems . The methods of psychological test construction were used to ensure proper construct and empirical validity of the items and to assess their reliability . The hierarchical breakdown of system attributes allows for differential weighting of components ( e . g . , in some systems character readability is of prime importance while online help is of minimal importance ) and adaptive evaluation to home in on problem areas quickly ( e . g . , if character readability is judged to be very good , then the specific items on that scale are skipped ) . The goal of the questionnaire is ( a ) to guide in the design or redesign of systems , ( b ) to give managers a tool for assessing potential areas of system improvement , and ( c ) to provide researchers with a validated instrument for conducting comparative evaluations . Validation studies have been conducted and the QUIS is available for licensing in paper form , IBM MS - DOS version , and a Macintosh HyperCard version . The Problem of Disambi ~ , uation of Natural Lan ~ uaCe Reference ; Reference to names and objects is often vague in natural language . Nevertheless , the listener can generally disambiguate the exact reference . Disambiguation requires an inference process using contextual information . For example , the listener may use information about frequency and recency of reference to target words . An experiment tested the comprehension of homographs as a function of their experienced frequency and recency to understand how people process ambiguous referents . User interfaces for home control : Our project investigates the user interface in a domestic home security and control systems . We extended our work on menu selection and direct manipulation to explore user interfaces that truly have ease - of - use , cognitive simplicity , and transparency . We focused on menu trees in a voice activated and touch screen environment that is being developed by Custom Command Systems under support from the Maryland Industrial Partnerships program . Our initial work on design suggestions and usability studies is being expanded to include the design of an advanced planning model for alarms and events . Museum of Jewish Heritage : Learning Center User Interfaces We support the development of computer - user interfaces for this project of the NY Holocaust Memorial Commission , Inc . MJH will be a world leader in the application of computer technology to support exhibits and personal exploration of databases , while providing a meaningful , and at times emotional experience . Computer installations for the Learning Center will include : 1 ) The Interactive Encyclopedia of Jewish Heritage , based on our Hyperties system , will enable vistors to browse , read , and explore 3000 articles and 10 , 000 videodisk images . 2 ) The Pages of Testimony database will contain information on Holocaust victims from Yad Vashem ( Jerusalem , Israel ) and other sources . Visitors will use a touchscreen to locate relatives or collections of names . 310