THE NONCONCEPT OF SPECIES DIVERSITY : A CRITIQUE AND ALTERNATIVE PARAMETERS ' STUART H . HURLBERT2 Division of Biological Control , Department of Entomology , University of California , Riverside A bstract . The recent literature on species diversity contains many semantic , conceptual , and technical problems . It is suggested that , as a result of these problems , species diversity has become a meaningless concept , that the term be abandoned , and that ecologists take a more critical approach to species - number relations and rely less on information theoretic and other analogies . As multispecific collections of organisms possess numerous statistical proper - ties which conform to the conventional criteria for diversity indices , such collections are not intrinsically arrangeable in linear order along some diversity scale . Several such properties or " species composition parameters " having straightforward biological interpretations are pre - sented as alternatives to the diversity approach . The two most basic of these are simply : [ N ] [ 1 - E ( N 2 ] = the proportion of potential interindividual en - counters which is interspecific ( as opposed to intraspecific ) , assuming every individual in the collection can encounter all other individuals , and E ( S . 7 ) = L1 n ] N = the expected number of species in a sample of n individuals selected at random from a collec - tion containing N individuals , S species , and N . individuals in the ith species . Ever since Fisher , Corbet , and Williams ( 1943 ) proposed the diversity index o and , more recently , since MacArthur ( 1955 ) and Margalef ( 1958 ) pro - posed indices based on information theory , com - munity ecologists have put much effort into the mathematical and statistical refinement of these in - dices , the devising of new indices , the calculation of diversity for various collections of organisms , and the correlation of diversity with other variables . These efforts have sometimes been at the expense of more substantive approaches to community ecology . The term " species diversity " has been defined in such various and disparate ways that it now conveys no information other than " something to do with com - munity structure " ; species diversity has become a nonconcept . The present paper offers a critique of semantic , conceptual , and technical problems in the diversity literature and suggests that ecologists take more di - rect approaches to the study of species - numbers re - lations . It treats only empirical measures , i . e . , those calculated directly from the observed relative abun - dances of the species in a collection . Theoretical in - dices , such as parameters of the log - series ( Fisher , Corbet , and Williams 1943 ) , log - normal ( Preston 1948 ) , or negative binomial distributions ( Brian 1953 ) seem inadequate for critical comparisons . Since the fit of actual data to theoretical species - numbers distributions is always less than perfect , no clear interpretation can be attached either to numer - ical values yielded by theoretical indices or to dif - ferences between such values calculated for different collections . Attempts to discover mathematical reg - ularity in species - numbers distributions are worth - while but are to be distinguished from the empirical description of community structure . SEMANTICS Species diversity is a function of the number of species present ( species richness or species abun - dance ) and the evenness with which the individuals are distributed among these species ( species evenness or species equitability ) ( Margalef 1958 , Lloyd and Ghelardi 1964 , Pielou 1966 ) . If the term " species diversity " is to retain any usefulness ( and this seems doubtful ) its meaning probably should be restricted to at least this extent . Its use in other senses has been one cause of the term ' s present ambiguity . Some workers appear to synonymize species richness with ' Received April 23 , 1970 ; accepted April 11 , 1971 . 2 Present address : Department of Biology , San Diego State College , San Diego , California 92115 . 578 STUART H . HURLBERT Ecology , Vol . 52 , No . 4 species diversity or at least consider species richness to be one of several possible measures of species diversity ( e . g . , MacArthur 1965 , Whittaker 1965 , Paine 1966 , Pianka 1966 , 1967 , Hutchinson 1967 : 372 , Hessler and Sanders 1967 , MacArthur and Wil - son 1967 , Odum 1967 , McNaughton 1967 , 1968 , Johnson , Mason , and Raven 1968 , Sanders 1968 , Whittaker and Woodwell 1969 ) . Margalef ( 1968 : 18 ) states that " an area with greater diversity of butter - flies would yield more species , and . . . there would be a higher proportion of rare varieties . " Although species diversity and species richness are often pos - itively correlated , e . g . , along latitudinal gradients , such positive correlation is neither a biological nor a mathematical necessity ; gradients can exist along which increases in species diversity are accompanied by decreases in species richness . Another problem concerns the distinction between abundance and importance and the occasional fail - ure to recognize that diversity , as it is usually mea - sured , is an aspect of community structure and that , structurally , rare species are minor components of their community . Complaints that an index such as Shannon ' s ( Shannon and Weaver 1962 ) Hi = " Nj log N ( 1 ) N is inadequate because it is " insensitive to the rare species . . . [ which may ] play a substantial role in the ecosystem " ( Sager and Hasler 1969 ) are as invalid as complaints that the weight of a tree is an inade - quate measure because it is insensitive to the tree ' s functionally important leaves . Diversity indices do not assume " that the more abundant a particular spe - cies , the more important it is in the community " ( Dickman 1968 ) . A species ' importance is not neces - sarily reflected by its relative contribution to the H ' value for the community . Despite its past use in more static senses , the term " importance " connotes eco - logical function . Whittaker ( 1965 ) feels the " best single measure of a species ' importance . . . is its productivity . " This definition may suffice when one is dealing with a restricted group of organisms ( e . g . , green plants ) among which competition is the major interaction ( e . g . , no predation , no parasitism ) ; but otherwise it gives little weight to a species ' actual impact on the rest of the community . For example , the fungus Endothia parasitica ( Chinese chestnut blight ) in the forests of the eastern United States and the cactus - eating moth Cactoblastis cactorurm in Queensland , Australia , presently have very low pro - ductivities , yet we know that they exert major in - fluences on the structure and function of their re - spective ecosystems . For similar reasons , MacFadyen ( 1936 : 236 ) has questioned the adequacy of popula - tional metabolic rate as a measure of importance . Perhaps the importance of a species is best defined as the sum , over all species , 8 of the changes ( sign ig - nored ) in productivity which would occur on re - moval of the particular species from the community . In symbolic notation , Importance of S jth species 1 Pi , ' = = lPiI - - o where P , is the productivity of the ith species before ( t = 0 ) and after ( t - 1 ) removal of the particular ( jth ) species being evaluated . This definition incor - porates all aspects , quantitative and qualitative , of a species which might determine its influence in a community . Since the total productivity of green plants in a community is usually much greater than the total productivity of all other organisms ( as a result of respiration losses ) , the most important spe - cies , by our definition , will include the commoner green plants and any organisms which , directly or indirectly , markedly influence their relative abun - dances . DUBIOUS INDICES The most widely used diversity indices , namely , H ' [ equation ( 1 ) ] and I N ! N 11 N , have been adopted from information theory and justified by cursory reference to " uncertainty of en - counter " or by a dubious analogy between letters on a printed page and individuals in a community . Al - though these information theoretic indices have been examined and applied to ecological problems by many ecologists , no one has yet specified exactly what significance the " number of bits per individual " has to the individuals and populations in a commu - nity . It has not been shown that information theo - retic indices have any greater biological relevance than do the infinite number of other potential indices which have a minimum value when S = I and a maximum value when S = N . MacArthur ( 1955 ) originally selected H ' as a measure of stability ( when calculated from data on energy flow ) for the ad - mittedly arbitrary reason that , in terms of Pielou ( 1967 ) , hierarchical diversities are then additive . Information theory may have heuristic value for ecology , but at least for the present its ' ' hard ' use - fulness in a practical sense seems doubtful " ( Pat - ten 1968 ) . Similar criticisms apply to other diversity indices , such as those based on geometric analogies ( McIntosh 1967 ) . The striking nonconcordance possible among var - ious diversity indices has been ignored . Table I illus - trates how two such indices can give different rank - ' Including the species that was removed and also those species that may not have been present before its removal but invaded subsequently . Summer 1971 SPECIES DIVERSITY 579 TABLE 1 . The comparison of two species diversity indices calculated for two hypothetical communities , each con - taining 100 , 000 individuals . Both indices have a max - imum value when S = N and a minimum value when S = 1 . ? 13 is an index mentioned by MacArthur and Wilson ( 1967 ) Com - Abundances Diversity , as measured munity by H1 3 S Ni = 2iX log - s = 1 / 2 A 6 Ni = 18 , 000 0 . 78 5 . 98 i = 1 , 2 Ni = 16 , 000 i = 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 B 91 Ni = 40 , 000 2 . 70 5 . 00 i = 1 Ni = 667 i = 2 , . . . . , 91 ings for a set of communities . Which is more diverse , A or B ? The example shows the looseness of the ques - tion . Several factors have motivated the creation of diversity indices , including ( i ) the observation that two collections could contain the same number of species and the same number of individuals but still have very different structures , and ( ii ) the intuitive feeling that the number of species and their relative abundances somehow could be combined into an index that would show a closer relation to other properties of the community and environment than would number of species alone . A central though unarticulated problem has been to determine the appropriate relative weights to be given to species richness and species evenness in the construction of such an index . And since diversity ( everyone agrees on the word ! ) has never had a single , unequivocal definition , there has been no objective way to assign these relative weights ; nor is one ever likely to be found . We therefore can muddle along with a ple - thora of indices , each supported by at least one per - son ' s intuition and a few recommended by fashion , or we can sharpen our thoughts and rephrase our questions in terms of biologically meaningful proper - ties which , when calculable on a list of species and their abundances , we might collectively refer to as species composition parameters . The second alterna - tive is recommended , and the remainder of this paper discusses a few such parameters . PROBABILITY OF INTERSPECIFIC ENCOUNTER Much of the interest in diversity has stemmed from its proposed relationship to community stability . Since stability is related to the number of links in a food web ( MacArthur 1955 , Leigh 1965 ) and since links imply interspecific encounters ( e . g . , fox eating woodchuck ) , the probability of interspecific encoun - ters is a variable of interest . Potentially , each indi - vidual in a community can encounter or interact with every other individual in the community . Of the ( N ) ( N - 1 ) / 2 potential encounters in a community of N individuals , Y ( Ni ) ( N - Ni ) / 2 encounters in - volve individuals belonging to different species . Thus , S N ) N - ) N _ N I I ) ( EXi2 ) ( 3 ) is the probability of interspecific encounter ( PIE ) or the proportion of potential encounters that is inter - specific , where Ni = number of individuals of the ith species in the community ( or collection ) , N = E Ni = total number of individuals in the community , ' ri = Ni / N , and S = number of species in the community . As an equivalent interpretation , note that if an in - dividual ( a biologist or any other organism ) enters a community and encounters two individuals at ran - dom , Al is the probability that they belong to differ - ent species . When the first individual encountered risks being the subject of the second encounter also , as in nonlethal encounters , this probability is simply S A2 = 1 - xi2 ( 4 ) i = 1 the complement of Simpson ' s ( 1949 ) " measure of concentration . " The concept of PIE finds perhaps its first expres - sion in one of Alfred Russell Wallace ' s ( 1876 : 65 ) observations on the structure of Amazonian forests : " If the traveller notices a particular species and wishes to find more like it , he may turn his eyes in vain in any direction . Trees of varied forms , dimen - sions and colours are around him , but he rarely sees any one of them repeated . Time after time he goes towards a tree which looks like the one he seeks , but a closer examination proves it to be distinct . He may at length , perhaps , meet with a second specimen half a mile off , or may fail altogether , till on another oc - casion he stumbles on one by accident . " If we think of the " traveller " as a phytophagous insect seeking its host plant , the biological significance of PIE is apparent . In communities with high PIE we can expect that the sensory abilities of animals , especially host - specific ones , will be more highly de - veloped , on average , than would those of animals living in communities with low PIE . Or perhaps we should simply say that in communities characterized by high PIE , fewer random components can be tol - erated in searching ( for mates , hosts , or prey ) be - 580 STUART H . HURLBERT Ecology , Vol . 52 , No . 4 havior of animals . In flowering plants the most ran - dom method of mate - seeking is wind dispersal of pollen , a method notably absent in high PIE com - munities such as tropical rainforests ( the year - round presence of wind - obstructing foliage in such com - munities may also be a factor ) ( Corner 1964 : 199 ) . Since Al ( and A2 ) ranges only from 0 to 1 , three communities consisting , respectively , of 2 , 10 , and 100 equally abundant species yield Al ( or L9 ) values of . 50 , . 90 , and . 99 . These suggest that from the viewpoint of an individual functioning in the com - munity , even large increases in species richness may add little to community complexity after a moderate degree of species richness has been attained . STATISTICS OF PIE For those rare occasions when it is possible to take a truly random sample of individuals from a community or other collection , the sample estimators of A2 and Al are provided by Simpson ( 1949 ) : D , = I ; ( ( j ( 5 ) N Di - ~ ~ ~ - D2 ~ ( 6 ) D N - ( 1 where nj = number of individuals of the jth species in the sample , n = E n - = total number of individuals in the sample , and Sn = number of species in the sample , S , , S ( Simpson 1949 ) . D1 and D2 are consistent , unbiased estimators so long as n ? 2 and do not require knowledge of the number of species in the community . As n increases , the distributions of D1 and D2 tend to normality ( ex - cept when S = N ) . The variance of D2 is given by Simpson ( 1949 ; he gives the variance of 1 - D2 , which is identical to that of D2 ) and the variance of D1 is simply N 2 Var ( D1 ) - ( NI Var ( D2 ) . ( 7 ) A TRANSFORMATION OF PIE Adopting a transformation applied by MacArthur ( 1965 ) to H ' , we can obtain an alternative way of expressing PIE by asking , " If species are equally abundant , how many would a hypothetical collection have to have in order to yield a PIE value equal to the PIE value of some real collection containing S unequally abundant species ? " If Sh is the number of species in the hypothetical collection and if Ad is the relative abundance of the ith species in the real col - lection , then we set S / 1 2 A2 1 j - 2 1 - ( 8 ) t = 1 \ A and obtain Sh 1 / ( - A2 ) - 1 / 2 , 2 = A3 . ( 9 ) The same result is obtained if we use Al as our mea - sure of PIE . A3 is a useful transformation for dealing with col - lections having high PIE ' s distributed over a narrow range ( for instance , A2 values of . 95 and . 99 yield A3 values of 20 and 100 ) or if we simply wish to ex - press results in familiar units , i . e . , number of species . RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION When calculated on a collection of closely related species on the same trophic level , Al measures the importance of interspecific competition relative to total competition , assuming that encounters occur at random and that each encounter represents a unit of competition . The remainder , 1 - Al , is the propor - tion of total competition which is intraspecific . Alter - natively , we can calculate the ratio of interspecific to intraspecific competition ( encounters ) , i . e . , = 1 - = ( A 2 ) - 1 / N ( 10 ) If N is large and PIE is low ( i . e . , E2r2 is high ) , we have the approximation , 1 1 - i2 A4 = t _ E _ 2 = A3 - 1 = 5 , . ( The percentage error arising from use of A , as an approximation of A4 is A4 NE . , . j2 ( 12 ) If we assume that , in some sense , an individual can compete with himself , then the ratio of interspecific intraspecific competition is given exactly by A5 . Having both species richness and species evenness components , Al , A2 , A3 , A4 , and A5 conform to the conventional criteria for diversity indices . Hopefully , they can be spared that unhelpful label , however . McIntosh ( 1967 ) has referred to A2 as " directly related to diversity " after implying a few pages earlier that it is a measure of equitability . Yule ( 1944 ) em - ployed the index K = ( 1 - A1 ) ( N ) in his sta - tistical studies of literature . Williams ( 1964 : 148 ) suggested 1 / ( 1 - Al ) as a diversity index ; it ap - proximates A3 if N is large . MacArthur and Wilson ( 1967 : 187 ) listed A3 as a possible measure of diver - sity , and Levins ( 1968 : 43 ) has used it to measure " niche breadth . " SPECIES RICHNESS Species richness can refer to the number of spe - cies present , without any particular regard for the Summer 1971 SPECIES DIVERSITY 581 exact area or number of individuals examined . How - ever , it is useful to distinguish between numerical species richness ( hereinafter referred to simply as species richness ) , the number of species present in a collection containing a specified number of individ - uals , or , possibly , amount of biomass ; and area spe - cies richness or species density ( Simpson 1964 ) , the number of species present in a given area or volume of the environment ( e . g . , square kilometer of grass - land , a liter of lake water ) . Species density is another parameter to which the term " species diversity " has been applied ( e . g . , Woodwell 1967 , Whittaker and Woodwell 1969 ) . By varying area or number of in - dividuals , we can generate species density ( = species - area ) or species richness curves . Species density is of considerable interest but falls outside the scope of the present discussion . Since the species richness of a collection generally increases with N , comparison of species richnesses of different collections requires that collections be re - duced to a common size ( n ) . This can be effected with the equation _ ~ - ( N - Ni ) E ( SO ) - L l ( AT ) ) ( 13 ) the expected number of species in a sample of n individuals selected at ran - dom ( without replacement ) from a collection containing N individuals and S species . For example , if we have two collections , A ( NA = 1013 , SA = 70 ) and B ( NB = 780 , SB = 65 ) , we can calculate 7 ( 1013 - NAi ) 70 V ~ 780 l E ( SA , n = 780 ) = E ( 03 11013 I 780 ) and compare E ( SA % ) directly with SIj . Such com - parisons will have greatest validity when each collec - tion is comprised either of all individuals in a given area , size of area being the same for each collection , or of a truly random sample of these individuals . If this method is applied to other types of collections , interpretation of results will be less conclusive . Species richness comparisons made at a single sample size ( n ) permit only limited conclusions . Since the manner in which sample species richness increases with sample size varies according to the number of species and their relative abundances in the collection , it is possible that at one sample size , collection A will have a greater sample species rich - ness than collection B , while at a larger sample size , collection B will have the greater sample species rich - ness . This same relativity plagued Yule ( 1944 : 83 ) in his attempts to compare different authors with respect to vocabulary richness . He concluded , " To transform the correct statement ' in a sample of n occurrences the vocabulary of author A is twice as great as that of author B ' into the general statement ' the vocabulary of author A is twice as great as that of author B ' may be an entirely fallacious pro - ceeding . " Probably the most instructive approach is to cal - culate , plot , and compare the species richness curves [ n vs . E ( Sn ) ] of the different collections , as sug - gested by Sanders ( 1968 ) . Although Sanders refers to these as " species diversity curves , " two collections can have identical diversities , as measured by one of the conventional indices , and yield radically different species richness curves , as they are termed here . It may also be noted that Sanders ' " rarefaction meth - odology " generally overestimates the " expected num - ber of species present in populations [ = samples ] of different sizes . " In Table 2 expected sample species richness ( for n = 100 ) has been determined both by E ( Sn ) and by the " rarefaction methodology " for five hypothetical collections of varying species evenness : in the first four collections , the error ranges from 12 % to 53 % . Despite its dependence on sample size , sample species richness is not without biological significance . Consider an individual which enters a community and in a certain period of time encounters n indi - viduals at random , the exact number being deter - mined by his mobility or sedentariness . If the in - truder eats or destroys each individual encountered , then he can expect to encounter E ( Sn ) species . If the intruder eats none of the individuals encountered , the number of species he will meet with is , on average , E ( S ' n ) = E [ 1 - ( 1 - i ) n ] ( 14 ) the " with replacement " equivalent of E ( Sn ) . For a member of the community , rather than an intruder into it , the number of species encountered would be , on average , E ( = f n ) ] j [ i ] ( 15 ) if each individual encountered is eaten , or E ( Sttt8 ) - = [ I ' ] j ( Sn ) ( 16 ) if no individuals ate eaten . Ej ( Sn ) and E ' j ( Sn ) are the number of species an individual of the jth spe - cies could be expected to encounter ; they are defined exactly in equations ( 28 ) and ( 29 ) . These four mea - sures of species richness [ equations ( 13 - 16 ) ] yield similar values when N is large relative to n and S . 582 STUART H . HURLBERT Ecology , Vol . 52 , No . 4 TABLE 2 . A comparison of expected sample species richness as determined by E ( Sn ) and by Sanders ' ( 1968 ) " rare - faction methodology . " Collections 1 , 2 , 4 , and 5 each contain 1 , 000 individuals and 100 species ; collection 3 contains 1 , 002 individuals and 40 species . Sample species richness is calculated for a sample size of 100 individuals Sample species richness ( n = 100 ) Collection type E ( Sn ) Sanders ' method 1 . Maximum evenness . 65 . 3 100 . 0 ( Ni = 10 , for all i ) 2 . High evenness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 . 5 53 . 4 ( N = 76 , N2 = . . . = N6 = 50 , N7 = . . . = N26 = 20 , N27 = . . = N76 = 5 , N77 = . . . = Nloo = 1 ) 3 . M oderate evenness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 22 . 9 ( Collection in Table 1 , Sanders 1968 ) 4 . Low evenness . . . 41 . 6 51 . 0 ( N . = 505 , Ni = 5 , fori = 2 , 3 , . . 100 ) 5 . Minimum evenness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 . 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 10 . 9 ( N1 = 901 , Ni = 1 , for i = 2 , 3 , 100 ) Of course , if an individual is considered to examine a given area , rather than encounter a given number of individuals , then species density becomes the vari - able of prime interest . The occasional intersection of species richness curves calls attention to the mobility of the individual as a factor determining effective species richness . If community A and community B have intersecting species richness curves , one might conclude that community A has greater richness for an individual ( or species ) of low mobility , but that community B has greater richness for an individual of high mo - bility . Species richness curves rise rapidly at first and then flatten out , so at sufficiently large sample sizes , the results of species richness comparisons tend to stabilize . Therefore , if a single measure of richness is desired , as when richness is being examined for correlation with other factors , one might compare E ( Sn ) values calculated for some high , standardized value of n . Odum ( 1967 ) , for example , found a relationship between sample species richness ( for n = 1000 ) and organic matter in marine systems , although he did not specify how his species richness values were calculated . SPECIES EVENNESS Species evenness usually has been defined as the ratio of observed diversity to maximum diversity , the latter being said to occur when the species in a collection are equally abundant ( Margalef 1958 , Patten 1962 , Pielou 1966 ) . Reasoning that " numer - ical equality among the species is too much to ex - pect , " Lloyd and Ghelardi ( 1964 ) defined maximum diversity to exist when the species ' abundances were as predicted by one of MacArthur ' s ( 1957 ) broken stick models . However , this causes their species equi - tability measure to be expressed in somewhat arbi - trary units , especially considering MacArthur ' s ( 1966 ) own comments on the model . The clearest approach seems to lie in taking complete numerical equality as the standard of comparison . Historically , two types of evenness measures have been defined , viz . V ' I = ( 17 ) Amax and A - Amin Amax - Amin where A = observed value of parameter Amax = value parameter would assume if all S species were equally abundant Amin = value parameter would assume if one species was represented by N - ( S + 1 ) individuals and the other species by one individual each . V ' indices have been defined for H and H ' ( Pielou 1966 ) , and Patten ( 1962 ) defined for H an index of the form R = 1 - V , terming it " redundancy " ; it can also be thought of as a measure of relative species unevenness . Kohn ( 1968 ) defined for H ' an index of the form R = 1 - V ' and used it to measure degree of food specialization . Below , / Amax and Amin are given for Al , A3 , and A4 ; one can utilize the relationships A2 = ( N ) ( A1 ) and A5 = - A3 - 1 to obtain A max and Amin for A2 and A5 . By substitution into equations ( 17 ) and ( 18 ) , V ' and V indices can be fashioned as needed . Al , Aax ( = ( N 1 5 ) ( 19 ) 51 ~ ~ ~ mi = N ( 2N - S ) ( S - 1 ) ) ( 0 A3 , max = S ( 21 ) N2 A3 , min N2 + ( S - 2N ) ( S - 1 ) ( 22 ) Summer 1971 SPECIES DIVERSITY 583 s - i 14 , max = S ( 23 ) 1 - - N ( 2N - S ) ( S - 1 ) - ( 24 ) N ( N - 1 ) + ( S - 2N ) ( S - 1 ) As V ' indices are dependent on species richness ( Sheldon 1969 ) , their principal value is as good ap - proximations , under some circumstances , of the cor - responding V indices , which are independent of S . ( The difference between V and V ' values will be negligible except when A is low or when A i is high - e . g . , as it would be if the ratio S / N approaches unity . ) This conclusion derives from the premise that all collections ( of the same size ) having every spe - cies but one represented by a single individual are equally " uneven . " 4 Thus these two collections - ( 17 , 1 , 1 , 1 ) and ( 15 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 ) - are regarded as differing in species richness but not in species even - ness ( V ) . These collections would not yield the same V ' values because V ' indices use S , the observed number of species , to determine n max but , implicitly , let S go to unity to determine Amni , - as result of which Amiii always equals zero , and so does not appear in the general expression [ equation ( 17 ) ] . This procedure seems inconsistent ; it is more logical to use observed S to determine both Amini and Amax . Differences in species richness pose no problem to statistical comparisons of species evenness so long as V indices are used . The same cannot be said of sample or collection size . As species richness tends to increase with sam - ple size , so species evenness tends to decrease with sample size . Thus , the species evenness of a com - munity cannot be estimated by sampling except to the extent that an indefinitely large sample will pro - vide an estimate containing an indefinitely small amount of bias ( Lloyd and Ghelardi 1965 , Pielou 1967 ) . As with species richness , comparisons of spe - cies evenness are meaningful only when all collections are adjusted to a common size . Other things being equal , larger collections have more rare species , and these always lower the value of V or V ' . This fact usually has been ignored ( e . g . , Patten 1962 , Goulden 1966 , Monk 1967 , Barrett 1968 , Pulliam , Odum , and Barrett 1968 , Buzas and Gibson 1969 , Sager and Hasler 1969 ) , and it is probable that some of the variation in species evenness ( or equitability ) dis - covered by these workers resulted entirely from variations in collection size ( N ) . Even when one ' s collections consist of all organisms found in areas of equal size , species evenness should be adjusted for collection size differences before comparisons are made ; whether two areas differ in species evenness and whether they differ in density ( = total no . indi - viduals / unit area ) are best treated as independent questions . To effect comparisons , we require the ability to predict the expected species evenness , E ( V , , ) , of a sample of n individuals selected at random ( without replacement ) from a larger collection . An exact esti - mator is beyond the abilities of the writer ; for the present , valid comparisons of species evenness are possible only ( i ) for collections of equal size , or ( ii ) if a computer is used to draw and replace suc - cessive random samples , calculating V , , for each until the mean value of Vn reaches a specified and satis - factory degree of constancy . ( Vn can be calculated with the formula for V . ) Unlike species richness , species evenness has been defined only in terms of PIE or other parameters and not as an independent entity . Species evenness therefore has significance only to the extent that the parameter on which it is defined is significant . Inter - pretation of species evenness values also must con - sider that even for closely related parameters , such as A , and A3 , differing species evenness values result from the same set of data ; if N = 1000 , xl = . 70 , 9 . 20 , and X3 = . 10 , then V = . 85 ( for A . ) , while V . 76 ( for A3 ) . PARAMETERS FOR INDIVIDUAL SPECIES So far I have presented parameters useful for com - paring different communities . Most of them actually are average values of parameters defined on individ - uals . For example , A1 is the probability of interspe - cific encounter averaged over all individuals in all species . One may define similar parameters which describe the community from the viewpoint of ( the individuals in ) a particular species . Such parameters can be used for comparing the biotic environments of different species in the same community and of the same species in different communities . Simplest of all is xj , relative abundance . Closely related are N - 1 ( I - N ) / ( 1 N ) ( 25 ) which is the proportion of potential encounters that is intraspecific for an individual of the jth species , and ( N 1 Ali = ( 1 - Xj ) N ( 26 ) ' Sheldon ' s ( 1969 ) premise that all collections where the abundances of species conform to MacArthur ' s ( 1957 ) broken stick model should possess the same de - gree of evenness seems less valid . There are many pos - sible models for predicting the relative abundances of species , but probably no one of them bears any constant relationship to species evenness unless species evenness is defined specifically in terms of the model , e . g . , Lloyd and Ghelardi ' s ( 1964 ) " equitability . " 584 STUART H . HURLBERT Ecology , Vol . 52 , No . 4 which is the proportion that is interspecific . The ratio of potential inter - to intraspecific encounter is then , for the jth species , A4 JN N ( 27 ) A4 equals infinity when every species is represented by a single individual , and , similarly , A4j equals in - finity when the jth species is represented by a single individual . A1 and Al , are clearly more amenable to statistical treatment than are A4 and A4j . One can define similar parameters on A2 , A3 , and A5 . Species richness also can be defined from the view - point of particular species . If an individual of the jth species encounters other individuals at random , then the number of species it will encounter is , on average , Ej ( S ) l - I Ij + F ( N - Ni - I ) I ~ [ - ( l ) J ( 28 ) if an individual cannot be encountered more than once , or * [ - N ) n ] + I [ ( ~ N - N - 1 QIZ ( 29 ) if an individual can be encountered more than once . To obtain the expected number of other species en - countered , simply omit the term in the first set of brackets . We could also assume that all n encounters are with other species ( or simply that intraspecific en - counters are of no import ) , in which case the aver - age number of species encountered per n interspe - cific encounters is Efjl , i i [ 1 ( V - N , ) ] ( 30 ) assuming the possibility of repeat encounters , or F ( N - Ni - Nij ? ~ ~ ~ ~ Ej ( S ) j ) = ij | 1 N - N ) ' I ( 31 ) assuming the impossibility of repeat encounters . All these parameters possess only abstract signif - icance , as in nature both spatial distributions and interindividual encounters are generally nonrandom in the extreme . However , they do have the benefit of measuring , within the limits of the assumptions , concrete and biologically significant properties . More - over , these parameters are all amenable to modifica - tion when data on the distributions of encounters and populations are available . A first step toward refine - ment might be to determine , still assuming random movement of individuals ( in space ) , the extent to which patchiness of spatial distributions decreases PIE and species richness for species of differing mo - bilities and spatial distributions . COLLECTION DELIMITATION For what types of collections is it appropriate or at least permissible to apply the holistic mathemat - ical approach implicit in such parameters as Al , A2 , E ( S , , ) , etc . ? In preceding sections I have sometimes used the term " community " in lieu of " collection " to make discussion a bit less abstract . Actually , I can - not imagine that there would ever be value in cal - culating a species composition parameter on an en - tire community , i . e . , on all producers , herbivores , carnivores , and decomposers present , and must dis - agree with Dickman ' s ( 1968 ) suggestion that " an index of community diversity [ or species composition parameter ] sensitive to changes in relative abundance of all trophic levels . . . appears to be a necessary prerequisite to comparative studies . " Two factors in particular argue against that approach . First , the value of any given species composition parameter would be determined almost entirely by relative abundances within one group of organisms ( e . g . , bac - teria , phytoplankton , trees ) , depending on our units of representation ( numbers , biomass , productivity , etc . ) and the type of community being studied . Sec - ondly , real and interesting differences between dif - ferent trophic or taxonomic groups could cancel each other out and thus yield parameter values of little interest . A mathematical approach does not oblige a biologist to be modest about his ability to make bio - logical distinctions . A taxocene is a taxonomic segment of a commu - nity or association ( Chodorowski 1959 , Hutchinson 1967 ) , and since " members of a taxocene are likely to be of about the same size , to have similar life his - tories , and compete over both evolutionary and eco - logical time " ( Deevey 1969 ) , species composition parameters probably will have clearest significance when calculated on a taxocene . If a taxocene spans more than a single trophic level , whether or not we calculate parameters for each trophic level separately may depend on the extent to which our questions relate to contemporary ( ecological ) versus historical ( evolutionary ) phenomena . Taxocenes can be defined at various taxonomic Summer 1971 SPECIES DIVERSITY 585 levels . The chydorids of a pond constitute a taxocene , as Deevey ( 1969 ) notes , but so do the cladocerans , the crustaceans , or even the arthropods . If a taxocene is defined so exclusively as to contain only one or a few species , then obviously calculation of species composition parameters offers little advantage over simple verbal analysis of the situation . If the taxo - cene is too inclusive , then interpretation of calculated parameters becomes weak because individuals be - longing to different species will be highly nonequiv - alent ( e . g . , in size , life history , etc . ) and because no or even negative correlation may exist between pa - rameters for different subgroups in the taxocene . Finding the middle ground may be simple enough in any given problem , but specific guidelines are not available . A taxocene also has a restricted spatial or environ - mental dimension ; Chodorowski ( 1959 ) distinguished in a single lake nine different taxocenes each span - ning the order Turbellaria and distinguished by dif - ferences in microhabitat . Since individuals sharing the same habitat or microhabitat are much more likely to encounter each other than are individuals in different habitats , interpretation of species com - position parameters in terms of " encounters " will be most valid when our collection or sample has been taken from a restricted environment . The appropriate size and uniformity of this piece of environment will be determined by the organisms ' size , mobility , and fidelity to particular microhabitats . Thus in a par - ticular pond we might distinguish a single fish tax - ocene , two to five chironomid taxocenes , and 10 to 50 protozoan taxocenes . CONCLUSIONS Communities having different species composi - sions are not intrinsically arrangeable in linear order on a diversity scale . Diversity per se does not exist . There are many statistical properties relating to spe - cies composition and species - numbers relations and each one may give a different ordering of the com - munities . Although I have defined a few parameters with simpler and more direct biological interpreta - tions than possessed by some commonly used diver - sity indices , it is not intended that these parameters be adopted simply as a new set of such indices . In fact , it is hoped that these parameters will be used much less than have diversity indices in the past , for problems that can be fruitfully investigated by this general approach are fewer than the volume of the diversity literature might seem to suggest . Just as there is no value in calculating H or H ' unless one is specifically interested in the number of bits per individual , so there will be no value in calculating A , unless one is specifically interested in the prob - ability of interspecific encounter . The fact that a par - ticular index shows a correlation with other proper - ties of the community or environment is not evidence that the index is either appropriate or useful . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author gratefully acknowledges support by a NSF Training Grant in Pest Population Ecology to Paul De - Bach and a grant from the Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife , U . S . Department of the Interior to Mir S . Mulla . P . DeBach , R . W . Gill , and A . S . Sheldon read and provided helpful criticism of an early draft of this paper . The frank skepticism of F . N . David and W . Klonecki concerning the mathematical sanity of ecol - ogists has been salutary . LITERATURE CITED Barrett , G . W . 1968 . The effects of an acute insecticide stress on a semi - enclosed grassland ecosystem . Ecology 49 : 1019 - 1035 . Brian , M . V . 1953 . Species frequencies in random sam - ples from animal populations . J . Anim . Ecol . 22 : 57 - 64 . Buzas , M . A . , and T . G . Gibson 1969 . Species diversity : benthic foranimifera in western North Atlantic . Sci - ence 163 : 72 - 75 . Chodorowski , A . 1959 . Ecological differentiation of tur - bellarians in Harsz - Lake . Polsk . Archwm . Hydrobiol . 6 : 33 - 73 . Corner , E . J . H . 1964 . The life of plants . World Publish - ing Company , New York . 315 p . Deevey , E . S . 1969 . Coaxing history to conduct experi - ments . Bioscience 19 : 40 - 43 . Dickman , M . 1968 . Some indices of diversity . Ecology 49 : 1191 - 1193 . Fisher , R . A . , A . S . Corbet , and C . B . Williams . 1943 . The relation between the number of individuals and the number of species in a random sample of an an - imal population . J . Anim . Ecol . 12 : 42 - 58 . Goulden , C . E . 1966 . The history of Laguna de Petenxil : the animal microfossils . Mem . Conn . Acad . Arts Sci . 17 : 84 - 120 . Hessler , R . R . , and H . L . Sanders . 1967 . Faunal diversity in the deep sea . Deep - Sea Res . 14 : 65 - 78 . Hutchinson , E . H . 1967 . A treatise on limnology . Vol . II . John Wiley & Sons , New York . 1115 p . Johnson , M . P . , L . G . Mason , and P . H . Raven . 1968 . Ecological parameters and plant species diversity . Amer . Natur . 102 : 297 - 306 . Kohn , A . J . 1968 . Microhabitats , abundance , and food of Conus on atoll reefs in the Maldive and Chagos Islands . Ecology 49 : 1046 - 1062 . Leigh , E . 1965 . On a relation between the productivity , biomass , stability and diversity of a community . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . 53 : 777 - 783 . Levins , R . 1968 . Evolution in changing environments . Princeton Univ . Press , Princeton , N . J . 120 p . Lloyd , M . , and R . J . Ghelardi . 1964 . A table for calcu - lating the " equitability " component of species diver - sity . J . Anim . Ecol . 33 : 217 - 225 . MacArthur , R . H . 1955 . Fluctuations of animal popula - tions , and a measure of community stability . Ecology 36 : 533 - 536 . . 1957 . On the relative abundance of bird species . Proc . Nat . Acad . S6i . 43 : 293 - 295 . - . 1965 . Patterns of species diversity . Biol . Rev . 40 : 510 - 533 . . 1966 . Notes on Mrs . Pielou ' s comments . Ecology 47 : 1074 . MacArthur , R . H . , and E . 0 . Wilson . 1967 . The theory 586 STUART H . HURLBERT Ecology , Vol . 52 , No . 4 of island biogeography . Princeton Univ . Press , Prince - ton , N . J . 203 p . MacFadyen , A . 1963 . Animal ecology . 2nd ed . Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons , London . 344 p . McIntosh , R . P . 1967 . An index of diversity and the relation of certain concepts to diversity . Ecology 48 : 392 - 404 . McNaughton , S . J . 1967 . Relationships among functional properties of Californian grassland . Nature 216 : 168 - 169 . . 1968 . Definition and quantitation in ecology . Nature 219 : 180 - 181 . Margalef , D . R . 1958 . Information theory in ecology . Gen . Syst . 3 : 36 - 71 . 1968 . Perspectives in ecological theory . Univ . Chicago Press , Chicago . 111 p . Monk , C . D . 1967 . Tree species diversity in the eastern deciduous forest with particular reference to North Central Florida . Amer . Natur . 101 : 173 - 187 . Odum , H . T . 1967 . Biological circuits and the marine systems of Texas , p . 99 - 157 . In T . A . Olson and F . J . Burgess [ ed . ] Pollution and marine biology . Paine , R . T . 1966 . Food web complexity and species diversity . Amer . Natur . 100 : 65 - 75 . Patten , B . C . 1962 . Species diversity in net phytoplank - ton of Raritan Bay . J . Mar . Res . 20 : 57 - 75 . . 1968 . Mathematical models of plankton pro - duction . Internationale Review der Gesamten Hydro - biologie und Hydrographie 53 : 357 - 408 . Pianka , E . R . 1966 . Latitudinal gradients in species di - versity . Amer . Natur . 100 : 33 - 46 . . 1967 . On lizard species diversity : North Amer - ican flatland deserts . Ecology 48 : 333 - 351 . Pielou , E . C . 1966 . Species - diversity and pattern - diversity in the study of ecological succession . J . Theoret . Biol . 10 : 370 - 383 . . 1967 . The use of information theory in the study of the diversity of biological populations . Proc . Fifth Berkeley Symp . Math . Statist . Probab . 4 : 163 - 177 . Preston , F . W . 1948 . The commonness and rarity of spe - cies . Ecology 29 : 254 - 283 . Pulliam , H . R . , E . P . Odum , and G . W . Barrett . 1968 . Equitability and resource limitation . Ecology 49 : 772 - 774 . Sager , P . E . , and A . D . Hasler . 1969 . Species diversity in lacustrine phytoplankton . I . The components of the index of diversity from Shannon ' s formula . Amer . Natur . 103 : 51 - 59 . Sanders , H . L . 1968 . Marine benthic diversity : a com - parative study . Amer . Natur . 102 : 243 - 282 . Shannon , C . E . , and W . Weaver . 1963 . The mathemat - ical theory of communication . Univ . Illinois Press , Urbana . 117 p . Sheldon , A . L . 1969 . Equitability indices : dependence on the species count . Ecology 50 : 466 - 467 . Simpson , E . H . 1949 . Measurement of diversity . Nature 163 : 688 . Simpson , G . G . 1964 . Species density of North American recent mammals . Syst . Zool . 13 : 57 - 73 . Wallace , A . R . 1878 . Tropical nature and other essays . MacMillan and Co . , London . 356 p . Whittaker , R . H . 1965 . Dominance and diversity in land plant communities . Science 147 : 250 - 260 . Whittaker , R . H . , and G . M . Woodwell . 1969 . Structure , production , and diversity of the oak - pine forest at Brookhaven , New York . J . Ecol . 57 : 155 - 174 . Williams , C . B . 1964 . Patterns in the balance of nature . Academic Press , New York . 324 p . Woodwell , G . M . 1967 . Radiation and the patterns of nature . Science 156 : 461 - 470 . Yule , G . U . 1944 . The statistical study of literary vo - cabulary . Cambridge Univ . Press , London . 306 p .