Correspondence Journals could share peer - review data Before dispensing with peer review in favour of open science , responsible scientists need to do everything they can to improve this centuries - old system . Our experience shows that journals that share information on all aspects of the peer - review process can foster transparency and accountability in publishing , while protecting the interests of authors , reviewers , editors and researchers . As part of PEERE , a large European Cooperation in Science and Technology ( COST ) Action project funded by the European Union , researchers teamed up with the publishers Elsevier , Springer Nature ( which publishes Nature ) and Wiley to devise a protocol for sharing such information ( see go . nature . com / 2rx5ert ) . Our publicly available protocol has already been piloted in hundreds of journals and is tackling issues such as anonymity , privacy and data management . This systematic investigation of the review process will enable more journals to recognize biases against the publication of innovative research , to test different peer - review models and to work out how best to engage and reward reviewers . We invite scholars , editors and publishers to participate in the PEERE initiative by contacting us . Flaminio Squazzoni University of Brescia , Italy . Francisco Grimaldo University of Valencia , Spain . Ana Marušić University of Split , Croatia . flaminio . squazzoni @ unibs . it Senior scientists as allies for equity Asking the scientific system to fix itself from the bottom up could place an unacceptable burden on junior scientists ( see J . Tregoning Nature 545 , 7 ; 2017 ) . Moreover , their efforts are likely to make little difference without the participation of senior colleagues . Young researchers , especially women and those from ethnic minorities , are already forced to challenge the existing culture if they are to advance professionally . They face overt and unconscious bias , barriers to recruitment and unequal pay . They receive fewer grants and citations and must work harder for recognition than those with similar qualifications ( see Nature 495 , 22 – 24 ; 2013 ) . Such inequity could be corrected with the support of peers , as Tregoning proposes . But without higher - ranking allies , the efforts of young scientists face obstacles . To bring about change , senior scientists should couple their insight , experience and enthusiasm to that of younger colleagues . This would highlight problem areas , implement policy solutions and lead to cultural reform . Christina Simkanin , Alison Cawood Smithsonian Environmental Research Center , Edgewater , Maryland , USA . simkaninc @ si . edu NIH competition to create ‘eye in a dish’ The National Eye Institute of the US National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) has launched a competition to develop a working model of the human retina from stem cells — namely , the 3 - D Retina Organoid Challenge Pay countries to stop whaling We raise the possibility that countries opposed to whaling could stop other nations that continue the practice simply by paying them compensation . This idea is inspired by a survey we conducted in February 2016 in Australia and Japan . We found that the maximum amount Australians would be willing to pay to discourage Japan’s whaling programme was Aus $ 31 . 4 ( US $ 23 . 6 ) per year per household . This exceeded the minimum compensation required by the Japanese for giving up their current whaling activities ( see M . Wakamatsu et al . Mar . Policy 81 , 312 – 321 ; 2017 ) . The benefits would go beyond those of a monetary transaction . Non - whaling countries would gain assurance of cetacean welfare Sustainability and resilience differ Sustainable urban development moved forward last year , when the United Nations adopted both the Sustainable Development Goal 11 on cities and the New Urban Agenda ( see go . nature . com / 2qz8ows ) . Unfortunately , these international policy documents interchangeably use two quite different concepts — sustainability and resilience . We are concerned that policymakers confuse the two because academics do , which hampers implementation . Resilience is a property of a complex system . For example , the Internet is resilient because it continues to function even when major nodes collapse . Resilience may not always be desirable — witness dictatorships that are resilient across generations . It may also run counter to sustainability goals : for instance , efficiency reduces diversity and redundancy , both of which are key features of resilience . This conflict is illustrated by high - density urban areas , which can be more efficient to run in terms of , say , energy distribution , communications and waste collection . However , these areas can also be vulnerable to extreme ( see www . nei . nih . gov / 3droc ) . This will help to clarify the mechanisms of retinal disease , stimulate new technologies and develop more effective therapies ( see also G . Quadrato et al . Nature 545 , 48 – 53 ; 2017 ) . There are other promising examples of NIH - funded 3D human - tissue models . Tissue chips are being derived from induced pluripotent stem cells in the Microphysiological Systems Program at the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences in Bethesda , Maryland . And 3D biomimetic systems are being developed in the National Cancer Institute’s Cancer Tissue Engineering Collaborative Research Program . The 3D Retina Organoid Challenge will run alongside the National Eye Institute’s Audacious Goals Initiative , which aims to restore vision by regenerating retinal neurons and their connections to the brain ( www . nei . nih . gov / audacious ) . Paul A . Sieving National Eye Institute , Bethesda , Maryland , USA . paulsieving @ nei . nih . gov and conservation worldwide . Whaling countries would no longer be ostracized by the international community . Global evaluation of whaling involving all stakeholders would refine this bargaining . Important non - economic factors such as cultural values would need to be taken into account . These could be offset by , for instance , public education programmes in the ecological and conservation advantages of giving up whaling , and by developing alternatives to whale products that are acceptable to consumers . Shunsuke Managi , Mihoko Wakamatsu Kyushu University , Fukuoka , Japan . managi @ doc . kyushu - u . ac . jp events such as flooding because they are less diverse ( with few green areas , for example ) and have few redundancies ( in the form of back - up facilities and disaster - management processes ) . The research community needs to be clear about the differences and synergies between sustainability and resilience . Only with clarity can such concepts be applied in policy and practice . Thomas Elmqvist * Stockholm Resilience Centre , Stockholm University , Sweden . thomas . elmqvist @ su . se * On behalf of 4 correspondents ( see go . nature . com / 2r23okn for full list ) . 3 5 2 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 4 6 | 1 5 J U N E 2 0 1 7 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .