Organization Science Vol . 16 , No . 6 , November – December 2005 , pp . 563 – 580 issn 1047 - 7039 (cid:1) eissn 1526 - 5455 (cid:1) 05 (cid:1) 1606 (cid:1) 0563 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1050 . 0145 ©2005 INFORMS Preadaptation , Firm Heterogeneity , and Technological Performance : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Gino Cattani Department of Management and Organizations , Stern School of Business , New York University , 40 West 4th Street Tisch Hall Suite 7 – 14 , New York , New York 10012 , gcattani @ stern . nyu . edu S trategy research typically traces stable performance differences among ﬁrms to a priori heterogeneity in initial resource endowments or in expected ﬂows of resources . The objective of this paper is to explore how this heterogeneity is created and how it affects ﬁrm technological performance . Within the framework of an evolutionary view of technological change , we develop the notion of technological preadaptation to describe that part of a ﬁrm’s prior experience that is accumulated without anticipation of subsequent uses . In particular , we hypothesize that ( technological ) performance differences are positively related to ( 1 ) ﬁrms’ stock of relevant skills and knowledge potentially available for applications other than those for which they were originally developed and ( 2 ) the extent to which ﬁrms actually build on these skills and knowledge in new domains . The empirical setting is ﬁber optics technology as it evolved for use in long - distance communications between 1970 and 1995 . We ﬁnd that “preadapted” ﬁrms that consistently leveraged their prior experience achieved higher levels of performance than did ﬁrms that did not leverage that experience or did not have prior experience . The study illustrates the importance of preadaptation in capability development and technological competition . Key words : prior experience ; preadaptation ; initial conditions ; technological performance 1 . Introduction The problem of sustaining competitive advantage in the face of technological change is especially critical in technology - intensive industries , where superior perfor - mance depends on consistent innovation ( Nelson 1991 , Teece et al . 1997 ) . Strategy research , which typically traces the ability to innovate consistently to heterogene - ity in initial resource endowments ( Rumelt 1984 , Barney 1991 , Peteraf 1993 ) , has shied away from establish - ing whether differences in resource endowments result from strategic foresight or historical accidents . Yet , while determining the role chance plays in human activ - ity is fraught with conceptual ambiguity , any attempt to derive normative implications of existing strategy research requires that the question of strategic foresight be properly addressed . Strategy researchers have recently begun to investigate more systematically whether ﬁrm heterogeneity is the result of luck or strategic foresight ( e . g . , Barney 1986 , 1997 ; Garud et al . 1997 ; Cockburn et al . 2000 ; Holbrook et al . 2000 ; Denrell 2004 ) . A few empirical studies have likewise examined the origin of differences in ini - tial conditions among ﬁrms . In particular , these studies have highlighted the positive impact of prior experience , that is , existing skills and knowledge , on innovation and ﬁrm performance , especially when ﬁrms redeploy that experience across new markets and / or industries ( e . g . , Carroll et al . 1996 , Holbrook et al . 2000 , Klepper and Simons 2000 , Klepper 2002 ) . Building on this existing research , we examine the extent to which ﬁrms that create new technological domains leverage skills and knowledge from other domains ( see Abernathy and Clark 1985 , Levinthal 1998 ) . Our empirical setting is the ﬁber optics technol - ogy industry as it evolved from 1970—the year when the possibility of using optical glass ﬁbers for long - distance telecommunications applications was demonstrated for the ﬁrst time—to 1995 . In examining the factors that lead to differential per - formance , we follow Cockburn et al . ’s ( 2000 ) suggestion that empirical strategy research should “not only iden - tify those factors that are correlated with superior per - formance but also attempt to explore the origins and the dynamics of their adoption . ” We concern ourselves with exploring whether the skills and knowledge ﬁrms use to develop a new technology—and even initiate a new technological trajectory ( Dosi 1982 , Nelson and Winter 1982 ) —are created in anticipation of this technology or were developed in the past for other applications . Because our objective is to study the potential value of preexisting skills and knowledge for the creation of new technological domains , we chart technological entry ( e . g . , Malerba and Orsenigo 1999 ) , deﬁned as innovation in a new technological domain , as distinct from mar - ket entry , which refers to initial production of a product or provision of a service ( Helfat and Lieberman 2002 , p . 726 ) . Since patent data provide a detailed and con - sistent chronology of when certain skills and knowledge 563 Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 564 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS were originally created ( Katila and Ahuja 2002 ) , we use them along with other sources ( ﬁeld interview data , industry and company reports , specialized books , and business press articles ) to measure technological entry . Our period of study spans from the inception of ﬁber optics technology to the advent of the Internet , so it is well suited to investigation of the performance impli - cations of prior experience . Fiber optics was originally applied in the long - distance telecommunications market and subsequently in short - distance markets ; over time it has grown into an industry in its own right . The research design is intended to capture the transition from the phase when ﬁrms accumulate skills and knowledge without anticipating their future use for other applica - tions to the phase when ﬁrms begin to apply those skills and knowledge in a new technological domain . In ﬁber optics , the ﬁrst phase lasted until 1966 , the year the the - oretical possibility arose of using glass for data trans - mission . Initial lab experiments were conducted between 1966 and 1970 , the year when producing ﬁbers that could be used in long - distance applications became a practical possibility . The application phase began in 1970 and lasted until the present . A ﬁrm’s history endows it with knowledge for reasons that are unrelated to that knowledge’s application in new areas of opportunity . Borrowing terminology from evo - lutionary biology , we develop the notion of technolog - ical preadaptation to describe the ﬁrm’s accumulation , without anticipation or foresight of subsequent uses , of skills and knowledge . In biology , preadaptation refers to cases when the feature of an organism proves by chance to be useful , or preadapted , for performing a function other than the one for which it developed or was originally selected ( Bock 1959 , Gould and Vrba 1982 ) . This formulation implicitly acknowledges that skills and knowledge might exist prior to full consideration of their possible uses . Our dependent variable measures a ﬁrm’s technolog - ical performance by gauging the quality of its patent - ing activity , that is , the number of citations its patents receive from subsequent patents ﬁled by other ﬁrms . We then estimate the contribution each sample ﬁrm made to the development of ﬁber optics by looking at the extent to which other ﬁrms build on its R & D activity . We chose to measure performance with patent data rather than revenue data both because the dataset was more complete and because patents report performance in the R & D phase as well as the market phase . Sales data for the industry proved less precise than patents ; in the case of some diversiﬁed ﬁrms , sales relevant to ﬁber optics are impossible to isolate . Using patents enables us to establish backward citation patterns and form direct links between a ﬁrm’s prior experience and its technological performance . While patents represent the best perfor - mance data that was available to us ( their shortcomings are discussed in § 4 ) , in technology - intensive industries technological performance measures tend to be posi - tively correlated to ﬁnancial and market - based perfor - mance measures ( e . g . , Trajtenberg 1990a , b ; Hall 2000 ) . In many industries patent data measure the knowledge embodied in a new technology accurately ( see Hall et al . 2001 ) . Qualitative evidence from our ﬁeld work ( includ - ing interviews with executives of Corning and data from the Freedonia Group ) and extensive research of the industry further support our empirical results . Our goal with this paper is to make three contributions to strategy and innovation research . First , in response to existing studies that assert the detrimental effect of established ﬁrms’ experience on their ability to innovate within an existing domain ( for a review see Methe et al . 1997 , Hill and Rothaermel 2003 ) , we introduce the idea that when creating new technologies , prior experience can become a source of competitive advantage rather than a constraint . Second , on the premise that ﬁrms dif - fer both with respect to their prior skills and knowledge and to their ability to properly leverage their skills and knowledge , we seek to separate the potential for inno - vation from the achievement of innovation . We distin - guish between having and using preadaptation by using backward citations , which reveal when a ﬁrm declines to build on its own research that is cited by other ﬁrms . Third , instead of attributing ﬁrm heterogeneity to ini - tial conditions deﬁned a priori ( e . g . , Stinchcombe 1965 , Porter 1991 ) , we seek to unpack sources of ﬁrm hetero - geneity by ﬁrst tracing differences in initial conditions to differences in the stock of ( potentially ) transferable skills and knowledge and then by examining to what extent ﬁrms actually use them in developing a new tech - nological domain . The paper is organized as follows . In the next sec - tion ( § 2 ) , we review brieﬂy the strategy and innovation literature that studies the link between prior experience and ﬁrm ( technological ) performance , develop the notion of technological preadaptation , and present the hypothe - ses . We then describe the empirical setting ( § 3 ) and the data ( § 4 ) and consider the dependent ( § 5 ) , indepen - dent ( § 6 ) , and control variables ( § 7 ) . We continue by presenting the model and method ( § 8 ) and the results of the analyses ( § 9 ) . We conclude with a discussion of the main implications of our ﬁndings and the identiﬁcation of important topics for future research ( § 10 ) . 2 . Theory Multiple studies have expounded the potential pitfalls of preentry experience . The dominant design theory , for instance , argues that preentry experience is disadvanta - geous when it weds ﬁrms to technologies made obso - lete by the emergence of a new dominant design ( see Christensen et al . 1998 ) . When searching locally , ﬁrms target technologies that are within the boundaries of what they have done , create incremental innovations , and Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 565 become more expert in their current domain . However , as established ﬁrms become “increasingly removed from other bases of experience and knowledge and more vul - nerable to change in their environments” ( Levinthal and March 1993 , p . 102 ) , they risk falling into competency traps ( Levitt and March 1988 ) or becoming hampered by their core rigidities ( Leonard - Barton 1992 ) . Several empirical studies have shown how local search without exploration may jeopardize innovation and performance at the ﬁrm level ( e . g . , Helfat 1994 , Stuart and Podolny 1996 , Martin and Mitchell 1998 , Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) . Firms can avoid the pitfalls of local search by part - nering with other ﬁrms ( e . g . , forming alliances , joint ventures ) to gain access to and / or create novel tech - nologies ( e . g . , Stuart and Podolny 1996 , Nagarajan and Mitchell 1998 ) . They can also build the absorptive capacity required to recognize the value of new , exter - nal information , assimilate it , and apply it to commercial ends ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) . But absorptive capac - ity is also path dependent and domain speciﬁc : As the argument goes , ﬁrms can enhance their ability to inno - vate by expanding their base of experience in an existing domain . These two alternatives have been extensively investigated . The case in which a ﬁrm explores a new domain , with customers’ needs and performance requirements differ - ent from the domains in which it is already competing , has received relatively less attention ( see Methe et al . 1997 ) . Using an evolutionary framework , technological speciation theory has recently argued that new tech - nological lineages may result from redeploying exist - ing knowledge across different domains ( Levinthal 1998 , Adner and Levinthal 2002 ) . Technological speciation originates from “transplanting the existing technological know - how to a new application domain where it evolves in new directions” ( Adner and Levinthal 2002 , p . 51 ) . The process of adapting to a new selection environment ultimately triggers novel ( rather than path - dependent ) evolutionary patterns , without requiring the ﬁrm to over - haul its knowledge base . Previous studies have recognized the value of deliber - ately redeploying existing technology in new domains . Abernathy and Clark ( 1985 ) , for instance , showed how old technologies can be used to create new market niches . As a result , the body of knowledge that is a source of competency traps in an existing domain might enable a ﬁrm to create new competitive advantages in a different domain . Current research on ﬁrm heterogeneity and industry evolution has further delved into this issue by focusing on the conditions favoring the ﬁt between prior expe - rience and new market applications . In their analysis of the relationship between market entry decisions and ﬁrm prehistory , Helfat and Lieberman ( 2002 ) emphasize the importance of the similarity effect , the idea that the degree of similarity between a ﬁrm’s preentry resources and capabilities and those required in a new domain pos - itively affects not only the decision to enter the new domain , but also the ability to innovate and then prosper in it . Several longitudinal studies provide supporting evi - dence for the similarity effect . Carroll et al . ( 1996 ) , for instance , found that ﬁrms entering the American auto - mobile industry from related industries survived longer than newly founded ﬁrms or ﬁrms from unrelated indus - tries . Klepper and Simons ( 2000 ) showed how ﬁrms experienced in the manufacturing of radios were more likely to enter the TV industry , were more innovative , achieved greater market share , and survived longer in the TV industry than ﬁrms with no radio production expe - rience . Other studies found consistent results in addi - tional industries ( e . g . , Holbrook et al . 2000 , King and Tucci 2002 , Klepper 2002 ) . This stream of research has signiﬁcantly enhanced our understanding of the relation - ship between prior experience , innovation , and ﬁrm per - formance and has shed light on why prior experience can be viewed as a critical source of variation in initial conditions . However , what is not entirely clear in these studies is to what extent the ability to innovate can be understood as a consequence of a ﬁrm’s prior experience in other domains . In other words , do ﬁrms innovate because they anticipate which skills and knowledge will be needed , or does the environment select those ﬁrms whose skills and knowledge randomly match the requirements of a new domain ? To analyze this question of intentionality , two issues surrounding the redeployment of technology must be addressed more thoroughly . First , if prior experience is a critical source of dif - ferences in initial conditions and possesses implications for ﬁrm performance , R & D efforts made in exploration of a new domain should be separated from those con - ducted without foreknowledge of any potential redeploy - ment . Identifying a ﬁrm’s prior experience ( its preentry resources and capabilities ) means clarifying what con - stitutes “entry . ” If entry “refers to initial production of a product or provision of a service” ( Helfat and Lieberman 2002 , p . 726 ) , then prior experience consists of both skills and knowledge created for other applications and skills and knowledge originating from deliberate efforts to adapt to a new application domain . The notion of “technological entry” ( e . g . , Malerba and Orsenigo 1999 ) —marked by innovation in a new area , regardless of whether a market exists—allows for a more accu - rate characterization of two conceptually and chronolog - ically distinct adaptive processes . Time , often years , may elapse between technological entry and market entry , the production or provision of a new product or service . During this interval , ﬁrms typically carry out the ﬁrst lab experiments to develop a new technology—a process of adaptation rather than preadaptation . R & D efforts between the technological and market entries could Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 566 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS enhance the degree of similarity between a ﬁrm’s exist - ing knowledge base and that required in a new domain ; therefore , R & D efforts must be separated according to when in the innovation timeline they occurred . Moreover , because previous studies typically estab - lish an indirect link between prior experience on the one hand and ﬁrm innovation and performance in a new domain on the other , it is not always entirely clear which part of that experience retains its value and is then selected for new uses ( e . g . , Mokyr 2000 ) . As a result , the question of whether ﬁrms anticipate new applications as they accumulate skills and knowledge within an exist - ing domain is not explicitly addressed . The next section seeks to tackle these two issues by developing the notion of technological preadaptation . 2 . 1 . Preadaptation in Evolutionary Biology and Technology In biology , preadaptation refers to the case where “by chance , an organ that works well in one function turns out to work well in another function after relatively lit - tle adjustment” ( Ridley 1999 , p . 347 ) . 1 The concept of preadaptation assigns no role to foresight . An organ or a feature of an organism did not evolve in anticipation of its new function ; it happened to be adaptable to it ( Futuyma 1998 ) . It was then selected for this new func - tion . The observed function of an existing feature does not always coincide with the use for which it developed or was originally selected , but it is often a by - product of adapting to novel , unanticipated conditions . 2 It is the nature of the selection forces that are associated with the new function to allow a preadapted feature to execute this function ( Bock 1959 , p . 201 ) . Biological preadaptation has technological analogues . Each invention or innovation offers a spectrum of oppor - tunities , only a few of which will ever be developed dur - ing its lifetime ( Basalla 1988 ) . A ﬁrm might be endowed by its past history with skills and knowledge for rea - sons that are unrelated to their application in a new opportunity . This body of knowledge frequently exists prior to full consideration of its possible uses . For exam - ple , in the early 1960s , Corning invested in the new ﬁeld of integrated circuits despite the fact that it was essentially a specialty glass manufacturer . Eventually , Corning divested , but a few years later the knowledge they had gathered as a result of this investment happened to be useful to ﬁber optics . Fiber optics’ synergetic combination of glass manufacturing and semiconductors meant that Corning’s past experiences made it particu - larly preadapted to the new industry ( Cattani 2004 ) . Firms can learn more about applications for which they are potentially preadapted as new information emerges . Past , even antiquated , technologies might in fact ﬁnd novel , unanticipated applications in new envi - ronmental conditions . 3 As a result , ﬁrms with a long - standing tradition in R & D very often already have in - house solutions to new problems ( see Garud and Nayyar 1994 ) . Moreover , as the notion of technological speciation implies , a ﬁrm’s knowledge base can spur the emergence of new technological ﬁelds when it taps into unexploited market niches , so long as the corresponding market needs and performance standards differ signif - icantly from those faced in other application domains . This further implies that even prior experience that has become a competency trap , that is , a “stable suboptimal solution” ( March 1994 , p . 96 ) , in its current application might turn out to be a source of adaptation when the ﬁrm uses it in a distinct application domain . Previous research has argued that the ease with which knowledge can be transferred across domains depends on the degree of similarity between them ( e . g . , Helfat and Lieberman 2002 ) . Technological preadapta - tion , while embracing the similarity effect , is less restric - tive about the designation of similarity . The same body of knowledge can in fact enhance the ability to gen - erate ( economically valuable ) innovations in domains with similar technological roots that appear entirely dis - tinct from a user’s perspective . Signiﬁcant variations in the market space do not necessarily command compa - rable variations in the technology space ( e . g . , Adner and Levinthal 2002 ) . This is especially true when ﬁrms create a new technological ﬁeld and the only available knowledge they can readily rely on is their own . Tech - nological preadaptation represents a vantage point from where signiﬁcant innovations but also new evolutionary patterns can be generated . Hypothesis 1 . Technological performance in a new domain of application is positively related to a ﬁrm’s level of relevant technological preadaptation , which serves as a potential source of competitive advantage . The emphasis placed on preadaptation might unwit - tingly convey the impression of underestimating the sig - niﬁcance of purposive behavior . As Cockburn et al . ( 2002 , p . 1 , 124 ) observed , if performance hetero - geneity “arises from the degree to which a ﬁrm’s resources and / or strategy ‘match’ the competitive envi - ronment , and if resources are randomly distributed at ‘birth’ (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) then performance heterogeneity simply reﬂects the fact that the realized competitive environment favors some strategies and some resource bundles over oth - ers . ” However , even ﬁrms that are similar in all accounts ( including resource endowment ) may still differ in their ability to take advantage of the same environmental conditions . Far from implying a deterministic view of innovation and technological performance , and thus dis - carding any meaningful role for strategy , preadapta - tion allows for variation in the observed behavior of preadapted ﬁrms . As we noted earlier , the degree of similarity between a ﬁrm’s knowledge base and that required in a new Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 567 domain increases the probability of entering , innovat - ing , and prospering in that domain . However , even ﬁrms originating from the same industry ( and thereby possess - ing similar market / technology experience ) are likely to exhibit a differential ability to leverage their experience . While many technological innovations arise from the recombination and novel application of existing knowl - edge , established ﬁrms often fail to capitalize on their past R & D ( e . g . , Garud and Nayyar 1994 ) . One of the challenges facing these ﬁrms is to make better use of their knowledge base . There is in fact an important dis - tinction between having a pool of “relevant specialized transferable skills and knowledge” ( Carroll et al . 1996 ) potentially available for other applications than the orig - inal ones and being able to leverage relevant skills and knowledge to generate innovations . 4 We believe that keeping the potential for innovation distinct from innovation itself is crucial to properly esti - mate whether the effects of prior experience “dissipate or persist over time and exactly how the backgrounds of entrants condition their performance (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) ” ( Klepper and Simons 2000 , p . 998 ) . Equally preadapted ﬁrms can display a differential ability to take advantage of solu - tions , which they have already in - house , to new prob - lems . Because the range of possible applications of a ﬁrm’s technological knowledge base is typically wider than its current applications , ﬁrms can capitalize on pre - vious technological investments , a capability that Garud and Nayyar ( 1994 ) call “transformative capacity . ” For instance , ﬁrms that have over time developed routines to store , transform , and retrieve knowledge ( e . g . , Garud and Nayyar 1994 , Hargadon and Sutton 1997 ) stand a better chance of realizing new syntheses and attaining higher levels of technological performance . This implies that “having” preadaptation ( i . e . , availability of relevant skills and knowledge ) is distinct from “using” preadap - tation . Even though performance ( as measured by patent impact ) of ﬁrms that continue to build on their prior knowledge within an existing domain is likely to decline ( e . g . , Sørensen and Stuart 2000 , Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) , knowledge that becomes less valuable in its cur - rent application might be of greater value for other applications . Hypothesis 2 . Technological performance in a new domain of application is positively related to the extent to which ﬁrms draw upon their technological preadaptation . To test these hypotheses , we study the emergence and evolution of ﬁber optics technology . Since we trace its evolution virtually from its inception , we can identify the experience accumulated before the development of ﬁber optics and estimate to what extent ﬁrms actually acted on their accumulated experience in their subse - quent innovative efforts . 3 . Empirical Setting : Evolution of Fiber Optics This analysis focuses on the emergence and evolution of ﬁber optics between 1970 and 1995 . An optical commu - nications system comprises several interdependent com - ponents , including a light - emitting device that converts an electric signal to light , a light - transmission medium ( optical ﬁber ) through which light is transmitted , and a light - receiving device that decodes the optical signal and converts it back to electricity . Optical ( glass ) ﬁbers are the core component in long - distance communications . The notion of preadaptation implies that in the course of technological evolution it is sometimes possible to identify a “dividing line” or “watershed event . ” Before this event , during the preadaptation phase , a ﬁrm accu - mulates skills and knowledge without anticipating their subsequent application . After the event , higher levels of foresight allegedly guide that ﬁrm’s search behavior as it incorporates market feedback . The role for foresight , and hence strategy , is especially critical during the tran - sition between these two phases because this transition is when a ﬁrm begins to realize the possibility of rede - ploying its preexisting skills and knowledge into a new domain . Because identifying such a dividing line is central to the variables of theoretical interest as well as the sta - tistical analyses , we offer a succinct narrative of these events below . Besides drawing from multiple sources of information ( books , newspaper articles , academic papers , case studies , annual ﬁnancial reports , and indus - try reports ) , we gathered additional data and informa - tion from three rounds of semistructured interviews with R & D managers from Corning ( some of whom experi - enced the development of the ﬁber optics industry ) and an interview with one expert in the ﬁeld of optical com - munications . These interviews let us discuss some of the key facts , double - check our interpretation of the infor - mation , and reduce the risk that we would impose mean - ing on historical events from knowledge of the outcomes ( Aldrich 2000 ) . The Industry The possibility of using low - loss optical glass ﬁbers over long distances was ﬁrst shown in 1970 , when Corning produced the low - loss optical glass ﬁber . However , the theoretical possibility of using light for communications purposes had been envisioned four years earlier by two researchers , Charles K . Kao and George Hockham , from the Standard Telecommunications Laboratories ( STL ) , the British subsidiary of ITT . The company had formed a research team to study the properties of optical waveguides to satisfy the needs of the British Post Ofﬁce , which at the time operated the British telephone network and was trying to improve the national telecommunications infrastructure . The British Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 568 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS Post Ofﬁce was concerned with “a better technology to send signals between local switching centers that typi - cally were a few miles apart (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) ” and in particular with “ (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) something easy and inexpensive to install in heav - ily developed areas , not high - priced - capacity systems to span vast distances” ( Hecht 1999a , p . 111 ) . At the Insti - tution of Electrical Engineers meeting held in London in 1966 , Kao and Hockham ( 1966 ) presented a paper in which they argued that optical ﬁbers would be a suit - able transmission medium for long - distance communi - cations if attenuation could be kept under 20 dB / km . This implied that 1 % of the light entering a waveguide would remain after traveling one kilometer . By setting this threshold Kao and Hockham laid out a concrete methodology , spurring the ﬁrst wave of large - scale lab - oratory experiments . Corning’s invention of the ﬁrst optical glass ﬁber with attenuation below 20 dB / km in 1970 and its sub - sequent reﬁnements during the early 1970s fundamen - tally shaped the evolution of optical communications by demonstrating for the ﬁrst time optical ﬁber’s commer - cial viability for long - distance telephone networks ( see Trajtenberg et al . 1997 ) . Concurrent advances in semi - conductor laser technology at AT & T Bell Laboratories also proved critical ( Hecht 1999a ) . The commercial suc - cess of ﬁber optics remained incomplete until the early 1980s , when the U . S . government ﬁrst deregulated the telecommunications industry ( 1982 ) and forced AT & T to split up ( 1984 ) . By injecting more competition into the long - distance telephone market , AT & T’s divestiture opened new investment opportunities and fostered the rapid growth of ﬁber optics . Moreover , in mid - 1982 , MCI decided to build the ﬁrst long - distance telephone network in the United States using single - mode opti - cal ﬁbers , which then became the new market standard . Since single - mode ﬁbers have a smaller core than multi - mode ﬁbers , they possess superior transmission qualities in terms of speed , capacity , and attenuation level ( see Hecht 1999a , b ) . To summarize , the evolution of optical commu - nications had three main phases . Until 1966 , light - transmission over long distances was conﬁned to the “realm of wishes . ” This is a period marked by no fore - sight with respect to this new application . After 1966 , Kao and Hockham’s paper fostered the ﬁrst wave of lab - oratory experiments to meet the 20 dB / km threshold . Also , the British Post Ofﬁce’s intention to replace cop - per ﬁbers with optical glass ﬁbers signaled the existence of a potentially proﬁtable market . After Corning demon - strated the commercial feasibility of ﬁber optics in 1970 , market feedback provided an increasingly clear sense of direction . Because preadaptation implies that success in a mar - ket is determined largely by circumstances established before anyone knew this market would exist , only skills and knowledge accumulated before 1966 represent preadaptation for later stages . Thus , 1966 is an ideal dividing line or “watershed event” between the period when foresight was not a factor and the period when a higher level of foresight was more explicitly at work . 5 Available sources on the history of ﬁber optics ( e . g . , Hecht 1999a , b ) as well as our ﬁeld interviews con - ﬁrmed that 1966 was indeed a turning point in the evolu - tion of ﬁber optics . This dividing line shaped the overall research design , how we collected data , and how we cre - ated the variable of theoretical interest . 4 . Data In the analysis we used patent data . We chose 1970 as the beginning of the observation period because the ﬁrst key patents that laid the foundations for the practical implementation of ﬁber optics were ﬁled in that year . In 1970 , Robert Maurer , Donald Keck , and Peter Schultz from Corning developed the ﬁrst low - loss optical glass ﬁber . The two key patents , Fused Silica Optical Waveg - uide ( No . 3659915 ) and Method of Producing Optical Waveguide Fibers ( No . 3711262 ) , were ﬁled on May 11 , 1970 . For the period 1966 – 1970 , we could not collect patent data , as they are not fully available electronically . We thus manually collected data on pre - 1970 patents , but only when these patents were cited by a post - 1970 patent . While patents do not measure all relevant knowledge held by a ﬁrm , research has increasingly employed them as a measure of ﬁrm knowledge ( e . g . , Henderson and Cockburn 1994 , Jaffe et al . 1993 , Albert et al . 1991 , Narin et al . 1987 ) and as an indicator of technologi - cal capabilities ( e . g . , Jaffe 1986 , Patel and Pavitt 1994 , Stuart and Podolny 1996 , Silverman 1999 , Fleming and Sorenson 2001 ) . Unlike R & D expenditures , patents offer information on a ﬁrm’s speciﬁc strengths . Furthermore , in ﬁber optics , ﬁrms display a high propensity to patent ( Levin et al . 1987 , Hall et al . 2001 ) . To identify the technology underlying optical ﬁbers , we conducted the analysis at the patent subclass level . The classes and subclasses we identiﬁed as relevant are listed in Table 1 . Instead of using a three - digit , pri - mary technological ﬁeld classiﬁcation in determining the Table 1 Patent Primary Classes and Subclasses Patent primary classes Patent subclasses 65 Glass manufacturing 17 . 1 – 35 , 60 . 1 – 65 , 102 – 121 , 134 . 1 – 137 , 157 – 192 , 268 – 301 , 335 , 346 , 348 – 362 , 370 . 1 , 374 . 1 – 540 356 Optics : Measuring 73 . 1 , 139 , 141 , 153 , 335 – 338 , 342 and testing 385 Optical waveguides All subclasses 427 Coating processes 162 , 163 . 2 501 Compositions : 11 – 79 Ceramic Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 569 degree of technological relatedness of patents falling into different classes , we captured technological similarity by using a classiﬁcation up to the nine - digit , subclass level . Doing so allowed us to deﬁne the relevant ﬁber optics technical ﬁelds as accurately as possible . To ensure pre - cise and comprehensive coverage of the relevant tech - nical ﬁelds , we double - checked our identiﬁcation of the relevant patent primary classes and subclasses with two ﬁrms in the sample . We also validated our interpretation of the data with these two ﬁrms . For the period 1970 – 1995 , we collected patent data from the National Bureau for Economic Research ( NBER ) ( see Hall et al . 2001 ) , the U . S . Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce ( USPTO ) , and the UPSTO Cassis databases . We traced backward citations from patents ﬁled subsequently using Micropatents . We obtained ﬁnancial data from Compustat . Detailed information about patents ﬁled before 1970 is not available elec - tronically . However , the creation of the variables of theoretical interest requires detailed information such as assignee , ﬁling year , and patent class for all back - ward citations made by the focal patents to previous patents , regardless of when they were granted . We thus retrieved relevant citation information manually from the USPTO’s ofﬁcial website for all backward citations referring to patents for which that information was not available electronically . As a result , our database is dis - tinctive because it captures as accurately as possible all prior work relevant to the development of ﬁber optics . The research sample was drawn from the population of ﬁrms patenting in the patent classes and subclasses that deﬁne the ﬁber optics technical ﬁelds ( Table 1 ) . We included a ﬁrm in the sample if it ﬁled at least one patent in one of the relevant subclasses . Unfortunately , using patent data means that potentially preadapted ﬁrms that never ﬁled a patent in ﬁber optics for telecommu - nications applications are not included in the ﬁnal sam - ple . A very interesting case in this regard is American Optical Company . During the 1950s it contributed to the development of the ﬁberscope , an image - transmitting device that used the ﬁrst practical all - glass ﬁber and was primarily employed for medical applications such as the endoscope . Although its patents were widely cited by subsequent patents in ﬁber optics for communica - tions applications , it never entered the telecommunica - tions market . As we noted in § 2 , in the paper we use notion of “technological entry” ( Malerba and Orsenigo 1999 ) , which is distinct from the case in which a product or ser - vice is actually brought to market ( Helfat and Lieberman 2002 ) . Our choice of technological versus market entry was motivated by the following reasons . First , as out - lined in § 2 , we are concerned with the technological lin - eage of the ﬁrms that came to establish a new ﬁeld ( ﬁber optics ) , not simply their decisions to create or enter a new or existing market . Second , though ﬁrms often ﬁle patents they never use for commercial applications , evi - dence from other industries’ ﬁrms indicates that not all such patents are purely exploratory ; sometimes ﬁrms prefer to license their patents without directly participat - ing in the production stage . For instance , in the semicon - ductor industry many patents are granted to ﬁrms ( also known as fabless ﬁrms ) that only design ( never produce ) chips but proﬁt from collecting patent license fees . Their involvement with the downstream market where those patents are actually used is only indirect . Third , product - level data were not available . While this is clearly a limitation of the study , many of the ﬁrms that in our sample appear as technology leaders , ﬁling more patents that were also more widely cited , became market lead - ers later on . 6 The ﬁnal list of ﬁrms is comprehensive : As Table 2 indicates , the number of patents ﬁled by the sample ﬁrms represents a signiﬁcant proportion of all patents falling in the relevant classes and subclasses , thus ensuring that we are not sampling on the dependent variable . The NBER database provides both the name of the ﬁrm to which the patent was assigned and the name of the parent company . A ﬁrm with several subsidiaries and divisions can , therefore , have a single entry in Compu - stat but several assignee names in the NBER database . We thus treated every assignee name as part of the same corporation whenever the latter held more than 50 % of that assignee . Availability of yearly data on the Table 2 Sample Firm Patents vs . Total Patents in Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Total patents Focal ﬁrm patents % Year ( a ) ( b ) ( b / a ) 1970 162 107 0 . 66 1971 193 131 0 . 68 1972 227 144 0 . 63 1973 227 134 0 . 59 1974 241 146 0 . 61 1975 261 174 0 . 67 1976 284 177 0 . 62 1977 301 180 0 . 60 1978 264 156 0 . 59 1979 286 178 0 . 62 1980 344 242 0 . 70 1981 339 218 0 . 64 1982 314 205 0 . 65 1983 304 185 0 . 61 1984 337 192 0 . 57 1985 427 216 0 . 51 1986 397 192 0 . 48 1987 444 209 0 . 47 1988 466 222 0 . 48 1989 491 236 0 . 48 1990 537 266 0 . 50 1991 615 283 0 . 46 1992 598 265 0 . 44 1993 465 210 0 . 45 1994 531 246 0 . 46 1995 563 268 0 . 48 Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 570 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS control variables reduced the ﬁnal sample to 206 public ﬁrms patenting in the United States and traded on U . S . stock markets , for a total of 1 , 209 ﬁrm years . Private ﬁrms , academic institutions , and public research labs for which R & D and ﬁrm size data are not available are not included . Nevertheless , the composition of the sample ensures enough variety on most of the key variables . For instance , ﬁrms vary in their size , with the largest ﬁrms having more than 70 , 000 employees and the smallest fewer than 100 employees ; their age , with some ﬁrms ( e . g . , Corning , General Electric ) being founded more than 100 years ago and others relatively recently ( e . g . , during the observation period ) ; and the volume of their patenting activity in ﬁber optics , with some ﬁrms ﬁling only a few patents and others more than 100 patents per year . Moreover , as we explain in § 9 , we ran the anal - ysis including all ﬁrms—not merely ﬁrms patenting in the United States and traded on U . S . stock markets— and found the results to be qualitatively similar to those reported here . The ﬁnal sample is an unbalanced panel . Over the study period , the sample ﬁrms ﬁled 5 , 067 patents , com - prising more than 50 % of all the 9 , 618 patents that other ﬁrms ( private or traded on foreign stock markets ) , research labs , individual inventors , or academic institu - tions ﬁled in any of the technological ﬁelds correspond - ing to the selected classes and subclasses . 5 . Dependent Variable We measured ﬁrm performance in technological terms by using patent citations to the focal ﬁrm from other ﬁrms to estimate the value of a ﬁrm’s innovative out - put . We preferred this measure to the number of patents each ﬁrm ﬁled in a given year because we are inter - ested in each ﬁrm’s actual contribution to the creation of a new technological ﬁeld ( i . e . , ﬁber optics ) . The use of patent counts can be questioned on several grounds : Firms differ in their propensity to patent ; not all inven - tions are eventually patented ; and not all patented inven - tions are turned into commercial applications ( see Hall et al . 2001 , Hall and Ham - Ziedonis 2001 ) . Also , many patents have little value and do not reﬂect any truly dis - tinctive or signiﬁcant innovation . As such , although a patent count indicates a ﬁrm’s R & D productivity , it is a poor proxy for the value of its patents ( e . g . , Griliches et al . 1987 , Scherer 1965 , Hall 2000 ) . Especially in R & D - intensive industries , the number of citations a patent receives from other patents is a more precise measure of technological performance and a better estimate of the focal patent’s true value ( e . g . , Griliches 1981 , 1990 ; Trajtenberg 1990a , b ) . Such cita - tions indicate “that the cited patents opened the way to a technologically successful line of innovation . (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) Thus , if citations keep coming , it must be that the innova - tion originating in the cited patent had indeed proven to be valuable” ( Trajtenberg 1990a , p . 174 ) . Patents that ﬁrms report as more valuable are typically more heav - ily cited in subsequent patents ( Harhoff et al . 1999 ) . Previous studies have found a positive relation between ﬁrm market value and patent citations ( Shane and Klock 1997 , Hall 2000 , Hall et al . 2001 ) . Strong citation indic - tors also tend to be positively correlated with ﬁrm sales , proﬁts , and stock prices ( see Narin et al . 2001 ) . Strat - egy research has focused increasingly on the number of future citations on the premise that they are a better estimate of true value of a patent and a more informa - tive signal of success ( e . g . , Ahuja and Lampert 2001 , Bierly and Chakrabarti 1996 , DeCarolis and Deeds 1999 , Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) . Indeed , highly cited patents “cover innovations that experts in a technological area perceive to have been the most important inventions in that area” ( Sørensen and Stuart 2000 , p . 93 ) . For all patents the sample ﬁrms ﬁled over the study period ( 1970 – 1995 ) we collected future citations up to April 2004 from Micropatents . Because patents ﬁled in earlier years are exposed to the risk of being cited by subsequent patents for a longer period , we compared patents only to those ﬁled during the same year . All the focal patents were issued before February 1996 ; as a result , they have remained at risk of being cited for at least eight years . For each patent , we counted all future citations received until April 2004 , net of a ﬁrm’s self - citations . While self - citations measure the extent to which a ﬁrm builds on its previous R & D efforts , cita - tions from other ﬁrms more objectively estimate the actual relevance of a ﬁrm’s patents . Following Trajtenberg ( 1990a , b ) , the dependent vari - able estimating the impact of a ﬁrm’s patenting activity is computed as an index of weighted citation counts as follows : Weighted Citation Index it = m (cid:1) j = 1 (cid:6) 1 + C(cid:8)(cid:9) where C is the number of future citations that patent j (cid:6) 1 (cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:9)m(cid:8) ﬁled by ( and then granted to ) ﬁrm i (cid:6) 1 (cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:9)n(cid:8) in year t (cid:6) 1970 (cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:9) 1996 (cid:8) received in subse - quent years ( until year 2004 ) from patents ﬁled in ﬁber optics by other ﬁrms . The results of the analysis do not vary if we compute the index including citations also coming from patents ﬁled in other classes / subclasses than those deﬁning ﬁber optics . 6 . Independent Variables To test Hypothesis 1 , we created the variable preadap - tation , which measures a ﬁrm’s stock of relevant trans - ferable skills and knowledge potentially available for new uses . The creation of a more ﬁne - grained variable would require deﬁning the proﬁle of each ﬁrm by recon - structing its historical background . Since some of the ﬁrms in the sample have roots in industries other than Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 571 telecommunications , one approach would be to trace their complete past patenting activity . Unfortunately , patents prior to 1970 are not available in an electronic format . We thus followed a different approach . We used patent backward citations to identify technological knowledge each ﬁrm accumulated before 1966 . Interestingly , even though ﬁrms typically build on their prior R & D efforts , very often they fail to do so fully , whether by design or by oversight . For instance , several sample ﬁrms never cited some of their early ( up to 1966 ) patents in their subsequent ﬁber optics patents , even though those same early patents were cited by other ﬁrms . In total , the sample ﬁrms ﬁled 1 , 234 ﬁber optics patents in 1966 or before that were subsequently cited by other patents . Of those 1 , 234 patents , 997 were cited only in patents ﬁled by ﬁrms other than the original assignee , and 237 were cited at least once by the original assignee . Thus , the pool of relevant skills and knowledge available to each ﬁrm was larger than the set of skills and knowledge they actually used . We considered each ﬁrm’s pool of pre - 1966 patents to reﬂect its level of preadaptation with respect to the new technology ( ﬁber optics ) , regardless of whether the sam - ple ﬁrms actually leveraged ( cited ) their prior experience ( the stock of pre - 1966 patents ) in subsequent innovative efforts ( new patents ) . This way of estimating technolog - ical preadaptation accounts for a ﬁrm’s knowledge by looking only at its patenting activity and thereby does not consider manifestations ( such as inventors’ scien - tiﬁc papers ) of knowledge that existed without having led to patents . Nevertheless , it represents a good approx - imation . If it is true that citation - based measures are noisy indicators of technological linkages , several stud - ies have validated their use in identifying the technolo - gies on which other innovations build ( e . g . , Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002 ) . Overall , 63 of the 206 sample ﬁrms were preadapted , to varying degrees . Twenty six had accumulated experi - ence in glass manufacturing , four in optics : measuring and testing , eight in optical waveguides , two in coating processes , and 24 in compositions : ceramic ( see Table 1 for the patent classes and subclasses deﬁning the cor - responding technical ﬁelds ) . While several ﬁrms ( e . g . , AT & T , Corning , General Electric , ITT ) were also oper - ating in technical ﬁelds other than glass , prior experience in glass manufacturing was clearly an important vantage point . In the analysis we do not distinguish between differ - ent types of prior experience or preadaptation to estab - lish how closely previous applications were related to ﬁber optics . This would require a precise identiﬁcation of all technical ﬁelds in which the sample ﬁrms were operating based on their primary patent classes . The technical background of the sample ﬁrms is quite het - erogeneous ( as the number of distinct primary classes of the cited patents clearly indicates ) . Distinguishing between different types of technological preadaptation represents an interesting avenue for future research but goes beyond the purpose of this study . We entered the variable preadaptation into the ﬁnal model after apply - ing a logarithmic transformation . Since for several ﬁrms the variable is equal to 0 , we added the value 1 to be able to take the log . The results do not change appreciably by using different values . To test Hypothesis 2 , we captured the extent to which ﬁrms build on their prior experience into a differ - ent domain by using backward self - citations . As future patents build on previous patents , a ﬁrm that cites its patents is leveraging its stock of skills and knowledge ( Jaffe et al . 1993 ) . Because the theoretical groundwork for the development of ﬁber optics dates back to 1966 , we chose this year as the dividing line ; only skills and knowledge available in 1966 or before represent preadaptation for future applications . A careful exami - nation of the content of the patents cited by the focal patents , along with our interviews with managers from Corning and an industry expert , further supports our choice . Among the cited patents , those ﬁled before 1966 did not mention telecommunications as a possible appli - cation for optical ﬁbers . Accordingly , the variable con - sists only of backward self - citations that refer to patents ﬁled until 1966 . Several years may elapse between a patent application and its publication date . One might thus fail to correctly identify when prior R & D efforts were ﬁrst conducted by simply looking at the year in which a cited patent was granted . The choice of the ﬁling year for back - ward self - citations thus traces more closely the timing of the process of accumulating skills and knowledge . An example may clarify this point . Suppose patent A granted in 1975 cites patent B , which was granted in 1970 but ﬁled in 1966 . The efforts that eventually led to patent B allegedly date back to 1966 or before . If a ﬁrm’s future patents build on its previous patents , the ﬁling year , rather than the publication year , of previous patents more accurately captures the time when the rel - evant skills and knowledge were ﬁrst created ( see Hall et al . 2001 ) . In other words , such skills and knowledge were available in - house earlier than the publication year would suggest otherwise . Following this reasoning , the variable leverage is given by the following ratio : Leverage it = total backward self - citations until 1966 total backward citations (cid:9) where the numerator , total backward self - citations until 1966 , is the number of citations that all patents ﬁled by ﬁrm i (cid:6) 1 (cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:9)n(cid:8) made in year t to patents ﬁled by ﬁrm i in 1966 or before . The denominator , total backward cita - tions , is the sum of all backward citations—self - citations and citations of patents ﬁled by other ﬁrms—made by the patents ﬁrm i ﬁled in year t . The variable measures Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 572 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS the extent to which ﬁrms actually leverage their prior experience in a different domain . It takes on the value 0 when one of the following three conditions is fulﬁlled : ( 1 ) a preadapted ﬁrm did not leverage its prior experi - ence ; ( 2 ) a ﬁrm in existence before the beginning of the observation period had no prior relevant knowledge ; and ( 3 ) a ﬁrm was founded after 1966 . 7 . Control Variables To account for possible competing hypotheses , we included several control variables in the model speciﬁ - cation . Technology Cycle . The value of prior experience is likely to decay over time ( see Argote et al . 1990 , Baum and Ingram 1998 ) . This implies that ﬁrms that build on older technologies might undermine their ability to innovate in the future . Following previous research ( e . g . , Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) , we controlled for this pos - sibility by creating a variable , technology cycle , that measures the average age of the patents cited by the patents a ﬁrm ﬁled in a given year . More speciﬁcally , we ﬁrst computed the difference between the year in which the ( focal ) citing patent was ﬁled and the ﬁling year of all cited patents . We did the same for all patents each ﬁrm ﬁled in a given year . We then calculated the average age of all cited patents . Firm Fiber Optics Patents . The number of patents a ﬁrm ﬁles in a given year is likely to be affected by its prior patenting activity . We should then expect future citation counts to grow with the number of patents being ﬁled . Controlling for the total number of patents previ - ously applied for allows capturing differences between ﬁrms in their quality threshold for patenting ( Sørenson and Stuart 2000 ) . We thus created the ﬁrm ﬁber optics patents variable by counting the number of patents a ﬁrm ﬁled in ﬁber optics in the previous year . We entered the variable with one - year lag to avoid simultaneity prob - lems with the dependent variable . R & D Expenditures . Several studies have documented the relation between a ﬁrm’s patenting activity and R & D expenditures ( Griliches 1981 , 1990 ; Hausman et al . 1984 ) . We used the log of yearly R & D , expressed in 1996 constant dollars , as a proxy for a ﬁrm’s total R & D inputs to the innovation process . We obtained data from Compustat . For the few observations where R & D was not reported , we created a dummy so the R & D coefﬁ - cient would not be biased ( Ham - Ziedonis 2004 ) . External Knowledge . Firms can accumulate skills and knowledge in a new domain by learning from direct experience or the experience of others ( Levitt and March 1988 ) . Firms that cite patents ﬁled by other ﬁrms are more likely to access external knowledge and expand their base of experience than are ﬁrms that continually cite their own patents . Prior research has shown that exploration that spans ﬁrm boundaries inﬂuences tech - nological evolution in a given domain more than explo - ration that does not span ﬁrm boundaries ( Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) . Firms can partly offset the disad - vantage of not having relevant transferable specialized skills and knowledge through “vicarious interorganiza - tional learning” during their lifetimes ( Baum and Ingram 1998 , p . 1 , 002 ) . We then created the variable external knowledge , which denotes the ratio of the number of backward citations made to patents ﬁled by other ﬁrms to the sum of all backward citations in a given year . Firm Size . Literature in economics has shown that large ﬁrms are responsible for a disproportionate quan - tity of innovation as measured by the number of patents ﬁled ( Cohen et al . 1987 , Cohen and Klepper 1996 ) . On the other hand , since large organizations “are often more bureaucratic and less entrepreneurial than small enterprises (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) [ size might ] have a negative effect on the importance of ﬁrms’ innovations” ( Sørensen and Stuart 2000 , p . 94 ) . To control for the effect of size , we used the log of the number of employees . We also tried a ﬁrm’s total assets ( in 1996 constant dollars ) but found no difference . Data were obtained from Compustat . Firm Age . Older ﬁrms are more likely to have accu - mulated experience in different domains and as such to have a larger stock of relevant transferable skills and knowledge . Older ﬁrms create more innovations , though these innovations often have less impact . Firm age should also increase the frequency of issuing self - citing patents ( Sørensen and Stuart 2000 ) . But older ﬁrms might also be less innovative due to inertial forces , core rigidities , or existing customers . To control for these possibilities we created a time - varying variable , ﬁrm age , measuring the years elapsed since the ﬁrm was founded , or , if the foundation year was not available , the difference between the current year and the year the focal ﬁrm ﬁrst ﬁled a patent in ﬁber optics . Total Fiber Optics Patents . The number of patents each ﬁrm ﬁled in a given year and the number of future citations received by them might also depend on the overall patenting activity in the relevant ﬁber optics patent classes . As the number of patents grows , the focal patents are more likely to be cited by subsequent patents . On the other hand , over time , future citations will be increasingly spread out over a larger number of patents . We then created a measure of patent density , total ﬁber optics patents , to control for all ﬁber optics patents ﬁled by any economic actors—not just the sample ﬁrms—in a given year . We also created a quadratic term but it turned out to be nonsigniﬁcant . Alternatively , we could have included a calendar time trend ( e . g . , year ) in all models to account for the fact that the overall patent - ing activity volume increases over time , but also because Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 573 “the actual composition of organizational innovation is likely to change as a consequence of the maturation of the industrial context” ( Sørensen and Stuart 2000 , p . 94 ) . Because the variable was highly correlated with the patent density measure and the results did not vary appreciably , we decided to enter only the latter into the model . Average Patent Impact . Regardless of their quality , on average recent patents are less frequently cited than older patents simply because they have been exposed to the risk of being cited for a shorter period . For each year , we thus estimated the average number of citations— average patent impact —ﬁber optics patents received from other patents in subsequent years . We computed this measure including all patents ﬁled in the relevant classes / subclasses by any type of assignee ( whether pub - lic or private ﬁrms , academic institutions , or an individ - ual inventor ) , not just the sample ﬁrms . We also ran the analysis using different citations windows by comput - ing the citation index with future citations within ﬁve to seven years after the focal patent was issued , but the results did not change signiﬁcantly . We used the former approach in our ﬁnal analysis . 8 . Model To test the previous hypotheses , we estimated a random - intercept model . The model has the following basic form : y it = (cid:12) t + (cid:13)x it + (cid:15)z i + a i + (cid:18) it (cid:1) ( 1 ) The random - effects model is related most closely to the ﬁxed - effects model . However , instead of assuming that a i represents a set of ﬁxed parameters , we suppose that each a i is a random variable with a speciﬁed prob - ability distribution . Typically , it is assumed that a i has a normal distribution with a mean of 0 and constant vari - ance and that it is independent of x it , z i , and (cid:18) it . Because the dependent variable weighted citation index can take on only nonnegative integer values , a Poisson or a negative binomial speciﬁcation is recom - mended ( Hausman et al . 1984 ) . In the Poisson distribu - tion , both the mean and the variance are equal to the single parameter (cid:19) , which is a function of the explana - tory variables—that is , E(cid:21)Y (cid:23) = var (cid:21)Y (cid:23) = (cid:19) ( Allison 1999 ) . However , in the presence of overdispersion—as in our data—the variance tends to be greater than the mean . While overdispersion does not bias the coefﬁ - cient estimates , standard errors might be underestimated and chi - square value statistics overestimated . We thus included the stochastic component (cid:18) it that allows for the effect of omitted explanatory variables to correct for this problem as follows : E(cid:21)Y it (cid:23) = (cid:19) it = exp (cid:6)y it = (cid:12) t + (cid:13)x it + (cid:15)z i + a i + (cid:18) it (cid:8)(cid:9) ( 2 ) where exp (cid:6)(cid:18) it (cid:8) ∼ (cid:24)(cid:21) 1 (cid:9)(cid:25)(cid:23) ; that is , it is assumed to have a gamma distribution . The subscripts i and t indicate that the parameter (cid:19) is allowed to vary across ﬁrms (cid:6)i = 1 (cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:9)n(cid:8) and time (cid:6)t = 1 (cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:9)m(cid:8) . In this formula - tion of the negative binomial model , the parameter (cid:25) is estimated directly from the data and captures overdisper - sion . Because (cid:19) ( weighted citation index ) cannot be less than 0 , it is generally expressed as a log - linear function of the covariates as follows . In the analysis , we report signiﬁcance levels based on Huber - White robust standard errors to control for any residual heteroscedasticity across panels . We obtained our estimates using PROC NLMIXED and PROC GENMOD in SAS ( version 9 . 1 ) for the random inter - cept and the ﬁxed - effects negative binomial regression models , respectively . 9 . Results Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics and the cor - relation values for all variables . The correlation values are relatively low , except for R & D and ﬁrm size . In analyses not reported here , we entered these two vari - ables separately into the model but found no differ - ence in the results . We thus decided to include only the variable R & D . Table 4 presents the coefﬁcient estimates for the random intercept negative binomial regression model ( Models 1 to 3 ) . Model 1 is the baseline model and includes all controls , which are statistically signiﬁcant and in the expected direction , except for external knowl - edge , which is not signiﬁcant . The positive coefﬁcient of the average patent impact variable suggests that a ﬁrm’s ﬁber optics patents tend to have greater impact in years when patents ﬁled in the same technical ﬁeld are more widely cited . This is especially true for older patents that have been exposed to the chance of being cited for a longer period . Moreover , patents ﬁled by older ﬁrms ( ﬁrm age ) , which also ﬁled more patents in the previous year ( ﬁrm ﬁber optics patents ) , have a higher chance of being cited in the future . In contrast , ﬁrms that build on older technologies , that is , that cite older patents ( tech - nology cycle ) , are more likely to generate innovations with less impact . Model 2 shows the results after we entered the ﬁrst variable of theoretical interest , preadaptation , to test Hypothesis 1 . The coefﬁcient is signiﬁcant and in the expected direction , providing support for the hypothesis . In line with our theory , technological preadaptation rep - resents a vantage point from where ﬁrms can eventually generate new , often very signiﬁcant , innovations—as the improvement in the overall ﬁt of the model indicates . Model 3 presents the results after we included the second variable of theoretical interest , leverage , to test Hypothesis 2 . The coefﬁcient is statistically signiﬁcant and in the expected direction . Firms leveraging their pre - 1966 pool of relevant skills and knowledge in developing ﬁber optics are , ceteris paribus , more likely to achieve Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 574 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS Table 3 Means , Standard Deviations , and Correlations Variables Mean Std dev Min Max 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 . Weighted citation 67 (cid:1) 98 117 (cid:1) 76 1 1 , 174 1 index 2 . Average patent 12 (cid:1) 55 1 (cid:1) 57 7 (cid:1) 36 15 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 05 1 impact 3 . Total ﬁber optics 6 (cid:1) 27 0 (cid:1) 48 5 (cid:1) 25 7 (cid:1) 28 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 07 1 patents ∗ 4 . Technology 7 (cid:1) 83 5 (cid:1) 51 0 45 (cid:1) 33 − 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 002 1 cycle 5 . R & D ∗ 12 (cid:1) 40 9 (cid:1) 34 0 (cid:1) 01 22 (cid:1) 87 − 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 05 1 6 . Firm size ∗ 7 (cid:1) 16 5 (cid:1) 17 0 (cid:1) 04 13 (cid:1) 68 − 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 06 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 94 1 7 . Firm ﬁber optics 0 (cid:1) 94 1 (cid:1) 02 0 4 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 62 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 11 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 04 1 patents ∗ † 8 . Firm age 55 (cid:1) 85 35 (cid:1) 83 0 152 0 (cid:1) 27 − 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 07 − 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 35 1 9 . External 0 (cid:1) 88 0 (cid:1) 17 0 1 − 0 (cid:1) 26 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 05 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 30 − 0 (cid:1) 20 1 knowledge 10 . Preadaptation ∗ 1 (cid:1) 50 1 (cid:1) 53 0 6 (cid:1) 88 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 13 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 21 0 (cid:1) 22 0 (cid:1) 18 0 (cid:1) 24 − 0 (cid:1) 21 1 11 . Leverage 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 06 0 0 (cid:1) 45 0 (cid:1) 09 − 0 (cid:1) 11 − 0 (cid:1) 27 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 36 0 (cid:1) 46 1 ∗ Variables are logged . † Variable with one - year lag . Table 4 Determinants of Patent Impact Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Variables Random effects Random effects Random effects Fixed effects Intercept − 0 (cid:1) 529 − 0 (cid:1) 810 − 1 (cid:1) 717 — (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 534 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 547 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 587 (cid:4) Average patent impact 0 (cid:1) 079 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 081 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 097 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 084 ∗∗∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 019 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 019 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 019 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 022 (cid:4) Total ﬁber optics patents ( log ) 0 (cid:1) 397 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 424 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 503 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 576 ∗∗∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 065 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 066 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 069 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 092 (cid:4) Technology cycle − 0 (cid:1) 029 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 028 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 030 ∗∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 020 ∗∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 007 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 007 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 007 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 008 (cid:4) R & D ( log ) 0 (cid:1) 009 ∗ 0 (cid:1) 007 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 018 ∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 005 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 005 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 005 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 009 (cid:4) Firm ﬁber optics patents ( log ) † 0 (cid:1) 364 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 361 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 373 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 220 ∗∗∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 044 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 044 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 044 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 048 (cid:4) Firm age 0 (cid:1) 004 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 001 (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 001 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 001 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 001 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 004 (cid:4) External knowledge 0 (cid:1) 090 0 (cid:1) 130 0 (cid:1) 377 ∗ 0 (cid:1) 624 ∗∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 225 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 224 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 227 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 255 (cid:4) Preadaptation ( log ) 0 (cid:1) 104 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 077 ∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 046 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 046 (cid:4) Leverage 3 (cid:1) 172 ∗∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 108 ∗∗ (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 864 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 955 (cid:4) Variance parameter 0 (cid:1) 269 0 (cid:1) 264 0 (cid:1) 260 (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 055 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 053 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 052 (cid:4) theta 1 (cid:1) 573 1 (cid:1) 580 1 (cid:1) 602 (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 077 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 077 (cid:4) (cid:3) 0 (cid:1) 078 (cid:4) − 2 Log likelihood 9 , 252 9 , 247 9 , 232 Likelihood ratio test ( vs . baseline ) 5 ∗∗∗ 20 ∗∗∗ Notes . Random intercept and ﬁxed - effect regression models dependent variable = weighted citation index , 1 , 209 observations . Sample includes ﬁrms publicly traded in the United States . The method of estimation is maximum likeli - hood for a negative binomial speciﬁcation . Standard errors ( in parentheses ) are heteroskedastic consistent ( “robust” ) . Although not shown , a dummy was included in the model when R & D was not reported . Two - tailed tests for all variables . ∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 1 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 05 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 001 . † One - year lag . Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 575 higher levels of technological performance . The vari - able preadaptation is now signiﬁcant at the 10 % level . While the availability of transferable skills and knowl - edge might enhance the ability to innovate in a new technological ﬁeld , ﬁrms that actually take advantage of their past R & D efforts have a better chance of inno - vating in the new ﬁeld as well as a better chance of creating innovations of greater impact . The inclusion of the two variables signiﬁcantly improves the overall ﬁt of the model as compared to the baseline model . Taken together , the results support the two hypotheses . Robustness Tests . We tested the robustness of the results against alternative model speciﬁcations . First , we compared them with those for the ﬁxed - effects model ( see Model 4 in Table 4 ) to verify whether unob - served heterogeneity might be a problem in our analysis . Because the variable preadaptation is time invariant , we excluded it from the model . Following Allison and Waterman ( 2002 ) , we estimated a ﬁxed - effects nega - tive binomial regression model by using unconditional maximum likelihood to control for all stable covariates ( easily accomplished in SAS with PROC GENMOD in version 9 . 1 ) . Allison and Waterman showed that the neg - ative binomial model of Hausman et al . ( 1984 ) , and its associated conditional likelihood estimator , does not accomplish what is usually desired in a ﬁxed - effects method , namely to control for all stable covariates . The reason is that the model is based on a regression decom - position of the overdispersion parameter rather than the usual regression decomposition of the mean . The coefﬁ - cient estimates for the ﬁxed - effects regression model are qualitatively similar to those obtained using the random - intercept model . Also the standard errors are not too different , though bigger for the ﬁxed - effects model . In line with previous research estimating a ﬁxed - effect neg - ative binomial model ( Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) , the only noticeable difference is that the coefﬁcient for the variable external knowledge is now statistically signif - icant . However , after controlling for the size effect by looking at the standardized coefﬁcients , we saw that the impact of the variable external knowledge on the depen - dent variable is smaller than that of the leverage variable . For several ﬁrms in the sample the preadaptation and leverage variables are equal to 0 over the entire study period . Apart from ﬁrms founded after 1966 ( for which the variable is obviously equal to 0 ) , the variable is equal to 0 when these ﬁrms did not have or did not leverage prior relevant skills and knowledge . To further check the robustness of the results , we excluded from the analysis those ﬁrms for which the two variables are always 0 . This led to a subsample of 34 ﬁrms for a total of 487 ﬁrm years . Though not reported here , we found similar results to those presented in the paper . We further controlled whether sample selection bias might affect our results . In particular , we ran the analy - sis by including all assignees—that is , public ﬁrms not traded on U . S . stock markets , private ﬁrms , research labs , and academic institutions—that ﬁled patents in any of the selected subclasses deﬁning the ﬁber optics technological ﬁeld ( for a similar approach see Sørensen and Stuart 2000 ) . Although we could not obtain data on R & D and size for those assignees , we nevertheless believe that the variable ﬁrm ﬁber optics patents , which measures their overall patenting activity in ﬁber optics , can be used as a “reasonably good” proxy for them , on the premise that larger ﬁrms invest more in R & D and thereby are more likely to patent . The results , which are available from the authors upon request , did not vary appreciably from those reported here , suggesting that sample selection bias may not be an issue in our analysis . Because previous studies have controlled for differ - ences in citation rates across technological domains by including dummies for the main patent classes ( e . g . , Sørensen and Stuart 2000 ) , we checked whether the propensity to patent varied across the relevant technical ﬁelds . While we found the propensity to patent higher for the classes 65 and 385 ( and related subclasses ) , where most ﬁber optics patents were ﬁled , the results are essentially the same with respect to the variables of theoretical interest . We also ran additional analyses by ( 1 ) including R & D and ﬁrm size in the same model , ( 2 ) replacing yearly R & D with a moving average of 3 – 5 years for R & D , and ( 3 ) substituting R & D inten - sity ( R & D divided by sales ) for R & D expenditures . All these tests supported the main results and are consistent with research showing that R & D spending is correlated to patent counts but not necessarily patent quality ( Narin et al . 2001 ) . Since the combined number of patents ﬁled by Corn - ing and AT & T in optical ﬁbers over the study period amounts to almost 26 % of the overall number of patents ﬁled by the ﬁrms in the sample ( 1 , 317 of 5 , 067 ) , in a separate set of analyses we excluded these two ﬁrms . But again we found no signiﬁcant difference from the results presented in the paper . Finally , we ran the analysis using patent counts as the dependent variable . Although not reported , the results are qualitatively similar to those reported here . 10 . Discussion and Conclusions The main objective of this paper was to explore how heterogeneity in technological knowledge affects ( tech - nological ) performance differences among ﬁrms . Using the concept of biological preadaptation , we investigated how the availability and exploitation of “relevant trans - ferable skills and knowledge” relate to technological performance differences among ﬁrms . Extant research emphasizes how a ﬁrm’s prior experience in its cur - rent application domain might become a constraint and jeopardize the ﬁrm’s ability to innovate in that Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 576 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS domain . In this paper , on the contrary , we examined the case when the very same ﬁrm redeploys that experi - ence across different domains . Firms are often endowed with skills and knowledge for reasons unrelated to the demands of a new opportunity . As a result , they have the possibility of creating new competitive advantages as they leverage their existing skills and knowledge into a different domain of application . We situated our analysis in the context of ﬁber optics , tracing the emergence and evolution of this new technology virtually from its incep - tion . We identiﬁed relevant transferable skills and knowl - edge using patent data and backward citation patterns . Firm ( technological ) preadaptation was found to have a positive effect on technological performance . Preadap - tation does not imply a deterministic view of innova - tion , discarding any meaningful role for strategy . If the availability of a pool of skills and knowledge poten - tially available for other applications is an important source of ﬁrm heterogeneity , so too is ﬁrms’ differ - ential inclination to leverage skills and knowledge to generate ( economically ) valuable innovations . Since we estimated the extent to which ﬁrms actually leverage their existing base of experience , the paper establishes a direct link between prior experience and technological performance . The results of the analysis seem to be inconsistent with previous research showing how the overall qual - ity of a ﬁrm’s patenting activity declines when ﬁrms repeatedly cite their own patents ( e . g . , Sørensen and Stuart 2000 , Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) . However , this apparent inconsistency can be explained by the fact that these studies do not distinguish between knowledge that predates the emergence of a new technological domain ( what we deﬁne as preadaptation ) and knowledge that ﬁrms accumulate after a new domain emerges . More - over , those studies focus on ﬁrm ( technological ) perfor - mance within an existing domain rather than creation of new technological domains . We believe our ﬁndings contribute to the ongoing debate in strategy on the determinants of competitive advantage , especially with respect to R & D - intensive industries , where superior performance rests on consis - tent innovation . One side of the debate argues that if superior performance results mainly from differences in resources that are distributed randomly “at birth , ” then some ﬁrms will outperform others “merely because the environment happens to change in such a way that it favors their particular resource environment” ( Henderson 2000 , p . 286 ) . The other arguement is that competitive advantage can be the result of “any kind of managerial foresight or strategic insight” ( Henderson 2000 , p . 289 ) . Realistically , probably both luck and foresight play a role ; the challenge is to clarify when each of these two forces is more likely to be at work . The identiﬁcation of a clear watershed event helped us delineate more accurately the role of foresight and test whether ( technological ) performance differences were attributable to circumstances established before the emergence of the new technology ( i . e . , ﬁber optics ) . While ﬁrms cannot determine ex ante whether their prior experience will ever become useful in a new domain , the spectrum of possible applications for a ﬁrm’s base of experience is often not conﬁned to current applica - tions . The strategic implication is that ﬁrms can increase their returns from previous technological investments by transferring skills and knowledge already available in - house , instead of creating new resources from scratch ( Garud and Nayyar 1994 ) . One challenge of using analogies from evolutionary biology is justifying their signiﬁcance in a different ﬁeld . Innovations are not exactly analogous to random bio - logical mutations ( Alchian 1950 ) , but rather result from ﬁrms’ attempts to adapt to and at times even alter their own environment ( Penrose 1952 , Garud et al . 1997 ) . Although we emphasize preadaptation , we do not want to downplay the signiﬁcance of purposive behavior . For instance , several ﬁrms in our sample had prior experi - ence in glass manufacturing—a clear vantage point for producing optical glass ﬁbers . However , even ﬁrms from the same origin industries exhibit a differential ability to take advantage of their prior experience across differ - ent domains , which clearly reﬂects purposive behavior . Equally preadapted ﬁrms can thus differ not only with respect to their ability to leverage preexisting skills and knowledge , but also with respect to when and / or how quickly they decide to do so . 7 A central assumption in the evolutionary theory of the ﬁrm is that of “local search”—a ﬁrm’s R & D activ - ity is closely related to its previous R & D activity ( March and Simon 1958 , Nelson and Winter 1982 , Helfat 1994 ) . While ﬁrms typically search locally , within the boundaries of their existing knowledge domain , some of them display a higher propensity to search beyond such boundaries ( e . g . , Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) . As research on learning has pointed out , ﬁrms have “to cope with confusing experience and the complicated prob - lem of balancing the competing goals of developing new knowledge ( i . e . , exploration ) and exploiting cur - rent competencies in the face of dynamic tendencies to emphasize one or the other” ( Levinthal and March 1993 , p . 95 ) . However , both processes can coexist when ﬁrms leverage their base of experience across different domains . These new applications can in fact be very different with respect to the market needs and perfor - mance requirements that must be satisﬁed . As such , even though they may not imply a major shift in a ﬁrm’s tech - nological knowledge base , they might require that a ﬁrm engage in exploration . In this paper , we concerned ourselves with the per - formance implications of being preadapted in the tech - nology space . However , the analysis could be further expanded to embrace “complementary assets” ( Teece Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 577 et al . 1994 , Helfat and Lieberman 2002 ) . A ﬁrm , for instance , is more likely to enter a new market or indus - try if it also “possesses a broad base of assets required for successful commercialization of the new goods (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) ” ( Mitchell 1989 , p . 208 ) . While our data do not lend themselves to properly measure complimentary assets and gauge their importance relative to prior ( technolog - ical ) experience , we surmise that the results would not change even after controlling for their effect . The two explanations are not in fact mutually exclusive . Further - more , in our empirical setting , patents are a key success factor . What the results suggest is that technological preadaptation , especially if combined with the ability to leverage it , positively affects ( technological ) per - formance , regardless of whether complementary assets retain their value in a new domain . There are some obvious limitations to the study . First , whenever an analysis focuses on only one technol - ogy , it is unclear whether ﬁndings can be generalized . Future research comparing and contrasting the evolution of different technologies will verify whether the same dynamics can be detected in technological settings other than ﬁber optics . More speciﬁcally , notwithstanding the continuity underlying technological evolution , the chal - lenge is to identify a clear dividing line to discrimi - nate between the preadaptation and adaptation phases as accurately as possible . Second , we could not compare technological perfor - mance with other market - based or ﬁnancial measures ( though in R & D - intensive industries technological per - formance measures are reasonably good proxies for ﬁrm performance ) . Third , since we do not have product - level data , we could not establish which ﬁrms actually entered the ﬁber optics market and which ﬁrms just ﬁled patents in this new ﬁeld . Given our interest in each ﬁrm’s con - tribution to the creation of a new technological ﬁeld , however , focusing on the impact of its patenting activity is consistent with the original purpose of this study . In conclusion , we would like to emphasize that despite their many useful applications , patent data exhibit some shortcomings as well . While patents have been increas - ingly used as a measure of ﬁrm knowledge , they do not fully measure a ﬁrm’s overall base of experience . For instance , even though reference to prior art—that is , citations to patents by other patents—has been a core methodology in research on social , organizational , and geographic pathways of knowledge ﬂows , citations made by patent examiners have not been separated from cita - tions made by inventors ( Alcacer and Gittelman 2004 ) . Focusing on a single industry , as we did in this paper , where patents are important for appropriating returns to R & D , might signiﬁcantly reduce the effect of this prob - lem , which is on the contrary compounded in studies comparing knowledge ﬂows across very different indus - tries . Of course , similar problems afﬂict most empirical measures , especially those measuring intangibles such as skills and knowledge . Looking at inventors’ patenting and publication records might be complimentary way of capturing how prior experience spanning several technological domains is embodied in technologies applied in other domains . The focus on inventors is consistent with the argument that , though organizational memory does not necessar - ily coincide with individual memory , inventors are often “the sole storage point of knowledge that is both idiosyn - cratic and of great importance to the organization” ( Nelson and Winter 1982 , p . 115 ) . Indeed , inventors play a key role in facilitating the diffusion and recombina - tion of skills and knowledge accumulated in otherwise distinct technological domains . Future research should explore this issue more deeply . Acknowledgments Funds for this research project were provided by the Mack Center for Technological Innovation at Wharton . The author gratefully acknowledges helpful comments on an earlier draft of the paper from Paul Allison , Jerker Denrell , Christina Fang , Rosemarie Ham , Constance Helfat , Witold Henisz , Daniel Levinthal , Anne - Marie Knott , Johannes Pennings , Lori Rosenkopf , the participants of the 2002 CCC Doctoral Consortium , Boston , and of the 2002 Strategic Management Society Annual Conference , Paris . The author also thanks Sidney Winter for his insight and help at various stages in the development of the article , and John Lafkas and Sarah Friedberg , whose thoughtful critique helped to polish the ﬁnal draft . Finally , a special thanks goes to the Senior Editor , Henrich Greve , and four anonymous reviewers whose insight - ful comments helped improve the paper . All errors remain the author’s responsibility . Endnotes 1 There is some disagreement on how expansive the concept of preadaptation should be . Bock ( 1959 ) does not distin - guish between features that have changed and those that have retained their original function . In contrast , for Gould and Vrba ( 1982 ) preadaptation refers solely to features that pro - mote ﬁtness and were built by selection to perform the same function for which they originally evolved , while features that evolved for other usages or for no function at all and that were coopted for their current role at a later point in time are “exaptations . ” Yet the usefulness of establishing whether exist - ing features were from the outset “optimally designed by nat - ural selection for their functions” ( Gould and Lewontin 1979 , p . 585 ) is questionable . As Reeve and Sherman ( 1993 ) point out , the original roles of many observable features are virtually impossible to identify because the phylogenetic and ecolog - ical information needed to infer such roles is unavailable or incomplete . 2 The evolution of tetrapod limbs is an example . A structure that was effective at locomotion in water was also good at locomotion over land with relatively few changes . Bird feath - ers are another example of a preadaptation : The ﬁrst feathers were for heat insulation rather than an adaptation for ﬂight ( see Ridley 1999 ) . Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 578 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 3 Intel’s ﬁrst microprocessor was a chip set designed to perform advanced calculator functions , not to be used in a computer ( Burgelman 1994 ) . 4 For instance , distinction between de alio and de novo ﬁrms Carroll et al . ( 1996 ) , and the ﬁnding that ﬁrms from ori - gin industries with relevant specialized transferable skills and knowledge have lower death rates than newly founded ﬁrms and / or ﬁrms without similar skills and knowledge clearly sheds light on sources of ﬁrm heterogeneity within an organizational population . However , a critical strategy question—what might be driving performance differences among ﬁrms within each group—is not properly accounted for . 5 For instance , while it laid out the foundations for the prac - tical implementation of ﬁber optics with the invention of the ﬁrst low - loss optical glass ﬁber in September 1970 , Corning initiated the ﬁrst lab experiments as early as 1966 , when it began to leverage its prior experience in specialty glass , quan - tum optics , and electronics ( see Figure 1 ) . A correct identiﬁca - tion of Corning’s preentry resources and capabilities , therefore , should trace them back to the period before 1966 . While sub - sequent efforts by Corning to develop new resources and capa - bilities before a market for optical ﬁbers materialized spanned several years , those efforts were made already knowing the new application ( i . e . , telecommunications ) . Therefore , they represent adaptation to this new application , but not preadap - tation , or adaptation to other application ( s ) . 6 We extracted what information about market share we could from the annual ﬁnancial reports of some of the sample ﬁrms and also by looking at the company list provided by the Freedonia Group , a leading international business research company that publishes industry ( including ﬁber optics ) research studies annually . 7 For instance , despite its monopoly within the long - distance telecommunications industry , AT & T failed to take the lead in the development of ﬁber optics and lost it to Corning . For Corning , ﬁber optics was a new technology that opened up a new market with high growth potential , while for AT & T it was a substitute technology bound to replace an existing telecom - munications network in which traditional ( copper based ) tech - nologies were still in use . The incentives to invest in the new technology and accelerate its large - scale adoption were obvi - ously quite different ( Cattani 2004 ) . In contrast , ITT entered the market for optical ﬁbers relatively late , although its engi - neers had done most of the theoretical groundwork for ﬁber optics . References Abernathy , W . J . , K . B . Clark . 1985 . Innovation : Mapping the winds of creative destruction . Res . Policy 14 3 – 22 . Adner , R . , D . A . Levinthal . 2002 . The emergence of emerging tech - nologies . California Management Rev . 45 ( 1 ) 50 – 66 . Ahuja , G . , C . M . Lampert . 2001 . Entrepreneurship in the large cor - poration : A longitudinal study of how established ﬁrms create breakthrough inventions . Strategic Management J . 22 521 – 543 . Albert , M . , D . Avery , F . Narin , P . McAllister . 1991 . Direct validation of citation counts as indicators of industrially important patents . Res . Policy 20 ( 3 ) 251 – 260 . Alcacer , J . , M . Gittelman . 2004 . How do you know what you know ? Patent examiners and generations of patent citations . Working paper , NBER , Summer Institute . Alchian , A . A . 1950 . Uncertainty , evolution and economic theory . J . Political Econom . 58 211 – 238 . Aldrich , H . 2000 . Organizations Evolving . Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA . Allison , P . D . 1999 . Logistic Regression Using the SAS System : Theory and Application . SAS Institute , Cary , NC . Allison , P . D . , R . Waterman . 2002 . Fixed - effects negative binomial regression models . R . Stolzenberg , ed . Sociological Methodol - ogy 2002 . Basil Blackwell , Boston , MA . Argote , L . , S . L . Beckman , D . Epple . 1990 . The persistence and transfer of learning in industrial settings . Management Sci . 36 140 – 154 . Barney , J . B . 1986 . Strategic Factor markets : Expectations , luck , and business strategy . Management Sci . 32 ( 10 ) 1231 – 1241 . Barney , J . B . 1991 . Firm resources and sustained competitive advan - tage . J . Management 17 99 – 120 . Barney , J . B . 1997 . On ﬂipping coins and making technology deci - sions : Luck on an explanation of technological foresight and oversight . R . Garud , P . R . Nayyar , Z . B . Shapira , eds . Techno - logical Innovation Oversights and Foresights . Cambridge Uni - versity Press , Cambridge , 13 – 19 . Basalla , G . 1988 . The Evolution of Technology . Cambridge University Press , New York . Baum , J . A . C . , P . Ingram . 1998 . Survival - enhancing learning in the Manhattan hotel industry , 1898 – 1980 . Management Sci . 44 ( 7 ) 996 – 1016 . Bierly , P . , A . Chakrabarti . 1996 . Generic knowledge strategies in the US pharmaceutical industry . Strategic Management J . 17 123 – 135 . Bock , W . J . 1959 . Pre - adaptation and multiple evolutionary pathways . Evolution 21 ( 2 ) 194 – 211 . Burgelman , R . A . 1994 . Fading memories : A process theory of strate - gic business exit in dynamic environments . Admin . Sci . Quart . 39 ( 1 ) 24 – 56 . Carroll , G . R . , L . Bigelow , M . D . Seidel , L . Tsai . 1996 . The fates of de novo and de alio producers in the American automobile industry , 1885 – 1981 . Strategic Management J . 17 117 – 138 . Cattani , G . 2004 . Essays on technological evolution . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , The Wharton School , Philadelphia , PA . Christensen , C . M . , F . F . Suarez , J . M . Utterback . 1998 . Strategies for survival in fast - changing industries . Management Sci . 44 ( 12 ) S207 – S220 . Cockburn , I . M . , R . M . Henderson , S . Stern . 2000 . Untangling the origins of competitive advantage . Strategic Management J . 21 1123 – 1145 . Cohen , W . M . , S . Klepper . 1996 . Firm size and the nature of inno - vation within industries : The case of process and product R & D . Rev . Econom . Stat . 78 223 – 243 . Cohen , W . M . , D . A . Levinthal . 1990 . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 ( 1 ) 128 – 152 . Cohen , W . M . , R . C . Levin , D . C . Mowery . 1987 . Firm size and R & D intensity : A re - examination . J . Indust . Econom . 35 543 – 565 . DeCarolis , D . M . , D . L . Deeds . 1999 . The impact of stocks and ﬂows of organizational knowledge on ﬁrm performance : An empirical investigation of the biotechnology industry . Strategic Manage - ment J . 20 953 – 968 . Denrell , J . 2004 . Random walks and sustained competitive advantage . Management Sci . 50 ( 7 ) 922 – 934 . Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS 579 Dosi , G . 1982 . Technological paradigms and technological trajecto - ries . Res . Policy 11 147 – 162 . Fleming , L . 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management Sci . 47 ( 1 ) 117 – 132 . Fleming , L . , O . Sorenson . 2001 . Technology as a computer adaptive system : Evidence from patent data . Res . Policy 30 ( 7 ) 1019 – 1039 . Futuyma , D . J . 1998 . Evolutionary Biology . Sinauer Associates , Sunderland , MA . Garud , R . , P . R . Nayyar . 1994 . Transformative capacity : Contin - ual structuring by inter - temporal technology transfer . Strategic Management J . 15 ( 5 ) 365 – 385 . Garud , R . , P . R . Nayyar , Z . B . Shapira . 1997 . Technological Inno - vation . Oversights and Foresights . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Gould , S . J . , R . C . Lewontin . 1979 . The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian paradigm : A critique of the adaptationist programme . Proc . Roy . Soc . London 205 581 – 598 . Gould , S . J . , E . S . Vrba . 1982 . Exaptation—A missing term in the science of form . Paleobiology 8 4 – 15 . Griliches , Z . 1981 . Market value , R & D and patents . Econom . Lett . 7 183 – 187 . Griliches , Z . 1990 . Patent statistics as economic indicators : A survey . J . Econom . Literature 28 1661 – 1707 . Griliches , Z . , A . Pakes , B . H . Hall . 1987 . The value of patents as indicators of inventive activity . P . Dasgupta , P . Stoneman , eds . Economic Policy and Technological Performance . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Hall , B . H . 2000 . Innovation and market value . R . Barrell , G . Mason , M . O’Mahoney , eds . Productivity , Innovation and Economic Performance . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Hall , B . H . , R . Ham - Ziedonis . 2001 . The patent paradox revisited : An empirical study of patenting in the US semiconductor indus - try , 1979 – 1995 . RAND J . Econom . 32 ( 1 ) 101 – 128 . Hall , B . H . , A . B . Jaffe , M . Trajtenberg . 2001 . The NBER patent citations data ﬁle : Lessons , insights and methodological tools . NBER Working Paper Series No . 8498 , Cambridge , MA . Ham - Ziedonis , R . 2004 . Don’t fence me in : Fragmented markets for technology and the patent acquisitions strategies of ﬁrm . Management Sci . 50 ( 6 ) 804 – 820 . Hargadon , A . , R . I . Sutton . 1997 . Technology brokering and innova - tion in a product development ﬁrm . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 ( 6 ) 716 – 749 . Harhoff , D . , F . Narin , F . M . Scherer , K . Vopel . 1999 . Citation fre - quency and the value of patented inventions . Rev . Econom . Stat . 81 ( 3 ) 511 – 515 . Hausman , J . , B . H . Hall , Z . Griliches . 1984 . Econometric models for count data with an application to the patents - R & D relationship . Econometrica 52 ( 4 ) 909 – 938 . Hecht , J . 1999a . City of Light . Oxford University Press , New York . Hecht , J . 1999b . Understanding Fiber Optics , 3rd ed . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ . Helfat , C . E . 1994 . Evolutionary trajectories in petroleum ﬁrm R & D . Management Sci . 40 ( 12 ) 1720 – 1747 . Helfat , C . E . , M . Lieberman . 2002 . The birth of capabilities : Mar - ket entry and the importance of pre - history . Indust . Corporate Change 11 ( 4 ) 725 – 760 . Henderson , R . M . 2000 . “Luck , ” “Leadership” and “Strategy . ” J . A . C . Baum , F . Dobbin , eds . Economics Meets Sociology in Strategic Management . JAI Press Inc . , Sanford , CT , 285 – 290 . Henderson , R . M . , K . B . Clark . 1990 . Architectural innovation : The reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 ( 1 ) 9 – 30 . Henderson , R . M . , I . M . Cockburn . 1994 . Measuring competence ? Exploring ﬁrm effects in pharmaceutical research . Strategic Management J . 15 63 – 84 . Henderson , R . M . , I . M . Cockburn . 1996 . Scale , scope , and spillovers : The determinants of research productivity in drug discovery . RAND J . Econom . 27 ( 1 ) 32 – 59 . Hill , C . W . , F . T . Rothaermel . 2003 . The performance of incum - bent ﬁrms in the face of radical technological innovation . Acad . Management Rev . 28 ( 2 ) 257 – 274 . Holbrook , D . , W . M . Cohen , D . A . Hounshell , S . Klepper . 2000 . The nature , sources , and consequences of ﬁrm differences in the early history of the semiconductor industry . Strategic Manage - ment J . 21 ( 10 – 11 ) 1017 – 1041 . Jaffe , A . B . 1986 . Technological opportunity and spillovers of R & D : Evidence from ﬁrms’ patents proﬁts and market value . Amer . Econom . Rev . 76 ( 5 ) 984 – 1001 . Jaffe , A . B . , M . Trajtenberg . 2002 . Patents , Citations , and Inno - vations : A Window on the Knowledge Economy . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Jaffe , A . B . , M . Trajtenberg , R . M . Henderson . 1993 . Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent cita - tions . Quart . J . Econom . 108 ( 3 ) 577 – 598 . Kao , K . C . , G . A . Hockham . 1966 . Dielectric - ﬁbre surface waveguides for optical frequencies . Proc . Institution Electrical Engrg . ( IEE ) 113 1151 – 1159 . Katila , R . , G . Ahuja . 2002 . Something old , something new : A longi - tudinal study of search behavior and new product introduction . Acad . Management J . 45 ( 6 ) 1183 – 1194 . King , A . A . , C . L . Tucci . 2002 . The role of experience and managerial choice in the creation of dynamic capabilities . Management Sci . 48 ( 2 ) 171 – 186 . Klepper , S . 2002 . The capabilities of new ﬁrms and the evolution of the US automobile industry . Indust . Corporate Change 11 ( 4 ) 645 – 665 . Klepper , S . , K . L . Simons . 2000 . Dominance by birthright : Entry of prior radio producers and competitive ramiﬁcations in the US television receiver industry . Strategic Management J . 21 997 – 1016 . Leonard - Barton , D . 1992 . Core capabilities and core rigidities : A paradox in managing new product development . Strategic Management J . 13 111 – 126 . Levin , R . C . , A . K . Klevorick , R . R . Nelson , S . G . Winter . 1987 . Appropriating the returns from industrial research and develop - ment . Brookings Papers Econom . Activity 3 783 – 833 . Levinthal , D . A . 1998 . The slow pace of rapid technological change : Gradualism and punctuation in technological change . Indust . Corporate Change 7 ( 2 ) 217 – 247 . Levinthal , D . A . , J . G . March . 1993 . The myopia of learning . Strategic Management J . 14 95 – 113 . Levitt , B . , J . G . March . 1988 . Organizational learning . Annual Rev . Soc . 14 319 – 340 . Malerba , F . , L . Orsenigo . 1999 . Technological entry , exit and survival : An empirical analysis of patent data . Res . Policy 28 643 – 660 . Cattani : A Study on the Evolution of Fiber Optics , 1970 – 1995 580 Organization Science 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 563 – 580 , ©2005 INFORMS March , J . G . 1994 . A Primer on Decision - Making : How Decisions Happen . The Free Press , New York . March , J . G . , H . A . Simon . 1958 . Organizations . Wiley , New York . Martin , M . , W . Mitchell . 1998 . The inﬂuence of local search and per - formance heuristics on new design introduction in a new product market . Res . Policy 26 753 – 771 . Methe , D . , A . Swaminathan , W . Mitchell , R . Toyama . 1997 . The underemphasized role of diversifying entrants and industry incumbents as the sources of major innovations . H . Thomas , D . O’Neal , eds . Strategic Discovery : Competing in New Arenas . Wiley , New York , 99 – 116 . Mitchell , W . 1989 . Whether and when ? Probability and timing of incumbents’ entry into emerging industrial subﬁelds . Admin . Sci . Quart . 34 208 – 230 . Mokyr , J . 2000 . Evolutionary phenomena in technological change . J . Ziman , ed . Technological Innovation as an Evolutionary Pro - cess . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 52 – 65 . Nagarajan , A . , W . Mitchell . 1998 . Evalutionary diffusion : Internal and external methods used to acquire encompassing , complementary , and incremental technological changes in the lithotripsy indus - try . Strategic Management J . 19 1063 – 1079 . Narin , F . , E . Noma , R . Perry . 1987 . Patents as indicators of corporate technological strength . Res . Policy 16 ( 2 – 4 ) 143 – 146 . Narin , F . , P . Thomas , A . Breitzman . 2001 . Using patent indicators to predict stock portfolio performance . B . Berman , ed . From Ideas to Assets : Investing Wisely in Intellectual Property . John Wiley & Sons , New York , 293 – 308 . Nelson , R . R . 1991 . Why do ﬁrms differ , and how does it matter ? Strategic Management J . 12 61 – 74 . Nelson , R . R . , S . G . Winter . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Eco - nomic Change . Belknap Press , Cambridge , MA . Patel , P . , K . Pavitt . 1994 . The continuing , widespread ( and neglected ) importance of improvements in mechanical technologies . Res . Policy 23 ( 5 ) 533 – 545 . Penrose , E . T . 1952 . Biological analogies in the theory of the ﬁrm . Amer . Econom . Rev . 42 804 – 819 . Peteraf , M . 1993 . The cornerstones of competitive advantage : A resource - based view . Strategic Management J . 14 179 – 191 . Porter , M . E . 1991 . Towards a dynamic theory of strategy . Strategic Management J . 12 95 – 117 . Reeve , H . K . , P . W . Sherman . 1993 . Adaptation and the goals of evolutionary research . Quart . Rev . Biol . 68 ( 1 ) 1 – 32 . Ridley , M . 1999 . Evolution . Blackwell Science , Cambridge , MA . Rosenkopf , L . , A . Nerkar . 2001 . Beyond local search : Boundary - spanning , exploration , and the impact in the optical disk indus - try . Strategic Management J . 22 287 – 306 . Rumelt , R . P . 1984 . Toward a strategic theory of the ﬁrm . R . B . Lamb , ed . Competitive Strategic Management . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Scherer , F . M . 1965 . Firm size , market structure , opportunity , and the output of patented innovations . Amer . Econom . Rev . 55 1097 – 1123 . Shane , H . , M . Klock . 1997 . The relation between patent citations and Tobin’s q in the semiconductor industry . Rev . Quant . Finance Accounting 9 ( 2 ) 131 – 146 . Silverman , B . S . 1999 . Technological resources and the direction of corporate diversiﬁcation : Toward an integration of the resource - based view and transaction cost economics . Management Sci . 45 ( 8 ) 1109 – 1124 . Sørensen , J . B . , T . E . Stuart . 2000 . Aging , obsolescence and organi - zational innovation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 45 81 – 112 . Stinchcombe , A . L . 1965 . Social structure and organizations . J . G . March , ed . Handbook of Organizations . Rand McNally , Chicago , IL . Stuart , T . E . , J . M . Podolny . 1996 . Local search and the evolu - tion of technological capabilities . Strategic Management J . 17 21 – 38 . Teece , D . J . , G . Pisano , A . Shuen . 1997 . Dynamic capabilities and strategic management . Strategic Management J . 18 ( 7 ) 509 – 533 . Teece , D . J . , R . Rumelt , G . Dosi , S . G . Winter . 1994 . Understanding corporate coherence : Theory and evidence . J . Econom . Behavior Organ . 23 1 – 30 . Trajtenberg , M . 1990a . A penny for your quotes : Patent cita - tions and the value of innovations . RAND J . Econom . 21 ( 1 ) 172 – 187 . Trajtenberg , M . 1990b . Economic Analysis of Product Innovation . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Trajtenberg , M . , R . M . Henderson , A . B . Jaffe . 1997 . University ver - sus corporate patents : A window on the basicness of invention . Econom . Innovation New Technology 5 ( 1 ) 19 – 50 .