of April 3 , 2017 . This information is current as Memory / Effector T Cells Invadosome - like Protrusions Formed by Antigen Recognition Is Facilitated by Springer , Arlene H . Sharpe and Christopher V . Carman E . Sciuto , Masataka Kamei , Ann M . Dvorak , Timothy A . Peter T . Sage , Laya M . Varghese , Roberta Martinelli , Tracey http : / / www . jimmunol . org / content / 188 / 8 / 3686 doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1102594 March 2012 ; 2012 ; 188 : 3686 - 3699 ; Prepublished online 21 J Immunol Material Supplementary 4 . DC1 http : / / www . jimmunol . org / content / suppl / 2012 / 03 / 21 / jimmunol . 110259 References http : / / www . jimmunol . org / content / 188 / 8 / 3686 . full # ref - list - 1 , 27 of which you can access for free at : cites 79 articles This article Subscription http : / / jimmunol . org / subscription is online at : The Journal of Immunology Information about subscribing to Permissions http : / / www . aai . org / About / Publications / JI / copyright . html Submit copyright permission requests at : Email Alerts http : / / jimmunol . org / alerts Receive free email - alerts when new articles cite this article . Sign up at : Print ISSN : 0022 - 1767 Online ISSN : 1550 - 6606 . Immunologists , Inc . All rights reserved . Copyright © 2012 by The American Association of 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 The American Association of Immunologists , Inc . , is published twice each month by The Journal of Immunology by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m The Journal of Immunology Antigen Recognition Is Facilitated by Invadosome - like Protrusions Formed by Memory / Effector T Cells Peter T . Sage , * , † Laya M . Varghese , † Roberta Martinelli , † Tracey E . Sciuto , ‡ Masataka Kamei , † Ann M . Dvorak , ‡ Timothy A . Springer , x Arlene H . Sharpe , * and Christopher V . Carman † Adaptive immunity requires that T cells efﬁciently scan diverse cell surfaces to identify cognate Ag . However , the basic cellular mechanisms remain unclear . In this study , we investigated this process using vascular endothelial cells , APCs that possess a unique and extremely advantageous , planar morphology . High - resolution imaging revealed that CD4 memory / effector T cells dynamically probe the endothelium by extending submicron - scale , actin - rich “invadosome / podosome - like protrusions” ( ILPs ) . The intimate intercellular contacts enforced by ILPs consistently preceded and supported T cell activation in response to endothelial MHC class II / Ag . The resulting calcium ﬂux stabilized dense arrays of ILPs ( each enriched in TCR , protein kinase C - u , ZAP70 , phosphotyr - osine , and HS1 ) , forming what we term a podo - synapse . Similar ﬁndings were made using CD8 CTLs on endothelium . Further - more , careful re - examination of both traditional APC models and professional APCs suggests broad relevance for ILPs in facilitating Ag recognition . Together , our results indicate that ILPs function as sensory organelles that serve as actuators of immune surveillance . The Journal of Immunology , 2012 , 188 : 3686 – 3699 . A daptive immunity relies on the ability of TCRs ex - pressed on lymphocytes to efﬁciently recognize peptide Ag bound to MHC molecules ( 1 ) . During the priming phase , naive lymphocytes must constitutively scan professional APCs within lymph nodes . During the effector phase , memory / effector T cells need to effectively survey an extremely wide range of APCs and potential target cells within peripheral tissues . Fundamental cellular mechanisms for such immune surveillance activities remain incompletely understood . At the heart of immune surveillance is the requirement for T cells to form extremely intimate ( ∼ 14 nm , the total height of the TCR – MHC complex ) ( 2 ) contacts with apposing cells to sample MHC / Ag . However , the surfaces of all cells are modiﬁed by a relatively thick ( 50 – 500 nm ) gel - like polysaccharide coat termed the glycocalyx ( 3 ) , which provides a formidable energy barrier ( via steric and electrostatic repulsion ) to close membrane – mem - brane encounter ( 4 , 5 ) . In this way , TCR and MHC are effectively shielded and immune recognition is opposed ( 5 – 10 ) . Thus , a fundamental question is , how do T cells overcome this energy barrier to engage immune receptors ? It has long been appreciated that as a consequence of Ag rec - ognition , specialized cell – cell interfaces form that involve mem - brane alignment , cytoskeletal remodeling , clustering / segregation of immune receptors / adhesion molecules , and glycocalyx com - ponents ( 5 , 11 – 15 ) . These “immunological synapses” ( ISs ) form within minutes of Ag recognition and are thought to amplify and sustain signaling , as well as facilitate exchange of cytokine and / or cytotoxic materials ( 5 , 11 – 15 ) . However , detailed mechanisms facilitating initial Ag sampling between T cells and APCs , and how these lead to early IS formation , are not completely under - stood ( 16 , 17 ) . This stems from technical challenges associated with irregular topologies of APC surfaces and poorly controlled orientation of the cell – cell interaction planes , issues that pro - foundly limit the requisite imaging approaches ( 16 – 18 ) . Investigators have partially circumvented these restrictions by developing planar substrate models ( i . e . , lipid bilayers and Ab - coated surfaces ) that provide optimal spatiotemporal resolution for monitoring Ag response dynamics ( 19 – 23 ) . These models have afforded invaluable insights , such as the discovery of TCR micro - clusters as critical mediators of effective signaling ( 15 , 19 – 22 ) . However , these systems lack key features of cellular APC surfaces , such as the glycocalyx , topological deformability , and molecular complexity . Therefore , it remains uncertain how to translate such ﬁndings to physiologic cell – cell immune surveillance . In this study , we used vascular endothelial cells ( ECs ) as a planar APC model to interrogate the details of initial Ag recogni - tion dynamics on a physiologic cellular substrate . ECs represent the interface between the blood circulation and tissue , and play critical roles in regulating immune cell trafﬁcking ( 1 , 24 , 25 ) . The dis - * Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 † Department of Medicine , Center for Vascular Biology Research , Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02215 ; ‡ Department of Pathology , Center for Vascular Biology Research , Beth Israel Dea - coness Medical Center , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02215 ; and x Department of Pathology , Immune Disease Institute , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 Received for publication September 14 , 2011 . Accepted for publication February 13 , 2012 . This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( Grants T32 AI070085 to P . T . S . , AI078897 to A . H . S . , and HL04006 to C . V . C . ) and the American Heart Association , the Arthritis Foundation , and the Roche Organ Transplant Research Foundation ( to C . V . C . ) . Address correspondence and reprint requests to Christopher V . Carman , Harvard Medical School—Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , 330 Brookline Avenue , RN234 , Boston , MA 02215 . E - mail address : ccarman @ bidmc . harvard . edu The online version of this article contains supplemental material . Abbreviations used in this article : BMDC , bone marrow - derived dendritic cell ; CAMKII , calcium - calmodulin – dependent kinase II ; CHO , Chinese hamster ovary ; DC , dendritic cell ; EC , endothelial cell ; HDMVEC , human dermal microvascular EC ; HLMVEC , human lung microvascular EC ; HS1 , hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ; HUVEC , human umbilical vein EC ; ILP , invadosome / podosome - like protrusion ; IRM , interference reﬂection microscopy ; IS , immunological synapse ; iT mem , induced / expanded human T memory cell ; mem - DsRed , palmitoylated DsRed ; mem - YFP , palmitoylated YFP ; MHC - I , MHC class I ; MHC - II , MHC class II ; nT mem , natural human T memory cell ; PKC , protein kinase C ; SA , streptavidin ; SEB , staphylococcal enterotoxin B ; TSST , toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 . Copyright (cid:1) 2012byTheAmericanAssociationofImmunologists , Inc . 0022 - 1767 / 12 / $ 16 . 00 www . jimmunol . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1102594 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m covery that ECs express MHC class I ( MHC - I ) , MHC class II ( MHC - II ) , and a large number of costimulatory molecules ( e . g . , CD40 , LFA - 3 , ICOSL , 4 - 1BB , OX40L , TL1A , PD - L1 , but not CD80 and CD86 ) has led to the controversial hypothesis that endothelium can also function as a type of APC ( 26 – 28 ) . Indeed , several studies have demonstrated that endothelium can effec - tively restimulate CD4 and CD8 memory / effector , but not naive , T cells ( 29 – 33 ) . Critically , when grown in vitro , ECs form virtu - ally planar cell surfaces that are ideal for high spatiotemporal resolution imaging of topological dynamics ( 34 ) . This study provides a detailed investigation of the initial events in CD4 and CD8 T cell scanning for Ag . We previously discovered that lymphocytes actively probe the surface of the endothelium by dynamic insertion and retraction of submicron - scale , actin - rich cylindrical protrusions related to invadosomes ( 35 ) , termed invadosome / podosome - like protrusions ( ILPs ) ( 34 ) . These were demonstrated to function in supporting migratory pathﬁnding ( 34 , 36 ) . In this study , we found that dynamic ILP probing by CD4 and CD8 memory / effector lymphocytes enforces close T cell – EC ap - position , which seems to facilitate Ag recognition and TCR sig - naling . Moreover , T cell activation is sustained through a novel IS architecture dominated by dense arrays of calcium - stabilized ILPs ( each enriched in signaling molecules ) that we term a podo - synapse . Complementary studies with model substrates and pro - fessional APCs ( B cells and dendritic cells [ DCs ] ) suggest that rather than being a unique feature of T cell – EC ISs , ILPs are uniquely revealed in this setting . Together , our results indicate that memory / effector T cells use ILPs to facilitate efﬁcient search for Ag and to help sustain the resulting signaling responses . Materials and Methods Cells Natural human T memory cells ( nT mem ; CD4 + CD45RO + CD45RA 2 ) were isolated via negative selection from peripheral blood using a CD4 T cell isolation kit , followed by CD45RA + cell depletion ( Miltenyi Biotec ) to . 95 % purity . Induced / expanded human T memory cells ( iT mem ; CD4 + CD45RO + ) were made by culturing peripheral blood buffy coats for 72 h in 1 m g / ml bacterial superantigens staphylococcal enterotoxin B ( SEB ) and toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 ( TSST ; Toxin Technology ) . CD4 memory cells were enriched by using a CD4 T cell memory negative isolation kit ( Miltenyi Biotec ) . Cells were cultured 3 – 10 d in 20 ng / ml IL - 15 ( R & D Systems ) to maintain memory phenotype . Mouse CD4 or CD8 T cells were isolated by magnetic separation from either OTII + TCR a 2 / 2 CD45 . 1 + / + or OTI + Thy1 . 1 + / + mice and activated with irradiated splenocytes in the pres - ence of 30 m g / ml OVA 323 – 339 ( OTII ) or 500 ng / ml OVA - SIINFEKL ( OTI ) supplemented with IL - 2 for 3 d . T cells were reselected with MACS beads and rested in culture in the presence of IL - 2 for a further 3 d . Human lung microvascular ECs ( HLMVECs ) , human dermal microvascular ECs ( HDMVECs ) , and human umbilical vein ECs ( HUVECs ) were from Lonza and cultured on ﬁbronectin ( 10 m g / ml ; Invitrogen ) in EBM - 2 MV media ( Lonza ) . Mouse heart ECs were isolated from C57BL / 6 mice by collagenization of heart tissue followed by positive selection with anti - CD31 ( MEC13 . 3 ) – coated beads ( Invitrogen ) . ECs were cultured for 7 d in media with EC growth supplement ( Biomedical Technologies ) fol - lowed by reselection with beads coupled to anti - CD102 . ECs were . 95 % purity based on expression of CD105 + CD102 + . ECs were transfected by Amaxa electroporation according to manufacturer’s instructions ( Lonza ) . Palmitoylated YFP ( mem - YFP ) and soluble monomeric DsRed were from Clontech . Palmitoylated DsRed ( mem - DsRed ) and ICAM - 1 – GFP were generated as described previously ( 34 ) . ECs were activated for 48 h with 100 ng / ml IFN - g ( R & D Systems ) and 12 h with 50 ng / ml TNF - a ( R & D Systems ) . Priess B cell line was a gift from Dr . Kai Wucherpfennig . Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) - K1 epithelial cells were from American Type Culture Collection . Murine bone marrow - derived DCs ( BMDCs ) were prepared from bone marrow cells cultured in 30 ng / ml GM - CSF ( PeproTech ) for 6 d . Transendothelial migration Lymphocyte transendothelial migration assays were conducted in both static and shear conditions as described previously ( 34 ) . In some cases , T cells were added to 8 - m m pore transwell inserts that were preceded with ECs and then collected from the bottom chamber 6 h later and analyzed by ﬂow cytometry . Live - cell imaging and analysis Live - cell imaging was performed on an Axiovert S200 microscope with Axiovision software ( Zeiss ) . For calcium imaging , T cells were pre - incubated with 1 m g / ml Fura - 2 – AM or Fluo - 4 – AM ( Invitrogen ) for 30 min . For Fura - 2 , standard Fura - 2 ﬁlters were used according to manu - facturer’s instructions ( Chroma ) and ratiometric calcium ﬂux was calcu - lated ( 340 nm EX - 510 nm EM - background / 380 nm EX - 510 nm EM - background ) for each cell using Axiovision . For Fluo - 4 , green ﬂuorescence ﬁlters were used and basal ﬂuorescence signal was established by imaging cells on uncoated chambers . T cell polarity was calculated from bright - ﬁeld images as the ratio of the greatest edge - to - edge dimension in the x – y plane ( i . e . , the long axis ) divided by the perpendicular axis . Migration velocity was measured for cells using the Axiovision Cell Tracking Module . Podo - print / ILP lifetimes were assessed using podo - print appear - ance and disappearance on mem - dsRed – or mem - YFP – transfected ECs as a readout for the presence of ILPs ( 34 ) . Podo - print / ILP lifetimes were calculated as follows : the last time point when an individual podo - print / ILP was visible 2 the time point when that podo - print / ILP ﬁrst appeared . Podo - print / ILP lateral translocation was assessed by determining the distance between the T cell centroid and the ﬁrst and last positions of an individual podo - print / ILP during its lifetime . Podo - print / ILP index , a measure of the total number of ILPs per cell , was calculated at 5 min after addition of T cells . “Offset time” was used to describe relative time between ﬁrst podo - print / ILP formation and calcium ﬂux rise above background . Temporal resolution was limited to 10 s , the maximal achievable acquisition frame rate of this analysis . Data was then sorted into 10 - s interval bins . For selected studies , lymphocytes were preincubated , or lymphocyte and APCs coincubated , with select pharmaceutical agents , including latrunculin A ( 1 m g / ml ; Sigma ) , BAPTA - AM ( 40 m M , Sigma ) , BTP2 ( 20 m M ; Cal - biochem ) , thapsigargin ( 1 m M Sigma ) , and calcium - calmodulin – dependent kinase II ( CAMKII ) inhibitor CK59 ( 50 m M ; EMD Biosciences ) as indi - cated . For calcium blockade conditions , T cells were pretreated with BAPTA - AM and BTP2 in imaging buffer containing high ( 45 mM ) po - tassium . T cells were added to ECs and imaged with additional BTP2 for the duration of imaging . Fixed cell imaging Fixed cell samples were imaged on an LSM 510 confocal microscope ( Zeiss ) . Samples were ﬁxed and stained for a L integrin ( TS2 / 4 ) , ICAM - 1 ( IC1 / 11 ) , F - actin ( phalloidin ) , MHC - II ( WR18 ; Abcam ) , protein kinase C ( PKC ) - u , talin ( rabbit anti - talin , a gift from Dr . Keith Burridge ) , CD3 ( OKT3 ; eBioscience ) , CD43 ( L60 ; BD Biosciences ) , CD45 ( HI30 or UCHL1 ; eBioscience ) , hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ( HS1 ; clone 9 [ BD Biosciences ] or rabbit anti - HS1 [ Cell Signaling ] ) , ZAP70 ( Santa Cruz ) , phosphotyrosine ( 4G10 platinum ; Millipore ) , or NFAT ( BD Biosciences ) . Transmigration was analyzed by confocal microscopy as described previously ( 37 ) . CTL killing assay Forspeciﬁc killing assay , murineECs were labeledwith either0 . 6 or0 . 02 m M CFSE ( CFSE hi andCFSE low , respectively ) . TheCFSE hi populationwaspulsed with 1 m g / ml SIINFEKL for 20 min . Both CFSE hi and CFSE low populations were plated together in a 1 : 1 ratio . Activated OTI CD8 T cells were rested for 5 h and added to monolayers in a 3 : 1 T cell / target cell ratio . Cultures were stained for CD105 to differentiate the ECs from T cells and analyzed by ﬂow cytometry . Speciﬁc lysis was calculated by the following equation : 1 2 ( [ CFSE hi / ( CFSE hi + CFSE low ) ] / [ control CFSE hi / CFSE low ] ) * 100 . Planar coated - glass APC model Coated glass IS models were prepared as described previously ( 20 , 38 ) . In brief , imaging chambers were coated with ICAM - 1 – Fc ( 10 m g / ml ; R & D Systems ) alone or together with anti - CD3 , anti - CD43 , anti - CD45 , or control IgG Ab ( 10 m g / ml ) . Fluo - 4 – labeled lymphocytes were added and imaged by ﬂuorescence and interference reﬂection microscopy ( IRM ) . Coated cell APC model CHO - K1 cells were transfected with ICAM - 1 - GFP and soluble dsRed via electroporation . Cells were then coated with Abs via a biotin / streptavidin ( SA ) - based approach ( 39 ) . Cells were subjected to primary amine - targeted The Journal of Immunology 3687 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m cell surface biotinylation for 15 min with biotin - NHS - ester ( 0 . 5 m g / ml ; Thermo Electron ) . Cells were incubated with SA at 10 m g / ml for 15 min . Cells were then incubated with biotinylated anti - CD3 , - CD43 , or - CD45 ( eBioscience ) at 10 m g / ml for 15 min . T cell activation by CD3 cross - linking Fluo - 4 – labeled T cells were settled onto uncoated glass chambers , 10 m g / ml anti - CD3 and - CD28 were added to the imaging chambers , and calcium was monitored . Transmission electron microscopy Transmission electron microscopy of T cell – APC complexes was per - formed as described previously ( 34 ) . Fifty randomly selected micrographs were analyzed by enumerating zones of membrane apposition ( , 20 nm ) and correlating them with respect to ILP location . Statistical analysis Error bars represent SE or SD as indicated . The p values were calculated via unpaired Student t tests in GraphPad Prism . Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated with p values as follows : * * * p , 0 . 0005 , * * p , 0 . 005 , * p , 0 . 05 . Results Endothelial - presented Ag promotes activation of CD4 memory T cells We wanted to elucidate the mechanisms by which memory / effector T cells probe for Ag using ECs as model APCs . Therefore , we isolated natural CD4 memory - like lymphocytes ( nT mem ) and generated induced / expanded CD4 memory - like lymphocytes ( iT mem ) from human peripheral blood . The isolated nT mem were CD4 + , CD45RO + , and contained both central memory and effector memory T cells ( ∼ 78 and ∼ 22 % , respectively ) based on CD62L staining ( Supplemental Fig . 1A ) . The iT mem were slightly more polarized toward the effector memory T cell subtype ( ∼ 69 versus ∼ 31 % ; Supplemental Fig . 1B ) . Monolayers of HLMVECs , HDMVECs , and HUVECs were used as models for the vascula - ture . In vivo endothelial MHC - II expression is dependent on IFN - g ( 26 ) . This was recapitulated in vitro by culturing ECs with exog - enous IFN - g ( Supplemental Fig . 1C ) . Endothelium was addition - ally activated with TNF - a to promote an inﬂamed phenotype . FIGURE 1 . Human microvascular ECs are capable of Ag - speciﬁc stimulation of CD4 memory - like T cells . ( A ) Human CD4 nT mem ( circles ) or iT mem ( triangles ) were loaded with Fura - 2 and incubated on Ag - pulsed HLMVECs . Calcium ﬂux at 5 min ( left ) or at maximal value over a 30 - min duration ( right ) were plotted . ( B and C ) iT mem were incubated on HLMVEC pulsed with Ag and T cell polarity ( length / width ratio ) at 5 min , and velocity was calculated over a 30 - min duration . ( D ) iT mem transendothelial migration was scored on Ag pulsed ECs as described in Materials and Methods . ( E ) iT mem were infused over Ag - pulsed HLMVEC at 2 dyne / cm 2 and imaged . Depicted is an end - point image with migration tracks of apical ( blue ) and transmigrated ( red ) lymphocytes . See also Supplemental Video 1 . ( F and G ) Lateral migration velocities for T cells from ( E ) during both prediapedesis and postdiapedesis phases of migration over 30 min ( F ) and percentage of iTmem transmigrated were measured ( G ) . ( H ) Representative images of nT mem incubated on Ag - pulsed HLMVEC and staining for actin ( green ) , NFAT ( red ) , and nucleus ( blue ) . ( I ) nT mem were incubated on activated HLMVEC . Nuclear NFAT translocation was scored according to line scan proﬁles ( left ) . ( J ) Samples were acquired as in ( H ) , and representative transmigrating or transmigrated ( ‘Under’ ) lymphocytes are shown . Data represent mean 6 SD ( B , C ) or SEM ( D , F , G , I ) . Scale bars , 5 m m . * p , 0 . 05 , * * p , 0 . 005 , * * * p , 0 . 0005 . 3688 INVADOSOME - LIKE PROTRUSIONS IN Ag RECOGNITION by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Next , we set up live - cell analysis to concomitantly monitor T cell activation ( i . e . , calcium ﬂux ) and migration on endothelium pulsed with Ag ( i . e . , bacterial superantigen , a widely used model Ag ) ( 38 , 40 , 41 ) . In the absence of Ag , nT mem and iT mem ﬂuxed little calcium ( Fig . 1A ) , remained polarized ( Fig . 1B ) , and underwent continuous lateral ( Fig . 1C ) and transendothelial migration ( i . e . , “diapedesis” ; Fig . 1D ) . On HLMVECs pulsed with Ag ( 1 m g / ml SEB and TSST ) , T cells rapidly ﬂuxed calcium , lost polarity , and arrested migration ( Fig . 1A – C ) . Similar results were found with alternate Ag ( e . g . , SEE and MAM ) presented by HDMVECs or HUVECs ( Supplemental Fig . 1D and data not shown ) . In ad - dition , in the absence of Ag , the majority of iT mem transmigrated within 30 min , whereas in the presence of Ag , diapedesis was delayed by ∼ 30 – 60 min ( Fig . 1D ) . Thus , the migratory stop signal was transient . IT mem also exhibited Ag - dependent transient mi - gration arrest under conditions of laminar ﬂuid shear ﬂow con - ditions similar to those found in microvasculature in vivo ( 2 dyne / cm 2 ; Fig . 1E – G , Supplemental Video 1 ) . During T cell activation , the transcription factor NFAT trans - locates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus . Incubation of nT mem on FIGURE 2 . CD4 memory - like T cells form stabilized arrays of ILPs on Ag - presenting endothelium . ( A and B ) HLMVECs were transfected with mem - YFP or mem - DsRed , activated , and pulsed without ( A ) or with ( B ) Ag ( TSST / SEB ) . iT mem were imaged live on addition to ECs . Individual frames at selected time intervals are shown . Arrows indicate ﬂuorescent rings formed on endothelium under adherent lymphocytes . The corresponding control ( A ) and Ag ( b1 and b2 ) videos are provided as Supplemental Videos 2 – 4 , respectively . ( C ) Podo - print / ILP lifetimes from imaging studies as in ( A ) and ( B ) . Data represent mean 6 SEM of at least 80 ILPs formed by at least 25 cells from $ 3 separate experiments . ( D ) Schematic representation of podo - print / ILP lateral translocation analysis . Gray “T cell outline” represents a T cell – EC contact area with the “T cell centroid” indicated as a blue circle and individual podo - prints indicated as black rings . The linear distance between the centroid and podo - print was measured at both the ﬁrst and last appearance of an individual podo - print / ILP during its lifetime . ( E and F ) Podo - print / ILP distances were measured as in ( D ) . Distances from the cell centroid at time of formation and disappearance were plotted for individual podo - prints ( E ) . Data from ( E ) was further processed to report change in distance ( F ) . Scale bars , 5 m m . * * * p , 0 . 0005 . The Journal of Immunology 3689 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Ag - pulsed ECs promoted robust nuclear translocation of NFAT ( Fig . 1H , 1I ) . Signiﬁcantly , transmigrating nT mem and iT mem retained nuclear NFAT , demonstrating that these cells remained activated ( Fig . 1J ) . NT mem on endothelium that was pulsed with Ag but not pretreated with IFN - g ( and therefore lacked strong MHC - II expression ) exhibited little NFAT translocation ( Fig . 1I ) , conﬁrming that the responses to Ag - pulsed endothelium were MHC - II dependent . To show that T cells achieved complete activation , we conducted studies using a transwell system , in which T cells loaded into an upper chamber migrated across an EC monolayer to reach the lower chamber . Flow cytometry revealed that after migrating across Ag - pulsed ECs , iT mem showed increased surface expression of CD69 and a reduction in CD62L ( Supplemental Fig . 1E ) . In addition , in these nonpolarizing conditions , a subset of the iT mem upregulated IFN - g expression ( Supplemental Fig . 1F , 1G ) and increased pro - liferation ( Supplemental Fig . 1H ) . Collectively , these results demonstrate that endothelium is able to present model Ag in an MHC - II – dependent manner to CD4 memory / effector lymphocytes , which induces a transient delay in diapedesis and T cell activation . ILP arrays dominate the T cell – EC interface during activation Next , we investigated the cellular and molecular basis for T cell activation in our endothelial APC model . Previously , we used ﬂuo - rescent membrane markers ( mem - YFP or mem - DsRed ) expressed in the ECs to detect topological changes in the plasma membrane ( 34 ) . In this way , we demonstrated that ∼ 0 . 5 - m m ﬂuorescent rings that formed dynamically on the endothelium under migrating T cells corresponded to cylinder - shaped cell surface invaginations ( i . e . , “podo - prints” ) induced by lymphocyte ILPs . Thus , podo - prints formed on the EC surface served as an indirect but sensi - tive readout for T cell ILPs ( 34 ) . In this study , we similarly ob - served in control settings that podo - prints formed and disappeared FIGURE 3 . Ag - stabilized ILPs exhibit a discrete three - dimensional architecture . ( A ) Ag - stabilized T cell ILPs protrude into the EC surface . Imaging was conducted as in Fig . 2B on HLMVECs coexpressing soluble , cytoplasmic GFP ( green ) and mem - DsRed ( red ) . ( B ) Three - dimensional reconstruction from confocal imaging of podo - prints and ILPs . iT mem were incubated for 20 min on activated Ag - pulsed ( SEE ) HUVECs and then ﬁxed , stained for ICAM - 1 ( green ) and LFA - 1 ( red ) , and imaged by confocal microscopy . Sections were digitally reconstructed and projected as three - dimensional renderings . ( b ) Magniﬁed view of the ILP arrays . ( b 9 ) Orthogonal cross section . See also Supplemental Video 5 . ( C and D ) Ag - stabilized ILPs are enriched in actin and talin . Mem - YFP – transfected ( C ; green ) or mem - DsRed – transfected ( D ; red ) HLMVECs were pulsed with Ag ( TSST / SEB ) and incubated with iT mem for 5 min and stained for F - actin ( C ; red ) or talin ( D ; green ) . ( E ) Quantitation of ultrastructural depth and width of T cell ILPs . Samples as in ( C ) were imaged by electron microscopy and ILPs were measured . Data represent mean 6 SEM from at least 100 ILPs from at least 20 representative micrographs per condition . ( F and G ) ILPs enforce close T cell – EC membrane apposition in the absence and presence of Ag . T cell and endothelial nuclei are indicated with red and green overlays , respectively . Arrows and ( a ) highlight regions of extremely close lymphocyte – EC membrane apposition enforced at the ILP tips . Scale bars , 5 m m ( A – D ) ; 500 nm ( F , G ) . * p , 0 . 05 . ns , Not signiﬁcant . 3690 INVADOSOME - LIKE PROTRUSIONS IN Ag RECOGNITION by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m continuously ( with lifetimes of tens of seconds ) under the leading edge lamellipodia of migrating iT mem ( Fig . 2A , 2C , Supplemental Video 2 ) . Strikingly , when ECs were pulsed with Ag , iT mem rapidly formed dense arrays of podo - prints largely localized at the periphery of the T cell – EC interface under symmetrical lamellipodia ( Fig . 2B , example 1 , and Supplemental Video 3 ) . A minority ( ∼ 20 – 30 % ) of the iT mem cells formed rosette - type podo - print arrays that lacked bias for the cell periphery ( Fig . 2B , ex - ample 2 , and Supplemental Video 4 ) . In both cases , podo - prints / ILPs were signiﬁcantly stabilized ( lifetimes of ∼ 18 min ; Fig . 2C ) and exhibited limited lateral translocation ( 0 . 31 6 1 . 5 m m ; Fig . 2D – F ) . After ∼ 30 min of contact , ILPs began to disappear and T cells initiated transmigration ( Supplemental Video 4 and data not shown ) . As conﬁrmation that the earlier observations reﬂected three - dimensional podo - prints in response to T cell ILPs , we cotrans - fected endothelium with mem - DsRed together with soluble GFP as a marker for cytoplasmic volume ( 34 ) . This showed individual ﬂuorescent membrane rings of each podo - print , in fact , repre - sented cytosol - displacing invaginations into the EC surface ( Fig . 3A ) . Furthermore , confocal imaging showed that podo - prints were ICAM - 1 – enriched cylindrical EC invaginations into which T cell ILPs extended ( Fig . 3B , Supplemental Video 5 ) . ILPs were enriched in LFA - 1 ( Fig . 3B ) , F - actin ( Fig . 3C ) , and talin ( Fig . 3D ) , similarly to invadosomes ( 35 , 36 ) . Analogous structures formed under physiologic shear ﬂow ( Supplemental Fig . 2A ) , with diverse ECs ( including HLMVECs [ Fig . 3A , 3C , 3D ] , HUVECs [ Fig . 3B ] , HDMVECs [ data not shown ] ) , with nT mem ( Supplemental Fig . 2B ) , and with alternate Ag ( Fig . 3B , Supple - mental Fig . 2D ) . Similar structures also formed when previously activated murine OT - II CD4 + T cells were incubated on heart microvascular ECs pulsed with OVA 323 – 339 peptide Ag ( Sup - plemental Fig . 2E ) . To assess the T cell – EC interaction in greater detail , we used transmission electron microscopy . In the absence of Ag , ILPs averaged 430 6 34 nm in depth and 348 6 33 nm in width ( Fig . 3E , 3F ) . In the presence of Ag , ILPs were similar in morphology and size ( depth = 437 nm , width = 277 nm ) , but tended to form in denser clusters ( Fig . 3E – G ) . An important feature of the ILPs , whether in the absence or presence of Ag , was the existence of zones of extremely close T cell – EC apposition , typically at the tips of the ILPs as if driven by ILP extension ( Fig . 3F , 3G , arrows ) . Although not exclusive to these locations , quantitative analysis revealed that intercellular contacts of , 20 nm were 9 - fold greater at ILP tips compared with other regions . The idea that ILPs can exert signiﬁcant force is supported by their ability to both drive FIGURE 4 . Ag - stabilized ILPs are foci for immune signaling . IT mem cells were incubated with activated , Ag - pulsed ( TSST / SEB ) HLMVEC for 5 min , ﬁxed , and stained as indicated and imaged by confocal microscopy . ( A ) Ag - stabilized ILPs ( F - actin , green ) protrude into MHC - II ( red ) – enriched podo - prints . Arrows indicate MHC - II – enriched podo - prints . ( B ) Samples as in ( A ) were stained for MHC - II ( HLA - DR / DP / DQ ; red ) and MHC - I ( HLA A / B / C ; green ) . Schematic of gated regions of interest is shown on the left and included a region outside of the IS ( I ) , the ILP - rich region of the IS ( II ) , and the central region of the IS ( III ) . Right panels show pixel ﬂuorescence intensity histograms for regions I – III . ( C ) ILPs ( F - actin , blue ) protruding into podo - prints ( mem - YFP , green ) are enriched in CD3 ( red ) . Within individual ILPs , CD3 is predominantly focused at the tip ( b1 ) and , to a lesser extent , the edge ( b2 ) . ( D ) PKC - u ( red ) is enriched with CD3 ( green ) in ILPs . ( E – G ) ILPs ( F - actin , blue ) colocalize with ZAP70 ( E ; red ) , phosphotyrosine ( F ; red ) , and HS1 ( G ; red ) . ( H ) HS1 ( red ) is highly enriched in ILPs . Cross - sectional views from serial - section confocal microscopy are shown of a lymphocyte adherent to the endothelium - presenting Ag . See three - dimensional rotation in Supplemental Video 6 . ( I and J ) ILP arrays were allowed to form as above with the additional presence of physiologic laminar ﬂuid shear ﬂow ( 2 . 0 dyne / cm 2 ; arrow indicates direction ) . ( I ) MHC - II ( red ) and F - actin ( green ) are shown . ( J ) CD3 ( red ) and ICAM - 1 ( green ) are shown . Scale bars , 5 m m . The Journal of Immunology 3691 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m FIGURE 5 . T cell ILP formation precedes and supports efﬁcient Ag recognition . ( A ) IT mem were labeled with Fura - 2 and imaged live ( at a maximal temporal resolution of 10 s ) during migration on mem - DsRed – transfected , Ag - pulsed HLMVECs . Upper panels show mem - DsRed . Arrows indicate initial ILP formation . Middle panels indicate calcium ﬂux values on a rainbow scale . Lower panels provide a schematic representation of newly formed ( green ) and previously formed ( in relation to previous ﬁeld ; red ) podo - prints . ( a ) Frame of initial ILP / podo - print . ( b ) Frame when calcium ﬂux rises above background . ( c ) Frame when the peripheral ILP array is stabilized . Note this correlates with peak calcium ﬂux . See also ( Figure legend continues ) 3692 INVADOSOME - LIKE PROTRUSIONS IN Ag RECOGNITION by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m transcellular diapedesis ( 34 ) and to displace / deform organelles such as the nucleus ( Fig . 3F ) . Ag - stabilized ILPs share features of traditional TCR signaling microclusters To address how these ILP - dominated cell – cell interfaces relate to TCR signaling , we stained for traditional IS markers ( 15 , 20 , 21 ) . Confocal microscopy revealed that podo - prints on endothelium were modestly , but consistently , enriched in MHC - II compared with MHC - I or mem - YFP ( Fig . 4A , 4B , Supplemental Fig . 3A ) , whereas T cell ILPs were enriched in CD3 ( Fig . 4C , Supplemental Fig . 3B ) . Comparable enrichment formed under physiologic shear ﬂow ( Fig . 4I , 4J ) . In , 5 % of T cells , CD3 was distributed into a central supramolecular activation cluster - like cluster rather than in peripheral ILPs ( Supplemental Fig . 3C ) . Molecules implicated in TCR signaling , including PKC - u ( Fig . 4D , Supplemental Fig . 3D ) , ZAP70 ( Fig . 4E ) , and phosphotyrosine ( Fig . 4F ) were also enriched in ILP cores , suggesting active signaling at these sites . The cortactin homolog HS1 , a known regulator of both podosomes and ISs ( 38 , 42 – 44 ) , showed particularly strong enrich - ment ( Fig . 4G , 4H , Supplemental Video 6 ) . Alternatively , the in - hibitory molecules CD43 and CD45 localized primarily to the region outside of the T cell – EC interface ( Supplemental Fig . 3B ) . These observations suggest that ILPs may serve as discrete loci for TCR signaling with general features similar to TCR signaling micro - clusters and “multifocal” synapses ( 15 , 21 , 22 , 45 – 47 ) . Collectively , these experiments show that CD4 iT mem activation caused by EC MHC - II / Ag is coupled to cell – cell interfaces dom - inated by arrays of ILPs that are enriched in TCR signaling mol - ecules . We term this previously undescribed architecture , which shares features of both podosome belts / rosettes and multifocal ISs , a “podo - synapse . ” ILPs support efﬁcient Ag recognition and sustained signaling To determine the functional relationship between ILP formation and T cell activation , we concomitantly monitored calcium ﬂux and ILP dynamics . In the presence of Ag , calcium ﬂux was evident shortly after the ﬁrst appearance of ILPs . It then peaked several minutes later and gradually decayed over the following 5 – 60 min ( Fig . 5A , 5B , Supplemental Video 7 ) . Calcium ﬂux always oc - curred subsequent to ( or in the same 10 - s interval as ) the ap - pearance of at least one ILP , with an average offset time of ∼ 25 s ( Fig . 5C ) . In turn , stabilized ILP arrays and symmetric lamelli - podia became evident in the ∼ 30 – 60 s following the increase in calcium ( Fig . 5A , 5B , Supplemental Video 7 ) . These observations suggested that the close intercellular con - tacts driven by ILPs may promote initial Ag recognition and TCR triggering . Testing this hypothesis is challenging because both ILPs and TCR signaling are fundamentally dependent on F - actin as - sembly and many of the same actin regulatory pathways ( 34 , 35 , 38 , 42 – 44 , 48 ) . Thus , we simply compared effects of F - actin in - hibition ( via latrunculin A ) on T cell activation through an Ag - pulsed APC versus direct TCR cross - linking . When stimulated by Ag - pulsed ECs , iT mem pretreatment with latrunculin A caused 100 % blockade of both ILP formation and calcium ﬂux during the ﬁrst 5 min of coincubation ( Fig . 5D , 5E ) . By contrast , when TCRs were stimulated directly by anti - CD3 / CD28 cross - linking , signiﬁcant ( although attenuated by ∼ 60 % ) , immediate calcium ﬂux was elicited in the presence of latrunculin A ( Fig . 5F , 5G ) , as shown previously ( 49 ) . From this we conclude that the total latrunculin A - induced blockade of early response to Ag - pulsed ECs reﬂects a defect in initial Ag recognition / TCR triggering ( Fig . 5F , 5G ) . We speculate that ILP formation may represent the latrunculin A - sensitive process behind this defect . Calcium ﬂux is necessary and sufﬁcient for Ag - mediated ILP stabilization Next , we investigated the transition from dynamic ILP probing to formation of stable ILP arrays . Given the correlation between in - creaseincalcium andappearanceofILParrays , wehypothesizedthat calcium may be key for stabilizing ILPs . To test this , we pretreated T cells with the calcium chelator BAPTA and the CRAC channel inhibitor BTP2 . On Ag - pulsed ECs , this greatly inhibited calcium ﬂux in iT mem , which correlated with strong reduction in the number of stabilized ILPs ( Fig . 6A – C ) . To determine whether calcium ﬂux was sufﬁcient to stabilize ILPs , iT mem were incubated on ECs in the absence of Ag , followed by application of thapsigargin to directly increase intracellular calcium . This caused iT mem already engaged in dynamic ILP probing to arrest migration and stabilize ILP clusters ( Fig . 6D – G ) . Thus , whereas dynamic ILP probing of ECs by iT mem seems to facilitate initial Ag recognition , the resulting increase in calcium is both necessary and sufﬁcient to drive accumulation / stabilization of ILPs into podo - synapses . The earlier ﬁndings point to a positive feedback loop for sus - taining TCR signaling . To break this loop , we sought to block proximalsignalingdownstreamofcalciumﬂux , speciﬁcallytargeting CAMKII via the inhibitor CK59 ( 50 ) . Treatment with CK59 atten - uated Ag - mediated ILP stabilization by ∼ 50 % ( Fig . 6H ) , which was coupled to a proportional decrease in calcium ﬂux ( Fig . 6I ) . This result supports the interdependence between ILPs and calcium ﬂux . CD8 CTLs use ILPs to probe for Ag The endothelium has been shown to initiate MHC - I / Ag - dependent activation of CD8 CTLs leading to direct killing of ECs ( 31 , 32 ) . To investigate these responses , we incubated previously activated murine OT - I CD8 T cells on murine heart microvascular ECs pulsed with SIINFEKL peptide Ag . Ag - pulsed ECs initiated a rapid calcium ﬂux ( Fig . 7A ) that was coupled to progressive spe - ciﬁc lysis of ECs over a 4 - h duration ( ∼ 50 % lysis ∼ 2 h ; Fig . 7B ) . Live - cell imaging showed that in the absence of Ag , CTLs avidly probed the endothelium with dynamic ILPs while migrating without ﬂuxing calcium ( Fig . 7C , Supplemental Video 8 ) . In the presence of Ag , initial ILPs were rapidly followed by calcium ﬂux ( offset time = 32 . 8 6 6 . 6 s ) , which then led to migrational arrest and formation of peripheral ILP arrays similar to those formed by CD4 effector T cells ( Fig . 7D , 7E ) . Thus , T cell ILPs seem to be a general feature of Ag sensing on ECs . Supplemental Video 7 . ( B ) Graphical representation of calcium ﬂux with frames a – c noted . ( C ) Quantitation of ILP - calcium ﬂux offset time . Live - cell imaging was as in ( A ) and offset time ( time from when ﬁrst ILP forms until calcium ﬂux rises above background ) was calculated . Data were binned into 10 - s intervals , and average 6 SEM is shown for 35 individual T cells from 3 separate experiments . ( D ) Imaging was performed as in ( A ) with additional pretreatment of T cells with latrunculin A before addition to Ag - pulsed EC monolayers . ( E ) Podo - print / ILP index ( average number of podo - prints / ILPs per cell ) and average calcium ﬂux at 5 min was calculated . Both analyses are pooled mean 6 SEM from three separate experiments . ( F ) IT mem were labeled with Fluo - 4 and imaged live with anti - CD3 / CD28 cross - linking with or without latrunculin A pretreatment . Left panels show resting T cells . Right panels show activated T cells imaged 60 s after addition of cross - linking Abs . Arrows indicate de novo formation of micron - scale T cell protrusions . ( G ) Average calcium ﬂux was calculated from three separate experiments as in ( F ) . Scale bars , 5 m m . Data represent mean 6 SEM . * p , 0 . 05 , * * * p , 0 . 0005 . The Journal of Immunology 3693 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m A planar - coated cell model for Ag recognition We next considered whether ILPs either represent unique features of T cell - endothelial Ag recognition or may be more broadly relevant and uniquely revealed by endothelium . We speculated that the rigidity of coated substrate models may frustrate / mask ILP formation , whereas orientation / resolution issues might obscure detection of ILPs with traditional cellular APCs ( 16 – 18 ) . First , we simply asked whether evidence consistent with ILPs could be detected in a coated glass model ( Fig . 8A ) . IT mem plated on glass coated with ICAM - 1 and anti - CD3 ( but not anti - CD43 / CD45 ) Ab rapidly ﬂuxed calcium ( Supplemental Fig . 4A – C ) . IRM revealed that initial “microcontacts” ( ∼ 0 . 2 - to 1 - m m dots consis - tent with T cell ILPs and / or microvilli ) always preceded calcium ﬂux ( Supplemental Fig . 4B , 4C ; offset time = 21 . 4 s ) . New micro - contacts also continued to form after T cell spreading ( Fig . 8B , Supplemental Fig . 4D , 4E , Supplemental Video 9 ) . We hypothesized that these microcontacts at least partly re - ﬂected ILP activity that was mechanically frustrated by the rigid substrate . To test this , we designed a “coated - cell APC” model whereby the earlier Ab - coated glass substrate was recapitulated on the surface of a deformable CHO - K1 cell ( Fig . 8C , Supplemental Fig . 4F ) . In this setting , clear three - dimensional ILP arrays were readily detected that were coupled to calcium ﬂux ( Fig . 8D , Supplemental Video 10 ) . As with iT mem on ECs , initial ILPs al - FIGURE 6 . Calcium ﬂux is necessary and sufﬁcient for ILP stabilization . ( A ) IT mem were Fura - 2 labeled , pretreated with the calcium chelator BAPTA and the CRAC channel inhibitor BTP2 , and imaged live on Ag - pulsed ECs . Arrows indicate a few sporadically formed podo - prints . ( B and C ) Podo - print / ILP index ( B ) and average calcium ﬂux ( C ) were calculated at 5 min for experiments as in ( A ) . ( D ) Live - cell imaging was conducted in the absence of Ag before and after addition of the calcium ionophore thapsigargin ( at time = ‘0 : 00’ ) . Arrows indicate ILPs / podo - prints . ( E ) Correlation of calcium ﬂux with ILP number after addition of thapsigargin . ( F ) Quantitation of the number of newly formed ILPs in the 2 min before and after addition of thapsigargin . ( G ) Quantitation of the lifetime of ILPs with or without addition of thapsigargin . ( H and I ) Imaging and analysis was performed as in ( A ) – ( C ) except T cells were pretreated with the CAMKII inhibitor CK59 . Data represent mean 6 SEM . Scale bars , 5 m m . * * p , 0 . 005 , * * * p , 0 . 0005 . 3694 INVADOSOME - LIKE PROTRUSIONS IN Ag RECOGNITION by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m ways preceded ( Supplemental Fig . 4G ; offset time ∼ 56 s ) and seemed to functionally support ( Fig . 8E , 8F ) initiation of calcium ﬂux . These ﬁndings suggest a general tendency of memory / effector T cells to use ILPs to probe diverse substrates for rec - ognition and response to Ag ( as modeled in Fig . 9 ) . ILPs are involved in recognition of Ag presented by professional APCs Next , we re - examined Ag recognition with professional APCs . Thus , iT mem were incubated with Priess B cells pulsed with Ag and imaged by confocal microscopy . Equatorial cross sections recapitulate classic views ( 12 ) of the T cell – B cell IS whereby T cell LFA - 1 shows enrichment in peripheral - supramolecular ac - tivation cluster – like peripheral membrane bulges ( Supplemental Fig . 4H , inset 2 , arrows ) . Cross sections taken at the edge of the IS additionally suggest presence of LFA - 1 – rich ﬁnger - like pro - trusions ( Supplemental Fig . 4H , insets 1a – d ) similar to ILPs formed on ECs ( Fig . 3Bb ) . More compelling imaging of putative ILPs can be seen in occasional examples where the T cells settle on top of B cells such that the IS aligns with the optimal imaging plane ( 18 ) ( Fig . 8G , Supplemental Video 11 ) . Ultrastructural views , evident in a subset of micrographs , further support the presence of ILPs ( Fig . 8H ) . Finally , we investigated murine OTII CD4 T cells incubated with BMDCs coexpressing mem - YFP and soluble DsRed . T cells interacted with DCs both laterally ( Fig . 8I , subset a ) and to a lesser extent through en face contacts ( Fig . 8I , subset b ) . In the former , side views of DC invaginations were readily evident that were similar to podo - prints / ILPs seen on endothelium ( Fig . 8I , panel 3i ) . En face interactions also revealed discrete circular podo - prints / ILPs ( Fig . 8I , panels 3ii , 3iii ) , although these were generally less obvious than those formed on endothelium because of the highly active and irregular surface topology of DCs . Dynamic im - aging showed ILP probing preceded calcium ﬂux , which , in turn , was coupled to peripheral ILP array formation ( Fig . 8J ) . Ultra - structural conﬁrmation of ILP formation could also be obtained FIGURE 7 . Murine CD8 CTLs use ILPs to sense Ag - bound MHC - I on endothelium . ( A ) Previously activated murine OTI CD8 T cells ( CTLs ) were imaged on mem - YFP – transfected , mouse heart microvascular ECs pulsed with SIINFEKL . Individual ratiometric calcium ﬂux values at 5 min were plotted for 6 Ag conditions . ( B ) CTLs were added to mixed cultures of Ag - pulsed / unpulsed ECs , and percentage of speciﬁc lysis is plotted at indicated time points . ( C ) CTLs were imaged during EC probing in the absence of Ag . Differential interference contrast and mem - YFP are shown in the upper and lower panels , respectively . Dashed line represents the outline of the migrating CTL under which transient ILPs are continuously formed . See also corresponding Supplemental Video 8 . ( D ) Imaging was conducted as in ( C ) on ECs pulsed with SIINFEKL . Red arrow indicates initial ILP formation preceding calcium ﬂux . ( E ) Average offset time for calcium ﬂux relative to initial ILP formation . Data represent mean 6 SEM . Scale bars , 5 m m . The Journal of Immunology 3695 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m FIGURE 8 . ILPs facilitate Ag recognition on professional APCs . ( A ) Schematic of the “coated - glass model” using ICAM - 1 – and Ab - coated glass . ( b ) Magniﬁed view of the interaction surface . ( B ) iT mem were added to an ICAM - 1 – Fc – and anti - CD3 – coated glass chamber and imaged by differential in - terference contrast and IRM . Arrows indicate IRM - detected “microcontacts . ” ( C ) Schematic of the “planar coated - cell APC model . ” CHO - K1 cells expressing ICAM - 1 – GFP and soluble DsRed were surface “coated” with Abs against CD3 , CD43 , or CD45 using a biotin / SA capture approach ( see also Supplemental Fig . 4F ) . ( d ) Magniﬁed view of the interaction surface . ( D ) Cells prepared as in ( C ) coated with anti - CD3 Ab were ( Figure legend continues ) 3696 INVADOSOME - LIKE PROTRUSIONS IN Ag RECOGNITION by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m in a subset of electron micrographs ( Fig . 8K ) . Finally , treatment of T cells with latrunculin A strongly inhibited both ILPs and initial calcium responses to Ag presented by DCs ( Fig . 8L ) . Discussion Basic cellular mechanisms by which lymphocytes effectively scan for peptide Ag on apposing cells and how this leads to IS formation have remained mysterious . Our results investigating endothelium as a model APC indicate potential roles for ILPs in these processes . Our further studies with diverse Ag recognition settings suggest broad , previously unappreciated functions for ILPs as actuators of immune surveillance . Vascular ECs represent intriguing and understudied APCs / target cells for adaptive immune responses . These MHC - I – , MHC - II – , and costimulator - expressing cells are strategically positioned at the blood – tissue interface to serve as unique sentinels for the immune system ( 26 ) . Previous studies demonstrated that ECs can effectively restimulate memory / effector , but not naive , T cells ( 26 – 33 ) . Thus , ECs have been hypothesized to serve as peripheral ancillary or “semiprofessional” APCs that contribute to the effector phase of adaptive immune responses . Although overall roles remain contro - versial , studies suggest that Ag presentation by ECs can inﬂuence T cell activation , differentiation , trafﬁcking , and memory ( 26 – 28 , 51 ) . In this study , we demonstrate that CD4 and CD8 memory / effector T cells exhibited a transient arrest in migration coupled , respectively , to Th1 and cytotoxic responses on ECs presenting MHC / Ag , consistent with previous ﬁndings ( 31 , 52 , 53 ) . Importantly , ECs exhibit a virtually planar cell surface in vitro , which we previously established to be ideal for high spatiotemporal resolution imaging of topological dynamics ( 34 ) . We reasoned that ECs might , therefore , serve as physiologic “planar APC / target cell” models uniquely suited to ﬁll two key gaps in our under - standing of immune surveillance mechanisms : 1 ) how initial MHC / Ag - sampling contacts form between T cells and APCs , and 2 ) how these lead to formation of productive ISs . Although planar APC substrates ( i . e . , lipid bilayers , Ab - coated glass ) provide excellent imaging , which has led to critical insights to these dy - namics ( 15 , 19 – 22 ) , such models are inherently limiting . Alter - natively , details of physiologic cell – cell scanning dynamics are profoundly obscured by orientation - related imaging issues ( 16 – 18 ) . The imaging afforded with our planar endothelial APC model in this study revealed unexpected involvement of ILPs in Ag recognition and response activities . ILPs ( “invadosome - like protrusions” ) are lymphocyte equiv - alents ( 36 ) to podosomes ( formed largely by myeloid lineage cells ) and invadopodia ( formed by transformed cells ) , collectively termed “invadosomes” ( 35 ) . Invadosomes and ILPs are actin - dependent cylindrical , protrusive organelles ( ∼ 200 – 1000 nm in diameter and depth ) that form on the ventral surface of migratory cells ( 35 ) . Distinct from invadosomes , characterized to form on matrix , bone , glass / plastic substrates , T cell ILPs have only been seen on cellular substrates , as shown in a range of in vitro ( 34 , 54 , 55 ) and in vivo studies ( reviewed in Ref . 56 ) . In such settings , dynamic ILP probing seems to function in migratory pathﬁnding , imaged live on addition of Fura - 2 – labeled iT mem . Panels demonstrate relatively early and later phases of interaction as indicated . Arrows indicate podo - prints / ILPs . See also Supplemental Video 10 . ( E and F ) Imaging experiments were conducted as in ( D ) , but T cells were pretreated with latrunculin A . Podo - print / ILP index ( E ) and calcium ﬂux ( F ) were calculated . ( G ) IT mem were incubated with Ag - pulsed Priess B cells for 5 min and stained for LFA - 1 and actin . Image represents a three - dimensional projection of T cell settled on top of the B cells with the IS forming more nearly parallel to the x – y imaging plane . See also Supplemental Video 11 . ( H ) Transmission electron micrograph of T cell – B cell IS as in ( G ) . The T cell is identiﬁed by a red overlay . Arrows indicate close intercellular contacts formed by T cell ILPs . ( I ) Schematic ( upper left panel ) shows both lateral ( a ) and various en face ( b ) interfaces typically formed in vitro between T cells and the highly irregular surfaces of DCs . ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) show previously activated murine CD4 OT - II lymphocytes interacting with Ag - pulsed mem - YFP – transfected DCs ( green , 2 ) . Red outlines depict T cell perimeter based on DIC imaging ( 1 ) . ( 3 ) is identical to ( 2 ) but shows three boxed regions ( i – iii ) expanded on the left . ( 3i ) shows a lateral interaction in which the T cell has pushed small ﬁnger - like invagination into the side of the BMDC putatively formed by ILPs ( arrows ) . ( 3ii ) and ( 3iii ) show en face interactions whereby ILPs seem to be extending normal to the imaging plane , giving rise to the typical ring - shaped podo - print appearance observed in endothelium ( i . e . , Fig . 2 ) . ( J ) DCs were transfected with soluble monomeric DsRed and mem - YFP , pulsed with Ag , and CD4 OT - II T cells were added . Panels show cytoplasm displacing podo - prints / ILP ( arrows ) , which precede calcium ﬂux and are stabilized after calcium ﬂux . ( K ) Transmission electron micrograph of T cell – DC IS as in ( J ) ﬁxed after 5 min . The T cell is identiﬁed by a red overlay . Arrows indicate close intercellular contacts formed by T cell ILPs . ( L ) Calcium ﬂux of previously activated CD4 OTII T cells 8 min after interaction with C57BL / 6 ( WT ) or Ciita 2 / 2 Ag - pulsed DCs with or without latrunculin A pretreatment . Data represent mean 6 SEM . Scale bars , 5 m m . * * * p , 0 . 0005 . FIGURE 9 . Hypothetical model for ILP function in Ag recognition and response . Schematic depicts top - down and side views of a memory / effector T cell interacting with an APC / target cell . Lymphocytes initiate lateral migration ( Step 1 ) and begin to dy - namically drive ILPs against the apposing cell ( Step 2 , 2a ) . Close interactions between T and APC / target cells , which are partially opposed by the cell glycocalyces ( 2b ) , form preferentially ( but not exclusively ) at ILP tips ( 2c ) . We hypothesize that TCR / MHC interactions may be facilitated in these zones . Initial calcium released on Ag rec - ognition ( green overlay / arrows ; Step 3 ) seems to be coupled to stabilization / accu - mulation of ILP arrays ( “podo - synapses” ; Step 4 ) , which we hypothesize could , in turn , help sustain / enhance signaling ( Step 5 ) . The Journal of Immunology 3697 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m apparently serving as biomechanical sensors ( 34 , 36 , 54 , 55 , 57 ) . These studies suggest that ILPs may also facilitate biochemical or “informational” scanning of diverse cell surfaces . We speculated that the ILP scanning seen on ECs was uniquely revealed by this setting , rather than a unique feature of it . IRM imaging of a rudimentary APC model ( anti - CD3 – coated glass ) showed that T cells form a series of microcontacts with the sub - strate that are consistent with either ILP or microvilli interactions . Similar microcontacts were previously shown to be enriched in F - actin , WASP , and TCR , and hypothesized to represent frustrated podosomes ( 20 , 22 ) . When we tested this hypothesis by recapit - ulating the same anti - CD3 activation stimuli on a pliable cell surface , we , indeed , found that the microcontacts transitioned into three - dimensional ILPs and podo - prints . Moreover , our studies using approaches optimized for imaging professional APCs ( i . e . , B cells and DCs ) readily detected ILPs probing in these settings . Importantly , although dynamics , molecular composition , and three - dimensional architectures were not deﬁned , extensive ( largely EM - based ) studies previously evidenced similar T cell protrusions extending against diverse APCs and target cell surfa - ces ( 21 , 43 , 58 – 63 ) . Collectively , this suggests broad relevance for memory / effector T cells probing their cellular environment with ILPs . The important question of whether naive T cells similarly use ILPs remains to be addressed . One possible role for ILP probing may be in enhancing the efﬁciency of Ag recognition . The act of Ag detection requires T cell and APC / target membranes to come within ∼ 14 nm of each other ( 2 , 64 ) . Yet , all cell membranes are extensively shielded by ∼ 50 - to 500 - nm - thick glycocalyces ( 3 – 5 ) that physically oppose close contact and negatively modulate immune recognition ( 5 – 10 ) ( Fig . 9 , inset 2b ) . In the periphery , patrolling effector / memory lymphocytes must effectively scan the surfaces of widely varying cell types ( indeed , essentially any host cell could become a target ) , each with glycocalyces of different thicknesses and physicochemical proper - ties . Forces provided by ILP ( which form independently of Ag during lateral migration ) ( 34 ) are sufﬁcient to deform nuclear lamina , displace and distort cytoskeleton and intracellular organ - elles , and promote transcellular diapedesis ( 34 ) . More than sufﬁ - cient energy would , therefore , seem to be available at the tips of ILPs ( Fig . 9 , inset 2a ) to overcome repulsion provided by the gly - cocalyx ( Fig . 9 , inset 2c ) . Previous studies showed that lamellipodia of migrating lym - phocytes are zones of heightened Ag recognition efﬁciency ( 65 – 67 ) . In both our previous ( 34 ) and current work , we show that lamellipodia are also the predominant areas of ILP formation . Moreover , in our experimental system , ILPs , but not necessarily lamellipodia , consistently preceded calcium ﬂux . Thus , although migration behaviors are necessary for immune surveillance , ILPs may function more directly in promoting intimate contacts , and thereby ensuring efﬁcient Ag sampling . Our studies with latrun - culin A are consistent with ( although do not prove ) such functional roles . It is also interesting to note that forces and membrane bending associated with ILPs are consistent with the hypothesized force - based mechanism for formal triggering of TCR signaling ( 22 , 68 – 71 ) . ILPs are probably not absolutely required for either TCR signaling or forming intimate T cell – APC / target contacts , but rather act to ensure efﬁciency and ﬁdelity of immune surveillance . Another possible function for ILPs may be to support signal ampliﬁcation and sustenance . Our studies reveal dense arrays of calcium - stabilized ILPs that dominate the IS after Ag recognition . Individual ILPs showed enrichment in TCR and molecules sug - gestive of active signaling . This feature is generally not unlike TCR signaling microclusters deﬁned using planar APC model substrates ( 14 , 15 , 20 – 22 , 38 , 72 , 73 ) , with the key distinction that ILPs have a discrete three - dimensional architecture . The well - developed concept that microclusters may function as “signal - osomes” to amplify and sustain signaling by concentrating impor - tant molecules / activities might then be extended to include limited “reaction volumes” formed within ILPs ( 17 , 74 – 78 ) . In addition , the stable peripheral ILP arrays are strikingly similar to osteoclast “podosome - belts” ( 79 , 80 ) that form sealing zones for directed se - cretion of bone - degrading enzymes ( 81 ) . Thus , it may be hypothe - sized that peripheral podo - synapses may function analogously for directed secretion of cytokines or cytotoxic materials . These studies collectively support the hypothesis that ILPs may serve as newly appreciated sensory organelles that facilitate Ag recognition and responses . By virtue of physical force exertion , ILPs literally allow T cells to get a deeper understanding of their local cellular environment . Such proactive “informational scan - ning” might ensure robust sampling of MHC / Ag on diverse cell types . It is tempting to speculate that stabilized TCR - enriched ILPs resulting from Ag recognition represent a clearer , more physio - logic view of TCR microclusters and “multifocal” ISs character - ized to date . Disclosures The authors have no ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest . References 1 . von Andrian , U . H . , and C . R . Mackay . 2000 . T - cell function and migration . Two sides of the same coin . N . Engl . J . Med . 343 : 1020 – 1034 . 2 . Rudolph , M . G . , R . L . Stanﬁeld , and I . A . Wilson . 2006 . How TCRs bind MHCs , peptides , and coreceptors . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 24 : 419 – 466 . 3 . Weinbaum , S . , J . M . Tarbell , and E . R . Damiano . 2007 . The structure andfunction of the endothelial glycocalyx layer . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 9 : 121 – 167 . 4 . Bell , G . I . , M . Dembo , and P . Bongrand . 1984 . Cell adhesion . Competition be - tween nonspeciﬁc repulsion and speciﬁc bonding . Biophys . J . 45 : 1051 – 1064 . 5 . Springer , T . A . 1990 . Adhesion receptors of the immune system . Nature 346 : 425 – 434 . 6 . Gubbels , J . A . , M . Felder , S . Horibata , J . A . Belisle , A . Kapur , H . Holden , S . Petrie , M . Migneault , C . Rancourt , J . P . Connor , and M . S . Patankar . 2010 . MUC16 provides immune protection by inhibiting synapse formation between NK and ovarian tumor cells . Mol . Cancer 9 : 11 . 7 . Komatsu , M . , L . Yee , and K . L . Carraway . 1999 . Overexpression of sialomucin complex , a rat homologue of MUC4 , inhibits tumor killing by lymphokine - activated killer cells . Cancer Res . 59 : 2229 – 2236 . 8 . Tsuboi , S . , and M . Fukuda . 2001 . Roles of O - linked oligosaccharides in immune responses . Bioessays 23 : 46 – 53 . 9 . van de Wiel - van Kemenade , E . , M . J . Ligtenberg , A . J . de Boer , F . Buijs , H . L . Vos , C . J . Melief , J . Hilkens , and C . G . Figdor . 1993 . Episialin ( MUC1 ) inhibits cytotoxic lymphocyte - target cell interaction . J . Immunol . 151 : 767 – 776 . 10 . Manjunath , N . , M . Correa , M . Ardman , and B . Ardman . 1995 . Negative regu - lation of T - cell adhesion and activation by CD43 . Nature 377 : 535 – 538 . 11 . Shaw , A . S . , and M . L . Dustin . 1997 . Making the T cell receptor go the distance : a topological view of T cell activation . Immunity 6 : 361 – 369 . 12 . Monks , C . R . , B . A . Freiberg , H . Kupfer , N . Sciaky , and A . Kupfer . 1998 . Three - dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T cells . Nature 395 : 82 – 86 . 13 . Delon , J . , S . Stoll , and R . N . Germain . 2002 . Imaging of T - cell interactions with antigen presenting cells in culture and in intact lymphoid tissue . Immunol . Rev . 189 : 51 – 63 . 14 . Brossard , C . , V . Feuillet , A . Schmitt , C . Randriamampita , M . Romao , G . Raposo , and A . Trautmann . 2005 . Multifocal structure of the T cell - dendritic cell synapse . Eur . J . Immunol . 35 : 1741 – 1753 . 15 . Dustin , M . L . 2009 . The cellular context of T cell signaling . Immunity 30 : 482 – 492 . 16 . Balagopalan , L . , E . Sherman , V . A . Barr , and L . E . Samelson . 2011 . Imaging techniques for assaying lymphocyte activation in action . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 : 21 – 33 . 17 . Cebecauer , M . , M . Spitaler , A . Serge ´ , and A . I . Magee . 2010 . Signalling com - plexes and clusters : functional advantages and methodological hurdles . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 309 – 320 . 18 . Oddos , S . , C . Dunsby , M . A . Purbhoo , A . Chauveau , D . M . Owen , M . A . Neil , D . M . Davis , and P . M . French . 2008 . High - speed high - resolution imaging of intercellular immune synapses using optical tweezers . Biophys . J . 95 : L66 – L68 . 19 . Grakoui , A . , S . K . Bromley , C . Sumen , M . M . Davis , A . S . Shaw , P . M . Allen , and M . L . Dustin . 1999 . The immunological synapse : a molecular machine controlling T cell activation . Science 285 : 221 – 227 . 20 . Bunnell , S . C . , D . I . Hong , J . R . Kardon , T . Yamazaki , C . J . McGlade , V . A . Barr , and L . E . Samelson . 2002 . T cell receptor ligation induces the formation of dynamically regulated signaling assemblies . J . Cell Biol . 158 : 1263 – 1275 . 3698 INVADOSOME - LIKE PROTRUSIONS IN Ag RECOGNITION by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 21 . Yokosuka , T . , K . Sakata - Sogawa , W . Kobayashi , M . Hiroshima , A . Hashimoto - Tane , M . Tokunaga , M . L . Dustin , and T . Saito . 2005 . Newly generated T cell receptor microclusters initiate and sustain T cell activation by recruitment of Zap70 and SLP - 76 . Nat . Immunol . 6 : 1253 – 1262 . 22 . Seminario , M . C . , and S . C . Bunnell . 2008 . Signal initiation in T - cell receptor microclusters . Immunol . Rev . 221 : 90 – 106 . 23 . Dustin , M . L . 2009 . Supported bilayers at the vanguard of immune cell activation studies . J . Struct . Biol . 168 : 152 – 160 . 24 . Springer , T . A . 1994 . Trafﬁc signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration : the multistep paradigm . Cell 76 : 301 – 314 . 25 . Butcher , E . C . 1991 . Leukocyte - endothelial cell recognition : three ( or more ) steps to speciﬁcity and diversity . Cell 67 : 1033 – 1036 . 26 . Choi , J . , D . R . Enis , K . P . Koh , S . L . Shiao , and J . S . Pober . 2004 . T lymphocyte - endothelial cell interactions . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 22 : 683 – 709 . 27 . Pober , J . S . , and W . C . Sessa . 2007 . Evolving functions of endothelial cells in inﬂammation . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 7 : 803 – 815 . 28 . Marelli - Berg , F . M . , K . Okkenhaug , and V . Mirenda . 2007 . A two - signal model for T cell trafﬁcking . Trends Immunol . 28 : 267 – 273 . 29 . Marelli - Berg , F . M . , R . E . Hargreaves , P . Carmichael , A . Dorling , G . Lombardi , and R . I . Lechler . 1996 . Major histocompatibility complex class II - expressing endothelial cells induce allospeciﬁc nonresponsiveness in naive T cells . J . Exp . Med . 183 : 1603 – 1612 . 30 . Ma , W . , and J . S . Pober . 1998 . Human endothelial cells effectively costimulate cytokine production by , but not differentiation of , naive CD4 + T cells . J . Immunol . 161 : 2158 – 2167 . 31 . Perez , V . L . , L . Henault , and A . H . Lichtman . 1998 . Endothelial antigen pre - sentation : stimulation of previously activated but not naı¨ve TCR - transgenic mouse T cells . Cell . Immunol . 189 : 31 – 40 . 32 . Epperson , D . E . , and J . S . Pober . 1994 . Antigen - presenting function of human endothelial cells . Direct activation of resting CD8 T cells . J . Immunol . 153 : 5402 – 5412 . 33 . Shiao , S . L . , N . C . Kirkiles - Smith , B . R . Shepherd , J . M . McNiff , E . J . Carr , and J . S . Pober . 2007 . Human effector memory CD4 + T cells directly recognize allogeneic endothelial cells in vitro and in vivo . J . Immunol . 179 : 4397 – 4404 . 34 . Carman , C . V . , P . T . Sage , T . E . Sciuto , M . A . de la Fuente , R . S . Geha , H . D . Ochs , H . F . Dvorak , A . M . Dvorak , and T . A . Springer . 2007 . Transcellular diapedesis is initiated by invasive podosomes . Immunity 26 : 784 – 797 . 35 . Linder , S . 2009 . Invadosomes at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 3009 – 3013 . 36 . Carman , C . V . 2009 . Mechanisms for transcellular diapedesis : probing and pathﬁnding by ‘invadosome - like protrusions’ . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 3025 – 3035 . 37 . Carman , C . V . , and T . A . Springer . 2004 . A transmigratory cup in leukocyte diapedesis both through individual vascular endothelial cells and between them . J . Cell Biol . 167 : 377 – 388 . 38 . Gomez , T . S . , S . D . McCarney , E . Carrizosa , C . M . Labno , E . O . Comiskey , J . C . Nolz , P . Zhu , B . D . Freedman , M . R . Clark , D . J . Rawlings , et al . 2006 . HS1 functions as an essential actin - regulatory adaptor protein at the immune synapse . Immunity 24 : 741 – 752 . 39 . Sarkar , D . , P . K . Vemula , G . S . Teo , D . Spelke , R . Karnik , Y . Wee , and J . M . Karp . 2008 . Chemical engineering of mesenchymal stem cells to induce a cell rolling response . Bioconjug . Chem . 19 : 2105 – 2109 . 40 . Anto´n , I . M . , M . A . de la Fuente , T . N . Sims , S . Freeman , N . Ramesh , J . H . Hartwig , M . L . Dustin , and R . S . Geha . 2002 . WIP deﬁciency reveals a differential role for WIP and the actin cytoskeleton in T and B cell activation . Immunity 16 : 193 – 204 . 41 . Wu¨lﬁng , C . , A . Bauch , G . R . Crabtree , and M . M . Davis . 2000 . The vav ex - change factor is an essential regulator in actin - dependent receptor translocation to the lymphocyte - antigen - presenting cell interface . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 : 10150 – 10155 . 42 . Billadeau , D . D . , J . C . Nolz , and T . S . Gomez . 2007 . Regulation of T - cell ac - tivation by the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 7 : 131 – 143 . 43 . Butler , B . , D . H . Kastendieck , and J . A . Cooper . 2008 . Differently phosphory - lated forms of the cortactin homolog HS1 mediate distinct functions in natural killer cells . Nat . Immunol . 9 : 887 – 897 . 44 . Klos Dehring , D . A . , F . Clarke , B . G . Ricart , Y . Huang , T . S . Gomez , E . K . Williamson , D . A . Hammer , D . D . Billadeau , Y . Argon , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2011 . Hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 functions in concert with the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome array organization and chemotaxis in dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 186 : 4805 – 4818 . 45 . Fooksman , D . R . , S . Vardhana , G . Vasiliver - Shamis , J . Liese , D . A . Blair , J . Waite , C . Sacrista´n , G . D . Victora , A . Zanin - Zhorov , and M . L . Dustin . 2010 . Functional anatomy of T cell activation and synapse formation . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 28 : 79 – 105 . 46 . Trautmann , A . , and S . Valitutti . 2003 . The diversity of immunological synapses . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 15 : 249 – 254 . 47 . Bunnell , S . C . 2010 . Multiple microclusters : diverse compartments within the immune synapse . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 340 : 123 – 154 . 48 . Dovas , A . , and D . Cox . 2011 . Signaling networks regulating leukocyte podo - some dynamics and function . Cell . Signal . 23 : 1225 – 1234 . 49 . Arrieumerlou , C . , C . Randriamampita , G . Bismuth , and A . Trautmann . 2000 . Rac is involved in early TCR signaling . J . Immunol . 165 : 3182 – 3189 . 50 . Hughes , K . , S . Edin , A . Antonsson , and T . Grundstro¨m . 2001 . Calmodulin - dependent kinase II mediates T cell receptor / CD3 - and phorbol ester - induced activation of IkappaB kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 36008 – 36013 . 51 . Turesson , C . 2004 . Endothelial expression of MHC class II molecules in auto - immune disease . Curr . Pharm . Des . 10 : 129 – 143 . 52 . Manes , T . D . , S . L . Shiao , T . J . Dengler , and J . S . Pober . 2007 . TCR signaling antagonizes rapid IP - 10 - mediated transendothelial migration of effector memory CD4 + T cells . J . Immunol . 178 : 3237 – 3243 . 53 . Manes , T . D . , and J . S . Pober . 2008 . Antigen presentation by human microvas - cular endothelial cells triggers ICAM - 1 - dependent transendothelial protrusion by , and fractalkine - dependent transendothelial migration of , effector memory CD4 + T cells . J . Immunol . 180 : 8386 – 8392 . 54 . Shulman , Z . , V . Shinder , E . Klein , V . Grabovsky , O . Yeger , E . Geron , A . Montresor , M . Bolomini - Vittori , S . W . Feigelson , T . Kirchhausen , et al . 2009 . Lymphocyte crawling and transendothelial migration require chemokine trig - gering of high - afﬁnity LFA - 1 integrin . Immunity 30 : 384 – 396 . 55 . Ge´rard , A . , R . A . van der Kammen , H . Janssen , S . I . Ellenbroek , and J . G . Collard . 2009 . The Rac activator Tiam1 controls efﬁcient T - cell trafﬁcking and route of transendothelial migration . Blood 113 : 6138 – 6147 . 56 . Sage , P . T . , and C . V . Carman . 2009 . Settings and mechanisms for trans - cellular diapedesis . Front . Biosci . 14 : 5066 – 5083 . 57 . Albiges - Rizo , C . , O . Destaing , B . Fourcade , E . Planus , and M . R . Block . 2009 . Actin machinery and mechanosensitivity in invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 3037 – 3049 . 58 . Bunnell , S . C . , A . L . Singer , D . I . Hong , B . H . Jacque , M . S . Jordan , M . C . Seminario , V . A . Barr , G . A . Koretzky , and L . E . Samelson . 2006 . Per - sistence of cooperatively stabilized signaling clusters drives T - cell activation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 : 7155 – 7166 . 59 . Wetzel , S . A . , T . W . McKeithan , and D . C . Parker . 2002 . Live - cell dynamics and the role of costimulation in immunological synapse formation . J . Immunol . 169 : 6092 – 6101 . 60 . Barcia , C . , A . Gomez , V . de Pablos , E . Ferna´ndez - Villalba , C . Liu , K . M . Kroeger , J . Martı´n , A . F . Barreiro , M . G . Castro , P . R . Lowenstein , and M . T . Herrero . 2008 . CD20 , CD3 , and CD40 ligand microclusters segregate three - dimensionally in vivo at B - cell - T - cell immunological synapses after viral immunity in primate brain . J . Virol . 82 : 9978 – 9993 . 61 . Barcia , C . , N . S . Sanderson , R . J . Barrett , K . Wawrowsky , K . M . Kroeger , M . Puntel , C . Liu , M . G . Castro , and P . R . Lowenstein . 2008 . T cells’ immu - nological synapses induce polarization of brain astrocytes in vivo and in vitro : a novel astrocyte response mechanism to cellular injury . PLoS ONE 3 : e2977 . 62 . Barcia , C . , Jr . , A . Go´mez , J . M . Gallego - Sanchez , A . Perez - Valle´s , M . G . Castro , P . R . Lowenstein , C . Barcia , Sr . , and M . T . Herrero . 2009 . Inﬁltrating CTLs in human glioblastoma establish immunological synapses with tumorigenic cells . Am . J . Pathol . 175 : 786 – 798 . 63 . Davis , D . M . 2009 . Mechanisms and functions for the duration of intercellular contacts made by lymphocytes . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 9 : 543 – 555 . 64 . Rudd , P . M . , T . Elliott , P . Cresswell , I . A . Wilson , and R . A . Dwek . 2001 . Glycosylation and the immune system . Science 291 : 2370 – 2376 . 65 . Valitutti , S . , M . Dessing , K . Aktories , H . Gallati , and A . Lanzavecchia . 1995 . Sustained signaling leading to T cell activation results from prolonged T cell receptor occupancy . Role of T cell actin cytoskeleton . J . Exp . Med . 181 : 577 – 584 . 66 . Negulescu , P . A . , T . B . Krasieva , A . Khan , H . H . Kerschbaum , and M . D . Cahalan . 1996 . Polarity of T cell shape , motility , and sensitivity to antigen . Immunity 4 : 421 – 430 . 67 . Wei , X . , B . J . Tromberg , and M . D . Cahalan . 1999 . Mapping the sensitivity of T cells with an optical trap : polarity and minimal number of receptors for Ca ( 2 + ) signaling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 8471 – 8476 . 68 . Ma , Z . , K . A . Sharp , P . A . Janmey , and T . H . Finkel . 2008 . Surface - anchored monomeric agonist pMHCs alone trigger TCR with high sensitivity . PLoS Biol . 6 : e43 . 69 . Ma , Z . , P . A . Janmey , and T . H . Finkel . 2008 . The receptor deformation model of TCR triggering . FASEB J . 22 : 1002 – 1008 . 70 . Groves , J . T . 2007 . Bending mechanics and molecular organization in biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 58 : 697 – 717 . 71 . Xu , C . , E . Gagnon , M . E . Call , J . R . Schnell , C . D . Schwieters , C . V . Carman , J . J . Chou , and K . W . Wucherpfennig . 2008 . Regulation of T cell receptor ac - tivation by dynamic membrane binding of the CD3epsilon cytoplasmic tyrosine - based motif . Cell 135 : 702 – 713 . 72 . Dustin , M . L . , S . Y . Tseng , R . Varma , and G . Campi . 2006 . T cell - dendritic cell immunological synapses . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 18 : 512 – 516 . 73 . Saito , T . , and T . Yokosuka . 2006 . Immunological synapse and microclusters : the site for recognition and activation of T cells . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 18 : 305 – 313 . 74 . Burbach , B . J . , R . B . Medeiros , K . L . Mueller , and Y . Shimizu . 2007 . T - cell receptor signaling to integrins . Immunol . Rev . 218 : 65 – 81 . 75 . Perez - Moreno , M . , C . Jamora , and E . Fuchs . 2003 . Sticky business : orchestrating cellular signals at adherens junctions . Cell 112 : 535 – 548 . 76 . Harwood , N . E . , and F . D . Batista . 2008 . New insights into the early molecular events underlying B cell activation . Immunity 28 : 609 – 619 . 77 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , and F . Sa´nchez - Madrid . 2004 . Role of the cytoskeleton during leukocyte responses . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 4 : 110 – 122 . 78 . Miranti , C . K . , and J . S . Brugge . 2002 . Sensing the environment : a historical perspective on integrin signal transduction . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : E83 – E90 . 79 . Luxenburg , C . , D . Geblinger , E . Klein , K . Anderson , D . Hanein , B . Geiger , and L . Addadi . 2007 . The architecture of the adhesive apparatus of cultured osteo - clasts : from podosome formation to sealing zone assembly . PLoS ONE 2 : e179 . 80 . Destaing , O . , A . Sanjay , C . Itzstein , W . C . Horne , D . Toomre , P . De Camilli , and R . Baron . 2008 . The tyrosine kinase activity of c - Src regulates actin dynamics and organization of podosomes in osteoclasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 : 394 – 404 . 81 . Saltel , F . , O . Destaing , F . Bard , D . Eichert , and P . Jurdic . 2004 . Apatite - mediated actin dynamics in resorbing osteoclasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 5231 – 5241 . The Journal of Immunology 3699 by gu e s t on A p r il 3 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . ji mm uno l . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m