Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) AMCIS 2012 Proceedings Proceedings Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development ( ISD ) : a Dramaturgical Perspective Using Sociodrama Jae Park Cleveland , OH , United States . , jxp354 @ case . edu Richard Boland Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH , United States . , boland @ case . edu Follow this and additional works at : http : / / aisel . aisnet . org / amcis2012 This material is brought to you by the Americas Conference on Information Systems ( AMCIS ) at AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) . It has been accepted for inclusion in AMCIS 2012 Proceedings by an authorized administrator of AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) . For more information , please contact elibrary @ aisnet . org . Recommended Citation Park , Jae and Boland , Richard , " Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development ( ISD ) : a Dramaturgical Perspective Using Sociodrama " ( 2012 ) . AMCIS 2012 Proceedings . 6 . http : / / aisel . aisnet . org / amcis2012 / proceedings / SocialIssues / 6 Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 1 Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development ( ISD ) : a Dramaturgical Perspective Using Sociodrama Jaehyun Park Case Western Reserve University jxp354 @ case . edu Richard Boland , Jr . Case Western Reserve University boland @ case . edu ABSTRACT This paper highlights how Information Systems Development ( ISD ) research related to boundary objects can be enhanced by a dramaturgical perspective using the technique of sociodrama . To understand current boundary object research in Information Systems ( IS ) , we synthesize the literature on boundary objects and develop a framework for summarizing the work to date . Based on this literature review , two research gaps are indentified : first , most IS research on boundary objects has been focused on IT artifacts and their impacts among individuals , groups , and organizations ; second , the body of IS related boundary objects research lacks a fundamental and a practical perspective for unifying the multiple , disconnected theoretical backgrounds of boundary objects . To address these gaps , we adopt a dramaturgical perspective and use sociodrama as a protocol for constructing dynamic boundary objects . Using a sociodrama protocol , this paper identifies a model of how the sociodrama protocol can enhance interactions in ISD . The contributions of this paper are identifying ( 1 ) existing themes in the research on boundary objects , ( 2 ) how sociodrama from the dramaturgical perspective can enhance actions within boundary objects research , and ( 3 ) ways in which researchers could test how effectively sociodrama inspires interactions that develop new types of boundary objects . Keywords Boundary Objects , Dramaturgical Perspective , Sociodrama , Information Systems Development . Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 2 INTRODUCTION Boundary objects research has become a central issue of Information Systems ( IS ) research , including theories and practices in knowledge management ( Carlile , 2002 , 2004 ; Pawlowski & Robey , 2004 ) , innovation ( Boland , Lyytinen , & Yoo , 2007 ) , new product development ( Carlile , 2002 ) , and information system development ( Star & Griesemer , 1989 ; Subrahmanian , et al . , 2003 ; Yakura , 2002 ) among others . Currently , many IS scholars have expanded the themes and scope of boundary objects research by diverse interdisciplinary approaches ( Bergman , Lyytinen , & Mark , 2007 ; Levina , 2005 ) . Based on our review of prior boundary object research , we believe that it has been largely divided into two different views - - boundary objects as artifacts and boundary objects as actions . Boundary objects as artifacts combines the components of IT artifacts ( e . g . graphic elements , Gantt chart , and diagrams ) , single IT artifacts ( e . g . ERP , email , e - commerce , DSS , and SNS ) , and temporal outcomes of Information Systems Development ( ISD ) ( e . g . prototypes , design methods , and system mock - ups ) . On the other hand , boundary objects as actions deals with actions for constructing new types of boundary objects and actions from the constructed boundary objects . As a result of this literature review , this paper synthesizes four research categories and eleven topics based on these two boundary object research perspectives , and it seems that most previous boundary object research has leaned toward boundary objects as artifacts . Indeed , previous researchers have developed diverse uses for boundary objects as artifacts . On the other hand , only a few IS scholars have highlighted boundary objects as actions using diverse interdisciplinary approaches . For example , Bergman et al . ( 2007 ) use boundary objects as the ecological actions in the development of system design . Levina and Vaast ( 2005 ) also expand the meanings of boundary objects by addressing ‘boundary spanners - in - practice’ who produce and use object among multiple stakeholders in the process of ISD . This new approach boundary objects as actions have moved toward as an expanded view of multiple stakeholders’ collaborations in ISD . Although only a few scholars have focused on boundary objects as actions , current boundary objects research still has the following two research gaps : ( 1 ) previous researchers have regarded boundary objects as relatively fixed artifacts or outcomes in IS research ; and ( 2 ) the presented IS boundary objects do not suggest any analytic protocols , models , or frameworks which deal with how boundary objects are emerged , occurred in a sequence , and evolved during a design process . To address these research gaps , the objective of this paper is to explore an alternative way for how current boundary objects research can take and make actions for constructing or reconstructing boundary objects in the process of IS design . In order to enhance actions to current artifact - centered boundary objects research in IS , this paper adopts a dramaturgical perspective and uses sociodrama as a protocol for representing how boundary objects can take and make new actions . With this sociodrama protocol , this paper proposes a model that arises from incorporating sociodrama in the construction and interpretation of boundary objects . Finally , this paper considers how a sociodrama protocol on a dramaturgical perspective can enhance actions to boundary objects and applies this to the design process between IT designers and IT users . Throughout this paper , we summarize four contributions : ( 1 ) it identifies the categories and research topics of published boundary objects research in IS ; ( 2 ) it expands current relatively static boundary objects research limitations by adopting the dramaturgical perspective using a sociodrama protocol ; ( 3 ) it suggests a model of how sociodrama as an interaction protocol can enhance current boundary objects ; ( 4 ) it offers ways in which researchers could test how effectively sociodrama inspires interactions between IT designers and IT users in boundary objects during the IS design process ; and ( 5 ) it identifies values of the expanded action - centered boundary objects in Information Systems Development ( ISD ) . LITERATURE REVIEW ON BOUNDARY OBJECTS Boundary objects afford the discovery of meanings , definitions , and understandings among different stakeholders in separate social groups . In prior boundary object research , several scholars ( Bergman , et al . , 2007 ; Briers & Chua , 2001 ; Star & Griesemer , 1989 ) have identified the conditions of boundary objects including their definitions and characteristics . Bergman et al . ( 2007 ) identify four conditions of a boundary object as follows ; ( 1 ) it inhabits several social worlds , ( 2 ) it satisfies the institutional requirements of each social world , ( 3 ) it is weakly structured in common use , and ( 4 ) it is strongly structured in local usage . Although these conditions define the characteristics of boundary objects , they did not suggest a clear cut of theories , models , or frameworks of boundary objects . Originally , the concept of boundary objects was introduced by Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) who defined boundary objects as a term of institutional ecology in order to distinguish amateurs from professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology . Here , they observe boundary objects as mediating translation among different perspectives across diverse groups . This boundary object concept was further developed by Carlile . Carlile ( 2002 , 2004 ) expanded boundary objects as Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 3 knowledge boundaries by emphasizing the material structuring of knowledge sharing in the process of a new product development in an engineering company . In his studies , he observed three different knowledge boundaries in new product development - - syntactic , semantic , and pragmatic . In this study , we reviewed previous boundary objects research in IS and analyzed prior works in order to overview the topics and trends of published boundary objects research . Two Perspectives / Four Categories / Eleven Topics Description / Major Authors Boundary Objects as Artifacts Tool Problem - Solving Tool Boundary objects are problem - solving tools used to identify complex organization problems and to synthesize malleable solutions ( Boland , et al . , 2007 ; Yoo , Boland , & Lyytinen , 2006 ) Brokering Tool Boundary objects are brokering tools for mediating different people , organizations , or cultures ( Pawlowski & Robey , 2004 ) Symbolic Interaction Tool Boundary objects are symbolic interaction tools to moderate the relationships among people , objects , environments , and actions etc . ( Lee , 2007 ; Luff & Heath , 1996 ; Lutters & Ackerman , 2007 ; Swan , 2007 ) Outcome Temporal Outcome Boundary objects are temporal outcomes during a design project ( Henderson , 1991 ; Subrahmanian , et al . , 2003 ; Yakura , 2002 ) Ecological Outcome Boundary objects are the ecological outcomes of a design project over time ( Akkerman , 2011 ; Barrett , 2010 ; Bergman , et al . , 2007 ) Interface Categorization Boundary objects are categories , regarding the distinctions between people , groups , organizations , and cultures ( Bowker & Star , 1999 ; Star & Griesemer , 1989 ) Intersection Boundary objects are intersections , which deal with trading zones with similarities for different people , groups , organizations , and cultures ( Fleischmann , 2006 ) Social Identity Boundary objects are social identities , which identify the different natures , norms , or characteristics for people , groups , organizations , and cultures ( Gal , Lyytinen , & Yoo , 2008 ; Peltokorpi , 2006 ) Boundary Objects as Actions Protocol Dynamic Role Boundary objects can make / take different roles in different people , groups , organizations , or cultures in the ISD process ( Briers & Chua , 2001 ; Mambrey & Robinson , 1997 ) Community of Knowing and Practice Boundary objects make / take the community of knowledge and practice in different people , groups , organizations , or cultures in the ISD process ( Bartel , 2009 ; Bechky , 2003 ; Boland & Tenkasi , 1995 ; Carlile , 2002 , 2004 ; Levina , 2008 ; Levina & Vaast , 2005 ) Distributed Cognition Boundary objects make / take distributed cognition in different people , groups , organizations , or cultures in the ISD process ( Ackerman & Halverson , 1999 ; Metiu , 2006 ) Table 1 . The Analysis of Prior Boundary Objects Table 1 shows a result of our review and the overview of current IS boundary object related research is elucidated by two perspectives , four categories , and eleven topics on boundary objects research in IS . Two Perspectives We identified boundary objects with two perspectives : boundary objects as artifacts and boundary objects as actions . The boundary objects as artifacts perspective deals with physical artifacts themselves ( e . g . e - mail , ERP , SNS ) , tools for simulating social interactions ( e . g . design methods ) , temporal or longitudinal outcomes ( e . g . prototypes ) in an IS process . On the other hand , the boundary objects as actions perspective deals with actions for synthesizing the artifacts in the process and the actions from the constructed artifacts . Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 4 Four Categories Based on two boundary object perspectives , we elicited four categories of boundary object research as follows : tool , outcome , interface , and protocol . Boundary objects as artifacts take up three categories : tool , outcome , and interface , while boundary objects as actions cope with the protocol category . Eleven Topics From this literature review , we defined eleven topics on boundary objects IS related research . The tool category is divided into problem - solving , symbolic , and brokering tools in IS boundary object research . A problem - solving tool is used to analyze complex organizational problems to identify current problems and to synthesize for malleable solutions ( Boland , et al . , 2007 ; Yoo , et al . , 2006 ) . The brokering tool serves to perform mutual communication as a mediator among different social worlds manipulating the amount of common values and characterizing different social identities ( Pawlowski & Robey , 2004 ) . The symbolic tool serves to support mutual communication by being a communication moderator ( Lee , 2007 ; Luff & Heath , 1996 ; Lutters & Ackerman , 2007 ; Swan , 2007 ) . The outcome category is separated into temporal and ecological outcomes on IS boundary object research . The temporal outcomes are used to synthesize innovative values and impacts between different thoughts and ideas through prototypes and design methods in different groups ( Henderson , 1991 ; Subrahmanian , et al . , 2003 ; Yakura , 2002 ) . The ecological outcomes deal with the whole mechanism that alternate between analyzing and synthesizing for discovering better boundary objects over time ( Akkerman , 2011 ; Barrett , 2010 ; Bergman , et al . , 2007 ) . The interface category involves categorization , intersection , and social identity as boundary object research topics . Categorization translates different local circumstances and organizes them to create reliable categories to use as standards ( Bowker & Star , 1999 ; Star & Griesemer , 1989 ) . Intersection defines issues related to social mode and genre between different social worlds , groups , and actors ( Fleischmann , 2006 ) . Social identities describe how boundary objects generate different social norms ( Gal , et al . , 2008 ; Peltokorpi , 2006 ) . The protocol category deals with dynamic role , community of knowledge and practice , and distributed cognition research topics . Dynamic role defines how roles form boundaries in heterogeneous actor - networks ( Briers & Chua , 2001 ; Mambrey & Robinson , 1997 ) . Community of knowledge and practice explores the ways in which actors or communities with different cultures and natures , describe reasonable knowledge and practices ( Bartel , 2009 ; Bechky , 2003 ; Boland & Tenkasi , 1995 ; Carlile , 2002 , 2004 ; Levina , 2008 ; Levina & Vaast , 2005 ) . Distributed cognition explores diverse understandings within different individuals , groups , and organizations ( Ackerman & Halverson , 1999 ; Metiu , 2006 ) . Based on this literature review , this paper presents four categories and eleven topics in IS boundary objects research on two perspectives ( boundary objects as artifacts and boundary objects as actions ) . From this review , this paper identifies two research gaps : ( 1 ) boundary objects research has not been well balanced in - between boundary objects as artifacts and boundary objects as actions . Because most boundary objects research has been focused on relatively fixed IT artifacts or temporal outcomes of ISD research ; and ( 2 ) current boundary objects research does not highlight the process of how boundary objects emerge , occur in a sequence , and evolve during the ISD process , nor does it provide any analytic protocols , models , or frameworks . In order to overcome these major research gaps , we explore a theoretical approach and an interaction protocol for enriching boundary objects research without becoming fixated on the object and distant from human interaction . Thus , this paper examines opportunities to enhance actions to current fairly artifact - centered boundary objects research , in which a dramaturgical perspective is adopted as a theoretical background and sociodrama is used as a practical protocol for demonstrating how boundary objects as actions can be developed in the process of ISD . DRAMATURGICAL PERSPECTIVE AS A THEORETICAL FOUNDATION In this paper , we adopt a dramaturgical perspective as a sound theoretical foundation to address current object - centered boundary objects in order to inspire more actions . The original concept of a dramaturgical perspective ( Hare , Blumberg , & Goffman , 1988 ) focuses on the development of performances in a social interaction . As a macro social interaction view , Burke ( 1954 , 1968 , 1969 , 1972 , 1985 ) identifies ‘dramatism’ as a social interaction structure in a dramaturgical perspective , and he suggests a pentad ( 1945 ) , which is made up of act ( performance ) , agent ( actor ) , scene ( stage ) , means ( agency ) , and a purpose . Considering the importance of narratives , Bruner ( 1990 ; 2004 ; 1962 ) suggests ‘cultural psychology’ combining anthropology and psychology in a dramaturgical perspective . His cultural psychology demonstrates how people use narratives in order to understand different cultural psychology in observed and unobserved events or situations . As a micro interaction view , Goffman ( 1961 , 1967 , 1970 , 1973 , 1981 ) describes malleable Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 5 participation interaction with self - role , facial work , and emotions in order to create situated activities in a dramaturgical perspective . His micro social dynamic is a dramaturgical analysis , and it presents an image of the self as a tool for representing multi - stakeholders’ facial actions , emotions , and their roles and situations with verbal and non - verbal communication ( 1967 ) . With the respect to roles , Sarbin ( 1976 ; 1986 ; 1968 ) highlights the importance of roles in a dramaturgical perspective . His role theory ( 1968 ) deals with role enactments identifying seamless elaborated episodes among different role - reversal interactions . In this way , this paper defines a dramaturgical perspective with the following four considerations : a macro social framework , cultural narratives , a micro social interaction , and social roles . SOCIODRAMA AS A PROTOCOL TO SIMULATE ACTION - CENTERED BOUNDARY OBJECTS As a theoretical underpinning , a dramaturgical perspective allows for action - centered boundary objects in IS research . In this paper , we use sociodrama as an interaction protocol to show how a dramaturgical perspective can inspire more actions to current boundary objects . The original concept of sociodrama is introduced by Moreno ( 1943 , 1978 ) ; however , sociodrama has been further considered as a social interaction technique by practitioners in education , psychology and social work field ( Browne , 2005 ; Sternberg & Garcia , 2000 ) . In general , sociodrama deals with the issues of group or organizational problem - solving by focusing on the development of social performance among multiple stakeholders ( Eckloff , 2006 ) . As a method , sociodrama requires the following practical techniques : role - reversal , doubling , mirroring , soliloquy , and empty chair etc . ( Sternberg & Garcia 2000 ) . These techniques of sociodrama make participants take different social roles , thoughts , emotions , and experiences during the sociodrama practice . In this process , participants can express desires and emotions , and they can perform what they cannot express . Through a sociodrama practice , participants can identify social problems by their interactions and sometimes they can realize who they are and what they should do for future actions . Compared to the structure and sequence of boundary objects , sociodramas have the same knowledge boundaries but different sequences . As Carlile ( 2002 , 2004 ) identifies , boundary objects consist of three knowledge boundaries : syntactic , semantic , and pragmatic . The systemic process of boundary objects begins with a syntactic boundary , and encounters a semantic one , and then produces a pragmatic boundary . On the other hand , sociodrama has an opposite communication sequence compared to boundary objects . A pragmatic boundary starts with sociodrama practices between individuals and groups , and then the participants encounter a semantic boundary for translating their roles and cognitions ; finally the participants produce a syntactic boundary , which synthesizes or creates a new knowledge as a shared outcome based on the practice of a sociodrama . Figure 1 . Model of Action - Centered Boundary Objects Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 6 Figure 1 represents a model of action - centered boundary objects using sociodrama as an interaction protocol . This model demonstrates how the knowledge boundaries of sociodrama can develop action - centered boundary objects by multiple actors’ interaction . The protocol of sociodrama begins by practical actions among different social actors that express / understand / elucidate different social , cognitive , cultural conflicts in order to find out their collaborative meanings , solutions , or reasons during a sociodrama process . The sequence begins with pragmatic to semantic boundary and from semantic to syntactic boundary . The pragmatic boundary accounts for the actions of information transformation that reveal where the different social conflicts exist between different actors in the first stage of the sociodrama protocol . To draw an overview of struggles between different actors , diverse role - playing techniques such as doubling , soliloquy , and mirroring can be used in the pragmatic boundary . For example , as shown in Figure 1 , actor A and actor B have struggles without understanding each other . When they start with role - playing , doubling , and mirroring , their social actions initiate and open their own social boundary . In the pragmatic boundary , actor A and B transform their thoughts , roles , and emotions , and they continually construct and reconstruct their traditional knowledge and cultures by the sociodrama practice . The semantic boundary takes up the actions of information translation between participants who encounter situated social meanings over time . This stage will be continued suggesting dynamic discourses between actors . Here , the actors can define potential outcomes of boundary objects . Their positions on the semantic boundary will continue until they can identify applicable findings such as the critical reasons of struggles , solution criteria , and future directions . For instance , actor A and actor B can perceive where the problem spaces exist from the perspective of the pragmatic boundary , and so they then seek to identify situated meanings of problem - solving and symbolic boundary objects as representative solutions over time . The purpose of this stage is to improve the quality of knowledge and situated meanings of boundary objects by negotiation between A and B . The syntactic boundary deals with the actions of information transfer , and it identifies a fully role - reversed communication outcome such as new social knowledge , an artifact , or a system . In this stage , actors can co - create an outcome that reflects the entire sociodrama process between different actors . For example , actor A and actor B distinguish the values of situated meanings stemming from the pragmatic and semantic boundaries , and they communicate with each other in order to synthesize an alternative outcome . In sum , the syntactic , semantic , and pragmatic boundaries answer the question of how different social actors can initiate sociodrama , how they can identify a sequential mechanism during the process of the sociodrama . Below is a brief overview of the type of experiment that could be performed to test how sociodrama would work as a design inquiry for creating new boundary objects in Information Systems Development ( ISD ) . In such a project , there are diverse actors , specialized IT designers and IT users , who have different knowledge , interests , and cultures . When project members do usability tests to change the form , functions , and features of a current IT design prototype , users typically provide feedback by expressing their feeling , emotions , and opinions about embedded design elements in light of their prior knowledge and experiences . The experiment would test sociodrama as a design inquiry for understanding users’ needs , environments , and requirements by having each design project member transform their roles in a given design situation . I anticipate that both IT designers and IT users would mutually benefit from sociodrama in a design project . By switching the specialized design roles and missions among designers and users , they will enhance their ability to identify situated design problems and to discover alternative design solutions using sociodrama as a design inquiry . The experiment would test how sociodrama serves as a technique of design inquiry among different social worlds and whether the actors can expand their current understandings by alternating among roles in ISD . Employing sociodrama , actors would play multiple different roles both within and across their specialized backgrounds ( designer versus user versus manager ) , and they would construct / reconstruct and make interpretations of new types of boundary objects . CONCLUSION This paper explores how a dramaturgical perspective using sociodrama can produce action - centered boundary objects . To address this , this paper conducts the following process : 1 ) literature review , 2 ) interpretation , 3 ) synthesis of boundary objects with by a dramaturgical perspective using sociodrama , and 4 ) a model of action - centered boundary objects . Several general discussions may be drawn from this work . The literature review of prior boundary objects research revealed the current boundary objects research domain and identified where challenges and limitations are in the field of boundary objects research . We categorized two boundary objects perspectives ( ‘object - centered’ and ‘action - centered’ ) with four categories and eleven topics . We assume there is a turning Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 7 point from object - centered boundary objects to action - centered ones . Our summary of the research requires an expanded perspective in order to engage more actions to boundary objects . The dramaturgical perspective involves a sound theory for expanding current object - centered boundary objects . This dramaturgical perspective will encourage diverse opportunities for boundary objects research and each dramaturgical perspective has a different concentration for expanding boundary objects research and also provides effective ways for extending the development of performance between boundary objects and social interaction . Sociodrama is an interaction protocol in order to create a new model of boundary objects by inspiring more actions to current object - centered boundary objects . There are ways in which people could test the effectiveness of sociodrama enhanced boundary objects in ISD . In order to test the effectiveness of sociodrama as a technique of constructing boundary objects , future research might test how sociodrama deals with complex design questions and design inquiry among different social actors in a design project . The test would include experiments that combine design sequences , design narration , and diverse actions in sociodrama contexts . For example , IT designers and IT users have different sets of information including motivations , emotions and requirements in a design project . In design process , they interpret and understand each other’s knowledge and practices in a sequence to create a form of objects . Here , sociodrama would act as a technique to manage a set of conflicts information between two groups ( designers and users ) and it will provide possible spaces for decision making , knowledge management , and new product development by complex design actions and questions between actors . In this process , the actors might encounter their own design conclusions as new boundary objects . Boundary objects research has diverse potential in management research of design science , decision supporting system , knowledge management , and dynamic group organization research , based on strategic management and organizational theory . Thus , it is important that scholars in management research are aware of how to understand prior literature on propositions in boundary object research . Here , we highlight boundary objects within social interaction through a dramaturgical perspective as a theoretical background and sociodrama as an interaction protocol . This research will provide a diversity of perspectives and approaches on how to consider boundary objects in social interaction contexts for the community of IS researchers and practitioners . LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH There are some challenges and limitations in this study . First of all , it is quite a subjective way of approaching research on boundary objects to use dramaturgical perspectives , and sociodrama . Second , this is not an empirical study so that overall reviews and research issues require empirical evidence , theoretical applications , or specific theoretical research model development . Third , the developed framework with the types and themes of boundary objects has certain limitations in that there are possibilities to interpret it differently . Thus , we wish to study boundary objects in management research by collecting empirical evidence testing our perspective and to further develop our perspective in different applications of boundary objects research . REFERENCES 1 . Ackerman , M . S . , & Halverson , C . ( 1999 ) . Organizational memory : processes , boundary objects , and trajectories . Paper presented at the System Sciences , 1999 . HICSS - 32 . Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on . 2 . Akkerman , S . F . , Bakker , A . ( 2011 ) . Boundary Crossing and Boundary Objects . Review of Educational Research , 81 ( 2 ) , 132 . 3 . Barrett , M . , Oborn , E . ( 2010 ) . Boundary object use in cross - cultural software development teams . Human Relations , 63 ( 8 ) , 1199 . 4 . Bartel , C . , and Garud , R . ( 2009 ) . The Role of Narratives in Sustaining Organizational Innovation . Organization Science , 20 ( 1 ) , 107 . 5 . Bechky , B . A . ( 2003 ) . Sharing meaning across occupational communities : The transformation of understanding on a production floor . Organization Science , 14 ( 3 ) , 312 - 330 . 6 . Bergman , M . , Lyytinen , K . , & Mark , G . ( 2007 ) . Boundary objects in design : An ecological view of design artifacts . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 8 ( 11 ) , 546 - 568 . Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 8 7 . Boland , R . J . , Jr . , Lyytinen , K . , & Yoo , Y . ( 2007 ) . Wakes of Innovation in Project Networks : The Case of Digital 3 - D Representations in Architecture , Engineering , and Construction . Organization Science , 18 ( 4 ) , 631 - 647 . 8 . Boland , R . J . , Jr . , & Tenkasi , R . V . ( 1995 ) . Perspective Making and Perspective Taking in Communities of Knowing . Organization Science , 6 ( 4 ) , 350 - 372 . 9 . Bowker , G . C . , & Star , S . L . ( 1999 ) . Sorting things out classification and its consequences . from http : / / www . netlibrary . com / urlapi . asp ? action = summary & v = 1 & bookid = 13186 10 . Briers , M . , & Chua , W . F . ( 2001 ) . The role of actor - networks and boundary objects in management accounting change : a field study of an implementation of activity - based costing . [ doi : DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0361 - 3682 ( 00 ) 00029 - 5 ] . Accounting , Organizations and Society , 26 ( 3 ) , 237 - 269 . 11 . Bruner , J . ( 1990 ) . Acts of Meaning . Cambridg , Mass , Harvard University Press . 12 . Bruner , J . ( 2004 ) . Life as narrative . Social research , 71 ( 3 ) , 691 . 13 . Bruner , J . S . ( 1962 ) . A study of thinking [ by ] Jerome S . Bruner [ et al . ] . New York : Wiley . 14 . Burke , K . ( 1954 ) . Permanence & change , an anatomy of purpose . Los Altos , Calif . : Hermes Publications . 15 . Burke , K . ( 1968 ) . Language as symbolic action : essays on life , literature , and method . Berkeley [ u . a . ] : Univ . of California Press . 16 . Burke , K . ( 1969 ) . A grammar of motives . Berkeley : University of California Press . 17 . Burke , K . ( 1972 ) . Dramatism and development . Barre , Mass . : Clark University Press . 18 . Burke , K . ( 1985 ) . Dramatism and logology . Communication Quarterly , 33 ( 2 ) , 89 . 19 . Carlile , P . R . ( 2002 ) . A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries : Boundary objects in new product development . Organization Science , 13 ( 4 ) , 442 - 455 . 20 . Carlile , P . R . ( 2004 ) . Transferring , translating , and transforming : An integrative framework for managing knowledge across boundaries . Organization Science , 15 ( 5 ) , 555 - 568 . 21 . Fleischmann , K . R . ( 2006 ) . Boundary objects with agency : A method for studying the design - use interface . Information Society , 22 ( 2 ) , 77 - 87 . 22 . Gal , U . , Lyytinen , K . , & Yoo , Y . J . ( 2008 ) . The dynamics of IT boundary objects , information infrastructures , and organisational identities : the introduction of 3D modelling technologies into the architecture , engineering , and construction industry . [ Article ] . European Journal of Information Systems , 17 ( 3 ) , 290 - 304 . 23 . Goffman , E . ( 1961 ) . Encounters . 24 . Goffman , E . ( 1967 ) . Interaction ritual ; essays in face - to - face behavior . Chicago : Aldine Pub . Co . 25 . Goffman , E . ( 1970 ) . Strategic interaction . Oxford : Blackwell . 26 . Goffman , E . ( 1973 ) . The presentation of self in everyday life . Woodstock , New York : Overlook Press . 27 . Goffman , E . ( 1981 ) . Forms of talk . Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania Press . 28 . Hare , A . P . , Blumberg , H . H . , & Goffman , E . ( 1988 ) . Dramaturgical analysis of social interaction . New York : Praeger . 29 . Henderson , K . ( 1991 ) . Flexible Sketches and Inflexible Data Bases : Visual Communication , Conscription Devices , and Boundary Objects in Design Engineering . Science , Technology , 16 ( 4 ) , 448 . 30 . Lee . ( 2007 ) . Boundary negotiating artifacts : Unbinding the routine of boundary objects and embracing chaos in collaborative work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 16 ( 3 ) , 307 . 31 . Levina , N . ( 2005 ) . Collaborating on multiparty information systems development projects : A collective reflection - in - action view . Information Systems Research , 16 ( 2 ) , 109 - 130 . 32 . Levina , N . ( 2008 ) . Innovating or doing as told ? Status differences and overlapping boundaries in offshore collaboration . M & O Quarterly , 32 ( 2 ) , 307 . 33 . Levina , N . , & Vaast , E . ( 2005 ) . The emergence of boundary spanning competence in practice . implications for implementation and use of information systems . Mis Quarterly , 29 ( 2 ) , 335 - 363 . 34 . Luff , P . , & Heath , C . ( 1996 ) . Documents and proffessional practice : Bad organisational reasons for good clinical records . 35 . Lutters , W . , & Ackerman , M . ( 2007 ) . Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support . [ 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 006 - 9036 - x ] . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 16 ( 3 ) , 341 - 372 . 36 . Mambrey , P . , & Robinson , M . ( 1997 ) . Understanding the role of documents in a hierarchical flow of work . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the international ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work : the integration challenge . 37 . Metiu , A . ( 2006 ) . Owning the Code : Status Closure in Distributed Groups . Organization Science , 17 ( 4 ) , 418 . 38 . Pawlowski , S . D . , & Robey , D . ( 2004 ) . Bridging user organizations : Knowledge brokering and the work of information technology professionals . Mis Quarterly , 28 ( 4 ) , 645 - 672 . 39 . Peltokorpi , V . ( 2006 ) . Knowledge sharing in a cross - cultural context : Nordic expatriates in Japan . Knowledge Management Research , 4 ( 2 ) , 138 . Park et al . Boundary Objects as Action in Information Systems Development Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , Seattle , Washington , August 9 - 12 , 2012 . 9 40 . Sarbin , T . R . ( 1976 ) . Contextualism : A world view for modern psychology . NEBRASKA SYMPOSIUM ON MOTIVATION . 41 . Sarbin , T . R . ( 1986 ) . Narrative psychology : the storied nature of human conduct . New York : Praeger . 42 . Sarbin , T . R . , & Allen , V . L . ( 1968 ) . Role Theory . In G . Lindzey ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Social Psychology ( Vol . 1 , pp . 488 - 559 ) . 43 . Star , S . L . , & Griesemer , J . R . ( 1989 ) . Institutional Ecology , ' Translations ' and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ' s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . Social Studies of Science , 19 ( 3 ) , 387 - 420 . 44 . Subrahmanian , E . , Monarch , I . , Konda , S . , Granger , H . , Milliken , R . , Westerberg , A . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Boundary Objects and Prototypes at the Interfaces of Engineering Design . [ 10 . 1023 / A : 1023976111188 ] . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 12 ( 2 ) , 185 - 203 . 45 . Swan , J . , Bresnen , M . , Robertson , M . , and Newell , S . ( 2007 ) . The object of knowledge : The role of objects in biomedical innovation . Human Relations , 60 ( 12 ) , 1809 . 46 . Yakura , E . K . ( 2002 ) . Charting Time : Timelines as Temporal Boundary Objects . The Academy of Management Journal , 45 ( 5 ) , 956 - 970 . 47 . Yoo , Y . J . , Boland , R . J . , & Lyytinen , K . ( 2006 ) . From organization design to organization designing . Organization Science , 17 ( 2 ) , 215 - 229 .