Exploring Effects of Multiple Design Options and Sketchy Design on Web End - Users Anke Dittmar anke . dittmar @ uni - rostock . de University of Rostock , Department of Computer Science Muhammad Umer Imam muhammad . imam @ uni - rostock . de University of Rostock , Department of Computer Science ABSTRACT While the role of users as co - designers is increasingly acknowledged in many design situations the focus in cognitive design research is still on professional designers . The present study explores effects of confronting web end - users with multiple design options , and sketchy design . The preliminary results suggest that by presenting a sketchy design , end - user designers contribute more as compared to a finalized design . However , when presented with ( not too many ) multiple design options , end - user designers do not generate more design ideas as compared to when presented with only one design . The exploratory study contributes to design research in the context of end - user design . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → User centered design ; Inter - face design prototyping ; Web - based interaction . KEYWORDS Design cognition , end - user designer , cultures of participation , par - allel prototyping ACM Reference Format : Anke Dittmar and Muhammad Umer Imam . 2022 . Exploring Effects of Multiple Design Options and Sketchy Design on Web End - Users . In 33rd European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics ( ECCE 2022 ) , October 4 – 7 , 2022 , Kaiserslautern , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3552327 . 3552356 1 INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION User - oriented design approaches contributed to an increased in - volvement of end users in design processes , whether as informants , testers or even co - designers . However , the focus in cognitive de - sign research is still on professional designers . They are described , for example , as ‘solution - led’ and jumping between solution and problem space to consider implications of alternative solutions [ 3 ] . One reason for the few existing studies on end - user designers ( e . g . , [ 11 ] ) may be that initially in user - oriented HCI design there was a limited understanding and support of creative design practices [ 6 , 13 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . ECCE 2022 , October 4 – 7 , 2022 , Kaiserslautern , Germany © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9808 - 4 / 22 / 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3552327 . 3552356 This paper presents a study that explores user behavior in the context of end - user web development and meta design . Here , sys - tems are considered to be open ( with no sharp separation between design and use ) . Professional designers apply ‘underdesign’ to pro - vide design spaces for end users during the use of the system ( ‘de - signing in use’ ) [ 8 ] . For example , CrowdAdapt [ 12 ] is an end - user web design tool which augments web pages by a visual design environment to allow end users to customize the web layout . The present study aims at identifying effects of presenting mul - tiple design options , and sketchy design on end - user designers . We use the web augmentation tool in [ 9 ] to enable end users to explore alternative design ideas in a parallel prototyping matter . Prototypes provide a way to communicate ideas , and help in decision making processes . However , overly investing in one idea , or continuously refining the same idea can lead to design fixation [ 10 ] . It has been noted that creating multiple prototypes generates more divergent set of ideas and encourages design space exploration , which leads to a more satisfactory and high - quality design [ 4 , 5 ] . According to Buxton [ 2 ] , sketches are valuable design representations because of their ambiguity . A sketch is tentative , it “leaves a lot out , or leaves a lot to the imagination” [ 2 ] and thus supports the generation of new ideas . Béguin and Rabardel [ 1 ] point out that experienced designers maintain some uncertainty in their designs not to “get trapped too soon into solutions that are too specific” . The results of our exploratory study suggest that these described effects can only be partly observed with end - user designers . The paper is structured as follows . Section 2 describes the details of the experiment ( hypotheses , design , data collection , analysis , and results ) . Section 3 discusses the results and limitations of the experiment and concludes with future work . 2 THE STUDY The objective of the study was to explore effects of different pro - totyping techniques on end - user designers’ website ( re - ) design capabilities . In particular , we wanted to investigate effects of pre - senting multiple design options both in a sketchy and finalized form . Based on findings described above , we hypothesized the following : ( H1 ) : End - user designers generate more design ideas when they are presented with multiple design options . ( H2 ) : End - user designers generate more design ideas when they are presented with a sketchy design . 2 . 1 Method and Participants A between - subject experiment was designed , in which the partic - ipants were presented with one of the four versions of a sports club website ( see Table 1 ) . They were asked to imagine that they were participating in the design process of the website , and should provide their feedback on how they can improve this website . The ECCE 2022 , October 4 – 7 , 2022 , Kaiserslautern , Germany Anke Dittmar and Muhammad Umer Imam sports domain was chosen because it is familiar and interesting to most participants , so that they could engage and provide quality comments . This would allow us to investigate cognitive aspects in end - user design activities . The website was designed thoroughly enough to imitate a real - world website , but still was not too com - plex , so that the experiment takes a reasonable time to complete . 41 participants ( 35 male , 6 female ) took part in the experiment but one was excluded from analysis because he left the session after less than five minutes ( 10 participants in each condition ) . Only two participants were younger than 20 , while 32 participants were between the ages 20 to 30 . Seven of the participants were older than 30 . 18 of the participants were recruited in the context of two university courses , the other 23 participants were contacted individually . Many participants stated that they have previous web - site design experience , with none of them working as professional designer . Table 1 : Four conditions with the different versions of the sports club website . Design Type With Options With No Options Finalized FWO FWNO Sketchy SWO SWNO 2 . 1 . 1 Websites and Annotation Tool . In the FWNO version , the web pages were designed fully ; i . e . , the web pages included pic - tures and complete information . The FWO version had everything that FWNO version had , but in addition , some alternative design options were added in almost all of the pages . The design options provided differences in layout , information or features . The SWNO and SWO versions were in their general structure similar to FWNO and FWO versions respectively , with the only difference being that these versions represented an incomplete design ; i . e . , there were no images , and text fragments were used instead of the complete text in these versions . All four versions had similar number of main pages , namely Home , News , Tickets , Players and Weather . The latter page showed the current weather , and the weather prediction for the upcoming week at the sports club’s physical location . Even though it does not make sense to have an entire page dedicated to weather on a sports club website , it was added to see whether participants were focused on the task and thinking critically . The websites were augmented with the annotation tool in [ 9 ] which enabled participants in all conditions to create and position comments on web pages ( Figure 1 , right - hand side ) . In FWO and SWO , participants could additionally switch between and explore design options for ( parts of ) a page , choose an option and optionally provide reasons for their preferences ( Figure 1 , left - hand side ) . 2 . 1 . 2 Procedure . The study was conducted in winter / spring 2021 . Because of the COVID - 19 restrictions , it was carried out online in a controlled manner by using meeting rooms in BBB - Greenlight and , as backup , Zoom . At the beginning , an information sheet was shared with the participants through screen sharing to explain what the experiment is about , and what tasks they will be performing . Participants were then asked to confirm their consent to take part in the experiment . After the instructions on using the annotation tool had been provided , a link was shared with the participants which took them to a brief survey which was created using Qualtrics ( https : / / www . qualtrics . com / ) . Upon the submission of the survey , participants were presented with a link to one of the four versions of the sports club website on the survey completion screen . There were no time constraints to complete the task . The participants were told that they can easily ask for help if they were facing any trouble or confusion with the annotation tool while performing their task . At the end , we held a little discussion with the participants to get to know about their impression of the design . They were thanked for their time and efforts , and the session was concluded . 2 . 2 Data Collection and Analysis We collected the following data about the participants from the survey : name , gender , age group ( < 20 , 20 - 25 , 26 - 30 , 30 - 40 , 40 + ) , in - terest in sports ( 5 - point scale ) , website design experience ( yes / no ) , frequency of visiting any sports club website ( never . . . daily ) , time and date of survey submission . The feedback that the participants submitted using the annota - tion tool was accessed via its management platform [ 9 ] : comments ( annotations ) for web pages , preferred design options for ( parts of ) web pages , and optionally , reasons for choice , time and date of ticket submissions , browser with window dimension and font size used by participant . The participants’ comments are categorized as follows : • Addition • Domain - related addition • Modification • Domain - related modification • Like • Dislike • Technical issue Addition comments are comments in which the participants sug - gest to add something new to the website . For example , the com - ment “I am missing filter options I would use immediately to narrow down the search ( time , price , clubs that play ) ” was classified as an addition comment . Modification comments are those in which the participants propose to modify something that was already present in the website , or a layout change . An example of a comment that we categorized as a modification comment is the following : “When first glancing at the site , I would ( semantically ) expect the item shop and the ticket shop to be in the same column , and the point table over the matches” . Domain - related additions / modifications are comments in which the participants think about additions or modi - fications related to the sports club domain respectively , for example , “Add a tab for the fans” . They were treated as a subset of addition and modification comments respectively . Comments in which the participants explicitly state that they like / dislike some aspect of the website are in the like / dislike category . Examples are : “good that there are league table displayed and I like the link that talks more about players” and “as a homepage , it is dull” respectively . Comments such as “Missing the links behind the Buy Now or Book Now” are classified as technical issues . Exploring Effects of Multiple Design Options and Sketchy Design on Web End - Users ECCE 2022 , October 4 – 7 , 2022 , Kaiserslautern , Germany Figure 1 : Augmented web page in FWO condition : part with design options is framed in red , with an attached dialog box for exploration , choice and optional comments ( left ) ; part of augmented sketchy web page with two comments by a participant ( right ) . 2 . 3 Results Table 2 gives an overview of the results . The participants who were presented with alternative design options ( SWO , FWO ) spent considerably more time on the task as compared to the participants who had only one design to explore ( SWNO , FWNO ) . The average number of comments in all groups were between 8 and 9 , with groups SWNO and FWNO having a higher average number of comments ( 8 . 8 vs . 8 . 2 and 8 . 1 ) . Participants in the sketchy condition groups provided higher numbers of additional comments on average ( SWNO : 3 . 6 , SWO : 3 . 3 ) . They were followed by participants in the group FWNO with 3 . 1 and then FWO with 2 . 3 additional comments on average . The participants in groups SWNO and FWNO provided almost the same number of domain - related addition comments ( 1 . 9 and 1 . 8 respec - tively ) . We saw the same pattern in groups SWO and FWO , where participants in group SWO generated slightly more domain - related addition comments on average than the participants in group FWO , 1 . 5 as compared to 1 . 3 . It should be noted that some of the idea expressed by participants in SWNO and FWNO were already pre - sented in the design options in SWO and FWO . For example , a participant in the FWNO group commented about the Tickets page , “I would sort by dates . . . ” . Similarly , a participant in the SWNO group suggested about the News page that “The news should be listed from top to bottom with the latest news at the top” . It can also be seen in Table 2 that the participants in group SWNO and FWNO created more modification comments on average than the participants in their respective groups offering design options SWO ( 2 vs . 1 . 5 ) and FWO ( 2 . 7 vs . 2 . 1 ) . This pattern also holds for domain - related modification comments for the participants in sketchy condition groups , but not for the participants in finalized design groups . The participants in the SWO and FWO groups expressed more likes than the participants in SWNO and FWNO groups respectively . Also , the participants that were not presented with alternative de - sign options expressed more dislikes as compared to the participants who were presented with alternative design options . It was observed that some participants in the sketchy condition groups did not like the website without any pictures . A participant commented that “The first impression of the website it’s actually not visually appealing . No images at all . Even though it’s for experi - mentation there should be a clear visual representation” . Generally , there was more dispersion in the results of the sketchy condition groups . The weather page was added to check if the participants were focused on the task . Our assumption was that attentive participants would suggest to remove the page , as it is not related to the sports club . Even though some participants did suggest exactly that , many participants came up with other ideas as well . For example , a par - ticipant commented , “I would not create an extra navigation point for weather . May be use it in the Ticket section so a customer can see the weather forecast for a specific game day” . 3 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS We conducted an experiment to find out the effects of presenting to end - user designers ( i ) one design or multiple design options , and ( ii ) a sketchy or finalized design . Our hypotheses were that when presented with ( not too many ) multiple design options , end - user designers generate more design ideas as compared to when presented with only one design ( H1 ) , and also that by presenting a sketchy design , end - user designers contribute more as compared to when presented with a finalized design ( H2 ) . The results support hypothesis ( H2 ) , as the participants who were provided with a sketchy design generated more additional comments than the participants who were presented with a final - ized design . However , they contradict our first hypothesis ( H1 ) . One reason could be that participants in the FWO and SWO groups could not express some ideas that were generated in the FWNO and SWNO groups , as they were already presented to them in the design options . Another reason could be that some participants did not make the effort to generate more ideas , when there were already multiple design options provided to them . They may have preferred to select one of the given design options as their favorite , without providing any more design ideas . Some comments in the sketchy condition groups and the dispersion in the results may ECCE 2022 , October 4 – 7 , 2022 , Kaiserslautern , Germany Anke Dittmar and Muhammad Umer Imam Table 2 : Results . n o . o f p a r t i c i p a n t s a v g . t i m e s p e n t o n t a s k ( i n m i n ) a v g . n o . o f a dd i t i o n s ( S D ) a v g . n o . o f d o m a i n - r e l a t e d a dd i t i o n s a v g . n o . o f m o d i fi c a t i o n s ( S D ) a v g . n o . o f d o m a i n - r e l a t e d m o d i fi c a t i o n s ( S D ) a v g . n o . o f l i k e s ( S D ) a v g . n o . o f d i s l i k e s ( S D ) a v g . n o . o f t e c h n i c a l i ss u e s a v g . n o . o f c o mm e n t s ( S D ) SWNO 10 26 . 2 ( 10 . 8 ) 3 . 6 ( 2 . 1 ) 1 . 9 2 . 0 ( 2 . 2 ) 0 . 5 1 . 5 ( 2 . 0 ) 1 . 2 ( 1 . 0 ) 0 . 5 8 . 8 ( 5 . 5 ) SWO 10 38 . 7 ( 13 . 0 ) 3 . 3 ( 1 . 9 ) 1 . 5 1 . 5 ( 1 . 1 ) 0 . 1 2 . 4 ( 0 . 7 ) 0 . 9 ( 1 . 4 ) 0 8 . 1 ( 3 . 2 ) FWNO 10 26 . 3 ( 9 . 7 ) 3 . 1 ( 2 . 5 ) 1 . 8 2 . 7 ( 2 . 2 ) 0 . 3 1 . 5 ( 2 . 0 ) 0 . 9 ( 1 . 1 ) 0 . 6 8 . 8 ( 3 . 8 ) FWO 10 33 . 8 ( 13 . 1 ) 2 . 3 ( 1 . 8 ) 1 . 3 2 . 1 ( 1 . 6 ) 0 . 4 2 . 9 ( 0 . 9 ) 0 . 5 ( 0 . 7 ) 0 . 4 8 . 2 ( 3 . 6 ) also support that not every consumer wants to be a prosumer . This reasoning is in line with Fischer [ 7 ] who points out that contribu - tions of end users depend on their expertise and motivation . The author recommends to develop a variety of technological environ - ments to support a broad spectrum of participation scenarios : “not every participant must contribute , but all participants must have opportunities to contribute when they want to” [ 7 ] . Participants in SWO and FWO groups generated more like com - ments than the participants in SWNO and FWNO groups respec - tively . There could be two reasons for this . One reason could be that the participants in SWO and FWO groups were asked to select one of the multiple design options as their favorite design , and optionally to provide some justification for the preferred option . This prompted some like comments . The other reason could be that the shortfalls that were present in one design option were rectified in another option . The participants liked this fact , and hence pro - vided more like comments . Here , we can note that the reception of positive comments by using parallel prototyping increases the professional designer’s confidence in their abilities . This is in line with the observation in [ 5 ] that one might receive rather nega - tive comments when presenting only one design , but by providing multiple designs , one gets positive comments too . The responses to the weather page highlight the importance of end - user design – the collaboration of many different minds from a variety of backgrounds [ 7 ] - as the participants came up with ideas that we did not think of . 3 . 1 Limitations and Future Work The experiment was carried out with a limited number of partic - ipants in an online mode because of the COVID - 19 restrictions . The website example and the annotation tool may have had an impact on the results . Most of the participants were male and with a technical background . We are currently conducting a study with a website in another domain and with more diverse participants . There were differences between participants regarding frequency of visiting existing sports club websites and design capabilities which seem to have an impact on the generation of domain - related design ideas . On the one hand , this can be seen as a limitation . On the other hand , end - user designers should not be equated with novice design - ers . End - user designer is a role which is filled by people for whom the design task is not the primary task , who can have diverse de - sign experience and who act in different contexts . This exploratory study focuses on cognitive aspects , future work should also include understanding more deeply contextual factors in end - user design . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the participants in the study . We would also like to thank Henrik Hertel and Doritt Linke for their technical support . REFERENCES [ 1 ] P . Béguin and P . Rabardel . 2001 . Designing for Instrument - Mediated Activity . Scandinavian journal of information systems 12 , 1 – 2 ( 2001 ) , 173 – 190 . [ 2 ] B . Buxton . 2007 . Sketching User Experiences : Getting the design right and the right design . M . Kaufmann . [ 3 ] N . Cross . 2001 . Design Cognition : Results from Protocol and other Empirical Studies of Design Activity . In Design Knowing and Learning : Cognition in Design Education , CharlesM . Eastman , W . MichaelMcCracken , andWendyC . Newstetter ( Eds . ) . Elsevier Science , Oxford , 79 – 103 . [ 4 ] S . Dow , J . Fortuna , D . Schwartz , B . Altringer , D . Schwartz , and S . Klemmer . 2011 . Prototyping Dynamics : Sharing Multiple Designs Improves Exploration , Group Rapport , and Results . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2807 – 2816 . [ 5 ] S . P . Dow , A . Glassco , J . Kass , M . Schwarz , D . L . Schwartz , and S . R . Klemmer . 2010 . Parallelprototypingleadstobetterdesignresults , moredivergence , andincreased self - efficacy . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 17 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 18 : 1 – 18 : 24 . [ 6 ] D . Fallman . 2003 . Design - Oriented Human - Computer Interaction . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’03 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 225 – 232 . [ 7 ] G . Fischer . 2011 . Understanding , Fostering , and Supporting Cultures of Participa - tion . Interactions 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 42 – 53 . [ 8 ] G . Fischer , D . Fogli , and A . Piccinno . 2017 . Revisiting and Broadening the Meta - Design Framework for End - User Development . In New Perspectives in End - User Development . Springer , 61 – 97 . [ 9 ] H . Hertel , A . Dittmar , and D . Linke . 2020 . Meta - Level Support for Facilitating Participation in Website ( Re - ) Design Activities . In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems ( EICS ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . [ 10 ] D . G . Jansson and S . M . Smith . 1991 . Design fixation . Design Studies 12 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 3 – 11 . [ 11 ] A . M . Kanstrup . 2012 . A Small Matter of Design : An Analysis of End Users as Designers . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 109 – 118 . [ 12 ] M . Nebeling , M . Speicher , and M . C . Norrie . 2013 . CrowdAdapt : enabling crowd - sourced web page adaptation for individual viewing conditions and preferences . . In Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems ( EICS ’13 ) . ACM , 23 – 32 . [ 13 ] E . Stolterman . 2008 . Thenatureofdesignpracticeandimplicationsforinteraction design research . International Journal of Design 2 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 55 – 65 .