Is passion contagious ? The transference of entrepreneurial passion to employees Melissa S . Cardon ⁎ Pace University , Lubin School of Business , 861 Bedford Road , Goldstein AC 227 , Pleasantville , NY 10570 , United States a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t The scholarly entrepreneurship community is coming to recognize what practicing entrepreneurs have known for some time — that passion is a central element of the entrepreneurial process . Recent developments have more carefully de ﬁ ned the construct of entrepreneurial passion and modeled its impact on entrepreneurial behaviors . This paper takes the next step by building a model of how that passion may be transferred from entrepreneur to employees . The question of interest is how entrepreneurs can facilitate the contagion of their own passion to others . © 2008 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Passion Emotional contagion Entrepreneurship 1 . Introduction An emerging stream of research concerns the powerful role affect plays in enhancing the success potential of would - be entrepreneurs . For example , positive emotion may enhance entrepreneurial creativity , which can aid in recognition of new opportunities ( Baron , 2008 ) , and entrepreneurs that are passionate for their ventures may be more creative and persistent , and may become more absorbed in venture - related activities , which should enhance key venture outcomes ( Cardon , Wincent , Singh , & Drnovsek , in press ) . More broadly , entrepreneurs who are passionate have been thought to be more successful than those who are not by both academics ( e . g . Baum & Locke , 2004 ; Cardon , Zietsma , Saparito , Matherne , & Davis , 2005 ) and practitioners ( e . g . Moses , 2001 ) . Chang ( 2001 : 106 ) argues that , “ Passion inspires us to work harder and with greater effect . The irony is that we hardly notice our effort . It comes easily and enjoyably . ” Yet entrepreneurs do not act alone ; successful recruitment and management of employees are critical factors in ﬂ uencing the success of emerging ventures ( Baron & Hannan , 2002 ; Deshpande & Golhar , 1994 ; Hornsby & Kuratko , 1990 ) . A growing body of literature on alternative models of human resource management in such ﬁ rms has emerged ( e . g . Baron , Burton , & Hannon , 1996 ; Baron & Hannan , 2002 ; Baron , 2003 ; Heneman & Tansky , 2002 ; Heneman , Tansky , & Camp , 2000 ) . This research suggests that ﬁ rm performance can be enhanced by effective HR practices such as attracting and retaining key talent ( Barber , Wesson , Roberson , & Taylor , 1999 ) , providing appropriate compensation and incentives ( Graham , Murray , & Amuso , 2002 ) , and developing employees through training ( Chandler & McEvoy , 2000 ) . Ifpassionateentrepreneursmakeformoreeffectiveorganizations , andemployeesarealsoacriticalinputto ﬁ rmperformance , then itfollowsthathavingpassionateemployeeswouldalsobebene ﬁ cial . Weknowthat , ingeneral , affectiveexperiencesatworkin ﬂ uence the direction , intensity , and persistence of employee behavior ( Seo , Barrett , & Bartunek , 2004 ) . Yet interestingly , we have only anecdotal evidence concerning the role that emotions and feelings of employees of entrepreneurial ﬁ rms play in in ﬂ uencing ﬁ rm survivaland success . It isatheoreticalandempiricalpuzzlewhether strongemotionsofentrepreneurs themselves , perhapscombined with effective HRM , are enough to lead to ﬁ rm success , or whether in small ﬁ rms the emotions of the employees are also important . Further , if employee passion is bene ﬁ cial , the question becomes how entrepreneurs can transfer their passion to employees . Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 ⁎ Tel . : + 1 914 773 3618 ; fax : + 1 914 773 3920 . E - mail address : mcardon @ pace . edu . 1053 - 4822 / $ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . hrmr . 2008 . 04 . 001 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Human Resource Management Review journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / humres Drawing from the psychological literature on emotions and feelings ( e . g . , Russell & Barrett , 1999 ) and emotional contagion 1 ( e . g . Sy , Cote , & Saavedra , 2005 ) , as well as literature on transformational leadership ( e . g . , Bass , 1985 ) , we build a model of emotional contagion within the entrepreneurial context , from entrepreneurs to employees . In the following sections we discuss entrepreneurial passion in general , then how it leads to the emotional displays of entrepreneurs . We then build a model of emotional contagion , drawing a distinction between contagion through primitive emotional mimicry and through social comparison processes . We discuss how transformational leadership can enhance contagion through social comparison , and ultimately suggest that for contagion of passion from entrepreneur to employee to occur , employees must experience both positive intense feelings for their activities and a sense of meaningfulness or identity connection to those activities within the entrepreneurial ﬁ rm . This draws directly from a recent de ﬁ nition of passion , where our discussion begins . 2 . Entrepreneurial passion Passion involves “ consciously accessible positive intense feelings experienced by engagement in entrepreneurial activities associated with roles that are meaningful and salient to the self - identity of the entrepreneur ” ( Cardon et al . , in press : 12 ) . There are two key elements of this de ﬁ nition , according to the authors . First , passion involves positive and intense feelings that occur over time , instead of in response to episodic or immediate triggers in the environment . Thus , passion is enduring rather than momentary . Second , passion feelings are for venture - related objects , such as roles , that are identity meaningful to the entrepreneur . As such , entrepreneurial passion involves more than just positive emotions ( see Baron , 2008 for a discussion of emotions in entrepreneurship ) ; passion also involves a deep identity connection between the entrepreneur and the venture or salient role ( see also Murnieks and Mosakowski , 2006 for further discussion of the entrepreneurial role identity ) . Identity relevance involves ﬁ nding personal meaning in the activities one is engaged in , typically because they relate to an enduring and central characteristic of a person ' s sense of who they are as an individual ( Stryker & Burke , 2000 ) . Thus , an entrepreneur who is passionate for being the founder or owner of their venture will experience positive and intense feelings for the ﬁ rm , and will also have the role of “ founder ” as a central part of their self - identity . As a result , the venture becomes an essential and unifying theme for the entrepreneur ' s life and de ﬁ nes his or her identity . “ When an entrepreneur ' s attachment is strong , the entrepreneur is likely to respond to cues in the venture that others may not notice , feeling every pain of the new venture , and taking every attack on it personally ” ( Cardon et al . , 2005 : 33 ) . Because of this identity connection , entrepreneurs may attribute business accomplishments to themselves , just as de ﬁ ciencies in the business are felt to re ﬂ ect their own failings or inadequacies ( e . g . , Shepherd , 2003 ) . It is important to note that while passion is long - term and is typically positive and intense ( Cardon et al . , in press ) , entrepreneurs who feel passion for their venture mayalso experience shorter - term emotions that vary in intensityand valence . For example , the loss of a client may yield a negative short - term emotion such as frustration , even when the entrepreneur still holds positive feelings for the venture and its future potential . Recent work in psychology and neuropsychology has demonstrated that feelings ( long - term ) and emotions ( short - term ) are distinct in how they are experienced and in how they in ﬂ uence cognitions and behaviors ( Damasio , 2003 ; Dolan , 2002 ) . An extensive review of these differences is outside the scope of this paper ( see Cardon , Wincent , Singh , & Drnovsek , 2005 ; Russell , 2003 ) , but the simplistic understanding of this difference is that feelings such as passion are long - term enduring affects that persist over extended periods of time , such as the love of a parent for a child , while emotions are shorter - term episodic affects that are in direct response to immediate stimuli , such as anger whenyour child breaks a plate . There is also a distinction between these and moods , which are low intensity , generalized affects that are unrelated to events and circumstances that created them ( Cross & Travaglione , 2003 ) . An example of this is “ she is in a bad mood today ” regardless of what caused that mood . While passion has been argued to be a central element in entrepreneurship ( Bird , 1988 ; Cardon et al . , in press ; Smilor , 1997 ) , emotions may also play an important role in the broader affective system for entrepreneurs and their employees ( Baron , 2008 ; Cardon et al . , 2005 ) . Passion has been argued to have strong effects on the creativity , persistence , and absorption of entrepreneurs ( Cardon et al . , 2005 ; Murnieks & Mosakowski , 2006 ) . For example , positive intense affect , such as passion , lead to people setting more challenging goals ( Seo et al . , 2004 ) , using more creativity in tackling those challenges , and persisting longer in tasks , even when overcoming obstacles ( Sy et al . , 2005 ) . Passion has been credited with giving entrepreneurs the power to do whatever it takes to realize their visions ( Chang , 2001 ; Shane , Locke , & Collins , 2003 ) , to guide their thoughts , actions , and pursuit of activities ( e . g . , Baum , 2003 ; Baum , Locke , & Smith , 2001 ) , and to work on tasks with tenacity ( Brush , Greene , & Hart , 2001 ) . More speci ﬁ cally , passion has been said to improve one ' s ability to pitch their ideas ( Elsbach & Kramer , 2003 ) and to raise funds from venture capitalists ( Chen , Yao , & Kotha , in press ) . However , excessive levels of passion may ultimately be dysfunctional , leading to blind persistence ( Branzei & Zietsma , 2003 ) , irrational escalation of commitment , or even obsessive behaviors ( Vallerand et al . , 2003 ) . Such dysfunctional outcomes of passion are outside the scope of the current manuscript . 3 . Emotional display of entrepreneurial passion Individualsvaryintheirabilitytocontroltheexperienceofaffect , suchaspassion ( antecedent - focusedemotionalregulation , Gross , 1998 ) . Individuals also vary in their ability to control the expression or display of affect once they do experience it ( response - focused emotional regulation , Gross , 1998 ) . Often we suppress emotions we experience from being displayed outwardly , either because of 1 Note that emotional contagion is used in this paper to refer to contagion of all affect , including emotions , feelings , or moods . This is consistent with other research that uses the term emotional contagion to refer to contagion of moods rather than emotion ( Barsade , 2002 ) . 78 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 social norms or a desire to internalize rather than externalize our feelings ( Gross & Levenson , 1993 ) . In addition , some individuals are quite adeptatemotionallabor , ordisplayingemotionsthattheymaynotactuallyfeelthemselves , whether inorder togain ahighertip ( Rafeli & Sutton , 1987 ) ortogetemployeestoperforminlinewithorganizationalgoalsregardlessof themanager ' sactualfeltemotions ( Dasborough & Ashkanasy , 2002 ) . We focus on the expression of authentic emotions ( those actually experienced ) , rather than on the arti ﬁ cial display of pseudo - emotions ( those not truly experienced by the individual displaying the emotion ) . Individuals typically display or express emotions they experience , such as through facial expressions and posture ( Gross & John , 1997 ) . While people vary in their emotional expressivity , or the extent to which they tend to outwardly display their emotions ( Kring , Smith , & Neale , 1994 ) , in general people are likely to display positive emotions that they experience , particularly in the presence of other familiar individuals ( e . g . , Buck , Loslow , Murphy , & Costanzo , 1992 ) , such as co - workers . Also , emotions that are more intense , such as entrepreneurial passion , are more likely to be displayed because they are harder to regulate ( Gross , 1998 ) . Therefore , we propose the following : P1 . The experience of passion will lead entrepreneurs to display their situational emotions more frequently and intensely . Research in psychology and neurobiology has proven that positive and negative affects are experienced in different parts of the brain and body , and operate very differently in their in ﬂ uence on behavior and cognitions ( Damasio , 2003 ) . If entrepreneurs are emotionally intelligent , meaning able to control their own emotions , pick up on the emotions of others , and deliberately try to in ﬂ uence emotions of others ( Cross & Travaglione , 2003 ) , then it is possible that entrepreneurs can choose whether to display positive emotions , negative emotions , neither , or both types of emotions with employees . We anticipate different effects of each of these choices , suggesting that a key link in the passion contagion process is the display of emotions by entrepreneurs . Emotional intelligence is the management of the emotions of self and of others ( Cross & Travaglione , 2003 ) and involves appraising and expressing emotion , awareness of verbally and nonverbally expressed emotions , regulation of emotions in the self and others , and utilizing emotions to provide ﬂ exibility in planning , creativity in thinking , motivation , and the ability to redirect attention ( Mayer , Caruso , & Salovay , 2000 ) . Emotionally intelligent people are able to choose what emotions to share , as well as when , and how to express these emotions to others . It is an empirical question whether entrepreneurs are emotionally intelligent , or can be trained to be so , but general management research suggests that good leaders are typically high in this skill , and are adept at varying their facial , vocal , and postural expression ( Sy et al . , 2005 ) . Moreover , subordinates usually can readily ascertain leaders ' affective displays ( Lewis , 2000 ) . Recent work in entrepreneurship on affect suggests that entrepreneurs not only experience emotions , but also express them in varying ways ( e . g . , Chen et al . , in press ) . We focus on the valence of the displayed emotion , whether entrepreneurs express positive or negative emotions with employees ( or both or neither ) . Why would entrepreneurs want to display positive emotions with employees ? Research suggests that sharing positive emotions lead to setting more challenging goals , being more committed to goals once they are set , and continued striving to attain relevant goals based on a desire to maintain such positive affective states ( e . g . , Vallerand et al . , 2003 ) . A recent empirical study demonstrated that entrepreneur ' s displays of positive emotions such as satisfaction with a project enhanced employees ' willingness to act entrepreneurially ( Brundin , Patzelt , & Shepherd , 2008 ) . Contagion of positive emotions can lead to improved cooperation , decreased con ﬂ ict , and increased perceived task performance within work groups ( Barsade , 2002 ) . However , positive affects also lead to less careful or systematic processing of information ( George , 2000 ) and may lead to complacency ( e . g . , Antonacopoulou & Gabriel , 2001 ) as individuals enjoy the positive state and may consequently not attend to factors in the environment that could reduce or remove that positivity . In contrast , negative affective states may lead individuals to process information more carefully ( Hirt , McDonald , & Melton , 1996 ; Martin , Ward , Achee , & Wyer , 1993 ) , to increase their effort towards desired outcomes ( Sy et al . , 2005 ) , and to demonstrate more creativityindevelopingsolutionstoproblems ( George & Zhou , 2002 ) . Essentially , negativeaffectindicatesthatprogresstowardgoalsis insuf ﬁ cient , which will cause individuals to increase their performance or effort on the task ( Syet al . , 2005 ) in order to make progress towards the goals and eliminate the negative affect . However , constant or prolonged displays of negative affect from a leader could have detrimental outcomes ( Sy et al . , 2005 ) as workers become burned out from their increased efforts and the overall tone of the workplace can turn to desperation from continued striving towards goals that are never reached . For example , manager ' s displays of negative emotions such as frustration or worry may diminish employee ' s willingness to act entrepreneurially ( Brundin et al . , 2008 ) . Taken together , this suggests a typology whereby entrepreneurs can choose to display or not display both positive and negative emotions with their employees ( see Fig . 1 ) . Entrepreneurs who share neither positive nor negative emotion are considered “ closed entrepreneurs ” in terms of their emotional displays . Such entrepreneurs likely either do not experience very intense or varying emotions , or else are very effective at response - focused regulation ( Gross , 1998 ) of these emotions . A close entrepreneur would prototypically be one who focuses on the business at hand rather than forming emotional bonds with employees . A second type of display occurs with “ overcon ﬁ dent entrepreneurs ” , who share positive emotions ( pleasure , happiness , excitement ) but do not share negative emotions ( frustration , anger , worry ) with employees . In such an environment , the overall atmosphere of the workplace is likely to be more positive , and to the extent that employees catch those positive emotions , they are more likely to set challenging goals and to be committed toward achieving such goals . However , sharing only positive emotions may lead to discounting of negative information , and less careful systematic processing of information that is associated with positive emotional states . Thus overcon ﬁ dent emotional display may also not be ideal . In the opposite condition , labeled “ scare entrepreneurs , ” entrepreneurs display negative but not positive emotions . This is likely to lead to increased effort and more systematic information processing , at least in the short - term , as employees are scared into trying to remove the negative affect from their leaders and their work environment . However , over the long - term , this approach is 79 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 also likely to be less than optimal , given that employees will at some point burn out if constantly faced with negative feedback ( Maslach , Schaufeli , & Leiter , 2001 ) or choose to leave an environment that is constantly negative . Individuals exposed to negative emotions of others may also choose to distance themselves from the source of those negative emotions ( Gross , 1998 ) , either by creating physical distance such as by leaving the ﬁ rm , or by creating psychological distance by withdrawing emotionally from the workplace or entrepreneur . The fourth condition , that of the open or “ contagious entrepreneur , ” is where both positive and negative emotions aredisplayed to employees . In this condition the productive bene ﬁ ts of sharing positive emotions are present , such as greater commitment and productivity ( Sy et al . , 2005 ) , along with the productive bene ﬁ ts of sharing negative emotions , such as greater task effort and more careful information processing ( Hirt et al . , 1996 ) . When entrepreneurs display both positive and negative emotions , a balanced emotional environment is created in the workplace , and the functional bene ﬁ ts of sharing both positive and negative emotions can be realized . While sharing of positive affect is more likely to lead to passion than sharing of negative affect ( as explained below ) , sharing both positive and negative affects is more likely to have productive bene ﬁ ts for the organization . 4 . Emotional contagion in entrepreneurial ﬁ rms As emotions are displayed within an entrepreneurial ﬁ rm , there is the potential for contagion to other stakeholders , including employees . Basic psychological research suggests two primary methods of contagion : primitive emotional mimicry and social comparison . Fig . 2 provides a conceptual model of the discussion to follow . Fig . 1 . Valence of entrepreneurs ' emotional display . Fig . 2 . Conceptual model of passion contagion . 80 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 4 . 1 . Primitive emotional mimicry With primitive emotional mimicry ( Hat ﬁ eld , Cacioppo , & Rapson , 1994 ) , people mimic the facial expression of others , as well as their body language and movements , automatically and subconsciously . This is the idea of “ monkey - see , monkey - do ” where employees may become emotionally positive about the business simply by mimicking emotionally positive language , expression , and behavior of entrepreneurs . Emotional display on the part of entrepreneurs should evoke emotions in employees , or at least mimicry of the display ( Neumann & Strack , 2000 ) , based on primitive emotional mimicry research . Over time when employees display a certain emotion , they begin to internalize it , and the actual emotional may develop ( Lazarus , 1991 ) . While primitive emotional mimicry is enough for emotional contagion to occur , we argue that it is not enough to create employee passion for the venture , for three primary reasons . First , entrepreneurial passion involves more than just momentary emotions ; it involves long - term enduring feelings . Emotional mimicry may lead employees to act happy or excited about the venture , but such emotionswilllikely not lastoncethe triggerthatproduced the emotionis removed . Psychological researchsupportsthis claim , inthat when stimuli used to induce positive emotions are removed , suchas giving people a small prize , the associated positive emotions also typically diminish quickly ( Bechara , Damasio , & Damasio , 2003 ; Cacioppo , Gardner , & Berntson , 1999 ) . Second , emotions and primitive emotional mimicry involve contagion of the valence and intensity of the affect ( how positive or negative is it , and how strongly do I express it ) , but not the dimension of identity meaningfulness that is as essential component of entrepreneurial passion . For feelings to be considered passion , there has to be an underlying sense that the activity that produced the feelings is an important , almost essential aspect of the person ' s self - identity . This identity relevance cannot be copied from one person to another , because every individual has a unique sense of self - identity developed over time and experience ( Stryker & Burke , 2000 ) that is not replicable , or even sometimes knowable , from simple observation . Third , as noted above , the emotions displayed by entrepreneurs can be both positive and negative , based on the immediate stimuli in the entrepreneur ' s environment . With emotional mimicry , employees could mimic both positive and negative emotional displays , with varying results . We anticipate that mimicry of negative emotions would not lead to passion feelings , given that passion is associated with positive feelings only ( Cardon et al . , in press ) . Passion has been de ﬁ ned in many different ways in psychologyand practice , but overwhelmingly it is viewed as positive , involving things that people love or that they ﬁ nd pleasure in ( Vallerand et al . , 2003 ) . The majority of research on emotions in entrepreneurship has dealt with positive emotions such as pride , hope ( Nair , 2003 ) , and love ( Branzei & Zietsma , 2003 ) . Even negative emotions that have been explored ( e . g . , grief , Shepherd , 2003 ) arise because of a deeply held positive attachment between the entrepreneur and the venture . Thus , we argue that while emotional mimicry can lead to transference of entrepreneur ' s emotional displays to employee emotions and associated displays , it will not lead to contagion of entrepreneurial passion to employees . More formally , P2a . Emotional display by entrepreneurs will lead to similar emotional display by employees , through the contagion process of emotional mimicry . P2b . While emotional display of entrepreneurial passion ( positive and intense feelings ) may lead to similar feelings in employees , it will not in ﬂ uence the meaningfulness and identi ﬁ cation employees experience toward the organization . 4 . 2 . Social comparison In the social comparison model of contagion ( e . g . , Sullins , 1991 ) , employee emotional reactions to stimuli are in ﬂ uenced by entrepreneurs ' emotional states only when the employee faces a similar situation as the entrepreneur , or believes that they do . This is the “ we ' re all in this together ” concept , where entrepreneurs and employees work together to overcome a common challenge or threat , and when employees can identify with the entrepreneur or the venture in a meaningful way . This identity connection is akin to the concept of organizational identi ﬁ cation , or the strength of an individual ' s cognitive attachment to an organization ( Dutton & Dukerich , 1991 ) . Employees experience organizational identi ﬁ cation when they see themselves as part of an organization and the organization as part of themselves . Employee passion involves a very high level of organizational identi ﬁ cation , which is a cognitive connection , and also avery high level of emotional connection , where the employee experiences very positive and intense feelings for the ﬁ rm . We argue that the social comparison aspect of emotional contagion is necessary for employees to experience identity meaningfulness , and therefore to experience employee passion . We note that the identity connection we propose as part of employee passion for the ﬁ rm is similar to the notion of organizational identi ﬁ cation . Organizational identi ﬁ cation for members of an organization refers to the strength of an individual ' s cognitive attachment to the organization ( Dutton & Dukerich , 1991 ) . With social comparison , people compare their emotions with relevant others around them , and use this as social information to understand how they themselves should be feeling ( Barsade , 2002 ) . This process involves people trying to determine why the other person is experiencing the emotion , and if it would be appropriate for themselves to experience a similaremotion . In the case of entrepreneurial passion , employees would observe the display of such passion and try to understand why the entrepreneur feels that passion . Cardon et al . ( in press ) argue that this is because they feel a deep identity connection to their entrepreneurial role . Employees would then determine if they share the same feeling of a deep identity connection to the ﬁ rm or its activities . If such an identity connection is present , along with positive and intense feelings , then employees would also experience passion . Contagion through both emotional mimicry and social comparison is more likely to occur with negative emotions than positive ones ( Barsade , 2002 ) . Negative events provide stronger cues and lead to quicker and stronger emotional reactions ( Cacioppo & 81 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 Berntson , 1994 ) . In addition , individuals tend to put stronger weight on negative cues than positive ones when both are present ( Barsade , 2002 ) . Therefore , entrepreneurs desiring to transfer their feelings of positively valenced passion to employees will likely have to work harder to ensure such contagion . Contagion of positive emotions through mimicrycan be facilitated byentrepreneurs displaying more positive than negative emotions , but contagion of positive emotions through social comparison involves more effort than mere emotional display . Instead , contagion through social comparison can be facilitated through transformational leadership , identi ﬁ cation as part of the founding team , and goal alignment . 4 . 2 . 1 . Transformational leadership Leadership is “ intrinsically an emotional process , where leaders display emotion and attempt to evoke emotion in their members ” ( Dasborough & Ashkanasy , 2002 : 615 ) . Transformational leadership involves creating changes in values , goals , and aspirations that are consistent with the values of followers , and implementing change through articulating a vision , fostering acceptance of group goals , providing individualized support and intellectual stimulation and clarifying performance expectations for employees ( MacKenzie , Podsakoff , & Rich , 2001 ) . Elements of transformational leadership are individualized consideration , inspirational motivation , intellectual stimulation , and charisma or idealized in ﬂ uence ( attributed or behavioral ) ( Bass & Avolio , 1990 ) . As such , entrepreneurs demonstrating transformational leadership behaviors are likely to enhance contagion and increase employee passion for two reasons . First , transformational leaders are more likely to display theiremotions to employees , given that transformational leadership relies upon things like inspirational motivation , which is inherently emotional . Second , inspirational motivation in the form of vision and a sense of mission raises levels of optimism and enthusiasm in employees ( Dubinsky , Yammarino , Jolson , & Spangler , 1995 ) , and is based on not only displaying emotions to employees , but also on fostering emotions among employees . In particular , transformational leadership is designed to enhance employee satisfaction ( increase positive feelings ) and also increase the employees ' acceptance of organizationally important goals as their own , thus increasing the identity relevance of the organization to the employees . We suggest the following : P3 . Entrepreneurs who experience passion will be more likely to demonstrate transformational leadership to their employees . P4 . Transformational leadership will enhance social comparisonprocesses , and increase the meaningfulness of the organization to employees , a key dimension of employee passion . A key part of transformational leadership is goal alignment , or when personal goals are in line with organizational or leader goals , and goal alignment alone is also likely to enhance contagion of passion to employees . When behavior is goal directed and feedback controlled , more challenging goals are set ( Carver & Scheier , 1998 ) and more effort is devoted to obtaining that goal ( George & Brief , 1996 ; Isen , 2000 ; Seo et al . , 2004 ) . Interestingly , goal alignment can be created through effective HR practices , such as byhiringemployees with good “ ﬁ t ” with the organization ( Cable & Judge , 1996 ) , orcreating proper incentivesto align goals ( such as through the use of stock options ) . It can also be created through explicit communication on the part of the entrepreneur concerning their passion , the source of it , and the meaningfulness of the organization to the entrepreneur . Communication and display of not only the raw emotion , but also the underlying cognitive sources of it , may raise the salience of the entrepreneurs ' identityconnection tothe venture to employees and the alignmentof goals between the entrepreneur and the employee . Such goal alignment would facilitate social comparison concerning the employee ' s own perceived meaningfulness of the venture , and therefore their passion . P4a . Transformational leadership will enhance the alignment of employee and organizational goals , and therefore enhance the meaningfulness of the organization to the employee , a key dimension of employee passion . Transformational leadership can also enhance social comparison processes concerning the employees place in terms of how valued they are within the organization . This may be especially important in nascent organizations , as employees are key stakeholders that can signi ﬁ cantly shape the organizations future ( Cardon & Stevens , 2004 ) . Identi ﬁ cation as part of the founding or managing team is likely to increase the meaningfulness of the organization to employees , and therefore to increase employee passion . When employees identifyas part of the team , theyare in closer contact with the owner / entrepreneur , and the passion and the object for which it is felt is likely to be more salient in the employee ' s minds . Employees may experience being part of the founding team as an important and meaningful aspect of their self - identity . However , such identi ﬁ cation is likely to decrease as the ﬁ rm grows , and as the ﬁ rm becomes more formal in terms of additional layers of management being installed within the ﬁ rm , because of the associated reduced familiarity with all parts of the organization and consequently less “ psychological ownership ” and less intrinsic motivation ( Pierce , Kostova , & Kirks , 2001 ) on the part of employees . As one employee of a small ﬁ rm said , “ I used to feel passionate about [ company ] when there were only 15 of us , I felt like whatIdidwasimportant , butwhentheVCfundingcameinandalayerofmanagementwasinstalled , Ididn ' tfeelascloseto [ leader ] or asimportant . Now I feel likeanemployee — a good one , but still anemployee . ” When ﬁ rms get larger , closerelationships between the leaderand employees are harder to maintain given the limited timeresource of entrepreneurs ( Klaas , McClendon , & Gainey , 2000 ) , so effortful attempts at contagion such as engaging in transformational leadership become more dif ﬁ cult . Even simpler attempts at contagion , suchasemotionaldisplay , aremorecomplicatedinalargerorganization , becausetheleadermaynotphysicallyseeallofthe employeesonaregularorongoingbasis , meaningdirectobservationofsuchdisplays , andtheresultingmimicryofthem , wouldbeless likely to occur . An increase in development in terms of the formality of the organization , or creation of bureaucratic layers , would also decrease the likelihood of contagion of passion , since again entrepreneurs would have less direct interaction with many employees 82 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 ( e . g . , Hellman & Puri , 2002 ) , makingemotional displayand transformational leadership more challenging . However , tothe extentthat itispossible , whenemployeesfeeltheyarepartof thefoundingteamtheyaremorelikelytofeelanidentityconnectiontothe ﬁ rmand its development , and are more likely to experience employee passion for the ﬁ rm and its development . Thus , P4b . Transformational leadership will enhance employee identi ﬁ cation as part of the founding team , and therefore enhance the meaningfulness of the organization to the employee , a key dimension of employee passion . 5 . Discussion and implications “ When employees are passionate about their work , their organizations thrive . Once passion is present and reinforced throughout an organization , it becomes contagious . ” ( Chang , 2001 : 110 ) . Research on the psychological , cognitive , and emotional aspects of entrepreneurship has focused primarily on the founder and on founding teams , rather than on employees of emerging ventures . This paper begins to address this void by focusing on the concept of emotional contagion and presenting an initial model of some factors that may affect the contagion process in entrepreneurial ventures . By drawing on existing research in management and psychology on emotions and contagion processes , the paper starts to build a more grounded approach to the elusive concept of entrepreneurial passion and how it might be transferred to employees in this domain . We agree with Shane et al . ( 2003 ) that many of the constructs we study in entrepreneurship should be better developed through application of existing literature in core disciplines such as psychology and sociology , and we have drawn from prior work on emotion , emotional contagion , and transformational leadership to develop the model here . However , we also echo the sentiment of Brief ( 2001 ) who argued that when studying affect , we must also attend tothe speci ﬁ c context in which we study it . Entrepreneurship is indeed a unique phenomenon where founders and ventures are often intertwined with a shared identity ( e . g . , Cardon et al . , 2005 ; Handler , 1990 ) , and in particular when studying emotions and feelings within this context , we suggest that we must borrow and adapt carefully . We know thatsuccessful recruitmentand managementof employees are critical factors in ﬂ uencingthe successof entrepreneurial ﬁ rms ( Baron & Hannan , 2002 ; Deshpande & Golhar , 1994 ) . Recentreviews of literature in this area ( Cardon & Stevens , 2004 ; Heneman & Tansky , 2002 ; Henemanetal . , 2000 ) highlighttheimportanceofeffectiveHRpracticessuchasrecruiting ( e . g . , Barberetal . , 1999 ) and compensation ( e . g . , Balkin , 2006 ) . This literature suggests thatone key way to motivate and engage employees is through appropriate HR systems , in particular hiring employees with appropriate “ ﬁ t ” to the organization ( Cable & Judge , 1996 ) and establishing incentive compensation to align employee and organizational goals ( Graham et al . , 2002 ) . Some would suggest that if HR systems are effective , then employees will be more engaged with the venture , will exert greater effort on behalf of the ﬁ rm , and may develop commonly studied outcomes such as job satisfaction and organizational commitment ( e . g . , Mathieu & Zajac , 1990 ) . We argue that such outcomes may also occur due to the emotional engagement of employees . Just as with entrepreneurs , employees who feel passion for the venture may also be more creative , persistent , and ambitious in goal setting due to positive affect . Indeed , a recent paper by David Goss suggests that Schumpeter ( 1934 ) , one of the ﬁ rst scholars in entrepreneurship , talks about the importance of emotion in entrepreneurship and suggests that “ Even where [ employees ] are in ﬂ uenced by consciously calculative motives ( i . e . sharing in the ﬁ nancial rewards of the innovator ) the emotional exhilaration of associating with a “ prime - mover ” is undeniable . ” ( Goss , 2005 : 215 ) . This suggests that the emotions of employees mayalso be highly relevant in entrepreneurship , even if they have a pro ﬁ t motive for working for the entrepreneur rather than a more intrinsic motive . Therefore understanding how such emotions and feelings , in particular passion , can be transferred from entrepreneur to employees is important . In particular , we argued that while primitive emotional mimicry may increase the emotional display of employees , it alone will not induce employee passion . Instead , employee passion is dependent upon employees experiencing both positive feelings for the venture and experiencing a sense of identity relevance or meaningfulness for the ﬁ rm . Such identity connection can be enhanced , we suggest , through transformational leadership including goal alignment and identi ﬁ cation as part of the founding team . Finally , because negative emotions are more easily communicated and transferred than positive ones ( Barsade , 2002 ) , we suggest that if entrepreneurs want their employees to experience passion they must work harder in order to make their own passion contagious to their employees . This model has a number of implications and areas for future inquiry . 5 . 1 . Areas for future inquiry Three fundamental sets of questions arise from the model . First , the model presented here is an initial look at the potential for emotional contagion of passion in entrepreneurship as the intentional transferof passion from entrepreneur to employees , yetemotional contagion may occur between other actors in an entrepreneurial environment . For example , entrepreneurs may try not to display emotions , a concept called bounded emotionality ( Aldrich , 1999 ; Mumby & Putnam , 1992 ) or emotional suppression ( Gross & Levenson , 1993 ) . If this occurs , then employees also play an active role in managing the emotions in their work environments , and it may be other entrepreneurialleadersorotheremployeesthatarecentraltothecreationofemployeepassioninthiscontext . Supportforthispossibility comes from Mumby and Putnam ( 1992 : 491 ) , who argue that sometimes “ emotional management tactics were actually developed and shared by theworkers as partof theircommunityof practice , rather thanby managers , ” a concept alsotalked about by Rafaeli and Sutton ( 1990 ) when discussing emotional display . Future work focused on identifying the “ emotional leader ” of entrepreneurial organizations and under what conditions this leader is distinct from the primary entrepreneur or entrepreneurial team , may yield interesting insights . Similarly , emotional contagion within a team of entrepreneurs , or between entrepreneurs and other key stakeholders , such as investors , is an area ripe for future inquiry . Recent research has demonstrated that venture capitalists respond to the level of 83 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 passion entrepreneurs express in their business pitches ( Chen et al . , in press ) , and extending this work to other resource sources using an emotional contagion framework may prove insightful . There is also recent work demonstrating that employees can often tell if the emotional displays of their founders are real or fake , designed simply to exert more productivity out of them . For example , research has been done on “ pseudo - transformational leadership ” where leaders deliberately manipulate the emotions of follows to achieve undesirable aims ( Bass , Avolio , & Atwater , 1996 ) . This research suggests that such pseudo - leadership is not effective , and may have a negative effect if employees feel theyare being deceived . While we have focused on the display of authentic , rather than arti ﬁ cial emotions in this paper , further exploration of potential differences between their effectiveness is needed in an entrepreneurial context . A second area for future inquiry concerns the role environmental or contextual factors may play on the emotional contagion process in entrepreneurship . For example , the size and age of the ﬁ rm may playa role , as may the stage of the life cycle the ﬁ rmwas in when the employee joined the ﬁ rm . Employees who join a ﬁ rm in its emergence stage may feel more identity meaningfulness than employees who join a ﬁ rm in a more mature stage , although potential confounds between life stage and organizational size will need to be considered . The speci ﬁ c job role the employee has within the ﬁ rm may also impact the extent to which they experience identity meaningfulness , and thereforecan experience passion for the venture . Finally , the speci ﬁ c HR practices that are in place to align goals or otherwise encourage employee engagement may in ﬂ uence the emotional contagion process . Although extrinsic incentives can often lead to a more transactional commitment to the organization than emotional commitment ( Meyer & Allen , 1997 ) , there is also evidence that when incentives include partial ownership of the ﬁ rm , psychological ownership and its associated meaningfulness can also occur ( Pierce et al . , 2001 ) . A third avenue for future research is to empirically examine the emotional contagion process in entrepreneurship . Such work would need to measure not only emotional display of both the entrepreneur and the employees , but also the felt meaningfulness and experience of passion feelings . As noted earlier , some individuals experience emotions but don ' t display them ( Gross & Levenson , 1993 ) , some individuals display emotions that they don ' t experience ( Rafeli & Sutton , 1987 ) , and of course some display emotions that they do experience . Future empirical research must separate the experience and display of emotions and measure both in order to understand the distinctions between what is experienced and displayed by both entrepreneurs and by employees , and the relationship of both to important work attitudes , behaviors and outcomes . Of note is that in order for such research to progress , a valid and reliable scale to measure entrepreneurial passion must be developed , and its distinction from other similar constructs , suchasoptimism ( Scheier , Carver , & Bridges , 1994 ) orcon ﬁ dence ( Mowday , 1979 ) mustbeestablished . Currentempirical work on emotions typically involves emotional reactions to stimuli that are independent from the individual ( such as watching a movie of puppies , designed to induce positive emotions ) , whereas in the case of entrepreneurial passion , the stimuli ( the venture , for example ) is a critical and central object in the entrepreneur ' s life ( Cardon et al . , in press ) . Because of these differences , new empirical research methods designed to study emotional contagion in entrepreneurship may need to be developed . The more practical implication of this work concerns the necessity for teaching entrepreneurs how to transfer passion to employees , if such contagion is found to be productive in this context . While we have made many suggestions in this regard in the conceptual model , it remains an empirical question how emotionally intelligent entrepreneurs are , or whether their level of such intelligence , or transformational leadership skills , can be increased through appropriate training . Work by Salovey and Mayer ( 1990 ) and Goleman ( 1998 ) suggests that emotional intelligence is indeed a trainable skill . People can be taught not only how to recognize their own emotions , but also how to regulate or control them and the behaviors that result from them , using both reactive and coping strategies including analytical , creative , and practical competencies and skills ( Kerr , Garvin , Heaton , & Boyle , 2006 ) , as well as response - focused regulation ( Gross , 1998 ) . The skills associated with emotional intelligence and emotional regulation are often incorporated into leadership training seminars , and some scholars have suggested that they should also be included in our entrepreneurial training ( e . g . , Matherne , Cardon , Zietsma , & Davis , 2004 ) , along with courses on how to write business plans , ﬁ nance new venture creation , and effectively manage operations . 6 . Conclusion The contagion of entrepreneurial passion to employees is a new area of inquiry in the ﬁ eld of entrepreneurship , and this initial foray into uncharted territory leaves more questions than answers . Yet the anecdotal evidence fromthe ﬁ eld suggests that the topic is important . The ability of leaders to in ﬂ uence the emotional climate of the organization can strongly in ﬂ uence performance ( Humphrey , 2002 ) as well as workplace attitudes . It is our challenge to ﬁ nd solid theories and empirical evidence to help entrepreneurs and ourselves understand and improve upon this process . Acknowledgements The author wishes to thank the Associate Editor , James Hayton , and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback and suggestions on earlier versions of this paper . I am also grateful for feedback received on this paper at the 2006 Babson College Entrepreneurship Research Conference . References Aldrich , H . E . ( 1999 ) . Organizations Evolving . London : Sage . Antonacopoulou , E . P . , & Gabriel , Y . ( 2001 ) . Emotion , learning and organizational change : Towardsan integration of psychoanalyticand other perspectives . Journal of Organizational Change Management , 14 , 435 − 451 . 84 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 Balkin , D . B . ( 2006 ) . Compensation during life - cycle . In R . L . Heneman , & J . W . Tansky ( Eds . ) , Human Resource Strategies for the High Growth Entrepreneurial Firm : Information Age Publishing . Barber , A . E . , Wesson , M . J . , Roberson , Q . M . , & Taylor , M . S . ( 1999 ) . A tale of two job markets : Organizational size and its effects on hiring practices and job search behavior . Personnel Psychology , 52 , 841 − 867 . Baron , J . N . , Burton , M . D . , & Hannon , M . T . ( 1996 ) . The road taken : Origins and evolution of employment systems in emerging companies . Industrial and Corporate Change , 5 ( 2 ) , 239 − 275 . Baron , J . N . , & Hannan , M . T . ( 2002 ) . Organizational blueprints for success in high - tech start - ups : Lessons from the Stanford project on emerging companies . California Management Review , 44 ( 3 ) , 8 − 36 . Baron , R . A . ( 2003 ) . Human resource management and entrepreneurship : Some reciprocal bene ﬁ ts of closer links . Human Resource Management Review , 13 ( 2 ) , 253 − 256 . Baron , R . A . ( 2008 ) . The role of affect in the entrepreneurial process . Academy of Management Review , 33 ( 2 ) , 328 − 340 . Barsade , S . G . ( 2002 ) . The ripple effect : Emotional contagion and its in ﬂ uence on group behavior . Administrative Science Quarterly , 47 , 644 − 675 . Bass , B . M . ( 1985 ) . Leadership : Good , better , best . Organizational Dynamics , 13 ( 3 ) , 26 − 42 . Bass , B . M . , & Avolio , B . J . ( 1990 ) . The implications of transactional and transformational leadership for individual , team , and organizational development . Research in Organizational Change and Development , 4 , 231 − 272 . Bass , B . M . , Avolio , B . J . , & Atwater , L . ( 1996 ) . The transformational and transactional leadership of men and women . Applied Psychology , 45 ( 1 ) , 5 − 34 . Baum , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Entrepreneurs ' start - up cognitions and behaviors : Dreams , surprises , shortages , and fast zigzags , Paper presented at the Babson - Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference . Wellesley , MA : Babson College . Baum , J . R . , & Locke , E . A . ( 2004 ) . The relationshipof entrepreneurial traits , skill , andmotivation tosubsequent venture growth . Journal ofAppliedPsychology , 89 ( 4 ) , 587 − 598 . Baum , J . R . , Locke , E . A . , & Smith , K . G . ( 2001 ) . A multidimensional model of venture growth . Academy of Management Journal , 44 ( 2 ) , 292 − 303 . Bechara , A . , Damasio , H . , & Damasio , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Role of the amygdala in decision - making . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 985 , 356 − 369 . Bird , B . ( 1988 ) . Implementing entrepreneurial ideas : The case for intention . Academy of Management Review , 13 ( 3 ) , 442 − 453 . Branzei , O . , & Zietsma , C . ( 2003 ) . Entrepreneuriallove : Theenablingfunctions ofpositiveillusionsinventuring , PaperpresentedattheBabson - KauffmanEntrepreneurial Research Conference . Wellesley , MA : Babson College . Brief , A . P . ( 2001 ) . Organizational behavior and the study of affect : Keep your eyes on the organization . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 86 , 131 − 139 . Brundin , E . , Patzelt , H . , & Shepherd , D . A . ( 2008 ) . Managers ' emotionaldisplaysandemployees ' willingnesstoactentrepreneurially . JournalofBusinessVenturing , 23 ( 2 ) 221 – 243 . Brush , C . B . , Greene , P . G . , & Hart , M . M . ( 2001 ) . From initial idea to unique advantage : The entrepreneurial challenge of constructing a resource base . Academy of Management Executive , 15 ( 2 ) , 64 − 78 . Buck , R . , Loslow , J . L . , Murphy , M . M . , & Costanzo , P . ( 1992 ) . Social facilitation and inhibition of emotionalexpression and communication . Journal of Personalityand Social Psychology , 63 , 962 − 968 . Cable , D . M . , & Judge , T . A . ( 1996 ) . Person - organization ﬁ t , job choice decisions , and organizational entry . Organizational Behaviorand Human Decision Processes , 67 ( 3 ) , 294 − 311 . Cacioppo , J . T . , & Berntson , G . G . ( 1994 ) . Relationship between attitudes and evaluative space : A critical review , with emphasis on the separability of positive and negative substrates . Psychological Bulletin , 115 ( 3 ) , 401 − 423 . Cacioppo , J . T . , Gardner , W . L . , & Berntson , G . G . ( 1999 ) . The affect system has parallel and integrative processing components : Form follows function . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 76 ( 5 ) , 839 − 855 . Cardon , M . S . , & Stevens , C . ( 2004 ) . Managing human resources in small organizations : What do we know ? Human Resource Management Review , 14 ( 3 ) , 295 − 323 . Cardon , M . S . , Wincent , J . , Singh , J . , & Drnovsek , M . ( 2005 ) . Entrepreneurial passion : The natureof emotionsinentrepreneurship . InK . M . Weaver ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the Sixty - ﬁ fth Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management ( CD ) 1543 - 8643 ( pp . G1 – G6 ) . Cardon , M . S . , Wincent , J . , Singh , J . , & Drnovsek , M . ( in press ) . The nature and experience of entrepreneurial passion . Academy of Management Review . Cardon , M . S . , Zietsma , C . , Saparito , P . , Matherne , B . , & Davis , C . ( 2005 ) . Ataleofpassion : Newinsightsintoentrepreneurshipfromaparenthoodmetaphor . Journalof Business Venturing , 20 ( 1 ) , 23 − 45 . Carver , C . S . , & Scheier , M . F . ( 1998 ) . On the Self - Regulation of Behavior . New York : Cambridge University Press . Chandler , G . N . , & McEvoy , G . M . ( 2000 ) . Human resource management , TQM , and ﬁ rm performance in small and medium - size enterprises . Entrepreneurship : Theory and Practice , 43 − 57 . Chang , R . ( 2001 ) . Turning passion into organizational performance . Training and Development , 55 ( 5 ) , 104 − 112 . Chen , X . - P . , Yao , X . , & Kotha , S . ( in press ) . Passion and preparedness in entrepreneurs ' business plan presentations : A persuasion analysis of venture capitalists ' funding decisions . Academy of Management Journal . Cross , B . , & Travaglione , A . ( 2003 ) . The untold story : Is the entrepreneur of the 21st century de ﬁ ned by emotional intelligence ? The International Journal of Organizational Analysis , 11 ( 3 ) , 221 − 228 . Damasio , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Fundamental feelings . Nature , 413 ( 6858 ) , 781 . Dasborough , M . T . , & Ashkanasy , N . M . ( 2002 ) . Emotion and attribution of intentionality in leader – member relationships . Leadership Quarterly , 13 , 615 − 634 . Deshpande , S . P . , & Golhar , D . Y . ( 1994 ) . HRM practices in large and small manufacturing ﬁ rms : A comparative study . Journal of Small Business Management , 32 ( 2 ) , 49 − 56 . Dolan , R . J . ( 2002 ) . Emotion , cognition , and behavior . Science , 298 ( 5596 ) , 1191 − 1194 . Dubinsky , A . J . , Yammarino , F . J . , Jolson , M . A . , & Spangler , W . D . ( 1995 ) . Transformational leadership : An initial investigation in sales management . Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management , 15 , 17 − 29 . Dutton , J . E . , & Dukerich , J . ( 1991 ) . Keeping an eye on the mirror : The role of image and identity in organizational adaptation . Academy of Management Journal , 34 , 517 − 554 . Elsbach , K . D . , & Kramer , R . M . ( 2003 ) . Assessing creativity in Hollywood pitch meetings : Evidence for a dual - process model of creativity judgements . Academy of Management Journal , 46 ( 3 ) , 283 − 301 . George , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Emotions and leadership : The role of emotional intelligence . Human Relations , 53 , 1027 − 1055 . George , J . M . , & Brief , A . P . ( 1996 ) . Motivationalagendasintheworkplace : Theeffectsoffeelingsonfocusandattentionatwork . InL . L . Cummings & B . M . Staw ( Eds . ) , Research in Organizational Behavior Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . George , J . M . , & Zhou , J . ( 2002 ) . Understanding when bad moods fostercreativityand good ones don ' t : The role of context and clarity of feelings . Journal of Applied Psychology , 7 , 687 − 697 . Goleman , D . ( 1998 ) . Working with Emotional Intelligence . London : Bloomsbury Publishing . Goss , D . ( 2005 ) . Schumpeter ' s legacy ? Interaction and emotions in the sociology of entrepreneurship . Entrepreneurship : Theory and Practice , 29 ( 2 ) , 205 − 218 . Graham , M . E . , Murray , B . , & Amuso , L . ( 2002 ) . Stock - related rewards , social identity , and the attraction and retention of employees in entrepreneurial SMEs . In J . Katz , & T . Welbourne ( Eds . ) , Managing People in Entrepreneurial Organizations , Vol . 5 . ( pp . 107 − 145 ) Amsterdam : Elsevier Science . Gross , J . J . ( 1998 ) . Antecedent - andresponse - focusedemotionregulation : Divergentconsequencesforexperience , expression , andphysiology . JournalofPersonality and Social Psychology , 74 ( 1 ) , 224 − 237 . Gross , J . J . , & John , O . P . ( 1997 ) . Revealing feelings : Facets of emotional expressivity in self - reports , peer ratings , and behavior . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 72 , 435 − 448 . Gross , J . J . , & Levenson , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Emotionalsuppression : Physiology , self - report , andexpressivebehavior . JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology , 64 ( 6 ) , 970 − 986 . Handler , W . C . ( 1990 ) . Succession in family ﬁ rms : A mutual role adjustment between entrepreneur and next - generation family members . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 15 ( 19 ) , 37 − 51 . 85 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86 Hat ﬁ eld , E . , Cacioppo , J . , & Rapson , R . L . ( 1994 ) . Emotional Contagion . : Cambridge University Press . Hellman , T . , & Puri , M . ( 2002 ) . Venture capital and the professionalization of start - up ﬁ rms : Empirical evidence . Journal of Finance , 57 , 169 − 197 . Heneman , R . L . , & Tansky , J . W . ( 2002 ) . Humanresourcemanagementmodelsforentrepreneurialopportunity : Existingknowledgeandnewdirections . InJ . Katz & T . M . Welbourne ( Eds . ) , Managing People in Entrepreneurial Organizations , vol . 5 . ( pp . 55 − 82 ) Amsterdam : JAI Press . Heneman , R . L . , Tansky , J . W . , & Camp , S . M . ( 2000 ) . Human resource management practices in small and medium - sized enterprises : Unanswered questions and future research perspectives . Entrepreneurship : Theory and Practice , 11 − 26 . Hirt , E . R . , McDonald , H . E . , & Melton , R . J . ( 1996 ) . Processinggoalsandtheaffect - performancelink : Moodasmaineffectormoodasinput ? InL . L . Martin & A . Tesser ( Eds . ) , Striving and Feeling : Interactions among Goals , Affect , and Self - regulation ( pp . 303 − 328 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Hornsby , J . S . , & Kuratko , D . F . ( 1990 ) . Human resource management in small business : Critical issues for the 1990s . Journal of Small Business Management , 9 − 18 ( July ) . Humphrey , R . H . ( 2002 ) . The many faces of emotional leadership . The Leadership Quarterly , 13 ( 5 ) , 493 − 504 . Isen , A . M . ( 2000 ) . Positive affect and decision making . In M . Lewis & J . Haviland - Jones ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Emotions ( pp . 417 − 435 ) . 2nd ed . New York : Guilford Press . Kerr , R . , Garvin , J . , Heaton , N . , & Boyle , E . ( 2006 ) . Emotional intelligence and leadership effectiveness . Leadership & Organization Development Journal , 27 ( 4 ) , 265 − 279 . Klaas , B . , McClendon , J . , & Gainey , T . W . ( 2000 ) . ManagingHRinthesmallandmediumenterprise : Theimpactofprofessionalemployerorganizations . Entrepreneurship : Theoryand Practice , 107 − 124 . Kring , A . M . , Smith , D . A . , & Neale , J . M . ( 1994 ) . Individualdifferencesindispositionalexpressiveness : Thedevelopmentandvalidationoftheemotionalexpressivity scale . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 66 , 934 − 949 . Lazarus , R . S . ( 1991 ) . Emotion and Adaptation . New York : Oxford University Press . Lewis , K . ( 2000 ) . When leaders display emotion : How followers respond to negative emotional expression of male and female leaders . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 21 , 221 − 234 . MacKenzie , S . B . , Podsakoff , N . P . , & Rich , G . A . ( 2001 ) . Transformationalandtransactionalleadershipandsalespersonperformance . JournalofAcademyofMarketing Science , 29 ( 2 ) , 115 − 134 . Martin , L . L . , Ward , D . W . , Achee , J . W . , & Wyer , R . S . ( 1993 ) . Mood as input : People have to interpret the motivational implications of their moods . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 64 ( 3 ) , 317 − 326 . Maslach , C . , Schaufeli , W . B . , & Leiter , M . P . ( 2001 ) . Job burnout . Annual Review of Psychology , 52 , 397 − 422 . Matherne , B . , Cardon , M . S . , Zietsma , C . , & Davis , C . ( 2004 ) . Thepedagogicalparenthoodmetaphorinentrepreneurshipeducation : Arelationalview . Paperpresented at the Academy of Management Annual Meeting . Mathieu , J . E . , & Zajac , D . M . ( 1990 ) . A review and meta - analysis of the antecedents , correlates , and consequences of organizational commitment . Psychological Bulletin , 108 ( 2 ) , 171 − 194 . Mayer , J . D . , Caruso , D . R . , & Salovay , P . ( 2000 ) . Emotional intelligence meets traditional standards for an intelligence . Intelligence , 27 ( 4 ) , 267 − 298 . Meyer , J . P . , & Allen , N . J . ( 1997 ) . Commitment in the Workplace : Theory , Research , and Application . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Moses , B . ( 2001 ) . It ' s all about passion . Across the Board , May / June , 55 – 58 . Mowday , R . T . ( 1979 ) . Leader characteristics , self - con ﬁ dence , and methods of upward in ﬂ uence in organizational decision situations . Academy of Management Journal , 22 ( 4 ) , 709 . Mumby , D . K . , & Putnam , L . L . ( 1992 ) . The politics of emotion : A feminist reading of bounded rationality . Academy of Management Review , 17 ( 3 ) , 465 − 486 . Murnieks , C . , & Mosakowski , E . ( 2006 ) . Entrepreneurial passion : An identity theory perspective . Atlanta , GA : Academy of Management . Nair , R . ( 2003 ) . The art of growing a company : An entrepreneurial monologue . VIKALPA , 28 ( 1 ) , 75 − 81 . Neumann , R . , & Strack , F . ( 2000 ) . ” Mood contagion ” : The automatic transfer of mood between persons . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 , 211 − 223 . Pierce , J . L . , Kostova , T . , & Kirks , K . T . ( 2001 ) . Toward a theory of psychological ownership in organizations . Academy of Management Review , 26 ( 2 ) , 298 − 310 . Rafaeli , A . , & Sutton , R . I . ( 1990 ) . Busystoresanddemandingcustomers : Howdotheyaffectthedisplayofpositiveemotion ? AcademyofManagementJournal , 33 ( 3 ) , 623 − 637 . Rafeli , A . , & Sutton , R . I . ( 1987 ) . Expression of emotion as part of the work role . Academy of Management Review , 12 , 23 − 37 . Russell , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion . Psychological Review , 110 ( 1 ) , 145 − 172 . Russell , J . A . , & Barrett , L . F . ( 1999 ) . Coreaffect , prototypical emotionalepisodes , andotherthings calledemotion : Dissecting theelephant . Journalof Personalityand Social Psychology , 76 ( 5 ) , 805 − 819 . Salovey , P . , & Mayer , J . ( 1990 ) . Emotional intelligence . Imagination , Cognition , and Personality , 9 ( 3 ) , 185 − 211 . Scheier , M . F . , Carver , C . S . , & Bridges , M . W . ( 1994 ) . Distinguishingoptimism from neuroticism ( and traitanxiety , self - mastery , andself - esteem ) : A re - evaluation of the Life Orientation Test . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 67 ( 6 ) , 1063 − 1078 . Schumpeter , J . A . ( 1934 ) . Theory of Economic Development : An inquiry into Pro ﬁ ts , Capital , Credit , Interest , and the Business Cycle . New York : Oxford University Press . Seo , M . , Barrett , L . F . , & Bartunek , J . M . ( 2004 ) . The role of affective experience in work motivation . Academy of Management Review , 29 ( 3 ) , 423 − 439 . Shane , S . , Locke , E . A . , & Collins , C . J . ( 2003 ) . Entrepreneurial motivation . Human Resource Management Review , 13 ( 2 ) , 257 − 279 . Shepherd , D . A . ( 2003 ) . Learning from business failure : Propositions of grief recovery for the self - employed . Academy of Management Review , 282 , 318 − 329 . Smilor , R . W . ( 1997 ) . Entrepreneurship : Re ﬂ ections on a subversive activity . Journal of Business Venturing , 12 ( 5 ) , 341 − 346 . Stryker , S . , & Burke , P . J . ( 2000 ) . The past , present , and future of an identity theory . Social Psychology Quarterly , 63 ( 4 ) , 284 − 297 . Sullins , E . S . ( 1991 ) . Emotional contagion revisited : Effects of social comparison and expressive style on mood convergence . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 17 ( 2 ) , 166 − 174 . Sy , T . , Cote , S . , & Saavedra , R . ( 2005 ) . Thecontagiousleader : Impactof theleader ' smoodonthemoodofgroupmembers , groupaffectivetone , andgroupprocesses . Journal of Applied Psychology , 90 ( 2 ) , 295 − 305 . Vallerand , R . J . , Mageau , G . A . , Ratelle , C . , Leonard , M . , Blanchard , C . , Koestner , R . , & Gagne , M . ( 2003 ) . LesPassionsdel ' Ame : Onobsessiveandharmoniouspassion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 ( 4 ) , 756 − 767 . 86 M . S . Cardon / Human Resource Management Review 18 ( 2008 ) 77 – 86