Abstract Within ARDA ' s GI2Vis program , we developed a unique framework for the definition of decision support requirements for intelligence analysis tools . This framework , based on a first - of - a - kind integration of a model of inferential analysis and principles for designing effective human - computer teams from Cognitive Systems Engineering , has defined the essential support functions to be pro - vided to the intelligence analyst ( s ) . This model has proven to be extremely useful in assessing the sup - port provided by a large set of visualization tools . This assessment has identified clusters of support functions that are addressed by many tools as well as key missing support functions . In this way , the Support Function Model has been used to identify gaps in the support function coverage of existing tools . This can serve as a valuable focusing mechanism for future design and development ef - forts . In addition , we would like to see its use as a mechanism to enhance cross - discussions among re - search teams involved in Cognitive Task Analysis efforts within the Intelligence Community . Having others transform their analytic results into this framework would provide the mechanism for ex - pansion of this model to become a more robust tool and have an even greater impact on the Intelligence Community . 1 . The Need Intelligence analysts are faced with one of the most formi - dable data overload problems in our world today . These include counter - terror , counter - insurgency , counter - drug , strategic assessment , etc . As a result , they need every ad - vantage they can get . However , simply providing the ana - lysts with additional data is not sufficient to make the neces - sary breakthroughs in intelligence analysis . Most techno - logical advantages , however , are on the ' front end ' – provid - ing greater data gathering techniques to help assure that critical events are not missed . The challenge is to design effective collaborative deci - sion support tools for the intelligence analysis process . Considerable support needs to be provided for ( a ) the cogni - tive activities involved in abductive inferential analysis which is at the heart of intelligence analysis and ( b ) the col - laboration activities involved in interacting with advanced automation in order to build effective joint cognitive sys - tems ( analyst ( s ) paired with automation tools to form an effective team ) . 2 . Our Solution Our proposed solution is a Support Function Model for In - telligence Analysis ( See Figure 1 ) . This model is a cross - product of two inter - related applications of Cognitive Sys - tems Engineering ( CSE ) to the challenge of designing deci - sion support tools for the Intelligence Community ( IC ) . First , based on a synthesis of prior work ( Miller , et al . , 2001 ; Patterson , et al . , 2001 ) , it is a model of interacting functions that comprise inferential analysis . This intelli - gence analysis model is an iterative broadening / narrowing convergent process . This model is a ' closed loop ' model of interacting functions ( not a sequence of tasks ) based on the primary functions of Down Collect , Conflict and Corrobo - ration , and Hypothesis Exploration . These functions were identified as the cornerstones for effective intelligence analysis . Down Collect deals with the focused collection of an essential , representative , ' on analysis ' sample from avail - able data . Conflict and Collaboration is focused on the con - struction of accurate interpretations of the findings from the Down Collect process . Hypothesis Exploration is focused on the construction of coherent stories / hypotheses to explain the interpretations of the findings . All of these functions are ' narrowing ' functions , in that they focus on a reduction of the problem toward ' the answer ' . In addition , there are ' broadening ' functions that serve as cross - checks against the predominantly narrowing aspects of the primary functions . The natural tensions between broadening ( to fully explore all options ) and narrowing ( to a Finding Decision Support Requirements for Effective Intelligence Analysis Tools William Elm , Scott Potter , James Tittle David Woods , Justin Grossman , Emily Patterson ManTech – Security and Mission Assurance The Ohio State University Cognitive Systems Engineering Center Cognitive Systems Engineering Laboratory 501 Grant St . , Suite 475 210 Baker Systems ; 1971 Neil Ave . Pittsburgh , PA 15219 USA Columbus , OH 43210 USA William . Elm @ ManTech . com Woods . 2 @ osu . edu Keywords : Inferential Intelligence Analysis , Convergence , Visualization , Decision Support Requirements finding ) at each ' edge ' ( between the three primary functions ) defines success or failure in reaching the analytical conclu - sion . Convergence , then , is a stable balance between broad - ening and narrowing while premature closure ( a typical characterization of analytical error ) is a lack of broadening . At these edges is a set of requirements that support the interaction of a coupling / transition of the primary func - tions . These include : • Down Collect / Conflict & Collaboration broadening is focused on revising the down - collect results based on interpretations from the Conflict and Collaboration process as well as generating new interpretations from revised Down Collect results . • Conflict and Collaboration / Hypothesis Exploration broadening is focused on revising the interpretations based on alternative hypotheses under consideration as well as generating new hypotheses based on the in - terpretations . • Hypothesis Exploration / Down Collect broadening is focused on revising the down collect process based on alternative hypotheses under consideration as well as on generating new alternative hypotheses based on revised Down Collect results . Our hypothesis is that in order to be effective , support must be provided for explicit control of this convergent , broadening / narrowing process . Thus , our Support Func - tion Model defines a system design goal decomposition model of support requirements for these functions . Re - quirements arise from two fundamentally different but com - plementary dimensions . First , there is the decomposition of system goals into sub - goals based on the framework defined by the convergent broadening / narrowing model of intelli - gence analysis . Second , that system goal decomposition model is augmented with requirements specific to the design of a joint cognitive system . Within each of the primary functions ( Down Collect ; Conflict and Corroboration ; Hypothesis Exploration ) is a specific set of support functions for accomplishing the pri - mary function . This integration results in a totally unique set of system requirements that define the decision support requirements for inferential analysis as well as support for effective human - automation interaction . This is a signifi - cant breakthrough in the application of lessons learned from many years of research on human interaction with complex systems . This Support Function Model has served as a mecha - nism to evaluate the decision support capabilities of intelli - gence analysis tools as well as identify gaps in the support function coverage of existing tools . This was accomplished by referencing a large sample of visualization tools onto the Support Function Model . This has provided a valuable fo - cusing mechanism for future design and development ef - forts . Acknowledgments This study was supported and monitored by the Advanced Research and Development Activity ( ARDA ) and the Na - tional Imagery and Mapping Agency ( NIMA ) under Con - tract Number NMA401 - 02 - 0017 . The views , opinions , and findings contained in this report are those of the author ( s ) and should not be construed as an official Department of Defense position , policy , or decision , unless so designated by other official documentation . References Cognitive Systems Engineering Center ( 2004 ) . Finding the decision support beneath the visualizations . Final Technical Report . Advanced Research and Development Activity . Miller , J . E . , Patterson , E . S . and Woods , D . D . ( 2001 ) . Modeling expertise in a domain with diversity . In Proceed - ings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 45th annual meeting . 8 - 12 October , Minneapolis , MN . Patterson , E . S . , Roth , E . M . , and Woods , D . D . ( 2001 ) . Predicting vulnerabilities in computer - supported inferential analysis under data overload . Cognition , Technology and Work , 3 ( 4 ) , 224 - 237 , 2001 . Figure 1 . Support Function Model of inferential Intelligence Analysis .