From shape to function : growth and physical regulation of dendritic spines Citation for published version ( APA ) : Kusters , R . P . T . ( 2016 ) . From shape to function : growth and physical regulation of dendritic spines Eindhoven : Technische Universiteit Eindhoven Document status and date : Published : 05 / 10 / 2016 Document Version : Publisher’s PDF , also known as Version of Record ( includes final page , issue and volume numbers ) Please check the document version of this publication : • A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer - review . There can be important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record . People interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication , or visit the DOI to the publisher ' s website . • The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review . • The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume , issue and page numbers . Link to publication General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research . • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal . If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act , indicated by the “Taverne” license above , please follow below link for the End User Agreement : www . tue . nl / taverne Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at : openaccess @ tue . nl providing details and we will investigate your claim . Download date : 25 . Apr . 2019 From shape to function : growth and physical regulation of dendritic spines A catalogue record is available from the Eindhoven University of Technology Li - brary ISBN : 978 - 94 - 028 - 0289 - 4 This thesis was prepared using the typesetting : classicthesis , developed by An - dré Miede . Cover design : Mariana Oshima Menegon Printed by Ipskamp Drukkers This work is part of the research programme of the Foundation for Fundamen - tal Research on Matter ( FOM ) , which is part of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research ( NWO ) . Copyright c (cid:13) 2016 by Rémy Kusters From shape to function : growth and physical regulation of dendritic spines PROEFSCHRIFT ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor aan de Technische Universiteit Eindhoven , op gezag van de rector magniﬁcus , prof . dr . ir . F . P . T . Baaijens , voor een commissie aangewezen door het College voor Promoties in het openbaar te verdedigen op woensdag 5 oktober 2016 om 16 . 00 uur door Rémy Philippe Theo Kusters geboren te Luik , België Dit proefschrift is goedgekeurd door de promotoren en de samenstelling van de promotiecommissie is als volgt : voorzitter : prof . dr . ir . G . M . W . Kroesen promotor : prof . dr . H . J . H . Clercx copromotor : dr . C . Storm leden : prof . dr . P . A . J . Hilbers prof . dr . C . C . Hoogenraad ( UU ) prof . dr . J . - F . Joanny ( Université Pierre et Marie Curie ) adviseur : dr . D . Kraft ( UL ) Het onderzoek of ontwerp dat in dit proefschrift wordt beschreven is uitgevoerd in overeenstemming met de TU / e Gedragscode Wetenschapsbeoefening . Summary The human brain consists of more than hundred billion neurons , interconnected at cell - cell contact sites called synapses . Most synapses in the brain are formed at dendritic spines , micron - sized protrusions containing a bulbous head and a narrow neck . Precise control of the connectivity and strength of these synapses is critical for normal brain function , including learning and memory . Dendritic spines exist in distinct shape and sizes , and certain types of stimulation prompt spines to evolve in fairly predictable fashion , from thin nascent morphologies to the mushroom - like shapes associated with mature spines . In the ﬁrst part of this thesis we invoke the Canham - Helfrich formalism to model the early formation and maturation of these dendritic spine and present a general framework that details the precise role of actin in directing the transi - tions between the various spine shapes . In the early stages of spine formation , the interplay between the elastic properties of the spine membrane and the protru - sive forces generated in the actin cytoskeleton propels the incipient spine . Using realistic estimates for the number of actin ﬁlaments involved , we ﬁnd that the dimensions of the ﬁlopodia in our models agrees well with the observed dimen - sions of newly formed protrusions in the developing neuron . In the maturation stage , actin remodeling in the form of the combined dynamics of branched and bundled actin is required to form mature , mushroom - like spines . Taken together , our model provides unique insights into the fundamental role of actin remodeling and polymerization forces during spine formation and maturation . In the second part of this thesis we focus on the various physical mechanisms that regulate the strength of a synapse , which is controlled by the concentration of membrane bound glutamate receptors at the synapse . The concentration of these receptors is balanced by active deposition in the head region , anchoring to scaffold proteins and lateral diffusion through the neck . Our theoretical study seeks to quantify the physical processes that are at heart of this synaptic strength regulation . We ﬁnd that at the one hand , geometrical conﬁnement and crowding , on the diffusion side , help sustain gradients in concentrations of receptors for very long times . At the other hand , an increased geometrical conﬁnement requires an increased number of molecular motors to transport the receptor containing vesicles through the neck . Taken together , modeling these various mechanisms of regulation indicate that mushroom - like shaped spines with local exocytotic sites adjacent to the PSD are privileged over others , because they can rapidly and efﬁciently regulate their synaptic receptor levels . In the third part of this thesis we redirect our attention to the problem of con - straint growth , now in context of ﬁlamentous growth . In particular we analytically and numerically study the pattern formation occurring during the growth of a ﬁl - ament , adhered to a solid or ﬂexible substrate . We report that for ﬁlaments with ﬁnite shear modulus , homogeneous growth induces strain localization along the ﬁlament . This observation is of potential interest in the context of programmable surfaces and stress regulated growth in biological tissues . In the last part of this thesis we present Langevin dynamics simulations to study the collective behavior of driven particles embedded in a densely packed background consisting of passive particles . We report that , after an initial aggre - gation stage of the driven particles very generically a wall - to - wall pluglike cluster is formed , phase separating from the passive particles . Our central ﬁnding is that , determined by the driving force , density , composition and temperature the driven particles very generically form a wall - to - wall pluglike cluster , phase separating from the passive particles . Contents summary INTRODUCTION 1 introduction 1 1 . 1 Aim of the thesis 3 1 . 2 On growth and form of the brain 3 1 . 3 Physical regulation of the synaptic transmission 4 1 . 3 . 1 Lateral diffusion of glutamate receptors in dendritic spines 5 1 . 3 . 2 Endosomal transport in dendritic spines 7 1 . 4 Growth and pattern formation in adhered ﬁlaments 7 1 . 5 Crowding induced clustering 9 1 . 6 Outline of the thesis 10 i morphogenesis of dendritic spines 13 2 growth of dendritic spines 15 2 . 1 Methods 16 2 . 1 . 1 Membrane model 16 2 . 1 . 2 Model for dendritic spine growth 18 2 . 2 Filopodium formation 21 2 . 3 Spine maturation 23 2 . 3 . 1 The role of the actin cytoskeleton in spine maturation 23 2 . 3 . 2 The role of actin - membrane anchoring and septin - complexes 26 2 . 4 Conclusions 30 ii regulation of dendritic spines 31 3 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion 33 3 . 1 Methods 35 3 . 1 . 1 Random walk simulation 35 3 . 1 . 2 Mean ﬁrst passage time 36 3 . 2 Impact of morphology on the diffusive dynamics 37 3 . 2 . 1 Model system 37 3 . 2 . 2 Relaxation of concentration proﬁles 39 3 . 2 . 3 Exit dynamics of single particles 40 Contents 3 . 2 . 4 Asymmetric diffusive dynamics 43 3 . 2 . 5 Conclusions 45 3 . 3 Role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion 47 3 . 3 . 1 Model system for the dendritic spines 48 3 . 3 . 2 Dendritic spine morphology controls AMPAR exit dynam - ics 49 3 . 3 . 3 Dendritic spine shape controls asymmetry between PSD cap - ture and escape 50 3 . 3 . 4 Exocytosis in spines is more efﬁcient than exocytosis on the dendritic shaft 51 3 . 3 . 5 Conclusions 53 4 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion 59 4 . 1 Method : Molecular dynamics on curved surfaces 60 4 . 1 . 1 Langevin dynamics 60 4 . 1 . 2 Rattle constraint algorithm 62 4 . 2 Anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder 63 4 . 2 . 1 Anistropic diffusion 63 4 . 2 . 2 An interplay between conﬁnement and conﬁgurational or - der 67 4 . 2 . 3 Conclusions 68 4 . 3 Directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces 71 4 . 3 . 1 Quantify diffusive properties on curved surfaces 71 4 . 3 . 2 Simulating diffusion on curved surfaces 72 4 . 3 . 3 Toroidal surface 73 4 . 3 . 4 The funnel 75 4 . 3 . 5 Escape dynamics 78 4 . 3 . 6 Conclusions 79 5 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport 83 5 . 1 Lattice - Boltzmann simulations 85 5 . 2 Analytical model : Limiting behaviors 89 5 . 2 . 1 Stretch - dominated ( capsule ) limit 91 5 . 2 . 2 Bend - dominated ( vesicle ) limit 93 5 . 3 Conclusions 95 iii pattern formation in an adhered filament 105 6 growth of an adherent filament 107 6 . 1 Method 109 6 . 1 . 1 Discrete rod model 109 6 . 1 . 2 Validating the discrete rod model 110 6 . 2 Buckling of a shearable ﬁlament 112 6 . 2 . 1 Localized buckling 112 6 . 2 . 2 Clamped boundaries 116 6 . 2 . 3 Edge buckling 118 6 . 2 . 4 The continuous equivalent of the discrete rod model 121 Contents 6 . 3 Growth of an adherent ﬁlament in 3 D 125 6 . 3 . 1 Modes of deformation 125 6 . 3 . 2 Phase diagram 128 6 . 4 Conclusions and outlook 131 iv crowding induced clustering 133 7 clustering of driven particles under confinement 135 7 . 1 Cluster mechanism 138 7 . 1 . 1 Critical conditions for cluster formation 140 7 . 1 . 2 Formation and growth of the jammed front 140 7 . 1 . 3 Dynamics of the driven particles 141 7 . 2 Conclusions 142 8 final conclusions and outlook 147 8 . 1 Summary of the aims 147 8 . 2 Conclusions and outlook 147 8 . 2 . 1 Part I : Growth of dendritic spines 147 8 . 2 . 2 Part II : Determinants of synaptic strength regulation 148 8 . 2 . 3 Part III : Growth of an adherent ﬁlament 151 8 . 2 . 4 Part IV : Crowding induced clustering 152 bibliography samenvatting publications acknowledgments I N T R O D U C T I O N Chapter 1 Introduction The mammalian brain is a complex structure that has an impressive hierarchi - cal organization . The average adult human brain has a volume of roughly 1200 cm 3 , a surface area of 2000 cm 2 , containing 86 billion nerve cells . Each cortical nerve cell is connected to approximately 7000 other cells resulting in roughly 0 . 15 quadrillion connections and more than 150000 km of nerve ﬁbers [ 115 ] . Its ability to process and store information is encoded in various orders of magnitude of temporal and spatial scales . On the largest length scale , we observe a convoluted pattern , arisen from gyri - ﬁcation ( see Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . This process of cortical folding maximizes the number of neurons and minimizes the distance between them . Gyriﬁcation can to large extent be explained with a physical model of differential growth , exemplifying that pattern selection and evolution of shape are not necessarily purely biological phenomena [ 140 , 177 ] . Once developed , the morphology of these gyri remains approximately constant during the lifespan of the organism . The ability of the brain to process and store information , mostly referred to as neural plasticity , oc - curs at much smaller length scales , at the level of single nerve cells , the neurons ( see Fig . 1 ( b ) ) . The search for the cellular mechanisms underlying learning and memory orig - inated in the late 19 th century with the work of Ramón y Cajal , demonstrating that the connection site of two neighboring neurons was discontinuous , separated by a narrow junction . He speculated that the creation , modulation and removal of the existing connections underlies information storage in the brain [ 200 ] . Half a century later , Hebb postulated that when a neuron drives the activity of another neuron , the connection between these neurons , the synapse , is modiﬁed [ 59 ] . This ability has been called synaptic plasticity . Since then , synaptic plasticity is consid - ered to be the cellular correlate of learning [ 10 ] . In the years to follow , increasing evidence shows that dendritic spines , micron sized protrusions on the dendritic membrane , form the main substrate of plasticity at the synapse ( see Fig . 1 ( c ) ) . In response to bursts of synaptic activation , spines grow and shrink in a typical fashion ( see Fig . 1 ( d ) ) [ 103 , 35 , 181 ] . From this it has been inferred that there ex - ists an intrinsic relation between the morphology of a spine and its function . The 2 introduction 100 μ m 1 μ m 5 cm ( b ) ( a ) ( d ) 2 μ m ( c ) Axon Dendrite elongation maturation dendritic filopodium mature , mushroom - like spine Membrane Figure 1 : Hierachical organization of the brain . ( a ) Cortical folds of the brain ; ( b ) Confocal image of non - pyramidal neurons in the superﬁcial layers of the visual cortex ( Adapted from [ 92 ] ) ; ( c ) Multiple synapses of the same axon innervate multiple spines of the same postsynaptic cell ( Adapted from [ 77 ] ) . ( d ) Outline of the model for spine formation and maturation : initiation , elongation and maturation . From left to right : stubby spines ; den - dritic ﬁlopodia or thin spines ; mature , mushroom shaped spines . 1 . 1 aim of the thesis 3 physical mechanisms underlying this growth and maturation form the main topic of Part I of this thesis while Part II of this thesis covers synaptic regulation . 1 . 1 aim of the thesis Growth and physical regulation are key processes in biology . The development of all biological organisms rely on a number of genetic , biochemical and me - chanical factors , altering their growth and regulation . In this thesis we consider a particular example where growth and physical regulations feature to determine biological functionality : The regulation and growth of the synapse . Precise control of the connectivity and strength of these synapses is critical for normal brain func - tion , including learning and memory . Dysfunctions in growth and regulation of synapses are associated with a host of neurological disorders such as schizofrenia [ 42 ] , Alzheimer’s disease [ 150 ] and autism [ 46 ] . The strength of a synapse is reg - ulated by a controlled concentration of glutamate receptors , which are effectively conﬁned to the membrane of the dendritic spine . Dendritic spines exist in distinct shape and sizes , and certain types of stimulation prompt spines to evolve in fairly predictable fashion , from thin nascent morphologies to the mushroom - like shapes associated with mature spines ( see Fig . 1 ( d ) ) . Now that we have introduced the main actors involved in synaptic plasticity we present the two central questions of this thesis : 1 . What physical mechanisms regulate the morphogenesis of dendritic spines ? 2 . How does the shape of the dendritic spine regulate the strength of a synapse ? Part I of this thesis focuses on the morphogenesis of dendritic spines and in Part II we cover the physical mechanisms that regulate the strength of synapses . Along the way of answering these central questions , two more general soft matter questions have been initiated and formed the base for Part III : Crowding induced clustering and Part IV : Growth and pattern formation in adhered ﬁlaments . 1 . 2 on growth and form of the brain The activity related creation , modulation and removal of synaptic connections in the brain is considered to underlie the process of learning and memory forma - tion . The most notable examples of this synaptic plasticity are Long - Term Poten - tiation ( LTP ) and Long - Term Depression ( LTD ) . During LTP / LTD a short period of synaptic activity ( high frequency for LTP and low frequency for LTD ) triggers a persistent change in synaptic transmission that can last for several hours and of - ten longer . The most notable changes during LTP and LTD occur at the dendritic spine ( see Fig . 1 ( d ) ) . During this remodeling of the synapse , the architecture of these dendritic spines and the structure of their underlying skeleton is constantly modulated . In contrast to the dendritic shaft , whose cytoplasm is dominated by 4 introduction microtubules , the cytoskeleton of the spine consists of ﬁlaments which form longi - tudinal bundles in the neck and a branched meshwork at its periphery [ 89 , 109 ] . These microﬁlaments are composed of actin , which is present throughout the spine cytoplasm . Actin cytoskeleton plays a pivotal role in numerous cellular processes that involve the reorganization of membrane , i . e . , cell motility and mor - phogenesis [ 132 ] . Numerous studies have indicated the role of actin cytoskeleton in the formation , elimination and stabilization of dendritic spines [ 51 ] as well as in the alteration of synaptic strength [ 109 , 24 ] . Rapid polymerization and depoly - merization of actin ﬁlaments produces protrusive forces that can quickly alter the morphology of the spine [ 24 ] . Dependent on the intensity and frequency of the pre - synaptic activation , bidirectional alterations of the spine morphology occur [ 35 , 198 ] . A mature mushroom - shaped spine is generally composed of a spine head and a thin spine neck , connecting the synapse to the dendritic shaft ( see Fig . 1 ( d ) ) . Typical dimensions are 0 . 2 - 1 . 5 µ m for the head diameter , 0 . 1 - 0 . 3 µ m for the neck width and 0 . 5 - 2 . 0 µ m for the length . Electron - microscopy studies have revealed a rich diversity of shapes that can roughly be divided into three shape categories : thin , ﬁlopodialike protrusions ( thin spines ) ; short spines without a well - deﬁned spine neck ( stubby spines ) ; and spines with a large bulbous head ( mushroom spines ) [ 52 ] . In a sense , ﬁlopodia are the precursors to dendritic spines , and their ﬂexibility allows the establishment of synaptic contacts . Once the contact between a dendritic ﬁlopodium and a neighboring axon has been established , the spine - head begins to swell , taking on a more mushroom - like morphology . Over time , such recognizable mushroom spines become the prevalent structure on the den - dritic shaft , and few ﬁlopodia remain . During this spine enlargement , rapid actin polymerization provides the me - chanical force required for pushing out the spine membrane [ 14 ] . Although the importance of actin remodeling as well as the synaptic signaling mechanisms in - volved in structural synaptic plasticity is well established , a general framework to correlate the state of the actin cytoskeleton to spine shape is lacking . Most im - portantly , it is not clear whether the actin is capable of autonomously driving the shape change , or whether the actin simply follows morphological transitions oth - erwise imposed . In Part I of this thesis we will address this question . Our model for spine dynamics uses the Canham - Helfrich formalism , an approach which has proven its strength in describing , both qualitatively and quantitatively , the de - formation of biological membranes in numerous biological systems such as red - blood cells [ 18 ] , membrane tethers [ 29 ] and binary or ternary lipid mixtures in giant - unilamellar vesicles [ 202 ] . 1 . 3 physical regulation of the synaptic transmission One of the primary functions of dendritic spines is that they compartmentalize functionality [ 1 ] . Before we elaborate on this further , we will ﬁrst outline the func - 1 . 3 physical regulation of the synaptic transmission 5 tioning of a synapse . To establish signal transmission between adjacent neurons , neurotransmitters are released at the pre - synaptic terminal ( axon ) . These neuro - transmitters , most commonly glutamate , diffuse into the synaptic cleft and bind to transmembrane receptor proteins at the postsynaptic neuron ( dendritic spine ) . This triggers the depolarization of the post - synapse . This post - synaptic site , typi - cally located on a dendritic spine plays an important role in the functioning of a synapse . In principle , there may be several advantages of having substructures like den - dritic spines along the dendrite . First of all , spines might bridge the gap between the distant axon and dendrite facilitating the formation of a synapse . Spines also play a role in the compartmentalization of synaptic signals , facilitating spine - speciﬁc plasticity and hence regulate the strength of individual synaptic connec - tions [ 201 , 108 ] . Here , we distinguish between compartmentalization of spines in the context of spine - speciﬁc plasticity on three levels , ( 1 ) signaling cascades elicited by synaptic stimulation can be conﬁned to single spines , making them ideal signaling compartments , ( 2 ) spines may serve as an electrical compartment , playing a role in the process of synaptic depolarization and ( 3 ) spines also play a role in the compartmentalization of neurotransmitter receptors [ 122 , 121 , 1 ] . The latter of these mechanisms will be the focus of Part II of this thesis . The controlled addition and removal of neurotransmitter receptors from the synapse , typically ( α - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methyl - 4 - isoxazolepropionic acid ) - type glutamate receptors ( AMPARs ) , is widely believed to underlie the changes in synaptic strength during learning and memory formation [ 104 ] . Reports based on static electron microscopy suggest an elevated concentration of glutamate re - ceptors at the Post Synaptic Density ( PSD ) , an electron dense region at the post synapse . The local enrichment of receptors at the PSD is thought to result from a combination of ( 1 ) receptors anchoring to the PSD and ( 2 ) exocytosis events of endosomal compartments at the synapse ( see Fig . 2 ) . Live - cell imaging techniques and single molecule tracking have identiﬁed that lateral diffusion of receptors and activity triggered exocytosis of receptors from internal endosomal compartments are the prime regulation mechanisms for synaptic strength . In Part II we study the role of dendritic spine morphology on the regulation of these glutamate receptors . In particular we focus on the role of morphology on ( 1 ) the lateral diffusion of receptors and ( 2 ) the endosomal transport through the dendritic spine neck . 1 . 3 . 1 Lateral diffusion of glutamate receptors in dendritic spines For long time , the elevation of receptor numbers at postsynaptic sites was consid - ered static and solely attributed to transient interactions with scaffolding proteins . Recent advances in imaging of lateral receptor movements along the plasma mem - brane have demonstrated that receptors switch at unexpectedly high rates be - tween extrasynaptic and synaptic localization by lateral diffusion [ 22 , 119 ] . Since then , various mechanisms are proposed to regulate the lateral mobility of recep - 6 introduction Dendritic exocytosis Spinal exocytosis Surface diffusion Endosomal transport Anchoring Recycling endosome Glutamate receptor PSD Figure 2 : Illustration depicting the main processes involved in targeting receptors to the synapse ; surface diffusion , anchoring at the PSD and endosomal transport . tors at the synapse : ( I ) anchoring at the post - synaptic density ( PSD ) via speciﬁc interactions with scaffolding molecules , effectively immobilizing the receptors , ( II ) molecular crowding and ( III ) the shape of the dendritic spine . In the past , theoretical models have conﬁrmed that the spine neck regulates dif - fusional coupling between spines and dendrites [ 67 , 66 ] . Given that spine geom - etry inﬂuences intracellular dynamics , it is also possible that spine morphology directly affects the lateral diffusion of AMPAR to and from the synapse . However , a quantitative model integrating the three dimensional morphological variability of dendritic spines into mechanisms that control AMPAR trafﬁcking at synapses is lacking . In Chapter 3 we combine analytic calculations of the Mean First Passage Time ( MFPT ) with numerical simulations to build a quantitative model integrat - ing the morphological variability of realistic spine geometries into mechanisms that control AMPAR trafﬁcking at postsynaptic sites . Our simulations allow the direct observation of how two trapping mechanisms - the PSD and spine shape - work together to control the number and spatial distribution of AMPARs for the regulation of synaptic strength . Another aspect that has been disregarded in most other studies is the effect of the PSD structure and the high surface coverage of proteins at the synapse , ren - dering the lateral diffusion anomalous . At the level of a single PSD , theoretical as well as experimental evidence was found for anomalous diffusion of AMPAR [ 34 , 60 , 143 , 101 ] . In Chapter 4 we model how molecular crowding affects the 1 . 4 growth and pattern formation in adhered filaments 7 diffusion of proteins conﬁned to a curved surface . This interplay remains un - explored and has potential applications in numerous other ﬁelds since highly curved [ 158 , 36 , 86 ] and crowded motifs ( see , e . g . , [ 64 ] and references therein ) are abundant in many other biological and microﬂuidic systems . In these systems crowding and shape signiﬁcantly contribute to the effective diffusivity of particles which , in the case of membrane - associated proteins , are completely conﬁned to a curved , 2 D substrate . 1 . 3 . 2 Endosomal transport in dendritic spines A second mechanism to control the concentration of glutamate receptors at the synapse is the active deposition of receptor rich intra - cellular endosomes at the synapse . These recycling endosomes are highly dynamic in dendrites and their widespread pool serve multiple dendritic spines [ 25 ] , provide membrane and molecular material to speciﬁc spine microdomains . During LTP it was found that the number of AMPA receptors at the plasma membrane increases due to an enhanced transport from recycling endosomes [ 128 , 191 ] . In Chapter 5 we study the regulatory use of recycling endosomes in dendritic spines through three - dimensional simulations and analytic modeling : large lipid bilayer vesicles are actively directed by myosin motors [ 30 ] into , and out of , a long thin neck that connects the functional domain of a dendritic spine to the dendritic shaft . These vesicles are thought to serve dual purposes : they actively transport AMPA receptors to the functional domain , but , when stuck inside the neck , they may also serve as a physical barrier that helps retain proteins inside the spine’s head compartment - not unlike the manner in which a cork serves to keep wine inside the bottle . In particular , the dynamics of the translocation process still poses some open questions : How fast is the container transported through the constriction ? When does it cease to translocate , and are typical molecular force levels sufﬁcient to effect translocation in physiological settings ? We focus in particular on those physical variables that cells have some control over : motor activity and constriction geometry . While studying the translocation of vesicles through narrow constrictions is of interest for the intracellular protein trafﬁcking of mem - brane - enclosed vesicles , membrane enclosed vesicles , because of their intrinsic biocompatibility and ﬂexi - bility , are becoming an increasingly common motif in drug delivery , for instance in transdermal applications , as well to microﬂuidic production and processing [ 98 , 97 ] . 1 . 4 growth and pattern formation in adhered filaments In Part III of this thesis we turn our attention to another problem of constrained growth . Growth is a key process in the regulation and development of all bio - logical tissue and apart from numerous genetic , biochemical , environmental cues 8 introduction Figure 3 : Hypothesis for the role of adhesion in generating topography of the neuro - muscular junction : ( Left ) When nerve ﬁrst contacts the muscle , sites of adhesion are es - tablished between the nerve terminal plasmalemma and the membrane of the myoﬁber . ( middle ) During the growth of the muscle ﬁber , new membrane ( green ) is inserted in the membrane . This insertion causes buckling of the postsynaptic site . ( right ) As a result of this postsynaptic growth , tension is exerted on the sites of adhesion , causing the mus - cle ﬁber to curl around the less elastic nerve terminal and eventually adhesive sites are ruptured ( Adapted from [ 107 ] ) . it depends on the mechanical state of the system . In particular , growth can be affected by mechanical stresses which modify the shape and growth of the tissue , giving rise to a wealth of patterns . To name but a few examples in nature ; growth of leaves and ﬂowers [ 164 ] , the wrinkling of the skin [ 20 ] , the formation of the gut [ 159 ] , the winding of cellulose microﬁbrils along the cell [ 96 ] and the forma - tion of the neuromuscular junction [ 142 , 107 ] . The latter of these examples has initiated this research ( see Fig . 3 ) . All these examples arise from an interplay be - tween growth and mechanical constraints . These systems all have in common that they essentially are composed of a growing ﬁlament or sheet which is constrained by their surrounding medium , giving rise to the wrinkling . Here , we consider a generic model system for this type of constrained growth , i . e . , a ﬁlament which is adhered to a substrate , either ﬁxed of ﬂexible . A commonly method to study the deformation of a beam or ﬁlament on an elastic substrate is the so called Winkler’s foundation . In this model , the ﬁlament is connected to a substrate via a set of mutually independent vertical springs [ 196 ] . An important assumption in this model is that the displacement of the springs , subsequent to growth of the beam or ﬁlament , only occurs in the vertical direction , i . e . , the substrate is not allowed to shear . In many practical systems however , shear is an important mode of deformation [ 19 ] . To overcome this problem , we present a discrete rod model to model the growth of a ﬂexible ﬁlament which is adhered to a second ﬁlament , either solid or ﬂexible , by a discrete number of Hookean springs . This model includes : ( i ) the bending of two consecutive segments in the ﬂexible ﬁlament , ( ii ) the stretching involved in the extension or contraction of the 1 . 5 crowding induced clustering 9 springs that connect the ﬁlament to the substrate , ( iii ) extension or contraction of the ﬁlament and ( iv ) shear of the ﬁlament with respect to the substrate . We observe that , upon growth , localized buckling occurs . These localized struc - tures have previously been observed in numerical FEM simulations as well as in experiments with multilayered elastic substrates [ 73 , 19 , 175 ] . Once we established the role of shear in adherent buckling in two dimensions we extend our model to allow the ﬁlament to buckle in three dimensions where , depending on the elastic moduli , we observe a wealth of different patters . Finally , since in many biological settings , growth is generally not homogeneous but rather depends on the local stress in the tissue / ﬁlament , i . e . , growth either be suppressed or promoted by stress we present an outlook featuring a model for stress regulated growth . 1 . 5 crowding induced clustering The last Part of this thesis focuses on the role of conﬁnement and crowding on the collective motion of driven particles . The collective motion in mixtures of driven and non - driven , or of differentially driven , particles has been the focus of numer - ous studies . Examples arise in ﬂows through random media [ 192 , 193 ] , in lattice gas simulations of oppositely charged particles under uniform external driving [ 147 , 187 ] and in mixtures of driven and non - driven colloids [ 136 ] . Mixtures of oppositely charged colloids driven by an external ﬁeld [ 47 , 171 , 138 ] resemble sit - uations encountered in pedestrian ﬂows [ 61 , 37 ] that obey similar basic laws , and show similar behaviors . Yet another way to realize differential driving is to have mixtures that differently sediment under the inﬂuence of gravity [ 5 , 194 , 2 ] . In each of these cases , heterogeneous driving - i . e . , different forces on different sub - sets of member particles - gives rise to nontrivial collective behavior , and prompts some degree of spatial nonunifomity , either in the distribution of velocities or in the distribution of the particles themselves . The behavior becomes even richer when such systems are considered at high volume fractions . A common phe - nomenon in such systems is the occurrence of aggregation of the driven particles . In the case of oppositely driven subsets , this generically manifests itself as a lan - ing transition , where the driven particles organize spontaneously into ﬁlamentous aggregates , aligned along the direction of the driving . In mixtures of driven and non - driven particles , one tends to ﬁnd small clusters of driven particles in the bulk , a phenomenon that has been interpreted in terms of an effective attraction mediated by the surrounding , nondriven particles [ 136 ] . In Chapter 7 we ask the question what happens after this initial aggregation stage in conﬁned systems . In many of the larger , bulk systems small clusters do not interact , and even when they do they do not encounter each other to any sig - niﬁcant extent . When we conﬁne our systems , we ﬁnd that doing so prompts an unexpected nonlinear , late stage regime in the spatial organization of driven / non - driven mixtures : Our central ﬁnding is that , determined by the driving force , density , composition and temperature the driven particles very generically form 10 introduction a wall - to - wall pluglike cluster , phase separating from the passive particles . This late - stage behavior is very different from laning , as it involves organization per - pendicular to the direction of driving rather than parallel to it . It is similarly distinct from bulk behavior , as all driven particles in a conﬁned system will - under the right conditions - come together and cluster . The appearance of this system - spanning aggregate has profound consequences for the further evolution of these systems : we show that it will completely dominate the global transport properties of the driven / nondriven mixture . One speciﬁc application that we foresee is to use the clustering mechanism to separate colloidal particles by mass : a random mixture of light and heavy parti - cles is poured into the top of a sedimentation column ﬁlled with density - matched colloids . Since both the light and the heavy particles are driven differently from the background , both phase separate into tight clusters . The cluster itself , how - ever , is also inhomogeneous in the sense that very quickly , the light particles are at the back and the heavy ones in front . This way , gravity can dynamically phase separate the various populations of particles by mass : colloidal chromatography . Whether or not clustering will occur in this case will similarly depend on density , mass and composition . 1 . 6 outline of the thesis part i : morphogenisis of the dendritic spines Chapter II : Growth of dendritic spines In the ﬁrst part of this Chapter we elaborate on the initiation of dendritic spines , which is the formation of ﬁlopodia . In particular we present a general framework that details the precise role of actin in directing the formation of ﬁlopodia and ﬁnd that the interplay between the elastic properties of the spine membrane and the protrusive forces generated in the actin cytoskeleton determines the shape of the ﬁlopodia . In the second part of this Chapter we extend our model for spine initiation to study the formation and stability of mature dendritic spines . In par - ticular we study the formation of the dendritic spine neck and head by taking into account the interplay of the spine membrane with the actin cytoskeleton , al - lowing us to compute the forces and energies required for spine head formation . Our model also highlights the important role of additional physical processes in stabilizing the morphological features of mature spines . We discuss several can - didate factors that may effect these processes , and conclude that these molecules are sufﬁciently rigid to be able to constrict the spine - neck to the extent reported in experiments . 1 . 6 outline of the thesis 11 part ii : regulation of dendritic spines Chapter III : Diffusion as barrier for lateral diffusion In the ﬁrst part of this Chapter we study the role of surface morphology on the lat - eral diffusion of particles , constrained to a curved surface . We present analytical and numerical analyses of in - plane diffusion of discrete particles on curved ge - ometries reﬂecting various generic motifs in biology and explore , in particular , the effect that the shape of the substrate has on the characteristic time scales of diffu - sive processes . To this end , we consider both collective measures ( the relaxation of concentration proﬁles towards equilibrium ) and single - particle measures ( escape rates and ﬁrst passage times of individual diffusing molecules ) . In the second part of this Chapter we present numerical and analytical analyses demonstrating that the morphology of dendritic spines strongly affects AMPAR diffusion . Chapter IV : Crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion In this Chapter we study the interplay between shape and crowding and elaborate on how these two features together render diffusive motion anisotropic on curved surfaces . To study this , we discusses a novel method to study crowded diffusion on curved surfaces and its implementation in the Molecular Dynamics Package LAMMPS . In the second part of this chapter we consider crowded diffusion on the surface of a cylinder and discover an unexpected anisotropic diffusive motion on cylindrical surfaces caused by the intrinsic conﬁnement which naturally arises from the cylindrical shape of the substrate . In the third part of this chapter we consider how diffusive motion is altered on various curved surfaces and try to come up with a generalized picture of how crowding and shape direct lateral diffusion . Chapter V : Shape as barrier for endosomal transport In this Chapter we focus on the role of the spine morphology on endosomal transport . We invoke an analytic model as well as 3 D Lattice Boltzmann simulation to study the forces and speed involved in the translocation of vesicles through narrow constriction . Finally , we present preliminary results that involve a more realistic forcing mechanisms for vesicles , where not the ﬂuid is driven but rather a constant body force is exerted on the vesicles itself . This method allows us to study the transportation of vesicles through a closed constrictions and highlight the role of the lubrication layer on the translocation of vesicles . 12 introduction part iii : pattern formation in an adherent filament Chapter VI : Growth of an adherent ﬁlament In the ﬁrst part of this Chapter we revisit a classical problem in elasticity , which is the growth of an adherent ﬁlament in two dimensions . In particular , we extend the classical Winkler approach to account for shear of the ﬁlament and discover the occurrence of localization of buckling subsequent to the growth of the ﬁl - ament . We ﬁnd that , while the shear modulus does not affect the wavelength , it does affect the size of the localized structure . The wavelength is , similarly to Winkler’s theory , set by the ratio of the bending modulus and stiffness of the sub - strate . In this ﬁnal part of this Chapter we will discuss the pattern formation in the growth of the adherent ﬁlament in three dimensions . Allowing the ﬁlament to buckle in the third dimension allows for a much richer pallet of morphologies . part iv : crowding induced clustering Chapter VII : Clustering of driven particles under conﬁnement In the ﬁrst part of this Chapter we consider the collective motion in mixtures of driven and non - driven particles and report that , after an initial aggregation stage of the driven particles very generically a wall - to - wall pluglike cluster is formed , phase separating from the passive particles . Our central ﬁnding is that , deter - mined by the driving force , density , composition and temperature the driven par - ticles very generically form a wall - to - wall pluglike cluster , phase separating from the passive particles . At the end of this Chapter we propose an application of this principle , where gravity can dynamically phase separate the various populations of particles by mass : colloidal chromatography . Part I M O R P H O G E N E S I S O F D E N D R I T I C S P I N E S Chapter 2 Growth of dendritic spines 1 A single neuron can contain hundreds to thousands of dendritic spines , actin - rich , micron - sized protrusions which project from dendritic shafts [ 69 ] . Mature spines consist of two basic compartments : a constricted region called the neck , sup - porting a bulbous head containing the postsynaptic site that makes contact with the axon of a nearby neuron . Spines come in a wide range of sizes and shapes , their lengths varying between 0 . 2 − 2 µ m and their volumes between 0 . 001 − 1 µ m 3 . Electron microscopy ( EM ) studies have identiﬁed several morphological cate - gories of spines , such as thin , ﬁlopodium - like protrusions ( ‘thin spines’ ) , and spines with a large bulbous head ( ‘mushroom spines’ ) [ 55 , 56 , 54 , 69 , 81 ] . Dif - ferent live cell - imaging techniques have demonstrated that dendritic spines are highly dynamic structures , subject to constant morphological change even after birth . During neuronal development , dendrites initially appear as thin and hairlike ﬁlopodia ( Fig . 4 ) . They are deﬁned as having a length that is at least twice the width , and they do not display the bulbous head found on dendritic spines [ 81 , 199 , 76 ] . Filopodia are devoid of organelles and vesicles , and are composed primarily of actin ﬁlaments . These actin ﬁlaments are bundled and primarily aligned to the nascent spine . Once the contact between a dendritic ﬁlopodium and a neighboring axon has been established , the spine - head begins to swell , taking on a more mushroom - like morphology . Over time , such recognizable mushroom spines become the prevalent structure on the dendritic shaft , and few ﬁlopodia remain . The progressive shape change is neither random nor deterministic . Rather , it is thought to be correlated with the strength and maturity of each synapse [ 199 , 76 ] . At the level of an individual spine , strengthening of a synapse is accompanied by modiﬁcations in the size of the spine . The prime mechanisms that drives struc - tural plasticity is the modulation of actin dynamics in dendritic spines . Although the importance of actin remodeling as well as the synaptic signaling mechanisms 1 The content of this Chapter is available on Arxiv as C . A . Miermans , R . P . T . Kusters , C . C . Hoogen - raad and C . Storm , Actin Remodeling and Polymerization Forces Control Dendritic Spine Mor - phology , A rXiv 2015 16 growth of dendritic spines involved in structural synaptic plasticity are well established [ 81 , 69 , 123 ] , a gen - eral framework to correlate the state of the actin cytoskeleton to spine shape is lacking . Most importantly , it is not clear whether the actin is capable of au - tonomously driving the shape change , or whether the actin simply follows mor - phological transitions otherwise imposed . The model for spine dynamics we present in this Chapter uses the Canham - Helfrich formalism . We analyze the interplay of the plasma membrane with the underlying actin cytoskeleton to quantify the forces that are required to prompt the initial formation of the spine , and its subsequent head formation . We ﬁnd that the forces generated by actin polymerization are sufﬁcient for it to drive ﬁlopodium formation , and that the resulting dimensioning ( quantiﬁed , for in - stance , by the ratio ( protrusion width ) / length ) closely resembles those reported in experiments . A related theoretical model taking into account the interplay of the spine membrane with the actin cytoskeleton allows us , in addition , to compute the forces and energies required for spine head formation . It shows that the si - multaneous presence of both branched actin ﬁlaments and bundled / aligned actin is required , and sufﬁcient , to produce the typical mushroom - like spine morphol - ogy . Finally , our model also highlights the important role of additional physical processes in stabilizing the morphological features of mature spines . We discuss several candidate factors that may effect these processes , and con - clude that these molecules are sufﬁciently rigid to be able to constrict the spine - neck to the extent reported in experiments . Our models do point to a fundamental role for actin remodeling in the process of spine formation and maturation . This ﬁnding supports earlier claims in the literature , and our model suggests novel experiments to further pin down the basic principles that control the structural plasticity of the brain . 2 . 1 methods 2 . 1 . 1 Membrane model To study the equilibrium shapes of membranes , we will need to come up with the general shape equation for a uniform membrane . A common way to write down the energy functional that corresponds to the shape of minimal bending energy is through the Canham - Helfrich free energy . This functional and their corresponding boundary condition describes the total free energy of a membrane due to the curvature of the membrane . Since the principle curvature must be coordinate invariant , it is typically expressed in terms of the mean curvature H and Gaussian curvature K , which are the average and product of the principal curvatures c 1 and c 2 , H = 1 2 ( c 1 + c 2 ) K = c 1 c 2 ( 1 ) 2 . 1 methods 17 elongation maturation dendritic filopodium mature , mushroom - like spine actin patch r ( s ) s z’ ( s ) = - sin r’ ( s ) = + cos z ( s ) R ( a ) ( b ) Membrane Model forces Legend Figure 4 : Outline of the model for spine formation and maturation . ( a ) : Cartoon of spine initiation , elongation and maturation . From left to right : stubby spines ; dendritic ﬁlopo - dia or thin spines ; mature , mushroom - like spines . In our mathematical model , we solve the shape equation based on the energy functional ( Eq . 5 ) . In this study we show that , at least for the purposes of the force calculations , the results of the shape equation can be reproduced using the geometries that are also displayed in this ﬁgure . ( b ) : Deﬁnition of axisymmetric coordinate system that we use in our model . The resultant Canham - Helfrich energy is given by , F = (cid:90) (cid:16) κ b 2 ( 2 H − C 0 ) 2 + ¯ κ b K (cid:17) dA , ( 2 ) where κ b is the bending modulus , ¯ κ b the Gaussian modulus and C 0 the sponta - neous curvature . A non - zero spontaneous curvature reﬂects typically an asym - metry between the two leaﬂets of the membrane . We will however only consider membranes with vanishing C 0 = 0 . In case of a closed membrane without holes , the Gauss - Bonnet theorem states that the last term of the integral in Eq . 2 , over the Gaussian curvature , also vanishes . 18 growth of dendritic spines Table 1 : Various ‘ball - park’ ﬁgures of dendritic spines . Code Quantity Typical Scale Source N Number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head O ( 70 ) [ 81 ] R base Radius of the base of the spine ( viz . where the spine is connected to the dendritic membrane ) . This quantity was estimated on the basis of microscopy images published by [ 180 ] . ∼ 300 nm [ 180 ] R neck Radius of a typical spine - neck 75 ± 30 nm [ 56 ] R head Radius of a typical spine - head 220 ± 154 nm [ 56 ] L neck Length of a typical spine - neck 0 . 2 − 2 µ m [ 180 ] L ﬁlop . Length of a typical ﬁlopodium 0 . 9 − 10 µ m [ 38 ] ( mean ≈ 5 µ m [ 205 ] ) [ 38 , 205 ] (cid:96) Length that actin ﬁlament extends upon one polymerization step 2 . 2 nm [ 112 ] A neck Surface - area of a typical spine - neck 0 . 24 ± 0 . 17 µ m 2 [ 56 ] A head Surface - area of a typical spine - head 0 . 61 ± 0 . 57 µ m 2 [ 56 ] A ﬁlop . Surface - area of a typical ﬁlopodium [ 38 , 205 ] 0 . 85 − 16 µ m 2 ( mean ≈ 6 . 3 µ m 2 ) [ 38 , 205 ] f neck Expansive force that a spine - neck of typical size exerts ( using the approximate formula f neck ≈ 4 πκ b R head / R 2neck , see text ) 9 − 290 pN f head Contractile force that a spine - head of typical size exerts ( using the approximate formula f head ≈ 17 . 23 κ b R neck / A head , see text ) 0 . 0007 − 0 . 05 pN f actin Average actin polymerization force 3 . 8 pN [ 112 ] κ b Bending rigidity of lipid bilayer membrane 5 × 10 − 19 J [ 151 ] 2 . 1 . 2 Model for dendritic spine growth Reﬂecting the approximate rotational symmetry of dendritic spines , we use an axisymmetric coordinate system consisting of an angle ψ with the horizontal , an arc - length parameter s , radial coordinate r and vertical coordinate z . The coor - 2 . 1 methods 19 dinate system is schematically displayed in Fig . 4 ( b ) . The arc - length parameter s = 0 . . . S is used as the independent variable and r ( s ) and ψ ( s ) as the coordinates , r (cid:48) ( s ) = cos ψ ( s ) z (cid:48) ( s ) = sin ψ ( s ) , ( 3 ) where the derivatives are taken with respect to the arc - length parameter s . The mean curvature in these coordinates is given by , H = 1 2 (cid:18) ψ (cid:48) ( s ) + sin ψ ( s ) r ( s ) (cid:19) . ( 4 ) Using these relations will enable us to derive the shape equations for rotational symmetric dendritic spine shapes in the next Section . In addition to the energy functional Eq . 2 we include the surface tension σ and point - force f in the functional as Lagrange multipliers to enforce speciﬁc values of the surface - area A 0 and the height of the shape L 0 [ 167 ] . We use the surface - area , the amount of membrane available to the spine , as a quantity that encodes growth [ 128 , 191 ] . The height of the shape reﬂects the cytoskeletal architecture of the spine . Although there is no obvious way of interpreting the Lagrange multiplier σ , the point - force f is simply the mechanical force that is exerted by the cytoskeleton on the spine membrane . The corresponding Canham - Helfrich energy functional is then given by [ 29 , 151 ] , F = 12 κ b (cid:90) ( 2 H ) 2 d A + σ ( A − A 0 ) − f ( L − L 0 ) , ( 5 ) where κ b ≈ 500 pN · nm is the bending rigidity of the membrane [ 151 ] , H is the mean curvature ( Eq . 4 ) [ 75 ] , A = (cid:82) d a is the surface area , σ is a surface tension which we use as a Lagrange multiplier to enforce the surface area , f is a point - force acting on the membrane and L = z ( S ) − z ( 0 ) is the height of the membrane . One of the main goals of this Chapter is to investigate whether these forces are attainable through actin polymerization . We will show that this is indeed the case . Our choice to work at ﬁxed total surface - area , rather than ﬁxed surface tension , is inspired by two considerations : ( i ) Dendrites are ﬁnite in size , and the membrane that envelopes the dendritic shaft can only be as small as the underlying cy - toskeleton of microtubules [ 81 , 69 ] therefore , we cannot regard the surroundings of the spine as a reservoir of freely accessible membrane . Instead , excess mem - brane needs to be transported , often by means of exocytic trafﬁcking , in order to be available to the spine [ 128 , 191 ] . ( ii ) On the dendritic shaft , generally , many spines exist side - by - side . In open boundary settings , such as those employed in [ 29 ] , area is exchanged with a virtual bath outside the integration domain . In the dendritic shaft , however , no such bath exists as the next spine is likely also grow - ing . Thus , a competition for membrane exists between proximate spines . For this reason , we choose to work with closed boundaries , prohibiting area to leak out of the domain of interest . 20 growth of dendritic spines We choose to work in a setting in which the amount of membrane available to the spine is conserved , i . e . membrane does not leak away from the shape . We point out that there is biological evidence that cells strive to maintain their surface - tension [ 45 , 134 , 29 ] . Although this empirical fact might seem incompatible with our simulations , the ensembles of constant surface - area and constant surface - tension are , for the purpose of modeling mushroom - like spines , approximately equivalent . The underlying reason for this similarity is simple : the energy cor - responding to the surface - tension of a typical spine - head is approximately equal to the bending energy of a typical spine - neck . Hence , for mushroom - like shapes , the two ensembles can be converted to one another by swapping an energy term of the same order of magnitude . We have veriﬁed this prediction by compar - ing various quantitative predictions between the two ensembles ( the ﬁlopodium width , number of ﬁlaments required to support a ﬁlopodium , neck width of a mature spine and head width differ 5 − 40 % between the two ensembles ) . Indeed , the predictions that we make here are valid in both ensembles . To obtain an extrema in the energy functional Eq . 5 we invoke the Euler - Lagrange formalism . Using this formalism Eq . ( 5 ) will yield a system of differen - tial equations . Taking the ﬁrst variation of the Canham - Helfrich energy functional , and insisting that the ﬁrst variation δ E is zero under all possible inﬁnitesimal perturbations results in a differential equation that describes stationary shapes { r ( s ) , ψ ( s ) } . The stationary shapes include shapes corresponding to an energetic minimum , an energetic maximum or a saddle point in the energy functional . A seminal paper by [ 203 ] describes the higher - order variations , from which we can infer the class of stationary point . The condition that the variation should vanish for an equilibrium shape results in the following shape equation [ 75 , 29 ] , ψ ( 3 ) = − 1 2 ( ψ (cid:48) ) 3 − 2 cos ψ r ψ (cid:48)(cid:48) + 3 sin ψ 2 r ( ψ (cid:48) ) 2 + ¯ σ r sin ψ + 3 ( cos ψ ) 2 − 1 2 r 2 ψ (cid:48) + ¯ σψ (cid:48) − ( cos ψ ) 2 + 1 2 r 3 sin ψ , ( 6 ) where we have dropped the s – dependencies and ¯ σ ≡ σ / κ b . Most publications that we have consulted make reference to second - order shape equations [ 75 ] , but – in accordance with [ 29 ] – we ﬁnd the third - order shape equation 6 to be numeri - cally substantially more stable . The second - order shape equations , e . g . found by taking the ﬁrst integral of Eq . 6 , is used to ﬁnd boundary conditions for ψ (cid:48)(cid:48) . This equation is [ 29 ] ψ (cid:48)(cid:48) cos ψ = − 1 2 ( ψ (cid:48) ) 2 sin ψ − ( cos ψ ) 2 r ψ (cid:48) + ( cos ψ ) 2 + 1 2 r 2 sin ψ + ¯ σ sin ψ − ¯ f r , ( 7 ) where ¯ f ≡ f / κ b . Although the point force f does not show up in the shape equation 6 , it does enter in the determination of the correct boundary conditions 2 . 2 filopodium formation 21 through Eq . 7 . We use a shooting - and - matching algorithm ( for more information on this numerical technique , we refer to [ 58 ] ) whereby ψ (cid:48) ( 0 ) , f , σ are used as shooting variables . These shape equations have been numerically solved by means of a shooting - and - matching technique for a wide range of parameters A 0 , L 0 and several sets of boundary conditions ( we drop the subscripts to A 0 , L 0 in the remainder of the Chapter ) . We ignore the stretching energy since lipid bilayer membranes can be regarded as approximately inextensible [ 135 ] . Also , the pressure - term − p V that is often cited in conjunction with the Canham - Helfrich formalism [ 148 , 75 , 74 ] is not applicable since we are discussing a system that is free to exchange cytosol with the environment . 2 . 2 filopodium formation It is well known that the actin cytoskeleton plays a large role in the formation of ﬁlopodia [ 69 ] . It has been hypothesized that polymerization of actin ﬁlaments and the resultant forces are sufﬁcient for the formation of dendritic ﬁlopodia [ 12 ] . In order to theoretically investigate this possibility , we will present a model that includes extension of the actin cytoskeleton in growing ﬁlopodia . This is schemat - ically displayed in the outline of our model , Fig . 5 . This is readily incorporated in the energy functional ( 5 ) by ﬁxing the height of the shape—thereby representing the vertical dimension of the cytoskeleton . Growth of the cytoskeleton , or change in cytoskeletal architecture , is represented by incrementing this height constraint . We will ﬁrst show that the forces that this rigid structure needs to exert on the spine membrane match the forces that are generated by actin polymerization . Then , we will show that the sequence of shapes as a consequence of polymeriza - tion of the actin cytoskeleton is similar to that of ﬁlopodium formation . The protrusive forces that the rigid actin cytoskeleton exerts on the spine - membrane , will result in tube - like shapes , as can be seen in Fig . 5 . Also shown are the force - extension curves of these tubes for various values of the membrane surface - area . Since growth of dendritic spines and ﬁlopodia is mediated by ex - ocytosis of endosomes at the synapse [ 128 , 191 ] , we can model the growth of spines by increasing the surface - area of the shape ( See Section 2 . 1 ) . Thus , we ﬁnd that ﬁlopodia with more membrane require less force to be extended—in other words , membrane addition will result in further elongation of ﬁlopodia . Although the full force - extension relation shown in Fig . 5 is non - trivial , the linear part for large extensions ( i . e . large height L ) can easily be understood from a theory that treats these structures as cylinders . From the bending energy of a cylinder ( with given surface - area ) E = 2 π 2 κ b L 2 / A we ﬁnd that the force f ≡ − ∂ L E to extend this cylinder is linear in L . Applying this derivative , we ﬁnd the force for pro - ducing ﬁlopodia f ≈ 4 π 2 κ b L / A . This approximation turns out to be accurate to within 9 % of the computed force - extension curves shown in Fig . 5 ( the error in this approximation decreases as the ﬁlopodium height increases ) . This is markedly 22 growth of dendritic spines ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) f fil . f fil . f fil . f fil . constant ≈ 0 4 7 10 actin filaments 0 . 40 0 . 45 0 . 57 0 . 68 membrane [ µm 2 ] 0 . 37 0 . 40 0 . 45 0 . 51 0 . 5 7 0 . 6 8 0 . 6 2 0 . 7 9 0 . 8 5 N u m b e r o f f il a m e n t s d e n d r i t i c f i l o p o d i a g r o w t h ( d ) Figure 5 : ( a ) : Cartoon of qualitative effect of increasing force whilst the amount of mem - brane is kept constant . ( b ) : Effect of growth on ﬁlopodium morphology at a ﬁxed vertical force of 35 pN . Membrane addition results in substantial elongation of the ﬁlopodium . ( c ) : Effect of cytoskeletal remodelling on ﬁlopodium morphology at a constant surface - area of 0 . 68 µ m 2 . ( d ) : Force - extension curves of our models of dendritic ﬁlopodia for various values of the surface - area A . Numbers at curves indicate the surface - area in units of µ m 2 whereby we used a radius of the base of the ﬁlopodia R base = 300 nm . 2 . 3 spine maturation 23 different from the force required for pulling a tube from a reservoir ( i . e . a ( quasi - ) inﬁnite bath of membrane ) of surface area . As is discussed in [ 29 ] ( using detailed analytical and numerical calculations ) the force for pulling a tube from such a reservoir converges to a constant for large extensions . If it were the case , then , that dendritic ﬁlopodia were connected to a bath of membrane , we would not ex - pect dendritic ﬁlopodia to have a typical length . On the contrary , in that scenario dendritic ﬁlopodia would grow indeﬁnetely ( given that the applied force is large enough to overcome an initial barrier ) . We assert that , within the paradigm of a conserved quantity of membrane available to the spine , a ﬁnite force will result in a deﬁnite length of the ﬁlopodia . As can be seen in Fig . 5 , the force required for formation of dendritic ﬁlopo - dia is in the tens of piconewtons . The polymerization of actin is able to exert , on the average , a force of f actin ≈ 3 . 8 pN ( from [ 112 ] ) . We ﬁnd , using the typical values for the length and surface - area ( table 1 ) and the aforementioned formula f ≈ 4 π 2 κ b L / A , a minimal number of actin ﬁlaments of 5 − 15 . Although we have not been able to ﬁnd publications that mention the number of actin ﬁlaments in dendritic ﬁlopodia , examining electron microscopy images of the cytoskele - tal organization of dendritic ﬁlopodia from [ 81 ] suggests that ﬁlopodia typically have 6 − 10 ﬁlaments . This comparison tentatively veriﬁes the plausibility of our model for ﬁlopodium formation . Our simulations span up to A = 0 . 85 µ m 2 and L ≈ 950 nm . Following [ 205 , 38 ] , these shapes can be regarded as relatively small ﬁlopodia . Now , measuring the width of the corresponding tubular part of the shape , we ﬁnd diameters in the order of 160 − 200 nm . Indeed , [ 56 ] report values for the diameters of ﬁlopodia or thin spines in the range 90 − 210 nm . Thus it is found that the simulations and experimental results have compatible ranges . 2 . 3 spine maturation 2 . 3 . 1 The role of the actin cytoskeleton in spine maturation As a consequence of synaptic activity , the spine volume increases and there is a change in the qualitative morphology through the formation of a bulbous spine - head [ 198 , 35 ] . We have previously shown that simply adding membrane to den - dritic ﬁlopodia results in larger ﬁlopodia , but not formation of a bulbous head . Therefore , an additional process is needed in order to produce mature spines . By which mechanisms does this qualitative change in morphology occur ? In this Section , we will show that the process of spine maturation can , at least in part , be ascribed to the interaction of the spine membrane with an the underlying actin meshwork . As is the case for ﬁlopodia , it is known that the actin cytoskeleton is intimately linked to the size and shape of the spine head [ 69 , 123 ] , and therefore is essential to understand the mechanism behind spine maturation . By modeling the inter - 24 growth of dendritic spines Figure 6 : ( a ) : Cartoon showing qualitative effect of increasing force whilst the amount of membrane is kept constant . Increasing the number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head enlarges the spine - head and , at the same time , a thinning neck . ( b ) 3 D growth - organization matrix showing the effects of increasing the number of ﬁlaments in the head N , the total surface - area A and the length of the spine - neck L . ( c ) : The minimum number of actin ﬁlaments required in the cytoskeleton for sustaining the contractile force f head that the spine - head membrane exerts and for counteracting the expansive force f neck of the spine - neck . Band indicates typical values of the total amount of membrane A = 0 . 5 . . . 2 . 0 µ m 2 ( cf . table 1 ) . Dashed lines indicate number of actin ﬁlaments required for counteracting f head + f neck . Empirical data ( black circles ) shows reasonable agreement with our model ( data taken from from [ 44 ] ) . ( d ) : Ratio of head and neck radii ( left ) and volumes ( right ) for a number of actin ﬁlaments N = 25 , 50 , 100 , 150 , 200 ( lower to upper curves ) . For these plots we used Eq . 8 with L neck = 500 nm . Data from [ 180 ] is highlighted in gray . 2 . 3 spine maturation 25 action of the cytoskeleton with the spine membrane , we will investigate the me - chanical requirements for a volume increase and morphological transition ( that is characteristic of spine maturation ) to occur . We will show ( by making use of the Canham - Helfrich energy ( 5 ) and comparison with experiments ) that branched actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head are plausibly responsible for the transition from dendritic ﬁlopodium to a mushroom - type morphology . Although the models we present here lack many of the biological details relevant for spine maturation , we ﬁnd that the forces that are required for the spine membrane match the forces that are generated by actin polymerization . Then , we show that typical spine - neck widths are accurately predicted by our models . An outline of our model for spine maturation is displayed in Fig . 6 . We model the polymerization of actin in the spine - neck as a vertical force and polymer - ization in the spine - head as a radial force . The discrepancy between these two types of forces stems from the difference in cytoskeletal organization in spines— the spine - head predominantly contains branched actin whereas oriented or linear actin mainly localizes in the spine - neck [ 69 , 81 ] . This gives rise to an approxi - mately isotropic network of actin in the spine - head , contrary to the actin orga - nization in spine - necks and dendritic ﬁlopodia [ 81 ] . The polymerization of these two manifestations of actin result respectively in a radial force and a directed force . As is the case for our models for dendritic ﬁlopodia , we approximate the total surface - area of the spine as a constant since there is only a ﬁnite pool of membrane available on the dendrite ( for a more detailed explanation , see Section 2 . 1 ) . This approximation , combined with the fact that lipid membranes are practi - cally inextensible [ 135 ] , leads to the following assertion : exerting an outward force on the spine - head results in the transportation of membrane from the spine - neck to the spine - head . More simply stated , cytoskeletal growth in the spine - head re - sults in an increase of the size of the spine - head at the expense of a decrease in the neck width . In order to make the above considerations quantitative , we propose a model for the spine membrane that is composed of a cylinder of constant height ( but variable radius ) connected to a sphere . As displayed in Figs . 6 and 7 , we model N ﬁlaments in the spine - head that each apply an outward radial force f actin = f head / N over a radius R head . The work performed by this force is f head R head . Like - wise , the energy required for attaining a neck of length L neck and radius R neck is πκ b L neck / R neck Eq . ( 5 ) . Balance of forces dictates that the total energy πκ b L neck / R neck − f head R head is minimized . 2 In order to insist conservation of membrane , we insert into the balance of forces the equation A ≈ 2 π R neck L neck + 2 We have shown that the force that is exerted by the contractile force due to the bending energy of the head can be neglected . This fact is reﬂected in the small number of actin ﬁlaments required to sustain a large , bulbous head , as can be seen in Fig . 6 ( b ) . 26 growth of dendritic spines A head with A a constant . Taken together , this results in the following implicit equation that we can solve for A head : 8 π 2 √ πκ b (cid:18) L neck A − A head (cid:19) 2 − f head / (cid:112) A head = 0 . ( 8 ) Given numerical values of f head , κ b , A and L neck , solving Eq . 8 for A head returns all other geometrical quantities , e . g . R neck , R head and A neck . We have numerically solved this equation for a range of values for the total surface - area A and number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head N = f head / f actin . The inﬂuences of growth , encoded in the total surface - area of the spine A , and cytoskeletal organization , en - coded in the number of actin ﬁlaments N , on spine morphology are combined in Fig . . 6 ( d ) . Using Eq . 8 and solving for the radius of the spine - neck we ﬁnd radii R neck = 60 − 93 nm ( whereby we use estimates for the number of actin ﬁl - aments N = 71 and the typical surface - areas A = 0 . 5 − 2 . 00 µ m 2 , cf . table 1 ) . This range agrees quite well with the experimentally observed ranges R neck = 45 − 105 nm by [ 56 ] and R neck = 50 − 100 nm by [ 180 ] . From the similarity of these ranges , we infer that at least a substantial part of the force that is exerted by the actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head is directed towards counteracting the expansive force of the spine - neck . Moreover , given numerical values of the total surface - area of the spine A we can solve for the number of actin ﬁlaments required for sustaining the spine - neck . We have done this for a wide range of surface - areas and reproduced the results in Fig . 6 ( b ) . These computations show that a larger spine - head ( with the same total quantity of membrane ) requires more actin ﬁla - ments to sustain it . This is in agreement with ﬁndings by [ 44 ] that show that the number of actin ﬁlaments increases substantially with increasing surface - area . In fact , the datapoints published in [ 44 ] match our model for N ( A head ) ( see Fig . 6 ( c ) ) . We have further used Eq . 8 for computing the ratios or radii R head / R neck and of volumes V head / V neck , shown in Fig . 6 ( c ) . We have found that both the numeri - cal values of R head / R neck and the upward trend w . r . t . A head of this metric agree well with data published by [ 180 ] if we use for the number of actin ﬁlaments N ≈ 70 − 150 . Thus , the renders shown in Fig . 6 ( d ) appear to be in the physio - logically relevant regime . Moreover , this number for the actin ﬁlaments appears to be supported by empirical data that shows N ≈ 50 − 150 ( we estimated this on the basis of data published in [ 44 ] ) . 2 . 3 . 2 The role of actin - membrane anchoring and septin - complexes We have discussed possible links between the cytoskeleton and spine morphol - ogy and how , within our model , pushing the spine membrane at the location of the head effectively pulls the spine membrane inwards at the location of the spine - neck . Within our paradigm of the conservation of membrane , directly applying a contractile force τ at one or more locations along the spine - neck can achieve the same result . This is possible due to the nature of the spine membrane , which 2 . 3 spine maturation 27 Figure 7 : Effects of growth ( membrane addition ) and the number of actin ﬁlaments in the spine - head on spine morphology . In these models , we kept the total length of the spine - neck ﬁxed . 28 growth of dendritic spines R neck = 45 nm R neck = 105 nm R neck = 105 nm R neck = 45 nm | | neck δ τ τ Figure 8 : Top ﬁgure : The line tension τ as a function of the distance L between the line tensions . Inset shows how line tension τ and ‘unduloid amplitude’ δ are deﬁned . Bottom ﬁgure : The absolute value of the reduced ‘unduloid amplitude’ , (cid:12)(cid:12) ˜ δ (cid:12)(cid:12) . Numerical simulations ( solid curves ) and theoretical model that treats these shapes as cylinders ( dashed curves ) . Inset ﬁgure shows the reduced ‘unduloid amplitude’ where it crosses ˜ δ = 0 . Indicated is ˜ δ neck = 10 % , the approximate amplitude of variations in the width of the spine - neck , corresponding to τ ≈ 6 . 5 − 15 pN . The computations have been performed for R neck = 45 . . . 105 nm as indicated in the ﬁgure . Black lines corresponds to R neck = 75 nm and κ b = 5 × 10 − 19 J [ 151 ] . 2 . 3 spine maturation 29 can be regarded as a two - dimensional ﬂuid—that is , contracting the spine - neck effectively channels membrane to the spine - head . Thus , applying a line tension can aid in the transition from an immature to a mature spine with a long , thin neck and bulbous head . Possible candidates for such line tensions are anchoring molecules ( such as the WASP / WAVE network [ 12 , 176 ] ) septin - complexes that form ring - like structures [ 114 ] and spectrin [ 197 ] . Next , we will show that anchor - ing molecules or ring - like complexes are able to apply sufﬁcient contractile force along the spine - neck . A line tension can be included in our models by adding a term τ C to the Canham - Helfrich free energy ( 5 ) , where τ is the line tension and C = 2 π R neck is the circumference of the spine - neck . The line tension can be measured thus τ = − ∂ E / ∂ C , where E is the bending energy of the shape . In Fig . 8 it can be seen that the line tensions are typically in the order of piconewtons . As a consequence of one or a number of such line tensions we ﬁnd ‘unduloidal’ spine - necks . Some representative shapes along with the required line tension have been reproduced in Fig . 8 . The shapes are characterized by an unduloid amplitude δ which de - scribes the maximum deviation from the base value R neck ( we have chosen to use the relative unduloid amplitude ˜ δ = δ / R neck ) . Although we have not been able to ﬁnd publications that measure the ‘unduloid amplitude’ ˜ δ for spine - necks , we have calculated this is in the order ∼ 10 % or less . Using this value of ˜ δ , we ﬁnd that , if line tensions are responsible for the typical spine - morphology the line tensions need to be placed at distances of L ≈ 0 . 14 − 0 . 33 µ m , as can be readily veriﬁed by examining Fig . 8 . Then , computing the line tension ( using numerical values R neck and κ b from table 1 ) corresponding to L ≈ 0 . 14 − 0 . 33 µ m , we ﬁnd that each of the line tensions experiences a load of τ ≈ 6 . 5 − 15 pN . This , too , can be veriﬁed by examining Fig . 8 . We are aware of various candidates for anchoring membrane to the cytoskele - ton , such as L - selectin , β 2 integrins and CD 45 . The literature reports that these three candidates have rupture forces respectively 25 − 45 pN , 60 − 120 pN and 35 − 85 pN [ 153 ] . Even the lowest values of these three ranges is almost double our highest estimate for the required line tension . Therefore , it is safe to conclude that anchoring molecules can withstand the mechanical forces that are required in order to constrain the spine - neck to R neck = 45 − 105 nm . Since spine - necks typically have lengths of 0 . 2 − 2 µ m ( table 1 ) , we ﬁnd that the number of line tensions that needs to be placed is 1 − 14 ( whereby we used the aforementioned distance between the line tensions L ≈ 0 . 14 − 0 . 33 µ m ) . However , as far as we can determine , literature does not mention these concentrations of anchoring molecules across all spine - necks . Although ring - like septin - complexes are found consistently along spine - necks [ 39 , 114 , 173 ] , they are only reported to be positioned at the base of the spine and not along the full length of the spine neck . Our models predict that it is required to place line tensions along the full length of the spine - neck in order to constrain it , and therefore we can refute septin complexes as being solely responsible for constraining the long , thin spine - necks . 30 growth of dendritic spines Moreover , the assembly of septins into ring - like structures has an associated time - scale in the order of minutes [ 79 ] . Hence , we ﬁnd that cytoskeletal remodeling - which can be performed on the time - scale of fractions of a second [ 112 ] - is much more rapid than positioning these constriction proteins . 2 . 4 conclusions We study the physical mechanisms that determine the morphology of dendritic spines . In particular , we investigate the ability of the actin cytoskeleton to change the size and shape of spines . We ﬁnd that the most striking primary features of spine growth and spine morphology can be straightforwardly understood as a consequence of the trade - off between the elastic properties of the spine mem - brane and the forces actively generated by the actin cytoskeleton . Speciﬁcally , we show that the initiation and formation of dendritic ﬁlopodia may be rationalized on the basis of the protrusive forces of the actin cytoskeleton . Using realistic esti - mates for the number of actin ﬁlaments involved , we ﬁnd that the dimensions of the ﬁlopodia in our models agrees well with the observed dimensions of newly formed protrusions in the developing neuron . We have also studied spine maturation , the process characterized by a morpho - logical transition from a ﬁlopodium or thin spine to the mature mushroom - like spine . Using models based on the coupling between the actin cytoskeleton and the spine membrane , we ﬁnd that the combined dynamics of branched actin and aligned actin inherently results in a mushroom - like morphology . Finally , we have discussed several candidate factors that might aid in the stabilization of the long , thin spine - neck and the bulbous spine - head . Our predictions for various morpho - logical quantities , such as the neck radius R neck and the ratios R head / R neck and V head / V neck , compare well with experimental data [ 180 , 56 ] . Furthermore , the sug - gested important dual roles of branched and aligned organizations suggest novel experiments analyzing ( possibly , even , altering ) the localization of proteins like Arp 2 / 3 and septin to the spine head and neck . Summarizing , our model suggests that actin organization is autonomously capable of controlling the shape changes of dendritic spines , providing the forces and geometry support for both the initial ﬁlopodial stage and the mature mushroom - like shape . Part II R E G U L AT I O N O F D E N D R I T I C S P I N E S Chapter 3 Shape as barrier for lateral diffusion An estimated 20 % to 30 % of all cellular proteins are membrane proteins that re - side exclusively within the two - dimensional conﬁnes of the various lipid bilayers in the cell . This conﬁnement has profound consequences for the functionality , the aggregation behavior and the modalities and regulation of the transport of these proteins . All these subjects have been the focus of vast amounts of research over the past 50 years ( see , for instance [ 3 ] and references therein ) . More recently , this ﬁeld has been able to make giant strides due to the arrival and perfection of sensitive experimental techniques such as Fluorescence Recovery After Pho - tobleaching ( FRAP ) [ 72 , 178 ] and single particle tracking ( SPT ) [ 146 , 145 ] . Such techniques allow one to observe the behavior of proteins within membranes in unprecedented detail at the level of single proteins and their trajectories as they move around in the membrane , but also offering a coarser view of the evolution of protein concentrations with time . These experiments reveal that cellular mem - branes present a highly heterogeneous environment to the diffusing species that inhabit it . Membranes are compartimentalized into so - called m icrodomains that may originate from a number of distinct mechanisms , including but not limited to the putative ( micro ) phase separation of the membrane lipids into rafts [ 17 ] , speciﬁc protein - protein interactions [ 26 ] , and cytoskeletal corrals [ 144 ] . In the ﬁrst part of this Chapter we focus on geometrical compartmentaliza - tion , where out - of - plane curvature is used to create relatively isolated micro - environments in the membrane . This is a common motif in cells : Among the many examples of biological systems in which morphology creates small mi - crodomains within a membrane are cristea in mitochondria [ 43 , 63 ] , grana thy - lakoids in chloroplasts [ 182 , 188 ] and dendritic spines in synapses [ 4 , 57 , 121 , 86 ] ( see Fig . 21 ) . The increased precision with which experiments can record indi - The content of this Chapter has been published as R . P . T . Kusters and C . Storm , Impact of morphol - ogy on diffusive dynamics on curved surfaces , P hys . Rev . E 2014 and R . P . T . Kusters L . C . Kapitein , C . C . Hoogenraad and C . Storm , Shape - Induced Asymmetric Diffusion in Dendritic Spines Allows Efﬁcient Synaptic AMPA Receptor Trapping , Biophys . J 2013 34 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 9 : ( a ) Tomography image of an isolated rat - liver mitochondrion , showing the cristea ( marked C in the image ) that are connected by tubular membrane regions to the larger inner membrane ( IM ) ( Figure from [ 106 ] ) . ( b ) Microdomains inside the chloroplast : The stacked grana thylakoids are connected to each other by a narrow tubular structure known as the stroma lamellae ( Figure from [ 166 ] ) . ( c ) Dendritic spines are micro - scale protrusions of the dendritic membrane where the signal transmission between dendrites and axons is localized ( Image courtesy of the Hoogenraad group ) . vidual trajectories as well as the evolution of concentration proﬁles requires an equally precise theoretical framework to interpret the results , and as we demon - strate the effects of observing diffusive processes in curved geometries introduce subtle but important phenomena . In the Chapter , we ask the question how the shape of a membrane alters the relevant time - scales and escape rates of particles laterally diffusing on the surface , both at the single particle level and that of con - centration proﬁles . Our approach is to combine Random Walk ( RW ) simulations with calculations of the so called Mean First Passage Time ( MFPT ) to study how diffusive time - scales and escape rates are altered by geometrical constraints of the membrane . In the second part of this Chapter we will turn our attention to the role of den - dritic spines in lateral diffusion of membrane - bound glutamate receptors . There , the notion has grown that the receptor concentration is the main determinant to regulate the synaptic strength , where receptors can switch at unexpected high rates between extrasynaptic and synaptic localization by lateral diffusion . These spines exhibit a remarkable morphological variety , ranging from thin protrusions , to stubby shapes , to bulbous mushroom shapes . The remodeling of spines is thought to regulate the strength of the synaptic connection , which depends vi - tally on the number and the spatial distribution of AMPA - type glutamate recep - 3 . 1 methods 35 tors ( AMPARs ) . We present numerical and analytical analyses demonstrating that this shape strongly affects AMPAR diffusion . Before we presents our results we will ﬁrst present the numerical and analytic framework that we use to study the diffusive dynamics on curved surfaces in the remainder of this Chapter . 3 . 1 methods 3 . 1 . 1 Random walk simulation In this section we present the Random Walk ( RW ) simulation methodology that we use throughout this work . The aim of this method is to simulate the in - plane Brownian motion of the particles on a curved surface . The method we use to account for the curved shape in the context of RW simulations is extensively dis - cussed in [ 23 ] - we now brieﬂy summarize our algorithm for computing such RW traces . We simulate random walks as trajectories composed of ﬁxed length steps in random directions on a curved geometry with in - plane coordinates u and v . On a curved surface , both the selection of a random direction as well as traveling a ﬁxed distance in this chosen direction require some attention . A true random directional unit vector (cid:126) w of unit length is chosen subject to the constraint | (cid:126) w | 2 = g uu ( w u ) 2 + g vv ( w v ) 2 = 1 , where g ij are the elements of the metric ( for rota - tionally symmetric systems g ij = 0 if i (cid:54) = j ) , which we explicitly calculate in Ap - pendix I for the geometries that we consider here . The length of this random vec - tor in local coordinates ( u , v ) is thus : | w u | = cos ( r n ) / √ g uu and | w v | = sin ( r n ) / √ g vv , where r n is a number picked randomly between 0 and 2 π . Next , we approximate the geodesic curve , parametrized by the arc length s [ 23 ] , and apply a second order approximation of the tangential plane : (cid:126) r ( s + d s ) = (cid:126) r ( s ) + d (cid:126) r ( s ) d s d s + 1 2 d 2 (cid:126) r ( s ) d s 2 d s 2 , ( 9 ) where the ﬁrst derivative is the unit tangent vector (cid:126) w and the second order cor - rection is obtained by solving the local geodesic equation for the surface d 2 r i d s 2 = − Γ ikl d r l d s d r k d s , ( 10 ) with Γ ikl the Christoffel symbols of the surface , and r i the i - component of (cid:126) r . We adopt the Einstein summation convention : summation over repeated indices is implied i . e . , a i b i = ∑ i ( a i b i ) [ 165 ] . Rewriting this to the parametrization ( u , v ) , a step of size λ ( i . e . , | (cid:126) w | 2 = g uu ( w u ) 2 + g vv ( w v ) 2 = λ 2 ) in these local coordinates is 36 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion achieved by a shift in coordinates ∆ (cid:126) w = ( ∆ u , ∆ v ) = ( u q + 1 − u q , v q + 1 − v q ) , where the index q labels the discrete iteration step number , and ∆ u = w u λ − 1 2 Γ uuu ( w u ) 2 λ 2 − Γ uuv w v w u λ 2 − 1 2 Γ uvv ( w v ) 2 λ 2 , ∆ v = w v λ − 1 2 Γ vuu ( w u ) 2 λ 2 − Γ vuv w v w u λ 2 − 1 2 Γ vvv ( w v ) 2 λ 2 . ( 11 ) The resultant diffusive motion is , by construction , locally Brownian ( (cid:104) x 2 (cid:105) = 4 Dt ) to second order in the curvature . In our simulation , we measure among others the average number of steps (cid:104) N (cid:105) of length λ it takes to arrive at a boundary . This quantity can be related to an effective mean escape time using the standard deﬁnition for diffusion , τ e scape = (cid:104) N (cid:105) λ 2 4 D , ( 12 ) where D is the diffusion constant . This implies that in RW simulations , the ef - fective time step δ t and the step length λ should be related by the diffusion coefﬁcient : δ t = λ 2 / ( 4 D ) . In the remainder of this Chapter we will use a step - size λ = 0 . 005 µ m ( this choice is motivated in Appendix II of this Section ) . For a diffusion coefﬁcient D = 0 . 1 µ m 2 / s , this requires a timestep of 6 . 25 × 10 − 5 s . Thus , when we report an escape time of 100 s , this corresponds to 1 . 6 × 10 6 steps . The results reported in this Chapter all reﬂect the fact that even for uniform and identical values of D , the quantity (cid:104) N (cid:105) is strongly inﬂuenced by the shape of the substrate - this is the mechanism for the regulation of diffusive dynamics in curved geometries . We will show in Section 3 . 2 that this mean escape time , ob - tained from simulations , equals the theoretically calculated Mean First Passage Time ( see Section 3 . 1 . 2 ) for those situations where an analytical computation is possible - we will use the numerical values in cases where an analytical answer is not available . 3 . 1 . 2 Mean ﬁrst passage time To analyze the effects of geometry and curvature on the conﬁnement of particles theoretically , we calculate the MFPT , which may be considered a characteristic time - scale for the diffusion in a system with absorbing boundaries . Numerous previous sources consider this quantity to characterize time - scales , and have cal - culated the MFPT analytically for geometries such as membrane patches , spheres and various other surfaces of revolution [ 6 , 172 , 65 , 67 , 160 , 161 , 162 , 66 , 195 , 21 ] . The MFPT W is generally obtained by solving the following differential equa - tion : ∇ 2 W = − 1 / D , ( 13 ) 3 . 2 impact of morphology on the diffusive dynamics 37 where D is the two - dimensional diffusion constant and ∇ 2 is the Laplace - Beltrami operator , which for non - trivially curved surfaces such as those we consider ( See geometry B in Fig . 10 ) here may also be calculated analytically [ 94 ] . Assuming rotational symmetry , the Laplace - Beltrami operator can easily be calculated from the metric and Christoffel symbols that we provide in Appendix I , ∇ 2 n = ∇ i ∇ i = g jk ∂ 2 ∂ x k ∂ x j − g jk Γ lkj ∂ ∂ x l . ( 14 ) We solve the equation for the resultant MFPT ( Eq . 13 ) numerically for geometry B ) and compare it to to the escape time obtained from the RW simulations presented in the previous section . 3 . 2 impact of morphology on the diffusive dynamics In this Section we present analytical and numerical analyses of in - plane diffu - sion of discrete particles on curved geometries reﬂecting various generic motifs in biology , and explore in particular the effect that the shape of the substrate has on the characteristic time - scales of diffusive processes . Firstly , we verify the ob - vious : that shape in itself cannot retain an elevated concentration of molecules in a certain sub - domain indeﬁnitely . Eventually gradients in concentration van - ish . Nonetheless , we ﬁnd that shape can , and does , affect the temporal evolution of a concentration proﬁle . We ﬁnd that particle concentrations within such mi - crodomains may remain elevated for increased periods of time , depending on the radius and length of the neck separating the two regions . In addition to the dynamics of diffusively relaxing concentration proﬁles we consider the escape dynamics of individual particles in the same microdomains , characterized by the Mean First Passage Time for crossing the microdomain boundary . By what precise mechanism does the shape of the membrane regulate the equi - libration dynamics of concentration proﬁles , as well as the exit dynamics of sin - gle particles ? To answer this question we isolate the effect of shape and study exit dynamics keeping the area of the absorbing boundary constant , but varying the curvature of the membrane connecting to it . At this constant boundary size , we demonstrate that in out - of - equilibrium situations the characteristic time - scale for particles leaving the domain may change over several orders of magnitude depending on the morphology of the system . That is to say , the time - scales and escape rates through a boundary do not solely depend on the size of the boundary itself , but rather are determined by an interplay between the size of the boundary and the available area around the absorbing boundary . 3 . 2 . 1 Model system To study how the morphology affects the time - scales of in - plane diffusion we study two distinct systems , shown in Fig . 10 A and B . The ﬁrst system to which 38 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion h 1 1 1 2 2 d 2 d 1 R e1 h 2 R e2 R ( a ) ( b ) Figure 10 : The two geometries we consider throughout this Chapter : ( a ) two planar sur - faces connected by a narrow neck with radius d and height h ( shape A ) and ( b ) a funnel - like geometry connecting an enclosed head domain ( which we shall also refer to as the top of the funnel ) to the surrounding membrane ( shape B , see main text for the parameter values ) . we will be referring as A consists of two large planar surfaces , separated by a tubular neck with radius d 1 and height h 1 . The second system , to which we will refer as B , consists of a bulbous head compartment , connected to the remainder of the system by a funnel - like neck of radius d 2 . The axisymmetric funnel - like geometry of system B is parametrized as x ( u , v ) = R sin u cos v y ( u , v ) = R sin u sin v z ( u , v ) = h 2 − R cos u Au , ( 15 ) where R is the maximal radial distance of the surface representing the largest radius of the funnel , h 2 a measure for the height of the funnel and A is a shape parameter which is large for systems with a narrow neck and small for a system with a wider neck . In the Appendix of this chapter , we calculate the corresponding metric and Christoffel symbols of this geometry . These shapes are connected to a ﬂat membrane with outer radius R e 1 in A and R e 2 in B . It should be noted that both in geometry A and B , the connection between the funnel and the plane and between the cylinder and the plane is continuous , but non - smooth . This is solved by truncating any step that takes the trajectory outside of the domain in which it originated to the point of intersection between the domains . Such steps are therefore shorter than λ . We have veriﬁed that this method yields the same results , for our choice of λ , as methods in which the remaining part of the step is rotated onto the second domain ( a method that yields steps of length λ , but is computationally more involved ) . These two systems are chosen to represent the two most widely encountered ge - ometries in cellular membranes : two regions connected by a slender neck , where one of these two regions is an extended plane , and the other is either an extended 3 . 2 impact of morphology on the diffusive dynamics 39 planar region ( as happens , for instance , in cristea connected to the inner mem - brane of mitochondria , or the stacked grana in thylakoids ) , or a smaller , bulbous compartment ( as is the case in dendritic spines and membrane pits ) . We do not claim that these geometries are represented with exact precision by the sample ge - ometries used here , our interest is in the general functioning of relevant generic shape motifs . 3 . 2 . 2 Relaxation of concentration proﬁles To determine how the shape affects the time - scales of lateral diffusion in mor - phological constricted environments we perform RW simulations in the manner discussed in the previous section . We do this for two distinct geometries , shown in Fig . 10 a and b . For these two systems , we calculate the temporal evolution of the density in the two indicated domains 1 and 2 ( see Fig . 10 a and b ) by releas - ing 5000 noninteracting particles at a distance 1 µ m from the center of the disc in A and at the top of the funnel ( i . e . , the leftmost part of shape B in Fig . 10 b ) . We consider , for the time being , a low - density regime for the diffusing species . Note that a sampling rate of 5000 particles corresponds to an error in the average which is smaller that 1 % . In the remainder of this Section we will choose micron length - scales , corresponding to the typical cellular length - scale . We ﬁnd that the density equilibrates to a uniform value , as it should . Note that for this measurement we have placed a reﬂecting boundary at the edge of the system leading to a conserved number of particles . This reﬂects the fact that the morphology of a system alone cannot retain density gradients , eventually a uniform equilibrium must be reached . However , we show in Fig . 11 a that the time it takes to reach equilibrium depends on the shape of the domains . We focus initially on the role of the radius of the constriction , separating the two large structures , as shown in Fig . 11 a : we vary the neck radius in geometry B using values of d = 0 . 1 ( red ) , 0 . 05 ( blue ) and 0 . 025 µ m ( black ) . To isolate the effect of the neck , we keep the diffusion coefﬁcient ﬁxed at 0 . 1 µ m 2 / s and use R = 1 µ m , h 2 = 4 µ m and R e 2 = 1 µ m in all cases considered . To quantify the ability of a shape to retain an elevated concentration of particles in a certain domain we will calculate the equilibration time τ e q , which we deﬁne as the time it takes for the difference in concentration to reach 99 % of its equilibrium value across domains 1 and 2 , for geometries A and B . We extract τ e q as function of the height of the system h for system A and as function of the radius of the constriction d 1 and d 2 , separating the two domains for system A and B . For A we also consider the case where the total surface area of the neck remains constant such that a decreasing neck radius is compensated by an increased neck length : h 1 × d 1 = 0 . 5 µ m 2 ( A : h 1 = 1 µ m , radius of the neck d 1 = 0 . 5 µ m and R e 1 = 2 µ m ﬁxed , for system B : R = 1 µ m , h 2 = 4 µ m and R e 2 = 1 µ m were ﬁxed ) . We demonstrate that this system exhibits power law dependencies of the equilibration time on both the length of the constriction : τ e q ∼ h 0 . 8 ( see Fig . 11 b ) and on the neck 40 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion radius : Figs . 11 c and d show scaling for both systems τ e q ∼ d − λ . The exponent λ for the equilibration time τ e q for system A equals 0 . 85 for a ﬁxed neck length and 1 . 73 for a constant area , and for system B equals 0 . 75 . From this , we conclude that an elevated concentration in one of the sub - domains , separated by a slender neck from the rest of the system , may be retained for sig - niﬁcantly longer times if the neck separating the two domains is narrow ( and thus highly curved in one direction ) . Clearly , this phenomenon serves to compartmen - talize functionality in several biological systems as mentioned before : diffusing species remain localized longer , and are contained within effectively isolated com - partments created by curvature , rather than physical boundaries . 3 . 2 . 3 Exit dynamics of single particles We now turn to the manifestations of morphology in single - particle behavior . Single particles exhibit similar morphological dependencies as concentration pro - ﬁles , as one observable is directly linked to the other . However , in membrane protein systems it is generally not obvious or even warranted to speak of concen - trations , as some proteins exist in very low copy numbers and coarse graining is ill - advised . In single - particle tracking , likewise , the behavior of one or few distinct diffusing entities is studied and the question of how such traces are affected by lo - cal and global geometry is of immediate relevance . Since most curved geometries in cell biology serve to retain functional proteins within some microdomain , we shall focus on measures associated to the escape from a region . This question has received considerable attention in the last couple of years , motivated particularly by the context of dendritic spines [ 67 , 66 ] . For these spines , the neck has been shown to be an important barrier for diffusion - increasingly so when it becomes longer or narrower . To focus , again , on the isolated effect of the neck radius we assume shape B with a ﬁxed height and a constant radius of the head ( see Fig . 12 a ) . Values chosen were a height of 4 µ m , head radius 1 µ m , and a diffusion constant of D = 0 . 1 µ m 2 / s . We vary the radius of the neck d 2 through varying the shape parameter A in Eq . 13 . We calculate the pdf of escape times , and the MFPT τ M FPT = (cid:104) τ (cid:105) p d f . Fig . 12 c we display the computed values τ M FPT as a function of the neck radius for particles either released at the top of the funnel ( i . e . , the leftmost part of shape B in Fig . 10 b ) , represented by the dots ( See Fig . 12 c ) and for a homogeneous concentration of particles ( triangles ) . It can be seen that for the release at the top , the solid line , which represents direct computation through Eq . 13 , perfectly coincide . Decreasing the size of the neck leads to a divergent increase in the MFPT ( as it should , the MFPT becomes inﬁnite in the limit of zero neck diameter ) , and does so in the same fashion as the equilibration time computed in Section 3 . 2 . 2 : τ ∼ d − 0 . 75 2 ( see Fig . 12 d ) . From the distribution of escape times in Fig . 12 b , we note that upon decreasing the size of the neck , the width of the distribution increases signiﬁcantly . If we 3 . 2 impact of morphology on the diffusive dynamics 41 d 2 ( μ m ) 1 / h 1 ( μ m - 1 ) τ e q ( s ) τ e q [ s ] 0 . 05 0 . 15 0 . 25 0 400 800 1200 log 2 [ d 2 ] 5 3 1 5 6 7 8 l og 2 [ τ e q ] log 2 [ 1 / h 1 ] l og 2 [ τ e q ] ( c ) ( a ) ( d ) ( b ) t ( s ) C ( μ m - 2 ) 0 200 400 600 800 1000 200 400 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 500 1000 1500 3 2 1 0 4 6 8 d 1 ( μ m ) τ e q ( s ) log 2 [ d 1 ] l og 2 [ τ e q ] 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 4 6810 4 3 2 1 0 d 2 = 0 . 025 μ m d 2 = 0 . 05 μ m d 2 = 0 . 1 μ m Figure 11 : ( a ) Temporal evolution of the density in domain 1 and 2 of shape B for various neck radii ( d 2 = 0 . 1 , 0 . 05 , 0 . 025 µ m ) after the release of 5000 particles in domain 1 . ( b ) Neck length dependence of the equilibration time τ e q for shape A , given a ﬁxed neck radius d 1 = 0 . 5 µ m . We ﬁnd that τ e q ∼ h 0 . 8 . In ( c ) and ( d ) we plot the equilibration time τ e q as a function of the radius of the constriction d . Decreasing the size of the neck , increases the equilibration time in power law fashion for both geometries : planar - planar d 1 : τ ∼ d − 0 . 85 1 and funnel d 2 : τ ∼ d − 0 . 75 2 . In ( c ) we have also plotted ( Red dots ) the dependence of the equilibrium time on the neck radius τ ∼ d − 1 . 73 1 , keeping the total surface area of the neck constant ( d 1 × h 1 = 0 . 5 µ m 2 ) . 42 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion l og [ pd f ] pd f ( b ) ( a ) ( d ) ( c ) 2 . 0 log [ d 2 ] 4 . 0 3 . 0 5 . 0 6 . 0 7 . 0 8 . 0 l og [ τ M F P T ] 0 . 10 0 . 20 0 500 1000 1500 2000 τ M F P T ( s ) 0 2000 4000 0 . 0000 0 . 0010 0 . 0020 0 4000 8000 14 10 6 d 2 ( μ m ) t ( s ) t ( s ) Figure 12 : ( a ) Probability density function ( pdf ) of the escape times for various neck radii ( Full line : d 2 = 0 . 02 µ m dotted line : d 2 = 0 . 03 µ m , dashed line : d 2 = 0 . 12 µ m , where we assume shape B ( Fig . 10 ) , see main text for the parameter values . Decreasing the size of the neck is seen to increase the breadth of the distribution considerably . ( b ) Log - linear plots ( See Appendix III ) reveal that the tail of the distribution follows p d f ( τ ) ∼ exp ( − τ / τ t ail ) , where moreover τ t ail = τ M FPT ∼ d − 0 . 75 2 . ( c ) Mean First Passage Time τ M FPT as function of the neck radius d 2 , measured in simulations for particles starting at the top of the funnel ( dots ) and a homogeneous distribution of the particles across the surface ( triangles ) . ( d ) Log - log plot of τ M FPT revealing power - law behavior over two decades . The exponent is λ = − 0 . 75 . now plot this data for various radii d 2 on a log - linear scale ( see Fig . 12 b ) , we ﬁnd that for long times the tail of the distribution scales exponentially : p d f ( τ ) ∼ exp ( − τ / τ t ail ) . Direct comparison furthermore yields that τ t ail is equal to τ M FPT . Thus , not only does the MFPT scale with neck radius , the fraction of particles that remains inside the domain does , too . In Appendix III we explore the distribution and its dependence on neck size further . The exponential tail of the distribution is characteristic for so - called narrow - escape systems [ 169 , 21 ] , of which ours is an example . The single exponent here is noteworthy : we speculate that it may be relevant in light of the small copy number of some proteins or in systems where only very few proteins sufﬁce to ensure functionality . A suitably chosen shape can ensure that a minimal occupancy is statistically retained over very long times . 3 . 2 impact of morphology on the diffusive dynamics 43 3 . 2 . 4 Asymmetric diffusive dynamics The central ﬁnding of the previous two sections is that shape , quantiﬁed in our case by the dimension of the restrictive passage between two domains , affects both the equilibration of concentrations and the behavior of single particles . An objection that one might raise is that obviously , as the radius of the passage is decreased there is simply a smaller exit , less likely to be found by particles . We now show , however , that even when the passage remains the same size , but the shape of the surface in its vicinity changes , the MFPT is directly affected . To this end , we consider the funnel - like geometry with an absorbing boundary at the top and one at the bottom . Both boundaries - the one at the top and the one at the bottom - are circular , and both have the same size . We release particles at different locations on the funnel surface , and record the fraction of particles that escape through the top compared to those that escape through the bottom of the funnel , as function of the height on which we release the particles ( see Fig . 13 , where we have assumed a ﬁxed shape with height h 2 = 4 µ m , a constant head radius of R = 1 µ m , radius of the boundary : 0 . 06 µ m ) . We ﬁnd that when released at a height of 0 . 25 times the total height of the funnel , there is an equal probability to escape through the top or through the bottom exit . When released halfway up the funnel , only 25 % of the particles exit through the base of the neck . Thus , the asymmetry of the shape is directly reﬂected in an asymmetric relaxation : the shape controls and , in effect , guides the particles to a target region of interest . If , however , we do distribute particles homogeneously over the surface there is still an asymmetry : eventually , all particles must leak away through one of the exits and the manner in which they do so distributed over the two exits is again asymmetric . We measure the fraction that escapes through the bottom and through the top as function of the shape , for different neck radii and thus for various sizes of the absorbing boundaries ( still , of course , identical at top and bottom ) . We use shapes ranging from a cylinder , where we expect a 50 - 50 ratio in escape rate , to a funnel with a thin neck where we expect to recover the asym - metry discussed earlier . In Fig . 13 b we show , for 1000 receptors , this fraction as function of the size of the neck and thus the size of the absorbing boundaries given a system with height h 2 = 4 µ m , a constant head radius of R = 1 µ m and a diffusion constant of 0 . 1 µ m 2 / s . This ﬁgure shows that for decreasing neck size an asymmetry occurs between exit at top and bottom . This phenomenon suggests , that by varying the shape of the surrounding substrate one can in principle regu - late capture at functional domains and ﬂuxes through boundaries . This somewhat counterintuitive effect is not determined by the size of the absorbing boundary , but rather by the available surface area in the vicinity of the absorbing boundary . The discrepancy between the escape times and probabilities of leaving the fun - nel through the neck or through a hole at the top , evident in both the simula - tions and theory , can be understood by considering the difference in available surface within one characteristic diffusion length from the absorbing boundary . 44 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion ∂Ω t ∂Ω b d N bot / N top N bot / N top h 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 0 2 4 0 2 4 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 13 : ( a ) The fraction of particles that escape through the boundary at the neck compared to these escaping through the boundary at the top N bot / N top as function of the height of release for a ﬁxed shape ( see parameter values in the main text ) . ( b ) The fraction of particles that escape through the boundary at the neck compared to these escaping through the boundary at the top N bot / N top as function of the overall shape of the membrane , varying from tubular where obviously N bot / N top = 1 to funnel - like where N bot / N top (cid:28) 1 . The surface in ( b ) is prepared such that the particles were homogeneously distributed over the surface . This available surface around the absorbing boundary at the top of the shape is larger than that at the base of the neck . To quantify the effect , we break the non - standard geometry of a funnel into two more intuitive geometries : a cylindrical surface with a total area of A c yl = 2 π R 0 h , with R 0 the radius of the cylinder and h the height of the cylinder , and a ﬂat disc with an inner radius R 0 and outer radius R 1 and a total surface of A d isc = π (cid:0) R 21 − R 20 (cid:1) . For a fair comparison , we set the two areas to be equal : A disc = A cyl . The two geometries are shown in Fig . 14 . On these two equally sized surfaces we ﬁrst start with reﬂecting boundaries at z = h , z = 0 ( cylinder ) , R o ut and R 0 ( disc ) and we simulate 1000 random walking par - ticles until their density has equilibrated , and is homogeneous across the entire surface , where we used a diffusion constant of 0 . 1 µ m 2 / s . After this equilibration , the inner radius of the disc and the boundary h = 0 at the base of the cylinder are changed to absorbing boundaries , and we measure the mean escape time of the receptors through the absorbing boundaries . In Fig . 14 ( black dots ) we show the ratio of the two mean escape times τ d isc / τ c ylinder and ﬁnd that assuming a constant R 1 , decreasing R 0 and also increasing h ( to ensure area conservation ) , strongly decreases the fraction τ disc / τ cylinder . This large difference can be understood as follows : First , consider the mean distance to the absorbing boundary , which is ¯ h = A c yl / ( 4 π R 0 ) for the cylinder and ¯ R 2 = 0 . 5 ( R 21 + R 20 ) for the plane . Next , we calculate the MFPT for a particle starting at this average distance from the absorbing boundary . In Fig . 14 ( d ) we demonstrate quantitatively that this argument indeed accurately reproduces the 3 . 2 impact of morphology on the diffusive dynamics 45 d d d ( μ m ) d ( μ m ) d ( μ m ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 20 40 60 80 100 ( b ) ( a ) ∂Ω abs ∂Ω ref ∂Ω ref ∂Ω abs τ d i sc / τ cy l τ d i sc ( s ) τ cy l ( s ) Figure 14 : The local geometry around the exits of the funnel - like geometry ( a ) is a planar surface ( b ) at the top , with a hole in the center of radius R 0 , but is a cylinder ( c ) with radius R 0 at the bottom . We ﬁx the total surface area and the size of the exit , and compute the average escape time : Fig . ( b ) show a marked difference in escape time between the two geometries . ( d ) shows the fraction of escape times as calculated in ( b ) and ( c ) , from which we see that , depending on the size of the hole , the escape through the circular hole may be up to an order of magnitude faster than escape through the base of the cylinder . marked difference in escape times observed for the funnel like geometry in Fig . 13 . Rewriting slightly the equations for ¯ R and ¯ h above , and assuming equal areas and equal exit sizes , we ﬁnd that (cid:18) ¯ R ¯ h (cid:19) 2 = 4 (cid:18) R 0 h (cid:19) 2 + 4 (cid:18) R 0 h (cid:19) . ( 16 ) Thus , in the thin neck limit ( R 0 (cid:28) h ) we are primarily interested in , ¯ h (cid:29) ¯ R . In short , it takes a lot longer to escape from a thin cylinder than it does from a plane , even for equal total area , and even for equal exit sizes . This is the effect of shape in its simplest form , and clearly determined by the global geometry which dictates that a particle is , on average , closer to the boundary on the disc than it is on the cylinder . 3 . 2 . 5 Conclusions We have analyzed how the morphology of a membrane within which particles diffuse regulates time - scales and ﬂuxes through the boundaries of domains for some biologically relevant geometries . In general , these microdomains serve to retain gradients in particle concentrations for increased time - scales . While this regulation by shape is certainly not the only regulatory mechanism , and we do not compare its magnitude directly to other factors at play , the highly curved ge - ometries in several biological systems like dendritic spines in synapses , cristeae in 46 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion mitochondria , and the thylakoid membrane ( which all share a single generic de - sign ) strongly suggests that the shape is , indeed , directly used to control diffusive behavior . By quantifying the dynamics of particles escaping through a narrow neck we have found a general power law dependence for both the equilibration time - scale of a population of particles and the single - particle characteristic time - scales of escape through the boundary of a domain such as Mean First Passage Time and the escape time . These diffusive time - scales depend , in general , on the neck radius and the length of the neck following a power law over several decades : τ e q ∼ ( neck radius ) − λ and τ e q ∼ ( neck length ) η , where the ( positive ) exponents λ and η reﬂect the precise geometry of the system . In addition to summarizing the statistics of the ﬁrst passage process by its mean , we have also determined the distribution of time - scales . This conﬁrms that for our system the tail of the distribution is single exponential : p d f ( τ ) ∼ exp ( − τ / τ M FPT ) , as was previously observed in cylindrical and circular membrane patches [ 169 , 21 , 195 ] . For systems where a small , but obviously non - zero concentration of proteins is required for functionality , we speculate that this mechanism helps keep a small quantity of these proteins around the functional domain for very long times . In addition , we ﬁnd that the morphology of a substrate may regulate not only the characteristic escape times but also the escape rates . This is illustrated by considering a funnel - like geometry and observing that depending on the shape , absorption rates at the top of the funnel may be up to an order of magnitude larger compared to those at the base , even though the two absorbing structures are of identical size . We have shown that the crucial geometric quantity is the available surface in the vicinity of the absorbing boundary , which directly determines the characteristic escape time of the particles - larger available surfaces leading to smaller average distances between particles and boundary . Our ﬁndings are relevant for the interpretation of FRAP data : The increased recovery time after photo - bleaching in a complex morphology may not originate uniquely from physically distinct local properties such as an elevated viscosity , coupling to the underlying cytoskeleton , or direct protein - protein interactions : we show , that even absent all these effects differential ﬂuorescent recovery may signal a nontrivial curved morphology of the system considered . While we show that such effects affect the evolution of concentration proﬁles , they also show up in single - particle traces . The RW modeling that we present here allows such traces to be studied in detail on arbitrarily curved backgrounds . The demand for such single - molecule modeling will surely rise with the advent of ever more sen - sitive super - resolution techniques such as PALM and STORM . Combining such techniques with computer modeling may permit one , for example , to distinguish between regions with locally increased viscosity , and a region that possess com - plex morphologies that affect diffusive time - scales . While the effects we describe here may , on the one hand , be seen to complicate the direct interpretation of FRAP and SPT measurements , particularly in highly contorted membrane envi - 3 . 3 role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion 47 ronments , we speculate that , on the other hand , FRAP and SPT have great poten - tial as probes of the local geometry , and that differences in the diffusive behavior of well - characterized membrane proteins may be used as reporters for local and global geometry . Super - resolution imaging brings the typical dimensions of such structures well within experimentally resolvable reach . In the next Section we will turn our attention to the role of morphology on the diffusion of glutamate receptors in the dendritic spine and exemplify how morphology impacts the functionality of a synapse . 3 . 3 role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion The AMPA - type glutamate receptors ( AMPARs ) are responsible for fast responses at excitatory synapses , and various signaling pathways and numerous regulatory proteins modulate the properties of synaptic AMPARs [ 71 , 168 ] . The number and density of AMPARs at postsynaptic sites is widely regarded to be a key deter - minant of synaptic strength and is affected during various neurodegenerative diseases [ 156 ] . The amount of AMPARs at these synaptic sites is not ﬁxed and dynamic changes in AMPARs underlie the long lasting changes in synaptic trans - mission such as long - term potentiation ( LTP ) and long - term depression ( LTD ) [ 156 , 16 ] . It is therefore of fundamental importance to control the local abundance of AMPARs at synapses . At least three cellular processes govern the density and distribution of synaptic AMPA receptors ; local endocytosis and exocytosis from intracellular compartments [ 78 ] , lateral diffusion from the surface [ 183 ] and im - mobilization at synapses by anchoring at the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) [ 155 ] . In most models , these different trafﬁcking steps are all required to eventually reach the synaptic membrane , although the relevance of exocytosis on the spine membrane has remained controversial [ 124 , 26 ] . In this Section we study how the spine morphology affects the lateral diffusion pf AMPA receptors to and from the synapse . Previous work has reported on various correlations between changes in the spine morphology and functional parameters of synapses [ 57 , 15 , 68 , 139 , 4 ] . Previous theoretical work on AMPAR trafﬁcking has mainly examined ﬂat , 2 D geometries when studied surface diffusion , internal recycling and the role of the PSD in AMPAR trapping [ 67 , 157 , 33 , 179 ] . For example , it has recently been demonstrated that controlling the AMPAR / scaffold binding and unbinding rates in the PSD allows enrichment of AMPARs at postsynaptic sites [ 27 ] . However , a quantitative model integrating the three - dimensional morphological variability of dendritic spines into mechanisms that control AMPAR trafﬁcking at synapses is lacking . In this study we build a quantitative model integrating the morphologi - cal variability of realistic spine geometries into mechanisms that control AMPAR trafﬁcking at postsynaptic sites . Our simulations allow for ﬁrst time the direct observation of how two trapping mechanisms - the PSD and spine shape - work together to control the number and spatial distribution of AMPARs in order to regulate synaptic strength . 48 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion Endosomal transport Dendritic exocytosis Spinal exocytosis Surface diffusion Surface diffusion PSD ( a ) ( b ) 3D view Projected view Figure 15 : ( a ) : Illustration depicting the main processes involved in targeting receptors to the PSD . ( b ) : Simulated trajectory of a membrane - bound receptor on the curved den - dritic membrane . Whereas the local receptor density on the membrane is constant , a local enrichment in spines is misleadingly suggested in the projected view . 3 . 3 . 1 Model system for the dendritic spines Electron microscopy of dendrites report spines with a wide variety of shapes , ranging from thin spine with lengths of 2 - 4 µ m and a radius of 0 . 1 - 0 . 5 µ m to mushroom - like shaped spines which have a relatively thin neck : radius 0 . 05 - 0 . 2 µ m and a large head : radius 0 . 5 - 1 µ m [ 15 , 53 ] . Other observed shapes such as the very thin ﬁlopodium to branched spines are rarer , and will not be considered explicitly although the same principles as those we present here apply to these shapes . The functional domain of the spines , associated with the electron - dense region in the PSD , is generally situated at the top of the spine . In this region of the spine AMPA receptors can be immobilized via interactions with scaffold proteins . The parametrization of the shape that we will be using in this Section effectively covers a large fraction of different spine shapes observed in experiments [ 53 ] . The axisymmetric body that we use is that of Model B as presented in Fig . 10 . Varying the parameters A , B and R allows one a transition from stubby , via thin , to mushroom - like morphologies . The bottom of the spine is connected to the dendritic membrane . Detailed information about this shape - including its metric tensor and Christoffel symbols - may be found in Appendix I . We model the lateral diffusion of surface AMPA receptors by simulating ﬁxed step - length random walks ( RWs ) of non - interacting hard - core particles on the curved surface of the dendritic membrane . On such curved surfaces , proper im - plementation of the RW requires careful thought as both the selection of a random angle as well as implementing the ﬁxed step length depend on the ambient ge - ometry . We expand the surface around a point of departure up to second order in the local curvature , a procedure that was proven to yield correct diffusive behav - ior provided that the step size is small compared to the smallest length - scale in 3 . 3 role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion 49 curvature ( see 3 . 1 and [ 23 ] ) . In rare cases , one may forego simulations and obtain analytical results for the Mean First Passage Time ( MFPT ) [ 67 , 66 , 65 ] . We present several cases where this could be obtained for our system , allowing validation of our simulation protocol ( see Section 3 . 1 ) . To properly capture the effects of the speciﬁc shape of a dendritic spine , while retaining a surface that is computationally manageable ( i . e . , that may be straight - forwardly parametrized ) , we distill from the considerable variety of shapes - see Fig . 15 ( a ) - the most notable classes of spine morphologies , including thin , stubby and mushroom - like - see Fig . 15 ( b ) [ 15 , 200 , 69 ] . We next generated trajectories of receptors diffusing across the surface of these various spine shapes and found that the local , time - averaged density of receptors is constant in equilibrium , as ex - pected for diffusion . Nevertheless , an apparent local enrichment was observed in an orthogonal projection , resulting from an increased projected surface area per - pendicular to the direction of observation . This is completely analogous to what happens on cylindrical substrates [ 137 ] . 3 . 3 . 2 Dendritic spine morphology controls AMPAR exit dynamics We next tested whether the shape of dendritic spines can directly affect lateral diffusion of surface AMPA receptors . We therefore simulated the temporal distri - bution of the receptor density in various domains for one particular type of spine and its surrounding dendritic membrane as depicted in Fig . 2 ( a ) ( R = 1 µ m , B = 4 µ m , d = 0 . 12 µ m , D = 0 . 1 µ m 2 / s ) . Fig . 16 ( b ) shows what happens following the release of 1000 receptors at the top of the spine at t = 0 . For a mushroom - like spine , and realistic parameter values , it takes approximately 500 s before all lo - cally measured concentrations of receptors in the spine are equilibrated with the surrounding dendritic membrane ( assuming a reﬂecting boundary positioned at a distance of 1 µ m from the center of the base of the spine to prevent all recep - tors from leaving the simulation domain ) . This simulation shows that the shape in itself cannot retain gradients in receptor density indeﬁnitely - at some point , it must come to a uniform equilibrium . To examine how the time until equilibrium depends on the morphology of the spine , we measured the progression of receptor movements following the release of 1000 receptors in the region at the top of the spine ( dashed region in Fig . 16 ( c ) ) for three distinct spine shapes . The spine morphologies each have the same height and same total surface area in the head of the spine to ensure that any effect we measure reﬂects how the surface is arranged in space . The surface area of the neck is slightly larger for the wider necks . Keeping the combined surface area of neck and head constant and renormalizing the height of the spine yields qualitatively similar results . Increasing the size of the head , as it occurs in spine maturation , is not explicitly covered here - it would add a trivial increase in the residence time due to the increased surface area in the head . Fig . 16 ( d ) shows that spines containing a thin neck ( mushroom - like spines ) are able to retain el - 50 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion ( a ) ( b ) t [ s ] D en s i t y [ μ m - 2 ] I III II I V 1 2 4 3 1 2 4 3 200 400 600 800 0 50 100 150 IV I II III 0 t [ s ] 200 400 600 800 D en s i t y [ μ m - 2 ] 50 100 150 Figure 16 : ( a ) : Time evolution of receptor density in domains I - IV after the release of 1000 receptors at the top of the spine . Reﬂecting boundary were positioned at a distance of 1 µ m from the centre of the base of the spine . ( b ) : Time evolution of receptor density in the dashed area for four different spine geometries . 1000 receptors were released in the centre of this region at t = 0 . evated concentrations of receptors after release approximately ﬁve times longer than stubby shapes , and between ten and twenty times longer than planar struc - tures of the same total area . These results demonstrate that the overall shape of a spine , rather than just the area and neck length , controls the equilibration time of receptors and that mushroom - like spines have strongly reduced receptor exit rates . 3 . 3 . 3 Dendritic spine shape controls asymmetry between PSD capture and escape To mediate synaptic transmission and intracellular signaling , AMPARs are po - sitioned at the post - synapse through interactions with the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) [ 155 , 120 , 100 , 125 ] . We therefore next investigated how the efﬁciency of AMPAR capturing at the PSD depends on the geometry of dendritic spines . We prepared a spine - like structure with an absorbing PSD region , as illustrated in Fig . 17 ( a ) , and simulate diffusive equilibration using three distinct settings . First , with an absorbing zone at the top of the spine and a reﬂecting structure at the base of the neck . Second , with an absorbing zone at the bottom and a reﬂecting structure at the top of the spine , and third , with absorbing zones at both top and bottom . At t = 0 , 1000 receptors are equally distributed on the surface of the spine ( R = 1 µ m , B = 4 µ m , d = 0 . 12 µ m , D = 0 . 1 µ m 2 / s ) , after which we record the tempo - ral capture at the top of the spine and escape through the neck of the spine ( Fig . 17 ( c ) ) respectively . For an unbiased comparison , the absorbing PSD zone at the top and the one at the bottom are of equal perimeter size . The reﬂective boundary settings simply serve to focus our attention on either PSD capture or base escape , preventing exit elsewhere . 3 . 3 role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion 51 We observed a striking difference in time - scales : receptor capture at the top occurs roughly twice as fast as leak - out at the bottom demonstrating the asym - metry induced by the speciﬁc morphology of the spine affects AMPA receptor distibutions . Similarly , when - after equilibration - both boundaries are rendered absorbing ( representing the realistic condition that receptors either escape or end up in the PSD , see Fig . 17 ( d ) ) , the ﬂux into the PSD domain at the top is larger than that out of the spine at the base . To further quantify these effects , we calculate the mean time it takes 1000 re - ceptors starting at the top of the spine to escape through the base of the neck ( red dots in Fig . 17 ( b ) 1 ) or the time it takes for the reverse process to complete : receptors released at the reﬂecting base of the neck and ending up captured in the PSD ( red dots in Fig . 17 ( b ) ) 2 ) . We measure a strong dependence of the outﬂow of receptors on the neck radius - MFPT ∼ ( neck radius ) − 0 . 7 . Mushroom - like spines - those with the smallest neck diameters - are thus signiﬁcantly more effective at retaining receptors . For this particular setting , we also computed the MFPT di - rectly ( solid black line in Fig . 17 ( b ) ) to validate our numerical method . We ﬁnd that when receptors are released homogeneously throughout the surface of the spine , the PSD together with the shape of a spine allows efﬁcient capturing of AMPA receptors in the spine head . 3 . 3 . 4 Exocytosis in spines is more efﬁcient than exocytosis on the dendritic shaft Besides AMPAR surface diffusion and PSD trapping , intracellular trafﬁcking and recycling of AMPARs is also important for synaptic strength [ 156 , 120 ] . Here , AMPARs containing vesicles are transport towards the plasma membrane and re - leased by exocytosis at speciﬁc sites , either at the dendrite shaft or in the dendritic spine [ 78 , 102 ] . Given these two different locations of AMPAR exocytosis , we de - termine which mechanism is most efﬁcient in concentrating AMPA receptors at the postsynaptic membrane . To quantify the process , we record the temporal evo - lution of the absorption of receptors in the PSD after the localized release of 1000 receptors , for different locations around the PSD ( See Fig . 18 ( a ) I , II and III ) . We employ similar simulation settings as before , allowing receptors to get absorbed at the PSD and diffuse freely elsewhere . To isolate the effect of morphology , we repeat this exercise for a planar geometry and for spines with different neck radii ( d = 0 . 24 µ m and d = 0 . 06 µ m , see Fig . 15 ( c ) ) . Fig . 4 B shows that release close to the PSD - especially for mushroom - like spines with a thin neck - results in nearly all receptors captured in the PSD , while for ex - ocytosis in the neck of the spine substantially fewer receptors end up in the PSD . If the receptors are exocytosed 0 . 5 µ m away from the base of the spine , almost none of them end up at the PSD . In short , release of AMPARs close to the PSD is markedly more efﬁcient than release at the dendritic membrane . Thus , AMPAR exocytosis in the spine heads provides rapid and speciﬁc control of AMPA recep - tors concentration at the PSD . Importantly , this effect is not simply a result of the 52 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion Ω 1 ( A , R ) Ω 2 ( A , R ) 0 0 25 50 0 . 37 0 . 63 1 . 0 1 . 0 100 200 0 . 5 0 . 5 d [ μm ] M F P T [ s ] III : N top N top ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) N neck N neck 0 . 05 0 . 15 0 . 25 0 500 1000 t [ s ] t [ s ] 1 2 2 1 ( b ) Figure 17 : ( a ) : A spinal surface , consisting of two equally sized absorbing regions , one at the the base of the neck and one at the top of the spine . ( b ) : Neck - size dependence of the mean escape time of receptors released at the reﬂecting boundary Ω 1 ( 1 ) or Ω 2 ( 2 ) and captured by the absorbing boundary Ω 2 ( 1 ) or Ω 1 ( 2 ) , respectively . The dots mark simulation results and the continuous line marks the analytical results based on MFPT . ( c ) : Time - evolution of capture at Ω 1 or Ω 2 upon rendering this region absorbing while keeping the other boundary closed . ( d ) : Time - evolution of capture at Ω 1 and Ω 2 upon rendering both regions absorbing . 3 . 3 role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion 53 proximity ; although the effect is still observed in a planar setting ( Fig . 18 ( b ) ) , the outcome is much weaker . Since all surface areas are kept constant , the advantage of exocytosis within the spine head is a direct consequence of the speciﬁc spine geometry . The location of exocytosis and the shape of the spine do not only inﬂuence the efﬁciency of AMPAR trafﬁcking , they also inﬂuence the time scale for PSD capture . To quantify this effect we now employ a reﬂecting boundary at a distance 1 µ m from the base of the spine and measure the time it takes to absorb the receptors in the PSD , again as a function of the location of the exocytosis . Fig . 18 ( c ) show that in the presence of the reﬂecting boundary , all receptors are ultimately absorbed at the PSD . However , there is a remarkable difference in the time scale for this capture process . For a typical mushroom - like spine , more than 90 % of the receptors are captured within seconds . For release in the neck , this takes ten times as long , and for release at the base it may take hundreds or even thousands of seconds . Again , the effect strongly depends on the morphology of the spine . Thus , our modeling demonstrates that exocytosis on the spine membrane is a very effective way to deliver AMPA receptors to postsynaptic membranes . 3 . 3 . 5 Conclusions In this section we have developed a quantitative model integrating the morpho - logical variability of realistic spine geometries into mechanisms that control AM - PAR trafﬁcking at postsynaptic sites . Our simulations reveal how two trapping mechanisms - anchoring at the PSD and diffusion on speciﬁc curved geometries - work together to control the number and spatial distribution of AMPARs in order to regulate synaptic strength . The model demonstrates that AMPAR trafﬁcking is a coordinated action between surface diffusion , local exocytosis and trapping at the PSD within the geometric restrictions of individual dendritic spines . We have examined the inﬂuence of spine morphology on three processes related to AMPAR trafﬁcking . First , we determined the exit dynamics of surface receptors through the neck of the spine and found a steep , power law suppression of the rate of outﬂow of receptors as a function of neck size . Therefore , mushroom - like spines are more effective at retaining gradients in receptor concentration after lo - cal release within the spine head when compared to stubby or elongated spines . Recently , experiments on narrow membrane tubes have shown that the curvature of the membrane affects the lateral diffusivity [ 31 ] due to hydrodynamic inter - actions in thin cylindrical geometries . These effects are not currently included in our model . We may , however , speculate on their effect on the processes considered here : since small necks reduce the diffusivity , the effects will further increase the escape time rendering the spine shape even more effective at retaining AMPAR gradients . In future work , we will include this effect by introducing a curvature - dependent diffusion coefﬁcient . 54 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion No boundary Reflecting boundary ( b ) ( c ) ( a ) 100 100 50 50 I II III 0 0 0 . 5 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 0 I II II I III III N PSD N PSD t [ s ] t [ s ] 500 250 I II III 0 0 250 0 . 5 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 0 I II II III III 500 I N PSD N PSD t [ s ] t [ s ] 500 250 I II III 0 0 250 0 . 5 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 0 I I II II III III 500 N PSD N PSD t [ s ] t [ s ] Figure 18 : ( a ) : Three different geometries used to analyze effect of the exocytotic position . ( b ) , ( c ) : Fraction of absorbed receptors over time for three different shapes following ex - ocytosis at position I , II or III , as depicted in A . Reﬂecting boundaries were positioned at inﬁnity ( B ) or at a distance of 1 µ m from the centre of the base of the spine ( c ) . 1000 receptors are released on various positions ( close to the head of the spine ( I ) , in the neck of the spine ( II ) and on a 0 . 5 µ m distance from the centre of the base of the spine on the dendritic membrane ( III ) . We consider three different shapes . In the ﬂat geometry the to - tal surface area in the PSD / Spine / Dendrite is the same as in the spine with a neck radius of 0 . 24 µ m ( Release I at 1 . 2 µ m , II at 2 . 2 µ m and III at 2 . 4 µ m from the centre ) . 3 . 3 role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion 55 Secondly , by considering the PSD in our measurement , we demonstrate that the time - scale for an AMPAR entering the spine , and ending up at the PSD may be up to an order of magnitude faster than the time of the reverse process , when a receptor is leaving the PSD and exiting the spine through the neck . Thus , the speciﬁc shape of the spine directly induces this asymmetric trafﬁcking . Third , our simulations reveal that local exocytosis results in effective and rapid capture of AMPARs , particularly at curved geometries such as in mushroom - like spines . The model reveals that increasing the number of AMPAR at synapses is most effectively achieved through active transport of AMPAR containing vesicles and subsequent release at local exocytotic sites in the spine head . The strong impact of morphology on receptor diffusion implies that in the interpretation of Single - Particle Tracking ( SPT ) and Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching ( FRAP ) experiments , the shape of the spine must be explicitly included . Our model indicates that mushroom - like shaped spines with local exocytotic sites adjacent to the PSD are privileged over others , because they can rapidly and efﬁciently regulate their synaptic AMPAR levels . The speciﬁc and high afﬁnity AMPAR / scaffold interactions within the PSD , in combination with the geometric shape of the mushroom - like spines and local exocytosis within the spine head , allow direct and rapid control over the amount of AMPARs at synaptic sites . In this way , each individual spine presents an isolated and asymmetric , but adaptive structure , which provides dendrites with a complex palette of regulatory options to efﬁciently control synaptic AMPAR level . In the next Chapter we will explicitly examine the effect of interactions between particles - which may lead to interesting crowding phenomena - and the dynamics within the PSD itself . Appendix I : Metric and Chistoffel symbols for system B In this appendix we will calculate the metric and the corresponding Christoffel symbols for the geometries A and B , as described in the Section 3 . 1 . The metric of system A ( See Fig . 10 in main text ) has the following two non - zero elements : g uv = (cid:32) 1 0 0 R 2 (cid:33) . ( 17 ) For this cylindrical surface all the Christoffel symbols Γ ki , j vanish . The metric of system B has the following two non - zero elements : g uv =   R 2 (cid:18) cos 2 u + ( cos u + u sin u ) 2 A 2 u 4 (cid:19) 0 0 R 2 sin 2 u   , ( 18 ) 56 shape as barrier for lateral diffusion l o g 2 [ p d f ] t ( s ) d ( μ m ) τ t a il ( s ) 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 11 10 9 8 7 6 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 500 1000 1500 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 10 0 200 400 600 800 τ M F P T ( s ) λ ( μ m ) ( a ) ( b ) Figure 19 : ( A ) Escape time from a type - B shape ( d 2 = 0 . 042 µ m , D = 1 µ m 2 / s , R = 1 µ m , h 2 = 4 µ m ) , measured for various values of the step size λ . For too large step sizes , the curved features are increasingly ignored and we measure faster escape times as a result . For values of λ below 0 . 02 µ m , the escape time saturates . ( B ) The tail of the distribution of escape times for various neck radii d , for a type - B shape . We ﬁnd perfect single - exponential behavior ; τ t ail = d − 0 . 75 2 . Moreover , τ t ail is exactly equal to the Mean First Passage Time , represented by the solid line in the inset ( see parameter values in the main text ) . from which we can calculate the Christoffel symbols Γ kij : Γ uvv = 1 tan u Γ uuu = − 2 sin u cos u + 2 cos u ( cos u + u sin u ) ) A 2 u 3 − 4 ( cos u + u sin u ) 2 A 2 u 5 2 (cid:18) cos 2 u + ( cos u + u sin u ) 2 A 2 u 4 (cid:19) Γ vvu = Γ vuv = − cos u sin u cos 2 u + ( cos u + u sin u ) 2 A 2 u 4 ( 19 ) Using this , we can calculate the Laplace - Beltrami operator from eq . 14 . Appendix II : Determination of the step size λ . In pure random walk simulations , the step length is generally irrelevant because of the self - similar behavior expected for long traces . As long as it is chosen in cor - rect proportion to the time step and the diffusion constant , according to Eq . ( 12 ) , the long - time results should not change . In curved geometries , however , there are intrinsic lengthscales related to the curvature of the substrate which warrant slightly more care : too large of a step size renders the simulation insensitive to shape features smaller than this step size . For this reason , we choose a step size that is considerably smaller than the smallest radius of curvature present in any of the systems we study . This , too , requires a caveat : since the composite shapes 3 . 3 role of spine morphology on the lateral diffusion 57 ( type - A as well as type - B ) consist of subdomains that are not smoothly joined to each other , the smallest radius of curvature is technically zero . We deal with this discontinuity as described in Section 3 . 1 , but have run the same simulation for a variety of step sizes to determine an appropriate choice . As we show in Fig . 19 , below a value of λ = 0 . 02 µ m , the measured escape times saturate . In all simu - lations presented in this Section , we have chosen λ = 0 . 005 µ m , well within this converged regime . Appendix III : Distribution of escape times As already pointed out in the main text , the distribution of escape times de - pends on the geometry - in our case varied by varying the size of the smallest constriction between two regions . In this Appendix we analyze the neck size de - pendence of the tail of the distribution of escape times ( see parameter values in the main text of Section 3 . 2 ) . We simulate the type - B shape and measure the tail of the escape time for various neck radii d . We ﬁnd that the tail is exponential pdf ( τ ) ∼ exp ( − τ / τ t ail ) , where τ t ail perfectly coincides with the Mean First Pas - sage Time τ M FPT , so that τ M FPT = τ t ail . Chapter 4 Crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion The picture that we painted in the previous Chapter , where diffusive motion of macromolecules and organelles is considered isotropic and homogeneous , is a considerable idealization of the actual lateral transport in biological membranes . These membranes are generally highly crowded surfaces , of which a large frac - tion of the surface is occupied by mobile as well as immobile obstacles , rendering the diffusive motion of macromolecules anomalous . To illustrate this , Fig . 20 ( a ) shows schematically how crowded a typical lipid bilayer of a trafﬁcking organelle is . To indicate how crowding alters diffusive motion , we have depicted the Mean Square Displacement ( MSD ) as function of time in Fig . 20 ( b ) . This ﬁgure shows the various temporal regimes of diffusive motion , ( i ) free diffusion at microscopic scales , characterized by a diffusion coefﬁcient D 0 , ( ii ) subdiffusive transport at intermediate time scales with anomalous scaling of the MSD . ( iii ) At sufﬁciently large time scales , this subdiffusive growth is followed by second crossover , after which the MSD again grows linearly with time , now with a reduced diffusion constant , D (cid:28) D 0 . Much work has been done in the past to study these various regimes and how these crossovers are affected by the amount of molecular crowd - ing , particularly in the context of biological membranes ( see [ 64 ] and references therein and more recently e . g . , [ 70 , 126 ] ) . In this Chapter we study the interplay between shape and crowding and in particular how these two features together render diffusive motion anisotropic on curved surfaces . We have seen in Chapter 3 that escape - times are highly altered by morphology and from the picture presented in Fig . 20 ( b ) we can presume that measures for long - time diffusion such as escape - times are affected by molec - ular crowding . Here we will show an intricate relation between the shape of a The content of this Chapter has been published as R . P . T . Kusters , S . Paquay and C . Storm , Con - ﬁnement without boundaries : anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder , S oft Matter 2015 and S . Paquay and R . P . T . Kusters , A Method for molecular dynamics on curved surfaces , Biophys . J 2016 60 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion ( a ) ( b ) l og ( Δ r 2 ) log ( t ) 1 1 1 1 1 ~ t α ~ D 0 t ~ Dt α Figure 20 : ( a ) Artist’s impression of the molecular anatomy of a trafﬁcking organelle [ 174 ] ( b ) The various temporal regimes of crowded diffusion , where free diffusion at microscopic scales is characterized by a diffusion coefﬁcient D 0 , at intermediate time scales this regime is followed by subdiffusive transport . In sufﬁciently large time scales , this subdiffusive growth is followed by second crossover , where the MSD grows linearly again with reduced diffusion constant , D (cid:28) D 0 . substrate and how crowding affects lateral diffusion . In Section 4 . 2 we discuss crowded diffusion on the surface of a cylinder . Here we report an unexpected anisotropic diffusive motion on cylindrical surfaces caused by the intrinsic con - ﬁnement which naturally arises from the cylindrical shape of the substrate . In Section 4 . 3 we expand this model to various curved surfaces and try to come up with a generalized picture of how crowding and shape direct lateral diffusion on surfaces with two non - zero radii of curvature . In particular we consider a funnel , a torus and a dumbbell shape . To study the diffusion on curved surfaces we in - voke a Rattle constraint algorithm to apply classical Molecular Dynamics ( MD ) simulations on curved surfaces . This algorithm is described in Section 4 . 1 . 4 . 1 method : molecular dynamics on curved surfaces In this Section we introduce the Langevin dynamics simulation that we use in the remainder of this Chapter in Section 4 . 1 . 1 and in Section 4 . 1 . 2 we cover the variant of the RATTLE constraint algorithm that we have developed to study diffusive motion on crowded surfaces , which we will use further in Section 4 . 3 . 4 . 1 . 1 Langevin dynamics A commonly used technique to model the dynamics of a molecular system , e . g . , to study the diffusive behavior is Langevin dynamics . It allows to include both particle - particle interactions as well as frictional effects due to an implicit solvent . The starting point for this method is the Langevin equation which we describe 4 . 1 method : molecular dynamics on curved surfaces 61 next . In this stochastic dynamics there are three components that have to be con - sidered , F c , a conservative force due to particle - particle interactions , F f = − ζ ˙ x ( t ) , a frictional force proportional to the velocity of the particle ˙ x ( t ) and the friction coefﬁcient ζ , and a random force R ( t ) . The friction coefﬁcient ζ is related to the collision frequency through : γ = ζ / m , where m is the mass of the particle . The correlation time τ = 1 / γ can be considered the time it takes for a particle to lose memory of its initial velocity . For a spherical particles immersed in a ﬂuid , the friction coefﬁcient is related to the free diffusion constant D 0 through the Einstein relation : ζ = k b T / D 0 . The third and last contribution to the force on the particle is due to the random ﬂuctuations , due to the collisions with the solvent molecules . Writing down the force balance gives us the so called Langevin equation , m ¨ x ( t ) = F c − γ m ˙ x ( t ) + R ( t ) . ( 20 ) We invoke the following integration algorithm for the position and velocity vector , the so called velocity Verlet algorithm , x i + 1 = x i + v i δ t + 1 2 ( δ t ) 2 (cid:16) − γ v i + m − 1 ( F i + R i ) (cid:17) , v i + 1 = v i + δ t (cid:16) − γ v i + m − 1 ( F i + R i ) (cid:17) . ( 21 ) As aforementioned the random force over the time step is drawn from a Gaus - sian distribution with a mean zero and variance 2 mk b T γ ( δ t ) − 1 [ 91 ] . This method gives rise to various types of motion , depending on the time - scales . On time - scales that are small relative to the correlation time , τ , there is very few interaction with the solvent and hence the motion is ballistic and the MSD ∼ t 2 . At time scales much larger than 1 / τ , the movement of particles can be described by Brownian motion , where the MSD is proportional to the diffusion coefﬁcient D 0 and time t , (cid:104) δ r 2 (cid:105) = 4 D 0 t ( 22 ) In the remainder of this chapter we will focus on the effect of molecular crowd - ing on the diffusive properties of these particles . Molecular crowding arise from steric repulsion between the particles . As conservative particle - particle force we have chosen the repulsive part of the Lennard - Jones force which is given by the following equation : F LJ = 24 (cid:101) (cid:20) 2 (cid:18) σ 12 r 13 (cid:19) − (cid:18) σ 6 r 7 (cid:19)(cid:21) , ( 23 ) here the 1 / r 13 term describes the short range repulsive force and the 1 / r 7 de - scribes the long range attractive tail but since we will use a cut - off distance of r = 1 . 12 σ the potential will effectively be purely repulsive . As indicated in Fig . 20 ( b ) , introducing a repulsive particle - particle interaction will eventually lower the " effective " diffusion coefﬁcient of the particles in the system . Note that the exact choice of the pair - potential will not qualitatively alter the results we will present further in this Chapter ( See Appendix I for a comparison of various pair - potentials ) 62 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion 4 . 1 . 2 Rattle constraint algorithm Most theoretical models to study diffusion on curved surfaces are based on solv - ing the diffusion equation on the curved surface ( See Chapter 3 ) . This method , however , is not always tractable , especially when complex particle - particle inter - actions , which are of great importance in these systems , are involved ( 2 ) . To over - come this we present the RATTLE - constraint algorithm and the corresponding equations of motion for particles constrained to a curved surface . The numerical schemes are obtained by applying constraint algorithms in combination with the velocity Verlet algorithm , that we described earlier , to the derived equations . The algorithm that we implemented in LAMMPS [ 130 ] and the various benchmarks of this method can be found in the supplemental material of our paper [ 127 ] . For unconstrained systems a MD simulation consists of solving Newton’s equations of motion , which can be obtained from the Hamiltonian of the system . If the par - ticles are all constrained to some arbitrary manifold , this can be incorporated into the Hamiltonian with Lagrange multipliers λ i , H = N ∑ i = 1 (cid:34) 1 2 m i p 2 i + N ∑ j = i + 1 V ij + λ i g ( x i ) (cid:35) , ( 24 ) where g ( x i ) = 0 for all i , with x i the position vector of particle i , p i its momentum and m i its mass , and where the inter - particle potential V ij is a function of x i and x j and V ij = V ji . The shape of g ( x i ) determines the manifold , e . g . , g ( x i ) = x 2 i − R 2 constrains x i to a sphere of radius R , and λ i is the aforementioned Lagrange multiplier . From Eq . ( 24 ) the equations of motion become , d x i d t = ∂ H ∂ p i = 1 m i p i , d p i d t = − ∂ H ∂ x i = − ∑ j (cid:54) = i ∂ V ij ∂ x i − λ i ∂ g ∂ x i , ( 25 ) where t is the time . The expression for the change in position remains unchanged , but an additional term enters in the equation for the change in momentum . Note also that − ∑ Nj (cid:54) = i ∂ V ij / ∂ x i is the total force acting on particle i , which we will de - note as f i . Any force not generated by a potential can be added to this function , e . g . , thermal ﬂuctuations for Brownian dynamics . The term ∂ g / ∂ x i is simply the normal of the manifold , n ( x i ) : = n i , which allows the equation for the momentum change to be rewritten as d p i d t = f i − λ i n i . ( 26 ) It is possible to derive a closed expression for the Lagrange multipliers as is done in e . g [ 186 ] . However , the idea of a behind RATTLE is to iteratively determine them during a simulation . This makes the method more ﬂexible , as it can also be applied for which a closed expression for λ is impossible to derive . In Section 4 . 3 , we will use this algorithm to study the diffusion on variously curved surfaces . 4 . 2 anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder 63 4 . 2 anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder In this section we study how crowding renders the lateral diffusion on a cylin - drical surface anisotropic , especially at high surface coverage , i . e . , close to the glass transition . The inﬂuence of conﬁnement on the dynamics of glassy systems has been the focus of numerous studies on particles and polymers conﬁned to narrow channels , or between parallel plates [ 185 , 99 ] . These works showed that the glass transition exhibits non - monotonic behavior , depending sensitively on particle - wall interactions [ 111 , 90 , 105 ] . In this Section , we seek to eliminate the interactions with walls to achieve a purely geometrical conﬁnement . We do so by studying diffusion of discs on a 2 D periodic plane . Effectively , this models the motion of discs bent onto a cylindrical surface . This way conﬁnement without boundaries is achieved . We map out how the diffusive motion of these discs is affected by the geometry of the conﬁnement . As aforementioned in the introduction , the system we consider is far from aca - demic : highly curved [ 158 , 36 , 86 , 87 ] and crowded motifs ( see , e . g . , [ 64 ] and references therein ) are abundant in biological and microﬂuidic systems . In these systems crowding and shape signiﬁcantly contribute to the effective diffusivity of particles which , in the case of membrane - associated proteins , are completely con - ﬁned to a curved , 2 D substrate . Likewise , rapidly evolving microfuidic techniques such as topological emulsions [ 158 ] and surface - conﬁned colloids [ 36 ] yield sys - tems where crowding and curvature meet directly . Finally , the dynamics of par - ticles in highly crowded and conﬁned environments has been the subject of nu - merous studies ( experimental and theoretical ) in the context of ﬂowing glassy materials , for instance in the rheological behavior of jammed emulsions in mi - crochannels [ 49 , 11 ] . The effects of crowding and shape , individually , have been extensively charac - terized in the past : experimental and theoretical work in the context of membrane - bound diffusion have clearly established the generic effects of shape on diffusive timescales [ 86 , 87 ] , the upshot being that shape , in itself , may alter and even direct diffusion in dilute particulate systems . The effects of pure crowding on the dif - fusive properties in two and three dimensions , likewise , has been widely studied ( see , e . g . , [ 64 ] and references therein ) . Here we combine both effects . 4 . 2 . 1 Anistropic diffusion In the present work , we study the combined effects of crowding and conﬁnement on the diffusion of discs bent onto a cylindrical surface . We achieve this by wrap - ping a 2 D periodic plane with width 2 π d and length L onto a cylindrical surface with radius d and height L . Recent works have shown that at high surface cov - erages , the packing of discs on a cylinder is elaborately organized into various screw - like packings , where the symmetry and the tilting axes of the screw struc - ture depend on the ratio between the radius of the crowders , R , and the radius of 64 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion R 2 π d d L L ζ = π d / R ( a ) ( c ) ( b ) ( Δ r 2 ) t φ = 0 . 5 φ 0 φ = 0 . 625 φ = 0 . 725 0 5 10 15 0 20 40 60 80 100 Figure 21 : ( a ) The system we consider : A cylinder with length L , circumference 2 π × d covered with particles with radius R that occupy a fraction φ of the cylinder’s area . ( b ) The MSD (cid:104) ∆ r 2 (cid:105) for various surface coverages ( ζ = 3 . 4 ) , in the long - time limit where the diffusivity is set by the collective motion . In this regime , the motion is diffusive ; (cid:104) ∆ r 2 (cid:105) = 4 D ( φ ) t . In ( c ) , red colors label the most mobile particles , and arrows indicate the displacement of the individual particle accumulated over 10000 steps ( vector shown only for particles that have moved at least twice the system mean ) , showing the coherent motion of clusters of particles ( φ = 0 . 75 and ζ = 7 . 0 ) . the cylinder , d [ 116 , 117 ] . While this was established for athermal ( granular ) pack - ings , we now measure whether these naturally arising screw - like structures alter the diffusive motion of the particles , particularly if d is not signiﬁcantly larger than R . In the following , we denote by ζ = π d / R the ratio of the circumference of the cylinder to twice the radius of the diffusing particles ( which we ﬁx at R = 0 . 5 ) . Using the molecular dynamics package LAMMPS [ 130 ] , we execute two - dimensional Langevin dynamics simulations with a damping time τ = 0 . 1 Lennard - Jones time units ( See Appendix I ) . We point out that the Lennard - Jones interaction is eval - uated in 2 D : the separation between interacting discs is the shortest center - to - center path ( i . e . , the geodesic ) along the curved surface , rather than the short - est 3 D center - to center path , which passes through the 3 D interior of the cylin - der . For membrane - bound proteins , the dominant mutual interactions are often membrane - mediated [ 28 , 118 , 152 ] in which case the 2 D separation is indeed the relevant one , but there may be important situations ( charged proteins at small zeta , for instance ) in which it is not . While we consider only cylindrical systems in this Section , we note that the computational techniques to address similar prob - lems on arbitrarily curved surfaces have been described in the previous section 4 . 2 anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder 65 and results obtained from this will be discussed in Section 4 . 3 . We focus on the regime where the MSD scales linear with time , (cid:104) ∆ r 2 (cid:105) = 4 D ( φ ) t ( see Fig . 21 ( b ) ) . Here the MSD is calculated taking into account the periodicity of the system , i . e . , the displacement in the circumferential direction is not bounded to 2 π d . In highly crowded systems , the long - term diffusivity is dominated by global rearrange - ments of large clusters of particles , caused by so called cage - rearrangements [ 32 ] . In Fig . 21 ( c ) we illustrate the displacement of particles over the course of 10000 time - steps , and indicate with arrows the particles that have traveled more than twice the root mean square displacement ∆ r > 2 ∆ r MSD . In the narrow systems we consider , there is a natural distinction between the longitudinal and circum - ferential direction : the longitudinal dimension is signiﬁcantly larger than the cir - cumferential one . In Fig . 22 ( a ) , we decompose the total MSD into a longitudinal and circumferential component : (cid:104) ∆ r 2 (cid:105) = (cid:104) ∆ r 2 C (cid:105) + (cid:104) ∆ r 2 L (cid:105) . This reveals that , at least for this system ( φ = 0 . 625 and ζ = 3 . 8 ) , the effective displacement in the longitu - dinal direction is signiﬁcantly smaller than the circumferential displacement ( See Fig . 22 ( a ) ) . In the following , we demonstrate that this geometrically induced anisotropy is generic in these systems . We determine the ζ - dependence of the longitudinal diffusivity , D L = (cid:104) ∆ r 2 L (cid:105) / 2 t , the circumferential diffusivity , D C = (cid:104) ∆ r 2 C (cid:105) / 2 t , and the total diffusivity , D = D L + D C , for a ﬁxed surface coverage φ = 0 . 725 ( See Fig . 22 ( b ) ) . We ﬁnd that upon increasing the radius of the system , and thus the number of particles that will ﬁt the circumference of the cylinder , the longitudinal diffusivity increases while the circumferential component decreases . For ζ (cid:29) 10 the two eventually become equal as the system tends to a homogeneously ﬂat , ( 2 D ) crowded system and if ζ < 2 the relative position of the particles cannot exchange position in the longitudinal direction and hence D L → 0 as the diffusion has become one dimensional . D L and D C are not monotonic functions ; they show distinct minima and maxima . The total diffusivity D also shows a non - monotonic dependence on ζ , not unlike the anisotropy observed in wall - conﬁned systems [ 90 , 105 ] . Next , Fig . 22 ( c ) shows that for various values of the surface coverage , the anisotropy as a function of ζ remains . In Fig . 22 ( d ) , we show the decrease in longitudinal component D L , relative to its value for φ → 0 , D L ( φ → 0 ) , as function of ζ , for various surface coverages φ and shows that the trend observed in Fig . 22 ( a ) , ( b ) and ( c ) , i . e . , an increasing longitudinal diffusivity upon increasing ζ , indeed appears for a broad range of surface coverages φ . The dashed line corresponds to a system whose length is equal to the circumference L = 2 π d and thus exhibits isotropic diffusion . Eventually at φ ≈ 0 . 82 the diffusivity vanishes as the system becomes glassy . In Fig . 23 we calculate the ratio D C / D L as a function of ζ for various surface coverages φ , and ﬁnd that although it shows an overall decrease with increasing ζ , maxima in the anisotropy arise periodically . The period of these peaks equals ζ = 1 and they occur each time one additional particle precisely ﬁts the circumference of the cylinder . The height of these peaks in D C / D L decreases as a power law 66 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion ( b ) D L D C ζ φ = 0 . 725 φ = 0 . 7 φ = 0 . 625 ζ = 4 ζ = 6 ζ = 2 ζ = 3 ( Δ r 2 ) t ( a ) 0 5 10 15 0 20 40 60 80 ( d ) ( c ) D L D L φ ζ D 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 . 0 0 . 50 0 . 60 0 . 70 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 D L ( φ 0 ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 C ( Δ r 2 ) L ( Δ r 2 ) Figure 22 : ( a ) Time evolution of the MSD (cid:104) ∆ r 2 (cid:105) and its components in the circumferential direction (cid:104) ∆ r 2 C (cid:105) and the longitudinal direction (cid:104) ∆ r 2 L (cid:105) ( ζ = 3 . 8 , φ = 0 . 625 and N = 2500 ) . ( b ) shows the longitudinal ( D L ) , circumferential ( D C ) and total ( D ) diffusivities as function of ζ ( φ = 0 . 725 and N = 2900 ) . ( c ) The longitudinal diffusivity D L as function of ζ for various surface coverages ( φ = 0 . 625 , 0 . 7 and 0 . 725 ) . ( d ) The longitudinal component of the diffusivity D L , relative to its value for φ → 0 , as a function of the surface coverage φ for ζ = 2 , 3 , 4 and 6 ( solid lines ) and for a square L = 2 π d ( Dashed line ) . The total system size was kept constant at 2 π d × L = 1570 . 8 , and φ was varied by varying N , the number of particles in the system . 4 . 2 anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder 67 with an exponent of approximately 3 , though we have a limited range and cannot ﬁrmly establish this scaling . We note , too , that the magnitude of the heterogeneity decreases with decreasing φ , establishing that it is truly the combination of shape and crowding , and not just the shape itself , that causes the effects we describe here . 4 . 2 . 2 An interplay between conﬁnement and conﬁgurational order The question we address now is whether the observed effect is a consequence of the conﬁgurational order of the particles , i . e . , of the screw - like patterns that naturally arise in these dense systems [ 116 , 117 ] . To quantify this , we apply the standard Delaunay triangulation scheme to ﬁnd the lines connecting each particle to its 6 nearest neighbors . Then , we calculate the orientation ( relative to the the circumferential axis , see Fig . 24 ( c ) ) of these lines . To properly account for the bonds at the periodic edges of the system we also include bonds with the mir - ror images of the system . Next , we tabulate the distribution of these angles α for φ = 0 . 725 at those ζ where D C / D L exhibits extrema ( see Fig . 24 ( a ) ) . We see that the anisotropy in diffusivity is strongly correlated to the spatial conﬁguration of the particles . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁnd that the structures where the dominant orien - tation is in the longitudinal direction , which correspond to α = 0 and α = 1 . 1 as peak values , have a larger diffusivity in the circumferential direction compared to systems which have α = 0 and α = 0 . 5 . These two states would , if densely packed , correspond to the symmetric packing and its afﬁnely rotated structure discussed by Mughal et al . [ 117 ] . Our observations strongly suggests that the conﬁgurational order of the sys - tem causes the diffusive anisotropy . The long - term diffusivity in highly crowded systems is generally dominated by so called cage - rearrangements [ 32 ] . We hy - pothesize that the cage rearrangements in these screw - like conﬁgurations induce motion in a preferred direction . To verify this , we have calculated the orientation and the magnitude of the displacement for various values of ζ . As may be seen in Fig . 24 ( c ) , those particles with a displacement larger than twice the mean , ∆ r > 2 × ∆ r MSD ( indicated with red arrows ) , appear in clusters . If we now vi - sualize the motions of these clusters , we ﬁnd that for ζ = 3 . 4 , their motion and thus the cage rearrangements promote motion in the circumferential direction , while this motion is not directed for ζ = 3 . 8 . To further quantify this , we plot in Fig . 24 ( b ) the absolute value of the angle of the displacement vectors , relative to the y - axes for red ( mobile ) particles , which have ∆ r > 2 × ∆ r MSD , and grey ( immobile ) particles , which have ∆ r < 2 × ∆ r MSD . Particularly for ζ = 3 . 4 , where we previously saw that the anisotropy is maximal , the slow particles do not show any directionality but the the fast moving clusters - that dominate the diffusivity - markedly do so . Based on previous work on dense suspensions under conﬁnement , we also expect to see some intrinsic effects of the constraint as a result of a conﬁnement 68 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion φ = 0 . 72 Peak value φ = 0 . 7 φ = 0 . 62 φ = 0 . 5 D L D C D L D C ζ ζ 0 2 4 6 8 1 3 5 7 9 11 2 . 0 10 . 0 4 . 0 6 . 0 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 50 1 . 00 5 . 00 10 . 00 Figure 23 : D C / D L as function of ζ = π d / R for various φ . The inset shows that the peak values of D C / D L . dependent ﬂow cooperativity , known to affect the diffusivity in narrow channels [ 49 , 11 ] . In order to establish whether this is also at play here , we suppress the tendency to order by introducing polydispersity into the system . In Fig . 25 we plot the ratio D C / D L as function of ζ for various degrees of polydispersity ( blue curve : monodisperse , red curve : tridisperse ( particle diameter : 0 . 9 , 1 . 0 , 1 . 1 ) and the black curve where we consider ﬁve different particle diameters ( 0 . 8 , 0 . 9 , 1 . 0 1 . 1 , 1 . 2 ) ) . We ﬁnd that for increasing polydispersity the peaks in D C / D L are reduced , conﬁrming the conﬁgurational nature of the anisotropy , but that the increasing trend of D C / D L for decreasing ζ remains . We speculate , that this may be related to a side effect of wall conﬁnement in glassy ﬂows , where fragile zones appear to live much longer near the wall than they do in the bulk [ 49 , 11 ] . Even absent a physical wall , our systems are conﬁned in the circumferential direction and we expect collective rearrangements in that direction to live longer than those along the long axis of the system . 4 . 2 . 3 Conclusions To summarize , we have addressed the question of how the lateral diffusion of densely packed particles , conﬁned to a cylinder , is affected by the shape of the substrate and the packing fraction . We ﬁnd that the shape of the substrate in combination with crowding induces an anisotropy between the longitudinal and the circumferential diffusivity . We ﬁnd that the extrema of the anisotropy coin - 4 . 2 anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder 69 α α α α α α ζ = 2 . 8 ζ = 3 . 8 ( a ) ( c ) ( b ) 0 400 800 1 . 5 1 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 0 400 800 1200 0 400 800 ζ = 4 . 8 0 400 800 0 100 200 300 ζ = 40 ζ = 3 . 4 ζ = 3 . 4 ζ = 3 . 8 0 400 800 ζ = 4 . 4 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 0 10 20 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 0 20 40 60 ζ = 3 . 8 ζ = 3 . 4 1 . 5 1 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 1 . 5 1 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 1 . 5 1 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 1 . 5 1 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 1 . 5 1 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 α Figure 24 : ( a ) The preferential bond angles α , indicating the distribution of relative ori - entations of the six nearest neighbor pairs ( φ = 0 . 725 and N = 2900 ) . In ( b ) we separate out the orientation of the displacements relative to the circumferential directions for the red ( mobile ) particles and the gray ( immobile ) particles . ( c ) Typical image of the system for ζ = 3 . 4 and ζ = 3 . 8 , indicating two distict orientations . These values of ζ were chosen to illustrate the behavior in adjacent maxima ( ζ = 3 . 4 ) and minima ( ζ = 3 . 8 ) in the ratio D C / D L . Arrows indicate the displacement of the particles for ∆ t = 10000 , where black arrows indicate those displacements with ∆ r < 2 × ∆ r MSD , and red arrows those with ∆ r > 2 × ∆ r MSD . 70 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion 1 1 . 1 0 . 9 0 . 8 1 . 2 1 1 . 1 0 . 9 1 100 % 33 . 3 % 20 % D L D C ζ 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 1 5 10 15 20 Figure 25 : The effect of polydispersity on the extent of the anisotropy in D C / D L , for φ = 0 . 75 . We consider a monodisperse system ( blue curve ) , a tridisperse system ( red curve ) and a polydisperse system ( black curve ) . cide with an ordered packing of discs in a triangular lattice and its afﬁnely ro - tated structure , geometries also observed for dense athermal packings [ 117 ] . These skewed patterns promotes collective motion in the circumferential direction . Our work reveals that diffusive motion of discs along the surface of a narrow , crowded tube is hindered by an interplay between local geometry and crowding . Diffusivity in highly crowded systems is dominated by the collective motion of clusters and the size of these clusters may , especially at high coverage , become comparable to the local radii of curvature of the system . Though we focus on dif - fusion on cylindrical surfaces here of discs with radii comparable to the typical radius of curvature of the substrate , even the diffusion of discs or particles that are small compared to the local radius of curvature may very well be sensitively affected by the curvature of the substrate ; not by their proper size , but through the size of the cage through which they diffuse , which - particularly at elevated densities - may become comparable in size to the local radius of curvature . From a more practical viewpoint , engineered structures such as colloids conﬁned to an interface and topological emulsions are systems where curvature and crowding directly meet and would be ideal candidates to experimentally verify this geo - metrically induced anisotropic diffusion . Some speciﬁc biological settings where dense packings as well as high curvatures feature are cristae in mitochondria , den - dritic spines in synapses and grana thylakoids in choroplasts , where the sizes of 4 . 3 directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces 71 narrow membrane tubes , connecting these microdomains to the remainder of the cell , are not that much larger than the protein complexes that diffuse on it . In this work , we have focused on the effect of the shape of the substrate itself . We should note , however , that proteins diffusing along these structures are most likely not isotropic - not in size , nor in their interaction . We expect such anisotropies in pro - tein features to considerably affect the ordering at higher densities , and thus to cause an additional anisotropy . Moreover , even a transmembrane protein with a perfectly cylindrical cross section in 3 D would present an anisotropic footprint on a cylindrical section of membrane , deviating from the discs we consider . The computational tools to conﬁne particles to more complex surfaces has been pre - sented in Section 2 . 1 and will be employed in the next Section to further study effects of particle shape , boundary and surface geometry [ 127 ] . 4 . 3 directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces In this Section we use the RATTLE constraint algorithm ( See Section 4 . 1 ) to study how crowding and the shape of the substrate interplay to affect the diffusive mo - tion on curved surfaces with two non - zero radii of curvature . In Section 4 . 2 we have shown that the diffusion of particles on the surface of a cylinder has a prefer - ential ( circumferential ) direction at high surface coverage . To distinguish between the roles of curvature and conﬁnement we present three case - studies for shapes , which , unlike a cylinder , have two non - zero radii of curvature : a funnel , a torus and a dumbbell . In particular we focus on how the diffusive motion will become anisotropic and how this anisotropy depends on the local curvature . Finally we show how these local properties affect large scale diffusive time - scales such as the escape time . The three shapes we consider here cover generic shapes featuring positive and negative curvature , such as one might encounter in cellular systems . At the end of this section we measure how the local anisotropic features of these shapes affect the global diffusive behavior , e . g . , escape times in a dumbbell geom - etry . 4 . 3 . 1 Quantify diffusive properties on curved surfaces To characterize the direction of the diffusive motion on a curved surface we need to come up with a consistent method to quantify the amount of isotrop - ic / anisotropic motion . In a planar two dimensional system , diffusive motion is characterized by a linear relation between the MSD and time : ( δ x ) 2 = 4 Dt , where D is long - time diffusion coefﬁcient ( See Fig . 20 ) . On a plane or a cylinder surface , the total MSD can straightforwardly be divided in two orthogonal directions , e . g . , for a cylinder a natural choice would be the circumferential ( δ s c ) 2 and lateral ( δ s l ) 2 directions . Measuring these quantities one can separate the diffusion coefﬁcient in circumferential D c = ( δ s c ) 2 / ( 2 t ) and lateral direction D l = ( δ s l ) 2 / ( 2 t ) , which at high density are not necessarily equal ( See Section 4 . 2 ) . 72 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion Similarly as we did for the cylindrical surface , for shapes with a spatially de - pending metric g ( x ) we construct an orthogonal space ( x i , x j ) and measure the local displacements in these coordinates δ x i and δ x j , during a time interval δ t , as well as the local metric g ii and g jj . A local displacements in this metric is then given by : (cid:8) ( δ x i ) 2 , ( δ x j ) 2 (cid:9) = (cid:8) g ii ( δ x i ) 2 , g jj ( δ x j ) 2 (cid:9) . Note that this is only true when g ij = 0 . These displacements should equal each other in the limit of low density , and no curvature , independently . Averaging over various measurements and keeping track of the initial position of the particle will eventually result in a spatially dependent map of diffusion coefﬁcient in both orthogonal directions . This fairly simple approach provides us an effective diffusion coefﬁcient in two orthogonal directions D i = ( δ x i ) 2 / ( 2 t ) and D j = ( δ x j ) 2 / ( 2 t ) . In the remainder of this Chapter we determine the diffusion coefﬁcient through - out space . This value is obtained by keeping track of the initial position of the particle and measuring over an interval δ t , where δ t is sufﬁciently large to ensure the particles are in the diffusive regime yet small enough that the particles are , on average , within a couple of particles diameters from there original position . By repeated sampling we obtain a histogram with (cid:8) ( δ x i ) 2 , ( δ x j ) 2 (cid:9) as function of the initial x i and y i . From this , we can construct a spatial map of the diffusion coefﬁcient D i ( x i , x j ) and D j ( x i , x j ) . 4 . 3 . 2 Simulating diffusion on curved surfaces To simulate diffusion on curved surfaces we use the molecular dynamics package LAMMPS [ 130 ] in combination with the Rattle constraint algorithm presented in Section 4 . 2 . We execute Langevin dynamics simulations with a damping time τ = 0 . 1 and a timestep of 0 . 001 , both in Lennard - Jones time units . The particle centers are constrained to an arbitrary surface ( See Section 4 . 2 and [ 127 ] for more details ) . We point out that the Lennard - Jones interaction is evaluated in 3 D : in highly curved systems , the separation between interacting particles is the shortest center - to - center path which is not necessarily the geodesic along the curved surface . The surface coverage that we use in the remainder of the section is φ = N π R 2 0 / A t , where N is the number of particles , R 0 is the interaction radius of the Lennard - Jones particle and A t is the total surface area of the manifold . Note that , for surface where the local radius of curvature is comparable to the radius of the particle , the effective surface coverage is slightly underestimated . 4 . 3 directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces 73 θ α φ φ = 0 . 12 φ = 0 . 62 r R ( a ) ( c ) x y z R > > r D α r = 2 . 0 r = 1 . 0 r = 0 . 8 D θ ( b ) l o g ( δ s α ) 2 l o g ( δ s θ ) 2 log t 0 1 2 3 4 - 2 . 0 - 1 . 5 - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 4 . 0 4 . 5 5 . 0 5 . 5 - 2 . 5 - 2 . 0 - 1 . 5 - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 Figure 26 : ( a ) Toroidal surface on which we constrain the particles . ( b ) MSD in the α ( orange ) and θ ( blue ) direction at low ( top ) and high density ( bottom ) on a log - log scale . Here r = 0 . 8 and R = 10 . ( c ) Ratio of the diffusion coefﬁcient in the α and θ direction for various values of r as function of the density φ . 4 . 3 . 3 Toroidal surface The ﬁrst shape that we consider here is a torus . This surface is characterized by two characteristic radii , the major radius R and the minor radius r , which can be varied independently from each other . A torus can be parametrized as , x ( θ , α ) = ( R + r sin α ) cos θ y ( θ , α ) = ( R + r sin α ) sin θ z ( α ) = r cos α , ( 27 ) where α and θ are the poloidal and toroidal angles , equivalent to the circumfer - ential and longitudinal directions on a cylindrical surface , at least in the limit of R (cid:29) r ( See Fig . 26 ( a ) ) . Note that the inside of the torus corresponds to a saddle point and the outer rim corresponds to a hill ( See Fig . 26 ( a ) ) . A local displacement in these local coordinates { θ , α } equals : (cid:110) ( δ s θ ) 2 , ( δ s α ) 2 (cid:111) = (cid:110) g θθ ( δθ ) 2 , g αα ( δα ) 2 (cid:111) , ( 28 ) where , g θθ = ( R + r sin α ) 2 g αα = r 2 . ( 29 ) First we consider the case where R (cid:29) r . In this limit we expect the toroidal surface to have characteristics similar to a long cylindrical surface , since the only 74 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion α θ ( a ) ( b ) 1 2 3 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 l o g ( δ s α ) 2 l o g ( δ s θ ) 2 log t D α D θ 0 α π / 2 π / 2 α = −π / 2 α = π / 2 α 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 06 High curvature Low curvature Figure 27 : ( a ) Mean Squared Displacement in both the α and θ direction , on a log - log scale , averaged over the whole surface ( r = 1 . 8 , R = 2 . 5 and N = 175 ) . ( b ) Diffusion coefﬁcient in the α and θ direction as function of the toroidal angle α . relevant radius of curvature is r , in the α - direction . We expect to recover similar results as we found for the periodic plane : upon lowering the radius of curvature r , the magnitude of the anisotropy ( α vs . θ directed ) should increase . In Fig . 26 ( b ) we plot the MSD in both the α and θ direction at low ( top ) and high density ( bottom ) . At low density we recover homogeneous diffusion δ s α = δ s θ . At increas - ing density we ﬁnd that ( δ s α ) 2 > ( δ s θ ) 2 and hence the magnitude of the diffusion coefﬁcient D α > D θ . This is in line with what we found for the planar - periodic surface of Section 4 . 2 . A direct comparison , however , is not straightforward since the calculation of the effective surface coverage is dependent on the ratio of par - ticle size and local radius of curvature . This is because the effective intersection plane of the particle with the surface is not cylindrical but rather ellipsoidal , with a larger effective radius in circumferential direction . To overcome this we will calculate the ratio of the diffusion coeﬁcient D θ / D α as function of φ for various values of r . In Fig . 26 ( c ) we show that both upon lowering r and increasing φ , the amount of anisotropy increases . This is in line with the results presented in Section 4 . 2 , where we found that on a cylindrical surface the contribution of the diffusion coefﬁcient in the circumferential direc - tion is higher than the one in the longitudinal direction and that the amount of anisotropy increases upon increasing φ . The values we report in Fig . 26 are all in the limit of R (cid:29) r , so that the contribution of the major radius R can be neglected . Next , we consider the situation where R is in the same order of magnitude as r . Here , both radii of curvature will impact the diffusion since the local curvature 4 . 3 directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces 75 strongly depends , both in sign and magnitude , on the toroidal angle α , i . e . a hill shape at the " outer rim " , when α ≈ − π / 2 and saddle like at the " inner rim " , α ≈ π / 2 ( See Fig . 27 ( a ) ) . In Fig . 27 we plot the average diffusion coefﬁcient , both in the toroidal , D α , and the circumferential direction , D θ , for r = 1 . 8 , R = 2 . 5 and N = 175 . For this particular geometry we ﬁnd that , averaged over the whole surface , D α < D θ . If we consider the spatial dependence of this diffusion coefﬁcient on this toroidal surface , that is to say , calculate the two components of the diffusion coefﬁcient ( D α and D θ ) for the particles as function of their position , both as function of α , we ﬁnd that the diffusion coefﬁcient is non - homogeneous over space . While D α is homo - geneous over space , D θ is higher at the saddle point of the torus ( α ≈ π / 2 ) and lower at the hill ( α ≈ − π / 2 ) . In terms of curvatures , a toroidal surface is characterized by a non - zero Gaus - sian and mean curvature which depend on the poloidal angle α . The Gaussian ( Is there curvature along both directions ? ) and mean ( Is there curvature along at least one direction ? ) curvature are both highest at α = π / 2 and lowest at α ≈ − π / 2 . In this case , a high value of anisotropy corresponds to a high value of of both invariant measures of curvature . The direction of the anisotropy , i . e , the direction with highest diffusion coefﬁcient coincides in this case with the direction of the smallest radius of curvature . To study this spatially dependent diffusion coefﬁ - cient further we will present a second case study , the funnel . 4 . 3 . 4 The funnel A natural generalization of the cylindrical surface that we covered in Section 4 . 2 is the funnel , i . e . , a cylindrical surface whose local radius of curvature depends on the longitudinal position z ( See Fig . 28 a ) , i . e . , R ( z ) = R 0 − 1 2 A ( 1 + cos kz ) , ( 30 ) for | z | < L / 2 . Here R 0 is the radius of the cylinder , A is the amplitude of the funnel and k is a measure for the lateral distance over which the radius changes . We construct an orthogonal frame with the longitudinal and circumferential axis of the funnel , such that a local displacement in these local coordinates { θ , z } reads , (cid:110) ( δ s c ) 2 , ( δ s L ) 2 (cid:111) = (cid:110) g θθ ( δθ ) 2 , g zz ( δ z ) 2 (cid:111) , ( 31 ) where , g θθ = ( A − 2 R 0 + A cos kz ) 2 / 4 g zz = (cid:16) 8 + A 2 k 2 ( 1 − cos 2 kz ) (cid:17) / 8 . ( 32 ) For the toroidal surface we found that the diffusion coefﬁcient was spatially inhomogeneous . For the funnel - shape we expect to ﬁnd a similar trend . To vali - date the simulations we ﬁrst check that in the limit of low density the diffusion 76 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion Region II Region II Region I Region I - 30 - 20 - 10 0 10 20 30 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 3 4 5 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 2 3 4 5 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 l o g ( δ s L ) 2 l o g ( δ s c ) 2 l o g D L l o g D c log t log t z z N = 100 N = 400 N = 600 N = 650 Region II Region I ( b ) ( c ) ( a ) R A L Figure 28 : ( a ) Funnel - shaped surface on which we constrain the particles . ( b ) Mean Squared Displacement in the circumferential ( top ) and lateral ( bottom ) dirrection as func - tion of time , averaged over particles in the region I and II ( See Fig . ( a ) ) , where N = 650 particles ( φ ≈ 0 . 75 ) diffuse on a funnel with A = 2 . 4 , R = 3 and L = 60 . This graph indi - cates caged diffusion : ( δ s ) 2 ∼ t 1 / 2 at short timescales and regular diffusion : ( δ s ) 2 ∼ t for larger time scales . ( c ) Logarithm of the diffusion coefﬁcient in the lateral ( solid line ) and circumferential ( dashed ) direction as function of the position along the z - axis for various surfaces densities ( by varying the number of particles N ) . is isotropic and not spatially dependent , i . e . , ( δ s c ) 2 = ( δ s L ) 2 . Upon increasing the density of particles on the surface we recover an anisotropic diffusion , similar to what we observed for the cylinder , i . e . , in regions where the absolute value of the radius of curvature is small , diffusive motion is preferentially in the circum - ferential direction , ( δ s c ) 2 > ( δ s L ) 2 . In Fig . 28 ( b ) we show the MSD in both the circumferential ( δ s c ) 2 and longitudinal ( δ s L ) 2 direction as function of time . Here we ﬁnd that , both in the caged diffusion regime ( MSD ∼ t 1 / 2 ) and in the diffusive regime ( MSD ∼ t ) , both the mean circumferential ( δ s c ) 2 and longitudinal ( δ s L ) 2 displacement vary over space . In Fig . 28 ( c ) we show both the logarithm of the circumferential and lateral diffusion coefﬁcient as function of the longitudinal co - ordinate z for various values of the surface density ranging from φ = 0 . 12 − 0 . 75 . Here we see that , at increasing values of the surface coverage φ both D c and D L non - monotonically depend on position . The absolute diffusivity hence also depends on the local radius of curvature . 4 . 3 directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces 77 Domain I τ τ τ N φ τ 0 Domain II Domain III ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) R I R II = 10 R II R II = 16 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 plane a = 0 . 8 a = 0 . 6 τ φ τ 0 10 100 1000 10 4 100200 500 1000 2000 5000 Domain I τ Domain II Domain III 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 1 2 5 10 20 Figure 29 : ( a ) Planar setting indicating the various domains . ( b ) Rescaled transition time as function of the surface converage φ for two values of R II . In the inset we show the transition time τ as function of the number of sampling events N ( black curve : φ = 0 . 2 , blue curve : φ = 0 . 6 and red curve : φ = 0 . 7 ) . ( c ) Dumbbell morphology indicating the various domains . ( b ) Rescaled transition time as function of the surface converage φ for various minimal radii of the dumbbell . Note that the black curve is the reference state from Fig . ( b ) This result suggests that , especially at high surface densities , diffusive motion along the direction of high curvature ( smallest radius of curvature ) , is preferred . This is in line with the results on the cylinder and torus . The magnitude of anisotropy non - monotonically depends on the local radius of curvature in a simi - lar fashion as we found for the cylindrical surface ( See Fig . 23 ) . One open question however remains : why , in contrast to what we found for the cylindrical surface , the peaks in diffusion coefﬁcient in the circumferential direction do not coincide with minima in the longitudinal direction , at least for φ > 0 . 7 . This observed anisotropy is also expected to have an effect on long - time diffusive timescales such as the escape time . To study this , we will consider a dumbbell like shape , resembling the shape of a dendritic spine in the next section . 78 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion 4 . 3 . 5 Escape dynamics In the two examples we covered in the previous sections we found that , depend - ing on the local radii of curvature , diffusive motion might become anisotropic , and increasingly so upon increasing the density . Next , we study how this anisotropy impacts an integrated property such as the Mean First Passage Time ( MFPT ) . In contrast to the φ → 0 limit we studied in Chapter 3 , we do not calculate the MFPT but rather the transition time . The transition time τ is calculated by deﬁning three distinct regions , as indicated in Fig . 29 ( a ) , and measuring the time it takes on av - erage for a particle to transition from domain I to domain III . t = 0 is the ﬁrst time a particle enters domain I and τ is deﬁned when the particle , after ﬁrst passing through domain I reaches domain III . The reason we choose to calculate the tran - sition time instead of the MFPT is that it allows a faster sampling , which at high densities is signiﬁcantly less computationally expensive . To compare our further simulations , we ﬁrst consider a planar surface and measure the transition time from domain I to domain III ( R I = 1 and R II = 10 , 16 ) . We ﬁnd that , by rescaling the value of τ ( φ ) with τ ( φ = 0 ) that , independent of the positioning of the edge R II we obtain a universal curve , independent of the position of the domains . In the inset of Fig . 29 ( b ) we show that for obtaining a proper transition time we have to sample at least O (cid:0) 10 3 (cid:1) events . This planar curve serves as the reference in the proceeding of this section . Next we consider transition times for non - planar geometries . Inspired by the type of surfaces considered in section 4 . 3 . 3 and 4 . 3 . 4 , we now consider a dumbbell - like surface , which essentially corresponds to two reservoirs , connected to each other through a narrow channel . This motif is a common motif in biology , as we extensively discussed in Chapter 3 . This surface is given by the implicit equation , − x 2 − y 2 + (cid:18) a 2 − (cid:16) z c (cid:17) 2 (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 + A sin (cid:16) B ( z ) z 2 (cid:17) 2 (cid:19) 4 = 0 , ( 33 ) where a is the radius of the channel , 2 ca the total length of the dumbbell and A , b shape parameters . In Fig . 29 ( c ) we outline the shape and deﬁne the three domains . Similarly to the planar geometry we now calculate the transition time from domain I to domain III . We ﬁnd for neck radii a (cid:29) 1 that the rescaled transition time as function of the surface density φ is similar to the planar reference curve . So in the limit of wide necks , there is no additional retention caused by the interplay of shape and crowding . If we now decrease the radius of the neck a we ﬁnd that the relative increase in retention time τ / τ 0 as function of φ deviates from the planar reference curve . Especially at high values of the surface density we ﬁnd that the additional retention increases most . So both by decreasing the radius of the neck a and increasing the density φ we ﬁnd that crowding disproportionally hinders the escape time through the neck of the dumbbell , relative to the planar reference curve . 4 . 3 directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces 79 4 . 3 . 6 Conclusions In this Section we have explored how crowding and the morphology of the sur - face on which particles diffuse renders their diffusion anisotropic and spatially inhomogeneous . Analysis of a toroidal and funnel shape shows that the diffusion coefﬁcient along the direction of highest curvature is higher than the one in the direction perpendicular to it . For a major radius much larger the minor radius we recover an anisotropy where the magnitude of the diffusion coefﬁcient in the circumferential direction of the torus ( along the minor radius ) depends on the minor radius . For the funnel shape we obtained a spatially dependent diffusion coefﬁcient , resulting from a spatially dependent radius of curvature . Decreasing the radius increases the circumferential component of the diffusion coefﬁcient and it does so in a non - monotonic fashion . This result is in line with the results we obtained for a cylindrical surface in Section 4 . 2 , where we showed that diffusion along the circumferential direction of the cylinder is preferred over the diffusion along the longitudinal direction ( See Fig . 23 ) . Here however we showed that the shape of the surface itself , and not conﬁnement , rendered the diffusive motion anisotropic . We hypothesize that the diffu - sion coefﬁcient in the direction of highest curvature is typically larger than the component perpendicular to it . A thorough analysis of various other surfaces is required to come up with a general framework to describe the interplay between shape and crowding . A consequence of this local anisotropic diffusion is that for shapes with a nar - row neck , i . e . , where circumferential diffusion does not contribute to the effective long - scale diffusion time , the anisotropy in local diffusion coefﬁcient affects the long - scale diffusive properties , e . g . , the MFPT or transition times . We studied the transition time for particles escaping a spine - like morphology as function of the surface coverage , relative to the transition time without crowding φ → 0 . Here , we found a shape and surface coverage dependent transition time in additionally affected by the interplay caused by crowding and morphology . At high densities and for narrow neck radii , the transition time for a given surface coverage is higher than what we would expect for a planar surface , for the same surface coverage . The interplay between shape and crowding increases the effective retention for shapes with a decreasing neck radius . To relate this back to the observations of Chapter 3 where we determined how shape affects diffusive time - scales we expect that , especially at high surface cov - erage and for transmembrane complexes that are in the same order of size as the radii of the neck on which they diffuse , there is a additional retention compared to what one would expect from crowding on a planar surface . For the biologically relevant examples that we discussed in Chaper 3 , e . g . , the neck of the dendritic spine or the grana tylakoids , we expect that the effects of the aditional retention due to the interplay between shape and crowding are signif - icantly smaller than the bare effects of crowding and shape itself . This interplay 80 crowding as barrier for lateral diffusion becomes dominant for high surface coverage φ > 0 . 65 which is a value that might be outside of the scope of biophysics . From a more practical viewpoint , engi - neered structures such as colloids conﬁned to an interface and topological emul - sions would provide systems where curvature and crowding directly meet and would be ideal candidates to experimentally verify this geometrically induced anisotropic diffusion . Appendix I : Langevin dynamics Using the molecular dynamics package LAMMPS [ 130 ] , we execute Langevin dy - namics simulations of point particles in two dimensions with periodic boundary conditions . The damping time of the Langevin equation is set to 0 . 1 Lennard - Jones time units . This corresponds to a velocity autocorrelation reduction of e − 1 after t = 0 . 1 time units . To prevent unphysically large overlap between particles in the initial conﬁguration the following scheme is used to prepare the system : First , a random conﬁguration of discs in the x - y - plane is generated , after which we equi - librate with a soft pair potential of the form V ij = V 0 (cid:0) 1 + cos ( π r ij / r c ) (cid:1) . V 0 is the maximum of the potential , r ij the distance between particles i and j and r c is the cutoff distance . During this run the constant V 0 is linearly ramped up from V 0 = 0 to V max = 3000 k B T ) . This ensures that initially overlapping particles are smoothly repelled until they no longer overlap , while any excess kinetic energy incurred by the forces is dissipated due to the viscosity term in the Langevin equation . After this equilibration run , the soft potential is replaced by the repulsive part of a 12 - 6 Lennard - Jonnes potential , where we have chosen to cut off the potential at one Lennard - Jones length unit . We have veriﬁed that the results presented are insen - sitive to both the exact form of the repulsive potential , and to the cutoff distance of the potential itself ( See Fig . 30 ) . Since the particles here are treated as point masses , there are no torque and rotation effects present in our simulations . While this is a simpliﬁcation , we expect that the effect of rotations and torques will not alter the conclusions of our work , because ( i ) the effects of Brownian rotation and translation of spheres in dilute solutions tend to decouple and ( ii ) rotational motion is expected to be severely damped ( the hydrodynamic drag for rotational motion scales with the third power of the radius , as opposed to the linear scaling of the translational Stokes drag ) . 4 . 3 directionality of diffusion on curved surfaces 81 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 D L D C ζ Yukawa ( A = 25 ) Yukawa ( A = 40 ) LJ ( cutoff = 2 . 5 σ lj ) Figure 30 : The ratio of the circumferential and lateral diffusivities as function of ζ = π d / R for various interaction potentials . The blue curve represents 2500 LJ particles with a radius R = 0 . 5 where we have set the cutoff at 2 . 5 . The black and the red curve are for 2500 particles with Yukawa potential V ( r ) = Ar exp − κ r , where κ = 0 . 5 , r the interparticle distance and A = 25 for the black curve and A = 40 for the red curve . The total system size was kept constant at 2 π d × L = 1570 . 8 and the temperature equals T = 1 . This implies that the presented conclusions are independent of the speciﬁc interaction potential . Chapter 5 Shape as a Barrier for endosomal transport In this section we turn our attention on the third mechanism to regulate the concentration of glutamate receptors in dendritic spine : The motor driven trans - portation of endosomes . Micron sized endosomes squeeze through the neck of the dendritic spine and subsequently release their glutamate - rich membrane through exocytosis . These recycling endosomes are highly dynamic in dendrites and their widespread pool serve multiple dendritic spines [ 25 ] , provide membrane and molecular material to speciﬁc spine microdomains . Continuous endocytosis of postsynaptic molecules occurs at specialized endocytic zones on spines lateral to the PSD [ 9 ] . It was found that during LTP , the number of AMPA - type glutamate receptors at the plasma membrane increases due to enhanced transport from re - cycling endosomes [ 128 , 191 ] . Membrane - enclosed vesicles are the principal carriers used in intracellular pro - tein trafﬁcking . Moreover , because of their intrinsic biocompatibility and ﬂexibil - ity they are becoming an increasingly common motif in drug delivery , for instance in transdermal applications , as well to microﬂuidic production and processing [ 98 , 97 ] . In each of these settings , vesicles frequently encounter narrow passages : geometric constrictions that force them to change shape dramatically in order to pass . While driving forces such as pressures ( possibly osmotic ) , ﬂuid ﬂow , directly exerted forces from molecular motors or external ﬁelds may promote passage , the required changes in shape generically result in energetic barriers to translocation and the eventual ( non - ) passage is thus determined by a subtle balance of forces originating from various physical sources , as well as by the geometry of the con - striction . Speciﬁc examples of the channel passage problem are encountered in microﬂu - idic devices in medical diagnostics [ 154 , 170 , 40 ] and the fabrication of microgel capsules [ 149 ] . Experimental work on red blood cells [ 154 ] and polymeric capsules The content of this Chapter has been published as R . P . T . Kusters , T . van der Heijden , B . Kaoui , J . Harting and C . Storm , Forced transport of deformable containers through narrow constrictions , P hys . Rev . E 2014 84 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport [ 141 ] has shown that changes in mechanical properties and cell radius determine the passage of the container and in some cases may induce capillary blockage [ 93 , 204 ] . Previous theoretical work has extensively studied the transient dynamics of elastic capsules in both cylindrical and rectangular constrictions [ 133 , 129 , 85 ] , the production of smaller vesicles [ 7 ] and the translocation of vesicles through narrow pores [ 95 ] . Here we study the regulatory use of recycling endosomes in dendritic spines through three - dimensional simulations and analytic modeling : large lipid bilayer vesicles are actively directed by myosin motors [ 30 ] into , and out of , a long thin neck that connects the functional domain of a dendritic spine to the dendritic shaft . These vesicles are thought to serve dual purposes : they actively transport membrane - bound glutamate receptors to the functional domain , but , when stuck inside the neck , may also serve as a physical barrier that helps retain proteins inside the spine’s head compartment - not unlike the manner in which a cork serves to keep wine inside the bottle . The dynamics of the translocation process still poses some physical questions : How fast is the container transported through the constriction ? When does it cease to translocate , and are typical molecular force levels sufﬁcient to effect transloca - tion in physiological settings ? We focus in particular on those physical variables that cells have some control over : motor activity and constriction geometry . In Section 5 . 1 we present full 3 D lattice Boltzmann simulations and in Section 5 . 2 we compare them with analytic models that describe the limiting behavior of ﬂuid - forced transportation of vesicles . We focus in particular on those physical vari - ables that cells have some control over : motor activity and constriction geometry . Our principal interest lies with the basic competition between the constriction geometry and the active forcing : how the shape , length and radius of the con - striction and the force regulate the transport of a deformable container through a narrow constriction . Our theoretical model may be applied to a wide range of deformable containers , but here we restrict ourselves to the discussion of two lim - iting cases : highly stretchable containers and inextensible membrane containers , to which we will refer as capsules and vesicles respectively . Our analysis reveals a generic phase behavior of the S tuck and P ass regimes as function of the applied force , relative size of the constriction and the mechanical properties , in both the vesicle and capsule limits . In addition to inﬁnitely long constrictions , we model the effect of a ﬁnite constriction length and show that the deformation energy and thus the minimal force necessary to get the capsule through the constriction signiﬁcantly decreases for decreasing neck length . As outlook for this research ( Appendix III ) we present a more realistic driving mechanism of the vesicle by applying a body force on the vesicle and include the full geometry of the dendritic spine . While most present studies [ 133 , 85 , 129 , 88 ] consider open channels with explicitly assuming periodic boundaries our prelim - inary results suggest that the narrow lubrication layer around the vesicle , which arises when ﬂuid has to exit subsequent to the entrance of the vesicle ( ensuring 5 . 1 lattice - boltzmann simulations 85 incompressibility ) , strongly impacts the translocation of vesicles through narrow constrictions . 5 . 1 lattice - boltzmann simulations In this Section we outline our three - dimensional Lattice - Boltzmann simulations for the deformable container and present our main results . In order to efﬁciently simulate deformable containers , immersed in a ﬂuid , we use a Lattice Boltzmann method as ﬂuid solver , an explicit immersed boundary method for the coupling of the ﬂuid and the membrane , and a ﬁnite element method for the computations of the membrane response to deformations . The surface of the particles is triangu - lated to allow efﬁcient calculations of the deformations The number of faces is in the range of 720 to 1280 , which is sufﬁcient to capture the studied deformations ) . For an overview of our method and membrane model , its relation to microscopic structure and the numerical evolution of the deformation gradient and its corre - sponding membrane forces we refer to [ 84 , 83 , 82 ] . We will present our results in conventional lattice units . Deviations from the equilibrium shape of the container incur an increase in the total energy , which we divide into three distinct contributions : i ) energy due to in - plane strain : local contributions due to resistance to shear and to lateral dilata - tion , ii ) energy due to out - of - plane bending , iii ) energy due to global volumetric expansion or compression . The in - plane strain energy of an isotropic and homo - geneous section of membrane is computed as E S = (cid:90) (cid:101) s dA , ( 34 ) where (cid:101) s is the surface strain energy density which depends on the principal stretches : the eigenvalues ( λ 1 , λ 2 ) of the displacement gradient tensor D . In gen - eral , the strain energy density is a function only of the invariants I 1 = λ 21 + λ 22 − 2 and I 2 = λ 21 λ 22 − 1 , and any constitutive model is represented by a speciﬁc func - tional form for (cid:101) S ( I 1 , I 2 ) . As the deformations in biological cells are in general large , a linear stress - strain approximation is generally not justiﬁed . In our mod - eling , we implement therefore the nonlinear strain energy density proposed by Skalak [ 163 ] for biological membranes , valid for both small and large strains : (cid:101) s = κ s (cid:0) I 21 + 2 I 1 − 2 I 2 (cid:1) / 12 + κ α I 22 / 12 . κ s is the surface elastic shear modulus , and κ α the area dilation modulus . For pure lipid bilayers , the in - plane behavior is liquidlike and κ s should be set to zero ( in favor , technically , of a 2 D viscosity mul - tiplying the in - plane strain rate - we will , however , consider slow deformations and neglect viscous effects ) . For polymer capsules and even more complex mix - tures of lipids , however , there will be contributions from the in - plane shear . Note that we neglect thermal area ﬂuctuations - their effects are discussed in [ 48 ] . 86 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport a L d F m R 0 b time ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) ( f ) ( e ) ( b ) x t t x v m i n v m i n d / R 0 ( d / R 0 ) * Stuck Pass Pass F m F m * Stuck 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 50 100 150 200 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 50 100 150 200 ×10 6 ×10 6 ×10 - 3 ×10 - 3 ×10 - 3 Figure 31 : ( a ) Model system for the transport of containers through a narrow constriction of length L and radius d . ( b ) A typical time sequence of the transport of a deformable container through a relatively short and narrow constriction . Position of the container’s center of mass x as function of time t for ( c ) varying the relative radius of the constriction d / R 0 ( solid line , P ass , d / R 0 = 0 . 92 - 0 . 68 and dashed line : S tuck , d / R 0 = 0 . 67 ) and a ﬁxed applied body force F d = 1 . 5 × 10 − 4 and ( d ) where we vary the applied force F m ( dashed line : S tuck , F m = 2 × 10 − 5 and 6 . 5 × 10 − 5 and solid line : P ass , F d = 7 × 10 − 5 − 2 × 10 − 4 ) and ﬁx d / R 0 = 0 . 7 . In ( e ) we ﬁx the applied body force F d = 1 . 5 × 10 − 4 and in ( f ) we ﬁx d / R 0 = 0 . 7 and we calculate the minimal velocity of the particle during transportation . For the containers that remained stuck v min = 0 . In ( c ) , ( d ) , ( e ) and ( f ) , the length of the constriction is L = 100 and the system size is b = 208 and a = 52 lattice units ( see ( a ) ) . 5 . 1 lattice - boltzmann simulations 87 To account for the membrane bending , we recall the Helfrich bending energy [ 62 ] , E B = κ B 2 (cid:90) ( H − H 0 ) 2 dA , ( 35 ) where κ B is ( the out - of - plane ) bending modulus of the membrane , H the mean curvature and H 0 the spontaneous curvature . The most general formulation of the Helfrich bending energy includes the Gaussian curvature term κ G (cid:82) KdA , but this does not contribute to the overall energy provided no topological changes occur . Finally , as the membrane is permeable to water , but not for ions , we associate an osmotic penalty for a deviation in volume given by E V = κ V 2 ( V − V 0 ) 2 V 0 , ( 36 ) where V − V 0 is the deviation in total volume and κ V is the volume modulus . We now use this model to address the question to what extent the force and the relative radius and length of the constriction affect the translocation of a de - formable container ( See Fig 31 ( a ) ) . In particular , we focus on a container with given mechanical properties ( ﬁxed κ V = 1 , κ α = 0 . 018 , κ s = 0 . 5 and κ b = 0 . 05 ) , where we have used a dimensionless lattice constant , time - step and mass and set them all to unity , as well as the relaxation time . For the parameter values we choose here , the container is highly stretchable and strongly resists deviations in total volume . The bending contribution is relatively weak and as it is resistant to shear , it resembles a polymeric capsule rather than a bilayer membrane . As we show in the next section , however , the bending dominated limit and the stretch - ing dominated limit show very similar behavior . In our simulations we assume that the ﬂuid both inside and outside the capsule is Newtonian and both have the same properties , i . e . the same viscosity and density . In Fig . 31 ( b ) we show a typical time sequence of the transport of a deformable container through a con - striction . To isolate the inﬂuence of neck size , relative to the radius of the container d / R 0 , we consider a system with a neck length that is considerably longer than the size of the container within the constriction : L = 100 and measure the time - evolution of the position of the center of mass . We vary the radius of the container in the range R 0 = 5 . 5 - 8 . 0 and ﬁx the radius of the neck at d = 5 . 5 ( see Fig . 31 ( c ) ) . The container is released at a distance 25 lattice units in front of the constriction and is propelled by a ﬁxed body force F m = 1 . 5 × 10 − 4 on all the ﬂuid nodes . Similarly we also ﬁx the size of the container and the size of the constriction d / R 0 = 0 . 7 , and vary the applied body force F m = 2 × 10 − 5 − 2 × 10 − 4 and observe highly similar behavior ( See Fig . 31 ( d ) ) . Below a threshold force F ∗ m and above a critical ratio ( d / R 0 ) ∗ , the container remains S tuck in front of the constriction ( dashed lines ) , and above F ∗ m and below ( d / R 0 ) ∗ , the velocity within the constriction increases for increasing F m , as can be seen in Fig . 31 ( c ) and ( d ) . 88 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport d / R 0 d / R 0 L F m Pass Stuck Stuck 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 10 20 30 40 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 Pass ( b ) ( a ) ×10 - 3 Figure 32 : ( a ) Phase diagram indicating whether the container passes the constriction as function of the relative size of the constriction d / R 0 and the applied body force F m . ( b ) Phase diagram as function of the neck length L and the relative size of the constriction d / R 0 , where F m = 1 . 5 × 10 − 4 . To quantify the speed of the translocation , we extract the minimal velocity of the container in the constriction v min as function of the relative size of the container d / R 0 , as shown in Fig . 31 ( e ) , where a sharp transition between S tuck and P ass is found at a critical ratio ( d / R 0 ) ∗ . Above this value , v min increases for increasing d / R 0 . The exact value of ( d / R 0 ) ∗ depends on the magnitude of the applied body force as can be seen from the force dependence , where likewise we ﬁnd that increasing the applied body force increases v min ( see Fig . 31 ( f ) ) , and that below a threshold force F ∗ m , the container remains S tuck . We combine the force and size dependence of the translocation into a single phase diagram , showing for which parameter values the container gets through the constriction ( P ass ) or remains stuck ( S tuck ) in Fig . 32 ( a ) . The regime for d / R 0 < 0 . 6 and F m > 0 . 0002 , which is expected to show a power law - like of F ∗ m with decreasing d / R 0 , at least for ﬂuid vesicles [ 48 ] , is presently inaccessible due to limitations in the simulation methods : velocities on the lattice nodes become too high and the weak incompressibility constraint may be numerically violated . As mentioned in the Introduction , both the radius and the length of the con - striction are expected to affect the dynamics of the passage process . As we show in Fig . 32 ( b ) , decreasing the length of the neck can considerably decrease the minimal relative radius of the neck d / R 0 through which the container can be forced . This is due to the fact that for shorter necks , one end of the container may already be exiting the constriction while the other end has not yet entered , allowing parts of the passage process to occur at considerably lower curvatures and thus to proceed more effectively . We discuss this in detail in Sec . 5 . 2 . 5 . 2 analytical model : limiting behaviors 89 To conclude this section we mention that this particular simulation method poses some limitations as it does not permit a large range of mechanical properties of the deformable container to be studied and henceforth , we are unable to simu - late the bilayer limit , where the shear modulus is negligible and the area stretching modulus is very large . To access these regimes , we now present a tractable model for the two limiting cases of the capsule and the vesicle . 5 . 2 analytical model : limiting behaviors In this section we consider two limiting cases of the translocation of a deformable container , the stretch - dominated and the bend - dominated . The geometry we con - sider is shown in Fig . 33 ( a ) . We presume the dynamics to be determined by a bal - ance of forces between a coarse grained hydrodynamic drag F d ( ˙ x ( t ) ) = 6 πη R 0 ˙ x ( t ) , with η the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid , R 0 the equilibrium radius of the con - tainer , and ˙ x ( t ) the instantaneous velocity of the containers center of mass , a driv - ing force , associated for instance with the pulling by molecular motors , F m , and a force opposing the motion due to the increase in membrane energy F g . The latter , in the two limits , can be determined by calculating the derivative with respect to the center of mass position of either the global stretching energy E A for the stretch - dominated limit or the bending of the surface E B for the bend - dominated limit , such that F g ( x ( t ) ) − F d ( ˙ x ( t ) ) + F m = m ¨ x ( t ) . ( 37 ) where m is the mass of the container and x ( t ) is the position of mass of the center of mass which for the non - spherical particles is calculated by summing the “weighted " contributions of the subunits and assuming a homogeneous density . In the remainder of this section we will assume the mass to be m = 4 π × 10 − 18 kg and the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid η = 10 − 3 Ns / m 2 . In the limit of low Reynolds number , Eq . 37 reduces to F g ( x ( t ) ) + F m = 0 . We should note that the force we apply in this theoretical model is applied to the container and not to the ﬂuid as we did in the simulations . Therefore , the numerical value of the force is actually signiﬁcantly lower compared to that in the simulations . We consider a spherical deformable container with radius R 0 that is transported through a cylindrical constriction with radius d and length L as depicted in Fig . 33 ( a ) and distinguish several distinct stages of the process : stage ( I ) is the free cap - sule in solution - the reference conﬁguration for the container shape . During this stage the deformation force , F g , acting on the container is zero and the motion is determined by a competition between the driving and drag force . Stage ( II ) : partial entry of the capsule into the constriction . Here , the hydrodynamic drag force is much smaller than the deformation force acting on the container . Stage ( III a ) : intermediate stage for short channels , or large containers . Stage ( III b ) : inter - mediate stage for long channels , or small containers and ﬁnally stage ( IV ) : partial exit out of the constriction . Stage ( III b ) is only encountered when the volume of 90 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport R 0 r r d d h r 1 r 2 d L Stage I Stage II Stage III a Stage III b d h Stage IV h d d r 4 2 0 2 4 0 20 40 60 80 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 20 40 60 80 d / R 0 E B ( 10 - 19 J ) E m a x ( 10 - 19 J ) L = 1 μ m L = 2 μ m L = 4 μ m d / R 0 E A ( 10 - 14 J ) E m a x ( 10 - 14 J ) ( b ) ( c ) ( a ) x ( μ m ) x ( μ m ) Stretching energy Bending energy ( d ) ( e ) Stretching energy Bending energy L = 1 μ mL = 2 μ m L = 4 μ m L = 5 μ m L = 10 μ m L = 2 μ m 10 5 0 5 10 0 50 100 150 200 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 0 0 40 80 120 L = 5 μ m L = 10 μ m L = 2 μ m Figure 33 : ( a ) Translocation sequence for the passage of a container through a narrow constriction . Stage ( I ) : free capsule in solution ( the reference conﬁguration ) , stage ( II ) : partial entry of the capsule into the constriction , stage ( III a ) : intermediate stage for short channels , or large containers , stage ( III b ) : intermediate stage for long channels , or small containers . Stage ( IV ) : partial exit out of the constriction . Stretching and Bending energy E A ( d ) and E B ( e ) , respectively , as function of x for various lengths of the constriction . Decreasing the length of the neck strongly diminishes the height of the energy barrier the container has to overcome . For ( b ) and ( c ) we assumed R 0 = 1 µ m , for ( b ) d = 0 . 2 µ m and κ A = 1 Jm − 2 and for ( c ) κ B = 10 − 19 J and d = 0 . 3 µ m . In ( d ) and ( e ) we show the height of the energy barrier as function of the radius of the constriction d relative to the initial radius of the vesicle R 0 , where for ( d ) κ A = 1 Jm − 2 and for ( e ) κ B = 10 − 19 J . If we decrease the length of the constriction we ﬁnd that the height of the barrier strongly diminishes . For an inﬁnite neck length , the height of the barrier strongly increases for decreasing d / R 0 . For ﬁnite neck lengths , however , there is a decrease at low d / R 0 in the stretching energy ( d ) . 5 . 2 analytical model : limiting behaviors 91 the container is smaller than the total volume inside the constriction . We will now consider the stretch - and bending - dominated regime of this translocation . 5 . 2 . 1 Stretch - dominated ( capsule ) limit In the stretch - dominated regime , we assume that the total volume of the container is conserved ( V = V 0 , E V = 0 ) and that , given a certain global stretching modu - lus κ A , the surface on the container is allowed to stretch . For simplicity we will account for a global energy penalty , associated with stretching : E A = κ A 2 ( A − A 0 ) 2 A 0 , ( 38 ) where A − A 0 is the deviation in total surface and κ A a global stretching modulus . In the limit of small and uniform stretch ( λ 1 = λ 2 ) and zero shear modulus κ s , κ A can be related to the more general area dilatation modulus κ α : 4 κ α / 3 = 2 κ A . We will refer to containers in this regime as c apsules . This approach enables us to analytically calculate the height of the elastic energy barrier due to stretching of a container . As shown in Eq . 38 we need to calculate the difference in total surface area for these three situations , illustrated in Fig . 33 ( a ) . In Appendix I we detail the calculations of the total stretching energy as function of the center of mass of this system . Fig . 33 ( b ) collects the results , showing the elastic energy E A as function of the position of the center of mass where we ﬁx the radius of the constriction and the stretching modulus and vary the constriction length . We ﬁnd that upon decreasing the length of the constriction , the height of the energy barrier decreases considerably as can be seen in Fig . 33 ( b ) and ( d ) . The height of the barrier is determined by the most stretched conﬁguration that is encountered during the passage . For large containers ( or smaller channels ) the most stretched state is attained at the moment during stage ( III a ) when R 1 = R 2 . If the length of the constriction is greater than that of the capsule , the spherocylindrical capsule ( stage ( III b ) in Fig . 33 ( a ) ) is the state with maximal surface area and thus the maximal elastic energy . For shorter neck lengths , there is a single maximum set by the symmetric intermediate stage ( III a ) shape . The height of the energy barrier is thus proportional to the square of the devia - tion in total surface between the stage ( III a ) shape and the sphere . If we calculate the height of this barrier as function of the relative size of the neck d / R 0 we ﬁnd , for the inﬁnitely long constriction , that upon decreasing d / R 0 the height of the barrier for d / R 0 < 0 . 2 , increases as E max ∼ κ A (cid:0)(cid:0) R 30 − R 31 (cid:1) / dR 0 (cid:1) 2 . If we now decrease the length of the constriction we ﬁnd that for d / R 0 → 0 the constricted capsule consists of two spheres with a total surface area equal to 4 π R 2 0 / 2 2 / 3 , which corresponds with two equally sized spheres . This limiting case has a smaller sur - face area than a system with a slightly larger d / R 0 and therefore an lower stretch - ing energy . Therefore , there is a length of the constriction for which the stretching energy is maximal , and at which upon increasing and decreasing d / R 0 , the height 92 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport v m i n ( 10 - 4 m / s ) v m i n ( 1 0 - 4 m / s ) d / R 0 d / R 0 Stuck Pass Stuck Pass d / R 0 κ A ( 10 4 J m - 2 ) F m ( p N ) F M ( pN ) Pass Pass Stuck Stuck ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 2 4 6 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Figure 34 : The minimal velocity during the entrence of the constriction v min as function of ( a ) the relative radius of the constriction d / R 0 ( κ A = 10 5 Jm − 2 , F m = 2 pN ) and ( b ) as function of the applied force F m ( κ A = 10 5 Jm − 2 , d / R 0 = 0 . 4 ) . Phase diagram indicating if the stretch - dominated container P asses or gets S tuck inside the constriction as function of ( c ) F m and d / R 0 ( κ A = 10 5 Jm − 2 ) and ( d ) κ A and d / R 0 ( F m = 4 pN ) . 5 . 2 analytical model : limiting behaviors 93 of the energy barrier decreases . In Fig . 33 ( d ) we plot the height of the barrier as function of d / R 0 for various neck lengths . Obviously , in realistic biological sys - tems , this description would fail as there would be a very high bending involved with such thin necks . From the deformation energy as a function of position we determine F g = d E A / d x , the force that opposes translocation due to the shape change . We solve the force balance ( Eq . 37 ) to determine x ( t ) and ˙ x ( t ) and extract the pass - stuck phase diagram . Similar to the simulations of 5 . 1 , we obtain x ( t ) and ˙ x ( t ) , from which we can calculate the phase diagram and minimal velocity v min within the constriction . This point of minimal velocity corresponds to the point of maximal stretching force and we will use this quantity to characterize the motion of the container . We have performed the calculations of v min for various radii of con - striction and found that , for a given force , decreasing the radius of the constric - tion decreases the minimal velocity inside the constriction . Eventually , at a critical radius ( d / R 0 ) ∗ , this velocity will become zero and the container will get stuck in the constriction . Above this critical radius , the minimal velocity increases with increasing d / R 0 as shown in Fig . 34 ( a ) . The occurrence of a critical threshold also holds for the driving force F m , above which , the velocity increases linearly with the driving force F m ( See Fig . 34 ( b ) ) . The dependence of the minimal velocity on driving force and d / R 0 allow us to create a phase diagram indicating whether a capsule gets through the constriction or not : this is presented in Fig . 34 ( c ) . This phase diagram indicates the critical force F m necessary to translocate a container of radius R 0 through a constriction with size d , for a given stretching modulus κ A . If we now ﬁx the driving force and vary the stretching modulus κ A and d / R 0 , we obtain a similar phase diagram for the critical κ A . Obviously , the minimal size of the constriction through which a container would pass decreases strongly with decreasing modulus ( See Fig . 34 ( d ) ) . While for biological membranes the elastic parameters are largely ﬁxed , in synthetic systems one may have some control over the area elastic properties . 5 . 2 . 2 Bend - dominated ( vesicle ) limit We now analyze the opposite limit , where the container has very limited oppor - tunity to stretch , and the elastic energy is dominated by the bending contribution E B . This would apply more closely to a biological membrane , whose internal vol - ume may adapt due to the relatively high permeability to water of lipid bilayers . Though there may be some areal extension , we will assume this is negligible com - pared to the bending contributions . As our reference conﬁguration , we take again the spherical vesicle , and the various stages of translocation are the same as in Fig . 33 ( a ) . The calculation of the elastic energy for this type of container is highly similar to that of the stretchable container - we refer to Appendix II for the details and summarize only our main ﬁndings here . 94 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport d / R 0 d / R 0 Stuck Pass d / R 0 κ B ( 10 - 19 J ) F M ( pN ) Pass Stuck Stuck Pass v m i n ( 10 - 4 m / s ) v m i n ( 10 - 4 m / s ) F m ( p N ) Pass Stuck ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) ( b ) 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 5 10 15 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 5 10 15 0 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 2 3 4 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 Figure 35 : The minimal velocity during the entrence of the constriction v min as function of ( a ) the relative radius of the constriction d / R 0 ( κ B = 2 × 10 − 19 J and F m = 10 pN ) and ( b ) as function of the applied force F m ( κ B = 4 × 10 − 19 J and d / R 0 = 0 . 4 ) . Phase diagram indicating if the stretch - dominated container P asses or gets S tuck inside the constriction as function of ( c ) F m and d / R 0 ( κ B = 2 × 10 − 19 J ) and ( d ) κ A and d / R 0 ( F m = 10 pN ) . These ﬁgures show a very generic phase behavior for both the stretch - and bend - dominated containers ( See Fig . 34 ) . Fig . 33 ( e ) shows the elastic energy for a bend - dominated container for a con - striction with ﬁnite ( solid lines ) and inﬁnite ( dashed line ) length . The transition from stage ( I ) , the free container , to the stage ( II ) is no longer continuous . This jump in the bending energy is an artifact of our simpliﬁed setup , as our model does not resolve the continuous transition from situation ( I ) to ( II ) . Once the con - tainer enters the constriction , its energy increases until it reaches a maximum . For larger vesicles , or short channels , this point corresponds to the symmetric conﬁg - uration during stage ( III a ) when R 1 = R 2 , provided the length of the constriction is short enough such that the container can span both ends of the constriction . For smaller vesicles , or longer channels , the stage ( II ) bending energy continues to increase until the vesicle has completely entered the constriction to reach stage ( III b ) - a spherocylinder completely inside the channel . Past this point , both stage ( III a ) and ( III b ) develop into stage ( IV ) , where the energy decreases in the inverse manner that it rose in stage ( II ) . 5 . 3 conclusions 95 If we now compute the maximal height of the energy barrier E max in Fig . 33 ( e ) as function of the radius of the constriction , we ﬁnd that it increases strongly for decreasing radius and length of the constriction . For long channels , we ﬁnd a scaling regime where E B ∼ κ B ( d / R 0 ) − 2 which is highly similar to what we found for the stretchable container in Fig . 33 ( d ) . There is , however , one notable difference : the barrier height does not display the maximum we ﬁnd in the capsule limit . This may be understood from the fact that the bending energy diverges for small d , whereas E A does not . Next , we use the equation of motion ( Eq . 37 ) to obtain the dependence of the minimal velocity during the passage through the constriction as a function of the relative radius of the constriction d / R 0 ( Fig . 35 ( a ) ) and the force applied to the vesicle F m ( Fig . 35 ( b ) ) . Figs . 35 ( a ) and ( b ) reveal similar behavior as for the stretch - dominated container : below a threshold force , the container gets stuck and above this critical force , its velocity increases linearly with increasing force F m . If the size of the neck , relative to the size of the vesicle , is decreased below a critical ratio d / R 0 , the vesicle gets stuck . Above this value the minimal velocity increases as shown in Fig . 35 ( a ) . We summarize in Fig . 35 ( c ) and ( d ) the force - dependence of the transloca - tion in a phase diagram , indicating under which combinations of parameters the vesicle gets through the constriction and when it does not . This phase diagram indicates the critical force F m necessary to transport a vesicle of radius R 0 through a constriction with radius d . If we now ﬁx the driving force and vary the bending modulus κ B and d / R 0 , again at ﬁxed area increasingly small bending moduli are required to pass through the channel . Overall , the results are very similar to those in the stretch - dominated limit and those observed in the simulations presented in Section 5 . 1 . 5 . 3 conclusions In this Chapter , we have sought to address the question of how passage dimen - sions , container mechanics and external forcing together determine whether or not a container will pass through a narrow constriction , and if it does - how fast it does so . We have shown that by varying the size of the container relative to that of the neck and by regulating the force that is exerted on the container , the sys - tem may be biologically or physically controlled to , for instance , switch between a state where the container remains S tuck in front of the neck and a state where the container passes through the neck . Both these states possess some biological signiﬁcance . We have presented the results of Lattice - Boltzmann simulations , supported by two limiting simpliﬁed theoretical models . Although a quantitative comparison between the simulations and the theoretical is difﬁcult to establish as a result of , among others , the dependence on the exact driving mechanism we ﬁnd that even while the energetics of highly stretchable containers is very different from that 96 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport of containers that are bend - energy - dominated . The resulting phase diagram , in terms of S tuck vs . P ass , is very similar in both cases , suggesting some universality between both limits . We focus on the scaling and a qualitative analysis of this problem in the regime of low ﬂow rates , justifying the fact that we neglect both the membrane viscosity as well as the solvent viscosity in our models . At high ﬂow rates , the imposed strain rate the membrane experiences may lead to signiﬁcant contributions from both the viscosity of the membrane as well as the viscosity of the solvent , and different behaviors from those we describe here are to be expected . Nonetheless , our modeling allows us to address some of the questions we have raised in the introduction : whether typical cellular force levels are sufﬁ - cient to effect translocation in typically dimensioned vesicles and constrictions , and whether it is feasible for a cell to switch between pass and stuck by con - trolling this force . In order to do so , we must quantify the position within the S tuck / P ass phase diagram for a typical biological cell . We may use our results to provide some quantitative insight into the passage of biological vesicles into thin necks , such as it occurs in the dendritic spines mentioned in the introduction . In Fig . 34 ( g ) we show the phase diagram as function of the minimal force that a molecular motor has to exert vs . the size of the neck , where we have substi - tuted typical values of relevant parameters for a recycling endosome , which has an equilibrium radius of 1 µ m [ 128 , 191 ] , and the bending modulus of a typical vesicle κ B = 2 × 10 − 19 J [ 151 ] . Our analysis shows , that the range of forces nec - essary to transport this container through a typical dendritic spine neck , which has a radius of between 0 . 2 − 0 . 6 µ m , is on the order of a few to tens of pN . A typical myosin motor can exert forces of 5 - 6 pN [ 41 , 80 ] . The dimensions of the dendritic neck - a very typical channel motif in cells - thus require one to a few motors to translocate vesicle - bound cargo , conﬁrming that motors are eminently capable of producing the requisite forces to selectively translocate or immobilize vesicles in the neck , and to switch quickly between these modes . We will note that although the translocation is dominated by a competition between deformation energy and forcing , it cannot be expected from this simple model to accurately capture the exact forcing involved in motor transport - indeed , pulling by motors bound to cytoskeletal polymers arranged mostly close to the cell membrane in the neck is likely to affect the shape of the endosome . These additional contributions are , however , unlikely to dominate ; the principal bending energy contribution still comes from the highly elongated transitional shape during stage III b . In Appendix III we will present a preliminary study that includes a more re - alistic driving mechanism . In this work we only considered open channels with explicitly assuming periodic boundaries , strongly affecting the ﬂuid ﬂow around the vesicle . An open setting does not allow the study of vesicles into a closed constriction , a motif encountered in numerous cellular setting where vesicles are transported into narrow pockets or compartments of the cell . Directly driving the vesicle also allows us to consider the full , closed geometry of the spine . We expect 5 . 3 conclusions 97 our quantitative results to depend on the precise driving mechanism as well as on the geometry . Transportation of vesicles in closed constrictions presents an chal - lenging system to study since when the vesicles enters the constriction , ﬂuid has to be transported of the the constriction to ensure incompressibility of the ﬂuid . In Appendix III we will include the full geometry of the spine as well as a more realistic driving mechanism . Appendix I : Stretch - dominated limit In this Appendix we outline the calculations of the energetics involved in the stretch - dominated regime . As mentioned in the main text we assume that for the container in the stretch - dominated limit that the total volume is conserved , and that the total surface determines the stretching energy as shown in Eq . 38 . The surface of the container in the constriction can be divided in three parts ( see Fig . 33 ( a ) for parameters ) , and in stage ( III a ) the total surface area of the capsule is computed to be A tot = 4 π R 21 − π (cid:32) d 2 + (cid:18) R 1 − (cid:113)(cid:0) R 21 − d 2 (cid:1)(cid:19) 2 (cid:33) + 2 π ld + 4 π R 22 − π (cid:32) d 2 + (cid:18) R 2 − (cid:113)(cid:0) R 22 − d 2 (cid:1)(cid:19) 2 (cid:33) . ( 39 ) The radius of the spherical cap R 1 is related to that of the second spherical cap R 2 via total volume conservation : V tot = 4 π R 30 3 = 4 π R 31 3 − π h 2 3 (cid:18) 3 R 1 − R 1 − (cid:113) R 21 − d 2 (cid:19) + π d 2 l + 4 π R 32 3 − π h 2 3 (cid:18) 3 R 2 − R 2 − (cid:113) R 22 − d 2 (cid:19) , ( 40 ) where V tot = 4 π R 30 / 3 is conserved . To calculate the course of the stretching energy , we identify the position of the center of mass of this system , then calculate the shape of the system and the corresponding area deviation . In stage ( I ) , where we have a spherical capsule at its equilibrium radius R 0 , the total stretching energy is 0 as A = A 0 . The deviation in total surface area and the corresponding stretching energy of the stages ( II ) and ( III a / III b ) are calculated assuming total volume con - servation . In stage II , we divide the membrane shape into three domains : a partial sphere of radius R outside the constriction , and a ( truncated ) spherocylinder with length h and radius ( both of the cylindrical section and the spherical cap ) equal to the radius of the channel , d . In stage ( III a ) , likewise , we distinguish three domains : a spherical cap with radius R 1 outside the entry , a cylindrical tube with radius d and length h inside the channel , and a spherical cap with radius R 2 outside the exit . In stage ( III b ) the shape is a spherocylinder with length h and all radii equal to d . 98 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport Appendix II : Bend - dominated limit In this appendix we outline the calculations of the energetics involved in the bend - dominated regime . For the initial state we consider a spherical vesicle that has an initial radius R 0 before it enters the constriction . Its bending energy is given by E B = 4 πκ B , independent of the radius . In stage ( II ) , we consider the entrance of the vesicle in the constriction . Again , the complete shape is divided into two , possibly distinct , spherical domains and the cylindrical part . Note that in contrast to the capsule , the total surface area of the vesicle is conserved : A tot = A I + A II + A III , where : A I ( R 1 , d ) = 4 π R 21 − π ( d 2 + (cid:16) R 1 − (cid:113) R 21 − d 2 (cid:17) 2 , A II ( h , d ) = 2 π dh and A III ( R 2 , d ) = 4 π R 22 − π ( d 2 + (cid:16) R 2 − (cid:113) R 22 − d 2 (cid:17) 2 . The volume of the vesicle is allowed to increase during the translocation . The bending energy associated to the vesicle in stage ( III a ) or ( III b ) can be ap - proximated by the sum of the three separate contributions : E B = κ B (cid:32) A I ( R 1 , d ) R 21 + A II ( h , d ) 4 d 2 + A III ( R 2 , d ) R 22 (cid:33) , ( 41 ) where A I is the surface of the spherical cap with radius R 1 , A II the cylindrical part with radius d and length h and A III the spherical cap with radius R 2 . As mentioned in the main text , by assuming the total surface area is conserved , on can relate R 1 and R 2 to the initial radius R 0 and the position of the center of mass x . As depicted in Fig . 33 ( a ) we consider two separate situations , ( III a ) and ( III b ) . in the ﬁrst , we assume a neck with short length L < R 0 and the situation where L (cid:28) R 0 . To calculate the bending energy of the ﬁrst situation we ﬁx R 2 = d . By ﬁxing the total area we obtain the following relation between the radius of the ﬁrst spherical part R 1 and the length of the cylindrical domain h : R 1 ( h ) = A tot − 2 d 2 π − 2 π dh (cid:112) 4 π A tot − 12 π 2 d 2 − 8 π 2 hd . ( 42 ) We use this condition to solve Eq . 41 as long as h < L . If h > L , we ﬁx h = L and by conserving the total area one can determine a relation between R 1 and R 2 . Assuming that the volume enclosed by the neck is 2 π dL (cid:28) 4 π R 20 one should consider an extra situation which is the vesicle completely inside the neck - stage ( III b ) . The calculation is a straightforward extension of the previous setting R 1 = R 2 = d . This yields the following relation between the length of the neck and the total area of the vesicle h ( d ) = A tot − 4 π d 2 2 π d . ( 43 ) 5 . 3 conclusions 99 Appendix III : Forced transportation of vesicles into closed constriction In this Appendix we will brieﬂy discuss some preliminary results on the translo - cation of vesicles through constrictions with a blind end . In particular we consider the role of the narrow lubrication layer which arises when ﬂuid has to exit subse - quent to the entrance of the vesicle ( ensuring incompressibility ) . The occurrence of this lubrication layer and the required back - ﬂow of the ﬂuid in the head will af - fect the translocation speed of the vesicle . For computational reasons we will limit our analysis to vesicles which have an equilibrium radius R 0 which is smaller or comparable to the radius of the constriction d . Further increasing the radius of the vesicle , relative to the radius of the constriction would require an increasing res - olution of the simulation grid . Similarly to the analysis within the main text , we focus on a container with given mechanical properties ( ﬁxed κ V = 1 , κ α = 0 . 018 , κ s = 0 . 5 and κ b = 0 . 05 ) , where we have used a dimensionless lattice constant , time - step , mass and relaxation time ar all to unity . In contrast to ﬂuid driven transportation that we study in the main text we now apply a body force directly on all the nodes of the vesicle . The surface of the vesicle is triangulated to allow efﬁcient calculations of the deformations and the number of faces has been ﬁxed to 3380 , which is sufﬁcient to capture the studied deformations . To allow a thorough study of the lubrication layer between the vesicle and the wall , we choose a sufﬁciently large size of the system ( 100 x 100 x 200 LU ) where the minimal radius of the constriction was set to d = 21 LU . In Figure 36 ( a ) we show a typical sequence of translocation for a vesicle with radius R 0 = 18 LU and driving force of F = 0 . 001 / node and see that during the translocation , the vesicles has to signiﬁcantly deform to pass through the constriction . We expect that the speed at which this transportation occurs sensitively de - pends on i ) the applied force on the particle , ii ) the geometry of the constriction and iii ) the shape and size of the container in which the particle is forced . Before we explore how the transportation depends on all these parameters we ﬁrst com - pare an open and closed channel , with otherwise identical parameters , and ﬁnd that the velocity of the translocation is nearly an order of magnitude slower for the closed constriction for these speciﬁc parameters ( See Fig . 36 ) . In Fig . 36 ( b ) and ( c ) we show the velocity ﬁelds for an vesicle with radius R 0 = 18 passing through an an otherwise identical constriction , with the only difference being that ( a ) has a blind end and ( b ) periodic ends . One can immediately see that the velocity at which the translocation occurs is signiﬁcantly slower for the closed constriction , compared to the open constriction and that for the closed constriction a lubrica - tion layer develops . Of particular interest in the translocation in a closed constriction is the lubri - cation layer that arises between the vesicle and the wall . This layer is required to allow the ﬂuid to escape the closed constriction and to ensure incompressibility when the vesicle enters the constriction . This narrow layer between vesicle and wall hinders the passage of the vesicle and effectively increasing the amount of 100 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport - 5 . 0 - 2 . 5 0 2 . 5 × 10 - 4 5 . 0 × 10 - 4 z x z x × 10 - 4 × 10 - 4 4 × 10 - 3 5 × 10 - 3 2 × 10 - 3 3 × 10 - 3 1 0 × 10 - 3 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 36 : ( a ) Sequence of translocation and ( b ) velocity ﬁeld for a vesicle with radius R 0 = 18 which is forced through a closed constriction at a constant driving force of F = 0 . 001 / node ( Minmal radius of the constriction d = 21 ) . ( c ) Veloctiy ﬁeld for an otherwise identical system , exept that the edges are periodic in stead of closed . 5 . 3 conclusions 101 v z v z r / d r / d f = 0 . 5 f = 1 . 0 f = 1 . 2 t z t = 40 t = 60 t = 80 t = 100 t = 120 ( b ) ( a ) 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 - 0 . 0010 - 0 . 0005 0 . 0000 0 . 0005 0 . 0010 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 - 0 . 0015 - 0 . 0010 - 0 . 0005 0 . 0000 0 . 0005 0 . 0010 0 . 0015 Figure 37 : ( a ) Temporal evolution of the z - velocity at the centre height of the constriction as function of the normalized distance from the center of the constriction ( d is the radius of the constriction ) for a vesicle with radius R = 18 and a driving force of F = 0 . 0012 / node . The inset of ( a ) shows the temporal evolution of the position of the centre of mass of the vesicle . ( b ) z - velocity at the centre height of the constriction for a vesicle with radius R = 18 for various values of applied force per node F . deformation the vesicle has to undergo to translocate . In Fig . 37 ( a ) we show the velocity proﬁle within the constriction we ﬁnd that upon entering , the lubrication decreases in size and the maximal velocity of the backﬂow increases . Upon in - creasing the driving force F , at otherwise identical parameters , we ﬁnd that both the size of the boundary layer as well as the maximal velocity of the backﬂow increases ( See Fig . 37 ( b ) ) . Hence the stronger the vesicle is forced in the closed constriction , the more the vesicle is required to deform to enter . This inertial ef - fect is not present for periodic systems and the presence of this lubrication layer effectively decreases the actual size of the constriction . While this should be stud - ied in more detail in future work , it highlights the importance of including the full geometry of the system , with respect to ﬂuid ﬂow , in modeling the effect of conﬁnement . By varying the applied force , we show in Fig . 38 ( b ) that upon increasing the applied force , the time it takes for the particle to pass the constriction decreases and so does the minimal velocity of the particle in the constriction . In Fig . 38 ( c ) we plot the minimal velocity , for various magnitudes of the body force F , as func - tion of the radius of the vesicle , relative to that of the constriction R 0 / d . Since upon increasing the radius of the vesicle , the vesicle has to increasingly deform , the minimal velocity in the constriction will be decreased upon increasing R 0 / d . If we rescale the minimal velocity in the constriction v min with the velocity of the particle , as it moves through the ﬂuid without constriction we ﬁnd that all the curves collapse for small values R 0 / d but that it starts to deviates when R 0 / d approaches unity ( see Fig . 38 ( d ) ) . Within this regime , we ﬁnd that by increas - ing the body force that the translocation does not get proportionally faster , since 102 shape as a barrier for endosomal transport F = 0 . 5 F = 0 . 8 F = 1 . 4 F = 1 . 2 F = 0 . 5 F = 0 . 8 F = 1 . 4 F = 1 . 2 ( c ) ( d ) ( a ) 0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200 t x ( b ) 0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200 t x i n c r e a s i n g R d e c r e a s i n g F Figure 38 : ( a ) and ( b ) Temporal evolution of the center of mass of the vesicle for ( a ) various radius ( R = 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 ) and ﬁxed force F = 0 . 01 and ( b ) various force F = 0 . 008 , 0 . 01 , 0 . 012 , 0 . 014 for a ﬁxed vesicle radius R = 18 . ( c ) Minimal velocity in the constriction v min as function of the radius of the vesicle , relative to the radius of the con - striction R 0 / d for various values of F . ( d ) Minimal velocity in the constriction , relative to the velocity before entering the constriction ( v min / v 0 ) as function of R 0 / d for various values of F . there still a lag time required for the incompressible ﬂuid to escape through the boundary layer . In this Appendix we have brieﬂy touched on the role of a blind end at the end of a constriction and how it affects the translocation of vesicles into closed constric - tion . We have , at least qualitatively demonstrated that , the speed of translocation through a closed constriction is signiﬁcantly slower than for a periodic channel . To ensure incompressibility of the ﬂuid , a narrow lubrication layer will develop between the vesicle and the constriction . The size of this lubrication layer as well as the maximal velocity of the back ﬂow sensitively depend on driving force and the size of the vesicle , relative to the size of the constriction . Further research will be required to present a thorough quantitative analyses of this problem . Especially , we expect these effects to become increasingly more important for vesicles of increasing radius . This regime remains , however , com - putationally challenging . To further develop this model to actually quantitatively study the tanslocation of endosomes into spines this model would also require an even more realistic driving mechanism since a constant body force is not necessar - 5 . 3 conclusions 103 ily a good model for motor driven transport where the molecular motors attach to the endosome on a discrete number of locations along the vesicle . Moreover , this analysis would requires a careful experimental analysis of the deformations of both vesicles and the spine neck during spine entry . Part III PAT T E R N F O R M AT I O N I N A N A D H E R E D F I L A M E N T Chapter 6 Growth of an adherent ﬁlament In Part III of this thesis we turn our attention to the constrained growth of an adherent ﬁlament . Constrained growth is a common motif in biology , where sur - faces and ﬁlaments are constrained by their surrounding medium . To name but a few examples in nature ; growth of leaves and ﬂowers [ 164 ] , the wrinkling of the skin [ 20 ] , the formation of the gut [ 159 ] , the winding of cellulose microﬁbrils along the cell [ 96 ] and the formation of the neuromuscular junction [ 142 , 107 ] . The latter example has been a direct inspiration for this research . Here , we consider a model system for constrained growth that captures the main features involved , the growth of a ﬂexible ﬁlament which is connected to a second ﬁlament , either solid or ﬂexible , by a discrete number of Hookean springs . Our discrete rod model takes into account bending of two consecutive segments in the ﬂexible ﬁlament , the stretching involved in the extension or contraction of the springs that connect the ﬁlament to the substrate , extension or contraction of the ﬁlament and shear of the ﬁlament with respect to the substrate . In short , we seek the solution with minimal total energy for a ﬁlament with initial rest length L which has grown to a total length of L ( 1 + Γ ) . Γ measures the relative growth of the ﬁlament . The model is illustrated in Fig . 39 . Buckling of an adherent ﬁlament is not a novel subject , at the end of the nine - teenth century Winkler already proposed an elastic model to study the defor - mation of a ﬁlament on an elastic substrate , at least in the limit for small defor - mations and for inﬁnite shear modulus k s [ 196 ] . To benchmark our discrete rod model we ﬁrst demonstrate that within the limit k s → ∞ , we indeed ﬁnd the ﬁrst buckling wave number scales with ( κ / k h ) 1 / 4 , as predicted by Winkler . Here κ is the bending modulus of the ﬁlament and k h is the stretching modulus of the springs . In Section 7 . 1 . 2 we recapitulate how the 1 / 4 exponent can be recovered from linearized buckling theory . In contrast to previous models of constrained growth , our discrete rod model allows us to explore the role of shear in the buckling of an adherent ﬁlament . Recent experiments with multilayered elastic substrates [ 73 , 19 , 175 ] as well as The research that we present in this Chapter was initiated during a research visit at Harvard University ( 9 / 2014 - 12 / 2014 and 9 / 2015 - 11 / 2015 ) under the supervision of Prof . L . Mahadevan 108 growth of an adherent filament l 0 b = L / N h 0 Γ Γ ( a ) ( b ) Figure 39 : ( a ) The model system . The red dots represent the connection between two Hookean spring that make up the ﬂexible ﬁlament . This ﬂexible ﬁlament is connected to a solid ﬁlament ( blue dots ) through Hookean spings . ( bottom ) The evolution a a growing rod with N = 50 springs ( κ / k h = 0 . 005 and k s (cid:29) 1 ) where the endpoints are periodically connected to one another . ( b ) Growth of an adherent ﬁlament in 3 D numerical FEM simulations [ 19 ] point to the occurrence of localized structures , even when the growth happens uniformly . H ow uniform growth of a ﬁlament can result in localization of strain remains an unanswered question . We ﬁnd that , upon lowering the shear modulus , localized structures naturally arise in an ad - hered ﬁlament . While the buckling wavelength remains unaltered we ﬁnd that the size of the localization decreases with increasing Γ and decreasing k s . Our study of two dimensional ﬁlaments considers a ﬁlament which has periodic ( Sec - tion 6 . 2 . 1 ) , clamped ( Section 6 . 2 . 2 ) and free edges ( Section 1 . 2 . 3 ) . For a system with periodic ends we ﬁnd that , once sufﬁciently localized , the strain localiza - tion can freely move along the ﬁlament . By introducing clamped boundaries , the minimal energy solution for small perturbations is localized in the center of the ﬁlament . Upon further increasing Γ , the global minimum starts to switch towards the edges . In principle , the energetic minimum , which localizes the strain , will be initiated in the center of the system and travel towards the edges upon increasing Γ . For a ﬁlament with free edges we ﬁnd , in the limit of vanishing shear modu - lus ( k s (cid:28) 1 ) , that the localization occurs at the edges of the system and travels inwards for increasing Γ . For free edges we ﬁnd a ﬁnite critical extension beneath which the ﬁlament laterally stretches and above which the ﬁrst bucking occurs . At the end of this Section 6 . 2 we explore whether analytic calculations of the cor - responding modiﬁed Föppl - von Karman equations can be used to rationalize the occurrence of localized strain solution of homogeneous as we obtained from the discrete rod model . 6 . 1 method 109 In Section 6 . 3 we allow the ﬁlament to buckle out of the plane , as we show in Fig . 39 ( b ) . Depending on the various elastic moduli of the ﬁlament and substrate we observe four distinct modes of deformation : ( i ) at k s (cid:29) 1 we recover the classical Winkler foundation , where the wavelength of the perturbation is set by an interplay between bending of the ﬁlament and the stiffness of the adherent springs . In mode ( ii ) , which occurs at k s (cid:28) 1 , the ﬁlament spirals around the solid ﬁlament . The radius and number of winding of the ﬁlament is , similarly as in ( i ) set by the ratio of the bending of the ﬁlament and the stiffness of the adherent springs . A third mode we consider here is the buckling that occurs when the adherent springs are inextensible ( iii ) , here the ﬁlament curls around the solid ﬁlament and the wavelength is set by the ratio of bending modulus of the ﬁlament and the shear modulus of the adherent springs . For intermediate values of the shear modulus and the stretch modulus of the spring we discover a ( iv ) ’th mode where the deformation is accommodated by both shearing and stretching the adherent springs . 6 . 1 method 6 . 1 . 1 Discrete rod model We assume the following situation : A ﬂexible ﬁlament that contains n s discrete segments is attached to a solid substrate through a set of N Hookean springs . In Fig . 39 ( a ) we depict the model . The energy contributions considered in our model are ( i ) the stretching of the Hookean springs that connect the ﬂexible ﬁlament to the solid substrate , ( ii ) the stretching and ( iii ) the bending of the ﬁlament and ( iv ) the shear of the ﬁlament , relative to the substrate . We model the springs that con - nect the ﬁlament to the solid substrate as Hookean springs , with a corresponding stretching energy ( i ) given by , E h = 1 2 (cid:18) k h b (cid:19) N ∑ i = 1 ( h i − h 0 ) 2 , ( 44 ) where k h is the stiffness of the springs , h 0 the rest length of the spring and h i the actual length of the spring . The spacing between the various segments is given by b = L / N , where N is the number of springs and L the total length of the solid rod ( See Fig . 39 ) . The ﬂexible ﬁlament itself is divided into n s discrete segments of length l 0 , described by the unit tangent vector ˆ t ( n ) , where n = 1 , . . . , n s are the individual segments . The total rest length of the chain is given by L = n s l 0 and in the inex - tensible limit , this is the actual length of the chain . The total stretching energy of the chain ( ii ) is the sum of the stretching of the individual segments , using the discrete worm like chain model , E f = 1 2 (cid:18) k f l 0 (cid:19) n s ∑ i = 1 ( l i − l 0 ) 2 , ( 45 ) 110 growth of an adherent filament where k f is the stiffness of the individual segments . In our simulations we increase the size of the ﬁlament by increasing the rest length of the segments , l 0 . The third term that contributes to the total energy is the " local " bending of the ﬁlament , where we penalize the tilting of two adjacent segments i and i + 1 , E b = κ l 0 n s − 1 ∑ i = 1 ( 1 − cos θ ( i , i + 1 ) ) , ( 46 ) where cos θ ( i , i + 1 ) = (cid:126) t ( n ) · (cid:126) t ( n + 1 ) / | (cid:126) t ( n ) | | (cid:126) t ( n + 1 ) | . This bending energy is an ap - proximation , valid for low bending . In fact the bending energy of an arc segment of a worm like chain is given by E b = ( 2 κ / l 0 ) θ sin θ / 2 , which for small θ reduces to E b ≈ ( κ / l 0 ) θ 2 which is approximately ( κ / 2 l 0 ) ( 1 − cos θ ) . The fourth term in that we consider here is the shear of the ﬁlament with respect to the substrate , E s = k s N ∑ i = 1 α ( i ) 2 , ( 47 ) where k s is the shear modulus and α the deviation in the angle that the adherent spring make with their initial unstressed orientation . To minimize the total energy of the system E h + E f + E b + E s we either use New - ton’s method , present in the F indMinimum routine or a global energy search present in the N Minimize routine . Both routines are implemented in W olfram Mathematica . We note however , that the Newton’s iteration method only guar - antees a local minimum and that even with N Minimize we have no guarantee of ﬁnding the actual global minimum . Therefore care has be be taken in evaluat - ing the growth . We are not necessarily interested in the global minimum of the system but in the solution that arises from subsequent growth of the ﬁlament . Typically , the procedure we use to " grow " the ﬂexible ﬁlament is the following : we initiate a conﬁguration where the springs are in their rest conﬁguration and no bending is present in the ﬁlament . We then increase the rest - length of the springs l 0 that make up the rod with a small amount l 0 Γ such that the new length of the segments l 0 → l 0 ( 1 + Γ ) . We then use our minimization algorithm to ﬁnd the en - ergetically optimal conﬁguration of the ﬁlament . Since this system typically has multiple local minimal energies , we will explore the different solution branches and calculate their energy and stability by adding white noise to the initial con - ﬁguration . In Fig . 39 we show an example of a typical sequence of shapes upon growth . 6 . 1 . 2 Validating the discrete rod model In this section we consider the growth of a ﬁlament , attached to a solid substrate with inﬁnite shear modulus , where the endpoints are periodically connected . This setting is analogous to the growth of a ﬁlament on a Winkler foundation . Since 6 . 1 method 111 k h / κ 1 / λ N = 80 N = 60 N = 100 1 1 / 4 ( b ) ( a ) κ / k s = 0 . 005 κ / k s = 0 . 2 κ / k s = 1 Figure 40 : ( a ) The equilibrium shape of an incompressible ﬁlament that is attached to a solid substrate through N = 50 springs for various ratios of the bending modulus and the stretching modulus of the springs κ / k h . The endpoints of the springs are periodically attached to one another . The typical wave number of the initial buckling 1 / λ as function of κ / k h for a system of N = 60 , 80 and 100 springs ( in - extensible ﬁlament k f (cid:29) k h ) . the solutions corresponding to Winkler’s foundation are analytically accessible these can serve as validation for the discrete rod model . In the Winkler model the ﬁlament is connected to the substrate via a set of mutually independent vertical springs with stiffness k h [ 196 ] . To determine how the wavelength depends on the bending modulus and stretch - ing of the adherent springs , we write down the energy balance between the bend - ing energy of the ﬁlament in the continuum limit for a vertical displacement y , E b = κ 2 (cid:90) L 0 ¨ y 2 dl ∼ κ L (cid:16) A / λ 2 (cid:17) 2 , ( 48 ) and the vertical stiffness of the adherent substrate E h = k h 2 (cid:90) L 0 y 2 dl ∼ k h LA 2 , ( 49 ) where A is the amplitude , L the length of the ﬁlament , κ the bending modu - lus and k h the stiffness of the adherent springs . A balance of these two energies yields : λ ∼ ( κ / k h ) 1 / 4 . If we assume imcompressibility , to linear approximation , Γ = 0 . 5 (cid:82) L 0 ˙ y 2 dl ∼ L ( A / λ ) 2 . This sets the amplitude , A ∼ λ (cid:112) Γ / L [ 131 ] . For an incompressible ﬁlament , buckling has to occur at an inﬁnitesimal amount of growth . In Fig 47 ( a ) we show the equilibrium shape for a ﬁlament that is at - tached to a substrate through N = 50 spring , this for various ratios between bend - ing and stretching modulus , κ / k h . We ﬁnd that the wavenumber of the initial buckling 1 / λ increases with κ / k h as a power - law , with exponent of 0 . 25 , which is indeed what we expect from the Winkler foundation . 112 growth of an adherent filament 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 0 . 116 0 . 118 0 . 120 0 . 122 0 . 124 E t k s 50 2 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 41 : Total energy and shape of the localized ( orange ) and homogeneous ( blue ) buckled ﬁlament for a Γ = 2 . 5 % ( N = 50 , κ = 0 . 1 , k h = 0 . 1 and k f = 100 ) . 6 . 2 buckling of a shearable filament In this Section we use the discrete rod model described in Section 6 . 1 . and show how uniform growth of an adhered ﬁlament induces localized buckling when the shear modulus is lowered . In Section 6 . 2 . 1 we explore the emergence of localized buckling in periodic ﬁlaments , Section 6 . 2 . 2 covers the growth of an adherent ﬁlament with clamped boundaries and in Section 6 . 2 . 3 we release the edges and discover the occurrence and propagation of edge buckling . We will conclude this Section with outlining the continuous equation that correspond to the discrete rod model in Section 6 . 2 . 4 . 6 . 2 . 1 Localized buckling A limitation of the Winkler foundation is its inability to allow for the adherent springs to shear , i . e . , the displacement of the springs are restricted to the vertical direction . To account for shear , we allow the ﬁlament to shear horizontally along the substrate at an energetic cost that is proportional to the square of the angle the adherent springs relative to its unstressed state ( See Eq . 47 ) . For k s → ∞ , i . e . , no horizontal displacement allowed , we recover the classical Winkler foundation ( See previous Section ) . If we decrease k s and allow the adherent springs to hinge , we ﬁnd that , upon growth ( increasing Γ ) , the vertical deformation along the ﬁlament is not uniform but rather a damped sinusoidal solution , with a width to which we will refer as the size of the localization Before we present our results we should ﬁrst note that the energy landscape of a growing ﬁlament contains multiple energetic minima and that we cannot guaranty that the solution we obtain here is indeed the global minimal energy solution . So to map out the various solution branches present in this system as function of k s and Γ we use as local conjugate gradient method to scan the en - ergy landscape and probe the stability of the solutions in Fig . 41 . We ﬁrst use a global energy solver to ﬁnd a minimum energy solution . We have done this for 6 . 2 buckling of a shearable filament 113 Γ = 0 . 4 % Γ = 2 . 0 % Γ = 4 . 0 % Γ = 4 . 8 % k s = 0 . 02 k s = 0 . 05 k s = 0 . 1 k s = 1 . 0 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) 2 40 Γ k s Figure 42 : Equilibrium shapes of the ﬁlament as function of ( a ) Γ ( k s = 0 . 1 ) and as function of k s for Γ = 0 . 03 ( N = 40 , κ = 0 . 1 , k f = 100 and k h = 0 . 1 ) . ( c ) Various solutions of a local minimum search indicating the localization that can move along the ﬁlament without energetic cost ( N = 40 , k s = 0 . 005 , κ = 0 . 1 , k f = 100 and k h = 0 . 1 ) . 114 growth of an adherent filament a system with N = 50 adherent springs for k s = 0 . 1 and k s = 0 . 0005 which yield , respectively , a uniform and a localized solution . We then use this solution as in - put for our conjugate gradient energy search and vary k s . We then calculate the corresponding energy of the system and map out the various solution branches by using the solution as input . We ﬁnd that , upon lowering k s , the total energy of the homogeneous state remains approximately constant while for the localized state the energy decreases upon decreasing k s . For this speciﬁc example we ﬁnd that below k s = 0 . 002 the localized state has a lower total energy compared to the homogeneous state . While we do not claim here that the state we found is the actual global minimal energy solution our results prove that , for low values of the shear modulus , the localized state does have a lower total energy . To probe the stability of the various branches we apply a random perturbation ( white noise ) to the so - lutions and study how , depending on the amplitude , the solution relaxes back to the branch or ﬁnds another minimal energy solution . If we prepare the homoge - neous state at k s = 0 . 001 , which is well below the value at which it is the global minimum , we ﬁnd that random perturbations of the ﬁlament , up to the buckling amplitude , relax back to the homogeneous state . Above this values , other local - ized state are found . We have similarly checked the stability of the localized state at k s = 0 . 005 and found that this state relaxes back for amplitudes of perturba - tions up to the buckling amplitude . At higher values we recover homogeneous buckling or less pronounced localized buckling . Next we study growth induces localization and show this for a system of N = 40 connecting springs ( κ = 0 . 1 , k h = 0 . 1 and k s = 0 . 1 ) in Fig . 42 ( a ) . Here we plot the shape of the ﬁlament for Γ = 0 . 4 , 2 , 4 and 4 . 8 % . We ﬁnd that the size of the localized structure decreases upon increasing Γ . If we calculate the shape of the ﬁlament for various values of the shear modulus k s ( See Fig . 42 ( c ) ) we ﬁnd that , upon lowering the shear modulus k s , the size of the localized structure decreases while the wavelength λ does not depend on k s , it is independently set by the ratio of κ and k h . When the wavelength is sufﬁciently large , the magnitude of the damping will further decrease upon decreasing k s until the state becomes completely localized . This localized structure can then , in the case of periodic boundary conditions , freely translate along the substrate as we show in Fig . 42 ( c ) . Increasing the length of the ﬁlament further to see how strongly we can localize this structure will , for this speciﬁc system size , eventually lead us deep into the non - linear regime where we will ﬁnd asymmetric and loop - like solutions of the ﬁlament . Numerically , the system becomes more and more degenerate ( multiple local energetic minima ) for increasing Γ and hence we focus on the small perturbation regime where the system may still be reliably evaluated numerically . One way to decrease the localization length is to increase the size of the system , relative to the wavelength λ ∼ ( κ / k h ) 1 / 4 . We now choose a system with N = 100 connecting springs ( κ = 0 . 1 , k h = 0 . 1 and k s = 0 . 1 ) and calculate the shape of the ﬁl - ament as function of the growth Γ . We ﬁnd that , even for very small perturbations , we immediately obtain a strongly localized structure ( See Fig . 43 ( a ) ) . In Fig . 43 ( b ) 6 . 2 buckling of a shearable filament 115 N = 20 N = 40 N = 60 N = 80 N = 100 N = 120 N = 140 N = 160 N = 180 N = 200 Γ = 0 . 05 % Γ = 0 . 1 % Γ = 0 . 15 % Γ = 0 . 25 % Γ = 0 . 5 % Γ = 0 . 7 % Γ = 0 . 8 % Γ = 1 . 0 % Γ = 1 . 25 % Γ = 1 . 4 % ( a ) ( b ) 100 2 Figure 43 : ( a ) Equilibrium shapes of the ﬁlament and adherent springs as function Γ ( N = 100 , κ = 0 . 1 and k h = 0 . 1 ) ( b ) Shape of the ﬁlament for Γ = 0 . 5 % where increasing the system size results in a increased amount of localization ( κ = 0 . 1 , k s = 0 . 1 and k h = 0 . 1 ) . 116 growth of an adherent filament we calculate the shape of the ﬁlament for various system sizes , while keeping the relative amount of growth ( Γ = 5 % ) and the other parameters constant . While in - creasing the system size does not affect the wavelength of the perturbation there is strong effect of system size on the size of the localization , especially for small values of N . Increasing N further localizes the structure up to N ≈ 100 above which the structure becomes fully localized . For values above N = 100 we ﬁnd that the amplitude of the structure increases while the size remains approximately constant . So all extra net growth is accommodated by the localized structure , by increasing the amplitude of the perturbation , while keeping the wavelength and size of the localization unaltered . The appearance of a soliton in the system , a localized structure that can freely move along the ﬁlament raises the question how the localized structure interacts with boundaries . To study this we will consider two types of boundary conditions , clamped and free boundary conditions . 6 . 2 . 2 Clamped boundaries We calculate now local energetic minima , starting from random perturbed initial conditions , for a ﬁlament with clamped boundaries . This allows us to probe the phase - space and compare the energies as function of the position of the local - ization . In Fig . 44 ( a ) we plot the shape of multiple solutions of the ﬁlament and the corresponding energy contributions as function of the position of the local - ized state The position corresponds to the x - value of the highest amplitude of the ﬁlament . For this case we ﬁnd that the sum of all energies is lower when the localized state is located at the edges compared to when it resides in the center of the ﬁlament . In Fig . 44 ( b ) we plot the various energy terms and ﬁnd that while the total energy and stretching energy of the adhesive springs are monotonically decreasing functions , this is not the case for the bending energy of the ﬁlament which has another local minimum at the middle of the ﬁlament and the shear energy which is a monotonically decreasing function , with respect to the edges of the system . Interestingly , we ﬁnd that for small perturbations , the energy landscape looks markedly different . For an otherwise similar system we now vary the growth Γ and ﬁnd that , slightly above the buckling transition has a lowest energy , buckling only occurs in the center of the ﬁlament . Upon increasing Γ we ﬁnd that edge solutions start to arise , yet have a higher energy relative to the solution in the central of the ﬁlament . Eventually when we increase Γ further ( Γ = 0 . 037 ) there are two minima arising halfway between the center and the edge and eventually for Γ > 3 . 8 % we recover the state where the edge modes have a lower energy . So whether the localized solution is attracted or repelled from the clamped boundary depends on the elastic moduli in the system and the amount of growth . 6 . 2 buckling of a shearable filament 117 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 0 . 11 0 . 12 0 . 13 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Γ = 4 % Γ = 3 . 8 % Γ = 3 . 7 % Γ = 3 . 6 % Γ = 3 . 5 % Γ = 3 . 4 % Γ = 3 . 3 % E t x x x x E s E T E h E b 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 5 . 10 - 3 10 - 2 0 . 05 0 . 10 ( b ) ( a ) ( c ) Figure 44 : ( a ) Shape of the ﬁlament for various locations of the localization along the ﬁlament ( Γ = 0 . 02 ) and ( b ) are the corresponding enery contributions ( E t = total , E h = adhesion stretch , E b = bening E s = shear and E f = stretch ﬁlament ) as function of the position of the localization . ( c ) E t as function of x for various values of growth Γ . ( N = 40 , k s = 0 . 002 , κ = 0 . 05 and k h = 0 . 1 ) . 118 growth of an adherent filament 6 . 2 . 3 Edge buckling Now we study buckling of a growing ﬁlament attached to a solid ﬁlament , where the end - points of the ﬁlaments are free . For simplicity we only consider inexten - sible ﬁlaments here ( k f = 1000 k h ) with vanishing shear modulus k s = 0 . As can be seen in Fig . 45 ( a ) for a ﬁlament with N = 50 during the initial growth the ﬁl - ament stretches parallel to the solid substrate . Above a critical extension Γ ∗ , the ﬁlaments starts to buckle at the edge . The exact value of Γ ∗ as well as the buckling wavelength λ strongly depend on the value of κ / k h . To enhance the stability of our minimization algorithm we minimize half of the space for the non - periodic ﬁlament . We assume that the minimal energy solution is symmetric around the midline of the system , this is achieved by ﬁxing the x - position of the midpoint seg - ment and equating the y - coordinate of the last two segments . We have checked that this approach yields the same equilibrium shape as when we would consider the whole space , at least for large systems . For small systems , the antisymmetric solutions are excluded by construction . Fig . 45 ( b ) shows a ﬁlament that is adhered with 50 springs corresponding to an extension Γ = 0 . 15 . Similar to what we observed for the buckling of a periodic ﬁlament we ﬁnd that decreasing κ / k h , decreases the wave number of the edge buckling 1 / λ . In Fig 45 ( e ) we measure this wave number 1 / λ as function of κ / k h and ﬁnd that , at least for N = 50 and N = 100 , 1 / λ ∼ ( κ / k h ) 1 / 6 . Although it makes intuitive sense that upon decreasing κ / k h bending becomes relatively cheaper and hence the wavelength of buckling decreases , the obtained exponent does not immediately look familiar . Similar to the wavelength of edge buckling we also ﬁnd that the critical exten - sion at which buckling is initiated Γ ∗ increases with increasing κ / k h ( Fig . 45 ( d ) ) since for large κ / k h , stretching remains more favorable for an increasing range of extension Γ . Although this edge buckling originate at the boundaries , the buck - ling arises as a result of tension on the springs throughout the whole system . To illustrate how system - size plays a role in this we repeat this for N = 50 and N = 100 , where we have kept the distance between the springs is constant . We show that the scaling of the wave number 1 / λ does not depend on the size of the system , although the offset of it and Γ ∗ do depend on N . The open question now remains , " Why is the scaling of the buckling wave num - ber so different for the system with the free edges ? " One major difference with the " classical " buckling is that for increasing Γ , the angle between the rigid sub - strate and the springs varies , i . e . , before buckling is induced , the rotation of these springs comes without extra energetic cost , and hence this degree of freedom is used for small Γ . As can be seen in Fig . 46 , for extensions larger than Γ ∗ , the angle α as well as the length of the springs oscillates ( See Fig . 46 ) . This 1 / 6’th power law dependence of the buckling wavelength has also been observed at the edges of buckling induced by the compression of laminated plates [ 8 ] . However we think that the discreteness of our system is crucial in the observed edge buckling . 6 . 2 buckling of a shearable filament 119 κ / k h = 10 - 3 κ / k h = 10 - 2 κ / k h = 10 - 1 κ / k h = 1 κ / k h = 10 - 2 E b / κ κ / k h = 10 - 1 κ / k h = 10 - 0 1 / λ Γ ∗ Γ ∗ Γ ∗ Γ κ / k h κ / k h N = 100 N = 50 Γ ∗ N = 100 N = 50 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) 1 1 / 6 Γ Figure 45 : ( a ) The equilibrium shape for a ﬁlament as function of growth Γ . ( b ) The equilibrium shape for a ﬁlament for various ratios of bending modulus and spring stifness κ / k h = 10 − 3 − 1 after a growth of Γ = 0 . 15 for a system with N = 50 springs . ( c ) The bending energy , normalized to the bending modulus E b / as function of the extension Γ . and 20 ) . ( d ) The critical extension as function of κ / k h for a system with N = 50 and 100 springs . ( e ) The inverse wavelength of the edge buckling as function of κ / k h for N = 50 and 100 springs . In the plotted regime , the wavelength scales as a power - law with an exponent of approximately 0 . 15 , independent of system - size . 120 growth of an adherent filament N Γ α 1 α α l l = 5 l = 10 l = 1 α 1 Γ = 0 Γ = 0 . 01 Γ = 0 Γ = 0 . 025 Γ = 0 . 05 Γ = 0 . 02 Γ = 0 . 05 Γ = 0 . 04 Γ = 0 . 03 κ / k h = 0 . 1 κ / k h = 0 . 01 l = 5 l = 10 l = 1 Γ Γ ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Figure 46 : ( Top ) A sequence of shapes of the edge of the ﬁlament where the occurence of edge buckling is illustrated . ( a ) angle α of the ﬁrst spring as function of the extension of the ﬁlament . ( b ) α of all the springs at various extensions Γ ( κ / k h = 0 . 001 ) . ( c ) α as function of Γ for the ﬁrst , the ﬁfth and the tenth spring . All these ﬁgures show the oscillation of the springs that induces the edge buckling . ( d ) shows a similar oscilation in the length of the springs , again for the ﬁrst , the ﬁfth and the tenth spring . 6 . 2 buckling of a shearable filament 121 6 . 2 . 4 The continuous equivalent of the discrete rod model In this section we map the discrete rod model to a set of continuum differential equations that describe the growth of an adhered ﬁlament . We start by writing down the various contributions to the total energy for the discrete system as function of the relative horizontal and vertical displacement { u , w } . In Fig . 47 we outline the model ; note that in this model every segment of the ﬁlament is connected to the substrate . Similar to the discrete rod model we have presented , the total energy of the system consists of four contributions , stretching of the ﬁlament E f , stretching of the adherent springs , E h , the shear energy of the ﬁlament , relative to the substrate , E s , and ﬁnally the bending energy of the ﬁlament E b . In these local horizontal and vertical displacement u , w ( See Fig . 47 ) , these different contributions can be written as , E f = ¯ k f (cid:18)(cid:113) ( b − u 1 + u 2 ) 2 + ( − w 1 + w 2 ) 2 − b ( 1 + Γ ) (cid:19) 2 , ( 50 ) E h = ¯ k h (cid:18) − h 0 + (cid:113) u 2 + ( h 0 + w 2 ) 2 (cid:19) 2 , ( 51 ) E s = k s (cid:18) arctan (cid:20) u 2 h 0 + w 2 (cid:21)(cid:19) 2 ( 52 ) E b = κ 2 (cid:18) 1 − ( b − u 1 + u 2 ) ( b − u 2 + u 3 ) − ( w 1 − w 2 ) ( w 2 + 3 ) √ ( b − u 1 + u 2 ) 2 + ( w 1 − w 2 ) 2 √ ( b − u 2 + u 3 ) 2 + ( w 2 − w 3 ) 2 (cid:19) (cid:112) ( b − u 1 + u 2 ) 2 + ( w 1 − w 2 ) 2 + (cid:112) ( b − u 2 + u 3 ) 2 + ( w 2 − w 3 ) 2 , ( 53 ) where ¯ k f = k f / l and ¯ k h = k h / b . If we expand these equations up to second order in u , w we obtain : E f = ¯ k f (cid:16) u 1 − 2 u 1 u 2 + u 22 + 2 b ( u 1 − u 2 ) Γ − ( w 1 − w 2 ) 2 Γ + b 2 Γ 2 (cid:17) , ( 54 ) E h = ¯ k h w 22 , ( 55 ) E s = k s (cid:18) u 2 h 0 (cid:19) 2 , ( 56 ) E b = κ ( w 1 − 2 w 2 + w 3 ) 2 2 b 3 . ( 57 ) 122 growth of an adherent filament ( - b , 0 ) ( - b + u 1 , h 0 + w 1 ) ( b + u 3 , h 0 + w 3 ) ( u 2 , h 0 + w 2 ) h 0 l 1 l 2 l 3 ( b , 0 ) ( 0 , 0 ) Figure 47 : Simpliﬁcation of the discrete model . where each segment of the ﬁlament is connected to the substrate . In the continuum limit ( u 1 = U ( x ) − bU (cid:48) ( x ) + 0 . 5 b 2 U (cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) , u 2 = U ( x ) , u 3 = U ( x ) + bU (cid:48) ( x ) + 0 . 5 b 2 U (cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) , w 1 = W ( x ) − bW (cid:48) ( x ) + 0 . 5 b 2 W (cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) , w 2 = W ( x ) , w 3 = W ( x ) + bW (cid:48) ( x ) + 0 . 5 b 2 W (cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) ) we can write down the Euler - Lagrange equations for the sum of all energies E tot = E f + E h + E s + E b results in two uncoupled ODEs for the horizontal U ( x ) and the vertical W ( x ) displacement , U (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) − 4 b 2 U (cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) + 8 k s b 4 h 20 ¯ k f U ( x ) = 0 , ( 58 ) and W (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) − 4¯ k f b Γ (cid:16) b 3 ¯ k f Γ − 4 κ (cid:17) W (cid:48)(cid:48) ( x ) − 4¯ k h b (cid:16) b 3 ¯ k f Γ − 4 κ (cid:17) W ( x ) = 0 . ( 59 ) Writing down the dispersion relation ( W ( x ) = W 0 exp iqx ) for Eq . 59 we obtain , b ( 4 κ − b 3 ¯ k f Γ ) q 4 + 4 b 2 ¯ k f Γ q 2 + 4 ¯ k h = 0 . ( 60 ) Solving this , we obtain the four eigenvalues of the system , q = ±√ 2 (cid:118) (cid:117) (cid:117) (cid:116) − b 2 ¯ k f Γ ± (cid:113) b 4 ¯ k f Γ ( ¯ k h + ¯ k f Γ ) − 4 b ¯ k h κ b 4 ¯ k f Γ − 4 b κ . ( 61 ) Above a critical value of the growth Γ ∗ all eigenvalues become real , corresponding to two wavelengths in the system , where Γ ∗ = ¯ k h ¯ k f (cid:32) − 1 + (cid:115) 1 + 16 κ ¯ k h b 3 (cid:33) . ( 62 ) 6 . 2 buckling of a shearable filament 123 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 . 00002 0 . 00001 0 0 . 00001 0 . 00002 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 - 0 . 0002 - 0 . 0001 0 . 0000 0 . 0001 0 . 0002 - - B = 1 / 3 B = 0 . 578 B = 0 . 580 B = 0 . 5776 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 - 0 . 00002 - 0 . 00001 0 0 . 00001 0 . 00002 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 - 0 . 10 - 0 . 05 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 Figure 48 : Horizontal ( Blue ) and vertical ( Black ) displacement for various values of the compression rate B ( A = 0 . 001 , C = 0 ) . Increasing B , which is analogous to increasing Γ decreases the size of the localization . Note that within this approximation , no localized solutions are found . These lo - calized states might arise when we solve the full non - linear problem . To date , we have not succeeded in writing down the set of ODEs for the full non - linear problem . However , a recent theoretical study has reveiled localized states in a strongly re - lated problem , the buckling of a thin ﬁlm bounded to a soft substrate [ 113 ] . Here , they consider a soft , elastic substrate which is initially in a stress - free conﬁgu - ration . The substrate is then subject to a step of prestretch , during which a thin stiff layer of thickness h l , which is assumed to be very small compared with all the other length scales in the problem , is coated to the surface . The pre - stretch is then released , making the system go under horizontal compression , and inducing buckling of the ﬁlm and formation of wrinkles . By using a tangential and longitudinal stress balance [ 113 ] we obtain the follow - ing set of differential equation for the vertical W and horizontal U displacement , 1 12 W (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) + BW (cid:48)(cid:48) + W + AUW (cid:48) − U (cid:48) W (cid:48)(cid:48) − 1 2 ( W (cid:48) ) 2 W (cid:48)(cid:48) + CW 3 = 0 , ( 63 ) 124 growth of an adherent filament and U (cid:48)(cid:48) + AU + W (cid:48) W (cid:48)(cid:48) = 0 , ( 64 ) where A compares the typical linear stretching stress with the typical tangential coupling stress and is related to our k s . B is the rescaled compressive strain ap - plied to the system and is analogous to Γ in our model . C compares the nonlinear term with the linear one in the normal coupling stress which for simplicity we will set to zero . While we cannot compare the full non - linear problem we can write down the linearized version of Eq . 64 and 63 , 1 12 W (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) + BW (cid:48)(cid:48) + W = 0 , ( 65 ) and U (cid:48)(cid:48) + AU = 0 , ( 66 ) and compare these with the linearized version of our discrete rod model . Simi - lar to 58 and 59 we obtain a set of uncoupled ODEs but , even in the linearized case , the equation for U ( x ) has a different structure compared to 63 and 66 . The equation for W ( x ) in essence similar in structure compared to Eq . 59 . So , the main difference is that this equation does not have the fourth order U ( x ) term . Below and at the bifurcation point B = 1 / √ 3 ( A = 0 . 001 ) we recover the homogeneous solution , even without the cubic term ( C = 0 ) . By slightly increasing the com - pression rate B above the critical B we obtain periodic solutions with an envelop . While our Shooting algorithm did not allow us to go behind B > 0 . 58 , we ﬁnd that the localization length decreases upon increasing B . Following [ 113 ] these state will , upon further compression become fully localized . Note that increasing B is analogous to increasing Γ in our system . Interestingly , for increasing com - pression rate we not only ﬁnd solutions with a single envelope but also shapes with two localizations . If we compare the elastic energy of these states , we have to determine the elastic energy density , ρ el = 1 2 (cid:18) 1 12 ( W (cid:48)(cid:48) ) 2 + 1 4 ( W (cid:48) ) 4 + W 2 + C 2 W 4 − AU 2 + ( U (cid:48) ) 2 + U (cid:48) ( W (cid:48) ) 2 − B ( W (cid:48) ) 2 + B 2 (cid:19) , ( 67 ) and the corresponding total elastic energy of the system , E el = 1 L (cid:90) L 0 ρ el ( x ) dx . ( 68 ) This energy has an offset of B 2 / 2 due to the compression at the ends of the sys - tem . If we compare the difference in energy E el − B 2 / 2 , for the single and double localized state we ﬁnd that , for B = 0 . 5786 , we ﬁnd that the double localized state 6 . 3 growth of an adherent filament in 3d 125 has a 0 . 1 % higher energy , a difference so small that it is close to the accuracy of the shooting algorithm . So a brief analysis of a related system shows that , for a system with ﬁnite shear ( A (cid:54) = ∞ ) and growth Γ > 0 , localized states can be recovered by solving the full non - linear equations . Since we cannot reproduce this analysis for the continuous version of the discrete rod model , a further study will be required to show that both system can directly be related to one another . 6 . 3 growth of an adherent filament in 3d In this Section we extend our model of adherent ﬁlament growth and allow the ﬁlament to deform in the third dimension . In Fig . 49 ( a ) we show the setting : the ﬂexible ﬁlament ( green curve ) is initially in an unstressed state and adhered through N Hookean springs to a solid substrate . The energetic contributions of the system that we consider are identical to the two dimensional model as de - scribed in Section 6 . 1 . In the upcoming Section we will , for the sake of simplicity , consider in - extendable ﬁlaments and we assume that the shear modulus is uni - form in all directions of space . As we depicted in Fig . 49 we ﬁnd that , depending on the various moduli in the system , the ﬁlament can exhibits four modes of deformation . ( i ) In - plane buckling , which occurs at high shear constant k s and where the buckling wavelength is set by the ratio of the bending modulus κ and the stiffness of the adherent springs k h . Mode ( ii ) and ( iii ) corresponds to the de - formation where the ﬂexible ﬁlament either fully curls around the solid substrate ( ii ) : k s = 0 or partially ( iii ) : low k s ( θ mode ) . In this mode , the substrate does not stretch and the wavelength of buckling is set by a ratio of the bending modulus κ and the shear modulus k s . Mode ( iii ) , where the ﬁlaments curls around its own axis ( φ - mode ) , occurs at intermediate values of k s , k h and κ and corresponds to a mode where the the adherent springs both stretch / compress and shear . In Section 6 . 3 . 1 we explore these three modes of deformation and in Section 6 . 3 . 2 we present a phase diagram , indicating under which conditions ( k s , κ and k h ) these various modes occur . Section 6 . 3 . 3 we extend this model and allow the subtrate to deform , subject to the growth of the ﬁlament . This will give rise to a wealth of shapes of the ﬁlament and the adhered substrate . 6 . 3 . 1 Modes of deformation r mode The ﬁrst mode that we explore is the " classical " in - plane buckling of the ﬁlament . This mode occurs when the shear modulus is much larger than the bending mod - ulus of the ﬁlament and the stretching of the adherent springs and the buckling occurs in the r - plane ( See Fig . 50 for a sequence of shapes subsequent to growth ) . Here , the deformation is , similarly as in two dimensions be dictated by ratio of the bending modulus and the stretching modulus of the adherent springs . This 126 growth of an adherent filament θ ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( e ) ( d ) θ θ φ φ r x y z r Figure 49 : ( a ) Initial setting of the ﬁlament adhered to a solid substrate . ( b ) , ( c ) and ( d ) : the various growth model of a ﬁlament where ( b ) the ﬁlament curls around the solid ﬁlament , ( c ) in and out of plane buckling of the adherent springs occurs and ( d ) the ﬁlament curls around the axis of the adherent springs . type of buckling is in fact identical to two dimensional Winkler buckling . In Fig . 50 we show that the bending energy E b and the stretching / compression of the adherent springs E h are the two relevant energies in the system and in Fig . 50 ( b ) we show , that identical to the Winkler foundation , the wavelength of the buckling will be set by the ratio of κ and k a and that λ ∼ ( κ / k h ) 1 / 4 . θ mode The second mode we consider here is the growth of a ﬁlament , with a low shear modulus k s . To showcase a typical sequence of growth in this limit , we have depicted the conﬁguration , for various values of growth Γ in Fig 51 ( a ) for zero k s and k s = 0 . 005 in ( b ) . In this speciﬁc example , the bending modulus is set to κ = 0 . 1 and the spring constant of the adherent springs k h = 0 . 1 . For k s = 0 , the ﬁlament initially stretches in plane and above a certain value of Γ , the ﬁlament curls around the solid ﬁlament and continue to do so by ( i ) increasing the number of windings and ( ii ) increasing the radius of the curl . The radius of the curl is set by the ratio of the bending modulus of the ﬁlament and the stretching modulus of the adherent springs κ / k h . To show this we have measured ( i ) the average radial displacement r as function of Γ and ( ii ) the angle θ of the topmost adhesive spring . ( i ) is a measure for the radius of the curl and the number of peaks in ( ii ) measures the number of winding of the ﬁlament . In Fig . 51 we ﬁnd that | r | is , initially decreasing . This corresponds to in plane stretching ( θ is constant ) . Subsequent 6 . 3 growth of an adherent filament in 3d 127 Γ x E h E b E s κ 0 5 10 15 20 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 θ r λ Γ λ 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 10 - 2 0 . 10 0 . 50 1 10 - 2 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 20 ( a ) ( b ) ( d ) ( c ) Figure 50 : ( a ) Growth sequence of the ﬁlament . Since k s (cid:29) κ , k h , the ﬁlament will buckle in the r - plane ( See Fig . 49 ) . ( b ) Distance to substrate r and angle θ as function of the height x . ( c ) E b , E s and E h as function of Γ . ( d ) Wavelength λ ∼ ( κ / k h ) 1 / 4 for k h = 0 . 1 and 0 . 01 ( ) . 128 growth of an adherent filament to this in - plane motion , the ﬁlament starts to curl around the substrate . Here we clearly see that for large κ and hence low k s / κ the average radius of the curls is large and the number of windings , at a given growth Γ is low . The example we show in Fig . 51 ( a ) is the limit of k s = 0 . For non - zero , yet small values of the shear constant k s we show in Fig . 51 ( b ) that , in stead of spiraling around the axis of the solid substrate ( k s = 0 ) , the ﬁlament will initially buckle perpendicular to the r - axis and subsequently start to shear the adhesive springs . As a result of this , the ﬁlament will bend around the solid ﬁlament , but unlike the k s = 0 - mode , it will only penetrate a fraction of the θ - space as can be seen in Fig . 51 ( b ) and ( c ) . This mode of deformation is an interplay between bending of the ﬁlament and shear of the adherent spring as we demonstrate in Fig . 51 ( d ) by depicting the various energetic contributions as function of growth Γ . For sufﬁciently high values of k h , the length of the adherent springs remain a ﬁxed length ( See Fig . 51 ( c ) ) . Similarly to what we found for the r - mode , the wavelength of the buckling will be set by the ratio of κ and k s and that λ ∼ ( κ / k s ) 1 / 4 . φ mode For intermediate values of the shear and stretch modulus of the adherent springs we discover an intermidiate state where growth results in deformations both is shearing and stretching of the adherent springs . In Fig . 52 ( a ) we show the state of the ﬁlament for various values of growth Γ . Here , the ﬁlament will start to curl around its own axis by slightly shearing the adhesive contacts . The number of windings as well as the average radius with respect to growth Γ will depend on κ , k s and k h . In Fig . 52 ( b ) we show the average radius u and angle φ with respect to the ﬁlaments axis of rotation . This ﬁgures shows that the windings are not perfectly circular , but rather ellipsoidal , as can also be observed in the top view of 52 ( a ) . 6 . 3 . 2 Phase diagram To summarize the various modes of deformation we will outline the phase dia - gram as function of the shear modulus k s and the bending modulus of the ﬁla - ment κ ( ﬁxed k h ) . With this phase diagram we indicate what mode will come up ﬁrst upon growth of the ﬁlament , depending on the shear modulus k s and the bending modulus of the ﬁlament κ . For simplicity we have ﬁxed the stretching modulus of the adherent springs k h . In Fig . 53 we show the phase diagram for a ﬁlament with N = 20 adherent springs and a stretching modulus of the adherent springs of k h = 0 . 1 . Note that here the ﬁlament can be considered in - extensible since k f (cid:28) k h . 6 . 3 growth of an adherent filament in 3d 129 x Γ θ r 0 5 10 15 20 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 50 1 10 - 2 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 10 E h E b E s ( b ) ( a ) ( c ) ( e ) ( d ) κ λ Γ Γ Figure 51 : ( A sequence of shapes for ( a ) k s = 0 and ( b ) a small but non - zero k s . ( c ) Distance to substrate r and angle θ as function of the height x . ( d ) shows the various energetic contributions ( E b : bending , E s : shear and E h : Stretch ) and ( e ) show that wavelength of buckling λ ∼ ( κ / k s ) 1 / 4 for k s = 0 . 5 and 0 . 05 ( ﬁxed k h = 1 ) . 130 growth of an adherent filament Γ x φ r ( a ) ( b ) Top view 0 5 10 15 20 0 1 2 3 4 Figure 52 : ( a ) A sequence of shapes for intermediate k s and k h . ( b ) The average radius u and angle φ with respect to the ﬁlaments axis of rotation ( κ = 0 . 1 , k h = 0 . 1 and k s = 0 . 1 ) 10 - 2 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 20 10 - 2 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 50 1 k s κ θ− mode θ − m o d e r − m o d e Figure 53 : Phase diagram as function of the shear modulus k s and the bending modulus κ indicting the various modes of deformation ( r , θ and the intermediate φ - mode ) . Here we have ﬁxed the modulus of the adherent springs k h = 0 . 1 . 6 . 4 conclusions and outlook 131 6 . 4 conclusions and outlook In this Chapter we have found that for the growth of a ﬂexible ﬁlament , connected to a solid substrate , depending on the various elastic moduli in the system , a wealth of interesting patterns occur , both in two and three dimensions . In two dimensions we found that uniform growth of the ﬁlament induces localization of strain ( localized state ) along the ﬁlament . While the shear modulus does not alter the buckling wavelength , it sets the size of the localized state . Lowering the shear modulus of the substrate decreases the size of the localization . For a shear modulus of inﬁnity we recover homogeneous buckling ( inﬁnite localization size ) . We show that for sufﬁciently low shear modulus this localized state has a lower total elastic energy compared to the homogeneous state . When introducing clamped boundaries to the ﬁlament we found that for small values of growth , the localized state occurs in the center of the ﬁlament while for increasing growth the energetic minimum shifts to the edges of the system . Setting the boundaries free and allow the adherent springs to hinge outward fol - lowing growth introduces another type of localization ; a localized state occurs at the edges of the system and travels inwards with increasing growth . To rational - ize the occurrence of localization , we have written down the continuous ODEs that correspond to the discrete rod model . While solving these full non - linear equations has yet to be done , we did observe localized states for a closely related problem of for a system of a compressed sheet , adhered to an elastic substrate , a system that closely resembles that of an adhered ﬁlament . We foresee another potential consequence of the occurrence of localized struc - tures . Growth in biological systems is not necessarily homogeneous but rather regulated by biochemical or mechanical cues . Examples of where mechanical cues such as stress regulate the amount of growth are , e . g . , bone tissue . Our discrete rod model allows us to take into account this feedback mechanism where the amount of growth is coupled to the mechanical state of the system , that is to say the local tangential compressive stress . Here , we will brieﬂy explore how this stress regulated growth , where the local amount of growth per segment is not ﬁxed but rather depends on the tangential stress in that segment , impacts pattern formation in a growing adherent ﬁlament . We consider a grow rate of the ﬁlament which depends on the the tangential compressive stress in the ﬁlament , d Γ dt = Γ 0 − (cid:101) d E d Γ , ( 69 ) where Γ 0 equals the grow rate without feedback , (cid:101) the magnitude of the feedback and d E d Γ the tangential stress in the ﬁlament . An increasing stress either slow down growth ( (cid:101) > 0 ) or enhances growth ( (cid:101) < 0 ) . For k s (cid:29) 1 , i . e . , uniform growth we ﬁnd that growth either completely shuts down growth , below the critical Γ ∗ ( below the buckling transition ) or slows down growth above this threshold . No stationary states are observed above this value . For localized buckling however , stress is strongly non - homogeneously distributed 132 growth of an adherent filament along the ﬁlament which provides us some very interesting behavior . Same holds for the system with free edges where we observe stationary states . Further re - search will be required to further explore this concept . In the second part of this Section we have elaborated on the growth of an ad - hered ﬁlament in three dimensions . We found that , depending on the various elastic moduli in the system , the ﬁlament exhibits various modes of deformation , ranging from curling patterning around the solid ﬁlament for low shear modu - lus , a spiraling mode for intermediate values of the shear modulus and classical Winkler buckling for high shear modulus . We have outlined how , depending on the shear modulus , bending modulus and stretching modulus of the substrate , these various modes arise in the system . Part IV C R O W D I N G I N D U C E D C L U S T E R I N G Chapter 7 Clustering of driven particles under conﬁnement In driven ﬂows , particles are generally not alike . The collective motion in mix - tures of driven and nondriven , or of differentially driven , particles has been the the focus of numerous studies . Examples arise in ﬂows through random media [ 192 , 193 ] , in lattice gases of oppositely charged particles under uniform exter - nal driving [ 147 , 187 ] and in mixtures of driven and non - driven colloids [ 136 ] . Mixtures of oppositely charged colloids driven by an external ﬁeld [ 47 , 171 , 138 ] resemble situations encountered in pedestrian ﬂows [ 61 , 37 ] that obey similar basic laws , and show similar behaviors . Yet another way to realize differential driving is to have mixtures of various mass , which differently sediment under the inﬂuence of gravity [ 5 , 194 , 2 ] . In each of these cases , heterogeneous driving - i . e . , different forces on different subsets of member particles - gives rise to nontrivial collective behavior , and prompts some degree of spatial nonunifomity , either in the distribution of velocities or in the distribution of the particles themselves . The behavior becomes even richer when such systems are considered at high volume fractions . A common phenomenon in such systems is the occurence of aggregation of the driven particles . In the case of oppositely driven subsets , this generically manifests itself as a laning transition , where the driven particles organize sponta - neously into ﬁlamentous aggregates , aligned along the direction of the driving . In mixtures of driven and non - driven particles , one tends to ﬁnd small clusters in the bulk , a phenomenon that has been interpreted in terms of an effective attraction mediated by the surrounding , non - driven particles [ 136 ] . In this Chapter , we ask the question what happens after this initial aggregation stage in conﬁned systems . In many of the larger , bulk systems small clusters do not interact , and even when they do they do not encounter each other to any sig - niﬁcant extent . When we conﬁne our systems , we ﬁnd that doing so prompts an unexpected nonlinear , late stage regime in the spatial organization of driven / non - driven mixtures : Our central ﬁnding is that , determined by the driving force , The content of this Chapter is available on Arxiv as R . P . T . Kusters and C . Storm , Crowding induced clustering under conﬁnement , A rxiv 2015 136 clustering of driven particles under confinement ( Ι ) ( ΙΙ ) ( ΙΙΙ ) ( Ι V ) ( V ) ( V Ι ) D i r e c t i o n o f f o r c e Figure 54 : ( a ) Snapshots of the clustering of the driven particles ( Red indicates a driven particle ) . The initial conﬁgurations consists of N d = 50 driven and N p = 450 passive partcles . clustering of driven particles under confinement 137 ( a ) ( b ) T F d φ φ 10 - 2 0 . 1 1 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 Figure 55 : Figure ( b ) and ( c ) display the density - driving force ( φ − F d at T = 1 ) and the density - temperature ( φ − T at F d = 1 ) regime diagram , respectively . The colors indicate the asymptotic state of the system . It is clustered when σ > 0 . 9 ( green ) , partial clustered when 0 . 9 > σ > 0 . 4 ( orange ) and there is no signiﬁcant clustering for σ < 0 . 4 ( red ) . ( b ) and ( c ) contain N p = 900 , N d = 100 particles . density , composition and temperature the driven particles very generically form a wall - to - wall pluglike cluster , phase separating from the passive particles . This late - stage behavior is very different from laning , as it involves organization per - pendicular to the direction of driving rather than parallel to it . The appearance of this system - spanning aggregate has profound consequences for the further evolution of these systems : we show that it will completely dominate the global transport properties of the driven / non - driven mixture . The basic effect is simple enough : As anyone who has ever attempted to guide a group of people through an otherwise stationary crowd can attest , those in front do all the work . The driven particles , on average , collide with more passive particles in front than at their rear . The momentum loss slows them down , but accelerates the passive particles in front . Further ahead of the driven particle , the average velocity is lower because the excess momentum is dissipated . As a result , there is a velocity gradient ahead of the particle which implies the accumulation of particles . This is indeed what is seen : a denser region in front of a driven particle develops . The excess particles in this denser zone must come from somewhere , and it cannot be the region ahead because this has not yet been affected by the driven particle . Therefore , the denser zone in front must be compensated for by a rariﬁed zone in the wake of the driven particle . Other driven particles moving in this wake are slowed down less by collisions . This allows those in the rear to catch up to the frontmost particles . In bulk systems , this leads to small clusters of driven particles . In conﬁned systems , however , under the right dynamical conditions , the aggregation continues , ultimately resulting in a stable cluster of driven particles , pushing a growing zone of jammed particles in front of it . 138 clustering of driven particles under confinement Using the molecular dynamics package LAMMPS [ 130 ] , we perform Langevin dynamics simulations with a damping time of τ = 0 . 1 Lennard - Jones time units . In the remainder of this Chapter , all results are presented in Lennard - Jones units - allowing us to focus on the basic principles underlying the observed behavior . After an initial equilibration run with a soft repulsive potential between all parti - cles , the interaction potential is replaced by the repulsive part of a 6 - 12 Lennard - Jonnes potential , where we cut off the potential at one Lennard - Jones length unit . We have veriﬁed that the results presented here are qualitatively independent of the precise choice of interaction potential ( for details , we refer to the Appendix I ) . A constant force F d is exerted on each of the driven particles , superimposed upon their Brownian motion . 7 . 1 cluster mechanism We illustrate the phase separation in a two - dimensional channel with periodic boundaries at the four edges of the system ( see Fig . 54 ) . We have performed simulations in two and three dimensions , for both doubly periodic and ﬁxed walls , and have in each case found completely analogous behavior ( see Appendix I ) . For clarity , we will present only the 2 D doubly periodic images here but the phenomenon is very robust . The length of the system , which is the direction of forcing , is signiﬁcantly larger than the width of the channel ( length l = 100 and width w = 6 , in LJ units ) . The system is initialized such that the driven particles ( of which there are N d = 50 ) are homogeneously distributed through the disordered background of N c = 450 Brownian particles ( Stage I ) . The initial aggregation of particles ( Stage II and III ) is induced by cooperative behavior of the driven particles in a background of Brownian particles , an effect also seen in [ 50 , 136 ] . Under our conﬁned conditions however , and at sufﬁciently high driving force and overall density , however , these small clusters can continue to grow as the density of the passive particles rises in front of them ( Stages V and VI ) . In these ﬁnal stages of the evolution of this system - only seen under conﬁnement - very generically , a single large plug develops . As it pushes against the particles in front , it densiﬁes them and we can see the front edge of the compressed zone extending further and further into the system . This is the general scenario : cluster initiation , maturation and subsequent den - siﬁcation of the passive particles ahead of it . In the following , we determine the critical conditions for cluster formation and then discuss the later stage dynamics of the densiﬁcaton front . In particular , we show that there is a growing length - scale λ , associated with the size of the compressed region in front of the cluster , and a characteristic velocity of the driven particles ¯ v , similar to those observed in the dynamic jamming fronts induced by uni - axial compression of a nearly jammed particle packing [ 189 ] . 7 . 1 cluster mechanism 139 Enriched domain 0 20 F = 2 F = 1 F = 0 . 5 F = 0 . 25 F = 3 40 60 80 100 - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 1 2 3 4 0 200 400 600 800 0 1 2 3 4 0 20 40 60 80 100 τ σ t t F d F d x c x c 1 10 100 1000 1 10 100 1000 0 . 5 t = 100 t = 10 t = 200 t = 300 t = 500 1 1 F = 0 . 5 F = 2 . 5 1 ( b ) ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) Figure 56 : ( a ) Snapshots of the clustering of an enriched region of containing 50 driven particles randomly distributed in a subdomain of size − 50 < z < 50 ( here we show a fraction of the system , total system size is ( length l = 4640 , width w = 6 and N c = 19950 ) . ( b ) The clustering parameter σ as function of time for various forces . Within this timeframe no clustering occurs for F = 0 . 25 , 0 . 5 . Note that σ becomes negative since we started with a enriched region of particles . ( c ) Time - evolution of the center of mass of the driven particles x d indicating the two distict regimes . ( d ) Time τ to reach a cluster as function of F d . x d as function of F d for various time intervals . ( e ) Travelled distance of the center of mass as function of F d . 140 clustering of driven particles under confinement 7 . 1 . 1 Critical conditions for cluster formation Whether or not the cluster forms depends on composition ( N d and N c ) , driving force F d , density of the background φ and temperature T . To quantify this we measure the variance in z - position ( parallel to the driving axis ) of the driven par - ticles , normalized to that of the initial conﬁguration , and construct the following parameter : σ ( t ) = 1 − ∑ N d ( x i ( t ) − ¯ x ( t ) ) 2 / ∑ N p ( x i ( 0 ) − ¯ x ( 0 ) ) 2 , ( 70 ) which approaches unity if a cluster is random closed packed and zero when there is no correlation present between the driven particles . In Fig . 55 ( b ) and ( c ) we display the density - driving force ( φ , F d ) and the density - temperature ( φ , T ) regime diagram respectively . In both cases the composition is N d = 100 and N c = 900 . We use the order parameter σ to distinguish various degrees of clustering of the system : fully clustered when σ > 0 . 9 , partially clustered when 0 . 9 > σ > 0 . 4 and not signiﬁcantly clustered when σ < 0 . 4 . Qualitatively we ﬁnd that at high F d or low T , clustering occurs at lower φ . At low F d and high T we generally observe intermittent clustering : a region with high density of driven particles is generally observed to form and dissolve repeatedly . In this state , the thermal motion of both the passive and the driven particles is sufﬁcient to prevent the formation of a single stable compact cluster . 7 . 1 . 2 Formation and growth of the jammed front Although the driven particles no longer evolve beyond the single cluster state , the presence of this single cluster becomes increasingly dominant for the behavior of the entire system . As the cluster progresses through the system , it continues to sweep up passive particles . The passive particles in front of the driven particles become jammed and fully immobilized . This jammed zone , in turn , acts as a plunger propagating through the system . To explore the formation and growth of this jammed front , we turn to larger system sizes . This ensures the system has sufﬁcient space and time to develop , and that there is no direct interaction between the compressed zone , and the wake behind the cluster ( see also Fig . 56 ) . We distribute 50 particles randomly in the subdomain − 50 < z < 50 , and immersed them in 19950 passive particles which are randomly distributed in the full system with size − 2320 < z < 2320 . The system width remains 6 . A section of the full system is shown in Fig . 56 ( a ) ) . This large system allows us to study the formation of the jammed front , eliminating the effects of the boundary at the end of the tube ( either periodic or solid ) . First , we report the time evolution of the order parameter σ for various driving force F d ( see Fig . 56 ( a ) ) . Initially , the driven particles move individually through the passive particles until , at some point , the region in front of the driven particles is so densiﬁed that it becomes jammed . 7 . 1 cluster mechanism 141 This prompts the formation of the cluster of driven particles . Subsequently , the region with elevated density in front of the cluster increases in size λ ( see Fig . 57 ( a ) ) . That the compressed zone should grow over time is to be expected : since the jammed particles are no longer able to move by diffusive motion , they act in unison with the driven cluster , and - even though they are not themselves driven - continue to sweep up nondriven particles in front . The evolution of the width of this front can thus be understood by means of a simple argument . Assuming that the cluster , and the jammed zone , move at some velocity v f , and that this velocity results from a driving force F d . This deﬁnes an effective friction coefﬁcient ξ = F d / v f . The coefﬁcient ξ should scale with the number of particles n that the front is pushing . On the other hand , a front moving at velocity v f sweeps up a number ∆ n ∼ v f ∆ t per time interval ∆ t , and these are added to the front . Thus we have two relations for the velocity : v f ∼ F d / n and v f ∼ d n / d t . From this , we see that d n / d t ∼ F d / n which means that n ( t ) ∼ √ F d t . Since the width is constant , this result means that the length of the compressed zone should scale as t 1 / 2 . Fig . 57 ( b ) conﬁrms that indeed , for various forces , the size of the jammed front grows as the square root of time . 7 . 1 . 3 Dynamics of the driven particles Driving in dense dispersions is typically applied to effect transport . A natural question to ask is how efﬁciently the driven particles may be transported in this manner . Does clustering help , or hinder , their passage through the background phase ? When we measure the velocity v d of the driven particles upon clustering we ﬁnd that the average velocity at which the individual particles move through the passive particles is higher than when the particles have clustered . So , in gen - eral , fully clustered states are non - optimal for transport . Clearly , however , no driving at all is also not optimal as then , no transport occurs . The question then arises : is there an optimal driving force for the transport of driven particles . We now measure the time - evolution of the center of mass of the driven particles , at a ﬁxed density φ and various forces F d . Fig . 56 ( c ) shows that the velocity evolves with time very differently before and after the clustering . Before clustering , the velocity is constant conﬁrming an effective friction coefﬁcient that is independent of time . After clustering occurs , the velocity drops to a different curve and scales as t − 1 / 2 , pointing to an effective friction coefﬁcient that grows as the square root of time - in agreement with the prediction from the argument we presented be - fore . The time at which the cluster forms depends inversely on F d ( See Fig . 56 ( d ) ) . This permits us to extract the optimal force for transport : transport of the driven particles is most effective at a force just prior to clustering , where they still travel efﬁciently through the medium but do not perturb it sufﬁciently to cluster and compress it ( see Fig . 56 ( e ) ) . 142 clustering of driven particles under confinement λ log t ( a ) ( b ) l og λ ρ x - x d t = 1 t = 100 t = 50 t = 10 t = 200 F = 1 . 5 F = 2 . 5 Figure 57 : ( a ) Density of the passive particles ρ as function of the position , relative to the center of mass of the driven particles . An increasing length scale λ occurs which signiﬁes the size of the jammed front . ( b ) The time evolution of λ , conﬁrming the λ ∼ √ t scaling . The same setup was used as in Fig . 56 . 7 . 2 conclusions To summarize , we report that , depending on the driving force F d , the density φ , the composition N d / N c and the temperature T a dynamically induced cluster - ing occurs in mixtures of driven and passive particles . A late times , the resulting system - spanning cluster dominates the global transport properties of the mixture . This effect is generic , and we hypothesize it to occur in a wide range of differ - entially driven , dense systems . One speciﬁc application that we foresee is to use the clustering mechanism to separate colloidal particles by mass . Fig . 58 shows the basic idea and operating principle : a random mixture of light ( green ) and heavy ( red ) particles is poured into the top of a sedimentation column ﬁlled with density - matched colloids . Since both the light and the heavy particles are driven differently from the background , both phase separate into tight clusters . The clus - ter itself , however , is also inhomogeneous in the sense that very quickly , the light particles are at the back and the heavy ones in front . This way , gravity can dy - namically phase separate the various populations of particles by mass : colloidal chromatography . Whether or not clustering will occur in this case will similarly depend on density , mass and composition . 7 . 2 conclusions 143 E n r i c h e d d o m a i n G r a v i t y F u ll S y s t e m Figure 58 : ( left ) Sedimentation of particles with mass 0 . 5 ( green ) and 2 , randomly dis - tributed in a subdomain 100 < z < 950 , where a reﬂecting wall is placed at the top and bottom of the system ( T = 1 , l = 1000 and w = 6 ) 144 clustering of driven particles under confinement appendix i In this Appendix we showcase the robustness of the crowding induced clustering by ( i ) using a soft potential V i , j = A (cid:0) 1 + cos π rR (cid:1) in a double periodic two dimen - sional setup ( see Fig . 59 ) and ( ii ) show that in three dimension we ﬁnd completely analogous behavior as reported in the Chapter ( see Fig . 60 ) . Soft potential Figure 59 : Snapshots of the clustering of soft particles with coefﬁcient A = 100 and R = 1 . 1 where 100 driven particles F d = 1 are randomly distributed in 900 passive particles ( T = 1 , width w = 6 and length 240 ) . 7 . 2 conclusions 145 time time g r a v i t y Density matched particles Particles with heavy core F d = 0 . 5 F d = 2 . 0 Figure 60 : A cylinderical tube with diameter of d = 6 and length l = 400 with passive particles ( the boundaries of the cylinder , the top and botton are reﬂective boundaries ) . The driven , repulsive Lennard - Jones , particles are randomly distributed in a subdomain of 350 < z < 400 at the top of the cylinder . A force F d = 2 ( right ) and F d = 0 . 5 ( left ) is exerted downwards and we ﬁnd that for F d = 0 . 5 no clustering occurs and for F d = 2 . 0 , the driven particles cluster ( φ = 0 . 37 , T = 1 ) . Chapter 8 Final Conclusions and Outlook 8 . 1 summary of the aims The central aim of this thesis was to use theoretical modeling to answer two questions that are at the heart of synaptic strength regulation in the brain , i . e . , 1 . What physical mechanisms regulate the morphogenesis of dendritic spines ? ( Part I ) 2 . How does the shape of the dendritic spine regulate the strength of a synapse ? ( Part II ) Along the way of answering these two spine related questions , several , more generic soft - matter projects were initiated and have formed the base for Part III and IV of this thesis . The study of dendritic spine morphogenesis turned out to be related to other biological relevant growth mechanisms . A common motif for pattern formation in biological systems that we discussed in Part III of this thesis is that of constrained growth , where surfaces or ﬁlaments are constrained by their surrounding medium . We take as a general model for this process here the growth of a ﬂexible ﬁlament which is adhered to a second ﬁlament , either solid or ﬂexible , by a discrete number of Hookean springs . The central aim here was to come up with a minimal model to reproduce experimentally and numerically observed localized states in the uniform growth of an adherent ﬁlament and to quantify the role of shear in this process . A second spin - off project was initiated from studying diffusion in highly crowded and conﬁned systems . The goal of P art IV was to explore the mechanisms that drive this cluster formation , and determine the critical conditions for phase separation . 8 . 2 conclusions and outlook 8 . 2 . 1 Part I : Growth of dendritic spines Conclusions : In this part of the thesis we have modeled the role of the modulation of actin dynamics in the plasticity of dendritic spine . Although the importance of 148 final conclusions and outlook actin remodeling as well as the synaptic signaling mechanisms involved in struc - tural synaptic plasticity are well established [ 81 , 69 , 123 ] , a general framework to correlate the state of the actin cytoskeleton to spine shape is lacking . Our models attribute a fundamental role to actin remodeling in the process of spine forma - tion and maturation . This ﬁnding supports earlier claims in the literature , and our model suggests novel experiments to further pin down the basic principles that control the structural plasticity of the brain . In particular , we analyze the inter - play of the plasma membrane with the underlying actin cytoskeleton to quantify the forces that are required to prompt the initial formation of the spine , and its subsequent outward growth . We ﬁnd that the forces generated by actin poly - merization are sufﬁcient for it to drive ﬁlopodium formation , and that the result - ing dimensioning ( quantiﬁed , for instance , by the ratio ( protrusion width ) / length ) closely resembles those reported in experiments . A related theoretical model tak - ing into account the interplay of the spine membrane with the actin cytoskeleton allows us , in addition , to compute the forces and energies required for spine head formation . It shows that the simultaneous presence of both branched actin ﬁlaments and bundled / aligned actin is required , and sufﬁcient , to produce the typical mushroom - like spine morphology . Finally , our model also highlights the important role of additional physical processes in stabilizing the morphological features of mature spines . Outlook : More experimental evidence is required to verify to what extend the re - modeling of the actin cytoskeleton shapes the dendritic spine . While the signaling mechanisms and the actin remodeling that induce structural synaptic plasticity are fairly well described [ 108 , 123 ] little is known about the cellular mechanisms controlling the actual remodeling of the spine . Recent studies have examined the spatiotemporal changes in synaptic morphology , composition and underlying sig - naling mechanisms during synaptic plasticity [ 110 , 13 ] These studies , which apply time - lapse two - photon imaging of synaptic marker proteins , reveal details of the step - by - step sequence by which new proteins are incorporated in the growing spine and postsynaptic density . Further experimental effort is however required to identify the molecular composition of the dendritic spine and to complete our understanding of spine function and synaptic plasticity . From a modeling side this information can be included to develop an even more accurate model for spine initiation and maturation and help in determining the role of the differ - ent components . This will provide a predictive framework to study their role in dysfunctions of the morphodynamics , associated with a host of neurological dis - orders such as schizophrenia [ 42 ] , Alzheimer’s disease [ 150 ] and autism [ 46 ] . 8 . 2 . 2 Part II : Determinants of synaptic strength regulation Conclusions : In Part II of this thesis we have elaborated on various mechanisms that regulate the synaptic strength by controlling the concentration of glutamate receptors at the synapse . In Chapter III we analyzed how the morphology of a 8 . 2 conclusions and outlook 149 membrane , within which particles diffuse , regulates timescales and ﬂuxes through the boundaries of domains for some biologically relevant geometries . In general , these microdomains serve to retain gradients in particle concentrations for in - creased timescales . By quantifying the dynamics of particles escaping through a narrow neck we have found a general power law dependence for both the equili - bration timescale of a population of particles and the single - particle characteristic timescales of escape through the boundary of a domain such as Mean First Pas - sage Time and the escape time . These diffusive timescales depend , in general , on the neck radius and the length of the neck following a power law over several decades : τ e q ∼ ( neck radius ) − λ and τ e q ∼ ( neck length ) η , where the ( positive ) exponents λ and η reﬂect the precise geometry of the system . In the second part of Chapter III we developed a quantitative model integrat - ing the morphological variability of realistic spine geometries into mechanisms that control AMPAR trafﬁcking at postsynaptic sites . We report that two trapping mechanisms - anchoring at the PSD and diffusion on speciﬁc curved geometries - work together to control the number and spatial distribution of AMPARs in order to regulate synaptic strength . The model demonstrates that AMPAR trafﬁcking is a coordinated action between surface diffusion , local exocytosis and trapping at the PSD within the geometric restrictions of individual dendritic spines . Our simulations demonstrate that the timescale for an AMPAR entering the spine and ending up at the PSD , may be up to an order of magnitude faster than the time of the reverse process , when a receptor is leaving the PSD and exiting the spine through the neck . The speciﬁc shape of the spine directly induces this asymmet - ric trafﬁcking . Moreover , local exocytosis results in effective and rapid capture of AMPARs , particularly at curved geometries such as in mushroom - like spines . The model reveals that increasing the number of AMPAR at synapses is most effectively achieved through active transport of AMPAR containing vesicles and subsequent release at local exocytotic site in the spine head . The strong impact of morphology on receptor diffusion implies that in the interpretation of Single - Particle Tracking ( SPT ) and Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching ( FRAP ) experiments , the shape of the spine must be explicitly included . In Chaper IV we have addressed the question of how the lateral diffusion of densely packed particles , conﬁned to a curved surface , is affected by the shape of the substrate and the packing fraction . We ﬁnd that the shape of the substrate , in combination with crowding , induces a spatial anisotropy in diffusion coefﬁcient . We ﬁnd that , for a cylinderical surface , diffusion is increasingly hindered upon decreasing the radius of the tube and it does this so in a non - monotonic fashion . The extrema of the anisotropy coincide with an ordered packing of discs in a triangular lattice and its afﬁnely rotated structure . These skewed patterns promote collective motion in the circumferential direction . Our work reveals that diffusive motion of discs along the surface of a narrow , crowded tube is hindered by an interplay between local geometry and crowding . Diffusivity in highly crowded systems is dominated by the collective motion of clusters and the size of these 150 final conclusions and outlook clusters may , especially at high coverage , become comparable to the local radii of curvature of the system . Though we have focused on diffusion on cylindrical surfaces here of discs with radii comparable to the typical radius of curvature of the substrate , even the diffusion of discs or particles that are small compared to the local radius of curvature may very well be sensitively affected by the curvature of the substrate ; not by their proper size , but through the size of the cage through which they diffuse . This length - scale may , especially at high densities , become comparable in size to the local radius of curvature . In Chapter V we raised the question whether typical cellular force levels are sufﬁcient to effect translocation of glutamate rich endosomes through the neck of the dendritic spine , and if it is feasible for a cell to switch between pass and stuck of the vesicle by controlling the force that is exerted on the endosome . Our simple theoretical analysis shows , that the range of forces necessary to transport this container through a typical dendritic spine neck , which has a radius of be - tween 0 . 2 − 0 . 6 µ m , is on the order of a few to tens of pN . A typical myosin motor can exert forces of 5 - 6 pN [ 41 , 80 ] . The dimensions of the dendritic neck - a very typical channel motif in cells - thus require one to a few motors to translocate vesicle - bound cargo , conﬁrming that motors are eminently capable of produc - ing the requisite forces to selectively translocate or immobilize vesicles in the neck , and to switch quickly between these modes . We will note that although the translocation is dominated by a competition between deformation energy and forcing , it cannot be expected from this simple model to accurately capture the exact forcing involved in motor transport - indeed , pulling by motors bound to cytoskeletal polymers arranged mostly close to the cell membrane in the neck is likely to affect the shape of the endosome . Moreover we have explored the ef - fect of spine morphology , that is to say , the effect of having a blind end at the end of the constriction . We found that , compared to a periodic constriction , the speed at which the translocation occurs is much lower for a closed constriction . Future studies will be required for a further quantitative analysis . We expect our quantitative results to depend on the precise driving mechanism and the precise geometry of the problem . Taken together , modeling these various mechanisms of regulation indicate that mushroom - like shaped spines with local exocytotic sites adjacent to the PSD are privileged over others , because they can rapidly and efﬁciently regulate their synaptic AMPAR levels . The speciﬁc and high afﬁnity AMPAR / scaffold interac - tions within the PSD , in combination with the geometric shape of the mushroom - like spines and local exocytosis within the spine head , allow direct and rapid control over the amount of AMPARs at synaptic sites . In this way , each individual spine presents an isolated and asymmetric , but adaptive structure , which pro - vides dendrites with a complex palette of regulatory options to efﬁciently control synaptic AMPAR level . The precise role of the endosomal transport and the ener - getic costs of transportation still remain elusive and requires more experimental 8 . 2 conclusions and outlook 151 analysis of the deformations of both vesicles and the spine neck during spine entry . Outlook : While our studies have identiﬁed the role of the spine - morphology in restricting the passive lateral transport and regulating the active receptor trans - port in intracellular vesicles , increasing evidence has been found of speciﬁc molec - ular barrier to diffusion in spines . An example of this is that recent super - resolution imaging studies have shown restricted lateral diffusion of glutamate receptors in the dendritic spine neck , associated with an altered local organisation of the F - actin cytoskeleton , that in turn restricts the diffusion of membrane proteins with large intracellular domains through the spine neck [ 190 ] . Another recent advance is the observation of complexes of septin cytoskeletal GTPases localized at the base of the spine neck which regulate the diffusion across the spine neck [ 39 ] . These studies show that , while shape itself has a considerable effect on the diffu - sive dynamics , the spine has a complex palette of regulatory options to efﬁciently control synaptic AMPAR level and that future work will have to shed light on the relative contributions of the different mechanisms . This will require quanti - tative measurements of ( i ) the forces and deformations involved in endosomal transport and ( ii ) measurements of the lateral diffusion at the synapse . While at present these studies have not been performed , recent advances in optogenetic control of endosomal transport [ 184 ] will allow a study of the positioning and de - formations involved in the endosomal regulation in dendritic spines . And for the study of the lateral diffusion we expect that Single Particle Tracking experiments will soon map out the diffusive properties of receptors at the synapse 8 . 2 . 3 Part III : Growth of an adherent ﬁlament Conclusions : In Part III of this thesis we have studied the growth of an adhered ﬂexible ﬁlament . We show that growth , depending on the various elastic mod - uli in the system , induces a wealth of interesting patterns , both in two and three dimensions . A key observation for the two - dimensional system is that homoge - neous growth of the ﬁlament induces localization of strain ( localized buckling ) in the ﬁlament . The width of the localized state is dictated by the shear modu - lus of the ﬁlament , where lowering the shear modulus increases the localization of strain . By increasing the shear modulus we recover homogeneous buckling . Depending on the boundary conditions we ﬁnd that for periodic edges a local - ized strain mode arises that can freely translate along the ﬁlament . For clamped boundaries we found that for sufﬁcient growth the localization is attracted by the edges of the system and for free edges we observed that buckling of the ﬁlament is initiated at the edges of the system and the perturbation travels inwards upon further growth . While a solid theoretical framework for the occurrence of this localization in this particular system is still lacking we have recovered localized structures in strongly related setting of the compression of a laminated surface . 152 final conclusions and outlook Further research will be required to provide direct insights in the relation between these two systems . Outlook : Localized pattern formation originates from otherwise homogeneous growth can potentially serve to create patterns in a laminated structure both in biology and in technological applications . An potential example of this localized patterning is " mechanical " typing , where localized structures can be imposed in quasi ideal laminated surfaces ( 3 D ) or arrays ( 2 D ) . By applying small defects or local strain it would be possible to encode a localized state on a predescribed location of an otherwise homogeneous surface . Another potentially relevant example where this localization might lead to even more localized pattern formation is stress regulated growth . Here , the local amount of growth per segment is not ﬁxed but rather depends on the tangential stress in that segment . This impacts pattern formation in a growing adherent ﬁlament . This is inspired from the observation that growth in biological systems is not necessarily homogeneous but rather regulated by biochemical or mechanical cues . Biological examples where mechanical cues such as stress regulate the amount of growth are , e . g . , bone tissue . 8 . 2 . 4 Part IV : Crowding induced clustering Conclusions : In the last Part of this thesis we have presented Langevin dynam - ics simulations to study the collective behavior of driven particles embedded in a densely packed background consisting of passive particles . Our main conclu - sions is that , depending on the driving force , the densities of driven and pas - sive particles , and the temperature we observed a dynamical phase separation of the driven particles , which cluster together in tight bands . We have explored the mechanisms driving this cluster formation , and determined the critical conditions for such phase separation . A simple physical picture explains the formation and subsequent growth of a jammed zone developing in front of the driven cluster . Our simple model correctly captures the observed scaling with time . Moreover we have analyzed the implications of this clustering transition for the driven trans - port in dense particulate ﬂows , which due to a non - monotonic dependence on the applied driving force is not straightforwardly optimized . Outlook : One speciﬁc application that we foresee is to use the clustering mech - anism to separate colloidal particles by mass or shape . The basic operating prin - ciple we have in mind in the following : a random mixture of light and heavy particles is poured into the top of a sedimentation column ﬁlled with density - matched colloids . Since both the light and the heavy particles are driven differ - ently from the background , both phase separate into tight clusters . The cluster itself , however , is also inhomogeneous in the sense that very quickly , the light particles are at the back and the heavy ones in front . This way , gravity can dy - namically phase separate the various populations of particles by mass : colloidal chromatography . Moreover we expect that anisotropy of particles may also serve 8 . 2 conclusions and outlook 153 as separating mechanism . Whether or not clustering will occur in this case will similarly depend on amount of anisotropy , density , mass and composition . Pre - liminary simulations show that the mass separation continues to work for much broader polydisperse mass distributions , and in future work we will explore the concept of the colloidal chromatograph in much greater detail . Sedimentation experiments will be required to validate the simulations and conﬁrm the operat - ing principle . Experiments , as well as ﬂuid dynamic simulations may also shed light on the role of hydrodynamics in this phase separation , i . e . hydrodynamic backﬂow can potentially quantitatively alter the observed results . We expect the mechanism itself remains unalterted . Bibliography [ 1 ] M . Adrian , R . Kusters , C . J . Wierenga , C . Storm , C . C . Hoogenraad , L . C . Kapitein , et al . Barriers in the brain : resolving dendritic spine morphology and compartmentalization . Frontiers in Neuroanatomy , 8 : 142 , 2014 . [ 2 ] M . Al - Naafa and M . S . Selim . Sedimentation of monodisperse and bidis - perse hard - sphere colloidal suspensions . AIChE J . , 38 ( 10 ) : 1618 – 1630 , 1992 . [ 3 ] P . F . Almeida and W . L . Vaz . Lateral diffusion in membranes . Handbook of Biological Physics , 1 ( C ) : 305 – 357 , 1995 . [ 4 ] M . C . Ashby , S . R . Maier , A . Nishimune , and J . M . Henley . Lateral diffusion drives constitutive exchange of ampa receptors at dendritic spines and is regulated by spine morphology . Journal of Neuroscience , 26 ( 26 ) : 7046 – 55 , 2006 . [ 5 ] G . Batchelor . Sedimentation in a dilute polydisperse system of interacting spheres . part 1 . general theory . Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 119 : 379 – 408 , 1982 . [ 6 ] H . C . Berg and E . M . Purcell . Physics of chemoreception . Biophysical Journal , 20 ( 2 ) : 193 , 1977 . [ 7 ] M . Bertrand and B . Joos . Extrusion of small vesicles through nanochannels : A model for experiments and molecular dynamics simulations . Physical Review E , 85 : 051910 , 2012 . [ 8 ] M . Biot . Edge buckling of a laminated medium . International Journal of Solids and Structures , 4 ( 1 ) : 125 – 137 , 1968 . [ 9 ] T . A . Blanpied , D . B . Scott , and M . D . Ehlers . Dynamics and regulation of clathrin coats at specialized endocytic zones of dendrites and spines . Neuron , 36 ( 3 ) : 435 – 449 , 2002 . [ 10 ] T . V . Bliss , G . L . Collingridge , et al . A synaptic model of memory : long - term potentiation in the hippocampus . Nature , 361 ( 6407 ) : 31 – 39 , 1993 . [ 11 ] L . Bocquet , A . Colin , and A . Ajdari . Kinetic theory of plastic ﬂow in soft glassy materials . Physical Review Letters , 103 : 036001 , 2009 . bibliography [ 12 ] G . G . Borisy and T . M . Svitkina . Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 12 ( 1 ) : 104 – 112 , 2000 . [ 13 ] M . Bosch , J . Castro , T . Saneyoshi , H . Matsuno , M . Sur , and Y . Hayashi . Structural and molecular remodeling of dendritic spine substructures dur - ing long - term potentiation . Neuron , 82 ( 2 ) : 444 – 59 , 2014 . [ 14 ] M . Bosch and Y . Hayashi . Structural plasticity of dendritic spines . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 22 ( 3 ) : 383 – 388 , 2012 . [ 15 ] J . N . Bourne and K . M . Harris . Balancing structure and function at hip - pocampal dendritic spines . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 31 : 47 – 67 , 2008 . [ 16 ] D . S . Bredt and R . A . Nicoll . Ampa receptor trafﬁcking at excitatory synapses . Neuron , 40 ( 2 ) : 361 – 379 , 2003 . [ 17 ] D . A . Brown and E . London . Functions of lipid rafts in biological mem - branes . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology , 14 : 111 – 136 , 1998 . [ 18 ] P . B . Canham . The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the biconcave shape of the human red blood cell . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 26 ( 1 ) : 61 – 81 , 1970 . [ 19 ] Y . Cao and J . W . Hutchinson . Wrinkling phenomena in neo - hookean ﬁlm / - substrate bilayers . Journal of Applied Mechanics , 79 ( 3 ) : 031019 , 2012 . [ 20 ] E . Cerda and L . Mahadevan . Geometry and physics of wrinkling . Physical Review Letters , 90 ( 7 ) : 074302 , 2003 . [ 21 ] A . F . Cheviakov , M . J . Ward , and R . Straube . An asymptotic analysis of the mean ﬁrst passage time for narrow escape problems : Part ii : The sphere . SIAM Multiscale Model and Simulation , 8 ( 3 ) : 836 – 870 , 2010 . [ 22 ] D . Choquet and A . Triller . The role of receptor diffusion in the organization of the postsynaptic membrane . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 ( 4 ) : 251 – 265 , 2003 . [ 23 ] M . Christensen . How to simulate anisotropic diffusion processes on curved surfaces . Journal of Computational Physics , 201 ( 2 ) : 421 – 438 , 2004 . [ 24 ] L . A . Cingolani and Y . Goda . Actin in action : the interplay between the actin cytoskeleton and synaptic efﬁcacy . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 9 ( 5 ) : 344 – 356 , 2008 . [ 25 ] J . R . Cooney , J . L . Hurlburt , D . K . Selig , K . M . Harris , and J . C . Fiala . En - dosomal compartments serve multiple hippocampal dendritic spines from a widespread rather than a local store of recycling membrane . The Journal of Neuroscience , 22 ( 6 ) : 2215 – 2224 , 2002 . bibliography [ 26 ] K . Cz¨ond¨or and O . Thoumine . Biophysical mechanisms regulating ampa receptor accumulation at synapses . Brain Research Bulletin , 93 ( 0 ) : 57 – 68 , 2013 . [ 27 ] K . Czöndör , M . Mondin , M . Garcia , M . Heine , R . Frischknecht , D . Choquet , J . - B . Sibarita , and O . R . Thoumine . Uniﬁed quantitative model of ampa re - ceptor trafﬁcking at synapses . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 ( 9 ) : 3522 – 3527 , 2012 . [ 28 ] N . Dan , P . Pincus , and S . Safran . Membrane - induced interactions between inclusions . Langmuir , 9 ( 11 ) : 2768 – 2771 , 1993 . [ 29 ] I . Derényi , F . Jülicher , and J . Prost . Formation and interaction of membrane tubes . Physical review Letters , 88 ( 23 ) : 238101 , 2002 . [ 30 ] C . Desnos , S . Huet , and F . Darchen . Should i stay or should i go ? : myosin v function in organelle trafﬁcking . Biology of the Cell , 99 ( 8 ) : 411 – 423 , 2007 . [ 31 ] Y . A . Domanov , S . Aimon , G . E . S . Toombes , M . Renner , and F . Q . et al . Mobility in geometrically conﬁned membranes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 : 12605 – 12610 , 2011 . [ 32 ] C . Donati , S . C . Glotzer , P . H . Poole , W . Kob , and S . J . Plimpton . Spatial correlations of mobility and immobility in a glass - forming lennard - jones liquid . Physical Review E , 60 : 3107 – 3119 , 1999 . [ 33 ] B . A . Earnshaw and P . C . Bressloff . Biophysical model of ampa receptor trafﬁcking and its regulation during long - term potentiation / long - term de - pression . The Journal of Neuroscience , 26 ( 47 ) : 12362 – 12373 , 2006 . [ 34 ] M . D . Ehlers , M . Heine , L . Groc , M . - C . Lee , and D . Choquet . Diffusional trapping of glur 1 ampa receptors by input - speciﬁc synaptic activity . Neuron , 54 ( 3 ) : 447 – 460 , 2007 . [ 35 ] F . Engert and T . Bonhoeffer . Dendritic spine changes associated with hip - pocampal long - term synaptic plasticity . Nature , 399 ( 6731 ) : 66 – 70 , 1999 . [ 36 ] D . Ershov , J . Sprakel , J . Appel , M . A . C . Stuart , and J . van der Gucht . Capillarity - induced ordering of spherical colloids on an interface with anisotropic curvature . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110 ( 23 ) : 9220 – 9224 , 2013 . [ 37 ] J . Evers and A . Muntean . Modeling micro - macro pedestrian counterﬂow in heterogeneous domains . Nonlinear Phenom . Complex Systems , 14 ( 1 ) : 27 – 37 , 2011 . [ 38 ] J . F . Evers , D . Muench , and C . Duch . Developmental relocation of presy - naptic terminals along distinct types of dendritic ﬁlopodia . Developmental Biology , 297 ( 1 ) : 214 – 227 , 2006 . bibliography [ 39 ] H . Ewers , T . Tada , J . D . Petersen , B . Racz , M . Sheng , and D . Choquet . A Septin - Dependent Diffusion Barrier at Dendritic Spine Necks . PLoS ONE , 9 ( 12 ) : e 113916 , 2014 . [ 40 ] D . A . Fedosov , M . Peltomaki , and G . Gompper . Deformation and dynamics of red blood cells in ﬂow through cylindrical microchannels . Soft Matter , 10 : 4258 – 4267 , 2014 . [ 41 ] M . E . Fisher and A . B . Kolomeisky . The force exerted by a molecular motor . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 96 ( 12 ) : 6597 – 6602 , 1999 . [ 42 ] W . G . Frankle , J . Lerma , and M . Laruelle . The synaptic hypothesis of schizophrenia . Neuron , 39 ( 2 ) : 205 – 216 , 2003 . [ 43 ] T . G . Frey and C . A . Mannella . The internal structure of mitochondria . Trends in Biochemical Sciences , 25 ( 7 ) : 319 – 324 , 2000 . [ 44 ] N . A . Frost , H . Shroff , H . Kong , E . Betzig , and T . A . Blanpied . Single - molecule discrimination of discrete perisynaptic and distributed sites of actin ﬁlament assembly within dendritic spines . Neuron , 67 ( 1 ) : 86 – 99 , 2010 . [ 45 ] N . C . Gauthier , T . a . Masters , and M . P . Sheetz . Mechanical feedback be - tween membrane tension and dynamics . Trends in Cell Biology , 22 ( 10 ) : 527 – 535 , 2012 . [ 46 ] D . H . Geschwind and P . Levitt . Autism spectrum disorders : developmental disconnection syndromes . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 17 ( 1 ) : 103 – 111 , 2007 . [ 47 ] T . Glanz and H . Löwen . The nature of the laning transition in two dimen - sions . Journal of Physics : Condensed Matter , 24 ( 46 ) : 464114 , 2012 . [ 48 ] G . Gompper and D . M . Kroll . Driven transport of ﬂuid vesicles through narrow pores . Physical Review E , 52 : 4198 – 4208 , 1995 . [ 49 ] J . Goyon , A . Colin , G . Ovarlez , A . Ajdari , and L . Bocquet . Spatial coopera - tivity in soft glassy ﬂows . Nature , 454 ( 7200 ) : 84 – 87 , 2008 . [ 50 ] P . Habdas , D . Schaar , A . C . Levitt , and E . R . Weeks . Forced motion of a probe particle near the colloidal glass transition . Europhysics Letters , 67 ( 3 ) : 477 , 2004 . [ 51 ] S . Halpain . Actin and the agile spine : how and why do dendritic spines dance ? Trends in Neurosciences , 23 ( 4 ) : 141 – 146 , 2000 . [ 52 ] K . M . Harris . Dendritic spines . eLS , 1994 . [ 53 ] K . M . Harris . Diversity in Synapse Structure and Compositon . Springer , 2008 . Hell and Ehlers ( Eds ) Structural and Functional Organization of the Synapse . bibliography [ 54 ] K . M . Harris , F . E . Jensen , and B . Tsao . Three - dimensional structure of dendritic spines and synapses in rat hippocampus ( CA 1 ) at postnatal day 15 and adult ages : implications for the maturation of synaptic physiology and long - term potentiation . The Journal of Neuroscience , 12 ( 7 ) : 2685 – 2705 , 1992 . [ 55 ] K . M . Harris and J . K . Stevens . Dendritic spines of rat cerebellar Purkinje cells : serial electron microscopy with reference to their biophysical charac - teristics . The Journal of Neuroscience , 8 ( 12 ) : 4455 – 4469 , 1988 . [ 56 ] K . M . Harris and J . K . Stevens . Dendritic Spines of CA 1 Pyramidal Cells in the Rat Hippocampus : Serial Electron Microscopy with Reference to Their Biophysical Characteristics . Journal of Neuroscience , 9 ( 8 ) : 2982 – 2997 , 1989 . [ 57 ] Y . Hayashi and A . K . Majewska . Dendritic spine geometry : functional im - plication and regulation . Neuron , 46 : 529 – 532 , 2005 . [ 58 ] M . T . Heath . Scientiﬁc Computing : An Introductory Survey . McGraw - Hill , 2002 . [ 59 ] D . O . Hebb . The organization of behavior : A neuropsychological approach . John Wiley & Sons , 1949 . [ 60 ] M . Heine , L . Groc , R . Frischknecht , J . - C . Béïque , B . Lounis , G . Rumbaugh , R . L . Huganir , L . Cognet , and D . Choquet . Surface mobility of postsynaptic ampars tunes synaptic transmission . Science , 320 ( 5873 ) : 201 – 205 , 2008 . [ 61 ] D . Helbing and T . Vicsek . Optimal self - organization . New Journal of Physics , 1 ( 1 ) : 13 , 1999 . [ 62 ] W . Helfrich . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible exper - iments . Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung . Teil C : Biochemie , Biophysik , Biologie , Virologie , 28 ( 11 ) : 693 , 1973 . [ 63 ] M . Herbstova , S . Tietz , C . Kinzel , M . V . Turkina , and H . Kirchhoff . Archi - tectural switch in plant photosynthetic membranes induced by light stress . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 ( 49 ) : 20130 – 20135 , 2012 . [ 64 ] F . Höﬂing and T . Franosch . Anomalous transport in the crowded world of biological cells . Reports on Progress in Physics , 76 ( 4 ) : 046602 , 2013 . [ 65 ] D . Holcman and Z . Schuss . Escape through a small opening : Receptor traf - ﬁcking in a synaptic membrane . Journal of Statistical Physics , 117 : 975 – 1014 , 2004 . [ 66 ] D . Holcman and Z . Schuss . Diffusion laws in dendritic spines . Journal of Mathematical Neuroscience , 1 ( 10 ) : 12041231 , 2011 . [ 67 ] D . Holcman and A . Triller . Modeling synaptic dynamics driven by receptor lateral diffusion . Biophysical Journal , 91 ( 7 ) : 2405 – 2415 , 2006 . bibliography [ 68 ] A . Holtmaat and K . Svoboda . Experience - dependent structural synaptic plasticity in the mammalian brain . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 10 ( 9 ) : 647 – 58 , 2009 . [ 69 ] P . Hotulainen and C . C . Hoogenraad . Actin in dendritic spines : connecting dynamics to function . The Journal of Cell Biology , 189 ( 4 ) : 619 – 629 , 2010 . [ 70 ] J . R . Houser , D . J . Busch , D . R . Bell , B . Li , P . Ren , and J . C . Stachowiak . The impact of physiological crowding on the diffusivity of membrane bound proteins . Soft Matter , 12 ( 7 ) : 2127 – 2134 , 2016 . [ 71 ] A . C . Jackson and R . A . Nicoll . The expanding social network of ionotropic glutamate receptors : Tarps and other transmembrane auxiliary subunits . Biophysical Journal , 70 : 178 – 199 , 2011 . [ 72 ] K . Jacobson , Z . Derzko , E . - S . Wu , Y . Hou , and G . Poste . Measurement of the lateral mobility of cell surface components in single living cells by ﬂu - orescence recovery after photobleaching . Journal of Supramolecular Structure , 5 : 565 – 576 , 1976 . [ 73 ] L . Jin , S . Cai , and Z . Suo . Creases in soft tissues generated by growth . Europhysics Letters , 95 ( 6 ) : 64002 , 2011 . [ 74 ] F . Jülicher and R . Lipowsky . Shape transformations of vesicles with in - tramembrane domains . Physical Review E , 53 ( 3 ) : 2670 – 2683 , 1996 . [ 75 ] F . Jülicher and U . Seifert . Shape equations for axisymmetric vesicles : A clariﬁcation . Physical Review E , 49 ( 5 ) : 4728 – 4731 , 1994 . [ 76 ] H . Kasai , M . Fukuda , S . Watanabe , A . Hayashi - Takagi , and J . Noguchi . Structural dynamics of dendritic spines in memory and cognition . Trends in Neurosciences , 33 ( 3 ) : 121 – 129 , 2010 . [ 77 ] N . Kasthuri , K . J . Hayworth , D . R . Berger , R . L . Schalek , J . A . Conchello , S . Knowles - Barley , D . Lee , A . Vazquez - Reina , V . Kaynig , T . R . Jones , et al . Saturated reconstruction of a volume of neocortex . Cell , 162 ( 3 ) : 648 – 661 , 2015 . [ 78 ] M . J . Kennedy and M . D . Ehlers . Mechanisms and function of dendritic exocytosis . Neuron , 69 : 856 – 875 , 2011 . [ 79 ] M . Kinoshita , C . M . Field , M . L . Coughlin , A . F . Straight , and T . J . Mitchison . Self - and Actin - Templated Assembly of Mammalian Septins . Developmental Cell , 3 ( 6 ) : 791 – 802 , 2002 . [ 80 ] A . B . Kolomeisky and M . E . Fisher . Molecular motors : A theorist’s perspec - tive . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . , 58 ( 1 ) : 675 – 695 , 2007 . bibliography [ 81 ] F . Korobova and T . M . Svitkina . Molecular Architecture of Synaptic Actin Cytoskeleton in Hippocampal Neurons Reveals a Mechanism of Dendritic Spine Morphogenesis . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 21 ( 22 ) : 4042 – 4056 , 2010 . [ 82 ] T . Krüger . Computer Simulation Study of Collective Phenomena in Dense Sus - pensions of Red Blood Cells under Shear . Springer , 2012 . [ 83 ] T . Krüger , S . Frijters , F . Günther , B . Kaoui , and J . Harting . Numerical simulations of complex ﬂuid - ﬂuid interface dynamics . EPJ Special Topics , 222 ( 1 ) : 177 – 198 , 2013 . [ 84 ] T . Krüger , F . Varnik , and D . Raabe . Efﬁcient and accurate simulations of de - formable particles immersed in a ﬂuid using a combined immersed bound - ary lattice boltzmann ﬁnite element method . Computers and Mathematics with Applications , 61 ( 12 ) : 3485 – 3505 , 2011 . [ 85 ] S . Kuriakose and P . Dimitrakopoulos . Motion of an elastic capsule in a square microﬂuidic channel . Physical Review E , 84 ( 1 ) : 011906 , 2011 . [ 86 ] R . Kusters , L . C . Kapitein , C . C . Hoogenraad , and C . Storm . Biophysical mechanisms regulating ampa receptor accumulation at synapses . Biophysi - cal Journal , 105 ( 12 ) , 2013 . [ 87 ] R . Kusters and C . Storm . Impact of morphology on diffusive dynamics on curved surfaces . Physical Review E , 89 : 032723 , 2014 . [ 88 ] R . Kusters , T . van der Heijden , B . Kaoui , J . Harting , and C . Storm . Forced transport of deformable containers through narrow constrictions . Physical Review E , 90 ( 3 ) : 033006 , 2014 . [ 89 ] D . Landis and T . S . Reese . Cytoplasmic organization in cerebellar dendritic spines . The Journal of Cell Biology , 97 ( 4 ) : 1169 – 1178 , 1983 . [ 90 ] S . Lang , V . Bo¸tan , M . Oettel , D . Hajnal , T . Franosch , and R . Schilling . Glass transition in conﬁned geometry . Physical Review Letters , 105 : 125701 , 2010 . [ 91 ] A . R . Leach . Molecular modelling : principles and applications . Pearson educa - tion , 2001 . [ 92 ] W . - C . A . Lee , H . Huang , G . Feng , J . R . Sanes , E . N . Brown , P . T . So , and E . Nedivi . Dynamic remodeling of dendritic arbors in gabaergic interneu - rons of adult visual cortex . PLoS Biol , 4 ( 2 ) : e 29 , 2005 . [ 93 ] F . Leong , Q . Li , C . Lim , and K . - H . Chiam . Modeling cell entry into a micro - channel . Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology , 10 ( 5 ) : 755 – 766 , 2011 . [ 94 ] J . J . Linderman and D . A . Lauffenburger . Analysis of intracellular recep - tor / ligand sorting in endosomes . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 132 ( 2 ) : 203 – 245 , 1988 . bibliography [ 95 ] G . T . Linke , R . Lipowsky , and T . Gruhn . Osmotically induced passage of vesicles through narrow pores . Europhysics Letters , 74 ( 5 ) : 916 , 2006 . [ 96 ] C . Lloyd and J . Chan . Helical microtubule arrays and spiral growth . The Plant Cell , 14 ( 10 ) : 2319 – 2324 , 2002 . [ 97 ] V . C . Lopez , J . Hadgraft , and M . Snowden . The use of colloidal microgels as a ( trans ) dermal drug delivery system . International Journal of Pharmaceutics , 292 ( 1 - 2 ) : 137 – 147 , 2005 . [ 98 ] V . C . Lopez , S . Raghavan , and M . Snowden . Colloidal microgels as trans - dermal delivery systems . Reactive and Functional Polymers , 58 ( 3 ) : 175 – 185 , 2004 . Frontiers of Polymer Colloids . [ 99 ] D . Lucena , D . Tkachenko , K . Nelissen , V . Misko , W . Ferreira , G . Farias , and F . Peeters . Transition from single - ﬁle to two - dimensional diffusion of in - teracting particles in a quasi - one - dimensional channel . Physical Review E , 85 ( 3 ) : 031147 , 2012 . [ 100 ] H . D . MacGillavry , J . Cornelis , L . R . van der Kallen , M . M . Sassen , J . Ver - haagen , A . B . Smit , and R . E . van Kesteren . Genome - wide gene expression and promoter binding analysis identiﬁes nﬁl 3 as a repressor of c / ebp target genes in neuronal outgrowth . Molecular and Cellur Neuroscience , 46 : 460 – 468 , 2011 . [ 101 ] H . D . MacGillavry , Y . Song , S . Raghavachari , and T . A . Blanpied . Nanoscale scaffolding domains within the postsynaptic density concentrate synaptic ampa receptors . Neuron , 78 ( 4 ) : 615 – 622 , 2013 . [ 102 ] H . Makino and R . Malinow . Ampa receptor incorporation into synapses during ltp : the role of lateral movement and exocytosis . Neuron , 64 : 381 – 390 , 2009 . [ 103 ] M . Maletic - Savatic , R . Malinow , and K . Svoboda . Rapid dendritic morpho - genesis in ca 1 hippocampal dendrites induced by synaptic activity . Science , 283 ( 5409 ) : 1923 – 1927 , 1999 . [ 104 ] R . Malinow and R . C . Malenka . Ampa receptor trafﬁcking and synaptic plasticity . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 25 ( 1 ) : 103 – 126 , 2002 . [ 105 ] S . Mandal , S . Lang , M . Gross , M . Oettel , D . Raabe , T . Franosch , and F . Varnik . Multiple reentrant glass transitions in conﬁned hard - sphere glasses . Nature Communications , 5 , 2014 . [ 106 ] C . Mannella . Introduction : Our changing views of mitochondria . Journal of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes , 32 ( 1 ) : 1 – 4 , 2000 . bibliography [ 107 ] M . J . Marques , J . - A . Conchello , and J . W . Lichtman . From plaque to pretzel : fold formation and acetylcholine receptor loss at the developing neuromus - cular junction . The Journal of Neuroscience , 20 ( 10 ) : 3663 – 3675 , 2000 . [ 108 ] M . Matsuzaki , N . Honkura , G . C . Ellis - Davies , and H . Kasai . Structural basis of long - term potentiation in single dendritic spines . Nature , 429 ( 6993 ) : 761 – 766 , 2004 . [ 109 ] A . Matus . Actin - based plasticity in dendritic spines . Science , 290 ( 5492 ) : 754 – 758 , 2000 . [ 110 ] D . Meyer , T . Bonhoeffer , and V . Scheuss . Balance and stability of synaptic structures during synaptic plasticity . Neuron , 82 ( 2 ) : 430 – 43 , 2014 . [ 111 ] J . Mittal , T . M . Truskett , J . R . Errington , and G . Hummer . Layering and position - dependent diffusive dynamics of conﬁned ﬂuids . Physical Review Letters , 100 : 145901 , 2008 . [ 112 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . Force generation by actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments . Biophysical Journal , 84 ( 3 ) : 1591 – 1605 , 2003 . [ 113 ] M . Monloubou and L . Mahadevan . Localized wrinkles on a thin ﬁlm bonded to a soft substrate . Master’s thesis , Harvard University , 2012 . [ 114 ] S . Mostowy and P . Cossart . Septins : the fourth component of the cytoskele - ton . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 13 , 2012 . [ 115 ] B . Mota and S . Herculano - Houzel . Cortical folding scales universally with surface area and thickness , not number of neurons . Science , 349 ( 6243 ) : 74 – 77 , 2015 . [ 116 ] A . Mughal , H . K . Chan , and D . Weaire . Phyllotactic description of hard sphere packing in cylindrical channels . Physical Review Letters , 106 : 115704 , 2011 . [ 117 ] A . Mughal and D . Weaire . Theory of cylindrical dense packings of disks . Physical Review E , 89 : 042307 , 2014 . [ 118 ] M . M . Müller , M . Deserno , and J . Guven . Interface - mediated interactions between particles : a geometrical approach . Physical Review E , 72 ( 6 ) : 061407 , 2005 . [ 119 ] D . Nair , E . Hosy , J . D . Petersen , A . Constals , G . Giannone , D . Choquet , and J . - B . Sibarita . Super - resolution imaging reveals that ampa receptors inside synapses are dynamically organized in nanodomains regulated by psd 95 . The Journal of Neuroscience , 33 ( 32 ) : 13204 – 13224 , 2013 . bibliography [ 120 ] T . M . Newpher and M . D . Ehlers . Glutamate receptor dynamics in dendritic microdomains . Neuron , 58 : 472 – 497 , 2008 . [ 121 ] T . M . Newpher and M . D . Ehlers . Spine microdomains for postsynaptic signaling and plasticity . Trends in cell biology , 19 ( 5 ) : 218 – 227 , 2009 . [ 122 ] E . A . Nimchinsky , B . L . Sabatini , and K . Svoboda . Structure and function of dendritic spines . Annual review of Physiology , 64 ( 1 ) : 313 – 353 , 2002 . [ 123 ] K . - I . Okamoto , T . Nagai , A . Miyawaki , and Y . Hayashi . Rapid and persistent modulation of actin dynamics regulates postsynaptic reorganization under - lying bidirectional plasticity . Nature Neuroscience , 7 ( 10 ) : 1104 – 1112 , 2004 . [ 124 ] P . Opazo and D . Choquet . A three - step model for the synaptic recruitment of ampa receptors . Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience , 46 : 1 – 8 , 2011 . [ 125 ] P . Opazo , M . Sainlos , and D . Choquet . Regulation of ampa receptor surface diffusion by psd - 95 slots . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . , 22 : 453 – 460 , 2012 . [ 126 ] F . Oswald , A . Varadarajan , H . Lill , E . J . Peterman , and Y . J . Bollen . Mreb - dependent organization of the e . coli cytoplasmic membrane controls mem - brane protein diffusion . Biophysical Journal , 110 ( 5 ) : 1139 – 1149 , 2016 . [ 127 ] S . Paquay and R . Kusters . A method for molecular dynamics on curved surfaces . Biophysical Journal , 110 ( 6 ) : 1226 – 1233 , 2016 . [ 128 ] M . Park , J . M . Salgado , L . Ostroff , T . D . Helton , C . G . Robinson , K . M . Harris , and M . D . Ehlers . Plasticity - induced growth of dendritic spines by exocytic trafﬁcking from recycling endosomes . Neuron , 52 ( 5 ) : 817 – 830 , 2006 . [ 129 ] S . - Y . Park and P . Dimitrakopoulos . Transient dynamics of an elastic capsule in a microﬂuidic constriction . Soft Matter , 9 : 8844 – 8855 , 2013 . [ 130 ] S . Plimpton . Fast parallel algorithms for short - range molecular dynamics . Journal of Computational Physics , 117 ( 1 ) : 1 – 19 , 1995 . [ 131 ] L . Pocivavsek , R . Dellsy , A . Kern , S . Johnson , B . Lin , K . Y . C . Lee , and E . Cerda . Stress and fold localization in thin elastic membranes . Science , 320 ( 5878 ) : 912 – 916 , 2008 . [ 132 ] T . D . Pollard and G . G . Borisy . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell , 112 ( 4 ) : 453 – 465 , 2003 . [ 133 ] C . Queguiner and D . Barthes - Biesel . Axisymmetric motion of capsules through cylindrical channels . Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 348 : 349 – 376 , 1997 . [ 134 ] D . Raucher and M . P . Sheetz . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension . Biophysical Journal , 77 ( 4 ) : 1992 – 2002 , 1999 . bibliography [ 135 ] W . Rawicz , K . C . Olbrich , T . McIntosh , D . Needham , and E . Evans . Effect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophysical Journal , 79 ( 1 ) : 328 – 339 , 2000 . [ 136 ] C . Reichhardt and C . O . Reichhardt . Cooperative behavior and pattern for - mation in mixtures of driven and nondriven colloidal assemblies . Physical Review E . , 74 ( 1 ) : 011403 , 2006 . [ 137 ] M . Renner , Y . Domanov , F . Sandrin , I . Izeddin , and e . a . P . Bassereau . Lateral diffusion on tubular membranes : quantiﬁcation of measurements bias . PLoS ONE , 6 : 9 , 2011 . [ 138 ] M . Rex and H . Löwen . Lane formation in oppositely charged colloids driven by an electric ﬁeld : Chaining and two - dimensional crystallization . Physical Review E , 75 ( 5 ) : 051402 , 2007 . [ 139 ] D . A . Richards , V . de Paola , P . Caroni , B . H . Gahwiler , and R . A . McKinney . Ampa - receptor activation regulates the diffusion of a membrane marker in parallel with dendritic spine motility in the mouse hippocampus . The Journal of Physiology , 558 ( 2 ) : 503 – 512 , 2004 . [ 140 ] D . P . Richman , R . M . Stewart , J . Hutchinson , and V . Caviness . Mechanical mode of brain convolutional development . Science , 189 : 18 – 21 , 1975 . [ 141 ] F . Risso , F . Colle - Paillot , and M . Zagzoule . Experimental investigation of a bioartiﬁcial capsule ﬂowing in a narrow tube . Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 547 : 149 – 173 , 2006 . [ 142 ] J . R . Sanes and J . W . Lichtman . Development of the vertebrate neuromuscu - lar junction . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 22 ( 1 ) : 389 – 442 , 1999 . [ 143 ] F . Santamaria , J . Gonzalez , G . J . Augustine , and S . Raghavachari . Quantify - ing the effects of elastic collisions and non - covalent binding on glutamate receptor trafﬁcking in the post - synaptic density . PLoS Computational Biology , 6 ( 5 ) : e 1000780 , 2010 . [ 144 ] M . Saxton . Single - particle tracking : effects of corrals . Biophysical Journal , 69 ( 2 ) : 389 – 398 , 1995 . [ 145 ] M . J . Saxton . Single - particle tracking : the distribution of diffusion coefﬁ - cients . Biophysical Journal , 72 ( 4 ) : 1744 – 1753 , 1997 . [ 146 ] M . J . Saxton and K . Jacobson . Single - particle tracking : applications to mem - brane dynamics . Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure , 26 ( 1 ) : 373 – 399 , 1997 . [ 147 ] B . Schmittmann , K . Hwang , and R . Zia . Onset of spatial structures in biased diffusion of two species . Europhysics Letters , 19 ( 1 ) : 19 , 1992 . bibliography [ 148 ] U . Seifert . Conﬁgurations of ﬂuid membranes and vesicles . Advances in Physics , 46 ( 1 ) : 13 – 137 , 1997 . [ 149 ] S . Seiffert , J . Thiele , A . R . Abate , and D . A . Weitz . Smart microgel capsules from macromolecular precursors . Journal of the American Chemical Society , 132 ( 18 ) : 6606 – 6609 , 2010 . [ 150 ] D . J . Selkoe . Alzheimer’s disease is a synaptic failure . Science , 298 ( 5594 ) : 789 – 791 , 2002 . [ 151 ] S . Semrau , T . Idema , L . Holtzer , T . Schmidt , and C . Storm . Accurate de - termination of elastic parameters for multicomponent membranes . Physical Review Letters , 100 : 088101 , 2008 . [ 152 ] S . Semrau , T . Idema , T . Schmidt , and C . Storm . Membrane - mediated interactions measured using membrane domains . Biophysical Journal , 96 ( 12 ) : 4906 – 4915 , 2009 . [ 153 ] J . Y . Shao and R . M . Hochmuth . Mechanical anchoring strength of L - selectin , beta 2 integrins , and CD 45 to neutrophil cytoskeleton and membrane . Bio - physical Journal , 77 ( 1 ) : 587 – 596 , 1999 . [ 154 ] J . P . Shelby , J . White , K . Ganesan , P . K . Rathod , and D . T . Chiu . A microﬂuidic model for single - cell capillary obstruction by plasmodium falciparum - infected erythrocytes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences , 100 ( 25 ) : 14618 – 14622 , 2003 . [ 155 ] M . Sheng and C . Hoogenraad . The postsynaptic architecture of excitatory synapses : a more quantitative view . Annual Review of Biochemistry , 76 : 823 – 847 , 2007 . [ 156 ] J . D . Shepherd and R . L . Huganir . The cell biology of synaptic plasticity : Ampa receptor trafﬁcking . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology , 23 : 613 – 643 , 2007 . [ 157 ] H . Z . Shouval . Clusters of interacting receptors can stabilize synaptic efﬁ - cacies . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 102 ( 40 ) : 14440 – 14445 , 2005 . [ 158 ] H . C . Shum , A . R . Abate , D . Lee , A . R . Studart , B . Wang , C . - H . Chen , J . Thiele , R . K . Shah , A . Krummel , and D . A . Weitz . Droplet microﬂuidics for fabrication of non - spherical particles . Macromolecular Rapid Communications , 31 ( 2 ) : 108 – 118 , 2010 . [ 159 ] A . E . Shyer , T . Tallinen , N . L . Nerurkar , Z . Wei , E . S . Gil , D . L . Kaplan , C . J . Tabin , and L . Mahadevan . Villiﬁcation : how the gut gets its villi . Science , 342 ( 6155 ) : 212 – 218 , 2013 . bibliography [ 160 ] A . Singer , D . Holcman , Z . Schuss , and R . Eisenberg . Narrow escape , part i . Journal of Statistical Physics , 122 : 437 – 463 , 2006 . [ 161 ] A . Singer , Z . Schuss , and D . Holcman . Narrow escape , part ii : The circular disk . Journal of Statistical Physics , 122 : 465 – 489 , 2006 . [ 162 ] A . Singer , Z . Schuss , and D . Holcman . Narrow escape and leakage of brow - nian particles . Physical Review E , 78 : 051111 , 2008 . [ 163 ] R . Skalak , A . Tozeren , R . Zarda , and S . Chien . Strain energy function of red blood cell membranes . Biophysical Journal , 13 ( 3 ) : 245 – 264 , 1973 . [ 164 ] J . M . Skotheim and L . Mahadevan . Physical limits and design principles for plant and fungal movements . Science , 308 ( 5726 ) : 1308 – 1310 , 2005 . [ 165 ] M . Spivak . A comprehensive introduction to differential geometry . Vol . V . Publish or Perish Inc . , second edition , 1979 . [ 166 ] L . Staehelin . Chloroplast structure : from chlorophyll granules to supra - molecular architecture of thylakoid membranes . Photosynthesis Research , 76 ( 1 - 3 ) : 185 – 196 , 2003 . [ 167 ] M . Stone and P . Goldbart . Mathematics For Physics . Cambridge University Press , 2012 . [ 168 ] C . Straub and S . Tomita . The regulation of glutamate receptor trafﬁcking and function by tarps and other transmembrane auxiliary subunits . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 22 : 488 – 495 , 2012 . [ 169 ] R . Straube , M . J . Ward , and M . Falcke . Reaction rate of small diffus - ing molecules on a cylindrical membrane . Journal of Statistical Physics , 129 ( 2 ) : 377 – 405 , 2007 . [ 170 ] S . Suresh . Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer cells . Acta Biomaterialia , 3 ( 4 ) : 413 – 438 , 2007 . [ 171 ] K . Sütterlin , A . Wysocki , A . Ivlev , C . Räth , H . Thomas , M . Rubin - Zuzic , W . Goedheer , V . Fortov , A . Lipaev , V . Molotkov , et al . Dynamics of lane formation in driven binary complex plasmas . Physical Review Letters , 102 ( 8 ) : 085003 , 2009 . [ 172 ] A . Szabo , K . Schulten , and Z . Schulten . First passage time approach to diffusion controlled reactions . The Journal of Chemical Physics , 72 ( 8 ) : 4350 – 4357 , 1980 . [ 173 ] T . Tada , A . Simonetta , M . Batterton , M . Kinoshita , D . Edbauer , and M . Sheng . Role of Septin Cytoskeleton in Spine Morphogenesis and Den - drite Development in Neurons . Current Biology , 17 ( 20 ) : 1752 – 1758 , 2007 . bibliography [ 174 ] S . Takamori , M . Holt , K . Stenius , E . A . Lemke , M . Grønborg , D . Riedel , H . Urlaub , S . Schenck , B . Brügger , P . Ringler , et al . Molecular anatomy of a trafﬁcking organelle . Cell , 127 ( 4 ) : 831 – 846 , 2006 . [ 175 ] A . Takei , L . Jin , J . W . Hutchinson , and H . Fujita . Ridge localizations and networks in thin ﬁlms compressed by the incremental release of a large equi - biaxial pre - stretch in the substrate . Advanced Materials , 26 ( 24 ) : 4061 – 4067 , 2014 . [ 176 ] T . Takenawa and S . Suetsugu . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connect - ing the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 8 ( 1 ) : 37 – 48 , 2007 . [ 177 ] T . Tallinen , J . Y . Chung , F . Rousseau , N . Girard , J . Lefèvre , and L . Mahade - van . On the growth and form of cortical convolutions . Nature Physics , 2016 . [ 178 ] R . Tilton , A . Gast , and C . Robertson . Surface diffusion of interacting pro - teins . effect of concentration on the lateral mobility of adsorbed bovine serum albumin . Biophysical Journal , 58 ( 5 ) : 1321 – 1326 , 1990 . [ 179 ] D . Tolle and N . L . Novere . Brownian diffusion of ampa receptors is sufﬁcient to explain fast onset of ltp . BMC systems biology , 4 : 25 , 2010 . [ 180 ] J . Tonnesen , G . Katona , B . Rózsa , and U . V . Nägerl . Spine neck plasticity regulates compartmentalization of synapses . Nature Neuroscience , 17 ( 5 ) : 678 – 85 , 2014 . [ 181 ] J . T . Trachtenberg , B . E . Chen , G . W . Knott , G . Feng , J . R . Sanes , E . Welker , and K . Svoboda . Long - term in vivo imaging of experience - dependent synaptic plasticity in adult cortex . Nature , 420 ( 6917 ) : 788 – 794 , 2002 . [ 182 ] I . Tremmel , H . Kirchhoff , E . Weis , and G . Farquhar . Dependence of plasto - quinol diffusion on the shape , size , and density of integral thylakoid pro - teins . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Bioenergetics , 1607 : 97 – 109 , 2003 . [ 183 ] A . Triller and D . Choquet . Surface trafﬁcking of receptors between synap - tic and extrasynaptic membranes : and yet they do move ! Trends in Neuro - sciences , 28 : 133 – 139 , 2005 . [ 184 ] P . van Bergeijk , M . Adrian , C . C . Hoogenraad , and L . C . Kapitein . Optoge - netic control of organelle transport and positioning . Nature , 518 ( 7537 ) : 111 – 114 , 2015 . [ 185 ] F . Varnik , J . Baschnagel , and K . Binder . Reduction of the glass transition temperature in polymer ﬁlms : A molecular - dynamics study . Physical Review E , 65 : 021507 , 2002 . [ 186 ] J . - P . Vest , G . Tarjus , and P . Viot . Dynamics of a monodisperse lennard - jones system on a sphere . Molecular Physics , 112 ( 9 - 10 ) : 1330 – 1335 , 2014 . bibliography [ 187 ] I . Vilfan , R . Zia , and B . Schmittmann . Spontaneous structure formation in driven systems with two species : exact solutions in a mean - ﬁeld theory . Physical Review Letters , 73 ( 15 ) : 2071 , 1994 . [ 188 ] E . Vladimirou , M . Li , C . P . Aldridge , L . Frigerio , M . Kirkilionis , and C . Robinson . Diffusion of a membrane protein , tat subunit hcf 106 , is highly restricted within the chloroplast thylakoid network . FEBS Letters , 583 ( 22 ) : 3690 – 3696 , 2009 . [ 189 ] S . Waitukaitis , L . Roth , V . Vitelli , and H . Jaeger . Dynamic jamming fronts . Europhysics Letters , 102 ( 4 ) : 44001 , 2013 . [ 190 ] L . Wang , A . Dumoulin , M . Renner , A . Triller , and C . G . Specht . The role of synaptopodin in membrane protein diffusion in the dendritic spine neck . PLoS ONE , 11 ( 2 ) : e 0148310 , 2016 . [ 191 ] Z . Wang , J . G . Edwards , N . Riley , D . W . Provance , R . Karcher , X . - d . Li , I . G . Davison , M . Ikebe , J . A . Mercer , J . A . Kauer , et al . Myosin vb mobilizes recycling endosomes and ampa receptors for postsynaptic plasticity . Cell , 135 ( 3 ) : 535 – 548 , 2008 . [ 192 ] J . Watson and D . S . Fisher . Collective particle ﬂow through random media . Physical Review B , 54 : 938 – 954 , 1996 . [ 193 ] J . Watson and D . S . Fisher . Dynamic critical phenomena in channel ﬂow of driven particles in random media . Physical Review B , 55 : 14909 – 14924 , 1997 . [ 194 ] D . Wedlock , I . Fabris , and J . Grimsey . Sedimentation in polydisperse partic - ulate suspensions . Colloids and Surfaces , 43 ( 1 ) : 67 – 81 , 1990 . [ 195 ] F . Wei , D . Yang , R . Straube , and J . Shuai . Brownian diffusion of ion channels in different membrane patch geometries . Physical Review E , 83 : 021919 , 2011 . [ 196 ] E . Winkler . Die lehre von der elastizitat und festigkeit . ( dominicus , prague ) , 1867 . [ 197 ] K . Xu , G . Zhong , and X . Zhuang . Actin , Spectrin , and Associated Proteins Form a Periodic Cytoskeletal Structure in Axons . Science , 339 ( 6118 ) : 452 – 456 , 2013 . [ 198 ] G . Yang , F . Pan , and W . - B . Gan . Stably maintained dendritic spines are associated with lifelong memories . Nature , 462 ( 7275 ) : 920 – 924 , 2009 . [ 199 ] N . Yasumatsu , M . Matsuzaki , T . Miyazaki , J . Noguchi , and H . Kasai . Princi - ples of long - term dynamics of dendritic spines . The Journal of Neuroscience , 28 ( 50 ) : 13592 – 13608 , 2008 . [ 200 ] R . Yuste and T . Bonhoeffer . Morphological changes in dendritic spines as - sociated with long - term synaptic plasticity . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 24 ( 1 ) : 1071 – 1089 , 2001 . bibliography [ 201 ] R . Yuste , W . Denk , et al . Dendritic spines as basic functional units of neu - ronal integration . Nature , 375 ( 6533 ) : 682 – 684 , 1995 . [ 202 ] O . - Y . Zhong - Can and W . Helfrich . Bending energy of vesicle membranes : General expressions for the ﬁrst , second , and third variation of the shape energy and applications to spheres and cylinders . Physical Review A , 39 ( 10 ) : 5280 , 1989 . [ 203 ] O . Y . Zhong - Can and W . Helfrich . Bending energy of vesicle membranes : General expressions for the ﬁrst , second , and third variation of the shape energy and applications to spheres and cylinders . Physical Review A , 39 ( 10 ) : 5280 – 5288 , 1989 . [ 204 ] C . Zhou , P . Yue , and J . Feng . Simulation of neutrophil deformation and transport in capillaries using newtonian and viscoelastic drop models . An - nals of Biomedical Engineering , 35 : 766 – 780 , 2007 . [ 205 ] N . E . Ziv and S . J . Smith . Evidence for a Role of Dendritic Filopodia in Synaptogenesis and Spine Formation . Neuron , 17 ( 1 ) : 91 – 102 , 1996 . Samenvatting Het menselijk brein bevat miljarden neuronen , zenuwcellen die met elkaar ver - bonden zijn in één groot netwerk . De plaats waar twee neuronen verbinding met elkaar maken noemt men een synaps . Deze synaps is de plek waar een elektrisch signaal in de presynaps ( de kant van het zendende neuron ) omgezet wordt in een chemisch signaal ( de afgifte van neurotransmitters ) , dat op zijn beurt receptoren in de postsynaps ( de kant het ontvangende neuron ) kan activeren . Wanneer die geactiveerd zijn , kan het elektrische signaal verder langs het ontvangende neu - ron reizen . Tijdens het herhaaldelijk stimuleren van dezelfde synaps vormt de aanvankelijk vlakke postsynaps een kleine uitstulping . Deze wordt vervolgens uitgerekt zodat de postsynaps en de presynaps steeds dichter bij elkaar komen . Deze uitstulping noemt men de ’dendritische stekel’ , een structuur die beter bek - end is onder zijn Engelse naam spine . Depositie van membraanmateriaal aan de bovenkant van spines zorgt er , in combinatie met krachten uitgeoefend door het cytoskelet , voor dat de vorm van de spine verandert van een uitgerekte uitstulp - ing naar een brede paddenstoelvorm met een dun nekje . In het eerste deel van dit proefschrift bestuderen we de initiatie en verdere groei van dendritische spines . Hiervoor hebben we een theoretisch model ontwikkeld dat de groei beschrijft en ons helpt te bepalen welke rol actine , een eiwit dat de belangrijkste com - ponent is van het onderliggende cytoskelet , en de elastische eigenschappen van het membraan spelen in de groei en stabilisatie van paddenstoelvormige spines . Onze studie laat zien dat de typische krachten zoals uitgeoefend door het ac - tine cytoskelet voldoende zijn om de initiatie van de spines te verklaren . Tijdens de verdere ontwikkeling zorgen structuurveranderingen in het actine ( van lin - eair naar een meer vertakte structuur ) ervoor dat volwassen , paddenstoelvormige spines ontstaan en stabiliseren . Dit inzicht werpt een nieuw licht op de rol van actine in de vorming en groei van dendritische spines , en suggereert een centrale rol voor direct fysische krachten en mechanismen in de morfogenese - het ontstaan en de verdere ontwikkeling van de vorm - van dendritische spines . In het tweede deel van dit proefschrift ligt de focus op de fysische processen die de sterkte van de signaaltransmissie in de synaps regelen . Deze sterkte wordt met name bepaald door de hoeveelheid receptoren die aanwezig is op de spine . Mo - menteel zijn er drie mechanismen bekend die de concentratie van deze receptoren samenvatting kunnen beïnvloeden . Deze zijn ( 1 ) het hechten van receptoren aan ankereiwitten die de receptoren binden aan het onderliggend cytoskelet , ( 2 ) het actief bijpompen van receptoren met behulp van endosomen ( kleine vesikels die receptoren trans - porteren ) die fuseren met het postsynaptisch membraan en ( 3 ) de geometrie van de dendritische spine zelf . Onze theoretische en numerieke modellen laten zien dat er twee kanten aan dit proces zitten : aan de ene kant zorgt de geometrie - en dan met name de dunne nek van de spine - van de synaps ervoor dat de laterale diffusie van receptoren uit de synaps verhinderd wordt . Aan de andere kant , zorgt datzelfde nekje ervoor dat actief transport van receptoren door de nek bemoeilijkt wordt . Een dunner wordend nekje zorgt dus voor een langere retentie van recep - toren , maar daarnaast leidt het er ook toe dat een groter aantal moleculaire mo - toren nodig is om endosomen door de nek te trekken . Alles bij elkaar genomen ondersteunen onze resultaten de conclusie dat paddenstoelvormige spines een zeer efﬁciënte en dynamische omgeving bieden om op korte tijdschalen het aan - tal receptoren in de synaps , en daarmee de transmissiesterkte van de synaps , te reguleren . Daarmee wordt de vorm van de spine een bepalende , en controleer - bare , factor om de ’paden’ in het neuronale netwerk te leggen en te verleggen . In het derde deel van het proefschrift richten we onze aandacht opnieuw op het pro - ces van groei , maar nu in de context van een ﬁlament dat verbonden is met een elastische , maar niet meegroeiende , ’ondergrond’ . Het probleem is geïnspireerd op de evolutie van de neuromusculaire overgang ; een structuur die veel lijkt op de dendritische spine maar waar nu een neuron en een spiercel contact maken . We modelleren zowel het groeiende ﬁlament als de ondergrond - het substraat - met behulp van simpele veertjes . We ontwikkelen analytische en numerieke mod - ellen om de patroonvorming te bestuderen die optreedt als gevolg van de groei van het ﬁlament . Deze modellen laten zien dat , voor ﬁlamenten met een eindige afschuifspanning , uniforme groei leidt tot een gelokaliseerde vervorming van het ﬁlament . Deze observatie is belangrijk in de context van spanningsgereguleerde groei in biologische materialen , maar meer algemeen ook mogelijk van nut in de ontwikkeling van programmeerbare synthetische oppervlakken . In het laatste deel van dit proefschrift - geïnspireerd door de combinatie van actieve en passieve processen in de dichtgepakte membraanomgeving van de dendritische spine - on - twikkelen we numerieke Langevin dynamica simulaties om het collectieve gedrag van gedreven deeltjes te bestuderen . Deze deeltjes zijn verdeeld in een kanaal met passieve deeltjes . Onze simulaties laten zien dat in veel gevallen de gedreven deeltjes spontaan een cluster vormen die de hele breedte van het kanaal opspant . Het ontstaan van deze clusters blijkt sterk afhankelijk te zijn van dichtheid , aan - drijvingskracht , temperatuur en verhouding van gedreven / passieve deeltjes . Dit effect , dat niet eerder waargenomen is , heeft mogelijk toepassingen in de scheid - ing van deeltjes in dichte , gedreven deeltjesstromen . Publications published • A method for molecular dynamics on curved surfaces ; S . Paquay , R . Kusters ; 110 : 1226 - 1233 ; Biophysical Journal ; 2016 • Conﬁnement without boundaries : anisotropic diffusion on the surface of a cylinder ; R . Kusters , S . Paquay , C . Storm ; 6 : 1054 - 1057 ; Soft Matter ; 2015 • Role of charge regulation and size polydispersity in nanoparticle encapsu - lation by viral coat proteins ; R . Kusters , H . Lin , R . Zandi , I . Tsvetkova , B . Dragnea , P . van der Schoot ; 119 : 1869 - 1880 ; The Journal of Physical Chemistry B ; 2015 • Barriers in the brain : resolving dendritic spine morphology and compart - mentalization ; M . Adrian , R . Kusters , C . Wierenga , C . Storm , C . Hoogenraad , L . Kapitein ; 8 : 142 ; Frontiers in Neuroanatomy ; 2014 • Forced transport of deformable containers though narrow constrictions ; R . Kusters , T . van der Heijden , B . Kaoui , J . Harting , C . Storm ; 90 : 033006 ; Physical Review E . ; 2014 • Impact of morphology on diffusive dynamics on curved surfaces ; R . Kusters , C . Storm ; 89 : 032723 ; Physical Review E . ; 2014 • Shape - induced asymmetric diffusion in dendritic spines allows efﬁcient synap - tic AMPA receptor trapping ; R . Kusters , L . Kapitein , C . Hoogenraad , C . Storm ; 105 : 2743 - 2750 ; Biophysical Journal ; 2013 • Digit somatotopy in the human cerebellum : a 7 T fMRI study ; W . van der Zwaag , R . Kusters , A . Magill , R . Gruetter , R . Martuzzi , O . Blanke , J . Marques ; 67 : 354 - 362 ; NeuroImage ; 2013 publications arxiv ( under review ) • Crowding induced clustering under conﬁnement ; R . Kusters , C . Storm ; arXiv : 1510 . 08816 ; 2015 • Actin remodeling and polymerization forces control dendritic spine mor - phology ; C . A . Miermans , R . Kusters , C . C . Hoogenraad , C . Storm ; arXiv : 1507 . 05071 ; 2015 in preparation ( in manuscript ) • Anisotropic diffusion on curved surfaces ; R . Kusters , S . Paquay and C . Storm • Localized buckling in adherent ﬁlaments ; R . Kusters , C . Storm and L . Ma - hadevan • Forced transportation of vesicles through narrow / closed constrictions ; R . Kusters ∗ , T . Fai ∗ , C . Rycroft and L . Mahadevan ∗ Equally contributing authors . Stay hungry . Stay foolish . — Stewart Brand : Whole Earth Catalog : 1974 Acknowledgments It was a great pleasure to spend these last four years working on the research that has led to this thesis . During this time I had the privilege to meet numerous people that have contributed to the science and joy behind this work . I would like to take the opportunity to thank the people that made all of this possible . Kees , while your role as my supervisor is self - evident to all the work presented in this thesis I feel that you deserve more than only the credit for guiding the presented work . During the last four years you have always encouraged and sup - ported me to do the research that I believed was interesting research . You gave me all the freedom to explore various side projects in the ﬁelds of soft matter physics and biophysics while at the same time you were always there whenever I needed guidance . You encouraged me to attend a considerable amount of con - ferences , workshops and summer schools allowing me not only to be exposed to an insane amount of knowledge but also to meet great people and visit places around the world . My research has brought me , among other places to , Washing - ton , San Francisco , Rome , Lisbon , Geneva , Bordeaux , Paris , Les Houches , Cargèse and Boston . Many thanks also for my promotor Herman for providing a critical reading of this manuscript and for his suggestions on improving this work . In the autumn of 2014 and 2015 I visited the group of prof . Mahadevan at Harvard University , whom I would like to thank for hosting me in his group as well as for the inspiring discussions we had during these visits . These two visits have led to a close collaboration with Thomas Fai . Thomas , I would like to thank you for all the interesting conversations we had during my time in Boston . During the same time in Boston I have also made amazing friends . In particular I would like to thank Marta , Tamara , Fokko and Twan and my roommates at Marion Street . Thanks guys for the many evenings and weekends we spend together . I am very grateful that , even after my visit of Boston , we still see each other regularly . I also would like to thank the whole Theory of Polymers and Soft matter group ( TPS ) for the wonderful atmosphere at work and outside work . In particular I would like to thank Stefan for the numerous extensive discussions , which have led acknowledgments to two joint papers at the time I ﬁnalize this . I am conﬁdent that we can continue our collaboration in our post - doc years that will follow . Paul and Wouter , the many valuable discussion we had have been very helpful both for my research an for me as a researcher . Finally I also would like to thank Mariana for designing the cover of this thesis and Helmi for all the administrative support and cheerful attitude with which you enlightened TPS . During my PhD I had the privilege to help supervise multiple bachelor and master students , who have had there inﬂuence on my research . Thanks Thijs , Karsten , Tamara , René , Stijn and Niki for all your contributions to my research . Met het afronden van mijn PhD rond ik ook een achtjarig hoofdstuk af in Eind - hoven . Ik heb me de stap vanuit België geen minuut beklaagd , vanaf mijn eerste dag hier heb ik me heel erg thuis gevoeld . Dit voornamelijk door de verschillende mensen die ik ontmoet heb aan de universiteit . In het bijzonder zou ik hiervoor graag Anne , Gijs , Mark , Paul , Koen , Erik Kamp , Erik Hermans , Frank , Dorris , Sjak en Bram willen bedanken . Ik ken jullie nu al acht jaar en jullie zijn van on - schatbare waarde geweest tijdens mijn studententijd hier in Eindhoven . Ook wil ik Roos en Gert - Jan bedanken voor de talloze avonden klimmen en bier drinken . Ik heb er alle vertrouwen in dat we elkaar de komende jaren niet uit het oog gaan verliezen . Mama , Papa en David . Jullie wil ik in de allereerste plaats bedanken voor de steun die jullie zijn geweest gedurende mijn volledige studie en het vertrouwen dat jullie me al die tijd hebben gegeven . Papa , jouw technisch inzicht heeft me enorm veel geholpen in het doen van mijn onderzoek . Maman , merci pour ton soutien et la conﬁance placée en moi ! David , bedankt voor de oprechte interesse die je altijd gehad hebt in mijn werk . Verder wil ik ook mijn verdere familie bedanken voor de steun die jullie me hebben geboden . Gitta , jou wil ik tot slot nog even in het bijzonder bedanken . Jij bent ongetwi - jfeld de persoon die me het beste kent en begrijpt . Jouw steun en geduld zijn cruciaal geweest in het verwezenlijken van al dit bovenstaande werk . Het is erg ﬁjn om iemand zo dichtbij te hebben die precies begrijpt waar ik de hele dag mee bezig ben . Je bent er altijd voor me , zelfs als ik langere tijd van huis ben . Daar ben ik je enorm dankbaar voor !