fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 1 ORIGINAL RESEARCH published : 12 November 2021 doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 725690 Edited by : Varun Dutt , Indian Institute of Technology Mandi , India Reviewed by : James Danckert , University of Waterloo , Canada Mel Win Khaw , Duke University , United States Abhinav Choudhury , Indian Institute of Technology Mandi , India * Correspondence : Doron Cohen doron . cohen @ unibas . ch † These authors have contributed equally to this work Specialty section : This article was submitted to Cognitive Science , a section of the journal Frontiers in Psychology Received : 15 June 2021 Accepted : 18 October 2021 Published : 12 November 2021 Citation : Cohen D and Teodorescu K ( 2021 ) On the Effect of Practice on Exploration and Exploitation of Options and Strategies . Front . Psychol . 12 : 725690 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 725690 On the Effect of Practice on Exploration and Exploitation of Options and Strategies Doron Cohen 1 * † and Kinneret Teodorescu 2 † 1 Center for Economic Psychology , University of Basel , Basel , Switzerland , 2 Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management , Technion , Haifa , Israel Insufﬁcient exploration of one’s surroundings is at the root of many real - life problems , as demonstrated by many famous biases ( e . g . , the status quo bias , learned helplessness ) . The current work focuses on the emergence of this phenomenon at the strategy level : the tendency to under - explore the set of available choice strategies . We demonstrate that insufﬁcient exploration of strategies can also manifest as excessive exploration between options . In such cases , interventions aimed at improving choices by reducing the costs of exploration of options are likely to fail . In Study 1 , participants faced an exploration task that implies an inﬁnite number of choice strategies and a small sub - set of ( near ) optimal solutions . We manipulated the amount of practice participants underwent during the ﬁrst , shorter game and compared their performance in a second , longer game with an identical payoff structure . Our results show that regardless of the amount of practice , participants in all experimental groups tended to under - explore the strategy space and relied on a speciﬁc strategy that implied over - exploration of the option space . That is , under - exploration of strategies was manifested as over - exploration of options . In Study 2 , we added a constraint that , on a subset of practice trials , forced participants to exploit familiar options . This manipulation almost doubled the per - trial average outcome on the comparable longer second game . This suggests that forcing participants to experience the effects of different ( underexplored ) strategy components during practice can greatly increase the chance they make better choices later on . Keywords : exploration and exploitation , practice , decisions from experience , Ill - structured problem , strategies , inertia , status quo INTRODUCTION Many famous inertia biases such as the status quo bias ( Samuelson and Zeckhauser , 1988 ) , the sunk cost eﬀect ( Arkes and Blumer , 1985 ) , the default eﬀect ( Johnson and Goldstein , 2003 ) , learned helplessness ( e . g . , Teodorescu and Erev , 2014a ) etc . , reﬂect the tendency to repeat familiar and / or default options , even when better alternatives exist . That is , people tend to prefer known alternatives Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 1 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 2 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies and to avoid the inherent risk and uncertainty embodied in exploration of new , potentially better , alternatives . These biases have been previously identiﬁed as major impediments for attempts to improve real life decisions ( e . g . , Samuelson and Zeckhauser , 1988 ) . For example , Larcom et al . ( 2017 ) found that a major disruption of service in the London Underground system ( due to a strike ) signiﬁcantly improved commuters route choices . This unexpected result was explained as a product of the strike interrupting inertia and forcing commuters to explore better routes . Other studies suggest inertia biases can lead to suboptimal pension and insurance choices ( Johnson et al . , 1993 ; Madrian and Shea , 2001 ) , to medical non - compliance ( Suri et al . , 2013 ) and resistance to adopting new technologies ( Kim and Kankanhalli , 2009 ; Polites and Karahanna , 2013 ) . Research suggests many of these biases can be understood as a problem of insuﬃcient exploration of new options . For example , Teodorescu and Erev ( 2014a , b ) focused on settings where exploration of new options is costly but advantageous as it can lead to the discovery of great rewards ( i . e . , a rare “Treasures” environment ) . In such settings , the researchers found that people tend to insuﬃciently explore due to the low prevalence of rewards from exploration . This implies that inertia biases arise when people under - explore diﬀerent options ( due to the low frequency of rewards exploration is perceived to yield ) and thus better options ( e . g . , routes ) are overlooked ( see also Roth et al . , 2016 for a similar observation regarding insuﬃcient checking ) . Thus , one natural solution to help people overcome sub - optimal inertia is to directly reduce both the perceived and the experienced costs of exploring new options . For example , Ashby and Teodorescu ( 2019 ) found that reducing the monetary costs of switching between alternatives reduced inertia biases in a binary choice setting . Similarly , reducing the costs of exploration between service providers , e . g . , by enforcing transparency of prices and providing easy comparison tools , reduces information costs and tends to alleviate consumer’s inertia biases ( e . g . , see Timmons et al . , 2019 ; Byrne et al . , 2020 ; Marandola et al . , 2020 ) . In fact , encouraging switching between service providers by reducing the associated switching costs is generally understood as a major factor for improving consumer welfare ( BEREC , 2010 ; Ofcom , 2010 ; Marandola et al . , 2020 ; Heiss et al . , 2021 ) . For example , research suggests that ensuring hassle - free and cheap portability between cell - phone carriers ( e . g . , with regulation that eﬀectively reduce portability costs , see BEREC , 2010 ; Sánchez and Asimakopoulos , 2012 ) greatly improves market eﬃciency and level of competition . Another way to increase the level of exploration is to directly and positively incentivize switching between new alternatives ( Gneezy et al . , 2020 ) . For example , Shavit et al . ( 2021 ) considered unhealthy eating habits as a problem of insuﬃcient exploration of healthy alternatives . These researchers found that incentivizing exploration of new fresh salads during a short intervention period increased ( healthier ) salad consumption in the long run . Thus , these examples suggest that to eﬀectively tackle problems of insuﬃcient exploration , one easy solution can be to develop interventions that reduce the direct costs ( or increase the direct beneﬁts ) incurred when trying new options . Yet , research also shows that the problem of insuﬃcient exploration is not limited to preference for familiar ( sub - optimal ) options but can also occur at the strategy level ( see also Mehlhorn et al . , 2015 ) . A “strategy” in this context can be deﬁned as any plan , method or system for executing a set of choices or actions , implemented to obtain some subjectively valued goal 1 . Studies focusing on acquisition of skills demonstrate the beneﬁts of training protocols that encourage exploration of new strategies ( rather than new options ) . Seagull and Gopher ( 1994 ) demonstrated the value of such training schemes . By forcing more head movement during training in a ﬂight simulator , participants greatly improved performance in a subsequent test , compared to a control group that could train without constraints . The researchers attributed the intervention’s success to its eﬀectiveness in forcing participants to explore diﬀerent strategies . Thus , forcing exploration of new options ( e . g . , new head movement ) might sometimes be needed to encourage exploration of favorable strategies . Note that in most cases , under - exploration of options coincides with under - exploration of strategies ( as the examples above suggest ) . However , this is not always true . For example , an underlying strategy of avoiding long term commitment would likely correlate with going on many diﬀerent dates . In this example , excessive exploration of alternatives ( i . e . , new dates ) still implies reliance on the same underlying strategy ( i . e . , non - commitment ) . Thus , insuﬃcient exploration of strategies can also manifest in over - exploration of options , leading to sub - optimal results . In such cases , reducing the costs of exploring new options ( or even forcing exploration of new options ) will only exacerbate the behavioral problem . Consider for example a person who eats on most weekdays at fast - food restaurants . This person might explore many fast - food items , alternating between alternatives and almost never repeating her choices . Yet , despite high exploration rates of new items , the underlying problematic behavior reﬂects a tendency to under - explore healthier eating strategies . The examples highlighted above illustrate the importance of distinguishing between interventions that encourage exploration of options and interventions that encourage exploration of strategies . Unlike insuﬃcient exploration of speciﬁc options , the problem of insuﬃcient exploration of strategies might not be solved by direct reduction of costs ( or increased prevalence of rewards ) from exploring new strategies . This is because strategies ( 1 ) cannot be directly observed and ( 2 ) in many cases they are neither explicit nor conscious ( i . e . , trainees and consumers might not be aware of the speciﬁc strategy they use , e . g . , see Dulany et al . , 1984 ; Shanks and St . John , 1994 ; Newell and Shanks , 2014 ; Plonsky and Teodorescu , 2020 ) . One indirect way to reduce the frequent costs associated with exploration of new strategies is to encourage experiences in which failures are not fully realized . For example , in competitive sports , exploring new techniques during a match is rare , as it will likely result in losing the competition . Yet practicing new moves during training can increase the chances of 1 We deﬁne the “goal” in this context very broadly . This can be a conscious goal set in advance by the decision maker ( e . g . , maximize proﬁt from each individual choice ) , or unconscious ( invest as little eﬀort as possible in the task ) . We assume each goal is situation speciﬁc and ﬂexible regarding the strategy it implies . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 2 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 3 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies success in competitions as , in addition to perfecting one’s skills , it allows ﬁnding new ways to win . For example , the discovery of a great ( but hard to ﬁnd ) set of moves that map particular responses to particular situations . Such a sequence of moves can be planned to anticipate opponent’s reactions and minimize the chance of a successful reply . In the decisions from experience literature , many choice tasks allow participants to freely sample the outcomes of available options before committing to a consequential , binding choice . This might be taken as a similar situation to the examples above , as this experimental paradigm includes a clear “practice” stage . During this type of practice , the participants can freely explore the available outcomes of each alternative before executing their conclusive choice ( Hertwig et al . , 2004 ) . Yet , the sampling paradigm does not allow to distinguish between exploration of options and exploration between sampling strategies . For example , high rates of alternation between two choice options might imply a participant’s attempt to either randomly explore the two options ( e . g . , Hills and Hertwig , 2010 ; Gonzalez and Dutt , 2016 ) , or exploit a strategy that follows a speciﬁc pattern ( see Cohen and Teodorescu , 2021 ; also see Schulze et al . , 2020 for a similar observation in a probability matching task ) . To examine the fundamental eﬀect of practice ( non - realization of payoﬀs ) on exploration of strategies we aimed for a context - free task in which exploration is of particular importance . Our goal was to design a setting in which numerous possible strategies exist , and exploration of strategies can be distinguished from exploration of options . We focus on a repeated decisions - from - experience setting , in which participants do not receive a priori information about the payoﬀ structure . This type of experimental tasks can be viewed as an example of an “ill - structured” problem ( Simon , 1973 ; Wood , 1983 ; Reed , 2016 ) . In a “well - structured” problem , the set stimuli ( e . g . , London subway system ) , the set of responses ( e . g . , possible routes from home to work ) and the set of rules that determine their interaction are all clearly deﬁned . Thus , such problems contain all the information needed to achieve the agent’s goal state . In contrast , in complex decisions - from - experience settings , participants must discover this information for themselves , requiring exploration of the task environment to be carried out over many of the trials . In addition , to distinguish between exploration of options and exploration of strategies , the number of available choice options should be suﬃciently large ( i . e . , correspond to the number of trials ) . This feature makes our settings very diﬀerent than most common decisions - from - experience tasks . These latter tasks include the binary clicking paradigm ( Barron and Erev , 2003 ) , the sampling paradigm ( Hertwig et al . , 2004 ; Weber et al . , 2004 ) , the Iowa Gambling Task ( Bechara et al . , 1997 ) , and probability learning tasks . These tasks typically present to participants only 2 – 4 options to choose from , and involve a relatively simple , static payoﬀ rule ( Cohen and Teodorescu , 2021 ) . Accordingly , in these tasks exploration of new options is limited to the ﬁrst few trials , precluding observations of behaviors that reﬂect under - and over - exploration of new alternatives . Similarly , to address exploration of strategies , our paradigm must allow for the execution of a suﬃcient number of strategies . Previous multi - alternative settings in decisions - from - experience studies ( e . g . , Teodorescu and Erev , 2014b ) usually diﬀerentiate between only two meaningful strategies – exploration of new options and exploitation of familiar options . We extend the set of available strategies in our task by introducing a dynamic payoﬀ rule ( described below ) that depends on the timing of exploration and the subject of exploitation . This ensures a large set of strategies that vary in their eﬀectiveness , thus allowing for improvements at the strategy level . To achieve such improvements , one must ﬁrst acquire costly information that can only be gained by exploration of the space . As the literature reviewed above suggests , reducing the cost of acquiring this information ( by eliminating the costs of exploration ) should increase the likelihood such a search will be eﬀective . Importantly , the above features were combined in a way that represents the elementary features of many real - life situations . Speciﬁcally , in the simpliﬁed task we developed , exploration of new options is frequently disappointing but can result in the discovery of great “treasure” options ( henceforth referred to as “treasures” ) . Yet , ﬁnding one treasure is not enough , because repeated selection of the same treasure leads to depletion of the rewards it yields , while avoiding selection of the treasure replenishes its reward . Accordingly , to maximize returns in our task , one must develop a strategy that ﬁrst ﬁnds several good options , and then alternate between them so that depletion of proﬁt is minimized . For example , consider a person trying to integrate more green salads into her diet . Exploration of new types of salads is costly ( purchasing the vegetables , peeling , cutting , etc . ) and the result might not be very tasty compared to unhealthier but favored dishes . Given enough exploration eﬀorts , one is likely to ﬁnd a salad that is both healthy and very tasty . Yet eating this “treasure” salad every day will gradually reduce its appeal . Alternatively , if one will avoid eating this speciﬁc salad for a while , its attractiveness is likely to be renewed so that the salad becomes very tasty once again . In the context of competitive sports , it is very hard to ﬁnd great moves that will defeat your opponent . After ﬁnding such a great move , using it repeatedly will likely make it predictable and reduce its value . Here too , avoiding this move for a while can restore its initial advantage . Thus , exploration between options in these examples can reﬂect choosing to eat a diﬀerent salad every day or trying diﬀerent moves against each diﬀerent opponent . For the salad eater , exploration between strategies might reﬂect , for example , trying diﬀerent rotation schedules between a handful favorite salads . In the context of competitive sports , it might reﬂect , for example , execution of one’s greatest moves only once against each opponent , at the most favorable time during the match . In both examples , as in other situations reﬂecting similar incentive structures ( i . e . , rare treasures that deplete and replenish depending on recent usage ) , the optimal strategy involves a relatively complex combination of exploration and exploitation of options . For optimal results , one should explore new options until several “treasures” are discovered . After this initial exploration , the optimal strategy dictates alternating Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 3 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 4 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies between the discovered treasures . Thus , an eﬃcient exploration - exploitation policy is required to prevent value depletion and yield maximum results . To ﬁnd this optimal strategy , one must ﬁrst acquire some understanding of the underlying dynamics of the depleting and replenishing treasures . In our ill - structured task , this requires participants to apply ﬂexible policies that involve exploration of the underlying rules and inhibition of unproﬁtable actions / hypotheses . Previous research in young children found the ability to solve such ill - structured problems ( i . e . , “tool - innovation” tasks ) is diﬃcult and late - developing ( Cutting et al . , 2011 ; Chappell et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , the complexity of the optimal strategy in the current multi - alternative setting implies that within the space of available strategies , the optimal strategy itself reﬂects a rare treasure . Accordingly , our setting implies a Rare Treasure environment at the strategy level . We hypothesized that in the current setting ( 1 ) most participants will not ﬁnd the optimal strategy due to insuﬃcient exploration of diﬀerent strategies . That is , participants will either not explore enough options to discover the good options and / or exploit treasures ineﬃciently ( without avoiding depletion and / or without taking advantage of replenished values ) . ( 2 ) Practicing the payoﬀ structure without realization of the payoﬀs will increase exploration of new strategies that are otherwise avoided due to the monetary losses associated with strategy exploration . More exploration between strategies is expected to enhance learning and lead to improved performance on a following task . In addition , previous research suggests that allowing participants to control the duration of practice can also improve learning and performance ( e . g . , Wulf et al . , 2010 ; Wu and Magill , 2011 ) . It was argued that self - controlled practice supports people’s need for autonomy , improves the level of ( deeper ) information processing while also increasing internal motivation ( Lessa and Chiviacowsky , 2015 ) . To examine whether self - controlled practice length helps people better explore the available strategy space , we also added a condition in which participants can terminate the practice trials whenever they wish . STUDY 1 Methods Participants One - hundred and eighty - three participants ( 65 females , M age = 30 . 3 , SD age = 9 . 5 , and Range age = [ 18 , 62 ] ) were recruited using Proliﬁc Academic . 2 Participants were informed they will earn a ﬁxed show - up fee of 0 . 85£ ( about 1 . 13 $ ) and will also receive a bonus based on the outcome of their choice in one randomly selected trial . As bonus , participants received an endowment of 0 . 2£ ( to oﬀset potential losses ) + the outcome of one randomly selected trial divided by six . Mean bonus was about 0 . 29£ ( about 0 . 39 $ ) . The whole experimental session lasted 12 min on average . 2 https : / / proliﬁc . ac FIGURE 1 | Examples of experimental screens for a hypothetical participant playing the ﬁrst T = 9 trials in Study 1 . Feedback regarding the trial’s outcome appeared for 1 s , after which the trial’s payoff disappeared and participants could choose again the same / another key . Procedure The experiment consisted of two games . Each game presented a matrix of keys with an underlying payoﬀ structure that represented a Rare Treasure environment ( see Teodorescu and Erev , 2014a , b ) . A novel feature of the current task was that keys representing Treasures depleted and replenished as a function of their past exploitation rates . In each of the two games , participants faced a grid of 12 × 12 unmarked keys ( see Figure 1 ) . Participants were told that the ﬁrst game they will face includes 75 trials and the second includes 150 trials ( the matrix was reset after the ﬁrst game ; see full instructions in the online Supplementary Appendix 3 ) . Importantly , participants were not informed about the underlying payoﬀ structure of the task . The participants were informed that their task in each trial is to choose one of the keys , and that each choice could either give them points or cause them to lose points . Immediately after each choice the trial’s payoﬀ appeared on the selected key for 1 s . Afterward , the feedback disappeared , and the participants could choose again . Immediately after each key was ﬁrst selected , its color changed to either dark blue ( for Non - treasure keys ) or red ( for Treasure keys ; see Figure 1 ) . The underlying payoﬀ structure was a modiﬁed version of the Rare Treasure game studied in Teodorescu and Erev ( 2014a , b ) . Exploration of a new key ( that was not selected in previous trials in that game ) either led to a small loss with probability 0 . 9 ( i . e . , a Non - treasure ) , or a large gain ( i . e . , a Treasure ) otherwise . A Non - treasure key always implied a loss of 1 point the ﬁrst time it was chosen and yielded an outcome of 0 on any subsequent selection . A Treasure key yielded on ﬁrst selection a payoﬀ of six points . The value of the same Treasure key on subsequent trials depended on the number of times that key was selected in the last 3 https : / / osf . io / m6gdz Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 4 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 5 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies TABLE 1 | The effect of previous choices on the value of treasure keys with k = 3 . Example n [ T ( i ) ] before the current trial T ( i ) payoff value in the current trial T ( i ) key was not selected in the prior 3 trials 0 6 T ( i ) was selected only once in the prior 3 trials 1 4 T ( i ) was selected twice in the prior 3 trials 2 2 T ( i ) was selected three times in the prior 3 trials 3 0 k trials . Table 1 presents the payoﬀ rule we used in the current experiment . This rule implies that the value of a Treasure key was equal to 2 ∗ ( k – n [ T ( i ) ] ) , where n [ T ( i ) ] equals the number of times Treasure T ( i ) was selected on the last k trials . In the current experiment , k was set to equal 3 . 4 Participants were randomly allocated to one of three conditions . In Condition “No Practice , ” participants were informed that out of the total 225 trials ( 75 trials in Game 1 , 150 in Game 2 ) , one trial will be chosen at random , and that trial will determine their ﬁnal payoﬀ . In Condition “Forced Practice , ” participants were told the ﬁrst game is dedicated to practicing the task and will not inﬂuence their ﬁnal payoﬀ . They were told only choices in the second game will inﬂuence their earnings ( i . e . , one trial out of the 150 trials of Game 2 will be selected randomly to determine the ﬁnal payoﬀ ) . In Condition “Free Practice , ” participants received the same instructions but were also provided with an option to stop practice and start the “real” game at any point during the 75 trials of Game 1 . They were told that once they indicate they wish to stop the practice stage , any following trials in the ﬁrst ( and second ) game can also determine their ﬁnal payoﬀ ( nothing else changed ) . See full instructions in the online Supplementary Appendix . We had 63 , 60 , and 60 participants in Condition No Practice , Forced Practice and Free Practice , respectively . Analysis of Different Strategies Using Computer Simulations The top ﬁve rows of Table 2 present the expected outcomes of diﬀerent strategies implying diﬀerent levels of sophistication , using computer simulations of the above task . Although an inﬁnite number of possible choice strategies exist for the current task , we chose to simulate these speciﬁc ﬁve strategies because they represent two extremes of the possible strategy space . While the top three strategies represent the optimal and local - maxima 4 For example , assuming k = 3 ( the task parameter k is deﬁned a priori ) , in the ﬁrst selection of a T ( i ) key , n [ T ( i ) ] = 0 , i . e . , the number of times this key was selected in the last three trials is zero . In such a case , the Treasure T ( i ) value will be six . If the same T ( i ) key is selected again on the subsequent trial , n [ T ( i ) ] = 1 and the Treasure T ( i ) ’s value will be four . On the 3rd consecutive selection of the same T ( i ) key , n [ T ( i ) ] = 2 , and T ( i ) ’s value will be two . With further consecutive selections of this key , n [ T ( i ) ] = 3 and T ( i ) ’s value will be zero . However , if after discovering a Treasure T ( i ) , one presses other keys for at least three consecutive trials , n [ T ( i ) ] will be reset and Treasure T ( i ) value will be six again . extremes , the bottom two strategies represent an extreme of naivete , characterized by random choice . The top row presents the optimal strategy : it assumes exploration of new keys until four Treasures have been found , and then assumes a strict policy of rotation between these Treasures . This policy relies on the replenishing nature of Treasures to ensure each selection maximizes the treasure’s value . The next two rows present “local maxima” strategies , i . e . , rotation between three or two Treasures . The following rows present the expected outcomes of executing random choice strategies . We consider two types of “random” strategies . In the ﬁrst , on each trial , the agent draws one key with replacement from the 144 possible keys ( i . e . , repetition is possible ) and chooses that key . In the second type of “random” strategy , on each trial , the agent draws one key without replacement ( i . e . , no repetition ) from the remaining ( 144 – # trial ) keys and chooses that key on that trial . In the ﬁnal 6 trials , the agent draws without replacement from the 144 keys again ( i . e . , the sample is reset ) . Results Analysis of Game 1 ( 75 trials ) shows no diﬀerence in either mean outcome or exploration rates ( of new keys ) across the 3 conditions ( see Supplementary Figure A1 in the online Supplementary Appendix for a detailed presentation of Game 1’s result ) . The mean outcome per trial in Game 1 was − 0 . 06 ( 95 % CI [ − 0 . 24 , 0 . 12 ] ) , − 0 . 07 ( 95 % CI [ − 0 . 23 , 0 . 09 ] ) , and − 0 . 01 ( 95 % CI [ − 0 . 18 , 0 . 15 ] ) for Condition No Practice , Forced Practice and Free practice , respectively . In Condition Free Practice , the practice phase was stopped on average after 35 . 7 trials , 95 % CI [ 28 . 8 , 42 . 6 ] . That is , participants stopped practice after about 48 % of the possible number of practice trials . We calculated the Spearman rho correlation coeﬃcient to evaluate the relationship between the number of practice trials at Game 1 and mean outcome per trial in Game 2 . This correlation was not signiﬁcant , r S = 0 . 033 , 95 % BCa CI [ − 0 . 220 , 0 . 292 ] , p = 0 . 802 , N = 60 . Table 2 ’s middle rows present the main results of Game 2 , which was equivalent across all three Conditions . The left panel of Figure 2 presents the mean outcome across the 150 trials in Game 2 , aggregated to blocks of ﬁve trials , for the three Conditions . To test for statistical signiﬁcance we used a linear mixed - eﬀects model ( using R packages lme4 , Bates et al . , 2015 ; and lmerTest , Kuznetsova et al . , 2017 ) . We set random intercepts for participants , and ﬁxed eﬀects for Condition ( three levels : No Practice , Forced Practice , and Free Practice ) and Trial number ( 1 – 150 , treated as a continuous variable ) along with their interaction . The main eﬀect for Condition ( χ 2 ( 2 ) = 1 . 81 , p = 0 . 404 ) was not statistically signiﬁcant . We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant main eﬀect for Trial ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 1042 . 0 , p < 0 . 001 ) , suggesting mean outcome increased signiﬁcantly over trials in all the conditions . The interaction between Condition and Trial was also statistically signiﬁcant ( χ 2 ( 2 ) = 41 . 11 , p < 0 . 001 ) . A post hoc analysis shows the outcome increased as a function of trial in all three Conditions . This increase was more pronounced in Condition Forced Practice , b = 0 . 014 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 012 , 0 . 015 ] , t ( 26911 ) = 22 . 5 , and p < 0 . 001 , compared with the No Practice Condition , b = 0 . 010 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 009 , 0 . 011 ] , t ( 26911 ) = 17 . 7 , and p < 0 . 001 , Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 5 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 6 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies TABLE 2 | Descriptive results of Game 2 in simulations and Conditions observed in Studies 1 and 2 . Outcome per trial Exploration rates # Treasures found # Exploitation of treasures # Total keys exposed Mean , Game 2 [ 95 % CI ] Strategy simulations Find T = 4 , then rotate ( exploit ) 4 . 3 0 . 27 4 114 38 . 9 Find T = 3 , then rotate ( exploit ) 3 . 2 0 . 20 3 123 28 . 8 Find T = 2 , then rotate ( exploit ) 3 . 44 0 . 13 2 132 18 . 7 Random , with replacement 0 . 04 0 . 62 9 . 3 15 89 . 3 Random , without replacement − 0 . 24 0 . 96 14 . 4 16 138 . 2 Study 1 No practice 0 . 42 0 . 81 12 . 6 34 . 7 119 . 1 [ 0 . 1 , 0 . 72 ] [ 0 . 75 , 0 . 87 ] [ 11 . 3 , 13 . 8 ] [ 26 , 43 ] [ 110 . 6 , 127 . 7 ] Forced practice 0 . 53 0 . 83 11 . 9 36 . 7 116 . 6 [ 0 . 2 , 0 . 85 ] [ 0 . 77 , 0 . 89 ] [ 10 . 5 , 13 . 2 ] [ 28 , 45 ] [ 107 . 4 , 125 . 7 ] Free practice 0 . 26 0 . 85 13 . 2 30 . 4 121 . 7 [ 0 . 02 , 0 . 5 ] [ 0 . 79 , 0 . 90 ] [ 12 . 1 , 14 . 4 ] [ 23 , 38 ] [ 113 . 6 , 129 . 7 ] Study 2 Forced practice , constrained 1 . 04 0 . 73 10 . 7 48 . 0 105 . 1 [ 0 . 62 , 1 . 46 ] [ 0 . 65 , 0 . 80 ] [ 9 . 5 , 11 . 9 ] [ 38 , 58 ] [ 93 . 6 , 115 . 2 ] Free practice , constrained 1 . 16 0 . 72 11 . 4 52 . 2 103 . 7 [ 0 . 77 , 1 . 55 ] [ 0 . 64 , 0 . 79 ] [ 9 . 9 , 12 . 8 ] [ 42 , 63 ] [ 92 . 2 , 113 . 8 ] T refers to treasure keys . Random strategy implies one key randomly selected in each trial . Exploration rates refer to % of choosing new ( unexploited ) keys in the 150 trials of Game 2 . # Treasures found and # Exploitation of Treasures refer to the number of Treasure keys discovered and the number of trials these were chosen , over the 150 trials of Game 2 , respectively . # Keys exposed refers to the average number of keys explored ( i . e . , uncovered ) over the 150 trials of Game 2 ( out of the possible 144 keys ) . FIGURE 2 | Left : mean outcome in trial blocks in Game 2 ( each block equals ﬁve trials ) , across the three Conditions of Study 1 . Right : choice rates implying choice of unexplored keys in Game 2 ( each block equals ﬁve trials ) , across the three Conditions of Study 1 . The right panel of Figure 2 presents the mean exploration rates across the 150 trials in the three Conditions . and Free Practice Condition , b = 0 . 009 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 007 , 0 . 098 ] , t ( 26911 ) = 15 . 1 , and p < 0 . 001 . The right panel of Figure 2 presents the mean exploration rates of the options across the 150 trials in Game 2 , aggregated to blocks of 5 trials , for the 3 Conditions . We deﬁne exploration as choice of an unfamiliar key ( i . e . , that was not selected in previous trials ) . A logistic mixed - eﬀects model 5 shows the main eﬀect for Condition ( χ 2 ( 2 ) = 0 . 89 , p = 0 . 64 ) was not 5 As Laplace approximation did not converge ( although yielding nearly identical results ) , we used the penalized least squares method for parameter estimation . statistically signiﬁcant . We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant main eﬀect for Trial ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 3184 , p < 0 . 001 ) , and a signiﬁcant interaction between Trial and Condition ( χ 2 ( 2 ) = 27 . 56 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Post hoc tests reveal the same pattern of results as the analysis of mean Outcome presented above . Discussion The results of Study 1 suggest participants in all three conditions did not ﬁnd and exploit any of the maximizing strategies ( see Table 2 ) . Rather , most participants seemed to rely heavily on a Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 6 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 7 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies strategy that implies over - exploration of the choice alternatives . Thus , participant’s tendency to over - explore alternatives implies under - exploration of choice strategies . Although allowing participants to explore between diﬀerent strategies with no costs ( i . e . , in the Free and Forced Practice Conditions ) did not alleviate this tendency , it did lead to somewhat improved learning rates in the Forced practice Condition . Conversely , in the Free Practice Condition , in which participants were free to decide when they had trained enough , learning rates and average score in Game 2 were the lowest ( see Table 2 ) . Participants in this condition exhibited a stronger tendency to over - explore alternatives , and thus had worse outcomes than in the other two conditions . This result is inconsistent with our initial hypothesis that removing the costs entailed by exploring among strategies will increase exploration of strategies and improve performance . The results of Study 1 suggest that removing the costs associated with exploration via an explicit practice phase ( in which payoﬀs are not realized ) is not enough to encourage exploration between choice strategies . One possible reason is that non - realization of payoﬀs reduces only the exogenous costs of exploration . However , exploration of new strategies might also involve endogenous costs , e . g . , requiring investment of additional cognitive / mental resources . This likely increases the perceived eﬀort of exploring new strategies , highlighting opportunity costs of investing one’s mental resources in potentially more attractive non - task activities ( such as daydreaming ; Kurzban et al . , 2013 ) . Moreover , it is possible that many participants in our ill - structured task might be oblivious to the existence of many of the possible strategies ( Sobolev et al . , 2016 ) , potentially increasing further the perceived opportunity costs . For example , it is possible that many participants explored only relatively easy strategies ( e . g . , always explore new keys ; ﬁnd a treasure and exploit it until depletion ) because they did not realize that more complex strategies could be much more rewarding ( outweighing the perceived opportunity costs ) . Therefore , one potential solution is to reduce the perceived opportunity costs of trying more complex strategies . To this aim , in Study 2 we impose a constrained practice intervention which ensures that participants can experience the potential value of diﬀerent strategy components . This approach is in line with Yechiam et al . ( 2001 ) , which imposed constraints that encourage participants to try alternative strategies . Speciﬁcally , Yechiam et al . ( 2001 ) observed that preventing repetition of familiar options in some of the trials led to improved performance . Yet while the behavior in their experimental task revealed a tendency to under - explore the available options , in our ( ill - structured ) task the natural inclination seems to reﬂect over - exploration of options . Thus , instead of enhancing exploration of new options ( as in Yechiam et al . , 2001 ) , our intervention encourages participants to exploit familiar options during some of the practice trials ( rather than allowing unconstrained exploration ) . We hypothesized that this simple intervention during practice would lead participants to learn that better strategies exist . If indeed the main obstacle is under - exploration of strategies , positive experiences with strategies that involve exploitation of options might reveal the value of diﬀerent ( and perhaps less intuitive ) policies . Such positive experiences could in turn outweigh the opportunity costs associated with strategy exploration and thus improve performance during the test phase ( i . e . , during Game 2 ) . Study 2 tests this hypothesis . STUDY 2 Methods Participants One - hundred and twenty - two participants ( 51 females , M age = 30 . 0 , SD age = 10 . 5 , and Range age = [ 18 , 63 ] ) who explicitly did not participate in Study 1 were recruited using Proliﬁc Academic ( see text footnote 1 ) . Participants were informed they will earn a ﬁxed show - up fee of 0 . 85£ ( about 1 . 13 $ ) and will also receive a bonus based on the outcome of their choice in one randomly selected trial . In Study 2 , as the bonus , participants received an endowment of 0 . 1£ + the outcome of one randomly selected trial with a conversion rate of one point = 0 . 05£ . Mean bonus was about 0 . 17£ ( about 0 . 22 $ ) . The whole experimental session lasted 11 . 46 min on average . 6 We had 61 participants in each of the two conditions . Procedure The two conditions in Study 2 were identical in design and instructions to conditions Forced Practice and Free Practice ( from Study 1 ) , with the following addition : during the practice phase in Game 1 , participants were required in a portion of the trials to only choose keys they already pressed in previous trials ( i . e . , to exploit rather than explore keys ) . Speciﬁcally , participants could choose freely for the ﬁrst 10 trials of Game 1 , after which they were constrained to choose only familiar keys for ﬁve consecutive trials 7 . After these ﬁve “constrained” trials , participants could again choose freely for the next 10 trials . This pattern repeated until the end of Game 1 ( in the Forced Constrained Practice Condition ) or until participants indicated they wish to stop practice ( in the Free Constrained Practice Condition ) . Thus , in a full 75 trial practice phase participants experienced ﬁve constrained blocks of ﬁve trials each , each immediately following a 10 - trial period of free choice . In the Forced Constrained Practice Condition , participants had to play Game 1 under this rule for 75 trials . In the Free Constrained Practice Condition , participants could choose to stop practice at any point during the 75 trials . Once they indicate this , 6 Due to a technical mistake , Study 2 used a slightly diﬀerent payoﬀ rule than Study 1 . This mistake implied that in Study 2 participants received a smaller positive payment from choosing treasure keys . Yet , our results ( see below ) suggest that if anything , the manipulation should be even stronger with an equivalent payoﬀ rule to that used in Study 1 . 7 Although ﬁve constrained trials ( on which participants are forced to explore familiar keys ) represent a somewhat arbitrary number , we chose it as it was similar to the manipulation of forced exploration in Yechiam et al . ( 2001 ) Experiment 1 . In Yechiam et al . ’s experiment , participants were forced to only explore unfamiliar option for ﬁve consecutive trials during their practice phase . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 7 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 8 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies the constraints were removed , and any subsequent choices could be realized . Results Analysis of Game 1 shows a large impact of the manipulation . Overall , mean outcome in Game 1 was 0 . 94 ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 71 , 1 . 16 ] ) and 0 . 56 ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 38 , 0 . 80 ] ) in Condition Forced Constrained Practice and Free Constrained Practice , respectively ( see Supplementary Figure A2 in the online Supplementary Appendix for a detailed presentation of this result ) . In Condition Free Constrained Practice , the practice phase was stopped on average after 40 . 2 trials , 95 % CI [ 32 . 8 , 47 . 5 ] . That is , participants stopped practice after about 54 % of the possible number of practice trials . We also calculated the Spearman rho correlation coeﬃcient to evaluate the relationship between the number of practice trials at Game 1 and mean outcome per trial in Game 2 . Unlike the results of the Free Practice Condition in Study 1 , this correlation for the Free Constrained Practice Condition was signiﬁcant , r S = 0 . 291 , 95 % BCa CI [ 0 . 043 , 0 . 512 ] , p = 0 . 023 , and N = 61 . That is , a longer practice phase in Game 1 was related to improved performance in Game 2 , providing additional support for the eﬀectiveness of the constrained practice . The current analysis focuses on Game 2 , which was equivalent across all conditions . Table 2 ’s bottom rows present the main results of this task , for the two “constrained” Conditions analyzed in Study 2 ( this task was the same across all studies and conditions ) . The left panel of Figure 3 presents the mean outcome across the 150 trials in Game 2 , aggregated to blocks of ﬁve trials , for these two “constrained” Conditions ( it also compares the results in Study 1 ) . First , we analyze the two constrained Conditions using the same statistical analysis as reported for Study 1 . We ﬁnd that the main eﬀect of Condition was not statistically signiﬁcant ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 18 , p = 0 . 672 ) . The main eﬀect for Trial was signiﬁcant ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 1118 . 3 , p < 0 . 001 ) . The interaction between Condition and Trial was also statistically signiﬁcant ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 21 . 78 , p < 0 . 001 ) . A post hoc analysis shows that the increase in outcome implied a higher slope in Condition Free Constrained Practice , b = 0 . 017 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 015 , 0 . 018 ] , t ( 18156 ) = 27 . 3 , p < 0 . 001 compared to the Forced Constrained Practice Condition , b = 0 . 013 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 011 , 0 . 014 ] , t ( 18156 ) = 20 . 78 , p < 0 . 001 . To test the signiﬁcance of the manipulation , we compare the two constrained Conditions and its corresponding two non - constrained practice Conditions ( from Study 1 ) on per - trial outcome in Game 2 . We use a linear mixed - eﬀects model with two dummy variables : Practice Type ( 2 levels : Forced / Free ) and Constraint ( 2 levels : With - Constraint / No - Constraint ) and Trial number ( 1 – 150 , treated as a continuous variable ) , along with the two and three - way interactions . We ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant three - way interaction , ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 57 . 48 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Considering the simple slopes between each Condition and Trial ( described above ) , this three - way interaction suggests that a Free Practice manipulation implies better results when coupled with Constrained practice ( compared to the Forced Practice Conditions ) . The same implies worse results when coupled with Non - constrained practice , compared to the Forced Practice Conditions . The two - way interaction between Constraint and Trial was also statistically signiﬁcant , ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 34 . 69 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This implies that overall , learning rates were higher in the Constrained Conditions . Conversely , the two - way interactions between Practice Type and Trial , ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 56 , p = 0 . 455 ) , and Constraint and Practice Type , ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 1 . 30 , p = 0 . 254 ) , were not statistically signiﬁcant . We found a signiﬁcant main eﬀect for Trial , ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 1844 . 80 , p < 0 . 001 ) and for Constraint , ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 15 . 77 , p < 0 . 001 ) . The main eﬀect of Practice Type was not statistically signiﬁcant , ( χ 2 ( 1 ) = 0 . 20 , p = 0 . 660 ) . Overall , analysis of the two - way interactions and main eﬀects suggest that the main driver in the improvement of outcomes is the Constraint manipulation . Supplementary Figure A3 ( in the online Supplementary Appendix ) presents the average per - trial outcome for individual participants in each condition of Studies 1 and 2 . Discussion The results of Study 2 suggest that forcing repeated exploitation of options during practice can reduce the tendency to under - explore diﬀerent strategies in our ill - structured task . Furthermore , our results suggest that a manipulation focused on constraining choices in a subset of practice trials can signiﬁcantly improve performance in a subsequent task . This was especially evident when comparing performance in the Free Practice Conditions : while allowing participants to decide when to stop practice led to the worst outcomes in Study 1 , combining this option with constrained exploration led to the best overall performance . Overall , the mean outcome per trial was almost twice as large in the Constrained Practice conditions ( compared to the non - constrained conditions ) . GENERAL DISCUSSION The current work demonstrates the importance of distinguishing between behaviors that imply suboptimal exploration of options and behaviors that imply suboptimal exploration of strategies . While the former has been shown to be the root of many real - life problems ( e . g . , inertia biases ) , the current work is the ﬁrst to investigate the distinct importance of the latter . Participants in our study faced two ill - structured exploration games with rare treasures that depleted following successive exploitation and replenished after a short period of abstinence . We manipulated the type of practice participants underwent during the ﬁrst , shorter game and compared their performance in a second , longer game with an identical payoﬀ structure . While participants in the current task could employ an inﬁnite number of strategies , our result show participants overwhelmingly preferred strategies that implied over - exploration of options . One explanation for this empirical result suggests our participants were strongly biased toward under - exploration of the space of available strategies . This explanation suggests that adverse behaviors , which can imply Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 8 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 9 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies FIGURE 3 | Left : mean outcome in trial blocks in Game 2 ( each block equals ﬁve trials ) , across the two Conditions of Study 2 . Right : choice rates implying choice of unexplored keys in Game 2 ( each block equals ﬁve trials ) , across the two Conditions of Study 2 . Shaded lines present the three Conditions of Study 1 for comparison . both under - and over - exploration of options , are in fact manifestations of under - exploration between choice strategies . In such cases , interventions that aim to improve the way people explore between options ( e . g . , by reducing the direct costs of exploring new options and / or by increasing the direct beneﬁts of trying new options ) might not increase , and potentially even reduce , exploration between strategies . Our result show that this type of oversight can reduce the chance that interventions have a beneﬁcial , lasting eﬀect . The current results also suggest a boundary condition for the assumption of a general exploratory mode ( Hills et al . , 2008 , 2015 ) . Speciﬁcally , a general exploratory mode assumes a co - dependence between internal search ( e . g . , search for a better strategy or plan ) and external search ( e . g . , search between options ) processes . Our results clarify this assumption , showing that these two modes can be disentangled in environments where a tendency to over - explore the external space implies a tendency to under - explore the internal space . Future research can further investigate this distinction , clarifying the environments in which external and internal search coincide ( see Hills et al . , 2008 , 2012 , 2015 ) . We manipulated the amount and type of practice participants experienced before playing the longer , second game . In Study 1 , we had three groups , a No Practice group , a group that was forced to practice throughout the entire ﬁrst shorter game ( Forced Practice ) , and a group that could stop practice whenever they felt ready ( Free Practice ) . Although the task presented an inﬁnite number of strategies ( i . e . , an inﬁnite problem space , see Reed , 2016 ) , there were only a few value maximizing strategies within the strategy space . These optimal strategies involved a relatively complex balance between exploration of unfamiliar keys and exploitation of uncovered treasures , and a policy of rotation between treasure keys when enough have been found . As this optimal solution is not intuitive or easy to ﬁnd , we hypothesized that a practice period ( in which exploration of new strategies do not bear monetary losses ) would encourage exploration of diﬀerent solution strategies . This , we expected , would increase the likelihood that participants learn an outcome - maximizing choice strategy . The results suggest otherwise , as participants preferred to persist with a strategy that implies over - exploration of the available options . Therefore , it seems that simply removing the monetary costs associated with exploration of strategies is not suﬃcient to improve performance . One likely explanation relies on the assumption that , much like in real life , exploration of new strategies entails substantial endogenous costs ( e . g . , cognitive / mental eﬀort ) on top of the exogenous costs ( i . e . , monetary losses ) . That is , while non - realization of payoﬀs during practice removes exogenous costs of exploration , it does not eliminate endogenous mental costs . Thus , it could be that participants did not suﬃciently explore the set of possible strategies due to perceived eﬀort and / or high opportunity costs ( Kurzban et al . , 2013 ) . To reduce the overall opportunity costs associated with exploration of new strategies , in Study 2 we aimed to expose participants to the beneﬁts of less intuitive strategies . Speciﬁcally , we forced participants to exploit familiar options in some of the practice trials . We hypothesized that such a manipulation would expose participants to the potential of more complex strategies that integrate exploration and exploitation of options ( rather than simpler classes of strategies , e . g . , always - explore - new - options ) . The results show that the constrained practice manipulation indeed improved later performance , almost doubling the mean outcome per trial in Study 2 ( compared with Study 1 ) . Moreover , in the free - practice condition without constraints ( Study 1 ) , we found no signiﬁcant correlation between practice length and subsequent performance . In contrast , in the constrained free - practice condition of Study 2 , a longer practice period was signiﬁcantly associated with improved performance , providing an additional support for the eﬀectiveness of the constrained practice . Taken together , these results demonstrate the potential of exposing trainees to the beneﬁts of diﬀerent strategy components via imposition of constraints during practice . This conclusion is in line with a study by Finke ( 1990 ) that Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 9 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 10 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies focused on creativity in a product design task . This study found that putting multiple constraints on participant’s designs improved both originality and novelty of their products . The conclusion was similar to ours – that the constraints impeded reliance on familiar ( but sub - optimal ) solutions to the problem ( Finke , 1990 ) . Comparison of the eﬀects of the forced - vs . free - practice duration revealed an interesting interaction . On average , participants in the Free Practice groups in both studies went through about 50 % of the practice trials experienced in the Forced Practice Conditions . Yet , while the Free Practice group exhibited the worst performance in Study 1 , combining free practice with constrains on exploration ( i . e . , during practice ) in Study 2 led to the best performance overall . This ﬁnding can be especially important as many types of real - world interventions are very costly . Thus , understanding the conditions that allow maximizing their impact while minimizing their duration can be extremely valuable . Our results suggest that experiencing the outcomes of diﬀerent strategies during practice is key to control the eﬃcacy of shorter interventions . The current study can also shed light on the eﬃcacy of “Emphasis Change” training protocols ( Gopher et al . , 1989 , 2007 ; Gopher , 1993 ) . This method focuses on repeated changes to the perceived priorities , from the perspective of trainees , of diﬀerent elements during training of a complex task . Previous studies have shown this method improved performance signiﬁcantly , compared to more complex training schemes ( Yechiam et al . , 2001 ; Gopher et al . , 2007 ; Lee et al . , 2012 ) . Yechiam et al . ( 2001 ) suggested that the Emphasis Change protocol is primarily successful because of its exploration - enhancing potential ( see also Erev and Gopher , 1999 ) . That is , it encourages exploration of options in settings in which people do not explore enough . Our study clariﬁes the type of exploration that is crucial for the success of such training schemes in ill - structured problems . Emphasis Change is expected to lead to signiﬁcant long - term learning and skill transfer primarily when it encourages exploration among strategies rather than among options ( see Lee et al . , 2012 for related results ) . Another way to learn about the possible payoﬀs without realizing the costs of exploration is through social observations of the consequences of other people’s choices ( e . g . , Yechiam et al . , 2008 ) . The fact that in our study non - constrained practice did not help people ﬁnd better solutions is in line with studies focused on this type of “social exposure” to other’s outcomes . For example , Yechiam et al . ( 2008 ) found that observing other’s outcomes led participants to exhibit more underweighting of rare events . Our ﬁndings suggest that social learning can be improved if decision makers are exposed to other players that explore the strategy space rather than explore diﬀerent options . Our results also demonstrate that in rare treasures settings , the frequently observed tendency to under - explore is robust at the strategy level , but not at the individual choice level . That is , when the optimal strategy is complex and reﬂects a rare treasure , people seem to under - explore the space of available strategies . In such settings , people’s policies of choice might converge to a narrow set of sub - optimal strategies that can also manifest as over - exploration of options . Accordingly , trainers and guides should focus on encouraging exploration of new strategies , rather than encouraging exploration of new options . In fact , in our task , encouraging exploration of new options directly , for example by rewarding participants for trying new options ( e . g . , with a bonus payoﬀ , see Shavit et al . , 2021 ) , would be counterproductive as it would have increased the usage of suboptimal strategies . On another practical level , our results demonstrate the potential of interventions that force exploitation of options to improve real - life outcomes and satisfaction . One example relates to online dating apps ( Tinder is one example ) . Online apps are purported to help reduce the costs of exploration of dating opportunities , and by doing so increase the chance its users establish meaningful relationships ( Finkel et al . , 2012 ) , which in turn have been shown to increase long - term life satisfaction ( see Lehmann et al . , 2015 ) . Yet , our results suggest that reducing the costs of exploration of options might not help increase exploration of strategies . Instead , our results suggest users might prefer to over - exploit a speciﬁc strategy that can imply over exploration of dating opportunities , thus reducing the chances of ﬁnding meaningful partnership ( e . g . , Rochat et al . , 2019 ) . The current work also suggests that a short intervention that encourages exploitation of familiar options ( or limiting the chance to explore new options ) can improve subsequent outcomes for users , by showing that better strategies exist . Future studies are needed to validate the practical implication of our results in diﬀerent real - life contexts . For example , it is possible that in highly engaging environments , curiosity naturally increases exploration of strategies , making constrained practice redundant and even potentially harmful . In addition , it is important to note that the focus of the current work is on an ill - structured experimental design , in which the information needed to achieve one’s goal is not readily available . This lack of information necessitates exploration by trial - and - error of diﬀerent strategies and options , mimicking natural experience - based activities such as dating , dietary decisions , and practicing competitive sports . In contrast , well - structured tasks can convey much more information ( e . g . , a description of the payoﬀ structure ) , greatly reducing the costs of exploration between diﬀerent solution strategies . Future studies can test whether the eﬀect of under - exploration of strategies also holds when such information is readily available . Lastly , an important open question is whether and how individual’s personality characteristics mediate the relationships between practice , exploration of options , exploration of strategies , and performance . For example , the positive relationship between practice length ( in the free - constrained practice condition of Study 2 ) and performance on the subsequent task ( i . e . , Game 2 ) might be driven by individual risk - taking and / or curiosity tendencies ( e . g . , people with lower need for cognition and / or higher risk tendencies could practice for shorter periods and also explore new options more ) . Therefore , a better understanding is needed of how disposition toward risk taking and need for cognition interact with exploration between options and strategies . For example , such understanding can contribute to the development of eﬀective tailored training protocols ( e . g . , see Schaefer et al . , 2010 ) . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 10 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 11 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories . The names of the repository / repositories and accession number ( s ) can be found below : https : / / osf . io / m6gdz / . ETHICS STATEMENT The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the Social and Behavioral Sciences Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) , Technion . The patients / participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS DC and KT came up with the idea and designed the experiment . DC programed the experiment with feedback from KT . DC collected and analyzed the data . Both authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . FUNDING This research was supported by the I - CORE program of the Planning and Budgeting Committee and the Israel Science Foundation ( grant no . 1821 / 12 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Andrei Teodorescu for his invaluable comments and help in improving the clarity and writing of the manuscript . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at : https : / / www . frontiersin . org / articles / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 725690 / full # supplementary - material REFERENCES Arkes , H . R . , and Blumer , C . ( 1985 ) . The psychology of sunk cost . Organiz . Behav . Hum . Decis . Proces . 35 , 124 – 140 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0749 - 5978 ( 85 ) 90049 - 4 Ashby , N . J . S . , and Teodorescu , K . ( 2019 ) . The eﬀect of switching costs on choice - inertiaanditsconsequences . PLoSOne 14 : e0214098 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0214098 Barron , G . , and Erev , I . ( 2003 ) . Small feedback − based decisions and their limited correspondence to description − based decisions . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 16 , 215 – 233 . doi : 10 . 1002 / bdm . 443 Bates , D . , Maechler , M . , Bolker , B . , and Walker , S . ( 2015 ) . lme4 : Linear Mixed - Eﬀects Models Using Eigen and S4 . R Package Version 1 . 1 – 7 . doi : 10 . 18637 / jss . v067 . i01 Bechara , A . , Damasio , H . , Tranel , D . , and Damasio , A . R . ( 1997 ) . Deciding advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy . Science 275 , 1293 – 1295 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 275 . 5304 . 1293 BEREC ( 2010 ) . Report on Best Practices to Facilitate Consumer Switching . Available online at : https : / / berec . europa . eu / eng / document _ register / subject _ matter / berec / reports / 185 - berec - report - on - best - practices - to - facilitate - consumer - switching ( accessed October 26 , 2021 ) . Byrne , S . , Devine , K . , and McCarthy , Y . ( 2020 ) . Room to Improve : A Review of Switching Activity in the Irish Mortgage Market . Economic Letters , 12 / EL / 20 . Dublin : Central Bank of Ireland . Chappell , J . , Cutting , N . , Apperly , I . A . , and Beck , S . R . ( 2013 ) . The development of toolmanufactureinhumans : whathelpsyoungchildrenmakeinnovativetools ? Philos . Transact . R . Soc . B Biol . Sci . 368 : 20120409 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2012 . 0409 Cohen , D . , and Teodorescu , K . ( 2021 ) . On the eﬀect of perceived patterns in decisions from sampling . Decision doi : 10 . 1037 / dec0000159 [ Epub ahead of print ] . Cutting , N . , Apperly , I . A . , and Beck , S . R . ( 2011 ) . Why do children lack the ﬂexibility to innovate tools ? J . Exp . Child Psychol . 109 , 497 – 511 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2011 . 02 . 012 Dulany , D . E . , Carlson , R . A . , andDewey , G . I . ( 1984 ) . Acaseofsyntacticallearning and judgment : how conscious and how abstract ? J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 113 : 541 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 113 . 4 . 541 Erev , I . , and Gopher , D . ( 1999 ) . “A cognitive game - theoretic analysis of attention strategies , ability , and incentives , ” in Attention and Performance XVII : Cognitive RegulationofPerformance : InteractionofTheoryandApplication , edsD . Gopher and A . Koriat ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , 343 – 371 . doi : 10 . 7551 / mitpress / 1480 . 001 . 0001 Finke , R . A . ( 1990 ) . Creative Imagery : Discoveries and Inventions in Visualization . Hillsdale NJ : England Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . Finkel , E . J . , Eastwick , P . W . , Karney , B . R . , Reis , H . T . , and Sprecher , S . ( 2012 ) . Online dating : a critical analysis from the perspective of psychological science . Psychol . Sci . Public Inter . 13 , 3 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 15291006124 36522 Gneezy , U . , Kajackaite , A . , and Meier , S . ( 2020 ) . Incentive - Based Interventions : The Handbook of Behavior Change . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press , 523 – 536 . doi : 10 . 1017 / 9781108677318 . 036 Gonzalez , C . , andDutt , V . ( 2016 ) . Explorationandexploitationduringinformation search and experimential choice . J . Dynam . Decis . Mak . 2 : 2 . Gopher , D . ( 1993 ) . “The skill of attention control : acquisition and execution of attention strategies , ” in Attention and Performance XIV : Synergies in Experimental Psychology , Artiﬁcial Intelligence , and Cognitive Neuroscience , eds D . E . Meyer and S . Kornblum ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , 299 – 322 . Gopher , D . , Kramer , A . , Wiegmann , D . , and Kirlik , A . ( 2007 ) . Emphasis change as a training protocol for high - demand tasks . Attent . Theory Pract . 101 , 209 – 224 . doi : 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 9780195305722 . 003 . 0015 Gopher , D . , Weil , M . , and Siegel , D . ( 1989 ) . Practice under changing priorities : an approach to the training of complex skills . Acta Psychol . 71 , 147 – 177 . doi : 10 . 1093 / heapol / 11 . 1 . 64 Heiss , F . , McFadden , D . , Winter , J . , Wuppermann , A . , and Zhou , B . ( 2021 ) . Inattention and switching costs as sources of inertia in medicare part d . Am . Econom . Rev . 111 , 2737 – 2781 . doi : 10 . 1257 / aer . 20170471 Hertwig , R . , Barron , G . , Weber , E . U . , and Erev , I . ( 2004 ) . Decisions from experienceandtheeﬀectofrareeventsinriskychoice . Psychol . Sci . 15 , 534 – 539 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 0956 - 7976 . 2004 . 00715 . x Hills , T . T . , and Hertwig , R . ( 2010 ) . Information search in decisions from experience : do our patterns of sampling foreshadow our decisions ? Psychol . Sci . 21 , 1787 – 1792 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797610387443 Hills , T . T . , Jones , M . N . , and Todd , P . M . ( 2012 ) . Optimal foraging in semantic memory . Psychol . Rev . 119 : 431 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a00 27373 Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , andGoldstone , R . L . ( 2008 ) . Searchinexternalandinternal spaces : evidence for generalized cognitive search processes . Psychol . Sci . 19 , 802 – 808 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2008 . 02160 . x Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , Lazer , D . , Redish , A . D . , Couzin , I . D . , and Group , C . S . R . ( 2015 ) . Exploration versus exploitation in space , mind , and society . Trends Cogn . Sci . 19 , 46 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2014 . 10 . 004 Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 11 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690 fpsyg - 12 - 725690 November 8 , 2021 Time : 15 : 12 # 12 Cohen and Teodorescu Exploration Between Options and Strategies Johnson , E . J . , and Goldstein , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Do defaults save lives ? Science 302 , 1338 – 1339 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1091721 Johnson , E . J . , Hershey , J . , Meszaros , J . , and Kunreuther , H . ( 1993 ) . Framing , probability distortions , and insurance decisions . J . Risk Uncert . 7 , 35 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF01065313 Kim , H . - W . , and Kankanhalli , A . ( 2009 ) . Investigating user resistance to information systems implementation : a status quo bias perspective . MIS Quar . 9 , 567 – 582 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12911 - 020 - 1090 - 7 Kurzban , R . , Duckworth , A . , Kable , J . W . , andMyers , J . ( 2013 ) . Anopportunitycost model of subjective eﬀort and task performance . Behav . Brain Sci . 36 , 661 – 679 . doi : 10 . 1017 / s0140525x12003196 Kuznetsova , A . , Brockhoﬀ , P . B . , and Christensen , R . H . B . ( 2017 ) . lmerTest package : tests in linear mixed eﬀects models . J . Stat . Softw . 82 , 1 – 26 . Larcom , S . , Rauch , F . , and Willems , T . ( 2017 ) . The beneﬁts of forced experimentation : striking evidence from the London underground network . Quar . J . Econom . 132 , 2019 – 2055 . doi : 10 . 1093 / qje / qjx020 Lee , H . , Boot , W . R . , Basak , C . , Voss , M . W . , Prakash , R . S . , Neider , M . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Performance gains from directed training do not transfer to untrained tasks . Acta Psychol . 139 , 146 – 158 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actpsy . 2011 . 11 . 003 Lehmann , V . , Tuinman , M . A . , Braeken , J . , Vingerhoets , A . J . J . M . , Sanderman , R . , and Hagedoorn , M . ( 2015 ) . Satisfaction with relationship status : development of a new scale and the role in predicting well - being . J . Happ . Stud . 16 , 169 – 184 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10902 - 014 - 9503 - x Lessa , H . T . , and Chiviacowsky , S . ( 2015 ) . Self - controlled practice beneﬁts motor learning in older adults . Hum . Mov . Sci . 40 , 372 – 380 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . humov . 2015 . 01 . 013 Madrian , B . C . , and Shea , D . F . ( 2001 ) . The power of suggestion : inertia in 401 ( k ) participation and savings behavior . Quar . J . Econom . 116 , 1149 – 1187 . doi : 10 . 1162 / 003355301753265543 Marandola , G . , Proestakis , A . , Lourenço , J . S . , and van Bavel , R . ( 2020 ) . Applying Behavioural Insight to Encourage Consumer Switching of Financial Products . Luxembourg : Publications Oﬃce of the European Union . Mehlhorn , K . , Newell , B . R . , Todd , P . M . , Lee , M . D . , Morgan , K . , Braithwaite , V . A . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Unpacking the exploration – exploitation tradeoﬀ : a synthesis of human and animal literatures . Decision 2 : 191 . doi : 10 . 1037 / dec0000033 Newell , B . R . , and Shanks , D . R . ( 2014 ) . Unconscious inﬂuences on decision making : a critical review . Behav . Brain Sci . 37 , 1 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0140525X12003214 Ofcom ( 2010 ) . Strategic Review of Consumer Switching . Available online at : https : / / www . ofcom . org . uk / _ _ data / assets / pdf _ ﬁle / 0025 / 54169 / switching . pdf ( accessed October 26 , 2021 ) . Plonsky , O . , and Teodorescu , K . ( 2020 ) . Perceived patterns in decisions from experience and their inﬂuence on choice variability and policy diversiﬁcation : a response to Ashby , Konstantinidis , & Yechiam , 2017 . Acta Psychol . 202 : 102953 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actpsy . 2019 . 102953 Polites , G . L . , and Karahanna , E . ( 2013 ) . The embeddedness of information systemshabitsinorganizationalandindividuallevelroutines : developmentand disruption . Mis Qua . 13 , 221 – 246 . doi : 10 . 25300 / misq / 2013 / 37 . 1 . 10 Reed , S . K . ( 2016 ) . The structure of ill - structured ( and well - structured ) problems revisited . Educ . Psychol . Rev . 28 , 691 – 716 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 015 - 9343 - 1 Rochat , L . , Bianchi - Demicheli , F . , Aboujaoude , E . , and Khazaal , Y . ( 2019 ) . The psychology of “swiping” : a cluster analysis of the mobile dating app Tinder . J . Behav . Addict . 8 , 804 – 813 . doi : 10 . 1556 / 2006 . 8 . 2019 . 58 Roth , Y . , Wänke , M . , and Erev , I . ( 2016 ) . Click or skip : the role of experience in easy - click checking decisions . J . Consum . Res . 16 : ucw053 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jcr / ucw053 Samuelson , W . , and Zeckhauser , R . ( 1988 ) . Status quo bias in decision making . J . Risk Uncer . 1 , 7 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00055564 Sánchez , B . U . , and Asimakopoulos , G . ( 2012 ) . Regulation and competition in the European mobile communications industry : an examination of the implementation of mobile number portability . Telecommun . Policy 36 , 187 – 196 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . telpol . 2011 . 12 . 008 Schaefer , P . S . , Bencaz , N . , Bush , M . , and Price , D . ( 2010 ) . Assessing Soldier Individual Diﬀerences to Enable Tailored Training ( ARI Research Report 1923 ) , ( DTIC No . AD A519 594 ) . Alexandria , VA : U . S . Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences . Schulze , C . , Gaissmaier , W . , and Newell , B . R . ( 2020 ) . Maximizing as satisﬁcing : on pattern matching and probability maximizing in groups and individuals . Cognition 205 : 104382 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2020 . 104382 Seagull , F . J . , and Gopher , D . ( 1994 ) . Expanding the envelope of performance : training pilots to use helmet mounted displays . Proc . Hum . Factors Ergonom . Soc . Annu . Meet . 38 , 11 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 154193129403800104 Shanks , D . R . , and St . John , M . F . ( 1994 ) . Characteristics of dissociable human learning - systems . Behav . Brain Sci . 17 , 367 – 395 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 273 . 5280 . 1399 Shavit , Y . , Roth , Y . , andTeodorescu , K . ( 2021 ) . Promotinghealthyeatingbehaviors by incentivizing exploration of healthy alternatives . Front . Nutr . 8 : 277 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnut . 2021 . 658793 Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . The structure of ill structured problems . Artif . Intell . 4 , 181 – 201 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0004 - 3702 ( 73 ) 90011 - 8 Sobolev , M . , Aharonov - Majar , E . , and Erev , I . ( 2016 ) . Imitation of costly mistakes : inspired exploration , copycat , andunderweighting ofrareevents . Acad . Manag . Proc . 2016 : 16531 . doi : 10 . 5465 / ambpp . 2016 . 16531abstract Suri , G . , Sheppes , G . , Schwartz , C . , and Gross , J . J . ( 2013 ) . Patient inertia and the statusquobias : whenaninferioroptionispreferred . Psychol . Sci . 24 , 1763 – 1769 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797613479976 Teodorescu , K . , and Erev , I . ( 2014a ) . Learned helplessness and learned prevalence : exploring the causal relations among perceived controllability , reward prevalence , and exploration . Psychol . Sci . 25 , 1861 – 1869 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797614543022 Teodorescu , K . , and Erev , I . ( 2014b ) . On the decision to explore new alternatives : the coexistence of under − and over − exploration . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 27 , 109 – 123 . doi : 10 . 1002 / bdm . 1785 Timmons , S . , Barjaková , M . , McElvaney , T . J . , and Lunn , P . D . ( 2019 ) . Oﬃcial advice improves mortgage - holders’ perceptions of switching : experimental evidence . Behav . Public Policy 19 , 1 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1017 / bpp . 2019 . 38 Weber , E . U . , Shaﬁr , S . , andBlais , A . - R . ( 2004 ) . Predictingrisksensitivityinhumans and lower animals : risk as variance or coeﬃcient of variation . Psychol . Rev . 111 : 430 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295x . 111 . 2 . 430 Wood , P . K . ( 1983 ) . Inquiring systems and problem structure : implications for cognitive development . Hum . Dev . 26 , 249 – 265 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000272887 Wu , W . F . W . , andMagill , R . A . ( 2011 ) . Allowinglearnerstochoose : self - controlled practice schedules for learning multiple movement patterns . Res . Quart . Exerc . Sport 82 , 449 – 457 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02701367 . 2011 . 10599777 Wulf , G . , Shea , C . , and Lewthwaite , R . ( 2010 ) . Motor skill learning and performance : areviewofinﬂuentialfactors . Med . Educ . 44 , 75 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2923 . 2009 . 03421 . x Yechiam , E . , Druyan , M . , and Ert , E . ( 2008 ) . Observing others’ behavior and risk taking in decisions from experience . Judg . Decis . Mak . 3 : 493 . Yechiam , E . , Erev , I . , and Gopher , D . ( 2001 ) . On the potential value and limitations of emphasis change and other exploration - enhancing training methods . J . Exp . Psychol . Appl . 7 : 277 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 1076 - 898x . 7 . 4 . 277 Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Publisher’s Note : All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations , or those of the publisher , the editors and the reviewers . Any product that may be evaluated in this article , or claim that may be made by its manufacturer , is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher . Copyright © 2021 Cohen and Teodorescu . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 12 November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 725690