Topical Review TRPs Make Sense T . Voets , B . Nilius Department of Physiology , Campus Gasthuisberg O & N , KU Leuven , B - 3000 Leuven , Belgium Received : 6 September 2002 / Accepted : 30 October 2002 Abstract . Drosophila ﬂies with the trp mutation ex - hibit impaired vision due to the lack of a speciﬁc Ca 2 + inﬂux pathway in the photoreceptors . The identiﬁca - tion of the trp gene product as a Ca 2 + - permeable ion channel and the search for TRP homologues in ﬂies , worms and mammals has opened the way to the dis - covery of a whole superfamily of cation channels , baptized TRP channels . In contrast to voltage - gated K + , Na + , or Ca 2 + channels , with whom they share their transmembrane architecture , TRP channels are not activated by voltage but by a variety of signals in - cluding intra - and extracellular ligands , Ca 2 + - store depletion and mechanical or thermal stress . Due to the promiscuityofthesegatingmechanisms , TRPchannels are privileged candidates as primary sensing molecules for the recognition and integration of physical and chemical signals from the environment . In this review we discuss recent evidence that implicates members of the TRP superfamily in sensory signal transduction . Key words : TRP - channels — Cation channels — Ca 2 + entry—Signaltransduction—Sensoryfunctions Introduction Ion channels have distinct functions in the signal transduction processes in sensory cells . First , at the level of receptor cells , they translate chemical or physical stimuli from the environment into an elec - trical signal . Second , they are responsible for the signal transduction from the sensory receptor cell to information - decoding structures in the central ner - vous system . Several diﬀerent families of ion channels have been implicated in the primary process of signal recognition : members of the ENaC / ASIC / degenerin superfamily , consisting of Na + - selective channels with two conserved transmembrane - spanning do - mains , have been implicated in pain perception , touch reception and proprioception ( for a review see Kel - lenberger & Schild , 2002 ) ; members of the family of ionotropic purinergic receptors ( P2X - receptors ) have been implicated in pain reception ( Julius & Basbaum , 2001 ) and mechanosensitivity ( Gillespie & Walker , 2001 ) ; TREK - 1 , a member of the 2 - pore - domain K + channel family , is stimulated by a variety of physical and chemical stimuli , such as membrane stretch , in - tracellular acidosis and polyunsaturated fatty acids and has therefore been proposed as a ‘‘sensory’’ channel ( Honore et al . , 2002 ) . In addition , two fam - ilies of ion channels within the superfamily of cation channels with six transmembrane ( TM ) domains seem to be especially important for coding the pri - mary steps in mammalian sensory transduction cas - cades . The ﬁrst and best - studied family consists of the cyclic nucleotide - gated ( CNG ) channels , which open upon direct binding of intracellular cyclic nucleotides ( cAMP or cGMP ) to their C - termini ( Broillet & Firestein , 1999 ) . The electrical signals caused by the opening / closing of these channels in rods , cones and olfactory receptor cells are the crucial initial events in mammalian olfactory and visual signal transduction . Recent evidence identiﬁes the novel TRP superfamily as a second important group of channels involved in sensory signal initiation . Based upon the knowledge of the function of the founding Drosophila TRP , members of the TRP superfamily were originally thought to mediate predominantly store - dependent and / or PLC - dependent Ca 2 + inﬂux in non - excitable cells ( Friel , 1996 ; Zhu et al . , 1996 ) . However , in the last ﬁve years several members of the TRP family have been identiﬁed as primary sensors of both physical ( e . g . , heat , cold , mechanical stress ) and chemical ( e . g . , pH , pheromones , ‘‘hot pepper’’ com - pounds ) external stimuli . In this review , we ﬁrst provide a brief overview of the nomenclature and structure of the more than 20 mammalian TRP - re - lated proteins , before focussing exclusively on the role of TRPs in sensory physiology . J . Membrane Biol . 192 , 1 – 8 ( 2003 ) DOI : 10 . 1007 / s00232 - 002 - 1059 - 8 Correspondence to : B . Nilius ; email : Bernd . Nilius @ med . kuleuven . ac . be Structure and Nomenclature of the TRP Superfamily The rapid identiﬁcation of a large number of TRP - related channels during the last years , including more than 20 in humans , has led to considerable confusion as to channel nomenclature , with several TRPs hav - ing multiple names or distinct proteins sharing the same name . Moreover , several ‘‘TRP - like’’ proteins display such a limited homology with the founding member of the family , Drosophila TRP , that classi - fying them as genuine members of the TRP super - family may be somewhat overzealous . This confusion , which is most likely an inevitable side ef - fect of the exciting discovery of a new protein family , has somewhat diminished with the recent consensus on a uniﬁed nomenclature for TRP channels ( Montell et al . , 2002 ) . According to this nomenclature , 20 mammalian TRP - related proteins are classiﬁed into three subfamilies : members of the TRPC ( C for Ca - nonical ) subfamily display the highest homology to Drosophila TRP , members of the TRPV subfamily ( V for Vanilloid ) are more closely related to the Vanil - loid Receptor 1 ( VR1 , now TRPV1 ) , and the TRPMs ( M for Melastatin ) are most homologous to Mela - statin ( now TRPM1 ) . The uniﬁed nomenclature does not ( yet ) include the more distally related PKD2 ( a protein implicated in polycystic kidney disease ; Cai et al . , 1999 ) , mucolipin ( the product of the gene that is mutated in mucolipidosis patients ; Bargal et al . , 2000 ; Sun et al . , 2000 ) , or NompC ( a mechanosensi - tive channel found in Drosophila and C . elegans ; Walker , Willingham & Zuker , 2000 ) , although it has been proposed that they are founding members of three additional subfamilies : the TRPPs , TRPMLs and TRPNs , respectively ( Montell , 2001 ) . A better understanding of their exact ( ion channel ) functions may help to determine whether they classify as gen - uine TRP channels . It should be noted that the fact that all members of the TRP family are characterized by a similar to - pology does not necessarily mean that they are all bona ﬁde cation channels . So far , it has been shown for only a few TRP channels ( TRPV1 , TRPV4 and TRPV5 ) that mutations in the putative pore region result in changes in permeation properties ( Garcia - Martinez et al . , 2000 ; Nilius et al . , 2001 ; Voets et al . , 2002 ) . Therefore , the possibility that some of the other TRPs are not channels per se but modulators ( or even subunits ) of other ion channels has not yet been excluded and is still a reasonable hypothesis until their channel nature has been clearly proven by showing that mutations to their putative pore region result in changes in pore properties . The transmembrane topology of TRPs is remi - niscent of that of voltage - gated and CNG channels : TRP channels consist of six transmembrane spanning helices ( TM1 – 6 ) , cytoplasmic N - and C - termini and a pore region between TM5 and TM6 ( Clapham , Runnels & Stru¨bing , 2001 ) . The highest degree of sequence homology between all members of the TRP superfamily is found in the transmembrane segments . Unlike voltage - operated channels , TM4 is not posi - tively charged , which explains the lack of intrinsic voltage dependence of TRP channels . The N - termini of several TRP channels contain multiple ankyrin - binding repeats : 3 – 6 in TRPCs and TRPVs and as much as 29 in NompC , but no such ankyrin domains are found in the TRPM subfamily . C - terminal to TM6 in TRPCs and TRPMs contain a conserved stretch of 25 amino acids called TRP domain , which starts with the nearly invariant TRP box ( EWKFAR ; Montell , 2001 ) . This domain is , however , poorly conserved in the TRPV subfamily . The TRPM sub - family is characterized by their relatively long N - and C - termini , and some members have entire enzyme domains linked to their C - termini : an ADP - ribose pyrophosphatase in TRPM2 ( Perraud et al . , 2001 ) and an atypical a - kinase domain in TRPM6 and TRPM7 ( Nadler et al . , 2001 ; Runnels , Yue & Clap - ham , 2001 ) . At present , the functional relation be - tween the channel and enzyme activities of these ‘‘chanzymes’’ remains to be fully established . TRPs and Light More than 30 years ago a Drosophila mutant was discovered that exhibited a transient instead of sus - tained response to light ( Cosens & Manning , 1969 ) . In the rhabdomeres of mutant ﬂies , sustained light induced a transient rather than the normal sustained , plateau - like increase in intracellular Ca 2 + . The elec - trical equivalent of this Ca 2 + signal in the Drosophila rhabdomeres is the receptor potential , and the mu - tant was therefore termed trp , for transient receptor potential . About two decades later , the trp gene was cloned ( Montell & Rubin , 1989 ) and subsequently shown to code for a Ca 2 + - permeable cation channel , TRP , the founding member of the TRP family ( Hardie & Minke , 1992 ) . Subsequently two addi - tional homologous proteins were identiﬁed in Dro - sophila : TRP - like ( TRPL ; Phillips , Bull & Kelly , 1992 ) and TRP c ( Xu et al . , 2000 ) . These proteins also appear to contribute to light recognition and , at least in expression systems , these three proteins form het - eromultimers with novel properties ( Niemeyer et al . , 1996 ; Xu et al . , 2000 ) . Flies with defects in TRPL were originally reported to be indistinguishable from wild type ( Niemeyer et al . , 1996 ) , but later it was found that the light response in trpl mutant ﬂies displays several anomalies , including changes in cat - ion selectivity of the light - induced current and a re - duced response to a light stimulus of long duration ( Reuss et al . , 1997 ; Leung , Geng & Pak , 2000 ) . Mu - tants lacking both TRP and TRPL are completely unresponsive to light ( Niemeyer et al . , 1996 ) , in - 2 T . Voets and B . Nilius : TRPs Make Sense