Neuron , Vol . 30 , 197 – 210 , April , 2001 , Copyright ª 2001 by Cell Press Nucleoside Diphosphate Kinase , a Source of GTP , Is Required for Dynamin - Dependent Synaptic Vesicle Recycling The most striking phenotype of shi ts mutants is rapid paralysis upon exposure to nonpermissive temperature , a behavior that reflects synaptic failure due to blocked vesicle recycling at presynaptic terminals ( Poodry and Edgar , 1979 ; Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ; Koenig and Ikeda , K . S . Krishnan , † Richa Rikhy , † Sujata Rao , † Madhuri Shivalkar , † Michael Mosko , * Radhakrishnan Narayanan , * Paul Etter , * Patricia S . Estes , * and Mani Ramaswami * ‡ * Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology and 1989 ) . In addition to dynamin , several other proteins ARL , Division of Neurobiology involved in coated vesicle formation at synapses and University of Arizona other cellular contexts have been biochemically purified Tucson , Arizona 85721 and analyzed ( Cremona and De Camilli , 1997 ; Marsh † Department of Biological Sciences and McMahon , 1999 ) . However , many“endocytosis pro - Tata Institute for Fundamental Research teins” and their regulators probably remain unknown . To Homi Bhabha Road identify potentially novel molecules required for synap - Colaba , Bombay 400005 tic vesicle recycling in vivo , we performed a classical India genetic screen designed to identify mutations that mod - ify the conditional paralysis phenotype of Drosophila shibire ts mutants ; ourexpectationbeingthatthesemuta - Summary tions will identify other genes in the same cellular path - way ( Simon et al . , 1991 ) . Nucleoside diphosphate kinase ( NDK ) , an enzyme en - Mutant shi ts flies show remarkably tight and penetrant coded by the Drosophila abnormal wing discs ( awd ) temperature - dependent paralysis ( Kim and Wu , 1990 ; or human nm23 tumor suppressor genes , generates Ramaswamietal . , 1993 ) . Thetightnessofthist . s . pheno - nucleoside triphosphates from respective diphos - type does not reflect a sudden , step - like decline in dy - phates . We demonstrate that NDK regulates synaptic namin activity . Rather , in shi ts animals , dynamin activity vesicle internalization at the stage where function of is likely to be steadily reduced as temperature is raised . the dynamin GTPase is required . awd mutations lower Thus , the restrictive temperature for a given allele re - the temperature at which behavioral paralysis , synap - flects the point at which dynamin activity drops below tic failure , and blocked membrane internalization oc - a level required for sustainedactivity of critical synapses cur at dynamin - deficient , shi ts , mutant nerve terminals . in the fly ( Ramaswami et al . , 1993 , 1994 ; Krishnan et Hypomorphic awd alleles display shi ts - like defects . al . , 1996 ; Grant et al . , 1998 ) . The tightness of the shi ts NDK is present at synapses and its enzymatic activity paralytic phenotype allowed us to identify second - site is essential for normal presynaptic function . We sug - “enhancer” mutations that cause shi ts mutants to be gest a model in which dynamin activity in nerve termi - paralyzed at lower temperatures . In a screen of about nals is highly dependent on NDK - mediated supply of 190 , 000 mutagenized shi ts flies , we isolated three en - GTP . This connection between NDK and membrane hancer of shibire , e ( shi ) , mutations . Our analysis indi - internalization further strengthens an emerging hypoth - cates that all three are alleles of abnormal wing discs esis that endocytosis , probably of activated growth fac - ( awd ) , the Drosophila ortholog of a human tumor sup - tor receptors , is an important tumor suppressor activ - pressor gene , nm23 ( Steeg et al . , 1988a , 1988b ; Rosen - ity in vivo . gard et al . , 1989 ; Biggs et al . , 1990 ) . awd / nm23 encodes cytoplasmic nucleoside diphosphate kinase ( NDP ki - Introduction nase , or NDK ) , an enzyme required for ATP dependent synthesis of nucleoside triphosphates from the respec - Dynamin is a GTPase required for fission of clathrin - tive nucleoside diphosphates . Several lines of genetic coated endocytic vesicles from the plasma membrane andcell biologicalevidence presentedhere indicatethat ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ; van der Bliek Awd / Nm23 functions to provide GTP required for dy - and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ; Takei et al . , namin function at nerve terminals . Because levels of 1995 ) . Dynamin functions at the rate - limiting step of dynamin : GTP determine the rate of endocytosis ( Sever endocytosis ; thus , increasing the stability of the active , et al . , 1999 ) , our data suggest that NDK - dependent GTPbound formofdynaminresults inacceleratedmem - supply of GTP helps determine the rate of endocytosis brane internalization in cultured fibroblasts ( Sever et al . , in vivo . 1999 , 2000b ) . Dynamin - mediated endocytosis is re - In humans , the tumor / metastasis suppressor nm23 is quired in several cellular processes such as synaptic a small gene family comprising at least three different vesicle recycling , nutrient uptake , or downregulation of homologousgenes H1 , H2 , and H3 . Reducedexpression activated growth factor receptors ( Kramer et al . , 1991 ; of nm23 appears to be a primary determinant of tumor De Camilli and Takei , 1996 ; Futter et al . , 1996 ; Vieira et progression , invasiveness , and serum - stimulated motil - al . , 1996 ) . This probably accounts for the pleiotropic ity ofseveral metastatictumors ( Leoneet al . , 1991 , 1993 ; phenotypes of Drosophila shibire ts ( shi ts ) mutants that Kantor et al . , 1993 ; Baba et al . , 1995 ; Parhar et al . , 1995 ; have a conditional block in dynamin function ( Kelly and Fukuda et al . , 1996 ) . Our data suggest that an early Suzuki , 1974 ; Poodry , 1990 ; Ramaswami et al . , 1993 ) . effect of nm23 inhibition may be to slow down dynamin - dependent membrane internalization . In light of recent links between putative tumor suppressors and other com - ‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed ( e - mail : mani @ u . arizona . edu ) . ponents of endocytosis , our observations strengthen the Neuron198 Table 1 . Temperature at which 100 % of Flies Are Paralyzed in Three Minutes Alleles shi ts2 / shi ts2 shi CK2 / shi CK2 para ts1 comt tp7 1 / 1 1 / 1 27 35 27 35 . 42 MSM95 / MSM95 22 29 27 35 40 MSF15 / MF15 22 29 27 35 40 CM47 / CM47 26 33 27 35 . 42 The MSM95 , MSF15 , and CM47 mutations specifically reduce the temperature required for shi ts paralysis ; the mutations have no effect on the paralytic behavior of para ts and comt ts alleles tested . hypothesis that endocytosis is an important tumor sup - types in a wild - type background ( Table 1 ) . We deter - mined that MSM95 , MSF15 , and CM47 are alleles of pressor function in vivo ( Floyd and De Camilli , 1998 ; Levkowitz et al . , 1998 ; Babst et al . , 2000 ) . the same gene by segregation analysis , chromosome mapping and genetic complementation . All three muta - tions mapped to the vicinity of claret , a genetic marker Results close to the tip of the right arm of the third chromosome . The mutations did not complement one another : for in - Isolation of Three Allelic Mutations that Enhance shi ts Paralysis stance shi t s ; MSM95 / MSF15 flies were paralyzed at much lower temperatures than shi ts ; MSM95 / 1 or shi ts ; In a behavioral genetic screen ( Experimental Procedures ) , we isolatedthree independent , EMS - induced , e ( shi ) muta - MSF15 / 1 . The suggestion of allelism was further strengthened by finer recombination analysis . From tions , MSM95 , MSF15 , and CM47 , that reduced the tem - perature at which shi ts mutants paralyze . We subsequently more than 1000 progeny of shi ts / shi ts ; MSM95 / MSF15 or shi ts / shi ts ; MSM95 / CM47 transheterozygous females , we discovered ( see below ) that these three mutations are alleles of a single gene that we termed e ( shi ) A . When failed to obtain any recombinants between the different e ( shi ) alleles ; thus , MSM95 , MSF15 , and CM47 are very e ( shi ) A mutations were heterozygous , their slight domi - nance was indicated by a marginal reduction in the tem - tightly linked ( , 0 . 1 cM ) . We tentatively concluded ( and subsequently confirmed by transgene rescue experi - perature for paralysis of shi ; e ( shi ) A / 1 flies when com - pared to shi ; 1 / 1 controls ( Table 2 ) . However , when ments ) that the three mutations were allelic and per - formed more detailed genetic studies on MSM95 , the homozygous , these mutations dramatically reduced the restrictive temperature for paralysis of shi ts flies ( Figure strongest allele of e ( shi ) A . 1 ; Tables 1 and 2 ) . For instance , w shi CK2 ; 1 / 1 flies require about 2 min to be paralyzed at 35 8 C and are not affected at all at temperatures below 33 8 C ; in contrast , e ( shi ) A Is Allelic to awd and e ( shi ) A Mutations Affect NDP Kinase Activity w shi CK2 ; MSM95 / MSM95 animals are rapidly ( within 2 min ) paralyzed at 29 8 C , an “enhancement” of about 6 8 C . Recombination and genetic deficiency analysis ( Experi - mental Procedures ) localized e ( shi ) A to near cytological The effect of e ( shi ) A mutations on paralytic behavior was specific to shi ts mutants : e ( shi ) mutations had no map position 100E , within a centimorgan of a P insertion in strain 2166 , in a region deleted in the deficiency strain effect on paralysis of Drosophila , comatose ts , and para ts mutants ( Table 1 ) that affect synaptic vesicle exocytosis Df ( 3R ) faf - BP ( missing 100D – 100F ) . ( Pallanck et al . , 1995 ) and axonal conduction ( Loughney A recessive lethal line , 2167 , that carries a P insertion et al . , 1989 ) , respectively . The specificity of these ge - at 100E did not complement MSM95 . To confirm that netic interactions argued a specific effect of e ( shi ) A mu - this noncomplementation resulted from the transposon tations on synaptic vesicle recycling , the function af - insertion , rather than an independent mutation on the fected in shi mutant animals . chromosome , we mobilized the P element in 2167 and All experiments to genetically map the mutations were obtained severalP elementexcision lines . Of 11excision performed in a shi ts background because e ( shi ) A muta - lines obtained , 4 were wild - type for e ( shi ) A ; excision tions do not show robust dominant or recessive pheno - chromosomes that did not complement e ( shi ) A were presumed to carry imprecise excisions of the P element typically obtainedin such P elementmobilization experi - Table 2 . Temperatures for Paralysis of shi Shy Flies Carrying ments ( Experimental Procedures ) . These observations Heteroalleleic Combinations of e ( shi ) A confirmed that the P insertion in line 2167 disrupts e ( shi ) A gene function . The Berkeley Drosophila Genome Allele / Allele 1 MSM95 MSF15 CM47 Project ( BDGP ; www . fruitfly . org ) has sequenced geno - 1 35 33 33 34 mic DNA flanking the P insertion in line 2167 . A BLAST MSM95 29 30 32 . 5 search using this genomic sequence showed that it de - MSF15 29 33 CM47 33 rives from the 5 9 untranslated sequence of the mRNA for the awd gene that also maps to the same region Thedataindicatenoncomplementationamong MSM95 , MSF15 , and of chromosome 3R . Interestingly , awd , the Drosophila CM47 for the enhancer of shi phenotype . Recombination analyses first indicated close genetic linkage of the MSM95 , CM47 , and ortholog of the human tumor suppresor nm23 , encodes MSF15 mutations ( Experimental Procedures ) . Allelism was further NDK , aprotein not previously associatedwith endocyto - indicated by results from the complementation analysis shown sis . We confirmed the accuracy of the BDGP report on above . the insertion site for 2167 by PCR , using oligonucleo - NDK Regulates Dynamin Function In Vivo 199 Figure 1 . enhancer of shibire Mutations Alter Temperature Dependence of shi ts Paralysis ( A ) MSM95 ( B ) MSF15 ( C ) CM47 tides from P element and awd DNA sequences , as well sic NDK activity , but severely affects a protein phospho - transferase activity of the protein ( Lascu et al . , 1992 ; as by isolating and sequencing genomic DNA flanking the P insertion ( Figure 2A ) . Freije et al . , 1997 ) . This viable allele shows a dominant lethal interaction with prune ( pn ) mutations that affect Three lines of evidence demonstrated that e ( shi ) A mu - tations MSM95 , MSF15 , and CM47 are alleles of awd . a potential GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) required for normal eye color ( Sturtevant , 1956 ; Biggs et al . , 1988 ; First , two lethal alleles of awd , awd b3 , a severe hypo - morph ( Dearolf et al . , 1988a , 1988b ) , and awd KRs6 , a null Teng et al . , 1991 , Lascu et al . , 1992 ) . We found that awd Kpn had no effect on shi ts paralysis . Conversely , the mutation ( Timmonsetal . , 1995 ) , didnotcomplementany of the e ( shi ) A mutations : for instance , w shi CK2 ; MSM95 / shi - enhancerallele awd MSM95 hadno effecton theviability of pn 1 ( Table 3 ) . That pn - interacting alleles ( or allelic awd KRs6 flies are rapidly debilitated at 28 8 C , compared to 34 8 C for w shi CK2 ; MSM95 / 1 controls ( Figure 2B and combinations ) show no overlap with the shi - interacting awd alleles indicates that the two genetic interactions Table 3 show representative data ) . Second , an awd transgene ( PAS7 ) , which includes native transcriptional occur through different underlying mechanisms . Our observation that reduction in NDK activity causes control sequences fused to the awd cDNA , rescues the enhancer of shi phenotype of MSM95 . Thus , w shi CK2 ; shi ts flies to paralyze at lower temperatures was consis - tent with synaptic vesicle endocytosis being regulated PAS7 / 1 ; MSM95 / MSM95 flies are paralyzed at 34 8 C , almost identical to w shi CK2 ( Figure 2D ) . Remarkably , by levels of Awd activity in vivo . We directly addressed this issue via a series of experiments designed to deter - we could also effect unambiguous ( though incomplete ) phenotypic rescue with either of two human nm23 trans - mine the effect of awd mutations on synaptic physiol - ogy , specifically on synaptic vesicle recycling . genes H1 ( line 1 ) or H2 ( line 4 ) driven by the native awd promoter ( Xu et al . , 1996 ) , an observation that empha - sizesphylogeneticconservationofAwd / Nm23functions The awd Alleles Increase the Temperature Sensitivity of Synaptic Failure in shi ts in vivo ( Table 3 ) . An awd transgene , H119A 3 , identical to PAS7 but for a point mutation at histidine 119 , the The temperature sensitivity of synaptic responses in shi ts , shi ts ; awd , or awd mutants exactly corresponded residue essential for the kinase activity of NDK , was unable to rescue or alleviate paralysis phenotypes of with observations made on the paralytic behavior of whole flies . The compound response of the visual sys - awd . As the H119A 3 transgene produces a stable Awd protein ( Xu et al . , 1996 ) , this result indicates that the tem to a light flash stimulus may be measured in a sim - ple extracellular recording called an electroretinogram enzymatic activity of NDK is required for its synaptic functions . Finally , when we measured NDK activity in ( ERG ) . A typical ERG includes different components : a “slow” receptor potential corresponds to photoreceptor extracts from control and mutant fly heads , we found a roughly 90 % reduction of activity in MSM95 / MSM95 depolarization ; two transient spikes , the on and off tran - sients ( arrowheads on Figure 3 ) , that flank the receptor heads when compared to appropriate controls ( Figure 2C ) . This reduction in enzyme activity is associated with potential represent compound synaptic responses of the optic lobe ( Alawi and Pak , 1971 ; Wu and Wong , reduced protein levels probably deriving from altered gene regulation ( Figure 2E ) . 1977 ; Zuker , 1996 ) . In shi ts mutants , the on and off tran - sients are lost at elevated temperature in a use - depen - We examined the behavior of a variety of awd mutant combinations ( Table 3 ) . The most striking observation dent manner . In shi CK2 , for instance ( n 5 15 ) , the synaptic transients clearly visible at room temperature and even was that specific allelic combinations of awd showed rapid and reversible temperature - dependent paralysis at 34 8 C are lost at 36 8 C ( Figure 3A , trace 1 ) . However , in an awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 mutant background , synaptic re - inawild - typebackground , abehaviorremarkablysimilar to that observed in shi ts mutants . For instance , a temper - sponsesof shi CK2 flies disappearat 30 8 C ( Figure 3A , trace 2 ; n 5 18 ) . That this “enhancement” of the shi synaptic ature of 38 8 C rapidly paralyzed awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 flies , a phenotype completely rescued by the presence of a transmission defect is caused by altered awd function , rather than genetic background effects , is shown by the single copy of the rescuing awd 1 transgene , PAS7 , or either human nm23 transgene H1 or H2 ( Table 3 ) . In greatly attenuated effect of awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 when the wild - type awd transgene , PAS7 , is present in the same general , awd alleles that enhance or mimic shi ts pheno - types are hypomorphs , and their severity corresponds genetic background ( Figure 3A , trace 3 ; n 5 14 ) . We further discovered that electroretinograms recorded roughly with allelic strength ( Table 3 ) . An unusual allele called killer of prune ( awd Kpn ) only slightly reduces intrin - from 1 / Y ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 animals ( a background wild - Neuron200 Figure 2 . Multiple Lines of Evidence to Show that e ( shi ) A is awd ( A ) A P element insertion in line 2167 that causes noncomplementation of the MSM95 phenotypeisinsertedintothe5 9 untranslated region of the awd mRNA encoding NDP kinase . ( B ) An awd null allele awd KRs6 does not com - plement the enhancer of shi phenotype of MSM95 . ( C ) Whole fly lysates from MSM95 / MSM95 mutants show reduced NDP kinase activity relative to controls . Enzyme activity is repre - sented in arbitrary units defined in terms of the slope of substrate utilization ( OD units ) as a function of time ( see Experimental Pro - cedures ) . ( D ) A single copy of a wild - type awd trans - gene ( PAS7 ) rescuestheenhancerof shi phe - notype of MSM95 ; further transgene rescue data are shown in Table 3 . ( E ) MSM95 / MSM95 flies show severely re - duced Awd protein in Western blots of head lysates relative to shi and wild - type controls . This figure shows data for alleles shi CK2 , MSM95 , and awd KRs6 ; they are representative of similar results obtained for various differ - ent combinations of shi ts , awd , and e ( shi ) al - leles ( Table 3 and data not shown ) . type for shi ) also lost their synaptic transients at 39 8 C indicating that it derives from a genetic reduction of awd function ( Figure 3B ) . In all of these mutant combinations , in a use - dependent manner ( n 5 10 ) . Again , this abnor - mality was rescued by the PAS7 transgene ( n 5 9 ) , loss of synaptic transmission at elevated temperatures Table 3 . Paralytic Temperature or Viability of awd Alleles in Combination with shi , prune , and awd / nm23 Transgenes awd MSM95 awd MSM95 awd Kpn awd MSM95 awd Kpn 1 / 1 awd KRs6 awd MSM95 awd Kpn awd Kpn awd KRs6 1 / Y . 42 38 40 . 42 . 42 . 42 1 / Y ; PAS7 / 1 . 42 . 42 . 42 ND ND ND 1 / Y ; H1 / 1 . 42 . 42 . 42 ND ND ND 1 / Y ; H2 / 1 . 42 . 42 . 42 ND ND ND shi CK2 / Y 35 27 29 35 34 . 5 34 . 5 shi CK2 / Y ; PAS7 / 1 35 33 34 ND ND ND shi CK2 / Y ; H119A 3 / 1 35 27 ND ND ND ND shi CK2 / Y ; H1 / 1 35 30 30 ND ND ND shi CK2 / Y ; H2 / 1 35 31 31 ND ND ND shi CK2 / Y ; H1 / H1 35 ND 30 . 5 ND ND ND shi CK2 / Y ; H2 / H2 35 ND 31 . 5 ND ND ND pn 1 / Y . 42 ND viable 40 lethal lethal lethal The awd allelic combination , awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 , shows rapid , reversible t . s . paralysis at 39 8 C , a phenotype rescued by an awd 1 transgene PAS7 . The enhancement of shi ts paralysis by awd is rescued by the awd 1 transgene PAS7 , but not by an identically expressed transgene H119A 3 that carries a point mutation in the active site histidine required for phosphate transfer in NTP synthesis from NDP . The awd Kpn ( Killer of prune ) allele does not interact with shi ts . The enhancer of shi allele , awd MSM95 , does not interact with pn 1 mutant in a potential GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) ( Teng et al . , 1991 ) . Human transgenes H1 and H2 partially rescue the enhancer of shi phenotype . Entries in bold font indicate the most important observations ; ND 5 not done . NDK Regulates Dynamin Function In Vivo 201 dependent , synaptic vesicle recycling , we studied the presynaptic effects of awd mutations . We specifically examined effects of awd mutations on nerve terminal ultrastructure , viewed by electron microscopy ( EM ) , and on membrane internalization , assayed by observing en - docyticuptakeofafluorescent dyeintorecyclingsynap - tic vesicles . When shi ts mutants are exposed to bright light at their restrictive temperature , their photoreceptor terminals accumulate deep , flat invaginations emanating from the plasma membrane ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1996 ) . At temperatures permissive for dynamin function , such structures are not seen . Although the origins of these invaginations remains poorly under - stood , itisclearthattheyarevesiclerecyclingintermedi - ates that accumulate when dynamin function is inhibited ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1996 , 1999 ) . If our awd mutations altered synaptic transmission by reducing dynamin ac - tivity , thenwe expectedto observe theserecycling inter - mediates at lower temperatures in shi ts ; awd double mu - tants than in shi ts mutants alone . Furthermore , we anticipated observing such membrane invaginations in 1 / Y ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 mutants at 39 8 C , a temperature at which they show a synaptic transmission defect in our electroretinogram recordings . In cross - sectional view , the membrane invaginations appear as thin , elongated electron - dense structures ( arrow in Figure 4B ) . After establishing conditions for observing these structures in our shi ts mutants , we ana - lyzed various experimental and control photoreceptor terminals by EM . For each animal , we selected single cross - sections through the lamina and counted the number of structures visible in individual cartridges , modules containing synaptic terminals of the photore - ceptor cells ( R1 – R6 ) . As predicted , we observed these Figure 3 . Hypomorphic awd Alleles Not Only Reduce the Tempera - tureforSynapticFailurein shi ts Synapses ( A ) , butalsoShowSynaptic characteristic structures at lower temperatures in a shi ts ; Failure in Isolation ( B ) awd mutant background than in shi ts or shi ts ; PAS7 ; awd ( A ) Numbers in parentheses beside the genotypes indicate restric - controls ( Figures 4A – 4C and 4F ) . At 31 8 C , shi CK2 ; tive temperature for adult paralysis . In the electroretinogram re - awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 nerve terminals show 5 . 3 6 0 . 2 struc - cordings shown , transient spikes that precede ( arrows ) and follow tures per section through a laminar cartridge ( 19 car - ( arrowheads ) compoundresponsesofphotoreceptorstolightstimu - tridges , 4 animals ) , compared to 0 . 9 6 0 . 1 structures lation derive from synaptic transmission between photoreceptor per section / cartridge in shi CK2 ; 1 / 1 flies under identical cells and the optic lobes . These “on” and “off” transients are selec - conditions ( 31 cartridges , 6 animals ) . This increase ( p , tively lost in shi CK2 flies at 36 8 C ( [ A ] , trace 1 ) ; however , in shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 double mutants , synaptic failure is evident at 30 8 C 10 2 9 ) in the observed number of recycling intermediates ( [ A ] , trace 2 ) . In the presence of a wild - type awd transgene ( PAS7 ) , is temperature and awd dependent as evidenced by the effect of awd mutations is alleviated : thus , ERGs of shi CK2 ; two control observations . First , at 19 8 C , shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 fliesdonotlosetheironandofftransients awd KRs6 show almost no evidence of abnormal recycling until 34 8 C ( [ A ] , trace 3 ) . ( 0 . 1 6 0 . 1 structures per section / cartridge based on 15 ( B ) Shows loss of synaptic on and off transients in ERG recordings cartridges in 3 animals examined ) ; second , the presence from y w / Y ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 mutants at 39 8 C ( [ B ] , trace 1 ) and con - of the PAS7 transgene greatly reduces ( p , 10 2 4 ) trols to show that this temperature dependent synaptic failure is not shown in the presence of a rescuing PAS7 transgene ( [ B ] , trace the number of tubular structures observed in shi CK2 ; 2 ) or in wild - type flies ( [ B ] , trace 3 ) . awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 nerveterminalsat31 8 C ( 1 . 8 6 0 . 4struc - tures per section / cartridge ; 18 cartridges , 5 animals ) . Structures similar to those observed in shi ts mutant pho - is reversible : that is , synaptic transients reappear if the toreceptor terminals were also observed at low levels fliesarerestoredtopermissivetemperatures . Thus , Awd in 1 / Y ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 terminals exposed to light at is essential for normal synaptic transmission , and condi - 39 8 C ( Figure 4D ; 23 cartridges , 5 animals ) . This number , tional synaptic defects are seen in mutant animals that 0 . 7 6 0 . 3 structures per section / cartridge , was signifi - otherwise appear completely normal . cantly reduced ( p 5 0 . 03 ) to 0 . 05 6 0 . 05 by the presence of the PAS7 transgene ( Figure 4E and 4F ; 17 cartridges , awd Function Is Required for Synaptic 4 animals ) . Vesicle Recycling Our observation that awd mutants cause accumula - To test whether the synaptic transmission block in shi ; tion of recycling intermediates indistinguishable from those observed in shi ts mutant nerve terminals strongly awd or awd mutants derive from blocked dynamin - Neuron202 Figure 4 . Similar Membrane Intermediates Are Arrested in awd and shi ts Mutant Nerve Terminals Characteristic recycling intermediates ( white arrows ) arrested in photoreceptor terminals of shi ts flies at nonpermissive temperatures are observed in shi ; awd double mutants at much lower temperatures ; remarkably , simi - lar structures are also visible in awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 animals at elevated temperatures . Abbreviations : shi 5 shi CK2 ; awd 5 awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 ; P ( awd 1 ) 5 PAS7 . ( A ) – ( C ) showrepre - sentative control ( w ) , w shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 and control w shi CK2 ; PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 terminals under EM at 31 8 C . ( D ) and ( E ) show y w / Y ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 and y w / Y ; PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 terminals at 39 8 C . The temperatures were selected based on behavioral and ERG analysis to most ef - fectively explore potential differences be - tween shi ; awd and shi ; P ( awd 1 ) ; awd mu - tants ( 31 8 C ) or awd and P ( awd 1 ) ; awd ( 39 8 C ) , respectively . Thehistogramin ( F ) showsnum - ber of invaginations apparent per section through a laminar cartridge in the various ge - notypes . Note that these structures are ab - sent at 19 8 C in shi ; awd double mutants that show large numbers of these structures at 31 8 C . indicates that awd mutations affect the internalization awd Mutations Do Not Alter Presynaptic Organization or Dynamin Levels step in vesicle recycling , at , or very close to , the stage Before considering how a relatively specific effect on at which dynamin is required . We looked to see whether dynamin function may derive from a reduced Awd activ - an internalization block could be directly observed by ity , we tested whether any of the awd mutant pheno - studying the temperature dependence of fluorescent dye types could derive from defects in synapse architecture ( FM1 - 43 ) uptake into recycling synaptic vesicles at mo - or altered levels or localization of dynamin . The general tor synapses on bodywall muscles of third instar larvae morphology of the motor nerve endings in an awd ( Betz and Bewick , 1992 ; Ramaswami et al . , 1994 ) . When background , visualized by synaptotagmin staining and stimulated at 38 8 C with high - potassium ( 60 mM ) saline viewed by confocal microscopy , was indistinguishable containing the endocytic tracer FM1 - 43 , wshi CK2 / Y ; from controls ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . In wild - type ( data not awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 motor terminals ( n 5 8 ) on larval body - shown ) , w shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 ( Figure 6A ) , and w wallmuscleswerelabeledpoorlyornotatall ; incontrast , shi CK2 ; PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 animals ( Figure 7B ) , the motor terminals on wshi CK2 / Y ; PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 characteristic arborization pattern of the two motor ax - muscles were robustly labeled ( Figure 5 ; n 5 8 ) . At room ons was clearly visible : synaptotagmin was tightly asso - temperature , terminals in animals of either genotype ciatedwithpresynaptic varicosities ( boutons ) , wherethe were strongly labeled ( data not shown ) . Although we transmitter release machinery is localized . Viewed at did observe some variability in the uptake into a single even higher resolution , a more detailed organization of identified synapse ( see Experimental Procedures ) , the dynamin , in a “honeycomb” pattern that surrounds ac - data unequivocally indicated a role for awd function in tive zones for vesicle release , exists within individual stimulation - dependent dye loading . To roughly monitor wild - type varicosities ( Figure 6C ; Estes et al . , 1996 ; Gon - theefficiencyofexocytosisatthesesynapses , wetested zalez - Gaitan and Jackle , 1997 ; Roos and Kelly , 1999 ; whether terminals loaded with dye at permissive tem - Wan et al . , 2000 ) . This organization is preserved in w peratures would unload their contents if stimulated at shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 ( Figure 6D ) as well as w shi CK2 ; 38 8 C . Consistent with a specific effect of awd , exocytosis , PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 ( Figure 6E ) animals . Finally , monitored by such dye - unloading experiments , was not as judged by Western blotting of head lysates ( Figure detectably different between experimental and control 6F ) , dynamin levels are unchanged in awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 larvae ( n 5 4 ) . Taken together with our physiological mutants analyzed in both wild - type and w shi CK2 back - and ultrastructural studies on synaptic transmission at grounds . Thus , the effect of awd mutations on vesicle photoreceptor synapses , these results establish that recycling occurs downstream of mechanisms that regu - synaptic vesicle endocytosis is severely compromised late presynaptic organization and levels of dynamin , yet at a stage very close to that requiring dynamin . by hypomorphic awd mutations . NDK Regulates Dynamin Function In Vivo 203 Figure 5 . awd Mutations Affect Synaptic Vesicle Internalization Reduceduptakeofafluorescentendocytosistracer , FM1 - 43 , into nerve terminals of w shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 larvae ( A ) compared to w shi CK2 ; PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 con - trols ( B ) identically stimulated at 38 8 C with high - potassium saline in the presence of FM1 - 43 . Terminals on muscles 6 and 7 , im - aged in both preparations after washing at 38 8 C to remove surface - bound dye , are clearly visible in ( B ) . Terminals of both these genotypes take up dye at lower tempera - tures ; control shi CK2 / Y ; 1 / 1 and 1 / Y ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 preparations efficiently in - ternalize FM1 - 43 under the conditions of the experiment ( data not shown ) . The tempera - turesrequiredforobservingacompleteblockinmembraneinternalizationat shi ts larval mo - tor terminals are typically about 6 8 C higher than the temperature at which behavioral pa - ralysis is observed ( Ramaswami et al . , 1993 , 1994 ; Krishnan et al . , 1996 ) . Most Cellular Dynamin and NDK Are Not Physically between dynamin and NDK using coimmunolocaliza - tion , cell fractionation , coimmunopreciptation , and GST Associated In Vivo While experiments described above demonstrate that pulldown experiments . Although Awd / NDK is highly ex - pressed in the CNS and present in synaptic regions of Awd is essential for internalization of synaptic vesicle membrane , they do not address the mechanism of Awd the brain , it is not selectively enriched at presynaptic terminals as might be predicted if it existed predomi - function in endocytosis . Several lines of data suggested a weakphysical associationbetween dynaminand NDK . nantly in a dynamin - bound form ( Figure 7 ) . In biochemi - cal fractionation experiments , we , like Shpetner and First , the original report on purification of dynamin de - scribed isolation of NDK as a dynamin cofactor required Vallee ( 1992 ) , found Drosophila dynamin to be substan - tially present in pellet fractions P2 and P3 , while the for observing a microtubule - stimulated ATPase activity ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) . Second , there are intriguing Awdprotein ishighlyenriched inthefinal supernatentS3 ( data not shown ) . Beads conjugated to affinity - purified observations to suggest that NDP kinase can act as a local GDP - GTP exchange factor by directly associating dynamin antibodies ( 2074 ) or a GST fusion to a domain of DAP160 / Intersectin ( Roos and Kelly , 1998 ) brought withspecificGproteins , thereby providingalocalsupply of GTP ( Zhu et al . , 1999 ) . down dynamin but not Awd / NDK from an S2 fraction containing both proteins . Attempts to trap transient in - We found little direct support for physical interactions Figure 6 . The Effect of awd Mutations on Vesicle Recycling Is Downstream of Mecha - nisms that Regulate Synapse Morphology , Dynamin Organization , and Dynamin Levels ( A and B ) In w shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 double mutants ( A ) , nerve terminal arborization viewed by synaptotagmin immunoreactivity appears normal compared to PAS7 trans - gene carrying controls ( B ) . ( C ) Dynamin ( green ) is organized asa presyn - aptic meshwork ( Estes et al . , 1996 ) that sur - rounds active zones for vesicle fusion ( red ) ( Roos and Kelly , 1999 ) . Active zones for fu - sion are labeled by anti - myc antibodies in MHC - GluRIIb - myc flies expressing a myc epitope – tagged glutamate receptor in mus - cle ; immunoelectron microscopy has shown that these receptors cluster at postsynaptic sites directly opposed to presynaptic , elec - tron - dense bodies ( Petersen et al . , 1997 ) . ( D and E ) This honeycomb organization of dynamin can be observed in w shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 terminals ( D ) as well as w shi CK2 ; PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 controls ( E ) . ( F ) Western blot data to show that dynamin ( Dyn ) levels are not altered by awd mutations in a wild - type or shi ts background . b - tubulin ( b - tub ) serves as a loading control . Neuron204 Figure 7 . Awd Protein Is Present in the Neu - ronal Cell Bodies , Axons , and Synaptic Re - gions of the Brain Immunocytochemical staining of sections through adult head sections show that Awd ( A ) is expressed in high levels in the brain being present in somatic as well as neuropile regions that are highly enriched in cysteine string protein Csp ( B ) . In awd MSM95 / awd MSM95 homozygotes , Awd immunoreactivity is se - verely reduced . Analysis of the larval nmj re - veals that , unlike dynamin or the synaptic vesicleproteinCsp , Awdpresentinnerveand muscle ( G ) isnotselectivelyenrichedatnerve terminals ( H ) where dynamin and synaptic vesicle protein csp are enriched ( I ) . ( H ) and ( I ) are a confocal image pair from a single preparation double stained for Awd ( H ) and csp ( I ) . teractions between NDK and dynamin , using high con - by NDK activity measured in fly homogenates . It further suggests that Awd and H1 / H2 may need to bind a spe - centrations of GDP and ATP or ATP g - s for instance , were also unsuccessful ( data not shown ) . These admit - cific partner protein for appropriate function in endocy - tosis : presumably , this binding involves protein domains tedly negative data indicate that dynamin and NDK are predominantly not associated in vivo . However , they do whose sequences have diverged through evolution . not rule out weak or transient associations between dynamin and NDK molecules at nerve terminals that are Discussion suggested by the following genetic data . An elegant genetic analysis of awd indicates that NDK The major conclusion of this study , that dynamin func - tion at nerve terminals is particularly sensitive to inhibi - function in vivo requires association with specific intra - cellular proteins ( Xu et al . , 1996 ) . Human H1 or H2 trans - tion of Awd function , is significant for three reasons . First , because dynamin appears to serve as a “master genes that provide levels of global NDP kinase activity greater than , or similar to , that provided by the Drosoph - regulator” of endocytosis ( Sever et al . , 1999 ) , the rate of synaptic vesicle recycling in vivo could be acutely ila PAS7 transgene only partially rescueorganismal phe - notypes of awd null mutants ( Xu et al . , 1996 ) . This sug - regulated by NDK - dependent supply of GTP . Second , our results imply that NDK , as the major facilitator of gested that enzyme activity required for viability needs to be provided in the local context of specific , yet un - dynamin’s GDP - GTP exchange reaction ( or simply GTP loading ) essentially acts as an unconventional guano - identified , protein partners ( Xu et al . , 1996 ) . Our analysis of the relative efficiency of awd rescue by the human sine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) for presynaptic dynamin . Finally , because awd and nm23 are tightly and Drosophila transgenes provides support for the no - tion that Awd function in endocytosis requires associa - conserved functional homologs , the in vivo link between Awd and the dynamin may be relevant to understanding tion with dynamin or a molecule in the proximity of dy - namin ( Table 3 ) . mechanisms that underlie nm23 - mediated tumor sup - pression . Xu et al . ( 1996 ) have demonstrated that two copies of the PAS7 , H1 ( line 1 ) and H2 ( line 4 ) transgenes , respectively , provide 46 % , 21 % , and 45 % of wild - type Awd Regulates Dynamin Function In Vivo The GTPase dynamin occupies a unique position in the NDK activity measured under identical conditions in adult fly homogenates . Single copies of the transgenes processofmembraneinternalization . Itsactivity , specifi - cally the lifetime of the GTP - bound form of dynamin provide half as much activity . We observe ( Table 3 ) that human transgenes providing more global NDK activity ( dynamin : GTP ) , controls the rate of membrane internal - ization in non - neuronal cells where this issue has been than a Drosophila transgene are yet less effective in providing NDK function required for endocytosis . For analyzed ( Sever et al . , 1999 , 2000b ) . Thus , the entire process of membrane internalization occurs faster in instance ( Table 3 ) , two copies of the H2 transgene that provide 46 % wild - type NDK activity result in a 2 . 5 8 C cells expressing a mutant dynamin in which its assem - bly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis is inhibited . Because dy - alleviation ( 40 % rescue ) of shi ; awd t . s . paralysis com - pared to a 5 8 C alleviation ( 80 % rescue ) by a Drosophila namin : GTP participates in the rate - determining step of membraneinternalization , mechanismsthatregulatethe transgene that provides only half as much ( 23 % ) NDK activity . This indicates that Awd / Nm23 activity required lifetime of dynamin : GTP are particularly important from the context of synaptic vesicle recycling . In principle , for synaptic vesicle endocytosis is not predicted simply NDK Regulates Dynamin Function In Vivo 205 altered rates of synaptic vesicle recycling could be achieved by regulation of dynamin activity . Multiple lines of evidence presented here indicate that reducing Awd activity in vivo specifically reduces the efficiency of dynamin , a GTPase essential for endocyto - sis . Inasearchforgenesencodingregulatorsofsynaptic vesicle endocytosis , we identified three viable , hypo - morphic alleles of awd , the Drosophila homolog of hu - man tumor suppressor nm23 , that encodes a cyto - plasmic NDP kinase activity ( Rosengard et al . , 1989 ; Biggs et al . , 1990 ; Figures 1 – 2 ) . The specificity of the effectsof awd onthe temperaturesensitivityof shi paral - ysis suggested a significant requirement for Awd in syn - aptic vesicle recycling ( Table 1 ) . We confirmed by elec - trophysiology ( Figure 3 ) , tracer uptake experiments ( Figure 5 ) , and electron microscopy ( Figure 4 ) that shi ts ; awd double mutant synapses show all the characteristic cellular phenotypes of dynamin inhibition at lower tem - peratures than shi ts mutants alone . No new phenotypes were seen . Importantly , EM analysis shows that charac - teristic recycling intermediates may be arrested at lower temperaturesin shi ts ; awd doublemutantnerveterminals than in shi ts mutant terminals alone . This localizes the effect of Awd inhibition to a stage indistinguishable from the dynamin - requiring step . Also significant , genetic re - duction of awd function alone caused synaptic failure at high temperature , in a manner similar to shi ts mutants that carry missense mutations in the GTPase domain of dynamin ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Grant et al . , 1998 ; Figure 3 – 4 ) . Thus , our experiments demon - strate that relatively high levels of Awd activity are re - quired for normal synaptic vesicle recycling . We show , Figure 8 . Models for Awd / NDK Function using an active site mutant transgene ( Xu et al . , 1996 ; ( A ) ModelindicatinghowAwd / NDKmayfacilitateformationofactive Table 3 ) , that NDK activity rather than other potential dynamin : GTP . In this model , NDK acts like an unconventional GEF activities of the protein is essential for Awd function in thatfacilitatesdynamins’sGTPloadingorGDP - GTPexchangereac - synaptic vesicle recycling ; thus , the effect of Awd in tion . This could occur either via regulation of global GTP levels to which presynaptic dynamin is particularly sensitive or via regulation vesicle recycling is likely mediated by a nucleotide tri - of local GTP levels at nerve terminals or in the immediate proximity phosphate ( NTP ) . Given that dynamin is a GTPase and of dynamin . Dynamin exists as an oligomer in vivo , probably as a thatAwd / NDK synthesizesGTPfrom GDP , itis likelythat tetramer . Although shown as a single step , the process of dynamin this effect of awd mutations occurs via altered dynamin activation is likely to involve multiple , NDK - sensitive , reversible function . Furthermore , as Awd levels appear limiting for steps , in which individual dynamin monomers exchange GDP for dynamin function at nerve terminals , our observations GTP . It is not yet clear whether a dynamin multimer associated with both GTP ( on some subunits ) and GDP ( on others ) is partially active . indicate that NDK can regulate dynamin activity in vivo . Adapted from Sever et al . ( 1999 ) . The import of this is that levels and stability of dy - ( B ) Thepathwayforreceptordownregulationwithpostulatedstages namin : GTP , whichcontrolstheratelimitingstepinendo - at which different tumor suppressor functions c - Cbl , Tsg101 , and cytosis , may be regulated not only by GAP activity trig - Nm23 ( Levkowitz et al . , 1998 ; Babst et al . , 2000 ; and this report ) are gered by dynamin assembly , but also by the efficiency required . This diagram is adapted from Babst et al . ( 2000 ) . of GTP loading , a step dependent on NDK - generated GTP ( Figure 8A ) . 1991 ) . For these GTPases , the availability of GTP - or GDP - bound forms are modulated by respective groups The Specificity of NDK – Dynamin Interactions Phenotypes we observe in our viable awd mutants are of accessory proteins such as GAPs and GEFs / GDIs that regulate GTP hydrolysis and GDP - GTP exchange , remarkably specific : the mutations either enhance or independently display shi ts phenotypes . Defects in de - respectively ( Bourne et al . , 1990 , 1991 ) . In contrast , GTP loading of dynamin may be determined substantially by velopment or general behavior are not obvious . This suggests a rather specific connection between NDK and local concentrations of cellular GTP : the K m of purified dynamin is between 10 m M and 30 m M , and accessory dynamin functions in vivo . One straightforward explana - tion for this specificity is that dynamin , in vivo , is unusu - GDP - GTP exchange factors have never been identified ( Baba et al . , 1995 ; Warnock and Schmid , 1996 ; Sever ally sensitive to levels of cytoplasmic GTP that , in turn , depend on levels of NDK . Experiments with purified et al . , 2000a ) . Dynamin’s unusual sensitivity to a general reduction in GTP concentration may be easily explained GTPases indicate that most bind GTP in a range of concentrations ( 10 2 7 – 10 2 11 ) much lower than the resting if the affinities for dynamin and other GTPases , deter - mined usingpurified proteinsin vitro , closely reflecttheir cytoplasmic GTP concentration ( 100 m M ; Bourne et al . , Neuron206 firmed in elegant experiments analyzing effects of con - Table 4 . Temperature - Sensitive Paralytic Mutations Used and Their Restrictive Temperatures stitutivelyexpressing nm23 inseveralmurineandhuman nm23 - deficent invasive tumor cell lines ( Leone et al . , Mutant Line Restrictive Temp ( 8 C ) 1991 , 1993 ; Baba et al . , 1995 ; Parhar et al . , 1995 ; Fukuda shi ts2 27 et al . , 1996 ) . Although NDP kinase is essential for a shi ts4 28 . 5 wide range of biological functions such as microtubule shi Shy 34 . 5 polymerization and signal transduction , it is not yet un - shi CK2 35 derstood which of these varied processes are involved para ts1 27 comt tp7 35 in tumor suppression . Our observations demonstrate that nm23 inhibition has the capacity to reduce the rate of dynamin - depen - dent endocytosis in vivo . It is conceivable that this is properties in vivo . As most biochemical properties of irrelevant to the tumor suppressor function of nm23 . For dynamin have been obtained in vitro , supporting in vivo instance , nm23 inhibition could affect dynamin activities data are both important and informative . Thus , in this unrelated to membrane internalization ( Whistler and von model , NDK provides GTP required for generating dy - Zastrow , 1999 ; Fish et al . , 2000 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ) , namin : GTPeitherbyfacilitatingGTP loadingorbyacting nm23 activities unrelated to GTP synthesis ( Engel et al . , like a local or remote GEF ( Figure 8A ) . 1995 , 1998 ; MacDonald et al . , 1996 ; Freije et al . , 1997 ; It is also feasible to consider an alternative model in Wagner et al . , 1997 ) or activities of other dynamin family which NDK transiently associates with dynamin and is members similarly sensitive to GTP levels ( Richter et al . , optimally positionedto providea very highlocal concen - 1995 ; van der Bliek , 1999 ) . However , it is interesting to tration of soluble GTP . This would promote GDP for GTP consider the possible connections between endocyto - exchange and increase the availability of GTP - bound sis and tumor suppression . Figure 8B suggests a model dynamin . Several previous analyses of NDP kinase inter - in which Nm23 functions as a tumor suppressor by facili - actions in vitro have suggested that NDKs can associate tating the downregulation of activated growth factor re - with GTPases and activate them in situ , via direct phos - ceptors via endocytosis ( Futter et al . , 1996 ; Figure 8B ) . phorylation of protein - associated GDP ( Zhu et al . , 1999 ; Such a model is supported by recent demonstrations but see Randazzo et al . , 1992 ) . Although we found no that two putative tumor suppressor proteins , Tsg101 physical evidence for association of Awd / NDK with dy - and c - Cbl function at deeper stages of the endocytic namin , genetic data ( Table 3 ) nevertheless support the pathway to lysosomes ( Jongeward et al . , 1995 ; Yoon et idea that NDK activity required for dynamin function is al . , 1995 ; Levkowitz et al . , 1998 , 1999 ; Babst et al . , 2000 ; provided close to the site of dynamin action . The two Figure 8B ) . In addition , several other tumor suppressor models we propose to explain the specific effect of genes have been mapped to small chromosomal inter - awd mutations on dynamin function are not mutually vals that encode , among others , proteins known to be exclusive . Model 1 suggests that dynamin is most sensi - involved in endocytosis ( Floyd and De Camilli , 1998 ) . tive to reductions in global GTP concentrations , model Data we present make a strong case that an early 2 that NDP kinase provides a local supply of GTP to effectof nm23 inhibitionmaybetocompromisedynamin dynamin . Itispossibletoimaginethatweakassociations activity in vivo . This association of Nm23 with a GTPase between NDP kinase and dynamin ( or a proximal mole - involved in endocytosis may be important for under - cule ) have evolved specifically to accommodate the low standing how nm23 functions in tumor suppression . In - K d of dynamin for GTP . terpreted in the context of recent links between cancer Finally , it is important to appreciate that the effect of and endocytosis , our results support an emerging idea NDK inhibition on GTP levels depends not only on NDK that endocytosis and receptor downregulation are criti - activitybutalsoontherateatwhichGTPisdepleted ; this cal for tumor suppression in vivo . could vary substantially under different physiological conditions and in different subcellular regions . Little is Experimental Procedures currently known about how GTP metabolism varies within cells . It is easy to conceive that GTP in a nerve Drosophila Stocks and Culture Conditions terminal undergoing rapid bursts of exocytosis , or in a Drosophila cultures were maintained between 18 8 and 25 8 . The shi ts4 rapidly dividing cell , may be more rapidly turned over strain was provided by Dr . Chun - Fang Wu ; para ts1 was obtained from Dr . Barry Ganetzky . A list of t . s . paralytic mutants used and than , for instance , GTP in a quiescent nondividing cell their temperatures of paralysis is shown in Table 4 . The awd lethal like an osteoclast . Thus , dynamin in these contexts may alleles , the awd transgene stocks ( PAS7 and H119A 3 ) , and the two be particularly sensitive to levels of NDK activity . human nm23 transgenes H1 - 1 and H2 - 4 were from Dr . Allen Shearn ; the awd Kpn ; prune alleles were provided by Dr . Tadmiri Venkatesh ; Insight into nm23 - Deficient , Invasive Tumors and transgenic MHC - DGluRIIb - myc flies were from Dr . Aaron Our analysis directly addresses NDK regulation of dy - Di Antonio . All other strains , duplications , deficiencies , conventional , and GFP balancer chromosomes were either from our lab stocks or namin in the context of synaptic vesicle recycling . How - from the Bloomington stock center ( GFP balancers , Df ( 3R ) faf - BP ) . ever , the discovery that awd mutations affect dynamin - dependent endocytosis may also have implications for Measurements of Paralysis understanding the role of the mammalian ortholog , To study paralysis , we used a previously described , temperature - nm23 , in tumor / metastasis suppression . Nm23 was controlled glass chamber called the “sushicooker” ( Ramaswami et identified based on its reduced expression in several al . , 1993 ; Grant et al . , 1998 ) . Paralysis was empirically defined as metastatic tumors ( Steeget al . , 1988a , 1988b ) . Its poten - the condition where the animal lies on its back with little effective movement of legs and wings . About 10 – 30 flies were loaded into tial role as a “metastasis suppressor” has been con - NDK Regulates Dynamin Function In Vivo 207 a glass chamber held at different temperatures . The number of was recorded in a spectrophotometer and read at intervals of 10 s for 10 min . The slope of a linear plot of OD versus time was used paralyzed flies was noted at varying time points 0 – 5 min after intro - duction into the chamber . Between experiments , flies were allowed asameasureofenzymaticactivity . Wecomparedenzymaticactivity in lysates of w 1118 shi CK2 / w 1118 shi CK2 ; MSM95 / MSM95 flies to those of to recover for at least 10 min at 18 8 C – 20 8 C . The flies tested were between 2 and 4 days of age ; there is no significant variation in the control w 1118 shi CK2 / w 1118 shi CK2 ; 1 / 1 ; 1 / 1 . paralytic behavior of shi ts flies within this age group . Electroretinogram ( ERG ) Recording Extracellularrecordingsoflight - evokedvisualresponsesweremade Screen for enhancers of shibire We used the temperature - controlled sushicooker to screen for en - from eyes of 2 - or 3 - day - old flies grown at 22 8 C . Flies , lightly anes - thetized by cooling on ice , were mounted upright on modeling clay hancers of shibire paralysis ( See Ramaswami et al . , 1993 ) . Two - to four - day - old adult male shi Shy or shi CK2 flies were subjected to EMS with the right eye facing the light . Electrodes were heat - pulled glass capillaries with a tip resistance of 3 – 5 M V filled with 3 M KCl . When mutagenesis and mated with appropriate shi ts / shi ts virgin females ( 15 – 20 males and 30 females per bottle ) . About 190 , 000 progeny placedincontactwiththeeye , therecordingelectrodesensedmem - brane potential of photoreceptor and laminar cells . A reference from these crosses were screened for enhanced paralysis . Candi - datemutantflies werecrossedwithappropriate shi ts / shi ts matesand ground electrode was inserted into the backof the fly’s head ( in shi ts mutants , this avoids signals from spontaneous thoracic ganglion their progeny rescreened . We identified at least three different loci that enhanced shi paralysis . Here , we focus our discussion on three activity at elevated temperatures ) . Light flashes were generated using a custom - made pulsing circuit to control a 60 watt bulb , con - mutations , MSM95 , MSF15 , and CM47 that , when homozygous , strongly enhance the t . s . paralysis of shi ts flies . For these e ( shi ) nected to an optic fiber output placed 3 – 4 cm from the eye of the fixed fly . A plate connected to a DC power supply heated the mutations , when shi ts / Y ; e ( shi ) / 1 males were mated to shi ts / shi ts ; e ( shi ) / 1 females , a quarter of the progeny showed very strongly preparation ; a digital probe monitored temperature very close to the fly . The ramp time for the temperature to change from 20 8 C enhanced paralysis . When these flies were crossed to each other , a stable stock of homozygous shi ts / shi ts ; e ( shi ) / e ( shi ) flies that showed to 39 8 C was z 5 min . Signals were amplified using an intracellular preamplifier ( WPI , Waltham , MA ) anddataacquireddirectlyfromthe very strongly enhanced paralysis could be generated . oscilloscope display using a Polaroid camera . Recordings shown represent the steady state ERG achieved after a series of light Mapping of e ( shi ) A Mutations to awd flashes at the indicated temperature . Recombination Mapping of MSM95 We mapped MSM95 finely to the 100E region of chromosome III using recombination and deficiency mapping . We obtained a series Electron Microscopy of Retinular Cell Synapses Three - day - old male flies were used in all experiments . Flies were of w 1 - marked transgenes [ P ( w 1 ) stocks : 2140 ( 88D5 – D6 ) , 2144 ( 91F10 – 11 ) , 2159 ( 97B8 – 9 ) , 2160 ( 98E ) , 2161 ( 99D1 – 2 ) , 2162 ( 99D1 – 2 ) , placed into P 2 or P 20 pipette tips cut at the end such that fly heads , but not thoraces , protruded from the tip . In some instances , 2163 ( 99E1 – 2 ) , 2164 ( 100B2 – 4 ) , and 2166 ( 100E1 - E2 ) ] that had been mapped by the Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project ( BDGP ) to the flies were secured with a small drop of superglue . They were dark adapted in a moist dark chamber for at least 15 min . The fly’s specific regions of chromosome 3R . We plotted the fraction of re - combinants obtained between MSM95 and P ( w 1 ) as a function of head was then immersed in saline held at the appropriate tempera - turebyaPeltiersystem ( Physitemp , NJ ) . Theflywasthenexposedto P element map position . The points fell into a roughly straight line that intersects the ordinate at 100E , the position of the P insertion in 1minoflightstimulationfromaLeicaLux1000fiberopticilluminatorplaced1cmfromtheretinabeforefixationatthesametemperature line2166 ( 0recombinantsobtainedfrom500testprogeny ) . Thismap position was strengthened by deficiency mapping—the deficiency as the saline . Either of two fixatives used ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1996 ; Stimson et al . , 1998 ) yielded tissue of similar quality . For fixation , Df ( 3R ) faf - BP that deletes 100D – F does not complement MSM95 . Isolation of a Transposon - Induced Allele of e ( shi ) A ; the proboscis was quickly removed , and fixative was then perfused into the resulting hole in the anterior portion of the head for five Establishing Identity between awd and e ( shi ) A When we tested 352 and 2167 , two other chromosomes carrying P minutes using a drawn out Pasteur pipette . The head was fixed at elevated temperature for an additional 30 min , removed from the insertions in 100E , we discovered that 2167 , but not 352 , failed to complement MSM95 . This result was surprising , given a BDGP body , and kept in 4 % glutaraldehyde or 4 % paraformaldehyde , 1 % glutaraldehydeovernightat4 8 C . Thenextday , theheadswererinsed database report that both insertions occur within a few base pairs of each other . PCR and sequence analysis confirmed that while the in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer with 264 mM sucrose , post - fixed in 1 % or2 % osmiumtetroxide , andstained“enbloc”duringethanoldehy - 2167 insertion is present in awd as reported , the P insertion in 352 is either lost or present elsewhere on 3R . dration with 1 % uranyl acetate . Heads embedded in Epon / Araldite were thin sectioned at 60 nm . Sections stained with 2 % uranyl To confirm that the enhancer of shi phenotype resulted from the P element insertion , we mobilized the P element by crossing a acetate and 1 % lead citrate were examined with a Jeol 1200EX electron microscope . A single section through the middle of the transposase source ( D 2 – 3 ) into the 2167 background and deter - mined that several excision lines , from progeny in which the white - lamina was analyzed per individual fly . Wecountedandanalyzedthenumberofthin , elongated , electron - expressing Pelement waslost bytransposition , were nowwild - type for e ( shi ) A function . For final proof that MSM95 , MSF15 , and CM47 dense structures in a single cross - section through a given cartridge ( Figure 4F ) . A detailed serial analysis on a small number of these phenotypes are caused by mutations in awd , we performed genetic complemention and rescue analyses using awd lethal alleles ( awd b3 structures confirmed that they are flat membranous cisternae ema - nating from near the active zone as previously reported by Koenig and awd KRs6 ) and transgenic strains expressing awd , or either of two human nm23 genes , under awd promoter control ( PAS7 , H1 , and and Ikeda , 1996 . The two lipid bilayers of invaginated membrane are tightly apposed ( within 30 nm and form complex folds in the H2 , respectively ) . These strains were generously provided by Allen Shearn ( Johns Hopkins University ) . cytosol ( data not shown ) . Analysis of FM1 - 43 Uptake and Release at Larval Assaying NDP Kinase Activity in Drosophila Lysates We useda previously describedprocedure for assayingNDP kinase Motor Terminals Larvaldissections , salines , andFM1 - 43concentrationswereaspre - from Drosophila lysates ( Biggs et al . , 1990 ; Timmons et al . , 1995 ) . In brief , 20 adult flies were homogenized in 100 m l of ice - cold buffer viously described ( Ramaswami et al . , 1994 ; Estes et al . , 1996 ) . In brief , wandering thirdinstar larvaewerefilleted toreveal entiremus - containing 100 mM Tris - HCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 , and 100 mM KCl . The homogenate was centrifuged , supernatant extracted , and diluted culatureandnervoussystem ; forloadingandunloadingprocedures , the CNS was left attached . Because complete block in endocytosis 1 : 20 in the same homogenization buffer . Ten microliters of diluted lysate was added to 990 m l of reaction mixture containing 10 mM at shi ts larvalmotorterminalsrequirestemperaturesabout6 8 Chigher than the restrictive temperature for adult paralysis ( Ramaswami et MgCl 2 , 100 mM KCl , 0 . 4 mM NADH , 6 mM ATP , 0 . 7 mM TDP , 4 mM PEP , and 10 units of pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase al . , 1994 ) , we were restricted in the range of useful temperatures for analysis of awd phenotypes . After empirical testing , we chose each ( Timmons et al . , 1993 ) . The absorbence of NADH at 340 nm Neuron208 38 8 Casthemostconvenienttemperatureatwhichtostudypotential maswami lab for useful discussions and / or comments on the manu - script . We acknowledge Subhabrata Sanyal for help with ERG re - differences in dye uptake between w shi CK2 ; PAS7 / 1 ; awd MSM95 / awd KRs6 and w shi CK2 ; awd MSM95 / ; awd KRs6 larval synapses . We initially cordings , Chuck Hoeffer for expert help with adult head sections , and Narmada Khare for help in identifying a transposon - induced focused our attention on the synapses innervating muscles 6 and 7 of abdominal segments A - 2 and A - 3 ; however , we observed more awd allele . We are grateful to Gina Zhang , ARL Division of Biotech - nology Imaging Facility , for EM sectioning , and to Patty Jansma consistent results when we considered all of the visible muscle fibers . The preparations were examined with a Zeiss Axioskop for essential assistance with confocal and electron microscopy , performed using instruments belonging to the ARL Division of Neu - through a water immersion lens ( 40 3 , NA 0 . 75 or 63 3 , NA 0 . 9 ) . ImageswerecapturedusingachilledCCDcamera ( PrincetonInstru - robiology . We thank Troy Littleton and Hugo Bellen for anti - syt anti - bodies , ErichBuchnerandKonradZinsmaierforanti - cspantibodies , ments ) . After background subtraction ( muscle surface close to bright boutons ) digitized images wereidentically stretched and pro - Aaron Di Antonio for MHC - DGluRIIb - myc flies , and Jack Roos for anti - dynamin antibodies , GST - DAP160 constructs , and advice on cessed to maximize contrast in the brighter image , while preserving the relative intensities between control and experimental samples . biochemistry . TheworkwasfundedbyNIHgrantstoM . R . ( NS34889 and KO2 - NS02001 ) , an HSFP grant to M . R . ( and five others ) , funds Loading and unloading experiments were carried out in pairs—one control and one experimental animal were treated together . For the from the McKnight and Alfred P Sloan Foundations ( M . R . ) , as well as grants from the Government of India , Departments of Science unloading experiments , preparations were loaded with FM1 - 43 at room temperature , and images were acquired . The preparations and Technology and Biotechnology to K . S . K . were prewarmed , stimulated with high K 1 saline for 5 min , and then viewedagainunderthefluorescencemicroscopeinCa 2 1 - freesaline . Received August 21 , 2000 ; revised January 23 , 2001 . References Immunohistochemistry and Confocal Microscopy Dissected larvae were fixed in 3 . 5 % paraformaldehyde and pro - Alawi , A . A . , and Pak , W . L . ( 1971 ) . On - transient of insect electroreti - cessed for antibody staining as previously described ( Estes et al . , nogram : its cellular origin . Science 172 , 1055 – 1057 . 1996 ; Stimson et al . , 1998 ) . A Bio - Rad 600 confocal microscope running COMOS ( Bio - Rad , Richmond , CA ) or a PCM - 2000 laser - Baba , H . , Urano , T . , Okada , K . , Furukawa , K . , Nakayama , E . , Tanaka , scanning confocal microscope ( Nikon , Melville , NY ) and Simple32 H . , Iwasaki , K . , and Shiku , H . ( 1995a ) . Two isotypes of murine nm23 / software ( C Imaging , Cranberry Township , PA ) were used for image nucleoside diphosphate kinase , nm23 - M1 and nm23 - M2 , are in - acquisition . Rabbit anti - synaptotagmin antibody DSYT2 was used volvedinmetastaticsuppressionofamurinemelanomaline . Cancer at a 1 : 500 dilution , mouse anti - CSP antibody mab49 at 1 : 20 , rabbit Res . 55 , 1977 – 1981 . anti - dynamin antibody 2074 at 1 : 200 , and anti - Awd antibody HA1 Baba , T . , Damke , H . , Hinshaw , J . E . , Ikeda , K . , Schmid , S . L . , and was used at 1 : 100 dilution . Anti - myc epitope monoclonal antibody Warnock , D . E . ( 1995b ) . Role of dynamin in clathrin - coated vesicle 9E10 ( Sigma ) wasusedat1 : 100dilution ; secondaryantibodies ( Cap - formation . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 60 , 235 – 242 . pel ) were used at 1 : 200 . Babst , M . , Odorizzi , G . , Estepa , E . , and Emr , S . ( 2000 ) . Mammalian TSG101 and the yeast homologue Vps23p , both function in late Biochemical Fractionation , Immunoprecipitation , endosomal trafficking . Traffic 1 , 248 – 258 . GST Pulldowns , and Western Blotting Betz , W . J . , and Bewick , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Optical analysis of synaptic Fractionation procedures were largely as described by Van de Goor vesicle cycling at the frog neuromuscular junction . Science 255 , et al . ( 1995 ) and Roos and Kelly ( 1998 ) . For immunoprecipitations 200 – 203 . or GST pulldowns , the samples were diluted to 1 mg / ml of protein Biggs , J . , Tripoulas , N . , Hersperger , E . , Dearolf , C . , and Shearn , A . in IP buffer ( 50 mM Tris 7 . 4 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , 150 mM Nacl , and ( 1988 ) . AnalysisofthelethalinteractionbetweenthepruneandKiller 0 . 5 % Tween - 20 ) . To 1 ml of sample , affinity - purified 2074 ( at 1 : 25 of prune mutations of Drosophila . Genes Dev . 2 , 1333 – 1343 . final dilution ) or 10 m g of GST - DAP SH3 - B fusion protein ( Roos and Kelly , 1998 ) was added , and the mixture incubated for 3 hr at 4 8 C . Biggs , J . , Hersperger , E . , Steeg , P . S . , Liotta , L . A . , and Shearn , A . In some instances , the buffer also contained 100 m M of either GDP , ( 1990 ) . A Drosophila gene that is homologous to a mammalian gene GDP - b - S , GTP , or GTP - g - S in the presence of ATP or ATP - g - S . The associated with tumor metastasis codes for a nucleoside diphos - samples were then mixed with protein A sepharose ( Pharmacia ) phate kinase . Cell 63 , 933 – 940 . slurry ( for IPs ) or 30 m l of glutathione agarose resin ( for GST pull - Bourne , H . R . , Sanders , D . A . , andMcCormick , F . ( 1990 ) . The GTPase downs ) for 30 min . Beads were washed with IP buffer at least 6 superfamily : a conserved switch for diverse cell functions . Nature times , spun down , and then boiled in sample buffer . Under these 348 , 125 – 132 . conditions , a substantial fraction of dynamin was recovered with Bourne , H . R . , Sanders , D . A . , andMcCormick , F . ( 1991 ) . The GTPase the beads , but NDK was found exclusively in the unbound fraction . superfamily : conservedstructureandmolecularmechanism . Nature No effect of varying nucleotides was observed on the absence of 349 , 117 – 127 . NDK from the bound fraction . Chen , Y . S . , Obar , R . A . , Schroeder , C . C . , Austin , T . W . , Poodry , C . A . , For Western blotting , samples were subjected to SDS – PAGE and Wadsworth , S . C . , andVallee , R . B . ( 1991 ) . Multipleformsofdynamin gels were electroblotted onto Hybond - PVDF ( Amersham , Arlington areencodedbytheshibire , aDrosophilageneinvolvedinendocyto - Heights , IL ) , blocked with 5 % nonfat dry milk powder in PBS / 0 . 05 % sis . Nature 351 , 583 – 586 . Tween 20 , and incubated with 1 : 1000 dilution of anti - dynamin Ab2074 or a 1 : 2000 dilution of anti - Awd HA1 ( Timmons et al . , 1995 ) . Cremona , O . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1997 ) . Synaptic vesicle endocyto - A 1 : 1000 dilution of mouse monoclonal anti - b - tubulin was used sis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 7 , 323 – 330 . as loading control . Detection was done with an HRP - conjugated Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induc - secondary antibody ( Cappel ) and developed with an ECL detection tion of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle system ( Amersham , ArlingtonHeights , IL ) accordingtothemanufac - formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . turer’s directions . For comparing relative amounts of dynamin , we DeCamilli , P . , andTakei , K . ( 1996 ) . Molecularmechanismsinsynap - selected a dilution of lysate ( 1 / 2 head for dynamin ) at which the tic vesicle endocytosis and recycling . Neuron 16 , 481 – 486 . ECL signal was maximally sensitive , and corresponded roughly lin - Dearolf , C . R . , Hersperger , E . , andShearn , A . ( 1988a ) . Developmental early , to protein concentration . consequences of awdb3 , a cell - autonomous lethal mutation of Dro - sophila induced by hybrid dysgenesis . Dev . Biol . 129 , 159 – 168 . Acknowledgments Dearolf , C . R . , Tripoulas , N . , Biggs , J . , andShearn , A . ( 1988b ) . Molec - ular consequences of awdb3 , a cell - autonomous lethal mutation of We are particularly grateful to Allen Shearn for generous supply of Drosophila induced by hybrid dysgenesis . Dev . Biol . 129 , 169 – 178 . awd reagents and for several useful discussions . We thank Patricia Steeg , Jitu Mayor , Veronica Rodrigues , Tadmiri Venkatesh , Charles Engel , M . , Veron , M . , Theisinger , B . , Lacombe , M . L . , Seib , T . , Dooley , S . , and Welter , C . ( 1995 ) . A novel serine / threonine - specific protein Dearolf , Subhabrata Sanyal , Ted Weinert , and members of the Ra - NDK Regulates Dynamin Function In Vivo 209 phosphotransferase activity of Nm23 / nucleoside - diphosphate ki - A Pro / Ser substitution in nucleoside diphosphate kinase of Dro - sophila melanogaster ( mutation killer of prune ) affects stability but nase . Eur . J . Biochem . 234 , 200 – 207 . not catalytic efficiency of the enzyme . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 12775 – Engel , M . , Seifert , M . , Theisinger , B . , Seyfert , U . , and Welter , C . 12781 . ( 1998 ) . Glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphatedehydrogenaseandNm23 - H1 / nucleoside diphosphate kinase A . Two old enzymes combine for Leone , A . , Flatow , U . , King , C . R . , Sandeen , M . A . , Margulies , I . M . , Liotta , L . A . , andSteeg , P . S . ( 1991 ) . Reducedtumorincidence , meta - thenovel Nm23protein phosphotransferasefunction . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20058 – 20065 . static potential , and cytokine responsiveness of nm23 - transfected melanoma cells . Cell 65 , 25 – 35 . Estes , P . S . , Roos , J . , van der Bliek , A . , Kelly , R . B . , Krishnan , K . S . , andRamaswami , M . ( 1996 ) . Trafficofdynamin withinindividualDro - Leone , A . , Flatow , U . , VanHoutte , K . , and Steeg , P . S . ( 1993 ) . Trans - fection of human nm23 – H1 into the human MDA - MB - 435 breast sophila synaptic boutons relative to compartment - specific markers . J . Neurosci . 16 , 5443 – 5456 . carcinoma cell line : effects on tumor metastatic potential , coloniza - tion and enzymatic activity . Oncogene 8 , 2325 – 2353 . Fish , K . N . , Schmid , S . L . , and Damke , H . ( 2000 ) . Evidence that dy - namin - 2functionsasasignal - transducingGTPase . J . Cell . Biol . 150 , Levkowitz , G . , Waterman , H . , Zamir , E . , Kam , Z . , Oved , S . , Langdon , W . Y . , Beguinot , L . , Geiger , B . , and Yarden , Y . ( 1998 ) . c - Cbl / Sli - 1 145 – 154 . regulates endocytic sorting and ubiquitination of the epidermal Floyd , S . , andDeCamilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Endocytosisproteinsandcancer : growth factor receptor . Genes Dev . 12 , 3663 – 3674 . a potential link . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 299 – 301 . Levkowitz , G . , Waterman , H . , Ettenberg , S . A . , Katz , M . , Tsygankov , Freije , J . M . , Blay , P . , MacDonald , N . J . , Manrow , R . E . , and Steeg , A . Y . , Alroy , I . , Lavi , S . , Iwai , K . , Reiss , Y . , Ciechanover , A . , et al . P . S . ( 1997 ) . Site - directed mutation of Nm23 – H1 . Mutations lacking ( 1999 ) . Ubiquitin ligase activity and tyrosine phosphorylation under - motilitysuppressivecapacityupontransfectionaredeficientinhisti - lie suppression of growth factor signaling by c - Cbl / Sli - 1 . Mol Cell dine - dependent protein phosphotransferase pathways in vitro . J . 4 , 1029 – 1040 . Biol . Chem . 272 , 5525 – 5532 . Loughney , K . , Kreber , R . , and Ganetzky , B . ( 1989 ) . Molecular analy - Fukuda , M . , Ishii , A . , Yasutomo , Y . , Shimada , N . , Ishikawa , N . , Hanai , sis of the para locus , a sodium channel gene in Drosophila . Cell 58 , N . , Nagata , N . , Irimura , T . , Nicolson , G . L . , and Kimura , N . ( 1996 ) . 1143 – 1154 . Decreased expression of nucleoside diphosphate kinase alpha iso - form , an nm23 - H2 gene homolog , is associated with metastatic MacDonald , N . J . , Freije , J . M . P . , Stracke , M . L . , Manrow , R . E . , and Steeg , P . S . ( 1996 ) . Site - directedmutagenesisofnm23 – H1 . Mutation potential of rat mammary - adenocarcinoma cells . Int . J . Cancer 65 , 531 – 537 . of proline 96 or serine 120 abrogates its motility inhibitory activity upon transfection into human breast carcinoma cells . J . Biol . Chem . Futter , C . E . , Pearse , A . , Hewlett , L . J . , and Hopkins , C . R . ( 1996 ) . 271 , 25107 – 25116 . Multivesicular endosomes containing internalized EGF - EGF recep - tor complexes mature and then fuse directly with lysosomes . J . Cell Marsh , M . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 1999 ) . The structural era of endocy - tosis . Science 285 , 215 – 220 . Biol . 132 , 1011 – 1023 . Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . , and Jackle , H . ( 1997 ) . Role of Drosophila McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . , andYoon , Y . ( 2000 ) . Thedynamin family of mechanozymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . alpha - adaptin in presynaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 88 , 767 – 776 . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 . Grant , D . , Unadkat , S . , Katzen , A . , Krishnan , K . S . , and Ramaswami , M . ( 1998 ) . Probablemechanismsunderlyinginteralleliccomplemen - Pallanck , L . , Ordway , R . W . , and Ganetzky , B . ( 1995 ) . A Drosophila NSF mutant . Nature 376 , 25 . tation and temperature - sensitivity of mutations at the shibire locus of Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 149 , 1019 – 1030 . Parhar , R . S . , Shi , Y . , Zou , M . , Farid , N . R . , Ernst , P . , and al - Sedairy , S . T . ( 1995 ) . Effects of cytokine - mediated modulation of nm23 ex - Jongeward , G . D . , Clandinin , T . R . , and Sternberg , P . W . ( 1995 ) . sli - 1 , a negative regulator of let - 23 - mediated signaling in C . elegans . Ge - pression on the invasion and metastatic behavior of B16F10 mela - noma cells . Int . J . Cancer 60 , 204 – 210 . netics 139 , 1553 – 1566 . Kantor , J . D . , McCormick , B . , Steeg , P . S . , and Zetter , B . R . ( 1993 ) . Petersen , S . A . , Fetter , R . D . , Noordermeer , J . N . , Goodman , C . S . , and DiAntonio , A . ( 1997 ) . Genetic analysis of glutamate receptors in Inhibition of cell motility after nm23 transfection of human and mu - rine tumor cells . Cancer Res . 53 , 1971 – 1973 . Drosophila reveals a retrograde signal regulating presynaptic trans - mitter release . Neuron 19 , 1237 – 1248 . Kelly , L . E . , andSuzuki , D . T . ( 1974 ) . Theeffectsofincreasedtempera - ture on electroretinograms of temperature - sensitive paralysis mu - Poodry , C . A . ( 1990 ) . shibire : a neurogenic mutant of Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 138 , 464 – 472 . tants of Drosophila melanogaster . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 71 , 4906 – 4909 . Poodry , C . A . , and Edgar , L . ( 1979 ) . Reversible alterations in the neuromuscularjunctionsofDrosophilamelanogasterbearingatem - Kim , Y . - T . , and Wu , C . - F . ( 1990 ) . Allelic interactions at the shibire locus of Drosophila : effects on behaviour . J . Neurogenet . 7 , 1 – 14 . perature - sensitive mutation , shibire . J . Cell . Biol 81 , 520 – 527 . Ramaswami , M . , Rao , S . , vanderBliek , A . , Kelly , R . B . , andKrishnan , Koenig , J . , and Ikeda , K . ( 1989 ) . Disappearance and reappearance of synaptic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed K . S . ( 1993 ) . Genetic studies on dynamin function in Drosophila . J . Neurogenet . 9 , 73 – 87 . under reversible blockage of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 9 , 3844 – 3860 . Ramaswami , M . , Krishnan , K . S . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 1994 ) . Intermedi - ates in synaptic vesicle recycling revealed by optical imaging of Koenig , J . H . , and Ikeda , K . ( 1996 ) . Synaptic vesicles have two dis - tinct recycling pathways . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 797 – 808 . Drosophila neuromuscular junctions . Neuron 13 , 363 – 375 . Randazzo , P . A . , Kahn , R . A . , and Northup , J . K . ( 1992 ) . Nucleoside Koenig , J . H . , and Ikeda , K . ( 1999 ) . Contribution of active zone sub - populationofvesiclestoevokedandspontaneousrelease . J . Neuro - diphosphate kinase : conclusions withdrawn . Science 257 , 862 . physiol . 81 , 1495 – 1505 . Richter , M . F . , Schwemmle , M . , Herrmann , C . , Wittinghofer , A . , and Staeheli , P . ( 1995 ) . Interferon - induced MxA protein . GTP binding Kosaka , T . , and Ikeda , K . ( 1983 ) . Possible temperature - dependent blockage of synaptic vesicle recycling induced by a single gene and GTP hydrolysis properties . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 13512 – 13517 . mutation in Drosophila . J . Neurobiol . 14 , 207 – 225 . Roos , J . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 1998 ) . Dap160 , a neural - specific Eps15 homologyandmultipleSH3domain - containingproteinthatinteracts Kramer , H . , Cagan , R . L . , and Zipursky , S . L . ( 1991 ) . Interaction of bride of sevenless membrane - bound ligand and the sevenless tyro - with Drosophila dynamin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 19108 – 19119 . sine - kinase receptor . Nature 352 , 207 – 212 . Roos , J . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 1999 ) . The endocytic machinery in nerve terminals surrounds sites of exocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1411 – 1414 . Krishnan , K . S . , Chakravarti , S . , Raghuram , V . , and Ramaswami , M . ( 1996 ) . Specific alleviation of the temperature - sensitive paralytic Rosengard , A . M . , Krutzsch , H . C . , Shearn , A . , Biggs , J . R . , Barker , phenotype of shibire ts mutants in Drosophila by subanesthetic con - E . , Margulies , I . M . , King , C . R . , Liotta , L . A . , and Steeg , P . S . ( 1989 ) . centrations of carbon dioxide . J . Neurogenet . 10 , 221 – 238 . ReducedNm23 / AwdproteinintumourmetastasisandaberrantDro - sophila development . Nature 342 , 177 – 180 . Lascu , I . , Chaffotte , A . , Limbourg - Bouchon , B . , andVeron , M . ( 1992 ) . Neuron210 Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1999 ) . Impairment of visualsystemofDrosophila : geneticdissectionofelectroretinogram components . J . Gen . Physiol . 69 , 705 – 724 . dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 , 481 – 486 . Xu , J . , Liu , L . Z . , Deng , X . F . , Timmons , L . , Hersperger , E . , Steeg , P . S . , Veron , M . , and Shearn , A . ( 1996 ) . The enzymatic activity of Sever , S . , Damke , H . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000a ) . Garrotes , springs , Drosophila AWD / NDP kinase is necessary but not sufficient for its ratchets and whips : putting dynamin models to the test . Traffic 1 , biological function . Dev . Biol . 177 , 544 – 557 . 385 – 392 . Yoon , C . H . , Lee , J . , Jongeward , G . D . , and Sternberg , P . W . ( 1995 ) . Sever , S . , Damke , H . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000b ) . Dynamin : GTP con - Similarity of sli - 1 , a regulator of vulval development in C . elegans , trols the formation of constricted coated pits , the rate limiting step to the mammalian proto - oncogene c - cbl . Science 269 , 1102 – 1105 . in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 50 , 1137 – 1148 . Zhu , J . , Tseng , Y . H . , Kantor , J . D . , Rhodes , C . J . , Zetter , B . R . , Moyers , Shpetner , H . , andVallee , R . ( 1989 ) . Identificationofdynamin , anovel J . S . , and Kahn , C . R . ( 1999 ) . Interaction of the Ras - related protein mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between mi - associated with diabetes rad and the putative tumor metastasis crotubules . Cell 59 , 421 – 432 . suppressor NM23 provides a novel mechanism of GTPase regula - Shpetner , H . S . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1992 ) . Dynamin is a GTPase stimu - tion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 14911 – 14918 . lated tohigh levels of activityby microtubules . Nature 355 , 733 – 735 . Zuker , C . S . ( 1996 ) . The biology of vision of Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Simon , M . A . , Bowtell , D . D . , Dodson , G . S . , Laverty , T . R . , and Rubin , Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 571 – 576 . G . M . ( 1991 ) . Ras1 and a putative guanine nucleotide exchange fac - tor perform crucial steps in signaling by the sevenless protein tyro - sine kinase . Cell 67 , 701 – 716 . Steeg , P . S . , Bevilacqua , G . , Kopper , L . , Thorgeirsson , U . P . , Tal - madge , J . E . , Liotta , L . A . , and Sobel , M . E . ( 1988a ) . Evidence for a novel gene associated with low tumor metastatic potential . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 80 , 200 – 204 . Steeg , P . S . , Bevilacqua , G . , Pozzatti , R . , Liotta , L . A . , and Sobel , M . E . ( 1988b ) . Altered expression of NM23 , a gene associated with low tumor metastatic potential , during adenovirus 2 Ela inhibition of experimental metastasis . Cancer Res . 48 , 6550 – 6554 . Stimson , D . T . , Estes , P . S . , Smith , M . , Kelly , L . E . , and Ramaswami , M . ( 1998 ) . AproductoftheDrosophilastonedlocusregulatesneuro - transmitter release . J . Neurosci . 18 , 9638 – 9649 . Sturtevant , A . H . ( 1956 ) . Genetics 41 , 118 – 123 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1995 ) . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are in - duced by GTPgS in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 – 190 . Teng , D . H . , Engele , C . M . , and Venkatesh , T . R . ( 1991 ) . A product of the prune locus of Drosophila is similar to mammalian GTPase - activating protein . Nature 353 , 437 – 440 . Timmons , L . , Hersperger , E . , Woodhouse , E . , Xu , J . , Liu , L . Z . , and Shearn , A . ( 1993 ) . TheexpressionoftheDrosophilaawdgeneduring normal development and in neoplastic brain tumors caused by lgl mutations . Dev . Biol . 158 , 364 – 379 . Timmons , L . , Xu , J . , Hersperger , G . , Deng , X . F . , and Shearn , A . ( 1995 ) . Point mutations in awdKpn which revert the prune / Killer of prune lethal interaction affect conserved residues that are involved in nucleoside diphosphate kinase substrate binding and catalysis . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 23021 – 23030 . van der Bliek , A . ( 1999 ) . Functional diversity in the dynamin family . Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 96 – 102 . van der Bliek , A . , and Meyerowitz , E . ( 1991 ) . Dynamin like protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with membrane traffic . Nature 351 , 411 – 414 . van de Goor , J . , Ramaswami , M . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 1995 ) . Redistribu - tion of synaptic vesicles and their proteins in shibire ts1 mutant Dro - sophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 5739 – 5743 . Vieira , A . V . , Lamaze , C . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1996 ) . Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 274 , 2086 – 2089 . Wagner , P . D . , Steeg , P . S . , and Vu , N . D . ( 1997 ) . Two - component kinase - like activity of nm23 correlates with its motility - suppressing activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 9000 – 9005 . Wan , H . I . , DiAntonio , A . , Fetter , R . D . , Bergstrom , K . , Strauss , R . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Highwire regulates synaptic growth in Drosophila . Neuron 26 , 313 – 329 . Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1996 ) . Dynamin GTPase , a force - generating molecular switch . Bioessays 18 , 885 – 893 . Whistler , J . L . , and von Zastrow , M . ( 1999 ) . Dissociation of funtional roles of dynamin in receptor - mediated endocytosis and mitogen signal transduction . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 24575 – 24578 . Wu , C . F . , and Wong , F . ( 1977 ) . Frequency characteristics in the