Structural Basis of Membrane Invagination by F - BAR Domains Adam Frost , 1 , 3 Rushika Perera , 2 Aure´lien Roux , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 Krasimir Spasov , 1 Olivier Destaing , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 Edward H . Egelman , 7 Pietro De Camilli , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and Vinzenz M . Unger 1 , 3 , 9 , * 1 Departments of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry 2 Cell Biology 3 Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program 4 Howard Hughes Medical Institute 5 Kavli Institute for Neuroscience 6 Program in Cellular Neuroscience , Neurodegeneration , and Repair Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06510 , USA 7 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics , Box 800733 , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA 22908 , USA 8 Present address : Laboratoire Physico - Chimie Curie , UMR 168 , CNRS / Institut Curie , 11 Rue Pierre et Marei Curie , 75005 , Paris , France . 9 Present address : Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry Yale University , P . O . Box 208024 , New Haven , CT 06520 - 8024 , USA . * Correspondence : vinzenz . unger @ yale . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 12 . 041 SUMMARY BAR superfamily domains shape membranes through poorly understood mechanisms . We solved structures of F - BAR modules bound to ﬂat and curved bilayers using electron ( cryo ) microscopy . We show that membrane tubules form when F - BARs polymerize into helical coats that are held to - gether by lateral and tip - to - tip interactions . On gel - state membranes or after mutation of residues along the lateral interaction surface , F - BARs adsorb onto bilayers via surfaces other than their concave face . We conclude that membrane binding is separable from membrane bending , and that imposition of the module’s concave surface forces ﬂuid - phase bila - yers to bend locally . Furthermore , exposure of the domain’s lateral interaction surface through a change in orientation serves as the crucial trigger for assem - bly of the helical coat and propagation of bilayer bending . The geometric constraints and sequential assembly of the helical lattice explain how F - BAR and classical BAR domains segregate into distinct microdomains , and provide insight into the spatial regulation of membrane invagination . INTRODUCTION Vast and largely unexplored , the interfaces between biological membranes and the compartments they delimit are the loci of di - verse and essential processes , including cellular motility , intra - and intercellular communication , cell division , and the biogene - sis of organelles . Great strides have been made in characterizing membrane dynamics , but a mechanistic understanding of these processes remains in its infancy . Missing from the analysis to date are structural descriptions of membrane - associated macromolecules and their interactions with the bilayer . To ad - vance our understanding of these fundamental mechanisms , we have exploited the versatility of ( cryo ) electron microscopy to directly image a membrane - bound protein module whose in - teractions with the bilayer are critical players in membrane - re - modeling processes . The BAR ( Bin , Amphiphysin , Rvs ) domain superfamily of pro - teins—including ‘‘classical’’ BAR domains , F - BAR ( FCH - BAR or EFC Extended - FCH ) and I - BAR ( Inverse - BAR ) domains—have emerged as important actors in membrane - remodeling pro - cesses throughout eukarya . Members of the superfamily are recruited from the cytoplasm to trigger the formation of plasma - membrane extensions , invaginations , tubular organ - elles , and transport intermediates , including endocytic vesicles ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Kamioka et al . , 2004 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ; Mattila et al . , 2007 ; Peter et al . , 2004 ; Tsujita et al . , 2006 ) . Much of what is known about the structure - function relationships of the BAR superfamily has emerged from crystallographic studies , showingthat members ofthefamilyare elongated dimersformed by the antiparallel association of a - helical coiled coils ( Casal et al . , 2006 ; Gallop et al . , 2006 ; Henne et al . , 2007 ; Lee et al . , 2007 ; Li et al . , 2007 ; Masuda et al . , 2006 ; Mattila et al . , 2007 ; Mill - ard et al . , 2005 ; Peter et al . , 2004 ; Shimada et al . , 2007 ; Tarricone et al . , 2001 ; Weissenhorn , 2005 ; Zhu et al . , 2007 ) . Individual members of the BAR superfamily differ in their overall degree of curvature , where F - BARs have an elongated and gentle crescent shape and I - BARs have a nearly ﬂat zeppelin shape , in compari - son with the banana shape of ‘‘classical’’ BAR modules ( Henne et al . , 2007 ; Lee et al . , 2007 ; Millard et al . , 2005 ; Shimada et al . , 2007 ; Tarricone et al . , 2001 ) . Despite these differences , all BAR superfamily dimers have a surface on which clusters of positive charges are positioned to interact with negatively charged phos - opholipid headgroups of the membrane . Based on biophysical and theoretical work and the visual cues provided by crystallographic studies , two distinct—but not exclusive—mechanisms have been proposed for the curva - ture - inducing activity of BAR superfamily domains . First , the Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 807 ‘‘scaffolding’’ hypothesis intuitively posits that the modules bend membranes by simply imposing their charged , curved shapes via electrostatic attraction ( Mattila et al . , 2007 ; Peter et al . , 2004 ; Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . Until now , there had been no direct evidence for this shape - based ‘‘scaffolding’’ hypothesis , other than that puriﬁed domains generate tubules in vitro whose curva - ture correlates with the concavity of their quaternary structure : classical BARs generate narrower tubules than elongated and gently curved F - BARs ( Farsad et al . , 2001 ; Henne et al . , 2007 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Peter et al . , 2004 ; Shimada et al . , 2007 ; Takei et al . , 1999 ) . Conversely , I - BAR modules appear to generate ﬁlo - podia in vitro and in living cells ( tubules of the opposite curvature ) by binding to the plasma membrane via a convex surface ( Mattila et al . , 2007 ) . The second mechanism proposes that protein - induced curvature is induced as a ‘‘buckling’’ response to the in - sertion of amphipathic sequences into the cytosolic leaﬂet of the bilayer ( Zimmerberg and Kozlov , 2006 ) . Reminiscent of the mechanism of curvature induction by epsin - family proteins ( Ford et al . , 2002 ) , biochemical ( Farsad et al . , 2001 ; Henne et al . , 2007 ) and spectroscopic ( Gallop et al . , 2006 ) data indicate that the eponymous N - terminal helix of endophilin and amphi - physin act like ‘‘wedges’’ that penetrate into one bilayer leaﬂet . Both the ‘‘scaffolding’’ and the amphipathic wedge mecha - nismplaceemphasisontheinteractionbetweenproteinmodules and their target membranes . Regardless of the molecular mech - anism , however , the energetic requirement for extensive mem - brane deformation—like endocytosis of coated pits or extension of membrane tubules—exceeds the interaction energy between an individual protein and the bilayer by at least one order of mag - nitude and therefore require the collective activity of many pro - teins ( Ayton et al . , 2007 ; Zimmerberg and McLaughlin , 2004 ) . In support of this idea , a continuous ﬁlament of F - BAR domains ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) has been proposed to encircle tubular mem - branes ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) , while direct protomer interactions enable polymerization of spherical or cylindrical coats for pro - teins like clathrin and its adaptors ( Brett and Traub , 2006 ) or the GTPase dynamin ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ; Takei et al . , 1995 ; Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ) . Moreover , theoretical studies show that even in the absence of protein - protein interactions , protein - induced changes in bilayer properties may create attrac - tive forces that cause microscopically bent bilayer regions to co - alesce into macroscopic curvature domains ( Ayton et al . , 2007 ; Bruinsma and Pincus , 1996 ; Reynwar et al . , 2007 ) . Scaffolding , amphipathicwedges , andensembleactivitymayeachcontribute to curvature generation or stabilization by a speciﬁc domain , but testing these hypotheses directly requires molecular - scale visu - alization of the proteins in their membrane - bound contexts . Using a structural approach that allows for the presence of a membrane holds the potential to advance a mechanistic de - scription of membrane remodeling by answering four immediate questions . First , it would visualize directly how members of the BAR superfamily interact with the bilayer . Second , it would pro - vide insight into the ensemble component of protein - induced membrane curvature . Third , it would explain whether and how the same type of domain accommodates a spectrum of different membrane curvatures . Fourth , structures may suggest how spa - tial regulation of membrane deformation is achieved . By showing directly how F - BARs employ a combination of scaffolding and ensemble action to induce curvature , our study provides answers to these questions . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION F - BAR Proteins Spontaneously Segregate from Classical BAR Proteins during Membrane Tubule Formation High - level expression of ﬂuorescently labeled F - BAR proteins revealed that they generate membrane tubules inside living cells ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Tsujita et al . , 2006 ) . Less appreciated but pre - sumably of functional signiﬁcance , F - BAR and other BAR super - family proteins physically segregated from each other on mem - brane surfaces during membrane remodeling as seen in Figure 1A ( Itoh and De Camilli , 2006 ) . While segregation is likely to be determined in part by the afﬁnity of a given BAR superfamily domain for a speciﬁc degree of curvature , the dynamic alterna - tion of F - BAR and N - BAR microdomains ( Figure 1A ) suggested that stereotyped protein - protein interactions enabled members of the BAR superfamily to distinguish and recruit self - similar do - mains during membrane remodeling . In support of this hypothe - sis , when two different F - BAR proteins from the Toca family ( t ransducer o f C dc42 - dependent a ctin assembly [ Ho et al . , 2004 ] ) , namely CIP4 / Toca - 3 and FBP17 / Toca - 2 , were coex - pressed , they colocalized on the same tubules ( Figure 1B ) . While interactions between highly homologous TOCA proteins may in - volve more than a single domain , it is most likely that colocaliza - tion of these proteins was driven by their highly conserved and structurally homologous membrane - binding F - BAR do - mains ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . F - BAR Tubules Are Larger Than N - BAR Tubules in Living Cells When analyzed in living cells , F - BAR tubules were > 3 - fold wider in diameter than tubules formed by N - BARs , as shown by thin - section electron microscopy of COS7 cells expressing GFP - FBP17 ( Figure 1C and inset ) , GFP - CIP4 ( Figure 1D ) , and GFP - amphiphysin - 2 ( Figure 1E ) . This observation mirrors data that were previously obtained in vitro ( Henne et al . , 2007 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Shimada et al . , 2007 ; Tsujita et al . , 2006 ) , emphasizing that tubulation in vitro generates biologically relevant structures . In addition , the striking differences in tubule diameters sup - ported the scaffolding hypothesis , as the size difference between F - BAR and N - BAR tubules in living cells correlated di - rectly with the difference in the radii of curvature for the respec - tive domains ( Casal et al . , 2006 ; Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . In Vitro Reconstitution of Membrane Tubulation By F - BAR Domains for Structural Analysis by Electron Cryomicroscopy To structurally analyze F - BAR - induced membrane deformation , we generated mixed populations of tubules in vitro whose range of diameters were consistent with the range observed in living cells ( 57 – 85 nm in vitro compared with 64 – 113 nm in living cells ; Figures 2A and 2B ) . Notably , micrographs of unstained lipo - somes caught in the process of tubule formation illustrated that tubulation involved at least two intermediate steps that cor - related with the reorganization F - BAR domains into a deﬁned 808 Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . coat following their adsorption onto the membrane . In Figure 2A , a bare bilayer is clearly resolved to the right of the yellow arrow and more clearly in the 2 3 enlarged inset . Immediately to the left of the yellow arrow , the outer surface of the bilayer is deco - rated by bound F - BAR domains but the curvature of the mem - brane has changed little if at all , in comparison with the naked membrane to the right . Between the yellow and cyan arrows , the F - BAR domains have clearly self - organized into a structured coat , and it is the organization of the coat that appears to trans - form the spherical liposome into a cylindrical tubule . Under the same solution conditions , when an N - BAR domain protein was mixed with an F - BAR domain protein prior to incubation with liposomes , homogeneous microdomains with a constant diame - ter—corresponding with the curvature of the F - BAR domain— were contiguous with equally homogenous but distinct tubules whose smaller diameter corresponded with the curvature of the N - BAR domain ( Figures 2E and 2F ) . These in vitro observa - tions were in accord with segregation observed in living cells . The heterogeneity within populations of tubules , subtle changes in diameter along individual tubules , and the loss of lat - tice coherence over long distances presented signiﬁcant obsta - cles to 3D reconstruction . Fortuitously , the long - range order of the CIP4 F - BAR coat could be improved by subjecting F - BAR tubules to a period of slow temperature annealing before vitriﬁ - cation ( see Experimental Procedures ) . In electron ( cryo ) micro - graphs of annealed tubules the helical nature of the F - BAR coat was obvious ( Figure 2C ) , and Fourier transforms of these images revealed strong layer lines ( Figure 2D ) . Temperature annealing was only used to generate images suitable for structure determi - nation . For all other in vitro experiments reported here , tubulation reactions were performed at room temperature for up to 30 min . Iterative Helical Real - Space Reconstruction of F - BAR Tubules We employed the iterative helical real - space reconstruction al - gorithm ( Egelman , 2000 ) to reconstruct volumes from individual tubules composed of up to (cid:2) 3000 F - BAR domains , after prelim - inary efforts with Fourier - Bessel reconstruction failed to achieve the desired resolution ( see Experimental Procedures ) ( Figures S1 – S3 ) . This approach enabled us to resolve individual F - BAR dimers and the contacts deﬁning the helical coat ( Figures 3A – 3C ) . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst reconstruction of a mem - brane - binding protein with sufﬁcient resolution to unambigu - ously identify individual protein subunits adsorbed onto an underlying membrane . The membrane itself appeared relatively smooth , with a hydrophobic core that was (cid:2) 26 A˚ thick and phos - phocholine headgroup regions that were (cid:2) 12 A˚ thick ( Figure 3C ) . The correspondence between the dimensions of the bilayer in our reconstructions and measurements of similar synthetic lipid mixtures strongly supported the validity of these results ( Rodri - guez et al . , 2007 ; Wang et al . , 2006 ) . Notably , in reconstructions calculated from images of tubules with broken - open ends ( Figure S2B ) , there was additional unstructured density along the surface of the inner leaﬂet . Since 3D reconstruction depends on averaging , we cannot rule out entirely that randomly distrib - uted lipid protrusions were responsible for this layer of unstruc - tured density . However , since this additional layer was observed only in tubules that were broken open , and given that the F - BAR domain was the only protein added to the reaction mixture , it seemed more likely that the additional densities represented a disordered layer of protein . This observation was signiﬁcant because it , unexpectedly , conveyed that F - BARs could appar - ently bind to membranes with convex curvature . Mechanisti - cally , this reinforced the idea that membrane binding and mem - brane bending are separable events ( Figure 2A ) . Direct Visualization of Scaffolding by F - BAR Domains Like other BAR superfamily domains , F - BAR tubulation requires the presence of anionic headgroups to be present in the mem - brane at > 10 mol % ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Tsujita et al . , 2006 ) . More - over , tubulation was inhibited by increasing solution ionic strength , such that tubule formation was blocked at > 300 mM Figure 1 . F - BAR Versus N - BAR Tubulation in Living Cells : Spontaneous Segregation , Differences in Diameter , and Rigidity ( A ) COS7 cell simultaneously transfected with amphiphysin2 - GFP ( green ) and mRFP - FBP17 ( red ) produces tubular networks in which the two proteins segregate from each other . Insets show the GFP , RFP , and merged channels . ( B ) High - magniﬁcation image of a cell transfected with GFP - CIP4 ( left ) and mRFP - FBP17 ( middle ) demonstrating the absence of segregation be - tween the two proteins ( merge ; right ) . ( C – E ) Large invaginations of the plasma mem - brane observed by electron microscopy of thin sections from COS7 cells transfected with full - length human GFP - FBP17 and ( D ) GFP - CIP4 , andincomparisonwiththesmallertubulesformed by amphiphysin2 - GFP ( E ) . Bars : ( A ) , 1 m m ; ( B ) , 0 . 5 m m ; and ( C ) – ( E ) , 70 nm . Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 809 [ NaCl ] ( data not shown ) , demonstrating that membrane defor - mation by F - BARs depended on electrostatic interactions . Con - sistent with these observations , the scaffolding hypothesis pre - dicts that deﬁned points of contact between the protein’s clusters of cationic residues and the phospholipid headgroups constrain the membrane to match the curvature of the domain . Proving this model , the 3D reconstruction visualized how through four points of close apposition the F - BAR dimer im - posed its own shape on the underlying bilayer ( Figures 3C and 4B ) . Moreover , there was no signiﬁcant difference between the curvature of the F - BAR dimer bound to tubules and the structure obtained from X - ray crystallography in the absence of lipids ( Figure 4B ) . This observation established the additional feature of the scaffolding hypothesis positing that protein scaffolds must be more rigid than the membrane . To identify which residues participated in membrane binding at these four sites , the atomic coordinates of the F - BAR domains of human FBP17 and CIP4 were ﬁt into the map manually and then reﬁned using algorithms implemented in UCSF Chimera ( Pettersen et al . , 2004 ) or the program SITUS ( Pettersen et al . , 2004 ; Wriggers et al . , 1999 ) with equivalent results . The agree - ment for the ﬁt of both structures was not surprising given that their crystal structures superimposed to within 2 . 15 A˚ rmsd be - tween corresponding C a - atoms ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) ( see Figure S4 ) . As illustrated in Figure 4 , two regions of membrane binding near the center of the module appeared to correspond with the cationic clusters composed of R / K27 , K30 , K33 , K110 , R113 , K114 , and R / K150 ( where R / K indicates the amino acid found in CIP4 or FBP17 , respectively ) . Two additional areas of contact nearer the dimer’s tips appeared to correspond with a cluster of cationic residues composed of R139 , R / K140 , R / K146 , and R / K150 . Consistent with this interpretation of our map , mutating residues that line the concave face , including K33E , K33Q , R113Q , and K114Q , compromise membrane bind - ing and tubule formation ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ; Tsujita et al . , 2006 ) . Importantly , there was no evidence at this resolution that ex - tended amphipathic sequences were partially intercalated into the bilayer—distinguishing F - BAR - mediated tubulation from the combination of scaffolding plus amphipathic ‘‘wedges’’ em - ployed by N - BAR domains ( Farsad et al . , 2001 ; Gallop et al . , 2006 ) . However , it is possible , given the moderate resolution of this analysis , that isolated residues shallowly inserted into the outer leaﬂet of the bilayer . To explore this possibility , we noted from the ﬁt of the atomic coordinates into our reconstruction that F117 faced the membrane from the concave surface of the domain and that it was surrounded by the hydrophobic al - kane moieties of cationic residues that mediated binding to lipid headgroups ( Figure S5C ) . To test whether possible insertion of F117 into the bilayer contributed to membrane - binding or tubu - lation , we mutated F117 to Ala and Asp , respectively . The F117A mutant had no observable defects in membrane tubule forma - tion . Given the smaller volume occupied by the hydrophobic side chain of Ala , this suggested that tubulation did not require insertion of a bulky Phe among the acyl chains of the membrane . Further supporting this idea , when F117 was mutated to Trp in a Trp - less variant of the domain , no blue - shift of the ﬂuorescence emission spectrum was detectable ( data not shown , ( Ladokhin et al . , 2000 ) ) . In contrast , the F117D mutation in FBP17 F - BAR domains potently inhibited tubulation in every reaction condition tested in vitro ( Figure 6A ) , while the corresponding mutation in full - length CIP4 also inhibited tubulation in living cells Figure 2 . Reconstitution of CIP4 F - BAR Induced Tubulation and Segregation from Endophilin N - BAR Domains In Vitro ( A ) electron ( cryo ) micrograph of a nascent tubule generated in vitro by F - BAR domains ( human CIP4 , residues 1 – 284 ) . The yellow arrow points to the demarcation between the membrane sur - face with and without F - BAR domains , revealing a smooth bilayer to the right and adsorbed protein to the left , as seen in the 2 3 enlarged inset sur - roundedbytheyellowbox . Totheleftoftheyellow arrow , the curvature of the membrane has changed little , if at all , despite the presence of bound proteins . Induction of tubule formation ac - companies self - organization of F - BAR domains into a helical coat ( cyan arrow and enlarged inset ) . ( B ) Histogram of tubule widths generated in vitro measured from electron ( cryo ) micrographs . ( CandD ) Electron ( cryo ) micrographofatubulefol - lowing temperature annealing and its correspond - ing Fourier Transform ( D ) , which displays high sig - nal - to - noise ratio layerlines beyond (cid:2) 27 A˚ . ( E and F ) Liposomes coincubated with F - BAR ( CIP4 ) and N - BAR ( endophilin - 1 ) proteins in vitro observed after negative staining with uranyl for - mate ( E ) or uranyl acetate ( F ) , displaying contigu - ous membrane tubules whose change in diameter corresponds with the change in the radius of cur - vature for F - BAR versus N - BAR domains . Bars : ( A ) , 300 A˚ ; ( C ) , 25 nm ; ( E ) and ( F ) , 40 nm . 810 Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . ( Figure 4D ) . This observation suggested that the F117D mutant was defective in forming high - afﬁnity interactions with the mem - brane surface via its concave surface . We speculate that the functional defect arose because the Asp strongly interacted with its neighboring cationic residues , partially neutralizing the surface potential and perhaps preventing conformational exten - sions of Lys and Arg residues toward the membrane surface . In support of the latter , we noted that the molecular envelope of the dimer was continuous with the bilayer exclusively in the four po - sitions that , based on the ﬁt of the crystal structure , were occu - pied by cationic clusters . F - BAR Domains Self - Organize into Helical Lattices to Induce Tubule Formation An important ﬁnding of our study was that scaffolding by individ - ual F - BARs was necessary but not sufﬁcient for tubule formation . Speciﬁcally , the reconstruction demonstrated that tubule forma - tion involved the collective assembly of F - BARs into a helical coat that propagated curvature around and along the growing tubule . The helical lattice was held together by tip - to - tip and ex - tensive lateral interactions ( Figures 3A , 3B , and 4A ) . Of the two , only the tip - to - tip interaction , mediated in part by K166 in the loop between the a 3 and a 4 helices , was predicted by the crystal structures ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . Importantly , the 6 . 3 A˚ transla - tion and 40 . 3 (cid:3) rotation separating each dimer along the helical path deﬁned by the tip - to - tip interaction did not allow preserva - tion of the reported hydrogen - bonding pattern , when the dimer was ﬁt as a rigid body . In fact , attempts to maintain the hydro - gen - bonding pattern as seen in the crystal structure resulted in a (cid:2) 50 % decrease in the correlation coefﬁcient between our map and the structure . The possibility that the tip - to - tip interaction was ﬂexible or un - derwent rearrangement during polymerization of the helical coat was consistent with the existence of an additional , lateral con - tact between neighboring dimers ( Figures 3A , 3B , and 4A ) . This broad overlapping interaction involved 50 % of the dimer’s lateral surface , including the loop between a 2 and a 3 , segments of the lateral surface of a 3 and a 5 , and the C - terminal extended pep - tide ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . Notably , the near - atomic model gen - erated by ﬁtting the crystal structures into our reconstruction suggested speciﬁc contacts that may have been important for the formation of the lateral interactions . This included ionic inter - actions between K66 or K273 in one dimer and E285 or D286 in the other , as well as between D161 or N163 in one dimer and R47 or K51 in the other ( Figures 4A and S4 ) . There also appeared to be hydrophobic interactions , including one between directly op - posing F276 in both dimers ( Figures 4A and S4 ) . As shown in the bottom panel of Figure S4 , these surface - exposed residues are among the most highly conserved throughout the evolution of the Toca proteins , and are oriented on the surface of the model such that if they do participate in lateral interactions , neighboring dimers would overlap by (cid:2) 50 % of their length . Because of the large number of potential pairwise interactions , we did not probe the importance of all these residues for the pur - pose of this study . Nevertheless , analysis of a total of 14 mutants along the lateral interface ( 7 each for CIP4 and FBP17 , respec - tively ) revealed that most of them affected tubulation behavior to some extent . Shown here are examples illustrating the spec - trum of effects that were observed in living cells with full - length CIP4 or FBP17 ( Figures 4C and 4D ) and in vitro with puriﬁed FBP17 F - BAR domains ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . Considering the large surface area involved in the lateral interaction , we were surprised that some point mutations did compromise tubule for - mation both in vitro and in living cells , at least as potently as the previously reported mutation of the tip - to - tip residue K166 to Ala ( Figure 6A ) ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . Speciﬁcally , replacing F276 with the charged residue Asp in full - length FBP17 and CIP4 po - tently inhibited tubule formation in living cells ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . Similarly , the same mutation strongly compromised tubula - tion in vitro using isolated F - BAR domains ( Figure 6A ) . Similarly , reversing the charge of K66 inhibited tubule formation when compared with wild - type FBP17 F - BAR domains when assayed under equivalent in vitro conditions ( Figure 6A ) ( see Experimental Procedures ) . The importance of the lateral interactions was further under - scored by electron microscopic examination of the ﬁlaments formed in the absence of liposomes by the F - BAR domains of FBP17 or CIP4 ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ) . Being 12 – 13 nm thick and with a 4 – 5 nm repeat distance , these ﬁlaments must contain both lateral and tip - to - tip interactions ( Figure S7 ) , which Figure 3 . Single Particle Helical Reconstruction of a CIP4 F - BAR Domain - Induced Membrane Tubule ( A ) Surface of a (cid:2) 67 nm diameter membrane tubule at (cid:2) 17 A˚ resolution . The protein coat is colored blue - gray and the underlying membrane is green . ( B ) Zoominonthelatticeseenorthogonaltothecylindrical axis , highlighting the tip - to - tip interactions and the broad contacts between laterally - adjacent dimers . ( C ) Cross - sectional slab through one dimer parallel with theplaneofthetip - to - tip interaction . Therearefourclearly resolved points of membrane binding . The hydrophobic core of the phospholipid bilayer is (cid:2) 26 A˚ thick and the headgroup regions are (cid:2) 12 A˚ thick . Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 811 contrasts with a previous proposal that the length of the F - BAR dimer corresponds to one periodic repeat of these ﬁlaments ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . Variability in Coat Architecture Allows a Range Of Tubule Diameters to Form F - BAR domains generate different diameter tubules in vitro and in living cells ( Figures 1C , 1D , and 2B ) . To determine the struc - tural basis for this variability , we calculated independent recon - structions of tubules with different diameters . These volumes re - vealed that F - BARs rotated relative to the tubule’s cylindrical axis while maintaining their intrinsic curvature ( Figure 5 ) . Specif - ically , tubules with a diameter near the population mean of 67 nm had (cid:2) 9 . 5 tip - to - tip dimers around the circumference . In these cases , the long axis of the dimer was only slightly tilted relative to the cylindrical axis , such that a thread of tip - to - tip dimers wrapped around the tubule with a shallow , right - handed twist . Subtle variability in the tilt angle of the dimer still produced resolvable differences in the helical symmetry , and precluded averaging data from different tubules of the same apparent diameter ( Figure 5B versus 5C ) . In contrast , the smallest tubule observed was (cid:2) 57 nm in diameter and accommodated only (cid:2) 8 dimers around its circumference ( Figure 5A ) . In this case , ﬁt - ting the dimers into the map suggested that each F - BAR had a left - handed tilt , relative to the cylindrical axis , and the tip - to - tip contacts apparently did not form ( Figure 5A , white asterisks ) . To test the hypothesis that F - BARs rigidly maintain their intrin - sic degree of curvature—even when bound to tubules with smaller diameters—we used the tubule radii and the pitch of the left - handed helical path deﬁned by the lateral interactions to calculate the helical arc length between the center of one di - mer and its nearest lateral neighbors . The helical arc lengths for all three tubules—as measured from the reconstructed volumes—were calculated to be 114 ± 1 . 5 A˚ ( see Experimental Procedures ) . This indicates that F - BARs bound to the smaller tu - bules were not appreciably deformed and that they overlapped their neighbors by the same length , despite being tilted relative to the cylindrical axis ( Figure 5A ) . Moreover , using a complete model of the protein coat , built from 128 copies of the CIP4 F - BAR domain structure , we observed that the density corre - sponding with the protein coat of the thinnest tubule could be entirely accounted for with rigid but tilted F - BAR modules , inter - acting via the same lateral contacts ( Figures 5D and 5E ) . Finally , abolishing the tip - to - tip interaction with the K166A mutation , which produces some tubules in vitro but not in living cells ( Shi - mada et al . , 2007 ) , appears to bias the population distribution of tubule diameters toward smaller diameters ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . This was consistent with the hypothesis that in the absence of the tip - to - tip constraint , F - BAR modules are more likely to tilt rel - ative to the tubule axis and thus produce narrower tubules . In contrast , compromising the formation of the lateral contacts with the K66E mutation biased the population distribution of tu - bule diameters toward larger diameters ( Figure 6B ) . Taken to - gether , these variations in coat structure , particularly in the angle between the dimer’s long axis and the cylindrical axis , empha - sized how plasticity in the lattice allows rigid dimers to accom - modate a range of curvatures . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst experimental demonstration of this previously predicted corol - lary of the scaffolding mechanism ( Blood and Voth , 2006 ; Henne et al . , 2007 ) . THE F - BAR Coat Is More Rigid Than N - BAR Or Dynamin Coats The extensive interactions between dimers observed in the re - construction explained why F - BAR - coated tubules seemed to be more rigid than tubules coated by classical BAR domains . To quantify the difference in the rigidities of N - BAR and F - BAR tubules in vitro , we calculated their persistence length , L p , which Figure 4 . Fitting F - BAR Crystal Structures into the CryoEM Map Re - veals Membrane - Binding Residues and Possible Lattice Contacts ( A ) Surface representation of amembrane tubule perpendicular to the cylindri - cal axis , focused on the interactions between four neighboring F - BAR mole - cules . The underlying membrane is colored in gray and the protein coat in gray mesh . One monomer of each F - BAR module is in yellow , the other in or - ange - red . Conservedresidueshypothesizedtocontributetothetip - to - tip , and lateral interactions are annotated and shown with space - ﬁlling atoms . ( B ) Cross - sectional slab through onedimer parallelwiththe planeof thetip - to - tip interactions . The four resolved points of membrane binding correspond with clusters of conserved , cationic residues found along the concave faces of both dimers , where R / K indicates the amino acid found in CIP4 or FBP17 , respectively ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) . ( C and D ) Representative images of COS7 cells with high levels of expression of wild - type ormutated constructsofGFP - FBP17or ( D ) GFP - CIP4 . Somemu - tations completely abolish membrane localization , while others only compro - mise tubule formation . Bars : 10 m m . 812 Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . is a measure of macromolecular rigidity expressed as the length over which correlations in the direction of the tangent are lost . For FBP17 - coated tubules , we determined an L p of 142 . 3 ± 8 . 8 m m . In comparison , amphiphysin - coated tubules had an L p of 9 . 1 ± 0 . 6 m m , while dynamin - coated tubules , which were used as a non - BAR superfamily control sample , had an L p of 37 . 3 ± 4 . 6 m m ( Figures 6C and 6D , dynamin data not shown ) . The 16 - fold smaller L p for amphiphysin tubules compared with FBP17 tubules may have been due partly to their thinner diameter , though it would be of interest to determine whether N - BAR di - mers form less extensive intermolecular contacts than those of the F - BAR coat . Similarly , the 4 - fold smaller L p observed for dy - namin , which also forms tubular coats , suggested that the con - tacts making up the dynamin coat were either less constraining than those of the F - BAR coat or , less likely , that F - BAR dimers were more rigid than dynamin dimers ( Chen et al . , 2004 ; Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ) . F - BAR Domains Bind to Flat Membranes via a Surface Other Than Their Concave Face Raw micrographs of liposomes in the midst of being transformed into tubules by the F - BAR domain displayed regions of the mem - brane that were clearly decorated by bound protein molecules , but whose curvature had not yet appreciably changed ( Figure 2A , enlarged insets ) . Fortuitously , we were able to ob - serve this intermediate state directly by cooling liposomes below the T m of the most abundant lipid species used in our experi - ments ( palmitoyl - oleyl - phosphatidylserine ) , which presumably increased membrane rigidity ( Figures S4A and S4B ) . Both FBP17 and CIP4 F - BARs bound avidly to these rigid membranes and formed 2D arrays in which laterally adjacent dimers aligned in almost perfect register while maintaining tip - to - tip interactions ( Figures 7A – 7C and S6A ) . Unexpectedly and regardless of whether crystals were negatively stained or vitriﬁed , a dozen pro - jection - density maps calculated from similar but not identical crystals lacked any evidence of the two - fold symmetry that would be observed if the dimers were bound symmetrically to the bilayer via their concave surface ( Table S1 and Figure S8 ) . The simplest explanation for this absence of a two - fold rotational Figure 6 . Mutant Phenotypes and Tubule Persistence Lengths ( A ) Quantiﬁcation of total tubule number , total tubule length ( sum of all tubule lengths measured ) as determined from 50 low magniﬁcation images evenly sampling one EM grid . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of mean tubule diameter from low - magniﬁcation images like those in Figures S5A – S5B . Error bars are the standard deviation for the pop - ulation of tubules . ( C ) Still images of video - DIC recordings of amphiphysin and FBP17 . ( D ) Each data point is therms 2 of 100tip - to - basemeasurementsof atubule as afunctionoftotaltubulelength . Thepersistencelength ( L p ) wasdeterminedby ﬁtting the data with a theoretical curve according to the equation : d R 2 ( t ) = 2 ( L p ) 2 [ x / L p (cid:4) 1 + e ( - x Lp ) ] ; where d R 2 ( t ) is the rms 2 , x the total length , and L p the persistence length ( Derenyi et al . , 2002 ; Le Goff et al . , 2002a ; Le Goff et al . , 2002b ) . Bars : ( C ) , 5 m m . Figure 5 . Independent Reconstructions of Tubules with Different Diameters and Symmetries ( A ) The narrowest tubule reconstructed is (cid:2) 56 nm in diameter , with (cid:2) 8 tip - to - tipdimersarounditscircumference . Tiltingthelongaxisofthedimerrelativeto the cylindrical axis produces a narrower tubule . In this case , the dimers are so steeply tilted that the tip - to - tip contacts appear to be broken ( white asterisks ) . The tubule has no rotationalsymmetry ; the fundamental ( J + 1 ) helical symme - try does not describe an intermolecular contact . Only the near side of the lat - tice is shown , and the underlying membrane has been masked out to empha - size differences in the protein coat . Atomic models of F - BAR domains were ﬁt into the map as rigid bodies . ( B and C ) Two tubules with the same apparent diameter and (cid:2) 9 . 5 tip - to - tip di - mers around their circumference have resolvable differences in their helical symmetry . ( D ) Central section along the longitudinal axis of the thinnest tubule shown in ( A ) , demonstrating that the density of the protein coat accommodates rigid atomic models of the F - BAR module that are tilted relative to the cylindrical axis , but whose radius of curvature is unchanged . ( E ) View along the cylindrical axis of the thinner reconstruction shown in ( A ) and ( D ) . Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 813 symmetry was that the domains were bound to the membrane obliquely , such that their maximum curvature surface could not be imposed . To obtain an estimate for the orientation of the module bound to these rigid membranes , we used a reference library of evenly spaced projection views of the FBP17 F - BAR domain atomic model ( Shimada et al . , 2007 ) to search for the highest correlation with the calculated 2D projection image ( Figure 7C ) . A broad cor - relation peak was found for views in which the dimer’s two - fold axis was rotated by (cid:2) 60 (cid:3) with respect to the membrane normal . In Figure 7C , ribbon diagrams of the domain in this orientation were superimposed over the projection image , as seen perpen - dicular to the membrane surface . In Figure 7D , two dimers inter - acting tip - to - tip are displayed as viewed parallel with the membrane surface ( or rotated by 90 (cid:3) with respect to the view in C ) . In this ‘‘side - lying’’ state , the lateral interactions seen in the helical lattice were unable to form , while the relatively ﬂat membrane - binding surface was composed almost entirely of one monomer ( another indication that the intrinsic rigidity of F - BAR dimers exceeds the rigidity of the membrane ) . A similar side - lying state was recently predicted for N - BAR domains in molecular dynamics simulations , in which a range of curvatures were semistable depending on the degree to which the maxi - mum curvature surface was directly imposed on the membrane ( Blood and Voth , 2006 ) . Based on this orientation , our model predicted that the conserved residues K56 , K / R104 , K122 , and K157 played an im - portant role in mediating the electrostatic interaction with the membrane in this side - lying state ( Figures 7D , S4 , S5B , and S4D – S4E ) . Point mutations of any of these residues to amino acids of the opposite charge abolished 2D lattice formation ( Figure 7E ) and were observed to have decreased tubulation ef - ﬁciencies in vitro ( Figure S5B ) . Moreover , mutating pairs of them ( K122E + K157E or K56E + R104D ) potently blocked tubulation in vitro with puriﬁed F - BAR domains ( Figure 6A ) and in living cells with full - length GFP - FBP17 ( Figure 4C ) . The K56E + R104D mu - tation in full - length GFP - FBP17 in living cells was particularly striking , in that it apparently abolished membrane binding en - tirely and resulted in a diffuse distribution of the associated GFP signal . These observations suggested that F - BAR proteins may form small clusters on membrane surfaces , ready to induce tu - bule formation ( Figure 7F ) . Importantly , in this side - lying state , the lateral interaction surfaces of the F - BAR domain were ob - scured , which prevented formation of the helical lattice . In sup - port of this idea , the 2D lattices converted to tubular structures upon warming . The easiest explanation for this behavior would be that the reduced rigidity and membrane - bending energy above the T m enabled individual dimers to force the bilayer to adopt their intrinsic curvature locally . Consequently , it was this transition to full imposition of the concave face that ex - posed the module’s lateral interaction surfaces to neighboring dimers and allowed the helical coat to polymerize ( Figure 7F ) . This proposed mechanism for tubulation predicted that inhibit - ing lateral interactions would shift the equilibrium away from tubule generation and toward the formation of 2D arrays . Con - sistent with this prediction and our model for the lateral con - tacts ( Figures 4A , and S4 ) , the mutants K66E and F276D shifted the equilibrium toward the formation of ﬂat lattices even at temperatures > T m of the principal lipid component ( Figure S6D ) . Figure 7 . F - BAR Domains Bind to Flat Membranes via a Surface Other Than Their Concave Face ( A ) Electronmicrograph of negatively stained membranes that were precooled before incubation with human FBP17 F - BAR domains ( see Figure S6 ) . ( B ) Higher magniﬁcation of the 2D F - BAR lattice ; unit cell a = 33 A˚ , b = 214 A˚ , g = 91 . 0 (cid:3) , bar : 220 A˚ . ( C ) Projection view of the F - BAR domain , calculated from a 3D data set com - posed of images from a single - axis tilt series over ± 40 (cid:3) ( representative lattice lines in Figure S7 , crystal statistics in Table S1 ) . Ribbon diagrams of the do - mainaresuperimposedovertheprojectionimage , asseenfromtheorientation with the highest correlation perpendicular to the membrane surface . ( D ) Two dimers interacting tip - to - tip viewed parallel with the membrane sur - face , or rotated by 90 (cid:3) with respect to the view in ( C ) . Residues likely to medi - ate membrane binding in this side - lying state are shown as space - ﬁling atoms from left - to - right : K122 , R104 , K56 , and K157 ( see also Figures S4 and S5 ) . ( E ) Tableofmutantpropensityforformingﬂatlatticesatdifferenttemperatures . ( F ) Proposedmodelinwhichtubuleformationproceedsthroughobservablein - termediatesteps . F - BARscanbindtoﬂatorcurvedbilayers , clusteringinarrays by forming intermolecular interactions . Following the transition to high - afﬁnity bindingofthedimer’sconcavesurface , formationofthelateralcontactstriggers the vectorial assembly of the helical coat and drives membrane invagination . 814 Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Conclusion Together , the results reported here indicate that tubule formation by the F - BAR domain results through a shape - based scaffolding mechanism that is ampliﬁed by the self - assembly of a helical coat . There is no apparent contribution—at the resolution of this analysis—from the insertion of amphipathic sequences ( Farsad et al . , 2001 ; Gallop et al . , 2006 ) . As shown here , F - BAR modules readily bind ﬂat membranes and generate curvature de novo , and hence , they are more than just curvature sensors or stabilizers . There is also no obvious need to invoke membrane curvature - mediated attractive forces ( Bruinsma and Pincus , 1996 ; Reynwar et al . , 2007 ) since the dimers interact directly and extensively with each other . At the same time , the structural determinants of tubule formation serve to spatially segregate F - BAR activity from other membrane - binding domains . The work presented here is an important ﬁrst step toward the struc - tural exploration of membrane remodeling . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Detailed Supplemental Experimental Procedures occupany this manuscript online . Protein Puriﬁcation cDNA fragments encoding human FBP17 ( 1 - 303 ) and CIP4 ( 1 - 284 ) were sub - cloned into pGEX6P - 1 ( Amersham Biosciences , Piscataway , NJ ) with codons for six additional histidine residues inserted at the C terminus via PCR . Fusion proteins were bacterially expressed and puriﬁed ﬁrst on a nickel afﬁnity resin and then on a GST - glutathione afﬁnity column . The GST tag was cleaved , fol - lowed by gel ﬁltration chromatography in buffer . Aliquots of 1 – 3 mg / ml protein were stored at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C . Liposome Preparation , Membrane Binding , and Tubulation In Vitro Lipidswerecombinedinmixturescomposedof85 % / 15 % phospholipids / cho - lesterol ( mol . / mol . ) and dried under a stream of argon with gentle vortexing in glass vials , redissolved in absolute hexane , dried with argon again , and dessi - cated under high - vacuum for 1 hr . Lipids were then hydrated with buffer , son - icated , subjected to 10 cycles of freeze thaw , and used immediately or stored in aliquots at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C ( see Figure S9 ) . Liposomes ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 25 mg / ml ) were equilibrated at 30 (cid:3) C ( tubules ) or 2 (cid:3) C ( 2D crystals ) for 1 hr before adding F - BAR domains at a lipid - to - protein ratio of 2 : 1 mass / mass . Ordered helical lattices were obtained after aperiod of slow cool - ing following tubule formation at 30 (cid:3) C . An annealing curve programmed into aPCRmachinecooledthesampleby5 (cid:3) / hr , eachfollowedby5minof1 (cid:3) warm - ing , such that after 7 hr the sample was at 2 (cid:3) C . This annealing procedure was only used for generating samples for structure determination and was shown to have negligible effects on the morphology of protein - free liposomes ( Figure S9 ) . Obtaining 2D lattices with the wild - type protein required that the liposomes never be warmer than 4 (cid:3) C after exposure to the protein . Electron Microscopy Two - dimensional and helical arrays were screened using 1 % uranyl acetate - stained samples and a Philips Tecnai 12 microscope operating at 120 kV . Cryo images were taken at a sample temperature of (cid:4) 172 (cid:3) C under low - dose conditions on a Philips Tecnai F20 microscope equipped with a ﬁeld emission gun and operating at an accelerating voltage of 160 – 200 kV , nominal magniﬁcations of 29 – 50 kx , and defocus values of – 1 , 500 to – 22 , 000 A˚ . Two - Dimensional Crystal Image Processing Images of 2D crystals were corrected for lattice distortions , effects of the con - trasttransferfunction , andastigmatismusingtheMRCimage - processingsoft - ware package ( Crowther et al . , 1996 ; Smith , 1999 ) . A single - axis tilt series in - cluding 13 images from ± 40 (cid:3) of a single negatively stained crystal was acquired . Applyingthepropertiltgeometry , all13imageswerebroughttotheir common phase origin , merged , and subjected to an additional round of origin and geometry reﬁnement . After ﬁtting a ﬁnal set of lattice lines ( Figure S8 ) , the projection structure was calculated from the 3D data set using a B - factor of (cid:4) 5000 A˚ (cid:4) 2 . Helical Image Processing Fourier – Bessel reconstruction proved to be limited in recovering high - resolu - tion features from these tubules because of ﬂexibility and the multiple image interpolations required for axis alignment and straightening . Moreover , helices with the same apparent diameter proved to have distinct helical symmetries , precluding reciprocal space averaging . We therefore reconstructed individual tubeswithanextendedversionoftheIterativeHelicalRealSpaceReconstruc - tion ( IHRSR ) single - particle algorithm as implemented in SPIDER ( Egelman , 2000 ; Frank et al . , 1996 ) . Determination of Persistence Lengths Video - DIC imaging was performed according to Itoh et al . ( 2005 ) and Roux et al . ( 2006 ) . For each tubule , positions of the tip and the base were tracked using the manual tracking plugin with NIH ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . This procedure was repeated for 100 sequential frames for each tubule , and the tip - to - base distance was extracted for each frame . Each data point is the rms 2 ( root - mean - square to the square ) for all of the tip - to - base measure - ments for a given tubule . Live Cell Microscopy and Thin Section EM COS7 cells ( ATCC , Rockville , MD ) were cultured , transfected , and imaged as previously described ( Perera et al . , 2006 ) . For EM , cells were ﬁxed , sectioned , and imaged using routine protocols ( e . g . , Ferguson et al . , 2007 ) . ACCESSION NUMBERS ThemapandlayerlinedatahavebeendepositedintheEMDBunderaccession code EMD - 1471 . SUPPLEMENTAL DATA Supplemental Data include nine ﬁgures , one table , Supplemental Experimen - tal Procedures , and Supplemental References and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 132 / 5 / 807 / DC1 / . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankDerekToomreforhisdirectionwiththelivecellimagingexperiments . We thank Bridget Carragher and the staff at the National Resource for Auto - mated Molecular Microscopy—which is supported by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) through the National Center for Research Resources ( NCRR ) P41 program ( RR17573 ) —where some of the data was collected . We thank Toshiki Itoh for discussion during the initial stages of this project . We also thank Robert Bjornson and Nicholas Carriero at the Yale Center for High Per - formanceComputationinBiologyandBiomedicine , whichissupportedbyNIH grant NCRR 19895 - 02 . Finally , we thank Fred Sigworth and David Chester for theiradviceandhelpfuldiscussions . ThisworkwassupportedbyaPredoctoral Research Training Fellowship from the Epilepsy Foundation ( A . F . ) ; the Euro - peanMolecularBiologyOrganizationLong - TermPostdoctoralFellowshippro - gram and the Cross - Disciplinary Fellowship program of the Human Frontier ScienceProgram ( A . R . ) ; andaG . HaroldandLeilaY . MathersCharitableFoun - dation grant ( P . D . C ) . Thisworkwas alsosupportedinpartby thefollowingNIH grants : MSTP TG 5T32GM07205 ( A . F . ) , GM071590 and DA024101 ( V . M . U ) , EB001567 ( E . H . E . ) , CA46128 , and DK45735 ( P . D . C ) . Received : August 31 , 2007 Revised : November 20 , 2007 Accepted : December 24 , 2007 Published : March 6 , 2008 Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 815 REFERENCES Ayton , G . S . , Blood , P . D . , and Voth , G . A . ( 2007 ) . Membrane remodeling from N - BAR domain interactions : insights from multi - scale simulation . Biophys . J . 92 , 3595 – 3602 . Blood , P . D . , andVoth , G . A . ( 2006 ) . Direct observation ofBin / amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domain - induced membrane curvature by means of molecular dynamics simulations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 15068 – 15072 . Brett , T . J . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2006 ) . Molecular structures of coat and coat - associated proteins : function follows form . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 395 – 406 . Bruinsma , R . , and Pincus , P . ( 1996 ) . Protein aggregation in membranes . Curr . Opin . Solid State Mater . Sci . 1 , 401 – 406 . Casal , E . , Federici , L . , Zhang , W . , Fernandez - Recio , J . , Priego , E . M . , Miguel , R . N . , DuHadaway , J . B . , Prendergast , G . C . , Luisi , B . F . , and Laue , E . D . ( 2006 ) . ThecrystalstructureoftheBARdomainfromhumanBin1 / amphiphysin II and its implications for molecular recognition . Biochemistry 45 , 12917 – 12928 . Chen , Y . J . , Zhang , P . , Egelman , E . H . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2004 ) . The stalk re - gion of dynamin drives the constriction of dynamin tubes . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 574 – 575 . Crowther , R . A . , Henderson , R . , and Smith , J . M . ( 1996 ) . MRC image process - ing programs . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 9 – 16 . Derenyi , I . , Julicher , F . , andProst , J . ( 2002 ) . Formationandinteractionofmem - brane tubes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 88 , 238101 . Egelman , E . ( 2000 ) . A robust algorithm for the reconstruction of helical ﬁla - ments using single - particle methods . Ultramicroscopy 85 , 225 – 234 . Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophi - lin bilayer interactions . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 193 – 200 . Ferguson , S . M . , Brasnjo , G . , Hayashi , M . , Wolfel , M . , Collesi , C . , Giovedi , S . , Raimondi , A . , Gong , L . - W . , Ariel , P . , Paradise , S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . A selective ac - tivity - dependent requirement for dynamin 1 in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Science 316 , 570 – 574 . Ford , M . G . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 , 361 – 366 . Frank , J . , Radermacher , M . , Penczek , P . , Zhu , J . , Li , Y . , Ladjadj , M . , and Leith , A . ( 1996 ) . SPIDER and WEB : processing and visualization of images in 3D electron microscopy and related ﬁelds . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 190 – 199 . Gallop , J . L . , Jao , C . C . , Kent , H . M . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , Langen , R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J . 25 , 2898 – 2910 . Henne , W . M . , Kent , H . M . , Ford , M . G . J . , Hegde , B . G . , Daumke , O . , Butler , P . J . G . , Mittal , R . , Langen , R . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2007 ) . Struc - ture and analysis of FCHo2 F - BAR domain : a dimerizing and membrane re - cruitment module that effects membrane curvature . Structure 15 , 1 – 14 . Hinshaw , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 . Ho , H . Y . , Rohatgi , R . , Lebensohn , A . M . , Le , M . , Li , J . , Gygi , S . P . , and Kirsch - ner , M . W . ( 2004 ) . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by ac - tivating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 , 203 – 216 . Itoh , T . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2006 ) . BAR , F - BAR ( EFC ) and ENTH / ANTH do - mains in the regulation of membrane - cytosol interfaces and membrane curva - ture . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1761 , 897 – 912 . Itoh , T . , Erdmann , K . , Roux , A . , Habermann , B . , Werner , H . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 – 804 . Kamioka , Y . , Fukuhara , S . , Sawa , H . , Nagashima , K . , Masuda , M . , Matsuda , M . , and Mochizuki , N . ( 2004 ) . A novel dynamin - associating molecule , for - min - binding protein 17 , induces tubular membrane invaginations and partici - pates in endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 40091 – 40099 . Ladokhin , A . , Jayasinghe , S . , and White , S . ( 2000 ) . How to measure and ana - lyze tryptophan ﬂuorescence in membranes properly , and why bother . Anal . Biochem . 285 , 235 – 245 . LeGoff , L . , Amblard , F . , andFurst , E . M . ( 2002a ) . Motor - drivendynamicsinac - tin - myosin networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 88 , 018101 . Le Goff , L . , Hallatschek , O . , Frey , E . , and Amblard , F . ( 2002b ) . Tracer studies on f - actin ﬂuctuations . Phys . Rev . Lett . 89 , 258101 . Lee , E . , Marcucci , M . , Daniell , L . , Pypaert , M . , Weisz , O . A . , Ochoa , G . C . , Farsad , K . , Wenk , M . R . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2002 ) . Amphiphysin 2 ( Bin1 ) and T - tubule biogenesis in muscle . Science 297 , 1193 – 1196 . Lee , S . , Kerff , F . , Chereau , D . , Ferron , F . , Klug , A . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2007 ) . Structural basis for the actin - binding function of missing - in - metastasis . Struc - ture 15 , 145 – 155 . Li , J . , Mao , X . , Dong , L . Q . , Liu , F . , andTong , L . ( 2007 ) . CrystalStructuresofthe BAR - PH and PTB Domains of Human APPL1 . Structure 15 , 525 – 533 . Masuda , M . , Takeda , S . , Sone , M . , Ohki , T . , Mori , H . , Kamioka , Y . , and Mochi - zuki , N . ( 2006 ) . Endophilin BAR domain drives membrane curvature by two newly identiﬁed structure - based mechanisms . EMBO J . 25 , 2889 – 2897 . Mattila , P . K . , Pykalainen , A . , Saarikangas , J . , Paavilainen , V . O . , Vihinen , H . , Jokitalo , E . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2007 ) . Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deformPI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranesbyaninverseBARdomain - like mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 953 – 964 . Millard , T . H . , Bompard , G . , Heung , M . Y . , Dafforn , T . R . , Scott , D . J . , Machesky , L . M . , andFutterer , K . ( 2005 ) . Structuralbasisofﬁlopodiaformationinducedby the IRSp53 / MIM homology domain of human IRSp53 . EMBO J . 24 , 240 – 250 . Perera , R . M . , Zoncu , R . , Lucast , L . , De Camilli , P . , and Toomre , D . ( 2006 ) . Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 19332 – 19337 . Peter , B . J . , Kent , H . M . , Mills , I . G . , Vallis , Y . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 – 499 . Pettersen , E . , Goddard , T . , Huang , C . , Couch , G . , Greenblatt , D . , Meng , E . , and Ferrin , T . ( 2004 ) . UCSF Chimera—A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 . Reynwar , B . J . , Illya , G . , Harmandaris , V . A . , Muller , M . M . , Kremer , K . , and Deserno , M . ( 2007 ) . Aggregation and vesiculation of membrane proteins by curvature - mediated interactions . Nature 447 , 461 – 464 . Rodriguez , Y . , Mezei , M . , and Osman , R . ( 2007 ) . Association free energy of dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines in a mixed dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine membrane . Biophys . J . 92 , 3071 – 3080 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . , andDeCamilli , P . ( 2006 ) . GTP - dependenttwist - ing of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 441 , 528 – 531 . Shimada , A . , Niwa , H . , Tsujita , K . , Suetsugu , S . , Nitta , K . , Hanawa - Suetsugu , K . , Akasaka , R . , Nishino , Y . , Toyama , M . , Chen , L . , etal . ( 2007 ) . CurvedEFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end toend into aﬁlament for membrane invag - ination in endocytosis . Cell 129 , 761 – 772 . Smith , J . M . ( 1999 ) . Ximdisp – A visualization tool to aid structure determination from electron microscope images . J . Struct . Biol . 125 , 223 – 228 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1995 ) . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 – 190 . Takei , K . , Slepnev , V . I . , Haucke , V . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1999 ) . Functional part - nership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 33 – 39 . Tarricone , C . , Xiao , B . , Justin , N . , Walker , P . A . , Rittinger , K . , Gamblin , S . J . , and Smerdon , S . J . ( 2001 ) . The structural basis of Arfaptin - mediated cross - talk be - tween Rac and Arf signalling pathways . Nature 411 , 215 – 219 . Tsujita , K . , Suetsugu , S . , Sasaki , N . , Furutani , M . , Oikawa , T . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2006 ) . Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane defor - mation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 269 – 279 . 816 Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Wang , L . , Bose , P . S . , andSigworth , F . J . ( 2006 ) . Usingcryo - EMtomeasurethe dipole potential of a lipid membrane . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 18528 – 18533 . Weissenhorn , W . ( 2005 ) . Crystal structure of the endophilin - A1 BAR domain . J . Mol . Biol . 351 , 653 – 661 . Wriggers , W . , Milligan , R . A . , andMcCammon , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Situs : Apackagefor dockingcrystalstructuresintolow - resolutionmapsfromelectronmicroscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 125 , 185 – 195 . Zhang , P . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction of dy - namin in the constricted state . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 922 – 926 . Zhu , G . , Chen , J . , Liu , J . , Brunzelle , J . S . , Huang , B . , Wakeham , N . , Terzyan , S . , Li , X . , Rao , Z . , Li , G . , and Zhang , X . C . ( 2007 ) . Structure of the APPL1 BAR - PH domain and characterization of its interaction with Rab5 . EMBO J . 26 , 3484 – 3493 . Zimmerberg , J . , andKozlov , M . M . ( 2006 ) . Howproteinsproducecellularmem - brane curvature . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 9 – 19 . Zimmerberg , J . , and McLaughlin , S . ( 2004 ) . Membrane Curvature : How BAR Domains Bend Bilayers . Curr . Biol . 14 , R250 – R252 . Cell 132 , 807 – 817 , March 7 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 817