STLF Report to CWSEI and Mathematics Department STLF : Sandra Merchant Period : 19 / 01 / 13 – 18 / 03 / 13 Submitted : 18 / 03 / 13 Specific activities performed by STLF 1 ) Professional development • Attended the weekly CWSEI Reading group meetings . • Attended the weekly STLF meetings . • Met with STLF Brett Gilley for a MetaSTLF meeting ( Jan 25 ) . • Attended the Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education Conference in Denver , Colorado ( Feb 20 - 23 ) . 2 ) MATH SEI general meetings / activity • Met with Director Costanza Piccolo and the MATH - SEI group to review the status of our projects and plan future work ( Jan 30 , Feb 6 , Feb 13 , Mar 13 ) . • Met with Sarah Gilbert and the MATH - SEI group ( Jan 23 ) to review the status of our projects . • Attended our Math Education Reading Group , where Wes Maciejewski presented “Extraneous perceptual information interferes with children ' s acquisition of mathematical knowledge , ” Kaminski & Sloutsky , 2012 . ( Feb 8 ) 3 ) Course - specific meetings / activities Tracking Proof Skills Project ( MATH 220 – Mathematical Proof and subsequent courses ) 1 . The bi - weekly workshops have continued in Math 220 , and the final workshop will take place March 28 th . On scoring the workshop quizzes ( a single question students do at the end of the workshop ) , I have noticed some excellent examples of student misconceptions . Therefore , for the final workshop I plan to photocopy the quizzes before marking them to create a pool of authentic examples to critique when I teach the course this summer . 2 . Our first draft of the proof concept test has now been reviewed by 5 faculty members , who have provided a substantial amount of feedback . Brian Marcus and I are now in the process of revising the test accordingly . I plan next to pilot the revised test in student think - aloud interviews during the last week of classes . 3 . At the Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education ( RUME ) conference , I presented the basic proof skills diagnostic test and some results we have found using this test in our courses . I received a lot of useful feedback from my talk , as well as met several individuals who are interested in using the test at their own institutions . Some ideas for future work on this test that came out of this are : ( 1 ) to develop a parallel version of the test , so that pre - and post - test need not be identical , and ( 2 ) to perform Item Response Theory analysis on the test to further assess its validity . MATH 103 ( Integral Calculus with Applications to Life Sciences ) 1 . I have continued preparing weekly WeBWorK assignments for MATH 103 . Overall , students and instructors are very happy so far with the implementation of WeBWorK in this course . MATH 105 ( Integral Calculus with Applications to Commerce and Social Sciences ) 1 . Together with instructor David Steinberg and graduate student Steve Bennoun , we are trying out a post - midterm reflection exercise called “exam wrappers . ” The exercise consists of a series of questions given along with the graded midterm that aim to have students reflect on how their prepared for the midterm , how effective their preparation was , and to make plans for changes in how they study for the next exam . Instructors in 5 sections of the course have agreed to participate and gave their students the wrappers along with their marked midterm 1 . Then , a week prior to midterm 2 the wrappers were returned to the students to remind them of what they had planned to change . The exercise will be repeated with midterm 2 , and we plan to compare the final exam and overall performance of students who completed the wrappers with those in other sections who did not participate in the exercise . We also plan to ask survey questions to all students at the end of term to probe whether they changed their study habits over the course of the term , as well as to see if this differs between the students who completed the exam wrappers and those who did not . Math Attitudes and Perceptions Survey ( MAPS ) – joint work with Warren Code and Joseph Lo 1 . We have completed our revisions to the survey based on the student validation interviews . We are now performing the factor analysis to establish the categories we will have for the survey . Once the categories are finalized , we will be soliciting expert responses so that we can further assess the validity of the survey questions as well as to determine the “expert response” for each question . 2 . We plan to run MAPS in a range of courses in the last 2 weeks of the term to collect baseline data for the most recent version of the survey . Current Project Status ( material was prepared by either STLF or other members of the MATH SEI group ) MATH 220 : Learning Goals : Learning goals have previously been created for this course . Assessments : The following assessments are planned to be used this term : basic proof diagnostic ( pre and post ) , Proof attitude survey ( pre and post ) . New Methods / Materials : A proof concept test is under development to assess higher - level proof skills . MATH 103 : Learning Goals : I do not know the status of learning goals for this course . Assessments : None . New Methods / Materials : A series of weekly WeBWorK assignments ( online homework ) is being prepared this term . MATH 105 : Learning Goals : Learning goals have previously been created for this course . Assessments : None . New Methods / Materials : An “exam wrapper” has been created as a post - midterm reflection exercise for students . Plan for immediate future work MATH 220 : 1 . Continue working on our paper about the basic proof skills diagnostic . Also , continue discussions with conference contacts about how to improve the test . 2 . Perform student validation on the portions of the basic proof skills diagnostic that have not been validated . 3 . Assist with the bi - weekly workshops and observe student behaviour with a view to improvements to be made in the summer term . 4 . Collect examples of proofs to critique in the workshops during the summer session of the course . Higher - Level Proof Courses 1 . Finish revising the proof concept test based on feedback received from faculty . 2 . Create an outline for student think - alouds on the revised proof concept test and begin student interviews . MATH 103 1 . Continue to make weekly WeBWorK problem sets . 2 . Run the WeBWorK survey in Math 103 and analyze the results . MATH 105 1 . Create the end of term survey questions probing how students study strategies changed over the term and run it in all sections ( if possible ) . 2 . Run the exam wrapper exercise for midterm 2 . MAPS 1 . Finish establishing the categories for the survey and finalize the current version . 2 . Post the finalized version of the survey online and solicit responses from experts ( aim for 50 expert responses ) . 3 . Run the survey in a range of courses at the end of term .