Participatory Design at the Museum - inquiring into children ʼ s everyday engagement in cultural heritage Christian Dindler , Ole Sejer Iversen , Rachel Smith , Rune Veerasawmy Department of Information & Media Studies , Aarhus University Helsingforsgade 14 DK - 8200 Aarhus Denmark { imvcdi , imvoi , imvrcs , imvrvn } @ hum . au . dk ABSTRACT We address the challenge of creating intersections between children’s everyday engagement and museum exhibitions . Specifically , we propose an approach to participatory design inquiry where children’s everyday engagement is taken as the point of departure . We base our discussion on a design workshop – Gaming the Museum – where a primary school class was invited to participate in exploring future exhibition spaces for a museum , based on their everyday use of computer games and online communities . We reflect on the results of the workshop , and broadly discuss the everyday engagement of children as point of departure for designing interactive museum exhibitions . Keywords Participatory Design , children , everyday engagement , cultural heritage . INTRODUCTION Attracting and engaging children remains a pivotal challenge for most modern cultural heritage museums . Among museums , there is a growing concern that the traditional exhibition and communication style too often fails to engage children , thus depriving the museum its potential to become a central institution in society where natural and cultural heritage is explored ( Hooper - Greenhill , 2001 ) . The introduction of various forms of interactive technologies in exhibition spaces has been pursued in order to engage audiences and create new avenues of learning . In particular , studies in fields concerned with interactive technology have explored the potential of augmented reality ( e . g . Woods et al . , 2004 ) , context aware exhibition guides ( Raptis et al . , 2005 ) , and various forms of mixed reality and tangible interaction that blend physical and digital material in the exhibition space ( e . g . Sparacino , 2004 ) . Besides the concrete technologies employed , these studies all reflect concerns in terms of how the relation between museums and their audiences can be framed , thus providing new formats for museum exhibitions . Most critically , this entails understanding the nature and dynamics of the museum experience as more than a transfer of knowledge from a value - free authority to a uniformed receiver ( Hooper - Greenhill , 2001 ) . The museum experience is fundamentally shaped by the wider personal , social , and institutional context in which visitors interact ( Falk & Dierking , 1992 ) . Within the Interaction Design & Children community , researchers have explored the issue of exhibition spaces , thus emphasizing the role of emerging technologies to support children’s learning ( Yiannoutsou et al . , 2009 ) , active engagement ( Ardito et al . , 2009 , Hall & Bannon , 2005 ) and social behavior in the exhibition space ( Rizzo & Garzotto , 2007 ) . Design methods deriving from the well - established Cooperative Inquiry approach ( Druin , 1999 ) and from Participatory Design ( Greenbaum & Kyng 1991 ) have been modified to document how children can participate as co - designers ( Iversen & Brodersen , 2007 ) in the process of developing new technology . Recently , Taxén ( 2004 ) argued that participatory design is a beneficial approach in producing high - quality user - oriented information technologies . However , as argued by Taxén ( ibid ) , research efforts in children’s participation tend to focus primarily on the development of new technologies and do not include aspects related to the exhibition content or the exhibition space . Taxén argues that the next challenge is to determine whether ( and how ) children can be involved in both content development and exhibit design . Hence , developing both content and supporting technologies as an intertwining and joint endeavour . Based on this challenge , our concern in this paper is how to create intersections between the everyday engagement of children and museum exhibitions ( Dindler & Iversen , 2009 ) . We propose an approach for participatory design inquiries where children’s everyday engagement functions as point of departure for the design of new exhibition spaces . To achieve this , we have found inspiration in children’s engagement in games and online communities . Throughout our case , we will illustrate how games and online communities can be used as vehicles of inquiry when designing museum exhibitions . The point of this OZCHI 2010 , November 22 - 26 , 2010 , Brisbane , Australia . Copyright the author ( s ) and CHISIG Additional copies are available at the ACM Digital Library ( http : / / portal . acm . org / dl . cfm ) or ordered from the CHISIG secretary ( secretary @ chisig . org ) OZCHI 2010 Proceedings ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0502 - 0 72 research is not that museums should be replaced by games , or that exhibition spaces in a literal sense should be game - like . Other authors have already debated various formats of games in museums exhibitions ( e . g . Dini et al . , 2007 , Laurillau & Paterno , 2004 ) . Rather , we suggest a particular form of participatory design inquiry , where children’s everyday engagement is used as a vehicle to address the issue of everyday engagement in exhibition spaces . In the following section , we introduce how children’s everyday engagement can function as point of departure for the design process . Next , we present our case study and discuss the setup and the progression of the workshop . Finally , we reflect on the results of the workshop and offer a more general reflection on a participatory design approach towards the design of interactive museums exhibitions . INQUIRING INTO EVERYDAY ENGAGEMENT Our approach to the design of technologies for museums centers on the notion of engagement , denoting a particular attention to how visitors as resourceful individuals and groups invest their time , skills and knowledge in exhibition spaces . Although engagement may be said to be a pervasive phenomenon , it is obvious that some technologies and exhibition spaces are more successful than others in spurring this engagement . As proposed by Borgmann ( 1995 ) , they succeed not only by the wealth of their experiential properties but also by their depth and unfoldedness . Their qualities are revealed and unfolded as people invest their resources in the situation . The traits of engaging interactive environments are obviously a complex mix of exhibited artefacts , physical surroundings and social relations . Moreover , engagement fundamentally depends on what people bring to the situation . People invest their time and efforts in particular situations based on prior experiences , knowledge and personal preferences . As argued by Czikzentmihalyi & Hermanson ( 1995 ) , a key issue for museums is how to create potential links and intersections between the interests and preferences of the visitors reflected in the everyday life of visitors and the knowledge presented in museums . Such intersections may be part of facilitating both depth ( Borgmann 1995 ) in interactive environments and rich cultural heritage experiences . Throughout children’s everyday lives , they engage enthusiastically in a wide variety of activities , including sports , family activities and computer games . Children invest their time and resources in these activities and social practices , thus becoming extremely knowledgeable within certain domains . Computer games and online communities such as ‘World of Warcraft’ are examples of activities where many children show a genuine and often consistent engagement . Not only do many children spend hours playing “World of Warcraft” , but they also become experts in the universe of the game ; a universe that is extremely complex and nuanced , and where the necessary knowledge has to be actively retrieved ( Corneliussen & Rettberg , 2008 ) . Many museums do succeed in engaging children . However , most cultural heritage museums would undoubtedly be thrilled if their collections were able to evoke the same kind of engagement as some computer games and online communities , and if they as an institution could play a more central role in the everyday lives of children . This is not to suggest that the museum should abandon its role as an educational institution in society and become a place of pure entertainment . However , as we will suggest in this paper , designers of exhibition spaces could benefit from placing the everyday engagement of their audiences at the centre of their work . This may be understood in a dual sense , reflecting both the product and the process . As argued by Pierroux et al . ( 2007 ) , a central challenge concerning the exhibition as a product , is the creation of links between the everyday practices of the visitors and the knowledge represented in museums . Arguably , museum exhibitions could be woven closer into everyday life and vice versa . Secondly , from the design process perspective , the engagement that children display in central activities in their everyday lives contains valuable insights and may provide a fruitful point of departure for the exploration of concepts for exhibition spaces . Although these two perspectives reflect two sides of the same coin , our concern here is primarily with the latter ; how everyday engagement of children may act as a point of departure for designerly inquiry . Our case exemplifies this by illustrating how children’s engagement might unfold in a concrete design situation and ultimately inform the design of exhibition spaces . The key aspect of the approach suggested here , is to initiate design inquiries not by asking what the museum should be like , but by asking where this engagement can be found . Based on an activity in which many children are engaged , ( computer games and online communities ) we explore how the qualities of engagement might translate to museums and inform the design of exhibition spaces . Computer games and online communities are thus used as vehicles of inquiry and not as aims in themselves . Considerable contributions address the issue of studying and working with children with a point of departure in the context where the product is to be implemented ( e . g . Bekker et al . , 2002 , Kelly et al . , 2006 , Roussou et al . , 2006 ) . There are obvious and valid reasons for these approaches . The participatory approach pursued in this paper complements these by considering design inquiries that start in the context where the engagement level is high , thus connecting with the use context . In the following case study , we show how this can be accomplished through two processes of translation in the design process . PD AT THE MUSEUM The ‘Gaming the Museum’ workshop was part of the Participatory Cultural Heritage project conducted by the Center for Digital Urban Living at the University of Aarhus , Denmark . The aim of the project is to explore and develop interactive exhibition spaces for engaging and 73 participatory experiences in museums . Furthermore , the project develops new user - driven design practices for conducting design of engaging exhibitions spaces . One of the major stakeholders in the project is the Moesgaard Museum . The museum combines archaeological and ethnographic collections with exhibitions related to Scandinavian history . In 2013 , the museum will extend the exhibition space with an additional 8 , 000 m2 . As a part of the expansion , the museum is exploring and experimenting with new strategies for cultural heritage communication . The “Gaming the Museum” workshop was part of this ongoing process . Gaming the Museum The ‘Gaming the Museum’ workshop took place in an empty exhibition space at Moesgaard Museum , where a class of 22 children ( aged 14 - 15 ) , their two teachers and five researchers participated . The aim of the workshop was to start from everyday practices where the children’s engagement was already strong . The genres of computer games and online communities were chosen , as we believed , that all the children were familiar with or engaged in one or more of these activities on a daily basis . The core of the workshop consisted of three parts . The movement between these parts was achieved through two processes of translation , where a move was made from the children’s everyday engagement , towards the museum domain ( figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . The workshop was structured as three parts connected by two translations : from computer games and online communities to physical games and from physical games to museum exhibition spaces . In the first part of the workshop , the children discussed the qualities of the chosen game or online community . In the second part of the workshop , the children where asked to create a physical addition or feature to the chosen computer game or online community , using simple props available such as paper and card - board . The physical addition should include the central qualities the children had discussed in the first part of the workshop . The first translation moved the process from the computer games and online communities to the physical realm . This translation served a double purpose : to concretize the features that had engaged the children in these games and online communities on a daily basis , at the same time maintaining the qualities of engagement that they had previously discussed . In the third part of the workshop , the children were invited for a 15 - minute visit to the exhibitions at Moesgaard Museum and were given the task to photograph the elements they found interesting and relatable . The visit was intended to introduce elements related to cultural heritage into the children’s work , but without restricting the children ' s focus to certain historical narratives or pre - described experiences . Having visited the museum , the children were assigned the task of creating a new exhibition space for the Moesgaard Museum , using the photos as well as the physical mock - ups made during the second part of the workshop . This was the second translation and moved the process from the physical addition the children had made to the domain of the museum . This exercise was intended to merge the points and experiences of everyday engagement with the physicality and locality of the cultural heritage museum . Hereby exploring new creative meanings and potentials of museum experiences when it is approached from the everyday engagement of children instead of museum collections and understandings . The intention with the translations was to move towards the domain of the museum while maintaining an anchor in the engagement shown in the games and online communities . The exhibition spaces created by the children in the final part of the workshop , were thus expressions of how an exhibition space might be like if it was based on the qualities of engagement from the children’s everyday lives . In relation to the overarching design process , the exhibitions created by the children functioned as material presenting new possible avenues in terms of spurring engagement . The translations from the online environment to the physical environment and ultimately to the museum were supported by a range of props . The progression is discussed further in the next section . Part I : Computer games and online communities The intention with the first part of the workshop was to explore and reflect upon the characteristics and experiences that engaged the children when playing particular computer games and using online communities on an everyday basis . The children worked in five groups with four different computer games and online communities of their choice : the online multi - player computer games World of Warcraft , TrackMania and the online social community sites , Facebook and MSN Messenger . The children had all brought printed photos , screen captures , or other kinds of representations of their computer game or online community with them to the workshop . The reason why the children were asked to bring these materials to the workshop was to encourage reflection on their computer game or online community at home , while playing the game or using the online community . Furthermore , the representation of their game or online community would serve the purpose of a prop that could assist the translation from the digital game to a physical game . Part II : Physical game spaces Based upon the reflections and discussions regarding the engaging qualities of their computer game and online communities , each group was asked to develop a new physical game or feature that would improve the value of the game or online community and their own everyday engagement . This way , we ensured that the children 74 discussed and articulated the engaging qualities of the computer game or online community . The translation from part I to part II was an issue of transforming their computer game or online community into a physical space of engagement by constructing it as a mock - up . The intention was to allow for the children to move from the online to the physical realm , whilst maintaining and carrying with them the engaging qualities of their game discussed in part I . The props available to the children were post - it notes , cardboards , posters , and a range of ad hoc materials at hand in the storage room of the workshop space ( figure 2 ) . The workshop space was a large , empty exhibition space under construction that appeared rough but instilled an atmosphere of construction and experimenting upon the workshop . Figure 2 . The workshop space The groups worked at different paces , depending on their chosen computer game or online community . Some got off to a slow start discussing their game and relied upon the researchers’ help to move ahead , while others quickly started constructing . Two factors seemed crucial here ; the digital environments’ relatedness to the physical world , and the social composition of the group . While one group working with Facebook found it very difficult to relate their online activities to a physical setting , the TrackMania group , consisting of five close friends , quickly began to build new features for the track after a short discussion about the game . Figure 3 . The TrackMania group builds a new track . The TrackMania group worked with new ideas for about an hour , adding choices , personal options and other features to their game , developing the physical track accordingly ( figure 3 ) . One example of an added feature was a garage that made it possible to customize cars . Another feature was related to the composition of teams . These features lead to a further application for communicating within or between the teams . This made it possible to interact with fellow players during the game , help and advise them through the challenges of the track , and report on good or bad choices , again adding to the sense of teamplay . At the end of part II of the workshop , the children were asked to rate their new physical game on a form . The form contained criteria often used in computer game ratings : Life factor : for how long would the game be fun and attractive , Friend factor : to what extent would the game be social or individual , Easy to use factor : how approachable would the game be for players who were unfamiliar with it , Brain factor : how much intellectual work would the game require and would players learn anything from playing it , Fun factor : how much fun would it be to play , Cool factor : how cool was the physical edition of the game or online community , and finally , X factor : a open category that the groups could define themselves . Each group was asked to fill in the form with smileys indicating scores of poor , average , good , very good , and to explain their ratings in group presentations . The rating had a dual purpose . First and foremost , the overall aim of the workshop was to translate the children’s engagement from a digital to a physical game and finally to a physical museum exhibition . The rating activity was designed as a tool for retaining this engagement through the translations . The ratings of their physical games would function as a set of requirements for the development of the physical exhibition space later . Secondly , the purpose of the rating activity was to articulate some of the reflections and discussions that had emerged during the first part of the workshop , concerning their own engagement in the game . It was clear that the undirected focus of the first task meant that the children had to articulate , foremost to themselves , the engaging factors that made them continuously engage with particular computer games or online communities . The extensive knowledge that the children had about the games and online communities , and the relation between the games and the children ' s everyday lives , visualized which general features that were important to them . In their physical designs , discussions , and ratings , the groups emphasized the challenges , skills , and tasks involved in the games , as well as the relational aspects of being part of a group , with whom they communicate , play , and have fun . An interesting point drawn from the second part of the workshop , was how the TrackMania group found it relatively easy to develop the physical features of the game world , and did in fact end up spending much time developing the social and relational aspects of their game . In comparison , the groups working with online communities , where the relational infrastructure was 75 already well developed , devoted more time to the development of the physical aspects . The translation of the children’s everyday engagement in computer games and online communities to the physical realm was challenging . However , the props , in the shape of the photos the children had brought to the workshop and the rating form , provided a fruitful resource in the translation process . Part III : Creating exhibition spaces Having rated their physical game , the children were introduced to the third and final part of the workshop . Each group was provided with a digital camera and asked to spend 15 minutes inside the museum exhibition space ( located next to the workshop room ) , exploring the museum space and capturing photos of objects and situations they found interesting . After 15 minutes the children printed their photos . The short visit to the museum marked the translation between the second and third part of the workshop ; between the physical game space and the exhibition space . Rather than providing the children with a clear task or a guided exhibition tour , the intention of this exercise was to gain insights into the things the children found interesting and engaging in the museum . The camera was introduced , as it was a familiar and easily accessible media for the children to work with . Moreover , it allowed for them to produce tangible representations of their museum visit that would act as props for the third and final part of the workshop . The children were reminded , that whatever they found interesting was a valid scene to capture , regardless of it being either cultural heritage artefacts , interior elements of the museum , or even photos of themselves . As such , the exercise continued to focus on the articulation of engaging qualities for the children , without emphasizing particular artefacts on display or historical narratives . At the museum , the groups immediately started to capture large amounts of photos . Initially , the children focused on capturing photos of the historical artefacts in the showcases , but after a few minutes their focus shifted towards including photos of themselves and their group posing in front of or behind the historical artefacts . Furthermore , they started to take photos of everyday objects such as door signs , trashcans , vending machines and security alarms . Their initial excitement seemed to decrease during the brief visit to the exhibition space . The camera functioned as a social media and the whole group often joined to review the newly captures photos . The children did not loose interest in the exhibited artefacts completely ; rather , the focus shifted from the objects towards performing or staging themselves in relation to these artefacts , e . g . by standing in front , beside , or behind the objects . In addition , trivial or unrelated objects such as vending machines , fire extinguishers , lamps , etc . were given new meanings and life in the collective performance around them . As such , the time limit of 15 minutes created a space in which the children started to create new narratives and forms of social behaviour inside the museum , but without restraining the children’s focus . The 15 - minute visit to the museum generated several hundred photos that were printed and sorted by the children . Having sorted the photos , the children were assigned the task of creating a new exhibition space by transforming their physical game developed in the previous sessions , and using their photos . The intention here was for the captured photos to function as props for this activity and once again translate the engagement embedded in their game design into the exhibition space . The focus and content of the exhibition was entirely up to the children . The only constraint was that the new exhibition space should have an identical or better score on the rating form when compared to their physical game . In other words , the children were constrained by the engaging qualities they had formulated in the form . For some groups this process proved to be very difficult . Particularly the TrackMania group found it hard to transform their physical racing game into an exhibition space about cultural heritage . Moreover , some of the obscure photos they had taken during the short visit to the museum suddenly seemed irrelevant . For the TrackMania group , the gap was too wide and neither the images nor the racing track suddenly made sense . Facing this obstacle , the researcher facilitating this group , started asking questions about the engaging features of their physical game , guiding their attention towards the qualities of engagement rather than the physicality of the game . With a new starting point , the group began exploring their collection of photos , allowing themselves to see the potential in the seemingly arbitrary images they had captured . The group discussed it and selected their favourite images and slowly started to generate ideas of their visions for the future museum exhibition . They decided to let museum visitors explore the exhibition space driving a vehicle . The vehicle used had multiple seats so visitors could experience the exhibition space with their friends and classmates . During the ride , the visitors would meet various obstacles in the form of challenges incorporating various cultural heritage objects , they had to overcome in order to continue . On the journey through the exhibition space , they had to collect different objects such as poison or a fire extinguisher that would help them overcome the obstacles and tasks of racing against the Bog Man ( a famous bog find displayed in the museum ) . At the end of the museum visit , visitors would receive a diploma with their photo , name , and the points collected during the trip . The diploma for best team of the day would be displayed inside the museum for others to see . The children’s activity in this phase of the workshop was primarily centred around two aspects . Firstly , they were very engaged by the social element in the exhibition space . They emphasized how visitors could collaborate and help each other when facing the different challenges . Secondly , the children found the idea of obstacles and assignments 76 that had to be overcome in order to complete the visit particularly interesting . Becoming acquainted with rune stones and the Bog Man became an integrated part of the experience . Not in the traditional sense of simply learning the facts , but by completing the journey through active involvement in a shared mission . At the end of the workshop , the children gathered for a de - briefing and discussed the events of the day . The translation from the second to the third part of the workshop required the children to abstract their current work in order translate their physical game or community to an actual museum exhibition space . To assist this process the photo session at the museum provided the children with props representing elements that they found engaging at the museum . Combined with the rating form , these functioned as some of the central props that supported the children in preserving the engaging elements through the translation phase . LESSONS LEARNED The purpose of the Gaming the Museum workshop was to explore how an exhibition space might be like if the point of departure was children’s everyday engagement . Here , we outline some of the specific insights the workshop provided for the remaining process of designing exhibitions at Moesgaard Museum . The museum visit as a social endeavour The social and relational aspects of the features and mock - ups developed by the children dominated the discussions and were strongly emphasized in all three parts of the workshop . Since the workshop took its point of departure in computer games and online communities , this was less surprising . Yet the continuous focus on friendship , communication , and teamwork played a significant role throughout the day and permeated every idea produced by the groups . The place provided for the workshop was used in creative ways to invent social events and interactive experiences that depended on their relation to others and the ability to work together . The race against the Bog Man was a good example of a social event , driven by a shared mission to overcome challenges and complete the assignments as a team . The visit was thus transformed into a journey , a quest , and a challenge . Another example was the Face Fight concept . Face Fight promoted social dynamics between friends inside the exhibition space , fighting with weapons from different historical periods while being ‘shot at’ with information and facts relating to the specific weapons . In both cases , visitors were engaged through active participation and agency in the game and the learning experience was thus developed as an active element in the event . Not as a didactic or reflective feature , but in a way that allowed information and facts to become dynamic and active props in a larger social endeavour . The museum as a place for triggering motivation Balancing between the everyday engagement of the children and the knowledge presented in the museum , it was clear from the latter parts of the workshop that the children’s engagement in the design space was strongest when they managed to move beyond their own pre - conceptions of the cultural heritage museum and allow themselves to create their own objectives in the exhibition space . ‘What is it we want to do here ? ’ became central to their engagement , rather than ‘How can we transform the museum as it is , into a place for us ? ’ It was obvious that the children’s own investment in the visit and their ability to direct , control , and frame the visit according to their own interests , were two very important aspects of their work . What the museum could tell them or teach them through displayed objects and installations seemed less important than choosing where and when to interact , and where not to . Only through active participation and investment was information retrieved . Elements that sparked curiosity and triggered engagement seemed to be central aspects of the exhibition spaces designed by the children . However , not all the exhibition spaces had to appeal to everyone . Rather , the children differentiated between elements that appealed specifically to them , and elements that might interest other people , but they themselves would not engage in . Leaving traces in the museum Another prominent feature of the mock - up exhibitions developed through the workshop was the interest in sharing knowledge and experiences with other visitors . There was a general focus on leaving traces behind and hereby making a personal mark . The diploma from the race against the Bog Man and the collected points in the Face Fight game , which were linked directly to Facebook , were other examples . It was important for the children to be able to appropriate the exhibition space as a place for co - creation or as a display to the world expressing who they were . Rather than merely being a self - centred experience , emphasis was placed on how the objects and installations gained meaning through the relations between the children . As seen through the children’s photo tour at the museum , objects like the Bog Man and old ceramics gained new meaning when staged as part of the social relations and dynamics of the groups . Museum objects as props in everyday life activities During the workshop , museum objects and stories were primarily utilized as props in the children’s conception of everyday life , rather than objects from the past . In general , the children related to the objects from their contemporary positions . The TrackMania group addressed the Bog man by questioning how they would look if they themselves were a bog body but were able to add other features such as head bans , sunglasses , and hairstyles . Their conceptions of the Bog Man were transformed according to their own attitudes and ideas of clothing . As we have tried to illustrate in these sections , the inquiry yielded rich insights into the potential relations between exhibition spaces and children’s everyday engagement . The workshop provided a first hand insight into children’s everyday engagement as it unfolded in the museum environment , grounded in reflections on the engaging 77 qualities of computer games and online communities . The concepts developed during the session serve as design material informing the process of designing new exhibition spaces for Moesgaard Museum . In the next section , we conclude the paper by reflecting on Gaming the Museum as an example of a general approach to designerly inquiry . DISCUSSION Within the literature concerned with interaction design and children , several contributions have explored participatory design inquiries that take as their point of departure the use practice in which new technologies are to be implemented ( e . g . Kelly et al . , 2006 , Bekker et al . , 2002 ) . The Gaming the Museum workshop exemplifies a participatory design perspective where point of departure is a domain where children’s engagement is strong . The potential contribution of this approach to designerly inquiry is how it provides participants with a legitimate space to rethink the assumptions that are embedded in a domain – for example the museum In this sense , the inquiry is a refinement of the fictional inquiry technique ( Iversen & Dindler , 2008 ) . Established ideas of a museum ' s characteristics are re - conceptualized and seen in a new light where the standard of measurement is how the museum channels engagement . Our approach has some similarities with metaphorical approaches to design ( Madsen , 1994 ) and techniques such as interaction re - labelling ( Djajadiningrat et al . , 2000 ) . These approaches also recast an existing and well - known situation in terms of something else . The distinctive feature of the approach pursued here is , however , that the inquiry does not aim at revealing what a museum would be like if it were a game ( a metaphorical approach ) . Games and online communities are used as vehicles for translating qualities of engagement to the domain of museums and ultimately informing the design of new interactive technologies . Indeed , the lessons learned from the workshop discussed in the previous section stretch beyond the concrete computer game metaphor and relate more generally to everyday engagement among children and how this engagement might inform the design of exhibition spaces . A central part of our approach is the processes of translation in which qualities of engagement are moved from one domain to another . In our case , the process of translation was broken down into two parts ; from the online domain to the physical domain , and from the physical domain to the domain of the museum ( figure 1 ) . It would of course be overly simplified to argue that qualities of engagement were moved between these domains without being altered themselves . Indeed , it is essential to note that the translations not only supported the crossing of domain boundaries , they also changed and re - shaped the qualities of engagement . As the children went through the translations in the workshop , the qualities of engagement that were crystallized in the forms changed and were moulded to fit the new domain . Arguably , it may prove a difficult task to engage children in exhibition design , if the starting point is an exhibition space in which they do not feel at home and at times fail to capture their interest . In our view , a clear strength of the approach presented here is the fact that it engages children by taking their everyday engagement as the focal point of design . It is important to note that this approach to inquiry complements rather than replaces inquiries that focus more specifically on the domain of study . As is evident from the case study , the approach emphasizes potentially engaging qualities , yet deals less rigorously with the aspects more specifically related to the museum artefacts and the museum as an educational institution . Any design process dealing with museums should reflect a concern for more in depth exploration of the qualities and potentials of exhibited artefacts , as well as a concern for how museums may realize their role as educational institutions in society . CONCLUSION In this paper we have reflected upon a particular concern for exploring how to create intersections between children’s everyday engagement and museum exhibitions by inquiring into the engaging qualities of computer games and online communities . The aim of the workshop , Gaming the Museum , was not that museum exhibitions should be based on a gaming approach as such . Rather , we used computer games and online communities as vehicles for exploring the potential dynamics , focus , and characteristics of children’s engagement and how these might inform the design of exhibition spaces . The approach presented here , provides participants with a way of exploring exhibition spaces with point of departure in the engaging qualities of their everyday life and not in the domain of the museum . This approach has the potential to foster the development of technologies that shape new types of interaction but more importantly are rooted deeply in the everyday engagement of children . The challenge of this approach is the process of translating and incorporating the engaging qualities from one domain to another . This approach should not be seen as a replacement of the current contextual approaches but as complementary . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work has been funded by Center for Digital Urban Living ( The Danish Council for Strategic Research grant number 2128 - 07 - 0011 ) . We thank the pupils and teachers from Engdalskolen for participating in the design workshop . Furthermore , we acknowledge the work of Marie Slundt , Per Henrik Storm , Mads Poulsen and Hans William Falck . 78 REFERENCES 1 . Ardito , C . , Costabile , M . F . and Lanzilotti , R . Enhancing user experience while gaming in archaeological parks with cellular phones . In Proc . of IDC . ( Como , Italy ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2009 , 270 - 271 . 2 . Bekker , M . , Beusmansb , J . , Keysonb , D . and Lloyd , P . KidReporter : a user requirements gathering technique for designing with children . In Proc . Of IDC , Eindhoven , the Netherlands . 2002 , 138 - 143 . 3 . Borgmann , A . 1995 . The Depth of Design , The University of Chicago Press , Chicago ( IL ) . 4 . Corneliussen , H . G . and Rettberg , J . W . Digital culture , play , and identity : a World of Warcraft reader . MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA , 2008 . 5 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . , & Hermanson , K . 1995 , ‘Intrinsic motivation in museums : Why does one want to learn ? ’ . In J . H . Falk & L . D . Dierking ( Eds . ) , Public institutions for personal learning : Establishing aresearch agenda ( pp . 66 - 77 ) . Washington D . C . : American Association of Museums . 6 . Dindler , C . & Iversen , O . S . ( 2009 ) : Motivation in the museum - Mediating between Everyday Engagement and Cultural Heritage , The Nordes Conference , Oslo , august 2009 7 . Dini , R . , Paternó , F . , Santoro , C . An Environment to Support Multi - User Interaction and Cooperation for Improving Museum Visits through Games , In proc . of Mobile HCI , 2007 , ACM Press , pp . 515 - 521 . 8 . Djajadiningrat , J . P . , Gaver , W . W . and Fres , J . W . Interaction relabelling and extreme characters : methods for exploring aesthetic interactions . In Proc . of DIS . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2000 , 66 - 71 . 9 . Druin , A . ed . The Design of Children ' s Technology . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , inc . , San Francisco , California , USA , 1999 . 10 . Falk , J . H . , Dierking , L . D . and Boyd , W . L . The museum experience . Howells House , Washington , DC , USA , 1992 . 11 . Greenbaum , J . & Kyng , M . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems , Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , New Jersey , 1991 12 . Hall , T . and Bannon , L . Designing ubiquitous computing to enhance children ' s interaction in museums . In Proc . of IDC . ( Boulder Colorado , USA ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2005 , 62 - 69 . 13 . Hooper - Greenhill , E . Communication and communities in the post - museum : from metanarratives to constructed knowledge . In the Nordic Museums Leadership Programme . University of Leicester , Copenhagen , Denmark , 2001 . 14 . Iversen , O . S . Brodersen , C . 2007 Building a BRIDGE between children and users : a socio - cultural approach to child – computer interaction , Cognition , Technology and Work , v . 10 n . 2 , p . 83 - 93 , March 2008 15 . Iversen , O . S . and Dindler , C . 2008 . Pursuing aesthetic inquiry in participatory design . In Proc . Of PDC . Indiana University , Indianapolis , IN , 138 - 145 . 16 . Kelly , S . R . , Mazzone , E . , Horton , M . and Read , J . C . Bluebells : a design method for child - centred product development . In Proc . of NORDICHI . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2006 , 361 - 368 . 17 . Laurillau , Y . , Paternó . Supporting museum co - visits using mobile devices , In proc . of mobile HCI 2004 , Springer , pp . 451 - 455 18 . Madsen , K . H . A guide to metaphorical design . Commun . ACM , 37 , 12 ( 1994 ) , 57 - 62 . 19 . Pierroux , P . , Bannon , L . , Walker , K . , Hall , T . , Kaptelinin , V . and Stuedahl , D . MUSTEL : Framing the Design of Technology - Enhanced Learning Activities for Museum Visitors . In Proc . of ICHIM . Archives & Museum Informatics , Toronto , Canada , 2007 . 20 . Raptis , D . , Tselios , N . and Avouris , N . Context - based design of mobile applications for museums : a survey of existing practices . In Proc . of HCI with mobile devices & services . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2005 , 153 - 160 . 21 . Rizzo , F . and Garzotto , F . The Fire and The Mountain : tangible and social interaction in a museum exhibition for children . In Proc of IDC . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2007 , 105 - 108 . 22 . Roussou , M . , Kavalieratou , E . and Doulgeridis , M . Children designers in the museum : applying participatory design for the development of an art education program . In Proc . of IDC , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2007 , 77 - 80 . 23 . Sparacino , F . Scenographies of the past and museums of the future : from the wunderkammer to body - driven interactive narrative spaces . In Proc . of ICME . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2004 , 72 - 79 . 24 . Taxén , G . Introducing participatory design in museums . In Proce . s of PDC . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2004 , 204 - 213 . 25 . Woods , E . , Billinghurst , M . , Looser , J . , Aldridge , G . , Brown , D . , Garrie , B . and Nelles , C . Augmenting the science centre and museum experience . In Proc . of GRAPHITE , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2004 , 230 - 236 . 26 . Yiannoutsou , N . , Papadimitriou , I . , Komis , V . and Avouris , N . " Playing with " museum exhibits : designing educational games mediated by mobile technology . In Proc . of IDC . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2009 , 230 - 23 . 79