Automated Gait Analysis Detects Improvements after Intracellular r Peptide Administration in a Rat Hemisection Model of Spinal Cord Injury T REVOR R . H AM , 1 M AHMOUD F ARRAG , 2 A NDREW M . S OLTISZ , 1 E MILY H . L AKES , 3 K YLE D . A LLEN , 3 and N IC D . L EIPZIG 1 , 2 , 4 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering , University of Akron , Akron , OH , USA ; 2 Department of Biology , University of Akron , Akron , OH , USA ; 3 J . Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering , University of Florida , Gainesville , FL , USA ; and 4 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of Akron , Akron , OH , USA ( Received 18 October 2018 ; accepted 4 January 2019 ) Associate editor Michael S . Detamore oversaw the review of the article . Abstract — A promising treatment strategy for spinal cord injury ( SCI ) is to reduce inhibition from chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans ( CSPGs ) . For example , administering intra - cellular r peptide ( ISP ) can improve the ability of axons to cross inhibitory CSPGs and improve function in rodent models of SCI . To translate such treatments into the clinic , we need robust and sensitive methods for studying rodent models . In this study , we applied a newly developed suite of quantitative gait analysis tools : gait analysis instrumentation and technology optimized for rodents ( GAITOR ) , which consists of an arena and open - source software ( AGATHA : automated gait analysis through hues and areas ) . We showed that GAITOR can be used to detect subtle functional improvements ( measured by hindlimb duty factor imbalance ) in rats following ISP administration in a T10 hemisection injury model . We demonstrated that SCI - speciﬁc parameters ( right paw placement accuracy and phase dispersion ) can be easily added to GAITOR to track recovery . We conﬁrmed the gait observations via retrograde tracer uptake . We concluded that GAITOR is a powerful tool for measuring recovery after moderate / mild SCI , and could be used to replace expensive / inﬂexible commercially - available gait anal - ysis techniques . Keywords — Spinal cord injury , Gait analysis , Hemisection , Intracellular sigma peptide , Behavioral analysis . INTRODUCTION Traumatic spinal cord injury ( SCI ) leaves patients with a permanent impairment , as there is no known clinical method for functionally regenerating spinal cord tissue . Following an initial injury ( e . g . , a mechanical impact or stab wound ) , the cellular response is chaotic , and a variety of secondary events occur over diﬀerent timescales . 3 Importantly , a per - manent barrier scar is formed around the damaged tissue . Scar formation is driven by different cell types , both CNS - intrinsic and extrinsic . 2 Inﬁltrating cells , such as type A pericytes , locate within the center of the lesion . 14 These are surrounded by reactive astrocytes , which deposit inhibitory chondroitin sulfate proteo - glycans ( CSPGs ) . Since these reactive astrocytes , and the barrier scar itself , play a beneﬁcial role in the limited recovery that does take place ( by compacting the lesion area and supporting the remaining tissue ) , 12 a potential treatment target is to attack the inhibitory components of the scar while allowing the physical scar matrix to remain in place . One such strategy utilizes intracellular r peptide ( ISP ) , a membrane - permeable peptide which reduces inhibition from CSPGs by inhibiting receptor PTP r and has been shown to im - prove locomotor recovery following contusive SCI . 9 However , its ability to promote recovery from a lateral hemisection SCI ( in which half of the spinal cord is cut and removed ) is unknown . One of the primary outcomes in any SCI treatment is to evaluate how it improves locomotion . In rats , which are the predominant laboratory SCI model , it can be diﬃcult to distinguish diﬀerences during the later stages of recovery after mild to moderate SCI . Quantitative gait analysis has been commonly em - ployed as an alternative or complimentary technique to standard , observer - scored techniques such as the Bas - so , Beattie , and Bresnahan ( BBB ) score . 1 Quantitative gait analysis allows researchers to study subtle changes in gait as an animal recovers , which may not be obvious using observer - scored techniques that are Address correspondence to Nic D . Leipzig , Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of Akron , Akron , OH , USA . Electronic mail : nl21 @ uakron . edu Annals of Biomedical Engineering ( (cid:2) 2019 ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 019 - 02198 - 0 BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY (cid:2) 2019 Biomedical Engineering Society conducted in real time . This allows the investigation of how a treatment affects an individual limb ( e . g . , in a unilateral injury ) and / or the isolation of spatial and temporal parameters . Additionally , quantitative anal - yses remove observer bias from studies that cannot be conducted in a double - blinded manner . However , there are issues with current techniques , as they may be closed source , require manual scoring , or involve a treadmill ( which inherently affects locomotion 4 ) . In the present study , we applied an open - source , closed - arena gait analysis technique ( GAITOR , gait analysis instrumentation and technology optimized for rodents , Fig . 1 ) . 5 GAITOR consists of an arena that allows the collection of high - speed footage of rat locomotion from both sagittal and ventral viewpoints , and a set of software tools to analyze the footage ( AGATHA , automated gait analysis through hues and areas 7 ) . While GAITOR was originally developed for orthopedic injury models , the open - source aspect allowed us to easily calculate additional parameters which are speciﬁc for SCI by making simple changes to the AGATHA calculator . We used GAITOR to eval - uate recovery from a right T10 hemisection SCI ( T10 was chosen due to its position rostral to the motor neuron pools which control rear hindlimb locomo - tion , 11 Fig . 1e ) after ISP administration in rats . In addition to previously calculated parameters ( duty factor , step width , stride length ) , we implemented SCI - speciﬁc parameters ( paw placement accuracy , phase dispersion 8 ) . Additionally , we investigated tissue - level recovery via retrograde tracer . Overall , the goal was to determine if GAITOR could be used to sensitively detect changes in locomotor recovery following treat - ment for SCI . MATERIALS AND METHODS Hemisection Injury Model All procedures described in this manuscript were conducted under the approval of the University of Akron Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC , protocol 16 - 04 - 07 LRE ) and performed un - der anesthesia . We performed the hemisection in a manner similar to that which has been described pre - viously . 10 Brieﬂy , we made an incision along the mid - line of female Fisher 344 rats ( Envigo , n = 6 , 3 total groups : ISP + , ISP - , and naı¨ve ) . After carefully counting the dorsal processes , we exposed the dorsal surface of the spinal column from approximately T8 - T11 . We performed a laminectomy on T10 , leaving the dura intact . We then performed a right lateral hemi - section with a # 11 scalpel blade and removed 2mm of the cord , resulting in a moderate injury to the spinal cord . Before continuing , we took care to scrape the bottom of the vertebrae repeatedly to ensure a com - plete hemisection ( i . e . , that no neuronal connections remained on the right side of the cord ) . After hemostasis was achieved , we closed the muscle with 4 - 0 Vicryl ( Ethicon ) and the skin with Michel clips . We treated pain with subcutaneous injections of carprofen ( 5 mg / kg ) for 3 days following the injury and expressed bladders as needed until the normal reﬂex returned . We replaced any animals which did not recover loco - motion by week 3 ( e . g . , dragging limbs , 1 animal from each injury group ) . We allowed the rats to recover for 13 weeks before perfusion . ISP Administration We administered ISP as described by others . 9 Brieﬂy , we prepared a 5 l m solution of ISP ( synthe - sized by GenScript ) in sterile DMSO : saline ( 1 : 20 ) and aliquoted each animal’s daily dose ( stored at 2 20 (cid:3) C ) . Beginning at 24 h post injury and continuing through day 49 , we gave each animal a 500 l L injection of the ISP solution in the subcutaneous tissue near the lesion ( within 2 cm of the original incision , on either side of the midline ) . We conducted the experiment in a dou - ble - blinded manner . Vehicle solution ( DMSO : saline ) was the negative control . Gait Testing We allowed rats to explore a specialized gait arena that has been described previously : full dimensions , instructions , and examples can be found in Ref . 5 . Brieﬂy , the arena consists of a clear acrylic enclosure with a 45 (cid:3) mirror placed below to enable viewing of both the sagittal and ventral planes ( Fig . 1a ) . The rats walked freely back and forth across the arena , against a black background , while being recorded at 250 FPS using a high speed camera ( MS85K , MegaSpeed Corp ) . For lighting , we used two 50’’ DC LED light bars ( SuperBrightLEDs ) producing (cid:2) 21 , 400 lumens each : one placed above the arena and one below to illuminate both views . Rats walked unprompted for up to 20 minutes to obtain 6 – 7 videos per animal . Importantly , we acclimatized the animals to the arena for 2 weeks prior to beginning the study . We rejected videos in which the animal changed speed or stopped before completing three full gait cycles . Retrograde Tracing We performed retrograde tracing using Fluo - roGold ( FG , Fluorochrome LLC ) as previously described . 10 , 15 We dissolved FG in phosphate buf - fered saline ( PBS , 4 % w / v ) and sterilized the solu - BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY H AM et al . tion via 0 . 22 l m ﬁltration . We then soaked a small ( 5 9 5 9 2 mm ) gelatin pledget ( Gelfoam , Pﬁzer ) in the FG solution for > 5 min . For tracing animals ( we traced half of each group described above , or n = 3 ) , 1 week before the study endpoint ( week 12 ) , we performed a laminectomy at T12 ( 2 segments caudal to the lesion ) , made a small incision in the dura , and placed the pledget on top of the incision , using petroleum jelly to hold it in place . We then closed the surgical site as described above , and allowed the animals to recover for 1 week before perfusion and analysis ( see below ) . Automated Gait Analysis A detailed overview of how AGATHA works , including a comparison with manual digitization , can be found in Ref . 7 . In brief : ﬁrst , the user selects ﬁl - tering parameters that enable AGATHA to ﬁlter the sagittal view to contain only the rat , and the ventral view to contain only the paws ( Fig . 1b ) . AGATHA then locates the row of pixels which represents the ﬂoor of the arena in the sagittal view . Next , AGATHA excludes any regions where the nose or tail are con - tacting the ﬂoor . AGATHA determines the earliest ( foot - strike ) and last ( toe - off ) frames in which a paw is FIGURE 1 . Overview of GAITOR and injury model . GAITOR is a open - source suite of hardware and software tools for preclinical gait analysis . High - speed footage of rats walking in an arena is collected , including sagittal and ventral views . AGATHA ( one software component of GAITOR ) examines each video frame - by - frame to extract relevant gait parameters . For detailed information about GAITOR , see Refs . 5 and 7 . ( a ) An example frame from a GAITOR video . ( b ) AGATHA ﬁlters the rat from the background in the sagittal view and paws from the background in the ventral view . These are then binarized and the sagittal view is used to determine which paws are in contact with the ground in each frame ( red arrows ) . ( c ) Detailed images showing each paw placement ( in space ) for each video are then generated . Notice how the right paws are placed farther apart on average when compared to the left ( orange box ) . ( d ) Plots showing foot strike ( when the paw contacts the ground , green circle on top of each box ) and toe - off ( when the paw leaves the ground , pink circles on bottom ) are also generated . Forepaws are blue , while hindpaws are red . The y - axis is descending frame number ( so the ﬁrst frame is at the top ) and the x - axis is the horizontal pixels of each frame . The right hindlimb ( steps 2 , 6 , 10 , 14 , and 18 ) can be seen to contact the ground for less than the left ( steps 4 , 8 , 12 , 16 ) and at a delay ( red box ) . Inset shows an example step in greater detail . ( e ) We performed a T10 hemisection , which disrupts the motor neuron tracts responsible for right hindlimb movement . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY Gait Analysis Shows Beneﬁts of ISP in Rat Hemisection in contact with the ground . These foot - strike / toe - off events are plotted in a foot - strike toe - off ( FSTO ) dia - gram , which shows each step as a rectangle , each foot - strike event as a green circle , and each toe - off event as a red circle ( Fig . 1d ) . From this information , AGA - THA calculates temporal parameters ( Table 1 shows a list of parameters used in this study : for additional parameters that AGATHA can calculate , as well as an explanation of what each parameter means , see Refs . 6 and 7 ) . For the spatial parameters , AGATHA starts by estimating the foot - strike location from the sagittal view . From this approximate location , the centroid of each foot - strike is determined in the ventral view . High - resolution images of each foot - strike are then overlaid onto one ﬁgure , showing each footfall as the rat moves across the arena ( Fig . 1c ) . The centroid is used to calculate spatial parameters ( Table 1 ) . Finally , the centroid of the entire rat is used to determine the overall velocity of the rat during each video . Tissue Processing After week 13 , we perfused the rats with PBS , fol - lowed by 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) in PBS . We then carefully explanted the entire spinal cord and placed it in 4 % PFA for 4 h at 4 (cid:3) C . We rinsed each cord once and stored them in 0 . 2 M phosphate buﬀer overnight at 4 (cid:3) C . Finally , we placed each cord in 30 % sucrose for 3 days at 4 (cid:3) C . We cut the cords into (cid:2) 2 cm blocks . Then , we embedded separate blocks containing the lesion and a segment rostral to the le - sion ( for analysis of retrograde tracer ) in OCT Com - pound ( Tissue - Tek ) and stored them at 2 80 (cid:3) C until cryosectioning ( Leica CM 1850 ) . We collected 25 l m longitudinal ( for analyzing the lesion area ) and cross ( for tracer analysis ) sections . Immunohistological Analysis We stained the longitudinal sections with rabbit anti - Tau ( Abcam ab32057 , 1 : 250 dilution ) or mouse anti - glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein ( GFAP , Millipore - Sigma MAB360 , 1 : 500 dilution ) . For secondary anti - bodies , we used either donkey anti - rabbit 488 ( Invit - rogen A21206 , 1 : 400 dilution ) or goat anti - mouse 546 ( Invitrogen A11030 , 1 : 400 dilution ) . We conducted the staining as described before . 10 Brieﬂy , we permeabi - lized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , blocked with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , incubated with 1 (cid:3) antibodies overnight at 4 (cid:3) C , washed 3 9 with PBS , incubated with 2 (cid:3) antibodies at RT for 1h , washed 3x with PBS , stained for nuclei with Hoechst 33342 ( 10 9 10 2 6 M ) at RT for 7 m , and ﬁnally washed 3 9 with PBS before mounting using Cytoseal XYL ( ThermoFisher ) . We imaged the slides on an Olympus IX81 ﬂuorescent microscope using the same acquisition settings for all sections . We minimally processed each image using MetaMorph ( Molecular Devices ) to correct back - ground ﬂuorescence and prepared them for publication ( cropping / resizing ) using Photoshop ( Adobe ) . Retrograde Tracing Analysis To analyze tracer intensity , we imaged cross sec - tions of the cord at 1 cm rostral to the lesion site . We carefully collected the cross - sections sequentially , to ensure that we knew the location ( i . e . , in multiples of 25 l m from the lesion site ) of each section . We directly imaged mounted ( Cytoseal ) sections ( no additional staining ) using an Olympus IX81 . To evaluate tracer intensity , we analyzed 10 sequential sections per ani - mal ( comprising a total distance of 250 l m ) in the following manner : ﬁrst , we collected images using identical acquisition settings ( exposure time , contrast , etc . ) . We then applied an identical threshold to each image and measured the total number of bright pixels ( i . e . , above the threshold ) in a consistently - sized region of interest on each side ( left and right ) of the cord . Finally , we took the ratio of right / left to control for overall uptake of tracer between animals . This analysis was conducted in MetaMorph . Experimental Design and Data Processing Only one treatment factor was analyzed in this study : ISP ( yes or no ) . We also included a comparison to naı¨ve rats at each timepoint , for three groups total ( n = 6 ) . We collected gait data beginning at 3 weeks post - injury ( this was the time by which all rats were consistently stepping ) and continuing until week 13 ( for a total of 11 timepoints ) . Prior to analyzing the gait parameters , we plotted the naı¨ve rat data for each parameter vs . velocity ( i . e . , all total data points over 11 weeks ) . For any parameter which was found to be velocity - dependent , we calculated velocity - weighted residuals at each timepoint . 6 These are expressed in the legend for each ﬁgure ( e . g . , ‘‘stride length residual’’ ) . Statistical Analyses For duty factor , paw placement accuracy , step width , and stride length , our hypothesis was that ISP TABLE 1 . List of gait parameters used in this study . Temporal parameters Spatial parameters Duty factor Paw placement accuracy Phase dispersion Step width Stride length BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY H AM et al . administration would aﬀect the mean value of each parameter after 13 weeks . To test this hypothesis , we used an ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc on the week 13 data with the week 3 data ( e . g . , starting values ) as a covariate . This allowed us to take into account any differences in starting values between groups . For phase dispersion , our hypothesis was that ISP would affect the spread of values ( consistency , as measured by standard deviation ) after 13 weeks . To test this , we performed an ANOVA on the mean standard devia - tion for each rat . 8 Lastly , for the tracing data , our hypothesis was that the ISP administration would af - fect the mean value of the tracer intensity . To test this , we used Student’s t - test . When an ANOVA was performed , groups not sharing a letter were found to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other . Descending letters ( beginning with A ) indicate smaller means . For Student’s t - test , the p - va - lue is shown on each graph . For all statistical com - parisons , we considered p < 0 . 05 to be signiﬁcant . RESULTS Duty Factor Imbalance and Right Paw Placement Accuracy Improve after ISP Administration Duty factor imbalance measures the degree to which an animal favors one hindlimb over another ( i . e . , an antalgic or limping gait ) . Based on our methodology , a number greater than 0 indicates that the animal is spending more time standing on the right hindlimb , and less than 0 indicates more time standing on the left hindlimb . Over the course of 13 weeks , rats that were administered ISP improved their imbalances , steadily moving closer to 0 ( Fig . 2a ) , while rats administered a vehicle control saw essentially no change in duty factor imbalance . A statistical com - parison of the week 13 values , using the week 3 values as covariates , indicated that the ISP + group bridges the gap between the ISP 2 and naı¨ve groups . No imbalance between right and left forelimbs was observed ( Fig . 2b ) , demonstrating that our T10 hemi - section did not cause limping in the forelimbs . Like - wise , we saw similar statistical patterns in right paw placement accuracy . During healthy locomotion , rats will place ipsilateral fore / hind limbs in the same place ( see Fig . 1c for an example ) . However , after receiving a hemisection , they lose this ability and will place their limbs much farther apart ( Fig . 2c ) , but only on the injured side . Paw placement accuracy measures the distance between the centroid of each paw , relative to that of a healthy animal ( a value of 0 is healthy , while > 0 indicates they are being placed farther apart and < 0 closer together ) . The animals which were admin - istered ISP improved their placement accuracy over time , while untreated animals did not . The same sta - tistical comparison as in duty factor imbalance yields similar results—the ISP + animals bridge the gap between ISP - and naı¨ve . No change in accuracy on the left side of the animals was observed ( Fig . 2d ) , demonstrating that our T10 hemisection only caused a deﬁcit in motor control on the injured side . Hindlimb Step Width and Stride Length are Unaﬀected by T10 Hemisection Interestingly , neither hindlimb step width ( perpen - dicular to the direction of travel ) nor hindlimb stride length ( along the direction of travel ) were aﬀected by our injury model ( Fig . 3 ) . There is a slight increase in step width for both injured groups at week 3 , but this was not statistically signiﬁcant , and furthermore , both groups recovered at largely the same rate . Stride length was not affected at any timepoints . This highlights the speciﬁcity of a T10 hemisection for only the right hindlimb—the animals can compensate for the limping and loss of accuracy ( Fig . 2 ) such an injury causes and not have it affect the width or length of their steps . Phase Dispersion Consistency is Improved after ISP Administration Phase dispersion ( PD ) measures the degree to which paw placement is coordinated in time . 8 , 13 Healthy rats place diagonal ( e . g . , right forelimb and left hindlimb ) paws at roughly the same time , which corresponds to a phase dispersion of 0 ( measured as a percentage of the total step cycle time ) . When the corresponding hind - paw is placed after the forepaw , this results in a posi - tive PD , whereas placement of the hindpaw before the forepaw results in a negative PD . By calculating the mean standard deviation for each rat at starting and ending timepoints ( i . e . , weeks 3 and 13 ) , we can obtain a quantitative measurement of PD consistency ( Fig . 4 ) . 8 A comparison of mean standard deviations for right hindpaw - left forepaw pairs across groups indicated that ISP treatment improved PD consistency ( lower mean standard deviation ) compared with the ISP - group ( Fig . 4a ) . Unlike duty factor imbalance or paw placement accuracy , ISP + was signiﬁcantly dif - ferent from both groups ( naı¨ve was the lowest and ISP 2 the highest ) . Left hindpaw—right forepaw PD was not affected by our injury model ( Fig . 4b ) , again highlighting the speciﬁcity of a T10 right hemisection for right hindlimb function only . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY Gait Analysis Shows Beneﬁts of ISP in Rat Hemisection FIGURE 2 . ISP improves duty factor imbalance and right hindpaw placement accuracy , while forelimb duty factor imbalance and left hindpaw placement accuracy are unaffected by a T10 right lateral hemisection . ( a ) Hindlimb duty factor imbalance ( right duty factor—left duty factor ) improves in ISP - treated animals over 13 weeks . ( b ) Forelimb duty factor imbalance is unaffected by our injury model . ( c ) Right paw placement accuracy ( linear distance between ipsilateral hindlimb / forelimb paw centroids ) also improves over 13 weeks . ( d ) Our injury model did not affect paw placement accuracy on the left side . For all graphs , data are shown as mean 6 standard error , n = 6 . Letters denote signiﬁcance as determined by ANOVA ( W3 values as covariates ) on the week 13 means with Tukey’s post hoc ( p < 0 . 05 ) . FIGURE 3 . Neither hindlimb step width ( a ) nor stride length ( b ) are affected by our injury model . For all graphs , data are shown as mean 6 standard error , n = 6 . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY H AM et al . Improvements in Gait Parameters are Conﬁrmed by Retrograde Tracing At week 12 , we administered FluoroGold ( FG , a retrograde tracer ) at T12 ( 2 segments caudal to the lesion ) to measure uptake of the tracer across the in - jury site ( Fig . 5 ) . The animals were allowed to recover for 1 week before sacriﬁce and analysis of tracer intensity at week 13 . After explanting the spinal cords , we collected transverse sections rostral to the lesion . A comparison of intensity 1 cm rostral to the lesion ( normalized to the uninjured side ) indicated that the ISP + animals transported signiﬁcantly more tracer across the lesion than did the ISP - animals ( Fig . 5c ) , although both groups transported less tracer across the FIGURE 4 . ISP treatment improves coordination between right hindpaw - left forepaw pairs as shown by phase dispersion , while left hindpaw - right forepaw pair coordination is unaffected by our injury model . ( a ) Both of the injured groups showed a much greater spread of PD values for right hindpaw - left forepaw pairs at week 3 when compared to the naı¨ve group . However , the ISP + group recovered some of the spread by week 13 ( i . e . , lower mean standard deviation ) when compared to the ISP - group . Neither group recovered to the same level as naı¨ve . ( b ) All three of the groups had the same PD distributions for left hindpaw - right forepaw pairs , indicating that our injury model does not affect coordination for this pairing . For all graphs , data are shown as histograms normalized to total step count , n = 6 . # , # # , and # # # denote signiﬁcance in descending order of mean standard deviation as determined by ANOVA ( W3 values as covariates ) on the week 13 mean standard deviations with Tukey’s post - hoc ( p < 0 . 05 ) . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY Gait Analysis Shows Beneﬁts of ISP in Rat Hemisection injured side than the non - injured side ( relative inten - sities < 1 ) . This was conﬁrmed via Student’s t - test . Tracer uptake is another way of measuring function , as the tracer will only be transported rostrally by func - tional neurons — thus , more functional neurons equates to a greater tracer intensity . The results from our tissue - level functional test match those from the locomotor functional tests : ISP improves function on the injured side , but not to the level of a healthy animal ( which would have a normalized tracer intensity of 1 ) . Tau and GFAP Expression at the Lesion Show Minor Improvements Lastly , to brieﬂy assess whether ISP aﬀected ax - onal growth into the lesion from the rostral and caudal stumps , we stained for the axonal marker Tau ( Fig . S1 ) . In the animals treated with ISP , we observed more Tau expression both within and immediately surrounding the lesion area , and it ap - pears that the edges have been ﬁlled in with Tau + axons . Of note are the intensity ( brighter staining around the lesion ) and appearance ( evenly dis - tributed around the lesion border ) of the Tau stain , which may indicate sprouting of axons from the rostral and caudal stumps into the lesion . This phenomenon is not observed in the ISP - animals . We also stained for GFAP around the lesion area ( Fig . S2 ) . The purpose of ISP is not to reduce glial reactivity , but to reduce the eﬀect of the inhibitory CSPGs . Expectedly , intensity and localization around the lesion edges , a hallmark of astrocyte reactivity , was similar between groups ( Fig . S2B vs . D ) . FIGURE 5 . Retrograde tracer uptake conﬁrms gait analysis results as determined by the ratio of tracer intensity on the right side ( injured ) to that on the left ( uninjured ) . ( a ) ISP + animals showed more tracer on the right side ( relative to the left ) than did ( b ) ISP 2 groups . ( c ) Quantiﬁcation of tracer intensity shows the same results , and a comparison of the means conﬁrms that there is a statistical difference between the two groups . Data are shown as mean 6 standard deviation , n = 3 . Asterisk ( * ) indicates signiﬁcance as determined by Student’s t - test ( p < 0 . 05 ) . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY H AM et al . DISCUSSION The overall purpose of this study was to implement GAITOR for evaluating locomotor changes after SCI , and see if it could track changes following ISP admin - istration in a lateral hemisection . We opted not to compare GAITOR with BBB score , as BBB was devel - oped for bilateral injury models , so it has limitations when applied to a right lateral hemisection . Addition - ally , we wanted to keep the focus of the manuscript on introducing a new technique , so we instead conﬁrmed locomotor improvements via tracing . Our purpose was not to supplant BBB or other functional tests ( gridwalk , etc . ) but to introduce a new , complementary technique . This study highlights the power of GAITOR for studying locomotor changes in rodents as they recover from SCI , especially in the later stages or after mild injuries , when BBB score tends to plateau . Here , we have used a rat injury model , but the same system ( with minor changes ) can be used to study mice as well . The open - source nature of GAITOR , combined with the ability to observe high - resolution images of the paws during the entire stance phase , is particularly useful in SCI research . In this study , we have added 2 parameters to AGATHA that are speciﬁc to SCI ( paw placement accuracy and phase dispersion ) , but more could be easily studied . For example , AGATHA could be used to study the magnitude and speed of paw rotation during stance phase ( e . g . , if the animal places the paw parallel and then rotates it prior to toe - oﬀ ) . The ability to implement new parameters is of partic - ular interest to SCI , which often has to rely on closed - source gait analysis techniques ( e . g . , DigiGait , Tread - scan ) that may not oﬀer as much adaptability to var - ious injury models . Additionally , such commercially available techniques are expensive and typically re - quire the use of a treadmill , which itself alters loco - motion ( rather than a closed arena , which does not ) . 4 It is also important to discuss some drawbacks to GAITOR . First , the animals must be consistently walking—if the animal is dragging limbs ( e . g . , in response to severe contusion ) , it cannot be studied . Additionally , it requires some knowledge of computer programming to fully harness . Online resources do exist , 5 and support is steadily growing , but the ‘‘do - it - yourself’’ nature of GAITOR ( which is also arguably its greatest strength ) will likely require collaboration for some neuroscientists to use effectively . Our results are similar to those published by Lang et al . , describing the beneﬁts of ISP in a bilateral contusion model . 9 They found that ISP administration improved function in a contusion model , as measured by BBB score , over a period of 11 weeks post - injury . Here , we build upon that study and show that ISP improves function in a lateral thoracic hemisection model as well . Importantly , we also show that GAI - TOR can be used to sensitively track such changes . We also show that GAITOR can be used to study a hemisection where an entire piece of the spinal cord is removed . Typically , groups that are studying hemi - section injuries do not remove a piece of the cord , but in the case of studying a biomaterial scaffold / bridge , some of the cord must be removed in order to implant the device . 10 In this study , we demonstrate that GAI - TOR can be used to study animals with such a defect , laying the groundwork for future studies involving biomaterial scaffolds . We also show that GAITOR could be used by other groups studying injury models of similar severity ( i . e . , where the animals are at least stepping ) , or expanded to injury models involving different deﬁcits simply by adding new parameters or changing existing ones . In general , the results from the tissue - level analyses match those from the gait analyses . ISP administration improves outcomes over a negative control , but treated animals fail to recover to their normal state . Some of the statistical tests indicated that the ISP + group essentially bridged the gap between ISP - and naı¨ve , being statistically diﬀerent from neither after 13 weeks ( see Fig . 2 ) . However , other tests indicated that that ISP + animals occupy a distinct middle ground between the two ( see Fig . 4 ) . It is important to also look at the actual trends , and observe that , while the ISP + animals might be statistically similar to the naı¨ve group , they do not achieve the same actual values . We can also see that there is no bridging of neurites across the entire gap ( see Fig . S1 ) , so true regeneration was not achieved . This highlights the need for a biomaterial scaffold in conjunction with ISP administration to provide a way to bridge the gap in patients who experience removal or degeneration of a portion of their spinal cord . In conclusion , we have shown that GAITOR detects improvements in rat locomotor recovery following ISP administration to block glial scar inhibition and that these are conﬁrmed by increased tracer uptake across the lesion . We added SCI - speciﬁc parameters to AGATHA , which we also show are speciﬁc and track recovery alongside more general parameters . Finally , we discussed how GAITOR can be used to study any SCI model where the animals are stepping , providing a useful , quantitative technique that can be used along - side existing behavioral analyses . ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL The online version of this article ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 019 - 02198 - 0 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY Gait Analysis Shows Beneﬁts of ISP in Rat Hemisection ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Dr . Hossein Tavana ( UA ) for the use of his Leica Cryostat and the faculty / staﬀ at the Ohio State University Spinal Cord Injury Training Program ( sponsored by the Craig H . Neilsen Foun - dation ) for their valuable input and advice . This work was supported by the National Institute of Neurolog - ical Disorders and Stroke ( Grant 1R21NS096571 - 01 ) . CONFLICT OF INTEREST No beneﬁts in any form have been or will be re - ceived from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript . REFERENCES 1 Basso , D . M . , M . S . Beattie , and J . C . Bresnahan . A sen - sitive and reliable locomotor rating scale for open ﬁeld testing in rats . J . Neurotrauma . 12 : 1 – 21 , 1995 . 2 Burda , J . E . and M . V . Sofroniew . Reactive gliosis and the multicellular response to cns damage and disease . Neuron 81 : 229 – 48 , 2014 . 3 Ham , T . R . and N . D . Leipzig . Biomaterial strategies for limiting the impact of secondary events following spinal cord injury . Biomed . Mater . 13 : 024105 , 2018 . 4 Jacobs , B . Y . , H . E . Kloefkorn , and K . D . Allen . Gait analysis methods for rodent models of osteoarthritis . Curr . Pain . Headache Rep . 18 : 456 , 2014 . 5 Jacobs , B . Y . , E . H . Lakes , A . J . Reiter , S . P . Lake , T . R . Ham , N . D . Leipzig , S . L . Porvasnik , C . E . Schmidt , R . A . Wachs , and K . D . Allen . The open source gaitor suite for rodent gait analysis . Sci . Rep . 8 : 9797 , 2018 . 6 Kloefkorn , H . E . , B . Y . Jacobs , A . M . Loye , and K . D . Allen . Spatiotemporal gait compensations following med - ial collateral ligament and medial meniscus injury in the rat : correlating gait patterns to joint damage . Arthritis Res . Ther . 17 : 287 , 2015 . 7 Kloefkorn , H . E . , T . R . Pettengill , S . M . Turner , K . A . Streeter , E . J . Gonzalez - Rothi , D . D . Fuller , and K . D . Allen . Automated gait analysis through hues and areas ( agatha ) : a method to characterize the spatiotemporal pattern of rat gait . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 45 : 711 – 25 , 2016 . 8 Kloos , A . D . , L . C . Fisher , M . R . Detloff , D . L . Hassen - zahl , and D . M . Basso . Stepwise motor and all - or - none sensory recovery is associated with nonlinear sparing after incremental spinal cord injury in rats . Exp . Neurol . 191 : 251 – 65 , 2005 . 9 Lang , B . T . , J . M . Cregg , M . A . DePaul , A . P . Tran , K . Xu , S . M . Dyck , K . M . Madalena , B . P . Brown , Y . - L . Weng , S . Li , S . Karimi - Abdolrezaee , S . A . Busch , Y . Shen , and J . Silver . Modulation of the proteoglycan receptor ptpsigma promotes recovery after spinal cord in - jury . Nature 518 : 404 , 2014 . 10 Li , H . , T . R . Ham , N . Neill , M . Farrag , A . E . Mohrman , A . M . Koenig , and N . D . Leipzig . A hydrogel bridge incorporating immobilized growth factors and neural stem / progenitor cells to treat spinal cord injury . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 5 : 802 – 812 , 2016 . 11 Mohan , R . , A . P . Tosolini , and R . Morris . Segmental distribution of the motor neuron columns that supply the rat hindlimb : a muscle / motor neuron tract - tracing analysis targeting the motor end plates . Neuroscience 307 : 98 – 108 , 2015 . 12 Okada , S . , M . Hara , K . Kobayakawa , Y . Matsumoto , and Y . Nakashima . Astrocyte reactivity and astrogliosis after spinal cord injury . Neurosci . Res . 126 : 39 – 43 , 2018 . 13 Redondo - Castro , E . , A . Torres - Espin , G . Garcia - Alias , and X . Navarro . Quantitative assessment of locomotion and interlimb coordination in rats after different spinal cord injuries . J . Neurosci . Methods 213 : 165 – 78 , 2013 . 14 Sabelstrom , H . , M . Stenudd , and J . Frisen . Neural stem cells in the adult spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 260 : 44 – 9 , 2014 . 15 Tsai , E . C . , R . L . van Bendegem , S . W . Hwang , and C . H . Tator . A novel method for simultaneous anterograde and retrograde labeling of spinal cord motor tracts in the same animal . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 49 : 1111 – 22 , 2001 . BIOMEDICALENGINEERING SOCIETY H AM et al .