Copyright © 2017 . The copyright of each paper in this conference proceedings is the property of the author ( s ) . Permission is granted to reproduce copies of these works for purposes relevant to the above conference , provided that the author ( s ) , source and copyright notice are included on each copy . For other uses please contact the author ( s ) . Re - Embodiment . New Strategies for teaching Embodied Interaction Susan Kozel a * a School of Art and Culture , Malmö University , Sweden * susan . kozel @ mah . se Abstract : This paper considers the role of the body and embodiment in design education . It offers a “re - do” of the Embodied Interaction course on the Interaction Design Master’s at Malmö University . This conceptual and pedagogic redo coincides with the increasing relevance of the field which now can be seen to include physical computing , wearables , haptics , and networked devices for transmitting bodily data . Three conceptual shifts are emphasised : embodiment redefined as materiality ; critical engagement with contemporary politics and economics ; methodological awareness and experimentation . This is not an abandonment of previous approaches , but a revision to coincide with developments in practice and scholarship , both within interaction design and in relevant related disciplines . It also reflects the current cultural and political educational climate by emphasizing a porosity of education , and a flow - through between the university and the world outside its walls . Keywords : embodiment , interaction , materiality , critical , methodology 1 . Introduction Embodied Interaction has become an established sub field in Interaction Design . In an educational context it has developed into an umbrella for addressing physical computing , wearables , haptics , electronic prototyping ( using platforms such as Arduino , LilyPad and Raspberry Pi ) and networked devices and systems that access and distribute bodily or personal data . It relies on Paul Dourish’s book Where the Action Is ( 2001 ) as a respected anchor in the field , and has fed into a range of related scholarship encompassing performativity ( Bentford & Giannachi , 2011 ; Wilde , 2012 ; Dalsgaard & Hansen , 2009 ; Fischer - Lichte , 2008 ) , somatic approaches to design ( Schiphorst , 2009 ; Höök , Ståhl , Jonsson , Mercurio , Karlsson , & Banka Johnson , 2015 ) , postcolonial design approaches ( Irani , Vertesi , Dourish , Philip , & Grinter , 2010 ; Mainsah & Morrison , 2014 ) , phenomenology ( Svaenes , 2013 ; Kozel . 2015 ) , queer bodies ( Light , 2011 ; Blas , 2006 ) and closely allied media art practices . 107 Susan Kozel Embodied Interaction generates enthusiasm for its ability to open a niche for practical designing , critical reflection and methodological questioning . However , when it is taught a paradox frequently emerges : over - generalization at the same time as over - specification . The generalization is the risk of becoming overly diluted , with embodiment escaping definition entirely or coming to refer to everything ; the over - specification is when the teaching becomes overly determined by a particular platform or set of technical skills . Methodological awareness , criticality and a clear sense of what embodiment means can be lost . The re - do discussed in this paper relates to a specific Embodied Interaction course ( it can also be called a module ) . It is a first year course on the 2 year Interaction Design Master ( IDM ) at Malmö University and has a student enrolment of between 18 - 22 students from around the world ( it is common for a minimum 10 countries to be represented ) . It is taught in English and it lasts 10 weeks . It follows the studio - based design teaching model whereby students are expected to be in the studio working full days , five days a week . The prior educational training of the students varies . Increasingly students from the humanities apply out of a desire to integrate their previous cultural and intellectual backgrounds into design . These students don’t always have significant prior design experience but provide interdisciplinary perspectives in combination with intercultural ones . The re - doing of this course took five years , and it is a continuing process of development and iteration . It is , in other words , a design project in itself that has integrated the voices of approximately 100 students . Significant revisions to the course occurred in the past two years in response to cultural , political and design developments in the wider world , in particular , the expansion of Big Data and the Internet of Things ( IoT ) ; the need for increasing attention to whose bodies we are designing for ( attending to race , class , age , gender , ability , legal status ) ; and the awareness of waste and excess ( taking in environmental questions , asking if we need more “smart” gadgets , questioning advertising hype ) . It must be stressed that this is not an abandonment of previous approaches , but a revision to coincide with developments in practice and scholarship both within interaction design and in relevant related disciplines . It also reflects current cultural and political dimensions thereby emphasizing a porosity of education , a flow - through between the university and the world outside its walls . Three conceptual shifts in how the course is taught will be emphasised : • embodiment redefined as materiality ; • critical engagement with contemporary politics and economics ; • methodological awareness and experimentation . 2 . Three conceptual Shifts in the Teaching of Embodied Interaction 2 . 1 Embodiment Redefined as Materiality Dourish famously framed embodied interaction as “interaction with computer systems that occupy our world , a world of physical and social reality” ( Dourish , 2001 , p . 3 ) . He shifted the focus to social context and challenged designers to get out of the lab and into the field . This was incredibly valuable for calling attention to real people and real lives , and for revealing how social relations integrating people and designed objects have histories and embedded realities before , during 108 Re - Embodiment . New Strategies for teaching Embodied Interaction and after the latest system or object reaches the market . It was an ethnographic move , informed by phenomenology , and continues to be a starting point for the course . But like any good starting point it opens itself up to critique and expansion , not least by Dourish himself . As such , in this course we read his “Epilogue” in conjunction with his earlier writing and attend to some of his self reflection , including his acknowledgement that the body “has very little presence” ( he reminds us that this was not the focus of the book ) , and his pointing to several important related developments that his book fed into : considerations of ubiquitous computing , attending to queer bodies , and a connection with artistic experiments emerging in the media art community ( Dourish , 2011 ) . The crucial shift in teaching this course is not just recognising that the body is under - determined in much embodied interaction or that bodies are swallowed up by context : it is a shift to understand embodied interaction as material interactions , and embodiment as a sort of materiality . Many designers work with the intuition that materials talk back to their hands and thoughts , and shape their processes . This points to an acceptance that matter is not passive , dull or inert ( Bennet , 2010 ) . At the same time , we know that the human body is not bounded or limited by its skin , nor does it exist in isolation . In other words , there is more to matter than passivity , and there is more to a body than its individual , organic and bounded state . Consistent with tenets of New Materialism , it therefore makes sense to approach embodiment as a sort of materiality ( Connolly , 2013 ) . This reframing yields relationality , extension and agency to Embodied Interaction , and it opens up a critical perspective that is “materialist and vitalist , embodied and embedded … suited to the complexity and contradictions of our times” ( Braidotti , 2013 , p . 51 - 52 ) . However , it does not mean losing the human body . This will be explained in the next conceptual shift . 2 . 2 Critical Engagement with Contemporary Politics and Economics The implications of framing embodiment as materiality in the teaching of embodied interaction are deepened by asking “whose bodies ? ” or “what bodies ? ” and by pointing out that this is not the same as eliminating the presence of the human body . The subtlety and complexity of human bodies are not nullified by a materialist approach that accounts for nonorganic or nonhuman bodies . They can be enhanced . A political stance on embodiment starts with the simple questions of whether we are designing for a single body or for multiple bodies . Attention is called to whether designs intended for multiple bodies are actually based on the model of the isolated body and mapped outwards ( this is often the default case and it is not always ideal . ) The next step is to ask what each student thinks embodiment refers to : this usually starts with a basic qualification of a body in terms of its five senses , but this model is rapidly challenged to ask whether there might be additional senses . The sense of time , sense of balance , proprioceptive sense , and other candidates for the category of sense emerge . Then the question of designing for body or mind , or body and mind arises : revealing that much interaction design in the 20th century related to interfaces to facilitate intellectual tasks with the support of eyes and fingers . Are we designing for whole bodies , or parts of bodies ? Emotions , memories , affects ( which are not the same as emotions ) , imaginations , fantasies and identity enter in to the mix , reminding us of just how multi - dimensional and multi - material embodied existence really is . The question of whose bodies are being designed for is deepened by the awareness that bodies are designed through the design of bodily interactions . In 109 Susan Kozel other words , we don’t just design interaction but we can be seen to design bodies . Further , when considering existing related designed systems an implicit body may be assumed but not made overt . These questions and implications open considerations of race , age , ability and gender , and assert that expectations of the performance of identity and ability lie hidden in most designed systems ( Nakamura , 1995 ; McFadden , 2014 ) . With particular reference to gender and sexuality , Zach Blas writes that “formations of body and identity bare the mark of technological networks , systems , and machines” ( Blas , 2006 , p . 1 ) . Embodiment is a profoundly political notion with clear design implications : each system affords a balance between choice and constraint , freedom and control , shaping practices , actions and movements ( Thacker , 2004 ) . Whether we like it or not , our designs exist within power structures and societies of control ( Deleuze , 1992 ) . The contemporary political climate has called increased attention to various domains of the immaterial or abstract side of materiality , leading us to ask “what bodies ? ” are being designed , and designed for . Consider data bodies when we design for our data - doubles and address issues of data protection and surveillance ( Zuboff , 2015 ) ; legal accountability as we are asked to design for refugees with unclear civic status , government agencies , or for the security industry ( Schuppli , 2015 ) ; and economic agency as both world trade and personal finances become more complex ( Lanier , 2014 ; Piketty , 2014 ) . What seems to be the disintegration of bodies is actually a form of re - materialisation . Bodies are not dissolved into the digital and rendered easier to control , protect and preserve , in fact their materiality only becomes more complex . In asking into the embodiment of Embodied Interaction it is possible to be overwhelmed by the range of options or complexity . The desire to return to a simple default assumption of a white , heterosexual , able - bodied , young man ( who is employed and has money to spend on gadgets ) may seem like a better option . It is certainly easier . This course expands the sense of what bodies might be , at the same time as stressing that designers cannot design for all potential variations of embodiment . At times we may design for the young white man mentioned above . Students are asked to define what they mean by embodiment based each specific design project . The pedagogic motivation is twofold . We aim for design students : • to take note of latent but not - acknowledged assumptions regarding the bodies for whom they design • to realise that they do not just design for bodies , they shape bodies with their designs . Tacit knowledge is rightfully valued in design practice , but tacit assumptions can become blind spots and hinder the design process . 2 . 3 Methodological Awareness and Experimentation The previous shift accounts for overcoming the void that can ensue when the application of skills occurs in a contextual vacuum . Here the focus shifts to the pedagogic handling of methodology and design processes , with the aim of promoting a reflective awareness regarding selection of methods most appropriate for the design project that students are asked to complete for this course . From a pedagogic standpoint there is some controversy over whether it is wise to introduce methodology so early in Master’s education , preferring to default to a one of the models for clear iterative process that provides scope for revision and experimentation . The critical skills developed by this course include the evaluation of a range of potentially relevant methodological approaches . This prompts 110 Re - Embodiment . New Strategies for teaching Embodied Interaction awareness into how designers choose to do their practical work , and validates the reflexive loop of questioning how and why one might select a particular approach for a particular project rather than using one general method for all design scenarios . Simultaneous to the acquisition of hardware and software skills with a focus on Arduino , the methodological reflection begins with “Lab , Field , Gallery and Beyond” ( Koskinen , Binder , & Redström , 2008 ) . It is important to stress that no judgement is offered . The point is not to convert the students to a particular method , but to develop in them the awareness that it is possible to select a different method for each project . The article by Koskinen et al is useful for calling attention to the differences between a technologically - driven inquiry which , quite legitimately , might need to be located primarily in a lab environment and a field - driven enquiry which develops by designers being in the world interacting with people “in the wild” . Mild ethnographic - style data gathering is introduced , and the groundwork is prepared for participatory design . ( It must be stated however that this course does not develop design ethnography or PD , we open scope for future courses to build upon these areas . ) From the Koskinen et al paper , we move to Critical Design ( Dunne & Raby , 2001 ) in conjunction with a specific methodological example in the form of Cultural Probes ( Gaver , Dunne , & Pacenti , 1999 ; Gaver , Boucher , Pennington , & Walker , 2004 ) . The Critical Design perspective is important given the emphasis placed on the porosity of the studio : the fact that big questions occurring in the world can and should filter into the student project process . This is not to say that these problems will be solved , or that the process becomes so complex that the project sinks , but that education is not separate from the students’ lives as thinking , observing , acting , political beings in the world . Departing from the model of Critical Design , well established by Dunne and Raby , and opening a sense of critical design as interpreted through contemporary practices with repositioned technological , aesthetic and political qualities is stressed . Cultural Probes prove to be useful for allowing a creative way to implement fieldwork in a condensed time frame and some students have used this effectively . This method of sending data gathering “kits” home with a limited number of people for a specified number of days in order to gain a glimpse of people’s lives , thoughts and imaginations provides practical and poetic grounds for design decisions ( Gaver et al , 1999 ; Gaver et al , 2004 ; Hansen & Kozel , 2007 ) . The combined qualities of playfulness and rigour are useful for opening out the students’ ideas of how to engage people in their design process , while at the same time providing a clear structure for data gathering and evaluation . It also permits a play across materials . Digital and analogue materials of all sorts can be included in the probes ( such as notebooks , evocative objects like postcards or photographs , little containers with scented or tactile materials , and digital or analogue recording devices ) . The responses of the participants can be embodied in various forms . Finally , body based methods – potentially a large field – are introduced with the assistance of two articles on bodystorming ( Oulasvirta , Kurvinen , & Kankainen , 2003 ; Schleicher , Jones , & Kachur , 2010 ) These two papers work well together for identifying why designers might need to open out design processes to include bodily experimentation . This points to the possibility for using embodied processes for designing for embodied interaction . The second article critiques the first , but both are quite limited in focus and design objectives , making the point that there is scope for further development in this area . Bodystorming opens out to performativity in relation to materiality should any students wish to develop 111 Susan Kozel this further in their projects or in their subsequent thesis projects ( Jacucci & Wagner , 2007 ) . The fairly rapid overview of methods ( technology - driven , ethnographic - style , critical and bodily ) may have a weakness of being confusing , but this is outweighed by the pedagogic value of instilling an awareness that designers can choose to apply and / or modify methods for particular design contexts . The essential ingredient is a quality of meta - level awareness of why and how a particular method is selected and implemented , in combination with careful attention to how others may have used similar methods . Ethics and accountability are stressed . This contributes to the often repeated goal of developing a reflective practitioner . It also echoes a the priority placed on experimental methods and processes espoused by the inter - disciplinary field of New Materialism , where practitioners and theorists are called to “advance speculations about processes that exceed our current capacity to grasp them and [ to ] act experimentally on those very processes when a problem , danger or disturbance arises . ” ( Connolly , 2013 ) 3 . Structure and Evaluation of the Course The focus of this paper is primarily the three conceptual shifts in the redo a course in Embodied Interaction outlined in Section 2 . This section provides some details on the practicalities of the course , such as its shape , instruction and basis of evaluation , to make clear that the course is not entirely abstract or theoretical . It integrates some approaches from the humanities , but is still a design course ( Bardzell & Bardzell , 2016 ) . A brief gallery of work is included . 3 . 1 Seminars , Technical Instruction and Deliverables The course balances seminar style discussions with an intensive workshop in technical skills , in particular hardware and software basics relevant to electronic prototyping using Arduino . This enables the students to achieve a basic level of functionality in the prototypes they develop for their practical project work . Variations in student technical skills are evaluated each year , resulting in modifications to the workshop process that may allow for two levels of instruction : basic and advanced . The work is practical and studio based , lasting between 7 - 10 days . Support by more advanced students of students with less knowledge has proven to be quite effective . The seminar component of the course is based around the discussion of assigned readings . Seminars last approximately 3 hours , and particular students are assigned to open out the readings by leading the discussion with the support of the teacher . This can imply a steep learning curve for students who have not had to grapple with academic argumentation or writing style before entering the Master’s , but it is necessary to support the educational development in criticality , reflectivity and academic writing . ( Note : Most of the readings assigned in class have been used as references in this paper ) . The course relies on another body of writing we call journalism that refers to shorter articles from newspapers , blogs and other discussion forums . These include everything from articles promoting or censoring smart gadgets and pointless apps , to claims that embodied devices will save national health care systems , to celebrating wearables in fashion or deploring the fashion for hack - a - thons . In this category of required reading there is passion , irony and a proximity to the reality of what is happening now that balances the more sober tone of academic articles and recognizes that intelligent journalistic 112 Re - Embodiment . New Strategies for teaching Embodied Interaction commentary emerges more quickly than the ( necessarily ) slow academic publishing processes for books or peer reviewed journal articles . The deliverables for the course upon which students are evaluated include a project prototype and a paper . The project prototype is produced by a team of between 3 - 5 students . Emphasis is on prototyping and conceptual experimentation , rather than taking a safe route for producing a fully functional , sleek design – which is unrealistic anyway , given the multiple learning objectives and short time frame of a 10 week course . The project brief is quite open , with the instructor assigning a provocative and sometimes abstract theme and supervising the development fairly closely . Previous themes include : “Archiving the Intangible , ” “Time Travel” and “Accidents . ” These themes are selected with reference to active research projects in the Faculty , providing a link between the students’ work and existing funded research projects . Students are never told what to do by faculty , but see the wider relevance of the pedagogic processes . The group project receives one evaluation applied to all of the students equally , but the papers are written by each student individually so that their separate voices can be heard and evaluated . They are asked to follow a strict short paper ACM format as an exercise in writing within formal constraints . They are , however , encouraged to experiment with their ideas while grounding their arguments by referring to their group projects , to the academic writing discussed in the course and to relevant design examples . They are given one group tutorial on writing . In summary , three educational processes integrated into one course : • Electronics skills acquisition in the form of a workshop component ( a “crash course” in Arduino , sensors , and actuators ) ; • A theoretical and critical component based on readings and seminar discussions ; • A collaborative project producing a design prototype . 3 . 2 Gallery of Student Projects Figure 1 and Figure 2 . Who Are Tina ? ( 2014 ) . Project intention : to awaken a fleeting memory of an absent person by using inflatables and a performative scenario . Designed by Kent Cam , Sarah Homewood , Petr Kozlik , Dennis Overhage , and Anna Navndrup Pedersen . ( Photo : Sarah Homewood ) 113 Susan Kozel Figure 3 and Figure 4 . The Everyday Ephemeral ( 2015 ) . Project Intention : to re - evaluate the concept of the archive by recording with rust on metal some non - human traces of change over time . Designed by Ana Barbosa , Erica Coria , Laura Potenti , Emma Rugg & Marjo Tikkanen . ( Photo : Erica Coria ) . Figure 5 and Figure 6 . The Bernhard Savings Pod , 2016 . Project intention : to make consumers more critical about personal spending habits by inventing a product with strong affective and material qualities . Designed by Tomas Sandahl Christensen , Jesper Hyldahl Fogh , Nina Cecilie Højholdt & Victor Bayer Permild . ( Photo and diagram : Jesper Hyldahl Fogh ) . 4 . Conclusion In reflecting upon the on - going design project that is this course on Embodied Interaction , a question emerged over who is doing the “redo” of bodies : the teachers or the students ? In other words , are we , design professionals who teach for university departments , re - doing the body so students can learn Embodied Interaction with more contemporary and critical relevance ? Or are are we teaching them to redesign the body in Embodied Interaction , which is to say , redesign contemporary bodies ? Clearly the second version of this question is the more significant , with more profound implications for cultural transformation , but it builds on the first . We are not merely revising and iterating prior scholarship in embodiment , offering new marketable skills and techniques . In developing greater awareness of the material and political implications of embodiment we reveal the extent to which our bodies are already modified by existing designs , and will continue to be modified by future designs . We are not abandoning the body in a turn toward materiality , but acknowledging that there is no unwinding the material transformations that have occurred and will continue to occur . Above all , we demonstrate that interaction designers have the conceptual and practical tools to tackle difficult questions and problems . 114 Re - Embodiment . New Strategies for teaching Embodied Interaction References Bardzell , J . , & Bardzell , S . ( 2016 ) . Humanistic HCI . Interactions , Vol . 23 , 2 , 20 - 29 . Bentford , S . , & Giannachi , G . ( 2011 ) . Performing Mixed Reality . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Blas , Z . ( 2006 ) . What is Queer Technology ? Retrieved 15 April 2017 , from http : / / www . zachblas . info / publications _ materials / whatisqueertechnology _ zachblas _ 2006 . pdf Braidotti , R . ( 2013 ) . The Posthuman . Cambridge : Polity Press . Connolly , W . E . ( 2013 ) . New Materialism and the Fragility of Things . Millennium : Journal of International Studies , Sage , 41 ( 3 ) , 399 - 412 . Dalsgaard , P . , & Hansen , L . K . ( 2008 ) . Performing Perception – Staging Aesthetics of Interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 15 , No . 3 , Article 13 , 1 - 33 . Deleuze , G . ( 1992 ) . Postscript on the Societies of Control . October , Vol . 59 Winter , 3 - 7 . Dourish , P . ( 2001 ) . Where the Action Is : The Foundations of Embodied Interaction . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Dourish , P . ( 2013 ) . Epilogue : Where the action was , wasn ' t , should have been , and might yet be . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction . 20 , 1 , Article 2 ( April 2013 ) , 1 - 4 . Dunne , A . , & Raby , F . ( 2001 ) . Design Noir : The secret life of electronic objects . August / Birkhäuser . Fischer - Lichte , E . ( 2008 ) . The Transformative Power of Performance . London : Routledge . Gaver , B . , Dunne , T . , & Pacenti , E . ( 1999 ) . Design : Cultural Probes . Interactions , January - February 1999 , 21 - 29 . Gaver , W . , Boucher , W . , Pennington , S . , & Walker , B . ( 2004 ) . Cultural Probes and the Value of Uncertainty . Interactions , Vol . 11 , Issue 5 , 53 - 56 . Hansen , L . K . , & Kozel , S . ( 2007 ) . Embodied imagination : a hybrid method of designing for intimacy . Digital Creativity , Vol . 18 , No . 4 , 207 - 220 . Höök , K . , Ståhl , A . , Jonsson , M . , Mercurio , J . , Karlsson , A . , & Banka Johnson , E . C . ( 2015 ) . Somaesthetic Design . Interactions , Vol . 22 Issue 4 , 26 - 33 . Irani , L . , Vertesi , J . , Dourish , P . , Philip , K . , & Grinter , R . E . ( 2010 ) . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1311 - 1320 . Jacucci , G . , & Wagner , I . ( 2007 ) . Performative Roles of Materiality for Collective Creativity . C & C ' 07 : Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & Cognition , June 13 – 15 , 2007 , Washington , DC , USA , 73 - 82 . Koskinen , I . , Binder , T . , & Redström , J . ( 2008 ) . Lab , Field , Gallery and Beyond . Artifact , 2 : 1 , 46 - 57 . Kozel , S . ( 2015 ) . Process Phenomenologies . In eds . Nedelkopoulou , E . , Sherman , J . F . , & and Bleeker , M . ( Eds . ) , Modes of Embodiment : The Poetics of Phenomenology in Performance Studies . London and New York : Routledge , 55 - 74 . Lanier , J . ( 2014 ) . Who Owns the Future ? New York : Penguin . Light , A . ( 2011 ) . HCI as heterodoxy : Technologies of identity and the queering of interaction with computers . Interacting with Computers Vol . 23 , Issue 5 , 430 - 438 . McFadden , S . ( 2014 ) . Teaching The Camera To See My Skin : Navigating photography’s inherited bias against dark skin . Retrieved 15 April 2017 , from 115 Susan Kozel https : / / www . buzzfeed . com / syreetamcfadden / teaching - the - camera - to - see - my - skin ? utm _ term = . ujzp7LyLw # . lwVPx4l45 Mainsah , H . , & Morrison , A . ( 2014 ) . Participatory design through a cultural lens : insights from postcolonial theory . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference , Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 ( PDC ' 14 ) , Vol . 2 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 83 - 86 . Morrison , A . , Davies , A . , Brec ̌ evi ć , G . , Sem , I . , Boykett , T . , & Bre č evi ć , R . ( 2010 ) . Designing performativity for mixed reality installations . FORMakademisk , Vol . 3 Nr . 1 , 123 - 144 . Nakamura , L . ( 1995 ) . Race In / For Cyberspace : Identity Tourism and Racial Passing on the Internet . Works and Days , Vol . 13 , 181 - 193 . Oulasvirta , A . , Kurvinen , E . , & Kankainen , T . ( 2003 ) . Understanding contexts by being there : case studies in bodystorming . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , Vol . 7 , Issue 2 , 125 – 134 . Piketty , T . ( 2014 ) . Capital in the Twenty First Century . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Schiphorst , T . ( 2009 ) . soft ( n ) : toward a somaesthetics of touch . CHI ’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Boston , MA , USA , 2427 - 2438 . Schleicher , D . J . , Jones , P . H . , & Kachur , O . ( 2010 ) . Bodystorming as Embodied Designing . Interactions , Vol . 17 , 47 - 51 . Schuppli , S . ( 2014 ) . Deadly Algorithms : Can Legal Codes hold Software accountable for Code that Kills ? Radical Philosophy , Issue 187 , 2 - 8 . Svaenes , D . ( 2013 ) . Interaction design for and with the lived body : Some implications of Merleau - Ponty ' s phenomenology . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Special issue on the theory and practice of embodied interaction in HCI and interaction design , Vol 20 , Issue 1 , march 2013 , Article 8 , 1 - 30 . Thacker , E . ( 2004 ) . Protocol is as protocol does . In Galloway , A . , ( Ed . ) , Protocol : How Control Exists after Decentralization . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Victor , B . ( 2011 ) . A brief rant on the future of Interaction Design . Retrieved 15 April 2017 , from http : / / worrydream . com / ABriefRantOnTheFutureOfInteractionDesign / Why Self - Driving Cars Must Be Programmed to Kill . ( 2015 ) . The MIT Review ( no specified author ) v1 . 13 . 05 . 10 . Retrieved 15 April 2017 , from https : / / www . technologyreview . com / s / 542626 / why - self - driving - cars - must - be - programmed - to - kill / Wilde , D . ( 2012 ) . hipDisk : Experiencing the Value of Ungainly , Embodied , Performative , Fun . CHI EA ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , May 5 – 10 , Austin , Texas , USA , 979 - 982 . Zuboff , S . ( 2015 ) . Big Other : Surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information civilization . Journal of Information Technology , Issue 30 , 75 - 89 . About the Authors : Susan Kozel is a Professor with the School of Art & Culture at Malmö University , Sweden . She integrates bodily practices such as dance improvisation and somatics with phenomenology , and applies this combination of theory and practice to technological environments , devices and systems . Acknowledgements : With appreciation to David Cuartielles and Linda Hilfling Ritasdatter for contributions to the teaching and development of the course , and to previous students for their creativity , adventurous spirits and intellectual engagement . 116