Review ARticle https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41565 - 021 - 00858 - 8 1 Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Monash University , Parkville , Victoria , Australia . 2 ARC Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio - Nano Science and Technology , Brisbane , Queensland , Australia . 3 Institute for Molecular Bioscience and Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , The University of Queensland , Brisbane , Queensland , Australia . ✉ e - mail : angus . johnston @ monash . edu ; r . parton @ imb . uq . edu . au E ngineering nanoparticles to deliver drugs has the potential to improve cancer therapy , vaccination and treatment of genetic disorders . The key advantages of nanoparticle delivery lie in the potential to reduce side effects by targeting specific cells , protecting delicate therapeutics from premature degradation , improving the solubility of hard - to - deliver drugs and providing sustained and con - trolled release of drugs . While a number of barriers must be overcome to achieve targeted nanoparticle drug delivery , ultimately in most cases the ability for a drug to have a therapeutic effect at its site of action is governed by the capacity of the nanoparticle to enter the cell . Internalization pathways are not ubiquitous . Phagocytosis and macropinocytosis , for example , may not be a feature of all cell types . However , it is less well recognized that other commonly studied internalization pathways are also limited to certain cells . When investigating nanoparticle uptake , it is crucial to understand if the pathways being studied are actually present in the cells . Determining the mechanism of uptake can give important information about efficiency of delivery , therapeutic activity and translation to other cells or in vivo studies . However , reporting an uptake mechanism for the sake of it and without reference to the biological relevance adds little to our knowledge . There are two main routes of entry into the cell : direct fusion with the plasma membrane or endocytosis . Direct fusion to the plasma membrane is exploited by some encapsulated viruses 1 , and a number of interesting nanoparticle systems have been engineered to exploit this pathway 2 , 3 . However , the principal route of entry of nanoparticles into the cell is via endocytosis . The importance of understanding endocytosis is highlighted by the effect nanoparticle targeting has on tumour regression . In vivo targeting of nanopar - ticles to tumours typically results in < 1 % of the total dose accumu - lating at the tumour site 4 . However , compared with non - targeted nanoparticles , the tumour regression for targeted systems is substan - tially greater than the increased accumulation . This suggests that uptake of nanoparticles by tumour cells is the driving force behind the increased activity of targeted nanoparticles . Understanding endocytosis is also important for engineered nanoparticles that can avoid clearance by the mononuclear phagocytic system ( MPS ) 5 , phagocytic immune cells that form the first line of defence in the body against foreign invaders . A major hindrance to nanoparticle therapies is the rapid clearance of nanoparticles by the MPS , which results in accumulation in the liver and spleen . This accumulation results in a loss of active therapeutic from the circulation and can result in significant toxic side effects if the nanoparticle carries a cytotoxic payload . A critical step in avoiding clearance by the MPS is avoiding nanoparticle uptake by these cells . An understanding of endocytosis can also benefit the devel - opment of different types of therapeutic strategy , independent of nanoparticle uptake . For example , a recent study demonstrated that the antitumour effects of anti - EGFR ( epidermal growth fac - tor receptor ) antibodies can be potentiated by inhibition of specific endocytic pathways , leading to enhanced antibody - dependent cel - lular cytotoxicity mediated by natural killer cells 6 . The role of endocytosis is also important for naturally occur - ring nanoparticles , such as viruses and exosomes . The rise of viruses such as SARS - CoV - 2 highlights the importance of under - standing uptake mechanisms , as this understanding can help to inform potential antiviral treatments . Exosome signalling plays an important role in normal growth and development , but also plays a key role in the progression of diseases such as cancer . Exosomes can also be exploited for their therapeutic potential , and are cur - rently being used for short interfering RNA ( siRNA ) , protein and small - molecule drug delivery 7 . As with synthetic nanoparticles , the ability of exosomes to carry out these functions is governed by the ability of a target cell to internalize the exosome and its cargo . While cellular uptake plays a critical role in the efficiency of ther - apeutic delivery , the analysis of internalization is often hampered by an outdated understanding of the mechanisms that drive cellular uptake . In this Review we will highlight the latest advances in our Key principles and methods for studying the endocytosis of biological and nanoparticle therapeutics Joshua J . Rennick 1 , 2 , Angus P . R . Johnston 1 , 2 ✉ and Robert G . Parton 2 , 3 ✉ Endocytosis is a critical step in the process by which many therapeutic nanomedicines reach their intracellular targets . Our understanding of cellular uptake mechanisms has developed substantially in the past five years . However , these advances in cell biology have not fully translated to the nanoscience and therapeutics literature . Misconceptions surrounding the role of different endocytic pathways and how to study these pathways are hindering progress in developing improved nanoparticle therapies . Here , we summarize the latest insights into cellular uptake mechanisms and pathways . We highlight limitations of current systems to study endocytosis , particularly problems with non - specific inhibitors . We also summarize alternative genetic approaches to robustly probe these pathways and discuss the need to understand how cells endocytose particles in vivo . We hope that this critical assessment of the current methods used in studying nanoparticle uptake will guide future studies at the interface of cell biology and nanomedicine . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 266 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy understanding of the cellular mechanisms of internalization and critically assess the current techniques that can be used to deter - mine the pathways involved . We also provide guidelines for future experiments assessing nanoparticle uptake ( Box 1 ) . Pathways of endocytosis Understanding the mechanisms by which nanoparticles can be internalized into cells is important for a number of reasons . First , the physical properties ( for example size ) of the nanoparticles govern the mechanisms that are able to mediate the uptake of the particle . Second , the rate of nanoparticle uptake is largely depen - dent on the internalization mechanism . Finally , not all cells pos - sess the same internalization machinery ; therefore , understanding the mechanisms of uptake can inform which cells will be likely to internalize nanoparticles that are engineered to target specific pathways . A poor understanding of internalization mechanisms can lead to poorly engineered nanoparticles that have suboptimal therapeutic performance and can lead to unexpected results when studying nanoparticles with different cell lines , or when translating nanoparticles from in vitro to in vivo studies . The same nanopar - ticle may also be internalized by different mechanisms in different cell types 8 , 9 , again emphasizing the need to understand endocytic pathways in the model cell studied in culture and within the target cells of interest in vivo . Before considering the relevance of different endocytic pathways for nanoparticles to enter the cell and reach their intracellular tar - gets , a brief summary of the current view of endocytosis is required . This is particularly important in view of recent major developments in our understanding of the endocytic pathways in vertebrate cells , particularly those that do not use clathrin . For more extensive reviews of this area the reader is referred to recent articles 10 , 11 . A consensus is now developing for five major types of endo cytosis : ( 1 ) clathrin - coated pit - mediated endocytosis ( CME ; clathrin and dynamin dependent ) , ( 2 ) fast endophilin - mediated endocytosis ( FEME , a clathrin - independent but dynamin - dependent pathway for rapid ligand - driven endocytosis of specific membrane proteins ) , ( 3 ) clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) / glycosylphosphatidyl inositol - anchored protein enriched early endocytic compartment ( GEEC ) endocytosis ( clathrin and dynamin independent ) , ( 4 ) macropinocytosis and ( 5 ) phagocytosis ( Fig . 1 and Box 2 ) . Caveolae represent a sixth pathway , which in theory can also contribute to endocytic uptake . While caveolae can bud from the plasma membrane , few if any cargoes are dependent on caveolae for their uptake 12 and endocytosis by the FEME and CLIC / GEEC pathways may be confused with the caveola pathway due to poor specificity of endocytosis inhibitors ( Tools to study mechanisms of uptake and Table 1 ) . These endocytic pathways will be briefly considered here as a framework for understanding the uptake of nanoparticles . Model cargoes for each pathway are highlighted , but no cargo is shown for the caveolin pathway due to the limited evidence of protein cargo that is specifically internalized by this pathway . A common feature of these pathways is that the majority of cargoes they internalize are trafficked to the early endosome . Cargo can be recycled back to the cell surface or onwards to the late endosome and subse - quently to the lysosome . It should also be appreciated that we are presenting a simplified view of the pathways as a working model for classifying and defining the different endocytic mechanisms . The study of endocytosis is an actively evolving field , so it is impor - tant for nanomaterial researchers to remain up to date with the lat - est advances in cellular understanding . Clathrin , for example , is a defining feature of CME but can also be involved in the uptake of large particles through a mechanism that is distinct from the clas - sical CME pathway . Boundaries between CLIC / GEEC endocytosis and macropinocytosis can also be unclear , and the two pathways may share common components 13 . There is also clearly cross - talk between pathways : for example , perturbation of the levels of caveo - lar components can affect the CLIC / GEEC pathway 14 . Finally , inhi - bition of one pathway can modulate another and so compensate for the lack of that pathway . For example , inhibition of dynamin using a temperature - sensitive mutant causes rapid upregulation of dynamin - independent endocytosis 15 . This is a crucial consideration in studies using inhibitors of specific pathways to define uptake mechanisms and emphasizes the need for multiple techniques . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis , CME . The clathrin - dependent pathway of endocytosis is the best understood endocytic route . It occurs in all mammalian cells and is the principal route for cells to obtain nutrients , for example facilitating the uptake of iron ( via transferrin ) and cholesterol ( via low - density lipoproteins ) . CME is sometimes referred to as receptor - mediated endocytosis ; however , this term is outdated and misleading , as clathrin - independent inter - nalization mechanisms can also involve specific receptor – ligand interactions ( for example the FEME pathway ) 16 . Clathrin - coated pits occupy 0 . 5 – 2 % of the cell surface 17 . Receptor clustering or phosphorylation within the cytoplasmic domain of surface mem - brane proteins recruits adaptin proteins and initiates a cascade of low - affinity protein – protein and protein – lipid interactions ( partic - ularly with phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) ) , which lead to the formation of a clathrin - coated pit . This is a highly dynamic and cooperative system in which a multitude of interac - tions form a pit within 30 – 120 s of ligand binding 18 . The pit rapidly invaginates to form a clathrin - coated vesicle , which pinches off the plasma membrane through the activity of dynamin , a large mechan - ical GTPase . Clathrin - coated vesicles have an average diameter of ~ 100 nm ( ref . 18 ) , representing the upper size limit of nanoparticles that can be internalized via this pathway . Bacteria and large particles up to 1 µ m in diameter have been shown to co - opt clathrin and form actin - rich pedestals to facilitate their uptake 19 . It has also been proposed that rod - like viruses and nanoparticles , longer than the diameter of the typical clathrin - coated vesicle , can be internalized by CME through the actin elongation of the clathrin - coated pit 20 . The requirement for actin recruitment can slow the endocytic process , leading to altered internalization kinet - ics compared with conventional CME . The distinct morphology of the clathrin - coated pit , systems to effectively and specifically perturb the pathway , and well charac - terized cargoes that are completely dependent on this pathway for uptake have facilitated the extensive characterization of this ubiqui - tous and constitutive pathway . Clathrin - independent / dynamin - dependent endocytosis , FEME . FEME has recently emerged as an important pathway for rapid endocytosis of specific transmembrane receptors , important in growth factor signalling and in cell migration 16 . Cargoes for FEME Box 1 | Key points to consider in nanoparticle uptake experiments 1 . What endocytic pathways exist in the cell culture system being used and in the target cells of interest in vivo ? 2 . Does efficient uptake in a cultured cell equate to efficient uptake in vivo ? 3 . Are inhibitors specific for a single pathway and are they non - toxic ( are there positive and negative controls with pathway - specific markers ) ? 4 . Can genetic perturbation be used to define the endocytic pathway ( s ) being used ? 5 . How does a nanoparticle of interest pass from the blood - stream to the target tissue ? NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 267 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy include G - protein - coupled receptors , such as β 1 - adrenergic , dopa - minergic and acetylcholine receptors , as well as the IL - 2 recep - tor and growth factor receptors ( EGFR , hepatocyte growth factor receptor ( HGFR ) ) . The FEME pathway has a number of unique features that distin - guish it from other pathways . First , the pathway is clathrin indepen - dent but dynamin dependent . Second , the formation of endocytic carriers is induced upon ligand binding to specific receptors . FEME relies on interactions between the SH3 domain of endophilin and cognate receptors ( for example G - protein - coupled receptors ) or indirect association through intermediate proteins such as CIN85 and Cbl ( for EGFR and HGFR ) . These interactions stabilize endophilin localized to the leading edge of migrating cells through the PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 - binding protein lamellipodin . Formation of FEME carriers is extremely rapid ( < 10 s ) , is dependent on pre - enrichment of endophilin at the membrane and leads to the formation of tubu - lar carriers , which are 60 – 80 nm in diameter and several hundred nanometres in length 16 . Clathrin - independent / dynamin - independent endocytosis , CLIC / GEEC . CLICs are involved in a distinct endocytic pathway , inde - pendent of dynamin or clathrin , which has been shown to be a high - capacity pathway in mammalian cultured cells and is also conserved in Drosophila 21 , 22 . This pathway , termed CLIC / GEEC endocytosis , shares some features with the FEME pathway , as they both localize to the leading edge of migrating cells and involve tubular and ring - shaped pleomorphic carriers ( ranging in diameter and length ) . However unlike FEME , which is stimulated by specific ligand – receptor interactions , CLIC / GEEC endocytosis is a constitutive pathway ( that is , it continuously occurs in the cells that possess the pathway ) that mediates the uptake of cargoes that are different from those using the FEME pathway 16 . Notably , this pathway is involved in the uptake of abundant sur - face proteins such as the hyaluronic acid receptor ( CD44 ) and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins , and in some cells also mediates the uptake of substantial amounts of fluid and membrane . Using a real - time fluorescence assay and total inter - nal reflection fluorescence microscopy to follow the early steps in this pathway , it was shown that there is minimal concentration of cargo proteins ( glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins ) in the forming carriers before endocytosis 23 . This feature of the pathway has made its study difficult in comparison with FEME and CME , where clustering of cargo in the forming carrier makes for more straightforward observation by fluorescence microscopy . The CLICs mature into tubular GEECs . The pathway is regulated by ARF1 / GBF1 , the actin regulatory complex Arp2 / 3 and the small GTPase Cdc42 , and is associated with a specific BAR domain pro - tein , IRSp53 , as well as GRAF1 ( ref . 23 ) . In addition to this cytoplas - mic machinery , a novel extracellular mechanism has been proposed for the uptake of specific CLIC / GEEC markers 24 . This process involves extracellular lectins called galectins that cluster glycosyl - ated proteins and glycosphingolipids into nanoscale domains that then invaginate inwards to generate the tubular carrier . A similar mechanism is exploited by infectious agents such as the SV40 virus , cholera and Shiga toxins to enter the CLIC / GEEC endocytosis path - way ( although note that these toxins are associated with a number CTBP1 Transferrin receptor AP2 Clathrin Clathrin Caveolin Macropinocytosis Phagocytosis FEME CLIC / GEEC Transferrin Caveolin Cavin 1 homotrimer Cavin 1 – 2 or Cavin 1 – 3 heterotrimers Clathrin disassembly Recycling Dynamin dependent EndophilinA2 Actin Actin Early endosome β 1 adrenergicreceptor EHD2 Extracellular Intracellular Phagocyticreceptors Adrenaline Galectin 3 Oligomerization Glycosylatedprotein Nanoparticle Rabankyrin - 5 Late endosome Lysosome Lysosomal proteases Dynamin Dynamin independent Fig . 1 | overview of the primary mechanisms of uptake into cells . CME is driven by the adaptor complex , AP2 , that recruits clathrin to cytosolic receptor domains , initiating the formation of a clathrin - coated pit . FEME is triggered by ligand – receptor interactions and regulated by endophilin A2 recruitment and actin polymerization . Both CME and FEME require dynamin to facilitate scission from the membrane and involve interactions of the intracellular domains of cell surface receptors with cytoplasmic machinery . Formation of caveolae is dependent on caveolin and cavin proteins . EhD2 stabilizes the neck of caveolae to regulate endocytosis . CLIC / GEEC endocytosis appears to be a constitutive process ( that is , a continuous endocytic uptake mechanism independent of receptor – ligand interactions ) and is clathrin and dynamin independent . Extracellular galectin proteins ( not shown ) cocluster glycoproteins and glycolipids to drive carrier formation and cargo incorporation . Macropinocytosis is generally a stimulated pathway involving uptake of large volumes of fluid . CLIC / GEEC endocytosis and macropinocytosis are controlled by actin dynamics and different BAR domain proteins with macropinosome fission from the surface also influenced by C - terminal - binding protein 1 ( CTBP1 ) . Phagocytosis occurs after a binding event at the cell surface triggers actin polymerization and a vesicle forms tightly around the bound material . After internalization , pathways merge into early endosomes before undergoing sorting , where material may be sent back to the surface or onwards to the late endosome and lysosome . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 268 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy of other endocytic pathways including FEME , CME and caveo - lae ) 25 . This mechanism is dependent on the multivalent nature of the galectin , which is secreted extracellularly in large quantities , and the coordinated interaction of the galectin with lipids and proteins , such as CD44 and integrins 24 . The pathway is particularly sensitive to changes in membrane tension and has been shown to be crucial for homoeostatic regulation of plasma membrane tension through the mechanotransducer protein vinculin 26 . Macropinocytosis . Macropinosomes form by the actin - driven extension of plasma membrane sheets followed by enclosure of large volumes of the extracellular medium as the macropinosome folds back . The mechanisms involved in this process have been elegantly described in macrophages using lattice light sheet microscopy and have demonstrated the formation of tentpole - like actin exten - sions with sheets of membrane between 27 . Twisting of the ‘tent - poles’ causes the trapping of fluid at the base of the structure . After closure , the macropinosome undergoes a transformation as mem - brane tubules form and detach to recycle out membrane while the remaining vacuole shrinks . The macropinosome undergoes interac - tions with other compartments to acquire the characteristics of an early endosomal compartment . The capacity for cells to macropinocytose material is highly dependent on the cell type and can be a constitutive or an induced process 28 . Macrophages and dendritic cells exhibit high levels of constitutive macropinocytosis to sample the extracellular environ - ment for pathogens 29 . Induction of macropinocytosis can occur through a range of stimuli , including receptor tyrosine kinase family receptors ( for example EGFR ) , proteoglycans or G - protein - coupled receptors . Neutrophils have been shown to induce macropinocy - tosis in response to viral infections , and dendritic cells upregulate their native levels of macropinocytosis in response to treatment with lipopolysaccharide 30 . In transformed cells with a RAS mutation , macropinocyto - sis plays a crucial role in uptake of protein to be used as a source of amino acids for fuel 31 . It has also been shown that breast and prostate cancer cells use macropinocytosis to increase trafficking of ErbB3 into the nucleus to promote proliferation 32 . Constitutive macropinocytosis levels vary in different cell lines in culture and undoubtedly also in different cells in vivo . Macropinocytosis can also be stimulated by growth factors in culture medium 33 . These fac - tors make it important to ascertain the role of macropinocytosis in the target cells in vivo . Phagocytosis . Phagocytosis involves the uptake of particulate mate - rial by professional phagocytes ( polymorphonuclear neutrophils , monocytes and macrophages ) and non - professional phagocytes 34 , 35 . This has been considered to involve the uptake of particles over 0 . 5 µ m in diameter , but the lower limits for phagocytic uptake are actually unclear and phagocytosis could be involved in the uptake of far smaller particles , including nanoparticles 36 . Phagocytosis is a crucial cellular process for uptake of cellular debris , including dead cells , and for the elimination of pathogenic microorganisms by cells of the innate immune system . Particles or microorganisms are engulfed by a tight - fitting membrane that extends around the particle until it is completely enclosed and scission from the plasma membrane occurs . The resultant intracellular vacuole , the early phagosome , matures into a degradative compartment containing a full complement of microbiocidal agents . Phagocytosis is initiated by binding of particles to surface pro - teins such as scavenger receptors , which can recognize a diverse range of materials 35 , or by specific receptor interactions . The uptake of pathogens by macrophages is one of the best understood phago - cytic processes . Clustering of surface receptors that recognize opsonized particles via their associated immunoglobulins acti - vates Src family kinases . Sustained activation requires exclusion of key phosphatases , such as CD45 and CD148 , from the site of phagocytosis . This process depends on the close apposition of the macrophage’s enclosing phagosomal membrane and coordina - tion with actin and integrin signalling networks . This signalling network strengthens the association of the phagosomal cup mem - brane with the phagocytosed particle , while the exclusion of CD45 and CD148 phosphatases accelerates the expansion of the phago - cytic cup . Membrane extension and phagosome formation rely on the actin cytoskeleton , with actin filaments depolymerizing at the base of the cup and polymerizing at the tips of the lamellae as they extend over the particle . This relies on a series of small GTPases including Cdc42 , Rac and RhoA working together with effectors such as WASP and Arp2 / 3 to generate a branched actin network . Actin remodelling also relies on transient changes in membrane lipids such as the consumption of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , through both hydrolysis and conversion to PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . Phagocytic cup extension also requires dynamin - 2 , which regulates both actin dynamics and scission from the plasma membrane ; however , the Box 2 | Summary of classical endocytic pathways Understanding the properties of each internalization pathway is crucial to understanding nanoparticle uptake . The table below provides a brief comparison of the parameters that should be con - sidered for each internalization pathway . There is evidence to sug - gest that elements from these classical pathways can be involved in hybrid pathways ; however , the behaviour of these hybrid pathways differs substantially from that of the classical pathways and should be considered separately . CME FEME CLIC / GEEC Caveolin Macrop inocytosis Phago - cytosis Classical size of endocytic vesicle ( diameter ) ~ 100 nm spherical ~ 60 – 80 nm tubular ( may be several hundred nm long ) ~ 100 nm a ~ 60 nm > 200 nm > 200 nm b Present in all cells Yes Possibly c No No d e Validated cargo Transferrin Anti - β 1 - adrenergic receptor Anti - CD44 anti - CD98 – Dextran f Chemically killed bacteria a Size is not well defined but is generally considered to be similar to that for CME and FEME . b Generally considered to involve particles larger than 500 nm in diameter but could play a role in uptake of smaller particles 36 . c The FEME pathway has been found in most cell lines studied ; however , only a limited number of cell lines have been explored . d Macropinocytosis is often upregulated in cultured cell lines and can be stimulated by growth factors . e Many non - professional phagocytic cells appear to have the molecular machinery to undergo phagocytosis , but lack the classical receptors to bind cargo and initiate the process . Knockin studies of these receptors have shown that a number of classically non - phagocytic cells will phagocytose cargo if the appropriate receptor is expressed on their surfaces 108 . f Note that if dextran is behaving as a true fluid phase marker it will be incorporated into all forming endocytic vesicles , particularly at low molecular masses ( < 10 , 000 Da ) , and cannot only label the macropinocytic pathway . However , the magnitude of the pathway , and size of the forming macropinosomes , provide some apparent specificity for macropinosomes depending on the concentration and imaging conditions used , especially for very large dextrans ( for example 2 , 000 , 000 Da ) . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 269 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy mechanism of action is probably different from other internaliza - tion mechanisms 37 . Once the phagosome forms , a series of complex maturation events occurs as the phagosome fuses with endosomal compart - ments and acquires the characteristics of a late - endosomal / lyso - somal compartment . These maturation steps involve a series of complex membrane trafficking steps , including sequential acquisi - tion of Rab GTPases , microtubule - dependent trafficking through dynein / dynactin , recruitment of elements of the autophagosomal machinery and selective retrieval of membrane - associated compo - nents from the forming phagolysosomes 38 . Caveolae : limited evidence for nanoparticle uptake . An exten - sive literature links caveolae to endocytosis . This includes decades of work in vascular endothelia , in which caveolae have been pro - posed to mediate transcellular transport from the lumen of vessels across the endothelium and into tissues . In non - endothelial cells , caveolae have also been implicated in a number of endocytic pro - cesses including uptake of toxins , viruses , whole bacteria , lipids and a range of nanoparticles . Each of these pathways remains some - what controversial , particularly as studies using genetic knockout of caveolar components have not generally shown a dependence on caveolae for endocytic uptake in any system 12 , 39 . For example , Table 1 | Summary of chemical endocytosis inhibitors Inhibitor target pathway Mode of action Pathways affected comments cMe FeMe cav clIc Macro Phago 2 - deoxy - d - glucose / sodium azide All energy - dependent pathways Decreases ATP and NADh by inhibiting glycolysis ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ hypertonic sucrose 79 CME Prevents disassembly of clathrin cage ✓ • • Non - specific 80 Potassium ion depletion 81 CME Causes aggregation of clathrin ✓ • • • • • Non - specific , interferes with actin 80 Chlorpromazine CME Mechanism unknown 82 , but probably inhibits AP2 83 ✓ • • • Increases the uptake of lactosylceramide , which is not internalized by CME ; 84 inhibits FEME 16 Chloroquine 83 CME Affects the function of clathrin and clathrin - coated vesicles 85 ✓ Also inhibits endosome acidification Pitstop 2 86 CME Interferes with binding to the N - terminal domain of clathrin 86 ✓ ◌ ◌ ◌ ◌ ◌ Mechanism and specificity questioned 87 , 88 Dynasore 89 & Dyngo 90 All dynamin - dependent pathways ( CME & FEME ) Block the GTPase activity of dynamin ✓ ✓ • • Can also interfere with actin , as shown in triple - knockout dynamin cells 91 Methyl - β - cyclodextrin 92 Lipid rafts / cholesterol - enriched microdomains / caveolae Removes cholesterol from the plasma membrane ◌ • ✓ ✓ • • Interferes with other uptake mechanisms because of changes in membrane fluidity 93 Nystatin Lipid rafts / cholesterol - enriched microdomains / caveolae Binds to cholesterol 94 ◌ • ✓ ✓ • • Interferes with other uptake mechanisms because of changes in membrane fluidity 93 7 - keto - cholesterol 14 CLIC / GEEC Prevents the close packing of acyl chains 95 ✓ LG186 26 CLIC / GEEC Reversible inhibitor of Arf - GEF function ✓ Genistein Unclear Broad - spectrum tyrosine kinase inhibitor 96 • • • • • Shown to partially inhibit endocytosis by caveolae , but specificity unclear 97 Cytochalasin D Macropinocytosis and phagocytosis Depolymerizes F - actin 98 • • • • ✓ ✓ Interference with actin polymerization affects multiple pathways 99 Amiloride ( EIPA ) 100 Macropinocytosis Inhibits Na + channels and Na + / h + exchange 101 ◌ • ✓ Reports have shown inhibition 100 , or lack of inhibition 102 , of EGFR uptake ; has been shown to inhibit FEME 16 ✓ Proposed target pathway . • Other , ‘off - target’ , pathways . ◌ Requires specific conditions to prevent ‘off - target’ effects . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 270 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy mice lacking caveolae show efficient transport of albumin from the bloodstream to tissues 40 , while viruses and toxins shown to asso - ciate with caveolae are not dependent on caveolae for their infec - tious entry and toxicity 41 . A set of criteria that can be used to assess uptake via caveolae has been discussed elsewhere 42 . Caveolae are characterized by a unique morphology as seen by electron microscopy : a bulb - shaped pit of approximately 60 nm diameter connected to the plasma membrane by a slightly smaller neck 43 . Caveolae are very abundant in some cell types but absent from others ( for example neurons and many blood cells ) . Many commonly used mammalian cell lines also lack caveo - lae , including PC3 cells and at least some MCF7 strains ( Box 3 ) . This cell - and tissue - specific distribution is very different from clathrin - coated pits , which show a fairly constant density in dif - ferent cell types . Caveolae are generated by caveolins and cavins working together with accessory proteins such as Eps15 homol - ogy domain - containing 2 ( EHD2 ) , pacsin / syndapins and ROR1 ( ref . 12 ) . Cavins are peripheral membrane proteins that associate primarily with caveolae under steady - state conditions . However , caveolins are integral membrane proteins that associate with a number of cellular compartments , including caveolae , endosomes , the Golgi complex and lipid droplets . This wide distribution of caveolins has led in part to confusion over the role of caveolins in endocytic pathways . Loss of caveolae occurs when the expression of caveolin - 1 ( CAV1 ; in non - muscle cells ) , caveolin - 3 ( CAV3 ; stri - ated muscle cells ) or cavin1 ( in both muscle and non - muscle cells ) is ablated . This provides a way to test whether uptake of specific markers is dependent on caveolae . The role of caveolae in endocytic processes , as endocytic carriers analogous to clathrin - coated pits , is not clear despite the dogma that has developed in some research fields . A number of factors have added confusion to the field . First , a number of studies have relied on inhibitors to test for the involvement of caveolae . Invariably these inhibitors have insufficient specificity to prove the involve - ment of caveolae ( Table 1 ) . For example , cholesterol perturbation not only disrupts caveolae but also perturbs CLIC / GEEC endocy - tosis and FEME , even under conditions where transferrin uptake via clathrin - coated pits is unaffected 14 , 16 , 41 , 44 . Second , colocalization with caveolin has been considered an indicator of caveolar endocy - tosis . In fact , overexpression of caveolin - 1 leads to its association with a number of endocytic pathways and compartments , as the levels of endogenous cavin limit caveolar formation . An example of this is the proposed association of caveolin - 1 with a novel com - partment called the caveosome 45 , subsequently proposed by the original authors to be an artefact of caveolin - 1 overexpression 46 . Experiments using fluorescently tagged caveolin - 1 must also be performed with care in view of studies proposing that both amino - and carboxy - terminal - tagged proteins can act as dominant - negative inhibitors 45 . Another important aspect of studies proposing involvement of caveolae is whether the particle or agent of interest can be physically accommodated within a caveola . The interior of caveolae , around 50 nm in diameter , can only accommodate relatively small cargo . Large cargo , such as bacteria 47 and larger nanoparticles 48 , have been proposed to use caveolae , but it is not clear how the caveola struc - ture could accommodate materials greater than the diameter of this pathway . The structure of vesicles to accommodate these particles would need to be dramatically modified and so they should not be considered caveolae . However , caveolar proteins could still be hijacked to facilitate the internalization process . We suggest that if such mechanisms are proven they should be very clearly differenti - ated from bona fide caveolar endocytosis , which should be confined to budding of intact caveolae with cargo . In conclusion , without further evidence , it is difficult to estab - lish whether any nanoparticles require caveolae for endocytosis , at least in non - endothelial cells . Use of genetically modified cells and organisms should be able to resolve many of these issues in the future ( Table 2 ) . Nanoparticle uptake : general considerations . Many notable stud - ies investigating nanoparticle size , shape , charge and targeting were performed before we fully understood the roles of the CLIC / GEEC and FEME pathways . Furthermore , recent advances in our under - standing of how pharmacological inhibitors interact with multiple endocytosis pathways also calls for us to reassess the properties that govern endocytosis 49 . The pathways of CME , FEME , CLIC / GEEC and caveolae are all associated with carriers with a diameter smaller than 200 nm , which means it is unlikely that particles larger than 200 nm can be internalized by these routes . Particles larger than 200 nm will typically be internalized by macropinocytosis or phago - cytosis ( but note that proteins such as clathrin and dynamin can still play a crucial role in these pathways ) 50 , 51 . Reports that particles larger than 200 nm are endocytosed by caveolae conflict with our current understanding of the caveola structure 48 . Below 100 nm , the size of the nanoparticle plays a less important role in possible routes of uptake , as the geometry of each pathway can readily accommo - date small nanoparticles . When nanoparticles are placed in cell media or are injected in vivo , serum proteins quickly adsorb to the surface of the nanopar - ticle , forming a protein corona . These adsorbed proteins , such as vitronectin , can induce binding to specific cell surface receptors , which in turn can influence the uptake pathway 52 . The formation of a protein corona can also cause particles to aggregate before they reach the cell , causing the effective nanoparticle size to be signifi - cantly larger than the size measured ex vivo in water or PBS . We have recently helped to draft the MIRIBEL standard for reporting the properties of nanoparticles , and feel that reporting the full char - acterization of these materials will help with the comparison of dif - ferent studies 53 . tools to study mechanisms of uptake A considerable research effort has been , and is still being , expended on understanding the pathways by which nanoparticles are internal - ized 9 . Many of these studies employ inhibitors , and particularly in the nanoparticle literature many rely solely on the use of inhibitors and cell culture models . A pertinent question is whether these stud - ies have helped the field to progress , and in particular whether their use helps in the design and application of new therapeutics ( here we are not discussing the use of endocytosis inhibitors themselves as therapeutic agents , something that has considerable potential ) 6 . Aside from the question of the importance of dissecting the pathways of endocytosis of nanoparticles in cultured cells , a crucial question is how specific these inhibitors are . Many inhibitors con - sidered specific for macropinocytosis also inhibit FEME ( Table 1 ) . In fact , in one study all tested inhibitors of macropinocytosis and clathrin - independent endocytosis also inhibited FEME 16 . A number of inhibitors of clathrin - coated pit endocytosis also inhibit FEME , including chlorpromazine and potassium depletion , whereas cho - lesterol depletion to inhibit uptake via caveolae also inhibits the CLIC / GEEC and FEME pathways . The non - specific and cross - reactive nature of these inhibitors means that it is important to confirm the activity of the inhibitors 54 . This can be achieved using markers that have been extensively vali - dated to be specifically internalized by particular pathways ( Box 1 ) . Use of these markers not only confirms the activity of the inhibitor but can also give information about non - specific inhibition . The methods used to study endocytosis are also important . The uptake of nanoparticles into cells is typically investigated by fluo - rescently labelling materials and measuring uptake using fluores - cence microscopy or flow cytometry . One challenge is accurately distinguishing material bound to the plasma membrane from inter - nalized material 55 . Confocal microscopy offers a low - throughput NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 271 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy technique to qualitatively determine if nanoparticles are inside the cell ; however , it can be difficult to distinguish between material that is internalized , but close to the cell surface , and material bound to the outer plasma membrane . Flow cytometry is a high - throughput method for rapidly quantifying the association of material with cells ; however , by default flow cytometry quantifies total association , rather than distinguishing internalized material from surface - bound material . Recently a number of new techniques have been devel - oped that allow rapid quantification of uptake using flow cytom - etry 56 , 57 . The specific techniques to quantify uptake are beyond the scope of this Review ; however , we have recently reviewed the lat - est advances in quantifying cellular uptake elsewhere 58 . A common technique to synchronize internalization and normalize nanopar - ticle binding is to initially incubate nanoparticles with cells at 4 °C to inhibit uptake . Unbound particles are then washed away and the cells returned to 37 °C to initiate uptake . The synchronized inter - nalization allows for easy interpretation of internalization kinetics . However , CLIC / GEEC endocytosis has been reported to recover slowly after a low - temperature incubation while clathrin - dependent endocytosis recovers rapidly 10 . This has the potential to underrep - resent the importance of CLIC / GEEC pathway and overestimate the importance of CME if a low - temperature protocol is used . To visualize the FEME pathway it is important that the cells are fixed at 37 °C , which suggests that temperature may also influence this pathway 16 . Furthermore , a number of endocytosis inhibitors require serum - free media ; however , it has been established that serum stim - ulates FEME but not CLIC / GEEC endocytosis , while serum star - vation downregulates FEME 16 , 21 . Consequently , decoupling the role of FEME from other pathways using small - molecule inhibitors can be challenging . Increasingly researchers are employing incubation at 37 °C with no cooling step and a serum - containing medium to minimize these problems . Knockout of key components in the internalization pathways , or expression of dominant - negative inhibitors , if performed carefully with appropriate controls , can overcome these problems ( Table 2 ; although note that these inhibitors can also have off - target effects because some components can be shared by different pathways or can influence these pathways ) 13 . These include the expression of the BAR domain of endophilin lacking its N - terminal amphipathic helix ( b ) for the FEME pathway , caveolin - 1 or cavin1 knockout for the caveolar pathway , and the use of dynamin - knockout cells in which all three isoforms are genetically ablated or can be condition - ally downregulated . RNA interference is a valuable tool to achieve knockdown of these key proteins and has been used to interrogate the role of different endocytic pathways in the endocytosis of nano - materials 8 . siRNA can also be used to screen numerous proteins either individually or in concert to assess their implications in dif - ferent endocytic pathways 59 , 60 . Although this approach is likely to be more specific than pharmacological inhibitors , the highly intri - cate nature of these endocytic pathways , which may share protein components ( an aspect that may not be well understood currently ) , means that validation is critical to avoid affecting multiple pathways . siRNA - mediated knockdown can also suffer from off - target effects . Fate For delivery of therapeutic nanoparticles , internalization is only the first step . The subsequent trafficking substantially impacts the effi - cacy of the delivery system . For delivery of the therapeutic to its site of action , typically in the cytosol or nucleus , a number of ques - tions arise . First , does the endocytic pathway matter ? Second , can we specifically exploit the distinct characteristics of specific path - ways to benefit drug or nanoparticle uptake and trafficking ? Third , what do we know about these pathways in vivo ? Surprisingly , in view of the importance of the question and the number of research papers devoted to nanoparticle or drug delivery , the answer to this last question is that very little is known . These questions will be addressed in turn . There is strong evidence to suggest that all major endocyto - sis pathways are capable of delivering their contents to the early endosome through a Rab5 / EEA1 - dependent trafficking pathway 61 . Box 3 | Summary of endocytic mechanisms in common human cell lines Understanding the biology of the cells being studied and the in - ternalization pathways they possess is crucial to understanding nanoparticle uptake . The table below provides a brief summary of the endocytic mechanisms present in seven commonly studied human cell lines . While all cell lines possess CME machinery , not all uptake mechanisms are ubiquitous . Of note , PC3 cells ( lack cavins ) 105 , HEK293 cells ( lack cavin1 ) , Caco2 cells ( lack CAV1 ) and many MCF7 cell lines ( lack caveolins and cavins ) 109 do not possess caveolae . Despite this , a number of studies have concluded that nanoparticles are internalized via a caveola - mediated process . Fur - thermore , HeLa cells do not possess the CLIC / GEEC pathway , as judged by a number of criteria 26 , 110 ; therefore , it cannot be assumed that this pathway is present in all cells . Phagocytosis is initiated by binding to surface receptors that are not present on all cells . How - ever , phagocytosis can be induced in some non - phagocytic cells if they are modified to express these receptors 111 . Recent work has also suggested that dividing cells in culture differ from the same cells in a non - dividing quiescent state in their endocytic uptake pathways 109 . All of these examples illustrate the importance of understanding the limitation of cell culture models and the need to develop assays for in vivo studies of endocytosis . Cell line Internalization pathway CME 112 FEME Cav CLIC / GEEC Macro 113 A549 ✓ ✓ a114 ◌ b115 , 116 ✓ a117 ✓✓ c118 MCF7 ✓ ? ✕ 109 ? ✓ PC3 ✓ ? ✕ 105 ? ✓ heLa ✓ ✓ 119 ✓ 120 ⦸ 26 , 110 ✓ hepG2 ✓ ? ◌ ✓ 121 ✓ hEK293 ✓ ✓ a122 ✕ 123 ◌ 124 ✓ Caco2 ✓ ✓ 125 ✕ 126 ✓ 127 ✓ ✓ Present . ✓✓ Upregulated . ✕ Not present due to the lack of key molecular machinery . ⦸ Not present on the basis of comparative cellular studies . This does not rule out modification of the classical pathway . ? Not investigated . ◌ Conflicting evidence . a Indirect evidence . b Conflicting evidence but probably very low . c A549 cells have the KRAS mutation , which has been shown to upregulate macropinocytosis 31 , 32 . Note that the table is only an indication of the variability that can occur in commonly used lines . For many cultured cells definitive evidence is lacking , and we have noted considerable variation in published findings even with apparently identical cell lines . It is also often difficult to demonstrate the lack of a particular pathway , such as CLIC / GEEC , rather than the existence of a modified version of this pathway in a specific cell type . However , the table serves to illustrate the dangers of assuming that all pathways exist in all cultured mammalian cell types , also illustrated by comparison of caveolae for which structural components and well defined ultrastructural morphology are available . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 272 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy From the early endosome , cargo can be recycled back to the cell sur - face either directly or via the Rab11 - positive recycling endosome , or can remain with the vacuolar portion of the early endosome as it converts to a late - endosomal compartment and is eventually trafficked to the lysosomes . The majority of studies investigating the fate of nanoparticles and their cargo show substantial accumulation in the lysosomes . In addition to the classical pathway of uptake to the EEA1 - positive early endosome , internalized cargo in clathrin - coated vesicles is also delivered to the APPL1 - positive early endosome , a parallel stable sorting compartment 62 , 63 . This compartment may be not an essen - tial station for bulk endocytic cargo but rather a signalling compart - ment 62 . Traffic to the APPL endosome may delay transport into the EAA1 endosome , where recycling or degradation could occur to allow prolonged signalling . It is important to note that cargo endocytosed by the same mechanism can be sorted into different endosomal compartments , and that cargo endocytosed by different mechanisms can be sorted into the same endosomal compartment . CD44 , CD98 , CD147 and MHCI enter cells via a clathrin - independent pathway , and colo - calize to the same endocytic vesicles after 5 min ( ref . 64 ) . However , CD44 , CD98 and CD147 are rapidly sorted in a different way from MHCI into EEA1 - negative endosomal compartments and avoid the degradative lysosomal pathway . This altered trafficking is controlled by sequences in the cytoplasmic domain of the receptors 65 . It has yet to be tested whether this distinct trafficking route can influence the fate of nanoparticles . The fate of nanoparticles can be driven by a number of factors that relate to the mechanism of internalization . These include the rate of internalization , the percentage of material internalized and signalling on the cytosolic side of the internalized receptor . There is some evidence to suggest that certain internalization pathways can influence subsequent cellular trafficking ; however , it is not clear if it is the internalization pathway or signalling from the receptor that is the major driver of this trafficking . As an example of differential trafficking , liposomes with high surface densities of octa - arginine have been shown to increase macropinocytosis , and had higher transfection efficiencies than lower - density octa - arginine lipo - somes , which were internalized by other pathways 66 . The delivery requirements of small - molecule drugs and large macromolecules such as proteins or RNA / DNA are quite differ - ent . Small - molecule drugs are generally synthesized such that their properties allow the passive diffusion across cell membranes . Therefore , simply achieving accumulation in a target tissue without regard for the subsequent internalization mechanism may be suf - ficient to attain enhanced drug delivery to a specific subset of cells . Comparatively large macromolecules are unable to passively diffuse across these membranes due to their size and polarity , and therefore rely on endosomal escape to reach sites of action within the cyto - sol or nucleus 67 . It remains to be seen whether endosomal escape is dependent on the trafficking route within which the internalized material finds itself . If certain trafficking vesicles result in increased endosomal escape ( perhaps due to specific lipid content ) 68 , it may be possible to target specific endocytic compartments to control the therapeutics’ fate and enhance cytosolic delivery . Methods to understand endosomal escape and engineer nanoparticles to pro - mote cytosolic delivery have been reviewed recently 67 , 69 , 70 , and are beyond the scope of this Review . endocytic pathways in vivo We have highlighted the variation in endocytic pathways in dif - ferent commonly used laboratory cell lines . It is clear that there will be even more variation in endocytosis between different cell types in vivo , reflecting the particular properties of these cells , their physiological functions and the ever changing local environment of cells in different tissues within a whole organism . The organization of the endosomal circuits differs between cell types in vivo 71 , and particular cell types , such as cells of the kidney proximal tubules , have evolved high - capacity internalization mechanisms . Even cells of the same type grown in culture under different conditions can dramatically remodel their endocytic pathways as they change from a dividing to a quiescent state 72 , and so it is not surprising that the few studies that have compared endocytosis by cells in culture with their in vivo counterparts have shown notable differences in Table 2 | Summary of genetic inhibitors of endocytosis Protein / gene Pathway targeted Mode of action Inhibition Knockout / down Dominant negative Dynamin - 2 ( DNM2 ) CME / FEME a Depletion of dynamin prevents vesicles budding from cell membrane ✓ 91 ✓ 103 Clathrin ( CLTC ) CME Clathrin depletion prevents formation of clathrin - coated pits ✓ 8 ✓ 104 Endophilin A2 ( ENDOA2 ) FEME Endophilin A2 depletion prevents reshaping of the membrane before scission of the vesicle ✓ [ b18 ✓ 16 Caveolin - 1 ( CAV1 ) CAV Caveolin - 1 depletion prevents caveola formation ✓ 8 ✓ 45 Caveolae associated protein 1 ( CAVIN1 ) CAV Cavin - 1 depletion prevents caveola formation ✓ 105 IRSp53 CLIC / GEEC IRSp53 depletion interferes with actin dynamics ✓ 23 PICK1 CLIC / GEEC PICK1 depletion interferes with actin dynamics , specifically the Arp2 / 3 complex ✓ 23 CtBP1 ( CTBP1 ) Macropinocytosis CtBP1 depletion inhibits macropinosome fission from the cell surface 106 ✓ 8 ✓ 107 Rabankyrin - 5 ( ANKFY1 ) Macropinocytosis Depletion of rabankyrin - 5 inhibits formation of macropinosomes ✓ 8 a Dynamin - 2 is implicated in phagocytosis ; however , only specialized cells are phagocytic . b For unambiguous knockdown it may be necessary to knock down all three forms of endophilin , although some show inhibition by only knocking down endophilin A2 . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 273 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy endocytic pathways 73 . Very little is still known of the magnitude of different endocytic pathways in physiological cell types in dif - ferent tissues and how these differences impact on the delivery of nanoparticles into the cells of interest in vivo . However , the appli - cation of intravital subcellular microscopy , including the use of light microscopy techniques such as spinning - disc , confocal and multiphoton microscopy in live animals , is now starting to provide new insights into the uptake of biological and therapeutic agents in vivo 74 – 76 . Another important aspect of delivery in vivo , which lies outside the scope of this Review , is transport from the bloodstream across the endothelium to the target cells , and the reader is referred to a recent review on this subject 77 . A crucial future aim must be to develop tractable systems that go beyond the culture dish and into more physiological systems . conclusion Nanoparticle delivery systems have the potential to improve the treatment of various diseases . Understanding how these nanopar - ticles are internalized by cells and then processed within the cells is critical for understanding how nanoparticles can reach their site of action . Here we present an overview of the current understand - ing of endocytosis , and the limitations of current experimental techniques , in the hope of stimulating research directed at under - standing how a nanoparticle is internalized in target cells in vivo , and how an understanding of this process can dictate therapeu - tic strategies . Increased understanding of the process can poten - tially help harness cell biological mechanisms for more efficient delivery . Whether we can actually modulate the endocytic process to favour therapeutic delivery via a productive pathway is still unclear , although modulation of endocytosis in the clinic is now becoming a real possibility . Simple analysis of nanoparticle uptake mechanisms through the use of one or two non - specific pharma - ceutical inhibitors adds little knowledge to our understanding of nanoparticle – cell interactions . It is important to recognize that most endocytosis inhibitors are working on multiple pathways ( Table 1 ) , which makes it difficult to draw definitive conclusions about the endocytic pathways . Instead , genetic knockouts or dominant - negative proteins may provide a more specific approach to understand uptake . There are a number of conflicting reports in the literature that conclude specific endocytic pathways without using the most up - to - date tools and knowledge . Compounding this , a number of commonly reported pathways are not ubiquitous to all cells . Aspects of nanoparticle design , such as size , shape and sur - face chemistry , are thought to influence the route of internaliza - tion . However , many of these studies were performed before we developed our current understanding of endocytosis mechanisms , and it is important to re - evaluate them with the most up - to - date understanding . While cell culture systems are vital for elucidating the funda - mental mechanisms , molecules and pathways of endocytosis , it is important to understand their limitations . In vitro studies help answer specific questions about the pathways being studied , but they do not answer the wider question of whether these mecha - nisms are relevant in vivo . We see use of systems that more faith - fully reflect the in vivo environment as vital . Ultimately this might require the use of whole - animal systems and development of new tools to study these in vivo . This does not mean that cell culture studies are not valid ; rather , it means that in vitro studies should be informed by in vivo evidence . The use of intermediate systems such as explants or organoids , in which endocytosis can be manipulated in vitro , might be an excellent intermediate step in characteriza - tion . The study of EGFR endocytosis in live ex vivo human tumour biopsies represents an interesting step in this direction 6 , 78 . Creating nanoparticle systems with this in mind will aid the development and testing of delivery systems in a rational scientific fashion and most importantly should improve the efficacy of nanoparticles in therapeutic applications . Received : 25 May 2020 ; Accepted : 19 January 2021 ; Published online : 12 March 2021 References 1 . Karasneh , G . A . & Shukla , D . Herpes simplex virus infects most cell types in vitro : clues to its success . Virol . J . 8 , 481 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Tang , R . et al . Direct delivery of functional proteins and enzymes to the cytosol using nanoparticle - stabilized nanocapsules . ACS Nano 7 , 6667 – 6673 ( 2013 ) . 3 . Mout , R . et al . General strategy for direct cytosolic protein delivery via protein – nanoparticle co - engineering . ACS Nano 11 , 6416 – 6421 ( 2017 ) . 4 . Wilhelm , S . et al . Analysis of nanoparticle delivery to tumours . Nat . Rev . Mater . 1 , 16014 ( 2016 ) . 5 . Tsoi , K . M . et al . Mechanism of hard - nanomaterial clearance by the liver . Nat . Mater . 15 , 1212 – 1221 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Chew , H . Y . et al . Endocytosis inhibition in humans to improve responses to ADCC - mediating antibodies . Cell 180 , 895 – 914 . e27 ( 2020 ) . 7 . Yamashita , T . , Takahashi , Y . & Takakura , Y . Possibility of exosome - based therapeutics and challenges in production of exosomes eligible for therapeutic application . Biol . Pharm . Bull . 41 , 835 – 842 ( 2018 ) . 8 . Gilleron , J . et al . Image - based analysis of lipid nanoparticle - mediated siRNA delivery , intracellular trafficking and endosomal escape . Nat . Biotechnol . 31 , 638 – 646 ( 2013 ) . Detailed ultrastructural analysis of lipid nanoparticle uptake , and siRNA delivery , in cultured cells and in mouse liver . 9 . Sahay , G . , Alakhova , D . Y . & Kabanov , A . V . Endocytosis of nanomedicines . J . Control . Release 145 , 182 – 195 ( 2010 ) . 10 . Johannes , L . , Parton , R . G . , Bassereau , P . & Mayor , S . Building endocytic pits without clathrin . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 311 – 321 ( 2015 ) . 11 . Thottacherry , J . J . , Sathe , M . , Prabhakara , C . & Mayor , S . Spoiled for choice : diverse endocytic pathways function at the cell surface . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 35 , 55 – 84 ( 2019 ) . A comprehensive topical review of clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytic pathways . 12 . Parton , R . G . Caveolae : structure , function , and relationship to disease . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 34 , 111 – 136 ( 2018 ) . 13 . Kumari , S . , MG , S . & Mayor , S . Endocytosis unplugged : multiple ways to enter the cell . Cell Res . 20 , 256 – 275 ( 2010 ) . 14 . Chaudhary , N . et al . Endocytic crosstalk : cavins , caveolins , and caveolae regulate clathrin - independent endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 12 , e1001832 ( 2014 ) . 15 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , van der Bliek , A . M . & Schmid , S . L . Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 69 – 80 ( 1995 ) . 16 . Boucrot , E . et al . Endophilin marks and controls a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Nature 517 , 460 – 465 ( 2015 ) . Characterization of a novel endophilin - dependent pathway , termed FEME . 17 . Brown , C . M . & Petersen , N . O . Free clathrin triskelions are required for the stability of clathrin - associated adaptor protein ( AP - 2 ) coated pit nucleation sites . Biochem . Cell Biol . 77 , 439 – 448 ( 1999 ) . 18 . Ehrlich , M . et al . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 ( 2004 ) . 19 . Veiga , E . et al . Invasive and adherent bacterial pathogens co - opt host clathrin for infection . Cell Host Microbe 2 , 340 – 351 ( 2007 ) . 20 . Li , Z . et al . Shape effect of glyco - nanoparticles on macrophage cellular uptake and immune response . ACS Macro Lett . 5 , 1059 – 1064 ( 2016 ) . 21 . Howes , M . T . et al . Clathrin - independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 675 – 691 ( 2010 ) . 22 . Hemalatha , A . , Prabhakara , C . & Mayor , S . Endocytosis of Wingless via a dynamin - independent pathway is necessary for signaling in Drosophila wing discs . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E6993 – E7002 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Sathe , M . et al . Small GTPases and BAR domain proteins regulate branched actin polymerisation for clathrin and dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nat . Commun . 9 , 1835 ( 2018 ) . 24 . Lakshminarayan , R . et al . Galectin - 3 drives glycosphingolipid - dependent biogenesis of clathrin - independent carriers . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 592 – 603 ( 2014 ) . 25 . Sandvig , K . & van Deurs , B . Endocytosis , intracellular transport , and cytotoxic action of Shiga toxin and ricin . Physiol . Rev . 76 , 949 – 966 ( 1996 ) . 26 . Thottacherry , J . J . et al . Mechanochemical feedback control of dynamin independent endocytosis modulates membrane tension in adherent cells . Nat . Commun . 9 , 4217 ( 2018 ) . 27 . Condon , N . D . et al . Macropinosome formation by tent pole ruffling in macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 3873 – 3885 ( 2018 ) . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 274 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy 28 . Lin , X . P . , Mintern , J . D . & Gleeson , P . A . Macropinocytosis in different cell types : similarities and differences . Membranes 10 , 177 ( 2020 ) . 29 . Kerr , M . C . & Teasdale , R . D . Defining macropinocytosis . Traffic 10 , 364 – 371 ( 2009 ) . 30 . Lim , J . P . & Gleeson , P . A . Macropinocytosis : an endocytic pathway for internalising large gulps . Immunol . Cell Biol . 89 , 836 – 843 ( 2011 ) . 31 . Commisso , C . et al . Macropinocytosis of protein is an amino acid supply route in Ras - transformed cells . Nature 497 , 633 – 637 ( 2013 ) . Macropinocytosis is shown to have a crucial role in providing nutrients for cancer cells through the internalization and catabolism of extracellular proteins . 32 . Ha , K . D . , Bidlingmaier , S . M . & Liu , B . Macropinocytosis exploitation by cancers and cancer therapeutics . Front . Physiol . 7 , 381 ( 2016 ) . 33 . Palm , W . Metabolic functions of macropinocytosis . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 374 , 20180285 ( 2019 ) . 34 . Niedergang , F . & Grinstein , S . How to build a phagosome : new concepts for an old process . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 50 , 57 – 63 ( 2018 ) . 35 . Lim , J . J . , Grinstein , S . & Roth , Z . Diversity and versatility of phagocytosis : roles in innate immunity , tissue remodeling , and homeostasis . Front . Cell . Infect . Microbiol . 7 , 191 ( 2017 ) . 36 . Desjardins , M . & Griffiths , G . Phagocytosis : latex leads the way . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 498 – 503 ( 2003 ) . 37 . Doherty , G . J . & McMahon , H . T . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 ( 2009 ) . 38 . Harrison , R . E . , Bucci , C . , Vieira , O . V . , Schroer , T . A . & Grinstein , S . Phagosomes fuse with late endosomes and / or lysosomes by extension of membrane protrusions along microtubules : role of Rab7 and RILP . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 6494 – 6506 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Parton , R . G . et al . Caveolae : the FAQs . Traffic 21 , 181 – 185 ( 2020 ) . 40 . Schubert , W . et al . Microvascular hyperpermeability in caveolin - 1 ( − / − ) knock - out mice . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 40091 – 40098 ( 2002 ) . 41 . Kirkham , M . et al . Ultrastructural identification of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 ( 2005 ) . 42 . Rewatkar , P . V . , Parton , R . G . , Parekh , H . S . & Parat , M . - O . Are caveolae a cellular entry route for non - viral therapeutic delivery systems ? Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 91 , 92 – 108 ( 2015 ) . A critical review of studies implicating caveolae in nanoparticle uptake . 43 . Richter , T . et al . High - resolution 3D quantitative analysis of caveolar ultrastructure and caveola – cytoskeleton interactions . Traffic 9 , 893 – 909 ( 2008 ) . 44 . Chadda , R . et al . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Traffic 8 , 702 – 717 ( 2007 ) . 45 . Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . & Helenius , A . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 473 – 483 ( 2001 ) . 46 . Parton , R . G . & Howes , M . T . Revisiting caveolin trafficking : the end of the caveosome . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 439 – 441 ( 2010 ) . 47 . Shin , J . S . , Gao , Z . & Abraham , S . N . Involvement of cellular caveolae in bacterial entry into mast cells . Science 289 , 785 – 788 ( 2000 ) . 48 . Rejman , J . , Oberle , V . , Zuhorn , I . S . & Hoekstra , D . Size - dependent internalization of particles via the pathways of clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . J . 377 , 159 – 169 ( 2004 ) . 49 . Iversen , T . - G . , Skotland , T . & Sandvig , K . Endocytosis and intracellular transport of nanoparticles : present knowledge and need for future studies . Nano Today 6 , 176 – 185 ( 2011 ) . 50 . Liebl , D . , Qi , X . , Zhe , Y . , Barnett , T . C . & Teasdale , R . D . SopB - mediated recruitment of SNX18 facilitates Salmonella typhimurium internalization by the host cell . Front . Cell . Infect . Microbiol . 7 , 257 ( 2017 ) . 51 . Aggeler , J . & Werb , Z . Initial events during phagocytosis by macrophages viewed from outside and inside the cell : membrane – particle interactions and clathrin . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 613 – 623 ( 1982 ) . 52 . Caracciolo , G . et al . Selective targeting capability acquired with a protein corona adsorbed on the surface of 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - 3 - trimethylammonium propane / DNA nanoparticles . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 5 , 13171 – 13179 ( 2013 ) . 53 . Faria , M . et al . Minimum information reporting in bio – nano experimental literature . Nat . Nanotechnol . 13 , 777 – 785 ( 2018 ) . Practical guidelines for studying nanoparticle uptake . 54 . Francia , V . , Reker - Smit , C . , Boel , G . & Salvati , A . Limits and challenges in using transport inhibitors to characterize how nano - sized drug carriers enter cells . Nanomedicine 14 , 1533 – 1549 ( 2019 ) . 55 . Johnston , A . P . R . Life under the microscope : quantifying live cell interactions to improve nanoscale drug delivery . ACS Sensors 2 , 4 – 9 ( 2017 ) . 56 . Liu , H . & Johnston , A . P . R . A programmable sensor to probe the internalization of proteins and nanoparticles in live cells . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 52 , 5744 – 5748 ( 2013 ) . 57 . Selby , L . I . , Aurelio , L . , Yuen , D . , Graham , B . & Johnston , A . P . R . Quantifying cellular internalization with a fluorescent click sensor . ACS Sensors 3 , 1182 – 1189 ( 2018 ) . 58 . FitzGerald , L . I . & Johnston , A . P . R . It’s what’s on the inside that counts : techniques for investigating the uptake and recycling of nanoparticles and proteins in cells . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 587 , 64 – 78 ( 2021 ) . 59 . Pelkmans , L . et al . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 436 , 78 – 86 ( 2005 ) . 60 . Sundaramurthy , V . et al . Integration of chemical and RNAi multiparametric profiles identifies triggers of intracellular mycobacterial killing . Cell Host Microbe 13 , 129 – 142 ( 2013 ) . 61 . Jovic , M . , Sharma , M . , Rahajeng , J . & Caplan , S . The early endosome : a busy sorting station for proteins at the crossroads . Histol . Histopathol . 25 , 99 – 112 ( 2010 ) . 62 . Kalaidzidis , I . et al . APPL endosomes are not obligatory endocytic intermediates but act as stable cargo - sorting compartments . J . Cell Biol . 211 , 123 – 144 ( 2015 ) . 63 . Zoncu , R . et al . A phosphoinositide switch controls the maturation and signaling properties of APPL endosomes . Cell 136 , 1110 – 1121 ( 2009 ) . 64 . Eyster , C . A . et al . Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis . Traffic 10 , 590 – 599 ( 2009 ) . 65 . Maldonado - Báez , L . , Cole , N . B . , Krämer , H . & Donaldson , J . G . Microtubule - dependent endosomal sorting of clathrin - independent cargo by Hook1 . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 233 – 247 ( 2013 ) . 66 . Khalil , I . A . , Kogure , K . , Futaki , S . & Harashima , H . High density of octaarginine stimulates macropinocytosis leading to efficient intracellular trafficking for gene expression . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 3544 – 3551 ( 2006 ) . 67 . Selby , L . I . , Cortez - Jugo , C . M . , Such , G . K . & Johnston , A . P . R . Nanoescapology : progress toward understanding the endosomal escape of polymeric nanoparticles . WIREs Nanomed . Nanobiotechnol . 9 , e1452 ( 2017 ) . A review of our current understanding of endosomal escape in relation to nanoparticle delivery . 68 . Erazo - Oliveras , A . et al . The late endosome and its lipid BMP act as gateways for efficient cytosolic access of the delivery agent dfTAT and its macromolecular cargos . Cell Chem . Biol . 23 , 598 – 607 ( 2016 ) . 69 . Cupic , K . I . , Rennick , J . J . , Johnston , A . P . & Such , G . K . Controlling endosomal escape using nanoparticle composition : current progress and future perspectives . Nanomedicine 14 , 215 – 223 ( 2019 ) . 70 . Smith , S . A . , Selby , L . I . , Johnston , A . P . R . & Such , G . K . The endosomal escape of nanoparticles : toward more efficient cellular delivery . Bioconjug . Chem . 30 , 263 – 272 ( 2019 ) . 71 . Weigert , R . Imaging the dynamics of endocytosis in live mammalian tissues . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a017012 ( 2014 ) . 72 . Hinze , C . & Boucrot , E . Endocytosis in proliferating , quiescent and terminally differentiated cells . J . Cell Sci . 131 , jcs216804 ( 2018 ) . 73 . Masedunskas , A . , Porat - Shliom , N . , Rechache , K . , Aye , M . - P . & Weigert , R . Intravital microscopy reveals differences in the kinetics of endocytic pathways between cell cultures and live animals . Cells 1 , 1121 – 1132 ( 2012 ) . 74 . Bhirde , A . A . et al . Targeted therapeutic nanotubes influence the viscoelasticity of cancer cells to overcome drug resistance . ACS Nano 8 , 4177 – 4189 ( 2014 ) . 75 . Pinilla - Macua , I . , Grassart , A . , Duvvuri , U . , Watkins , S . C . & Sorkin , A . EGF receptor signaling , phosphorylation , ubiquitylation and endocytosis in tumors in vivo . eLife 6 , e31993 ( 2017 ) . 76 . Ebrahim , S . & Weigert , R . Intravital microscopy in mammalian multicellular organisms . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 59 , 97 – 103 ( 2019 ) . A summary of state - of - the - art methods in intravital microscopy being used to study cell biology in vivo . 77 . Fung , K . Y . Y . , Fairn , G . D . & Lee , W . L . Transcellular vesicular transport in epithelial and endothelial cells : challenges and opportunities . Traffic 19 , 5 – 18 ( 2018 ) . 78 . Joseph , S . R . et al . An ex vivo human tumor assay shows distinct patterns of EGFR trafficking in squamous cell carcinoma correlating to therapeutic outcomes . J . Invest . Dermatol . 139 , 213 – 223 ( 2019 ) . An imaging method to study ligand - induced epidermal growth factor receptor internalization in ex vivo human tumour samples . 79 . Hansen , S . H . , Sandvig , K . & van Deurs , B . Molecules internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis are delivered to endosomes containing transferrin receptors . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 89 – 97 ( 1993 ) . 80 . Carpentier , J . - L . et al . Potassium depletion and hypertonic medium reduce non - coated and clathrin - coated pit formation , as well as endocytosis through these two gates . J . Cell . Physiol . 138 , 519 – 526 ( 1989 ) . 81 . Larkin , J . M . , Brown , M . S . , Goldstein , J . L . & Anderson , R . G . W . Depletion of intracellular potassium arrests coated pit formation and receptor - mediated endocytosis in fibroblasts . Cell 33 , 273 – 285 ( 1983 ) . 82 . Daniel , J . A . et al . Phenothiazine - derived antipsychotic drugs inhibit dynamin and clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 16 , 635 – 654 ( 2015 ) . NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 275 Review ARticle NaTurE NaNOTEcHNOlOgy 83 . Wang , L . H . , Rothberg , K . G . & Anderson , R . G . W . Mis - assembly of clathrin lattices on endosomes reveals a regulatory switch for coated pit formation . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 1107 – 1117 ( 1993 ) . 84 . Sasso , L . , Purdie , L . , Grabowska , A . , Jones , A . T . & Alexander , C . Time and cell - dependent effects of endocytosis inhibitors on the internalization of biomolecule markers and nanomaterials . J . Interdiscip . Nanomedicine 3 , 67 – 81 ( 2018 ) . 85 . Chen , C . - L . et al . Inhibitors of clathrin - dependent endocytosis enhance TGF signaling and responses . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1863 – 1871 ( 2009 ) . 86 . von Kleist , L . et al . Role of the clathrin terminal domain in regulating coated pit dynamics revealed by small molecule inhibition . Cell 146 , 471 – 484 ( 2011 ) . 87 . Dutta , D . , Williamson , C . D . , Cole , N . B . & Donaldson , J . G . Pitstop 2 is a potent inhibitor of clathrin - independent endocytosis . PLoS ONE 7 , e45799 ( 2012 ) . 88 . Willox , A . K . , Sahraoui , Y . M . E . & Royle , S . J . Non - specificity of Pitstop 2 in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biol . Open 3 , 326 – 331 ( 2014 ) . 89 . Macia , E . et al . Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev . Cell 10 , 839 – 850 ( 2006 ) . 90 . McCluskey , A . et al . Building a better dynasore : the Dyngo compounds potently inhibit dynamin and endocytosis . Traffic 14 , 1272 – 1289 ( 2013 ) . 91 . Park , R . J . et al . Dynamin triple knockout cells reveal off target effects of commonly used dynamin inhibitors . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 5305 – 5312 ( 2013 ) . 92 . Kilsdonk , E . P . C . et al . Cellular cholesterol efflux mediated by cyclodextrins . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17250 – 17256 ( 1995 ) . 93 . Hao , M . , Mukherjee , S . , Sun , Y . & Maxfield , F . R . Effects of cholesterol depletion and increased lipid unsaturation on the properties of endocytic membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 14171 – 14178 ( 2004 ) . 94 . Bolard , J . How do the polyene macrolide antibiotics affect the cellular membrane properties ? Biochim . Biophys . Acta Rev . Biomembr . 864 , 257 – 304 ( 1986 ) . 95 . Rentero , C . et al . Functional implications of plasma membrane condensation for T cell activation . PLoS ONE 3 , e2262 ( 2008 ) . 96 . Akiyama , T . et al . Genistein , a specific inhibitor of tyrosine - specific protein kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 262 , 5592 – 5595 ( 1987 ) . 97 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . & Simons , K . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 ( 1994 ) . 98 . Brenner , S . L . & Korn , E . D . Substoichiometric concentrations of cytochalasin D inhibit actin polymerization . Additional evidence for an F - actin treadmill . J . Biol . Chem . 254 , 9982 – 9985 ( 1979 ) . 99 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 1 , 161 – 171 ( 2000 ) . 100 . Gladhaug , I . P . & Christoffersen , T . Amiloride inhibits constitutive internalization and increases the surface number of epidermal growth factor receptors in intact rat hepatocytes . J . Cell . Physiol . 143 , 188 – 195 ( 1990 ) . 101 . Kleyman , T . R . & Cragoe , E . J . Amiloride and its analogs as tools in the study of ion transport . J . Membr . Biol . 105 , 1 – 21 ( 1988 ) . 102 . Henriksen , L . , Grandal , M . V . , Knudsen , S . L . J . , van Deurs , B . & Grøvdal , L . M . Internalization mechanisms of the epidermal growth factor receptor after activation with different ligands . PLoS ONE 8 , e58148 ( 2013 ) . 103 . Ceresa , B . P . , Kao , A . W . , Santeler , S . R . & Pessin , J . E . Inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis selectively attenuates specific insulin receptor signal transduction pathways . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 3862 – 3870 ( 1998 ) . 104 . Liu , S . - H . , Marks , M . S . & Brodsky , F . M . A dominant - negative clathrin mutant differentially affects trafficking of molecules with distinct sorting motifs in the class II major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) pathway . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1023 – 1037 ( 1998 ) . 105 . Hill , M . M . et al . PTRF - cavin , a conserved cytoplasmic protein required for caveola formation and function . Cell 132 , 113 – 124 ( 2008 ) . 106 . Liberali , P . et al . The closure of Pak1 - dependent macropinosomes requires the phosphorylation of CtBP1 / BARS . EMBO J . 27 , 970 – 981 ( 2008 ) . 107 . Kalin , S . et al . Macropinocytotic uptake and infection of human epithelial cells with species B2 adenovirus type 35 . J . Virol . 84 , 5336 – 5350 ( 2010 ) . 108 . Licona - Limón , I . , Garay - Canales , C . A . , Muñoz - Paleta , O . & Ortega , E . CD13 mediates phagocytosis in human monocytic cells . J . Leukoc . Biol . 98 , 85 – 98 ( 2015 ) . 109 . Gambin , Y . et al . Single - molecule analysis reveals self assembly and nanoscale segregation of two distinct cavin subcomplexes on caveolae . eLife 3 , e01434 ( 2014 ) . 110 . Bitsikas , V . , Corrêa , I . R . & Nichols , B . J . Clathrin - independent pathways do not contribute significantly to endocytic flux . eLife 3 , e03970 ( 2014 ) . 111 . Arredouani , M . S . et al . MARCO Is the major binding receptor for unopsonized particles and bacteria on human alveolar macrophages . J . Immunol . 175 , 6058 – 6064 ( 2005 ) . 112 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 ( 2003 ) . 113 . King , J . S . & Kay , R . R . The origins and evolution of macropinocytosis . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 374 , 20180158 ( 2019 ) . 114 . Yuan , M . et al . Enhanced human enterovirus 71 infection by endocytosis inhibitors reveals multiple entry pathways by enterovirus causing hand - foot - and - mouth diseases . Virol . J . 15 , 1 ( 2018 ) . 115 . Volonte , D . et al . Caveolin - 1 promotes the tumor suppressor properties of oncogene - induced cellular senescence . J . Biol . Chem . 293 , 1794 – 1809 ( 2018 ) . 116 . Yang , C . - P . H . , Galbiati , F . , Volonté , D . , Horwitz , S . B . & Lisanti , M . P . Upregulation of caveolin - 1 and caveolae organelles in Taxol - resistant A549 cells . FEBS Lett . 439 , 368 – 372 ( 1998 ) . 117 . Qhattal , H . S . S . & Liu , X . Characterization of CD44 - mediated cancer cell uptake and intracellular distribution of hyaluronan - grafted liposomes . Mol . Pharm . 8 , 1233 – 1246 ( 2011 ) . 118 . Yoon , Y . - K . et al . KRAS mutant lung cancer cells are differentially responsive to MEK inhibitor due to AKT or STAT3 activation : implication for combinatorial approach . Mol . Carcinog . 49 , 353 – 362 ( 2010 ) . 119 . Yang , Y . et al . Endophilin A1 regulates dendritic spine morphogenesis and stability through interaction with p140Cap . Cell Res . 25 , 496 – 516 ( 2015 ) . 120 . Torrino , S . et al . EHD2 is a mechanotransducer connecting caveolae dynamics with gene transcription . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 4092 – 4105 ( 2018 ) . 121 . Aït - Slimane , T . , Galmes , R . , Trugnan , G . & Maurice , M . Basolateral internalization of GPI - anchored proteins occurs via a clathrin - independent flotillin - dependent pathway in polarized hepatic cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3792 – 3800 ( 2009 ) . 122 . Zhang , J . et al . Distinct functions of endophilin isoforms in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neural Plast . 2015 , 371496 ( 2015 ) . 123 . Moore , R . H . et al . Ligand - stimulated β 2 - adrenergic receptor internalization via the constitutive endocytic pathway into rab5 - containing endosomes . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 2983 – 2991 ( 1995 ) . 124 . Nonnenmacher , M . & Weber , T . Adeno - associated virus 2 infection requires endocytosis through the CLIC / GEEC pathway . Cell Host Microbe 10 , 563 – 576 ( 2011 ) . 125 . Chen , S . - L . et al . Endophilin - A2 - mediated endocytic pathway is critical for enterovirus 71 entry into caco - 2 cells . Emerg . Microbes Infect . 8 , 773 – 786 ( 2019 ) . 126 . Mirre , C . , Monlauzeur , L . , Garcia , M . , Delgrossi , M . H . & Le Bivic , A . Detergent - resistant membrane microdomains from Caco - 2 cells do not contain caveolin . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 271 , C887 – C894 ( 1996 ) . 127 . Zachos , N . C . , Alamelumangpuram , B . , Lee , L . J . , Wang , P . & Kovbasnjuk , O . Carbachol - mediated endocytosis of NHE3 involves a clathrin - independent mechanism requiring lipid rafts and Cdc42 . Cell . Physiol . Biochem . 33 , 869 – 881 ( 2014 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Australian Research Council ( Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio - Nano Science and Technology CE140100036—A . P . R . J . and R . G . P . ) and National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia Fellowships ( A . P . R . J . , APP1141551 , R . G . P . , APP1156489 ) . J . J . R . was supported by an Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship . We are grateful to G . Griffiths , E . Boucrot and F . Simpson for insightful comments and thank the members of the Parton and Johnston groups and Centre of Excellence collaborators for discussion . competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Correspondence should be addressed to A . P . R . J . or R . G . P . Peer review information Nature Nanotechnology thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . © Springer Nature Limited 2021 NAtuRe NANotechNoloGy | VOL 16 | MARCh 2021 | 266 – 276 | www . nature . com / naturenanotechnology 276