i I Accommodation of a Scientific Conception : Toward a Theory· of Conceptual Change * GEORGE . I , POSNER . KENl \ ETH A , STRIKE . PETER W , HEWSON . and WILLI \ \ 1 A , GERTZOG Dt ' f ' lIrl / 1 / ( ' 1 / I of t : dll , ' { II ion . Com ! ' 11 L ' niu ' r . fi ' . 1 ' . II h { lea . Sf ' ' ' ' } ' ork / 4853 . It has b . . : . : om . . : a . : omlllonpla . : c bdief that learning is the result of th . . : intera . : tion be tw . . : . . : n \ \ hat the stulknt is taught and his . : urrent Id . : " s or . : oncepb , 1 This is by no means a n . : \ \ l ' ic \ \ Ill ' karning . Ib r ' h ) \ s c ' , ln bc tra . : ed b . lck to e " r1 ~ Gcstalt ps ~ . : hologists , Ih ) \ \ c , cr . l ' iaget·s ( 19 ~ 9 . 1930 ) carl ~ , tudic . , of . : hildren ' , c \ planallonsofnatural phe nomena and his more recent studies ofeausalit \ ( Plaget . 197 ~ ) have perhaps had the greatest imp : ! . : t , ) n the study 01 ' the interprcti \ c fr : ! me \ \ orks students bring III karning situations . Th " rcsea r . : h has kd to the \ \ Idcspread st ud ~ , If st udents ' s < : ient I fi . : m is . : onceptions , ~ From these studies and . parti < : ularl ~ , from re < : ent \ \ ork b ~ resean : hers su < : h as Viennot ( 1 ' J79 ) and Driler ( 1973 ) . we hale devdoped a m " re detailed understanding of some of these Illi , , : on < : eptions and . more importantly . \ \ hy they arc so " highl ~ robust " and typically outli , , : teaching whi < : h contradi < : ts them ( Viennot . 1979 . p , 2051 . But identif ~ ing misconceptions or . more broadly speaking . " altcrnative frameworks " ( Driver & . Easky . I < ) is ) . and undeNanding some reasons for their persistence . falls short of developing a reasonable vie \ \ of ho " a student ' s < : urrent ideas interact with n . : w . in compatible ideas , , , \ Ithough Piaget ( 197 ~ ) d . : veloped one such theory . there appears to be a ne . : d for \ \ < lrk \ \ hieh focus . : s " more on the actual content of th . : pupil ' s ideas and less on the , uppused underly ing logical , tructurcs " ( Driver & . Easley . I 97lS . p , 76 ) , Sev . : ral n : scan : h studies have bcen performed ( ' ussbaum . 1 < ) 79 ; : - ' ; ussbaum & " , " ovak . 1976 : Driver . 1973 ; Erickson . 1979 ) whl < : h ha \ ' c investigated " the . Hlh . \ IW / c ! ' of the actual bdi . : fs and concepts held by children " ( Erickson . 1979 . p , 221 ) , However . th . : re has b . : . : n no \ \ dl - articulated theory . : \ pbining or de , , : ribing th . : substantive dim . : nsions of th . : proc . : ss b ~ \ \ hidl peopk ' , central . organizing eon . : epts change from on . : set of concepts III another sct . incolllpatibk \ \ ith the liN , Wc believ . : that a major source of hypotheses conc . : rning this issue is contemporary philo , oph ~ of science . since a eentral4u . : stion of r . : c . : nt phi losoph ~ of , < : ience is ho \ \ Clln < : epts < : hange und . : r the impact of n . : w ideas or new infor mation , In this article \ \ . : first sketch a gen . : ralmodcl of conceptual change which is largdy deri , , : d from < : urrcnt philosophy of science . but which we believe can illuminate • Thi " ; arlid ~ I ' i ' . lrll ~ b . l ' ' ' ' ·u on . 1 paper cntitkd ··1 . c ~ lrning Special Relativity : A Study of Inldlcclual Problcnh ' · ; U ' : l . . ' tl b ~ Cullc ~ c ~ luJcnt . . . : · J ' Irc ! < ocnh : J ; . tllhe International Conference Celebrating thc IOOth An ni \ ' crsar } ~ ) f : \ lbat ! : In , tctn . : ' \ ' J \ ' cmber : < 10 . P } ' 79 at lIufstra Univcr ! iity 1 Sec . for c \ arnph : . : \ u . . ubd ( ! 9hX ) r 1 Sec DrI \ cr . lnLl LI ' h : ~ ( ! 9iX ) rur an c \ cdlcnl rcview of research in this an ; ; ! . r Scicnce hjuc ~ llion h6 \ ' : t , ~ II · ' : ~ i ( 19X ' : ) t ; . 19X ~ Juhn \ \ . ·ik ~ . . \ . : Snn ' o . Inc . CCC 0036 - MJ26 / ~ ~ / 020 ~ tt·t7S0 ~ , 70 212 POSNER ET AL . learning as well . We then illustrate some features of this model from interviews with students studying special relati " ity in physics . Finally . we derive some pedagogi . : al im plications . Our central commitment in this study is that learning is a rational activity . That is . learning is fundamentally coming to comprehend Jnd accept ideas because they are s . : en as intelligible and rational . LeJrning is thus a kind of inquiry . The student mu , t make judgments on the basis of available evidence . It does not . of course . follow that motiva tional or affective variables are unimportant to the learning process . The claim that le ' lrning is a rational activity is meJnt to focus attention on what learning is . not what learning depends on . Learning is concerned with ideJs . their structure and th ~ ~ \ ·id . : nce for them . It is not simply the acquisition of a set of correct responses . a verbal repertoire Or a set of behaviors . We b . : lieve it follows that leJrning . like inquiry . is best \ h : wed as a process of conceptual change . The basic question concerns how students ' conceptions change under the impact of new ideas and new evidence . The Epistemological Base Contemporary views in philosophy of science suggest that there are two distinguishable phases of conceptual change in science . L ! sually scientific work is done against the background of central commitments which organize research . These central commitments define problems . indicate strategies for dealing with them . and specify criteria for \ \ hat counts as solutions . Thomas Kuhn ( 1970 ) calls these central commitments ) " paradigms . " and paradigm - dominated research " normal science . " Irme Lakatos ( 1970 ) labels sci entists ' central commitments as their " theoretical hard core " and suggests that these commitments generate " research programs " designed to apply them to and defend them from experience . The second phase of conceptual change occurs when these central commitments require modific . ttion . Here the scientist is faced with a challenge to his basic assumptions . If inquiry is to proceed . the scientist must acquire new concepts and a new way of se ~ ing the world . Kuhn terms this kind of conceptual change a " scientific revolution . " For Lakatos it is a change of research progrJms . We believe there are analogous patterns ' of conceptual change in learning . Sometimes students use existing concepts to deJl with new phenomena . This variant of the first phase of conceptual change we call assimilation . Often . however . the students ' current concepts arc inadequate to allow him to grasp some new phenomenon successfully _ Then the stu d . : nt must replace or reorganize his central concepts . This more radical form of conceptual change we call accommodation . · This view of inquiry and learning involves one additional feature . We believe that in quiry and learning occur against the background of the learner ' s current concepts . \ Vhenever the learner encounters a new phenomenon . he must rely on his current concepts to organize his investigation . Without such concepts it is impossible for the learner to ask a 4uestion about the phenomt : non . to know what would count as an answer to the J In this article the terms " commitments : ' " concepts , " and uconccptions " : ue equivalent . Although these terms ( p : . Hlicularly the latter two ) refer to differing levels of conccptuali7 . ntion . we do not distinguish among the level ! ' . in this article . : t > rhcsc arc Piagct " s words . but in using them we do not intend any commitment to his theories . I I I CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 213 questioo , or to disti ~ guish relev ~ nt fr ~ m irrelevantfeatun : sof the p ~ enomenon . W , i , thout lIo . . . . . , de ~ concepts the world IS and remams \ \ Ilham James " bloommg buzzing confusion . Bor - ~ " " " " ' " ? rowing a phrase from Stephen Toulmin { I 972 ) , we refer to those concepts which govern c ~ c . . l - - ' " ~ . a conceptual change as a " conceptual ecology . , , - ' Our work has focused on the kinds of radical conceptual changes which we describe as accommodations . How do accommodations take place ? Recent work in philosophy of science suggests that this question be divided into two . The first conccrns the conditions under which an accommodation is likely to take place . When will individual > find it reasonabk to undertake a major reorganization of their current conccpts or to replace one sct of central concepts with another ' ? Even in a major conceptual reorganization . hl1 \ \ cvcr , not all concepts are replaced . Individual > will retain man ~ of their current con . : epts . some of which will function to guide the process of conc . : ptual change . One can til . : n ask what kinds of concepts tcnd to govern the process of accommodation . This is , in cfkct , to ask for the features of thc conceptual ecologics which go \ ern the process of major conceptu . t1 changes . We thus e ' prcss our theory of accommodation in n : sponse to t \ \ O 4uestJons : I ) Lnder what conditions docs onc central conccpt come to be replaced by an other " 2 ) What : Ire the fe ' Hures of a conccptual . : cology which govern the selection of ne \ l ( ' onl . , : t : ph ' . ) Conditions of Accommodation The vie " s of science on which this \ lork is based differ from th . : ir empiricist predc c . : ssors in v . ays that ar . : suggest in : conc . : rning th . : conditions of accommodation . \ Iost vari . : ti . : s of . : mpiricism t . : nd to s . : . : the grounds for accepting a given scientific th . : ory as th . : c : lp : lcity of the theory to generate confirmcd predictions . More recent vic \ " , howcver . suggest that an adc4uatc vicw of the grounds for accepting a new theory must take into aC ' count the character of the problems gcncrated by its predecessor and the naturc of the new theory ' s competition . 00 \ : rathcr common theme in rccent literature is that central concepts rarely directly ent . lil anything about experience . Rather they suggest strategi ~ s and procedures whereby phenomena may be assimilated . Central concepts are thus not judged in terms of their . immediate capacity to generate corrcct predictions . They arc judged in terms of their \ . lc \ . . . . n : sources for solving current problems . In Lakatos ' terms ( 1970 ) research programs are . . . . . " - , \ . . . ~ , ) . J < not confirmed or rduted . Instead they arc progressive or degenerative . Central concepts ~ ~ arc likely to be rejected when they have generated a class of problems which they appear ~ noS ~ \ . . . vo . . . tu lack the capacity to solve . A competing view will be accepted when it appears to have \ the potential to solve these problems and to generate a fruitful line of further re - search . It is alsu important to note th : Jt a person ' s central concepts arc the \ ' ehicle whereby a given range of phenomena become intelligible . Such concepts can be linked to prior ~ \ Ve und . : r : ' lL . lnJ ( hi ! ' > vicw in direct opposirion to traditional empiricism . Empiricism ' 3 , central commitment Ih ; Jt there l ! ' o nuthlng in the mind nut firs ! in the senses , requires people to be : able to le : . ! rn something in the 10t . : . 1 absence nr any priur concl . : pts . \ \ ' c bclicn ~ this to be impossible . A mind which began as a blank tablet wuuh rCOla , " ' 0 , for II ~ ould laL : k the means h , J im ' cstigatc c " pcricnce . • 214 POSNER ET AL . experience . images . or models which make them appear intuitively obvious and which make competing . concepts seem not just wrong but virtually unintelligible . Often . therefore . the first hurdle a set of central concepts must face in gaining acceptance is to appear to make sense . These kinds of considerations suggest that there arc several important conditions which must be fulfilled before an accommodation is likely to occur . The following four seem to us to express conditions which arc common to most cases of accommodation . I ) There must be dissatisfaction wiIh e . ti . < ling conceptions . Scientists and students arc unlikely to make major changes in their concepts until they believe that less radical changes will not work . Thus . before an accommodation will occur . it is reasonable to suppose that an individual must have collected a store of unsolved puzzles or anomalics and lost faith in the capacity of his current concepts to solve these problems . ' 2 ) A nl . ' ' ' conception muSI he imelligible . The individual must be able to grasp ho \ \ experience can be structured by a new concept sufficiently to explore the possibilities inherent in it . Writers often stress the importance of analogies and metaphors in lending initial meaning and intelligibility to new concepts ( Ortony . 1975 ; Belth . 1977 ; Black . 19 ( 1 ) . 3 ) A new conceplion must appear inilially plausible . Any new concept adopted must at least appear to have the capacity to solve the problems generated by its predecessors . Otherwise it will not appear a plausible choice . Plausibility is also a result of consistency of the concepts with other knowledge . A new idea in . say . astronomy is less likcly to be accepted if it is inconsistent with current physical knowledge or if it simply has no clear physical account . Physical scientists prior to the ~ Oth century . for example . were reluctant to accept what geologists were claiming about the age of the world since they had no theory which would allow the sum to provide energy for that period of time . ~ A new concepI should suggesIIhe possihilily of a fruilfuI research program . It should haY < ! the potential to be extended . to open up new areas of inquiry . 1i ' e " K \ ev _ s : WoJ . ~ ' . \ . - ; - + ~ \ - , ) . . . . , . - . . . . . . , . . . rJ . : ~ - 1 - 11 7 . ~ ~ ' r ~ i ~ ~ - Features 01 a Conceptual Ecology An individual ' s current concepts . his conceptual ecology , will innuence the selection of a new central concept . The literature in philosophy of science and our own work ( to be discussed shortly ) have suggested that the following kinds of concepts arc particularly important determinants of the direction of an accommodation . I ) Anolllalies : The character of the specific failures of a given idea are an important part of the ecology which selects its successor . 2 ) Analugies and metaphorJ : These can serve to suggest new ideas and to make thcm intelligible . f > There i ! oo . of . . : our ~ c . a si1cablc body of literature in both psychology ( Smcdslund . 1961 ; Kuhn . 1972 : Bcrlync . 1965 ) and science cducalilm ( Driver . 1973 ; Stavy & Bcrko \ \ ilz . 1980 ) on the usc of conceptual or cognitive conniet for the de " dopnlcnl of thought and conl . ' cplual change . But most of this Iiteraturc has been conducted within a strictl ~ Piag . clian framc . . . . . ·ork ( though Bcrlync ( 196 : ' ) reviews the broader usc of con met situations in educatlonl . Ilowevcr . none of this work appears to be grounded in a theory of conceptual change of the sort discussed in lhj ~ article . Tha - t is . none is focused on fundamental changes in 3 person ' s ccntr : lI . organizing concepts from Il " C set of concepts to another sct incompatible with the first . • CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 215 3 ) Epistemological commitments : a ) Explanatory ideals : Most fields have some subject matter - specific views con cerning what counts as a successful explanation in the field . b ) General views about the character of knowledge : Some standards for successful knowledge such as elegance . economy . parsimony . and not being ad hoc seem subject matter neutral . 4 ) Metaphysical belieff and concepts : a ) I \ letaphysicial beliefs about science : Bdiefs concerning the cxtent of orderliness . svmmetry . or nonrandom ness of the universe arc often important in scientific work and can result in epistemological views which in turn can select or reject particular kinds of explanations . Such beliefs played a l : lrge role in Einstein ' s thought . Beliefs about the relations between science and commonpl ~ ce experience are also important here . bl " ' etaph ~ sical concepts of science : Specific scientific concepts often have a metaphysical quality in that they arc beliefs about the ultimate nature of thc universe and arc immune from direct empirical refutation . A bclief in absolute space or time is an example . 5 ) Other kIlUld " df ? e : a I I \ no " ledge in other fields . bl Competing concepts : One condition for the selection of a new concept is that it should appear to have more promise than its competitors . Wc will sec in this study how these five features of a conceptual ecology relate to the four conditions of a conceptual change in accounting for the difficulties students face in learning science . We thus turn to a study of the conceptual change required of physics students in the context of a specific topic : Einstein ' s special theory of relativity . This topic was chosen because it has been commonly viewed as a prototype of a scientific revolu tion . The Method In order to study students ' allempts in coming to terms with the special theory . we conducted interviews in a noncalculus . self - study . self - paced introductory collcge physics coursc with students who had completed a unit on special relativity . and with several physics instructors . In the interviews . two problems were presented to the interviewees who were requested to soh ' c the problems whilc thinking aloud . At each stage they were asked to give reasons for their answers . but no attempts were made to teach them in those cases where their answers were inconsistent with the special theory . The first problem considered the workings of a light clock and the implications it has for the concept of time . The second problem involved simultaneity and the synchronization of distant clocks and was followed by thc presentation of written explanations from two different points of view which the intervic \ \ ee was asked to read . and subsequently to repeat back . as a comprehension exercise . 7 7 _ Sec Plhncr t : l ; . \ 1 . . ( 19 ; 9 ) fur a full description of the problems . 215 POSNER ET AL . The Theory with Illustrations from Interviews We now explore in greater detail the conditions governing assimilation and accom modation by relating them to the different features of a conceptual ecology listed above . The application to the special theory of relativity is illuminated by examples taken from the interviews with physics students and instructors . IIII ( ' / / igihility of a Ne ' " Conception I In order for a student to consider an alternative conccption . he must find it intelligible . It should be clear that intelligibility is necessary for but not c4uivalent to or , ufficient for accommodation . Intelligibility at a superficiallcvcl requires an understanding of the component terms and symbols used and the syntax of the mode of expression . For some new cono . : ptions . this aspect of intelligibility is easily met . The special theory is one such case in whieh this aspect is not particularly problematic for college students with an ade4uate background in algebra . - M " . , . . . \ Wj ; Howevcr . as recent research on language eomprchension demonstrates . finding dis course ( or for that mattcr . thcories ) intclligible requires more than just know ing what the words and symbols mean . Intelligibility also requires constructing or identify ing a coherent representation of what a passage or theory is saying ( Bransford & : Johnson . 1973 ) . In fact . we would claim that no theory CJn function psychologically at all unless it is internally represented by the individual . In general . reprcsentations may be in the form of propositions or images . or networks of interrelated propositions and / or images . One might . for example , represent travel distances between ' ew York State cities as a series : Ithaca - Albany . 165 miles : Al bany - Syracuse . 60 miles : Albany - New York City . 150 miles . etc . Or . the same infor mation could be represented by a matrix formed by writing each city on both the hori zontal and vertical axes of the matrix . where each matrix cell contains the distance be tween the two cities intersecting at the ceil . Or . the same information could be represented cven more economically by a ; \ icw York State map with lines connecting pairs of cities and distancc written on each line . Similarly , a truth table and a Venn diagram can . rep resent the same information as propositions and as images , respectively . ' I Representations function both passively and actively . They function passively as a format into which information must be fit . In paragraph comprehension tasks . for ex ample . anomalous sentences are confusing ( i . e . • unintelligible ) because they cannot be fit into the representations being built and . thus , are not easily entered into the reader ' s memory ( Bransford & : Johnson , 1973 ) . Representations also function actively as a plan for directing one ' s attention and conducting purposeful searches ( Neisser , 1976 ) . Tile inability of readers to remember an anomalous sentence in an otherwise coherent para graph may bc attributed to the readers ' inattention to it . The different functions of a representation showed up dramatically in the comparison between the responses of a student , ON facing relativity for the first time , and an in structor . ET . who had taught physics , but not relativity , for a number of years . Both read the written explanation of the simultaneity problem , part of which follows : When E passed A . they both set their clocks to zero and sent me a synchronization signal . Sinee I was a distance d , \ B / c from 1 \ when the signal arrived I set my clock to re ' ld t = dAHle . So E ' s H These c , amplc ' wen : all adapted from Jerome Bruner ( 1966 ) . , CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 217 - clock . and my clock were correctly synchronized when E was al A . bUI since moving clocks run slow . when E reached me . his clock had fallen behind mine . ON ' s recollection of this section came without hesitation as follows : ( B said ) Ihat when E reached poinl A . they synchronized Ihe clocks 10 read zero . and al Ihal point he sends a signal 10 B . and B synchronized his clock with ( equal to the distance AB over the velocity and that ' s how B stated that he did it - because moving clocks run 510 " . E was behind . There was no indication of any active functioning . She was intent on giving the written explanation without comment . She had already attempted her 0 \ \ n solution to the problem . but there is no comparison between the \ \ ritten explanation and h ~ r o " n previous attempt . This . in contrast . is ET ' s recollection of precisely the same scction : ( [ , aid ) that he sent a synchronization signal to B . . Ind th . • t dlrf ~ rs r " ' l11 . Ipproach " hi . : h was to ha ' ·e B 10l ) k at them visually . And apparently here " , B . : on " denng that tE ) sent vut a " n . : hroni - 7atinn signal and th : . lt the distance : that it travclh : d lp . Ju ~ CJ ~ C ~ . sec . that·s v " here hl . ! " s getting his \ ' cit ) l . ; ity . n : laliq ! vclo ~ il ~ . Thc rcprescntation which ET builds . functton , actively to direct his attention in c ( ) t11t11enting on the written e \ planation and to conduct a search for any information which could be used to clear up difficulties in his own solution to thc problem . As he says latcr : Lon • . I don ' t remember w hat he said . I \ \ asn ' t rca II ; try Ing to recall it . but to SOrt out my v \ \ n ideas . . . I suppa , . . : I was selective in m ~ reading . . trying onl : to L . 1kc from ( the written c ' ( planalion ) what " ould . : brif ' my lNn ideas . How onc represent ; ; knowledge and theories determines one ' s ability to make sense of and u , e thc new ideas . Onl \ if the student can sychologically construct a coherent . meanin ! ! ful rcpn ' scntation of a theon ' can it become an object of assessment and a t I of thou ! ! ht . Only an intelligible theory can be a candidate for a new conception in a conceptual change . How difficult is this task for special relativity ? Einstein ( 1954 ) describes the two basic postulates of special relativity as follows : . . . Ever ; unive " allaw llf natur ~ \ \ hich is valid in rclation to a coordinate systcm C . must also be valid . as it stands . in rclation tll a coordinatc system C . which is in uniform translatory motion relatJvd ; tv C . . . The sl ! cond principle . on \ \ hich the special theory of relativity rests . is the " principle of the constant velocity of light illl ' Q < ' I / { ) . " This principle asserts that light illl " QCIIO always has a delinitc velocity of propagation ( independcnt of the state of motion of the observer or of the source of the light ) ( pp . 224 - 225 ) . Constructing a coherent repr ~ ' Sentation of the theory ' s two postulates individually is not particularly problematic . One can imagine a state of affairs in which each in turn is true , although thc morl ! one accepts ' ewtonian mechanics the harder it will be to imagine a world in which the postulate about constancy of the speed of light is true . But in balance . intelligibility of each of Einstein ' s twO postulates is not particularly problematic . Thl ! intelligibility of the theory as a whole , however . is a different matter . Finding it intelligible entails imagining a world in which both of Einstein ' s postulates an : true , to - 218 POSNER ET AL . gcther with the logical implications of the postulates for notions of space and time . This t : lsk is a demanding one . To make matters even more difficult . it is possible to apply the postulates and formulas of special relativity in a superficial way without those necessary revisions in one ' s conceptions of space and time which arc in accord with the theory ; or without even having understood the full implications of its principles . Thus , both learner and instructor can mistake the intelligibility of the parts - the postulates of the special theory - for the intelligibility of the whole . I " itial Plausibility of a New Conception One source of difficulty in learning special relativity stems from its lack of initial plausibility to physics students . Regardkss of how intelligible one finds the theory . it may still appear counterintuitive . Whell makes a theory like special relativity counter intuiti \ " e ' ~ Initial plaw ; ibility can be thought of a , the anticipated degree of fit of a new conception into an existing conceptual ecology . There appear to be at least five ways b ~ which a conception can become initially plausible . I ) One finds it consistent with onc ' s current metaphysical beliefs and epistemological commitments . i . e . . one ' s fundamental assumptions . / ~ ) One finds the conception to be consistent with other theories or knowledge . v - - - L 3 ) One finds the conception to be consistent with past experience . ' 7 4 ) One finds or can create images for the conception . which match one ' s sense of what the world is or could be like . S ) One finds the new conception capable of solving problems of which one is aware ( i . e . . resolving anomalies ) . 9 Of these five factors the first appears to offer the greatest explanatory power with regard to the difficulties faced by students attempting to learn Einstein ' s special theory . Let us then look at fundamental assumptions as they bear on this learning task . One set of fundamental assumptions is the individuals ' epistemological commitments . Einstein ( 1949 ) was committed to two fundamental epistemological principles : • I ) A theory must not contradict empirical facts ; and 2 ) The premises of the theory must be characterized by " naturalness " or " logical simplicity , " a kind of " inner perfection " of the theory . He was committed so fully to these two principles that he was able to apply them ruthlessly , even if that application meant a rejection of our common sense notions of space and time . l \ ieedkss to say , students do not always share Einstein ' s epistemological commitments , but their own commitments arc likely to be highly significant in determining what they find initially plausible and , thus , in shaping their conceptual changes . Therefore , it is important to find out just what epistemological commitments students have , if one wants to understand what they arc likely to find initially plausible or implausible and more generally . to understand their processes of conceptual change . What is their theory of theories " What is their theory of knowing ? What is their view of the relation of disci plinary knowledge to everyday knowledge " 9 The prc , cnl di , cu . . . . . . II . m will focus only on the first of these : live ways , thal is . on the individual ' s fundamental assumption . . . . I n the nc ~ t " I , . ~ lion we elaborate on the last of these ways . - There we discuss the dual function of anomalies . CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 21 ' • Scientific metaphysical beliefs . like epistemological commitments . are central to a conception . The central scientilic metaphysical belief that contrasts special relativity with its immediate predecessors is its rejection of an absolute space and absolute time in favor of an interpretation which considers space and time relative to any given inertial system . So long as students arc lirmly committed to absolute space and time . they will lind the special theory counterintuitive . A good example of such a commitment is provided by student CPo who outlines her belief in absolute time explicitly and repeatedly . In response to a portion of the simul taneity problem ( for which t h . : s ( X . - cial th . : ory predicts that two clocks re ~ d difli : n : nt times ) she rcsponds : ( C ~ ) Ime ; ln . how could they change " Time only goes at one rate . right ' ! . - \ ft . : r she has read the written explanation showing th . : derivation oi the rclati \ ' istic pr . : di - : tion . the inler \ ' i . : wer ( I ) qUl ! stions hl ! r furthl ! r : ( I ) . \ nd so what about this idea of absolute time " ( CP ) I can ' t say that ' s IWI true . . . CP not , ) nl : states her belief in absolute time but at a bter stage shows how she defends it in a discussion of the troublesome results or the simultaneity problem w hi , h shl ! assi milates int " an existing . : oncl ! ption : ( I ) I ' m ju . , t asking you what you feci about rl ! sults like that . ( C p ) Yea h . I ml ! an , a bsol ute time , it just seems to go on a t a el ! rtain ra tl ! e \ ' l ! rywhere . It just seems natural that it ' s constant eVl ! rywhere . I mean . e \ ' en though you sec these results . ( I ) . . . it seems these arc strange results . What attitude do you take of these re sults " ( CP ) I say they don ' t really mean all that much : it just depends on what your frame is . It·s sort or like potential energy depends on the way you define zero to be ? ( I ) The amount or potential energy you ' ve got ' . ' ( CP ) Right . all relative to what ' s going on . Cp ' s reference to potential energy is significant in pinpointing a conception which enables her to regard the values given to a variable as arbitrary . being dependent solely on the obsen ' er ' s point of view . She attempts to resolve some counterintuitive results of Einstein ' s view of time by drawing an analogy between time and potential energy . No matter that the analogy might break down with further analysis - it serves her belief in absolute time . It is appropriate at this point to note the importance of the strength and depth of a metaphysical belief in determining whether assimilation or accommodation occurs . Because CP ' s commitment to absolute time is . 50 strong , accommodation is a less attractive option than assimilation , and as a result she needs to be able to make her belief in absolute time and her undl ! rstanding of special relativity consistent . She succeeds . to her satis faction , by using the potential energy analogy . A tutor in thl ! coursc , SL . provides another example of an attempt to assimilate the findings of the special theory into an existing conception . in this case in a rather more sophisticated and dl ! tailcd fashion . He shows a firm Newtonian commitment to a mechanistic viI ! " of the world which requires that objects have fixed properties such as length . mass , I ! tc . . and that I ! xplanations of phenomena should be given in terms of these 220 POSNER ET AL . objects and their interactions . In talking about the question of shrinking rods and slowing clocks , he says : ( SL ) I sec them as being - as changing their length , or changing their time . But I can ' t talk to the person who ' s moving at the same velocity as the stick and the clock . He ' s telling me that they don ' t change . . . I feel they haven ' t changed , but the way I ' m looking at them has changed . . . I guess I ' m allowing for the fact that person who ' s seeing these things at rest , who has his clock at rest . his meter stick at rest , has ( pause ) a little more right to say what is really happening to the sticks . A little later he continues : ( SL ) But I ' m not at all uncomfortable with the idea of for ~ shortening . I do say . I do feel it is a perception . I will say it is a shortening . , know in the back of my mind that my friend who ' s riding along with that meter stick is telling me all the time that as far as he can tell . it ' s the same length and ' believe what he ' s saying . which is o . k . ( I ) It ' s not a connict ~ ( Sl ) : ' \ 0 , because the fact that it ' s moving makes it appear to me as if it were fore - shortened . Here SL insists on treating length as constant . independent of frames of reference . He is . thus , led to treat the special theory ' s claims concerning the relativity of length as simply a distortion of perception . \ Vhat is of interest to us at this point is that SL reveals this commitment by using it as the conception to which he assimilates the findings of special relativity . ' n order to do this he has to make two auxiliary assumptions : that a shrinking rod constitutes a pcn : eptu ; ! 1 problem . and doesn ' t actually shrink ( " , feel they [ rods and clocks ] haven ' t changed . but the way I ' m looking at them has changed " ) . and that in principle a mech anistic interpretation in terms of objects and their motion is needed in order to explain why clock , run slower ( " , don ' t sec how in depth . . . but I believe it can be done " ) . Neither of these assumptions is necessary or even consistent with an Einsteinian perspective based on a reanalysis of space and time . They do , however , play an integral part in protecting SL ' s metaphysical commitments . Dissalis / aClioll . . . illI Exi . Hillg COllcepliolls 10 Generally . a new conception is unlikely to displace an old one , unless the old one en counters difticulties , 11 and a new intelligible and initially plausible conception is available that resolves these difficulties . That is , the individual must first view an existing conception with some dissatisfaction before he will seriously consider a new one . One major source of dissatisfaction is the anomaly . Each time a person unsuccessfully attempts to assimilate an experience or a new conception into his existing network of conceptions . that person e . ' perienccs an anomaly . An anomaly exists when one is unable to assimilate something that is presumed assimilable - or ( in other words ) , one simply cannot make sense of something . III The r , ' adcr , hould " " Ie thltthi , , ection builds on some of the point . ' raised in the two prcvious . , cctions . ThcrE : fon : . fur purf \ thl ! ' " nr cbrilY and ) u ~ cinctnc . . . s . this section is placed Out of order in relation to the list of condiliun ~ pn : : ) cnled earlier . II LJlal ! ) , t l ' liO ) h : rnh lhe ~ e difrl . . : : uhies " " rcc ; dcilranl data . " • CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 221 When raced with an anomaly . the individual ( scientist or student ) has several alter natives . One may come to the conclusion that one ' s existing conceptions require some rundamental revisions ( i . e . . an accommodation ) in order to eliminate the connict . But this is the most dirlicult and . thererore . the most unlikely approach . especially when there are other possibilities : I ) rejection of the observ ' llional theor } " : ; ~ ) a lack of concern with e ' raimental findings on the grounds that they are irrcie " ant to one ' s current ~ onccption : 3 ) a cOl11partmcnlalilalion of knnwlcdgc to pre \ ' ent th ~ new information from connicting with c ' ( isling bdicf ( ··Scicn . . : ! . ! doesn ' t ha \ " c an ~ lhing 10 do " ith the ' rear \ \ orlo " ) ; and - ' ) an Jltcmr1 to assimilatl . : thl . ! nc \ \ information into c \ I ~ ling conception . . . ( e . g . . " ~ cwtoni7 . ing·· rda t j \ ' i . ' 111 , ; ' phenomena ) . Th is ana lysis suggests t ha t the presen ta t ion of a noma I ies wi II rrod uce dissa t isfaction with an existing conception only if : I ) Studcnl ' i undcrstand \ \ hy the l ! \ . pcrimcntaJ finding rcprc ~ cnh an anomaly : 21 Studcnts bclicn : lh ~ ll it i ~ ncccssar : to rcconcik the findings with their existing concep tions : 31 Students arc . : ommitted to the r ~ duction of inconSlstcncies among th ~ beliefs they hold : and 4 ) Alt ~ mrts to assimilat ~ the findings into the studcnts " existing conceptions are seen not to work . Giv . : n the improbability that all these conditions will be mel . it is no wonder that few students find their current conceptions weakened by anomalies . Why consider alternatives to a ' ewlOnian view ( or whate \ , er view they hold ) when they arc unconvinced of the in adequac \ of their conceptions ' ! The search for inslrUctionally viable and effective anomalies is or primary importance if accommodation is to be taken seriously as a goal . Recounting historical anomalies ( such as the Miehclson - ~ lorley experiment ) won ' t always do ' Assuming this formidable instructional problem is solved . the process or accommo dation can proceed . If the dissatisfaction with the existing conception created by its in ability to make sense of experience is followed by learning of an intelligible alternative which resolves or promises to resolve some or the anomalies of its predecessor . then the new conception may be plausible . There is little evidence in the interviews that students were aware of anomalies . even though \ ' ideotapes of two experiments formed part or the study material in the course . It is significant that the clearest example of a student ' s awareness or anomalous behavior occurs along with a statement of his epistemological commitment . H U has derived a mistaken result from his view or the relativity principle which implies that pictures taken by tWO cameras moving past one another at the same instant and of I ~ Rep . ms or ob , er \ ' ation J . re nl ) ltheor ~ neutral . Rather . observations arc d ~ cribc . - d and intcrprel ( , . - d by means or con , cpb t ; Jlo . cn rrom : - oome thear ) . or ~ llme th . . : ory is assumed in treating the observations as data . Treating obscrvation ~ or the red . . . hirt J . \ ; I mca ~ un : of distance J . : \ . ~ umcs ~ I ~ ' avc theory or light and . in some eaS \ . . " S . relativity . _ Eyen the usc or a telescope assumes : J Jheury of optics . T ~ eories which function to describe or interpret data we refer to as observation theories . . 222 POSNER ET AL . the same two clocks will show different things . The interviewer looks for confirmation of this view : ( I ) So what you ' re saying is that they wouldn ' t agree , they couldn ' t agree , that they ' d actually see different things . ( HU ) Right . ( I ) That doesn ' t bother you ? ( HU ) It did at first , but when you think about it and hash it out , there really is no reason why we should limit ourselves to one frame of mind . Ilike to think ab stractly and I can see that . I had trouble realizing that lengths would change , too , but you know , I ' m game ! ) \ io . it doesn ' t bother me . It ' s just that we don ' t realize it due to our slow speeds . I tend to agree with scientific data that ' s brought up and when they say that an electron - what was that - a meson , actually goes with the predictions , what can you do ' And once you see th . : facts . you can stretch your imagination . H L ' s stated epistemology is simple and empiricist : Theories are derived from experi mental evidence . It also appears to exhibit a degree of tolerance for theoretical incon sistencies . which tolerance precludes him from seeing that he has made a mistake . However , HU has pinpointed one anomaly : l " ewtonian m ~ ' Chanics calculates the lifetime of a meson to be much ' shorter than that which is observed experimentally . He has , however . seen that special relativity ' S prediction agrees with experiment . Thus . HlJ sees an anomaly . he sees the alternative conception . and his epistemological commitment allows for its plausibility . Fruiljuillt ! ss uj a : Vew CUIlCeplioll Once aware of an intelligible , plausible alternative to an existing conception that re solves apparent anomalies , students may actively attempt to map their new conceptions onto the world : that is . they may attempt to interpret experience with it . I f the new con ception not only resolves its predecessor ' s anomalies but also leads to new insights and discoveries . then the new conception will appear fruitful and the accommodation of it will seem persuasive . A brief examination of the fruitfulness of the special theory for professional scientists may suggest some of the theory ' s potential . It is this potential of which students should be made aware . if they are to share in the view that the theory is indeed fruitful , and , thus . worth accommodating : I ) As an engineering tool in the design of accelerators ( relativistic mechanics ) ; 2 ) As a technological tool in the development of nuclear weapons and nuclear reac tors ; 3 ) As a theoretical and technological tool in nuclear chemistry for predicting the products of nuclear reactions ; 4 ) As a theoretical and mathematical tool in astronomy for calculating life expec tancies of stars . for explaining astronomical phenomena ( e . g . supernovae ) , and for making calculations of astronomical distances ; 5 ) As a theoretical basis ( along with quantum physics ) for the development of modern physics . To the extent that the sill , dent can understand these contributions and trace them back to the basic postulates of the special theory , they may begin to appreciate the fruitfulness of the them \ . CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 223 The Character 01 Accommodation Our description of the four conditions of a succcssful accommodation may ha \ ' c sug gested a fairly straightforward linear process : students ' dissatisfaction with Newtonian physics ; followed by the students ' linding special relativity intelligible ; leading to an initial belief in its plausibility ; and concluding with the belief that the theory is ultimately fruitful . However . it should be clear that this account is oversimplified . since many basic con ceptions . including relativity . arc so complex that at a particular time one is likely to accommodate certain aspects but not others . We have . of course . described accommo dation as a radical change in a person ' s conceptual system . That an accommodation is a radical change docs not . however . cntailthat it is abrupt . Indeed . there arc good reasons to suppose that for students accommodation will be a gradual and piecemeal affair . Students ~ Ire unlikely to have at the outset a clear or we ! l - de \ ' eloped grasp of any given theory an < . l what it entails about the world . For them . accommodation may be a process of taking an initial step toward a new conception by accepting some of its claims and then gradually modifying other ideas . as they more fully reali7 . e the meaning and implication of these new commitments . Accommodation . particularly for thc novice . is best thought of as a gradual adjustment in one ' s conception . each new adjustment laying the groundwork for further adjustments but where the end result is J substantial reorgani zation or change in one ' s central concepts . Our interviews also indicate that what may initially appear as an accommodation may turn out to be something less than that . As the interview with SL indicates . people who accept Einstein ' s two postulates may understand them in a rather non - Einsteinian fashion . Often it appears that as students . who have accepted the two postulates . begin to realize their counterintuitive implications or their conflicts with I \ ' ewtonian notions of space and time . the commitment to the two postulates weakens . Typically . students will attempt various strategies to escape the full implication of the two postulates or to reconcile them with , , " ewtonian assumptions . Accommodation may . thus . have to wait until some un fruitful attempts at assimilation arc worked through . It rarely seems characterized by either a flash of insight . in which old ideas fall away to be replaced by new visions . or as a steady logical progression from one commitment to another . Rather . it involves much fumbling about . many false starts and mistakes . and frequent reversals of direction . Educational Implications Teaching science involves providing a rational basis for a conceptual change . We have also seen that fun < . lamental conceptual changes . termed accommodations . may involve changes in one ' s fundamental assumptions about the world . about knowledge . and about knowing aed that such changes can be strenuous and potentially threatening . particularly when the individual is firmly committed to prior assumptions . We have seen that people resist making such changes . unless they arc dissatisfied with their current concepts and find an intelligible and plausible alternative that appears fruitful for further inquiry . Two features of a conceptual ecology . in particular . were shown to guide t ~ e change process from one conception to another : I ) anomalies . and 2 ) fundamental assumptions about science and about knowledge : - . 22 . POSNER ET AL . If taken seriously by students , anomalies provide the sort of cognitive conflict ( like a Kuhnian state of " crisis " ) that prepares the student ' s conceptual ecology for an ac commodation . The more students consider the anomaly to be serious , the more dissatisfied thcy will be with current concepts , and the more likely they may be ready ultimately to accommodate new ones . Metaphysical belicfs and epistemological commitments form the basis on which judgments are made about new knowledge . Thus . a conceptual change will be rational to the c ) ( tent that students have at their disposal the requisite standards of judgment necessary for the change . If a change to special relativity requires a commitment to the parsimony and symmetry of physical theories ( as it did for Einstein ) , then students without these commitments will have no rational basis for such a change . Faced with such a situation students , if they are to accept the theory . will be forced to do so on non - G tional bases . for example . because the book or the instructors says it is " true . " Our study of the history of science reveab that man ~ conceptual changes in science have been driven by the scientists ' fundamental assumpllons rather than by the awareness f empirical anomalies u Einstein ' s special rdativity can be seen as such a case . 14 However . since it is unlikely that students in an introductory physics course can be suc - cessfully taught the requisite standards of judgmcnt for an accommodation of special relativity . physics teachers must rel ~ on " anomalies " to prepare the student for the ac commodation . Our problem rcmains unsolved . ho \ \ ever . \ lost of the anomalies will not be readily secn as anomalics by students without a thorough understanding of the observational thcory in which the experiment was em bedded . Tha t is . most of the experiments are far from being " transparent . " Does this problem mean that the special theory can realisticall ~ be madc at bcst only intelligible and partially plausible . but never fully persuasive te students who arc firmly committed to a set of conflicting metaphysical beliefs and epis· tcmological commitments ' ? It is one thing to educate physicists over a course of four te six years into a givcn set of standards of judgmcnt . It is quite another thing to accomplis ~ this goal in an introductor ; . physics course , along with covering a great deal of content And further . ho \ \ is one to demonstrate the theory ' s fruitfulness in the limited time availablc " Accepting . then . that accommodation of the special theory runs the risk of being dif ficult if not impossible , is there anything we as educators can do to enable physics student to accommodate new conceptions on a rational basis ~ Let us examine the implication of our rescarch for science education . We shall frame these implications in the form 0 qucstions and suggcstions raised by our research thus far . Curricular OhjecriL ' es Our discU ! , sion of the critical role played by the student ' s fundamental assumptior . about the world and about their knowledge of the world raises serious questions aboL thc objectives of sciencc courses . If the conceptual change process is to be rationally basel then students will need to be immunized against the kind of inevitable indoctrinatic 11 Sec Burn· . . . ( 190 : . flP . 36 ·6 ~ ) account of Copernicus . whose theory was not a response to anomalies . bl . " J . : - . t ) nl ~ pn . : , cntcd a ~ a slmph : r and more harmonious interpretation . 1 . & Emplri & : al findings anomalou ~ with n : spcct to Newtonian physics but consistent with Einsteinian thear dcvclupcu m . l . ny ~ cars after the sp ~ cial theory of rcialiv ~ lY was ~ roposcd . • CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 225 ~ h ; lt occurs when neithcr the teacher nor the student is aware of his own fundamental assumptions . much less those implied by the science he is teaching and learning . The primary question which must be raised about curriculum objectives as a result of our discussion in this artide is the following : Is it realistic to expect science instruction to produce accommodation in students , rather than merely to help students make sense of new theories ' ! And secondarily . should this be an expectation for all students . or only for certain groups . such as science majors ? In the event that an affirmative answer is given to the primary question . the contents of t he previous sections suggest we aim at developing . in students : I ) An ; Iwareness of their fundamental assumptions and of those implicit in scientific Ih ~ \ 1ry : ' 2 ) . . \ demand for consistency among their beliefs about the world : . \ ) / \ n awareness of the epistemological and historical foundations of modern sci ~ ncC ' : ~ ) Some sense of the fruitfulness of new conceptions . The extent to which any of the abol ' e should be considered is a mailer for future i \ ·cstigjtion . ( ' ( ) lIIelll If we aim to produce rationally based conceptual change in students . then according to what we havc said thus far . the content of science courses should be such that it renders scientific theory intelligible . plausible . and fruitful . In order to give expression to this general requirement . the following conditions appear to be necessary : I ) ~ Iore emphasis should be givcn to assimilation and accommodation by students of th ; 1I content than to content " coverage . " 2 ) " Retrospectil ' e anomalies " should be included . particularly if historically valid anomalies arc difficult to comprehend . or . as with the special theory . were not responsible ( olf dril ' ing the conceptual change in the first place . I ' 3 ) Sufficient observational theory should be taught for studcnts to understand the anomalies employed . ~ ) Any available metaphors . models . and analogies should be used to make a new conception more intelligible and plausible . Teaching Strategies Teaching is typically thought of as clarifying content presented in texts . explaining solutions to prnbJ . : m , . demonstrating principles . providing laboratory exercises . and testing for rec ; dl of facts and ability to apply knowledge to problems . That is . teaching is for recall and a > similation . For teaching aimed at accommodation the following possible changes in thi , approach arc implied by our research : I ) Develop lectures . demonstrations . problems . and labs which can be used to create cog . nitive conniets in students . I \ mong othcd ~ hlrigs . one might conSider what types of homework problems would create the kind of cognitive eonnict necessary as preparation for an accommodation . and whether labs could be used to help students experience anomalies ( Stavy & Berkowitz . 19XO ) . I ~ Sec ! \ nlhun ~ P . Frcn ( ' h ( 1968 . pp . 6 - 29 ) . for an ex ~ mplc or the use of retrospective anomalies in tC ' " oJching spcc , , : i . iI rcla ( ivi [ ~ . 226 POSNER ET AL . 2 ) Organizc instruction so that teachers can spend a substantial portion of their time in diagnosing crrors in student thinking and idcntifying defensive moves used by students to resist accommodation . 3 ) Develop the kinds of strategies which teachers could include in their repertoire to ~ I with studcnt errors and moves that interfere with accommodation . 4 ) Hdp students make sense of science content by representing content in multiple modes ( e . g . • verbal . mathematical . concrete - practical . pictorial ) . and by helping students tr ' slate from one mode of representation to another ( Clement . 1977 ) . 5 ) Devdop evaluation techniques to help the teacher track the process of conceptual change in students ( e . g . . the Piagetian clinical interview ) ( Posner & Gertzog . 1982 ) . T , ' C / cher RIJ / r The teacher as clarifier of idcas and presenter of information is clearly not adequate for helping students accommodatc new conceptions . Our research suggests that the teacher might have 10 assume two further roles in order to facilitate studcnt accommo dation . In these roles thc tcacher would become : ~ I ) An adwrsary in the sense of a Socratic tutor . In this role . the teacher confronts the students \ \ ith the problem arising from their allempts to assimilate new conceptions . 1 \ point of concern is the need to avoid establishing an advcrsarial role with regard to students as persons while developing and maintaining it with regard to conceptions . ) 2 ) 1 \ model of scientific thinking . I \ speets of such a model might include a ruthless demand for consistency among beliefs and betwecn theory and empirical evidence . a pursuit of parsimony among bclicfs . a skepticism for excessive " ad hoc - ness ' in theories and a critical appreciation of whether discrepancies between results may be in " reasonable agreement " · \ \ ith theor ) . Ib Whcther an ) of the above changes could be implemented . and the extent to which they would prove efkctivc in facilitating accommodation in students . are questions which wc have not as yet addressed . References " u , ube \ . D . P . t " llucariu , w / rxych ( ) / ( ) gJ " : A cogllilin ' L " ie " poinr . i ' iew York : Holt . Rinehart & Win , ton . 19h5 Belth . \ 1 . Th . . rroct ' ss of Ihillkillg . : \ ew York : David ~ cKay . 1977 . Beriyne . D . E . Curiosity and education . In Leamillg and Ihe . ducaliolla / process . J . D . Krumboltz ( Ed . ) Chica ~ ll : Rand \ kNally . 1965 . Black . M . M " d , , / , ' JlIlI " " ' l£lr ' IlJrs . It haca . NY : Cornell t . . : niversity Press . 1962 . Bransford . J . D . . . I < Johnslln . 11 . 1 . K . Con , iderations of some problems of comprehension . In Visual inJ0rl / WI ; IJIl r " " eHillg . W . G . Chase ( Ed . ) . New York : Academic Press . 1973 . Bruner . J . S . 1 , , , , , , , , / < I I " mr \ " ( ) / in . ' lrllrli ( ) n . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . 1966 . Burtt . E . A . Till ' " " ·hl / . " . . . . , , , · , " jiJlllldulilJlIS of mudern science ( rev . ed . ) . Garden City . NY : Doubleday . · \ n , h " , Bu . , " , . 1 ' / 31 . Clement . J . J . Sum , Iy 1 " = ' of knowledge u , ed in understanding physics . University of Massachusetts , Departmcnl 01 " Phy , i . . " and . . \ st , , , numy . 1977 ( mimeographed ) . ' " Sec Tho " , . " S " uhn « ' ) 77 . rr 17X ll ~ l . fur an insighlrul discussion of this poinl . Fo , a userul discussion of thl . ! lc : u : hl . ! r . 1 : - . ; 1 Jll \ > Ol . ! ll . If ' ~ Icntlfic thought . : - . cc Gene D ' Amour ( 1977 . pp . 183 - 190 ) . • CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 227 D·Amour . G . Problem , solving strategies and the epistemology of science . In Cognitia process illstr / / ( ·tioll . J . Lockhead & J . J . Clement ( Eds . ) . Philadelphia : The Franklin Press . 1979 . Driver . R . The representation of conceptual frameworks in young adolescent science students . Unpublished Ph . D . dissertation . University of Illinois . Urbana . Illinois . 1973 . Driver . R . . & Easley . J . Pupils and paradigms : A review of literature related to concept development in adolescent science students . Stud . Sci . Ed . • 1918 . 5 . 61 - 84 . Einstein . A . Autobiographical not ~ ' S . In Albert EilL < leill : Philosopher , scientist . P . A . Schilpp ( Ed . ) . E , ·anston . IL : Library of Living Philosophers . 1949 . Erickson . G . L . Children ' s conceptions of heat arid temperature . Sci . Educ . . 1979 . 63 . 221 - 230 . French . A . P . Special relaticity . New York : W . W . Norton . 1968 . Kuhn . D . Mechanisms of change in the development of cognitive structure . Child Del " . . 1972 . 43 . 823 . Kuhn . T . S . The Itrllcrllre oj . < ciefl / iJIc r ( ' wilitio / / . ' ( 2nd cd ) . Chicago : University of ChicJgo Press . 1970 . Kuhn . T . S . The functidn of measurement in modl ! rn ph ~ sicJJ scit : nc ~ . In Tht ! essential tt ! IlJion : Se / ec / ( ' , / Hudie ! ; ill sdol / ific lradilion and challgt ' . Chicago : University of Chic : lgo Press . 1977 . Labtos . J . Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programmes . In Criticism a " , lth " gruh·th of kll ( Nled ! J < ' . J . Lakatos & A . Musgra " e ( Eds . ) . Cambridge : Cambridge Cniversit ) " Prcss . 19 ~ O . Nei ~ ~ c : r . L : . Cogllil ion aJ1d r ( ' tJlin " . San F r ; J ncisco : \ \ ' . H . Freeman . 1976 . : " ussbauJ1l . J . Children ' , conceptions of the Earth as a cosmic body : A cross age study . SJ Edllc . . 1979 . rd . X3 - 93 . ; - " u " b , lum . J . . & " 0 \ ~ k . J . D . An ass ~ ssment of childrcn ' s concepts of the earth utilizing strUl : tured jntl . ! r \ ' ie \ l . ~ . Sci . t : du ( . . 1976 . 6IJ . 535 - 550 . Ortony . A . Why metapho " arc n ~ cessary and not just nice . Educ . Theory . 1975 . 25 . 45 - 53 . Pia gel . . I . Clld ~ ntalldll , g cUl / sality . : \ c \ \ York : W . W . : \ orton . 197 ~ . Pia gel . J . The child ' s cOllccptioll oj Ih ~ , , ·orid . ) \ ; ew York : Harcourt Brace . 1929 . Piagel . J . The child ' s COIICfptioll oj phr . " col call . < aIiIY . London : Kegan Paul . 1930 . Posner . G . J . . St rike . " . \ . . H e \ \ ison . P . W . . & Gertzog . W . A . Learning special rciativity : A study of intdkctucl probkm , raced by . : ollege students . Paper presented at the I OOth Anniversary or the B , rth of Albert Einstein . Hofstra Lniversity . 1979 . Posner . G . J . . & Gerllog . W . A . The clinical interview and the measurement of conceptual change . S , ·i . t· , , " c . . 19S2 . 615 . 195·209 . Sm ~ d , lund . J . The acquisition of . : onservation of substance and weight in children : V . Practice in conflict situ . 1l ions \ Ii ithout external reinforcemcnt . Scal / d . J . Psychol . . 1961 . 2 . 156 - 160 . Slavy . R . . & Berb , , \ it ? B . Cognitive conflict as a basis for tcaching quantitative asp ~ ets of thc concept of temperature . Sci . t·duc . 19 ~ O . 6 - 1 . 679 - 692 . Toulmin . S . HUII / alll / lld ~ r . < lalldillg . Princeton : Princeton l . ! niversity Press . 1972 . Viennot . L . Spont ~ ne " u ' rca , oning in elementary dynamics . El / r . J . Sci . Educ . . 1979 . I . 205 - 221 . Rcccivcd I I Scptember 19X I Rcviscd 12 September 19S I Acccpted ror publication 21 September I n I