ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE published : 01 April 2014 doi : 10 . 3389 / fnsyn . 2014 . 00007 Homeostatic structural plasticity increases the efﬁciency of small - world networks Markus Butz 1 * , Ines D . Steenbuck 2 and Arjen van Ooyen 3 1 Simulation Lab Neuroscience , Bernstein Facility for Simulation and Database Technology , Institute for Advanced Simulation , Jülich Aachen Research Alliance , Forschungszentrum Jülich , Jülich , Germany 2 Student of the Medical Faculty , University of Freiburg , Freiburg , Germany 3 Department of Integrative Neurophysiology , VU University Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Netherlands Edited by : Christian Tetzlaff , Georg - August University , Germany Reviewed by : Kurt Gottmann , University of Duesseldorf , Germany Michael Fauth , Georg - August Universität Göttingen , Germany * Correspondence : Markus Butz , Simulation Lab Neuroscience , Bernstein Facility for Simulation and Database Technology , Institute for Advanced Simulation , Jülich Aachen Research Alliance , Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH , JSC , 52425 Jülich , Germany e - mail : m . butz @ fz - juelich . de In networks with small - world topology , which are characterized by a high clustering coefﬁcient and a short characteristic path length , information can be transmitted efﬁciently and at relatively low costs . The brain is composed of small - world networks , and evolution may have optimized brain connectivity for efﬁcient information processing . Despite many studies on the impact of topology on information processing in neuronal networks , little is known about the development of network topology and the emergence of efﬁcient small - world networks . We investigated how a simple growth process that favors short - range connections over long - range connections in combination with a synapse formation rule that generates homeostasis in post - synaptic ﬁring rates shapes neuronal network topology . Interestingly , we found that small - world networks beneﬁted from homeostasis by an increase in efﬁciency , deﬁned as the averaged inverse of the shortest paths through the network . Efﬁciency particularly increased as small - world networks approached the desired level of electrical activity . Ultimately , homeostatic small - world networks became almost as efﬁcient as random networks . The increase in efﬁciency was caused by the emergent property of the homeostatic growth process that neurons started forming more long - range connections , albeit at a low rate , when their electrical activity was close to the homeostatic set - point . Although global network topology continued to change when neuronal activities were around the homeostatic equilibrium , the small - world property of the network was maintained over the entire course of development . Our results may help understand how complex systems such as the brain could set up an efﬁcient network topology in a self - organizing manner . Insights from our work may also lead to novel techniques for constructing large - scale neuronal networks by self - organization . Keywords : topology , development , neuronal network model , structural synaptic plasticity , homeostasis , small - world network , efﬁciency 1 . INTRODUCTION The synaptic wiring of cortical networks is key to the function - ality of the brain and a precondition for all cognitive behavior ( Park and Friston , 2013 ) . How are synaptic connections set up between the brain’s billions of neurons so that cost efﬁciency ( Latora and Marchiori , 2001 ) , for example in terms of wiring length or energy consumption associated with information trans - mission , is maximized ? Due to the presence of long - range con - nectivity , the brain can be regarded as a highly efﬁcient graph , in the sense that information has to pass only a few intermedi - ate neurons ( “nodes” ) to travel across the whole brain ( Kaiser and Hilgetag , 2006 ) . At the same time , brain connectivity is local and clustered ( Hilgetag and Kaiser , 2004 ) , making net - works less vulnerable because of the many alternative routes that exist between two nodes . Network topology that combines these two properties , long - range connectivity and high cluster - ing , is called small - world ( Watts and Strogatz , 1998 ) . Small - world networks have the advantages of local connectivity combined with a high efﬁciency brought about by a small number of long - range connections ( Watts and Strogatz , 1998 ) . The brain seems to be optimized for maximizing cost efﬁciency of par - allel information processing ( Achard and Bullmore , 2007 ) by widely adopting small - world topology ( Sporns and Zwi , 2004 ; Bassett and Bullmore , 2006 ) . Already in the infant brain , con - nectivity has small - world characteristics ( Fransson et al . , 2011 ) . A recent fMRI study reported an increase in small - worldness of brain networks in the ﬁrst 2 years of life that goes along with a growing number of long - distance connections and therefore an increase in global efﬁciency ( Gao et al . , 2011 ) . So far , analysis of topology has focused on neuronal networks with static connec - tivity , in which plasticity arises from changes in the strength of existing synapses rather than from the rewiring of connectivity . However , particularly during development but also in adult - hood , connectivity is not ﬁxed ( Butz et al . , 2009b ) , and synapse formation goes along with massive synapse deletion and reorga - nization of connectivity ( Missler et al . , 1993 ; Siegel and Lohmann , 2013 ) . This observation triggered the question of this study : how does network topology develop during ontogeny when synapse Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 1 SYNAPTIC NEUROSCIENCE Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks formation and pruning cause a constant rewiring of network connectivity ? Various explanations have been proposed to account for the development of synaptic connectivity . For example , axon guid - ance molecules may form the basis of a genetically - encoded developmental scheme ( Yamamoto et al . , 2002 ; Borisyuk et al . , 2008 ) . Target neurons may secret signaling molecules that can attract or repel axons . Axons can then follow or move away from the concentration gradient . This form of chemotaxis is usually discussed in the context of the formation of global connectiv - ity . However , for the formation of local connectivity chemical cues are less suitable , since they fail to establish stable gradients over very short distances , below 0 . 7 mm ( Kaiser et al . , 2009 ) . Synaptic adhesion molecules ( e . g . , neuroligins ) were proposed as molecular cues for local synapse formation ( Scheiffele et al . , 2000 ; Stan et al . , 2010 ) . In addition , mechanical forces in the tissue could inﬂuence neurite outgrowth ( Franze , 2013 ) . Alternatively , the formation of local connectivity may basically be random ( Braitenberg and Schüz , 1998 ) , just depending on the acciden - tal overlap of axons and dendrites ( Binzegger et al . , 2004 ; van Pelt and van Ooyen , 2013 ; McAssey et al . , 2014 ; van Ooyen et al . , 2014 ) . With random synapse formation , the chance of forming connections decreases with increasing distance between neurons ( Kaiser et al . , 2009 ) . Although random overlap of axons and dendrites may explain emerging connectivity , it does not account for the actual driv - ing forces underlying neurite outgrowth . There is ample evidence that electrical activity shapes neuronal morphology ( Dalva et al . , 1994 ; Wong and Ghosh , 2002 ; Uesaka et al . , 2005 ; Butz et al . , 2009b ) and network formation ( Ko et al . , 2013 ) . Electrical activ - ity inﬂuences neurite outgrowth and retraction ( McKinney et al . , 1999a ; Konur and Ghosh , 2005 ; Lohmann and Wong , 2005 ; Tailby et al . , 2005 ; Hutchins and Kalil , 2008 ) , as well as the formation and deletion of axonal boutons and dendritic spines ( McKinney et al . , 1999b ; Groc et al . , 2002 ; Jourdain et al . , 2003 ; Kirov et al . , 2004 ; Hofer et al . , 2009 ) . Experimental ﬁndings further suggest that neuronal morphogenesis is driven by the need of neurons to establish and maintain a homeostatic equilibrium of their aver - age electrical activity ( Kirov et al . , 2004 ; Keck et al . , 2008 , 2013 ) . Restoration of neuronal ﬁring rate after a change in neuronal input has been found experimentally after , for example , focal reti - nal lesions ( Hengen et al . , 2013 ) . Based on these experimental ﬁndings , we postulated that whenever during development ( van Ooyen and van Pelt , 1994 ; Van Ooyen et al . , 1995 ; Tetzlaff et al . , 2010 ) or in the mature brain ( Butz et al . , 2008 ; Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) a neuron senses a deviation of its electrical activ - ity from a homeostatic set - point , it will initiate changes in its morphology that increase the chance of synapse formation or break existing connections so that its ﬁring rate may be restored . Here we investigate what the impact is of neurons regulating their electrical activities homeostatically on network formation and emerging network topologies . In order to study the impact of electrical activity on emerg - ing network topology , we used our recent Model of Structural Plasticity ( MSP ) ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) . There are impor - tant earlier models of homeostatic structural plasticity , such as the compensation model by Dammasch et al . ( Dammasch et al . , 1986 , 1988 ; Cromme and Dammasch , 1989 ; Butz and Teuchert - Noodt , 2006 ; Butz et al . , 2006 ) and the activity - dependent neurite outgrowth model by van Ooyen ( van Ooyen and van Pelt , 1994 ; Van Ooyen et al . , 1995 ) . The latter model , which studied the reciprocal interactions between neuronal activity and network formation , successfully accounted for experimental data on devel - oping cell cultures ( van Ooyen and van Pelt , 1994 ; van Oss and van Ooyen , 1997 ; Abbott and Rohrkemper , 2007 ; Tetzlaff et al . , 2010 ) . However , both models are not suited for studying topol - ogy development . The compensation model lacks topology at all , whereas the representation of neuritic ﬁelds by circles in the model by van Ooyen imposes too strong constraints on net - work topology . In van Ooyen’s model , neurons always connect to their direct neighbors before connecting to more distant neurons . Therefore , we developed our MSP ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) , in which we replaced the circle representation by discrete synaptic elements whose numbers change in an activity - dependent man - ner . Synapses are formed in a random and distance - dependent way by combining synaptic elements from different neurons . In MSP , the local activity - dependent growth process in com - bination with a simple kernel function favoring the formation of short - range connections over long - range connections shapes the development of small - world networks . Our simulation results revealed an interesting property of homeostatic growth : as soon as most neurons approached homeostasis in electrical activity , they started forming more long - range connections than expected from the kernel function . Although the clustering coefﬁcient decreased as a result of the formation of long - range connections , the network maintained its small - world property . Furthermore , connectivity became more diverse , as indicated by a decreasing betweenness centrality , and attained a higher global efﬁciency ( deﬁned as the averaged inverse of the shortest paths between all neurons in the network ) than small - world networks with - out homeostasis . Our ﬁndings may account for experimental data on the topology of developing dissociated cell cultures ( Downes et al . , 2012 ) . Interesting similarities were also found between the model and early human brain development ( Gao et al . , 2011 ) with respect to an increasing number of long - range connections and an increasing global efﬁciency during development . 2 . MATERIALS AND METHODS 2 . 1 . NEURON MODEL The model network consisted of n = 400 neurons , of which 80 % were excitatory and 20 % inhibitory . Excitatory neurons were placed with some jitter on a 20 × 16 grid with a spatial dis - tance between two grid points of 150 μ m . Inhibitory neurons were placed evenly between the excitatory neurons . The same net - work layout was used as in Butz and van Ooyen ( 2013 ) . We used Izhikevich’s model ( Izhikevich , 2003 ) to simulate neuronal elec - trical activity . This model has two differential equations , one for the membrane potential v ( in mV ) and one for a recovery variable u ( in mVms − 1 ) , enabling re - polarization after an action potential : dvdt = k 1 v 2 + k 2 v + k 3 − u + I dudt = a ( bv − u ) ( 1 ) Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 2 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks where k 1 = 0 . 04 mV − 1 ms − 1 , k 2 = 5 ms − 1 , k 3 = 140 mVms − 1 , and t is in ms . Every time a neuron ﬁres ( v ≥ 30 mV ) , v and u are reset : if v ≥ 30 mV , then (cid:2) v ← c u ← u + d ( 2 ) As in Izhikevich ( 2003 ) , the following parameter values were used : a = 0 . 1 ms − 1 , b = 0 . 2 ms − 1 , c = − 65 mV , d = 2 mVms − 1 . We used the same dynamics for excitatory and inhibitory neurons . Each neuron receives input I = I syn + I ext , consisting of synap - tic input I syn from within the network and external input I ext . Neurons interchange electrical signals on a millisecond timescale without synaptic delay . Synaptic input consists of the incoming action potentials from the presynaptic neurons low - pass ﬁltered by an exponential ﬁlter function h ( t ) = exp (cid:3) − t μ (cid:4) with decay constant μ = 5 ms . Network connectivity W i , j is deﬁned as the number of synapses from neuron j to i . If a synapse exists , it has a ﬁxed strength of 1 mVms − 1 . Neurons are either excitatory or inhibitory . Indices refer to excitatory neurons if i or j ∈ { Ex } and to inhibitory neurons if i or j ∈ { In } . As in Izhikevich ( 2003 ) and Butz and van Ooyen ( 2013 ) , I ext is delivered as white noise with mean 5 mVms − 1 and standard deviation 1 mVms − 1 . In some cases lower input values were required and speciﬁed where relevant . The intracellular calcium concentration of a neuron is used as a low - passed ﬁltered average of its ﬁring frequency ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) . Every time a neuron ﬁres , the calcium concentra - tion is increased by a ﬁxed amount ; otherwise the concentration decreases exponentially to zero : d (cid:5) Ca 2 + (cid:6) i dt = ⎧⎪⎨ ⎪⎩ − [ Ca 2 + ] i τ Ca + β if v ≥ 30 mV − [ Ca 2 + ] i τ Ca otherwise ( 3 ) where β = 0 . 001 ms − 1 and τ Ca = 10 , 000 ms . We deﬁned a set - point (cid:4) = 0 . 7 in calcium concentration , corresponding to an intermediate level of average electrical activity . Every time the neuron’s calcium concentration deviates from (cid:4) , it will induce structural changes in connectivity to restore the desired average level of activity , as described below . 2 . 2 . SYNAPSE MODEL FOR STRUCTURAL PLASTICITY During development , neurons show a pronounced formation and pruning of synapses . To simulate reorganization of synaptic connectivity , standard models of synaptic plasticity , in which con - nectivity is considered ﬁxed with plasticity merely arising from changes in the strength of existing synapses ( modeled as weight factors ) , are not suitable . For this study on the development of neuronal networks , we therefore used our Model of Structural Plasticity ( MSP ) ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) . The characteristic feature of this model is that it represents synapses as consisting of two recombinable synaptic elements , namely an axonal element and a dendritic element . Axonal elements represent countable presynaptic specializations for transmitter release such as axonal terminals or boutons , while dendritic elements represent the postsynaptic counterparts , i . e . , postsynaptic receptor plates on dendritic spines or the dendritic shaft . Axonal and dendritic ele - ments are either excitatory or inhibitory . Any neuron i can form A i axonal elements , which are excitatory if the neuron is excita - tory , or inhibitory if the neuron is inhibitory . At the same time , a neuron , irrespective of its type , can express D exi excitatory and D ini inhibitory dendritic elements . Complementary elements can merge to form a synapse ( excitatory axonal with excitatory den - dritic elements , and inhibitory axonal with inhibitory dendritic elements ) . Synaptic elements form and delete independently from a synaptic contact partner . In case a neuron deletes a synaptic element that is bound in a synapse , the complementary synap - tic element on the other neuron remains and becomes vacant and available again for synapse formation with a new target . Therefore MSP allows for synaptic rewiring . 2 . 3 . HOMEOSTATIC GROWTH RULES It is well documented that neurons change their morphology in an activity - dependent fashion during development ( Butz et al . , 2009b ; van Ooyen , 2011 ) . The way in which neurons change their morphology suggests that they try to maintain homeostasis of electrical activity ( van Ooyen and van Pelt , 1994 ; Van Ooyen et al . , 1995 ; Butz et al . , 2009a ; van Ooyen , 2011 ; Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) . That is , neurons in which the average activity is too low start forming new neuritic structures , whereas neurite growth is halted or neurites are pruned when activity is higher than a desired level ( homeostatic set - point ) . In our MSP , we abstracted away from describing detailed neuronal morphology and assumed that changes in morphology effectively result in changing numbers of axonal and dendritic elements—the con - tact sites for synaptic connections . Homeostatic adaptation of the number of axonal and dendritic elements was modeled by the fol - lowing growth rule ( Figure 1 ) , in which dz represents the change in the number of synaptic elements , with z being A , D ex or D in : dz dt = ν (cid:11) 2 1 + e ( [ Ca 2 + ] − (cid:4) ) / 0 . 1 − 1 (cid:12) ( 4 ) where (cid:4) is the set - point of the intracellular calcium concentra - tion , corresponding to a desired average ﬁring rate of the neuron , and ν is the growth rate of synaptic elements . We chose ν = 10 − 4 ms − 1 , which is slow enough that electrical dynamics and structural dynamics do not interfere , yet fast enough not to slow down the simulations unnecessarily . For reasons of simplicity and because of a lack of detailed experimental data , we applied iden - tical sigmoid growth rules to all types of synaptic elements . In a random and distance - dependent recombination process , newly formed synaptic elements were distributed to matching synaptic elements , thereby forming synapses and creating the pattern of connectivity in the network . 2 . 4 . KERNEL FUNCTION FOR SYNAPSE FORMATION As in our previous work on MSP ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) , we assumed that synapse formation is more likely between adja - cent neurons than between distant ones . We applied a two - dimensional Gaussian - shaped kernel function centered at the x , y - coordinates of neuron i , with K i , j the distance - dependent Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 3 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks FIGURE 1 | Identical sigmoidal growth rules were used for all types of synaptic elements to determine the change dz / dt in the number of synaptic elements in dependence on the intracellular calcium concentration (cid:2) Ca 2 + (cid:3) . z needs to be replaced by the respective type of element A , D ex or D in . The homeostatic set - point (cid:4) is the value of the calcium concentration where dz / dt = 0 . likelihood for synapse formation between neuron j and i : K i , j , i (cid:5) = j = e − (cid:13) pos xj − pos xi (cid:14) 2 + (cid:13) pos yj − pos yi (cid:14) 2 σ 2 ( 5 ) where pos xi is the x - coordinate and pos yi is the y - coordinate of postsynaptic neuron i , and pos xj and pos yj are the coordinates of presynaptic neuron j . The probability for autapse connections ( i . e . , a neuron connecting to itself ) was set to zero ( K i , j = 0 for i = j ) . For these simulations we chose σ = 1 × 150 μ m where 150 μ m is the distance between two grid points . In order to investigate the impact of this distance - dependency on emerging network topologies , we additionally grew networks with a ﬂat kernel , i . e . , with K i , j , i (cid:5) = j = 1 and K i , j = 0 for i = j . 2 . 5 . SYNAPSE FORMATION AND DELETION The MSP algorithm ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) proceeded in three steps to update network connectivity in an activity - dependent fashion . First , electrical activity of all neurons was computed continuously over time . Secondly , depending on the average electrical activity and according to the homeostatic growth rule ( Equation 4 ) , the number of elements changed con - tinuously , too . Thirdly , at discrete time points , network connec - tivity W was updated by synapse formation and deletion . Because of the low growth rate ν = 10 − 4 ms − 1 , changes in connectivity are very slow compared to changes in activity , so it was not nec - essary to update connectivity at every time step but only at every 100 ms . The timescale of network formation in the model corre - sponds in principle to a timescale of days or weeks . However , as described above under homeostatic growth rules , the timescale of structural changes was chosen so that the simulations were not unnecessarily slowed down , which means that the total duration of the simulation in milliseconds is not required to sum up to weeks . 2 . 5 . 1 . Synapse deletion Since network connectivity is updated at discrete time steps but synaptic elements change continuously over time due to the activity - dependent growth rules , it can happen that a neuron has more outgoing synapses than axonal elements or more incoming synapses than dendritic elements at the time of the next update in network connectivity . In this case , the neuron has to delete the surplus of synapses and to update connectivity . To update connectivity , the algorithm needs to select which synapses are to be removed . All synapses have an equal chance of being deleted . Note , however , that multiple synapses can co - exist from neuron j to i and that the more synapses there are , the higher the chance that a synapse between neuron j and i will be deleted . The probability P deli , j for synapse deletion between neuron j and i is computed by the following master equation that captures four different cases : P deli , j = W i , j (cid:15) W k , l ( 6 ) For deletion of incoming synapses , we need to distinguish between excitatory and inhibitory synapses in Equation ( 6 ) . For deleting incoming excitatory synapses of neuron i ∈ { In ∪ Ex } , we sum up W k , l over all l ∈ { Ex } . For deleting incoming inhibitory synapses of neuron i ∈ { In ∪ Ex } , we sum up W k , l over all l ∈ { In } . For deletion of outgoing excitatory synapses of excitatory presy - naptic neuron j with j ∈ { Ex } , in Equation ( 6 ) all synapses are considered to any postsynaptic neuron k with k ∈ { In ∪ Ex } . Thus , we sum up W k , l over all k ∈ { In ∪ Ex } . The same holds true for outgoing inhibitory synapses with j ∈ { In } . Sequentially , outgoing and incoming excitatory and inhibitory synapses were selected for deletion . For every type of synapse , the accumulated sum of P deli , j [ see description of Equation ( 6 ) for the range of i and j ] gave a probability distribution from which we drew the required number of synapses to be deleted . The selected synapse was deleted by reducing the respective entry W i , j in the connectivity matrix by one . It can happen that more then one synapse is selected for deletion from the same connection j to i . In this case , the implementation of the algorithm makes sure that the number of synapses to be deleted did not exceed W i , j . Whenever a neuron deletes a synaptic element that is bound in a synapse , the complementary synaptic element on the other neuron remains and becomes vacant again . 2 . 5 . 2 . Synapse formation For synapse formation , the algorithm checked whether a neuron gained vacant synaptic elements , i . e . , whether the total number of synaptic elements exceeded the number of bound synaptic ele - ments of this type . Matching vacant synaptic elements ( vacant excitatory axonal elements A ex , vac j with vacant excitatory dendritic elements D ex , vac i , and inhibitory axonal with inhibitory dendritic elements D in , vac ) were randomly distributed among each other with probability density function P form . The probability P formi , j for forming new synapses between neuron j and i depended on Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 4 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks the number of vacant synaptic elements they offered and on the Euclidean distance between neuron j and i : P formi , j = ⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨ ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ j ∈ { Ex } : A vacj D ex , vac i (cid:15) ι ∈ { Ex } A vac ι (cid:15) κ ∈ { Ex ∪ In } D ex , vac κ K ij j ∈ { In } : A vacj D in , vac i (cid:15) ι ∈ { In } A vac ι (cid:15) κ ∈ { Ex ∪ In } D in , vac κ K ij ⎫⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬ ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭ with i ∈ { Ex ∪ In } . ( 7 ) The minor number of vacant excitatory and inhibitory axonal or dendritic elements determined how many new excitatory and inhibitory synapses , respectively , could at most be formed ( so - called potential synapses ) in every update of connectivity . Thus , the number of excitatory and inhibitory potential synapses equaled M PotSyn , ex = min (cid:3)(cid:15) ι ∈ { Ex } A vac ι , (cid:15) κ ∈ { Ex ∪ In } D ex , vac κ (cid:4) M PotSyn , in = min (cid:3) (cid:15) ι ∈ { In } , A vac ι , (cid:15) κ ∈ { Ex ∪ In } D in , vac κ (cid:4) ( 8 ) for every update in connectivity . From this distribution , the algorithm chose at maximum M PotSyn , ex excitatory and M PotSyn , in inhibitory connections at which new synapses were created . The respective entries W i , j in the connectivity matrix were then increased by one . A connection was chosen by drawing a random number from a uniform dis - tribution and comparing it to the accumulated probabilities P formi , j for all excitatory connections and all inhibitory connections of the entire network . That connection was chosen that had the high - est accumulated probability that the random number just did not exceed . If , for this try , the random number exceeded all accumu - lated probabilities , no synapse was formed . Hence , not necessarily all of the potential synapses were formed . Additionally , synapse formation needed to fulﬁl the condition that the number W + i , j of newly - formed synapses from neuron j to i did not exceed the number of vacant synaptic elements that neuron j and i offered : W + i , j ≤ ⎧⎪⎨ ⎪ ⎩ j ∈ { Ex } : min ( A vacj , D ex , vac i ) j ∈ { In } : min ( A vacj , D in , vac i ) ⎫⎪⎬ ⎪ ⎭ with i ∈ { Ex ∪ In } . ( 9 ) In every update , this condition was checked and synapse for - mation infringing this condition was rejected . Alternatively , the update of connectivity can also be implemented in a purely local fashion ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) . For small networks , the current implementation is more efﬁcient than the original MSP algorithm ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) because run time is not dependent on the growing numbers of vacant synaptic elements but proportional to the square of the number of neurons in the network . However , for large networks with n > > 1000 , n 2 will quickly out - range the number of vacant synaptic elements , in which case looping over the number of synaptic elements would be faster . Particularly in Matlab , the current description of MSP allows for an elegant vectorized implementation providing additional speed up . 2 . 6 . DEVELOPMENT OF NON - HOMEOSTATIC NETWORKS To investigate the impact of homeostasis in electrical activity on developing network topology , we created for every home - ostatic network a corresponding non - homeostatic network . At every update in connectivity , we took the number of synapses from the homeostatic network and distributed them in the non - homeostatic network with the same kernel function as used in the homeostatic network . Hence , the placement of synapses in the non - homeostatic network was purely dependent on the kernel function but did not meet the homeostasis criterion . The algo - rithmic implementation for placing synapses was the same for homeostatic and non - homeostatic networks , with P formi , j = K i , j . Instead of distributing M PotSyn synapses ( Equation 8 ) , we simply distributed the total number of synapses from the homeostatic network . Since synapse formation was not limited by numbers of vacant elements , Equation ( 9 ) was not applicable . 2 . 7 . TOPOLOGY MEASUREMENTS A neuronal network can be seen as a graph with the neu - rons being the nodes and the synapses being the edges or links between two nodes . Since the presynaptic neuron always activates the postsynaptic neuron ( and never the other way around ) , we regard the graph as directed . At every update in connectivity , we assessed those graph theoretical measures that are indicative of small - worldness and network efﬁciency . In addition , betweenness centrality was measured to determine the importance of nodes in the network . To reduce the complexity of the assessment , we considered only the topology of excitatory synaptic connections W ex , ex between the n ex excitatory neurons . For the graph theo - retical assessments , the brain connectivity toolbox by Olaf Sporns et al . ( Rubinov and Sporns , 2010 ) was used . 2 . 7 . 1 . Weighted characteristic path length The characteristic path length L is the average shortest path from one node to any other node in the network . Path length is deﬁned as the number of links that need to be traveled to go from one node ( possibly via intermediate nodes ) to any other node . On top of this deﬁnition , a direct link between two nodes in a weighted network is considered “shorter” the stronger the weight of the link is . For our network , we take the number of synapses W ex , ex i , j between two directly linked neurons j and i , with i , j ∈ { Ex } , as the weight of the connection and the inverse 1 / W ex , ex i , j as the length l i , j of the connection . The shortest path d i , j is then the smallest sum of connection lengths that lead from neuron j to i via any interme - diate neurons . Our calculation of the weighted characteristic path length was based on an implementation of Dijkstra’s algorithm for computing the shortest path in weighted directed networks by Rubinov and Sporns ( 2010 ) . 2 . 7 . 2 . Weighted clustering coefﬁcient The clustering coefﬁcient is an indication of how strongly nodes in a network are interconnected . It can be measured by the num - ber of triangles , ˜ t Di , one node forms with any other two nodes in the network divided by the total number of possible triangles , T Di . For weighted and directed graphs , one needs to realize that the adjacency matrix ( in our case , the connectivity matrix W ex , ex of the excitatory neurons ) is not symmetric and that the entries Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 5 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks of the adjacency matrix are not one but can have any weight . According to Fagiolo ( 2007 ) , the clustering coefﬁcient of a single node in a weighted directed network ˜ C Di is computed as ˜ C Di (cid:13) W ex , ex (cid:14) = ˜ t Di T Di = (cid:19) ( W ex , ex ) [ 1 / 3 ] + (cid:3) ( W ex , ex ) T (cid:4) [ 1 / 3 ] (cid:20) 3 i , i 2 (cid:5) d toti (cid:13) d toti − 1 (cid:14) − 2 d ↔ i (cid:6) ( 10 ) where ( W ex , ex ) [ 1 / k ] = w 1 / k i , j , the k th root of the entries of the matrix for i , j ∈ { Ex } , and ( W ex , ex ) T is the transposed W ex , ex matrix . The variable d toti denotes the total degree of node i ( the degree counts the number of either incoming or outgo - ing edges per node , and the total degree is the sum over both the incoming and outgoing edges ) , and d ↔ i stands for the num - ber of bilateral edges of node i ( the number of nodes node i projects to and receives edges from , excluding self - interactions of node i ) . The overall clustering coefﬁcient of the network is thus ˜ C D = ( n ex ) − 1 (cid:15) Ni = 1 ˜ C Di . Note that for this assessment we only con - sidered n ex excitatory nodes and excitatory connections W ex , ex . For a more detailed description of Equation ( 10 ) , see Fagiolo ( 2007 ) . We computed the clustering coefﬁcient of the develop - ing neuronal networks at every update in connectivity by using the implementation by Mika Rubinov from the brain connectivity toolbox ( Rubinov and Sporns , 2010 ) . 2 . 7 . 3 . Small - world parameter To estimate small - worldness of the developing networks , we applied the formalism by Humphries and Gurney ( 2008 ) : s = C / C rand L / L rand ( 11 ) We replaced the clustering coefﬁcient C and the characteristic path length L by the corresponding versions for weighted directed graphs as described above . C rand and L rand were taken from an Erd˝os - Rényi random graph generated with the same number of synapses as in the developing networks at every update in connectivity . 2 . 7 . 4 . Betweenness centrality The local betweenness centrality is a measure for the impor - tance of a node in a network . A high betweenness central - ity of a node i means that many shortest paths between any two nodes k and l pass through node i . Thus , the local betweenness centrality counts the number of times , σ kl ( i ) , that node i is on a shortest path between two nodes k and l . The local betweenness centrality is normalized by the num - ber σ kl of alternative shortest paths between k and l that do not pass through node i . Global betweenness centrality is the sum of all local betweenness centrality values of the individual nodes : BC global = n ex (cid:21) i (cid:21) k (cid:5) = i (cid:5) = l σ kl ( i ) σ kl ( 12 ) Consequently , betweenness centrality provides a measure for how well networks are interconnected . A high local or global betweenness centrality means that individual nodes or the entire network , respectively , is badly interconnected , because all infor - mation has to travel through the same nodes in the absence of alternative routes or by - passes . Clinical data shows that after brain lesions , betweenness centrality of directly and indi - rectly affected brain areas changes ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Note that as for the measurements above , the shortest paths are based on weighted excitatory connections W ex , ex i , j . Therefore , global betweenness centrality was computed by the formalism for weighted directed networks by Brandes ( 2001 ) as imple - mented in the brain connectivity toolbox ( Rubinov and Sporns , 2010 ) . 2 . 7 . 5 . Efﬁciency Global efﬁciency is related to the inverse characteristic path length with the advantage over characteristic path length that it can be meaningfully computed also of disconnected graphs ( Latora and Marchiori , 2001 ; Achard and Bullmore , 2007 ) . While path lengths between disconnected cells are inﬁnite , efﬁciency becomes zero and , thus , adds neutrally to global efﬁciency . E global = 1 n ex ( n ex − 1 ) (cid:21) i (cid:5) = j 1 d i , j ( 13 ) where n ex is the number of excitatory neurons . 2 . 7 . 6 . Euclidean distance Although not a topology measure in a strict graph theoretical sense , the average Euclidean distance between nodes that are con - nected by synapses was measured in order to help interpret the development of characteristic path length and clustering coefﬁ - cient . To obtain the average Euclidean distance ED , we multiplied the Euclidean distances between all pairs of excitatory neurons in the network with the number of synapses between these neurons . We then summed up all of the so - weighted distances and divided the sum by the number of excitatoy synapses : ED = ⎛ ⎝ n ex (cid:21) i , j (cid:24) (cid:13) pos xj − pos xi (cid:14) 2 + (cid:13) pos yj − pos yi (cid:14) 2 W ex , ex i , j ⎞ ⎠ / n ex (cid:21) i , j W ex , ex i , j ( 14 ) with i , j ∈ { Ex } 3 . RESULTS We started each network simulation with zero connectivity and zero synaptic elements . Due to the homeostatic formation of axonal and dendritic elements , model neurons are able to form synapses and to adapt the number of synapses so as to reach a homeostatic equilibrium in electrical activity ( Figure 2 ) . For a wide range of set - points (cid:4) , model neurons adapt their aver - age ﬁring rate so that , at the end of each simulation ( here after 15 , 000 updates in connectivity ) , their calcium concentra - tion [ Ca 2 + ] has converged to (cid:4) , with a corresponding ﬁring rate y ( in Hz ) that follows the linear relation y = 100 × [ Ca 2 + ] Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 6 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks ( Figure 3 ) . We investigated how the topology of these self - organizing networks developed over time when neurons favor short - range connections over long - range connections , or , alter - natively , when all connections are equally likely . In the ﬁrst case , as we will show in detail later on , networks developed a distinct small - world property , with small - world parameter s markedly greater than 1 , whereas in the second case , s reaches 1 . Therefore , we will call networks that resulted from distance - dependent synapse formation small - world networks and those that resulted from synapse formation without distance - dependency random networks . In networks that favor long - range over short - range connec - tions ( small - world networks ) ( Figure 4A ) , s constantly increased FIGURE 2 | Development of intracellular calcium concentration (cid:2) Ca 2 + (cid:3) over time . ( A ) Development of calcium concentration in small - world networks arising from synapse formation that favors short - range over long - range connections . Mean calcium concentrations averaged over ﬁve simulations reach the set - point (cid:4) = 0 . 7 when the number of synaptic elements is regulated homeostatically ( yellow ) , whereas calcium concentrations remain much lower when there is no homeostatic regulation ( gray ) . ( B ) Development of calcium concentration in random networks without any distance - dependency in synapse formation . The random network with homeostatic regulation of synaptic elements ( blue ) also reaches the homeostatic set - point (cid:4) , whereas the network without homeostasis ( gray ) and the same number of synapses as the homeostatic network has much lower values in calcium . Shadow around the curves ( hardly visible since so small ) indicates the standard deviation . FIGURE 3 | Neurons develop their connectivity in order to reach a homeostatic set - point (cid:2) of intracellular calcium . The ﬁgure shows the ﬁring rates attained for different set - point values of calcium . For each calcium concentration , the ﬁring rates of all neurons were pooled from four different simulations recorded over the last 20 , 000ms . The central mark of each box is the median ﬁring rate ; boxes represent the 25th and 75th percentiles ; the whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered “outliers” ; and “outliers” are plotted individually ( which show up here as thick bold lines ) . An “outlier” is a value that is more than 1 . 5 times the interquartile range away from the top or bottom of the box . The ﬁring rate is proportional to (cid:4) by a factor of 100 . For this set of simulations lower external inputs I ext with mean 2 mVms − 1 were used . and reached a maximum markedly greater than 10 at around 7000 updates in connectivity . Small - world networks that were set - up by an additional rule for homeostasis in electrical activity reached a plateau of about s = 10 very early but began to decrease again around the time that neuronal activities reached the homeo - static set - point (cid:4) . Nevertheless , small - world networks with home - ostasis maintained their small - world property throughout the whole course of the simulation ( s > 5 at T = 15 , 000 ) . In net - works without distance - dependency in synapse formation ( ran - dom networks ) ( Figure 4B ) , s equaled 1 from the very beginning of network development . Random networks with and with - out homeostasis did not differ in the course of s ( Figure 4B ) . Hence , homeostasis did not seem to have an impact on the development of topology in random networks . Knowing that homeostasis inﬂuenced the development of small - worldness , we further analyzed how homeostasis exerted its inﬂuence during network formation . For some simulations , s could not be com - puted for the ﬁrst few updates in connectivity because of division by zero . 3 . 1 . HOMEOSTASIS INFLUENCES THE CLUSTERING COEFFICIENT AND CHARACTERISTIC PATH LENGTH OF DEVELOPING SMALL - WORLD NETWORKS The mean or characteristic path length in small - world net - works without homeostasis showed , after an initial sharp rise , a steady decrease and converged toward values of around 3 ( Figure 5A ) . Homeostatic small - world networks also started with a sharp rise and a subsequent decrease in characteris - tic path length . The decrease was even steeper than in the non - homeostatic case , and the characteristic path length con - verged toward slightly lower values than in non - homeostatic networks . In addition , networks with homeostasis showed a second but minor decrease in characteristic path length when activities reached the homeostatic set - point (cid:4) . The ﬁnal values of the characteristic path length after 15 , 000 updates in con - nectivity were stable in both homeostatic and non - homeostatic small - world networks . The initial sharp increase is caused by the limited number of synapses in the network at the begin - ning of the simulation . Characteristic path lengths in developing random networks showed an identical course with and without homeostasis ( Figure 5B ) . The ﬁnal values in random networks FIGURE 4 | Small - worldness of developing networks . ( A ) Small - world networks with ( orange ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . ( B ) Random networks with ( blue ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . Means over ﬁve simulations per scenario . Shadings of the curves indicate standard deviations . Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 7 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks were marginally lower than those in homeostatic small - world networks . The clustering coefﬁcient in developing homeostatic small - world networks took a considerably different course from the coefﬁcient in small - world networks without homeostasis ( Figure 6A ) . Whereas the clustering coefﬁcient in networks with - out homeostasis converged , with a small overshoot , toward high levels of over 1 . 6 , networks with homeostasis generated a con - siderable overshoot and ended up at much lower values as com - pared with non - homeostatic networks . After a ramp - up phase , homeostatic networks reached a maximum clustering coefﬁ - cient of about one ; thereafter , the clustering coefﬁcient decreased again with a decreasing negative slope . The maximum cluster - ing coefﬁcient was reached when the average electrical activities approached the homeostatic set - point (cid:4) . By contrast , we did not see an overshoot in clustering coefﬁcient in homeostatic and non - homeostatic random networks ( Figure 6B ) . Therefore , the homeostasis in electrical activity had no effect on clustering in random networks . 3 . 2 . HOMEOSTASIS FAVORS LONG - RANGE CONNECTIONS IN SMALL - WORLD NETWORKS Particularly the development of the clustering coefﬁcient , with its pronounced overshoot , determines the emerging small - worldness FIGURE 5 | Characteristic path length in developing networks . ( A ) Small - world networks with ( orange ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . The inset in ( A ) is a close - up of the time interval from 5000 to 10 , 000 updates in connectivity that clearly shows the decay in characteristic path length in homeostatic networks compared to non - homeostatic networks . ( B ) Random networks with ( blue ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . Means over ﬁve simulations per scenario . Shadings of the curves indicate standard deviations . FIGURE 6 | Clustering coefﬁcient in developing networks . ( A ) Small - world networks with ( orange ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . ( B ) Random networks with ( blue ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . Means over ﬁve simulations per scenario . Shadings of the curves indicate standard deviations . in networks favoring short - range connections over long - range connections . We therefore further studied how homeostasis inﬂu - enced clustering in small - world networks . We tested the hypothe - sis that homeostasis produced more long - range connections than expected from the kernel function K ( Equation 5 ) . Computing the average Euclidean distance between the pre - and postsy - naptic neuron for every synapse indeed revealed longer average Euclidean distances in homeostatic than in non - homeostatic networks ( Figure 7A ) . In non - homeostatic networks , the aver - age Euclidean distance was constant , because it is directly derived from the kernel function ( in Equation 5 : σ = 150 μ m ) . In homeostatic networks , however , we observed two different phases . First , during initial network development ( [ Ca 2 + ] < < (cid:4) ) , the average Euclidean distance converged quickly toward a stable value of around 2 , which was only slightly higher than in non - homeostatic networks . Secondly , when calcium concentrations approached the homeostatic set - point (cid:4) , the average Euclidean distances ramped up and reached values greater than 4 . The con - siderable increase in the average Euclidean distance of synaptic connections coincided with a drop in clustering coefﬁcient . As the initial high clustering of the network is due to the kernel function for synapse formation favoring short - over long - range connections , we may conclude that increasing Euclidean lengths of synaptic connections give rise to the decrease in clustering right at the time neurons approach the homeostatic set - point in electrical activity . The effect was also noticeable in the course of the characteristic path length but much less pronounced . We did not observe a comparable effect of homeostasis on Euclidean dis - tances of synaptic connections in random networks ( Figure 7B ) . Are the increasing average Euclidean distances of synaptic con - nections caused by the fact that average neuronal activities are reaching a homeostatic equilibrium , or is this just some net - work effect that merely coincides with neurons equilibrating their activities ? To answer this question , we assessed the number of all types of vacant elements ( i . e . , excitatory or inhibitory axonal elements , excitatory or inhibitory dendritic elements ) and the spatial position of their hosting neurons at every time step of the simulation . We ﬁrst checked whether there was any bias in the spatial position of synaptic elements that could generate more FIGURE 7 | Average Euclidean distance between pre - and postsynaptic neurons for every synapse during network development . ( A ) Small - world networks with ( orange ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . ( B ) Random networks with ( blue ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . Means over ﬁve simulations per scenario . Shadings of the curves indicate standard deviations . Inset in ( A ) depicts the change in Euclidean distances for homeostatic random ( blue ) and homeostatic small - world networks ( orange ) with torus boundary conditions . Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 8 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks distant connections , e . g . , a placement of synaptic elements at the boundaries of the network . We accumulated the number of vacant axonal ( Figure 8A ) and dendritic elements ( Figure 8B ) for each neuron for the ﬁrst 5000 updates in connectivity with [ Ca 2 + ] < (cid:4) as well as for the next 5000 time steps with [ Ca 2 + ] ≈ (cid:4) . In the beginning of the simulation , we indeed found a little more vacant synaptic elements at the network boundaries , which can be explained by the fact that neurons at boundaries have less neigh - bors than neurons in the center and compensate for this by getting a higher number of vacant dendritic elements . However , by the time that the homeostatic equilibrium is reached , vacant synaptic elements were equally distributed over the network , and therefore the placement of vacant synaptic elements cannot account for the increasing distances of synaptic connections once the network has reached the homeostatic set - point . We found a comparable course of Euclidean distances in homeostatic small - world networks with torus boundary conditions ( see inset of Figure 7A ) . Since we could exclude a spatial bias in the distribution of vacant synaptic elements , we tested whether the increasing dis - tances of synaptic connections were a direct consequence of the activity - dependent growth rules . On the basis of the number of vacant elements per neuron and the Euclidean distance between the host neurons , we determined the most likely synaptic connec - tion every time a new synapses was formed , which is equivalent to the maximum of P formi , j ( Equation 7 ) . Since the change in the FIGURE 8 | Spatial position of vacant synaptic elements in small - world networks . The purpose of this ﬁgure is to rule out that the position of vacant synaptic elements alone gave rise to longer - ranged synaptic connections . The left column shows vacant synaptic elements accumulated over the ﬁrst 5000 updates in connectivity , whereas the right column shows the accumulation of vacant synaptic elements over the following 5000 updates . Although some tendency of vacant synaptic elements being located at the borders of the network is visible , this effect is gone after 5000 updates in connectivity . So there is no bias in the distribution of vacant synaptic elements when activity reaches the homeostatic set - point , and therefore the position of vacant synaptic elements alone cannot account for the formation of longer - ranged synaptic connections for T > 5000 . ( A ) Vacant axonal elements . ( B ) Vacant dendritic elements . Color scale indicates number of vacant synaptic elements per neuron . number of synaptic elements and therefore also the distribu - tion of vacant synaptic elements are activity - dependent , the most likely synaptic connection to be formed is a direct consequence of the neurons’ electrical activities . It turned out that in the begin - ning of development , when all neurons offer vacant synaptic elements , the most likely synaptic connections are those between adjacent neurons ( Figures 9A , B ) . In other words , when neuronal activities were much lower than the homeostatic set - point (cid:4) , the kernel function had a large impact on the Euclidean length of synaptic connections . Therefore , at this stage of development , homeostatic and non - homeostatic networks did not differ much in connection lengths . However , when the activity of all individ - ual neurons approached the set - point (cid:4) , vacant synaptic elements became rare and matching synaptic elements were available , if at all , only between more distant neurons . Expected distances for most likely synaptic connections therefore became much larger . Moreover , the distribution of expected Euclidean lengths of new synaptic connections did not follow the Gaussian - shaped kernel any longer but became much wider and ﬂatter . At the same time , it took much longer for a synapse to form because , although longer - range synaptic connections were the most likely ones , their probability was still very low due to the kernel function . Due to a lack of shorter - range alternatives , these longer - range synaptic connections were nonetheless formed at some point in time , because the kernel function is non - zero for all distances . Taken together , the Euclidean length of synaptic connections in small - world networks is inﬂuenced by the homeostatic forma - tion of synaptic elements . As expected from the topology data , no activity - dependent effect on the Euclidean distance of synaptic connections was observed in random networks . Additionally , synapse deletion could in principle also inﬂu - ence the Euclidean length of synaptic connections if , for example , with increasing neuronal activities preferentially short connec - tions would be deleted . Therefore , we further tested whether the expected Euclidean length of synaptic connections that were most likely to be deleted correlated with the current average activity in the network . However , an activity - dependent effect on synapse deletion was not observed ( Figures 9C , D ) . 3 . 3 . HOMEOSTASIS DECREASES THE BETWEENNESS CENTRALITY IN SMALL - WORLD NETWORKS Betweenness centrality ( or inbetweenness ) is a measure for the importance of nodes in a network . Compared with random net - works , small - world networks without homeostatic synapse for - mation had a relatively high betweenness centrality ( Figure 10A ) . Small - world networks with homeostasis , by contrast , revealed a pronounced decrease in betweenness centrality over develop - mental time . Values peaked in the beginning of development when neurons ﬁrst connected to their nearest neighbors only . However , right after the peak , homeostatic synapse formation generated topologies with values for betweenness centrality that were lower than in non - homeostatic networks . Betweenness centrality is high in non - homeostatic small - world networks because synapse formation is only determined by the kernel func - tion ( Equation 5 ) , which often caused that the same cell pairs were connected repeatedly . The consequence is a limited num - ber of shortest paths between any pairs of nodes in the network . Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 9 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks FIGURE 9 | The spatial distribution of newly formed synapses change in dependenceonthecalciumconcentration . In ( A , B ) , eachdotrepresentsthe Euclidean distances between those neurons that are most likely to form a synaptic connection with each other at this update in connectivity . For this , we took at every update in connectivity in which vacant synaptic elements were available the Euclidean distance of the connection from neuron j to i for which P formi , j ( Equation7 ) wasmaximal . In ( C , D ) , eachdotrepresentsthelengthofthat connection ( again in terms of the Euclidean distance between the connected neurons ) for which synapse deletion was most likely , i . e . , P deli , j ( Equation 6 ) was maximal for every update in connectivity in which synapses had to be deleted . In ( A , C ) , weplottedtheEuclideandistancesforsynapseformationanddeletion over time . The black curve ( right y - axis ) indicates the course of the calcium concentration (cid:5) Ca 2 + (cid:6) . In ( B , D ) , we plotted synapse formation and deletion in dependence on (cid:5) Ca 2 + (cid:6) . The color code inallpanels indicates thedensity of the dots in the diagrams , with blue and red representing low and high densities of dots , respectively . Theﬁgureessentiallyshowsthatbeforecalciumreachesthe homeostatic set - point (cid:4) , the distribution for synapse formation is rather Gaussian , following the Kernel function K ( Equation 5 ) . The distribution becomes random and scattered , with increased Euclidean distances , when calciumisattheset - point . Thestripesinthedistributionarisefromthefactthat not all Euclidean distances are possible due to the grid layout of the network . There is no change in the distribution for synapse deletion . FIGURE 10 | Changingbetweennesscentralityovertime . ( A ) Small - world networks with ( orange ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . ( B ) Randomnetworkswith ( blue ) andwithout ( gray ) homeostasisinelectrical activity . Means over ﬁve simulations per scenario . Shadings of the curves indicate standard deviations . By contrast , in homeostatic networks , synapse formation depends on the availability of synaptic elements , which can force synapses to be formed that are less likely according to the kernel . This may increase the number of alternative paths between two neu - rons and therefore also increase the number of multiple shortest paths through the network . Hence , betweenness centrality quickly decreased over time . Because the variety of shortest paths in non - homeostatic net - works is limited , betweenness centrality reached a stable plateau in these networks . Interestingly , the betweenness centrality in homeostatic networks initially also converged toward a quasi - stable level . However , as soon as activities approached the home - ostatic set - point (cid:4) , betweenness centrality strongly decreased . Over time , the rate of decrease slowed down . The decrease in betweenness centrality precisely coincided with the increase in Euclidean lengths of synaptic connections . Because the kernel function favors short - over long - range connections and therefore initially creates networks with high betweenness centrality , we may conclude that the formation of longer - range connections ( in an Euclidean sense ) lead to a decreasing betweenness centrality . Any new long - range connection not present in the network before creates new shortest paths , which in turn decreases betweenness centrality . By contrast , homeostasis did not affect the course of betweenness centrality in random networks ( Figure 10B ) . 3 . 4 . SMALL - WORLD NETWORKS BECOME MORE EFFICIENT BY HOMEOSTASIS Efﬁcient information transmission is probably the most - desired property in computational networks . Small - world networks are Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 10 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks very efﬁcient because they combine a high clustering coefﬁcient with a short characteristic path length . Nevertheless , their efﬁ - ciency is still markedly lower than that of random networks . Homeostatic small - world networks , however , generated efﬁciency levels that during the whole course of development exceeded the levels in non - homeostatic small - world networks ( Figure 11A ) . Remarkably , at the time when average activities reached the homeostatic set - point (cid:4) , efﬁciency levels of homeostatic net - works further increased and almost reached the levels in random networks ( Figure 11B ) . Consequently , favoring more distant con - nections in combination with homeostasis in electrical activity led to a more efﬁcient network topology than achieved without homeostasis . 4 . DISCUSSION We have shown that network formation favoring short - range over long - range connections produced networks with a pronounced small - world structure . Networks with homeostasis in electrical activity developed a weaker small - world structure in favor of more efﬁcient wiring of connections . Global efﬁciency particu - larly increased when network activity reached the homeostatic set - point . Increased global efﬁciency was caused by the fact that homeostasis favored longer - ranged connections , which affected clustering as well as characteristic path length . Thus , network topology continued to change even after the network had reached a homeostatic equilibrium in electrical activity . Adding more long - range connections to a small - world net - work makes the network more efﬁcient but also more ran - dom . This is apparent in our simulations , too , by a decreas - ing clustering coefﬁcient and a decreasing characteristic path length . Nevertheless , the small - world property of the net - works was preserved throughout the whole course of devel - opment , and the decrease in clustering coefﬁcient was slow - ing down over time . However , networks would most likely turn into random networks if rewiring continued indeﬁnitely . Consequently , there seems to be a trade - off in network devel - opment between high clustering and strong small - worldness on the one hand and more randomness and higher efﬁciency on the other hand . The latter particularly arises when networks con - tinue to rewire their circuitry when they are in a homeostatic equilibrium . FIGURE 11 | Global efﬁciency changes over time due to network development . ( A ) Small - world networks with ( orange ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . ( B ) Random networks with ( blue ) and without ( gray ) homeostasis in electrical activity . Means over ﬁve simulations per scenario . Shadings of the curves indicate standard deviations . With additional long - range connections betweenness central - ity decreases . Networks with low betweenness centrality are more robust against lesions because all nodes are equally important . By contrast , networks with high betweenness centrality are very vulnerable to lesions . If neurons that are part of many short - est paths are lost , the characteristic path length will immediately increase , with a signiﬁcant impact on information transmission . It is remarkable that a self - organizing process that forms net - works by striving toward homeostasis in electrical activity as a side effect produces topologies with lower betweenness centrality that contribute to a higher robustness against lesions . Key to the homeostasis - driven change in topology is the increasing Euclidean length of connections . Since we did not observe an increase in connection length in networks with - out homeostasis , we concluded that the increase in connection lengths was caused by homeostasis in electrical activity . To create networks without homeostasis , we took the number of synapses from the homeostatic network at every update in connectiv - ity and distributed them randomly under the same kernel in the non - homeostatic network . There are , in fact , other ways to create networks without homeostasis . We additionally built non - homeostatic networks by initially giving all model neurons a ﬁxed number of vacant synaptic elements and then running updates in connectivity until no more synapses could be formed . Also in this scenario we did not see an increase in connection length . In a third scenario , we added a few vacant synaptic elements to all neurons before every update in connectivity . No matter how few vacant elements we added and how long we ran the network , we did not obtain more long - range connections than expected from the kernel . We only observed more long - range connections when we slowly added vacant elements at a few randomly selected neu - rons at a time ( i . e . , spatial sparseness in the formation of synaptic elements ) . From these observations we concluded that the contri - bution of homeostasis is not only to limit the number of available vacant synaptic elements but also to generate a certain sparseness in the formation of vacant elements . In fact , as long as the neurons were far away from the homeostatic set - point , synaptic element formation was not sparse at all as all neurons added elements roughly at the same time at equal rates . Only when the neurons approached the homeostatic set - point did sparseness in synap - tic element formation arise . Homeostasis creates this sparseness because balancing the activity of one neuron immediately affects the activity in other neurons , which in turn may be driven fur - ther away from the homeostatic set - point and then start forming new vacant elements . The presence of inhibitory neurons would further reinforce this process . Homeostasis in electrical activity is one way by which a local process can give rise to a change in global topology . Another com - parable mechanisms was provided by Kaiser et al . ( 2009 ) . In their model study , they showed that a simple axonal growth process can generate the experimentally observed exponential decrease in number of connections with increasing connection length . As a result of the growth process , most connections become short - range , although long - range connections also arise , but in lower numbers . The idea of their model is that axons grow out until they hit a postsynaptic target . The capacity of model neurons to receive connections is limited , and if nearby target neurons are Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 11 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks completely occupied by incoming connections , axons continue to grow out until they hit a vacant target . Hence , Euclidean connec - tion length increases over developmental time . In this model , the spatial growth process in combination with a hard boundary on the number of incoming synapses per model neuron generates the increase in connection lengths . There are striking similarities between the topology of our model networks and that of developing dissociated cell cultures . It is well known that cultured neuronal networks can form small - world topology ( Bettencourt et al . , 2007 ; Yu et al . , 2008 ; Gerhard et al . , 2011 ) . Downes et al . ( 2012 ) reported an increase in clus - tering coefﬁcient of dissociated cell cultures between 14 days in vitro ( DIV ) and 28 DIV and a subsequent drop until 35 DIV , a course of development that is comparable to the course of devel - opment in our model networks with homeostasis . Between 14 and 35 DIV , the mean shortest path length did not change signif - icantly , only showing a slight drop around 28 DIV . Consequently , small - worldness reached its maximum around 28 DIV . Moreover , the experimental data indicated the presence of longer synaptic connections from 28 DIV onwards that had not been not present at 21 DIV . From our previous studies we know that dissociated cell cultures reach homeostasis around this time ( Tetzlaff et al . , 2010 ) . Therefore , we may hypothesize that the increase in con - nection length in dissociated cell cultures may be due to neurons reaching a homeostatic equilibrium in electrical activity . Other synaptic plasticity mechanisms not currently incorporated in our model may of course also have contributed to network formation in developing cell cultures . On a macroscopic scale , functional imaging data reveal a devel - opment of small - world topology that also has interesting similar - ities with the self - organizing network formation in our model . The infant human brain has small - world properties already at the third post - natal week ( Fransson et al . , 2011 ) . During the follow - ing 2 years , network topology undergoes a signiﬁcant reﬁnement : brain networks increase their small - worldness , global efﬁciency and number of long - distance connections ( Gao et al . , 2011 ) . Although our network model shows only an initial transient increase in small - worldness , it may offer a simple explanation for the sudden increase in number of long - range connections and the associated increase in global efﬁciency . Could it be that even in the human brain , neurons establishing a homeostatic equilib - rium in electrical activity produce—as an emergent property of the homeostatic growth process—more long - range connections ? Remarkably , the increase in number of long - range connections occurs not during a genetically - encoded formation of an initial embryonic layout of projections but during the post - natal critical period ( Gao et al . , 2011 ) , during which neurons are highly sensi - tive to afferent input . In general , the importance of critical periods is to balance excitatory and inhibitory circuits and to establish homeostasis in neuronal electrical activity ( Hensch , 2005 ; Butz et al . , 2009b ) . Considering that long - range connections arise in local as well as global networks , our study raises the interesting hypothesis that homeostasis in electrical activity may be the driv - ing force for the formation of long - range connections on both a microscopic and a macroscopic scale . Homeostasis in electrical activity is a ubiquitous principle in the nervous system ( Wolff and Wagner , 1983 ; Ramakers et al . , 1991 ; Abbott and Nelson , 2000 ) and a variety of plasticity mech - anisms can act homeostatically . Scaling of synaptic strengths ( Turrigiano , 1999 ) , for example , has been reported as a mech - anism acting at existing synapses to stabilize postsynaptic ﬁring in cortical , hippocampal and spinal cord networks ( Lissin et al . , 1998 ; O’Brien et al . , 1998 ; Turrigiano and Nelson , 1998 ) . Even in the mature brain , not only the strength of synapses but also the formation of new synapses can contribute to the stabilization of neuronal activity , for example after focal retinal lesions ( Butz and van Ooyen , 2013 ) . In developing dissociated cell cultures , we showed that homeostasis in electrical activity may be a precon - dition for the emergence of self - organized criticality in neuronal ﬁring ( Tetzlaff et al . , 2010 ) . In another study , we showed that homeostasis in electrical activity can regulate the synaptic embed - ding of newly formed neurons in the mature hippocampal dentate gyrus ( adult neurogenesis ) and can account for the experimen - tally observed counter - intuitive inverse relationship between cell proliferation rate and synaptogenesis ( Butz et al . , 2008 ) . In summary , we conclude that homeostatic regulation of elec - trical activity together with simple distance - dependent forma - tion of connections is capable of creating , in a self - organizing manner , neuronal networks that are more robust and more efﬁcient than networks grown without homeostatic regulation . Strikingly , the growth process revealed features of developing topologies that are also observed in dissociated cell cultures and infant human brains . The formation of network topology by a self - organizing , local growth process may also be relevant for automatically generating the connectivity structure of large - scale neuronal networks ( Potjans and Diesmann , 2014 ) that are cur - rently studied in enterprizes such as the Human Brain Project ( www . humanbrainproject . eu ) . FUNDING This work was partly funded by the Helmholtz Association through the Helmholtz Portfolio Theme “Supercomputing and Modeling for the Human Brain . ” Markus Butz and Ines D . Steenbuck were also partly supported by the NETFORM project ( grant number 635 . 100 . 017 , awarded to Arjen van Ooyen ) of the Computational Life Sciences program of the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research ( NWO ) and by a starting grant awarded to Markus Butz from the collaborative research center ( SFB 874 ) funded by the German Research Foundation ( Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft , DFG ) . REFERENCES Abbott , L . F . , and Nelson , S . B . ( 2000 ) . Synaptic plasticity : taming the beast . Nat . Neurosci . 3 , 1178 – 1183 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 78829 Abbott , L . F . , and Rohrkemper , R . ( 2007 ) . A simple growth model constructs critical avalanche networks . Prog . Brain Res . 165 , 13 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0079 - 6123 ( 06 ) 65002 - 4 Achard , S . , and Bullmore , E . ( 2007 ) . Efﬁciency and cost of economical brain func - tional networks . PLoS Comput . Biol . 3 : e17 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 0030017 Bassett , D . S . , and Bullmore , E . ( 2006 ) . Small - world brain networks . Neuroscientist 12 , 512 – 523 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1073858406293182 Bettencourt , L . M . , Stephens , G . J . , Ham , M . I . , andGross , G . W . ( 2007 ) . Functional structure of cortical neuronal networks grown in vitro . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 75 , 021915 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 75 . 021915 Binzegger , T . , Douglas , R . J . , and Martin , K . A . ( 2004 ) . A quantitative map of the circuit of cat primary visual cortex . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8441 – 8453 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 1400 - 04 . 2004 Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 12 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks Borisyuk , R . , Cooke , T . , and Roberts , A . ( 2008 ) . Stochasticity and functionality of neural systems : mathematical modelling of axon growth in the spinal cord of tadpole . Biosystems 93 , 101 – 114 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biosystems . 2008 . 03 . 012 Braitenberg , V . , and Schüz , A . ( 1998 ) . Cortex : Statistics and Geometry of Neuronal Connectivity , 2nd edn . Berlin : Springer . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 662 - 03733 - 1 Brandes , U . ( 2001 ) . A Faster algorithm for betweenness centrality . J . Math . Soc . 25 , 163 – 177 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0022250X . 2001 . 9990249 Butz , M . , Lehmann , K . , Dammasch , I . E . , and Teuchert - Noodt , G . ( 2006 ) . A theo - reticalnetworkmodeltoanalyseneurogenesisandsynaptogenesisinthedentategyrus . Neural Netw . 19 , 1490 – 1505 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neunet . 2006 . 07 . 007 Butz , M . , and Teuchert - Noodt , G . ( 2006 ) . A simulation model for compensatory plasticity in the prefrontal cortex inducing a cortico - cortical dysconnection in early brain development . J . Neural Transm . 113 , 695 – 710 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00702 - 005 - 0403 - 4 Butz , M . , Teuchert - Noodt , G . , Grafen , K . , and van Ooyen , A . ( 2008 ) . Inverse rela - tionship between adult hippocampal cell proliferation and synaptic rewiring in the dentate gyrus . Hippocampus 18 , 879 – 898 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hipo . 20445 Butz , M . , and van Ooyen , A . ( 2013 ) . A simple rule for dendritic spine and axonal bouton formation can account for cortical reorganization after focal retinal lesions . PLoS Comput . Biol . 9 : e1003259 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1003259 Butz , M . , van Ooyen , A . , and Wörgötter , F . ( 2009a ) . A model for cortical rewiring following deafferentation and focal stroke . Front . Comput . Neurosci . 3 : 10 . doi : 10 . 3389 / neuro . 10 . 010 . 2009 Butz , M . , Wörgötter , F . , and van Ooyen , A . ( 2009b ) . Activity - dependent structural plasticity . Brain Res . Rev . 60 , 287 – 305 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainresrev . 2008 . 12 . 023 Cromme , L . J . , and Dammasch , I . E . ( 1989 ) . Compensation type algorithms for neural nets : stability and convergence . J . Math . Biol . 27 , 327 – 340 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00275816 Dalva , M . B . , Ghosh , A . , and Shatz , C . J . ( 1994 ) . Independent control of dendritic and axonal form in the developing lateral geniculate nucleus . J . Neurosci . 14 , 3588 – 3602 . Dammasch , I . E . , Wagner , G . P . , and Wolff , J . R . ( 1986 ) . Self - stabilization of neu - ronalnetworks . I . Thecompensationalgorithmforsynaptogenesis . Biol . Cybern . 54 , 211 – 222 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00318417 Dammasch , I . E . , Wagner , G . P . , and Wolff , J . R . ( 1988 ) . Self - stabilization of neu - ronal networks . II . Stability conditions for synaptogenesis . Biol . Cybern . 58 , 149 – 158 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00364134 Downes , J . H . , Hammond , M . W . , Xydas , D . , Spencer , M . C . , Becerra , V . M . , Warwick , K . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Emergence of a small - world functional net - work in cultured neurons . PLoS Comput . Biol . 8 : e1002522 . doi : 10 . 1371 / jour - nal . pcbi . 1002522 Fagiolo , G . ( 2007 ) . Clustering in complex directed networks . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 76 : 026107 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 76 . 026107 Fransson , P . , Aden , U . , Blennow , M . , and Lagercrantz , H . ( 2011 ) . The functional architecture of the infant brain as revealed by resting - state fMRI . Cereb . Cortex 21 , 145 – 154 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhq071 Franze , K . ( 2013 ) . The mechanical control of nervous system development . Development 140 , 3069 – 3077 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 079145 Gao , W . , Gilmore , J . H . , Giovanello , K . S . , Smith , J . K . , Shen , D . , Zhu , H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Temporal and spatial evolution of brain network topology during the ﬁrst two years of life . PLoS ONE 6 : e25278 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0025278 Gerhard , F . , Pipa , G . , Lima , B . , Neuenschwander , S . , and Gerstner , W . ( 2011 ) . Extraction of network topology from multi - electrode record - ings : is there a small - world effect ? Front . Comput . Neurosci . 5 : 4 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncom . 2011 . 00004 Groc , L . , Petanjek , Z . , Gustafsson , B . , Ben - Ari , Y . , Hanse , E . , and Khazipov , R . ( 2002 ) . In vivo blockade of neural activity alters dendritic develop - ment of neonatal CA1 pyramidal cells . Eur . J . Neurosci . 16 , 1931 – 1938 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1460 - 9568 . 2002 . 02264 . x Hengen , K . B . , Lambo , M . E . , Van Hooser , S . D . , Katz , D . B . , and Turrigiano , G . G . ( 2013 ) . Firing rate homeostasis in visual cortex of freely behaving rodents . Neuron 80 , 335 – 342 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2013 . 08 . 038 Hensch , T . K . ( 2005 ) . Critical period plasticity in local cortical circuits . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 , 877 – 888 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn1787 Hilgetag , C . C . , and Kaiser , M . ( 2004 ) . Clustered organization of cortical connec - tivity . Neuroinformatics 2 , 353 – 360 . doi : 10 . 1385 / NI : 2 : 3 : 353 Hofer , S . B . , Mrsic - Flogel , T . D . , Bonhoeffer , T . , and Hübener , M . ( 2009 ) . Experience leaves a lasting structural trace in cortical circuits . Nature 457 , 313 – 317 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature07487 Humphries , M . D . , and Gurney , K . ( 2008 ) . Network ‘small - world - ness’ : a quan - titative method for determining canonical network equivalence . PLoS ONE 3 : e0002051 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0002051 Hutchins , B . I . , and Kalil , K . ( 2008 ) . Differential outgrowth of axons and their branches is regulated by localized calcium transients . J . Neurosci . 28 , 143 – 153 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 4548 - 07 . 2008 Izhikevich , E . M . ( 2003 ) . Simple model of spiking neurons . IEEE Trans . Neural Netw . 14 , 1569 – 1572 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TNN . 2003 . 820440 Jourdain , P . , Fukunaga , K . , and Muller , D . ( 2003 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II contributes to activity - dependent ﬁlopodia growth and spine formation . J . Neurosci . 23 , 10645 – 10649 . Kaiser , M . , and Hilgetag , C . C . ( 2006 ) . Nonoptimal component placement , but short processing paths , due to long - distance projections in neural systems . PLoS Comput . Biol . 2 : e95 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 0020095 Kaiser , M . , Hilgetag , C . C . , and van Ooyen , A . ( 2009 ) . A simple rule for axon outgrowth and synaptic competition generates realistic connection lengths and ﬁlling fractions . Cereb . Cortex 19 , 3001 – 3010 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhp071 Keck , T . , Keller , G . B . , Jacobsen , R . I . , Eysel , U . T . , Bonhoeffer , T . , and Hubener , M . ( 2013 ) . Synaptic scaling and homeostatic plasticity in the mouse visual cortex in vivo . Neuron 80 , 327 – 334 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2013 . 08 . 018 Keck , T . , Mrsic - Flogel , T . D . , Vaz Afonso , M . , Eysel , U . T . , Bonhoeffer , T . , and Hubener , M . ( 2008 ) . Massive restructuring of neuronal circuits during func - tional reorganization of adult visual cortex . Nat . Neurosci . 11 , 1162 – 1167 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn . 2181 Kirov , S . A . , Goddard , C . A . , and Harris , K . M . ( 2004 ) . Age - dependence in the homeostatic upregulation of hippocampal dendritic spine number dur - ing blocked synaptic transmission . Neuropharmacology 47 , 640 – 648 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropharm . 2004 . 07 . 039 Ko , H . , Cossell , L . , Baragli , C . , Antolik , J . , Clopath , C . , Hofer , S . B . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The emergence of functional microcircuits in visual cortex . Nature 496 , 96 – 100 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature12015 Konur , S . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2005 ) . Calcium signaling and the control of dendritic development . Neuron 46 , 401 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 04 . 022 Latora , V . , and Marchiori , M . ( 2001 ) . Efﬁcient behavior of small - world networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 : 198701 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 87 . 198701 Lissin , D . V . , Gomperts , S . N . , Carroll , R . C . , Christine , C . W . , Kalman , D . , Kitamura , M . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Activity differentially regulates the surface expres - sion of synaptic AMPA and NMDA glutamate receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 7097 – 7102 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 95 . 12 . 7097 Lohmann , C . , and Wong , R . O . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of dendritic growth and plas - ticity by local and global calcium dynamics . Cell Calcium 37 , 403 – 409 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceca . 2005 . 01 . 008 McAssey , M . P . , Bijma , F . , Tarigan , B . , van Pelt , J . , van Ooyen , A . , and de Gunst , M . ( 2014 ) . A morpho - density approach to estimating neural connectivity . PLoS ONE 9 : e86526 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0086526 McKinney , R . A . , Capogna , M . , Durr , R . , Gahwiler , B . H . , and Thompson , S . M . ( 1999a ) . Miniature synaptic events maintain dendritic spines via AMPA recep - tor activation . Nat . Neurosci . 2 , 44 – 49 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 4548 McKinney , R . A . , Luthi , A . , Bandtlow , C . E . , Gahwiler , B . H . , and Thompson , S . M . ( 1999b ) . Selective glutamate receptor antagonists can induce or prevent axonal sprouting in rat hippocampal slice cultures . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 11631 – 11636 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 20 . 11631 Missler , M . , Wolff , A . , Merker , H . J . , and Wolff , J . R . ( 1993 ) . Pre - and postna - tal development of the primary visual cortex of the common marmoset . II . Formation , remodelling , and elimination of synapses as overlapping processes . J . Comp . Neurol . 333 , 53 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cne . 903330105 O’Brien , R . J . , Kamboj , S . , Ehlers , M . D . , Rosen , K . R . , Fischbach , G . D . , and Huganir , R . L . ( 1998 ) . Activity - dependentmodulationofsynapticAMPArecep - tor accumulation . Neuron 21 , 1067 – 1078 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0896 - 6273 ( 00 ) 80624 - 8 Park , H . J . , and Friston , K . ( 2013 ) . Structural and functional brain networks : from connections to cognition . Science 342 , 1238411 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1238411 Potjans , T . C . , and Diesmann , M . ( 2014 ) . The cell - type speciﬁc cortical microcir - cuit : relating structure and activity in a full - scale spiking network model . Cereb . Cortex 24 , 785 – 806 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhs358 Ramakers , G . J . , Raadsheer , F . C . , Corner , M . A . , Ramaekers , F . C . , and Van Leeuwen , F . W . ( 1991 ) . Development of neurons and glial cells in cere - bral cortex , cultured in the presence or absence of bioelectric activity : mor - phological observations . Eur . J . Neurosci . 3 , 140 – 153 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 9568 . 1991 . tb00074 . x Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 13 Butz et al . Homeostatic small - world networks Rubinov , M . , and Sporns , O . ( 2010 ) . Complex network measures of brain connectivity : uses and interpretations . Neuroimage 52 , 1059 – 1069 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2009 . 10 . 003 Scheiffele , P . , Fan , J . , Choih , J . , Fetter , R . , and Seraﬁni , T . ( 2000 ) . Neuroligin expressed in nonneuronal cells triggers presynaptic development in contacting axons . Cell 101 , 657 – 669 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80877 - 6 Siegel , F . , and Lohmann , C . ( 2013 ) . Simultaneous imaging of structural plasticity and calcium dynamics in developing dendrites and axons . Cold Spring Harb . Protoc . 2013 : pdb . prot078592 . doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot078592 Sporns , O . , and Zwi , J . D . ( 2004 ) . The small world of the cerebral cortex . Neuroinformatics 2 , 145 – 162 . doi : 10 . 1385 / NI : 2 : 2 : 145 Stan , A . , Pielarski , K . N . , Brigadski , T . , Wittenmayer , N . , Fedorchenko , O . , Gohla , A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Essential cooperation of N - cadherin and neuroligin - 1 in the transsynaptic control of vesicle accumulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 11116 – 11121 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0914233107 Tailby , C . , Wright , L . L . , Metha , A . B . , and Calford , M . B . ( 2005 ) . Activity - dependent maintenance and growth of dendrites in adult cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 4631 – 4636 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0402747102 Tetzlaff , C . , Okujeni , S . , Egert , U . , Wörgötter , F . , and Butz , M . ( 2010 ) . Self - organized criticality in developing neuronal networks . PLoS Comput . Biol . 6 : e1001013 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1001013 Turrigiano , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Homeostatic plasticity in neuronal networks : the more things change , the more they stay the same . Trends Neurosci . 22 , 221 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0166 - 2236 ( 98 ) 01341 - 1 Turrigiano , G . G . , and Nelson , S . B . ( 1998 ) . Thinking globally , acting locally : AMPA receptor turnover and synaptic strength . Neuron 21 , 933 – 935 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0896 - 6273 ( 00 ) 80607 - 8 Uesaka , N . , Hirai , S . , Maruyama , T . , Ruthazer , E . S . , and Yamamoto , N . ( 2005 ) . Activity dependence of cortical axon branch formation : a morphological and electrophysiological study using organotypic slice cultures . J . Neurosci . 25 , 1 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3855 - 04 . 2005 van Ooyen , A . ( 2011 ) . Using theoretical models to analyse neural development . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 12 , 311 – 326 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn3031 van Ooyen , A . , Carnell , A . , de Ridder , S . , Tarigan , B . , Mansvelder , H . D . , Bijma , F . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Independently outgrowing neurons and geometry - based synapse formation produce networks with realistic synaptic connectivity . PLoS ONE 9 : e85858 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0085858 van Ooyen , A . , and van Pelt , J . ( 1994 ) . Activity - dependent neurite outgrowth and neuralnetworkdevelopment . Prog . BrainRes . 102 : 245 – 259 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0079 - 6123 ( 08 ) 60544 - 0 van Ooyen , A . , van Pelt , J . , and Corner , M . A . ( 1995 ) . Implications of activity dependent neurite outgrowth for neuronal morphology and network development . J . Theor . Biol . 172 , 63 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jtbi . 1995 . 0005 van Oss , C . , and van Ooyen , A . ( 1997 ) . Effects of inhibition on neural network development through activity - dependent neurite outgrowth . J . Theor . Biol . 185 , 263 – 280 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jtbi . 1996 . 0361 van Pelt , J . , and van Ooyen , A . ( 2013 ) . Estimating neuronal connectivity from axonal and dendritic density ﬁelds . Front . Comput . Neurosci . 7 : 160 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncom . 2013 . 00160 Wang , L . , Yu , C . , Chen , H . , Qin , W . , He , Y . , Fan , F . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Dynamic func - tional reorganization of the motor execution network after stroke . Brain 133 , 1224 – 1238 . doi : 10 . 1093 / brain / awq043 Watts , D . J . , and Strogatz , S . H . ( 1998 ) . Collective dynamics of ‘small - world’ networks . Nature 393 , 440 – 442 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 30918 Wolff , J . , and Wagner , G . ( 1983 ) . “Selforganization in synaptogenesis : interaction between the formation of excitatory and inhibitory synapses , ” in Synergetics of the Brain , eds E . Basar , H . Flohr , H . Haken , and A . Mandell ( Berlin ; Heidelberg ; New York ; Tokyo : Springer ) . Wong , R . O . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2002 ) . Activity - dependent regulation of den - dritic growth and patterning . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 3 , 803 – 812 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn941 Yamamoto , N . , Tamada , A . , and Murakami , F . ( 2002 ) . Wiring of the brain by a range of guidance cues . Prog . Neurobiol . 68 , 393 – 407 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0301 - 0082 ( 02 ) 00129 - 6 Yu , S . , Huang , D . , Singer , W . , and Nikolic , D . ( 2008 ) . A small world of neuronal synchrony . Cereb . Cortex 18 , 2891 – 2901 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhn047 Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was con - ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Received : 12 December 2013 ; accepted : 10 March 2014 ; published online : 01 April 2014 . Citation : Butz M , Steenbuck ID and van OoyenA ( 2014 ) Homeostatic structural plas - ticity increases the efﬁciency of small - world networks . Front . Synaptic Neurosci . 6 : 7 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnsyn . 2014 . 00007 This article was submitted to the journal Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience . Copyright © 2014 Butz , Steenbuck and van Ooyen . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience www . frontiersin . org April 2014 | Volume 6 | Article 7 | 14