ORIGINAL RESEARCH published : 27 March 2020 doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁmmu . 2020 . 00520 Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 1 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Edited by : Laura Vesala , Tampere University , Finland Reviewed by : Rebecca M . McQuade , University of Arizona , United States Kwang - Zin Lee , Fraunhofer Society ( FHG ) , Germany * Correspondence : Koki Kamiya kamiya @ gunma - u . ac . jp Noriyuki Kodera nkodera @ staff . kanazawa - u . ac . jp Takayuki Kuraishi tkuraishi @ staff . kanazawa - u . ac . jp † These authors share ﬁrst authorship Specialty section : This article was submitted to Comparative Immunology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Immunology Received : 29 November 2019 Accepted : 06 March 2020 Published : 27 March 2020 Citation : Nonaka S , Salim E , Kamiya K , Hori A , Nainu F , Asri RM , Masyita A , Nishiuchi T , Takeuchi S , Kodera N and Kuraishi T ( 2020 ) Molecular and Functional Analysis of Pore - Forming Toxin Monalysin From Entomopathogenic Bacterium Pseudomonas entomophila . Front . Immunol . 11 : 520 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁmmu . 2020 . 00520 Molecular and Functional Analysis of Pore - Forming Toxin Monalysin From Entomopathogenic Bacterium Pseudomonas entomophila Saori Nonaka 1† , Emil Salim 1 , 2† , Koki Kamiya 3 , 4 * , Aki Hori 1 , Firzan Nainu 1 , 5 , Rangga Meidianto Asri 1 , 5 , Ayu Masyita 1 , 5 , Takumi Nishiuchi 6 , Shoji Takeuchi 3 , 7 , Noriyuki Kodera 8 * and Takayuki Kuraishi 1 * 1 Faculty of Pharmacy , Institute of Medical , Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences , Kanazawa University , Kanazawa , Japan , 2 Faculty of Pharmacy , Universitas Sumatera Utara , Medan , Indonesia , 3 Kanagawa Institute of Industrial Science and Technology , Kawasaki , Japan , 4 Graduate School of Science and Technology , Gunma University , Maebashi , Japan , 5 Faculty of Pharmacy , Universitas Hasanuddin , Makassar , Indonesia , 6 Institute for Gene Research , Kanazawa University , Kanazawa , Japan , 7 Department of Mechano - Informatics , Graduate School of Information Science and Technology , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan , 8 WPI Nano Life Science Institute , Kanazawa University , Kanazawa , Japan Pseudomonas entomophila is a highly pathogenic bacterium that infects insects . It is also used as a suitable model pathogen to analyze Drosophila’s innate immunity . P . entomophila’s virulence is largely derived from Monalysin , a β - barrel pore - forming toxin that damages Drosophila tissues , inducing necrotic cell death . Here we report the ﬁrst and efﬁcient puriﬁcation of endogenous Monalysin and its characterization . Monalysin is successfully puriﬁed as a pro - form , and trypsin treatment results in a cleaved mature form of puriﬁed Monalysin which kills Drosophila cell lines and adult ﬂies . Electrophysiological measurement of Monalysin in a lipid membrane with an on - chip device conﬁrms that Monalysin forms a pore , in a cleavage - dependent manner . This analysis also provides a pore - size estimate of Monalysin using current amplitude for a single pore and suggests lipid preferences for the insertion . Atomic Force Microscope ( AFM ) analysis displays its structure in a solution and shows that active - Monalysin is stable and composed of an 8 - mer complex ; this observation is consistent with mass spectrometry data . AFM analysis also shows the 8 - mer structure of active - Monalysin in a lipid bilayer , and real - time imaging demonstrates the moment at which Monalysin is inserted into the lipid membrane . These results collectively suggest that endogenous Monalysin is indeed a pore - forming toxin composed of a rigid structure before pore formation in the lipid membrane . The endogenous Monalysin characterized in this study could be a desirable tool for analyzing host defense mechanisms against entomopathogenic bacteria producing damage - inducing toxins . Keywords : innate immunity , Drosophila , pore - forming toxin , atomic force microscope , Monalysin Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin INTRODUCTION The innate immune system is the front line of defense against microbial infection in metazoan animals ( 1 ) . Innate immune cells can sense infectious threats either by pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) or damage - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) ( 1 – 3 ) : pathogen - speciﬁc molecules such as peptidoglycans utilized by microbes as an essential substance of their life ( 1 ) , or host - derived molecules that are normally kept inside in their cells but released because of the tissue damage by infection ( 2 ) , respectively . The recognition and signaling mechanisms involving PAMPs are relatively well - studied . In Drosophila , humoral innate immunity relies on distinct signaling pathways , the Toll pathway and immune deﬁciency ( IMD ) pathway ( 4 , 5 ) . The Toll pathway is responsible for infectious threats from fungi or Gram - positive bacteria , and it senses fungal β - glucans or bacterial Lysine ( Lys ) - type peptidoglycans with a pattern recognition receptor PGRP - SA / GNBP1 complex or GNBP3 in the hemolymph ( 6 – 9 ) . PAMPs recognition by those receptors stimulates serine protease cascades in the hemolymph , which produces a cleaved form of the cytokine - like protein Spätzle ( Spz ) , a ligand of a Toll receptor ( 10 ) . An activated Toll receptor transmits a signal to NF - κ B Dif and / or Dorsal through a dMyd88 - Tube - Pelle complex , producing antimicrobial factors such as the antifungal peptide Drosomycin ( 11 , 12 ) . The IMD pathway is another NF - κ B pathway that recognizes Diaminopimelic acid ( DAP ) - type peptidoglycans released from Gram - negative bacteria ( 13 ) , eventually triggering the translocation of Relish to the nucleus and inducing the expression of genes that encode antimicrobial proteins , including Diptericin ( 14 ) . In contrast to a PAMPs - initiated innate immunity , DAMPs - mediated innate immune mechanisms in terms of an infectious situation have not been well - characterized yet . In ﬂies , protease cascade upstream of a Toll receptor is partly involved in DAMPs recognition . For example , fungal proteases could potentiate the serine protease cascade through Persephone ( 15 – 17 ) . Additionally , entomopathogenic nematodes damage epithelial cells and / or cuticles and degrade basement membrane ( BM ) . Clotting and components from disrupted BM seem to have a protective function against nematode infection ( 18 , 19 ) . However , the whole picture of damage - induced innate immunity is far from understood . Pseudomonas entomophila is an entomopathogenic , Gram - negative bacterium that was originally isolated from a wild ﬂy sampled in Guadeloupe in the Caribbean ( 20 ) . P . entomophila displays pathogenicity by oral infection , and the bacteria are widely used as a tool to examine gut innate immune responses ( 20 ) . Recently , P . entomophila has also been used in a systemic infection model ( 21 ) . In the gut , P . entomophila infection imposes severe damage via a reactive oxygen species , produced by host cells and a pore - forming toxin ( PFT ) from the bacteria , generally inhibiting translation in the intestine and thus blocking epithelium renewal ( 22 ) . The virulence of P . entomophila is under the control of a GacS / GacA two component system ( 20 ) . One of the main eﬀector molecules in this system is a PFT , Monalysin . Monalysin is secreted as a pro - toxin that is cleaved by proteases , such as AprA in P . entomophila , to become fully active ( 23 ) . Drosophila adults combat these eﬀectors using a cross - linked drosocrystallin ( dcy ) protein , which works as physical barrier blocking the permeation of macromolecules ( > 500 kDa ) in the peritrophic matrix ( 24 , 25 ) . Cleaved Monalysin shows cytotoxic activity , probably by forming pores in the plasma membrane of host cells , leading to disrupted membrane permeability and cell death ( 23 ) . The secondary structure prediction of the membrane - spanning domain indicates that Monalysin is a PFT of the β type ( 23 ) . Leone et al . reported that X - ray crystallography and cryo - electron microscopy , with recombinant Monalysin produced in E . coli , revealed its 3D structure and its putative mechanism during pore formation in the lipid membrane ( 26 ) . The recombinant Monalysin is an 18 - mer complex composed of two disk - shaped nonamers held together by the N - terminal swapping of the pro - peptides . The membrane - spanning region of pro - Monalysin is fully buried in the center of the ring or torus , and , perhaps during activation upon cleavage , the two disk - shaped nonamers dissociate to leave the transmembrane segments that attach to the target membrane , undergo conformational changes , and form the pore . In order to study the interaction between the host and entomopathogenic bacteria producing damage - inducing toxins , well - characterized puriﬁed Monalysin may be a useful tool . Besides , pore - forming proteins such as Monalysin may potentially be developed as biological control agents against insects ( e . g . , Cry toxin ) ( 27 – 29 ) , as well as biological “nanopores” that are used as a detector for single - molecule ( e . g . , α - hemolysin ) ( 30 ) . In that sense , endogenous Monalysin puriﬁed from P . entomophila could provide more precise insight of its protein function , rather than using the recombinant protein generated by E . coli that may have distinct intracellular environment from P . entomophila , which potentially gives rise to a diﬀerent subunit composition of the protein and thereby could inﬂuence the structural and functional features of the molecule . Additionally , a detailed analysis of the structure of the native pore - forming protein and its dynamics in solution and in lipid membrane would serve basic information for various applications . In this study , we succeeded in purifying native endogenous Monalysin from P . entomophila with killing activity in Drosophila cell line and adult ﬂies . We also characterized its structure and function using electrophysiological measurements and a high - speed atomic force microscope ( HS - AFM ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS Bacteria Stocks , Other Materials , and Cell Culture P . entomophila wild - type strain L48 and a Monalysin mutant mnl were kindly provided by Dr . B . Lemaitre . 1 , 2 - Dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - L - serine ( DOPS ) , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine ( DOPE ) , and 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - ( cap - biotinyl ) ( biotin - cap - DOPE ) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids . n - decane was purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . S2 cells from Drosophila hemocytes were maintained at 25 ◦ C in Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 2 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin Schneider’s Drosophila medium ( Thermo Fisher SCIENTIFIC ) containing 10 % ( v / v ) heat - inactivated FBS , 100 units / mL penicillin , and 100 µ g / mL streptomycin . Puriﬁcation of Pro - Monalysin P . entomophila was grown in LB at 29 ◦ C overnight , and was collected by centrifugation at 8 , 700 × g at 4 ◦ C for 15 min . The cell pellets were washed with PBS and lysed in PBS containing 2 % ( w / v ) CHAPS . Cells were sonicated at 4 ◦ C overnight , ﬁltrated with a 70 µ m Cell Strainer ( BD Falcon ) , and centrifuged at 9 , 000 × g at 4 ◦ C for 20 min to remove insoluble pellets . The collected supernatant was diluted 10 times with PBS , ﬁltrated with a 0 . 22 µ m ﬁlter ( Corning ) , and dialyzed with PBS for 9 h to exchange the solvent . Total lysate ( P . entomophila extracts ) was performed by ammonium sulfate precipitation ( 25 – 50 % ) . The pellet was dissolved in 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH8 . 0 and dialyzed against the same buﬀer for 9 h to remove salts . The dialysate was then subjected to anion exchange chromatography with a HiTrap Q HP column ( GE Healthcare ) , pre - equilibrated in 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH8 . 0 and then eluted with a linear gradient 0 to 1 M NaCl dissolved in 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH8 . 0 at a ﬂow rate of 1 mL / min for 30 min . After a cell viability assay , the fractions with cytotoxic activity were harvested and concentrated by ammonium precipitation ( 50 % ) . The pellet was dissolved in 10 mM sodium phosphate buﬀer , pH 7 . 4 , containing 140 mM NaCl , and then subjected to gel ﬁltration chromatography with a Superdex 200 Increase 10 / 300 GL column ( GE Healthcare ) , pre - equilibrated in a 10 mM Sodium phosphate buﬀer , pH 7 . 4 , containing 140 mM NaCl , and then eluted with the same buﬀer at a ﬂow rate of 0 . 75 mL / min . The peak eluted at 13 – 14 min ( molecular weight : around 460 kDa ) was collected and analyzed by SDS - PAGE . The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue ( Kanto Chemical Co . , Inc . ) to check the purity . The 30 kDa band was excised and analyzed by mass spectrometry . The molecular weight of each peak in gel ﬁltration chromatography was estimated by loading Gel ﬁltration Calibration Kit HMW ( GE Healthcare ) in the same column . Protein concentrations of fractions were measured by a Lowry method with Bio - Rad DC protein assay kit ( Bio - Rad ) . In the trypsin treatment to get active - Monalysin , trypsin was added to puriﬁed pro - Monalysin ( 175 µ g ) at 0 . 2 mg / mL and incubated at 25 ◦ C for 10 min , followed by a Protease Inhibitor Cocktail for General Use ( nacalai tesque , Cat # 04080 - 11 ) was added . To completely degrade Monalysin , trypsin was added to pro - Monalysin ( 10 µ g ) at a concentration of 0 . 2 mg / mL and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 58 h . Mass Spectrometry To identify the protein in the cytotoxic fraction , MALDI - TOF MS / MS analysis was performed at the Institute for Gene Research , Advanced Science Research Center , Kanazawa University , using a tandem mass spectrometer ( 4 , 800 plus MALDI TOF / TOF TM Analyzer [ Sciex ] ) with 2 , 5 - dihydroxybenzoic acid ( DHB ) as a matrix as described in Asano and Nishiuchi ( 31 ) . Brieﬂy , a cytotoxic fraction was loaded on an SDS - acrylamide gel , and a 30 kDa band was excised and in - gel digested with trypsin . The digested peptides were analyzed by MALDI - TOF / TOF . The data was subjected to the Protein Pilot ver . 4 . 0 ( Sciex ) against the Pseudomonas entomophila ( NCBI , Tax ID 312306 ) protein database ( 2017 - 8 - 23 ) . To determine the molecular weight of the active - Monalysin multimer , MALDI - TOF analysis was performed using the UltraﬂeXtreme MALDI TOF / TOF Analyzer ( Bruker Daltonix ) at Fukui Prefectural University with sinapic acid ( SA ) as a matrix . First , areas on the MALDI plates were coated with the SA solution . Then , the mixture of active - Monalysin with SA was dropped onto the SA - coated spots . Each spot was analyzed to obtain the molecular weight by MALDI - TOF ( ultraﬂeXtreme ) . The results from several measurements were integrated via analysis software version 4 . 1 . 2 . Cell Viability Assay S2 cells ( 1 . 5 – 8 . 0 × 10 5 cell in 100 µ L ) were inoculated in a 96 - well plate . 10 µ L of P . entomophila extract or collected fractions after chromatography , puriﬁed pro - Monalysin ( 1 . 5 µ g / mL ) , active - Monalysin ( 1 . 5 µ g / mL ) , or trypsin ( 3 . 8 × 10 − 2 µ g / mL ) were added and incubated at 25 ◦ C for 12 – 18 h . Cell viability was monitored by luminescence from a CellTiter - Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay ( Promega ) with a Spark 10 M ( TECAN ) . Cell viability is expressed as a relative value , with luminescence in cells incubated with the buﬀer ( negative control ) being 100 % . To measure total activity , cell viability , after incubation with serial diluted fractions , was examined and total activity was calculated as 1 unit corresponding to activity that yields 70 % cell viability . Speciﬁc activity was expressed as total activity divided by total protein ( mg ) . Caspase - 3 / 7 Activity Assay S2 cells ( 1 . 5 × 10 5 cell in 100 µ L ) were inoculated onto a 96 - well plate . Cycloheximide and active - Monalysin were added at 1 . 5 µ g / mL and incubated at 25 ◦ C for 6 , 12 , 18 , and 24 h . Caspase - 3 / 7 activity was monitored by luminescence from a Caspase - Glo 3 / 7 Assay ( Promega ) using a Synergy HTX ( BioTek ) . Monalysin Injection and Survival Assay Oregon R ﬂies ( Drosophila melanogaster , females , 3 – 7 days after eclosion ) were injected with a pro - Monalysin , active - Monalysin , or degraded - Monalysin solution ( 1 mg / mL ) into their hemolymph by micro - injection ( 70 nL per ﬂy ) , and kept at 25 ◦ C . Surviving ﬂies were counted at 1 h after injection . For dose - dependent analysis , ﬂies were injected with active - Monalysin solution ( 3 – 30 µ g / mL ) , and surviving ﬂies were monitored every 12 h for 60 h . Total RNA Extraction and Real - Time PCR Oregon R ﬂies ( Drosophila melanogaster , female , 3 – 7 days after eclosion ) were injected with an active - Monalysin , degraded - Monalysin solution ( 50 µ g / mL ) , or 1 , 000 times dilution of heat - killed E . coli into their hemolymph and kept at 25 ◦ C for 3 , 6 , 20 h . To obtain the heat - killed E . coli , overnight culture of E . coli ( DH5 α ) without dilution were heated at 100 ◦ C for 30 min , sonicated for 10 min , and then diluted with water . To quantify the Drosomycin ( Drs ) , total RNA of the collected ﬂies was isolated with Sepasol - RNA I Super G ( nacalai tesque ) and used for cDNA synthesis with ReverTra Ace reverse transcriptase ( TOYOBO ) and oligo ( dT ) 12 – 18 primers . To quantify the Diptericin ( Dpt ) , Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 3 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin puckered ( puc ) , and Turandot A ( TotA ) , isolated RNA were subjected to DNase treatment ( Promega , M6101 ) , followed by cDNA synthesis with ReverTra Ace reverse transcriptase ( TOYOBO ) and oligo ( dT ) 12 – 18 primers . Quantitative real - time PCR ( RT - qPCR ) was performed using a LightCycler 480 ( Roche Diagnostics ) . rpL32 was used as an internal control . The following primers were used for RT - qPCR : Drs forward , TTGTT CGCCCTCTTCGCTGTCCT ; Drs reverse , GCATCCTTCGCAC CAGCACTTCA ; Dpt forward , GTTCACCATTGCCGTCGCC TTAC ; Dpt reverse , CCCAAGTGCTGTCCATATCCTCC ; puc forward , GGCCTACAAGCTGGTGAAAG ; puc reverse , AGTTCAGATTGGGCGAGATG ; TotA forward , CCAAAATGAATTCTTCAACTGCT ; TotA reverse , GAATAGCCCATGCATAGAGGAC ; rpL32 forward , AGA TCGTGAAGAAGCGCACCAAG ; rpL32 reverse , CACCAG GAACTTCTTGAATCCGG . Immunohistochemistry For oral ingestion of Monalysin , dcy 1 ﬂies ( Bloomington # 26106 , females , 3 – 7 days after eclosion ) obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center were starved for 2 h at 29 ◦ C , then placed in a ﬂy vial with the food solution . The food solution consisted in a mixture of active - Monalysin solution ( 4 mg / mL ) and 5 % sucrose ( 1 : 1 ) , which was added to a ﬁlter disk that completely covered the surface of the standard ﬂy medium . Flies were kept at 29 ◦ C for 8 h , after which their guts were dissected out . Antibody staining was performed as previously described by Kenmoku et al . ( 32 ) with 1 : 200 rabbit anti - PH3 ( Cell Signaling , Cat # 9701 ) , 1 : 50 mouse anti - Dlg ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) , and 1 : 200 Alexa 555 - coupled and Alexa 488 - coupled secondary antibodies ( Thermo Fisher SCIENTIFIC ) . Nuclei were stained by 0 . 1 µ g / mL of 4’ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) . Samples were visualized with a LSM710 confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) or observed using a conventional ﬂuorescent microscope and images were reconstructed using Photoshop ( Adobe ) . SLP Assay for Puriﬁed Monalysin To examine the contamination level of peptidoglycan , 10 µ L of 0 . 001 – 1 mg / mL pro - Monalysin , active - Monalysin and degraded Monalyin were incubated with 40 µ L of Silkworm Larvae Plasma ( SLP ) reagent ( Wako ) at 25 ◦ C for 30 min in a 96 - well plate . The SLP reagent contains all factors involved in the prophenoloxidase cascade system triggered by peptidoglycans , which consequently activates prophenoloxidase . The activated prophenoloxidase then oxidizes 3 , 4 - dihydroxyphenylalanine ( DOPA ) in the substrate , thus forming a black melanin pigment . The amount of peptidoglycan was monitored as the blackness of the mixture visually . As a positive control , several dilution ( 1 / 10 , 1 / 10 2 , 1 / 10 3 , 1 / 10 4 ) of heat - killed E . coli solution were subjected to the same test . Ion Current Measurement of Monalysin Using a Bilayer Lipid Membrane ( BLM ) Chip With 16 Separate Channels One microliter of pro - Monalysin solution ( 1 . 5 mg / mL ) was added to 0 . 1 µ L of trypsin ( 0 . 25 % [ w / v ] ) . The mixture was incubated for 10 min at room temperature ( ∼ 23 ◦ C ) . To form a planar BLM , using the droplet contact method ; 3 . 7 µ l of lipid dissolved in n - decane ( 20 mg / mL dioleoylphosphatidylcholine [ DOPC ] or dioleoylphosphatidylcholine , dioleoylphosphatidylserine , and dioleoylphatidylethanolamine [ DOPC / DOPS / DOPE ] [ molar ratio of 7 : 2 : 1 ] ) was added to each double well on a BLM chip with 16 separate channels ( 16 - ch ) . Twenty one microliter of buﬀer solution ( 20 mM Tris - HCl / 150 mM NaCl [ pH 8 . 8 ] ) containing 0 . 015 mg / mL of Monalysin solution was added to each double well . The planar BLM was formed at the macroapertures . The Monalysin’s current signals were recorded using a multichannel patch clamp ampliﬁer with a 1 - kHz low - pass ﬁlter at a sampling frequency of 5 kHz ( Tecella JET ) . The measurement temperature was 23 ± 1 ◦ C . Current analysis was performed using the pCLAMP software program ( molecular devices ) . Atomic Force Microscopy AFM imaging was performed in a solution at room temperature ( 24 – 26 ◦ C ) , using a laboratory - built high - speed AFM setup ( 33 ) as described in Uchihashi et al . ( 34 ) . For AFM substrates , two types were used : the ﬂat muscovite mica substrate and the polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) substrate with controlled convex shapes ( ca . 50 nm ) ( 35 ) . Either a mica disc ( 1 . 5 mm in diameter and ∼ 0 . 05 mm in thickness ) or a PDMS disk ( 2 mm in diameter and ∼ 0 . 02 mm in thickness ) was glued on a glass sample stage ( 2 mm in diameter and height ) by epoxy . A freshly cleaved mica surface was prepared by removing the top layers of mica using Scotch tape . The PDMS surface was hydrophilized by a plasma ion bomber ( PIB - 10 , Vacuum Device ) set to hard mode for 3 min . The glass stage with either substrate was attached to the top of a Z - scanner by a drop of nail polish , on which a drop ( 2 µ L ) of sample solution ( either 0 . 1 mg / mL Monalysin or 0 . 1 mg / mL liposome ) was deposited . The liposome solution was prepared as previously described ( 34 ) , and the lipid composition was DOPC : DOPS : biotin - cap - DOPE = 7 : 2 : 1 ( w / w ) . After incubation for 3 – 5 min , the substrate surface was rinsed with 20 µ L of the observation buﬀer to remove ﬂoating samples . The sample stage was then immersed in a liquid cell containing ∼ 60 µ L of the observation buﬀer . AFM imaging was carried out in tapping mode , using small cantilevers ( BLAC10DS - A2 , Olympus ) , with a resonant frequency of ∼ 0 . 5 MHz in water , a quality factor of ∼ 1 . 3 in water , and a spring constant of ∼ 0 . 08 N / m . The cantilever’s free oscillation amplitude A 0 and set - point amplitude A s were set at 1 – 2 nm and ∼ 0 . 9 × A 0 , respectively . In some experiments , high tapping forces were applied to the samples by reducing A s , and a protein solution containing either Monalysin or trypsin ( 5 µ L ) was injected in the observation buﬀer during high - speed atomic force microscopy ( HS - AFM ) imaging . The imaging rate , scan size , and the pixel size for each AFM image are described in ﬁgure legends . Analysis of AFM Images AFM images were pretreated for analysis by a low - pass ﬁlter to remove spike noise and a ﬂatten ﬁlter to make the overall xy - plane ﬂat , using a laboratory built software as described in Ngo et al . ( 36 ) . The molecule heights were measured semi - automatically using the following steps . First , the most probable Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 4 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin highest point near the highest point of the molecule was selected manually . Second , the actual highest point was determined automatically by searching a 10 × 10 - pixel area ( typically 10 × 10 nm 2 ) around the selected point . The surface area occupied by the speciﬁc molecular species was analyzed by ImageJ using binarized images . The binarized images were obtained by setting a threshold height . The threshold heights were 8 nm for the double - ring complex of pro - Monalysin and 4 nm for the single - ring complex of pro - and active - Monalysin , respectively . Statistical Analysis Statistical analyses were performed by a Student’s t - test or log - rank test , and P < 0 . 05 were considered signiﬁcant . RESULTS Puriﬁcation of Endogenous Monalysin Protein From P . entomophila In our previous study , we demonstrated that an extract from P . entomophila , prepared by sonication of the bacterial cells with detergent , followed by membrane - ﬁltration , is fatal to adult ﬂies if ingested ( 24 ) . To examine whether P . entomophila extract acts as source for the puriﬁcation of endogenous Monalysin , we tested whether P . entomophila extract had Monalysin - derived cytotoxic activity . P . entomophila extract was simply added to the Drosophila embryonic hemocyte - derived S2 cell culture , and we found that , after 12 h of incubation , almost all cells lost their normal morphology and fell apart ( Figure 1A ) . A CellTiter - Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay , which measures cellular ATP , indicated that the S2 cells were dying ( Figure 1B ) . Next , we performed the cytotoxic assay , using an extract from a Monalysin - deﬁcient strain of P . entomophila to know whether P . entomophila extract - induced cell death depends on Monalysin . We found that an extract from a Monalysin - deﬁcient strain showed less cytotoxicity than that of a wild type ( Figures 1A , B ) . This indicates that a P . entomophila extract contains Monalysin toxin , and that endogenous Monalysin could be puriﬁed using the extract . Furthermore , we expected that this cytotoxic assay could be used to ﬁnd fractions containing Monalysin in each puriﬁcation step . We attempted its puriﬁcation in this way ( Figure 1C , Table 1 ) . First , a P . entomophila extract or total lysate were precipitated with ammonium sulfate to reduce the extract volume . The precipitate was suspended with a Tris buﬀer , subjected to a column for anion exchange chromatography , and eluted by a linear gradient of 0 to 1 M NaCl . The active fraction ( Fraction III ) was subjected to an ammonium sulfate precipitation again and suspended with a phosphate buﬀer ( Fraction IV ) . Fraction IV was subjected to a column for gel ﬁltration chromatography , and several sub - fractions were collected . A CellTiter - Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay showed that only sub - fraction 1 contained cytotoxic activity ( Figure 1E ) . The recovered activity of this ﬁnal fraction ( Fraction V in Table 1 and Figure 1C , sub - fraction 1 in Figures 1D , E ) was 6 % that of the starting total lysate of P . entomophila . The speciﬁc activity increased 14 - fold ( Table 1 ) . The chromatogram of the ﬁnal fraction ( Fraction V in Table 1 and Figure 1C , sub - fraction 1 in Figures 1D , E ) showed a sharp single peak around 460 kDa and gave a single band with a molecular mass of 30 kDa on an SDS - PAGE ( Figure 1F ) , which is the estimated size of the pro - form of Monalysin monomer . Mass spectrometric analysis of the single band resulted in speciﬁc amino acid sequences of Monalysin ( data not shown ) . From these results , we concluded that Monalysin , as a pro - form , was puriﬁed as a homogeneity from the wild type P . entomophila . Note that the molecular mass estimated by gel ﬁltration ( 460 kDa ) , that of the multimer of Monalysin , was slightly smaller than the estimate found in previous literature ( 26 ) . Pro - Monalysin is considered to undergo proteolytic cleavage by AprA , a protease secreted by P . entomophila , in order to be fully activated as a toxin ( 23 ) . Leone et al . showed that trypsin cleavage of recombinant pro - Monalysin recapitulated the proteolysis by AprA ( 26 ) . Thus , we performed trypsin cleavage on our puriﬁed endogenous Monalysin to see whether it transforms from a pro - form to an active - form . SDS - PAGE analysis showed that 30 kDa of pro - Monalysin monomer was cleaved to 27 kDa of monomer , as previously reported ( Figure 2A ) . Hereafter , we refer to trypsin - treated endogenous pro - Monalysin as active - Monalysin since the cleaved form exhibited much higher cytotoxic activity than the pro - form ( Figure 2B ) . Note that the trypsin in active - Monalysin did not show cytotoxic activity ( Supplementary Figure 1 ) . A lethal concentration of 50 % ( LC 50 ) of pro - and active - Monalysin was estimated from Figure 2B as 1 . 4 and 3 . 1 µ g / mL , respectively ( Figure 2C ) , which suggested that pro - Monalysin is also toxic to S2 cells . We interpreted this to mean that pro - Monalysin has cytotoxic activity without trypsin treatment because it can undergo proteolysis with some proteases of S2 cells in a cultured medium or on the cell surface , since the pore formation eﬃciency of pro - Monalysin in artiﬁcial membranes is much lower than active - Monalysin ( Figure 3B ) . This cell death induced by active - Monalysin appears to be necrotic rather than apoptotic , as the cells did not show caspase - 3 / 7 activation , while cells treated with cycloheximide ( reported to induce typical apoptosis in S2 cells ) showed signiﬁcant induction of the caspase - 3 / 7 activity [ ( 37 ) ; Figure 2D ] . These results are consistent with cell death induced by Monalysin produced in E . coli described in Opota et al . ( 23 ) . To conﬁrm whether puriﬁed Monalysin had toxic activity in vivo , we injected Monalysin into adult hemolymphs . Figure 2E shows that active - Monalysin killed adult ﬂies more eﬃciently than pro - Monalysin and degraded - Monalysin that is digested by trypsin for a long time to be fully decayed ( Supplementary Figure 2 ) , and the insecticidal eﬀect of active - Monalysin has a dose - dependent eﬀect ( Figure 2F ) . Furthermore , the analysis of dcy mutant guts fed with active - Monalysin revealed that the number of mitotic stem cells using phospho - histone H3 ( PH3 ) staining ( 38 ) —an indicator of gut repair after damage—increased after ingestion of active - Monalysin ( Supplementary Figure 3A ) . In addition , an immunostaining of the septate junction marker Discs large ( Dlg ) ( 39 ) and nuclear staining in ﬂies after oral injection of active - Monalysin showed disrupted organization of the epithelial cells ( Supplementary Figure 3B ) , implying that Monalysin could damage the ﬂies’ intestines . Collectively , these results suggest that puriﬁed Monalysin has toxic activity in vivo . Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 5 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 1 | Puriﬁcation of endogenous pro - Monalysin from P . entomophila . ( A ) Phase contrast images of S2 cells after incubation with PBS , wild type ( Pe WT ) or Monalysin - deﬁcient strain ( Pe 1 mnl ) of P . entomophila extracts ( 15 µ g protein / 8 × 10 5 cells in 100 µ L ) for 12h . Magniﬁcation images are shown in the square on the right side . Scale bar ; 20 µ m . The space around the S2 cells after incubation with Pe WT extracts appears whiter than others , due to cell debris . ( B ) S2 cells were ( Continued ) Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 6 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 1 | incubated with Pe WT or Pe 1 mnl total lysates ( 15 µ g protein / 8 × 10 5 cells in 100 µ L ) for 12h . Cell viability was monitored as luminescence by a CellTiter - Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay . Cell viability is shown relative to luminescence in cells that were incubated with PBS , taken as 100 % . The means ± S . E . obtained with the data from triplicate samples , are presented ( * P < 0 . 05 , as determined by a Student’s t - test ) . ( C ) The puriﬁcation step of endogenous pro - Monalysin . A HiTrap Q HP column and a Superdex 200 Increased 10 / 30L GL column were used in anion exchange chromatography and gel ﬁltration chromatography , respectively . ( D ) Chromatogram of gel ﬁltration chromatography . Eluted proteins were detected by measuring OD 280 . The retention time was the time passed after loading the sample into the column . The molecular weight of each retention time was estimated by loading Gel ﬁltration Calibration Kit HMW ( GE Healthcare ) in the same column . The estimated molecular mass was around 460 kDa for the ﬁrst eluted peak . Pre - loading indicates a fraction before loading to column for gel ﬁltration chromatography ( that is , it is the same Fraction IV in Table 1 ) . Brackets and numbers were collected fractions and sub - fraction numbers , respectively . ( E ) S2 cells were incubated with each fraction obtained from gel ﬁltration chromatography for 12h . Cell viability was monitored as luminescence by a CellTiter - Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay . Cell viability is shown relative to luminescence in cells incubated with an elution buffer , taken as 100 % . The means ± S . E . obtained with the data from triplicate samples , are presented . ( F ) SDS - PAGE analysis of fraction 1 . The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue . The arrowhead indicates a pro - Monalysin monomer ( 30 kDa ) . The numbers on the left side indicate molecular weight . TABLE 1 | Puriﬁcation of pro - Monalysin . Fraction Total protein ( mg ) Total activity a ( units ) Speciﬁc activity b ( units / mg protein ) Puriﬁcation ( fold ) Yield ( % ) I Total lysate 3 . 5 3 . 1 × 10 3 8 . 7 × 10 2 1 . 0 100 II 25 – 50 % ( NH4 ) 2 SO 4 ppt c 2 . 6 1 . 7 × 10 3 6 . 8 × 10 2 0 . 78 57 III Anion exchange HPLC 2 . 3 × 10 − 1 1 . 6 × 10 3 7 . 0 × 10 3 8 . 0 52 IV 0 – 50 % ( NH4 ) 2 SO 4 ppt 6 . 0 × 10 − 2 4 . 7 × 10 2 8 . 4 × 10 3 9 . 7 16 V Gel ﬁltration HPLC 2 . 0 × 10 − 2 1 . 8 × 10 2 1 . 2 × 10 4 14 6 a Total activity was calculated as 1 unit corresponding to activity that yields 70 % cell viability . b Speciﬁc activity indicates total activity divided by total protein . c ppt : precipitate . We also examined whether Monalysin injections could induce antimicrobial peptides ( AMP ) and stress gene expressions in adult ﬂies , as tissue damage could induce infection - independent humoral innate immunity . Real - time quantitative PCR ( RT - qPCR ) analysis suggested that the expression of Drosomycin ( Drs ) and Turandot A ( TotA ) , a read - out of the activation of the JAK - STAT pathway , was signiﬁcantly induced by the injection of active - Monalysin ( Supplementary Figures 4A , D ) . This suggests that Monalysin activates the innate immune and stress pathways , possibly through the Toll and / or JAK - STAT pathways . Monalysin injection , however , did not induce Diptericin ( Dpt ) and puckered ( puc ) gene expression , a read - out of the activation of the IMD pathway and Jun - N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) pathway ( Supplementary Figures 4B , C ) . P . entomophila is a Gram - negative bacterium which does not contain the Lys - type peptidoglycan recognized by the Toll pathway . In addition , degraded - Monalysin did not induce Drs and TotA expression ( Supplementary Figures 4A , D ) and a peptidoglycan - contamination test using Silkworm Larvae Plasma ( SLP ) . Reagent did not show signiﬁcant contamination of peptidoglycans , which normally activate innate immunity , in active - Monalysin ( Supplementary Figures 4E , F ) . These results might exclude the possibility that contamination of some PAMPs activates humoral immunity and imply that tissue damage induced by Monalysin might induce a humoral innate immune response and stress response in adult Drosophila . Taken together , these results show we succeeded to purify endogenous Monalysin , which has a toxic and damage - inducing activity in Drosophila . Electrophysiological Characterization of Monalysin as a Pore - Forming Toxin We next sought to conﬁrm that endogenous Monalysin indeed functions as a PFT and characterize its mode - of - action by functional analysis . To monitor pore formation on the lipid membrane , we adopted an “on - chip lipid bilayer system , ” which was composed of a parallel ion current recording device with 16 separate channels ( 16 - ch ) of artiﬁcial planar BLM wells , where the bilayers in the wells were formed based on the droplet contact method ( Figure 3A ) ( 40 ) . First , we observed the formation of Monalysin nanopores onto lipid bilayers via the electrophysiological analysis of an artiﬁcial cell membrane . We obtained stepwise signals speciﬁc to nanopore - containing proteins in the solution containing the active - Monalysin ( Figure 3B , left ) . A total of 723 stepwise signals for active - Monalysin on the DOPC lipid bilayer were observed for 30 min using a 16 - ch device ( N = 2 ) . On the other hand , in case of the pro - Monalysin , 35 stepwise signals were observed for 30 min using a 16 - ch device ( N = 2 ) ( Figure 3B , right ) . These results suggest that the trypsin - treated active - Monalysins were more vigorously reconstituted into the lipid bilayer and formed nanopores within it . Next , we investigated the appearance of the active - Monalysin on lipid bilayers composed of DOPC and DOPC / DOPS / DOPE ( mol ratio of 7 : 2 : 1 ) . The formation of the Monalysin nanopores in the lipid bilayers was more occurrent on the DOPC lipid bilayer ( 723 stepwise signals ) than the DOPC / DOPS / DOPE lipid bilayer ( 349 stepwise signals ) ( Figure 3C ) . We found two amplitude peaks for the active - Monalysin - speciﬁc stepwise Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 7 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 2 | Trypsin treatment transforms puriﬁed pro - Monalysin into its active - form . ( A ) A SDS - PAGE analysis of puriﬁed pro - Monalysin before and after trypsin treatment . The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue . Trypsin was incubated with puriﬁed pro - Monalysin at 0 . 2 mg / mL for 10min . Closed and open arrowheads indicate a pro - Monalysin monomer ( 30 kDa ) and an active - Monalysin monomer ( 27 kDa ) , respectively . The arrow indicates trypsin . ( B ) Cell viability after incubation with pro - Monalysin and active - Monalysin . S2 cells ( 1 . 5 × 10 5 cells in 100 µ L ) were incubated with the indicated concentration of pro - Monalysin or active - Monalysin for 18h , cell viability was measured via a CellTiter - Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay . Cell viability is shown , relative to luminescence in cells incubated with PBS , taken as 100 % . ( C ) LC 50 of pro - Monalysin and active - Monalysin . LC 50 was estimated from data in the B . The means ± S . E . obtained with the data from triplicate samples are presented ( * P < 0 . 05 , as determined by a Student’s t - test ) . ( D ) Caspase - 3 / 7 activity in cells after incubation with active - Monalysin . S2 cells ( 1 . 5 × 10 5 cell in 100 µ L ) were incubated with active - Monalysin or Cycloheximide ( an apoptosis inducer ) at 1 . 5 µ g / mL for the indicated time . Caspase - 3 / 7 activity was measured as luminescence using a Caspase - Glo 3 / 7 Assay . The means ± S . E . obtained with the data from duplicate samples in two independent experiments ( E ) Survival analysis of adult ﬂies upon injection with pro - Monalysin , active - Monalysin , or degraded - Monalysin ( 1 mg / mL ) into their hemolymph for 1h ( * P < 0 . 05 ; NS , not signiﬁcant , as determined by a Student’s t - test ) . The minus indicates un - injected ﬂies . The means ± S . E . were obtained with the data from three vials ( 10 ﬂies / each ) . The data represents two independent experiments . ( F ) Survival analysis of adult ﬂies upon injection with active - Monalysin ( 3 – 30 µ g / mL ) at indicated time points ( * P < 0 . 0001 , as determined by a log - rank test ) . Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 8 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 3 | Characterization of Monalysin as a pore - forming toxin using electrophysiological measurements . ( A ) Experimental design for monitoring Monalysin pore formation . A buffer containing Monalysin was supplied to a planar bilayer lipid membrane , prepared by the droplet contact method , and pore formation was monitored by recording ion current signals . ( B ) Typical current trace of the Monalysin , which was digested by trypsin . Applied potential : + 100mV ( left ) . Red triangles represent the detections of a single Monalysin nanopore within the BLM . Total stepwise signals of Monalysin , with or without trypsin treatment , on the DOPC lipid bilayer were shown . Signals for Monalysin were observed for 30min using a 16 - ch device ( right ) . ( C ) Current - amplitude histogram of the Monalysin onto lipid bilayers composed of DOPC and DOPC / DOPS / DOPE ( mol ratio of 7 : 2 : 1 ) using a 16 - ch device . Applied potential : + 100mV ( left ) . Total signals of Monalysin on the DOPC and DOPC / DOPS / DOPE lipid bilayer were shown . Signals for Monalysin were observed for 30min using a 16 - ch device ( right ) . The curve represents a multipeak Gaussian ﬁtting ( P < 0 . 05 , F - test , respectively ) : the red , green and blue curves show the ﬁrst , second and third Gaussian peak , respectively , and the black curves represent the sum of the three Gaussian curves . signals in each case : 1 . 5 ± 1 . 9 pA , 17 . 3 ± 1 . 9 pA , and 25 . 5 ± 2 . 2 pA ( mean ± S . D . ) for the DOPC lipid bilayer , and 12 . 3 ± 1 . 8 pA , 18 . 1 ± 2 . 0 pA , and 26 . 1 ± 2 . 7 pA ( mean ± S . D . ) for the DOPC / DOPS / DOPE lipid bilayer ( Figure 3C , left ) . The amplitude peaks of the active - Monalysin signals in case of the DOPC and DOPC / DOPS / DOPE bilayers showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences . We estimated the diameters of the active - Monalysin nanopores from the amplitude of the active - Monalysin signals and buﬀer conductance , in accordance with the method described in Gutsmann et al . ( 41 ) . The diameters Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 9 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin of the active - Monalysin nanopores were estimated , using the amplitude peaks , to be 0 . 74 ± 0 . 30 nm , 0 . 91 ± 0 . 30 nm , and 1 . 10 ± 0 . 32 nm ( mean ± S . D . ) in case of the DOPC lipid bilayer , and 0 . 77 ± 0 . 30 nm , 0 . 77 ± 0 . 29 nm , 0 . 93 ± 0 . 31 nm , and 1 . 12 ± 0 . 36 nm ( mean ± S . D . ) in case of the DOPC / DOPS / DOPE lipid bilayer . In summary , Monalysin appears to insert itself preferably within a lipid bilayer with high ratio of PC , and forms pores measuring around 0 . 7 – 1 nm , regardless of the lipid composition . Atomic Force Microscope Analysis for the Structure of Monalysin in Solution Gel ﬁltration chromatography of endogenous Monalysin indicates that Monalysin forms a stable pore - forming complex before activation and membrane interaction , as previously suggested ( 26 ) . However , based on the gel ﬁltration analysis , it seems that the molecular weight of a Monalysin complex is slightly smaller than that of a previous 18 - mer model of Monalysin . Data from an MALDI - TOFMS analysis is in line with this estimate . We detected a possible molecular ion peak of active - Monalysin multimers , whose m / z was 217932 . 23 . This value was very close to the molecular weight of an 8 - mer active - complex expected from the amino acid sequences , 213160 . 4 Da ( Supplementary Figure 5 ) . Revealing the structure of native Monalysin in solution and lipid membrane , particularly its dynamic nature , is essential to understand its detailed molecular function and use to evaluate innate immunity mechanisms in ﬂies , as well as to develop biological control agents against insects and biological nanopores . To this end , we employed HS - AFM that enabled dynamic real - time observations of macromolecules at nanometer resolutions , which are not feasible with other methods ( 42 , 43 ) , and had recent achievements of revealing the dynamic structures of pore - forming proteins ( 44 – 47 ) . First , we observed pro - Monalysin in the PBS buﬀer on a mica surface . The experimental setup is shown in Figure 4A . As shown in Figure 4B , molecules with a uniform height covered the mica surface . At smaller scan sizes , trefoil - shaped molecules were seen ( Figure 4C , Supplementary Movie 1 ) . Importantly , the molecule corresponding to each leaf of the trefoil dissociated from , and re - bound to , a trefoil - shaped molecule ( Figure 4C , 9 . 75 , and 10 . 25 s ) , indicating that one particle in the trefoil - shaped molecule is the minimum unit of pro - Monalysin . Note that pro - Monalysin occasionally forms a trimer of the minimum unit in the solution . Hereafter , we refer to this minimum unit of pro - Monalysin as pro - form . The pro - form height was 14 . 0 ± 0 . 9 nm ( mean ± S . D ) ( Figures 4D , E ) . The center - to - center distance between the adjacent pro - forms in the trefoil - shaped molecule was 11 . 3 ± 1 . 7 nm ( Figure 4F ) . This result suggests that this distance corresponds to the maximal pro - form diameter , which is slightly smaller than the reported value of recombinant Monalysin ( ∼ 14 nm ) ( 26 ) . We did not conﬁrm the presence of the reported pore structure on the center of the pro - form . This is because the pro - form moved faster than the AFM scanning speed . Next , we observed active - Monalysin in the PBS buﬀer on a mica surface . As shown in Supplementary Figure 6A , no trefoil - shaped molecules were observed , but molecules with a similar width to that of the pro - form were rapidly moving on the mica surface ( Supplementary Movie 2 ) . The striking diﬀerence from the pro - form was that the height of the molecules was 5 . 1 ± 0 . 3 nm ( Supplementary Figures 6B , C ) , which is less than half of the pro - form . This result is consistent with the idea that pro - Monalysin , double - stacked disk - like oligomers , dissociates into two disk - shaped oligomers upon proteolytic cleavage ( 26 ) . This suggests that we could observe the active - form of Monalysin . However , the presence of the central pore could not be conﬁrmed as the molecules moved rapidly . Use of a low salt buﬀer ( 30 mM NaCl , 10 mM Sodium phosphate , pH 7 . 0 ) as an observation buﬀer induced strong immobilization of Monalysin oligomers on the mica surface , allowing us to image the molecular feature at a high spatial resolution . As shown in Figure 4G , oligomers with a central pore were clearly visualized by the AFM even at somewhat larger scan sizes . The height was 5 . 3 ± 0 . 3 nm ( mean ± S . D . ) ( Figures 4H , I ) , identical to that obtained under the PBS buﬀer . The central pore had an aperture diameter of ∼ 3 nm ( Figure 4H ) , consistent with the previous report ( 26 ) . The center - to - center distance between the adjacent active - forms was 11 . 4 ± 0 . 9 nm ( Figure 4J ) , indicating that the maximal diameter of the active - form is identical to that of the pro - form . This result is consistent with no signiﬁcant change induced in the outer diameters of Monalysin upon protease activation ( 26 ) . At smaller scan sizes , the sub - unit stoichiometry was directly resolved ( Figure 4K , Supplementary Movie 3 ) . Unexpectedly , the active - Monalysin was composed of eight sub - units and formed a disk - shaped octamer , in contrast to the crystalline structure of recombinant pro - Monalysin ( 26 ) , which suggests nonameric ( 9 - mer ) composition . We next visualized the conversion of pro - Monalysin to active - Monalysin after trypsin treatment in the PBS buﬀer . The video shows that , in a trypsin - concentration dependent manner , almost all molecules with a height of ∼ 14 nm were converted into molecules with a height of ∼ 5 nm over time ( Figure 5 , Supplementary Movie 4 ) . Interestingly , we noticed that , by applying stronger tapping forces , the pro - form with a height of ∼ 14 nm can be changed into molecules with a height of ∼ 5 nm without trypsin treatment . Indeed , this change occurred depending on the strength of the tapping force ( Supplementary Figures 7A – C , Supplementary Movie 5 ) . When A sp / A 0 were set at 0 . 5 , this height change was seen for almost all the pro - form molecules after 60 s . The average tapping force in this imaging condition is estimated to be 53 ± 17 pN , using the nominal values of A 0 = 2 . 0 ± 0 . 2 nm , k c = 80 ± 20 pN / nm , and Q c = 1 . 3 ± 0 . 2 . In contrast , under the typical imaging conditions using A sp / A 0 of more than 0 . 8 , giving an average tapping force of < 37 ± 17 pN , this height alteration was not seen at all , even after 60 s . These results strongly suggest that the pro - Monalysin height change seen in the trypsin treatment is induced by the proteolytic cleavage , not by the mechanical perturbations . Thus , the results seen in Figure 5 are direct evidence that trypsin treatment eﬀectively digests a portion of pro - Monalysin and produces the active - forms by dissociating the doubly stacked disks . Note that the active - forms can withstand an average tapping force of ∼ 50 Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 10 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 4 | Molecular features of pro - and active - Monalysin on a mica surface visualized by AFM . ( A ) Experimental design for AFM analysis . Samples were absorbed into a substrate surface and imaged by a probe - tip attached at the end of a cantilever . In some experiments , the injection solution was added to the buffer solution during AFM imaging . ( B ) A wide - area image of pro - Monalysin . Typical trefoil - shaped molecules are encircled by red dashed - lines . The scanning area was 200 × 200 ( Continued ) Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 11 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 4 | nm 2 with 100 × 100 pixels , and the imaging rate was 330 ms / frame . ( C ) Successive AFM images of pro - Monalysin ( see Supplementary Movie 1 ) . The light blue arrowhead shows that a pro - form detaches from , and binds to , a trefoil - shaped molecule . The scanning area was 100 × 100 nm 2 with 100 × 100 pixels and the imaging rate was 250 ms / frame . ( G ) A wide - area image of active - Monalysin . Two different height scale images are shown . Bright spots are some adsorbed debris . The scanning area was 80 × 80 nm 2 with 160 × 160 pixels and the imaging rate was 330 ms / frame . ( K ) Small - area image of active - Monalysin ( see Supplementary Movie 3 ) . The scanning area was 40 × 40 nm 2 with 120 × 120 pixels , and the imaging rate was 150 ms / frame . The right image is an averaged image using four successive images . ( D , H ) A cross - section analysis of pro - and active - Monalysin . The sections are from the blue and red lines drawn on the images in C , G . Each dashed line indicates the center position of a molecule used in the analysis of F , J . ( E , I ) Height distributions of pro - and active - Monalysin . ( F , J ) Center - to - center distance distributions of pro - and active - Monalysin . All distributions were ﬁtted by single - Gaussian curve . pN ( Supplementary Figures 7D , E , Supplementary Movie 6 ) . In addition , the height alternation of the pro - form from 14 to 5 nm was also induced just when the molecules were strongly immobilized on the mica surface under the low salt buﬀer ( Supplementary Figure 8 , Supplementary Movie 7 ) . These results suggest that the intramolecular interactions supporting the disk - shaped octamer structure are strong , while the disk - disk interaction is relatively weak and perhaps only sustained by the interaction of amino acid residues removed during protease activation . However , it remains an open question whether the force - indeed molecules from the pro - form with a height of ∼ 5 nm are active and can form nanopores within the cell membrane . Importantly , the pro - Monalysin , not activated by trypsin treatment , strongly immobilized on the mica surface formed the disk - shaped octamer with the central pore ( Supplementary Figure 8B ) . Consistent with the previous report ( 26 ) , this result suggests that the central pore is already formed in the doubly stacked disks of the pro - Monalysin in solution . Real - Time Dynamics of Monalysin Insertion Into a Lipid Bilayer We next visualized the insertion events of the active - Monalysin into a lipid membrane ( Figure 6 ) . A lipid membrane composed of a mixture of phospholipids of DOPC / DOPS / biotin - cap - DOPE was formed on the surface of PDMS ( 35 ) . The active - Monalysin was then added into the observation buﬀer to be monitored . HS - AFM video showed that the active - Monalysin was inserted into the lipid membrane without signiﬁcant structural change ( Figure 6 , Supplementary Movie 8 ) . The active - form height was 6 . 1 ± 0 . 7 nm ( mean ± S . D . ) from the surface of lipid membrane ( Figures 6B , C ) , which is slightly higher than that seen in the active - form on mica . At smaller scan sizes , the sub - unit stoichiometry was directly resolved to be 8 - mer ( Figure 6D , Supplementary Movie 9 ) . These results collectively suggest that endogenous pro - Monalysin is a 16 - mer complex , separated by protease into 8 - mer active complexes , and the 8 - mer active complex is inserted into the lipid membrane as they are . Interestingly , Monalysin was preferentially inserted into the edge of the lipid membrane ( Figure 6E ) . This implies that Monalysin prefers to be inserted in highly curved parts of the membrane . Consistent with this , we observed many insertions of active - Monalysin into the liposome ( Supplementary Figure 9A , Supplementary Movie 10 ) , while no insertion was seen into the lipid membrane formed on the mica surface ( Supplementary Figure 9E ) . The surface roughness of the lipid bilayer formed on the PDMS and mica surfaces were 0 . 51 ± 0 . 08 nm and 0 . 13 ± 0 . 05 nm , respectively . These results indicate that the active - Monalysin can recognize such diﬀerence in the surface roughness of lipid membrane and make a drastic diﬀerence in the membrane insertion . Interestingly , the liposome placed on the mica surface was distorted and deformed into a disc shape ( ∼ 13 nm in height and ∼ 80 nm in width ) rather than a spherical shape ( Supplementary Figure 9B ) , and all Monalysin molecules were located on the outer periphery of the disc ( see the blue arrowheads in Supplementary Figure 9A ) . This suggests that the active - form can spontaneously migrate to highly curved sites on the lipid membrane . In addition , we found that the active - Monalysin which have been reconstituted with liposome has two height states of 5 . 9 ± 0 . 5 and 7 . 3 ± 0 . 4 nm ( Supplementary Figures 9C , D ) . Considering that the height of the active - form inserted into the lipid membrane formed on the PDMS is ∼ 6 nm , the active molecule inserted into the curved membrane may have a height of ∼ 7 nm , and the molecules with the height of ∼ 7 nm seen in Supplementary Figures 9C , D are presumably in a molecular state before height transition from ∼ 7 to ∼ 6 nm . DISCUSSION In this study , we reported , for the ﬁrst time , on the puriﬁcation of endogenous pro - Monalysin from entomopathogenic bacteria P . entomophila . Puriﬁed pro - Monalysin is activated by trypsin treatment , which is conﬁrmed by electrophysiological analysis with an artiﬁcial lipid membrane . The pro - form is stable for more than a month at 4 ◦ C ( data not shown ) , and active - form produced by trypsin treatment had cytotoxic activity in Drosophila cell line and adult ﬂies . In particular , we examined the distinct structure and dynamics of endogenous Monalysin in solution and within the lipid membrane using HS - AFM and revealed the stability of the active - octamer structure . This study suggests that endogenous Monalysin is one of the best model toxins from entomopathogenic bacteria . Additionally , information on pore size estimated by electrophysiological analysis is useful for the potential development of biological nanopores from endogenous Monalysin . We puriﬁed pro - Monalysin based on cytotoxic activity from cell pellets of P . entomophila , not from a culture supernatant , meaning that a large amount of Monalysin is kept inside the cells as an assembled pro - form . The diameters of pro - Monalysin and active - Monalysin , estimated from HS - AFM analysis , are ∼ 11 nm and their heights are ∼ 14 and 5 – 7 nm , respectively . Both sizes are too large to be secreted by P . entomophila’s secretion system . It has type I and II secretion systems with secretion pore diameters that are generally < 5 nm ( 48 – 50 ) . Since P . entomophila Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 12 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 5 | AFM images showing the height conversion of pro - Monalysin upon trypsin treatment . ( A , B ) Successive AFM images before and after trypsin injection ( Supplementary Movie 4 ) . The scanning area was 200 × 200 nm 2 with 100 × 100 pixels , and the imaging rate was 330 ms / frame . At 0s , a drop of trypsin solution was injected in the observation buffer . The ﬁnal concentrations of trypsin in the observation buffer were 0 . 2 mg / mL for A and 0 . 02 mg / mL for B , respectively . After injection , the height conversion was gradually seen . ( C ) The time course of the relative area of the double - ring complex of pro - Monalysin before and after trypsin injection . The average coverage area before trypsin injection is set to 1 . The time course after injection is missing for 20 – 30s . This is because the AFM images during this term were disturbed , and the area measurements cannot be performed . Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 13 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 6 | AFM images showing insertion of active - Monalysin onto lipid membrane formed on the PDMS surface . ( A ) Successive AFM images before and after active - Monalysin injection ( Supplementary Movie 8 ) . Dark area represents the PDMS surface , while slightly bright area represents the lipid membrane surface ( see the asterisk in the ﬁrst image ) . The scanning area was 150 × 150 nm 2 with 80 × 80 pixels , and the imaging rate was 250 ms / frame . At 0s , a drop of active - Monalysin solution was injected in the observation buffer . The ﬁnal concentrations of active - Monalysin in the observation buffer were 0 . 015 mg / mL . After injection , the active - Monalysin were gradually inserted on the lipid bilayer ( see the light blue arrowheads ) . ( B ) A cross - section analysis of active - Monalysin inserted in the lipid bilayer . The section is from the red line drawn on the image in A . ( C ) Height distributions of active - Monalysin inserted in the lipid bilayer . The distribution was ﬁtted by single - Gaussian curve . ( D ) Small - area image of active - Monalysin inserted in the lipid bilayer ( Supplementary Movie 9 ) . The scanning area was 30 × 30 nm 2 with 150 × 150 pixels , and the imaging rate was 330 ms / frame . The right image is an averaged image using 20 successive images . ( E ) AFM image gallery showing that the active - Monalysin are preferentially inserted into the edge of lipid bilayer . Asterisk marks represent the lipid bilayer areas . The scanning area was 200 × 200 nm 2 with 100 × 100 pixels , and the imaging rate was 330 ms / frame . tends to undergo autolysis , particularly at temperatures over 30 ◦ C , some P . entomophila may have been lysed in the host’s intestine . In this case , pro - Monalysin was released from the dead bacteria and digested by bacterial proteases such as AprA , or perhaps also by host proteases , to become its active - form . We also observed that the trefoil - shaped structure of 16 - mer Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 14 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin FIGURE 7 | A model of Monalysin activation for pore formation . Endogenous pro - Monalysin presents a 16 - mer complex and occasionally forms a trefoil - shaped structure composed of trimer complex in the PBS buffer when its concentration is high enough . After trypsin treatment or mechanical perturbation , the double - stacked disk - like 16 - mer complex dissociates into two disk - shaped 8 - mer complexes . The 8 - mer complex of active - Monalysin , in turn , preferentially inserts itself into the curved lipid membrane and forms nanopores ( pore size = 1nm ) . pro - Monalysin composes the trimer complex in the PBS buﬀer when the concentration of pro - Monalysin is high enough . By making a trimer complex , the cleavage site for proteolytic activation of pro - Monalysin might be hidden and prevented from being an active - form in P . entomophila . Sub - cellular localization and estimated concentration of pro - Monalysin in P . entomophila should be investigated in a future study . The most well - characterized PFTs that damage insect tissue are probably Cry toxins from Bacillus thuringiensis , a Gram - positive bacterium commonly used as a biological pesticide ( 27 ) . Cry toxins represent a large family , consisting of more than 350 diﬀerent members , yet their common features as toxins are essentially the same ( 27 ) . They form crystalline inclusions after production , are solubilized , undergo partial cleavage by proteases in digestive juice , and are activated after ingestion . The activated Cry toxin is considered a monomer and then forms a pore on the cell membrane of midgut epithelial cells , following speciﬁc interactions with a receptor ( s ) , resulting in cell lysis and destruction of midgut tissue ( 27 , 28 ) . However , our study showed that endogenous Monalysin was composed of a pore - forming multimer from the beginning and demonstrates a receptor - independent insertion into the lipid membrane . Importantly , since Cry toxins show target speciﬁcity of insect species through selective toxin - receptor interactions , one needs to employ a genetic trick when using them on ﬂies , e . g . , overexpression of the Cry1Aa receptor and the application of Cry1Aa thereafter ( 29 ) . Thus , if one seeks to impose tissue damage in a non - speciﬁc manner , Monalysin injection or ingestion would be a simple method . Indeed , our study showed that injection of endogenous Monalysin , through a standard procedure , eﬀectively killed adult ﬂies and induced an innate immune response . This study provides a theoretical basis for the use of endogenous Monalysin toxins as a tool for studying injury - induced innate immunity in the context of microbial infections . Note that endogenous Monalysin can be puriﬁed milligram order from 1 L of bacterial culture , suggesting its versatility within a range of experiments . Our HS - AFM analysis revealed real - time dynamics of Monalysin in action ( Figure 7 ) . Pro - Monalysin puriﬁed from P . entomophila showed a relatively scissile 16 - mer complex ( though stable enough during the puriﬁcation step and storage ) , in contrast to the 18 - mer structure of recombinant Monalysin prepared from E . coli . A 16 - mer model of our endogenous Monalysin is consistent with gel ﬁltration chromatography and MALDI - TOFMS analysis . This discrepancy might be derived from the diﬀerent techniques , or the hosts , used to express Monalysin . Alternatively , pore - forming toxins tend to compose diﬀerent subunit stoichiometry in solution than in crystal . Indeed , α - hemolysin had been suggested to form heptamer by Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 15 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin X - ray crystallography , though an AFM analysis indicated that α - hemolysin composes hexameric stoichiometry ( 51 ) . This report and our current study may imply that pore - forming toxins , in general , could form two diﬀerent energetically stable oligomers in diﬀerent conditions . By using endogenous Monalysin , it would be interesting to solve crystal structure or to perform cryo - EM in the future study . Activated - Monalysin obtained by trypsin treatment has an 8 - mer constitution and roughly halves in height , indicating that pro - Monalysin is half dissociated into an 8 - mer pair well before insertion . It penetrates and forms pores in the lipid bilayer without profound structural change . Notably , Monalysin was preferentially inserted into the edge of the lipid membrane , implying that Monalysin could recognize the target membrane’s curvature . Eukaryotic cells possess local membrane subdomains , some of which have high curved areas , such as the tip of ﬁlopodia and the area of endocytosis or exocytosis . Those subregions have important biological functions for cell movement , intracellular communication , and signaling ( 52 ) . Phagocytosing immune cells , such as macrophages , extend a lot of ﬁlopodia , particularly upon immune activation . Monalysin or its relatives might preferentially target those cells and / or important biological membrane regions . Additionally , a possible entry site of Monalysin is the tip of microvilli of enterocytes in the ﬂy’s intestinal epithelium , as previous studies have reported that Monalysin killed adult ﬂies after oral infection through gut injury ( 23 ) . Furthermore , electrophysiological analysis revealed that Monalysin inserts itself most commonly within lipid bilayers with high ratio of PC . The chemical nature of lipids determines how the lipids bundle side - by - side in a monolayer and thereby inﬂuences the monolayer curvature . For example , lysophospholipids form positively curved monolayers ; PC build nearly ﬂat monolayers ; and DOPE assemble negatively curved monolayers ( 53 ) . Notably , upon cell activation , some of the membrane phospholipids are metabolized into eicosanoids and lysophospholipids ( 54 ) . Active - Monalysin may prefer to insert a highly bent portion of the plasma membrane with a large amount of lysophospholipids produced upon a cell signaling event . From this point of view , not only local membrane subdomains , but also some speciﬁc cell types and / or cell activation status could be the insertion target of active - Monalysin . And then , these characteristics might determine host and position speciﬁcity where Monalysin shows toxicity . More detailed analysis to ﬁnd more speciﬁc lipid preference and the optimal radius of curvature for Monalysin insertion shall be conducted in vitro and in vivo . Further studies on endogenous Monalysin are required to answer questions concerning the precise mode - of - action during pore formation in the target membrane . DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT All datasets generated for this study are included in the article / Supplementary Material . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS NK and TK : conceptualization . SN , KK , NK , and TK : formal analysis and writing—original draft . SN , ES , KK , AH , FN , RA , AM , TN , ST , NK , and TK : investigation . SN , ES , KK , AH , ST , NK , and TK : funding acquisition . All authors writing—review and editing . FUNDING This work was supported by a JSPS KAKENHI Grant and an AMED Grant for TK , an Indonesia Endowment Fund for Education ( LPDP ) and Ministry of Research , Technology and Higher Education of the Republic of Indonesia ( BUDI - LN Scholarship ) and the Sasakawa Scientiﬁc Research Grant for ES , The Mochida Memorial Foundation for Medical and Pharmaceutical Research for SN , the Kao Foundation for Arts and Sciences for AH , JSPS KAKENHI Grant ( 15H04360 and 18H05269 ) and JST CREST ( JPMJCR1762 ) for NK . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Bruno Lemaitre for strains of P . entomophila and antibody against Monalysin . We also thank the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center and Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for providing us with the ﬂies and antibodies , respectively . We are grateful to Drs . Shoichiro Kurata and Yoshinobu Nakanishi for our discussions . We acknowledge the technical support in the electrophysiological characterization of Monalysin provided by Ms Y . Yatomi , and the technical support for the HS - AFM from Drs . Toshio Ando and Takayuki Uchihashi . The authors would like to thank Enago ( www . enago . jp ) for the English language review . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at : https : / / www . frontiersin . org / articles / 10 . 3389 / ﬁmmu . 2020 . 00520 / full # supplementary - material REFERENCES 1 . Akira S , Uematsu S , Takeuchi O . Pathogen recognition and innate immunity . Cell . ( 2006 ) 124 : 783 – 801 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 02 . 015 2 . ChenGY , NunezG . Sterileinﬂammation : sensingandreactingtodamage . Nat Rev Immunol . ( 2010 ) 10 : 826 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nri2873 3 . Venereau E , Ceriotti C , Bianchi ME . DAMPs from cell death to new life . Front Immunol . ( 2015 ) 6 : 422 . doi : 10 . 3389 / ﬁmmu . 2015 . 00422 4 . Lemaitre B , Hoﬀmann J . The host defense of Drosophila melanogaster . Annu Rev Immunol . ( 2007 ) 25 : 697 – 743 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . immunol . 25 . 022106 . 141615 5 . Myllymaki H , Valanne S , Ramet M . The Drosophila imd signaling pathway . J Immunol . ( 2014 ) 192 : 3455 – 62 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1303309 6 . Valanne S , Wang JH , Ramet M . The Drosophila toll signaling pathway . J Immunol . ( 2011 ) 186 : 649 – 56 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 10 02302 Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 16 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin 7 . Gobert V , Gottar M , Matskevich AA , Rutschmann S , Royet J , Belvin M , et al . Dual activation of the Drosophila toll pathway by two pattern recognition receptors . Science . ( 2003 ) 302 : 2126 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1085432 8 . Michel T , Reichhart JM , Hoﬀmann JA , Royet J . Drosophila toll is activated by gram - positive bacteria through a circulating peptidoglycan recognition protein . Nature . ( 2001 ) 414 : 756 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 414756a 9 . Gottar M , Gobert V , Matskevich AA , Reichhart JM , Wang C , Butt TM , et al . Dual detection of fungal infections in Drosophila via recognition of glucans and sensing of virulence factors . Cell . ( 2006 ) 127 : 1425 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 10 . 046 10 . Parthier C , Stelter M , Ursel C , Fandrich U , Lilie H , Breithaupt C , et al . Structure of the Toll - Spatzle complex , a molecular hub in Drosophila development and innate immunity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . ( 2014 ) 111 : 6281 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1320678111 11 . Sun H , Bristow BN , Qu G , Wasserman SA . A heterotrimeric death domain complex in toll signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . ( 2002 ) 99 : 12871 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 202396399 12 . Lindsay SA , Wasserman SA . Conventional and non - conventional Drosophila toll signaling . Dev Comp Immunol . ( 2014 ) 42 : 16 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . dci . 2013 . 04 . 011 13 . Kleino A , Silverman N . The Drosophila IMD pathway in the activation of the humoral immune response . Dev Comp Immunol . ( 2014 ) 42 : 25 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . dci . 2013 . 05 . 014 14 . Paquette N , Broemer M , Aggarwal K , Chen L , Husson M , Erturk - Hasdemir D , et al . Caspase - mediated cleavage , IAP binding , and ubiquitination : linking three mechanisms crucial for Drosophila NF - kappaB signaling . Mol Cell . ( 2010 ) 37 : 172 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 12 . 036 15 . ElChamyL , LeclercV , CaldelariI , ReichhartJM . Sensingofdangersignalsand pathogen - associated molecular patterns deﬁnes binary signaling pathways upstream of Toll . Nat Immunol . ( 2008 ) 9 : 1165 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ni . 1643 16 . Ming M , Obata F , Kuranaga E , Miura M . Persephone / spatzle pathogen sensors mediate the activation of toll receptor signaling in response to endogenous danger signals in apoptosis - deﬁcient Drosophila . J Biol Chem . ( 2014 ) 289 : 7558 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 543884 17 . Issa N , Guillaumot N , Lauret E , Matt N , Schaeﬀer - Reiss C , Van Dorsselaer A , et al . The circulating protease persephone is an immune sensor for microbial proteolytic activities upstreamofthe Drosophila tollpathway . MolCell . ( 2018 ) 69 : 539 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2018 . 01 . 029 18 . Areﬁn B , Kucerova L , Dobes P , Markus R , Strnad H , Wang Z , et al . Genome - wide transcriptional analysis of Drosophila larvae infected by entomopathogenic nematodes shows involvement of complement , recognition and extracellular matrix proteins . J Innate Immun . ( 2014 ) 6 : 192 – 204 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000353734 19 . Hyrsl P , Dobes P , Wang Z , Hauling T , Wilhelmsson C , Theopold U . Clotting factors and eicosanoids protect against nematode infections . J Innate Immun . ( 2011 ) 3 : 65 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000320634 20 . Vodovar N , Vinals M , Liehl P , Basset A , Degrouard J , Spellman P , et al . Drosophila host defense after oral infection by an entomopathogenic pseudomonas species . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . ( 2005 ) 102 : 11414 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0502240102 21 . Martins NE , Faria VG , Teixeira L , Magalhaes S , Sucena E . Host adaptation is contingent upon the infection route taken by pathogens . PLoS Pathog . ( 2013 ) 9 : e1003601 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1003601 22 . Chakrabarti S , Liehl P , Buchon N , Lemaitre B . Infection - induced host translational blockage inhibits immune responses and epithelial renewal in the Drosophila gut . Cell Host Microbe . ( 2012 ) 12 : 60 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2012 . 06 . 001 23 . Opota O , Vallet - Gely I , Vincentelli R , Kellenberger C , Iacovache I , Gonzalez MR , et al . Monalysin , a novel β - pore - forming toxin from the Drosophila pathogen Pseudomonas entomophila , contributes to host intestinal damage and lethality . PLoS Pathog . ( 2011 ) 7 : e1002259 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1002259 24 . Kuraishi T , Binggeli O , Opota O , Buchon N , Lemaitre B . Genetic evidence for a protective role of the peritrophic matrix against intestinal bacterial infection in Drosophila melanogaster . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . ( 2011 ) 108 : 15966 – 71 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105994108 25 . Shibata T , Maki K , Hadano J , Fujikawa T , Kitazaki K , Koshiba T , et al . Crosslinking of a peritrophic matrix protein protects gut epithelia from bacterial exotoxins . PLoS Pathog . ( 2015 ) 11 : e1005244 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1005244 26 . Leone P , Bebeacua C , Opota O , Kellenberger C , Klaholz B , Orlov I , et al . X - rayandcryo - electronmicroscopystructuresofmonalysinpore - formingtoxin reveal multimerization of the pro - form . J Biol Chem . ( 2015 ) 290 : 13191 – 201 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M115 . 646109 27 . Jurat - Fuentes JL , Crickmore N . Speciﬁcity determinants for cry insecticidal proteins : insights from their mode of action . J Invertebr Pathol . ( 2017 ) 142 : 5 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jip . 2016 . 07 . 018 28 . Bravo A , Gómez I , Porta H , García - Gómez BI , Rodriguez - Almazan C , Pardo L , et al . Evolution of Bacillus thuringiensis cry toxins insecticidal activity . Microb Biotechnol . ( 2013 ) 6 : 17 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1751 - 7915 . 2012 . 00342 . x 29 . Obata F , Tanaka S , Kashio S , Tsujimura H , Sato R , Miura M . Induction of rapid and selective cell necrosis in Drosophila using Bacillus thuringiensis cry toxin and its silkworm receptor . BMC Biol . ( 2015 ) 13 : 48 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12915 - 015 - 0160 - 2 30 . Jetha NN , Wiggin M , Marziali A . Forming an alpha - hemolysin nanopore for single - molecule analysis . Methods Mol Biol . ( 2009 ) 544 : 113 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 59745 - 483 - 4 _ 9 31 . Asano T , Nishiuchi T . Comparative analysis of phosphoprotein expression using 2D - DIGE . Methods Mol Biol . ( 2011 ) 744 : 225 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 61779 - 123 - 9 _ 16 32 . Kenmoku H , Ishikawa H , Ote M , Kuraishi T , Kurata S . A subset of neurons controls the permeability of the peritrophic matrix and midgut structure in Drosophila adults . J Exp Biol . ( 2016 ) 219 : 2331 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jeb . 122960 33 . Ando T , Uchihashi T , Fukuma T . High - speed atomic force microscopy for nano - visualization of dynamic biomolecular processes . Prog Surf Sci . ( 2008 ) 83 : 337 – 437 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . progsurf . 2008 . 09 . 001 34 . Uchihashi T , Kodera N , Ando T . Guide to video recording of structure dynamics and dynamic processes of proteins by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nat Protoc . ( 2012 ) 7 : 1193 – 206 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2012 . 047 35 . Uchihashi T , Watanabe H , Kodera N . Optimum substrates for imaging biological molecules with high - speed atomic force microscopy . Methods Mol Biol . ( 2018 ) 1814 : 159 – 79 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 8591 - 3 _ 10 36 . Ngo KX , Kodera N , Katayama E , Ando T , Uyeda TQ . Coﬁlin - induced unidirectional cooperative conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Elife . ( 2015 ) 4 : e04806 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04806 . 033 37 . Manaka J , Kuraishi T , Shiratsuchi A , Nakai Y , Higashida H , Henson P , et al . Draper - mediated and phosphatidylserine - independent phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by Drosophila hemocytes / macrophages . J Biol Chem . ( 2004 ) 279 : 48466 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M408597200 38 . Obata F , Tsuda - Sakurai K , Yamazaki T , Nishio R , Nishimura K , Kimura M , et al . Nutritional control of stem cell division through S - adenosylmethionine in Drosophila intestine . Dev Cell . ( 2018 ) 44 : 741 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2018 . 02 . 017 39 . Buchon N , Broderick NA , Kuraishi T , Lemaitre B . Drosophila EGFR pathway coordinates stem cell proliferation and gut remodeling following infection . BMC Biol . ( 2010 ) 8 : 152 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1741 - 7007 - 8 - 152 40 . Funakoshi K , Suzuki H , Takeuchi S . Lipid bilayer formation by contacting monolayers in a microﬂuidic device for membrane protein analysis . Anal Chem . ( 2006 ) 78 : 8169 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ac0613479 41 . Gutsmann T , Heimburg T , Keyser U , Mahendran KR , Winterhalter M . Protein reconstitution into freestanding planar lipid membranes for electrophysiological characterization . Nat Protoc . ( 2015 ) 10 : 188 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2015 . 003 42 . Ando T , Uchihashi T , Scheuring S . Filming biomolecular processes by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Chem Rev . ( 2014 ) 114 : 3120 – 88 . doi : 10 . 1021 / cr4003837 43 . Ando T , Kodera N , Takai E , Maruyama D , Saito K , Toda A . A high - speed atomic force microscope for studying biological macromolecules . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . ( 2001 ) 98 : 12468 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 211400898 44 . Czajkowsky DM , Hotze EM , Shao Z , Tweten RK . Vertical collapse of a cytolysin prepore moves its transmembrane beta - hairpins to the membrane . EMBO J . ( 2004 ) 23 : 3206 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7600350 45 . Yilmaz N , Yamada T , Greimel P , Uchihashi T , Ando T , Kobayashi T . Real - time visualization of assembling of a sphingomyelin - speciﬁc toxin on planar lipid membranes . Biophys J . ( 2013 ) 105 : 1397 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 07 . 052 Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 17 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520 Nonaka et al . Analysis of Monalysin 46 . Leung C , Dudkina NV , Lukoyanova N , Hodel AW , Farabella I , Pandurangan AP , et al . Stepwise visualization of membrane pore formation by suilysin , a bacterial cholesterol - dependent cytolysin . Elife . ( 2014 ) 3 : e04247 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04247 . 021 47 . Ni T , Jiao F , Yu X , Aden S , Ginger L , Williams SI , et al . Structure and mechanism of bactericidal mammalian perforin - 2 , an ancient agent of innate immunity . Sci Adv . ( 2020 ) 6 : eaax8286 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aax8286 48 . Vodovar N , Vallenet D , Cruveiller S , Rouy Z , Barbe V , Acosta C , et al . Complete genome sequence of the entomopathogenic and metabolically versatile soil bacterium Pseudomonas entomophila . Nat Biotechnol . ( 2006 ) 24 : 673 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt1212 49 . Kim JS , Song S , Lee M , Lee S , Lee K , Ha NC . Crystal structure of a soluble fragment of the membrane fusion protein HlyD in a type I secretion system of gram - negative bacteria . Structure . ( 2016 ) 24 : 477 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2015 . 12 . 012 50 . Hay ID , Belousoﬀ MJ , Lithgow T . Structural basis of type 2 secretion system engagement between the inner and outer bacterial membranes . mBio . ( 2017 ) 8 : e01344 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mBio . 01344 - 17 51 . Czajkowsky DM , Sheng S , Shao Z . Staphylococcal alpha - hemolysin can form hexamers in phospholipid bilayers . J Mol Biol . ( 1998 ) 276 : 325 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 1997 . 1535 52 . McMahon HT , Boucrot E . Membrane curvature at a glance . J Cell Sci . ( 2015 ) 128 : 1065 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 114454 53 . Graham TR , Kozlov MM . Interplay of proteins and lipids in generating membrane curvature . Curr Opin Cell Biol . ( 2010 ) 22 : 430 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2010 . 05 . 002 54 . Hla T , Lee MJ , Ancellin N , Paik JH , Kluk MJ . Lysophospholipids – receptor revelations . Science . ( 2001 ) 294 : 1875 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1065323 Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2020 Nonaka , Salim , Kamiya , Hori , Nainu , Asri , Masyita , Nishiuchi , Takeuchi , Kodera and Kuraishi . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Immunology | www . frontiersin . org 18 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 520