ENTREPRENEURS’ OPTIMISM AND NEW VENTURE PERFORMANCE : A SOCIAL COGNITIVE PERSPECTIVE KEITH M . HMIELESKI Texas Christian University ROBERT A . BARON Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Previous research indicates that entrepreneurs are generally high in dispositional optimism—the tendency to expect positive outcomes even when such expectations are not rationally justified . Findings of the current study demonstrate a negative relation - ship between entrepreneurs’ optimism and the performance ( revenue and employment growth ) of their new ventures . Past experience creating ventures and industry dyna - mism moderated these effects , strengthening the negative relationship between entre - preneurs’ optimism and venture performance . These findings illustrate the benefits of applying a social cognitive perspective toward efforts to understand key aspects of the new venture creation and development process . Considering the substantial impact that new ven - tures have on economic growth within most indus - trialized nations ( Sternberg & Wennekers , 2005 ) , it is fortunate that entrepreneurs pursue their dreams of developing successful new ventures despite the great odds against them ( Dosi & Lovallo , 1997 ) . The fact that entrepreneurs decide to forge ahead in the face of daunting obstacles suggests that they are high in dispositional optimism and indeed , re - search findings indicate that entrepreneurs score particularly high on measures of this personal char - acteristic ( e . g . , Abdelsamad & Kindling , 1978 ; Fraser & Greene , 2006 ; Lowe & Ziedonis , 2006 ) . For example , Cooper , Woo , and Dunkelberg ( 1988 ) found that entrepreneurs express high levels of op - timism , regardless how prepared they are to lead their firms . In addition , research by Busenitz and Barney ( 1997 ) demonstrated that entrepreneurs tend to overestimate the probability of being right and overgeneralize from a few characteristics or observations significantly more so than managers of large , established organizations . Further sup - porting the claim that entrepreneurs tend to view the world through “rose - colored glasses , ” Simon , Houghton , and Aquino ( 2000 ) found that entrepre - neurs commonly overemphasize the extent to which their skills can increase performance in sit - uations where chance plays a large role and skill is not necessarily a deciding factor ; further , they tend to use a small number of information inputs as the basis for drawing conclusions . De Meza and Southey ( 1996 ) accounted for the phenomenon of entrepreneurs being high in opti - mism by arguing that , because individuals starting new businesses have little evidence upon which to base beliefs about likely success , those with unre - alistic expectations are disproportionately attracted into entrepreneurship . This line of reasoning is consistent with research demonstrating that highly optimistic individuals are confident of achieving successful outcomes independently of being able to visualize the path that will get them there—simply believing that everything will work out favorably in the end ( Scheier , Carver , & Bridges , 2001 ) . A key question arising from the finding that en - trepreneurs are generally high in optimism is this : How does optimism relate to the performance of their new ventures ? Although it has been argued that excessive optimism is a primary reason for the high incidence of failure among start - ups ( Gartner , 2005 ) , few studies have investigated the relationship between entrepreneurs’ optimism and the actual per - formance of their new ventures . Further , existing ev - idence suggests that high levels of optimism can negatively affect judgment and decision making ( Aspinwall , Sechrist , & Jones , 2005 ; Åstebro , Jef - frey , & Adomdza , 2007 ) . Thus , optimism seems likely to have important negative effects on the strategic decisions made by lead entrepreneurs and the performance of their new ventures . Social cognitive theory ( Bandura , 1986 ) provides a useful theoretical framework for understanding such effects . Specifically , social cognitive theory suggests that the effects of personal dispositions We would like to express our thanks to R . Duane Ireland and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments . In addition , we would like to thank Michael S . Cole for his methodological suggestions . (cid:1) Academy of Management Journal 2009 , Vol . 52 , No . 3 , 473 – 488 . 473 Copyright of the Academy of Management , all rights reserved . Contents may not be copied , emailed , posted to a listserv , or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s express written permission . Users may print , download or email articles for individual use only . ( including optimism ) are often determined by their interaction with important behavioral and environ - mental factors ( Wood & Bandura , 1989 ) . As such , the theory blends dispositional , behavioral , and en - vironmental perspectives , thus providing a more comprehensive framework for examining human action and its outcomes than could be gained by focusing on any of these levels and classes of vari - ables independently . In this regard , social cognitive theory provides a useful framework for undertaking the task of identifying the mechanisms through which individual dispositions ultimately influence firm - level performance—a task that has been iden - tified as crucial in recent years by many researchers ( e . g . , Baron , 2007 ; Wright , Hmieleski , Siegel , & En - sley , 2007 ) . The basic proposals of social cognitive theory are also consistent with the multilevel perspective highlighted by Hitt , Beamish , Jackson , and Mathieu ( 2007 ) . This perspective suggests that in order to fully understand complex organizational processes ( including new venture development ) , it is essential to examine variables operating at different levels of analysis ( e . g . , individual , group , subunit , organiza - tional , interorganizational , and environmental ) . In the current study we adopt this perspective by examining the joint effects of two individual vari - ables—entrepreneurs’ optimism and their previous experience in starting new ventures—and a key en - vironmental variable : dynamism . Resting firmly both on social cognitive theory and a multilevel perspective , the current research was designed to make several contributions . First , most empirical research examining the effects of optimism is based on the results of investigations conducted with var - ious types of samples ( e . g . , college students , factory workers ) . Although such samples offer important advantages , they do not provide information per - taining to effects that may occur at extreme levels of this dimension . Thus , they do not relate directly to entrepreneurs , who have been found to score very high on measures of optimism ( e . g . , Fraser & Greene , 2006 ; Lowe & Ziedonis , 2006 ) . As we de - scribe in more detail in the following section , very high levels of optimism are likely to produce dif - ferent effects than moderate levels and—more im - portantly—there are strong theoretical grounds for predicting that these effects will vary considerably in different environments ( for example , environ - ments that are low or high in dynamism ) . Thus , the present research provides new evidence concern - ing the role of optimism in new venture develop - ment and growth , processes that occur in a very wide range of environments . Second , in examining the effects of optimism , we adopt a perspective suggested both by social cogni - tive theory and the emerging multilevel perspective in management research ( Barden & Mitchell , 2007 ; Hitt et al . , 2007 ) . Specifically , we recognize that the effects of individual - level variables occur primarily through interactions with key environmental fac - tors . Prior research in both the fields of entrepre - neurship ( Shaver & Scott , 1991 ) and organizational behavior ( House , Shane , & Herold , 1996 ) has long been criticized for failing to adopt such an ap - proach . In response to such critiques , in the current study we employed social cognitive theory , which emphasizes the reciprocal relationships between dispositional , behavioral , and environmental vari - ables , as the basis for deriving predictions concern - ing the mechanisms through which dispositional optimism influences the performance of key organ - izational decision makers ( in this case , lead founders of new ventures ) . Third , following the spirit of Hambrick’s ( 2007 ) assertion that organizational researchers must balance theoretical with practical implications , this study also addresses an issue we consider to be of great importance : How best to coach or train entrepreneurs so that they both recognize their own tendencies to have high levels of optimism , and are maximally able to convert these tenden - cies into personal strengths that help them to found , lead , and grow their new businesses . Such findings are likely to contribute to the literature linking the characteristics of top management to firm performance . For example , much has been written within this literature about the negative effects of hubris ( Hayward & Hambrick , 1997 ; Hayward , Shepherd , & Griffin , 2006 ; Hiller & Hambrick , 2005 ) , which is a form of overconfi - dence and a potential manifestation of extreme optimism . However , to date , little empirical re - search has been conducted to examine theoretical arguments on this topic . Our results contribute to this body of work by evaluating when such neg - ative effects are most likely to occur ( that is , at varying levels of experience and dynamism ) . THEORY AND HYPOTHESES We begin this section by examining the potential benefits and costs of entrepreneurial optimism . Then , following suggestions derived from the so - cial cognitive theory framework , we explore the potentially moderating effects of key behavioral ( i . e . , entrepreneurial experience ) and environmen - tal ( i . e . , environmental dynamism ) variables with respect to dispositional optimism . 474 June Academy of Management Journal Entrepreneurs’ Optimism Given the pervasiveness of optimism among en - trepreneurs , we focus on dispositional optimism , defined as generalized expectancies for experienc - ing positive outcomes ( Scheier et al . , 2001 ) . Re - search has demonstrated that optimism tends to remain relatively stable for individuals over time , situation , and context ( Schulman , Keith , & Seligman , 1993 ) . Individuals high in optimism exhibit confi - dence in a way that is both broad and diffuse , and it encourages them to approach challenges with enthu - siasm and persistence ( Carver & Scheier , 2003 ) . Re - search findings indicate that as a result , individuals high in optimism tend to experience better physical and psychological well - being than individuals low in optimism ( Peterson & Bossio , 2001 ) . Additional findings , however , have underscored the fact that high levels of optimism can be linked to negative outcomes . Highly optimistic individu - als often hold unrealistic expectations , discount negative information , and mentally reconstruct ex - periences so as to avoid contradictions ( Geers & Lassiter , 2002 ) . In contrast , individuals who are moderate in optimism tend to possess a more bal - anced view ( Spencer & Norem , 1996 ) . They are more sensitive to negative information and less likely to gloss over discrepancies ( Spirrison & Gordy , 1993 ) , less easily persuaded by positive in - formation ( Geers , Handley , & McLarney , 2003 ) , and less likely to have an attentional bias in favor of positive stimuli ( Segerstrom , 2001 ) , and they hold more realistic expectations when engaging in high - risk situations than those higher in optimism ( Gib - son & Sanbonmatsu , 2004 ) . For these reasons , re - search findings have suggested , overall , that high levels of optimism often have significant detrimen - tal effects on the judgment and decision making of individuals . Considering the consistency of such findings in the extant literature , it seems likely that highly optimistic entrepreneurs may be prone to make less than optimal strategic decisions . Also of particular relevance to entrepreneurs , positive expectations often lead to goal conflict , in that optimists tend to see new opportunities every - where they look ( Segerstrom & Solberg Nes , 2006 ) . This tendency can generate significant problems for individuals who cannot easily decide which goals to pursue and therefore may become seriously overextended as they seek to exploit more oppor - tunities than is realistically feasible . In contrast , moderate optimists tend to be more realistic in their choice and pursuit of opportunities . This moderation is important because entrepreneurs must be able to decide which goals they can real - istically accomplish early in the development of their new ventures in order to maximize the poten - tial for survival and long - term success ( McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . In general , research findings indicate that on a wide range of activities and tasks , optimism has a curvilinear relationship with performance ( Brown & Marshall , 2001 ) . Individuals who are very low in optimism tend to lack motivation because they as - sume that no matter how hard they try , failure is likely to result . In addition , they have a propensity to focus on negative information , which reinforces their view that disaster awaits them . For these rea - sons , they often attain relatively low levels of per - formance . Moderate optimists tend to set moder - ately high , yet realistic , goals and put forth the necessary effort to reach their goals . These individ - uals recognize a balance of positive and negative cues within their environment , noting both the po - tential benefits and risks associated with each de - cision alternative . This more balanced approach tends to make them above - average performers . Ex - tremely optimistic individuals , in contrast , tend to set unrealistically high goals and are overconfident that their goals will be attained . Further , they focus primarily on positive information , which supports their belief that success is likely . These tendencies often interfere with effective performance . As a re - sult , they tend to attain only average levels of per - formance in many contexts ( Judge & Ilies , 2004 ) . Taken together , existing evidence suggests that across many different tasks , performance increases with task performers’ optimism , but only up to a point ; beyond this point , further increments in op - timism actually generate reductions in perfor - mance ( Brown & Marshall , 2001 ) . When this curvi - linear relationship between optimism and per - formance observed in the general population is extended to entrepreneurs , an intriguing—and counterintuitive—prediction emerges . Although performance is positively related to optimism in the general population , this relationship might well tend to be negative for entrepreneurs , since they range from moderately high to extremely high on the optimism dimension ( Abdelsamad & Kindling , 1978 ; Busenitz & Barney , 1997 ; Cooper at al . , 1988 ; Dosi & Lovallo , 1997 ; Fraser & Greene , 2006 ; Lovallo & Kahneman , 2003 ; Lowe & Ziedonis , 2006 ; Simon et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , they fall into the portion of the optimism - performance function beyond the inflection point ( i . e . , the downward - trending por - tion ) . Following this logic and also reflecting pre - viously discussed research regarding the negative effects of optimism on judgment and decision mak - ing ( e . g . , Geers et al . , 2003 ; Gibson & Sanbonmatsu ; 2004 ; Judge & Ilies , 2004 ; Segerstrom , 2001 ; Seger - 2009 475 Hmieleski and Baron strom & Solberg Nes , 2006 ; Spirrison & Gordy , 1993 ) , we propose the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 1 . Entrepreneurs’ level of disposi - tional optimism is negatively related to the per - formance of their new ventures . Moderating Effects of Entrepreneurial Experience The form of experience the entrepreneurship lit - erature most commonly refers to is experience ac - quired through having started multiple new ven - tures ( Wright , Westhead , & Sohl , 1998 ) . Individuals possessing such experience are often described as habitual or repeat entrepreneurs . This type of ex - perience typically offers benefits in terms of devel - oping contacts ( Danson , 1999 ) , gaining knowledge about obtaining the most appropriate sources of fi - nancing ( Starr & Bygrave , 1991 ) , learning the mana - gerial and technical skills necessary for leading new ventures ( Wright et al . , 1998 ) , and identifying how to serve new and emerging market segments ( Wright , Robbie , & Ennew , 1997 ) . Entrepreneurial experience is also a primary mode for increasing one’s entrepre - neurial self - efficacy , because it provides opportuni - ties for “enactive mastery” and role modeling ( Zhao , Seibert , & Hills , 2005 ) . At first glance , one might assume that experience would help to temper or counterbalance entrepre - neurs’ high levels of optimism ( Hayward , Shep - herd , & Griffin , 2006 ) . However , the fact that entrepreneurs are , on average , relatively high in optimism calls attention to two relevant points . First , highly optimistic individuals tend to suffer from a “confirmation bias” ( Klayman & Ha , 1987 ) , focusing on information that supports or validates their current beliefs while largely ignoring informa - tion that is not consistent with these beliefs ( Gibson & Sanbonmatsu , 2004 ) . Thus , even though experi - enced entrepreneurs have more highly developed frameworks for processing a wide range of informa - tion than less experienced entrepreneurs ( e . g . , Baron & Ensley , 2006 ) , those who are high in opti - mism are likely to focus most on confirming infor - mation . This , in turn , may result in overconfidence on the part of experienced , highly optimistic entre - preneurs—a tendency that , as Hayward and col - leagues ( 2006 ) noted , may negatively affect the per - formance and survival of new ventures . Second , experienced entrepreneurs tend to have more op - portunities available to them via their more extensive entrepreneurial networks and also possess richer cog - nitive frameworks for processing such opportunities than do novices ( Ozgen & Baron , 2007 ) . One result of such an abundance of opportunities , especially for highly optimistic entrepreneurs , may be competing demands on their information - processing capacity— a kind of “opportunity overload . ” Since highly opti - mistic entrepreneurs tend to expect positive out - comes in many situations , such opportunity overload may encourage experienced , highly optimistic entre - preneurs to pursue more opportunities than they can realistically manage . This tendency , in turn , has been shown in previous research to be a major problem for entrepreneurs , one that interferes with their ability to build sustainable growth for their new ventures ( Baker & Nelson , 2005 ) . On the basis of these consid - erations and in the context of social cognitive theory , we propose the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 2 . Entrepreneurial experience in starting new ventures moderates the relation - ship between the level of entrepreneurs’ dispo - sitional optimism and the performance of their new ventures : the relationship is more negative for those with high , as opposed to low , entre - preneurial experience . Moderating Effects of Environmental Dynamism Dynamic environments are characterized by un - predictable and rapid change , which increases un - certainty for individuals and firms operating within them ( Dess & Beard , 1984 ) . It has been sug - gested that environmental dynamism forms a fertile context in which entrepreneurial opportunities arise ( Hayek , 1945 ; Kirzner , 1997 ; Shane & Venkat - araman , 2000 ) . Such environments , however , also present major challenges . Because of high levels of uncertainty and the large amount of financial cap - ital ( and associated risk ) needed to compete ( Al - drich , 2000 ) , entrepreneurs leading their firms in dynamic environments often face unusually heavy information processing burdens ( Chandler , Honig , & Wiklund , 2005 ) . As a result , they may also expe - rience high levels of distress and anxiety ( Mark - man , Baron , & Balkin , 2005 ) . Optimism can help to reduce such effects ( Luthans & Youssef , 2004 ) but can also lead to overconfidence or other cognitive errors ( Hayward et al . , 2006 ) and hence , can nega - tively affect judgment and decision making ( Mc - Kenzie , 1997 ) , especially within dynamic environ - ments ( Klayman , Soll , Gonzalez - Vallejo , & Barlas , 1999 ) . Therefore , we suggest that highly optimistic entrepreneurs will be particularly poor at leading their new ventures in dynamic , as opposed to sta - ble , industry environments , because their attention will lack the focus needed to respond quickly and effectively to emerging opportunities . Further , their discounting of negative information could be par - ticularly damaging if it prevents them from making the strategic changes necessary to respond effec - 476 June Academy of Management Journal tively to competitors . For example , according to uncertainty reduction theory , highly optimistic in - dividuals will attune to the aspects of the environ - ment that align most closely with their past expe - rience to make sense of the uncertainty present in dynamic environments ( Berger & Gudykunst , 1991 ) . Considering that optimistic individuals tend to view both their past and future through rose - colored glasses , they are likely to selectively map an unbalanced mix of mostly positive information from their past into a present situation and thus make less than optimal decisions . In further sup - port of this line of reasoning , optimism has been found to be negatively related to situational aware - ness , in such a way that highly optimistic persons tend to be fairly ineffective at perceiving elements of their environment , comprehending their meaning , and projecting their status into the near - term future ( Eid , Matthews , Meland , & Johnsen , 2005 ) . Consider - ing the importance of rapidly identifying and inte - grating key information when making strategic deci - sions in fast - changing environments ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ) , highly optimistic entrepreneurs would appear to be at a particular disadvantage in leading new ventures in dynamic , as opposed to stable , industry environments . On the basis of this reasoning and again , in keeping with a general social cognitive per - spective , we offer the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 3 . Environmental dynamism mod - erates the relationship between the level of en - trepreneurs’ dispositional optimism and the performance of their new ventures : the rela - tionship is more negative for those leading their firms within dynamic , as opposed to sta - ble , industry environments . METHODS Sample and Procedure A national random sample of 1 , 000 new ventures was drawn from Dun & Bradstreet for use in the current study . Dun & Bradstreet compiles what is considered to be the most exhaustive database of young firms founded in the United States ( Kalle - berg , Marsden , Aldrich , & Cassell , 1990 ) . The vast majority of new ventures within the United States must file for a DUNS number with Dun and Brad - street to create a business credit record , which is a primary way that companies evaluate whether to do business with each other ( for instance , whether to sell , lend money , partner , or lease equipment ) . Dun & Bradstreet provided the names and address of the firms and their top management team leaders ( i . e . , chief executive officers ) , who in each case was also a firm founder . A packet containing our survey , along with a cover letter and prepaid business reply envelope , was sent to the participants . In total , 185 of the mailings were returned as nondeliverable , and 207 completed surveys were returned . The number of nondeliverable survey mailings was not surprising considering that Dun & Bradstreet reports that 20 percents of the firms that they track change their address each year . Removal of six cases because of incomplete performance data resulted in a total us - able response rate of 24 . 8 percent , which is in align - ment with those produced by other studies using similar samples of top management ( e . g . , Hmieleski & Ensley , 2007 ; Waldman , Ramirez , House , & Puranam , 2001 ) . We examined nonresponse bias using t - tests on top management team leader’s gender and firm age , revenue , number of employees , and growth . In each case the results were nonsignificant . Demographic questions at the end of the admin - istered survey confirmed that each respondent was a founder and the top management team leader of his / her firm . These participants included 163 males and 38 females , with an average age of 52 years . The highest educational degrees earned by participants included high school ( n (cid:1) 37 ) , associ - ate’s ( n (cid:1) 18 ) , bachelor’s ( n (cid:1) 80 ) , master’s ( n (cid:1) 47 ) , and doctoral ( n (cid:1) 19 ) . The mean age of the firms studied was 5 . 74 years , which is in alignment with research arguing that start - ups are in a critical developmental stage during their first 6 years of existence and may be considered new ventures during this period ( Shrader , Oviatt , & McDougall , 2000 ) . Further , the first 6 years is a particularly relevant time period in the development of a firm within which to consider objective performance outcomes such as revenue and employment growth , whereas earlier on in the firm’s develop - ment such factors may be less relevant . Finally , the sample was broad in scope ; partici - pants’ current businesses were located in 40 different states and had primary operations in 114 different industries ( as classified by four - digit Standard Indus - trial Classification codes ) . Further , no more than four firms were from the same state , and no more than three firms were from the same industry . Thus , our national sample is not biased by industry or geo - graphic location . Measures Optimism . Optimism was measured using Scheier et al . ’s ( 1994 ) six - item Life Orientation Test – Revised ( LOT - R ) . Example items include , “In uncertain times , I usually expect the best” and “Overall , I expect more good things to happen to me than bad” ( 1 , “strongly disagree , ” to 7 , “strongly 2009 477 Hmieleski and Baron agree” ) . We summed responses into an overall score ; high scores indicated a generalized feeling of optimism about the future , and low scores indi - cated a more pessimistic outlook . To investigate the test - retest reliability of the LOT - R , Scheier and col - leagues ( 1994 ) examined scores for four different groups of individuals who completed the scale at various time intervals . The test - retest intervals were 4 , 12 , 24 , and 28 months . The test - retest cor - relations were . 68 , . 60 , . 56 , and . 79 , respectively . Therefore , as expected for a dispositional measure , the LOT - R appears to be fairly stable over time . Finally , the measure produced a Cronbach’s coeffi - cient alpha of . 80 in the current study . Entrepreneurial experience . Following prior re - search , we measured entrepreneurial experience as the number of previous ventures founded ( Stuart & Abetti , 1990 ) . Specifically , a single survey item asked respondents to report “the number of new ventures started prior to the founding of your cur - rent business . ” Responses ranged from 0 to 6 , with nearly half of the respondents ( n (cid:1) 91 ) having previously founded a business . Whereas other studies have dummy - coded the previous founding of new ventures dichotomously as 0 or 1 ( e . g . , Coo - per , Folta , & Woo , 1995 ; Forbes , 2005 ) , we used the actual number of new ventures started as our study variable . This approach was taken because some additional learning should take place each time an entrepreneur starts another new venture ( Zhao et al . , 2005 ) . In other words , knowledge of the entre - preneurial process should increase each time that an individual proceeds through founding an addi - tional new venture ( Wright et al . , 1998 ) . Environmental dynamism . We measured indus - try - level rate of unpredicted change as the standard errors of four regression slopes , following the work of Dess and Beard ( 1984 ) , Keats and Hitt ( 1988 ) , Sharfman and Dean ( 1991 ) , and Castrogiovanni ( 2002 ) . In each case the independent variable was time . The dependent variables were industry reve - nues , number of industry establishments , number of industry employees , and research and develop - ment intensity . Industry revenue has been used as a measure of uncertainty in prior studies ( e . g . , Keats & Hitt , 1988 ; Sharfman & Dean , 1991 ) , and number of employees is a common measure of change for use in research involving new businesses . The number of establishments has been used by Aldrich ( 1979 ) as the basis for understanding industry size and the extent of industry change . Finally , indus - trywide research and development intensity is a variable that captures the speed of the technologi - cal evolution of an industry ( Castrogiovanni , 2002 ; Dess & Beard , 1984 ) . Data on industry revenues , industry establish - ment , and industry employment totals were ac - quired through the U . S . Bureau of the Census . Re - search and development intensity data were acquired from the U . S . Patent Office . Following Sharfman and Dean ( 1991 ) , we regressed time against these variables for the most recent ten - year period . An index of the standard errors of the re - gression slopes divided by their respective means was used the indicator of unpredicted change for each of the four variables . These figures were then standardized and summed into an overall index of environmental dynamism . To evaluate the extent to which the four variables loaded onto a single di - mension , we conducted a single - factor confirma - tory analysis using AMOS 6 . 0 . The chi - square for the model was nonsignificant ( (cid:1) 2 (cid:1) 2 . 35 , p (cid:1) . 13 ) and results from absolute fit ( GFI (cid:1) . 99 ; SRMR (cid:1) . 04 ) and relative fit ( CFI (cid:1) . 98 ) indexes each dem - onstrated good fit . The standardized factor loadings ranged from . 68 to . 86 . Further supporting the reli - ability of the measure , the overall index produced a Cronbach’s coefficient alpha of . 69 . New venture performance . Growth is often cited as the most important performance indicator of new venture success ( Brush & Vanderwerf , 1992 ; Danson , 1999 ) . In keeping with this literature , we used two different objective measures of growth : revenue growth and employment growth . The per - formance data were obtained from Dun & Brad - street . Recent studies have validated the accuracy of Dun & Bradstreet revenue and employment data for new ventures ( e . g . , Baum & Locke , 2004 ; Baum , Locke , & Smith , 2001 ) . The performance measures were calculated as the average annual revenue and employment growth over the two years immedi - ately following the collection of the survey data . We used lagged performance data in order to en - hance our ability to draw causal inferences from our results . Control variables . Firm - level control variables included the age of a firm , its revenue and employ - ment totals for the year in which the survey data were collected , and the average revenue and em - ployment growth rates for the three years prior to collection of survey data . Data for each of these variables were acquired from Dun & Bradstreet . To reduce the threat of multicollinearity , we standard - ized and summed revenue and employment totals for the year in which the survey data were collected to create a variable labeled “firm size . ” For the same reason , the average revenue and employment growth rates for the three years before collection of our survey data were standardized and summed to create a variable labeled “prior firm growth . ” Indi - vidual control variables included the sex ( “male” (cid:1) 0 , “female” (cid:1) 1 ) , age ( in years ) , and educational 478 June Academy of Management Journal attainment ( 1 (cid:1) “high school , ” 2 (cid:1) “associate’s degree , ” 3 (cid:1) “bachelor’s degree , ” 4 (cid:1) “master’s degree , ” 5 (cid:1) “doctoral degree” ) of respondents . These data were collected as demographic items at the end of the administered survey . Statistical Procedures Moderated hierarchical regression analysis was utilized as the main statistical procedure for exam - ining the relationship between entrepreneurs’ opti - mism and new venture performance , as well as the proposed moderating effects of entrepreneurial ex - perience and environmental dynamism . We mean - centered the variables before creating the interac - tion terms and graphed each interaction following procedures set forth by Dawson and Richter ( 2006 ) . RESULTS Table 1 provides the means , standard deviations , and bivariate correlations for study variables . Table 2 provides the results of the hierarchical regression models for revenue and employment growth . The interactions are graphed in Figures 1 – 3 . We describe results in relation to the individual hypotheses . Hypothesis 1 proposed that entrepreneurs’ level of dispositional optimism is negatively related to the performance of their new ventures . As shown in models 2 and 6 of Table 2 , the relationships between entrepreneurs’ optimism and the revenue growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) . 17 , p (cid:3) . 05 ) and employment growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) . 20 , p (cid:3) . 01 ) of their new ventures are both significant and negative . Therefore , the findings offer support for Hypothesis 1 . Hypothesis 2 suggested that entrepreneurial ex - perience in starting new ventures moderates the relationship between the level of entrepreneurs’ dispositional optimism and the performance of their new ventures , such that the relationship will be stronger ( i . e . , more negative ) for those with high , as opposed to low , entrepreneurial experience . As shown in models 3 and 7 of Table 2 , the interaction of entrepreneurial experience with optimism is significant and negative for both revenue growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) . 15 , p (cid:3) . 05 ) and employment growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) . 22 , p (cid:3) . 01 ) . The graph of this interaction ( Figure 1 ) shows that the relationship between entrepre - neurs’ optimism and the performance of their new ventures is more negative for those with high , as opposed to low , entrepreneurial experience . In fact , there appears to be no relationship between opti - mism and new venture performance for those with low entrepreneurial experience . Therefore , results support Hypothesis 2 . Hypothesis 3 stated that environmental dyna - mism moderates the relationship between the level of entrepreneurs’ dispositional optimism and the performance of their new ventures , with the rela - tionship being stronger ( i . e . , more negative ) for those leading their firms in dynamic rather than in stable industry environments . As shown in models 3 and 7 of Table 2 , the interaction of environmental dynamism with optimism is significant and nega - tive for both revenue growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) . 33 , p (cid:3) . 01 ) and employment growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) . 34 , p (cid:3) . 01 ) . The graph of this interaction ( Figure 2 ) shows that the relationship between entrepreneurs’ optimism and the performance of their new ventures is more neg - ative for those leading their firms in dynamic , as opposed to stable , industry environments . There - fore , Hypothesis 3 too , receives support . In addition to influencing the relationship be - tween entrepreneurs’ optimism and new venture performance individually , the social cognitive per - spective suggests that environmental dynamism TABLE 1 Descriptive Statistics and Correlations a Variable Mean s . d . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 . Firm age 5 . 74 2 . 43 2 . Firm size 0 . 00 1 . 81 (cid:2) . 08 3 . Prior growth 0 . 00 1 . 93 (cid:2) . 09 . 35 * * 4 . Age of entrepreneur 51 . 83 9 . 12 . 07 . 14 * (cid:2) . 08 5 . Sex 0 . 19 0 . 40 . 00 (cid:2) . 12 (cid:2) . 17 * (cid:2) . 20 * * 6 . Education 2 . 97 1 . 17 . 03 . 11 (cid:2) . 08 . 10 . 11 7 . Optimism 5 . 87 0 . 90 (cid:2) . 09 (cid:2) . 10 (cid:2) . 03 . 16 * . 12 (cid:2) . 03 8 . Entrepreneurial experience 0 . 95 1 . 34 (cid:2) . 08 . 00 . 05 . 22 * * (cid:2) . 12 (cid:2) . 07 . 21 * * 9 . Dynamism 16 . 56 11 . 19 (cid:2) . 04 . 10 (cid:2) . 04 . 12 (cid:2) . 04 . 13 . 02 . 05 10 . Revenue growth 1 . 79 1 . 65 (cid:2) . 02 . 09 . 18 * * (cid:2) . 05 (cid:2) . 02 . 09 (cid:2) . 15 * . 06 . 09 11 . Employment growth 1 . 50 1 . 12 . 02 . 09 . 11 (cid:2) . 02 (cid:2) . 04 . 04 (cid:2) . 19 * * . 02 . 10 . 53 * * a n (cid:1) 201 . For sex , male (cid:1) 0 , female (cid:1) 1 . * p (cid:3) . 05 * * p (cid:3) . 01 2009 479 Hmieleski and Baron and entrepreneurs’ past experience in creating new ventures may also exert joint effects on this rela - tionship . In other words , these key behavioral and environmental factors should act as moderators concurrently—reciprocally enhancing the effects of entrepreneurs’ optimism on the performance of their new ventures . Therefore , in a post hoc analy - sis , we examined the three - way interaction of opti - mism , entrepreneurial experience , and dynamism on new venture performance . As shown in models 4 and 8 of Table 2 , the three - way interaction is found to be significant and negative for both reve - nue growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) – . 32 , p (cid:3) . 01 ) and employment growth ( (cid:2) (cid:1) – . 47 , p (cid:3) . 01 ) . The graph of this inter - action ( Figure 3 ) indicates that the relationship be - tween entrepreneurs’ optimism and the perfor - mance of their new ventures is most negative when entrepreneurial experience and environmental dy - namism are both high . Thus , as a social cognitive perspective suggests , these moderating variables appear to operate jointly in influencing new ven - ture performance . DISCUSSION The results of the current study suggest that en - trepreneurs’ level of optimism has , on average , a negative relationship with the performance of their new ventures and that , moreover , both entrepre - neurial experience and environmental dynamism moderate this relationship . Specifically , the nega - tive relationship between entrepreneurs’ optimism and the performance of their new ventures is stron - ger for experienced than for inexperienced entre - preneurs , and stronger in dynamic than in stable environments . In addition , there is some indication ( from our post hoc analysis ) that the negative rela - tionship between entrepreneurs’ optimism and the performance of their new ventures is strongest when entrepreneurs are high in previous business - founding experience and lead their firms in dynamic environments . From a theoretical perspective , these findings support the basic predictions of social cognitive theory , which suggests that full understanding of the impact of dispositional variables can only be TABLE 2 Results of Hierarchical Regression Models of Revenue and Employment Growth a Variables Revenue Growth Employment Growth Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Firm control variables Firm age . 00 (cid:2) . 01 . 02 . 01 . 04 . 03 . 05 . 04 Firm size . 03 . 00 (cid:2) . 01 . 01 . 06 . 03 . 01 . 04 Prior growth . 17 * . 18 * . 19 * . 19 * . 09 . 10 . 10 . 10 Individual control variables Age (cid:2) . 05 (cid:2) . 04 (cid:2) . 06 (cid:2) . 07 (cid:2) . 03 (cid:2) . 01 (cid:2) . 03 (cid:2) . 05 Sex (cid:2) . 01 . 03 . 07 . 06 (cid:2) . 03 . 01 . 05 . 04 Education . 10 . 09 . 08 . 06 . 04 . 03 . 01 . 02 Main effects Optimism (cid:2) . 17 * (cid:2) . 20 * * (cid:2) . 20 * * (cid:2) . 20 * * (cid:2) . 25 * * (cid:2) . 25 * * Entrepreneurial experience . 10 . 17 * . 23 * * . 06 . 16 * . 24 * * Dynamism . 09 . 14 . 22 * * . 10 . 16 * . 28 * * Two - way interactions Optimism (cid:4) experience (cid:2) . 15 * (cid:2) . 16 * (cid:2) . 22 * * (cid:2) . 24 * * Optimism (cid:4) dynamism (cid:2) . 33 * * (cid:2) . 40 * * (cid:2) . 34 * * (cid:2) . 45 * * Experience (cid:4) dynamism . 10 . 33 * * . 12 . 46 * * Three - way interaction Optimism (cid:4) experience (cid:4) dynamism (cid:2) . 32 * * (cid:2) . 47 * * F 1 . 54 1 . 86 3 . 66 * * 4 . 25 * * 0 . 64 1 . 48 3 . 90 * * 5 . 66 * * R 2 . 05 . 08 . 19 . 23 . 02 . 07 . 20 . 28 Adjusted R 2 . 02 . 04 . 14 . 17 . 00 . 02 . 15 . 23 a Standardized coefficients are shown . n (cid:1) 201 . * p (cid:3) . 05 * * p (cid:3) . 01 480 June Academy of Management Journal gained through careful consideration of the inter - action between such variables and key behavioral and environmental factors ( Bandura , 1986 ) . In ad - dition , results are consistent with the view that a multilevel perspective is essential in all branches of management science for continued refinement of researchers’ knowledge base and theoretical mod - els and for fuller understanding of complex organ - izational processes ( Hitt et al . , 2007 ) . Entrepreneurs’ Optimism and Firm Performance : Is the Relationship Always Negative ? Overall , the findings of the present research sug - gest that entrepreneurs’ dispositional optimism is negatively related to firm performance . As noted earlier , there are strong grounds for predicting such a relationship . Highly optimistic individuals often hold unrealistic expectations , suffer from overcon - fidence , and discount negative information—ten - dencies that can seriously interfere with their de - cision making and judgment ( Geers & Lassiter , 2002 ; Segerstrom & Solberg Nes , 2006 ) . The present results indicate that such effects may indeed oper - ate among entrepreneurs and combine to exert a negative influence on new venture performance . It is important to note , however , that other evi - dence suggests that high levels of optimism some - times yield important benefits . These include en - hanced ability to form coalitions and lasting FIGURE 1 Interaction Effect of Dispositional Optimism with Entrepreneurial Experience on Revenue Growth a – 1 – 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 Optimism RevenueGrowth Lowentrepreneurialexperience Highentrepreneurialexperience – 1 s . d . + 1 s . d . a The interaction graph for employment growth follows the same pattern as the above . FIGURE 2 Interaction Effect of Dispositional Optimism with Environmental Dynamism on Revenue Growth a – 1 – 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 Optimism RevenueGrowth Lowenvironmentaldynamism Highenvironmentaldynamism – 1 s . d . + 1 s . d . a The interaction graph for employment growth follows the same pattern as the above . 2009 481 Hmieleski and Baron friendships ( Fredrickson , 2001 ) , increased resis - tance to prolonged , intense stress ( Tugade & Fredrickson , 2004 ) , greater persistence in the face of adversity ( Markman et al . , 2005 ) , and enhanced ability to develop extensive social networks ( Greve & Salaff , 2003 ) . Several of these skills or capaci - ties—especially the ability to develop extensive social networks—have been shown to be important predictors of entrepreneurial performance ( e . g . , Oz - gen & Baron , 2007 ) . Thus , although the present findings clearly indicate a negative relationship be - tween entrepreneurs’ optimism and new venture performance , it seems premature to conclude that the relationship between these variables is always , or uniformly , negative . In fact , two points suggest that the relationship between these variables may be complex and possibly , curvilinear . First , entrepreneurs in general , and certainly the entrepreneurs who participated in the present study , tend to be very high in optimism ( e . g . , Ab - delsamad & Kindling , 1978 ; Busenitz & Barney , 1997 ; Cooper at al . , 1988 ; Dosi & Lovallo , 1997 ; Fraser & Greene , 2006 ; Lovallo & Kahneman , 2003 ; Lowe & Ziedonis , 2006 ; Simon et al . , 2000 ) . In fact , the entrepreneurs in the current sample scored very high on the measure of optimism we employed ( mean (cid:1) 5 . 87 ) —higher , in fact , than participants drawn from a wide range of different populations in previous research who completed the same mea - sure ( e . g . , Armstrong - Stassen , 2006 ; Aspinwall et al . , 2005 ) . Second , the findings of many previous studies indicate that the relationship between op - timism and individual performance is curvilinear in a wide variety of tasks and populations ( e . g . , Brown & Marshall , 2001 ) . Performance initially rises as optimism increases , but beyond some point , further increments in optimism are associ - ated with actual decrements in performance . Tak - ing these two facts into account , we suggest that the same principle may operate with respect to entre - preneurs . The relationship between optimism and new venture performance may be positive up to moderate levels of optimism , but beyond this point , may become negative . This reversal may occur be - cause when optimism reaches very high levels , entrepreneurs may fail to assess potential oppor - tunities carefully , show a strong preference for heuristic decision making ( a procedure that is often ineffective in dynamic environments [ Sarma´ny , 1992 ] ) , and come to experience high levels of over - confidence . As Hayward et al . ( 2006 ) noted , this latter factor , in particular , may adversely affect new venture performance . Although it is always diffi - cult ( and fraught with uncertainty ) to move from measures of individual performance to measures of firm performance , we tentatively suggest that very high optimism encourages tendencies among entre - preneurs ( e . g . , overconfidence ) that interfere with their performance of key tasks ( e . g . , full assessment of potential opportunities ) and hence , adversely affects the success of their new ventures . Only future research can fully examine these and related possibilities . However , the present findings do suggest quite clearly that among entrepreneurs , FIGURE 3 Interaction Effect of Dispositional Optimism with Entrepreneurial Experience and Environmental Dynamism on Revenue Growth a – 1 – 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 Optimism RevenueGrowth ( 1 ) High experience , high dynamism ( 2 ) High experience , high dynamism ( 3 ) Low experience , high dynamism ( 4 ) Low experience , low dynamism – 1 + 1 s . d . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) s . d . a The interaction graph for employment growth follows the same pattern as the above . 482 June Academy of Management Journal the potential costs of high optimism may often out - weigh any potential benefits of such a disposition . Put in other terms , very high levels of optimism may indeed constitute too much of a good thing where entrepreneurs are concerned and may adversely influence the performance of their new ventures . The Effects of Entrepreneurial Experience and Environmental Dynamism The link between entrepreneurial experience and new venture performance is an intuitive connec - tion and one that has been frequently assumed to be positive ( Wright et al . , 1998 ) . Empirical evidence concerning this relationship has , however , gener - ally been less than robust ( Carter & Ram , 2003 ) . The lack of significant findings regarding this relation - ship in past research may be due , in part , to the fact that entrepreneurs differ greatly in terms of the degree to which they learn from their experience , and optimism may influence the efficiency of such learning . For example , entrepreneurs who are highly optimistic are likely to learn less from their experience than ones who are moderate in opti - mism , given the tendency of the first group to focus primarily on positive , belief - confirming informa - tion . This line of reasoning is supported by previ - ous research examining the important role that en - trepreneurs’ cognitive frameworks play in their ability to transform information from their past experience into knowledge that helps them to identify and exploit entrepreneurial opportunities ( Corbett , 2005 , 2007 ) . Considering that highly opti - mistic entrepreneurs are cognitively predisposed to undervalue new or dissenting information , they are likely to learn less from their past experience than more moderately optimistic entrepreneurs . This may partly explain why we found entrepreneurial experience to exacerbate the negative relationship between optimism and new venture performance— suggesting that entrepreneurs who are moderate optimists might be more effective at learning from their past experiences than those who are very high in optimism . Similarly , although some have suggested a posi - tive link between environmental dynamism and new venture performance ( Kirzner , 1997 ) , there is relatively little empirical support for such a rela - tionship . Even though the potential for achieving major success may be greater in dynamic industries than in stable ones , the chance of failure is also greater ( Markides & Geroski , 2004 ) . Thus , the ef - fects of the few who succeed may be offset by a considerably greater number of relatively poor per - formers . In contrast , within stable environments there is a better chance of long - term survival , but less opportunity for impressive gains . As our re - sults show , certain dispositional and behavioral characteristics ( for example , moderate optimism coupled with high entrepreneurial experience ) may increase the odds of entrepreneurs successfully leading their new ventures within dynamic indus - try environments . In sum , we believe that the design of our study , which applies social cognitive theory to entrepre - neurship and adopts the contextual perspective recommended by Hitt et al . ( 2007 ) , helps shed new light on why extant research has not clearly and definitively verified intuitively appealing relation - ships between entrepreneurial experience and en - vironmental dynamism on the one hand , and new venture performance on the other . We suggest that this lacuna exists primarily because these linkages are more complex than previously believed and are , in fact , contingent on moderating factors ( such as the ones examined in the current study ) . Implications for Entrepreneurship Educators and Practitioners The results of the current study offer support for Lovallo and Kahneman’s suggestion that “there needs to be a balance between optimism and real - ism—between goals and forecasting . Aggressive goals can motivate the troops and improve the chances for success , but outside - view forecasts should be used to decide whether or not to make a commitment in the first place” ( 2003 : 63 ) . A natural conclusion would be to suggest that lead entrepre - neurs , who are by nature often highly optimistic , may benefit from adding top management team members who are more moderate in optimism than themselves ( Hayward et al . , 2006 ) . This is , how - ever , more easily said than done . Decades of re - search in several fields clearly demonstrate that similarity is a powerful determinant of liking and forming positive personal relationships ( e . g . , Baron , Branscombe , & Byrne , 2008 ) . Accordingly , optimistic persons prefer to work with individuals similar to themselves on this dimension ( Hiller & Hambrick , 2005 ) . Moreover , if the members of top management teams differ considerably in terms of optimism , this situation can generate conflict and dysfunctional management . We suggest , therefore , that a more effective approach may be to train entrepreneurs to self - regulate their optimism in ways that permit them to be realistic as well as positive—to recognize when they need to constrain their enthusiasm and when they can move more energetically . In other words , the development of appropriate metacognitive and self - regulatory mechanisms may be crucial , for it may be those 2009 483 Hmieleski and Baron entrepreneurs who are best able to regulate and direct their own intrinsic optimism who are most likely to achieve the success that they seek . In so doing , entrepreneurs should pay particular atten - tion to how their inherent levels of optimism inter - act with their experience and environment to influ - ence their ability to achieve successful outcomes . Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research Several limitations to the current study suggest opportunities for future research . First , although our findings uncovered contextual differences in the relationship between optimism and new ven - ture performance , we did not examine the under - lying mechanisms through which such effects oc - curred . Therefore , future research might address , for example , the use of heuristic versus systematic decision - making processes by entrepreneurs as pathways mediating such effects . Because high lev - els of optimism tend to be related to heuristic de - cision making and lower levels of optimism tend to be related to systematic decision making ( Scheier et al . , 2001 ) , and because repeat entrepreneurs tend to rely more heavily on intuitive modes of thinking than novice entrepreneurs ( Brigham , De Castro , & Shepherd , 2007 ; Buttner & Gryskiewicz , 1993 ) , this may prove to be a particularly fruitful extension to the current study . Further , additional behavioral factors , such as improvisation ( Hmieleski & Cor - bett , 2006 ) , and other environmental factors , such as munificence ( e . g . , Sharfman & Dean , 1991 ) , may be worth investigating in combination with the ef - fects of optimism . Second , previous studies of entrepreneurs have failed to identify significant linkages between per - formance and personal satisfaction ( e . g . , Brigham et al . , 2007 ; Hmieleski & Corbett , 2008 ) . Identifying such links would be particularly relevant for stud - ies of entrepreneurs’ optimism , because optimism has generally been found to be positively related to work satisfaction ( Youseff & Luthans , 2007 ) ; but as the present results show , it appears to be negatively linked to performance among entrepreneurs . Fu - ture studies of entrepreneurs’ optimism might em - brace efforts to evaluate what configurations of op - timism with other behavioral and environmental factors simultaneously maximize both performance and satisfaction . Third , the specific nature of our sample ( entre - preneurs leading new ventures ) limits the extent to which our findings can be generalized to other groups of individuals and organizations . As noted earlier , entrepreneurs tend to range from moderate to very high in optimism ( Abdelsamad & Kindling , 1978 ; Busenitz & Barney , 1997 ; Cooper et al . , 1988 ; de Meza & Southey , 1996 ; Fraser & Greene , 2006 ; Lowe & Ziedonis , 2006 ; Simon et al . , 2000 ) . There - fore , our results are not informative about popula - tions in which optimism is considerably lower . Although we have no strong reason to assume that similar findings would not occur for leaders in other types of firms who are moderately to highly optimistic , research has shown that the optimal characteristics of leaders vary with a firm’s evolu - tionary stage ( Smith & Miner , 1983 ) . For example , high optimism might be more beneficial than mod - erate optimism during the idea generation stage of the new venture creation process . Therefore , it seems important to examine the relationships ex - plored in the current study longitudinally over var - ious stages in the organizational life cycle . Follow - ing this approach might necessitate adoption of other performance measures that are more applica - ble to a given type of firm and a given stage of firm development . Such research should , insofar as pos - sible , track the development of firms from their initial founding so as to avoid survival bias . Finally , the cross - sectional design of the current study limits our ability to make causal inferences about the observed relationships . The fact that our performance data were lagged from the time period in which the data for the independent variables were collected does support our case for causality . Such arguments would , however , be made stronger in future studies if both the independent and out - come variables were measured on multiple occa - sions over time . Such multiple measurement would also allow for a more comprehensive test of social cognitive theory by presenting the opportu - nity to examine the bidirectional relationships be - tween the variables studied . Conclusions Early investigation of the potential role of entre - preneurs’ personal dispositions in new venture cre - ation and development failed to provide clear or consistent findings ( Gartner , 1989 ) . Many factors contributed to these disappointing results , includ - ing inadequate operationalization and measure - ment of variables , lack of attention to relevant the - oretical frameworks , and relatively little focus on the crucial task of linking these microlevel vari - ables to overt actions by entrepreneurs or to firm performance ( Low & MacMillan , 1988 ) . In contrast , more recent research focusing on the personal char - acteristics of entrepreneurs ( or , more broadly speaking , individual - level variables such as the skills , motives , experience , attitudes , and other characteristics of individual entrepreneurs ) has been based on well - established theoretical frame - 484 June Academy of Management Journal works and employed carefully chosen measures and improved research designs ( e . g . , Baum et al . , 2001 ; Hmieleski & Baron , 2008 ; Zhao et al . , 2005 ) . The resulting findings provide evidence that sev - eral individual - level variables do indeed matter : they are significantly related to new venture per - formance ( e . g . , Baron , 2007 , 2008 ) . Despite these advances , however , the amount of variance in new venture performance explained by such variables has continued to be small ( Davidsson , Low , & Wright , 2001 ) . This seems to be partly due to the fact that many studies still seek to identify global characteristics that differentiate successful from less successful entrepreneurs . We suggest that a more fruitful approach may be to examine the in - teractions between individual - level variables and both behavioral and environmental moderating variables , thus applying a social cognitive perspec - tive . Such an approach fully reflects the nature of modern research on the role of microlevel variables in several branches of management ( e . g . , organiza - tional behavior , human resource management ) . In these fields , it is widely recognized that factors relating to the skills , motives , experience , and char - acteristics of individuals do indeed influence work - related behavior and , hence , important organ - izational outcomes . However , it is also recognized that such effects are rarely direct ; rather , more fre - quently other variables relating to the tasks that individuals perform and the environments in which they operate moderate these effects . Adopt - ing this broader perspective in order to more fully understand the role of individual entrepreneurs in new venture performance may greatly facilitate progress toward a central goal of the field of entre - preneurship : accurate comprehension of the com - plex process , involving many different factors op - erating at many different levels , through which enterprising entrepreneurs conceive , launch , and operate new ventures . In somewhat broader terms , we hope that the present findings encourage ongo - ing efforts to incorporate a multilevel approach into entrepreneurship research—an approach aimed at gaining understanding of the complex interplay be - tween individual , organizational , and environmen - tal variables in new venture performance ( Hitt et al . , 2007 ) . In our view , such research is crucial , for it is this complex , reciprocal interchange that ulti - mately shapes the survival and fortunes of new ventures . REFERENCES Abdelsamad , M . H . , & Kindling , A . T . 1978 . Why small businesses fail . Advanced Management Journal , 43 ( 2 ) : 24 – 32 . Aldrich , H . 1979 . Organizations and environments . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Aldrich , H . 2000 . Organizations evolving . London : Sage . Armstrong - Stassen , M . 2006 . Determinants of how man - agers cope with organisational downsizing . Applied Psychology : An International Review , 55 : 1 – 26 . Aspinwall , L . G . , Sechrist , G . B . , & Jones , P . R . 2005 . Expect the best and prepare for the worst : Anticipa - tory coping and preparations for Y2K . Motivation and Emotions , 29 : 357 – 388 . Åstebro , T . , Jeffrey , S . A . , & Adomdza , G . K . 2007 . Inven - tor perseverance after being told to quit : The role of cognitive biases . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 20 : 253 – 272 . Baker , T . , & Nelson , R . E . 2005 . Creating something from nothing : Resource construction through entrepre - neurial bricolage . Administrative Science Quar - terly , 50 : 329 – 366 . Bandura , A . 1986 . Social foundations of thought and action : A social cognitive theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Barden , J . Q . , & Mitchell , W . 2007 . Disentangling the influences of leaders’ relational embeddedness on interorganizational exchange . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 50 : 1440 – 1461 . Baron , R . A . 2007 . Behavioral and cognitive factors in entrepreneurship : Entrepreneurs as the active ele - ment in new venture creation . Strategic Entrepre - neurship Journal , 1 ( 1 – 2 ) : 167 – 182 . Baron , R . A . 2008 . The role of affect in the entrepreneur - ial process . Academy of Management Review , 33 : 328 – 340 . Baron , R . A . , & Ensley , M . D . 2006 . Opportunity recognition as the detection of meaningful patterns : Evidence from comparisons of novice and experienced entrepreneurs . Management Science , 52 : 1331 – 1344 . Baron , R . A . , Branscombe , N . R . , & Byrne , D . 2008 . Social psychology ( 12th ed . ) . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Baum , J . R . , & Locke , E . A . 2004 . The relationship of entrepreneurial traits , skill , and motivation to sub - sequent venture growth . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 89 : 587 – 598 . Baum , J . , Locke , E . , & Smith , K . 2001 . A multidimen - sional model of venture growth . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 44 : 292 – 303 . Berger , C . R . , & Gudykunst , W . B . 1991 . Uncertainty and communication . In B . Dervin & M . Voight ( Eds . ) , Progress in communication sciences : 21 – 66 . Nor - wood , NJ : Ablex . Brigham , K . H . , De Castro , J . O . , & Shepherd , D . A . 2007 . A person - organization fit model of owner - managers’ cognitive style and organizational demands . Entre - preneurship Theory and Practice , 31 ( 1 ) : 29 – 51 . Brown , J . D . , & Marshall , M . A . 2001 . Great expectations : 2009 485 Hmieleski and Baron Optimism and pessimism in achievement settings . In E . C . Chang ( Ed . ) , Optimism & pessimism : Implications for theory , research , and practice : 239 – 255 . Washing - ton , DC : American Psychological Association . Brush , C . G . , & Vanderwerf , P . A . 1992 . A comparison of methods and sources for obtaining estimates of new venture performance . Journal of Business Ventur - ing , 7 : 157 – 170 . Busenitz , L . W . , & Barney , J . B . 1997 . Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations : Biases and heuristics in strategic decision - making . Journal of Business Venturing , 12 : 9 – 30 . Buttner , E . H . , & Gryskiewicz , N . 1993 . Entrepreneurs’ problem - solving styles : An empirical study using the Kirton adaptation / innovation theory . Journal of Small Business Management , 31 ( 1 ) : 22 – 31 . Carter , S . , & Ram . M . 2003 . Reassessing portfolio entrepre - neurship . Small Business Economics , 21 : 371 – 380 . Carver , C . S . , & Scheier , M . 2003 . Optimism . In S . J . Lopez & C . R . Snyder ( Eds . ) , Positive psychological assessment : A handbook of models and measures . Washington DC : American Psychological Association . Castrogiovanni , G . J . 2002 . Organization task environ - ments : Have they changed fundamentally over time . Journal of Management , 28 ( 2 ) : 129 – 150 . Chandler , G . N . , Honig , B . , & Wiklund , J . 2005 . Anteced - ents , moderators , and performance consequences of membership change in new venture teams . Journal of Business Venturing , 20 : 705 – 725 . Cooper , A . C . , Folta , T . B . , & Woo , C . 1995 . Entrepreneur - ial information search . Journal of Business Ventur - ing , 10 : 107 – 120 . Cooper , A . C . , Woo , C . Y . , & Dunkelberg , W . C . 1988 . Entrepreneurs’ perceived chances for success . Jour - nal of Business Venturing , 3 : 97 – 108 . Corbett , A . C . 2005 . Experientiallearningwithintheprocessof opportunity identification and exploitation . Entrepre - neurship Theory and Practice , 29 : 473 – 491 . Corbett , A . C . 2007 . Learning asymmetries and the dis - covery of entrepreneurial opportunities . Journal of Business Venturing , 22 : 97 – 118 . Danson , M . W . 1999 . Debates and reviews . Regional Studies , 33 ( 2 ) : 157 – 173 . Davidsson , P . , Low , M . , & Wright , M . 2001 . Editor’s in - troduction—Low and MacMillan ten years on : Achievements and future directions for entrepre - neurship research . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 25 ( 4 ) : 5 – 16 . Dawson , J . F . , & Richter , A . W . 2006 . Probing three - way interactions in moderated multiple regression : De - velopment and application of a slope difference test . Journal of Applied Psychology , 91 : 917 – 926 . de Meza , D . , & Southey , C . 1996 . The borrower’s curse : Optimism , finance and entrepreneurship . Economic Journal , 106 : 375 – 386 . Dess , G . G . , & Beard , D . W . 1984 . Dimensions of organi - zational task environments . Administrative Science Quarterly , 29 : 52 – 73 . Dosi , G . , & Lovallo , D . 1997 . Rational entrepreneurs or optimistic martyrs ? Some considerations on technolog - ical regimes , corporate entries , and the evolutionary role of decision biases . In R . Garud & P . R . Nayyar ( Eds . ) , Technological innovation : Oversights and foresights : 41 – 68 . New York : Cambridge University Press . Eid , J . , Matthews , M . D . , Meland , N . T . , & Johnsen , B . H . 2005 . Dispositional optimism and self - assessed situa - tion awareness in a Norwegian military training exer - cise . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 100 : 649 – 658 . Eisenhardt , K . M . 1989 . Making fast strategic decisions in high - velocity environments . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 32 : 543 – 576 . Forbes , D . P . 2005 . Managerial determinants of decision speed in new ventures . Strategic Management Journal , 26 : 355 – 366 . Fraser , S . , & Greene , F . J . 2006 . The effects of experience on entrepreneurial optimism and uncertainty . Eco - nomica , 73 : 169 – 192 . Fredrickson , B . L . 2001 . The role of positive emotions in positive psychology : The broaden - and - build theory of positive emotions . American Psychologist , 56 : 218 – 226 . Gartner , J . D . 2005 . America’s manic entrepreneurs . American Enterprise , 16 ( 5 ) : 18 – 21 . Gartner , W . B . 1989 . Some suggestions for research on entrepreneurial traits and characteristics . Entrepre - neurship Theory and Practice , 14 ( 1 ) : 27 – 37 . Geers , A . L . , Handley , I . M . , & McLarney , A . R . 2003 . Discerning the role of optimism in persuasion : The valence - enhancement hypothesis . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 85 : 554 – 565 . Geers , A . L . , & Lassiter , G . D . 2002 . Effects of affective expectations on affective experience : The moderat - ing role of optimism - pessimism . Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin , 28 : 1026 – 1039 . Gibson , B . , & Sanbonmatsu , D . M . 2004 . Optimism , pes - simism , and gambling : The downside of optimism . Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin , 30 : 149 – 160 . Greve , A . , & Salaff , J . W . 2003 . Social networks and entrepreneurship . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 28 ( 1 ) : 1 – 22 . Hambrick , D . C . 2007 . The field of management’s devo - tion to theory : Too much of a good thing ? Academy of Management Journal , 50 : 1346 – 1352 . Hayek , F . A . 1945 . The use of knowledge in society . American Economic Review , 35 : 519 – 530 . Hayward , M . L . A . , & Hambrick , D . C . 1997 . Explaining the premium paid for large acquisitions : Evidence of 486 June Academy of Management Journal CEO hubris . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 103 – 127 . Hayward , M . L . A . , Shepherd , D . A . , & Griffin , D . 2006 . A hubris theory of entrepreneurship . Management Science , 52 : 160 – 172 . Hiller , N . J . , & Hambrick , D . C . 2005 . Conceptualizing executive hubris : The role of ( hyper - ) core self - eval - uations in strategic decision - making . Strategic Man - agement Journal , 26 : 297 – 319 . Hitt , M . A . , Beamish , P . W . , Jackson , S . E . , & Mathieu , J . E . 2007 . Building theoretical and empirical bridges across level : Multilevel research in management . Academy of Management Journal , 50 : 1385 – 1399 . Hmieleski , K . M . , & Baron , R . A . 2008 . When does entre - preneurial self - efficacy enhance versus reduce firm performance ? Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 2 : 57 – 72 . Hmieleski , K . M . , & Corbett , A . C . 2006 . Proclivity for improvisation as a predictor of entrepreneurial in - tentions . Journal of Small Business Management , 41 ( 1 ) : 45 – 63 . Hmieleski , K . M . , & Corbett , A . C . 2008 . The contrasting interaction effects of improvisational behavior with entrepreneurial self - efficacy on new venture perfor - mance and entrepreneur work satisfaction . Journal of Business Venturing , 23 : 482 – 496 . Hmieleski , K . M . , & Ensley , M . D . 2007 . A contextual examination of new venture performance : entrepre - neur leadership behavior , top management team het - erogeneity , and environmental dynamism . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 28 : 865 – 889 . House , R . J . , Shane , S . A . , & Herold , D . M . 1996 . Rumors of the death of dispositional research are vastly ex - aggerated . Academy of Management Review , 21 : 203 – 224 . Judge , T . A . , & Ilies , R . 2004 . Is positiveness in organiza - tions always desirable ? Academy of Management Executive , 18 ( 4 ) : 151 – 155 . Kalleberg , A . L . , Marsden , P . V . , Aldrich , H . E . , Cassell , J . W . 1990 . Comparing organizational sampling frames . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 : 658 – 688 . Keats , B . W . , & Hitt , M . A . 1988 . A causal model of linkages among environmental dimensions , macro organizational characteristics , and performance . Academy of Management Journal , 31 : 570 – 598 . Kirzner , I . 1997 . Entrepreneurial discovery and the com - petitive market process : An Austrian approach . Jour - nal of Economic Literature , 35 : 60 – 85 . Klayman , J . , & Ha , Y . W . 1987 . Confirmation , disconfir - mation , and information in hypothesis testing . Psy - chological Review , 94 : 211 – 228 . Klayman , J . , Soll , J . B . , Gonzalez - Vallejo , C . , & Barlas , S . 1999 . Overconfidence : It depends on how , what , and whom you ask . Organizational Behavior and Hu - man Decision Processes , 79 : 216 – 247 . Lovallo , D . , & Kahneman , D . 2003 . Delusions of success : How optimism undermines executives’ decisions . Harvard Business Review , 81 ( 7 ) : 56 – 63 . Low , M . , & MacMillan , I . 1988 . Entrepreneurship : Past research and future challenges . Journal of Manage - ment , 14 ( 2 ) : 139 – 161 . Lowe , R . A . , & Ziedonis , A . A . 2006 . Overoptimism and the performance of entrepreneurial firms . Manage - ment Science , 52 : 173 – 186 . Luthans , F . , & Youssef , C . M . 2004 . Human , social , and now positive psychological capital management : In - vesting in people for competitive advantage . Orga - nizational Dynamics , 33 ( 2 ) : 143 – 160 . Markides , C . C . , & Geroski , P . A . 2004 . Fast second : How smart companies bypass radical innovation to en - ter and dominate new markets . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Markman , G . D . , Baron , R . A . , & Balkin , D . B . 2005 . Are perseverance and self - efficacy costless ? Assessing entrepreneurs’ regretful thinking . Journal of Orga - nizational Behavior , 26 : 1 – 19 . McKenzie , C . R . M . 1997 . Underweighting alternatives and overconfidence . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 71 : 141 – 160 . McMullen , J . S . , & Shepherd , D . A . 2006 . Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the theory of the entrepreneur . Academy of Management Review , 36 : 132 – 152 . Ozgen , E . , & Baron , R . A . 2007 . Social sources of infor - mation in opportunity recognition : Effects of men - tors , industry networks , and professional forums . Journal of Business Venturing , 22 : 174 – 192 . Peterson , C . , & Bossio , L . M . 2001 . Optimism and phys - ical well - being . In E . C . Chang ( Ed . ) , Optimism & pessimism : Implications for theory , research , and practice : 127 – 145 . Washington , DC : American Psy - chological Association . Sarma´ny , I . 1992 . Optimism and cognitive style . Studia Psychologica , 34 : 261 – 267 . Scheier , M . F . , Carver , C . S . , & Bridges , M . W . 1994 . Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism ( and trait anxiety , self - mastery , and self - esteem ) : A re - evalua - tion of the Life Orientation Test . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 67 : 1063 – 1078 . Scheier , M . F . , Carver , C . S . , & Bridges , M . W . 2001 . Optimism , pessimism , and psychological well - be - ing . In E . C . Chang ( Ed . ) , Optimism & pessimism : Implications for theory , research , and practice : 189 – 216 . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Schulman , P . , Keith , D . , & Seligman , M . 1993 . Is opti - mism heritable ? A study of twins . Behaviour Re - search & Therapy , 31 : 569 – 574 . Segerstrom , S . C . 2001 . Optimism , goal conflict , and stressor - related immune change . Journal of Behav - ioral Medicine , 24 : 441 – 467 . 2009 487 Hmieleski and Baron Segerstrom , S . C . , & Solberg Nes , L . 2006 . When goals conflict but people prosper : The case of disposi - tional optimism . Journal of Research in Personal - ity , 40 : 675 – 693 . Shane , S . , & Venkataraman , S . 2000 . The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research . Academy of Management Review , 25 : 217 – 226 . Sharfman , M . , & Dean , J . 1991 . Conceptualizing and mea - suring the organizational environment : A multi - di - mensional approach . Journal of Management , 17 : 681 – 700 . Shaver , K . , & Scott , L . 1991 . Person , process , choice : The psychology of new venture creation . Entrepreneur - ship Theory and Practice , 16 ( 2 ) : 23 – 45 . Shrader , R . C . , Oviatt , B . M . , & McDougall , P . P . 2000 . How new ventures exploit trade - offs among interna - tional risk factors : Lessons of the accelerated inter - nationalization of the 21st century . Academy of Management Journal , 43 : 1227 – 1247 . Simon , M . , Houghton , S . M . , & Aquino , K . 2000 . Cogni - tive biases , risk perception , and venture formation : How individuals decide to start companies . Journal of Business Venturing , 15 : 113 – 134 . Smith , N . R . , & Miner , J . B . 1983 . Type of entrepreneur , type of firm , and managerial motivation : Implica - tions for organizational life cycle theory . Strategic Management Journal , 4 : 325 – 340 . Spencer , S . M . , & Norem , J . K . 1996 . Reflection and distraction : Defensive pessimism , strategic opti - mism , and performance . Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin , 22 : 354 – 365 . Spirrison , C . L . , & Gordy , C . C . 1993 . The constructive thinking inventory and detecting errors in proofread - ing . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 76 : 631 – 634 . Starr , J . A . , & Bygrave , W . D . 1991 . The assets and liabilities of prior start - up experience : An exploratory study of multiple venture entrepreneurs . In N . C . Churchill et al . ( Eds . ) , Frontiers of entrepreneurship research : 213 – 227 . Babson Park , MA : Babson College . Sternberg , R . , & Wennekers , S . 2005 . Determinants and effects of new business creation using Global Entre - preneurship Monitor Data . Small Business Econom - ics , 24 : 193 – 203 . Stuart , R . W . , & Abetti , P . A . 1990 . Impact of entrepre - neurial and management experience on early perfor - mance . Journal of Business Venturing , 5 : 151 – 162 . Tugade , M . M . , & Fredrickson , B . L . 2004 . Resilient indi - viduals use positive emotions to bounce back from negative emotional experiences . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 86 : 320 – 333 . Waldman , D . A . , Ramirez , G . G . , House , R . J . , & Puranam , P . 2001 . Does leadership matter ? CEO leadership attributes and profitability under conditions of per - ceived environmental uncertainty . Academy of Management Journal , 44 : 134 – 143 . Wood , R . , & Bandura , A . 1989 . Social cognitive theory of organizational management . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 14 : 361 – 384 . Wright , M . , Hmieleski , K . M . , Siegel , D . , & Ensley , M . D . 2007 . The role of human capital in technological entrepreneurship . Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice , 31 : 791 – 806 . Wright , M . , Robbie , K . , & Ennew , C . 1997 . Serial entre - preneurs . British Journal of Management , 8 : 251 – 268 . Wright , M . , Westhead , P . , & Sohl , J . 1998 . Editors’ intro - duction : Habitual entrepreneurs and angel investors . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 22 ( 4 ) : 5 – 21 . Youssef , C . M . , & Luthans , F . 2007 . Positive organization - al behavior in the workplace . Journal of Manage - ment , 33 : 774 – 800 . Zhao , H . , Seibert , S . E . , & Hills , G . E . 2005 . The mediating role of self - efficacy in the development of entrepre - neurial intentions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 90 : 1265 – 1272 . Keith M . Hmieleski ( k . hmieleski @ tcu . edu ) is an assistant professor of management in the M . J . Neeley School of Business at Texas Christian University . He received his Ph . D . from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute . His research focuses on psychological and behavioral aspects of the new venture creation and development process . Robert A . Baron ( baronr @ rpi . edu ) is Bruggeman Profes - sor of Entrepreneurship in the Lally School of Manage - ment and Technology at Rensselaer Polytechnic Univer - sity . He received his Ph . D . from the University of Iowa . His current research focuses on social and cognitive fac - tors in entrepreneurship . 488 June Academy of Management Journal