Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration in Healthcare Settings Carsten S . Østerlund School of Information Studies , Syracuse University , 309 Hinds Hall , Syracuse , NY 13244 , USA ( E - mail : costerlu @ syr . edu ) Abstract . The notion of place often connotes our understood reality populated with people , practices , meanings , and artifacts . This paper suggests that documents , whether electronic , paper - based , or set in stone , offer important insights into how people establish and maintain places for communication and coordination . Data from an ethnographic study in a large hospital system illustrates how doctors carefully craft their medical histories in various electronic record systems to demarcate speci ﬁ c places for their communication and coordination with speci ﬁ c collaborators . Such documents serve as portable places , allowing the doctors to navigate a constantly changing landscape of relevant patients , participants , times , and spaces . The documents demarcate such places by pointing out the interdependencies among particular participants , places , and times . Doctors care deeply about these documents and they play a central part not only in securing ef ﬁ cient communication and coordination but also in the socialization of newcomers . A study of the complex interrelationships between documents and place , therefore , offers important insights into organizational environments characterized by distributed and mobile work practices . Key words : communication genres , context , distributed work , documents , indexical analysis , knowledge sharing , mobile work , medical informatics , place , practice theory , space 1 . Introduction As modern organizations have become more distributed and mobile , organiza - tional life is becoming increasingly dependent on community members who are distant in time and space . The dilemma of how to establish a shared sense of place for the communication and work within collaborations is an important concern for organizational members . A host of geographical technologies , collaborative systems and interactive environments strive to facilitate and accommodate these work arrangements , with varying degrees of success . Such concerns are vital to the medical community , which is characterized by not only a highly distributed and mobile workforce but also a hodgepodge of information systems and other material resources , some of which are closely tied to speci ﬁ c locations . Today , despite extensive efforts to develop universal and integrated record systems , one ﬁ nds that individual settings , departments , and Computer Supported Cooperative Work © Springer 2007 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 007 - 9064 - 1 sub - disciplines within healthcare facilities have implemented their own informa - tion systems ( Hartswood et al . 2003 ; Schloeffel 1998 ) . Emergency departments will typically have one electronic record system , the Intensive Care Unit ( ICU ) another , outpatient care a third , and nurses ( in some hospitals ) yet another nurse - use - only online record system ; rarely do these systems communicate . In the process of getting admitted , typical patients will have their histories taken more than 15 times and these will be recorded in more than 34 information systems , some paper - based , others electronic ( Østerlund 2004 ) . The problem speaks to the larger theoretical investigation into how people use documents to communicate and coordinate their activities and knowledge in a complex environment incorporating many locations , people , and material resources . The question becomes : how do doctors use medical documents to demarcate places for communication and the subject of their work ? The paper is organized as follows : ﬁ rst , to address this larger issue I turn to scholars discussing how people use documents to maintain spatial and temporal order and demarcate places for interaction . Second , drawing from a larger ethnographic study I present data on how two doctors use two documents in their care for two patients . Third , in my analysis and discussion of the case I describe how the doctors use their documents to demarcate places for their communication and coordination with speci ﬁ c constituencies of collaborators . Finally , I draw implica - tions for our understanding of information systems in regard to people ’ s use of place . 2 . Place : practices , meanings , and material form In tandem with the increased use of geographical technologies , distributed and mobile work arrangements we ﬁ nd that the concepts of place , space , and spatiality have made their way into the organization studies and information systems literature ( Amin and Cohendet 2004 ; Brown and O ’ hara 2003 ; Czarniawska 2004 ; Dourish 2006 ; Fleming and Spicer 2004 ; Kornberger and Clegg 2004 ; Luff and Heath 1998 ; Orlikowski 2002 ; Rennecker 2002 ; Schultze and Boland 2000 ) . Large parts of this body of work draws on a practice - oriented or relational view of place tracing its roots into several academic ﬁ elds including social geography ( Crang and Thrif 2000 ; Gregory 1994 ; Hägerstrand 1975 ; Harvey 1996 ) , social anthropology ( Clifford 1997 ; Gupta and Ferguson 1999 ) , sociology ( Bourdieu 1990 ; Giddens 1985 ; Gieryn 2000 ; Goffman 1959 ) , science and technology studies ( Bowker and Star 1999 ; Callon and Law 2004 ; Latour 1997 ) , philosophy ( de Certeau 1984 ; Lefebvre 1991 ) and communication ( Bakhtin 1986 ) . In this larger debate one does not ﬁ nd consistent de ﬁ nitions of spatial terms such as place , space , and spatiality . For the purpose of this article , I will describe place through the following three features : First , places are outcomes of practices . They are the collective product of shared forms of practices and demarcate the speci ﬁ c ways people move in the Carsten S . Østerlund world and put it to use . Rather than de ﬁ ned and imposed from the outside their spatiality is experienced and crafted to support particular needs ( de Certeau 1984 ; Dourish 2006 ; Gieryn 2000 ) . Places locate and frame appropriate activities and relations among people : for instance , a hospital ward is associated with certain practices and not others . Second , places are invested with meanings . They locate and frame social and cultural understandings . However , the meanings and values imbued on a place like the medical ward are labile . The demarcation of places and rhythm of activities differ circumstantially – by day compared to at night , for example : people move differently in a hospital depending on the hour , and one sees staff members at night behave in ways one would not during the day ( Zerubavel 1979 ) . Places are ﬂ exible in the hands of different people , and contested and malleable over time . Third , places have material form . Whether physical or technology - mediated , places are made up of stuff , virtual or real , arti ﬁ cial or natural , built or found . Sociologists and anthropologists have for some time discussed the signi ﬁ cance of material culture in social life . We also ﬁ nd a large literature in science and technology studies on the role of technology and other artifacts in the making of places . Scholars debate the role of this materiality in the constitution of places . Some argue that a place is always associated with a geographic location – a unique spot in the universe ( Gieryn 2000 ) . Others contend that we can ﬁ nd virtual places entirely mediated by information technologies . Particularly in the initial heady excitement of internet discourse , the cybernetic , the electronic , and the virtual propelled many scholars away from the physical and material , insisting on freedom and motion , and questioning whether experiences of place and identity must be tied to bodies and geographic locations ( Virilio 1991 ) . Pioneering work on internet groups focused on dynamics such as online discourse and identity play , suggesting that digital media enables place formation not bound by common conventions such as geographic locations or other physical limitations ( Benedikt 1992 ; Hine 2000 ; Jones et al . 2004 ) . Recent work calls for a close examination of places as hybrids , locations which are neither purely geographic nor wholly virtual ( Dourish 2006 ; Harrison and Dourish 1996 ; Jones et al . 2004 ) . Here , the challenge becomes to understand how people use documents , locations , and other material resources to establish and maintain places associated with speci ﬁ c spatial and temporal orders , which accommodate their mobile activities and frame the meanings and practices of community members . 2 . 1 . Documents and places Documents , which include the recordings made in various media , whether paper based , electronic , wall mounted , or set in stone , constitute important material resources in many places . This may be particularly so when dealing with hybrid and mobile places distributed across time and space . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration For years scholars have recognized a co - constitution of documents and the situational and organizational contexts in which they are produced and used ( Douglas 1986 ; Gar ﬁ nkel 1967a ; Smith 1990 , 2005 ; Suchman 1987 ; Zerubavel 1981 ) For instance , Gar ﬁ nkel demonstrates in his classic article on good organizational reasons for bad clinical records that documents , their production , results , and use are integral features of the same social order they describe ( Gar ﬁ nkel 1967a , p . 192 ) . Rather than being carriers of mere content or produced to create complete accounts of a context , documents are directed at solving a paramount problem of organizational life , the practical problem par excellence : “ What to do next ? ” ( Gar ﬁ nkel 1967b ) . The literature on medical records offers many examples supporting this general view of documents . Doctors and nurses use records to accomplish particular tasks at hand and support their sense - making activities ( Atkinson 1995 ; Berg 1996 , 1997 , 1999 ; Hartswood et al . 2003 ; Heath and Luff 1996 ) . Medical documents constitute an integral part of transforming patients into manageable problems in particular organizational contexts . This includes a host of document practices such as using the format and layout of records to give signi ﬁ cance to certain elements , the combination of documents , or paying attention to what information is included and left out ( Berg and Bowker 1997 ; Bossen 2002 ; Hartswood et al . 2003 ; Heath and Luff 1996 ; Østerlund 2007 ) . Many of these studies draw inspiration from an ethnomethodological perspective ( Hak 1992 ; Heath 1982 ; Pettinari 1988 ; Rees 1981 ) and science studies ( e . g . , Haraway 1991 ; Latour 1986 ) . Documents interact with their context in two closely entwined ways . First , documents are self - explicating devices ( Brown and Duguid 1994 ; Harper 1998 ; Hartswood et al . 2003 ; Smith 1990 ) . They denote the context of their use by telling the reader how they ( the documents ) are to be applied . Documents and their content are important resources through which people bring other parts of the worlds into focus ( Hanks 1996 ) . Second , people are able to recognize what these instructions are because they are familiar with the settings in which these documents exist . The context provides a resource whereby a user will know what to expect and how to use the document . In other words , users need to know how those documents are bound up with certain kinds of organizational practices . The possibility of understanding the document is based on a shared , practical , and entitled understanding of a common context between writer and reader ( Gar ﬁ nkel 1967a pp . 201 ) . In short , people bring contextual background knowledge on which they rely into their writing and reading practices . At the same time documents support tasks by offering instructions to their producers and users . This does not mean that documents simply force certain reading on their reader . Instead , the writer and reader engage with documents in a reciprocal relationship where the one informs the other . The dynamic relationship between documents as explicating devices and users as carriers of contextual background knowledge create an interesting dynamic : How much does the user know about the context and how much does the Carsten S . Østerlund document explicate ? Inspired by the linguistic anthropologist , William Hanks ( 1990 , 1996 , 2000a , b ) I will suggest that this depends on the level of symmetric access to knowledge about the context among document writers and readers . In the medical setting it depends on the degree of symmetric access to knowledge about the patient ; knowledge of people who have contributed to the record ; knowledge of the clinic ’ s organization and operating procedures ; and knowledge of the mutual history with other persons – patients and care providers . Symmetric access to knowledge often depends on the degree to which people are distributed in time and space ( Bossen 2002 ) . The more distributed and mobile the less background knowledge people tend to share and the more documents need to explicate . However , when taking these spatial and temporal dimensions into account the broader and ethereal notion of context easily becomes a liability . As an alternative the concept of place offers a helpful alternative highlighting the spatio - temporal and material form of social formations . In other words , when studying distributed and mobile work the spatio - temporal dimensions play an important role in describing the delicate balance between , on the on hand , the degree to which documents articulate pertinent practices and social relations , and on the other hand , the knowledge that writers and readers bring to the interactions . My further articulation of the relationship between documents and place falls in two parts . First , I discuss how documents may demarcate the spatio - temporal dimensions of the places out of which they emerge . Second , I draw on Hanks and others to explore how these spatio - temporal aspects of documents allow people to establish a more or less shared understanding of place . 2 . 1 . 1 . The spatio - temporal dimensions of documents A number of scholars have looked speci ﬁ cally at how people use various types of documents to demarcate places for communication and work . Maps stand out as one apparent use of documents to demarcate particular places of interest and imbue them with meaning ( Hägerstrand 1975 ; Harvey 1996 ; Wood 1992 ) . Maps highlight some elements in space and time , while others remain invisible . As a city can look fundamentally different depending on what side of the tracks one views it from , so can maps depict starkly different places and social relations in the same space . Cartographic documents allow individuals to see themselves in terms of different social relations in time and space . Mapping and its role in demarcating places for social relations and activities are dif ﬁ cult to separate from representations of time . The ﬁ rst maps emerged as travel itineraries where relations among places depicted in the document represented the time it would take to travel between various locations . Giddens ( 1987 ) , for instance , highlights how the use of timetables is a signi ﬁ cant device in choreographing social relations in time and space . Depending on the time , one point in space can host several different places , each of which may be associated with radically different meanings and practices . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration Apart from these more apparent examples of space and time ordering documents , one can , with Latour ( 1997 ) and Bowker and Star ( 1999 ) , argue that all sorts of documents , from mere lists to large scale classi ﬁ cation systems , include temporal and spatial markers which support speci ﬁ c practices in certain places . According to Bowker and Star ( 1999 ) even classi ﬁ cation systems as abstract as the International Classi ﬁ cation of Diseases ( ICD ) order entries into accordance with some temporal and spatial markers . For instance , the ICD , read in its entirety , contains many references to the temporal periods right around the start and end of a human life , but few references that deal with adulthood . These markers provide a window into the times that concern the medical community that uses the ICD . Bowker and Star ( ibid . ) further show how the times and places represented in classi ﬁ cation systems often have consequences for the lived biographies of patients , doctors , and nurses , framing appropriate behaviors and giving meanings to certain spaces and times . These temporal and spatial markers , embedded within classi ﬁ cation systems and enacted in a constant negotiation between doctors , nurses , and the evolving nature of the patients ’ illness , often support the work of doctors and nurses , but con ﬂ ict with the meanings and practices guiding patients ’ lives . 2 . 1 . 2 . Documents and shared notions of place The literature on communication genres supports the general notion of documents as demarcating times and places . A document genre is typi ﬁ ed communicative action invoked in response to a recurrent situation ( Bazerman 1995 ; Yates and Orlikowski 1992 ) . People engage genres to accomplish social actions in particular situations , characterized by a particular purpose , content , form , set of participants , time , and place . On the one side , a producer of a document tries to invoke a particular genre – to establish the context and conventions for their communica - tion , typically associated with speci ﬁ c people in particular times and places . On the other side , document users try to recognize which genre has been involved , which conventions are in play , so that they may respond appropriately . The document genre allows people to identify addresser ( “ I ” ) and addressee ( “ you ” ) and other contextual clues . “ I , ” “ you , ” and words like “ now , ” “ here , ” “ there , ” “ below , ” “ tomorrow , ” and “ next ” are indexical terms ( Hanks 1990 , 1996 , 2000a ) . These words index , or point to , the context of communication ( Brown and Duguid 1994 : 12 ) . They indicate the socially accessible places , times , and participants of the communication . In face - to - face conversation , indexicals support ef ﬁ cient communication . A doctor may ask a nurse where he can ﬁ nd Mr Jones . The nurse responds : “ I think that you can ﬁ nd him down there . ” The shared ﬁ eld of perception and knowledge makes available the “ I ” who speaks , the “ you ” who listens , the “ him ” to whom she refers , the “ down there ” to which she points . When communication is mediated over time and space , however , indexicals can become a liability . For instance , the doctor would have been left rather Carsten S . Østerlund perplexed had he received the same answer from a disembodied voice over the hospital ward ’ s intercom . To avoid such situations document producers often include speci ﬁ c indexical references to the participants , places , and times that characterize the context of communication . In other words , we cannot assume that doctors and nurses share corresponding representations of the practices , social order and contexts in which they work , especially when they are not interacting face - to - face . People bring different notions of place and social order to a situation . Document alleviates the problem by helping people ‘ get on the same page ’ . Document genres and their indexical structures allow them to establish a shared sense of place . Inspired by Brown and Duguid ( 1994 , pp . 12 ) , one can say that producers build into the document a portable context or portable place , which helps the reader locate the meaning and the spatio - temporal order out of which it emerges . In this way , indexicals remain ef ﬁ cient and secure robust communication across space and time . In other words , the document will demarcate a place for communication to help the user locate themselves , others , and the subject of their communication in relation to one another . The details of such clues greatly depend on the level of mutual perception offered by the media and shared knowledge among the producers and users of a document . In a tight knit community such cues can be quite subtle ; in other situations they may be spelled out in great detail . 2 . 2 . Documents as portable places Documents can and often do demarcate places for communication and collaboration . They do so by associating speci ﬁ c spaces and times with certain people , practices , and meanings . In doing so , documents can serve as portable places which help the producers and users of a document to situate their utterances and maintain ef ﬁ cient and meaningful communication . What makes this possible is the directive function of indexicals and genre expectations , which serve to direct an addressee to particular participants , places , times , or objects . In addition a document can indicate power relations , etiquette , and other cultural norms central to the place of communication . This makes documents , whether electronic , paper - based , or wall - mounted , a central element in the material form of many collaborative places . For instance , a doctor on a hospital ward may receive a document from a colleague in the intensive care unit ( ICU ) . The document summarizes a patient ’ s case . However , it does more than that . Through its indexical structures it points to other doctors and nurses relevant to the particular case , important places for collaboration , and a timeframe for the work ahead . The document , thus , serves as a portable place in the sense that it can move across space and time but retain the indexical structure which points out relevant participants , places and times . Furthermore , doctors can use the document on the move as they continuously readjust their care activities for many patients across multiple locations . The document , thus , serves as a place in the sense that it retains the indexical structure which points out relevant Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration participants , places and times . Furthermore , it is portable in the sense that doctors can use the document on the move as they continuously readjust their care activities for many patients across multiple locations . One can distinguish two types of relationships in the portable places demarcated by a document . First , a document can demarcate a place for communication by marking the relationship between the interacting parties ( Hanks 1996 ) . The degree of access among producers and users of a document in ﬂ uence the type of place clues needed to make the documents an ef ﬁ cient and meaningful mean of communication . Such access can vary in degrees of mutual perceptibility and prior knowledge : two physicians , for example , may have face - to - face interaction on a regular basis , or their relationship may be de ﬁ ned by great distance ; they may share a common knowledge about each other or they may never have met . For instance , if the ICU doctor and ward doctor do not know each other or their respective work rhythms they may use the patient history to spell out in great detail relevant collaborators and the times and places of their daily interactions . If they do know each other they may leave out that information . Second , a document can specify the relationship between the interacting parties and the subject of communication ( e . g . , a patient , an object , a process ; ibid . ) . The relationship to the subject may be characterized by a common knowledge or a more or less asymmetrical access . For instance , our two doctors may interact with the subject of their communication and work – the patient – on a daily basis , or one doctor could be reporting on her relation to the patient to another physician who has no prior knowledge of that patient . All of these factors affect the level of detail with which a document will demarcate the place for the doctors ’ communication and for their subject of work , the patient . 3 . Method and case To explore the use of documents and place , I draw my empirical case from a 15 - month , ethnographic study where I followed pediatric nurses , doctors , and secretaries in their daily work . The organization is a highly regarded nonpro ﬁ t teaching hospital tied to a large university and located in a major US urban area . I spent approximately 2 , 000 h in ﬁ ve primary care clinics , one ER , and two hospital wards , focusing speci ﬁ cally on the practices that go into documenting patients ’ care as they move within and across healthcare settings . These documenting practices included the recordings made on various note cards , preprinted forms , on - line record systems , and whiteboards . My unit of analysis was the work practices of doctors and nurses in documenting patients ’ care . I relied on participant observation , semi - structured interviews , focus group interviews , documents , and archival data . Practice - oriented theories ( Barley 1986 ; Bourdieu 1998 ; Orlikowski 2000 ; Schultze 2000 ; Schultze and Boland 2000 ) framed my understanding of how doctors and nurses produce and consume documents , and guided my analysis of transcribed interviews , collected documents , and hand written and typed ﬁ eld notes . Carsten S . Østerlund In an attempt to limit the scope of the present paper I focus on two physicians ’ use of two documents in their care for the same two infants with bronchiolitis . 1 Both documents are electronic . One system known as the House Of ﬁ cer Sign Out note ( HOSO ) is used by interns and residents ; the other known as Senior Notes is used by senior residents across the hospital . These are just two among many other information systems used daily by the two physicians . Parallel to the HOSO and Senior Note the doctors daily write in or read the hospitals electronic discharge summaries , emergency room notes , laboratory and registration systems and a host of paper - based documents including among others the medical record , progress notes , tracking boards , order forms , medication lists , nurse ﬂ ow sheets , and personal documents often referred to as brain notes . Drawing on Fitzpatrick ’ s ( 2004 ) research we can characterize the HOSO and Senior Notes as part of the “ working patient record , ” in contrast to the “ archival patient record . ” The former include locally evolved and maintained documents that support clinical practices . The latter consist of legal documents such as progress notes , discharge summaries , test results , etc . The HOSO and Senior Notes often serve as an intermediate document between other legal documents . I found comparable use of locally designed working documents in all the other settings involved in this and other healthcare organizations I have studied . The case is qualitatively representative in the sense that it re ﬂ ects typical document practices repeated countless times daily by ward physicians . 2 3 . 1 . Case : two patients , two doctors , two information systems Around four o ’ clock on a February afternoon in Kiltham Hospital an infant boy , Dylan , lies in a small transparent plastic crib . Two doctors and a medical student are simultaneously leaning over Dylan , three stethoscopes pressed to his chest listening , eyes turned to the ceiling . The medical student and two doctors , an intern and a senior resident , ﬁ nish their exam and turn to the other infant in the room , Anna . Like Dylan , she has been admitted for bronchiolitis . Both infants spent several weeks in the hospital , ﬁ rst in the intensive care unit ( ICU ) and then transferred to their current beds in a regular pediatric department , 10 East . The intern , Marc , a newly minted doctor in his ﬁ rst year of medical residency , and the senior resident , Elisabeth , in the fourth year of her residency , turn to Anna ’ s mother sitting weary - looking beside Anna ’ s crib . 2 For a broader description and history of the documents , work practices and hospital ’ s and clinics ’ organizational arrangements see Østerlund ( 2004 , 2007 ) . 1 To protect the privacy of both healthcare providers and patients I have changed all names , dates , institutional identi ﬁ ers ( e . g . , record numbers , phone numbers , department names , and institutional names ) , and sometimes the gender of my informants . The examples of records included in Figures 1 and 2 below are excerpts from ﬁ eld notes that did not contain any patient , clinician , or institutional identi ﬁ ers . Those identi ﬁ ers were never copied from the originals in the process of the ﬁ eldwork . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration Elisabeth says , “ We know this has been a long ordeal for all of you ; but we think Anna will be ready to go home tomorrow or the day after . ” Marc continues : “ I will put the discharge papers together and the nurse will help you get ready to go home . ” After they have assured Anna ’ s mother that her baby will be ﬁ ne , Marc , Elisabeth , and the medical student all head for the doctors ’ conference room . The medical student grabs a clean Progress Note sheet at the nursing station . Behind the glass walls , known as the “ aquarium , ” Marc and Elizabeth each ﬁ nd a computer terminal . Marc logs on to the “ House Of ﬁ cer Sign - Out ” ( HOSO ) , an online system used by interns . Elisabeth logs into the senior resident note system . They each start updating their notes on Dylan , Anna , and the other patients they have seen since 7 : 00 AM . Marc will never read the senior resident ’ s notes and vice - versa . Neither of these documents becomes part of the of ﬁ cial medical record , nor do Marc ’ s and Elisabeth ’ s supervisors access those two information systems to evaluate or compensate them for their work . Case summary . At ﬁ rst glance it seems counterintuitive , if not counterproductive , that the senior resident and the intern would not use the same information system to document their care . Elisabeth spends most of the day in close collaboration with Marc and three other interns . They gather for rounds in the morning , see new patients together , go to radiology rounds , have noon conferences , and share meal breaks . In the afternoon the senior resident works closely with one or more of the interns in the team ’ s conference room , writing notes or going to patient rooms for joint interviewing and patient examination . As in Dylan and Anna ’ s cases , it is not uncommon to see a medical student , an intern , and a senior resident all bent over the same child , each with their stethoscopes on the young patient ’ s chest . These groups obviously share practices , they regard themselves as teams , and yet they do not share the same document genres : Marc documents Dylan ’ s and Anna ’ s histories in one information system and Elisabeth documents them in another . One can observe comparable documenting practices among the nurses and other physicians involved in Dylan ’ s and Anna ’ s care . Each healthcare provider typically maintains multiple records of patient care . One way of approaching this seemingly inef ﬁ cient record keeping is to ask how Marc and Elisabeth ’ s use of the HOSO and Senior Note relate to the places , times , participants of their ongoing communication and work . 4 . Documents and the demarcation of places for communication and the subject of work Marc and Elisabeth record Anna ’ s and Dylan ’ s histories in two different documents , the senior residents ’ Senior Note ( Figure 1a and b ) and the interns ’ HOSO ( Figure 2 ) . I will analyze these two documents as demarcating a place for : ( 1 ) communication among a group of collaborators and ( 2 ) the subject of work , the patients . Carsten S . Østerlund 4 . 1 . Demarcating places for communication In this and the following section I look for differences and commonalities in the places demarcated by the two documents as represented by their different references to author , addressees , and other participants ( participants ) ; references to places and place - names ( spatial markers ) ; and dates , temporal deictics , and frequencies ( temporal markers ) . 4 . 1 . 1 . Participatory markers Different documents or information systems correspond to distinct conceptions of the addressers and addressees . The addresser or addressee may be an individual , a a Figure 1 a Excerpt from senior notes showing the ﬁ rst page ; 3 b excerpt from senior notes showing two entries . 3 Notice : This and the following ﬁ gures contain no real patient , clinician , or institutional identi ﬁ ers . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration social group , contemporaries , successors , an unconcretized Other , or a combination ( Hanks 2000b , p . 151 ) . In the Senior Notes and HOSO we do not ﬁ nd any explicit address apart from the name of each document genre . Senior Notes address senior residents only , whereas House Of ﬁ cer Sign Out ( HOSO ) addresses house of ﬁ cers , the latter being physicians in Kiltham ’ s residence programs , including interns ( ﬁ rst year residents ) and second and third year residents . In Kiltham interns predominantly use the HOSO . Equally important and in contrast to the majority of medical documents , neither the Senior Notes nor the HOSO identify the speaker . We ﬁ nd no signatures or speci ﬁ cation of who tailored these documents . In the HOSO we do ﬁ nd Marc ’ s name in the header to Dylan and Anna ’ s entries as the “ Intern . ” This does not mean that Marc is the sole author of the record ; simply that he is in charge of these two patients during his rotation in the Pediatric Team B . Senior Notes and the HOSO are communal documents where a distinct social group constitutes each document ’ s collective addresser and addressee . Most likely three or four senior residents have been involved in the writing of Dylan and Anna ’ s histories . Likewise , Marc did not write all parts of the HOSO . For instance , if we return to the day where Marc and Elisabeth examine Dylan and Figure 1 ( continued ) . Carsten S . Østerlund Anna we ﬁ nd that in the late afternoon , just before going home , Marc signs - out his patients to one of his fellow interns , Donna , who is staying in the hospital overnight . They use the HOSO to structure their conversation . Overnight , Donna uses the HOSO to structure her activities , and if anything happens to Anna or Dylan , she will add the event to the HOSO . On her on - call nights , Elisabeth covers for not only patients at Pediatric Team B but also two other departments . When the senior residents in those other units sign - out , Elisabeth prints out a new version of the Senior Note containing all patients currently in all these three units . The Senior Note printout can easily contain 30 – 40 patients . Elisabeth builds on other senior residents ’ entries rather than writing Dylan and Anna ’ s histories anew . Senior residents in the ICU most Figure 2 Excerpt from HOSO showing two entries . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration likely wrote parts of these two histories ; Elisabeth and other senior residents later edit those earlier entries to make them re ﬂ ect the current status of a patient . While the HOSO and Senior Notes contain no explicit speaker and address , they do contain references to the current community of senior resident users . At the beginning of the Senior Note ( see Figure 1a ) we ﬁ nd a table listing the names of senior residents , interns , medical students , and attending physicians . The four senior residents named on the left hand side are all contemporaries to the current document and this group of patients . Elisabeth ’ s name goes ﬁ rst signalling that she is currently in charge of the patients admitted to Pediatric Team B . The other three senior residents all cover for her on different nights of the week . In the HOSO we would get a comparable sense of the author / addressee community if we printed out the entire HOSO for Pediatric Team B . If we read the right hand side of the headers for each patient in Figure 2 we would ﬁ nd the names of the four interns on Marc ’ s team . Each of them would be assigned as responsible for a portion of those patients . In contrast to the implicit composition of speakers and addressees among the interns and senior residents , respectively , we ﬁ nd an explicit structure referring to other collaborators and their interdependencies . Starting with the Senior Notes ( Figure 1a ) , the top of the document includes a four - column table , listing not only the senior residents producing and using the senior notes , but also the interns , medical students and attending physicians with whom they currently collaborate on Pediatric Team B . The table demarcates a group of collaborators all communicating daily about the present patients . The sequence of the four columns hints at the power relations among the four groups . The senior residents oversee the work of the interns , who manage and mentor the medical students . The attending physicians watch over the entire team by taking on a supervisory role . One attending physician is responsible for the patients not attended to by their private physician or other sub - specialties , in this case Patrick ; the other , Law , supervised the teaching of the medical students . Given that the attending physicians hold the ultimate responsibility for patient care one may expect to ﬁ nd them in the ﬁ rst column . However , the senior residents ’ “ ownership ” of the record most likely explains this inconsistency in the sequencing . In summary , the table recaps a group of co - workers . It goes beyond the relations among speakers and addressees by including other important collaborators central to the senior residents ’ or interns ’ daily communication . 4 . 1 . 2 . Spatial markers Elisabeth ’ s Senior Note contains an explicit structure demarcating the spatial dimensions for her communication and collaboration with the other members of Pediatric Team B . Following the table we ﬁ nd on the right hand side a list of three important places and their phone numbers : ( 1 ) Pediatric Team B uses the 10 East Conference Room as their base for writing records , hanging out , and Carsten S . Østerlund working rounds . ( 2 ) The conference room is located on the 10 East Ward next to the nursing station where all calls to the ward get directed . ( 3 ) The PTB Senior Call Room is where senior residents hope to catch a few hours of sleep when they are on - call at night . Furthermore , we ﬁ nd in the Senior Note the pager numbers of all the physicians and medical students on the team . Following Harrison and Dourish ( 1996 ) one can consider these pager numbers a reference to a virtual space . 4 . 1 . 3 . Temporal markers As in the case of the spatial markers , the Senior Note starts out by demarcating an explicit temporal structure for Pediatric Team B ’ s work . With a glance at the top of the senior note we learn that the daily work for the senior residents is structured around working rounds at 7 : 30 , radiology rounds at 9 : 20 , and senior rounds at 10 : 00 ( see Figure 1a ) . All the members of Pediatric Team B outlined in the table participate in work rounds and radiology rounds . During those rounds the team will go over each patient case , typically initiated by the intern or a medical student , recounting the patient ’ s history and progress . After radiology rounds the group splits up . The senior residents will go to their senior rounds while the rest of the team starts working on individual patient cases . In the late afternoon Elisabeth will sign - out to the senior resident staying overnight , as will Marc with the corresponding intern . If Marc and Elisabeth are on call themselves , the other senior residents or interns will sign out their cases to them . At this point , one may ask why the HOSO ( Figure 2 ) , compared to the Senior Note , does not contain a comprehensive mapping of the participants and temporal and spatial structures demarcating a detailed place for communication . The key question here is the degree to which interns have access to other interns and senior residents have access to other senior residents . We ﬁ nd many gradations of mutual access and the question becomes : to what degree do the interns share mutual perceptibility and prior knowledge about their place for communication compared to the senior residents ? The answer is embedded in the temporal and spatial structure of their communication . For the 5 weeks Marc and his three other interns are on rotation in Pediatric Team B they share collaborators , spaces , and temporal rhythm . Every morning they listen as they each present old and new patients . At night they cover for each other . In contrast , Elisabeth only works in Pediatric Team B during the day , but at night she covers for other teams with different participants and spatial and temporal structures . When on - call at night , Elisabeth prints out a fresh Senior Note demarcating her new and larger place for collaboration . Marc and his fellow interns do not need to be reminded of the spatial and temporal dimension of their shared place for communication every time they look at their HOSO . It is the same for several weeks , and in case they should forget they do keep a log of it on a large whiteboard in the 10 East conference room where they typically type up their notes . Elisabeth does not share such a symmetric space with her fellow senior residents . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration In summary , these two communal documents demarcate distinct places for ef ﬁ cient and task - speci ﬁ c communication and interaction among a group of collaborators . As summarized in the two left hand columns of Table 1 , each document does so by pointing to important collaborators and the temporal and spatial structures of their interactions . The HOSO and Senior Notes can be seen as maps for the interns ’ and senior residents ’ communication . As with all maps they only highlight some elements , while others remain invisible . For instance , the Senior Notes do not mention the nurses , clerical staff , medical consultants , etc . Nor do these notes make references to places and temporal rhythms not central to the collaboration of the senior residents . The Senior Notes provide a map of the senior residents ’ close collaborators in which each element is distributed in a particular relationship of co - existence . The level of detail depends on the degree of shared perceptibility and knowledge among community members . These maps are not set in stone but constantly changing . The Senior Notes Elisabeth uses between 7AM and 5 PM are radically different from the Notes she uses from 5 PM to 6 AM the same day . In the evening she will collaborate with a new group of interns , medical students , and attending doctors , caring for a different con ﬁ guration of patients . With this in mind let us move on to looking at how Elisabeth and Marc use their documents to demarcate the subject of their work : the patients . 4 . 2 . Demarcating places for the subject of work The second dimension of the HOSO and Senior Note ’ s document - to - place references involves the relationship between collaborators and subject of their work , the patients . In the two documents the subject of work can be read in two Table 1 . Documents demarcating places for communication and the subject of work . Demarcating a place for communication Demarcating a place for the subject of work Senior note HOSO Senior note HOSO Participants CommunaldocumentDetailedmapping of collaborators Communaldocument Sketchy mapping of collaborators Detailed mapping of participants without enduring relationships to team members Specify same participantsasSenior Note despite shorter note Spatial Detailed mapping of important places for communication Sketchy mapping of important places for communication Mapping of patient ’ s trajectory by organ group Mapping of patient ’ s currentlocation Temporal Detailed mapping of temporal organization of communication Sketchy mapping of temporal organization of communication Patient ’ s trajectory and major areas of potential work / concern Itinerary : When to do work and how long it is likely to take Carsten S . Østerlund ways . On the one hand , the documents represent a compilation of individual patient histories , each specifying the relationship between caregivers and one patient . On the other hand , the HOSO and Senior Notes present all patients as one object of referent , which is a compilation of all patients currently admitted to Pediatric Team B . This means that Marc and Elisabeth not only read their notes when addressing individual patient issues ; they use the records to give them an overview of their current workload , i . e . all the patients admitted to the team . In other words , the subject of work as referred to in the documents can be seen as either an individual patient or a patient cohort . The bold section following the table and timetable on the ﬁ rst page of the Senior Note illustrates this latter point ( Figure 1a ) . This section constitutes a table of contents by automatically compiling all the headings from each patient history in the present version of the Senior Note . Each line summarizes the department , patient , service in charge , intern in charge , the patient ’ s age , and chief complaint or diagnosis . As an entity this table of contents outlines a body of work characterized by a particular con ﬁ guration of participants and places . For instance , in the Senior Note ’ s table of contents , each line starts with the name of the ward where a patient is admitted . We see that the team has eight patients on 10 East , two patients on 10 West , ﬁ ve patients on 11 East , and seven patients on 12 South . In other words , the left hand column serves as a ﬂ exible map . The team ’ s patients are distributed all over the hospital and the con ﬁ guration of these locations changes through the day as new patients get admitted and others discharged or transferred from the wards . A boy suffering from Sickle Cell disease is admitted to 12 South , as Elisabeth and Marc write their notes . When Anna gets discharged in a few days the team may get another patient on 11 West , and if Dylan ’ s condition should deteriorate and require a transfer back to the ICU , another patient may take his place on 10 East . Elisabeth refers to her Senior Note when determining where to go next or where the nurse calling her about a patient , for example , Hugh Fisher , may be located . In addition , the table speci ﬁ es the distribution of team members in relation to this larger body of work . With a glance we can tell where Marc ’ s patients are admitted in comparison to Donna ’ s patients ; we know how many patients Patrick has been assigned ; and so forth . The interns use the HOSO in a similar fashion despite its lack of a summary table . Each new history starts with the patient ’ s location . A glance at the HOSO tells us that Dylan and Anna both are admitted to 10 East . If more histories had been included in Figure 2 one would see that they are sequenced the same way as the Senior Note , starting with the wards at the lowest ﬂ oors and then moving up . Marc and his fellow interns will ﬂ ip through the HOSO when planning their day or determining where to call if they need to know whether the patient ’ s primary care doctor is responsible for the care or an attending physician in the hospital is assigned to the case . In short , these two document types serve as ﬂ exible maps outlining the ever - changing relationships between the physicians on Pediatric Team B and all patients currently admitted to the service . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration With this broader de ﬁ nition of subject of work in mind let us now turn to the individual patient histories and the places those narratives outline for the interactions between physicians and patients . I start out with the participants , followed by a discussion of the spatial and temporal markers . 4 . 2 . 1 . Participants The HOSO and Senior Note outline another level of participants in the body of Dylan and Anna ’ s histories compared to the collaborators discussed above . These participants do not have enduring relationships with the members of Pediatric Team B . Their interactions are de ﬁ ned by the requirements of individual patients ’ cases . For instance , Dylan ’ s Senior Note history mentions four groups following his case ( Figure 1b ) : “ Cardio following , ” “ Nutrition consult , ” “ Peter NP , ” “ SW involved ” ( i . e . , social work ) . In contrast to the earlier section of the Senior Note , we ﬁ nd no proper nouns designating particular participants , with the exception of Peter , a nurse practitioner in the shelter where Dylan ’ s mother lives . The same is the case in Anna ’ s history : we learn that the pulmonary team has been consulted ( i . e . , “ Pulm consulted ” ) . The lack of proper names referring to the physicians involved from the different services can be explained by the ad hoc relationship between the consulting services and the members of Pediatric Team B . They are not part of the community . We recall that the Senior Note provides a comprehensive mapping of current collaborators and their interdependencies . Interns do not use the HOSO to outline their community of collaborators on Pediatric Team B . Yet , when it comes to Dylan and Anna ’ s actual patient history we ﬁ nd little variation in the speci ﬁ cation of participants and their relation to the patient – despite the vast difference in length and detail between the Senior Note and HOSO . For instance , we notice that regardless of the glaring lack of detail in Anna ’ s HOSO history , all it misses within its sphere of concern is a reference to the pulmonary consult involved when she was weaned off diuretics – the Senior Note does not mention any other participants in the body of the history . Interns would most likely not regard the omission of the pulmonary consult as an oversight but simply as a fact that is no longer relevant to Anna ’ s current care . 4 . 2 . 2 . Spatial markers In Dylan and Anna ’ s individual histories we ﬁ nd a number of place names – many of which are repeated several times . In the Senior Notes Dylan ’ s history , for instance , mentions the ICU three times , and the ﬂ oor and shelter two times . Reading those place names within their individual sections we ﬁ nd that they are organized to connote Dylan ’ s trajectory through a number of locales , but seen through the lenses of relevant organ systems . The ﬁ rst section summarizing his past and present medical history refers to the ER and the shelter where he lives with his mother . In the next section ( i . e . , RESP . ) we learn that he was transferred Carsten S . Østerlund to the ICU . The CV section ( cardiac vascular ) mentions “ the ﬂ oor , ” Cardio , and “ F / u in Clinic ” ( follow - up in Clinic ) . “ The ﬂ oor ” refers to his current admission to a general pediatric unit , 10 East . The FEN section refers to ICU , Nutrition , and “ the ﬂ oor ” again . The ID section mentions the ICU , and the ﬁ nal section refers to the social worker team and the shelter . Anna ’ s history offers a comparable sequencing of place - names : Common Hospital = > ICU = > Floor ; Pulmonary consult ; ICU ; ICU ; ICU = > Discharge pending . We notice that this by no means provides complete depiction of her care trajectory ; yet , it offers a general sense of her movements : admitted to Common Hospital , transferred to Kiltham ’ s ICU , transferred to 10 East , and now pending discharge from the hospital . The repetition of ICU highlights that most of the signi ﬁ cant events took place there . Similarly , the header explicitly states that she is an ICU transfer . To the senior residents this is important information that will prompt their attention . Otherwise , infants with bronchiolitis do not receive much attention during the winter months . The number of admissions with this diagnosis is so high that their care is regarded as routine and something worth little consideration from the senior residents . The HOSO presents noticeably few place - names compared to the Senior Note ( See Figure 2 ) . Anna ’ s case stands out by containing no place names apart from the reference to 10 East in the header . Dylan ’ s history does reference his stay in the ICU and the current involvement of nutrition , cardiac team , social workers , and the shelter where his mother lives . However , we do not get the same sense of trajectory spelled out in the Senior Note ( from ER to ICU to 10 East , later to be followed in clinic ) . Furthermore , there is no repetition of place - names within the history . 4 . 2 . 3 . Temporal markers The different spatial markers found in the two document genres relate closely to their temporal orientation . The trajectories sketched in the Senior Note are a temporal organization of places and participants . The Senior Note characterizes the relationship between physicians and patients as temporally organized around a sequence of locations involving different participants , dependent on the organ system . In contrast , the HOSO offers a here - and - now framing of the relation between participants , places , and patient . We ﬁ nd three main types of temporal references in the HOSO and Senior Notes : dates , temporal deictics ( e . g . , when , now ) , and references to the frequency of speci ﬁ c activities ( e . g . , how often to administer medication ) . The header of both HOSO and Senior Notes summarize Dylan and Anna ’ s admission dates and their ages . The admission date plays an important role in patient care as it pertains to reimbursement and the physicians ’ general sentiment of how long a patient should be in the hospital given the severity of his or her ailment . Frequently , a senior resident or attending doctor will state some variation of the following Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration comment during morning rounds : “ This kid has been here for more than a week . We need to get him rolling . ” Translated this means that the intern should start working hard on getting the patient ready for discharge . We ﬁ nd another set of temporal markers in the body of the histories . Marc ’ s HOSO includes dates under the “ Problems ” and “ Procedures ” sections ( Figure 2 ) . This builds a temporal structure where the date of a procedure , the beginning and end of a problem de ﬁ ne the paramount issue at hand . What matters to the interns are when a problem started , or rather was diagnosed , and whether the problem has been resolved . What happens in between does not seem to be essential in the context of the HOSO . The Senior Note does not demarcate quite as narrow a temporal structure . Dylan and Anna ’ s histories contain the dates of several important events . For instance , in Figure 1b we learn that Anna was transported from Common Hospital on January 29 , intubated in the ICU between January 29 and February 12 , and transferred to the ﬂ oor ( i . e . , 10 East ) on February 15 . Likewise , the senior history provides the dates for a number of different events such as the discontinuation of some of her medication on February 11 . In comparison , the HOSO only provides the names of medications currently administered . If we introduce temporal deictics into our analysis of the Senior Notes we ﬁ nd that each paragraph builds around a past – present tense structure . Consider the following GI section with the temporal deictics , “ when ” and “ now ” highlighted : GI : On NJ continuous feeds when transferred from ICU . Now on po feeds . The excerpt follows a past – present structure – explaining that Anna received nutrition through a tube at the time she was transferred from the ICU to 10 East . Now the tube has been removed and she gets her food by mouth . Most of the other paragraphs follow the same sentence structure . The ﬁ rst part of the paragraph summarizes a number of past events and / or test results ; a date or temporal deictic typically specifying the timing of the event . The section closes with a description of the current state of affairs , for instance : “ now on room air ; ” or “ currently stable . ” Each patient history follows the same general narrative structure . It starts with the patient ’ s state on arriving in the institution and closes with the here and now situation . Dylan ’ s and Anna ’ s histories in the HOSO contain only one such example . In line 12 Dylan ’ s entire hospital trajectory is summarized in one sentence . The remaining sections simply recap the current state of affairs . We learn nothing about past medication or test results . The only other temporal reference we ﬁ nd in Dylan ’ s HOSO history is the frequency with which his medication should be given ( Figure 2 ) . Even this is not spelled out very carefully . We learn that he should be given Racemic Epinephrine “ when needed ” ( i . e . PRN ) . We do not learn how often he should get Azihromycin – only that it should be given for 5 days . The Senior Note tends to be more speci ﬁ c , as for instance , in line 16 of Dylan ’ s history : “ Started Prosobee at 5 cc / h . ” Carsten S . Østerlund Given that the interns are responsible for patients ’ medication one might expect that they would record the dose and frequency more carefully in their notes . However , the interns use a separate order sheet and medication chart for this speci ﬁ c purpose , which also serves as a means of communication with the nurses . Giving too much detail on medication in the HOSO would lead to needless repetition . The senior residents do not use the order sheets , so to them it becomes valuable to specify the temporal structure of medication administration . Comparable to Dylan ’ s case , Anna ’ s HOSO history provides a snapshot of the current state of affairs : her respiratory distress and bronchiolitis are considered cured on today ’ s date and she receives only medication if needed ( i . e . , PRN ) . Anna ’ s HOSO history is a signal to Marc and his fellow interns that Anna is ready to go home and that she requires little if any medical attention . Dylan , in contrast , calls for signi ﬁ cantly more involvement and collaboration with several different subspecialties . 4 . 3 . Documents that matter : ‘ getting people on the same page ’ The HOSO and Senior Note contain many common features and references to participants and their relations to patients . Nevertheless , our analysis reveals important variations in the two places demarcated by the two documents . As summarized in Table 1 the HOSO builds a here - and - now ﬁ eld for a small group of interns working closely together on a day - to - day basis . The HOSO does not concern itself with a description of past places and events . It emphasizes the current tasks at hand . Much like an itinerary , the HOSO outlines the day ’ s activities facing Marc and his colleagues . The interns have as mentioned relatively symmetric access to the knowledge about Anna and Dylan and their past medical history . In contrast , the senior residents ’ places for collaboration change when they go from their day work in e . g . Pediatric Team B to covering for other senior residents ’ teams at night . The senior residents do not share the same degree of symmetric access to the patients . With their Senior Notes , the senior residents demarcate a ﬁ ne grained place within which they can communicate and coordinate . If we look at the ﬁ rst dimension , communication among collabora - tors , the Senior Notes contain an explicit structure for the senior residents ’ current collaborators and the temporal and spatial arrangements under which they work . In terms of the second dimension , the relations between the collaborators and the patients , the histories take into account the lack of relevant knowledge about patients like Dylan and Anna . To account for this lack of symmetrical knowledge , the histories demarcate a collaborative place that speci ﬁ es the times and places of the patient ’ s past and present care , tests results , medication , etc . To one of Elisabeth ’ s fellow senior residents on - call at night , Anna ’ s HOSO history would not make much sense – it would be opaque at best , and possibly even misleading . Apart from Elisabeth , the senior residents do not know what Marc and three other Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration interns know – that Anna , despite the horrible hospital trajectory she has been going through the past few weeks , is set to go home . To them Anna ’ s history in the HOSO would read as a patient who has recovered from her bronchiolitis and requires little if any attention . On Marc ’ s part , why should he spend valuable time dissecting the Senior Note to determine the current status of Anna ’ s case when his consistency of experience with her case allows him simply to glance at the HOSO and go to work ? Interns and senior residents care greatly about their documents and the way they are composed , as do other doctors , nurses , and clinical staff . Individual document systems are invested with understandings of behavioral appropriateness and cultural expectations . For instance , doctors and nurses do not include all the compiled information about a patient in a document , but strive to shorten their histories to a minimum by tailoring them to a speci ﬁ c audience . Succinctness stands out as the overarching rule for both the oral and recorded histories . Over lunch , interns , senior residents , and attending doctors often share war stories from previous rotations . One day an intern , Donna , just out of her surgical rotation , described how the senior insisted that to him interns were nothing but information hunters and bell ringers – the bell referring to him being warned of an abnormal test result or a suddenly deteriorating patient . Otherwise , he did not want to hear from them . He insisted that their Progress Notes ( another document type ) should be no longer than seven lines long and that they should leave space for his note at the bottom of the Progress Note sheet . If not , he would tear up the sheet . Senior residents see it as one of their main functions to develop the medical students ’ and interns ’ ability to give and record good histories . Interns struggle with their histories and senior residents often spend hours editing each other ’ s Senior Notes down to their assumed essence . One resident gave the following answer when asked why he had just spent 45 min editing entries originally initiated by other senior residents : I ’ m anal . I want the notes to follow a speci ﬁ c setup . No empty spaces . Look at this one [ pointing to a particular voluminous patient entry on the screen ] . It ’ s so long that you think that it ’ s a complicated case , but it ’ s just a 4 month old with bronchiolitis . In short , the participants and temporal and spatial structures demarcated by the various information systems are more than references to points in mere space . They frame portable places with meaningful spatio - temporal boundaries for interaction among speci ﬁ c collaborators . They imbue these portable places with patterns of understandings , power relations , and expectations . It is no wonder that learning to tailor medical histories to a speci ﬁ c document type is central to the training of doctors and one which senior residents and attending doctors pay particular attention to in their training of medical students and interns . Through the proper use of different documents newcomers learn the cultural norms and mores of each ward and subspecialty they rotate through , as part of their socialization into the communication patterns and work practices of each place . Carsten S . Østerlund 4 . 3 . 1 . Documents out of place Given the place - speci ﬁ c use of documents , those information systems do not tend to travel well to other places with different con ﬁ gurations of collaborators valuing other relations , temporal rhythms , and locations . The case of the night ﬂ oats illustrates this tightly - knit relation between place and document . Between midnight and 7 AM , two doctors known as “ night ﬂ oats ” handle all new admissions from the ER to the hospital . That means that each night ﬂ oat works with the night nurses at four wards . The night ﬂ oats write orders and deal with any issue related to these new admissions to the inpatient wards until signing the patients out to the day teams during morning rounds . Despite the fact that the night ﬂ oats ’ major collaborators are inpatient unit staff , the ﬂ oats spend the night in the ER . Instead of running from unit to unit , they ﬁ nd it more convenient to see the admitted patients at the source , the ER , where the ﬂ oats can be proactive and examine patients as soon as the ER doctors decide to admit them . One night ﬂ oat , Heidi , puts it this way : It ’ s easier for me to work down here . I can do more things . Up there it takes a long time to get medication from the pharmacy and have tests ordered . Down here , we have it all at hand . Heidi clearly feels part of the ER ’ s local work setting . She aligns herself with the local documenting practices , discusses cases with her fellow doctors , and writes orders to the ER nurses to have them administer medication before sending her patients to the units . To a large extent , she shapes her practices to the rhythm of work in the ER . In Heidi ’ s words : “ When I ’ m down here [ in the ER ] it ’ s like being part of the team . When I work up there [ on the ﬂ oors ] , it ’ s us and them . ” Nevertheless , Heidi is accountable for the new patients at the inpatients units and must coordinate her work with the nurses there . The night ﬂ oats are required to use local documenting practices of the units they cover , while their work practices unfold in the ER , an altogether different place . This has created some tension , as night ﬂ oats rarely see the need to adhere to each locale ’ s particular canon for documenting rather than to follow practices that serve their immediate interests in the ER . The hospital has even furnished the night ﬂ oats with handy little packets with all the needed paperwork to carry with them , but to little avail . To put it differently , the night ﬂ oats object to the use of documents that do not envelop the temporal and spatial dimension of their direct work practices . The nurses have a vested interest in the use of these forms as it directly affects their documenting practices . If Heidi does not use the ‘ proper ’ documents when sending up a baby with bronchiolitis , the nurses will have to plead with a day doctor to copy Heidi ’ s entries over to the “ proper ” forms . The alternative is to accept that the documents are not tailored to the place and its ﬁ ne - tuned coordination among multiple occupational groups . The night ﬂ oats like Heidi do Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration not face this local reality of the wards when working in the ER . It is just one among several departments they cover that night . To start taking the temporal and spatial organization of work as expressed in documents into consideration becomes an unnecessary obstacle , avoided most easily by applying documents found in the ER . The documents , which support Heidi ’ s activities when she is on an inpatient ward rotation , lose their appeal when applied out of place . From Heidi ’ s point of view the wards ’ documents do not make her collaboration with the ward nurses easier , and it does not support the documents in her present locale , the ER . The attempt to apply a document out of place largely fails . Heidi ’ s unfolding practices do not match the concerns and stakes embedded in the use of the in - patient wards ’ documents , carefully tailored to the temporal and spatial coordination and concerns found in each of these places . In short , documents may be used across space , like the Senior Notes traveling with senior residents all over the hospital , but they do not transfer well beyond their place , i . e . the speci ﬁ c con ﬁ gurations of collaborators , temporal and spatial structures within which they frame appropriate behavior . 5 . Discussion To return to the broader question motivating the analysis , how do people use information systems and other documents to create places accommodating their communication and collaboration ? Consistent with prior research ( Bowker and Star 1999 ; Brown and Duguid 1994 ; Giddens 1985 ; Hanks 1990 , 2000b ; Latour 1997 ; Yates and Orlikowski 2002 ) I ﬁ nd clear temporal and spatial references in Marc ’ s and Elisabeth ’ s documents central to their unfolding practices and collaboration with others . The HOSO and Senior Note do not disagree about the facts associated with Anna ’ s and Dylan ’ s histories . What distinguish the two information systems is the participants , places , and times regarded as important for the community ’ s communication and collaboration . Inspired by Brown and Duguid , we can argue that a document provides a portable place for its community of producers and users to orient their communication and engage particular work practices . Such a perspective has a number of consequences for how we understand place and the role of technology : Portable places serve as more than mere funnels allowing people to communicate across time and space . Where people may use documents and other information technologies to bridge time and space they can also use documents to demarcate how those space , times and participants congeal into places for collaboration . In this way , documents constitute one of the resources out of which people build such places . Research of other communication technologies , e . g . mobile phones or blackberries , may bene ﬁ t from comparable analysis highlighting the indexical structures of the mediated communication and how it ties into people ’ s notions of place . Carsten S . Østerlund Portable places frame appropriate practices . The HOSO and Senior Note serve as collective maps and itineraries for their respective communities in a constantly changing space where patients move and collaborators come and go . Such a perspective supplements existing research on routines and their relation to organizational contexts ( Howard - Grenville 2005 ; Pentland and Rueter 1994 ) . As portable documents information systems articulate organizational routines in their spatio - temporal context . Portable places have social meanings . They are rooted in the practices and understandings of the community which are constantly produced and reproduced by the group over time in response to events . This explains why different groups develop different understandings of the same spaces . The senior residents and interns maintain different documents to support the particular meanings and practices . Likewise , we can now understand why comparable wards within a hospital will maintain different types of documents . Each ward develops its own compilation of portable places over time , re ﬂ ecting the evolution of practices in the particular place . Each group will demarcate its places for communication and collaboration differently , which makes groups highly resistant to documenting practices forced upon them from the outside . Physicians ’ antipathy to large scale medical informatics systems , then , cannot be explained by a general technopho - bia among doctors , as much research assumes . It is more likely the case that physicians ( and nurses ) simply resist interventions that disrupt their neatly constructed and maintained places for communication and collaboration . Portable places are tuned to particular media and constitute important material resources of a place . Different media offer different degrees of shared perceptibility and clues . Likewise , the relations among collaborators can vary in access to each other and shared knowledge . Community members ﬁ ne tune their documents to support the particular circumstances under which they communi - cate and work . In other words , a portable place builds on the strengths and weaknesses of each medium and the reality of a community of users . Research is needed to further understand how portable places and their indexical structures interact with particular media and the types of distributed and mobile work they support . Such research would complement existing studies demonstrating the power and irreproducible affordances of paper records in comparison to electronic systems ( Brown and Duguid 1994 ; Harper 1998 ; Hartswood et al . 2003 ; Luff and Heath 1998 ; Sellen and Harper 2002 ) . For instance , writers and readers draw on the paper media to develop pattern recognition and encode characteristics ( Nygren et al . 1992 ) . This becomes especially important in distributed and mobile work environ - ments , where collaborators may not share knowledge or symmetric access to each other and the subject of their work . Many such places emerge in the interstices of organizations , beyond the communities objecti ﬁ ed by formal organizational structures . The literature on boundary objects is a testimony to these types of documenting practices , which often form rapidly , operate independently of Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration organizational structures , and ﬁ ll the gaps that open as new requirements outstrip canonical preconceptions and documentation ( Ackerman and Halverson 2004 ; Bechky 2003 ; Carlile 2002 ; Levina and Vaast 2005 , 2006 ) . Approaching boundary objects as one type of portable places may allow us to further our understanding of the heterogeneous and loose knit places that take form among collaborators with little shared knowledge and symmetric access to one another and the subject of their work . 6 . Conclusion and implications The notion of place has become an important conceptual tool in recent studies of distributed and mobile work environments . I have pointed to the important relationship between place and documents . In short , when community members cannot rely on the rich cues associated with face - to - face communication the need for a robust portable place becomes paramount . Yet , even groups working side by side like Marc and his three fellow interns rely on a portable context in the form of the HOSO , allowing them to manage their collective work burden and cover for each other at night . This explains why a doctor often records the same patient ’ s history in not one but four or ﬁ ve different documents . For each record the doctor tailors the history to a particular portable place shared with a speci ﬁ c community of collaborators . Does this leave us anything but good organizational reasons for bad clinical records ? The approach offers some implications for research and design which may reduce the number of times doctors and nurses record patients ’ histories . Let me address these in turn . The present research sketches a set of analytical tools . First , the framework may allow us to distinguish important places for interaction and work which do not map nicely to geographically bounded and organizationally recognized territories , such as the emergency department , ICU or lab . Each document and its indexical structures offer a window to the important spatio - temporal rhythms , meanings , practices , and artifacts . This could be typical patterns of mobile work or other non - apparent routines . System developers are likely to glean important insights from the places and types of interactions supported by those documents . Second , document analysis allows us to assess the degree of shared knowledge and symmetric access to contextual clues among a group of collaborators . As in the case with Marc and Elisabeth meaty documents with elaborate indexical references to participants , places and times may suggest low levels of shared knowledge in certain areas , whereas thin records could go hand in hand with close collaborate relationships involving signi ﬁ cant amounts of face - to - face interaction . Obviously , other social factors could play a role , for instance , the legal requirement for documentation ( Berg 1996 ; Gar ﬁ nkel 1967a ; Suchman 1993 ) . But in cases such as Marc ’ s and Elisabeth ’ s where the documents do not become Carsten S . Østerlund part of an of ﬁ cial and legally binding record such readings of documents may be productive . Third , the types of document analysis presented here offer important historical insights . Going through the various documents systems in a hospital ward can be like excavating the history of that place . Each document highlights various important relations in the place and points to social relations important at the time the document was ﬁ rst introduced . Understanding what parts of a document are no longer used may hint at historical changes . These place speci ﬁ c politics often play out during staff meetings when revising old or conceiving new documents genres . Finally , the socialization of newcomers typically involves the mastery of various documenting practices . Following newcomers struggle with documenting work offers important insights into how people become part of a place and the power relations and sanctions involved . This paper ’ s analytical framework may contribute to system design . One of the striking inef ﬁ ciencies in hospital based documenting practices is the repeated recordings of patients ’ histories even among individual caregivers . One solution may be to allow doctors and nurses to record their histories in a large repository and give them a free hand in what indexical references should structure the presentation of histories in various places . Marc and Elisabeth may compose their documents from the same repository to which they both contribute . But , they will generate and use documents supporting distinct portable places with different levels of details and references to participants , times , and places . Individuals and groups should be able to compose documents which bring discrete aspects of their interactions and work into focus . Marc may choose to generate one document outlining his work tasks for the day , a second document demarcating the collaborate place he shares with his three fellow interns , and a third document which highlights to all the doctors and nurses , patients , and tasks associated with the geographically bounded ward 10 East . These systems need to support continuity , improvisation and change . Many of the documents in such a system would follow relatively stable genre conventions with a long history in the institution . Others may need to be generated on the ﬂ y facilitating unusual situation or emergent relationship . In healthcare settings resources would be required to support ongoing adjustments of the more stable documents and their indexical structures . This would facilitate gradual changes in relations among healthcare providers , the subject of their work . System developers and information systems staff would have to be keenly aware of the media used to present individual documents . In some situations paper may be the most appropriate in other ’ s large electronic boards or portable devices best serve the speci ﬁ c types of distributed interactions or mobile work arrangements . Last not least , realizing these rudimentary ideas would obviously require a much more detailed understanding of indexicals and other referential practices than presented in this paper . The work of William Hanks referenced in this article would serve as a good source of inspiration . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration References Ackerman , Mark S . and Christine Halverson ( 2004 ) : Organizational Memory : Processes , Boundary Objects , and Trajectories . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing , vol . 13 ( 2 ) , pp . 155 – 189 . Amin , Ash and Patrick Cohendet ( 2004 ) : Architectures of Knowledge : Firms , Capabilities , and Communities . Oxford University Press : Oxford , UK . Atkinson , Paul ( 1995 ) : Medical Talk and Medical Work . Sage : London . Bakhtin , M . M . ( 1986 ) : The Problem of Speech Genres . In C . Emerson and M . Holquist ( eds ) : Speech Genres and Other Late Essays : M . M . Bakhtin ( p . 60 – 102 ) . Austin : University of Texas Press . Barley , Stephen R . ( 1986 ) : Technology as an Occasion for Structuring : Evidence from Observation of CT Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments . Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 31 , pp . 78 – 108 , ( March ) . Bazerman , C . ( 1995 ) : System of Genres and the Enactment of Social Intentions . In A . Freedman and P . Medway ( eds ) : Genre and the New Rhetoric ( p . 79 – 104 ) . London : Taylor & Francis . Bechky , Beth ( 2003 ) : Sharing Meaning Across Occupational Communities : The Transformation of Understanding on a Product Floor . Organization Science , vol . 14 ( 3 ) , pp . 312 – 330 . Benedikt , Michael ( Ed . ) . ( 1992 ) : Cyberspace : First Step . MIT : Cambridge . Berg , Marc ( 1996 ) : Practices of Reading and Writing : The Constitutive Role of the Patient Record in Medical Work . Sociology of Health & Illness , vol . 18 ( 4 ) , pp . 499 – 524 . Berg , Marc ( 1997 ) : Of Forms , Containers , and the Electronic Medical Record : Some Tools for a Sociology of the Formal . Science , Technology , & Human Value , vol . 22 ( 4 ) , pp . 403 – 433 . Berg , Marc ( 1999 ) : Patient Care Information Systems and Healthcare Work : A Sociotechnical Approach . International Journal of Medical Informatics , vol . 55 , pp . 87 – 101 . Berg , Marc and Geoffrey Bowker ( 1997 ) : The Multiple Bodies of the Medical Record : Towards a Sociology of an Artifact . Sociology Quarterly , vol . 38 , pp . 511 – 535 . Bossen , Claus ( 2002 ) : The Parameters of Common Information Spaces : The Heterogeneity of Cooperative Work at a Hospital Ward . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , New Orleans , Louisiana , USA . Bourdieu , Pierre ( 1990 ) : The Logic of Practice . Stanford University Press : Stanford . Bourdieu , Pierre ( 1998 ) : Practical Reason : On the Theory of Action . Stanford University Press : Stanford , CA . Bowker , Geoffrey C . and Susan L . Star ( 1999 ) . Sorting Things Out : Classi ﬁ cation and Its Consequences . MIT : Cambridge . Brown , John S . and Paul Duguid ( 1994 ) : Borderline Issues . Human – Computer Interaction , vol . 9 ( 1 ) , pp . 3 – 36 . Brown , Barry and Kenton O ’ Hara ( 2003 ) : Place as a Practical Concern of Mobile Workers . Environment and Planning A , vol . 35 ( 9 ) , pp . 1565 – 1587 . Callon , Michel and John Law ( 2004 ) : Introduction : Absence – Presence , Circulation , and Encountering in Complex Space . Environment and Planning : Society and Space , vol . 22 , pp . 3 – 11 . Carlile , Paul R . ( 2002 ) : A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries : Boundary Objects in New Product Development . Organization Science , vol . 13 ( 4 ) , pp . 442 – 455 . Clifford , J . ( 1997 ) : Spatial Practices : Fieldwork , Travel , and the Disciplining of Anthropology . In A . Gupta and J . Ferguson ( eds ) : Anthropological Locations : Boundaries and Grounds of a Field Science ( p . 185 – 222 ) . Berkeley : University of California Press . Crang , Mike and Nigel Thrif ( 2000 ) : Thinking Space . Routledge : New York . Czarniawska , Barbara ( 2004 ) : On Time , Space , and Action Nets . Organization , vol . 11 ( 6 ) , pp . 773 – 791 . de Certeau , Michel ( 1984 ) : The Practice of Everyday Life . University of California Press : Berkeley . Douglas , Mary ( 1986 ) : How Institutions Think . Syracuse University Press : Syracuse . Carsten S . Østerlund Dourish , Paul ( 2006 ) : Re - space - ing Place : “ Place ” and “ Space ” Ten Years On . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work CSCW ‘ 06 , Banff , Alberta , Canada . Fitzpatrick , Geraldine ( 2004 ) : Integrated Care and the Working Record . Health Informatics Journal , vol . 10 ( 4 ) , pp . 291 – 302 . Fleming , Peter and Andre Spicer ( 2004 ) : ‘ You Can Checkout Anytime , But You Can Never Leave ’ : Spatial Boundaries in a High Commitment Organization . Human Relations , vol . 57 ( 1 ) , pp . 75 – 94 . Gar ﬁ nkel , Harold ( 1967a ) : Good Organizational Reasons for Bad Clinic Records . In H . Gar ﬁ nkel ( ed ) : Studies in Ethnomethodology ( p . 186 – 204 ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Gar ﬁ nkel , Harold ( 1967b ) : Studies in Ethnomethodology . Prentice - Hall : Englewood Cliffs . Giddens , A . ( 1985 ) : Time , Space and Regionalisation . In D . G . J . Urry ( ed ) : Social Relations and Spatial Structures . New York City : St . Martin ’ s . Giddens , A . ( 1987 ) : Time and Social Organization . In A . Giddens ( ed ) : Social Theory and Modern Sociology ( p . 140 – 165 ) , Polity : Cambridge . Gieryn , Thomas F . ( 2000 ) : A Space for Place in Sociology . Annual Review of Sociology , vol . 26 , pp . 463 – 496 . Goffman , Erving ( 1959 ) : The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life . Doubleday : New York . Gregory , Derek ( 1994 ) : Geographical Imaginations . Blackwell : Cambridge , MA . Gupta , Akhil and James Ferguson ( Eds . ) . ( 1999 ) : Culture , Power , Place : Explorations in Critical Anthropology . Duke University Press : Durham . Hägerstrand , T . ( 1975 ) : Space , Time and Human Conditions . In A . Karlqvist ( ed ) : Dynamic Allocation of Urban Space . Farnborough : Saxon House . Hak , T . ( 1992 ) : Psychiatric Records as Transformations of Other Texts . In G . Watson and R . M . Seiler ( eds ) : Texts in context : Contributions to Ethnomethodology . London : Sage . Hanks , William F . ( 1990 ) : Referential Practice : Language and Lived Space Among the Maya . University of Chicago Press : Chicago . Hanks , William F . ( 1996 ) : Language & Communicative Practices . Westview : Boulder . Hanks , William F . ( 2000a ) : Indexicality . Journal of Linguistic Anthropology , vol . 9 ( 1 – 2 ) , pp . 124 – 126 . Hanks , William F . ( 2000b ) : Intertexts : Writings on Language , Utterance , and Context . Rowman & Little ﬁ eld : Lanham , MD . Haraway , Donna ( 1991 ) : Simians , Cyborgs , and Women : The reinvention of Nature . Routledge : New York . Harper , Richard ( 1998 ) : Inside the IMF : An Ethnography of Documents , Technology , and Organizational Action . Academic : San Diego . Harrison , Steve and Paul Dourish ( 1996 ) : Re - Place - ing Space : The roles of place and space in collaborative systems . Paper presented at the CSCW ’ 96 . Hartswood , Mark , Rob Procter , Mark Rounce ﬁ eld and Roger Slack ( 2003 ) : Making a Case in Medical Work : Implications for the Electronic Medical Record . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 12 ( 3 ) , pp . 241 – 266 . Harvey , David ( 1996 ) : Justice , Nature , & the Geography of Difference . Blackwell : Oxford . Heath , Christian ( 1982 ) : Preserving the Consultation : Medical Record Cards and Professional Conduct . Sociology of Health and Illness , vol . 4 , pp . 56 – 74 . Heath , Christian and Paul Luff ( 1996 ) : Documents and Professional Practice : Bad Organizational Reasons for Good Clinical Records . ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 354 – 363 . Hine , Christine ( 2000 ) : Virtual Ethnography . Sage : London . Howard - Grenville , Jennifer A . ( 2005 ) : The Persistence of Flexible Organizational Routines : The Role of Agency and Organizational Context . Organization Science , vol . 16 ( 6 ) , pp . 618 – 636 . Jones , Geoff , Christine McLean and Paolo Quattrone ( 2004 ) : Spacing and Timing . Organization , vol . 11 ( 6 ) , pp . 723 – 741 . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration Kornberger , Martin and Clegg , Stewart R . ( 2004 ) : Bringing Space Back In : Organizing the Generative Building . Organization Studies , vol . 25 ( 7 ) , pp . 1095 – 1114 . Latour , Bruno ( 1986 ) : Visualization and Cognition : Thinking with eyes and hands . Knowledge and Society : Studies in the Sociology of Culture Past and Present , vol . 6 , pp . 1 – 40 . Latour , Bruno ( 1997 ) : Trains of Through : Piaget , Formalism and the Fifth Dimension . Common Knowledge , vol . 6 , pp . 170 – 191 . Lefebvre , Henri ( 1991 ) : The Production of Space . Blackwell : Oxford . Levina , Natalia and Emmanuelle Vaast ( 2005 ) : The Emergence of Boundary Spanning Competence in Practice : Implications for Implementation and Use of Information Systems . MIS Quarterly , vol . 29 ( 2 ) , pp . 335 – 363 . Levina , Natalia and Emmanuelle Vaast ( 2006 ) : Turning a Community into a Market : A Practice Perspective on Information Technology Use in Boundary Spanning . Journal of Management of Information Systems , vol . 22 ( 4 ) , pp . 13 – 37 . Luff , Paul and Christian Heath ( 1998 ) : Mobility in Collaboration . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Nygren , Else , Mats Lind , Mats Johnson and Bengt Sandblad ( 1992 ) : The Art of the Obvious . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the SIG CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , Monterey , CA , United States , May 03 – 07 . Orlikowski , Wanda J . ( 2000 ) : Using Technology and Constituting Structures : A Practice Lens for Studying Technology in Organizations . Organization Science , vol . 11 ( 4 ) , pp . 404 – 428 . Orlikowski , Wanda J . ( 2002 ) : Knowing in Practice : Enacting a Collective Capability in Distributed Organizing . Organization Science , vol . 13 ( 3 ) , pp . 249 – 273 . Østerlund , Carsten ( 2004 ) : Mapping Medical Work : Information Practices Across Multiple Medical Settings . Journal of the Center for Information Studies , vol . 5 , pp . 35 – 43 . Østerlund , Carsten S . ( 2007 ) : Genre Combinations : A Window into Dynamic Communication Practices . Journal of Management of Information Systems , vol . 23 ( 4 ) , pp . 81 – 108 . Pentland , Brian T . and Henry H . Rueter ( 1994 ) : Organizational Routines as Grammars of Action . Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 39 , pp . 484 – 510 . Pettinari , Catherine J . ( 1988 ) : Task , Talk , and Text in the Operating Room : A Study of Medical Discourse . Ablex : Norwood . Rees , C . ( 1981 ) : Records and Hospital Routine . In P . Atkinson and C . Heath ( eds ) : Medical Work : Realities and Routines . Farnborough : Gower . Rennecker , Julie ( 2002 ) : The Situated Nature of Virutal Teamwork : Understanding the Constitutive Role of “ Place ” in the Enactment of Virtual Work Con ﬁ guration . Sprouts : Working Papers on Information Environments , Systems , and Organizations , vol . 2 ( 3 ) , pp . 115 – 139 . Schloeffel , Peter ( 1998 ) : Information Management and Information Technology ( IM / IT ) for Integrated Care . Healthcare Review Online , vol . 2 ( 12 ) . Schultze , Ulrike ( 2000 ) : A Confessional Account of an Ethnography About Knowledge Work . MIS Quarterly , vol . 24 ( 1 ) , pp . 3 – 6 . Schultze , Ulrike and Richard J . Boland ( 2000 ) : Place , Space , and Knowledge Work : A Study of Outsourced Computer Systems Administrators . Accounting , Management , & Information Technology , vol . 10 ( 3 ) , pp . 187 – 219 . Sellen , Abigail and Richard Harper ( 2002 ) : The Myth of the Paperless Of ﬁ ce . MIT : Cambridge . Smith , Dorothy E . ( 1990 ) : Texts , Facts , and Femininity : Exploring the Relations of Ruling . Routledge : London . Smith , Dorothy E . ( 2005 ) : Institutional Ethnography : A Sociology for People . AltaMira : Oxford . Suchman , Lucy A . ( 1987 ) : Plans and Situated Actions : The problem of Human – Machine Communication . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge . Suchman , L . ( 1993 ) : Technologies of Accountability : Of lizards and Aeroplanes . In G . Button ( ed ) : Technology in Working Order . London : Routledge . Carsten S . Østerlund Virilio , Paul ( 1991 ) : The Lost Dimension . Semiotext ( e ) : New York . Wood , Denis ( 1992 ) : The Power of Maps . Guilford : New York . Yates , JoAnne and Wanda J . Orlikowski ( 1992 ) : Genres of Organizational Communication : A Structurational Approach to Studying Communication and Media . The Academy of Management Review , vol . 17 ( 2 ) , pp . 299 – 327 . Yates , JoAnne and Orlikowski , Wanda J . ( 2002 ) : Genre Systems : Structuring Interaction through Communicative Norms . Journal of Business Communication , vol . 39 ( 1 ) , pp . 13 – 35 . Zerubavel , Eviatar ( 1979 ) : Patterns of Time in Hospital Live . The University of Chicago Press : Chicago . Zerubavel , Eviatar ( 1981 ) : Hidden Rhythms : Schedules and Calendars in Social Life . University of Chicago Press : Chicago . Documents in Place : Demarcating Places for Collaboration