Review of Educational Research Spring 2004 , Vol . 74 , No . 1 , pp . 59 - 109 School Engagement : Potential of the Concept , State of the Evidence Jennifer A . Fredricks Connecticut College Phyllis C . Blumenfeld University of Michigan Alison H . Paris Claremont McKenna College The concept of school engagement has attracted increasing attention as repre - senting a possible antidote to declining academic motivation and achievement . Engagement is presumed to be malleable , responsive to contextualfeatures , and amenable to environmental change . Researchers describe behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement and recommend studying engagement as a multifaceted construct . This article reviews definitions , measures , precursors , and outcomes of engagement ; discusses limitations in the existing research ; and suggests improvements . The authors conclude that , although much has been learned , the potential contribution of the concept of school engagement to research on student experience has yet to be realized . They callfor richer characterizations of how students behave , feel , and think - research that could aid in the development offinely tuned interventions . KEYWORDS : motivation , school engagement , self - regulated learning . The concept of school engagement has attracted growing interest as a way to ame - liorate low levels of academic achievement , high levels of student boredom and dis - affection , and high dropout rates in urban areas ( National Research Council & Institute of Medicine , 2004 ) . Some studies examine how contexts interact with individual needs to promote or undermine engagement ( Connell , 1990 ; Eccles & Midgley , 1989 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . Others explore how classroom instruction and tasks can heighten intellectual engagement ( Newmann , 1992 ; Newmann , Wehlage , & Lambom , 1992 ) . Yet others investigate the relationship between school engage - ment and dropping out ( Finn & Rock , 1997 ; Wehlage , Rutter , Smith , Lesko , & Fernandez , 1989 ) . There are historical , economic , theoretical , and practical reasons for the growing interest in school engagement . Historians note a general decline in respect for author - ity and institutions among students ; one consequence , they argue , is that students can no longer be counted on to automatically respect and comply with the behavioral and academic expectations imposed by teachers and school administrators ( Janowitz , 1978 ; Modell & Elder , 2002 ) . As portrayed in recent popular books , students view 59 Fred ricks et al . schooling as boring or as a mere grade game , in which they try to get by with as lit - tle effort as possible ( Burkett , 2002 ; Pope , 2002 ) . Studies find steep declines in moti - vation across the grade levels ( Eccles , Midgley , & Adler , 1984 ; Fredricks & Eccles , 2002 ) . Some scholars argue that these problems are most intense for minority stu - dents , whose group dropout rates are the most severe ( Rumberger , 1987 ) . These observations are particularly troubling in light of the claim that the new global , fast - changing economy requires knowledgeable workers who can synthesize and evalu - ate new information , think critically , and solve problems . Even though attendance is compulsory , establishing a commitment to education is essential if youth are to ben - efit from what schools have to offer and acquire the capabilities they will need to suc - ceed in the current marketplace . School engagement is seen as an antidote to such signs of student alienation . The term , in both popular and research definitions , encapsulates the qualities that are seen as lacking in many of today ' s students . For instance , Merriam Webster ' s Colle - giate Dictionary ( 11th ed . ) lists " commitment " among the most common usages of " engagement . " The American Heritage College Dictionary ( 4th ed . ) defines engage - ment as " [ being ] actively committed " ; to be engaged is " to involve oneself or become occupied ; to participate " ( a definition based on behavior ) . Finally , as defined in the New Oxford American Dictionary , to engage is to " attract or involve " ( a definition based on emotion ) . The multifaceted nature of engagement is also reflected in the research literature , which defines engagement in three ways . Behavioral engagement draws on the idea of participation ; it includes involvement in academic and social or extracurricular activities and is considered crucial for achieving positive academic outcomes and preventing dropping out . Emotional engagement encompasses positive and nega - tive reactions to teachers , classmates , academics , and school and is presumed to cre - ate ties to an institution and influence willingness to do the work . Finally , cognitive engagement draws on the idea of investment ; it incorporates thoughtfulness and willingness to exert the effort necessary to comprehend complex ideas and master difficult skills . In many ways , the concepts included in the three types of engagement overlap with constructs that have been studied previously . For example , research on behav - ioral engagement is related to that on student conduct and on - task behavior ( Karweit , 1989 ; Peterson , Swing , Stark , & Wass , 1984 ) . Research on emotional engagement is related to that on student attitudes ( Epstein & McPartland , 1976 ; Yamamoto , Thomas , & Karns , 1969 ) and student interest and values ( Eccles et al . , 1983 ) . Re - search on cognitive engagement is related to that on motivational goals and self - regulated learning ( Boekarts , Pintrich , & Zeidner , 2000 ; Zimmerman , 1990 ) . Because there has been considerable research on how students behave , feel , and think , the attempt to conceptualize and examine portions of the literature under the label " engagement " is potentially problematic ; it can result in a proliferation of constructs , definitions , and measures of concepts that differ slightly , thereby doing little to improve conceptual clarity . Despite these problems , we argue that engagement has considerable potential as a multidimensional construct that unites the three components in a meaningful way . In this sense , engagement can be thought of as a " meta " construct . In fact , some scholars suggest that the term engagement should be reserved specifically for work where multiple components are present ( Guthrie & Anderson , 1999 ; Guthrie 60 School Engagement & Wigfield , 2000 ) . The fusion of behavior , emotion , and cognition under the idea of engagement is valuable because it may provide a richer characterization of chil - dren than is possible in research on single components . Defining and examining the components of engagement individually separates students ' behavior , emotion , and cognition . In reality these factors are dynamically interrelated within the indi - vidual ; they are not isolated processes . Robust bodies of work address each of the components separately , but considering engagement as a multidimensional con - struct argues for examining antecedents and consequences of behavior , emotion , and cognition simultaneously and dynamically , to test for additive or interactive effects . The idea of commitment , or investment ( the two terms are used interchangeably in this article ) , which is central to the common understanding of the term engage - ment , also makes engagement an appealing and valuable concept because it implies that there may be qualitative differences in the level or degree of engagement along each component . For instance , behavioral engagement can range from simply doing the work and following the rules to participating in the student council . Emotional engagement can range from simple liking to deep valuing of , or identification with , the institution . Cognitive engagement can range from simple memorization to the use of self - regulated learning strategies that promote deep understanding and exper - tise . These qualitative differences within each dimension suggest that engagement can vary in intensity and duration ; it can be short term and situation specific or long term and stable . The potential for evolution in intensity makes engagement a desir - able outcome . It is reasonable to assume that engagement , once established , builds on itself , thereby contributing to increased improvements in more distal outcomes of interest . Another reason for the growing interest in engagement is that it is presumed to be malleable . It results from an interaction of the individual with the context and is responsive to variation in environments ( Connell , 1990 ; Finn & Rock , 1997 ) . Routes to student engagement may be social or academic and may stem from oppor - tunities in the school or classroom for participation , interpersonal relationships , and intellectual endeavors . Currently , many interventions , such as improving the school climate or changing curriculum and standards , explicitly or implicitly focus on engagement as a route to increased learning or decreased dropping out . For instance , Guthrie and Wigfield ( 2000 ) argue that engagement mediates the impact of curricular and instructional reforms on achievement . A multifaceted approach to engagement argues for exploring how attempts to alter context influence all three types of engagement and determining whether outcomes are mediated by changes in one or more components . The study of engagement as multidimensional and as an interaction between the individual and the environment promises to help us to better understand the complexity of children ' s experiences in school and to design more specifically targeted and nuanced interventions . The purpose of this article is to critically evaluate the strengths , weaknesses , and gaps in the literature on behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement so that the potential of the concept can be realized . We include research on engagement in the classroom and in the larger school community . Although it is important to distin - guish between these two types of engagement because they are likely to have differ - ent antecedents and outcomes , several of the studies reviewed have failed to make this distinction . 61 Fredricks et al . The central information in this article is organized into four sections . In the first , we define engagement and the assumptions about why each of the three types of engagement is important . In the second , we outline the measurement of the con - struct . In the third and fourth , we examine research on the outcomes and antecedents of engagement . To help synthesize that information , the definitions ( or measures ) , samples , methods , and key findings of studies that have explicitly used the term engagement are summarized in the Appendix . In each section we indicate where the literature on engagement overlaps with other bodies of work that do not specify engagement as a focus but use similar variables or concepts and are often cited by engagement researchers as support for their ideas and findings . Our goal is not to review these related literatures in detail , it is to suggest how insights gained from them can contribute to our understanding of what engagement is and how to enhance it in practice . Finally , we make an overall assessment of the quality of the research , highlighting the strengths and limitations of the current work on engagement . We end with several suggestions for future investigation . What Is Engagement ? In this section , we describe how the three types of engagement have been defined , how the definitions vary , and where they overlap . Although we present behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement separately , we note where studies combine components of engagement . Finally , we discuss how these definitions resemble other motivational and cognitive constructs and how the literature on those constructs can inform the research on engagement . Behavioral Engagement Behavioral engagement is most commonly defined in three ways . The first def - inition entails positive conduct , such as following the rules and adhering to class - room norms , as well as the absence of disruptive behaviors such as skipping school and getting in trouble ( Finn , 1993 ; Finn , Pannozzo , & Voelkl , 1995 ; Finn & Rock , 1997 ) . The second definition concerns involvement in learning and academic tasks and includes behaviors such as effort , persistence , concentration , attention , asking questions , and contributing to class discussion ( Birch & Ladd , 1997 ; Finn et al . , 1995 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . A third definition involves participation in school - related activities such as athletics or school governance ( Finn , 1993 ; Finn et al . , 1995 ) . In general , these definitions do not make distinctions among various types of behavior , such as participation in academic and nonacademic school activities . One exception is Finn ' s ( 1989 ) definition of behavioral engagement . He divides participation into four levels , which range from responding to the teacher ' s direc - tions to activities that require student initiative , such as involvement in extracur - ricular activities and student government . The assumption is that participation at the upper levels indicates a qualitative difference in engagement in terms of greater commitment to the institution . From research on classroom participation , there also is evidence of differences in typologies of behavior . Some studies sep - arate cooperative participation , or adhering to classroom rules , from autonomy participation , or self - directed academic behaviors ( Birch & Ladd , 1997 ; Buhs & Ladd , 2001 ) . 62 Emotional Engagement Emotional engagement refers to students ' affective reactions in the classroom , including interest , boredom , happiness , sadness , and anxiety ( Connell & Wellbom , 1991 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . Some researchers assess emotional engagement by measuring emotional reactions to the school and the teacher ( Lee & Smith , 1995 ; Stipek , 2002 ) . Some conceptualize it as identification with school ( Finn , 1989 ; Voelkl , 1997 ) . Finn defines identification as belonging ( a feeling of being important to the school ) and value ( an appreciation of success in school - related outcomes ) . The emotions included in these definitions duplicate an earlier body of work on attitudes , which examined feelings toward school and included survey questions about liking or disliking school , the teacher , or the work ; feeling happy or sad in school ; or being bored or interested in the work ( Epstein & McPartland , 1976 ; Yamamoto et al . , 1969 ) . Emotions that were included in this construct , such as interest and value , also overlap considerably with constructs used in motivational research . In fact , the authors of a recent report entitled Engaging Schools ( National Research Council & Institute of Medicine , 2004 ) consider motivation and engage - ment as synonyms and use the words interchangeably . However , the definitions used in engagement studies are much less elaborated and differentiated than those used in the motivational literature . For example , motivational studies of interest distinguish between situational and personal interest . The former is transitory , aroused by specific features of an activity , such as novelty . The latter is a relatively stable orientation that is more likely to involve consistent choices to pursue an activity or studying a topic and willingness to undertake challenging tasks ( Krapp , Hidi , & Renninger , 1992 ) . The conceptualization of personal interest assumes that interest is directed toward a particular activity or situation . In contrast , the defini - tions in the engagement literature tend to be general and not differentiated by domain or activity . As a consequence , the source of the emotional reactions is not clear . For instance , it may not be clear whether students ' positive emotions are directed toward academic content , their friends , or the teacher . The theoretical work on values also outlines finer distinctions than are currently present in the engagement literature . Eccles et al . ( 1983 ) describe four components of value : interest ( enjoyment of the activity ) , attainment value ( importance of doing well on the task for confirming aspects of one ' s self - schema ) , utility value / importance ( importance of the task for future goals ) , and cost ( negative aspects of engaging in the task ) . Furthermore , definitions of emotional engagement do not make qualita - tive distinctions between positive emotions and high involvement or investment . The concept of flow makes this distinction : Flow is a subjective state of complete involve - ment , whereby individuals are so involved in an activity that they lose awareness of time and space ( Csikzentmihalyi , 1988 ) . The definition of flow provides a concep - tualization that represents high emotional involvement or investment . Cognitive Engagement Research on cognitive engagement comes from the literature on school engage - ment , which stresses investment in learning , and from the literature on learning and instruction , which involves self - regulation , or being strategic . One set of definitions focuses on psychological investment in learning , a desire to go beyond the require - ments , and a preference for challenge ( Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ; Newmann et al . , 63 Fred ricks et al . 1992 ; Wehlage et al . , 1989 ) . For example , Connell and Wellborn ' s conceptualiza - tion of cognitive engagement includes flexibility in problem solving , preference for hard work , and positive coping in the face of failure . Other researchers have out - lined general definitions of engagement that emphasize an inner psychological qual - ity and investment in leaming , implying more than just behavioral engagement . For example , Newmann et al . define engagement in academic work as the " student ' s psychological investment in and effort directed toward learning , understanding , mastering the knowledge , skills or crafts that the academic work is intended to pro - mote " ( p . 12 ) . Similarly , Wehlage et al . define engagement as " the psychological investment required to comprehend and master knowledge and skills explicitly taught in schools " ( p . 17 ) . These definitions are quite similar to constructs in the motivation literature , such as motivation to learn ( Brophy , 1987 ) , learning goals ( Ames , 1992 ; Dweck & Leggett , 1988 ) and intrinsic motivation ( Harter , 1981 ) . Brophy describes a stu - dent who is motivated to learn as valuing learning and striving for knowledge and mastery in learning situations . Similarly , students who adopt learning rather than performance goals are focused on learning , mastering the task , understanding , and trying to accomplish something that is challenging . Intrinsically motivated students prefer challenge and are persistent when faced with difficulty . Each of these con - cepts emphasizes the degree to which students are invested in and value learning and assumes that the investment is related to , but separate from , strategic learning . The learning literature defines cognitive engagement in terms of being strategic or self - regulating . Whether described as cognitively engaged or self - regulated , strate - gic students use metacognitive strategies to plan , monitor , and evaluate their cogni - tion when accomplishing tasks ( Pintrich & De Groot , 1990 ; Zimmerman , 1990 ) . They use leaming strategies such as rehearsal , summarizing , and elaboration to remember , organize , and understand the material ( Como & Madinach , 1983 ; Wein - stein & Mayer , 1986 ) . They manage and control their effort on tasks , for example , by persisting or by suppressing distractions , to sustain their cognitive engagement ( Corno , 1993 ; Pintrich & De Groot , 1990 ) . A qualitative distinction is made between deep and surface - level strategy use . Students who use deep strategies are more cog - nitively engaged ; they exert more mental effort , create more connection among ideas , and achieve greater understanding of ideas ( Weinstein & Mayer ) . The school engagement literature could benefit from incorporating ideas from the strategy liter - ature to specify what more general terms such as " hard work , " " mental effort , " and " flexibility " actually entail . In addition , the use of the term effort is problematic in that it is included in defini - tions of both cognitive and behavioral engagement . A distinction needs to be made between effort that is primarily behavioral , a matter of simply doing the work , and effort that is focused on learning and mastering the material . Research in the moti - vational literature that addresses the concept of volition can inform these distinctions . It emphasizes cognitive , or psychological , effort , characterizing volition as " psycho - logical control processes that protect concentration and directed effort in the face of personal and / or environmental distractions , and so aid leaming and performance " ( Como , 1993 , p . 16 ) . Similarly , it is important to distinguish among various types of " going beyond requirements " to further differentiate behavioral and mental effort . In summary , definitions of cognitive engagement draw from two different liter - atures . One group specifically highlights a psychological investment in learning ; 64 School Engagement another targets cognition and emphasizes strategic learning . Neither definition alone adequately deals with the qualitative aspects of engagement . Students may be both highly strategic and highly invested in learning ; they may be strategic only when it is necessary to get good grades , not because they are motivated to learn ; or they may be motivated to learn but lack skills or knowledge about how or when to use strate - gies . Overall , the idea of cognitive engagement would be more valuable for under - standing school success if scholars integrated the specificity of cognitive processes provided by the self - regulated learning literature with definitions of psychological investment found in the motivational literature . Summary We have noted several strengths and limitations of current conceptualizations of behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement . First , definitions of engagement incorporate a wide variety of constructs . For example , behavioral engagement encom - passes doing the work and following the rules ; emotional engagement includes inter - est , values , and emotions ; and cognitive engagement incorporates motivation , effort , and strategy use . This inclusiveness comes at a price . Some of the definitions over - lap almost completely with prior literatures , such as those on attitudes toward school or those that use teachers ' ratings of behavior to predict achievement . In addition , many of the definitions in the engagement literature are more general than those in other bodies of research from which it draws . The engagement literature is also marked by duplication of concepts and lack of differentiation in definitions across various types of engagement . For example , effort is included as part of definitions of behavioral and cognitive engagement , and no distinction is made between effort aimed merely at fulfilling behavioral expectations and that aimed at understanding the material and mastering the content . Finally , many conceptualizations of engage - ment include only one or two of the three types . Measurement of Engagement In this section , we present measures of behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement ; discuss varying approaches to measuring the same types of engage - ment ; and look at the duplication of questionnaire items across the three types . Finally , we discuss limitations of current measurement techniques . Measuring Behavioral Engagement There have been several teacher ratings and self - report surveys of behavioral engagement . These include a variety of indicators of conduct , work involvement , and participation , although few studies measure all types of behavior . Aspects of behavior are sometimes separated into different scales ( Finn , Folger , & Cox , 1991 ; Ladd , Birch , & Buhs , 1999 ) . However , the majority of studies combine conduct , persistence , and participation in a single scale . This combination may be problem - atic because students who are poorly behaved but persist and complete the work are different from those who conform to classroom rules but do not meet acadernic requirements . Conduct measures include positive behaviors such as completing homework and complying with school rules ( Birch & Ladd , 1997 ; Finn et al . , 1995 ) . Other mea - sures incorporate negative behaviors , at both the classroom and school levels , which are indicative of disengagement , such as the frequency of absences and tardiness , 65 Fredricks et al . fighting or getting into trouble , and interfering with others ' work ( Finn , 1993 ; Finn et al . , 1995 ; Finn & Rock , 1997 ) . To assess work - related behaviors , some scales include effort , attention , and persistence . For example , teachers are asked to rate the extent to which a particular student " is persistent when confronted with difficult problems " and " approaches new assignments with sincere effort " ( Finn et al . , 1995 ) . The Rochester School Assessment Package ( Wellbom & Connell , 1987 ) has been used by many researchers to measure behavioral engagement . It contains question - naire items about effort and attention , such as " I work very hard on my schoolwork " and " When I ' m in class I usually think of other things . " Finally , some studies have used teachers ' reports of helpless behavior as indicators of engagement ( Rudolph , Lambert , Clark , & Kurlakowsky , 2001 ) . Other scales focus on students ' participatory behaviors . For example , teachers are asked to rate students ' level of participation with items such as " Student partic - ipates actively in class discussions " and " Student is withdrawn and uncommunica - tive " ( Finn et al . , 1995 ; Wellborn & Connell , 1987 ) . In addition , students are asked to report on their level of initiative with survey items such as " I ask questions to get more information " ( Birch & Ladd , 1997 ; Finn et al . , 1995 ; Wellborn & Connell , 1987 ) . Participation at the school level is assessed with survey questions about involvement in extracurricular activities and governance decisions ( Finn , 1993 ; Finn & Rock , 1997 ) . Observation techniques also are used to assess behavioral engagement ( Lee & Anderson , 1993 ; Newmann , 1992 ; Stipek , 2002 ) . For example , Stipek had observers rate students ' engagement by using scales ranging from off - task to deeply involved , where behaviors included student attentiveness , doing the assigned work , and show - ing enthusiasm . One potential problem with observational measures is that they pro - vide limited information on the quality of effort , participation , or thinking . Peterson et al . ( 1984 ) found that some students judged to be on - task by observers reported in subsequent interviews that they were not thinking about the material . In contrast , many of the students who appeared to be off - task actually were highly cognitively engaged , that is , they were trying to relate new ideas to what they had already learned . Measuring Emotional Engagement Most of the studies of emotional engagement use self - report measures , which include survey items about a variety of emotions related to the school , school - work , and the people at school . The Rochester School Assessment Package also contains items about positive and negative emotions such as being happy , inter - ested , sad , bored , frustrated , and angry ( Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . Others assess emotional engagement by asking young children to report on their general feelings about their teacher and their school ( Stipek , 2002 - Valeski & Stipek , 2001 ) . Finn and Voelkl take a different approach , oper - ationalizing emotional engagement as identification with school ( Finn , 1989 ; Voelkl , 1997 ) . In Finn ' s research , indicators of emotional engagement include student - teacher relations ( e . g . , " Students get along well with teachers at this school " ) and values ( e . g . , " Math will be useful to my future " ) . Finally , Steinberg , Brown , and Dornbush ( 1996 ) measure emotional engagement by assessing stu - dents ' work orientation ( e . g . , " I find it hard to stick to anything that takes a long time to do " ) and their orientation toward school ( e . g . , " I feel satisfied with school because I am learning a lot " ) . 66 School Engagement We noted several issues with how emotional engagement has been measured . First , items that tap behavioral engagement and emotional engagement are often combined in a single scale ( see Appendix for examples ) . This practice makes it more difficult to identify the precursors and consequences of each type of engagement . Second , the survey items do not specify the source of the emotions . For example , one student may be happy because of the school community , whereas another may be happy because of classroom processes . Third , the measures of emotional engage - ment tend to be more general than related constructs such as interest and value ( Eccles et al . , 1983 ; Krapp et al . , 1992 ) . Finally , the quality and intensity of emotion may vary depending on the type of class activity and setting ( Larson & Richards , 1991 ) . Experience - sampling techniques ( see Csikzentmihalyi , 1988 ) are one way to determine the extent to which emotional engagement is a function of stable and enduring qualities or a function of contextual factors . Measuring Cognitive Engagement The measures of cognitive engagement , conceptualized as a psychological investment in learning , are limited . In a theoretical piece , Connell and Wellbom ( 1991 ) describe measures of cognitive engagement such as survey items about flex - ible problem solving , preference for hard work , independent work styles , and ways of coping with perceived failure . However , we were unable to find any published studies using these measures . Many of the items parallel those used in the intrinsic motivation literature to tap preference for challenge and independent mastery attempts ( e . g . , Harter , 1981 ) . This is another example of the overlap of engagement literature with previous research . One area of literature that can inform the measurement of a psychological invest - ment in learning is goal theory . Although a variety of terms have been used , such as learning , mastery , and task - focus , the measurement of goals tends to be very consis - tent . The measurement scales include items such as being committed to understand - ing the work , in contrast to wanting to get a good grade or wanting to look smart . The different types of investment lead to different levels of strategy use . For example , students who endorse mastery goals are more likely to use deep - level strategies such as elaboration or organization than are students who endorse performance goals ( Ames & Archer , 1988 ; Pintrich & De Groot , 1990 ; Wolters , Yu , & Pintrich , 1996 ) . Other studies have assessed a psychological investment in learning by rating the quality of instructional discourse in classrooms . Nystrand and Gamoran ( 1991 ) dis - tinguish between substantive engagement , a sustained conmmitment to the content of schooling , which is similar to cognitive engagement , and procedural engagement , or trying to complete task requirements , which lasts only as long as the task itself . In this research , substantive engagement is inferred from the frequency of high - level evaluation and authentic questions ( Gamoran & Nystrand , 1992 ; Nystrand & Gamoran , 1991 ) . Although the quality of discourse is a measure of engagement at the classroom level , these indicators also could be used to assess an individual ' s level of engagement . Researchers who write about " cognitive engagement " or " self - regulation , " or both , using the terms interchangeably , have developed several measures of student strategy use . One common method for assessing strategy use is self - report ques - tionnaires . These instruments typically measure metacognition , volitional and effort control , and cognitive strategy use . Students are asked about their metacognitive 67 Fredricks et al . strategies , or how they set goals , plan , and organize study efforts , and how they monitor and modify cognition . They are also asked about how they manage effort and exercise volitional control that helps them to concentrate and complete work effectively ( Pintrich & De Groot , 1990 ; Zimmerman & Martinez - Pons , 1988 ) . Some researchers specifically differentiate between deep and surface - level strategy use ( Meece , Blumenfeld , & Hoyle , 1988 ; Miller , Greene , Montalvo , Ravindran , & Nichols , 1996 ) . Deep strategy use includes metacognitive and effort management strategies such as regulating attention , persistence , relating new information to existing knowledge , and actively monitoring comprehension ( e . g . , " I went back over things that I did not understand " ) . Surface strategy use includes help seeking or effort - avoidant strategies that maximize short - term retention of information ( e . g . , " I skipped the hard parts " ) . These measures tend not to be situation specific ; rather , they ask students to generalize about their cognitions and actions across situations and contexts . Observational techniques also have been used to assess cognitive engagement and strategy use in specific subject areas , including math , reading , and science , although these techniques are less common . For example , Helme and Clarke ( 2001 ) observed mathematics classrooms for indicators of cognitive engagement such as self - monitoring , exchanging ideas , giving directions , and justifying an answer . Turner ( 1995 ) observed four categories of behavior during reading activities : use of reading strategies , use of learning strategies , evidence of volitional control strategies , and evi - dence of persistence . Lee and colleagues examined students ' attempts to achieve scientific understanding ( Lee & Anderson , 1993 ; Lee & Brophy , 1996 ) , noting behaviors such as relating the task to prior knowledge , requesting clarification , and using analogies as measures of cognitive engagement . These observational studies measured students ' cognitive engagement in specific tasks and domains . Several issues complicate the measurement of cognitive engagement . One is the inherent difficulty of assessing cognition ( Pintrich , Wolters , & Baxter , 2000 ; Winne & Perry , 2000 ) . Because cognition is not readily observable , it must be either inferred from behavior or assessed from self - report measures . As students work , it is difficult to discern by observation whether they are trying to get the work done as quickly and easily as possible or whether they are using a variety of deep - level learning strate - gies to master the content . Moreover , tasks in many classrooms involve drill and practice or memorization of facts , which may require only surface - level strategy use . Hence it may be difficult to find deep - level strategy use , because what can be mea - sured is a function of what is afforded by the classroom . In addition , tapping cogni - tive engagement in elementary grades is particularly difficult . There are several measures for older students ( middle school , high school , and college ) and a dearth of self - report measures for younger children . Because children ' s metacognitive knowledge increases with age ( Schneider & Pressley , 1997 ) , it is challenging and perhaps developmentally inappropriate to assess their strategy use with questions that fundamentally require reflection on cognition . Another problem is that most self - report measures do not link strategy use to specific tasks . Consequently , students are asked to think hypothetically about what might happen , which is also problematic for younger children . In summary , the cognitive engagement literature can be strengthened by draw - ing on the broader motivational literature on goals and intrinsic motivation , which includes survey items that might be indicators of psychological investment . Cur - 68 School Engagement rently , investment and strategy use are measured separately or , in some cases , are not measured at all . To fully assess psychological investment in academic tasks , a more inclusive measure is needed that combines measures that target preferences for hard work and challenge with measures that target precisely how students think . In addi - tion , researchers should consider including survey items from the self - regulation lit - erature or observational techniques that assess the quality of engagement . Summary In addition to the specific problems that we have noted concerning the measure - ment of each type of engagement , there are measurement problems that span all three . Some scholars include conceptually distinct and discrete scales for each type of engagement ( e . g . , Miller et al . , 1996 ; Nystrand & Gamoran , 1991 ; Patrick , Skin - ner , & Connell , 1993 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) ; others combine these into a sin - gle , general engagement scale ( e . g . , Connell , Halpem - Felsher , Clifford , Crichlow , & Usinger , 1995 ; Marks , 2000 ; Lee & Smith , 1995 ) . The practice of combining items into general scales precludes examining distinctions among the types of engagement . In addition , conceptual distinctions are blurred because similar items are used to assess different types of engagement . For example , questions about persistence and preference for hard work are included as indicators of both behavioral engagement ( Finn et al . , 1995 ) and cognitive engagement ( Connell & Wellbom , 1991 ) . An additional problem is that most measures do not distinguish a target or source of engagement . In some measures the target is quite general , such as " I like school " ; in others , the social and academic aspects of school are combined . This melding makes it impossible to determine the actual source of engagement . In addition , most of the self - report measures of behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement do not specify subject areas . Incorporating domain - specific measures can help to deter - mine to what extent engagement represents a general tendency and to what extent it is content specific . Recent research has begun to address this problem ; observa - tional methods and discourse analysis are being used to examine emotional and cog - nitive engagement in math ( Helme & Clarke , 2001 ) , science ( Blumenfeld & Meece , 1988 ; Lee & Anderson , 1993 ) and reading ( Alvermann , 1999 ; Guthrie & Wigfield , 2000 ) . Furthermore , measures are rarely attached to specific tasks and situations , instead yielding information about engagement as a general tendency . Thus it is dif - ficult to ascertain to what extent engagement is a function of individual differences or contextual factors . Finally , current measures do not tap qualitative differences in the level of engagement , making it difficult to distinguish the degree of behavioral , emotional , or cognitive investment or commitment . Each type of engagement combines several constructs that are usually measured individually . As a consequence , the measures of the constructs in engagement scales are less well developed than when each construct is examined separately . For exam - ple , emotional engagement scales typically include one or two items about interest and values along with items about feelings . Other measures that focus only on inter - est and value include many items that make distinctions within interest , such as intrinsic versus situational interest , and within value , such as intrinsic , utility , and attainment value ( Eccles et al . , 1983 ; Krapp et al . , 1992 ) . Obviously , to measure every construct in detail is not practical , because of time and resource constraints . If the goal is to study and understand a particular construct in depth , then the typi - cal measures of engagement that are more inclusive are insufficient . However , if the 69 Fredricks et al . goal is to predict staying in school or academic success , then any disadvantages of using only a few items to tap each construct may be offset by the increased predic - tive strength of a streamlined single measure . The benefits of the tradeoff remain to be determined by researchers who study engagement . Outcomes of Engagement Achievement Several studies have demonstrated a positive correlation between behavioral engagement and achievement - related outcomes ( e . g . , standardized tests , grades ) for elementary , middle , and high school students ( Connell , Spencer , & Aber , 1994 ; Marks , 2000 ; Skinner , Wellborn , & Connell , 1990 ; Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ) . Dis - cipline problems also have been associated with lower school performance across grade levels ( Finn et al . , 1995 ; Finn & Rock , 1997 ) . For example , Finn et al . catego - rized fourth - grade elementary school students as disruptive , inattentive , or withdrawn and contrasted them with students who displayed none of these types of behavior . The authors found that disruptive and inattentive students had lower scores on achieve - ment tests . In addition , Finn and Rock documented large , significant differences on behavioral engagement measures among high school students classified as resilient ( still in school and academically successful ) , nonresilient completers ( still in school and not academically successful ) , and noncompleters ( dropouts ) . Although much of the research in this field has been cross - sectional , longitudinal studies show that early problems with behavioral engagement have long - lasting effects on achievement . For example , the Beginning School Study ( Alexander , Entwisle , & Dauber , 1993 ; Alexander , Entwisle , & Horsey , 1997 ) showed that teachers ' ratings of behavioral engagement in the first grade were related to achievement test score gains , grades over the first 4 years , and decisions to drop out of high school . In general , there is a consistent association between teacher and student reports of behavioral engagement and achievement across a variety of samples . The strength of this correlation varies across studies . One possible reason is the variety of students studied , ranging from at - risk to gifted students . Another is the use of various achieve - ment measures , including self - reports of grades , teachers ' grades , nationally stan - dardized achievement tests , and tests administered by schools , districts , or states . The correlation may be overestimated in the case of grades because teachers take behav - iors that indicate effort , such as completing work and paying attention , into account when assigning grades . In addition , the association may be overestimated in the case of tests , which often assess memory and low - level skills , where simply doing the work and paying attention ( indicators of behavioral engagement ) may be sufficient for success . In contrast , behavioral engagement may not be a very good predictor of performance on assessments that require deep understanding of the material . Much less research exists on emotional engagement and achievement . Some stud - ies show a correlation between achievement and a combined measure of emotional and behavioral engagement ( Connell et al . , 1994 ; Skinner et al . , 1990 ) . However , these studies do not allow for an examination of the unique contribution of emotional engagement on academic outcomes because they combine different types of engage - ment . VoeLkl ( 1997 ) documented that school identification , measured by value and school belonging , was significantly correlated with achievement test scores in fourth and seventh grades for White students but not for African American students . 70 School Engagement Studies of the relationship of specific constructs combined under the term emotional engagement , such as interest and value , also show varying associations with achieve - ment ( Pintrich & De Groot , 1990 ; Schiefele , Krapp , & Winteler , 1992 ) . Achievement benefits are found when students are rated as going beyond , doing more work than is required , or initiating discussions with the teacher about school subjects ( Fincham , Hokoda , & Sanders , 1989 ) . Research on instructional discourse also demonstrates the achievement benefits of cognitive engagement . Nystrand and Gamoran ( 1991 ) documented that substantive engagement ( similar to cognitive engagement ) in the classroom was positively related to scores on an achievement test developed to measure students ' in - depth understanding and synthesis . Numer - ous studies from the field of learning also have shown the achievement benefits of strategy use . Children who use metacognitive strategies , such as regulating their attention and effort , relating new information to existing knowledge , and actively monitoring their comprehension , do better on various indicators of academic achieve - ment ( Boekarts et al . , 2000 ; Zimmerman , 1990 ) . In conclusion , the research reviewed shows that behavioral engagement ( e . g . , par - ticipation , work behavior , and conduct ) is correlated with higher achievement across various samples and ages . Similarly , the link between one aspect of cognitive engagement - strategy use - and achievement in the middle and high school years has been well documented . There also is some evidence of a correlation between emo - tional engagement and achievement . However , support for this correlation comes mainly from the literature on specific constructs incorporated into definitions of emo - tional engagement , such as interest and value . Because much of this research is cross - sectional , one concern is that the causal direction has not been identified and that any causality may be bidirectional over time . Moreover , measurement problems make it impossible to disentangle the unique contribution of each type of engagement to achievement . Finally , the correlation between engagement and achievement varies depending on how achievement is assessed . Behavioral engagement is likely to be associated with teacher grades and scores on tests that tap basic skills , whereas links with cognitive engagement are more likely to emerge when tests measure synthesis , analysis , and deep - level understanding of content . Although these problems make it difficult to draw firm conclusions , there is evidence from a variety of studies to sug - gest that engagement positively influences achievement . Dropping Out Engagement may help to protect individuals from dropping out of school . Most of the research on this correlation explores the impact of behavioral engagement on the decision to drop out of school . Ekstrom , Goertz , Pollack , and Rock ( 1986 ) showed that students who eventually drop out do less homework , exert less effort in school , participate less in school activities , and have more discipline problems at school . Other studies of urban minority samples demonstrate a correlation between low behavioral engagement and cutting class , skipping school , suspension , and reten - tion ( Connell et al . , 1994 ; Connell et al . , 1995 ) . Involvement in these risky behav - iors is a precursor to dropping out . Further evidence comes from the research on extracurricular participation , an aspect of behavioral engagement in school . Involve - ment in extracurricular activities has been associated with a decreased likelihood of dropping out of school and may be particularly important for certain populations , such as students who are academically at risk and low - income girls ( Ekstrom et al . , 71 Fredricks et al . 1986 ; Mahoney & Cairns , 1997 ; McNeal , 1995 ) . Other research has shown that behavioral engagement can reduce the likelihood of dropping out and the likelihood of school - age pregnancy among teenage girls ( Manlove , 1998 ; Pillow , 1997 ) . Behavioral engagement in the early years of schooling is a critical mediator in the dropout process ( Rumberger , 1987 ) . The Beginning School Study provides the most extensive research documenting the longitudinal effects of early school behav - iors on decisions to drop out ( Alexander et al . , 1997 ; Ensminger & Slusarcick , 1992 ; Entwisle & Alexander , 1993 ) . Teachers ' ratings of children ' s behavioral engage - ment and academic adjustment in the first grade were related to the decision to drop out of high school ( Alexander et al . , 1997 ) . Dropouts are more likely than other stu - dents to have poor attendance , display disruptive behaviors , and exhibit early school failure ( Barrington & Hendricks , 1989 ; Cairns , Cairns , & Neckerman , 1989 ) . Students ' emotional engagement also has impact on the decision to drop out . Some scholars have claimed that alienation , or feelings of estrangement and social isolation , contribute to the dropout problem ( Finn , 1989 ; Newmann , 1981 ) . Ethno - graphic studies support this claim ; perceiving an emotional connection to the school or teachers can be a protective factor that keeps at - risk children in school ( Fine , 1991 ; Mehan , Villanueva , Hubbard , Lintz , Okamato , & Adams , 1996 ; Wehlage et al . , 1989 ) . Studies that have examined specific concepts related to engagement point to similar findings . Students who have social difficulties and negative attitudes toward school are more likely to drop out of school ( Cairns & Cairns , 1994 ; Ekstrom et al . , 1986 ; Wehlage & Rutter , 1986 ) . Several conceptual models have been developed to explain how and why engage - ment is related to the decision to drop out , but to date there are few empirical studies testing the validity of these models . Finn ' s ( 1989 ) participation - identification model assumes that patterns of engagement and disengagement in the early grades have long - term effects on students ' behavior and academic achievement in the later years . According to this model , lack of participation ( i . e . , lack of behavioral engagement ) leads to unsuccessful school outcomes , which in turn lead to emotional withdrawal and lack of identification with the school . Lack of identification is related to nonpar - ticipation in school - related activities , resulting in even less academic success . The process is cyclical : Participation and identification reciprocally influence each other . Other researchers argue that the dropout process is influencedjointly by engagement and school membership ( Newmann et al . , 1992 ; Wehlage et al . , 1989 ) . These models assume that the decision to drop out is shaped by individuals ' social relationships , commitment to the institution , and belief in the value and legitimacy of school . In summary , several studies show that behavioral disengagement is a precursor of dropping out . These findings have been based on various measures of behavior ( participation , work involvement , and conduct ) across ethnically diverse samples in the elementary and high school years . There is less empirical evidence of a correla - tion between emotional engagement and dropping out . However , the ethnographic research indicates that an emotional connection to teachers and peers can help to reduce dropout rates . We found no studies of cognitive engagement and dropping out . In addition , we know very little about the process by which disengagement influ - ences the decision to drop out . Longitudinal research that explores the mediating processes between behavioral and emotional disengagement and dropping out is crit - ical for intervention efforts . Furthermore , dropout rates vary dramatically by school , even after controlling for demographic characteristics ( Rumberger , 1995 ) . An impor - 72 School Engagement tant issue for future study is which aspects of the school and classroom context can promote engagement . Some possible answers to this question can be found in the next section , where we review factors in the school and classroom that are related to engagement . Antecedents of Engagement Family , community , culture , and educational context influence engagement ( Con - nell & Wellbom , 1991 ; Mehan et al . , 1996 ; Ogbu , 2003 ) . However , a discussion of the first three factors is beyond the scope of this article . Here , we focus on the impact of the educational context on engagement . First , we describe the school - level factors that are associated with engagement . Next , we review the research on classroom con - text and engagement . Finally , we discuss how individual needs may mediate the rela - tion between the classroom context and engagement . We include findings from studies in major journals cited by engagement researchers as supporting a link between engagement and specific aspects of context when the amount of research on that aspect is relatively small . Our goal is not to provide a comprehensive review of the related literatures but to determine whether these aspects of context merit attention in future research on engagement . School - Level Factors In a review article , Newmann ( 1981 ) outlined characteristics of high schools that can reduce student alienation and " increase students ' involvement , engagement , and integration in school " ( p . 546 ) . These include voluntary choice , clear and consistent goals , small size , student participation in school policy and management , opportu - nities for staff and students to be involved in cooperative endeavors , and academic work that allows for the development of products . There is evidence to support many of these principles . For instance , school size influences behavioral and emotional engagement . In a classic study , Barker and Gump ( 1964 ) found that students ' oppor - tunities to participate and develop social relations were greater in small schools than in large ones . Researchers who specifically study engagement report similar findings . Students in small schools participate more in extracurricular and social activities ( Finn & Voelkl , 1993 ) . Wehlage and Smith ( 1992 ) concluded that small alternative high schools were more likely to have the conditions that promote engagement for at - risk students , including an emphasis on building school membership and a cur - riculum characterized by authentic work . The school restructuring movement , which supports changing from a bureaucratic to a communal structure , embodies many of the principles outlined by Newmann ( 1981 ) . Communal structures encourage shared responsibility and commitment to common goals , lateral decision making , and greater individual discretion . Using the National Educational Longitudinal Study , Lee and Smith ( 1993 , 1995 ) found that students in schools with more elements of communal organization showed higher engagement and greater gains in engagement over time . Other research has examined disciplinary practices , school engagement , and the decision to drop out . Fairness and flexibility in school rules are assumed to reduce the risk of disengagement ( Finn & Voekl , 1993 ; Miller , Leinhart , & Zigmond , 1988 ; Natriello , 1984 ) . However , the results concerning this assumption are mixed . Natriello ( 1984 ) interviewed students about disciplinary and evaluation practices in their schools and found that students who perceived lack of fairness in implementing 73 Fredricks et al . rules were more likely to be behaviorally disengaged . In contrast , Finn and Voelkl did not find that rigid rules and an emphasis on discipline had a negative impact on behavioral engagement . Other work shows that schools that hold students account - able for behavioral standards have a lower incidence of dropping out ( Bryk & Thum , 1989 ; McDill , Natriello , & Pallas , 1986 ) . The goal of some current school reforms is to increase engagement . One exam - ple is the First Things First model ( Institute for Research and Reform in Education , 2003 ) , developed to increase engagement and achievement in under - performing urban and rural areas . This reform model focuses on teachers to decrease the student ! adult ratio and to increase continuity of care ; on academics to instantiate high stan - dards and enriching and diverse learning tasks ; and on staff to enhance collective responsibility and opportunities for instruction . Initial evaluations demonstrate positive effects on behavioral engagement ( e . g . , attendance , persistence , and mis - conduct ) and emotional engagement ( e . g . , school connectedness and support from teachers ) . Another intervention model is the School Development Program , intended to mobilize the entire school community to support students ' holistic development ( Comer , 1980 ) . Evaluations of this model in urban schools show increases in posi - tive affect and attitudes toward school , which are aspects of emotional engagement , and decreases in truancy and disciplinary problems , which are aspects of behavioral engagement ( Cook , Habib , Phillips , Settersten , Shagle , & Degirmencioglu , 1999 ) . In summary , this research suggests that school - level factors are associated with behavioral engagement . There is less evidence about the link between school - level factors and emotional and cognitive engagement . Future investigations need to sys - tematically examine the impact of school - level factors , such as those noted by New - mann ( 1981 ) , on the three types of engagement across diverse populations and ages . Longitudinal tracking of changes in engagement as a result of attempts to alter the school context also are needed . There are several widely implemented school reforms that focus on increasing achievement and not explicitly on engagement ( see Borman , Hewes , Overmann , & Brown , 2003 , for a review of school reforms ) . Although eval - uations of these reforms do not specifically measure it , engagement may be the mediator that links reforms to outcomes . Including engagement measures in these intervention studies can provide insight into the degree to which engagement is responsive to variations in the environment and can point to the specific school and classroom changes that have the largest effects on behavioral , emotional , and cogni - tive engagement . Classroom Context In this section , we discuss classroom context and engagement . We focus on fac - tors that have been studied in the engagement literature , including teacher support , peers , classroom structure , autonomy support , and task characteristics . Teacher Support Teacher support has been shown to influence behavioral , emotional , and cogni - tive engagement . Teacher support can be either academic or interpersonal , although the majority of studies do not make this distinction and many studies combine items about the two into one scale ( Wenztel , 1997 ) . Teachers ' reports of the quality of the teacher - child relationship in the early school years have been associated with teach - ers ' ratings of behavioral engagement , such as cooperative participation and self - 74 School Engagement directedness ( Birch & Ladd , 1997 ; Valeski & Stipek , 2001 ) . Children ' s initial behavioral engagement also influences their relationship with the teacher ( Ladd et al . , 1999 ) . In fact , an extensive literature suggests that teachers prefer students who are academically competent , responsible , and conform to school rules over students who are disruptive and aggressive ( see Kedar - Voivodas , 1983 ) . This preference is likely to lead teachers to provide different opportunities to behaviorally engaged and dis - engaged students . However , the majority of the research on teacher support and engagement has been cross - sectional , making it difficult to test these reciprocal links . One exception is the research by Skinner and Belmont ( 1993 ) . They docu - mented that teacher involvement was positively associated with engagement , and that , in turn , higher student engagement elicited greater teacher involvement . Other work has examined the effect of perceived teacher support in the elemen - tary , middle , and high school years . Teacher support and caring has been correlated with various aspects of behavioral engagement , including higher participation in learning and on - task behavior ( Battistich , Solomon , Watson , & Schaps , 1997 ) , lower disruptive behavior ( Ryan & Patrick , 2001 ) , and a lower probability of dropping out of school ( Croninger & Lee , 2001 ) among samples of ethnically diverse elementary , middle , and high school students . Furthermore , Marks ( 2000 ) demonstrated that a classroom environment in which students received support from both teachers and peers was associated with higher engagement among elementary , middle , and high school students in schools undergoing reforms . Additional evidence of the impor - tance of teacher support comes from the ethnographic research ; students are more likely to drop out of school when they feel they do not have a positive or supportive relationship with their teachers ( Farrell , 1990 ; Fine , 1991 ; Wehlage et al . , 1989 ) . Teacher support has been correlated with emotional engagement in a primarily White middle - class sample ( Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . This research replicates an earlier literature on classroom climate that related per - ceived teacher support and student attitudes ( Fraser & Fisher , 1982 ; Moos , 1979 ) . It is also similar to research on the middle school transition , which shows a decline in the quality of teacher - student relations and may explain the decrease in adoles - cents ' interest during this period of their lives ( Feldlaufer , Midgley , & Eccles , 1988 ; Midgley , Feldlaufer , & Eccles , 1989 ) . Another body of literature has investigated teacher support and cognitive engage - ment . A sample of middle school students reported higher cognitive engagement and greater use of learning and metacognitive strategies in classrooms where teachers presented challenging work and pressed for understanding ( Blumenfeld & Meece , 1988 ; Blumenfeld , Puro , & Mergendoller , 1992 ) . Observational studies illustrate the benefits of a socially supportive and intellectually challenging environment . In classrooms where teachers created respectful and socially supportive environments , pressed students for understanding , and supported autonomy , students were more strategic about learning and had higher behavioral engagement and affect ( Stipek , 2002 ; Tumer , Meyer , Cox , Logan , DiCintio , & Thomas , 1998 ) . If teachers focus only on academics but create a negative social environment , students are likely to experi - ence emotional disengagement and be more apprehensive about making mistakes . In contrast , if teachers focus only on the social dimension but fail to attend to the intel - lectual dimensions , students are less likely to be cognitively engaged in learning . In summnary , numerous studies have illustrated a link between teacher support and behavioral engagement . These studies are based on a variety of measures of behavior 75 Fredricks et al . ( e . g . , participation , work involvement , and conduct ) across diverse samples in the elementary , middle , and high school years . Most of the evidence concerning the asso - ciation between teacher support and emotional engagement comes from related lit - eratures . Findings concerning the impact of teacher support on cognitive engagement are beginning to accumulate and point to the importance of a combination of aca - demic and social support . Determining whether the effects of social or academic sup - port on engagement vary with student age and background requires further study . Finally , because the majority of research has been cross - sectional rather than longi - tudinal , we know very little about the long - term consequences of teacher support on behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement . Peers Researchers have focused less on the peer group than on teachers as a factor in the socialization of engagement ( Ryan , 2000 ) . Children in elementary and middle school cluster together in peer groups with similar levels of engagement , and this clustering strengthens existing differences ( Kindermann , 1993 ; Kindermann , McCollam , & Gibson , 1996 ) . For example , Kindermann ( 1993 ) used social com - posite mapping to document that elementary school children who were affiliated with high engagement peer groups increased their level of behavioral engagement across the school year . The bodies of literature on peer acceptance and rejection have been used as theo - retical justification for studying peers and engagement . Peer acceptance in both child - hood and adolescence is associated with satisfaction in school , which is an aspect of emotional engagement , and socially appropriate behavior and academic effort , which are aspects of behavioral engagement ( Bemdt & Keefe , 1995 ; Ladd , 1990 ; Wentzel , 1994 ) . In contrast , children who are rejected during the elementary school years are at greater risk for poor conduct and lower classroom participation , both elements of behavioral engagement , and lower interest in school , an aspect of emotional engage - ment ( Buhs & Ladd , 2001 ; DeRosier , Kupersmidt , & Patterson , 1994 ) . Peer support and engagement are likely to be reciprocal . Children who do not conform to school rules or who dislike school are less likely to perceive peers as supportive ( Ladd et al . , 1999 ; Ladd & Coleman , 1997 ) . Peer rejection in both childhood and adolescence increases the probability of dropping out of school ( French & Conrad , 2001 ; Parker & Asher , 1987 ) . Other work has focused on the negative effect of the peer group on adolescents ' commitment to doing well in school , especially among minority youth . Ogbu ' s cultural ecological model attempts to explain the academic failure of involuntary minority groups ( Ogbu , 1987 , 2003 ) . Ogbu claims that students in these groups dis - engage from school because they perceive limited opportunities to attain school suc - cess and they fear peer rejection for " acting White " in trying to get good grades . Several scholars have criticized Ogbu ' s theory for its failure to explain why some minority students do try to succeed whereas others disengage from school ( Con - chas , 2001 ; Mehan et al . , 1996 ; O ' Connor , 1997 ) . 1 Recent qualitative descriptions of resistance and resilience examine minority youth ' s perceptions of discrimination , social support , and school engagement . Students who perceive that race and class constrain their educational opportunities , but who also have social supports that pro - mote the development of agency and strategies for confronting discrimination , are 76 School Engagement more likely to remain engaged in school ( Conchas , 2001 ; Deyhle , 1995 ; Mehan et al . , 1996 ; O ' Connor , 1997 ; Stanton - Salazar , 2001 ) . Newer work on cognitive engagement and learning communities illustrates how peers can be more than friends or associates . Cognitive engagement is enhanced when class members actively discuss ideas , debate points of view , and critique each other ' s work ( Guthrie & Wigfield , 2000 ; Meloth & Deering , 1994 ; Newmann , 1992 ) . For example , Guthrie and colleagues created a year - long intervention pro - gram that emphasized peer interactions and the use of interesting materials as cru - cial aspects , of enhancing engagement in reading ( Guthnre , McGough , Bennett , & Rice , 1996 ) . In conclusion , the primary evidence for the effect of peers on engagement comes from studies of naturally occurring peer groups ( Kindermann , 1993 ; Kindermann et al . , 1996 ) . Other work has shown that the peer group can contribute to school dis - engagement among minority youth . Related studies that use constructs and measures similar to those used in the engagement literature also illustrate the link between peers and engagement . For example , peer acceptance and peer rejection are pre - dictors of outcomes that are aspects of behavioral engagement ( e . g . , participation , conduct , work involvement ) and emotional engagement ( e . g . , interest , satisfaction in school ) . Future investigations should examine the impact of peers on cognitive engagement . They should also consider whether there are developmental and group differences in how peers affect engagement . For example , whether the relationship is stronger for older children , as they develop gender , racial , and cultural identities , remains to be explored . Classroom Structure Other research has explored the impact of classroom structure on behavioral and emotional engagement . Connell and others ( Connell , 1990 ; Connell & Wellbom , 1991 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) have explored the association between students ' perceptions of classroom structure and their behavioral engagement . Structure refers to the clarity of teacher expectations for acadenic and social behavior and the con - sequences of failing to meet those expectations ( Connell , 1990 ) . Teachers who are clear in their expectations and provide consistent responses have students who are more behaviorally engaged ( Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . Fredricks , Blumenfeld , Friedel , and Paris ( 2002 ) found that students ' per - ceptions of work norms were positively correlated with behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement . The research on classroom structure duplicates earlier work on classroom cli - mate that showed a correlation between rules , clarity , work orientation , and student attitudes ( Moos , 1979 ; Fraser , 1991 ) . Another extensive body of research , which has not been cited in studies of engagement , demonstrates that teachers in well - managed classrooms create norms and employ efficient procedures that are associated with higher time on task and fewer disciplinary problems , both indicators of behav - ioral engagement ( see reviews by Brophy & Evertson , 1976 ; Doyle , 1986 ) . In sum - mary , although only a few studies of structure and engagement exist , the findings , when considered along with those from other well - established literatures , indicate that classroom structure should be examined in future work on the effects of con - text on engagement . 77 Autonomy Support Contexts that support autonomy are presumed to enhance engagement ( Connell , 1990 ) . Autonomy - supportive classrooms are characterized by choice , shared deci - sion making , and absence of external controls , such as grades or rewards and pun - ishments , as reasons for doing schoolwork or behaving well ( Connell , 1990 ; Deci & Ryan , 1985 ) . These claims derive from laboratory - based experiments on intrin - sic motivation , which demonstrate that controlling environments diminish interest , preference for challenge , and persistence - all aspects of engagement ( Deci & Ryan , 1987 ; Grolnick & Ryan , 1987 ; Ryan & Grolnick , 1986 ) . In contrast , in a field study , Skinner and Belmont ( 1993 ) failed to document a link between perceived autonomy support and engagement . Only limited research has been done on the consequences of autonomy support in classroom contexts where choices are more constrained than in laboratory settings . One example is research in literacy on open - choice tasks : In two separate studies , suburban elementary school students whose teachers offered more choices - about which literacy tasks to perform and when and where to perform them - worked more strategically and persisted longer in the face of difficulty , thus manifesting two aspects of cognitive engagement ( Turner , 1995 ; Perry , 1998 ) . In contrast , studies of the junior high school transition do not corroborate presumed influences of auton - omy support . Junior high school classrooms are characterized by a greater emphasis on teacher control and discipline and fewer opportunities for student decision making than are elementary school classrooms ( Midgley & Feldlaufer , 1987 ; Moos , 1979 ) . Eccles and colleagues hypothesized that the lack of opportunities for student auton - omy would help to explain declines in interest , one aspect of emotional disengage - ment , during the transition from elementary to middle school . This hypothesis has not been empirically supported in longitudinal research ( Eccles et al . , 1993 ) . Before claims can be made about the benefits of autonomy - supportive environ - ments for engagement , there is a need for more research into the consequences of choice , opportunities for decision making , and reward structures for behavioral , emo - tional , and cognitive engagement in actual classroom settings . Most studies have been conducted with predominately White samples ; research on the impact of auton - omy support on engagement across various ethnic and racial populations is critical . Another important question is whether there are developmental differences in the effects of autonomy - supportive environments on engagement . For example , the engagement of adolescents , who are more capable and desirous of independence , may be more responsive to such contexts . Finally , it remains to be determined what is the optimal mix of autonomy support and classroom structure for promoting engagement . Task Characteristics Many studies demonstrate a link between behavioral engagement and achieve - ment ( Connell et al . , 1994 ; Marks , 2000 ; Skinner et al . , 1990 ) . The reason may be that tasks that require recall or repetition of procedures are the most common instructional approach in classrooms ( Larson , 2000 ; Newmann et al . , 1992 ) . Students can com - plete assignments by paying attention and staying on - task and using superficial learning strategies to memorize rather than deeper strategies to understand what is being taught . Unfortunately , this type of schoolwork is not likely to require inten - sive effort and self - regulation or to engender commitments to learning that pro - 78 School Engagement mote deep understanding and flexible use of knowledge - hallmarks of cognitive engagement . Newmann theorizes that engagement in learning will be enhanced in classrooms where the tasks ( a ) are authentic ; ( b ) provide opportunities for students to assume ownership of their conception , execution , and evaluation ; ( c ) provide opportunities for collaboration ; ( d ) permit diverse forms of talents ; and ( e ) provide opportunities for fun ( Newmann , 1991 ; Newmann et al . , 1992 ) . Newmann ' s conceptualization incorporates academic and social aspects of context , such as the nature of academic work and peer interactions , whose influence usually is studied separately . Similar combinations of contextual factors are included in theories of engagement proposed by Guthrie and colleagues ( Guthrie & Anderson , 1999 ; Guthrie & Wigfield , 2000 ) . Guthrie and Wigfield argue that engagement in reading is enhanced in classrooms with interesting texts , real - world interactions , autonomy support , strategy instruc - tion , opportunities for collaboration , and teacher involvement . In one of the few empirical studies to examine task characteristics and engage - ment , Marks ( 2000 ) tested the impact of authentic instructional work and social sup - port on engagement in schools undergoing reforms to improve achievement . Using a combined measure of behavior and emotion , she found that elementary , middle , and high school students ' perceptions of the opportunities to be involved in authen - tic instruction were a strong unique predictor of engagement . Similarly , Fredricks et al . ( 2002 ) examined the impact of task challenge , work norms , teacher support , and peer support on behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement among low - income urban elementary school students . They found that perceptions of task chal - lenge were uniquely associated with each type of engagement . Other research has used observational techniques to examine task characteristics and cognitive engagement in math ( Helme & Clarke , 2001 ) and science ( Blumen - feld & Meece , 1988 ) . Helme and Clarke concluded ; that cognitive engagement is more likely to be observed when students work with peers on novel tasks that have personal meaning . Blumenfeld and Meece showed that both tasks and teachers influ - ence engagement . They found that students in science classes in Grades 4 - 6 who were assigned complex hands - on tasks reported higher cognitive engagement and motivation to learn when teachers provided instructional support and pressed stu - dents for understanding . Few studies of context and engagement include measures of academic work ( see Blumenfeld et al . , in press ; Fredricks et al . , 2002 ; Marks , 2000 ) . However , the studies that do include such measures show that authentic and challenging tasks are associated with higher behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement . This is especially true when studies examine social and academic dimensions together . One concern about this literature is that much of our knowledge of engaging tasks comes from theoretical pieces and observational studies in middle and high schools under - going instructional reforms . We need to know more about the impact of task char - acteristics on engagement across age , socioeconomic status , and race . Another question for future inquiry is how individual differences , such as children ' s ability levels , moderate the relationship between task characteristics and engagement . In summary , we reviewed school and classroom factors that are associated with engagement . In general , there is more research on social contextual factors than on acadermic factors and engagement . Many of the findings are based on related studies of context cited by engagement researchers as support for their ideas . Our review 79 Fredricks et al . indicates that these antecedents merit further consideration in an engagement framne - work . One concern is that the literature does not test the underlying assumption that engagement is the mediator between context and achievement . In general , researchers have examined engagement as an outcome rather than testing whether the relation between context and engagement leads to other outcomes of interest , such as achieve - ment . Another concern is that almost no studies examine how a given classroom fac - tor or school factor influences the three types of engagement simultaneously . As a consequence , we do not know whether the environment affects each type of engage - ment similarly . An additional concern is that researchers tend to examine aspects of context separately rather than considering how the pattern of contextual variables working together influences engagement . The literature on task characteristics is beginning to address this point . From the current body of work , however , it is not clear whether these classroom factors work additively or interactively to influence engagement , or whether the presence of some contextual factors compensates for the absence of others . Individual Needs In this section , we review studies that assume that individual needs are a mediator between contextual factors and engagement . We also draw on motivational research with similar conceptualizations of needs . The most prevalent theory of individual needs and engagement is Connell ' s self - system model ( Connell , 1990 ; Connell & Wellbom , 1991 ) . According to this perspective , individuals have fundamental psy - chological needs for relatedness , autonomy , and competence . The degree to which students perceive that the classroom context meets those needs determines how engaged or disaffected they will be in school . However , few scholars include mea - sures of context , needs , and engagement in the same study . Instead most simply examine the direct link between individual needs and engagement . Need for Relatedness It is assumed that students will be more engaged when classroom contexts meet their needs for relatedness , which is likely to occur in classrooms where teachers and peers create a caring and supportive environment . Elementary school students who had higher perceived relatedness , conceptualized as the emotional quality of rela - tionships , were more engaged , as rated by teachers ( Connell & Wellbom , 1991 ) . Similarly , Furrer and Skinner ( 2003 ) found that perceived relatedness to teachers , parents , and peers uniquely contributed to emotional engagement . Furthermore , using a combined measure of emotional and behavioral engagement , Ryan , Stiller , and Lynch ( 1994 ) found that middle school students who felt more secure with teach - ers had higher engagement . The research on the concept of belonging , which is similar to the need for relat - edness , also supports this assumption ( see review by Osterman , 2000 ) . Belonging is defined as an individual ' s sense of being accepted , valued , included , and encouraged by others ( Baumeister & Leary , 1995 ) . Osterman ( 2000 ) concluded that feelings of belonging were linked to engagement and ultimately to the decision to drop out . In addition , Goodenow and colleagues have shown a positive association between per - ceptions of school belonging in adolescence and effort , an aspect of behavioral engagement ( Goodenow , 1993 ; Goodenow & Grady , 1993 ) . Other work focuses on the development of schools as communities , which is similar to the need for related - 80 School Engagement ness ( Osterman , 2000 ; Solomon , Watson , Battistich , Schaps , & Delucchi , 1996 ) . Battistich , Solomon , and others have shown a positive association between students ' perceptions of community and positive affect and intrinsic motivation ( Battistich et al . , 1997 ; Solomon , Battistich , Watson , Schaps , & Lewis , 2000 ) . All of the studies show a direct link between the need for relatedness , or similar needs , and engage - ment . We found only one study that tested whether the need for relatedness medi - ated the relation between context and engagement . Roeser , Midgley , and Urdan ( 1996 ) showed that perceptions of positive teacher - student relationships predicted positive school - related affect and that this relation was mediated through feelings of school belonging . NeedforAutonomy Individuals have a need for autonomy , or a desire to do things for personal rea - sons , rather than doing things because their actions are controlled by others ( Ryan & Connell , 1989 ) . It is assumed that the need for autonomy is most likely to be met in contexts where students have choice , shared decision making , and relative freedom from extemal controls . When individuals ' autonomy needs are met , it is assumed that they will be more engaged ( Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ) . A few studies have exam - ined the link between engagement and the need for autonomy ; no studies have tested whether autonomy needs are a mediator between measures of autonomy - supportive contexts and engagement . The need for autonomy is assessed by asking individuals to report on their reasons for participating in an activity . Reporting more autonomous ( intemal ) reasons for involvement in schoolwork , such as pursuing the activity out of interest or for the pleasure of doing so , has been positively associated with behav - ioral engagement ( e . g . , participation , work involvement ) and emotional engagement ( e . g . , interest and happiness ) in elementary school ( Connell & Wellbom ; Patrick et al . , 1993 ) . Similarly , Ryan and Connell ( 1989 ) found a positive association between autonomy styles and positive affect . Needfor Competence Competence involves beliefs about control , strategies , and capacity ( Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ; Skinner et al . , 1990 ) . When individuals ' need for competence is met , they believe that they can determine their success ( control beliefs ) , can under - stand what it takes to do well ( strategy beliefs ) and to succeed ( capacity beliefs ) . The assumption is that students ' need for competence is met when they experience classrooms as optimal in structure and have adequate information about how to effectively achieve desired outcomes ( Connell & Wellborn ; Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . We found no studies that tested the assumption that classroom structure is positively associated with the need for competence . Several studies have tested the direct link between perceived competence and engagement . Perceived competence and control beliefs have been associated with behavioral and emotional engagement in both the elementary and middle school years ( Connell et al . , 1994 ; Rudolph et al . , 2001 ; Skinner et al . , 1990 ) . The long - term consequences of control beliefs on engagement also have been examined . Using hier - archical linear modeling , Skinner , Zimnmer - Gembeck , and Connell ( 1998 ) docu - mented that high perceptions of control helped to offset declines in engagement ( a combined measure of behavior and emotion ) from third to seventh grade . Expectancy beliefs ( Eccles et al . , 1983 ) and self - concept of ability ( Harter , 1983 ) are cited in the 81 Fredricks et al . engagement literature as similar to need for competence . In both junior high and high school samples , expectancy measures predicted students ' use of cognitive and metacognitive strategies ( Pintrich & De Groot , 1990 ; Pintrich & Garcia , 1991 ; Zimmerman & Martinez - Ponz , 1992 ) . Furthermore , Valeski and Stipek ( 2001 ) found that first - grade students ' perceptions of academic competence were significantly associated with teachers ' ratings of engagement . Summary of Needs The literature on needs provides a theoretical perspective on why certain contex - tual factors promote engagement . However , the degree to which needs mediate between contextual factors and engagement is not examined in most studies . In gen - eral , the research has tested the direct link between needs and engagement . For example , there is fairly consistent evidence from the literature on relatedness , belong - ing , and community that feeling that one belongs to and is a member of the commu - nity is associated with behavioral and emotional engagement in the elementary and middle school years . In addition , a few studies show that the need for autonomy is correlated with behavioral and emotional engagement . These studies are based on a measure of autonomy that contrasts acting for internal reasons , such as interest and pleasure , with acting for external reasons , such the teacher ' s requirement . The real - ity is that classrooms are constrained situations and students often have to perform an activity for external reasons , whether they like it or not . Finally , several studies demonstrate a consistent association between the need for competence and behav - ioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement in the elementary , middle , and high school years . Our review also raises several critical questions for future inquiry . Of the various topics in the research on needs , the least studied is the relation between needs and cognitive engagement . Much of the research on that subject has been based on sam - ples of elementary school students . Those samples need to be expanded . We also know very little about how these processes operate among minority children and older youth . Finally , although a theoretical framework of engagement based on needs is a promising way to examine the interaction between the individual and context ( Connell , 1990 ; Connell & Wellbom , 1991 ) , surprisingly few studies actually test mediation . Clearly , more empirical research is needed to validate the hypothesized links between contextual factors , individual needs , and engagement . Conclusion and Future Directions At the beginning of this article , we observed that the concept of engagement is receiving increased attention because it offers several benefits for research and practice . It is multidimensional ; it has the potential to link areas of research about antecedents and consequences of how students behave , how they feel , and how they think . Ultimately , although engagement might begin with liking or participating , it can result in commitment or investment and thus may be a key to diminishing student apathy and enhancing learning . Engagement is inclusive ; each type of engagement combines constructs that are usually studied separately , which results in detailed information about the constructs . Thus the concept of engagement has the potential to unify insights from a considerable body of research for practical purposes . Engagement is malleable ; it is presumed to be a function of both the individual and the context . Thus it can be changed more easily than an individual trait or a gen - 82 School Engagement eral tendency . Moreover , engagement can result from a variety of antecedents in the context , both social and academic , at both the school and classroom levels , allowing for a wide range of intervention targets . This review suggests that although much has been learned , the potential contribution of the construct of engagement toward understanding school success has yet to be realized . In this section , we highlight how the current research maps onto each of these assumptions , and we discuss the limitations of this research and offer suggestions for future research . Engagement as a Multidimensional Concept To date , research has not capitalized on the potential of engagement as a multidi - mensional construct that encompasses behavior , emotion , and cognition . The rich - ness of encompassing the three components leads to the challenge of defining and studying each and their combination in conceptually nuanced ways . Many of the studies of engagement include one or two types ( e . g . , behavior and emotion ) but do not consider all three . The vast majority of studies test the impact of a single type of engagement and a single outcome of interest , such as the correlation between behav - ioral engagement and achievement . Similarly , with a few exceptions , the literature does not examine the influence of multiple classroom antecedents on the three types simultaneously . We do not know which contextual factors or combinations of fac - tors have the most influence on each type . Nor do we know how the coherence among contextual factors affects engagement or how different types of engagement interact ( Guthrie & Wigfield , 2000 ) . For instance , it is likely that emotional engagement leads to increases in behavioral and cognitive engagement , both of which mediate subse - quent achievement . Tests for nonlinear relationships also need to be conducted to address questions about thresholds - whether it is always desirable or necessary to enhance engagement or whether some amounts of particular components are suffi - cient to achieve particular outcomes . Another strength of the multidimensional concept of engagement is that it allows for rich characterizations of individuals . Yet most studies use variable - centered techniques that assume linear relations among relevant dimensions , accounting for all other factors in the model . Pattern - centered analysis techniques could be used to examine various configurations of behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engage - ment . This methodological technique would help to answer important questions about the desirability of various configurations of engagement and synergy among the components ( see Blumenfeld et al . , in press ; Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ; Patrick et al . , 1993 , for examples ) . Research on outcomes of interest is needed to answer the following questions : 1 . Are some individual patterns more predictive than others ? 2 . Are dimensions of engagement additive , so that having more of each is ben - eficial ? 3 . Is some amount of one component enough to compensate for less of another ? Clarifying Definitions and Measures There are several problems with the definitions and measures of engagement . One benefit of integrated definitions of engagement is that they combine more specific concepts into a larger entity . However , definitions of the three types of engagement vary , with considerable overlap across the components . Furthermore , the definitions 83 Fred ricks et al . and measures of concepts that are combined within each type of engagement are less precise than in studies that focus on a single concept . For example , emotional engage - ment includes feelings , values , and interest , each of which is more fully unpacked in the literature on motivation than in the research on engagement . Similarly , invest - ment and strategy use are less well defined and measured when considered as two aspects of cognitive engagement than when explored as separate concepts in the lit - eratures on motivation and self - regulation . Another measurement problem is the common practice of using a single scale or combined averages from different scales to measure engagement . This practice allows for the measurement of general levels of engagement . However , more spe - cific measures are necessary to disentangle links between contextual factors , out - comes , and each type of engagement ( for examples , see Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ; Patrick et al . , 1993 ) . Similarly , the practice of combining items that measure engage - ment in the classroom and in the school masks potentially important differences in antecedents and outcomes of engagement by level ( Stipek , 2002 ) . Essentially , there is a tension between conceptual clarity and practical reality . One solution is that each of the concepts should be examined in detail when the goal is greater theoretical understanding about how it operates and its unique con - tributions to variance in outcomes of interest . However , when the goal is more practical , for example , to predict outcomes such as school success or persistence , it may not be feasible to examine independently each of the ideas included within the types of engagement because of the large number of survey questions that would be required and the time constraints on administering surveys in schools . Mixing various concepts in measures of engagement potentially has the benefit of greater predictive power , which may compensate for what it loses in conceptual clarity . The key is to make sure that the combinations are deliberately based on an under - standing of what each concept means and how it contributes to the types of engage - ment under study . Our review illustrates the need for clarity about what is and is not included in engagement and for an assessment of the " value added " by studying engagement . Currently , engagement is theoretically messy ; sometimes it overlaps with other con - structs , sometimes it simply substitutes different terminology for the same constructs , and sometimes it incorporates constructs from other literatures in very general rather than precise ways . It is necessary to consider whether the advantages of an inclusive construct outweigh the drawbacks of the loss of specificity about the individual con - cepts that it incorporates . Our concern is that , although engagement has considerable practical benefit as an umbrella that synthesizes a broad range of research , it suffers from being everything to everybody . Developmental Issues and Longitudinal Models Engagement has been explored in the elementary , middle , and high school years , although studies of antecedents have not been spread equally over the three age ranges . For example , we know more about peer support and engagement in the ele - mentary school years and more about task characteristics and engagement in the mid - dle and high school years . Student engagement is likely to take different forms in the elementary and high school years . One example of this is that students may not become deeply invested in learning until they have the intellectual capacity to self - regulate and become intentional learners , which tends to occur at later ages . Future 84 School Engagement research needs to determine whether engagement becomes less context - dependent as individuals become more invested in the value of learning and schooling . The majority of research on engagement is cross - sectional . However , some lon - gitudinal research has been used to document changes in engagement over time ( Skinneret al . , 1998 ) and reciprocal relations between contextual factors and engage - ment ( Skinner & Belmont , 1993 ) . Longitudinal research is needed to determine how behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement develop and whether they are syn - ergistic . Important questions for future inquiry include the following : 1 . Which types of engagement are more likely to be displayed during the early grades ? 2 . How do the three types of engagement evolve and change over time ? 3 . Are any aspects of context more important among some age groups than others ? The idea of engagement as commitment also has not been adequately explored . A vast majority of the studies rely on average scores , assuming that higher averages mean more engagement , but do not examine whether the higher scores indicate greater commitment . Longitudinal designs are needed to examine how and why engagement evolves and whether the evolution is age related . Research is needed that differentiates students who become invested in learning from those who do what they are supposed to do ( e . g . , attend school and achieve ) but do not become invested in leaming . To date , there are few developmentally based models of how relations between engagement and context may vary as a function of age . Eccles and colleagues provide an example of how that relationship may be conceptualized and examined ( Eccles et al . , 1993 ; Eccles & Midgley , 1989 ) . They integrate models of person - environment fit within a developmental framework to explain declines in motivation and engage - ment over the junior high transition . In addition , there are not many conceptual models for understanding continuity and change in engagement . Finn ' s participant - identification model ( 1989 ) assumes that participation ( behavioral engagement ) enhances identification ( emotional engagement ) , which in tum increases participa - tion . Longitudinal research could help to test the validity of this model for explain - ing changes in engagement over time . Malleability and Interaction of Individual and Context Another problem is that the literature does not provide adequate evidence about the malleability of engagement . The limited number of longitudinal studies leaves open questions about how responsive engagement is to changes in context . Because surveys often combine questions about the classroom , the school , academics , and social relationships , it is difficult to deternine the actual source of engagement , how engagement is related to context , and how engagement changes if conditions are altered . One important area for future inquiry is the impact of school and classroom interventions on behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement . Widely imple - mented school reforms where the goal is to increase achievement , not explicitly to improve engagement , often implicitly target aspects of the context that affect engage - ment ( Borman et al . , 2003 ) . Including measures of engagement in these intervention studies can provide insight into the degree to which engagement is the mediator between context and achievement - related outcomes . To design effective interventions 85 Fredricks et al . and attain desirable outcomes such as higher achievement and lower dropout rates , it is crucial to ask questions about such connections . For instance , in the effort to influence behavioral engagement , is it more important to change student - teacher relations or to change academic tasks ? Or is it equally important to deal with both ? We also assume that engagement lies in the interaction of the individual and the setting . Current studies do not tell us enough about how such interactions produce engagement . We know that children who have more favorable perceptions of par - ticular classroom factors , such as a supportive teacher , are more engaged . The pre - sumption is that support from the teacher meets an individual ' s need for relatedness ; but , for the most part , the mediation assumption has not been tested . In addition , it is not clear why children in the same classroom respond differently to the same antecedents . Examinations of other individual factors , such as anxiety or ability , would also be of interest . It may be that challenges accompanied by teacher or peer support will have a different impact on anxious students ' engagement than will sim - ilar challenges not accompanied by such support . Future research might use person - environment models , such as the self - system model ( e . g . , Connell & Wellborn , 1991 ) , across samples of children with different individual characteristics . Such research would tell us which aspects of the classroom context are most salient , and hence potentially the most important , in increasing engagement for different types of students . The diversity of participants in engagement studies needs to be expanded . Many of the studies of context and engagement are conducted with White middle - class samples . Changing demographics , the growing literature on disengagement among minority youth , and the obstacles that many minority youth face in school have made the study of engagement among immigrant and minority youth an imperative . One needed area of inquiry is how school and classroom factors influence behavioral , emotional , and cognitive engagement among children from various ethnic and racial groups and social classes . Another interesting population for further study is teenage pregnant girls , who are more likely to disengage and drop out of school after the birth of their child ( Pillow , 1997 ) . Such research can help us to discover whether some aspects of the classroom and school context are more important than others for enhancing the three types of engagement among different populations . Use of Multiple Methods Another concem is the narrow array of methods used to study engagement . Many studies use student and teacher surveys to measure engagement and classroom con - text . From this research , we can list contextual factors that influence engagement , but thick descriptions of classroom contexts are needed to enhance our understand - ing of how and why they work . For example , although the research shows that teacher support is associated with engagement , we know less about what aspects of the context create those perceptions of the teacher . Recent observational studies in math and reading that explore which aspects of context create individual percep - tions ( e . g . , Helme & Clarke , 2001 ; Turner et al . , 1998 ) are critical for knowing where and how to intervene . Research that takes a qualitative approach to understanding the phenomenology of engagement is needed . Qualitative methods can illustrate the process whereby students construct the meaning and purpose of education in a highly complex and sometimes contradictory school environment ( see Locke - Davidson , 1996 ) . In addi - 86 School Engagement tion , qualitative methods can shed light on how the various types of engagement develop and interact , as well on as why some students begin to disengage from school . Such methods can help to explain individual and cultural differences . Qual - itative studies that investigate the complex interaction between identity develop - ment , school context , and engagement are critical for advancing our understanding of how and why some students do well in school and others do not ( see Conchas , 2001 ; Locke - Davidson ; Mehan et al . , 1996 ) . Although it is beyond the scope of this article to explore the impact of the family and the community on school engage - ment , long - term ethnographic studies on that topic have been very helpful in explain - ing variation in working - class and immigrant students ' identity development and school engagement ( see MacLeod , 1995 ; C . Suarez - Orozco & M . M . Suatrez - Orozco , 2001 ) . In summary , the evidence that we reviewed suggests that the concept of engage - ment merits further exploration . Engagement is associated with positive academic outcomes , including achievement and persistence in school ; and it is higher in class - rooms with supportive teachers and peers , challenging and authentic tasks , opportu - nities for choice , and sufficient structure . Despite the great amount that we have learned about academic and school engagement , the literature has several gaps . In general , the definitions , measures , and designs do not capitalize on what a multi - dimensional conceptualization of engagement can offer . Distinctions among the three types of engagement and among the concepts within each type need to be specified . In addition , the overlap with other literatures should be acknowledged . Moreover , the individual types of engagement have not been studied in combination , either as results of antecedents or as influences on outcomes . In addition , the research has used variable - centered rather than pattem - centered analytic techniques . As a result , we have little information about interactions or synergy . Moreover , the current research sheds little light on the development or malleability of engagement , because there are few longitudinal studies or studies of interventions . Future research should address the difficulties of studying how individuals and contexts interact . We need to know more about age , individual , racial , and cultural differences in how individuals respond to opportunities afforded by educational contexts and how the differences affect school success . More multi - method , observational , and ethnographic studies would contribute to this effort . Such information is essential for creating finely tuned inter - ventions that target specific aspects of the environment . The hope is that such inter - ventions can counteract well - documented declines in motivation and engagement and bring about the level of commitment that students need to benefit from school - ing and to meet the challenges of society . Note The research for this article was supported by the MacArthur Foundation Network on Successful Pathways Through Middle Childhood , which is directed by Jacquelynne Eccles . The ideas expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect foundation policy . The authors would like to thank John Modell , Walter Secada , Jacquelynne Eccles , and Todd Barkto for their conceptual contributions to the article . Correspondence may be addressed to Jennifer A . Fredricks ( see author information on last page of this article ) . ' One criticism of Ogbu ' s model is that the assumptions about the lack of school engagement among involuntary racial ninorities are based on an inaccurate historical account of the value that African Americans have placed on education ( Anderson , 1988 ) . 87 Fredricks et al . Another criticism emerging from recent cross - cultural and ethnographic research is that the strict typology of immigrants and involuntary minorities fails to apply to many immni - grant groups and does not describe the diversity of school experience among ethnic minorities ( Gibson , 1997 ) . References Alexander , K . L . , Entwisle , D . R . , & Dauber , S . L . ( 1993 ) . First - grade classroom behav - ior : Its short - and long - term consequences for school performance . Child Development , 64 , 801 - 814 . Alexander , K . L . , Entwisle , D . R . , & Horsey , C . S . ( 1997 ) . From first grade forward : Early foundations of high school dropout . Sociology of Education , 70 , 87 - 107 . Alvermann , D . E . ( 1999 ) . Modes of inquiry into studying engaged reading . In J . T . Guthrie & D . E . Alvermann ( Eds . ) , Engaged reading : Processes , practices and pol - icy implications . New York : Teachers College Press . Ames , C . ( 1992 ) . Classrooms : Goals , structures , and student motivation . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 261 - 271 . Ames , C . , & Archer , J . ( 1988 ) . Achievement goals in the classroom : Students ' learn - ing strategies and motivational processes . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 , 260 - 267 . Anderson , J . D . ( 1988 ) . The education of Blacks in the South , 1860 - 1935 . Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press . Barker , B . G . , & Gump , P . V . ( 1964 ) . Big school , small school : High school size and student behavior . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Barrington , B . L . , & Hendricks , B . ( 1989 ) . Differentiating characteristics of high school graduates , dropouts , and nongraduates . Journal of Educational Research , 82 , 309 - 319 . Battistich , V . , Solomon , D . , Watson , M . , & Schaps , E . ( 1997 ) . Caring school commu - nities . Educational Psychologist , 32 , 137 - 151 . Baumeister , R . F . , & Leary , M . R . ( 1995 ) . The need to belong : Desire for interpersonal attachments as afundamentalhuman motivation . PsychologicalBulletin , 117 , 497 - 529 . Berndt , T . J . , & Keefe , K . ( 1995 ) . Friends ' influence on adolescents ' adjustment to school . Child Development , 66 , 1312 - 1329 . Birch , S . , & Ladd , G . ( 1997 ) . The teacher - child relationship and children ' s early school adjustment . Journal of School Psychology , 35 , 61 - 79 . Blumenfeld , P . C . , & Meece , J . L . ( 1988 ) . Task factors , teacher behavior , and students ' involvement and use of learning strategies in science . Elementary School Journal , 88 , 235 - 250 . Blumenfeld , P . C . , Modell , J . Bartko , W . T . , Secada , W . , Fredricks , J . , Friedel , J . , et al . ( in press ) . School engagement of inner city students during middle childhood . In C . R . Cooper , C . Garcia Coll , W . T . Bartko , H . M . Davis , & C . Chatman ( Eds . ) , Hills of gold : Rethinking diversity and contexts as resources for children ' s developmen - tal pathways . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Blumenfeld , P . C . , Puro , P . , & Mergendoller , J . R . ( 1992 ) . Translating motivation into thoughtfulness . In H . Marshall ( Ed . ) , Redefining student learning ( pp . 207 - 241 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Boekarts , M . , Pintrich , P . R . , & Zeidner , M . ( Eds . ) . ( 2000 ) . Handbook of self - regulation : Theory , research and applications . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Borman , G . D . , Hewes , G . M . , Overmann , L . T . , & Brown , S . ( 2003 ) . Comprehensive school reform and achievement : A meta - analysis . Review of Educational Research , 73 , 125 - 230 . Brophy , J . E . ( 1987 ) . Socializing students ' motivation to learn . In M . L . Maehr & D . Kleiber ( Eds . ) , Advances in motivation and achievement : Enhancing motivation ( pp . 181 - 210 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . 88 School Engagement Brophy , J . E . , & Evertson , C . M . ( 1976 ) . Learning from teaching : A developmental perspective . Boston : Allyn and Bacon . Bryk , A . S . , & Thum , Y . M . ( 1989 ) . The effects of high school organization on drop - ping out : An exploratory investigation . American Educational Research Journal , 26 , 353 - 384 . Buhs , E . S . , & Ladd , G . W . ( 2001 ) . Peer rejection as an antecedent of young children ' s school adjustment : An examination of mediating process . Developmental Psychol - ogy , 37 , 550 - 560 . Burkett , E . ( 2002 ) . Another planet : A year in the life of a suburban high schooL New York : Harper Collins . Cairns , R . B . , & Cairns , B . D . ( 1994 ) . Lifelines and risks : Pathways of youth in our time . New York : Cambridge University Press . Cairns , R . B . , Cairns , B . D . , & Neckerman , H . J . ( 1989 ) . Early school dropout : Con - figurations and determninants . Child Development , 60 , 1437 - 1452 . Comer , J . ( 1980 ) . School power : Implications of an intervention project . New York : Free Press . Conchas , G . ( 2001 ) . Structuring failure and success : Understanding the variability in Latino school engagement . Harvard Educational Review , 71 , 475 - 504 . Connell , J . P . ( 1990 ) . Context , self , and action : A motivational analysis of self - system processes across the life - span . In D . Cicchetti ( Ed . ) , The self in transition : Infancy to childhood ( pp . 61 - 97 ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Connell , J . P . , Halpern - Felsher , B . L . , Clifford , E . , Crichlow , W . , & Usinger , P . ( 1995 ) . Hanging in there : Behavioral , psychological , and contextual factors affecting whether African American adolescents stay in school . Journal of Adolescent Research , 10 , 41 - 63 . Connell , J . P . , Spencer , M . B . , & Aber , J . L . ( 1994 ) . Educational risk and resilience in African - American youth : Context , self , action , and outcomes in school . Child Devel - opment , 65 , 493 - 506 . Connell , J . P . , & Wellborn , J . G . ( 1991 ) . Competence , autonomy , and relatedness : A motivational analysis of self - system processes . In M . Gunnar & L . A . Sroufe ( Eds . ) , Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology ( Vol . 23 ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Cook , T . D . , Habib , F . N . , Phillips , M . , Settersten , R . A . , Shagle , S . C . , & Degirmen - cioglu , IS . R . ( 1999 ) . Comer ' s School Development Program in Prince George ' s County , Maryland : A theory - based evaluation . American Educational Research Journal , 36 , 543 - 597 . Corno , L . ( 1993 ) . The best - laid plans : Modem conceptions of volition and educational research . Educational Researcher , 22 , 14 - 22 . Corno , L . , & Mandinach , E . ( 1983 ) . The role of cognitive engagement in classroom learning and motivation . Educational Psychologist , 18 , 88 - 108 . Croninger , R . G . , & Lee , V . E . ( 2001 ) . Social capital and dropping out of school : Ben - efits to at - risk students of teachers ' support and guidance . Teachers College Record , 103 , 548 - 581 . Csikzentmihalyi , M . ( 1988 ) . The flow experience and its significance for human psy - chology . In M . Csikzentmihalyi & I . S . Csikzentmihalyi ( Eds . ) , Optimal experience ( pp . 15 - 35 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Deci , E . L . , & Ryan , R . M . ( 1985 ) . Intrinsic motivation and self - determination in human behavior . New York : Plenum . Deci , E . L . , & Ryan , R . M . ( 1987 ) . The support of autonomy and the control of behav - ior . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 1024 - 1037 . DeRosier , M . E . , Kupersmidt , J . B . , & Patterson , C . J . ( 1994 ) . Children ' s academic and behavioral adjustment as a function of the chronicity and proximity of peer rejec - tion . Child Development , 65 , 1799 - 1813 . 89 Fredricks et al . Deyhle , D . ( 1995 ) . Navajo youth and Anglo racism : Cultural integrity and resistance . Harvard Educational Review , 65 , 403 - 444 . Doyle , W . ( 1986 ) . Classroom organization and management . In M . Wittrock ( Ed . ) , Handbook of research on teaching ( pp . 392 - 431 ) . New York : Macmillan . Dweck , C . , & Leggett , E . L . ( 1988 ) . A social - cognitive approach to motivation and per - sonality . Psychological Review , 95 , 256 - 273 . Eccles ( Parsons ) , J . S . , Adler , T . F . , Futterman , R . , Goff , S . B . , Kaczala , C . M . , Meece , J . L . , et al . ( 1983 ) . Expectations , values and academic behaviors . In J . T . Spence ( Ed . ) , Achievement and achievement motivation ( pp . 75 - 146 ) . San Francisco : W . H . Freeman . Eccles , J . S . , & Midgley , C . ( 1989 ) . Stage / environment fit : Developmentally appro - priate classrooms for early adolescents . In R . Ames & C . Ames ( Eds . ) , Research on motivation in education ( Vol . 3 , pp . 139 - 18 1 ) . New York : Academic Press . Eccles , J . S . , Midgley , C . , & Adler , T . F . ( 1984 ) . Grade - related changes in school envi - ronment : Effects on achievement motivation . In J . G . Nicholls ( Ed . ) , Advances in motivation and achievement ( pp . 283 - 33 1 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Eccles , J . S . , Midgley , C . , Wigfield , A . , Buchanan , C . M . , Reuman , D . , Flanagan , C . , et al . ( 1993 ) . Development during adolescence : The impact of stage - environment fit on young adolescents ' experience in school and in families . American Psychologist , 48 , 90 - 101 . Ekstrom , R . B . , Goertz , M . E . , Pollack , J . M . , & Rock , D . A . ( 1986 ) . Who drops out of high school and why ? Findings from a national study . Teachers College Record , 87 , 356 - 373 . Ensminger , M . E . , & Slusarcick , A . L . ( 1992 ) . Paths to high school graduation or dropout : A longitudinal study of a first grade cohort . Sociology of Education , 65 , 95 - 113 . Entwisle , D . R . , & Alexander , K . L . ( 1993 ) . Entry into schools : The beginning school transition and educational stratification in the United States . Annual Review of Soci - ology , 19 , 401 - 423 . Epstein , J . L . , & McPartland , J . M . ( 1976 ) . The concept and measurement of the qual - ity of school life . American Educational Research Journal , 13 , 15 - 30 . Farrell , E . ( 1990 ) . Hanging in and dropping out : Voices of at - risk students . New York : Teachers College Press . Feldlaufer , H . , Midgley , C . , & Eccles , J . S . ( 1988 ) . Student , teacher , and observer per - ceptions of the classroom environment before and after the transition to junior high school . Journal of EarlyAdolescence , 8 , 133 - 156 . Fincham , F . R . , Hokoda , A . , & Sanders , R . ( 1989 ) . Learned helplessness , test anxiety , and academic achievement : A longitudinal analysis . Child Development , 60 , 138 - 145 . Fine , M . ( 1991 ) . Framing dropouts : Notes on the politics of an urban high school . Albany : State University of New York Press . Finn , J . D . ( 1989 ) . Withdrawing from school . Review of Educational Research , 59 , 117 - 142 . Finn , J . D . ( 1993 ) . School engagement and students at risk . Washington , DC : National Center for Education Statistics . Finn , J . D . , Folger , J . , & Cox , D . ( 1991 ) . Measuring participation among elementary grade students . Educational and Psychological Measurement , 51 , 393 - 402 . Finn , J . D . , Pannozzo , G . M . , & Voelkl , K . E . ( 1995 ) . Disruptive and inattentive - withdrawn behavior and achievement among fourth graders . Elementary School Journal , 95 , 421 - 454 . Finn , J . D . , & Rock , D . A . ( 1997 ) . Academic success among students at risk for school failure . Journal of Applied Psychology , 82 , 221 - 234 . Finn , J . D . , & Voelkl , K . E . ( 1993 ) . School characteristics related to school engage - ment . Journal of Negro Education , 62 , 249 - 268 . 90 School Engagement Fraser , B . J . ( 1991 ) . Two decades of classroom environment research . In B . J . Fraser and H . J . Walberg ( Eds . ) , Educational environments : Evaluations , antecedents and consequences . New York : Pergamon Press . Fraser , B . J . , & Fisher , D . L . ( 1982 ) . Predicting students ' outcomes from their percep - tions of classroom psychosocial environment . American Educational Research Journal , 19 , 498 - 518 . Fredricks , J . A . , Blumenfeld , P . B . , Friedel , J . , & Paris , A . ( 2002 , April ) . Increasing engagement in urban settings . An analysis of the influence of the social and aca - demic context on student engagement . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , New Orleans . Fredricks , J . A . , & Eccles , J . S . ( 2002 ) . Children ' s competence and value beliefs from childhood to adolescence : Growth trajectories in two " male - typed " domains . Jour - nal of Developmental Psychology , 38 , 519 - 533 . French , D . C . , & Conrad , J . ( 2001 ) . School dropout as predicted by peer rejection and antisocial behavior . Journal of Research on Adolescence , 11 , 225 - 244 . Furrer , C . , & Skinner , C . ( 2003 ) . Sense of relatedness as a factor in children ' s aca - demic engagement and performance . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 , 148 - 162 . Gamoran , A . , & Nystrand , M . ( 1992 ) . Taking students seriously . In F . Newmann ( Ed . ) , Student engagement and achievement in American secondary schools . New York : Teachers College Press . Gibson , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Complicating the immigrant , involuntary , minority typology . Anthropology and Education Quarterly , 28 , 431 - 454 . Goodenow , C . ( 1993 ) . Classroom belonging among early adolescent students : Rela - tionship to motivation and achievement . Journal of Early Adolescence , 13 , 21 - 43 . Goodenow , C . , & Grady , K . E . ( 1993 ) . The relationship of school belonging and friends ' values to academic motivation among urban adolescent students . Journal of Experimental Education , 62 , 60 - 71 . Grolnick , W . S . , & Ryan , R . M . ( 1987 ) . Autonomy in children ' s leaming : An experi - mental and individual difference investigation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 890 - 898 . Guthrie , J . T . , & Anderson , E . ( 1999 ) . Engagement in reading : Processes of motivated , strategic , and knowledgeable social readers . In J . T . Guthrie & D . E . Alvermann ( Eds . ) , Engaged reading : Process , practices and policy implications ( pp . 17 - 46 ) . New York : Teachers College Press . Guthrie , J . T . , McGough , K . , Bennett , L . , & Rice , M . E . ( 1996 ) . Concept - oriented read - ing instruction : An integrated curriculum to develop motivations and strategies for reading . In L . Baker , P . Afflerbach , & D . Reinkng ( Eds . ) , Developing engaged read - ers in school and home communities ( pp . 165 - 190 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Guthrie , J . T . , & Wigfield , A . ( 2000 ) . Engagement and motivation in reading . In M . Kamil & P . Mosenthal ( Eds . ) , Handbook ofreading research ( Vol . 3 , pp . 403 - 422 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Harter , S . ( 1981 ) . A new self - report scale of intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation in the classroom : Motivational and informational components . Developmental Psychol - ogy , 17 , 300 - 312 . Harter , S . ( 1983 ) . Developmental perspectives on the self - system . In P . H . Mussen ( Ed . ) , Handbook of child psychology ( Vol . 4 , pp . 275 - 385 ) . New York : Wiley . Helme , S . , & Clarke , D . ( 2001 ) . Identifying cognitive engagement in the mathematics classroom . Mathematics Education Research Journal , 13 , 133 - 153 . Institute for Research and Reform in Education . ( 2003 ) . First Things First : A frame - work for successful school reform ( white paper prepared for the E . M . Kaufman Foundation ) . Kansas City , MO : Author . Janowitz , M . ( 1978 ) . The last half - century : Societal change in America . Chicago : Uni - versity of Chicago Press . 91 Fredricks et al . Karweit , N . ( 1989 ) . Time and learning : A review . In R . E . Slavin ( Ed . ) , School and classroom organization ( pp . 69 - 95 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Kedar - Voivodas , G . ( 1983 ) . The impact of elementary children ' s school roles and sex roles on teacher attitudes : An interactional analysis . Review of Educational Research , 53 , 415 - 437 . Kindermann , T . A . ( 1993 ) . Natural peer groups as contexts for individual development : The case of children ' s motivation in school . Developmental Psychology , 29 , 970 - 977 . Kindermann , T . A . , McCollam , T . , & Gibson , E . ( 1996 ) . Peer networks and students ' classroom engagement during childhood and adolescence . In J . Juvonen & K . Wentzel ( Eds . ) , Social motivation : Understanding children ' s school adjustment ( pp . 279 - 312 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Krapp , A . , Hidi , S . , & Renninger , K . A . ( 1992 ) . Interest , learning , and development . In K . A . Renniger , S . Hidi , & A . Krapp ( Eds . ) , The role of interest in learning and development ( pp . 3 - 27 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Ladd , G . W . ( 1990 ) . Having friends , keeping friends , making friends , and being liked by peers in the classroom : Predictors of children ' s early school adjustment ? Child Development , 61 , 1081 - 1100 . Ladd , G . W . , Birch , S . H . , & Buhs , E . S . ( 1999 ) . Children ' s social and scholastic lives in kindergarten : Related spheres of influence . Child Development , 70 , 1373 - 1400 . Ladd , G . W . , & Coleman , C . ( 1997 ) . Children ' s classroom peer relationship and early school attitudes : Concurrent and long - term associations . Early Education and Devel - opment , 8 , 51 - 66 . Larson , R . W . ( 2000 ) . Towards a psychology of positive youth development . Ameri - can Psychologist , 55 , 170 - 183 . Larson , R . W . , & Richards , M . H . ( 1991 ) . Boredom in the middle school years : Blam - ing schools versus blaming students . American Journal of Education , 99 , 418 - 443 . Lee , O . , & Anderson , C . W . ( 1993 ) . Task engagement and conceptual change in middle school science classrooms . American Educational Research Journal , 30 , 585 - 6 10 . Lee , 0 . , & Brophy , J . ( 1996 ) . Motivational patterns observed in sixth - grade science classrooms . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 33 , 303 - 318 . Lee , V . E . , & Smith , J . B . ( 1993 ) . Effects of school restructuring on the achievement and engagement of middle school students . Sociology of Education , 66 , 164 - 187 . Lee , V . E . , & Smith , J . B . ( 1995 ) . Effects of high school restructuring and size on early gains in achievement and engagement . Sociology of Education , 68 , 241 - 270 . Locke - Davidson , A . ( 1996 ) . Making and molding identity in schools : Student narra - tives on race , gender , and academic engagement . Albany : State University of New York Press . MacLeod , J . ( 1995 ) . Aspirations and attainment in a low - income neighborhood . Boul - der , CO : Westview Press . Mahoney , J . L . , & Cairns , R . B . ( 1997 ) . Do extracurricular activities protect against early school dropout ? Developmental Psychology , 33 , 241 - 253 . Manlove , J . ( 1998 ) . The influence of high school dropout and school disengagement on the risk of school - aged pregnancy . Journal of Research on Adolescence , 82 , 187 - 220 . Marks , H . M . ( 2000 ) . Student engagement in instructional activity : Patterns in the ele - mentary , middle , and high school years . American Educational Research Journal , 37 , 153 - 184 . McDill , E . L . , Natriello , G . , & Pallas , A . ( 1986 ) . A population at risk : Potential con - sequences of tougher standards for student dropouts . American Journal of Educa - tion , 94 , 135 - 181 . McNeal , R . B . ( 1995 ) . Extracurricular activities and high school dropouts . Sociology of Education , 68 , 62 - 81 . 92 School Engagement Meece , J . , Blumenfeld , P . C . , & Hoyle , R . H . ( 1988 ) . Students ' goal orientation and cognitive engagement in classroom activities . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 , 514 - 523 . Mehan , H . , Villanueva , I . , Hubbard , L . , Lintz , A . , Okamato , D . , & Adams , J . ( 1996 ) . Con - structing school success , The consequence of untracking low - achieving students . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Meloth , M . S . , & Deering , P . D . ( 1994 ) . Task talk and task awareness under different cooperative learning conditions . American Educational Research Journal , 31 , 138 - 165 . Midgley , C . , & Feldlaufer , H . ( 1987 ) . Students ' and teachers ' decision - making fit before and after the transition to junior high school . Journal of Early Adolescence , 7 , 225 - 241 . Midgley , C . , Feldlaufer , H . , & Eccles , J . S . ( 1989 ) . Student teacher relations and atti - tudes toward mathematics before and after the transition to junior high school . Child Development , 60 , 981 - 992 . Miller , R . B . , Greene , B . A . , Montalvo , G . P . , Ravindran , B . , & Nichols , J . D . ( 1996 ) . Engagement in academic work : The role of learning goals , future consequences , pleasing others , and perceived ability . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 21 , 388 - 422 . Miller , S . E . , Leinhart , G . , & Zigmond , N . ( 1988 ) . Influencing engagement through accommodation : An ethnographic study of at - risk students . American Educational Research Journal , 25 , 465 - 487 . Modell , J . , & Elder , G . H . ( 2002 ) . Children develop in history : So what ' s new ? In W . Hartup & R . Weinberg ( Eds . ) , Child psychology in retrospect and prospect : In cel - ebration of the 75th anniversary of the Institute of Child Development ( Minnesota Sym - posia on Child Psychology , Vol . 32 , pp . 173 - 205 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Moos , R . H . ( 1979 ) . Evaluating educational environments . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . National Research Council & Institute of Medicine . ( 2004 ) . Engaging schools : Foster - ing high school students ' motivation to learn . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Natriello , G . ( 1984 ) . Problems in the evaluation of students and student disengagement from secondary schools . Journal of Research and Development in Education , 17 , 14 - 24 . Newmann , F . ( 1981 ) . Reducing student alienation in high schools : Implications of the - ory . Harvard Educational Review , 51 , 546 - 564 . Newmann , F . ( 1991 ) . Student engagement in academic work : Expanding the perspec - tive on secondary school effectiveness . In J . R . Bliss & W . A . Firestone ( Eds . ) , Rethinking effective schools : Research and practice ( pp . 58 - 76 ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Newmann , F . ( 1992 ) . Higher - order thinking and prospects for classroom thoughtful - ness . In F . Newmann ( Ed . ) , Student engagement and achievement in American sec - ondary schools ( pp . 62 - 91 ) . New York : Teachers College Press . Newmann , F . , Wehlage , G . G . , & Lamborn , S . D . ( 1992 ) . The significance and sources of student engagement . In F . Newmann ( Ed . ) , Student engagement and achievement in American secondary schools ( pp . 11 - 39 ) . New York : Teachers College Press . Nystrand , M . , & Gamoran , A . ( 1991 ) . Instructional discourse , student engagement , and literature achievement . Research in the Teaching of English , 25 , 261 - 290 . O ' Connor , C . ( 1997 ) . Dispositions toward ( collective ) struggle and educational resilience in the inner city : A case analysis of six African - American high school stu - dents . American Educational Research Journal , 34 , 593 - 629 . Ogbu , J . U . ( 1987 ) . Variability in minority school performance : A problem in search of an explanation . Anthropology and Education Quarterly , 18 , 312 - 334 . 93 Fredricks et al . Ogbu , J . U . ( 2003 ) . Black American students in an affluent suburb : A study of aca - demic disengagement . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Osterman , K . F . ( 2000 ) . Students ' need for belonging in the school community . Review of Educational Research , 70 , 323 - 367 . Parker , J . G . , & Asher , S . R . ( 1987 ) . Peer relations and later personal adjustment : Are low - accepted children at risk ? Psychological Bulletin , 86 , 357 - 389 . Patrick , B . C . , Skinner , E . A . , & Connell , J . P . ( 1993 ) . What motivates children ' s behavior and emotion ? Joint effects of perceived control and autonomy in the aca - demic domain . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 , 781 - 791 . Perry , N . ( 1998 ) . Young children ' s self - regulated learning and contexts that support it . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 715 - 729 . Peterson , P . , Swing , S . , Stark , K . , & Wass , G . ( 1984 ) . Students ' cognitions and time on task during mathematics instruction . American Educational Research Journal , 21 , 487 - 515 . Pillow , W . S . ( 1997 ) . Decentering silences / troubling irony : Teen pregnancy ' s chal - lenge to policy analysis . In C . Marshall ( Ed . ) , Feminist Critical Policy Analysis 1 : A perspective from primary to secondary schooling . London : Falmer Press . Pintrich , P . R . , & De Groot , E . ( 1990 ) . Motivated and self - regulated learning compo - nents of academic performance . Journal of Educational Psychology , 82 , 33 - 40 . Pintrich , P . R . , & Garcia , T . ( 1991 ) . Student goal orientation and self - regulation in the college classrooms . In M . L . Maehr & P . R . Pintrich ( Eds . ) , Advances in motivation and achievement : Goals and self - regulatory processes ( Vol . 7 , pp . 371 - 402 ) . Green - wich , CT : JAI Press . Pintrich , P . R . , Wolters , C . , & Baxter , G . ( 2000 ) . Assessing metacognition and self - regulated learning . In G . Schraw & J . Impara ( Eds . ) , Issues in the measurement of metacognition ( pp . 43 - 97 ) . Lincoln , NE : Buros Institute of Mental Measurement . Pope , D . ( 2002 ) . Doing school : How we are creating a generation of stressed - out , materialistic , and miseducated students . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Roeser , R . , Midgley , C . , & Urdan , T . C . ( 1996 ) . Perception of the school environment and early adolescents ' psychological and behavioral functioning in school : The medi - ating role of goals and belonging . Journal of Educational Psychology , 88 , 408 - 422 . Rudolph , K . D . , Lambert , S . F . , Clark , A . G . , & Kurlakowsky , K . D . ( 2001 ) . Negoti - ating the transition to middle school : The role of self - regulatory processes . Child Development , 72 , 929 - 946 . Rumberger , R . W . ( 1987 ) . High school dropouts : A review of issues and evidence . Review of Educational Research , 57 , 101 - 121 . Rumberger , R . W . ( 1995 ) . Dropping out of middle school : A multilevel analysis of stu - dents and schools . American Educational Research Journal , 32 , 583 - 625 . Ryan , A . M . ( 2000 ) . Peer groups as a context for the socialization of adolescents ' moti - vation , engagement , and achievement in school . Educational Psychologist , 35 , 101 - 111 . Ryan , A . M . , & Patrick , H . ( 2001 ) . The classroom social environment and changes in adolescents ' motivation and engagement during middle school . American Educa - tional Research Journal , 28 , 437 - 460 . Ryan , R . M . , & Connell , J . P . ( 1989 ) . Perceived locus of causality and internalization : Examining reasons for acting in two domains . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 , 749 - 761 . Ryan , R . M . , & Grolnick , W . S . ( 1986 ) . Origins and pawns in the classroom : Self - reports and projective assessments of individual differences in children ' s percep - tions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 550 - 558 . Ryan , R . M . , Stiller , J . D . , & Lynch , J . H . ( 1994 ) . Representations and relationships to teachers , parents , and friends as predictors of academic motivation and self - esteem . Journal of Early Adolescence , 14 , 226 - 249 . 94 School Engagement Schiefele , J . , Krapp , A . , & Winteler , A . ( 1992 ) . Interest as apredictor of academic achieve - ment : A meta - analysis of research . In K . A . Renninger , S . Hidi , & A . Krapp ( Eds . ) , The role of interest in learning and development . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Schneider , W . , & Pressley , M . ( 1997 ) . Memory development between 2 and 20 . Mahweh , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Skinner , E . A . , & Belmont , M . J . ( 1993 ) . Motivation in the classroom : Reciprocal effect of teacher behavior and student engagement across the school year . Journal of Educational Psychology , 85 , 571 - 581 . Skinner , E . A . , Wellbom , J . G . , & Connell , J . P . ( 1990 ) . What it takes to do well in school and whether I ' ve got it : The role of perceived control in children ' s engage - ment and school achievement . Journal of Educational Psychology , 82 , 22 - 32 . Skinner , E . A . , Zimmer - Gembeck , M . L . , & Connell , J . P . ( 1998 ) . Individual differ - ences and the development of perceived control ( Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , No . 63 ) . Ann Arbor , MI : Society for Research in Child Development . Solomon , D . , Battistich , V . , Watson , M . , Schaps , E . , & Lewis , C . ( 2000 ) . A six - district student of educational change : Direct and mediated effects of the Child Develop - ment Project . Social Psychology of Education , 41 , 3 - 51 . Solomon , D . , Watson , M . , Battistich , V . , Schaps , E . , & Delucchi , K . ( 1996 ) . Creating classrooms that students experience as communities . American Journal of Commu - nity Psychology , 24 , 719 - 748 . Stanton - Salazar , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Manufacturing hope and despair : The school and kin support networks of U . S . Mexican youth . New York : Teachers College Press . Steinberg , L . , Brown , B . B . , & Dombush , S . M . ( 1996 ) . Beyond the classroom : Why school reform has failed and what parents need to do . New York : Simon and Schuster . Stipek , D . ( 2002 ) . Good instruction is motivating . In A . Wigfield & J . Eccles ( Eds . ) , Development of achievement motivation . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Sudrez - Orozco , C . , & Su6rez - Orozco , M . M ( 2001 ) . Children of immigration . Cam - bridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Turner , J . C . ( 1995 ) . The influence of classroom contexts on young children ' s motiva - tion for literacy . Reading Research Quarterly , 30 , 410 - 441 . Turner , J . C . , Meyer , D . K . , Cox , K . E . , Logan , C . , DiCintio , M . , & Thomas , C . T . ( 1998 ) . Creating contexts for involvement in mathematics . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 730 - 745 . Valeski , T . N . , & Stipek , D . ( 2001 ) . Young children ' s feelings about school . Child Development , 73 , 1198 - 2013 . Voelkl , K . E . ( 1997 ) . Identification with school . American Journal of Education , 105 , 204 - 319 . Wehlage , G . G . , & Rutter , R . A . ( 1986 ) . Dropping out : How much do schools con - tribute to the problem ? Teachers College Record , 87 , 374 - 392 . Wehlage , G . G . , Rutter , R . A . , Smith , G . A . , Lesko , N . L . , & Fernandez , R . R . ( 1989 ) . Reducing the risk : Schools as communities of support . Philadelphia : Farmer Press . Wehlage , G . G . , & Smith , G . A . ( 1992 ) . Building new programs for students at risk . In F . Newmann ( Ed . ) , Student engagement and achievement in American secondary schools . New York : Teachers College Press . Weinstein , C . , & Mayer , R . ( 1986 ) . The teaching of learning strategies . In M . C . Wit - trock ( Ed . ) , Handbook of research on teaching and learning ( 3rd ed . , pp . 315 - 327 ) . New York : Macmillan . Wellborn , J . G . , & Connell , J . P . ( 1987 ) . Manualfor the Rochester Assessment Pack - age for Schools . Rochester , NY : University of Rochester . Wentzel , K . R . ( 1994 ) . Relation of social goal pursuit to social acceptance , classroom behavior , and perceived social support . Journal of Educational Psychology , 86 , 173 - 182 . 95 Fredricks et aL Wentzel , K . R . ( 1997 ) . Student motivation in middle school : The role of perceived ped - agogical caring . Journal of Educational Psychology , 90 , 202 - 209 . Winne , P . H . , & Perry , N . E . ( 2000 ) . Measuring self - regulated learning . In M . Boekaerts , P . R . Pintrich , & M . Zeidner ( Eds . ) , Handbook of self - regulation ( pp . 531 - 566 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Wolters , C . , Yu , S . , & Pintrich , P . R . ( 1996 ) . The relation between goal orientation and students ' motivational beliefs and self - regulated learning . Learning and Individual Differences , 8 , 211 - 238 . Yamamoto , K . , Thomas , E . C . , & Karns , E . A . ( 1969 ) . School - related attitudes in middle - school - age students . American Educational Research Journal , 6 , 191 - 206 . Zimmerman , B . J . ( 1990 ) . Self - regulated learning and academic achievement : An overview . Educational Psychologist , 21 , 3 - 17 . Zimmerman , B . J . , & Martinez - Pons , M . ( 1988 ) . Construct validation of a strategy model of student self - regulated learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 , 284 - 290 . Zimmerman , B . J . , & Martinez - Pons , M . ( 1992 ) . Perceptions of efficacy and strategy use in the self - regulation of learning . In D . H . Schunk & J . L . Meece ( Eds . ) , Student perceptions in the classroom ( pp . 185 - 207 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Authors JENNIFER A . FREDRICKS is an Assistant Professor of Human Development at Con - necticut College , Department of Human Development , Box 5308 , 270 Mohegan Avenue , New London , CT 06320 ; e - mail ffred @ conncoll . edu . Currently , she is a Spencer Post - Doctoral Fellow . Her research interests include motivation , school engagement , extracur - ricular participation , and adolescent development . PHYLLIS C . BLUMENFELD is a Professor at the University of Michigan , School of Educa - tion , 610 East University , Room 4124 , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 ; e - mail blumenfe @ umich . edu . She also teaches in the Combined Program in Education and Psychology at the university . She is interested in how learning environments influence student motivation and thought - fulness . ALISON H . PARIS is an Assistant Professor of Developmental Psychology at Claremont McKenna College , Department of Psychology , 850 Columbia Avenue , Claremont , CA 91711 - 6420 ; e - mail alison . paris @ claremontmckenna . edu . Her research interests include self - regulation of learning and motivation , school engagement , early literacy develop - ment , assessment , and instruction . 96 U C ' s r . Ow Ce > , 5 , G ' 0 to S4 ' - CZ E 0 to b ; y 4 t ~ ~ ~ ~ - u d 18 ti , 9 E 2 ' 8 * . ia 5 w - i ' 8 3 rCg ) a E i 4 i i 4 : ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . Q re iE * f o 4 am ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ C to - t Q $ 4 i ; CZ 97 c YCC CZ , C ' s , , < a ! 0 USC . s ' - . o a c ' , 0D U . e   - ! e 9 C(cid:2) U - o O9(cid:2) (cid:2)9 . (cid:2) (cid:2) 0 0 , . (cid:2) 9 . 0 o 0 (cid:2) 0 . 0 . 0 (cid:2)0 C - Cl 00 99 U 9 (cid:2) UU0U(cid:2) (cid:2) 0 0 (cid:2) . 0 (cid:2) 0 o (cid:2) OUO . 0 (cid:2)0 0CA CCCl 0 . 000 0 6 1 ) . u0 , to r . V 9 . ~ 9 o 9 tbo0 * 0 9 , ~ 0 ' 4 0 0 a _ U n - Z , 9 : C ~ U a 0i A0 o , U o - CA 73 0 0 - o 80 - CP . CO I C . , 0 0 . - o C . CsC ( 0 CC z4 - C _ I CA U : : 3 C - . 2 ' CU rC ; . 9 a z : 4  . 98 z C s E 0 c n5 > a o > C > Ut , 0 > C CO U i : t ' a * a o : o > u a UO 2 00 i ; 0 C > a ) > Y . . U - 14 u . . - - . - . U - E a - CZ F - - ; 0 " 1 0 0 CO U C C - CC - 1 0 = 0 C C - ~ C 0 o 4 CO ~ Co C - C - ~ C a 4 @ . 9 = ~ O E ' 0 e 0 . 1 u E ! - cn C - 100 Co . 0 ' C ' s ~ E 2 C : , , ! t . Co 0 Eo 0 - > r oh > t 8 0 . _ Oo - , . - C - C ) C - U o C . a C " O o I 7 . 1 0 - > o Ug 0 2 : , = , f - 3 . 4 Q 0 : b . 0 00CZ U U ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ U 0 0 U ~ t IDU U C - ~ ~ 3 U ~ ~ ~ 5 : 4 ' ~ ~ ~ 00C - - t CZE o . o 0 0 ' U U ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ n F - 4 u - 1 ' Ct al 0o U , - 0 0 ; 2 0 0 . ~ 0 o5 0 ' 99 A > 0 > 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 40 ~ 0 ) C ' 0 0 CZ 0 0 . 4 0 0 CZ 1 ) U ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 02 ( 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ : ~ cu ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ o . . 0 ' ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ C F - o ' 20 0 . cd ~ 3 o ( 0 0 . 4 - 1 0 0 0 ' Z 0 ' 0 a ) , 0z 001 0 ) - r . 0 ~ - 22 , u ; 0 0 . 0 ( 0 r z o ~ M 0 a E ' E > a ) m m ' ) I - 0 a ) . 2 0 . CZ te . _ o 0 ) ( 0 ( a ) C 3 0 . ' g 0 E0 0 ' ' 0s 0 d0 m 2 E : i 2E 02 . 0 ) CL 0 ) 2 0 Cf ) 0 0h N - 0 or cl _ > oe ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ I ; LI 0 0 . ) 0 . 0 - 0 0C ~ Q0 0 F - 0 ) a ) 21 C ) 0 ) . 2 P0 co r . W . 0 . ' 100 L0 - a3 0 C9 ' a JR 0 . 0 0 - = 0 0 0S . O ) u 0 ) - Q 0O c a 0 O ) . n - . O - . OCO tQo 00 0 ) 000t COt = o : : . 0 CO . - . i 3 . 2 * Z - r . . . . 0 > a Ca C ~ . . 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ c C a C a ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ C a ~ c 0 ) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ o 0 ) 0 ) 0 0 ) 2 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ CI CN FN 0 Che 0 . 0 - qv - . ) = m C ) 1Q ( 0 C0 . 5 CO . 0 ' a = . . C . > 0 00 W 0 0 W ) 0 ) = - C a 0 o C z 0 04 101 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 6 C ) , ~ ~ o . 9 ~ V ) (cid:2)C ) (cid:2) C ) C ) * (cid:2)C(cid:2) (cid:2) C 9 - (cid:2) C ) C ) C ) - o (cid:2) oCo (cid:2) 9 . 9 (cid:2) . (cid:2) (cid:2) C ) - o (cid:2) . (cid:2) (cid:2) - (cid:2) C ) (cid:2)C C ) C ) C - a - o * c ) o CZC ) w El > a ) a - - z S S CoC ) a . - i ^ . 9 a ; C ) * C C ' 0 0 . C o (cid:2)C ) a - o (cid:2) 0 (cid:2) 0 C * (cid:2) 95 C ) C ) S ' S . 9 C ) (cid:2) C ) C ) (cid:2) . (cid:2) (cid:2) ' 0 C ) Co CC C ) C - a CD CC ) c ) o CC _ C ) t ~ < C ) P o 9 ) . cr t ~ a . ' V C ) = s C ae to C . CC C ) - 0 0 - S Co - C ) C ) C S6 ~ , " C ) C ) Oo ~ L Z ) - c C C C CZ C o C . . Y . C - r 9 E D . ; f i ~ 2 C ) c - C . _ C ) 9 0a CC ~ ~ C ) t ) o I ~ - C ) 0 0 ~ . E tj ~ o % . 0 - 6 C ) C C ) - . t - S x z  P . C 102 - U a o - c c g ' ; a W . : 4 E o , C o E  . R Q m . e X , = Q e V : iE C C . C , v , ^  O 90 m tC C , } O IY CN sCl cr c , E , 0 q _ - C : ; 103 O 5 c dC " , 60 Ei = 4 Zs lu " to 2 = tS V c - Z " 8 ct ; 0 0t = X ~ ~ a S r > to t - Q8 J : P , > _ U : S Z ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ t E ~ ~ ~ E , ; t ' ; = E B U ; E g , . > E mE E Q $ - 3X t = EEZ3 t5 0 , 0 bo E4 2 g 3 c 0b 30 , , 40 0 > : 2 ' D ' 0 - 5 0 E 0 - 0 0t E 0ow 4 . 40 ' C fJ t . E 0 = 0 00 0  . z 2 o - C0 . 0 00 ; 1 Ca 00 A 0 D 0400 cxs  ' 5C * o C > : 0 0C E 0DE > i ' 40 0 Jc o 2 C b 0 ~ b 00 ~ ~ ~ t00 O0 0i 0l 00 0 - E 0 0 Q Z . 0 0 > , 000 E ' . 0 o 0 4 - . C = 5 3 . U 0 . - 2j 0 0 gS 0 ~ Z szr 92 C ) IX  104 E a B g o E i . 3 @ E E ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ t - . l ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ o ^ O _ ; t : L , ; i0 o6 . to C , _ X cz to e ~ : o a W o g g E O : 3 : Z Z > Z Z ) 105 a ) E C > C . . - 0 ~ ~ ~ o o 0 CaT 0 i 5 u 00 M 0 C - 0 o E CaC 4 0 0 0 0 0 Ch Ca C I P . . _ 0 * E , _ V : CL OC 0 , . 2 . 2 5 ` 4 > _ 0C00 g . 0I0 0 ' s 0 ' a . C a 0 - C . 0 0 ~ u o < - , i . 2 C 2o = lc Ca ~ ' S o . 0 C ( 0 0 0 00 0 4 Ec c c = ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ = g Q O I 0 Ca 0 . 0 0 = 0t o 5 0 Q * 2 0 V Ca 2 2 5 . 2 X CZO Caa0 O . i r v i < 0 C6 0 001 . 0 ~ 10 0 CL aCa t2 t '  > 0 5 * 0 000 OC 1 ) , 51 ) Ca Ca0 0 ~ 0 ) a0 0 0 % 04 0 0 z 106 00 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 4 ) ~ . C 0 0 0 > 0C > o ~ ~ ~ ~ E 2 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 E ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 2 ~ ~ ~ C ID . C E - 0 0 - 0 = - Ca ; ~ 0 0 . - 4 ) o . 0 0 C a o * t ~ . S o o - : i r 4 ) C a . C a 4C 0 00 0 CO ) I 00 . 0 0 - 0 I00 0 . - 4 ) . 0 - - = 0 0 04 E . 4 0 ) - 0 0 0n CZ20p - 5 0 0 , q % 6 1 2 - 50 . 0 0 E 0 r . 0 0 . - c - C . 0 e . 0 P . ~ . t " ' 0 . ) bp4 ~ 04 to 7Eo ~ o - 0 0 r . o 0 u Et ) ~ ~ Ca 4 - C 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ C - z 0s 04 C ) . v0 > 0 0 01 - 0 ~ 0 0 0M 0 . - c00 4 ) 00 (cid:2) ' 00 . 0 (cid:2) o (cid:2) 00(cid:2) (cid:2) 0 0 0 . 0(cid:2) ' 0 (cid:2) (cid:2) 0 U E ~ 01 4 ) - 00 107 0 044 ) 4 ) 0 - (cid:2) - (cid:2) . (cid:2) . (cid:2) (cid:2) . 0 (cid:2) ' (cid:2) . (cid:2) . (cid:2) 00Ca0 4 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 04(cid:2) (cid:2) 4 ) 4 ) Ca (cid:2) 4 ) 04 . 0 Ca 04 ) 0 . . 4 ) (cid:2)0Ca 4 ) Ca0 0 00 . 0 4 - 4 ) 0 00 (cid:2) 4 ) 0Ca(cid:2) 0 C ) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 4 Ca ~ ~ o o ~ ~ V ( D ) 4 ) - = - ( U 0 ~ ~ ~ 0 . 0 ~ ~ 0 - 4 ) ~ ~ ~ 4 ) 4j ) > 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 ~ > 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 79 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ a4 0 9 - ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 0 ~ ~ 00 ~ ~ ~ 0 = t 0 4 ) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Z4 ) * ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ OA * 000 0 . - 0 ' 00 0 108 > , , o , i Z , : Q > ; t ; ' < 8 2 t S X 53 a n 8 O = ; Q ' ) e r . J : o . _ X ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 4 . 0 ~ . , o tib2 i = g - g E ) lX2 @ 0 CTM - D S  0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 COPYRIGHT INFORMATION TITLE : School Engagement : Potential of the Concept , State of the Evidence SOURCE : Rev Educ Res 74 no1 Spr 2004 WN : 0410800924003 The magazine publisher is the copyright holder of this article and it is reproduced with permission . Further reproduction of this article in violation of the copyright is prohibited . To contact the publisher : http : / / www . aera . net / Copyright 1982 - 2004 The H . W . Wilson Company . All rights reserved .