Student representational competence and self - assessment when solving physics problems Patrick B . Kohl and Noah D . Finkelstein Department of Physics , University of Colorado , Boulder , Colorado 80309 , USA (cid:1) Received 17 May 2005 ; published 19 October 2005 (cid:2) Student success in solving physics problems is related to the representational format of the problem . We study student representational competence in two large - lecture algebra - based introductory university physics courses with approximately 600 participants total . We examined student performance on homework problems given in four different representational formats (cid:1) mathematical , pictorial , graphical , verbal (cid:2) , with problem statements as close to isomorphic as possible . In addition to the homeworks , we examine students’ assessment of representations by providing follow - up quizzes in which they chose between various problem formats . As a control , some parts of the classes were assigned a random - format follow - up quiz . We ﬁnd that there are statistically signiﬁcant performance differences between different representations of nearly isomorphic state - ments of quiz and homework problems . We also ﬁnd that allowing students to choose which representational format they use improves student performance under some circumstances and degrades it in others . Notably , one of the two courses studied shows much greater performance differences between the groups that received a choice of format and those that did not , and we consider possible causes . Overall , we observe that student representational competence is tied to both micro - and macrolevel features of the task and environment . DOI : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 1 . 010104 PACS number (cid:1) s (cid:2) : 01 . 40 . Fk I . INTRODUCTION Student competence with different representational for - mats is a popular topic in modern science and mathematics education . By “representational formats , ” we refer to the many ways in which a particular concept or problem can be expressed . One can categorize problem representations ac - cording to whether they are formal or informal , abstract or concrete , or text based versus graphics based , to name just a few . Studies involving representational formats have taken many approaches to this division of representations , includ - ing comparisons of mathematical problems couched in words to those stated primarily in equations , 1 comparisons of learn - ing environments that are virtual to those that are physical , 2 and comparisons between verbal , mathematical , graphical , and diagrammatic formats . 3 Scientists can interpret all of these formats effectively and are able to integrate them , translate among them , and assess their usefulness in different situations . A possible instructional goal is to develop this cross - representational facility in science students . In physics education research (cid:1) PER (cid:2) , there have been several studies in which students are explicitly taught to handle multiple rep - resentations of the same topic . 4 – 6 There have been a number of studies (cid:1) both in 7 – 9 and out - side of PER (cid:2) that examined student performances on particu - lar representations of physics problems (cid:1) see Meltzer for a short overview 3 (cid:2) . There have also been studies that compare student performance on problems that involve multiple rep - resentations to performance on problems that involve iso - lated representations , 10 , 11 and studies that investigate student skill at translating between representations . 12 , 13 There has , however , been less research that compares student perfor - mance on different single representations of a problem . Koedinger and Nathan 1 studied the performance and strate - gies of middle - school algebra students solving both word - and formula - based representations of problems . He found signiﬁcant performance differences between the formats , and noted that these differences correlated with the different strategy choices that students made when handling different representations . In Meltzer’s work , 3 he provides students in an introductory level algebra - based physics class with quiz - zes that have nearly isomorphic problems represented four different ways (cid:1) verbally , mathematically , graphically , and diagrammatically (cid:2) . His prior lectures and assignments made heavy use of the different representations seen on the quiz - zes . After averaging over several years of data for the same class , Meltzer found instances where students performed sig - niﬁcantly better on one representation of a problem than on another . He also found that students were not necessarily consistent in their performance on the same representations across topics , leaving open the question of why these perfor - mance differences exist . We should note that the meaning of the term “problem” has not been completely speciﬁed and agreed upon in these communities . Many researchers implicitly treat problems as always involving some quantitative analysis (cid:1) including but not limited to Refs . 5 and 14 (cid:2) . Others do not make such a restriction . 3 We do not wish to debate the proper use of the term “problem” in this paper , and we will simply use the term to refer to typical physics tasks given to students , for example those found in homework assignments and those studied here . This will include questions that do not require calculation . In this study , we directly compare student performance on different representational formats in the style of Meltzer . In addition , we perform the study in two different classroom environments (cid:1) one mostly traditional , and one reformed (cid:2) . We divide study problems into verbal , mathematical , graphical , and pictorial formats . We do not mean to imply that these representations span the space of all possible representations nor that they are mutually exclusive , but we do consider this set to cover most of the representations seen by students in lecture and in standard texts . We also consider these repre - PHYSICAL REVIEW SPECIAL TOPICS - PHYSICS EDUCATION RESEARCH 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 1554 - 9178 / 2005 / 1 (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) / 010104 (cid:1) 11 (cid:2) ©2005 The American Physical Society 010104 - 1 sentations to be fundamental in physics generally . We should point out that variations are possible within any particular category of representation ; for example , our pictorial format includes both literal pictures of diffraction patterns and sche - matic pictures of Bohr - model electron orbits . 15 As we will see , the data show that student success with one representa - tion of a problem does not necessarily imply success with another , a result that may have signiﬁcant implications . Con - ceptual surveys , for instance , may need to carefully attend to the various possible representations of a topic to avoid false positives where a student is assumed to have mastered a concept based on performance on one or two representational formats . Furthermore , we will see that success with a par - ticular representation of a topic does not necessarily imply success with that same representation of a different topic . Note that this last point is somewhat confounded by the fact that representations vary from topic to topic ; for instance , a graph associated with one topic might differ signiﬁcantly in style from a graph associatead with another topic . Neverthe - less , we consider this division of representations into catego - ries to be productive and consistent with general use in phys - ics . We also broaden the examination by investigating whether students can assess their own representational com - petence , what motives they have for handling a problem in a particular representational format given a choice of formats , and whether providing this choice affects their performance compared to students randomly assigned to particular for - mats . These questions relate to students’ “metarepresenta - tional competence , ” a notion that diSessa and Sherin have developed in their work . 16 There , diSessa and others investi - gated students’ ability to generate their own representations of a concept or situation , sometimes in cases where they have very little formal training . 17 They have also considered students’ ability to assess and critique the representations that they generate . 18 Our study differs from these in that we ask students to assess fairly standard representations that we have provided rather than ones they have generated them - selves . We also have them assess their own skills and pref - erences regarding these standard physics representations , in part by choosing which representational format they would like to work with on a quiz . There are a number of outcomes that we might observe here . It may be that students have well - deﬁned learning styles and are aware of them , enabling these students to increase their performance given a choice of representation . It may be that students perform in a rela - tively consistent way across representational formats but are unaware of their strengths , leading to unchanged or even reduced performance when given a choice . Or it may be that students’ performance when given a choice of representa - tions varies and is difﬁcult to predict , with some topics and representations resulting in improved performance and other topics and representations resulting in lower performance . This would suggest a more complicated explanation of how their performance varies as it does , one that must attend care - fully to both micro - and macrolevel features of the context , and this is in fact what we ﬁnd . In short , we have four primary goals . (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) To further demonstrate that student performance var - ies , often strongly , across different representations of physics problems with similar content . (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) To investigate why students perform differently on these different representations . (cid:1) 3 (cid:2) To show that giving students a choice of representa - tional format will change their performance either for better or for worse , depending on the circumstances . (cid:1) 4 (cid:2) To begin to explain how providing a choice of repre - sentation results in these performance differences , and to note the possible effects of different instructional techniques . II . METHODS We administered our study in recitation to two large (cid:1) 546 - and 367 - student (cid:2) algebra - based introductory physics classes at the University of Colorado at Boulder . These courses are composed primarily of students taking the class to satisfy the requirements for life science , social science , and premedical programs . These students are typically in their second or third year of study . College algebra is a prerequisite , though in practice student math skills are quite varied . The ﬁrst course in our study was an on - sequence second - semester class (cid:1) Physics 202 (cid:2) held in the spring of 2004 . The format was mostly traditional , albeit with some in - lecture qualitative and quantitative concept tests using a personal response sys - tem . Students had three one - hour lectures per week , and met for two hours each week in either a recitation and lab . The recitation or laboratory part of the course was directed by a different professor than the lecture portion . The recitations were generally traditional , with students spending most of their time discussing homework and exam questions with a graduate teaching assistant (cid:1) TA (cid:2) . The labs focused mostly on investigation , testing predictions , and completing open - ended tasks (cid:1) that is , tasks where the students were given a general goal but no speciﬁc directions for how to accomplish that goal (cid:2) . Students’ grades were based on exams , labs , homework assignments (cid:1) both online 19 and long answer (cid:2) , and participation in the concept tests . The second course was an on - sequence ﬁrst - semester class (cid:1) Physics 201 (cid:2) in the fall of 2004 . This course precedes 202 in the standard sequence , but this particular 201 section took place the semester following the 202 class mentioned above , and so each group was being exposed to the study for the ﬁrst time . The 201 course was taught by a different pro - fessor , who is familiar with many of the major results of physics education research . The 201 class was largely re - formed , with heavy use of interactive concept tests and an emphasis on tightly integrated lecture demonstrations . The students had the same number of lectures , recitations , and labs as the 202 students . The recitation and laboratory sec - tion was taught by the lecture professor and another profes - sor working together . The recitations focused on working through problems rich in context in small groups , with some demonstrations and some time reserved for homework and exam questions . The labs were a mixture of directed work , open - ended questions , and testing predictions . Students’ grades were determined in much the same way as in 202 . For the sake of comparison , we videotaped three lectures from the 201 and 202 courses . 57 % of the 201 class time was spent on interactive concept tests versus 23 % of the 202 class time , supporting the notion that the 201 course had a P . B . KOHL AND N . D . FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 2 greater commitment to reform - style student engagement . For the 202 class , we performed the study in two different subject areas : wave optics and atomic physics . The general subject areas were chosen based on which weeks the recita - tions were available for study ; we attempted to avoid weeks with exams or holidays . The students were assigned four multiple - choice homework questions that covered the same concept in four different representational formats , as well as a one - question multiple - choice quiz given in recitation . We selected speciﬁc subtopics that were covered in class and were amenable to representation in a number of different formats . The quiz subtopics were also chosen to match ma - terial covered in lab in the hopes that the extra time on task from the laboratory would better prepare students to choose between representations . These homeworks were assigned online as prerecitation questions and were turned in at the start of the recitation section . Students were expected to turn in prerecitation homeworks each week and were prepared for the possibility of quizzes , and so these study materials did not represent a signiﬁcant departure from the norm . The study quizzes were administered by their section TAs . All of the homework and quiz problems are available in the Appendix . An example of two of four homework problems from one of the two 202 assignments is shown in Fig . 1 . After turning in the homeworks , the students were given the one - question quiz in one of four representational formats . These quiz problems were isomorphic from format to format , with the answers and distractors mapping from one format to the next . It is worth noting that we use the word “isomorphic” to mean isomorphic from the point of view of a physicist . A student may have a different view of the similarity (cid:1) or lack thereof (cid:2) between these problems . 20 We also refer to isomor - phism between problem statements and answer choices . We consider it likely that student solution strategies will be con - siderably less constant across representation . Nine of the thirteen 202 recitation sections were allowed to choose from the four representational formats on the quiz without getting to see the problems before they selected . Our intent was for the students to make their choice based on their previous experience with representations in classes and on the homework assignment . The other four sections had quiz formats randomly distributed to the students ; these stu - dents served as a control group . We provided more of the recitation sections with a choice of format to ensure that a reasonable number of students chose each format . The choice and control sections did not change from one subject area to the next , and the students in the two groups per - formed similarly on the study homeworks , the course exams , and in the course overall . Both the quizzes and homeworks included a Likert scale survey on which the students could rate the perceived difﬁculty of the question , and the quizzes included a section where the students were asked to write about why they chose the format they did (cid:1) if they had a choice (cid:2) or which format they think they would have per - formed best at given the choice (cid:1) if they had a random assign - ment (cid:2) . Both the quizzes and the homeworks counted toward the students’ recitation scores for participation but were not otherwise graded . The study was conducted in much the same way in the 201 class . We covered two subject areas : energy (cid:1) in particu - lar , kinetic and potential energies and their connection to motion (cid:2) and pendulums . For the energy and motion topic , the students received a four - question pre - recitation home - work and an in - recitation quiz . The 201 class was larger (cid:1) attrition shrinks the 202 class in relation (cid:2) , and so we were able to designate nine of the 18 recitation sections as control sections , with the remaining nine receiving a choice of quiz format . For the pendulum topic , we gave the students a reci - tation quiz only (cid:1) no homework (cid:2) in order to satisfy schedule constraints . Again , the choice and control groups were the same from one topic to the next , and the two groups per - formed similarly on homeworks , exams , and the class over - all . In this paper , we restrict our attention to students who completed a homework (cid:1) when there was a homework (cid:2) and FIG . 1 . Isomorphic homework problems (cid:1) in graphical and pictorial formats (cid:2) regarding Bohr - model electron orbit radii . STUDENT REPRESENTATIONAL COMPETENCE AND … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 3 the corresponding quiz for a topic , which amounts to roughly 240 and 220 students in the ﬁrst and second 202 studies , and 330 students in each of the two 201 studies . III . DATA AND RESULTS In this section , we focus on comparisons of student per - formances on similar problems in different formats and com - parisons of student performance in choice and random - assignment (cid:1) control (cid:2) recitation sections . We also examine why students made use of the representations they did and how they used multiple representations when they did . Table I shows the fraction of students (cid:1) in both choice and control sections (cid:2) that answered each of the twelve homework (cid:1) HW (cid:2) problems (cid:1) four formats in three different topics (cid:2) cor - rectly . Table II shows the performances of the students on each format of each in - recitation quiz , grouped by whether they were in a choice or control section . The number of students in each subgroup appears in parentheses . A . Performance across representational format All statistical signiﬁcance tests involving student success rates are two - tailed binomial proportion tests . We shall use the following terminology : A difference with p (cid:1) 0 . 10 is re - ferred to as not signiﬁcant , p between 0 . 10 and 0 . 05 is mar - ginally signiﬁcant , p between 0 . 05 and 0 . 01 is signiﬁcant , and p (cid:2) 0 . 01 is highly signiﬁcant . 1 . Homework problems In examining the homework data , we note that in several cases there were differences in performance from format to format on a particular assignment . When there was a differ - ence in performance between two formats , the mathematical format was often one of the formats involved . This was the only format to require an explicit calculation . The other for - mats involved conceptual reasoning supported by descriptive language , graphs , or pictures . We see that on average stu - dents were most successful with the mathematical homework format , which is consistent with the notion that ﬁrst - year university physics students are more comfortable with “plug ’n chug” types of problems than with conceptual problems . 21 , 22 We should point out that a mathematical for - mat need not always involve numerical calculation ; indeed , one of the math - format quiz questions (cid:1) to be described later (cid:2) was best solved through conceptual reasoning supported by the qualitative use of equations . Nevertheless , in this study the mathematical format usually involved direct calculation . We also see that there are some noticeable performance differences among the more conceptual formats . For in - stance , consider the graphical and pictorial problems on the Bohr model assignment , shown in Fig . 1 . Both require knowledge of how the electron orbit radius varies with the principal quantum number in the Bohr model . The questions differ only in which speciﬁc transition is being presented and in whether the problem and solutions are expressed in graphs or pictures . Of the 218 students who answered both prob - lems , 76 % answered the graphical problem correctly and 62 % answered the pictorial problem correctly . This differ - ence is highly signiﬁcant statistically (cid:1) p = 0 . 006 (cid:2) and is par - ticularly interesting in that the graphical representation is a rather nonstandard one . Students had not seen any graphs of orbital radius versus quantum number , but the pictorial rep - resentation of electron orbits should have been somewhat familiar since it is featured in both the textbook and the lectures that preceded this quiz . Further examination of the individual student answers on these two questions indicates that this performance difference can be attributed almost en - tirely to the 36 students who answered the graphical problem correctly and missed the pictorial problem by choosing the distractor C . This distractor bears a strong resemblance to the energy - level diagrams seen in the Bohr model section of the TABLE I . Fraction of students answering a homework problem correctly , broken down by representational format and topic . Standard errors vary but are on the order of 0 . 02 . Verbal format Mathematical Graphical Pictorial 202 Diffraction and Interference HW (cid:1) N = 241 (cid:2) 0 . 52 0 . 61 0 . 46 0 . 54 202 Bohr model HW (cid:1) N = 218 (cid:2) 0 . 84 0 . 83 0 . 76 0 . 62 201 Mechanics and energy HW (cid:1) N = 333 (cid:2) 0 . 54 0 . 70 0 . 50 0 . 49 TABLE II . Quiz performance of students from the random - format recitation sections (cid:1) left (cid:2) and from the recitations sections that had a choice of formats (cid:1) right (cid:2) . The number of students taking a quiz is in parentheses . The quiz topics are diffraction , spectroscopy , springs , and pendulums . Standard errors vary and are not shown . Control (cid:1) random - format (cid:2) group Choice group Verbal Math Graphical Pictorial Verbal Math Graphical Pictorial 202 Diff . 0 . 24 (cid:1) 17 (cid:2) 0 . 56 (cid:1) 18 (cid:2) 0 . 25 (cid:1) 16 (cid:2) 0 . 58 (cid:1) 19 (cid:2) 0 . 35 (cid:1) 17 (cid:2) 0 . 37 (cid:1) 57 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:1) 26 (cid:2) 0 . 82 (cid:1) 59 (cid:2) 202 Spec . 0 . 32 (cid:1) 19 (cid:2) 0 . 13 (cid:1) 15 (cid:2) 0 . 53 (cid:1) 17 (cid:2) 0 . 83 (cid:1) 18 (cid:2) 0 . 81 (cid:1) 21 (cid:2) 0 . 90 (cid:1) 42 (cid:2) 0 . 96 (cid:1) 27 (cid:2) 0 . 39 (cid:1) 58 (cid:2) 201 Springs 0 . 56 (cid:1) 43 (cid:2) 0 . 41 (cid:1) 39 (cid:2) 0 . 69 (cid:1) 42 (cid:2) 0 . 58 (cid:1) 40 (cid:2) 0 . 55 (cid:1) 11 (cid:2) 0 . 57 (cid:1) 102 (cid:2) 0 . 88 (cid:1) 17 (cid:2) 0 . 77 (cid:1) 39 (cid:2) 201 Pend . 0 . 55 (cid:1) 42 (cid:2) 0 . 30 (cid:1) 40 (cid:2) 0 . 64 (cid:1) 39 (cid:2) 0 . 67 (cid:1) 43 (cid:2) 0 . 62 (cid:1) 21 (cid:2) 0 . 39 (cid:1) 28 (cid:2) 0 . 65 (cid:1) 40 (cid:2) 0 . 78 (cid:1) 80 (cid:2) P . B . KOHL AND N . D . FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 4 text and lectures . Since the problems are so similar and the same distractors are present in each problem , it appears that in this case representational variations may be traceable to a very topic - dependent cueing on visual features of one of the problems . 2 . Quiz problems We can ﬁnd another example of performance variation across isomorphic problem presentations in the second 202 quiz , which deals with the emission spectrum of a Bohr - model hydrogen atom . The students were prompted to recall the spectrum of hydrogen , and were asked how that spectrum would change if the binding of the electron to the nucleus were weaker . The questions , answers , and distractors were the same on each quiz except for their representation . Figure 2 shows the problem setups and one distractor for the verbal and pictorial formats (cid:1) performance data are in Table II (cid:2) . Note that one week previous to the quiz , students completed a lab covering emission spectroscopy , and the quiz images match what students saw through simple spectrometers . Nineteen students in the control group were randomly assigned a verbal - format quiz , and 18 were assigned a pictorial - format quiz . 32 % of the verbal group answered the question cor - rectly , while 83 % of the pictorial group answered correctly . This difference is highly signiﬁcant (cid:1) p = 0 . 0014 (cid:2) . Answer breakdowns indicate that eight of the ten students in the ver - bal group that missed the question chose the distractor cor - responding to the spectral lines moving in the wrong direc - tion (cid:1) pictured in Fig . 2 (cid:2) . Only one student from the pictorial group made this error . It is not clear why there would be such a split , especially since the pictorial format shows numeri - cally larger wavelengths as being on the left , opposite the standard number line convention . A possible hypothesis is that students connect the pictorial format more closely to the lab , giving them additional resources with which to handle the problem . However , as we will see , the students that were given a choice of format performed signiﬁcantly worse on this pictorial format despite being more likely to cite the lab in making their choice , and so easy identiﬁcation with the lab cannot be a complete explanation . Next , consider the performance of control group students on the mathematical formats of the 201 and 202 quizzes . In three of the four quizzes , the average success rate on the math quiz was signiﬁcantly lower than the average success rate on the other three formats combined . For the spectros - copy quiz , the average verbal / graph / pictorial score was 0 . 56 versus 0 . 13 on the math format , a difference signiﬁcant at the p = 0 . 004 level . For the 201 spring quiz , the difference was 0 . 61 vs 0 . 41 (cid:1) p = 0 . 03 (cid:2) , and for the 201 pendulum quiz , the difference was 0 . 62 vs 0 . 30 (cid:1) p = 0 . 0004 (cid:2) . The difference be - tween the average verbal / graph / pictorial score and the aver - age math score on the 202 diffraction test was marginally signiﬁcant (cid:1) p = 0 . 09 (cid:2) . It is somewhat surprising that students were less successful with the randomly assigned math format given their generally higher performance on the equation - based homework problems , though we should note that the students took the quiz in recitation with a time limit (cid:1) about ﬁfteen minutes (cid:2) and without access to a textbook , making the environment much different from that in which they would do a homework problem . We should also note that the math problem on the 201 spring quiz was difﬁcult to solve through explicit calculation , and was more easily handled by using the equations qualitatively . This gives it a different character from the other math - format problems , which is a point we shall return to later . In closing this subsection , we note that in addition to ana - lyzing homework or quiz problems alone , one can examine whether performance on homeworks is correlated to perfor - mance on quizzes in a number of ways . For example , one can ask whether performance on a quiz is correlated to per - formance on the corresponding homework problem format . Generally , such homework - quiz correlations were very weak , and are not explored further here . FIG . 2 . (cid:1) Color (cid:2) Setup and second answer choice for the verbal - and pictoral - format quizzes given in the second trial . The other distractors match up between the formats as well . STUDENT REPRESENTATIONAL COMPETENCE AND … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 5 B . Effect of student choice of representation In Table II , we see a format - by - format comparison of the students who received a quiz at random and the students who were allowed to choose a quiz format . There were a total of 16 choice - control comparisons available (cid:1) four trials with four formats each (cid:2) . Of the eight from the 202 class , six showed a statistically signiﬁcant performance difference . These data , along with the signiﬁcances of the choice - control differences (cid:1) or lack thereof (cid:2) in the 201 class , are summarized in Table III . These results are notable in that the effects are in some cases quite strong . For instance , 90 % of the 42 students in the choice group answered the math - format question cor - rectly for the spectroscopy topic , while 13 % of the 15 - student control group answered the same problem correctly . In addition , the direction of the effect can vary . In four of the six cases , giving students a choice of formats signiﬁcantly increased performance , while in two of the six cases it re - sulted in a signiﬁcant decrease . Furthermore , when compar - ing across content areas we see reversals in the direction of the effect . On the diffraction quiz , students in the choice group do better than the control group on the pictorial rep - resentational format and worse on the graphical representa - tional format , while on the spectroscopy quiz the students in the choice group do worse on the pictorial representation and better on the graphical representation . As we can see , giving students a choice of format does not result in consistently increased or consistently decreased performance relative to the control groups . Rather , the direction of the effect appears to vary strongly across both topic and representation , which suggests two things . First , these students do not have the metarepresentational skills necessary to consistently make productive representational choices under these circum - stances . Second , a complete explanation of these perfor - mance differences will likely be nontrivial and will not be able to rely entirely on broad generalities . We can further characterize student performance in these cases by considering which distractors they chose . As was mentioned above , the control groups for the pictorial and verbal formats of the 202 spectroscopy quiz (cid:1) see Fig . 2 (cid:2) showed a signiﬁcant performance difference , with the errors made by the verbal format control group being concentrated almost entirely on the distractor B in which the spectral lines move in the wrong direction (cid:1) other distractors include the lines compressing , the lines staying the same , and none of the above (cid:2) . The corresponding choice groups did the reverse . The verbal - format group had 17 out of 21 people answer correctly , with three choosing the distractor B . The pictorial group had 23 of 58 students answer correctly , with 27 stu - dents selecting the distractor B . Thus , we see that the stu - dents who chose a verbal - format quiz performed in very nearly the same way as the students who received the picto - rial format at random , in terms of both success rate and choice of distractors . Similarly , the students who chose a pictorial quiz performed in the same way as the students who were randomly assigned a verbal quiz . In general , of the six statistically signiﬁcant 202 choice - control comparisons , the performance difference in two of them (cid:1) spectroscopy verbal and pictorial (cid:2) was mainly attrib - utable to students focusing on a particular distractor . In the other four (cid:1) spectroscopy mathematical and graphical , diffrac - tion mathematical and verbal (cid:2) the incorrect answers were split among two or more distractors . Note that the quiz dis - tractors map from one format to the others , so this is not simply a case of some of the problems not having any attrac - tive distractors , though apparently (cid:1) and perhaps not surpris - ingly (cid:2) different representations of a problem can make dif - ferent distractors more or less attractive . Next , consider the eight choice - control comparisons from the 201 section (cid:1) Tables II and III (cid:2) . None of the pairs showed different performance at a p = 0 . 05 signiﬁcance level . Two were marginally signiﬁcant (cid:1) the math - format spring quiz at p = 0 . 09 and the pictorial - format spring quiz at 0 . 07 (cid:2) . There was very little difference in performance between the choice and control groups on the pendulum quiz , which was given four weeks after the spring quiz . The difference between these data and the corresponding 202 data is pronounced . Students in 201 did roughly as well regardless of whether they received their preferred format or a format at random , suggesting that their representational skills are more bal - anced . That is , they are less likely to have much more trouble with a random representation than with their representation of choice . Since one of the major differences between the 201 and 202 groups was the method of instruction , it may be that the instruction contributed to the effect . We also should note that the 201 and 202 studies involved different topics , which may have contributed to the different performances . We are currently running a comparison of two 202 sections with different professors teaching the same topics . The re - sults will be part of a follow - up paper that allows us to ex - plore the effects of instructor independent of content . C . Student self - assessment and assessment of the representations In this section we consider data intended to address two related questions . First , how do students assess and value different representations ? Second , how (cid:1) and how success - fully (cid:2) do they assess their own representational competence ? The students in the format choice groups were asked to “write a few sentences about why you chose the problem format you did . ” We then coded these responses , separating them into categories that developed as the coding proceeded . TABLE III . Statistical signiﬁcance of the quiz performance dif - ferences between the format choice and control groups in the 202 and 201 sections . Numbers are p values using a two - tailed binomial proportion test . (cid:3) denotes a p value of greater than 0 . 10 . Bold indicates that the choice group had higher performance than the control group . Quiz subject Verbal Math Graphical Pictorial 202 Diffraction (cid:1) (cid:3) 0 . 04 0 . 03 202 Spectroscopy 0 . 002 0 . 0001 0 . 0004 0 . 001 201 Springs (cid:3) 0 . 09 (cid:1) 0 . 07 201 Pendulums (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) P . B . KOHL AND N . D . FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 6 In Tables IV and V we present the three dominant categories for each quiz . The complete set of data is in the Appendix . Some remarks regarding our categorization methods : Stu - dents in the “visual learners” category have explicitly iden - tiﬁed themselves as visual learners or visual people . People that expressed a preference for plug and chug problems used language that clearly indicated the insertion of numbers into formulas in a simple fashion , and always used the words plug and / or chug . Students that remarked that they simply found equations or mathematics easier to handle or more straightforward were placed in other categories . In some cases , there is a category for those that chose a format be - cause they were attracted to it and a separate category for those that chose a format because they were avoiding a dif - ferent one . Many of the responses were too vague to be useful , “pictures are pretty , ” for example . These were dis - carded . There are a few notable trends . First , 72 % of all the choice group students (cid:1) including those who did not make comments (cid:2) selected either a math - or pictorial - format quiz . We also see that the vast majority of students who cited their lab in explaining their choice chose the pictorial format . This is despite the fact that the recent lab included representations that corresponded to each quiz format . There are a fair number of students that chose the math - ematical format expecting a plug and chug style of problem , except in the case of the 201 pendulum quiz , which followed the 201 quiz on springs . The 201 quiz on springs was unique in that the mathematical format quiz was difﬁcult to handle through explicit calculation alone , and favored qualitative reasoning supported by equations . Eighteen students taking the 201 pendulum quiz mentioned that they did not like the math format for the earlier spring quiz , with 13 of these choosing the pictorial format the second time . It would ap - pear that in this case there was a mismatch between the stu - dents’ conception of what constituted a math problem (cid:1) plug - ging and chugging (cid:2) and our conception (cid:1) either calculation or TABLE IV . Reasons 202 students gave for choosing a particular representation of a quiz . Only the largest categories are presented here . The numbers in the format column are the numbers of usable responses . 202 Diffraction quiz 202 Spectroscopy quiz Verbal 3 : Preference for qualitative analysis Verbal 3 : Preference for concepts over math / pictures 10 1 : Connected it to the prerecitation HW 12 3 : Don’t like pictures 1 : Preference for concepts over math 2 : The format supports the concepts Math 9 : Preference for “plug ’n chug” problems Math 5 : Preference for “plug ’n chug” problems 24 4 : Find equations / numbers easy 18 4 : Preference for mathematics over concepts 3 : Preference for math over pictures 3 : Preference for mathematics over pictures Graph . 3 : Visual learners / people Graph . 2 : Visual learners / people 12 2 : Like having a visualization provided 10 2 : Preference for visuals over math 2 : Connected it to the prerecitation HW 2 : Connected it to the prerecitation HW Pict . 17 : Visual learners / people Pict . 12 : Liked the colors / found it attractive 51 12 : Connected it to lab 35 8 : Like having a visualization provided 9 : Find other formats difﬁcult 6 : Connected it to lab TABLE V . Reasons 201 students gave for choosing a particular representation of a quiz . Only the largest categories are presented here . The numbers in the format column are the numbers of usable responses . 201 Spring quiz 201 Pendulum quiz Verbal 6 : Preference for concepts / intuition Verbal 4 : Preference for concepts over math / pictures 9 3 : Other formats are difﬁcult 17 4 : Clear / ordered presentation 3 : Other formats are difﬁcult Math 16 : Preference for math over concepts Math 7 : Comfortable handling equations 74 12 : Like the straightforward / deﬁnite nature 22 6 : Like the straightforward / deﬁnite nature 11 : Comfortable handling equations 2 : Preference for math over concepts 7 : Preference for plug ’n chug problems Graph . 3 : Visual learners / people Graph . 6 : Visual learners / people 11 2 : Like having a visualization provided 27 6 : Like having a visualization provided 2 : Connected it to the prerecitation HW 3 : Didn’t like the math format before Pict . 12 : Visual learners / people Pict . 15 : Visual learners / people 26 7 : Like having a visualization provided 62 13 : Didn’t like the math format before 5 : Find other formats difﬁcult (cid:1) esp . math (cid:2) 12 : Like having a visualization provided STUDENT REPRESENTATIONAL COMPETENCE AND … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 7 using equations as a conceptual tool (cid:2) , and the students re - sponded accordingly . In the 202 class , 9 % of the people who initially chose a verbal format quiz stayed with that format for the second quiz . Twenty - nine percent of the graphical , 42 % of the pic - torial , and 46 % of the mathematical groups stayed with their format . For the 201 section , 73 % of the verbal , 25 % of the math , 71 % of the graphical , and 79 % of the pictorial groups stayed with their choice of format from the ﬁrst quiz to the second . For all formats but the math (cid:1) which , for the 201 spring quiz , was different in character from the other math problems in this study (cid:2) , the 201 section was substantially more likely to stay with their choice of format . Of the 76 students in 201 that changed from math on the ﬁrst quiz to a different format on the second , 11 chose verbal , 22 chose graphical , and 43 chose pictorial . The strong preference for the pictorial format during this switch , the fractions of the class selecting either a math or pictorial quiz , and the the student comments overall are all consistent with the notion that students perceive the mathematical and pictorial formats to be dominant and antithetical . That is , when considering the different possible representations of a physics problem , students appear to think primarily of pictorial and math - ematical formats (cid:1) and not so much of others (cid:2) and to think of these formats as opposites in a sense . In both the 201 and 202 sections , many of the students who selected a graphical or pictorial format identiﬁed them - selves as visual learners (cid:1) 15 and 7 of the students on the ﬁrst and second 202 quizzes , and 15 and 21 students on the ﬁrst and second 201 quizzes (cid:2) . No students identiﬁed themselves as any other type of learner , save one that identiﬁed himself as a kinesthetic learner and chose a mathematical format . In the cases of the pictorial formats of the 202 diffraction quiz , the 201 spring quiz , and the 201 pendulum quiz , there were enough self - identiﬁed visual learners to compare their per - formance to the other people choosing the same format . There were 18 self - identiﬁed visual learners in the 202 dif - fraction quiz , who had a success rate of 0 . 89 as compared to the success rate of 0 . 78 for the other 41 students . This dif - ference is not statistically signiﬁcant (cid:1) p = 0 . 33 (cid:2) . For the 201 spring quiz , there were 12 self - identiﬁed visual learners , who had a success rate of 1 . 00 as compared to 0 . 67 for the other 27 students . This difference is signiﬁcant at the p = 0 . 02 level . For the 201 pendulum quiz , there are 15 self - identiﬁed visual learners . These had a success rate of 0 . 87 , as compared to 0 . 75 for the other 65 students . This difference is not statisti - cally signiﬁcant (cid:1) p = 0 . 35 (cid:2) . Averaging the above , the self - identiﬁed visual learners had a success rate of 0 . 91 versus 0 . 75 for the other students , which is signiﬁcant at the p = 0 . 02 level . There are a number of confounding factors that leave us hesitant to draw conclusions based on these data alone . Both the students’ abilities to assess their own compe - tencies in this fashion and the overall usefulness of catego - rizing people as different types of learners are somewhat unclear here , and we also note that the students made these identiﬁcations (cid:1) or did not (cid:2) after having succeeded or failed at visual and / or nonvisual tasks . D . Students’ use of multiple representations The students in this study were provided with single rep - resentations of quiz problems , but in many cases the stu - dents’ papers showed that they had made explicit use of supplementary representations in solving the quiz . This was most often a picture that they drew in support of a mathematical - or verbal - format problem . Some students wrote equations in support of nonmathematical formats and a handful wrote out physical principles longhand or drew a graph . It is a common goal in physics education to teach the use of multiple representations , 4 , 6 so it is interesting here to compare the performance of students that produce supple - mentary representations to those that do not . We should em - phasize that neither of the courses studied here made an ex - plicit attempt to teach the use of multiple representations in the style of the just mentioned references . We should also note that the students who had no explicit supplementary representation may well have used multiple representations in their solution to some extent (cid:1) it is hard to conceive of a student that can think strictly in terms of one representation and no other (cid:2) , but we shall focus on the students that made these explicit . On the 202 diffraction quiz , 51 % of the 172 choice group students made explicit use of some supplementary represen - tation . These students had an average success rate of 0 . 47 , compared to 0 . 54 for the students that did not explicitly use a supplementary representation . This difference is not statis - tically signiﬁcant (cid:1) p = 0 . 12 (cid:2) . Breaking it down by format , 35 – 40 % of each of the verbal , graphical , and pictorial groups used a supplementary representation , and in each case the group using such a representation did not do signiﬁcantly better or worse than the group that did not explicitly use an additional representation . Of the students that chose a math format , 75 % (cid:1) 43 out of 57 (cid:2) used a supplementary represen - tation , which was always a picture . These students had a success rate of 0 . 28 , compared to 0 . 64 for the 14 that did not . This performance difference is signiﬁcant at the p = 0 . 014 level . That the performance difference should favor students that did not draw a picture is surprising , and so we examined the problem in more detail . The math - format quiz question is displayed along with a student drawing in Fig . 3 . This is a question regarding the diffraction pattern coming from two ﬁnite - width slits illuminated by monochromatic light , a topic that was featured in a lab but was covered minimally in lecture . The pattern will have a narrow peaks separated by a distance X governed by the slit separation D , and a longer - period envelope with peaks separated by a distance x gov - erned by the slit width d . Given the distance from the slits to the screen L , the wavelength of the incident light (cid:4) , and either X or x , one can calculate either D or d using (cid:1) d , D (cid:2) sin (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:2) = n (cid:4) . Most student errors involved mixing up D and d . We examined each student picture (cid:1) which was often a hybrid of a picture and a graph (cid:2) and categorized it . Almost no one drew a correct two - slit diffraction pattern , suggesting that this topic was not well understood at this point . Of the 35 students that drew a picture and answered the question wrong , 13 students drew a picture that represented a single - slit diffraction pattern with peaks separated by x , which led to a mix - up of D and d in the equation . There were also eight students that drew such a picture with peaks separated by X and then used the equation appropriately , answering the question correctly . Fourteen of the students that drew a pic - P . B . KOHL AND N . D . FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 8 ture drew a single - slit diffraction pattern with both x and X labeled as follows : X was marked off between two peaks far from the center , and x was marked off as the distance from the centerline to the ﬁrst minimum . These students did not appear to notice that the distance labeled 0 . 5 cm on their paper was roughly twice as wide as the distance labeled 2 cm . This drawing was an apparent misinterpretation of the phrase “the ﬁrst minimum in the overall intensity envelope is at 2 . 0 cm from the center of the pattern” present in the prob - lem statement . This language is similar to that of the text and of the lab that covered this topic , though this is no guarantee that it would be understood . Of these 14 students , two an - swered correctly and 12 answered incorrectly , calculating d instead of D . These 12 students account for much of the performance difference between the picture and no - picture groups . These data recall Chi et al . ’s 20 ﬁnding that in some cases novice problem solvers draw more pictures than experts while making more errors . This suggests that one motivation for using multiple representations is to work through some - thing perceived to be difﬁcult . However , the students that drew a picture rated the problem to be just as difﬁcult as the students that did not draw a picture . On a Likert scale from 1 (cid:1) easiest (cid:2) to 5 (cid:1) hardest (cid:2) , the students that drew a picture gave this problem an average rating of 3 . 76 while those that did not draw a picture gave a rating of 3 . 79 . It is thus not clear whether the students that struggled with this problem were more likely to draw a picture . There have been other studies in which including multiple representations of a problem re - sulted in poorer performance than using single representa - tions . This performance difference was interpreted broadly either as an increase in cognitive load when the representa - tions are separated 11 , 23 or as an increase in load stemming from an inability to map from one representation to the next . 10 The case here is somewhat different in that it appears to be tied to the speciﬁc contextual features of the problem and the problem solvers . It seems that here the higher error rate among students using multiple representations is trace - able to a particular misunderstanding of the problem state - ment that was much more likely to be detrimental if it was expressed in a pictorial manner . If the problem or the general background of the students on this topic had been slightly different , this likely would not have occurred . On the 202 spectroscopy quiz , ten out of 148 students in the choice group used a supplementary representation . This is too small a sample for analysis . We do ﬁnd it notable that there would be such a large difference from topic to topic , with 51 % of students using an explicit supplementary repre - sentation for the diffraction quiz and only 7 % using one for the spectroscopy quiz . The average success rate across all students on this quiz (cid:1) choice and control (cid:2) was 0 . 62 , which is signiﬁcantly greater than the 0 . 42 for the students on the diffraction quiz (cid:1) p = 0 . 0004 (cid:2) . In contrast , the choice and con - trol students gave the spectroscopy quiz a difﬁculty rating of 3 . 60 averaged across all formats , compared to the rating of 3 . 47 for the diffraction quiz . Thus , it appears that the spec - troscopy quiz was easier for the students , though they did not rate it as such . It is not clear whether this inﬂuenced their decision to use an explicit supplementary representation . On the 201 spring quiz , 74 of the 169 students in the choice group used a supplementary representation . Sixty - nine of these were students that had chosen a math - format problem . These students had a success rate of 0 . 55 as com - pared to 0 . 61 for the 33 students that chose a math format and did not use a supplementary representation . This differ - ence is statistically insigniﬁcant (cid:1) p = 0 . 60 (cid:2) . The use of supplementary representations was less common but some - what more spread out for the control group on the same quiz : 9 , 23 , 9 , and 4 students used a supplementary representation on the verbal , math , graphical , and pictorial formats , respec - tively . This variation accounts for 45 students out of 164 , or 27 % . The 23 students that used a supplementary representa - tion on the math format had a success rate of 0 . 43 , which did not differ signiﬁcantly from the success rate of 0 . 38 achieved by the 22 students that did not use a supplementary repre - sentation (cid:1) p = 0 . 62 (cid:2) . These data were very similar for the 201 pendulum quiz . In summary , students that use explicit supplementary rep - resentations on these quizzes are roughly as successful as those that do not , with one case in which they are less suc - cessful . This ﬁnding is consistent with the cognitive science results mentioned previously in which researchers found that multiple representations do not necessarily increase perfor - mance . Rather , multiple representations are tools that stu - dents can either use productively or not . FIG . 3 . A student’s use of a supplementary representation (cid:1) hybrid graph and picture (cid:2) to solve the math - format 202 diffraction quiz . STUDENT REPRESENTATIONAL COMPETENCE AND … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 9 IV . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION This study began with a number of goals . First , we wished to know whether student performance on physics problems varies with representational format . We see evidence that it does , often strongly . In the case of the Bohr - model home - work problem , the performance difference between the nearly isomorphic graphical and pictorial problems is due to students selecting a particular distractor . This distractor is one that superﬁcially resembles energy - level diagrams that they have seen associated with this material , but only when it is represented pictorially . We also see students in the random - format groups doing much better on a pictorial - format spectroscopy quiz than on a verbal format of that same quiz . It is less clear what might have triggered this . While the choice groups make it clear that students connect the pictorial format more closely to their laboratory experi - ences , the laboratory did not ask them to consider this par - ticular concept (cid:1) though it did make use of similar represen - tations (cid:2) . This issue is further confounded by the fact that the students that were allowed to choose a pictorial format , in the process perhaps identifying themselves as students con - necting more strongly with the laboratory , did signiﬁcantly worse than the students that chose a verbal format . We note that students that were randomly assigned a mathematical quiz did signiﬁcantly worse in three of the four cases than students assigned any other format . This was true in two cases when the math problem involved simple calcu - lation . This is surprising since the selections and comments of the choice groups , in particular the reasons cited for the move away from the math format in response to the ﬁrst 201 quiz (cid:1) a problem that was not plug ’n chug (cid:2) , suggested that many of the students preferred plug ’n chug problems to other sorts . The poorer performance on the mathematical for - mat was also present on the aforementioned 201 quiz where the mathematical format was more easily handled with con - ceptual reasoning . In that case , the equations appear to have provoked the students to spend time on unhelpful calcula - tions instead of thinking about the problem . Students calcu - lating without thinking has been observed many times be - fore , and has been attributed in part to a lack of metalevel skills . 24 Given that students do perform differently on different assigned representations of problems , our second goal was to determine why . The data suggest that performance on differ - ent representations depends on a number of things , including student expectations , prior knowledge , metacognitive skills , and the speciﬁc contextual features of the problems and the representations . This dependence on speciﬁc , microlevel fea - tures also seems to be responsible for the reduced perfor - mance of some 202 students that made use of multiple rep - resentations , as compared to students that did not . It may also be that different problem representations are prompting different solution strategies , as Koedinger and Nathan 1 have observed in young algebra students . The strategies of our students cannot be consistently inferred from the data pre - sented here , and so we have interviewed students in depth as they solve these sorts of problems . The results of these inter - views will be part of a later paper . Our third goal was to determine whether allowing stu - dents to choose which representation they worked in would have an effect on their performance . The data show that giv - ing them this choice for a quiz did indeed result in perfor - mance differences as compared to the random - format stu - dents ; however the direction of that effect turned out to be inconsistent . In some cases , students given a choice of rep - resentation did much better than the students that were as - signed a format at random ; in other cases , they did much worse . Furthermore , whether the choice group did better or worse than the control group for a particular format some - times varied from one quiz topic to the next , as was the case for both the graphical and pictorial groups in the 202 section . This could possibly be explained by the movement of a group of students that is good at choosing from one format to another , but analysis of the students that switch formats shows that this is not the case . Students that stayed with these formats did approximately as well on the second quiz as students that switched to these formats . Finally , we hoped to explain the effect of student choice . To this end , we examined the students’ comments . It appears that , correct or otherwise , students generally view math - ematical and pictorial representations as dominant and oppo - site , at least out of the set of representations presented here . Most students selected one of these two formats . Students that switched from a mathematical format typically switched to a pictorial format . Student comments regarding their choice of quizzes frequently pitted mathematics against pic - tures , with one being favored versus the other . These same comments suggest that students connect pictorial representa - tions quite strongly with “concepts , ” which students appear to view as unconnected to the mathematics . By itself , this characterization of student motives does not explain why stu - dent choice of representation had the effect that it did . One could suppose that student choices and performances are guided by intrinsic learning styles . While it is the case that self - identiﬁed visual learners performed better on one of the pictorial format quizzes than other students (cid:1) which is cause and which is effect is not clear here (cid:2) , the arrangement of the performance variations seen here suggests that the bulk of the data cannot be explained by a simple alignment of student choices with some individual learning style . For example , the students that chose pictorial - format quizzes for both the diffraction and spectroscopy topics had success rates of 0 . 86 and 0 . 33 on these quizzes . This is a dramatic differ - ence since it appears that the spectroscopy quiz was easier overall , as the choice group had respective success rates of 0 . 48 and 0 . 70 averaged across all formats . A learning styles explanation would expect the same students to perform rea - sonably consistently on the same formats relative to the rest of the class . Considering the complexity of the performance data , it appears likely that an explanation of the effect of giving students a choice of representation will need to care - fully attend to the context of the problem , much as we argued above regarding a complete explanation of student perfor - mance on different representations . Another partial explanation of our data is suggested by the fact that the 201 students showed a much smaller perfor - mance difference between their choice and control groups than the 202 students . This may be a function of the broader , macrolevel features of the context , including the methods of instruction . As we described before , the 201 class included P . B . KOHL AND N . D . FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 10 more reforms and the features of the course may have pro - vided students with a more varied set of representational skills . This could have leveled out students’ performances on their preferred representations as compared to other repre - sentational formats . This might also explain the 201 stu - dents’ much greater tendencies to remain with a format from quiz to quiz , as students with broader representational skills may be less likely to be dissatisﬁed with a particular repre - sentation . We should caution that this explanation is purely speculative at this point , and we note that in this study we cannot separate out the effect of instructional differences from the effect of content differences . The 201 and 202 courses are quite different in subject matter and in represen - tational content . To make such an assertion , we would need to perform a repeat study that uses these quizzes and home - works in a 202 course taught by the same instructor as this 201 course . Such a study will be the subject of a follow - up paper . The current study has a number of limitations . First , as was just noted , the two courses studied differed in both sub - ject area and instructional method , making cross - class com - parisons difﬁcult . Second , while the courses studied had a few hundred students each , it would still be desirable to rep - licate the study from year to year . Third , physics , including introductory physics , has a very rich collection of subtopics and associated representations . For the sake of this study , we have deﬁned several representational categories , but such a deﬁnition cannot be unique or complete . Further , we have only examined a small selection of possible subtopics in this study , though this is perhaps not a severe limitation . One of our conclusions is that speciﬁc problems often will have fea - tures that are particular to the representation used that have signiﬁcant impacts on student performance . Thus , there are aspects of this study that we would not expect to be invariant across all subtopics . Finally , this study gives us fairly limited insight as to how the students solved these problems . Such insight will likely be necessary in order to better understand how and why representation affects performance . We plan to address this with a series of student interviews , which will be the subject of a future paper . From the above , it appears that a complete understanding of student representational competence will need to attend to the speciﬁc and general features of the problems , the courses , and the learners . In this paper , we have taken a detailed look at student performance on speciﬁc problems . In the future , we will expand this look at the microlevel with a series of problem - solving interviews . We have also noted the possible effect of instructional method on representational perfor - mance . This macrolevel effect will be the subject of our follow - up paper , in which we directly compare the courses studied here with a 202 course taught by the reform - style instructor from the 201 course . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported in part by NSF and by Colorado PhysTEC . Special thanks to the rest of the Physics Education Research group at the University of Colorado at Boulder . Thanks also to Dr . Beale , Dr . Munsat , and Dr . Peterson for their cooperation and aid . APPENDIX : SUPPLEMENTARY AUXILIARY MATERIAL See separate auxiliary material for the homework , quiz problems , and student reasons for selecting a representa - tional format . 1 K . R . Koedinger and M . J . Nathan , J . Learn . Sci . 13 , 129 (cid:1) 2004 (cid:2) . 2 N . Finkelstein , W . K . Adams , C . J . Keller , P . B . Kohl , K . K . Perkins , N . S . Podolefsky , S . Reid , and R . LeMaster , Phys . Rev . ST Phys . Educ . Res . 1 , 010103 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) . 3 D . E . Meltzer , Am . J . Phys . 73 , 463 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) . 4 A . Van Heuvelen and X . Zou , Am . J . Phys . 69 , 184 (cid:1) 2001 (cid:2) . 5 A . Van Heuvelen , Am . J . Phys . 59 , 891 (cid:1) 1991 (cid:2) . 6 R . J . Dufresne , W . J . Gerace , and W . J . Leonard , Phys . Teach . 35 , 270 (cid:1) 1997 (cid:2) . 7 R . J . Beichner , Am . J . Phys . 62 , 750 (cid:1) 1994 (cid:2) . 8 F . M . Goldberg and J . H . Anderson , Phys . Teach . 27 , 254 (cid:1) 1989 (cid:2) . 9 L . C . McDermott , M . L . Rosenquist , and E . H . Van Zee , Am . J . Phys . 55 , 503 (cid:1) 1987 (cid:2) . 10 S . E . Ainsworth , P . A . Bibby , and D . J . Wood , in Learning with Multiple Representations , edited by M . W . van Someren , P . Re - imann , H . Boshuizen , and Ton de Jong (cid:1) Pergamon , New York , 1998 (cid:2) . 11 R . E . Mayer , Learn . Instr . 13 , 125 (cid:1) 2003 (cid:2) . 12 W . Schnotz and M . Bannert , Learn . Instr . 13 , 141 (cid:1) 2003 (cid:2) . 13 R . B . Kozma and J . Russell , J . Res . Sci . Teach . 34 , 949 (cid:1) 1997 (cid:2) . 14 P . Heller , R . Keith , and S . Anderson , Am . J . Phys . 60 , 627 (cid:1) 1992 (cid:2) . 15 It is also worth noting that the boundaries between representa - tional categories can be fuzzy . For example , pictorial represen - tations may not have a distinct boundary from graphical repre - sentations ; however , for this paper , we draw distinct boundaries . We delineate graphical as a representation that includes an inde - pendent axis (cid:1) generally numerical (cid:2) , and a dependent quantity (cid:1) generally these are Cartesian in nature (cid:2) . We classify pictorial as a literal or iconic depiction of an observable event , or model . 16 A . A . diSessa and B . L . Sherin , J . Math . Behav . 19 , 385 (cid:1) 2000 (cid:2) . 17 A . A . diSessa , D . Hammer , B . L . Sherin , and T . Kolpakowski , J . Math . Behav . 10 , 117 (cid:1) 1991 (cid:2) . 18 A . A . diSessa , in Symbolizing , Modeling and Tool Use in Math - ematics Education , edited by K . Gravemeijer , R . Lehrer , B . van Oers , and L . Vershaffel (cid:1) Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dor - drecht , The Netherlands , 2003 (cid:2) . 19 http : / / www . lon - capa . org 20 M . Chi , T . H . Glaser , and E . Rees , in Advances in the Psychology of Human Intelligence , edited by R . J . Sternberg (cid:1) Lawrence Er - lbaum Associates , Hillsdale , NJ , 1982 (cid:2) , Vol . 1 . 21 E . Mazur , Peer Instruction : A User’s Manual (cid:1) Prentice - Hall , Up - per Saddle River , NJ , 1996 (cid:2) . 22 E . F . Redish , Teaching Physics with the Physics Suite (cid:1) Wiley , New York , 2003 (cid:2) . 23 M . Ward and J . Sweller , Cogn . Instruct . 7 , 1 (cid:1) 1990 (cid:2) . 24 A . Schoenfeld , in Cognitive Science and Math Education , edited by A . Schoenfeld (cid:1) Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1987 (cid:2) . STUDENT REPRESENTATIONAL COMPETENCE AND … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 1 , 010104 (cid:1) 2005 (cid:2) 010104 - 11