V O L . 2 9 , N O . 3 , M AY / J U N E 2 0 1 0 1 9 7 N E O N A T A L N E T W O R K e VIDeNCe - BASeD PRACTICe ensures that the best care is provided to patients and families , and the results include improved patient outcomes and satisfac - tion . As nurses master evidence - based practice , they are faced with searching out the best evidence to support assessments and interven - tions , refine policies , and develop new practices . Determining what is strong evidence and what is not is a complex task . Both quantitative and qualitative research methods generate valuable knowledge for our practice ; however , it is critical to identify which type of evidence provides the best answers for specific practice questions . Quantitative evidence provides the empiric knowing necessary for practice , and qualitative evidence supports the personal and experiential knowing critical for practice . Qualitative research presents its find - ings through participants’ words and stories , which are easily applied to nursing care practices . Nurses are attracted to qualitative research because its methods and findings often emulate the art of nursing practice , where understanding the whole patient and knowing patients individually matters . Yet qualitative research has not always been considered sound evidence for practice . 1 It has been accorded lesser importance than quantitative research , which has been the gold standard . Researchers are working to justify the importance of qualita - tive research to clinicians and fellow researchers and to iden - tify its role in evidence - based practice . 2 , 3 Although the integration of qualitative research into practice is challenging and not straightforward , this column advocates its use as a significant contribution to the quality of evidence - based practice . first , a general review of the science of qualitative research is given . Then , the methods of evaluat - ing the merit of qualitative research are discussed . In conclu - sion , a metasynthesis of qualitative research about mothers’ experiences of having a preterm infant in the NICU 4 is evalu - ated and shared as an example of using qualitative material as evidence for nursing practice . QualitatiVE rE sEarcH and E VidEncE HiErarcHy evidence for basing health care clinical decision making and practice guidelines has been organized into a hierarchal structure . evidence and knowledge are valued and respected according to their hierarchical location . The classic hierarchy is a pyramid , with four to nine levels , with systematic reviews of quantitative studies at the tip of the pyramid ( level I ) being the strongest evidence . 5 – 9 Many evidence pyramids do not include qualitative evidence or classify it as level V or VI ( figure 1 ) , indi - cating less strength . Recently , evidence - based lit - erature has incorporated a hier - archy of qualitative evidence that has four levels : Level I ( strongest qualitative evidence ) is systematic reviews of descriptive and quali - tative studies ; level II is evidence from a single descriptive or quali - tative study ; level III is expert opinion and expert committees ; level IV is evidence based on quantitative approaches ( p . 119 ) . 3 This hierarchy primarily focuses on the qualitative perspective where the description of the experience is primary . Quantitative evidence is still included in the pyramid , but because it cannot provide a full represen - tation of lived experiences , it is placed at the lowest level of evidence . QualitatiVE rEsEarcH traditions and a ims The primary aim of qualitative research is to deepen the understanding and meaning of the phenomenon under study . Through qualitative research , new evidence for nursing practice can be generated and eventually contribute to knowledge development . Six main qualitative traditions are commonly described in research texts : case study , ethnogra - phy , grounded theory , historical , narrative , and phenomenol - ogy ( Table 1 ) . 2 , 10 , 11 Qualitative data and findings are necessary when the goal is to describe or understand an experience . It is not for precise answers testing a hypothesis . for example , consider family satisfaction scores . If a set of quantitative ( numerical ) data yields low family satisfaction scores , the researcher only knows that families are dissatisfied . These results need qualita - tive exploration to help understand why the family is dissatis - fied . Questions like “What event ( s ) was this family dissatisfied with ? ” or “What other stressors are influencing family sat - isfaction ? ” could be asked of participants . Detailed answers may be generated from this type of open - ended , unstructured questions . Qualitative research makes known patients’ perspectives of the phenomenon under study . 12 The context in which a person interprets the experience is critical to qualitative research . 2 Qualitative research answers “how” and “what” questions . 13 These seek an understanding of the experience ( for example , “How do mothers describe their first holding of their preterm baby ? ” or “What do these mothers find stressful in the NICU environment ? ” ) . “Qualitative approaches tend to best answer The Role of Qualitative Research in Evidence - Based Practice Jennifer L . Broeder , PhD , RN Ann Donze , MSN , RN , NNP - BC C olumn E ditors Joan Renaud Smith , MSN , RN , NNP - BC Ann Donze , MSN , RN , NNP - BC . Evidence - Based Practice . 1 9 8 M AY / J U N E 2 0 1 0 , V O L . 2 9 , N O . 3 N E O N A T A L N E T W O R K questions that relate to ‘knowing’ patients’ preferences , expe - riences , concerns , and priorities” ( p . 486 ) . 14 These ques - tions can delve into areas not yet researched or topics that have been inadequately studied . Processes can also be better understood with these kinds of questions ( for example , “How do mothers come to know their babies in an NICU environ - ment ? ” ) . Interview guides and questions are then designed that aim to answer these kinds of research questions and take into account the patient’s contextual understanding : their personal background and life experiences that are critical to their understanding of a situation . from these data , research - ers can analyze and reveal new meanings and understandings that are rooted in the experiences of patients . Nursing practice frequently relies on qualitative data ( “Understanding the whole patient , knowing the patient as a unique individual , engaging with the patient in an authentic relationship , and addressing ethical conflicts relate to qualita - tive ways of knowing that are vitally important to nursing” [ p . 485 ] ) . 14 Therefore , these kinds of data from research studies are necessary to answer questions in clinical practice . Support is thus growing for the use of qualitative research as evidence , including efforts focused on bringing qualitative research to practice by way of the qualitative metasynthesis . 3 , 15 Health care professionals are also using findings from qual - itative studies to gain insight into quantitative findings ( such as patients’ reasons for following or not following medical plans ) and clearer understanding of the patient’s perception of clinical issues . 16 The Cochrane Collaboration has long been recognized as a source of high - quality systematic reviews of quantitative research . The Cochrane Qualitative Research Methods group has recently been convened to develop and support systematic reviews of qualitative studies and dis - seminate the results within and beyond the collaboration’s review groups . The Joanna Briggs Institute , an international collaboration of health researchers , clinicians , academics , and quality managers , is providing technical , administrative , and website support as part of this effort . 17 When considering what counts as evidence , we must include both qualitative and quantitative evidence . 18 Indeed , a new tradition is emerging that combines quantitative and qualitative research . This use of mixed methods can answer both quantitative and qualitative research questions about a clinical issue . Tools to evaluate qualitative evidence and mixed methods are still evolving . rEViEW of QualitatiVE data collEction and manag EmEnt Methods of data collection vary according to the qualita - tive tradition used , but most include one or more of the fol - lowing : interviews , storytelling , focus groups , observations , and fieldwork . The data presented are in the language of the participants , often in the way of stories , not in the language of statistics , so this research is often easier to read and apply to practice . Managing qualitative data can be an overwhelm - ing experience , yet a very rewarding learning process . With advanced computer technology , there are numerous pro - grams , such as The ethnograph , QUALPRO , NUD * IST , and MARTIN . 19 These can organize qualitative data , yet only the researcher can fully analyze the data . True understand - ing comes while engaging intimately with the data—thinking about it , organizing it , rereading it , searching for common - alities and differences—most of which a computer cannot Table 1 n Qualitative Research Traditions Qualitative Research Method General Description Case study One strong paradigmatic example of a situation that brings new meaning and understanding Ethnography Studying a culture through direct on - site participant observation and field study Grounded theory Method developed by Glaser and Strauss that generates theory from data that explains patterns of behavior Historical Study of past events and history Narrative Use of a set of stories within the context of cultural and family beliefs as the source of data Phenomenology Variations of methods authored by philosophers Heidegger and Husserl involving the search for new meaning and depth that describes lived experiences Figure 1 n Evidence - based practice pyramid : Qualitative studies are shown at level VI . SystematicReviews & CPGs Based on SRs Critically Appraised Topics ( Evidence Synthesis ) Critically Appraised Individual Articles Randomized Controlled Trials Quasi - Experimental Studies Cohort , Descriptive , Qualitative Studies Case - Controlled Studies , Case Series / Reports Background Information / Expert Opinion Key : CPG = clinical practice guideline , SR = systematic review From : State University of New York . ( 2008 ) . EBP pyramid . Retrieved May 9 , 2009 , from http : / / library . upstate . edu / evidence / pyramid / Reprinted by permission . V O L . 2 9 , N O . 3 , M AY / J U N E 2 0 1 0 1 9 9 N E O N A T A L N E T W O R K accomplish . In this work , there is much reading and rereading while search - ing for understanding . Researchers immerse themselves in the data , getting new impressions and making new assumptions . To validate the interpreta - tions before conclusions are made , the nurse researcher gets input from other perspectives . She may ask nurse clinicians or other health care profes - sionals to read the transcripts and offer insights . She may also reinterview participants to confim or clarify her impressions and assumptions . syntHEsizing tHE Qualitati VE E VidEncE Qualitative research is now being included more readily in the evi - dence paradigm by way of synthesis . There is qualitative research synthesis , qualitative metasummary , and qualitative metasynthesis . See Definitions of Synthesis . In these synthesis projects , it is common to find articles that include a foundational literature review of the topic , a description of the synthesis methods , integration of findings from studies , evaluation of the quality of the studies , themes and categories that integrate findings , and implications for nursing practice . Tables that organize some of this infor - mation are often presented . APPRAISAL of A METAS yNTHESIS ABou T motHEring P rEtErm infants Aagard and Hall wrote a metasynthesis of 14 qualitative research studies on mothers’ experiences of having a preterm infant in the NICU . 4 They used Noblit and Hare’s metaethnographic synthesis approach that inte - grates interpretive research findings . 20 Appraisal of this metasynthesis incorporates some of the questions used to evaluate quantitative reviews , but also requires review and evaluation of the methodologies specific to qualitative research . 1 . What is the research question , and is it clear and focused ? The PICO mnemonic is frequently used to formulate questions for quantitative research , but may not be appropriate for qualitative questions . An alternate mnemonic , the SPICe framework , may also be used . PICO : patient population , intervention ( or area of interest ) , com - a . parison group , outcome SPICe : setting , perspective , intervention / phenomena of interest , b . comparison , evaluation ( Table 2 ) 21 for all of the studies in this metasynthesis , the setting was NICUs in the 2000s . The study presented the perspective of mothers of preterm infants , Table 2 n Using the SPICE Mnemonic to Develop a Qualitative Study Question SPICE mnemonic Qualitative question components for study conducted by Aagard and Hall 4 S : setting Neonatal units in 2000s P : perspective Lived experiences of mothers I : intervention / phenomena of interest Mothers’ experiences surrounding having a premature baby requiring intensive care C : comparison group None E : evaluation Determine common findings and themes ; integrate and interpret findings from qualitative studies about mothers of premature babies Adapted from : Booth , A . ( 2006 ) . Using research in practice : Australian supermodel ? A practical example of evidence - based library and information practice . Health Information and Libraries Journal , 23 , 69 – 72 . Definitions of Synthesis Qualitative research synthesis combines knowledge generated from research studies in a content area in preparation for applica - tion to practice or outlining future research ( p . 23 ) . 15 It takes the format of a study in which research studies instead of individual subjects are the frame of reference . It is a rigorous , scientific process whereby the writer follows research expectations and critically analyzes samples , methods , and inclusion / exclusion criteria across a group of studies and subsequently makes a case for future research . Qualitative metasummary is a quanti - tatively oriented summation of qualitative research findings ( p . 17 ) . 15 Metasummaries integrate findings and produce thematic summaries of research data . Quantitative techniques are used to present the data by stating frequencies of findings and possibly noting a thematic pattern found in the review . Qualitative metasynthesis is an interpre - tive integration and synthesis of qualita - tive findings ( p . 18 ) . 15 Metasynthesis move beyond the metasummary and provide an interpretation of the main elements of the research studies as a whole , not reporting about isolated parts of the studies . What did General Sherman offer Abraham Lincoln as a Christmas gift in 1864 ? 2 0 0 M AY / J U N E 2 0 1 0 , V O L . 2 9 , N O . 3 N E O N A T A L N E T W O R K and the phenomenon of interest was their experiences sur - rounding having a premature baby requiring intensive care . There was no comparison group . The aim or purpose of the study was to identify recent nursing research , synthesize find - ings , and use the findings to promote family - centered care ( Table 3 ) . 2 . Did the authors discuss their literature search , including databases searched and search terms used ? The authors found no other metasynthesis that answered the question of interest . They found six metasynthesis that answered questions about mothering in general and in spe - cific situations . The search strategy was not described . When they did not find a published metasynthesis that described the experiences of mothers having an infant in an NICU , they searched the literature for studies related to their ques - tion . They described the keywords used to guide the search , listed the databases searched , and reviewed the references in all studies found . They listed their inclusion criteria ( articles related to mothering preterm infants or mothering preterm and full - term infants ) and exclusion criteria ( articles about mothering full - term infants only ) . 3 . Did the authors outline the systematic method that they used to appraise the articles included in the systematic review ? The appraisal of qualitative studies is based on rigor , cred - ibility , and relevance . 22 These correspond to the concepts of validity , reliability , and applicability in quantitative research . 23 The rigor of the study relates to the qualitative research methodology used and whether the methodological approach is appropriate for the research question . Credibility refers to the findings and questions whether the findings are presented clearly and whether they are meaningful . Relevance defines how useful the findings are to one’s practice . The authors did not indicate whether they used a system - atic method to evaluate the 14 studies they found in their literature search . They did describe the method used to structure their metasynthesis , which was Noblit and Hare’s approach ( see Table 3 ) . 20 4 . Were the authors able to extract findings : themes , meta - phors , findings , or conclusions ? In reviewing each study , the authors identified data per - taining to the question of interest and extracted themes and findings from each study . They then categorized the data on the basis of similarity in meaning and integrated the findings from all of the studies . Integration focuses on summarizing and synthesizing the data from all the studies . This is very similar to the Qualitative Assessment and Review Instrument , the method suggested by the Joanna Briggs Institute . 18 The integration of findings from all the studies was summarized in five interrelated themes : 1 . “Mother - baby relationship : from their baby to my baby” 2 . “Maternal development : a striving to be a real normal mother” 3 . “Turbulent neonatal environment : from foreground to background” 4 . “Maternal caregiving and role reclaiming strategies : from silent vigilance to advocacy” 5 . “Mother - nurse relationship : from continuously answer - ing questions through chatting to sharing of knowledge” ( pp . e31 – 32 ) 4 These five themes described the mothers’ experiences . An overall finding that mothering a preterm infant is a develop - mental process supports the contention that mothering is a process that develops while in relationship with the infant . In the discussion section , the authors interpreted the find - ings . Interpretation involves both induction and interpreta - tion , and the authors are concerned not to predict but to “anticipate” what might be involved in analogous situations and to understand how things connect and interact . The authors carefully provided both limitations and strengths in their discussion . They noted that the big concern with meta - synthesis is the potential for the loss of “rich descriptions that validate and illuminate categories , domains , and themes in the original studies” ( p . e33 ) . 4 Nevertheless , they make the strong argument that through a metasynthesis a phenomenon can be more deeply understood and become “generalizable , ” thus offering the strongest qualitative evidence for practice . Validity of QualitatiVE rEsEarcH mEtasyntHEsis “Qualitative research syntheses are , at the very least , three times removed from the lived experiences of the research Table 3 n Noblit and Hare Model for Metasynthesis 20 Steps Explanation Getting started The researcher identifies a topic and the target audience . Determining what studies are relevant to the qualitative research question The researcher chooses which studies to include and exclude on the basis of objective criteria . Reading the studies These studies need to be read repeatedly to identify all of the metaphors and include all of the details of the studies . Determining how the studies are related The researcher identifies key themes and concepts in each study and determines the similarities , dissimilarities , and relationships between studies . Translating the studies into one another While maintaining the integrity of each study , the researcher must start to compare metaphors and relationships between metaphors in each study . Synthesizing The findings from all the studies are combined . Any competing interpretations are identified . Communicating the synthesis The researcher communicates the metasynthesis to the target audience in language that they can understand . V O L . 2 9 , N O . 3 , M AY / J U N E 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 N E O N A T A L N E T W O R K participants they are meant to represent . . . . Qualitative research synthesis is inescapably an act of re - presenting repre - sentations . . . . Reviewers conducting qualitative research syn - thesis projects must , there - fore , assume a methodologically self - conscious stance whereby they show their awareness of the wide gap that may exist between the lived experiences depicted in research reports and their own interpretive inte - grations of them ( p . xvi ) . 15 Because of the interpretive nature of qualitative research synthesis , steps need to be in place to ensure validity . In their 2007 text , Handbook for Synthesizing Qualitative Research , Margarete Sandelowski and Julie Barroso outlined a means for ensuring that researchers maintain validity of the metasyn - thesis : audit trail , negotiated consensual validity , and expert peer review . An audit trail includes keeping track of detail , rationale , and explanations about how each phase of the metasynthesis was conducted . 15 The four questions asked in the preceding section highlight the audit trail for this meta - synthesis . In negotiated consensual validity , there is consen - sus among the research team . The team negotiates and comes to agreement on the final interpretation and synthesis of the studies based on strong , clear arguments or justification . The authors did not elucidate how they came to consensus or whether they read , integrated , and interpreted the findings separately and then compared their assumptions and impres - sions for consistency . Although this may have been the case , there was no clarification of the process used . And , lastly , expert peer review by qualitative researchers and the clinical peer group is sought . Again , although this may have been the case , there was no account of clarifying the results with a clin - ical peer group . The authors themselves may have had exten - sive clinical experience , but this was not evident to the reader . It is crucial that the final findings are validated by those who work in the setting of interest and who care for families and patients similar to the study participants . It is through the ability to transform findings to practice guidelines where true validity can be found . conclusion Qualitative approaches can make clearer the everyday aspects of mothering preterm infants that can be missed in traditional quantitative scrutiny . Mothering is a process and , as such , develops in the practice of caring for and nurtur - ing children . 4 , 24 , 25 It develops in the actual mothering of a preterm infant . Qualitative methods and perspective suit the study of experiences of mothering preterm infants because mothering can be studied as a process instead of isolated vari - ables that are measured by asking a mother to rate an experi - ence on a predetermined scale . Yet the challenge of applying qualitative findings to practice remains ; clinicians continue to struggle with the best mechanism for evaluation and integra - tion of qualitative studies . Writing qualitative metasyntheses should be encouraged in both the practice and academic settings . As more qualitative metasyntheses are published , qualitative findings can be affirmed for their value and signifi - cance to practice . Then , integration of both qualitative and quantitative metasynthesis will ultimately transform practice . rEf ErEncEs 1 . Sandelowski , M . ( 2008 ) . Justifying qualitative research . Research in Nursing & Health , 31 , 193 – 195 . 2 . Munhall , P . L . ( 2007 ) . Nursing research : A qualitative perspective . Boston : Jones and Bartlett . 3 . Salmond , S . W . ( 2007 ) . Advancing evidence - based practice : A primer . Orthopaedic Nursing , 26 , 114 – 123 . 4 . Aagard , H . , & Hall , e . O . C . ( 2008 ) . Mothers’ experiences of having a preterm infant in the neonatal care unit : A metasynthesis . Journal of Pediatric Nursing , 23 ( 3 ) , e26 – e36 . 5 . State University of New York . ( 2008 ) . EBP pyramid . Retrieved May 9 , 2009 , from http : / / library . upstate . edu / evidence / pyramid / 6 . Harvey Cushing / John Hay Whitney Medical Library , Yale University School of Medicine . ( 2008 ) . Evidence - based clinical practice resources . Retrieved May 9 , 2009 , from http : / / guides . med . yale . edu / content . php ? pid = 9786 & sid = 73113 7 . Penn State University Libraries . ( 2005 ) . The information resources pyramid . Retrieved May 9 , 2009 , from http : / / www . libraries . psu . edu / instruction / ebpt - 07 / learnmore / resources . htm 8 . Loyola Medicine . ( 2008 ) . evidence based medicine pyramid . Health Sciences Library . Retrieved July 14 , 2009 , from http : / / library . luhs . org / wwwlinks / evidencebasedmedicine . htm 9 . Library of the Health Sciences - Chicago at University of Illinois at Chicago . ( 2006 ) . Evidence based medicine in the health sciences . Retrieved May 9 , 2009 , from http : / / ebp . lib . uic . edu / medicine / ? q = node / 12 10 . Burns , N . , & grove , S . k . ( 2009 ) . The practice of nursing research : Appraisal , synthesis , and generation of evidence . St . Louis : Saunders / elsevier . 11 . Polit , D . f . , & Beck , C . T . ( 2008 ) . Nursing research : Generating and assessing evidence for nursing practice . Philadelphia : Lippincott Williams & Wilkins . 12 . grypdonck , M . H . f . ( 2006 ) . Qualitative health research in the era of evidence - based practice . Qualitative Health Research , 16 , 1371 – 1385 . 13 . Powers , B . A . ( 2005 ) . generating evidence through qualitative research . In B . M . Melnyk & e . fineout - Overholt ( eds . ) , Evidence - based practice in nursing and healthcare : A guide to best practice ( pp . 283 – 298 ) . Philadelphia : Lippincott Williams & Wilkins . 14 . Zuzelo , P . R . ( 2007 ) . evidence - based nursing and qualitative research : A partnership imperative for real - world practice . In P . L . Munhall ( ed . ) , Nursing research : A qualitative perspective ( pp . 481 - 499 ) . Boston : Jones and Bartlett . 15 . Sandelowski , M . , & Barroso , J . ( 2007 ) . Handbook for synthesizing qualitative research . New York : Springer . 16 . kuper , A . , Reeves , S . , & Levinson , W . ( 2008 ) . An introduction to reading and appraising qualitative research . British Medical Journal , 337 , a288 . 17 . Joanna Briggs Institute . ( 2007 ) . Cochrane Qualitative Research Methods Group : About us . Retrieved May 7 , 2009 , from http : / / www . joannabriggs . edu . au / cqrmg / about . html 18 . Pearson , A . ( 2007 ) . Introduction to qualitative research findings as a legitimate source of evidence . In Cochrane Qualitative Research Methods Group . Retrieved May 7 , 2009 , from http : / / www . joannabriggs . edu . au / cqrmg / tools _ 1 . html 19 . St . John , W . , & Johnson , P . ( 2000 ) . The pros and cons of data analysis software for qualitative research . Journal of Nursing Scholarship , 32 , 393 – 397 . 2 0 2 M AY / J U N E 2 0 1 0 , V O L . 2 9 , N O . 3 N E O N A T A L N E T W O R K 20 . Noblit , g . W . , & Hare , R . D . ( 1988 ) . Meta - ethnography : Synthesizing qualitative studies . Newbury Park , CA : SAge . 21 . Booth , A . ( 2006 ) . Using research in practice : Australian supermodel ? A practical example of evidence - based library and information practice . Health Information and Libraries Journal , 23 , 69 – 72 . 22 . Public Health Resource Unit , england . ( 2006 ) . Critical Appraisal Skills Programme ( CASP ) : making sense of evidence : 10 questions to help you make sense of qualitative research . Retrieved May 7 , 2009 , from http : / / www . phru . nhs . uk / Doc _ Links / S . Reviews % 20Appraisal % 20 Tool . pdf 23 . Johnston , L . ( 2005 ) . Critically appraising quantitative evidence . In B . M . Melnyk & e . fineout - Overholt ( eds . ) , Evidence - based practice in nursing and healthcare : A guide to best practice ( pp . 79 – 125 ) . Philadelphia : Lippincott Williams & Wilkins . 24 . Broeder , J . ( 2003 ) . Motherhood too soon : Beginning mothering from the neonatal intensive care unit . Dissertation Abstracts International , 64 , 08B . ( UMI No . AAT 3102874 ) 25 . Leonard , V . ( 1996 ) . Mothering as a practice . In S . gordon , P . Benner , & N . Noddings ( eds . ) , Caregiving : Readings in knowledge , practice , ethics , and politics ( pp . 124 – 140 ) . Philadelphia : University of Pennsylvania Press . About the Authors Jennifer L . Broeder is an associate professor at Webster University in St . Louis , Missouri . Dr . Broeder has held practice , research , and teaching positions in neonatal , pediatric , and family nursing throughout her career . Her dissertation was a qualitative study of mothering preterm infants that examined the process of becoming a mother during infant hospitalization and after discharge . This study aimed to reveal mothers’ transitions in coping and caregiving prac - tices and what helped or impeded their getting to know their infants . Dr . Broeder is currently collaborating with advanced practice nurses at St . Louis Children’s Hospital , where they are qualitatively examin - ing the issue of NICU nurses and NICU parents and how these roles infl uence each other . Ann Donze has 30 years of experience in the NICU at St . Louis Children’s Hospital , with the past 11 years as a neonatal nurse prac - titioner . She has coordinated the neonatal nurse practitioner program at Barnes - Jewish College of Nursing and Allied Health . She is also the cochair of the NICU Joint Practice Committee , which reviews all research done in the NICU . She received her nursing diploma from Barnes School of Nursing , her bachelor’s degree in health facility man - agement from Maryville University , and her graduate nursing degree from Southern Illinois University – Edwardsville . And the author is . . . . Have you considered publishing but just have not gotten to the point of submission ? This workshop is for you ! Come to the preconference day at the 10th Anniversary Neonatal Nurses Conference in Savannah and attend the Writing for Publication workshop presented by Executive Editor , Debbie Fraser , MN , RNC - NIC . It’s the boost you need to get you writing and submitting !