ORIGINAL ARTICLE npg Cell Research ( 2012 ) 22 : 1479 - 1501 . © 2012 IBCB , SIBS , CAS All rights reserved 1001 - 0602 / 12 www . nature . com / cr The R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex controls endothelial cell adhesion and morphogenesis via active integrin endocytosis and Rac signaling Chiara Sandri 1 , 2 , * , Francesca Caccavari 1 , 2 , * , Donatella Valdembri 1 , 2 , * , Chiara Camillo 1 , 2 , Stefan Veltel 3 , Martina Santambrogio 1 , 2 , Letizia Lanzetti 2 , 4 , Federico Bussolino 2 , 5 , 6 , Johanna Ivaska 3 , Guido Serini 1 , 2 , 6 1 Laboratory of Cell Adhesion Dynamics , Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment ( IRCC ) , Strada Provinciale 142 , Km 3 . 95 , 10060 Candiolo ( TO ) , Italy ; 2 Department of Oncological Sciences , University of Torino School of Medicine , 10060 Candiolo ( TO ) , Italy ; 3 University of Turku Centre for Biotechnology and VTT Medical Biotechnology , FIN - 20520 , Turku , Finland ; 4 Laboratory of Membrane Trafficking , Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment ( IRCC ) , 10060 Candiolo ( TO ) , Italy ; 5 Laboratory of Vascular Oncology , Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment ( IRCC ) , 10060 Candiolo ( TO ) , Italy ; 6 Center for Complex Systems in Mo - lecular Biology and Medicine – SysBioM – University of Torino , c / o Department of Animal and Human Biology ( DBAU ) , 10123 Torino , Italy * These three authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence : Guido Serini Tel : + 39 11 9933508 ; Fax : + 39 11 9933524 E - mail : guido . serini @ ircc . it Received 26 August 2011 ; revised 6 May 2012 ; accepted 14 June 2012 ; published online 24 July 2012 During developmental and tumor angiogenesis , semaphorins regulate blood vessel navigation by signaling through plexin receptors that inhibit the R - Ras subfamily of small GTPases . R - Ras is mainly expressed in vascular cells , where it induces adhesion to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) through unknown mechanisms . We identify the Ras and Rab5 interacting protein RIN2 as a key effector that in endothelial cells interacts with and mediates the pro - adhesive and - angiogenic activity of R - Ras . Both R - Ras - GTP and RIN2 localize at nascent ECM adhesion sites associated with lamellipodia . Upon binding , GTP - loaded R - Ras converts RIN2 from a Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) to an adaptor that first interacts at high affinity with Rab5 - GTP to promote the selective endocytosis of ligand - bound / active β1 integrins and then causes the translocation of R - Ras to early endosomes . Here , the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 sig - naling module activates Rac1 - dependent cell adhesion via TIAM1 , a Rac GEF that localizes on early endosomes and is stimulated by the interaction with both Ras proteins and the vesicular lipid phosphatidylinositol 3 - monophosphate . In conclusion , the ability of R - Ras - GTP to convert RIN2 from a GEF to an adaptor that preferentially binds Rab5 - GTP allows the triggering of the endocytosis of ECM - bound / active β1 integrins and the ensuing funneling of R - Ras - GTP toward early endosomes to elicit the pro - adhesive and TIAM1 - mediated activation of Rac1 . Keywords : integrins ; R - Ras ; Rab5 ; endosomal signaling ; angiogenesis Cell Research ( 2012 ) 22 : 1479 - 1501 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cr . 2012 . 110 ; published online 24 July 2012 Introduction In vertebrates , the appearance of vascular networks shaped to fulfill the disparate demands of nutrients by different tissues [ 1 ] and to optimize blood fluidodynam - ics [ 2 ] grounds on the possibility of modulating endothe - lial cell ( EC ) adhesion , spreading , and motility . While the formation of a structurally and functionally normal vascular tree is essential for proper embryonic devel - opment [ 3 ] , this usually does not apply to most of the malignant lesions that form in the adult organisms [ 4 ] . Indeed , solid cancers usually display an abnormal vascu - lature that impairs the optimal delivery of chemotherapy and oxygen , the latter being a pre - requisite for an effec - tive radiotherapy [ 5 ] . Therefore , dissecting the molecular mechanisms that underpin the regulation of EC adhesion could allow a deeper understanding of both physiological and pathological vascular morphogenesis . During the formation and remodeling of blood ves - R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1480 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 sels , EC adhesion to provisional extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins , such as fibronectin ( FN ) and vitronectin ( VN ) , is mediated by α5 and αv integrin receptors [ 6 , 7 ] that cooperate in remodeling the vasculature dur - ing angiogenesis [ 8 ] . Small GTPases belonging to the R - Ras branch of the wider Ras superfamily [ 9 ] , namely R - Ras ( also known as R - Ras1 ) , TC21 ( also known as R - Ras2 ) , and M - Ras ( also known as R - Ras3 ) , have all been reported to enhance integrin - mediated cell - to - ECM adhesion [ 10 ] . Of note , R - Ras expression is mainly restricted to ECs and vascular smooth muscle cells both in vivo and in vitro [ 11 ] and it has been implicated in cardiovascular diseases . Genome wide association studies identified a new susceptibility locus for coronary artery disease in the MRAS gene that is also highly expressed in the cardiovascular system [ 12 ] . In addition , the cytoplasmic domain of PlexinD1 receptor , which in ECs conveys signals elicited by several secreted chemorepellents belonging to the class 3 semaphorin family [ 13 - 15 ] , functions as an R - Ras and M - Ras GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) [ 16 ] . Observations that genetic inactivation of plexinD1 in ECs causes severe cardiovascular defects in mouse embryos [ 15 ] and that PlexinD1 is overexpressed in the tumor vasculature of mouse models of cancer [ 17 ] further underscore the central role played by R - Ras GTPases and their regulators in both embryonic and tumor angiogenesis . Our understanding of the molecular details through which R - Ras promotes EC adhesion to ECM proteins is however still patchy and incomplete . Investigating non - adherent myeloid cells and Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells overexpressing constitutively active R - Ras 38V , Zhang et al . [ 18 ] originally found that R - Ras signaling acts by increasing the affinity and avidity ( i . e . , clustering ) of integrins . Regulation of the affinity of integrins for their ECM ligands largely depends on their conformational activation [ 19 , 20 ] ; however , R - Ras 38V does not directly stimulate integrin conformational activation in CHO cells [ 10 , 21 ] , thus suggesting that R - Ras should promote cell adhesion to the ECM by alternative mechanisms . For example , spreading and motile cells also control their adhesion dynamics by trafficking integrins [ 22 - 24 ] and recent evidence suggests how different molecular machineries and endosomal compartments govern the traffic of ligand - free / inactive and ECM - bound / active integrins [ 25 - 28 ] . Indeed , neu - ropilin - 1 ( Nrp1 ) membrane receptor , in association with the endocytic adaptor GIPC1 / synectin , and the molecular motor myosin 6 selectively promote the endocytosis of FN - bound / active α5β1 integrin from fibrillar adhesions , thus regulating EC adhesion to FN and FN fibrillogenesis [ 25 , 28 ] . Once internalized into Rab5 - positive early en - dosomes , ECM - bound / active α5β1 integrin accumulates in late endosomes [ 26 , 27 ] , where pH and the CLIC3 chloride channel control the recycling of ECM - freed in - tegrins to the plasma membrane , which is mandatory for efficient cell migration [ 26 ] . Endocytosis and traffic of active integrins could support ECM adhesion dynamics either per se ( see above ) [ 25 , 29 ] or by allowing the endosomal activation of signaling pathways , such as Src tyrosine kinase [ 26 , 30 ] and / or Rho family GTPases [ 31 , 32 ] . In spreading cells , the formation of active integrin - containing ECM adhesions is under the control of Rho GTPase - driven actin polymerization [ 33 ] . Depending on their size , shape , subcellular localization , molecular composition , and dynamics , ECM adhesive structures are classified as nascent adhesions ( NAs ) , focal complexes ( FCs ) , and focal adhesions ( FAs ) [ 34 ] . NAs are highly dynamic ad - hesive entities that appear in response to Rac activation as small dot - like structures at the periphery of spreading cells , where they associate with the loose peripheral actin meshwork [ 35 ] . In response to RhoA - elicited actomyosin contractility , NAs mature first into larger and round FCs , located at the lamellipodium - lamellum interface , and then into long FAs , located at the end of the actin stress fibers and displaying a slower turnover than NAs [ 34 ] . In this framework , hence , the ability of R - Ras to trigger the activation [ 36 , 37 ] and ensuing Arf6 - driven translocation of Rac - GTP to the cell surface [ 38 ] , where it can then promote actin polymerization , cell adhesion , and spreading , is of particular relevance [ 39 ] . In the pathway that controls the spatially restricted activation of Rac , in addition to R - Ras , the small GTPase Rab5 , a crucial regulator of the early steps of endocytosis [ 40 ] , has also been found to play a relevant function [ 31 , 41 ] . Indeed , Rab5 - positive early endosomes ( EE ) can act as signaling platforms on which Rac is first GTP - loaded by the phosphatidylinositol 3 - monophosphate ( PIns ( 3 ) P ) - and Ras - regulated guanyl exchange factor ( GEF ) T - lympho - ma invasion and metastasis - inducing protein 1 ( TIAM1 ) [ 42 - 45 ] and then recycled to the plasma membrane in an Arf6 - dependent manner [ 31 ] to induce cell migration . Here , we identify the Ras and Rab interactor 2 ( RIN2 ) protein as a key R - Ras mediator that , by physically and functionally coupling R - Ras and Rab5 GTPases at NAs and on early endosomes , elicits EC - to - ECM adhesion , migration , and vascular morphogenesis . Upon cell binding to the ECM , the association of RIN2 with R - Ras - GTP lessens its Rab5 GEF activity and maximizes its docking function . As an adaptor protein , on the one hand RIN2 concentrates a pool of Rab5 at NAs , while on the other hand it promotes the Rab5 - dependent topological relocation of active R - Ras to Rac1 - containing early www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1481 npg endosomes . Accordingly , R - Ras - GTP via RIN2 / Rab5 specifically elicits the endocytosis of ECM - bound / active integrins from the plasma membrane while the concurrent association of RIN2 with active R - Ras and Rab5 , which at steady state mainly occurs on EEA1 - positive early endosomes , is instead required to stimulate the activation of Rac1 and the ensuing adhesion of ECs to ECM proteins . Furthermore , stimulation of cell adhesion by RIN2 depends on TIAM1 , a Rac GEF that can be activated on early endosomes by the coincident detection of two Rab5 - triggered phenomena : the VPS34 - mediated production of PIns ( 3 ) P and the RIN2 - dependent translocation of R - Ras - GTP . Results R - Ras interacts with the Rab5 - binding protein RIN2 to stimulate EC adhesion Overexpression of wild - type ( WT ) or constitutively active R - Ras 38V small GTPase promotes the adhesion of different cell types to ECM proteins [ 10 ] . However , despite its restricted tissue distribution to ECs and vascu - lar smooth muscle cells [ 11 ] , a direct evidence of the role of endogenous R - Ras in the regulation of EC adhesion is still lacking . To investigate this , we silenced R - Ras in hu - man umbilical vein ECs by transducing them with three different lentivirus - delivered short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) . Western blot analysis revealed that , in comparison with control cells ( shCtl ) , R - Ras protein , but not β - tubulin , was successfully silenced in sh h R - Ras ECs ( Figure 1A ) . Next , we examined the effect of R - Ras silencing on EC adhesion to ECM proteins . Short - term adhesion assays showed that loss of R - Ras significantly reduced EC adhesion to FN and VN ( Figure 1B ) . Similarly , R - Ras silencing impaired EC adhesion to type I collagen ( Coll I ) ( Supplementary information , Figure S1A ) . Thus , en - dogenous R - Ras is a general positive regulator of EC - to - ECM adhesion . To investigate the underlying mechanisms of R - Ras - induced EC adhesion to the ECM , we performed a yeast - two - hybrid screen employing constitutively active R - Ras 38V as bait . Interestingly , in addition to confirming that Ral GEFs are major R - Ras - associated proteins [ 46 , 47 ] , we found that another traffic regulator , namely the Rab5 - binding protein RIN2 , accounted for about one fourth of the isolated preys ( Supplementary information , Table S1 ) . Thus , we were interested to study whether RIN2 could be a major effector of the R - Ras pro - adhesive activity in ECs . Together with RIN1 and RIN3 , RIN2 belongs to the RIN family of Rab5 GEFs [ 48 ] . While RIN1 and RIN3 protein synthesis is highly restricted to nervous and hematopoietic tissues , respectively , RIN2 is instead more broadly expressed [ 49 ] . To understand whether the association of RIN2 was sensitive to the conformational activation of R - Ras , we verified whether RIN2 could interact with either constitutively active ( 38V ) or dominant - negative ( 43N ) R - Ras in mammalian cells . Therefore , we generated an N - terminal hemagglutinin ( HA ) - tagged full - length murine RIN2 construct ( m RIN2 ) and co - transfected it in NIH - 3T3 fibroblasts together with either green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) , or GFP - tagged constitutively active R - Ras 38V , or dominant - negative R - Ras 43N . Cell lysates were then immunoprecipitated with anti - GFP and blotted with an anti - HA antibody ( Supplementary in - formation , Figure S2A ) . We found that RIN2 efficiently associated with GFP - tagged active R - Ras 38V , but neither with its dominant - negative mutant ( R - Ras 43N ) nor with GFP alone . Moreover , we showed that , in NIH - 3T3 cells co - transfected with HA - tagged m RIN2 and GFP - tagged Rab5A or Rab7 , RIN2 is able to bind the early endocytic small GTPase Rab5A , but not the late endosome / lysosome small GTPase Rab7 ( Supplementary information , Figure S2B ) . Therefore , as inferred from the yeast two - hybrid system and co - immunoprecipitation analysis in mammalian cells , RIN2 protein associates with both active R - Ras and Rab5A . Next , we investigated whether RIN2 could participate in the signaling pathways that control EC adhesion to the ECM . We oligofected human ECs with either a pool of four siRNAs targeting human RIN2 ( si h RIN2 ) or control non - targeting siRNA ( siCtl ) . Western blot analysis confirmed that RIN2 protein , but not β - tubulin , was effectively silenced in si h RIN2 ECs compared to control cells ( Figure 1C ) . Short - term adhesion assays revealed that loss of RIN2 significantly impaired EC adhesion to FN and VN ( Figure 1D ) . In addition , upon retrovirus - mediated m RIN2 overexpression the number of ECs adhering on both ECM proteins was significantly higher than that of control - transduced cells ( see below ) . Since RIN2 clearly behaved as a positive regulator of EC - to - ECM adhesion , we then tested whether RIN2 was required for the induction of cell adhesion by R - Ras . As illustrated in Figure 1E , silencing of human RIN2 with shRNA fully abrogated or severely impaired the ability of WT and constitutively active R - Ras 38V to promote EC adhesion to FN and VN . Likewise , RIN2 regulated both basal and R - Ras 38V - elicited adhesion of ECs to Coll I as well ( Supplementary information , Figure S1B ) . In addition , FACS analysis revealed that both R - Ras and RIN2 silencing inhibit to a similar extent rhodamine - FN binding to ECs ( Figure 1F ) . Collectively , these results indicate that the Rab5 - binding protein RIN2 is a key mediator of R - Ras - elicited EC adhesion to the ECM . R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1482 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1483 npg Figure 1 R - Ras and RIN2 promote EC - to - ECM binding , adhesion , migration , and vascular morphogenesis ; RIN2 mediates the pro - adhesive effects of R - Ras . ( A ) Representative western blot analysis of R - Ras and β - tubulin protein expression in con - trol ( shCtl ) and R - Ras - silenced ( sh h R - Ras ) human ECs . ( B ) Comparison between shCtl and sh h R - Ras ECs adhering to FN and VN . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per ex - perimental condition ) . ( C ) Western blot analysis of RIN2 expression in human ECs silenced for RIN2 ( si h RIN2 ) or transfected with control siRNA ( siCtl ) . β - tubulin was used as an internal and loading control . ( D ) Comparison between siCtl - and si h RIN2 - transfected human ECs adhering to FN and VN . A representative of eight ( FN ) and five ( VN ) independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experimental condition ) . ( E ) Comparative analysis of stimulation of cell adhesion to FN and VN by WT and constitutively active R - Ras 38V in either control ( shCtl ) or RIN2 - silenced ( sh h RIN2 ) human ECs . Ctl corresponds to ECs transduced with the empty PINCO retroviral vector . A representative of three indepen - dent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experimental condition ) . ( F ) FACS analysis of rhodamine - FN binding to siCtl , si h R - Ras , and si h RIN2 ECs . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 4 samples per experimental condition ) . ( G , H ) Comparison between siCtl and si h R - Ras ( G ) or si h RIN2 ( H ) EC migration rate ( µ m / h ) in wound healing assays . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experimental condition ) . ( I - L ) Comparison of the number of branching points / mm 2 of vascular networks formed by siCtl and si h R - Ras ( I ) or si h RIN2 ( L ) ECs plated on growth factor - reduced Matri - gel matrix . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experimental condition ) . ( M ) Representative pictures of vascular networks formed by siCtl , si h R - Ras , si h RIN2 ECs plated on growth factor - reduced Matrigel matrix . Scale bars , 500 µ m . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . During embryonic development and tumor angio - genesis , vascular morphogenesis relies on the ability of ECs to move and dynamically control their integrin - dependent adhesive interactions with the surrounding ECM [ 6 , 7 , 50 ] . Therefore , we first investigated whether and how R - Ras and RIN2 protein expression could influence motility of ECs on their own endogenous ECM , mostly constituted by FN [ 25 ] , as measured in wound healing assays captured by time - lapse phase - contrast videomicroscopy [ 51 ] . Both R - Ras ( Figure 1G and Supplementary information , Movie S1 ) and RIN2 ( Figure 1H and Supplementary information , Movie S2 ) silencing resulted in a significant reduction of EC migration rate . Next , we studied vascular morphogenesis in vitro by exploiting the permissive activity of Matrigel , a natural laminin - containing basal membrane matrix that unleashes the cell autonomous property of cultured ECs to self - aggregate and morphologically differentiate in tubular networks almost identical to those observed in vivo [ 52 ] . In this morphogenetic assay , vascular networks resulting from the aggregation of both si h R - Ras ( Figure 1I and 1M ) and si h RIN2 ( Figure 1L and 1M ) ECs plated on Matrigel were disrupted and significantly less branched when compared to those formed by siCtl ECs . Thus , R - Ras and RIN2 control the ability of ECs to adhere , directionally migrate , and self - organize on ECM substrates , finally giving rise to properly organized vascular networks . R - Ras and RIN2 localize with Rab5 both at nascent ad - hesions and on early endosomes To gain insight into mechanisms by which R - Ras and RIN2 could cooperate in regulating EC adhesiveness , we characterized by fluorescent confocal microscopy their subcellular localizations in ECs spreading on FN . We found that in cultured ECs , m RIN2 colocalized with GFP - R - Ras 38V in dot - shaped NAs located at the cell borders ( Figure 2A , arrowheads ) and in vesicular struc - tures ( Figure 2A , dashed arrows ) . We identified the ves - icles on which RIN2 was targeted together with R - Ras 38V ( Figure 2A , dashed arrows ) as GFP - Rab5A - positive early endosomes ( Figure 2C ) . Accordingly , as shown in Supplementary information , Figure S3 , m RIN2 and R - Ras 38V double - positive endosomes also contained the early endosome marker EEA1 , but neither LAMP1 nor TGN46 , which label late endosomes / lysosomes and trans - Golgi network , respectively . In addition , GFP - Ra - b5A colocalized with m RIN2 in NAs ( Figure 2C ) . Fur - ther analysis showed that upon co - transfection in ECs , m RIN2 fully colocalized with GFP - vinculin - containing NAs in the outermost region of the cell periphery ( Figure 2B , external arrowheads ) , while in the innermost area ( Figure 2B , internal arrowheads ) m RIN2 overlapped only with the external portion of vinculin - labeled FCs that were maturing into FAs , from which m RIN2 was excluded ( Figure 2B , arrows and Supplementary infor - mation , Figure S4 ) . To further confirm the localization of R - Ras and RIN2 in NAs , we treated ECs with blebbista - tin , a myosin II inhibitor that blocks the force - dependent maturation of NAs into FCs and hence maximizes the formation of NAs [ 35 , 53 ] . In blebbistatin - treated ECs R - Ras 38V and m RIN2 clearly localized not only in ve - sicular structures , but also in vinculin - positive NAs that accumulated in lamellipodia at the cell periphery because of the inhibition of myosin II - dependent contractility that drives the transformation of NAs into FCs and FAs R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1484 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1485 npg ( Supplementary information , Figure S5 ) . Remarkably , the amount of GFP - Rab5 that colocalized with m RIN2 at NAs became more evident after blebbistatin treatment ( Supplementary information , Figure S5 ) . Thus , to initi - ate signals that regulate EC adhesion and spreading , R - Ras , RIN2 , and Rab5 meet in a myosin II - driven way at lamellipodia - associated NAs and on early endosomes . Reciprocal control of R - Ras / RIN2 and ECM - bound / ac - tive β1 integrin endosomal traffic In cells migrating over the ECM , adhesion dynamics can be modulated by regulating integrin conformational activation , traffic , or both [ 24 ] . Therefore , by capture ELISA upon biotin labeling of surface proteins we ini - tially compared the amount of total ( i . e . , mostly ligand - free / inactive ) and ECM - bound / active β1 integrins , as re - vealed by the 9EG7 mAb [ 54 ] , on the plasma membrane of siCtl , si h R - Ras , and si h RIN2 ECs . In accordance with the study by Sehti et al . [ 21 ] that overexpressed constitu - tively active R - Ras in CHO cells , we found that in ECs neither R - Ras ( Figure 3A and 3B ) nor RIN2 ( Figure 3C and 3D ) silencing affected the surface amount of either total ( Figure 3A and 3C ) or active ( Figure 3B and 3D ) β1 integrins compared to control cells , thus indicating that R - Ras should regulate EC - to - ECM adhesion through mechanisms alternative to the control of integrin confor - mational activation . Since we found that RIN2 could localize together with its interactors R - Ras and Rab5 both at NAs and on early endosomes and previous overexpression studies sug - gested that R - Ras can influence integrin traffic [ 55 ] , we biochemically quantified the effect of R - Ras or RIN2 si - lencing on total and active integrin endocytosis . Notably , although internalization of total β1 integrin ( Figure 3E and 3G ) was not significantly impaired in either si h R - Ras ( Figure 3E ) or si h RIN2 ( Figure 3G ) ECs , knockdown of either R - Ras ( Figure 3F ) or RIN2 ( Figure 3H ) selectively reduced the amount of active ( 9EG7 - positive ) β1 integ - rin endocytosed by ECs . Furthermore , we found ( Figure 3I ) that overexpressing either WT or constitutively ac - tive R - Ras 38V caused a dramatic increase of active β1 integrin internalization that depended on RIN2 . Finally , since RIN2 is a Rab5 GEF [ 48 , 56 ] , we simultaneously silenced in ECs the three Rab5 isoforms Rab5A , Rab5B , and Rab5C and , as expected , we detected a significant decrease of both total and active β1 integrin endocytosis ( Supplementary information , Figure S6 ) . Hence , analo - gously to what we already observed for Nrp1 - GIPC1 / synectin - Myo6 complex [ 25 ] , in ECs R - Ras and RIN2 localize at ECM adhesion sites , where active integrin re - ceptors concentrate , and , likely at this location , they pro - mote the Rab5 - dependent endocytosis of ECM - bound / active β1 integrins . ECM - bound / active integrin internalization could favor cell spreading via at least two non - mutually exclusive mechanisms , i . e . , by supporting adhesion site dynamics or by triggering pro - adhesive signals from endosomal platforms [ 25 , 26 , 28 , 57 ] . Therefore , we analyzed the endosomal localization of HA - m RIN2 , Rab5 - GFP , and WT or constitutively active monomeric red fluorescent protein ( mCherry ) - R - Ras 38V in adherent or non - adher - ent suspended ECs ( Supplementary information , Figure S7 ) . Notably , we found that while constitutively active mCherry - R - Ras 38V localized on RIN2 - and Rab5 - posi - tive early endosomes both in adherent and non - adherent ECs , the same was not true for WT mCherry - R - Ras . Indeed , keeping ECs in suspension severely impaired the localization of both WT mCherry - R - Ras and m RIN2 on the Rab5 vesicular compartment ( Supplementary information , Figure S7 ) . However , likely because ECM binding to integrins triggers GTP loading of R - Ras [ 58 , 59 ] , addition of soluble FN significantly increased the relocation of both WT mCherry - R - Ras and m RIN2 to Rab5 endosomes of suspended ECs ( Supplementary in - formation , Figure S7 ) . Thus , our data suggest a model in which ECM binding to integrins triggers the GTP load - ing of R - Ras at NAs and its binding to RIN2 , which via Rab5 - GTP in turn favors the endocytosis of ECM - bound / active integrins and simultaneously relocates R - Ras - GTP to early endosomes . Figure 2 RIN2 colocalizes with active R - Ras in NAs , FCs and Rab5 - positive early endosomes . ( A ) Fluorescent confocal mi - croscopy analysis of ECs transfected with m RIN2 ( left panels , red ) and GFP - R - Ras 38V ( central panels , green ) indicates that m RIN2 and GFP - R - Ras 38V colocalize in peripheral NAs ( arrowheads ) , and vesicles ( dashed arrows ) as shown in merge ( right panels ) . Lower panels are magnifications of the corresponding upper panels . ( B ) Fluorescent confocal microcopy re - veals that in ECs transfected with m RIN2 ( left panels , red ) and GFP - vinculin ( central panels , green ) , m RIN2 colocalizes ( right panels ) in full with peripheral NAs ( external arrowheads ) , in part with the external portion of FCs maturing into FAs ( internal arrowheads ) , but not with elongated FAs ( arrows ) . Lower panels are magnifications of the corresponding upper panels . ( C ) Fluorescent confocal analysis of ECs transfected with m RIN2 ( left panels , red ) and GFP - Rab5A ( central panels , green ) un - veils that m RIN2 and Rab5A colocalize in early endosomes as shown in merge ( right panels ) . A minor amount of GFP - Rab5A is present at the cell periphery as well , where it colocalizes with HA - RIN2 in NAs . Panels are representative of more than 25 cells in four independent experiments . Scale bars , 10 µ m . R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1486 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 Figure 3 R - Ras controls active β 1 integrin endocytosis via RIN2 in ECs . ( A - D ) Comparison of the amounts of total ( A , C ) or active ( B , D ) β 1 integrins on the plasma membrane of siCtl versus si h R - Ras ( A , B ) or si h RIN2 ( C , D ) , as evaluated by sur - face biotinylation and capture ELISA assays . Values are mean ± SD from more than three independent experiments ( n = 6 ; P ≥ 0 . 2 and differences are not statistically significant ) . ( E - H ) Time - course analysis of the amounts of total ( E , G ) or active ( F , H ) β 1 integrins endocytosed in siCtl versus si h R - Ras ( E , F ) or si h RIN2 ( G , H ) , as evaluated by integrin internalization assay and capture ELISA assay . Values are mean ± SD from more three independent experiments ( n = 6 ) . In E and G , P ≥ 0 . 3 and differences are not statistically significant . ( I ) Time - course analysis of the amounts of active β 1 integrins endocytosed in shCtl versus sh h RIN2 ECs overexpressing or not R - Ras WT or 38V , as evaluated by integrin internalization assay and capture ELISA assay . Values are mean ± SD from more than three independent experiments ( n = 6 ) . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1487 npg RIN2 regulates the adhesion of ECs to ECM proteins via its Rab5 and Ras binding domains Proceeding from the N - to the C - terminus , RIN proteins display a phosphotyrosine - binding Src - homology - 2 ( SH2 ) domain followed by one or more proline - rich domains ( PRDs ) , a RIN - homology ( RH ) domain that together with the GEF domain VPS9 is responsible for binding to Rab5 GTPase , and a Ras - associating ( RA ) domain that mediates the interaction of RIN proteins with Ras GTPases ( Figure 4A ) . All together , the above results sug - gest that the stimulation of EC cell adhesion by RIN2 could depend on its ability to bring active R - Ras onto the Rab5 - containing early endosomal compartment . To ad - dress this issue , we first generated two HA - tagged dele - tion mutants of m RIN2 lacking either the RH and VPS9 domains ( m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 ) , which are responsible for RIN2 binding to and GTP loading of Rab5 , or the RA domain ( m RIN2 ∆RA ) that could mediate the interaction between RIN2 and active R - Ras ( Figure 4A ) . As expect - ed , biochemical analysis showed that compared to WT m RIN2 , m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA mutant proteins were unable to bind active Rab5 ( Supplemen - tary information , Figure S8 ) and R - Ras ( Supplementary information , Figure S9 ) GTPases , respectively . Then , we compared the ability of retrovirus - delivered full - length and deletion constructs of m RIN2 to rescue the adhesion defects of human ECs in which RIN2 had been silenced by a lentiviral shRNA ( sh h RIN2 ) that did not target m RIN2 constructs ( Figure 4B ) . In comparison to the WT m RIN2 , both m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA con - structs were fully impaired in their ability to rescue the adhesion defects of sh h RIN2 ECs on FN and VN ( Fig - ure 4C ) . Furthermore , while the overexpression of WT m RIN2 stimulated the adhesion of ECs to ECM proteins , both m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA displayed a dominant - negative effect , with a strong reduction of the number of cells adhering to ECM proteins ( Figure 4D ) . To get further insight into the dominant - negative activity of m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA dele - tion mutants , we compared their subcellular localization with that of WT m RIN2 in ECs where they were over - expressed together with mCherry - R - Ras 38V and GFP - Rab5A . In agreement with biochemical evidence that in ECs endogenous R - Ras , RIN2 , and Rab5 simultaneously interact ( Figure 4E ) , confocal microscopy unveiled how a significant fraction of HA - tagged WT m RIN2 ( Figure 5A and 5D ) colocalized with both mCherry - R - Ras 38V and GFP - Rab5A on the same early endosomes . Conversely , m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 localized mostly on mCherry - R - Ras 38V - positive vesicles , but significantly less on GFP - Rab5A - positive endosomes ( Figure 5B and 5D ) . Vice versa , most of m RIN2 ∆RA was present on GFP - Rab5 - positive vesicles , but almost absent from mCherry - R - Ras 38V - positive endosomes ( Figure 5C and 5D ) . Hence , the pro - adhesive function of RIN2 clearly correlates with its ability to simultaneously associate on early endosomes with active Rab5 and R - Ras small GTPases via its RH / VPS9 and RA domains , respectively . Accordingly , in addition to impairing EC adhesion , a major effect of dominant - negative m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA deletion mutants is the abrogation of the colocalization of R - Ras , RIN2 , and Rab5 on early endosomes . The Rab5 GEF RIN2 acquires Rab5 effector properties upon R - Ras , but not H - Ras binding Our finding that RIN2 needs to simultaneously bind R - Ras and Rab5 to elicit the adhesion of ECs to the ECM prompted us to study the functional relationships be - tween R - Ras , RIN2 , and Rab5 in regulating the adhesive interactions among ECs and ECM molecules . RIN proteins , via their VPS9 domain , function as Rab5 GEFs [ 9 ] . It has been shown previously that the binding of active H - Ras to the RBD domain of RIN1 stimulates its Rab5 GEF activity [ 60 ] and , at least in some cell types , H - Ras has also been found to counteract the pro - adhesive activity of R - Ras [ 10 ] . Notably , when we assayed the ability of purified RIN2 protein to stimu - late the nucleotide exchange from unlabeled GDP to [ 3 H ] - GDP on Rab5A , we observed that GTPγS - loaded H - Ras and R - Ras behaved differently . In particular , R - Ras - , but not H - Ras - GTPγS ( compared to Rab5 + m RIN2 alone ) reduced the rate of RIN2 - catalyzed nucleotide exchange of Rab5A ( Figure 6A ) . Moreover , extending previous in vitro association studies on RIN2 [ 48 , 56 ] and RIN3 [ 61 ] , we found that , unlike RIN1 [ 60 ] , GTPγS - loaded glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - Rab5A pulled down m RIN2 from lysates of R - Ras - expressing NIH - 3T3 cells much more efficiently than its GDP - loaded counter - part ( Supplementary information , Figure S8 ) . Both find - ings strongly indicate that R - Ras - bound RIN2 acts rather as a Rab5 effector or docker and only a slow acting GEF protein . Therefore , active R - Ras , by binding and switch - ing the prevailing function of RIN2 from Rab5 GEF to adaptor protein , could first cause the recruitment of a pool of Rab5 at NAs ( Supplementary information , Figure S5 ) and then warrant its own stable relocation to Rab5 - containing early endosomes ( Figure 5 ) . An R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 signaling module controls EC ad - hesion to the ECM The latter observation , together with the fact that when overexpressed , Rab5 [ 62 ] , similarly to R - Ras and RIN2 ( see above ) , increases integrin - dependent cell adhesion to the ECM , suggested that the pro - adhesive activity of R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1488 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 Figure 4 Stimulation of EC adhesion to ECM proteins by RIN2 depends on its Rab5 - and Ras - binding domains and endog - enous RIN2 associates with both R - Ras and Rab5 . ( A ) Schematic representation of full - length m RIN2 together with its Rab5 - and Ras - binding defective deletion mutants m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA . ( B ) Western blot analysis of exogenously transduced and silencing - resistant HA - tagged m RIN2 constructs and endogenous β - tubulin expression in ECs first infected with PINCO retrovirus carrying or not ( Ctl ) m RIN2 constructs and then with a sh h RIN2 lentivirus . ( C ) Comparison of WT full - length m RIN2 , m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 , and m RIN2 ∆RA efficiency in rescuing the defective adhesion of sh h RIN2 ECs to FN and VN . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experi - mental condition ) . ( D ) Comparative analysis of the modulation of cell adhesion to FN and VN by overexpression of either full - length m RIN2 or m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA deletion mutants in human ECs . Ctl corresponds to ECs transduced with the empty PINCO retroviral vector . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experimental condition ) . ( E ) Immunoprecipitation ( IP ) of endogenous h RIN2 followed by western blotting with anti - R - Ras , anti - Rab5 , or anti - RIN2 antibodies . In ECs , RIN2 associates with both R - Ras and Rab5 . An EC lysate was employed as positive control or immunoprecipitated with irrelevant IgG for negative control purposes . * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1489 npg R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1490 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 Rab5 could require both R - Ras and RIN2 . To verify this hypothesis , we transduced human ECs first with a ret - rovirus encoding WT Rab5A and then with lentiviruses carrying shRNAs able to target either R - Ras or RIN2 . As expected [ 62 ] , the overexpression of WT Rab5A strongly promoted EC adhesion to different ECM components ( Figure 6B ) . Moreover , we found that the increase of EC adhesion elicited by Rab5A is fully dependent on the presence of both R - Ras and RIN2 ( Figure 6B ) . Thus , in ECs , RIN2 appears to act as a docking adaptor protein that , on early endosomes , initiates the formation of a synergistic platform hinged on R - Ras and Rab5 GTPases that then sparks off a pro - adhesive signal . To further validate this concept , we retrovirally overexpressed either WT R - Ras , or constitutively active R - Ras 38V or RIN2 in human ECs that were then silenced with either a pool of three siRNAs targeting the three human isoforms of Rab5 , namely Rab5A , B , and C ( si h Rab5ABC ) , or control non - targeting siRNA ( siCtl ) ( Figure 6C ) . Short - term adhesion assays showed that knocking down Rab5 proteins significantly impaired both R - Ras - and RIN2 - elicited EC adhesion ( Figure 6D ) , further demonstrating that these three proteins constitute the backbone of a new signaling pathway that controls endothelial spreading over ECM proteins . The R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 signaling module controls GTP loading of Rac1 in ECs GTP loading of Rac1 , a key regulator of adhesion - in - duced cell spreading [ 63 ] , can be initiated by both R - Ras [ 36 - 38 ] and Rab5 [ 31 ] . These observations , together with our finding that to stimulate EC adhesion to the ECM , RIN2 needs to associate with active Rab5 and R - Ras on early endosomes , suggest that on this vesicular compart - ment the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex could activate Rac1 to promote EC adhesion and spreading over the ECM . In accordance with what was previously reported by Palamidessi et al . [ 31 ] , fluorescent confocal microscopy analysis revealed that overexpression of GFP - Rab5A , but not GFP alone in ECs ( Figure 7A and Supplemen - tary information , Figure S10 ) , elicits the translocation of endogenous Rac1 onto early endosomes ( Figure 7B and Supplementary information , Figure S10 ) . In addition , we found that WT HA - tagged m RIN2 localizes together with Rab5 and Rac1 on these vesicles ( Figure 7B and Supplementary information , Figure S10 ) . However , we observed that even without Rab5 overexpression , GFP - R - Ras 38V was able to promote the relocation of Rac1 onto endosomes per se ( Figure 7C and Supplementary information , Figure S10 ) and this effect was maximized when GFP - R - Ras 38V was co - transfected together with m RIN2 in ECs ( Figure 7D and Supplementary informa - tion , Figure S10 ) . In addition , we found that a constitu - tively active Rac1 mutant ( Q61L ) was able to efficiently rescue the adhesion defects of sh h RIN2 ECs to differ - ent ECM ligands ( Supplementary information , Figure S11A ) . All together , these data prompted us to directly test whether the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 module could be involved in Rac1 activation in ECs . To this aim , we mea - sured Rac1 activity by an affinity assay in which Rac1 - GTP was pulled down from lysates of adherent ECs incubated with a GST fused to the Cdc42 / Rac Interactive Binding ( CRIB ) region of the Rac1 - GTP effector p21 - activated kinase1 ( GST - CRIB ) [ 64 ] . When compared to cells transduced with control lentiviral shRNA ( shCtl ) , sh h RIN2 ECs clearly displayed a 50 % reduction of ac - tive Rac1 - GTP ( Figure 8A ) . Furthermore , as expected [ 36 , 37 ] , retrovirus - mediated delivery of constitutively active R - Ras 38V in ECs elicited a 1 . 7 - fold activation of Rac1 that however was inhibited by RIN2 silencing ( Fig - ure 8A ) . Hence , in ECs , RIN2 is required for both basal and R - Ras - triggered GTP loading of Rac1 . Next , we evaluated the capacity of retrovirus - delivered full - length and deletion constructs of m RIN2 to rescue the defec - tive activation of Rac1 observed in sh h RIN2 ECs ( Fig - ure 8B ) . Compared to WT m RIN2 , both m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA constructs not only were unable to rescue , but in fact enhanced the defect in GTP load - ing of Rac1 of adherent sh h RIN2 ECs ( Figure 8B ) . The finding that m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA dele - tion constructs display dominant - negative effects both in short - term adhesion assays ( Figure 4D ) and GTP load - Figure 5 RIN2 promotes the recruitment of R - Ras to Rab5 - positive early endosomes . Fluorescent confocal microscopy anal - ysis of ECs transfected with GFP - Rab5A ( central left panels , green ) , mCherry - R - Ras 38V ( central right panels , red ) and HA - m RIN2 ( A ) or HA - m RIN2 RH / VPS9 ( B ) or HA - m RIN2 RA ( C ) ( left panels , blue ) . Right panels correspond to merged image . ( A ) HA - m RIN2 , GFP - Rab5A , and mCherry - R - Ras 38V colocalize on early endosomes . ( B ) HA - m RIN2 RH / VPS9 and mCherry - R - Ras 38V colocalize in the perinuclear vesicular compartment , but they are excluded from the peripheral Rab5 - labeled early endosomes . ( C ) HA - m RIN2 RA colocalizes with GFP - Rab5A in peripheral early endosomes , whereas mCherry - R - Ras 38V is excluded from these compartments . Lower panels are magnifications of the corresponding upper panels . ( D ) Quantification of colocalization signal between : ( 1 ) m RIN2 constructs and GFP - Rab5 ; ( 2 ) m RIN2 constructs and mCherry - R - Ras 38V ; ( 3 ) mCherry - R - Ras 38V and GFP - Rab5 in ECs simultaneously transfected with different m RIN2 constructs ( mean ± SD ; n = 25 cells per experimental condition ) . Scale bars , 10 µ m . * * * P < 0 . 001 . www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1491 npg Figure 6 R - Ras , RIN2 , and Rab5 constitute a new signaling module that controls the adhesion of ECs to the ECM . ( A ) The GEF activity of mRIN2 on Rab5A is measured by a nucleotide exchange assay from unlabeled prebound GDP to [ 3 H ] - GDP on GST - Rab5A . The rate of [ 3 H ] - GDP association is presented as a correlation of measured counts per minute at each time point for each sample divided by the counts per minute after 60 min for the control sample Rab5A alone ( “standardized c . p . m . ” ) . The GEF activity of RIN2 on Rab5A is inhibited by the presence of R - Ras * GTP γ S , but not H - Ras * GTP γ S . Error bars corre - spond to the standard error of the mean . ( B ) Comparative analysis of the modulation of cell adhesion to FN and VN in control ( shCtl ) or h RIN2 ( sh h RIN2 ) - or R - Ras ( shR - Ras ) - silenced human ECs overexpressing Rab5A or empty PINCO retroviral vec - tor ( Ctl ) . Error bars correspond to standard deviation . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experimental condition ) . ( C ) Western blot analysis of Rab5 expression in human ECs silenced for Rab5A , B , C ( si h Rab5ABC ) or transfected with control siRNA ( siCtl ) . β - tubulin was used as an internal and loading control . ( D ) Comparative analysis of the modulation of cell adhesion to FN and VN by overexpression of m RIN2 or R - Ras WT in control ( siCtl ) or h Rab5ABC ( si h Rab5ABC ) - silenced human ECs . Ctl corresponds to ECs transfected with the empty PINCO retroviral vector . A representative of three independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 3 samples per experimental condition ) . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . ing of Rac1 ( Figure 8B ) further supports the notion that Rac1 activation constitutes a key molecular mechanism through which the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex controls EC adhesion to the ECM . Finally , we decided to investigate which Rac1 GEFs could mediate the pro - adhesive signaling triggered by the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 module . Since both the Rab5 - and Ras - binding domains of RIN2 are required to stimulate cell adhesion ( Figure 4 ) , Rac1 GTP loading ( Figure 8B ) and active R - Ras localization on Rab5 - positive endo - R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1492 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1493 npg somes ( Figure 5 ) , the candidate Rac1 GEF ( s ) should be able to associate spatiotemporally with and get acti - vated by the simultaneous presence of R - Ras and some biochemical feature ( s ) of the early endosomal environ - ment . Of note , the TIAM1 Rac1 GEF fulfills all these requirements [ 44 ] : it can be recruited to Rab5 - positive endosomes , where it activates Rac1 [ 31 ] , and displays a Ras - binding RA domain as well as a pleckstrin homol - ogy ( PH ) domain that selectively interacts with PIns ( 3 ) P [ 42 , 45 ] , a phosphoinositide enriched on early endo - somal membranes [ 65 ] . Moreover , TIAM1 can mediate Ras activation of Rac1 via its RA domain [ 66 ] . Hence , we investigated whether the pro - adhesive activity of R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 signaling module would require the TIAM1 Rac1 GEF . We found that ECs were very sen - sitive to TIAM1 silencing , most likely due to the key pro - survival role of Rac1 in normal cells [ 67 ] . Thus , we transduced human HeLa cells first with a retrovirus encoding the WT version of R - Ras , m RIN2 , or Rab5A and then transfected these same cells with a pool of four siRNA duplexes targeting human TIAM1 ( siTIAM1 ) or control non - targeting siRNA ( siCtl ) ( Figure 8C ) . As observed in human ECs , the overexpression of R - Ras , m RIN2 , or Rab5A promoted HeLa adhesion to the ECM ( Figure 8D ) . Importantly , we found that the increase of cell adhesion caused by all these three proteins is dependent on the presence of TIAM1 ( Figure 8D ) . Furthermore , TIAM1 overexpression rescued most of the ECM adhesion defect phenotype that characterizes RIN2 - silenced ECs ( Supplementary information , Figure S11B ) . Thus , the Rac1 GEF TIAM1 emerges as a key transducer of the pro - adhesive signaling elicited by the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex . Discussion In vivo , the small GTPase R - Ras is mainly expressed in vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells , regu - lates blood vessel remodeling [ 11 ] , and plays a key role in the control of integrin - mediated cell adhesion to the ECM [ 10 , 18 ] . In ECs , SEMA3 , either directly or in co - operation with neuropilins , activates PlexinD1 [ 13 , 15 ] that via its cytoplasmic R - Ras GAP domain , directly switches R - Ras off [ 68 - 70 ] and controls vascular mor - phogenesis [ 13 - 15 ] . However , the molecular mechanisms by which R - Ras positively influences the ability of ECs to adhere and spread over the ECM are still unknown . Data from R - Ras overexpression effects in cell types other than ECs have demonstrated that R - Ras does not conformationally activate integrins [ 10 , 21 ] and could instead act by activating Rac1 through undefined signal - ing pathway ( s ) [ 36 , 37 ] and / or favoring the RLIP76 / Arf6 - mediated targeting of Rac1 - GTP to the plasma membrane [ 38 ] . Indeed , active Rac1 , e . g . , by triggering integrin activation [ 71 ] and actin polymerization [ 63 ] , can mediate the R - Ras - elicited and integrin - mediated spreading of ECs on matrix proteins . Moreover , the Rac effector WASH and Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymeriza - tion have been recently found to control endosomal inte - grin recycling toward the plasma membrane as well [ 72 ] . Likely because of its central role in regulating adhesive and cytoskeletal dynamics , endothelial Rac1 is in fact es - sential for embryonic vascular morphogenesis [ 73 ] . Here , we show that the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 signaling complex transiently localizes at NAs and selectively controls the endocytosis of active β1 integrins . Impor - tantly , active integrin - mediated ECM binding , likely by triggering GTP loading of R - Ras [ 58 ] , in turn triggers R - Ras and RIN2 relocation onto Rab5 - positive early endosomes , where at steady state the tripartite R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex preferentially localizes in adher - ent ECs . In addition , we provide mechanistic evidence of how the RIN2 - assisted targeting of R - Ras - GTP onto the Rab5 - positive endosomal compartment causes the TIAM1 - mediated activation of Rac1 , finally promoting EC attachment to the ECM . Even if the R - Ras / RIN2 / Figure 7 RIN2 , R - Ras and Rac1 colocalize on Rab5 - positive early endosomes . ( A ) Fluorescent confocal microscopy analy - sis of ECs transfected with GFP ( left panel , green ) and stained for endogenous Rac1 ( central panel , red ) shows how Rac1 is quite homogeneously distributed throughout the cell . Right panel corresponds to merged image . ( B ) Fluorescent confocal microscopy analysis of ECs transfected with HA - m RIN2 ( left panels , blue ) and GFP - Rab5A ( central left panels , green ) and stained for Rac1 ( central right panels , red ) shows that HA - m RIN2 and Rac1 colocalize in vesicular compartment marked by GFP - Rab5A . Right panels correspond to merged images . Lower panels are magnifications of the corresponding upper pan - els . ( C ) Fluorescent confocal microscopy analysis of ECs transfected with GFP - R - Ras 38V ( left panel , green ) and stained for endogenous Rac1 ( central panel , red ) shows a partial colocalization of GFP - R - Ras 38V and Rac1 in bona fide vesicular structures . Right panel corresponds to merged image . ( D ) Fluorescent confocal microscopy analysis of ECs transfected with HA - m RIN2 ( left panels , blue ) and GFP - R - Ras 38V ( central left panels , green ) and stained for Rac1 ( central right panels , red ) shows the colocalization of HA - m RIN2 , GFP - R - Ras 38V and Rac1 in vesicular compartments . Right panels correspond to merged images . Lower panels are magnifications of the corresponding upper panels . Panels are representative of more than 25 cells in three independent experiments . Scale bars , 10 µ m . R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1494 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1495 npg Rab5 complex could trigger GTP loading of Rac1 when transitorily localized at the plasma membrane , the fact that at steady state two major TIAM1 activators , namely active R - Ras ( this study and [ 46 ] ) and PIP3 [ 74 ] , local - ize on ( early ) endosomes strongly points to this vesicular compartment as a preferential site for Rac1 activation downstream of R - Ras . By silencing - rescue experiments and biochemical analysis , we showed that RIN2 is a key effector pro - tein that physically interacts with and mediates the pro - adhesive effects of active R - Ras . Notably , while we confirmed that RIN2 [ 48 , 56 ] , similar to RIN3 [ 61 ] but different from RIN1 [ 60 ] and other Rab5 GEFs [ 75 ] , preferentially binds Rab5 - GTP , we uncovered that active R - Ras but not H - Ras inhibits the Rab5 GEF activity and favors the R - Ras / Rab5 adaptor function of RIN2 . The latter finding is of interest in light of the fact that H - Ras and R - Ras have been reported to play opposite and coun - teracting roles in integrin - mediated adhesion in some cell types [ 10 ] . Moreover , based on our finding that the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex promotes the selective en - docytosis of ECM - bound / active β1 integrins , it is likely that R - Ras - associated RIN2 docks a GTP - loaded pool of Rab5 at NAs . The amount of Rab5 - GTP required to elicit active integrin endocytosis at ECM adhesions could ei - ther be derived from the residual Rab5 GEF activity of RIN2 itself or generated by another Rab5 GEF or , similar to what was described for Rab4 [ 76 ] , R - Ras - bound RIN2 could extract Rab5 - GTP from a cytosolic carrier protein - buffered pool . Further work is required to clarify this is - sue . We found that vesicular localization of R - Ras requires R - Ras activation . In addition , ECM binding to integrins drives R - Ras and RIN2 targeting onto Rab5 - positive ear - ly endosomes . In particular , GTP - bound R - Ras exploits the docker properties of RIN to promote its own trans - location onto early endosomes . We favor the hypothesis that rather at NAs , on this specific vesicular compartment R - Ras - GTP acts as a key element of a signaling platform that finally triggers GTP loading of Rac1 and cell adhe - sion to the ECM . Indeed , when we reintroduced full - length and mutant murine RIN2 constructs in human ECs in which endogenous h RIN2 had been simultaneously silenced , we observed that both EC adhesion to ECM proteins and Rac1 GTP loading depend on the RH / VPS9 and RA domains of RIN2 that bind to the active forms of Rab5 and R - Ras , respectively . Importantly , compared to WT m RIN2 , overexpression of m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA failed to rescue the Rac1 activation and cell adhesion defects caused by h RIN2 silencing , and more importantly , it worsened the phenotypes , indicating that these mutants behave as dominant - negative RIN2 con - Figure 8 The R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 module controls Rac1 activation and EC adhesion via TIAM1 . ( A ) Pull - down assay of ac - tive Rac1 in ECs overexpressing constitutively active R - Ras 38V or the control empty PINCO retroviral vector and silenced for h RIN2 ( sh h RIN2 ) or infected with control shRNA ( shCtl ) . Total Rac1 , detected in the input fractions , is used to calculate the normalized optical density ( N . O . D . ) of active Rac1 . A representative of three independent pull - down assays with similar results is shown . Bands were quantified and N . O . D . s were calculated relative to control ( Values are means ± SD ; n = 3 sepa - rate assays ) . ( B ) The ability of m RIN2 or m RIN2 RH / VPS9 or m RIN2 RA to rescue the Rac1 activation defect in control ( shCtl ) or RIN2 - silenced ( sh h RIN2 ) ECs was tested by pull - down assay . Total Rac1 , detected in the input fractions , is used to calcu - late the N . O . D . of active Rac1 . A representative of three independent pull - down assays with similar results is shown . Bands were quantified and N . O . D . s were calculated relative to control ( Values are means ± SD ; n = 3 separate assays ) . ( C ) Western blot analysis of TIAM1 expression in HeLa silenced for TIAM1 ( siTIAM1 ) or transfected with control siRNA ( siCtl ) . Vinculin was used as an internal and loading control . ( D ) Comparative analysis of the modulation of cell adhesion to FN by overex - pression of m RIN2 or R - Ras WT or Rab5A in control ( siCtl ) or TIAM1 ( siTIAM1 ) - silenced HeLa . Ctl corresponds to HeLa transfected with the empty PINCO retroviral vector . A representative of two independent experiments with similar results is shown ( mean ± SD ; n = 6 - 9 samples per experimental condition ) . ( E ) Model of how the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex controls active integrin endocytosis and signals the TIAM1 - dependent activation of Rac1 and EC adhesion to the ECM . At the leading edge of motile ECs , ECM - bound / active integrins trigger GEF - mediated GTP loading of R - Ras . At NAs , active R - Ras interacts with the RA domain of RIN2 , inhibits its Rab5 GEF activity , and transforms RIN2 into an adaptor that binds GTP - Rab5 via its RH / VPS9 domain , thus localizing this Rab GTPase at the plasma membrane . Here , the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 complex drives the endocytosis of ECM - bound / active integrins and the ensuing translocation of R - Ras and RIN2 proteins to Rab5 - positive early endosomes ( EE ) . Also TIAM1 , a protein that presents a Ras - binding domain , is recruited to Rab5 - positive early endosomes [ 31 ] ; indeed , TIAM1 possesses a PH domain that binds PIns ( 3 ) P , which is highly enriched at the endosomal surface and posi - tively regulates TIAM1 GEF activity [ 42 , 45 ] . Upon its double binding to PIns ( 3 ) P and R - Ras , TIAM1 gets completely activated and acts as a GEF for Rac1 . Active Rac1 can promote , in turn , integrin - dependent cell adhesion to the ECM through several mechanisms . Indeed , the Arf6 - dependent delivery of Rac1 - GTP to the plasma membrane can drive WAVE - Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization that mediates the formation of new NAs [ 34 ] . Furthermore , Rac1 - dependent endosomal activation of the WASH - Arp2 / 3 complex can support the recycling of internalized integrins to the plasma membrane [ 72 ] , a process that is central to directional cell migration [ 22 ] . * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1496 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 structs . Furthermore , different from WT m RIN2 , both m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and m RIN2 ∆RA were almost unable to relocate active R - Ras onto Rab5 - positive endosomes . Therefore , the ability of RIN2 to spatially couple R - Ras and Rab5 is responsible for four interconnected events : ( 1 ) the endocytosis of ECM - bound / active integrins ; ( 2 ) the shift of active R - Ras onto early endosomes , where Rac1 also localizes ; ( 3 ) the R - Ras - dependent GTP loading of Rac1 ; and ( 4 ) the R - Ras - elicited adhesion of ECs to the ECM . In addition , the fact that the overexpression of the constitutively active Rac1 Q61L mutant rescued the ad - hesion defect caused by RIN2 silencing , further proves the downstream involvement of Rac1 in this pathway . We identified TIAM1 as a Rac1 GEF that mediates the pro - adhesive activity of the R - Ras / RIN2 / Rab5 signaling complex . Similar to these three latter proteins , TIAM1 can also localize on Rab5 - positive vesicles [ 31 ] , likely because its PH domain selectively interacts with the early endosome - enriched phosphatidylinositol PIns ( 3 ) P [ 42 , 45 , 65 ] . Furthermore , the Ras - binding RA domain of TIAM1 allows this GEF to function as an effector that directly mediates the Ras activation of Rac1 [ 66 ] . All together , these data support a positive feedback model in which at the leading edge of motile cells ligand - engaged integrins trigger the formation of an R - Ras - GTP / RIN2 / Rab5 - GTP complex . This complex drives both the en - docytosis of ECM - bound / active integrins themselves and the RIN2 - mediated funneling of R - Ras - GTP toward Rab5 - containing vesicular compartments to allow the ( local ) activation of Rac1 by TIAM1 , which in turn sup - ports integrin - mediated cell adhesion ( Figure 8E ) . The need of a RIN2 - and Rab5 - dependent transloca - tion of R - Ras - GTP onto early endosomes to activate Rac1 and support EC adhesion and spreading on ECM could be due to at least two non - mutually exclusive rea - sons : polarized endo - exocytic cycling and endosomal signaling ( Figure 8E ) . Indeed , we found that , in spread - ing ECs , RIN2 colocalizes with active R - Ras both at lamellipodium - associated NAs and on Rab5 - containing early endosomes . Of note , in motile cells R - Ras is much more robustly activated at the leading edge than in the cell body [ 58 ] . Therefore , it is conceivable that in lamel - lipodia ECM - bound integrins signal to GTP - loaded R - Ras [ 58 ] that thereafter binds to and switches off the Rab5 GEF activity of RIN2 . In turn , RIN2 , by display - ing a much higher affinity for Rab5 - GTP than its GDP - loaded counterpart , behaves as an adaptor responsible for the translocation of active Rab5 and R - Ras at NAs and onto early endosomes , respectively . While at NAs Rab5 - GTP elicits the endocytosis of active integrins , on the early endosomal compartment R - Ras - GTP can first trig - ger the RIN2 / TIAM1 - dependent activation of Rac1 ( this study ) and then the RLIP76 / Arf6 - mediated recycling of Rac1 - GTP to lamellipodial protrusions [ 38 ] ( Figure 8 ) . The fact that Rac1 signals the creation of new lamellipo - dia - associated NAs [ 77 ] would suggest that the R - Ras / RIN2 signaling module might also be the hub of a posi - tive feedback mechanism aimed at steering cell spread - ing , by further propagating lamellipodial protrusion and NA formation . Finally , it is now well documented that endosomes , in addition to controlling the recycling or degradation of receptors , have been also evolutionarily exploited as subcellular platforms for the assembly and compartmentalization of signaling complexes in space and time [ 57 , 78 ] . The ECM - bound / active integrin - elicited and R - Ras - mediated activation of Rac1 on early endosomes could be required to allow the interaction of Rac1 - GTP with yet to be identified effector protein ( s ) not present at the plasma membrane , hence achieving the signaling specificity necessary to control cell adhesion and spreading . A candidate endosomal effector of Rac1 would for example be represented by the Arp2 / 3 activator WASH that controls the recycling of endocytosed α5β1 integrin to the plasma membrane [ 72 ] . From this point of view , endosomes defined by the presence of RIN2 could represent a novel class of signaling endosomes involved in the control of the dynamics of integrin - mediated cell attachment to the ECM . Materials and Methods Antibodies and extracellular matrix proteins Mouse monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) anti - α - tubulin ( B - 5 - 1 - 2 ) , anti - R - Ras ( 2E12 ) for western blot analysis , and anti - vinculin ( hVIN - 1 ) for immunofluorescence analysis were from Sigma - Aldrich . Mouse mAb anti - RIN2 ( ab57377 ) was from Abcam and used for immunoprecipitation experiments . Mouse mAbs anti - Rac1 ( 102 ) , anti - Rab5 ( 1 / Rab5 ) , and anti - LAMP1 ( H4A3 ) were from BD Biosciences . Rabbit anti - RIN2 ( HPA034641 ) and anti - Rab5 ( R4654 ) antibodies were from Sigma - Aldrich and employed for western blotting . Rat mAb anti - HA High Affinity ( 3F10 ) , used both for western blot and immunofluorescence analysis , was from Roche . Mouse mAb HA - probe ( F - 7 ) and goat polyclonal anti - EEA1 ( N - 19 ) for immunofluorescence analysis , rabbit polyclonal anti - TIAM1 ( C - 16 ) , rabbit polyclonal anti - β - tubulin ( H - 235 ) and mouse monoclonal anti - vinculin ( H - 10 ) for western blot analy - sis were all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . Rabbit polyclonal anti - GFP ( A11122 ) was from Invitrogen . Rabbit polyclonal anti - human - TGN46 ( AHP1586 ) for immunofluorescence analysis was from AbD Serotec . In endocytosis assays , total and active β1 inte - grins were detected by mouse mAb JB1B ( ab30388 ) from Abcam and rat mAb 9EG7 ( 550531 ) from BD Biosciences , respectively . Goat anti - rabbit and anti - rat secondary antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , while goat anti - mouse secondary antibody was from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories . Alexa Fluor 647 and 555 goat anti - mouse IgG2a , Alexa Fluor 488 and 555 donkey anti - mouse IgG ( H + L ) , Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti - www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1497 npg mouse IgG2b and Alexa Fluor 647 chicken anti - rat IgG secondary antibodies were from Invitrogen . Human FN was from R & D Systems . Human plasma VN and Coll I were from Sigma - Aldrich . Rhodamine - labeled bovine FN was from Cytoskeleton Inc . DNA constructs The constructs of pEGFP - R - Ras WT , pEGFP - R - Ras CA ( 38V ) and pEGFP - R - Ras DN ( 43N ) were kindly provided by Johan Per - anen ( University of Helsinki , Finland ) . Using standard PCR pro - tocols we transferred these cDNAs in PINCO retrovirus or pGEX - 4T1 ( Amersham Biosciences ) vectors . cDNAs of R - Ras 38V and WT were also subcloned in pAcmCherry - N1 vector ( derived from the Clontech pAcGFP - N1 vector whose GFP - coding sequence was substituted with the cDNA of the red fluorescent protein mCherry ) . pEGFP - Rab7 and Rab5 - pCX4 - bsr - mEGFP constructs were kindly donated by Cecilia Bucci ( University of Salento , Italy ) and Michiyuki Matsuda ( Kyoto University , Japan ) , respectively , while Rab5A - GST and Rab5A - GFP / YFP constructs were from Marino Zerial ( Max Plank Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden , Germany ) . Silvio Gutkind ( National Institutes of Health , USA ) kindly provided the construct of Rac1 Q61L / pcDNA 3 . The HA - tagged m RIN2 construct was generated by standard PCR protocols according to the Taq polymerase manufacturer’s instructions ( Fynnzymes ) , using m RIN2 / pCMV - Sport6 ( Invitrogen ) as template and phCMV - 2 ( Genlantis ) as host expression vector . Deletion mutant m RIN2 constructs were obtained with standard molecular biology techniques . In particular , the mutant m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 was lacking in 1 363 - 2 214 base pairs ( aa 455 - 738 ) , while the mutant m RIN2 ∆RA was devoid of 2 251 - 2 508 base pairs ( aa 751 - 836 ) . Afterwards , these mutants were also subcloned in PINCO retrovirus or pGEX - 4T1 vectors . Gene silencing For siRNA - mediated silencing , the day before oligofection , ECs were seeded in 6 - well dishes at a concentration of 10 × 10 4 cells / well . Oligofection of siRNA duplexes was performed accord - ing to manufacturer’s protocols . Briefly , human ECs or HeLa were transfected twice ( at 0 and 24 h ) with 200 pmol of siCONTROL non - targeting siRNA # 1 ( as control ) or siGENOME SMART pools ( Dharmacon ) for human R - Ras ( M - 010352 - 02 ) or RIN2 ( M - 008173 - 01 ) or TIAM1 ( M - 003932 - 02 ) . 24 h ( R - Ras and RIN2 ) or 48 h ( TIAM1 ) after the second oligofection ECs or HeLa were lysed or tested in functional assays . To silence Rab5A , B and C , human ECs were transfected with 375 pmol of Stealth RNAi - negative control duplexes ( medium GC duplex ) or 200 pmol of each of HSS184174 ( against human Rab5A ) , HSS108980 ( against human Rab5B ) and HSS143567 ( against human Rab5C ) , provided by Invitrogen . 48 h after the oligofection , ECs were lysed or tested in functional assays . Lentiviral vectors carrying shRNA sequences against R - Ras ( TRCN0000047885 ) or RIN2 ( TRCN0000062645 ) were from the RNAi Consortium library ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Lentiviruses were pro - duced as described in the TRC shRNA guidelines [ 48 ] . Adhesion assay 6 000 ECs were resuspended in 0 . 1 ml of EBM - 2 medium ( Lonza ) and plated on 96 - well microtitre plates ( Costar ) that were previously coated with ECM proteins ( 0 . 3 µg / ml FN or 1 µg / ml VN or 0 . 5 µg / ml Coll I ) and then saturated with 3 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) . Cells were left to adhere for 20 min at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 in a humidified atmosphere . 70 000 HeLa were resuspended in 0 . 3 ml of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium ( Sigma ) and plated on glass coverslips previously coated with 1 µg / ml of FN and saturated with 3 % BSA . Cells were left to adhere for 90 min at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 in a humidified atmosphere . Cells were fixed in 8 % glutaraldehyde , and then stained with 0 . 1 % crystal violet and 20 % methanol . Cells were photographed with a QIcam FAST1394 digital color camera ( QImaging ) and counted by Image - ProPlus 6 . 2 software ( Media Cybernetics ) . Re - sults were expressed as relative adhesion , i . e . , number of control cells adhered to ECM ligands was assigned the value of 1 - fold ( 100 % ) and relative adhesion was calculated . FACS analysis of FN binding to ECs ECs were detached , counted ( 150 000 cells / sample ) , washed once with 1 ml of Tyrode’s buffer ( 10 mM HEPES - NaOH , pH 7 . 5 , 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 68 mM KCl , 0 . 42 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 1 . 7 mM MgCl 2 , 11 . 9 mM NaHCO 3 , and 5 mM glucose ) [ 79 ] at 4 °C , resuspended in Tyrode’s buffer containing or not 15 µg / ml of rhodamine - FN , and incubated for 30 min at room temperature ( RT ) . Cells were then washed twice with Tyrode’s buffer at 4 °C and finally ana - lyzed by FACS with a CyAN ADP analyzer ( Beckman Coulter ) . In vitro angiogenesis assay 16 000 ECs were resuspended in 350 µl of 10 % FBS EBM - 2 , plated in each well of a 48 - well plate previously coated with 150 µl / well of 8 mg / ml growth factor - reduced Matrigel ( BD Biosci - ences ) , and incubated at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 in a humidified atmo - sphere for 5 h to allow vascular network formation . Samples were then observed by a Leica DMI 3000 B inverted microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) . Images were acquired with a CoolSNAP HQ cam - era ( Photometrics ) controlled by Image Pro Plus software ( Media Cybernetics ) and the number of branching points per mm 2 were analyzed and counted with ImageJ software ( Wayne Rasband , Na - tional Institutes of Health , USA ) as previously described [ 80 ] . Wound healing assay 200 000 ECs were plated in each well of a 24 - well plate pre - viously coated with 3 µg / ml human plasma FN and incubated overnight at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 in a humidified atmosphere . The day after , each well was scratched with a 200 µl Gilson pipette tip in the middle of the monolayer . Cells were then incubated at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 in a humidified atmosphere in an AF6000 LX workstation ( Leica Microsystems ) and imaged by time - lapse phase - contrast videomicroscopy . Frames were taken every 15 min for 12 h . Dis - placement of the endothelial sheet leading edge over time was quantified by LAS AF Leica Application Suite software ( Leica Microsystems ) . Confocal scanning microscopy Cells were plated on glass coverslips coated with 5 µg / ml FN and allowed to adhere for 3 h . Cells were washed in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , fixed in 4 % para - formaldehyde ( PFA ) , permeabilized in 0 . 01 % saponin for 5 min on ice , incubated with different primary antibodies for 1 h , and revealed by appropriate Alexa - Fluor - tagged secondary antibody ( Molecular Probes by Life Technologies ) . HA - m RIN2 , HA - m RIN2 ∆RH / VPS9 and HA - R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1498 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 m RIN2 ∆RA were stained with a mouse anti - HA antibody and the Alexa - 405 - tagged secondary antibody . Rac1 was detected by an anti - Rac1 antibody and the Alexa - 555 - tagged secondary antibody . Cells were analyzed by using a Leica TCS SP2 AOBS confocal laser - scanning microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) . Immunofluo - rescence analysis was performed as previously described [ 49 , 50 ] . Colocalization analysis was performed with the Imaris 6 . 3 ( Bitplane , AG ) software colocalization module . We also quantified fluorescence intensity profiles along linear regions of interest ( ROI ) in multiple channels by the Leica Confocal Software Quantifica - tion Tool ( Leica Microsystems ) . Image acquisition was performed by adopting a laser power , gain , and offset settings that allowed maintaining pixel intensities ( gray scale ) within the 0 - 255 range and hence avoided saturation . In some immunofluorescence experiments , ECs were plated on FN ( 5 µg / ml ) - coated coverslips in a 24 - well plate and the day after they were treated with 20 µM Blebbistatin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) diluted in M199 complete medium for 1 h at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 in a humidi - fied atmosphere . Afterwards , cells were gently washed and fixed in 4 % PFA . To stain suspended ECs , cells were detached , counted , centri - fuged at 800× g RT , resuspended in poor M199 medium , and kept in suspension on ice for 30 min to allow a complete switch - off of ECM - dependent integrin signaling . Cells were then re - pelleted at 800× g RT , resuspended in 1 ml of prewarmed poor M199 medium containing or not 30 µg / ml of human plasma FN , and incubated for 5 min at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 in a humidified atmosphere . ECs were then washed once with ice - cold PBS , centrifuged at 800× g RT , put back on ice , fixed in 4 % PFA , and then permeabilized for 5 min with 0 . 01 % saponin in PBS on ice . Cells were then washed once in PBS , stained , and finally centrifuged and resuspended in mounting medium , 10 µl of which were then plated on a slide be - fore being covered with a coverslip . Confocal stack images were digitally post - processed with background subtraction and blind deconvolution algorithms of Imaris 6 . 3 software . Colocalization analysis was then performed with the Imaris 6 . 3 software colocal - ization module . Integrin internalization assay Integrin traffic assays were performed as previously described by Roberts et al . [ 81 ] with minor modifications . Cells were trans - ferred to ice , washed twice in cold PBS , and surface - labeled at 4 °C with 0 . 2 mg / ml sulfo - NHS - SS - biotin ( Pierce ) in PBS for 30 min . Labeled cells were washed in cold PBS and transferred to prewarmed M199 containing 10 % FBS and 0 . 1 mM Primaquine at 37 °C . At the indicated times ( 5 , 10 , and 15 min ) , the medium was removed , and dishes were rapidly transferred to ice and washed twice with ice - cold PBS . Biotin was stripped from pro - teins remaining at the cell surface by incubation with a solution containing 20 mM sodium 2 - mercaptoethanesulfonate ( MesNa ) in 50 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 8 . 6 ) , 100 mM NaCl for 1 h at 4 °C . MesNa was quenched by the addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide ( IAA ) for 10 min , and after other two further washes in PBS , the cells were lysed in 25 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 100 mM NaCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 0 . 5 mM ( ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid ) EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 5 % glycerol , protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma - Aldrich , 50 mg / ml pepstatin , 50 mg / ml leupeptin , and 10 mg / ml aprotinin ) , and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride ( PMSF ) . Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12 000× g for 20 min . Supernatants were corrected to equivalent protein concentrations and levels of biotinylated integrin were determined by capture ELISA assay . Capture ELISA assay Corning 96 Well Clear Polystyrene High Bind Stripwell Mi - croplate ( product # 2592 ) were coated overnight with 5 µg / ml appropriate anti - integrin antibodies in 0 . 05 M Na 2 CO 3 ( pH 9 . 6 ) at 4 °C and were blocked in PBS containing 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ( PBS - T ) with 5 % BSA for 1 h at RT . Integrins were captured by overnight incubation of 50 µl cell lysate at 4 °C . Unbound material was removed by extensive washing with PBS - T , and wells were incubated with streptavidin - conjugated horseradish peroxidase ( Amersham ) in PBS - T containing 1 % BSA for 1 h at 4 °C . Fol - lowing further washing , biotinylated integrins were detected by a chromogenic reaction with ortho - phenylenediamine . Statistical analysis For statistical evaluation , results were analyzed by a two - tailed heteroscedastic Student’s t - test . Further information can be found in Supplementary informa - tion , Data S1 . Acknowledgments We acknowledge Johan Peranen , Cecilia Bucci , Michiyuki Matsuda , Marino Zerial , and Silvio Gutkind for providing re - agents . We are grateful to Giorgio Scita and Andrea Palamidessi for suggestions and insightful discussions . We thank Elena Astanina and Giorgio Seano for help in analysis and quantifica - tion of confocal images . This work was supported by grants from Telethon Italy ( GGP04127 and GGP09175 to GS ) ; Compagnia di San Paolo – Neuroscience Program Multicentre Projects ( to GS ) ; Associazione Augusto per la Vita ( to GS ) ; Fondazione Guido Ber - lucchi ( to GS ) ; Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro ( IG # 9211 to GS , IG # 10133 to FB , and START UP PROGRAM to LL ) ; Fondazione Piemontese per la Ricerca sul Cancro – ONLUS – Intramural Grant 2010 ( to GS and LL ) ; Ministero della Salute – Programma Ricerca Oncologica 2006 and Ricerca Finalizzata 2006 ( to GS and FB ) ; Ricerca Finalizzata 2007 ( to LL ) ; Regione Piemonte – Ricerca Sanitaria Finalizzata 2006 , 2008 , and 2009 ; Ricerca Scientifica Applicata 2004 : grants D10 and A150 ; Ricerca industriale e sviluppo precompetitivo 2006 : grants PRESTO and SPLASERBA ( to GS , LL and FB ) ; Piattaforme Tecnologiche per le Biotecnologie : grant DRUIDI ; Ricerca Tecnologie Convergenti : grant PHOENICS ; Ricerca Industriale 2009 : grant BANP ( to FB ) ; Ministero dell’Università e della Ricerca – Fondo per gli Investi - menti della Ricerca di Base : grant NEWTON - RBAP11BYNP ( to FB ) ; University of Torino - Progetti di Ateneo 2011 : grant Rethe – ORTO11RKTW ( to FB ) ; and Academy of Finland and ERC Start - ing grant ( to JI ) . SV is supported by EMBO LTF and Alexander Von Humbolt Foundation . References 1 Fraisl P , Mazzone M , Schmidt T , Carmeliet P . Regulation of angiogenesis by oxygen and metabolism . Dev Cell 2009 ; www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1499 npg 16 : 167 - 179 . 2 Jones EA , le Noble F , Eichmann A . What determines blood vessel structure ? Genetic prespecification vs . hemodynamics . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 2006 ; 21 : 388 - 395 . 3 Adams RH , Alitalo K . Molecular regulation of angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 464 - 478 . 4 Jain RK . Lessons from multidisciplinary translational trials on anti - angiogenic therapy of cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 2008 ; 8 : 309 - 316 . 5 Jain RK . Normalization of tumor vasculature : an emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy . Science 2005 ; 307 : 58 - 62 . 6 Serini G , Valdembri D , Bussolino F . Integrins and angiogen - esis : a sticky business . Exp Cell Res 2006 ; 312 : 651 - 658 . 7 Hynes RO . Cell - matrix adhesion in vascular development . J Thromb Haemost 2007 ; 5 Suppl 1 : 32 - 40 . 8 van der Flier A , Badu - Nkansah K , Whittaker CA , et al . En - dothelial alpha5 and alphav integrins cooperate in re modeling of the vasculature during development . Deve lopment 2010 ; 137 : 2439 - 2449 . 9 Colicelli J . Human RAS superfamily proteins and related GTPases . Sci STKE 2004 ; 2004 : RE13 . 10 Kinbara K , Goldfinger LE , Hansen M , Chou FL , Ginsberg MH . Ras GTPases : integrins’ friends or foes ? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003 ; 4 : 767 - 776 . 11 Komatsu M , Ruoslahti E . R - Ras is a global regulator of vascular regeneration that suppresses intimal hyperplasia and tumor angiogenesis . Nat Med 2005 ; 11 : 1346 - 1350 . 12 Erdmann J , Grosshennig A , Braund PS , et al . New susceptibi - lity locus for coronary artery disease on chromosome 3q22 . 3 . Nat Genet 2009 ; 41 : 280 - 282 . 13 Gitler AD , Lu MM , Epstein JA . PlexinD1 and semaphorin signaling are required in endothelial cells for cardiovascular development . Dev Cell 2004 ; 7 : 107 - 116 . 14 Torres - Vazquez J , Gitler AD , Fraser SD , et al . Semaphorin - plexin signaling guides patterning of the developing vasculature . Dev Cell 2004 ; 7 : 117 - 123 . 15 Zhang Y , Sing MK , Degenhardt KR , et al . Tie2Cre - mediated inactivation of plexinD1 results in congenital heart , vascular and skeletal defects . Dev Biol 2009 ; 325 : 82 - 93 . 16 Uesugi K , Oinuma I , Katoh H , Negishi M . Different requi - rement for Rnd GTPases of R - Ras GAP activity of Plexin - C1 and Plexin - D1 . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 6743 - 6751 . 17 Roodink I , Raats J , van der Zwaag B , et al . Plexin D1 expression is induced on tumor vasculature and tumor cells : a novel target for diagnosis and therapy ? Cancer Res 2005 ; 65 : 8317 - 8323 . 18 Zhang Z , Vuori K , Wang H , Reed JC , Ruoslahti E . Integrin activation by R - ras . Cell 1996 ; 85 : 61 - 69 . 19 Moser M , Legate KR , Zent R , Fassler R . The tail of integrins , talin , and kindlins . Science 2009 ; 324 : 895 - 899 . 20 Shattil SJ , Kim C , Ginsberg MH . The final steps of integrin activation : the end game . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010 ; 11 : 288 - 300 . 21 Sethi T , Ginsberg MH , Downward J , Hughes PE . The small GTP - binding protein R - Ras can influence integrin activation by antagonizing a Ras / Raf - initiated integrin suppression pathway . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 1799 - 1809 . 22 Caswell PT , Vadrevu S , Norman JC . Integrins : masters and slaves of endocytic transport . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 ; 10 : 843 - 853 . 23 Ivaska J , Heino J . Cooperation between integrins and growth factor receptors in signaling and endocytosis . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2011 ; 27 : 291 - 320 . 24 Margadant C , Monsuur HN , Norman JC , Sonnenberg A . Mechanisms of integrin activation and trafficking . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2011 ; 23 : 607 - 614 . 25 Valdembri D , Caswell PT , Anderson KI , et al . Neuropilin - 1 / GIPC1 signaling regulates alpha5beta1 integrin traffic and function in endothelial cells . PLoS Biol 2009 ; 7 : e25 . 26 Dozynkiewicz MA , Jamieson NB , Macpherson I , et al . Rab25 and CLIC3 collaborate to promote integrin recycling from late endosomes / lysosomes and drive cancer progression . Dev Cell 2012 ; 22 : 131 - 145 . 27 Arjonen A , Alanko J , Veltel S , Ivaska J . Distinct recycling of active and inactive β1 integrins . Traffic 5 January 2012 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2012 . 01327 . x 28 Valdembri D , Sandri C , Santambrogio M , Serini G . Regulation of integrins by conformation and traffic : it takes two to tango . Mol Biosyst 2011 ; 7 : 2539 - 2546 . 29 Ribeiro I , Yuan L , Tanentzapf G , Dowling JJ , Kiger A . Phosphoinositide regulation of integrin trafficking required for muscle attachment and maintenance . PLoS Genet 2011 ; 7 : e1001295 . 30 Sandilands E , Frame MC . Endosomal trafficking of Src ty - rosine kinase . Trends Cell Biol 2008 ; 18 : 322 - 329 . 31 Palamidessi A , Frittoli E , Garre M , et al . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 2008 ; 134 : 135 - 147 . 32 Sandilands E , Cans C , Fincham VJ , et al . RhoB and actin polymerization coordinate Src activation with endosome - mediated delivery to the membrane . Dev Cell 2004 ; 7 : 855 - 869 . 33 Vicente - Manzanares M , Choi CK , Horwitz AR . Integrins in cell migration – the actin connection . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 : 199 - 206 . 34 Parsons JT , Horwitz AR , Schwartz MA . Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011 ; 11 : 633 - 643 . 35 Choi CK , Vicente - Manzanares M , Zareno J , Whitmore LA , Mogilner A , Horwitz AR . Actin and alpha - actinin orchestrate the assembly and maturation of nascent adhesions in a myosin II motor - independent manner . Nat Cell Biol 2008 ; 10 : 1039 - 1050 . 36 Holly SP , Larson MK , Parise LV . The unique N - terminus of R - ras is required for Rac activation and precise regulation of cell migration . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 2458 - 2469 . 37 Osada M , Tolkacheva T , Li W , et al . Differential roles of Akt , Rac , and Ral in R - Ras - mediated cellular transformation , adhe - sion , and survival . Mol Cell Biol 1999 ; 19 : 6333 - 6344 . 38 Goldfinger LE , Ptak C , Jeffery ED , Shabanowitz J , Hunt DF , Ginsberg MH . RLIP76 ( RalBP1 ) is an R - Ras effector that me - diates adhesion - dependent Rac activation and cell migration . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 174 : 877 - 888 . 39 Insall RH , Machesky LM . Actin dynamics at the leading edge : from simple machinery to complex networks . Dev Cell 2009 ; 17 : 310 - 322 . 40 Bucci C , Parton RG , Mather IH , et al . The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . R - Ras signals to active integrins and Rac via RIN2 1500 npg Cell Research | Vol 22 No 10 | October 2012 Cell 1992 ; 70 : 715 - 728 . 41 Lanzetti L , Palamidessi A , Areces L , Scita G , Di Fiore PP . Rab5 is a signalling GTPase involved in actin remodelling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 2004 ; 429 : 309 - 314 . 42 Baumeister MA , Martinu L , Rossman KL , Sondek J , Lemmon MA , Chou MM . Loss of phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate bin - ding by the C - terminal Tiam - 1 pleckstrin homology domain prevents in vivo Rac1 activation without affecting membrane targeting . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 11457 - 11464 . 43 Crompton AM , Foley LH , Wood A , et al . Regulation of Tiam1 nucleotide exchange activity by pleckstrin domain binding ligands . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 25751 - 25759 . 44 Mertens AE , Roovers RC , Collard JG . Regulation of Tiam1 - Rac signalling . FEBS Lett 2003 ; 546 : 11 - 16 . 45 Snyder JT , Rossman KL , Baumeister MA , et al . Quantitative analysis of the effect of phosphoinositide interactions on the function of Dbl family proteins . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 45868 - 45875 . 46 Takaya A , Kamio T , Masuda M , et al . R - Ras regulates exocytosis by Rgl2 / Rlf - mediated activation of RalA on endosomes . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 1850 - 1860 . 47 Xu J , Shi S , Matsumoto N , Noda M , Kitayama H . Identification of Rgl3 as a potential binding partner for Rap - family small G - proteins and profilin II . Cell Signal 2007 ; 19 : 1575 - 1582 . 48 Saito K , Kajiho H , Araki Y , et al . Purification and analysis of RIN family - novel Rab5 GEFs . Methods Enzymol 2005 ; 403 : 276 - 283 . 49 Wang Y , Colicelli J . RAS interaction with effector target RIN1 . Methods Enzymol 2001 ; 332 : 139 - 151 . 50 Astrof S , Hynes RO . Fibronectins in vascular morphogenesis . Angiogenesis 2009 ; 12 : 165 - 175 . 51 Rodriguez LG , Wu X , Guan JL . Wound - healing assay . Methods Mol Biol 2005 ; 294 : 23 - 29 . 52 Serini G , Ambrosi D , Giraudo E , Gamba A , Preziosi L , Bussolino F . Modeling the early stages of vascular network assembly . EMBO J 2003 ; 22 : 1771 - 1779 . 53 Pasapera AM , Schneider IC , Rericha E , Schlaepfer DD , Water - man CM . Myosin II activity regulates vinculin recruitment to focal adhesions through FAK - mediated paxillin phosphorylati - on . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 188 : 877 - 890 . 54 Askari JA , Tynan CJ , Webb SE , Martin - Fernandez ML , Balle - strem C , Humphries MJ . Focal adhesions are sites of integrin extension . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 188 : 891 - 903 . 55 Conklin MW , Ada - Nguema A , Parsons M , Riching KM , Kee - ly PJ . R - Ras regulates beta1 - integrin trafficking via effects on membrane ruffling and endocytosis . BMC Cell Biol 2010 ; 11 : 14 . 56 Saito K , Murai J , Kajiho H , Kontani K , Kurosu H , Katada T . A novel binding protein composed of homophilic tetramer exhi - bits unique properties for the small GTPase Rab5 . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 3412 - 3418 . 57 Scita G , Di Fiore PP . The endocytic matrix . Nature 2010 ; 463 : 464 - 473 . 58 Wozniak MA , Kwong L , Chodniewicz D , Klemke RL , Keely PJ . R - Ras controls membrane protrusion and cell migration through the spatial regulation of Rac and Rho . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 84 - 96 . 59 Hansen M , Prior IA , Hughes PE , et al . C - terminal sequences in R - Ras are involved in integrin regulation and in plasma membrane microdomain distribution . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003 ; 311 : 829 - 838 . 60 Tall GG , Barbieri MA , Stahl PD , Horazdovsky BF . Ras - acti - vated endocytosis is mediated by the Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange activity of RIN1 . Dev Cell 2001 ; 1 : 73 - 82 . 61 Kajiho H , Saito K , Tsujita K , et al . RIN3 : a novel Rab5 GEF interacting with amphiphysin II involved in the early endocytic pathway . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 4159 - 4168 . 62 Pellinen T , Arjonen A , Vuoriluoto K , Kallio K , Fransen JA , Ivaska J . Small GTPase Rab21 regulates cell adhesion and controls endosomal traffic of beta1 - integrins . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 173 : 767 - 780 . 63 Heasman SJ , Ridley AJ . Mammalian Rho GTPases : new in - sights into their functions from in vivo studies . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008 ; 9 : 690 - 701 . 64 Waterman - Storer CM , Worthylake RA , Liu BP , Burridge K , Salmon ED . Microtubule growth activates Rac1 to promote lamellipodial protrusion in fibroblasts . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 45 - 50 . 65 Nicot AS , Laporte J . Endosomal phosphoinositides and human diseases . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1240 - 1249 . 66 Lambert JM , Lambert QT , Reuther GW , et al . Tiam1 mediates Ras activation of Rac by a PI ( 3 ) K - independent mechanism . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 621 - 625 . 67 Mettouchi A , Klein S , Guo W , et al . Integrin - specific activa - tion of Rac controls progression through the G ( 1 ) phase of the cell cycle . Mol Cell 2001 ; 8 : 115 - 127 . 68 Kruger RP , Aurandt J , Guan KL . Semaphorins command cells to move . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 6 : 789 - 800 . 69 Neufeld G , Kessler O . The semaphorins : versatile regulators of tumour progression and tumour angiogenesis . Nat Rev Cancer 2008 ; 8 : 632 - 645 . 70 Sakurai A , Gavard J , Annas - Linhares Y , et al . Semaphorin 3E initiates antiangiogenic signaling through Plexin D1 by regulating Arf6 and R - Ras . Mol Cell Biol 2010 ; 30 : 3086 - 3098 . 71 Bolomini - Vittori M , Montresor A , Giagulli C , et al . Regula - tion of conformer - specific activation of the integrin LFA - 1 by a chemokine - triggered Rho signaling module . Nat Immunol 2009 ; 10 : 185 - 194 . 72 Zech T , Calaminus SD , Caswell P , et al . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH regulates α5β1 - integrin - mediated invasive migration . J Cell Sci 2011 ; 124 : 3753 - 3759 . 73 Tan W , Palmby TR , Gavard J , Amornphimoltham P , Zheng Y , Gutkind JS . An essential role for Rac1 in endothelial cell func - tion and vascular development . FASEB J 2008 ; 22 : 1829 - 1838 . 74 Huotari J , Helenius A . Endosome maturation . EMBO J 2011 ; 30 : 3481 - 3500 . 75 Hama H , Tall GG , Horazdovsky BF . Vps9p is a guanine nucle - otide exchange factor involved in vesicle - mediated vacuolar protein transport . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 15284 - 15291 . 76 Gerez L , Mohrmann K , van Raak M , et al . Accumulation of rab4GTP in the cytoplasm and association with the peptidyl - prolyl isomerase pin1 during mitosis . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 2201 - 2211 . 77 Rottner K , Hall A , Small JV . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr Biol 1999 ; 9 : 640 - 648 . 78 Sorkin A , von Zastrow M . Endocytosis and signalling : in - www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Chiara Sandri et al . 1501 npg tertwining molecular networks . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 ; 10 : 609 - 622 . 79 Rantala JK , Pouwels J , Pellinen T , et al . SHARPIN is an endo - genous inhibitor of β1 - integrin activation . Nat Cell Biol 2011 ; 13 : 1315 - 1324 . 80 Guidolin D , Vacca A , Nussdorfer GG , Ribatti D . A new image analysis method based on topological and fractal parameters to evaluate the angiostatic activity of docetaxel by using the Matrigel assay in vitro . Microvasc Res 2004 ; 67 : 117 - 124 . 81 Roberts M , Barry S , Woods A , van der Sluijs P , Norman J . PDGF - regulated rab4 - dependent recycling of alphavbeta3 in - tegrin from early endosomes is necessary for cell adhesion and This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - No Derivative Works 3 . 0 Unported License . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 3 . 0 spreading . Curr Biol 2001 ; 11 : 1392 - 1402 . ( Supplementary information is linked to the online version of the paper on the Cell Research website . )