INTRODUCTION Rat myotubes grown in tissue culture adhere to a vitronectin - coated glass substrate through two distinct structures , focal contact domains and clathrin - coated membrane domains . Intracellularly , the focal adhesions contain vinculin , talin , bundles of actin microﬁlaments , and associated proteins ( e . g . Bloch and Geiger , 1980 ; Bloch et al . , 1989 ; Samuelsson et al . , 1993 ; Plopper and Ingber , 1993 ) , and so are typical of focal adhesions in mononucleated cells . Clathrin - coated membrane domains are characterized by extensive arrays of clathrin that are too large to form as a result of individual coated vesicles fusing with the membrane ( Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) . Glycoproteins in these domains are so closely bound to the substrate that they block access of antibodies to the vitronectin coating the glass ( Baetscher et al . , 1986 ) . The identity of these glycoproteins and their mode of adhesion to the tissue culture substrate have remained unknown . Here we report that integrins , particularly vitronectin receptors ( VnR ) , are present at the two types of contact domains , and so are likely to account for the close interactions with the vitronectin substrate . We focused our attention on the VnR at the clathrin - coated membrane domains , as an association between clathrin and this family of integrins has not been widely reported . We used intracellular injection and affinity chromatography to show that the association of clathrin with the VnR is mediated by a limited region of the short cytoplasmic sequence in the b 5 subunit of the VnR . This region contains an NPXY motif that has been suggested to be a signal for assembly of clathrin complexes at the plasma membrane ( Chen et al . , 1990 ; Vaux , 1992 ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS Culture of primary muscle cells Primary cultures of rat myotubes were prepared as described ( Bloch 2729 Journal of Cell Science 111 , 2729 - 2740 ( 1998 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1998 JCS4539 Rat myotubes cultured in fetal calf serum adhere to vitronectin - coated substrates through two distinct structures , focal contacts and clathrin - coated membrane domains . We studied the integrins in myotubes to learn how they associate with these two domains . Double label immunoﬂuorescence studies with antibodies speciﬁc for clathrin , vinculin and several forms of integrin showed that focal contacts and clathrin - coated membrane domains contain both vitronectin receptors ( VnR , containing b 3 - and b 5 - integrins ) and ﬁbronectin receptors ( FnR , containing b 1 - integrin ) . VnR but not FnR associates tightly with the substrate in both domains , as the VnR alone remains attached to the coverslip when the lipid bilayer and other membrane proteins are removed by detergent . Ultrastructural studies conﬁrmed the localization of the b 5 subunit of the VnR at both domains . We used intracellular injection and affinity chromatography to test the possibility that clathrin at coated membrane domains associates with the cytoplasmic sequence of the b 5 subunit of the VnR . Injection of a synthetic peptide containing the NPXY motif from the cytoplasmic domain of the human b 5 subunit , SRARYEMASNPLYRKPIST , depleted clathrin from coated membrane domains without affecting clathrin in perinuclear structures or vinculin at focal contacts . Injection of the homologous b 1 peptide , MNAKWDTGENPIYKSAVITT , also containing an NPXY motif , had no signiﬁcant effect on any of these structures . Affinity matrices containing the b 5 but not the b 1 peptide selectively retained clathrin from myotube extract , and bound clathrin could be selectively eluted by soluble forms of the b 5 but not the b 1 peptide . Thus , a sequence including the NPXY motif in the integrin b 5 subunit is involved in the speciﬁc anchoring of the VnR , but not the FnR , to clathrin - coated membrane . Key words : Integrin , Vitronectin receptor , Fibronectin receptor , Vitronectin , Clathrin , Vinculin , Acetylcholine receptor , Muscle , Neuromuscular junction SUMMARY The vitronectin receptor associates with clathrin - coated membrane domains via the cytoplasmic domain of its b 5 subunit Patrick G . De Deyne 1 , 2 , * , Andrea O’Neill 1 , Wendy G . Resneck 1 , George M . Dmytrenko 3 , ‡ , David W . Pumplin 4 and Robert J . Bloch 1 Departments of 1 Physiology , 2 Surgery , 3 Neurology and 4 Anatomy & Neurobiology , School of Medicine , University of Maryland at Baltimore , Baltimore , MD 21201 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : pdedeyne @ surgery1 . umaryland . edu ) ‡ Present address : The Neurosurgical Group , Pensacola , FL 32501 , USA Accepted 3 July ; published on WWW 27 August 1998 2730 and Geiger , 1980 ; Bloch , 1979 ) . Brieﬂy , muscles from neonatal rat hindlimb were dissociated enzymatically and suspended at 10 6 cells / ml in Dulbecco - Vogt modiﬁed Eagle’s medium containing 10 % fetal calf serum ( medium ) . Cultures were initiated by applying aliquots ( 0 . 4 ml ) to glass coverslips ( Van Labs , Oxnard , CA ) and were supplemented the next day with 1 . 5 ml medium . Medium was removed 3 days later and replaced with medium containing 2 · 10 - 5 M cytosine arabinoside to kill dividing cells . Cultures were used 6 days after initial plating for most immunolocalization experiments and 4 - 5 days after plating for intracellular injections . Isolation of substrate - attached material To isolate substrate - attached material ( SAM ) , cultures were either extracted with saponin ( Bloch , 1984 ) or treated brieﬂy with ZnCl 2 and sheared with a stream of ice cold buffer ( Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) . Saponin removes > 99 % of total cellular protein from cultures , leaving only SAM remaining on the coverslip ( Bloch , 1984 ) . Shearing after treatment with ZnCl 2 removes most of the myotubes and contaminating ﬁbroblasts , but leaves membrane and associated peripheral membrane proteins on the coverslips . Some cultures were ﬁrst incubated with monotetramethylrhodamine - a - bungarotoxin ( R - BT ; 5 m g / ml in Hepes - buffered DMEM containing 5 % fetal calf serum ) to label acetylcholine receptors ( AChR ) . Large clusters of AChR form preferentially at the myotube - substrate interface ( e . g . Bloch and Geiger , 1980 ) and serve as a useful marker for SAM in these cultures . Preparations of SAM were usually ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) immediately after saponin extraction or shearing . Samples were often treated brieﬂy either before or after ﬁxation with 0 . 05 % or 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 to expose extracellular determinants ( Baetscher et al . , 1986 ) . Shearing and extraction with saponin yielded similar distributions of integrins , but FnR was only visualized in samples that were ﬁxed before extraction with Triton X - 100 ( see Results ) . Immunolabeling Some samples , labeled with R - BT to visualize AChR clusters in SAM , were prepared as above and incubated with rabbit antibodies to integrins or with control antibodies , followed by ﬂuoresceinated goat antibodies to rabbit IgG ( FGAR ) . Samples that had not been prelabeled with R - BT were double - labeled with mouse monoclonal antibodies to vinculin or to the heavy chain of clathrin and with rabbit antibodies to the integrins . Bound antibodies were visualized with rhodaminylated goat antibodies to rabbit IgG ( RGAR ) and ﬂuoresceinated antibodies to mouse IgG ( FGAM ) . Appropriate controls demonstrated the species speciﬁcity of the secondary antibodies . Labeled coverslips were mounted in glycerol , 1 M Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 ( 9 : 1 , v : v ) , supplemented with 1 mg / ml p - phenylenediamine to reduce photobleaching ( Longin et al . , 1993 ) . Samples were observed with a Zeiss IM - 35 microscope equipped for epiﬂuorescence and were photographed using Kodak TMAX 3200 ﬁlm that was exposed for 5 - 20 seconds and developed to an ASA of 1600 using Kodak TMAX developer ( Eastman - Kodak , Rochester , NY ) . Alternatively , samples were observed with a Zeiss 410 confocal laser scanning microscope , with pinhole settings to yield the highest possible resolution . ‘Bleed - through’ of ﬂuorescence from one channel to the other was minimal in both epiﬂuorescence and confocal images . Antibodies Antibodies against vitronectin and the vitronectin and ﬁbronectin receptors were obtained from Life Technologies ( Gaithersburg , MD ) . Antibodies speciﬁc for the b 1 , b 3 and b 5 subunits of integrin were purchased from Chemicon ( Temecula , CA ) . Monoclonal antibodies to vinculin ( 11 . 5 ) and to the heavy chain of clathrin ( X - 22 ) were kindly provided by Dr B . Geiger ( Weizmann Institute , Rehovot , Israel ) , and Dr F . Brodsky ( University of California , San Francisco , CA ) , respectively . An affinity - puriﬁed rabbit antibody to the COOH - terminal sequence of the b 5 subunit of integrin ( Ramaswamy and Hemler , 1990 ) was also generously provided by Dr M . Hemler ( Dana Farber Cancer Research Institute , Boston , MA ) and affinity - puriﬁed rabbit antibodies to the COOH - terminal sequences of the b 1 - and b 3 - integrin subunits were generously provided by Dr E . Ruoslahti ( The Burnham Institute , La Jolla , CA ) . A non - immune mouse monoclonal IgG ( MOPC - 21 ) and normal rabbit serum were routinely used as controls in immunolabeling experiments . The speciﬁcity of the anti - integrin antibodies were tested by immunoblotting of proteins from myotube cultures , separated by SDS - PAGE and transferred electrophoretically to nitrocellulose ( see below ) . The speciﬁcities of these and the other antibodies we have used have been established ( Mahaffey et al . , 1990 ; Pasqualini et al . , 1993 ; Adams and Watt , 1991 ; Leavesley et al . , 1992 ; Ruoslahti and Pierschbacher , 1987 ) . Secondary antibodies conjugated to ﬂuorescein or rhodamine were obtained from Jackson Laboratories ( West Chester , PA ) . Ultrastructural studies SAM was prelabeled with R - BT , isolated by shearing , ﬁxed in paraformaldehyde and labeled for 1 hour at RT with affinity - puriﬁed rabbit antibody to the COOH - terminal region of b 5 - integrin ( diluted 1 : 100 in 1 % bovine serum albumin in PBS ) , followed by ﬂuoresceinated mouse anti - rabbit IgG ( diluted similarly ) for 1 hour at RT . After brief washing , samples were incubated overnight at 4°C with goat anti - mouse IgG adsorbed to 10 nm colloidal gold ( Janssen Pharmaceuticals , Beerse , Belgium ) , diluted 1 : 10 in BANT ( 0 . 1 % BSA , 0 . 5 M NaCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM Tris - HCl , 20 mM NaN 3 , pH 7 . 4 ; Luther and Bloch , 1989 ) . AChR clusters labeled with the anti - integrin were chosen for the clarity of the ﬂuorescence label and a minimum of material visible by phase contrast microscopy . Circles around these structures were scribed with a diamond marking objective and broken out of the coverslips . The SAM was subjected to quick - freezing and deep - etch rotary replication as described previously ( Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) . Electron micrographs of replicas were taken at low magniﬁcation ( · 1 , 400 ) to compare with corresponding ﬂuorescence images and at high magniﬁcation ( · 30 , 000 or · 45 , 000 ) in stereo pairs with 6° of tilt . Intracellular injections Peptides were synthesized and puriﬁed by Dr N . Ambulos ( Biopolymer Core Facility , University of Maryland at Baltimore ) . The lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in microinjection buffer ( see below ) and stored as a 10 mM solution at 4°C . One 19mer peptide , SRARYEMASNPLYRKPIST , contained an ‘NPXY’ motif and ﬂanking sequence of the cytoplasmic domain of the b 5 subunit of human integrin ( Williams et al . , 1994 ) . The other 19mer , MNAKWDTGENPIYKSAVTT , contained the ‘NPXY’ motif and the ﬂanking sequence from the homologous region of the b 1 subunit ( Williams et al . , 1994 ) . Peptides ( 5 m M ) and ﬁxable dextran - rhodamine ( 0 . 75 mg / ml ; Molecular Probes , Oregon ) were dissolved in microinjection buffer ( 40 . 5 mM K 2 HPO 4 , 39 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 12 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , pH 7 . 25 ) for injection into cells . Prior to injection , myotubes were incubated with R - BT to assist in identifying substrate - apposed membrane . Only unbranched myotubes of similar size ( ~ 400 m m in length , 15 - 20 m m in width ) and showing large , well - deﬁned clusters of AChR were selected for injection . Micropipettes with an inner diameter of 0 . 5 m m were made from borosilicate glass capillaries containing an internal ﬁlament ( World Precision Instruments , Sarasota , FL ) on a model P - 87 Flaming / Brown microelectrode puller ( Sutter Instrument Co . , Novato , CA ) . Micropipettes were back - ﬁlled with the peptide - dextran solutions described above . For injection , the tip of the micropipette was pushed into the myotube by a smooth movement of the micromanipulator ( MMO - 203 Narashige , Tokyo , Japan ) . Approximately 3 nl of solution ( an estimated 10 % of the intra - cellular volume ) was injected into the cell at a constant ﬂow rate , and typically the microinjection took 1 - 2 P . G . De Deyne and others 2731 The association of vitronectin receptors with clathrin in cultured myotubes seconds per myotube . The micropipette was then withdrawn and moved to the next cell . Microinjection was followed under ﬂuorescent illumination to ensure that the injected ﬂuorescent dextran marker was retained by the cell , consistent with the cell remaining intact and adhering to the substrate . Following injection , cultures were incubated at 37°C for 1 . 5 hour , then ﬁxed , permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 5 minutes , and labeled with antibodies to clathrin or vinculin , followed by FGAM . Due to the presence of high concentrations of rhodamine - dextran in the myoplasm of injected cells , we usually used confocal laser scanning microscopy to examine these samples . Affinity chromatography Myotubes were collected at 4°C by scraping the cultures into 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ; pH 7 . 4 ) containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors ( 220 units / m l aprotinin , 1 mM benzamidine , 10 m g / ml leupeptin , 10 m g / ml antipain , 200 m g / ml soybean trypsin inhibitor , 100 m M phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride ) . The cell extract was centrifuged at 3 , 000 rpm for 3 minutes at 4°C in a clinical centrifuge and the supernatant was subjected to affinity chromatography on matrices containing peptides from the cytoplasmic domains of the b 5 or b 1 subunits of integrin ( see above ) , linked to a Multiple Antigenic Peptide ( MAP ) system ( Tam , 1988 ) . The MAP - peptides were covalently bound to CNBr - activated Sepharose 4B ( Pharmacia Biotech , Sweden ) , following the recommendations of the manufacturer . In addition to the b 1 - and b 5 - MAP conjugates , we also used an affinity matrix with an unrelated control peptide , SK - 1 , having the sequence , SEGLSDDEET . The columns were washed with PBS to elute unbound proteins ; bound protein was then eluted in 0 . 5 % SDS in PBS . Alternatively , material bound to the column was eluted with solutions containing 1 µg / ml of the b 1 and b 5 peptides dissolved in PBS . Fractions ( 1 ml ) were collected , analyzed by SDS - PAGE in 7 % acrylamide gels , and immunoblotted with antibodies to clathrin ( X - 22 ) . Bound antibodies were visualized colorimetrically with alkaline phosphatase - conjugated secondary antibodies and a kit obtained from Kierkegaard and Perry ( Gaithersburg , MD ) . RESULTS We isolated SAM from myotubes by extraction with saponin , to study AChR , or by shearing , to study structural proteins , and examined the distribution of the integrins in these preparations . We then focused on the interactions of integrin with clathrin - coated membrane , using intracellular injection techniques and affinity chromatography to identify a sequence on the cytoplasmic ‘tail’ of the integrin responsible for anchoring clathrin to coated membrane domains . Antibodies to the integrins in muscle cultures Rabbit antibodies to the b 1 , b 3 and b 5 subunits of integrin were obtained from two independent sources . We tested these antibodies by immunoblotting proteins isolated from cultures of rat myotubes that had been subjected to SDS - PAGE under reducing conditions ( Fig . 1A ) . Antibodies speciﬁc for the b 1 and b 5 subunits both reacted with doublets , of 150 and 130 kDa , and 140 and 120 kDa , respectively , consistent with other reports ( Damsky et al . , 1985 ; Bozyczko et al . , 1989 ) . Antibodies to the b 5 subunit also recognized a smaller band , at ~ 65 kDa ( Fig . 1A ) . Antibodies to VnR and FnR labeled the same bands recognized by anti - b 1 and anti - b 5 - integrin antibodies ( Fig . 1B , arrows ) . In addition , anti - FnR also reacted with a pair of bands at 95 and 90 kDa ( Fig . 1B , arrowheads ) that are likely to represent the extracellular domains of a - integrins , expected under the reducing conditions we used . Only one band in the immunoblots was not accounted for by integrin subunits , but this was also present in the sample blotted with non - immune rabbit serum ( Fig . 1 , lane 4 ) , indicating that it was due to non - speciﬁc binding of antibodies . Our results indicate that the subunit - speciﬁc antibodies and the antibodies to the heterodimeric integrins speciﬁcally recognize bands of the appropriate molecular masses in SDS - PAGE . Only antibodies that reacted with the integrins , and not non - immune kDa Fig . 1 . Speciﬁcity of antibodies to the b subunits of integrin in cultures of rat myotubes . Proteins extracted from cultures of rat myotubes were separated by SDS - PAGE under reducing conditions , transferred electrophoretically to nitrocellulose paper , and incubated with : ( A ) subunit speciﬁc rabbit antibodies to the b 1 , b 3 , and b 5 subunits of integrin or with non - immune rabbit serum ( NRS ) ; and ( B ) rabbit antibodies to the heterodimeric integrins , FnR and VnR . Bound antibody was visualized chromogenically after labeling with a secondary antibody conjugated to alkaline phosphatase . ( A ) Each of the anti - b - subunit antibodies speciﬁcally labeled 1 - 3 bands with apparent molecular masses appropriate for their respective antigens . The antibodies to the b 1 subunit labeled a doublet at 150 and 130 kDa , antibodies to the b 3 subunit reacted with a single band at 135 kDa , and antibodies to the b 5 subunit recognized three bands at 140 , 120 and 65 kDa . The band visualized at lower molecular masses ( around 40 kDa ) associated with antibodies non - speciﬁcally , as indicated by the reaction with non - immune serum . The positions of the molecular mass standards are shown to the left . ( B ) Antibodies to the FnR speciﬁcally reacted with 4 bands , at 150 , 130 , 95 and 90 kDa . The former 2 bands ( arrows ) were also recognized by anti - b 1 - integrin ( See A ) . The latter pair of bands ( arrowheads ) are likely to represent the extracellular domains of a - integrins . Antibodies to the VnR labeled bands at 140 , 120 and 65 kDa ( arrows ) , as also seen with the anti - b 5 - integrin ( see A ) . 2732 serum or control antibodies , labeled SAM speciﬁcally ( see below ) . Distribution of the integrins We used all the antibodies described above to localize integrins within AChR clusters . Neither the antibodies to the FnR and VnR , nor the subunit - speciﬁc antibodies to b 1 or b 5 integrin labeled the AChR - rich domains of clusters , but instead they all labeled the receptor - poor regions ( e . g . Fig . 2 ) . These regions have been previously shown to contain focal contacts and clathrin - coated domains ( Bloch and Geiger , 1980 ; Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ; see below ) . In general , antibodies to the FnR ( not shown ) or the b 1 - integrin ( Fig . 2A , B , C ) labeled these domains of clusters less intensely than antibodies to the VnR ( not shown ) or to b 5 - integrin ( Fig . 2D , E , F ) . The clusters were not labeled by non - immune rabbit antibodies ( not shown ) , and labeling by anti - b 5 - integrin was inhibited by its peptide antigen ( Fig . 2G , H , I ) . These results strongly suggest that labeling of AChR - poor domains by the anti - integrin antibodies was speciﬁc . Antibodies to the b 3 subunit of integrin did not label clusters to any signiﬁcant extent , although they labeled focal contacts in ﬁbroblasts brightly ( not shown ) . These results suggest that the FnR and its b 1 subunit , and the b 5 but not the b 3 form of the VnR , are present in AChR clusters . We compared the distribution of the FnR and VnR to vinculin and clathrin , which are markers for focal contacts and coated membrane domains in SAM derived from myotubes ( Bloch and Geiger , 1980 ; Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) . Anti - VnR and anti - FnR co - localized with anti - vinculin in focal contacts and with anti - clathrin in coated membrane domains ( Fig . 3A - I ) . Similarly , antibodies to b 1 - integrin ( not shown ) and b 5 - integrin ( e . g . Fig . 3J , K , L ) colocalized with these markers . These results indicate that the FnR , VnR , and their constituent b subunits are present in both focal contacts and clathrin - coated domains . In the following , we focus on the relationship between the clathrin - coated domains and the b 1 - and the b 5 - integrins . As the antibody to the COOH - terminal sequence of b 5 - integrin gave strong and speciﬁc labeling , we used it to conﬁrm the localization of the VnR to focal contacts and coated membrane at the ultrastructural level . Colloidal gold particles , representing sites of antibody binding , appeared at both focal contact domains and at clathrin - coated membrane domains . Stereo views ( Fig . 4 ) showed that gold particles at focal contacts were concentrated where actin ﬁlaments closely P . G . De Deyne and others Fig . 2 . Integrins in regions of AChR clusters poor in AChR . Cultures of myotubes were labeled with R - BT ( A , D , G ) , and clusters were isolated by extraction with saponin ( see Materials and Methods ) . Samples were ﬁxed , permeabilized brieﬂy with Triton X - 100 , and labeled with antibodies to the b 1 ( B ) or b 5 ( E ) subunits of integrins , followed by FGAR . The results show that both the b 1 - and b 5 - integrin subunits are present in dart - like structures resembling focal contacts ( arrows in B , C and E , F ) , and in small spots resembling clathrin - coated domains ( arrowheads in B , C and E , F ) . Double color overlay ( C and F ) shows that neither protein codistributes with AChR ( AChR is shown in red and the integrin subunits are shown in green in C , F ) . The binding of antibodies to the b 5 - integrin subunit was blocked in a 10 m M solution of the immunogenic peptide ( G , H , and overlay in I ) , suggesting that the labeling shown in E is speciﬁc . Bar , 10 m m . 2733 The association of vitronectin receptors with clathrin in cultured myotubes approached the inner membrane surface , consistent with the location of the cytoplasmic tail of b 5 - integrin . Clathrin - coated domains had more label around their edges , suggesting that the clathrin coat limits access of gold - adsorbed antibodies to the cytoplasmic tails of b 5 - integrin molecules . Alternatively , the b 5 subunit of integrin may be concentrated in these regions , while more central areas may be enriched in other integrins . VnR , but not FnR , blocks access to the substrate We showed previously that vitronectin coats the coverslip glass on which myotubes are grown , and that extraction of AChR clusters with Triton X - 100 leaves material remaining on the cover glass that binds concanavalin A ( Dmytrenko et al . , 1990 ) . This material is so tightly attached to the substrate that it blocks access of antibodies to the vitronectin beneath it ( Baetscher et al . , 1986 ) . We examined SAM further to learn if this material contains integrins . Even after extraction of unﬁxed , isolated membrane fragments with Triton X - 100 , we detected signiﬁcant amounts of VnR attached to the substrate ( Fig . 5A , B ) . The labeling pattern was consistent with the presence of the VnR in both focal contact and clathrin - coated membrane domains . Fig . 3 . VnR and FnR codistributes with vinculin and clathrin . Substrate - attached membrane ( SAM ) from cultures of rat myotubes was isolated by treatment with ZnCl 2 followed by shearing , ﬁxed , permeabilized with Triton X - 100 , and labeled with rabbit antibodies to the FnR ( B , E ) , VnR ( H ) , or b 5 - integrin subunit ( K ) , together with mouse monoclonal antibodies to either vinculin ( D , J ) or the heavy chain of clathrin ( A , G ) . The bound antibodies were visualized with RGAM and FGAR . Double color overlay images ( C , F , I , L ) show that labeling of the VnR and the FnR overlap ( yellow ) with labeling of both vinculin ( at focal contacts , arrows ) and clathrin ( at coated membrane domains , arrowheads ) . Similar results to those shown in B and E were obtained with the antibodies speciﬁc for the b 1 subunit of integrin ( Fig . 2 ) . Bar , 20 m m . 2734 Similarly treated samples were not labeled by a ﬂuorescent lipid probe , C 18 - diI ( not shown ) , indicating that the lipid bilayer had indeed been removed by the detergents . AChR had also been extracted from these samples , as R - BT labeling was absent . Despite strong labeling by antibodies to the VnR , little FnR labeling remained in these samples ( Fig . 5C , D ) , suggesting that most of the FnR had also been extracted by detergent . Thus , the binding of VnR to the substrate is not dependent on FnR . Furthermore , the VnR probably associates more stably with the substrate than the FnR and is therefore more likely to block access of anti - vitronectin antibodies to the vitronectin coating the coverslip . To test this idea we compared labeling by anti - VnR and anti - vitronectin antibodies . We observed a complementary staining pattern ( Fig . 5E , F ) : where VnR was present , vitronectin could not be immunolabeled , and where vitronectin was brightly immunolabeled , VnR was not detectable . The VnR - rich domains were also stained with ﬂuoresceinated concanavalin A ( e . g . Fig . 5A , B ) , which we had previously used to identify glycoproteins that were closely apposed to vitronectin on the glass coverslip ( Baetscher et al . , 1986 ) . These results suggest that the tight adhesion of myotubes to the substrate is mediated by VnR rather than by FnR . Perturbing clathrin - coated domains by microinjection Clathrin is bound to integral membrane proteins via the adaptin complex ( reviewed by Robinson , 1994 ; Schmid , 1997 ) . During endocytosis from the surface , AP - 2 binds to integral membrane proteins at or near sequences of amino acids , such as FRXY and NPXY , that are thought to form tight turns that serve as signals for assembly of coated membrane ( Chen et al . , 1990 ; Collawn et al . , 1990 ; Vaux , 1992 ) . We therefore studied the role of the NPXY motif common to both integrin subunits in anchoring clathrin complexes at coated membrane domains . We synthesized oligopeptides containing these NPXY motifs ( see Materials and Methods ) and injected them into myotubes . After injection , cells were incubated brieﬂy , then ﬁxed , permeabilized and immunolabeled . Given that the VnR is more stably associated with clathrin - coated membrane domains than the FnR , we anticipated that the oligopeptide containing the NPXY motif from the b 5 subunit would have a more potent effect than the homologous b 1 oligopeptide . Shortly after injection of the b 5 peptide , the labeling of clathrin - coated membrane domains by anti - clathrin was signiﬁcantly reduced ( Fig . 6B ) . This was not due to direct effects of the b 5 peptide on the anti - clathrin antibody , as immunoblotting by the antibody was unaffected in the presence of the peptide ( Fig . 8 , lanes 1 , 2 ) , even at concentrations much higher ( m M ) than those achieved intracellularly following injection . Injection of the b 1 peptide had no detectable effects on clathrin labeling and , indeed , cells injected with the b 1 peptide could usually not be distinguished from uninjected controls ( Fig . 6D , F ) . Double - blind evaluation revealed that a signiﬁcant reduction of labeling by anti - clathrin occurred in 21 of the 27 cells ( 77 % ) injected with the b 5 peptide , but only in 9 of the 33 cells ( 27 % ) injected with the b 1 peptide ( n = 33 ) . This difference was highly signiﬁcant by Chi 2 analysis ( P < 0 . 0001 ) . We also examined cells injected with the b 5 peptide to learn if clathrin was altered elsewhere in the cell . Clathrin labeling at perinuclear structures seemed unaffected by the b 5 peptide , P . G . De Deyne and others Fig . 4 . Ultrastructural localization of b 5 - integrin in focal contact and clathrin - coated membrane domains . Substrate - associated membrane fragments were isolated by treatment with ZnCl 2 followed by shearing , and labeled with antibodies directed to the C - terminal , cytoplasmic sequence of b 5 - integrin . Samples were labeled ﬁrst with FGAR and then with rabbit anti - goat IgG coupled to 10 nm particles of colloidal gold , and processed by quick - freeze , deep - etch , rotary - replication electron microscopy . Samples show immunogold labeling at the cytoplasmic surface of the cell membrane at sites where actin ﬁlaments associate ( double arrowheads ) , and at large clathrin - coated membrane domains ( C , arrowheads ) . Bar , 0 . 1 m m . 2735 The association of vitronectin receptors with clathrin in cultured myotubes suggesting that this sequence was not involved in the binding of clathrin to Golgi membranes ( Fig . 7D ) . Vinculin at focal contacts was also not affected by the injected b 5 peptide ( Fig . 7F ) , consistent with evidence that other integrin sequences help to mediate the binding of cytoskeletal proteins at focal contacts ( Reszka et al . , 1992 ; Otey et al . , 1993 ; Lewis and Schwartz , 1995 ) . These results , together with the lack of effect of the b 1 peptide , show that when myotubes are grown on a vitronectin substrate , the clathrin - AP - 2 complex associates with membrane domains that are enriched in the b 5 subunit of integrin by virtue of its ability to recognize the cytoplasmic sequence containing the NPXY motif and adjacent amino acids . Selective association with the clathrin complex with b 5 - integrin demonstrated by affinity chromatography The effect of the injected b 5 peptide could be due to interaction of this peptide with the clathrin - AP - 2 complex , or it could be indirect . For example , proteins with NPXY motifs are known to be involved in downstream signaling initiated by the activation of receptor tyrosine kinases ( reviewed by Fantl et al . , 1993 ) . Injection of the b 5 oligopeptide might therefore have pleiotropic effects on cells that result in the selective disaggregation of clathrin - coated membrane domains . In this case , we would not expect to see binding of the clathrin complex to the b 5 peptide in biochemical assays . If , however , the injected oligopeptide directly inhibits the ability of the clathrin complex to associate with integrins at coated membrane domains , the oligopeptide should associate with clathrin in vitro . We performed affinity chromatography on resins containing the b 5 and b 1 peptides to try to distinguish between these possibilities . We prepared the oligopeptides as MAP Fig . 5 . VnR , but not FnR , is tightly bound to the substrate . SAM was isolated by extraction with saponin , treated with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , ﬁxed , and double labeled with ﬂuoresceinated concanavalin A ( A , C ) or with mouse antibodies to vitronectin ( E ) together with rabbit antibodies to the FnR ( D ) or the VnR ( B , F ) and followed by FGAM ( E ) and RGAR ( B , D , F ) . The results show signiﬁcant amounts of VnR ( B ) but not FnR ( D ) remaining associated with the glass coverslip . Fluorescently labeled vitronectin is present over most of the substratum , but is not labeled by anti - vitronectin antibodies where the VnR is also present ( e . g . arrows in E , F ) . Bar , 20 m m . 2736 conjugates , to facilitate coupling to CNBr - activated Sepharose and to increase the binding capacities of the affinity resins . Myotube extracts were prepared in PBS containing 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 and passed over the affinity columns ; bound protein was eluted with SDS and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting . The affinity column carrying the b 5 peptide was considerably more effective in retaining clathrin than the column carrying the b 1 peptide ( Fig . 8A , lanes 4 , 6 ) . An unrelated sequence , SK - 1 , prepared as a MAP peptide and conjugated to Sepharose identically , was unable to retain any detectable clathrin ( Fig . 8A , lane 8 ) , conﬁrming the speciﬁcity of the interaction between clathrin and the b 5 oligopeptide . Columns carrying the b 1 or b 5 peptides did not bind myosin , talin , or vinculin ( not shown ) , all of which were present in the myotube extract . Although previous studies suggested that this region of the b 1 sequence could interact with talin ( Tapley et al . , 1989 ; see also Lewis and Schwartz , 1995 ) , the binding is weak ( Horwitz et al . , 1986 ) and would probably not be detected under our experimental conditions . We further examined the speciﬁcity of binding by using soluble peptides to compete for clathrin binding with the immobilized b 5 peptide . Clathrin that had been prebound to the affinity column carrying the MAP - b 5 peptide was eluted by the b 5 peptide but not by the b 1 peptide ( Fig . 8B ) . Similarly , the b 5 peptide , but not the b 1 peptide , prevented clathrin from binding the immobilized ligand ( not shown ) . These results indicate that the clathrin complex associates with a speciﬁc cytoplasmic sequence of b 5 - integrin , consistent with the idea that this sequence selectively anchors clathrin at coated membrane domains . DISCUSSION Rat myotubes in tissue culture attach to the substrate through two distinct membrane domains . One domain resembles focal contacts in mononucleate cells ( for a review see Kinch and Burridge , 1995 ) . The other is composed of clathrin - coated membrane plaques that are ﬂat and several times larger than individual clathrin - coated vesicles ( Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) . Our results suggest that myotube - substrate adhesion is mediated primarily by integrins of the VnR family located in both focal contacts and clathrin - coated membrane domains . We show further that a small region of the b 5 subunit of the VnR mediates the binding of the clathrin complex to the cytoplasmic surface of coated membrane domains . P . G . De Deyne and others Fig . 6 . Injection of a peptide containing the NPXY cytoplasmic sequence of the b 5 subunit perturbs clathrin distribution . Myotubes were labeled with R - BT and injected with ‘injection buffer’ containing rhodamine - dextran ( 0 . 75 mg / ml ) and an oligopeptide ( 0 . 5 m M ) that includes the cytoplasmic NPXY sequence of either b 5 - integrin ( A , B ) or b 1 - integrin ( C , D ) . Samples were then permeabilized and immunolabeled for clathrin . Rhodamine - dextran was used to identify injected cells . The AChR clusters present in substrate - attached membrane were visualized by R - BT ( A , C , E ) . Confocal microscopy was used to observe the immunolabeled clathrin at the same focal plane ( B , D , F ) . The uninjected control is shown in E and F . The b 5 but not the b 1 peptide perturbed clathrin organization at the substrate - attached membrane . Bar , 20 m m . 2737 The association of vitronectin receptors with clathrin in cultured myotubes The identity of VnR as the molecule that mediates substrate adhesion at the clathrin - coated membrane domains could not have been predicted easily from earlier studies . Smaller clathrin - coated structures have been reported to mediate cell - substrate adhesion ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Nicol and Nermut , 1987 ; Nermut et al . , 1991 ; Wayner et al . , 1991 ; Tawil et al . , 1993 ) but , with the exception of podosomes or ‘point contacts’ , the adhesive molecules that anchor them to the substrate have not been identiﬁed . Podosomes and point contacts are small , punctate structures that mediate adhesion through integrins and that associate with vinculin and actin ( Marchisio et al . , 1988 ; Nermut et al . , 1991 ; Tawil et al . , 1993 ; Arregui et al . , 1994 ) . Although the much larger clathrin - coated membrane domains of rat myotubes lack vinculin and actin ( Figs 3 and 4 ; see also Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) , they are also anchored to the substrate by integrins and , in particular , by the VnR . The presence of extracellular ligands is known to inﬂuence the accumulation and organization of integrins in the plasma membrane ( e . g . Singer et al . , 1988 ; Miyamoto et al . , 1995 ) . Consistent with this , the presence of vitronectin on the glass substrate ( Baetscher et al . , 1986 ) is probably the single most important determinant of integrin localization in cultured myotubes . The vitronectin - coated glass coverslip binds cellular material tightly enough to resist extraction by neutral detergent and to inhibit access of antibodies to the vitronectin on the substratum ( Baetscher et al . , 1986 ) . Although myotubes express both VnR and FnR , and both integrins associate with substrate - attached membrane ( SAM ) , the FnR binds to the substrate only weakly ( see below ) . By contrast the VnR binds very tightly indeed , so that it remains attached to the substrate even after many other integral and peripheral membrane proteins have been extracted by detergent ( Fig . 5B ) . This tight binding is almost certainly the result of the speciﬁcity of VnR for vitronectin and the high local concentrations of both ligand and receptor achieved at the myotube - substrate interface . A vitronectin substrate cannot explain the presence of VnR at two different membrane - cytoskeletal domains , however . Why should VnR in one domain associate with vinculin and proteins of focal contacts , but at the other associate only with clathrin , adaptin , and other proteins of coated membrane ? One possible explanation is that different forms of the VnR ( e . g . containing b 3 or b 5 subunits ) tend to associate preferentially with different structural proteins . Although the inconsistent labeling by anti - b 3 - integrin antibodies has made this difficult to conﬁrm in myotube membranes , this Fig . 7 . Microinjection of the b 5 peptide selectively displaces clathrin from coated membrane domains at the plasma membrane . Myotubes were labeled with R - BT and then injected with a solution containing the b 5 or b 1 oligopeptides ( 0 . 5 m M ) together with rhodamine - dextran ( 0 . 75 mg / ml ) , as outlined in the legend to Fig . 6 . Samples were then ﬁxed , permeabilized , and labeled with anti - clathrin ( B , D ) or anti - vinculin antibodies ( F ) , followed by secondary antibodies ( FGAM ) . Injected cells , identiﬁed from their intracellular content of rhodamine - dextran , were observed and photographed under confocal laser optics . Fluorescently labeled clusters of AChR marked the substrate - attached membrane in A and E ; the AChR cluster shown in A is not in the focal plane in C . Microinjection of the b 5 peptide perturbed the clathrin - coated domain at the substratum ( B ) . The perinuclear staining of clathrin in the same cell was unaffected ( D , arrow ) . Injection of the b 5 peptide did not affect vinculin at focal contacts ( E , F ) . Bar , 20 m m . 2738 explanation would be consistent with our results with ﬁbroblasts ( P . De Deyne and R . J . Bloch , unpublished ) , and with the results reported by others in carcinoma cells and astrocytes ( Wayner et al . , 1991 ; Tawil et al . , 1993 ) . In the former , a v b 3 partitioned preferentially into focal adhesions and a v b 5 partitioned into distinctive structures at substrate - associated membrane that appeared as small spots or irregular lines ( see also Nicol and Nermut , 1987 ) . From our results , it is likely that the regions enriched in a v b 5 in carcinoma cells and astrocytes are clathrin - coated membrane domains . Thus , these structures are probably more widespread than previously recognized and may play an important role in adhesion in many cells other than myotubes . Although clathrin associates with VnR at coated membrane domains , it is still not clear if this interaction is direct or indirect . The oligopeptides we used for microinjection and affinity chromatography contain an NPXY motif , a conserved sequence present in the cytoplasmic tails of the b 1 , b 3 , and b 5 subunits . In other molecules this sequence is believed to form a tight turn that interacts with the adaptin complex at the plasma membrane ( Chen et al . , 1990 ; Collawn et al . , 1990 ; Chang et al . , 1993 ; for reviews , see Robinson , 1994 ; Schmid , 1997 ) . It therefore seems likely that the b 5 oligopeptide interacts directly with the adaptin complex and only indirectly with clathrin . Preferential binding of the b 5 oligopeptide to adaptins at the plasmalemma would also explain its inability to disturb clathrin binding to Golgi membrane , which is mediated by a different set of adaptins ( reviewed by Sandoval and Bakke , 1994 ; Robinson , 1994 ; Schmid , 1997 ) . We have not been able to determine if the b 5 peptide does indeed bind to the adaptins , because these proteins have not yet been characterized in developing skeletal muscle . In preliminary experiments , antibodies to a 1 - adaptin ( kindly provided by Dr F . Brodsky ) labeled the clathrin - coated membrane domains of myotubes and also recognized several proteins that bound preferentially to the affinity matrix coupled to the b 5 oligopeptide ( not shown ) . The apparent molecular masses of these proteins were signiﬁcantly greater than 100 , 000 , the molecular mass of a 1 - adaptin , suggesting that muscle , like nerve ( Zhou et al . , 1993 ; Newman et al . , 1995 ) may have predominantly large isoforms of this molecule . Cytoplasmic tails of b subunits of integrins have many binding activities that have been ascribed to particular sequences ( Reszka et al . , 1992 ; Otey et al . , 1993 ; Cone et al . , 1994 ; Filardo et al . , 1995 ; Lewis and Schwartz , 1995 ; reviewed by Williams et al . , 1994 ) . Our results strongly suggest that the ability of VnR to concentrate clathrin at coated membrane domains depends largely on the NPXY sequence and surrounding amino acids in the cytoplasmic tail of the b 5 subunit . The homologous peptide of the b 1 - integrin , which helps to mediate the association of FnR with cytoskeletal proteins at focal contacts ( Tapley et al . , 1989 ; Reszka et al . , 1992 ; Lewis and Schwartz , 1995 ) , contains an NPXY sequence that is almost identical to that of the b 5 peptide , differing only in the substitution of isoleucine for leucine at the X position . Nevertheless , it has no noticeable effect on the organization of clathrin at coated membrane domains . This suggests that an NPXY motif in this region of the cytoplasmic sequence of b 5 - integrin is not sufficient to account for its association with clathrin . Flanking the NPXY motif of the b 1 sequence , however , only 9 of 19 amino acids ( 47 % ) are conserved or identical to those of the b 5 oligopeptide , with the largest changes immediately N - and C - terminal to the NPXY motif . These sequences also differ greatly between the b 5 and the b 3 subunits ( Williams et al . , 1994 ) . It therefore seems likely to us that the ability of the b 5 subunit to interact preferentially with clathrin relies in large part on amino acids that surround the NPXY motif , rather than on the NPXY signal itself . This is consistent with the fact that mutation of the NPXY sequence of b 1 - integrin to NPXS did not affect the clathrin - mediated internalization of the FnR in Chinese hamster ovary cells ( Vignoud et al . , 1994 ; P . G . De Deyne and others Fig . 8 . Affinity chromatography using the b 1 - and b 5 - integrin oligopeptides . ( A ) Lanes 1 and 2 show rat hippocampal homogenates that were subjected to SDS - PAGE , transferred electrophoretically to nitrocellulose paper , and immunoblotted with X - 22 anti - clathrin in the absence ( lane 1 ) or the presence ( lane 2 ) of the soluble b 5 peptide ( 1 m M ) . The peptide did not inhibit the reaction of anti - clathrin with its antigen . Lane 3 shows an immunoblot of myotube extracts probed with a non - speciﬁc mouse IgG , MOPC - 21 . No clathrin was detected . Lanes 4 - 6 show the results of immunoblotting the fractions from myotube extracts that were eluted from affinity columns linked to MAP - peptides . Synthetic MAP - peptides , with sequences identical to the sequences containing and ﬂanking the NPXY motifs of the b 5 and b 1 subunits of human integrins , or a control MAP - peptide , were covalently coupled to Sepharose beads . Extracts of myotubes prepared with non - denaturing detergent were applied to the columns . After unbound material was washed free of the columns , bound material was eluted with a solution containing SDS ( lanes 4 - 6 ) . Lane 4 : MAP - b 5 - Sepharose ; lane 5 : MAP - b 1 - Sepharose ; lane 6 : MAP - SK1 - Sepharose , which serves as an additional control . Clathrin , detected in immunoblots using monoclonal antibody X - 22 , was retained speciﬁcally by the MAP - b 5 - Sepharose column . ( B ) Myotube extracts were applied to MAP - b 5 - Sepharose and unbound material was removed by washing . The column was then eluted with solutions containing either the b 5 ( lane 2 ) or b 1 ( lane 1 ) oligopeptides ( 1 m g / ml buffered saline ) . Clathrin , detected in immunoblots using monoclonal antibody X - 22 , was selectively eluted by the b 5 oligopeptide . kDa kDa 2739 The association of vitronectin receptors with clathrin in cultured myotubes but see Vaux , 1992 ) . Our results suggest that the speciﬁcity of association of clathrin with b 5 - integrin can be studied effectively using homologous oligopeptides in which selected amino acids have been altered . Although association of the b 5 oligopeptide with the clathrin complex is sequence - speciﬁc , it is probably not modulated by phosphorylation . Our affinity chromatography protocols used synthetic peptides that were not phosphorylated and that were unlikely to be modiﬁed to any signiﬁcant extent during the course of the experiment . This suggests that , unlike the interaction of b 1 - integrin with talin ( Tapley et al . , 1989 ) , phosphorylation of the tyrosine in the NPXY sequence does not signiﬁcantly alter the ability of b 5 - integrin to interact with the clathrin - adaptin complex . Phosphorylation of the NPXY motif of b 5 - integrin probably has other important effects , however . Following ligand - integrin binding and activation of soluble tyrosine kinases ( Blystone et al . , 1996 ; Miyamoto et al . , 1995 ; Law et al . , 1996 ) , phosphorylation of the NPXY sequence of integrin might lead to the binding of proteins containing SH2 or PTB domains , with subsequent activation of several signaling cascades ( Kuriyan and Cowburn , 1997 ; Law et al . , 1996 ) . This raises the interesting possibility that the NPXY motif of b 5 - integrin serves as an intermediate in intracellular signaling when phosphorylated , but as a structural element when unphosphorylated . A reciprocal relationship between the activation of a tyrosine kinase cascade and the association of clathrin with large plaques of VnR , while of potential interest in a wide variety of cells , may be especially relevant in embryonic muscle cells at the time of innervation . Recent evidence indicates that agrin , a macromolecule deposited on muscle cells by motor neurons , can both bind to integrins ( Martin and Sanes , 1997 ) and activate a muscle - speciﬁc receptor tyrosine kinase ( MuSK : De Chiara et al . , 1996 ) to initiate the process of AChR clustering ( for reviews , see Glass and Yancopoulos , 1997 ; Slater , 1997 ; Wells and Fallon , 1997 ) . Simultaneously , neuregulin released by the motor neuron activates erbB receptors in the muscle membrane that in turn modulate the synthesis of new AChR ( Francoeur et al . , 1995 ) . These new AChR are processed through clathrin - coated vesicles ( Bursztajn and Fischbach , 1984 ; Porter - Jordan et al . , 1986 ; see also Matthews - Bellinger and Salpeter , 1983 ) and may be inserted preferentially into the postsynaptic membrane as it is assembled ( Campanelli et al . , 1992 ) . The association of integrins with both agrin in the synaptic cleft and large arrays of clathrin on the cytoplasmic surface of the sarcolemma suggests that clathrin - coated membrane domains may help both to direct the local insertion of AChR and to organize the signal transducing mechanisms responsible for postsynaptic differentiation of the neuromuscular junction . We are grateful to R . Meyer , J . Strong and D . Yarnell for their technical assistance , to Drs M . Hemler , F . Brodsky , B . Geiger , and E . Ruoslahti for their generous donations of antibodies , and to Dr J . Barker for her gift of the MAP conjugate of the SK - 1 peptide . Our research has been supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( NS 15513 to D . W . P . ; NS17282 to R . J . B . ) and the Muscular Dystrophy Association ( to R . J . B . ) , by a Clinical Investigator Development Award ( to G . M . D . ) , and by funds made available to P . G . D . D . by the School of Medicine , University of Maryland at Baltimore . REFERENCES Adams , J . C . and Watt , F . M . ( 1991 ) . Expression of b 1 , b 3 , b 4 , and b 5 integrins by human epidermal keratinocytes and non - differentiating keratinocytes . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 829 - 841 . Arregui , C . O . , Carbonetto , S . and McKerracher , L . ( 1994 ) . Characterization of neural cell adhesion sites : point contacts are the sites of interaction between integrins and the cytoskeleton of PC12 cells . J . Neurosci . 14 , 6967 - 6977 . Baetscher , M . , Pumplin , D . W . and Bloch , R . J . ( 1986 ) . Vitronectin at sites of cell - substrate contact in cultures of rat myotubes . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 369 - 378 . Bloch , R . J . ( 1979 ) . Dispersal and reformation of acetylcholine receptor clusters of cultured rat myotubes treated with inhibitors of energy metabolism . J . Cell Biol . 82 , 626 - 643 . Bloch , R . J . ( 1984 ) . Isolation of acetylcholine receptor clusters in substrate - associated material from cultured rat myotubes using saponin . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 984 - 993 . Bloch , R . J . and Geiger , B . ( 1980 ) . The localization of acetylcholine receptor clusters in areas of cell - substrate contact in cultures of rat myotubes . Cell 21 , 25 - 35 . Bloch , R . J . , Velez , M . , Krikorian , J . G . and Axelrod , D . ( 1989 ) . Microﬁlaments and actin - associated proteins at sites of membrane - substrate attachment within acetylcholine receptor clusters . Exp . Cell Res . 182 , 583 - 596 . Blystone , S . D . , Lindberg , F . P . , Williams , M . P . , McHugh , K . P . and Brown , E . J . ( 1996 ) . Inducible tyrosine phosphorylation of the b 3 integrins requires the a v integrin cytoplasmic tail . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 31458 - 31462 . Bozyczko , D . , Decker , C . , Muschler , J . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1989 ) . Integrin on developing and adult skeletal muscle . Exp . Cell Res . 183 , 72 - 91 . Bursztajn , S . and Fischbach , G . D . ( 1984 ) . Evidence that coated vesicles transport acetylcholine receptors to the surface membrane of chick myotubes . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 498 - 506 . Campanelli , J . T . , Ferns , M . , Hoch , W . , Rupp , F . , von Zastrow , M . , Hall , Z . and Scheller , R . H . ( 1992 ) . Agrin : a synaptic basal lamina protein that regulates development of the neuromuscular junction . CSH Symp . Quant . Biol . 57 , 461 - 472 . Chang , M . , Mallet , W . G . , Mostov , K . E . and Brodsky , F . M . ( 1993 ) . Adaptor self - aggregation , adaptor - receptor recognition and binding of alpha - adaptin subunits to the plasma membrane contribute to recruitment of adaptor ( AP2 ) components of clathrin - coated pits . EMBO J . 12 , 2169 - 2180 . Chen , W . J . , Goldstein , J . L . and Brown , M . S . ( 1990 ) . NPXY , a sequence often found in cytoplasmic tails , is required for coated pit - mediated internalization of the low density lipoprotein receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 3116 - 3123 . Collawn , J . F . , Stangel , M . , Kuhn , L . A . , Esekogwu , V . , Jing , S . , Trowbridge , I . S . and Tainer , J . A . ( 1990 ) . Transferrin receptor internalization sequence YXRF implicates a tight turn as the structural recognition motif for endocytosis . Cell 63 , 1061 - 1071 . Cone , R . I . , Weinacker , A . , Chen , A . and Sheppard , D . ( 1994 ) . Effects of beta subunit cytoplasmic domain deletions on the recruitment of the integrin alpha v beta 6 to focal contacts . Cell Adhes . Commun . 2 , 101 - 113 . Damsky , C . H . , Knudsen , K . A . , Bradley , D . , Buck , C . A . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1985 ) . Distribution of the cell substratum attachment ( CSAT ) antigen on myogenic and ﬁbroblastic cell in culture . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 1528 - 1539 . DeChiara , T . M . , Bowen , D . C . , Valenzua , D . M . , Simmons , M . V . , Poueymirou , W . T . , Thomas , S . , Kinetz , E . , Compton , D . L . , Rojas , E . , Park , J . S . , Smith , C . , Distefano , P . S . , Glass , D . J . , Burdern , S . J . and Yancopoulos , G . D . ( 1996 ) . The receptor tyrosine kinase MuSK is required for neuromuscular junction formation in vivo . Cell 85 , 501 - 512 . Dmytrenko , G . M . , Scher , M . G . , Poiana , G . , Baetscher , M . and Bloch , R . J . ( 1990 ) . Extracellular glycoproteins at acetylcholine receptor clusters of rat myotubes are organized into domains . Exp . Cell Res . 189 , 41 - 50 . Fantl , W . J . , Johnson , D . E . and Williams , L . T . ( 1993 ) . Signalling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 62 , 453 - 481 . Filardo , E . J . , Brooks , P . C . , Deming , S . L . , Damsky , C . and Cheresh , D . A . ( 1995 ) . Requirement of the NPXY motif in the integrin beta 3 subunit cytoplasmic tail for melanoma cell migration in vitro and in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 441 - 450 . Francoeur , J . R . , Richardson , P . M . , Dunn , R . J . and Carbonetto , S . ( 1995 ) . Distribution of erb - B2 , erb - B3 , and erb - B4 in the developing avian nervous system . J . Neurosci . Res . 41 , 836 - 845 . 2740 Glass , D . J . and Yancopoulos , G . D . ( 1997 ) . Sequential roles of agrin , MuSK and rapsyn during neuromuscular junction formation . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 7 , 379 - 384 . Horwitz , A . F . , Duggan , K . , Beckerle , M . C . and Burridge , K . ( 1986 ) . Interactions of plasma membrane ﬁbronectin receptor with talin : a transmembrane linkage . Nature 320 , 531 - 533 . Kuriyan , J . and Cowburn , D . ( 1997 ) . Modular peptide recognition domains in eukaryotic signaling . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 26 , 259 - 288 . Kinch , M . S . and Burridge , K . ( 1995 ) . Altered adhesions in ras - transformed breast epithelial cells . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 23 , 446 - 450 . Law , D . A . , Nannizzi - Alaimo , L . and Phillips , D . R . ( 1996 ) . Outside - in integrin signal transduction . Alpha IIb beta 3 ( GP IIb IIIa ) tyrosine posphorylation induced by platelet aggregation . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 10811 - 10815 . Leavesley , D . I . , Ferguson , G . D . , Wayner , E . A . and Cheresh , D . A . ( 1992 ) . Requirement of the integrin b 3 for carcinoma cell spreading or migration on vitronectin and ﬁbrinogen . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 1101 - 1107 . Lewis , J . M . and Schwartz , M . A . ( 1995 ) . Mapping in vivo associations of cytoplasmic proteins with integrin beta 1 cytoplasmic domain mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 151 - 160 . Longin , A . , Souchier , C . , French , M . and Bryon , P . A . ( 1993 ) . Comparison of anti - fading agents used in ﬂuorescence microscopy : image analysis and laser confocal microscopy study . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 41 , 1833 - 1840 . Luther , P . W . and Bloch , R . J . ( 1989 ) . Formaldehyde - amine ﬁxatives for immunocytochemistry of cultured Xenopus myocytes . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 37 , 75 - 82 . Mahaffey , D . T . , Peeler , J . S . , Brodsky , F . M . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1990 ) . Clathrin - coated pits contain an integral membrane protein that binds the AP - 2 subunit with high affinity . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 16514 - 16520 . Marchisio , P . C . , Bergui , L . , Guelfa , C . C . , Cremona , O . , D’Urso , N . , Schena , M . , Tesio , L . and Caligaris - Cappio , F . ( 1988 ) . Vinculin , talin and integrins are localized at speciﬁc adhesion sites of malignant B lymphocytes . Blood 72 , 830 - 833 . Martin , P . T . and Sanes , J . R . ( 1997 ) . Integrins mediate adhesion to agrin and modulate agrin signaling . Development 124 , 3909 - 3917 . Matthews - Bellinger , J . A . and Salpeter , M . M . ( 1983 ) . Fine structural distribution of acetylcholine receptors at developing mouse neuromuscular junctions . J . Neurosci . 3 , 644 - 657 . Maupin , P . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1983 ) . Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin ﬁlaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin ﬁxation . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 51 - 62 . Miyamoto , S . , Teramato , H . , Coso , O . A . , Gutkind , J . S . , Burbelo , P . D . , Akiyama , S . K . and Yamada , K . M . ( 1995 ) . Integrin function : Molecular hierarchies of cytoskeletal signaling molecules . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 791 - 805 . Nermut , M . V . , Eason , P . , Hirst , E . M . and Kellie , S . ( 1991 ) . Cell / substratum adhesions in RSV - transformed rat ﬁbroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 193 , 382 - 397 . Newman , L . S . , Mc Keever , M . O . , Okano , H . J . and Darnell , R . B . ( 1995 ) . Beta - NAP , a cerebellar degeneration antigen , is using a neurin - speciﬁc coat protein . Cell 82 , 773 - 783 . Nicol , A . and Nermut , M . V . ( 1987 ) . A new type of substratum adhesion structure in NRK cells revealed by correlated interference reﬂection and electron microscopy . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 43 , 348 - 357 . Otey , C . A . , Vasquez , G . B . , Burridge , K . and Erickson , B . W . ( 1993 ) . Mapping of the a - actinin binding site within the b 1 integrin cytoplasmic domain . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 21193 - 21197 . Pasqualini , R . , Bodorova , J . , Ye , S . and Hemler , M . E . ( 1993 ) . A study of the structure , function and distribution of b 5 integrins using novel anti - b 5 monoclonal antibodies . J . Cell Sci . 105 , 101 - 111 . Plopper , G . and Ingber , D . E . ( 1993 ) . Rapid induction and isolation of focal adhesion complexes . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 193 , 571 - 578 . Porter - Jordan , K . , Benson , R . J . J . , Buoniconti , P . and Fine , R . E . ( 1986 ) . An acetylcholinesterase - mediated density shift technique demonstrates that coated vesicles from chick myotubes may contain both newly synthesized acetylcholinesterase and acetylcholine receptors . J . Neurosci . 6 , 3112 - 3119 . Pumplin , D . W . and Bloch , R . J . ( 1990 ) . Clathrin - coated membrane : a distinct membrane domain in acetylcholine receptor clusters of rat myotubes . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 15 , 121 - 134 . Ramaswamy , H . and Hemler , M . E . ( 1990 ) . Cloning , primary structure and properties of a novel human integrin beta subunit . EMBO J . 9 , 1561 - 1568 . Reszka , A . A . , Hayashi , Y . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1992 ) . Identiﬁcation of amino acid sequences in the integrin beta 1 cytoplasmic domain implicated in cytoskeletal association . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 1321 - 1330 . Robinson , M . S . ( 1994 ) . The role of clathrin , adaptors and dynamin in endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 , 538 - 544 Ruoslahti , E . and Pierschbacher , M . D . ( 1987 ) . New perspectives in cell adhesion : RGD and integrins . Science 238 , 491 - 497 . Samuelsson , S . J . , Luther , P . W . , Pumplin , D . W . and Bloch , R . J . ( 1993 ) . Structures linking microﬁlament bundles to the membrane at focal contacts . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 485 - 496 . Sandoval , I . V . and Bakke , O . ( 1994 ) . Targeting of membrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes . Trends Cell Biol . 4 , 292 - 297 . Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an integrated process . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 511 - 548 . Singer , I . I . , Scott , S . , Kawka , D . W . , Kazazis , D . M . , Gailit , J . and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1988 ) . Cell surface distribution of ﬁbronectin and vitronectin receptors depends on substrate composition and extracellular matrix accumulation . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 2171 - 2182 . Slater , C . R . , Young , C . , Wood , S . J . , Bewick , G . S . , Anderson , L . V . , Baxter , P . , Fawcett , P . R . , Roberts , M . , Jacobson , L . , Kuks , J . , Vincent , A . , and Newsom - Davis , J . ( 1997 ) . Utrophin abundance is reduced at neuromuscular junctions of patients with both inherited and acquired acetylcholine receptor deﬁciencies . Brain 120 , 1513 - 1531 . Tapley , P . , Horwitz , A . F . , Buck , C . , Duggan , K . and Rohrschneider , L . ( 1989 ) . Integrins isolated from Rous sarcoma virus - transformed chicken embryo ﬁbroblasts . Oncogene 4 , 325 - 333 . Tam , J . P . ( 1988 ) . Synthetic peptide vaccine design : synthesis and properties of a high - density multiple antigenic peptide system . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 5409 - 5413 . Tawil , N . , Wilson , P . and Carbonetto , S . ( 1993 ) . Integrins in point contacts mediate cell spreading : factors that regulate integrin accumulation in point contacts vs . focal contacts . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 261 - 271 . Vaux , D . ( 1992 ) . The structure of an endocytosis signal . Trends Cell Biol . 2 , 189 - 192 . Vignoud , L . , Usson , Y . , Balzac , F . , Tarone , G . and Block , M . R . ( 1994 ) . Internalization of the alpha 5 beta 1 integrin does not depend on ‘NPXY’ signals . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 199 , 603 - 611 . Wayner , E . A . , Orlando , R . A . and Cheresh , D . A . ( 1991 ) . Integrins alpha v beta 3 and alpha v beta 5 contribute to cell attachment to vitronectin but differentially distribute on the cell surface . J . Cell Biol . 113 , 919 - 929 . Wells , D . G . and Fallon , J . R . ( 1996 ) . The state of the union . Neuromuscular junction . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1073 - 1075 . Williams , M . J . , Hughes , P . E . , O’Toole , T . E . and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1994 ) . The inner world of cell adhesion : integrin cytoplasmic domains . Trends Cell Biol . 4 , 109 - 112 . Zhou , S . , Tannery , N . H . , Yang , J . , Puszkin , S . and Lafer , E . M . ( 1993 ) . The synapse - speciﬁc phosphoprotein F1 - 20 is identical to the clathrin assembly protein AP - 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 12655 - 12662 . P . G . De Deyne and others