Volume 30 March 21 , 2019 851 MBoC | ARTICLE Ena / VASP processive elongation is modulated by avidity on actin filaments bundled by the filopodia cross - linker fascin ABSTRACT Ena / VASP tetramers are processive actin elongation factors that localize to di - verse F - actin networks composed of filaments bundled by different cross - linking proteins , such as filopodia ( fascin ) , lamellipodia ( fimbrin ) , and stress fibers ( α - actinin ) . Previously , we found that Ena takes approximately threefold longer processive runs on trailing barbed ends of fascin - bundled F - actin . Here , we used single - molecule TIRFM ( total internal reflection fluo - rescence microscopy ) and developed a kinetic model to further dissect Ena / VASP’s proces - sive mechanism on bundled filaments . We discovered that Ena’s enhanced processivity on trailing barbed ends is specific to fascin bundles , with no enhancement on fimbrin or α - actinin bundles . Notably , Ena / VASP’s processive run length increases with the number of both fascin - bundled filaments and Ena “arms , ” revealing avidity facilitates enhanced processivity . Consis - tently , Ena tetramers form more filopodia than mutant dimer and trimers in Drosophila cul - ture cells . Moreover , enhanced processivity on trailing barbed ends of fascin - bundled filaments is an evolutionarily conserved property of Ena / VASP homologues , including human VASP and Caenorhabditis elegans UNC - 34 . These results demonstrate that Ena tetramers are tailored for enhanced processivity on fascin bundles and that avidity of multiple arms associ - ating with multiple filaments is critical for this process . Furthermore , we discovered a novel regulatory process whereby bundle size and bundling protein specificity control activities of a processive assembly factor . INTRODUCTION Many important cellular functions depend on formation of actin cy - toskeleton networks at the correct time and location with specific architectures and dynamics ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ; Campellone and Welch , 2010 ) . For example , filopodia are filamentous actin ( F - actin ) - rich finger - like protrusions that elongate from the lamelli - podium , a dense , branched F - actin network kept short by capping protein ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) at the cell periphery . Filopodia are important for cell motility and environment sensing . Filopodial actin filaments are assembled by actin elongation factors such as formins and Enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( Ena / VASP ) ( Mattila and Lappalainen , 2008 ) . The 10 – 30 filaments in filopodia are bundled primarily by fascin , a globular cross - linking protein con - taining β - trefoil domains ( Vignjevic et al . , 2006a ; Jansen et al . , 2011 ) . Fascin bundles are composed of parallel filaments with nar - row spacing , between 8 and 10 nm ( Cant et al . , 1994 ; Edwards and Bryan , 1995 ; Jansen et al . , 2011 ; Yang et al . , 2013 ) . During filopodia initiation , Ena / VASP localizes to the edge of the lamellipodium where it can compete with capping protein for barbed ends Monitoring Editor Manuel Théry CEA , Hopital Saint Louis Received : Aug 9 , 2018 Revised : Dec 6 , 2018 Accepted : Dec 27 , 2018 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E18 - 08 - 0500 ) on January 2 , 2019 . † These authors contributed equally to this work . * Address correspondence to : David R . Kovar ( drkovar @ uchicago . edu ) . © 2019 Harker et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : CC , coiled coil ; FRAP , fluorescence recovery after photo - bleaching ; SH3 , SRC Homology 3 ; TIRFM , total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ; WT , wild type . Alyssa J . Harker a , Harshwardhan H . Katkar b , c , d , † , Tamara C . Bidone b , c , d , † , Fikret Aydin b , c , d , Gregory A . Voth b , c , d , Derek A . Applewhite e , and David R . Kovar a , f , * a Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , b Department of Chemistry , c The James Franck Institute , and d Institute for Biophysical Dynamics , and f Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology , University of Chicago , Chicago , IL 60637 ; e Department of Biology , Reed College , Portland , OR 97202 852 | A . J . Harker et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell ( Bear et al . , 2002 ; Bear and Gertler , 2009 ; Svitkina et al . , 2003 ; Barzik et al . , 2005 ; Applewhite et al . , 2007 ; Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) and facilitate generation of long , straight actin filaments . Ena / VASP sub - sequently localizes to the tips of emerging and mature filopodia , ultimately resulting in fascin - bundled filaments of the same length ( Faix and Rottner , 2006 ; Gupton and Gertler , 2007 ) , presumably en - suring uniform thickness of filopodia required for protrusive force ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ; Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . Ena / VASP is a multidomain homotetramer with homologues in all metazoan cells ( Sebé - Pedrós et al . , 2013 ) . A few Ena / VASP ho - mologues have been biochemically characterized , including human VASP ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Chereau and Dominguez , 2006 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) , Drosophila Enabled ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) , and Dictyoste - lium VASP ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ) . Ena / VASP proteins contain two conserved Ena / VASP homology domains , EVH1 and EVH2 ( Figure 1A ) . The N - terminus EVH1 domain is important for cellular localization and binds to proteins with FPPPP ( FP4 ) repeats , such as lamellipodin , zyxin , and formin ( Ball et al . , 2001 ; Bilancia et al . , 2014 ) . The C - terminus EVH2 domain consists of three smaller FIGURE 1 : Ena Δ L has enhanced processivity on F - actin bundles formed specifically by fascin . ( A ) Ena / VASP domain organization and constructs used for Ena , UNC - 34 , and VASP : Self - labeling tag ( SNAP ) , Ena / VASP homology domain 1 ( EVH1 ) , polyproline region ( PPR ) , Ena / VASP homology domain 2 ( EVH2 ) includes G - actin binding domain ( G ) , F - actin binding domain ( F ) , coiled coil region ( CC ) . * Putative domain . Two - color TIRFM visualization of 1 . 5 µM Mg - ATP - actin ( 15 % Oregon green - actin ) with 15 pM SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L and unlabeled 130 nM human fascin , 250 nM fly fascin Singed , 125 nM a - actinin , or 100 nM fimbrin . ( B ) Cartoon . Ena / VASPs bound to leading and trailing barbed ends in a fascin bundle . ( C , D ) Representative experiment of OG - actin with SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L and fascin . Arrows indicate leading ( orange ) , first trailing ( white ) , second trailing ( yellow ) , and third trailing ( blue ) barbed ends . ( C ) Merged time - lapse micrographs . Scale bar , 5 µm . ( D ) Merged kymograph of filament length ( scale bar , 5 µm ) over time ( time bar , 10 s ) . ( E – H ) Kaplan – Meier curves representing average processive run lengths ( τ ) for Ena Δ L with ( E ) fascin , ( F ) Singed , ( G ) α - actinin , or ( H ) fimbrin on leading ( red ) and trailing ( blue ) barbed ends . Error bars , 95 % CI . n ≥ 127 . ( I ) Average processive run lengths for leading ( red ) and trailing ( blue ) barbed ends shown in E – H for 2 - filament bundles with fascin , Singed , α - actinin , or fimbrin . P values ( * < 0 . 0001 ) . Error bars , 95 % CI . ( J ) Average processive run lengths for antiparallel and parallel 2 - filament α - actinin ( green ) or fimbrin ( purple ) bundles . Error bars , 95 % CI . n ≥ 64 . ( K ) Fold increase of barbed end elongation rates of Ena Δ L on fascin ( yellow ) , Singed ( blue ) , α - actinin ( green ) , or fimbrin ( purple ) bundled filaments . Error bars , SEM . n ≥ 5 barbed ends from at least two movies . Volume 30 March 21 , 2019 Ena / VASP processivity on actin bundles | 853 subdomains : G - actin binding domain ( GAB ) ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Ferron et al . , 2007 ) , F - actin binding domain ( FAB ) ( Dominguez and Holmes , 2011 ) , and a C - terminal coiled - coil tetramerization domain ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Kuhnel et al . , 2004 ) . Between the EVH1 and EVH2 domains there is a poly - proline – rich region that binds profilin as well as SH3 domains ( Ferron et al . , 2007 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) . In addition to the leading edge and tips of filopodia , Ena / VASP proteins also localize to focal adhesions and stress fibers ( Reinhard et al . , 1992 ; Haffner et al . , 1995 ; Smith et al . , 2010 ; Gateva et al . , 2014 ) , which are composed of filaments cross - linked by a Calponin Homology ( CH ) domain superfamily cross - linker , α - actinin . Bundles formed by α - actinin can contain either parallel or antiparallel fila - ments with wide spacing ( 30 – 36 nm ) ( Sjöblom et al . , 2008 ) . Another CH domain superfamily member , fimbrin / plastin , localizes to the lamellipodia and base of filopodia . In comparison , fimbrin bundles filaments with mixed polarity , but has narrow spacing ( 10 – 12 nm ) , similar to fascin ( Hanein et al . , 1998 ) . Ena / VASP has been shown to cluster in cells ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ; Applewhite et al . , 2007 ) , and the processive elongation activity of clustered Ena / VASP is enhanced in vitro ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 , 2011 ; Brühmann et al . , 2017 ) . Although it was originally thought that clustering of Ena / VASP was required for processive elongation of F - actin and competition with capping protein , individual tetramers are also active processive assembly factors . In solution , human VASP tetramers processively elongate filaments for short ∼ 1 . 45 s runs and antagonize capping protein ( Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) and Drosophila Ena tetramers processively elongate filaments for longer ∼ 10 s runs and protect against capping ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , it is possible that individual Ena / VASP tetramers also have critical cellular functions , requiring further investigation of the mechanism of Ena / VASP tetramers , particularly on bundled actin filaments such as those found in filopodia . Within the convergent elongation model for filopodia formation ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) , filaments bundled by fascin within nascent fi - lopodia are likely to have varied lengths as they emerge from the lamellipodium . In these early fascin bundles , in contrast to the shorter actin filaments ( trailing filaments ) , the longest actin filament ( leading filament ) would have no nearby F - actin at its barbed end . A mechanism must exist so that trailing filament barbed ends can catch up to the leading filament barbed end , resulting in filaments of equal length in mature filopodia . Consistent with this possibility , we previously discovered that Ena makes longer processive runs on the trailing barbed ends of actin filaments bundled by fascin in vitro ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . Specifically , individual tetramers of a func - tional version of Drosophila Enabled ( Ena Δ L ) , in which a linker in the middle of the sequence is removed ( Figure 1A ) , remain processively associated with trailing barbed ends in fascin bundles threefold lon - ger ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . However , the underlying molecular mechanisms that facilitate Ena’s enhanced processivity on bundled actin filaments remain unclear . We therefore used a combination of in vitro reconstitution with single - molecule multi - color total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) , kinetic modeling , and analysis of Drosophila culture cells to characterize the dynamics and function of processive elongation of single and bundled filaments by multiple Ena / VASP homologues including Ena , human VASP , and Caenorhabditis elegans UNC - 34 . Together , our experiments and simulations inform our mechanistic understanding of single Ena / VASP molecules on single and bundled filaments , which demon - strate that avidity of multiple filaments within fascin bundles and multiple Ena arms leads to increased processivity of tetrameric Ena on trailing barbed ends , and reveal a novel regulatory process whereby the particular F - actin bundling protein matters for Ena / VASP processivity . RESULTS Ena is more processive on trailing barbed ends of both human and fly fascin ( Singed ) bundles To understand what features are important for Drosophila Ena’s en - hanced processive run length on trailing barbed ends within human fascin bundles ( Figure 1B ) ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) , we first tested whether a different fascin homologue also facilitates enhanced resi - dence times . We used two - color TIRFM to directly visualize the as - sembly of 1 . 5 μM Mg - ATP - actin monomers ( 15 % Oregon green la - beled ) with 15 pM fluorescently labeled SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L ( referred to as Ena Δ L ) ( Figure 1A ) and human fascin or fly fascin , Singed . TIRFM allows direct visualization of individual Ena Δ L molecule dy - namics on single and bundled actin filament barbed ends . Ena Δ L processive run lengths were measured for leading and single fila - ment barbed ends ( collectively referred to as leading ) as well as trailing barbed ends ( Figure 1 , C and D , and Supplemental Movie S1 ) . Kaplan Meier survival curves were calculated from individual Ena Δ L processive runs ( Figure 1 , E and F ) , revealing that Ena Δ L re - mains associated with trailing barbed ends ( τ fascin = 23 . 7 s , τ Singed = 28 . 1 s ) approvimately threefold longer than with leading barbed ends ( τ fascin = 8 . 4 s , τ Singed = 10 . 1 s ) for both human fascin and fly Singed ( Figure 1I and Supplemental Table S1 ) , consistent with our previous findings ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , enhancement of Ena Δ L’s processive elongation on trailing barbed ends is not spe - cific to a particular fascin homologue . Ena’s residence time is not enhanced on trailing barbed ends of fimbrin and α - actinin bundles To determine whether diverse bundle architectures are similarly suf - ficient to enhance Ena’s processivity on trailing barbed ends , we tested the effect of bundling proteins with distinct properties . Fascin forms narrow ( 8 – 10 nm ) bundles consisting of only parallel filaments ( Cant et al . , 1994 ; Edwards and Bryan , 1995 ; Jansen et al . , 2011 ; Yang et al . , 2013 ) . In contrast , α - actinin makes more widely spaced bundles ( 30 – 36 nm ) of both parallel and antiparallel filaments ( Sjöblom et al . , 2008 ) . Fimbrin has similar narrow spacing to fascin ( 10 – 12 nm ) , but can also make bundles of mixed polarity ( Hanein et al . , 1998 ) . First , we measured elongation rates of Ena Δ L - bound leading and trailing barbed ends of filaments bundled by human fascin , fly fascin Singed , α - actinin , or fimbrin . Two - color TIRFM visu - alization of control and Ena Δ L - bound barbed ends revealed a simi - lar fold increase in Ena Δ L - mediated actin elongation for leading ( ∼ 2 . 2 - to 3 - fold ) and trailing ( ∼ 2 - to 2 . 5 - fold ) barbed ends with all four bundling proteins ( Figure 1K and Supplemental Tables S2 and S3 ) . Therefore , Ena’s barbed end elongation enhancement is bun - dling protein independent . Conversely , Ena’s enhanced processivity on trailing barbed ends is specific to fascin bundles . The average processive run length on leading barbed ends with all four bundling proteins is similar , ∼ 10 s ( Figure 1I ) . However , there is no enhancement of Ena Δ L’s average residence time on trailing barbed ends of α - actinin ( τ = 9 . 4 s ) or fimbrin ( τ = 8 . 7 s ) bundles ( Figure 1 , G – I , and Supplemental Table S1 ) . Therefore , F - actin bundling proteins are not universally suffi - cient to enhance Ena’s processivity on trailing barbed ends . Although fascin exclusively forms parallel bundles , α - actinin and fimbrin form bundles composed of filaments with mixed polarities . We therefore compared Ena Δ L’s residence time on trailing barbed ends in parallel and antiparallel two - filament bundles . For both fim - brin and α - actinin bundles , the average residence times for trailing 854 | A . J . Harker et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell parallel and antiparallel barbed ends are equivalent ; thus , neither bundler enhances Ena Δ L’s processivity ( Figure 1J and Supplemental Table S4 ) . Therefore , neither “fascin - like” filament spacing ( 8 – 10 nm ) nor polarity ( parallel ) of actin filaments within bundles is suffi - cient to facilitate increased processivity on trailing barbed ends . Given that Ena Δ L’s approximately threefold enhancement of proces - sivity on trailing barbed ends is specific to fascin , different bundling proteins could regulate Ena’s specific activity for different F - actin networks . Ena’s processive run length increases with bundle size Filopodia are composed of ∼ 10 – 30 actin filaments bundled by fascin ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ; Faix and Rottner , 2006 ) , suggesting an avidity mechanism where enhanced processivity depends on Ena / VASP simultaneously associating with a barbed end and sides of neighboring filaments . To test whether the number of filaments in a fascin bundle positively correlates with processive run length , we determined the dependence of Ena Δ L’s enhanced processivity on fascin bundle size ( Figure 2A ) . Average run lengths on trailing barbed ends ( Figure 1 , E and F ) were thereby parsed into two - fil - ament bundles or three - or more filament bundles for both human and fly fascin ( Figure 2 , B – D , and Supplemental Table S1 ) . Ena Δ L’s average residence time on trailing barbed ends of a two - filament bundle ( τ fascin = 16 . 8 s , τ Singed = 21 . 7 s ) is approximately twofold longer than on single filament barbed ends ( τ fascin = 8 . 9 s , τ Singed = 10 . 0 s ) . Furthermore , there is an additional ∼ 1 . 5 - fold increase in processivity when Ena Δ L is bound to trailing barbed ends of three - or more filament bundles ( τ fascin = 26 . 0 s , τ Singed = 32 . 2 s ) ( Figure 2D ) . Therefore , consistent with an avidity effect , Ena Δ L’s processivity increases with the number of fascin - bundled fila - ments . In contrast , Ena Δ L’s enhanced processivity on trailing barbed ends of fascin bundles is not altered by the concentration of fascin ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) . This indicates that the mecha - nism for Ena’s enhanced processivity is independent of fascin con - centration and does not likely rely on a direct interaction between fascin and Ena . FIGURE 2 : Ena / VASP’s processive run length increases with the number of filaments in a fascin bundle . ( A ) Cartoons of Ena / VASP on a single filament and 2 - and 3 - filament fascin bundles . ( B – G ) Two - color TIRFM visualization of 1 . 5 µM Mg - ATP - actin ( 15 % Oregon green - actin ) with fly SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L ( red ) , human SNAP ( 549 ) - VASP or worm SNAP ( 549 ) - UNC - 34 and unlabeled 130 nM human fascin or 250 nM Singed as indicated . ( B , C ) Kaplan – Meier curves representing average processive run lengths ( τ ) for 15 pM Ena Δ L with ( B ) fascin or ( C ) Singed on single filaments ( red ) , or bundles with 2 ( blue ) and ≥ 3 ( green ) filaments . Error bars , 95 % CI . n ≥ 98 . ( D ) Average processive run lengths for increasing number of filaments in fascin ( yellow ) or Singed ( blue ) bundles shown in B and C . Error bars , 95 % CI . P values ( * < 0 . 0001 ) . ( E , F ) Kaplan – Meier curves representing run lengths ( τ ) for ( E ) 25 pM VASP or ( F ) 18 pM UNC - 34 with fascin on single filaments ( red ) , or bundles with 2 ( blue ) and ≥ 3 ( green ) filaments . Error bars , 95 % CI . n ≥ 60 . ( G ) VASP and UNC - 34 average processive run lengths for increasing number of filaments in fascin bundles shown in E and F . Error bars , 95 % CI . P values ( * < 0 . 0001 ) . Volume 30 March 21 , 2019 Ena / VASP processivity on actin bundles | 855 Human VASP and worm UNC - 34 also have enhanced processive properties on fascin bundles To determine whether enhanced processivity on fascin - bundled trailing filament barbed ends is conserved among Ena / VASP family members , we extended our analysis to full - length human VASP and full - length worm UNC - 34 ( Figure 1A ) . Human VASP is a well - charac - terized Ena / VASP protein ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Chereau and Dominguez , 2006 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) , whereas UNC - 34 has not yet been bio - chemically characterized in vitro despite multiple in vivo studies ( Sheffield et al . , 2007 ; Fleming et al . , 2010 ; Havrylenko et al . , 2015 ) . For our initial characterization of the three homologues , we measured the affinity for barbed ends and effect on actin elonga - tion for Ena Δ L , VASP , and UNC - 34 . Initially , the effect of Ena / VASP homologues on actin elongation rates and their apparent affinity ( K d , app ) for barbed ends was determined by single - color TIRFM vi - sualization of spontaneous assembly of 1 . 5 μM Mg - ATP - actin ( 15 % Oregon Green ) over a range of concentrations for each unlabeled Ena / VASP homologue ( Supplemental Figure S2 , A – F ) . At near satu - rating concentrations all three Ena / VASP homologues increase ac - tin elongation by a similar amount , ∼ 1 . 6 - to ∼ 2 . 7 - fold , but have somewhat varying affinities for actin filament barbed ends ranging from 3 . 2 nM ( Ena Δ L ) to 6 . 7 nM ( UNC - 34 ) to 12 . 2 nM ( VASP ) ( Sup - plemental Figure S2F ) . Likewise , bulk seeded pyrene actin assem - bly assays also show that all three Ena / VASP homologues increase actin elongation rates by similar amounts , and fits of assembly rate over a range of Ena / VASP concentrations revealed apparent affini - ties for barbed ends ranging from 0 . 7 nM ( Ena Δ L ) to 10 . 2 nM ( UNC - 34 ) to 10 . 8 nM ( VASP ) ( Supplemental Figure S2 , G and H ) . We then used two - color TIRFM visualizations of red - labeled Ena Δ L , VASP , and UNC - 34 on fascin bundles to measure actin elongation rates of Ena / VASP - bound leading and trailing barbed ends ( Supplemental Figure S2I and Supplemental Movie S2 ) . All three Ena / VASP homo - logues similarly increase actin elongation approximately two - to threefold on both leading and trailing barbed ends ( Supplemental Figure S2J and Supplmental Tables S2 and S5 ) . Enhancement of actin elongation rates by Ena Δ L and VASP are similar to previously reported values ( Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ; Winkelman et al . , 2014 ; Brühmann et al . , 2017 ) , and the actin elongation properties of UNC - 34 are in good agreement with those of the other homo - logues . Therefore , though Ena , VASP , and UNC - 34 vary in their barbed end affinity , they all similarly increase the actin elongation rate of both leading and trailing barbed ends of fascin - bundled filaments . To test whether different Ena / VASP homologues have similarly enhanced processive properties on fascin bundles , two - color TIRFM visualization of 1 . 5 μM Mg - ATP - actin ( 15 % Oregon Green ) was used to quantify the processive run lengths of fluorescently labeled VASP and UNC - 34 on fascin bundles ( Figure 2 , E – G , and Supplemental Movie S2 ) . The average residence time of both VASP ( 1 . 0 s ) and UNC - 34 ( 1 . 2 s ) on single filament barbed ends is ∼ 9 - fold shorter than Ena Δ L ( 8 . 9 s ) , as expected from lower apparent affinities for barbed ends and previously reported values ( Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) . Yet , like Ena Δ L , both VASP and UNC - 34 have ∼ 2 . 5 - fold longer processive run lengths on trailing barbed ends of 2 - filament fascin bundles ( τ VASP = 2 . 6 s , τ UNC - 34 = 2 . 9 s ) , with an additional ∼ 1 . 5 - fold increase on trailing barbed ends of three - or more filament bundles ( τ VASP = 4 . 2 s , τ UNC - 34 = 3 . 9 s ) ( Figure 2 , E – G , and Supplemental Table S1 ) . Therefore , enhanced processivity on fascin - bundled trailing barbed ends is conserved from worms to flies to humans , suggesting that enhanced processivity is important for Ena / VASP’s activity in cells . Enhanced elongation and processive run length increases with the number of Ena arms Wild - type Ena is a tetrameric protein ( Kuhnel et al . , 2004 ; Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) , with four arms that could facilitate simultaneous asso - ciations with a barbed end , neighboring actin filaments , and / or ac - tin monomers for processive elongation . Since we observed that Ena Δ L’s average processive run length increases with the number of fascin - bundled filaments ( Figure 2 ) , we investigated the importance of Ena’s oligomeric state by measuring actin elongation and proces - sive properties of dimeric and trimeric Ena Δ L . Dimer and trimer con - structs were formed by replacing Ena Δ L’s ( referred to in this section as Ena Δ L Tetramer ) coiled - coil tetramerization domain with a GCN4 dimerization domain ( Harbury et al . , 1993 ) or a Foldon trimerization domain ( Figure 3A ) ( Güthe et al . , 2004 ; Papanikolopoulou et al . , 2004 ) , and the oligomeric state was verified by gel filtration and multi - angle light scattering ( Supplemental Figure S3 , A – C ) . Two - color TIRFM was used to visualize 1 . 5 μM Mg - ATP - actin ( 15 % Al - exa - 488 labeled ) with SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L Δ CC - GCN4 ( referred to as Ena Δ L Dimer ) or SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L Δ CC - Foldon ( referred to as Ena Δ L Trimer ) on fascin bundles . First , we measured actin elongation rates of Ena Δ L - bound leading and trailing barbed ends ( Figure 3B and Supplemental Tables S2 and S5 ) . While all constructs increase actin’s elongation rate on both leading and trailing filaments , the fold increase is positively correlated with the number of Ena Δ L arms . Ena Δ L Tetramer has the largest enhancement of actin elongation ( 2 . 56 - fold leading , 2 . 1 - fold trailing ) , followed by Ena Δ L Trimer ( 1 . 74 - fold leading , 1 . 62 - fold trailing ) , and then Ena Δ L Dimer ( 1 . 45 - fold leading , 1 . 46 - fold trailing ) . Similar to actin elongation rates , average processive run length is also positively correlated with number of Ena Δ L arms ( Figure 3 , C – E ) . Remarkably , although reduced ∼ 10 - fold compared to Ena Δ L Tetramer , Ena Δ L Dimer does remain processively associated with single filament ( τ = 1 . 2 s ) , 2 - filament trailing ( τ = 1 . 5 s ) , and 3 - or more filament trail - ing ( τ = 2 . 5 s ) barbed ends ( Figure 3 , C and E , Supplemental Movie S3 , and Supplemental Table S1 ) . Ena Δ L Trimer has intermediate pro - cessivity on single filament ( τ = 5 . 3 s ) , 2 - filament trailing ( τ = 8 . 9 s ) , and 3 - or more filament trailing ( τ = 11 . 2 s ) barbed ends ( Figure 3 , D and E , and Supplemental Table S1 ) . For each construct , the fluores - cence intensity was not correlated with run length ( Supplemental Figure S3 , D – G ) , indicating that processive activity is not affected by Ena Δ L construct multimerization . Ena Δ L Trimer ’s processive run lengths are similar to the residence time of Ena Δ L Tetramer on single filaments but are not comparably enhanced on trailing barbed ends ( Figure 3E ) . Therefore , Ena Δ L Dimer is sufficient for minimal proces - sive elongation and Ena Δ L Trimer is necessary for longer processive runs on single filaments , but Ena Δ L Tetramer is necessary for the lon - gest processive runs on trailing barbed ends of fascin bundles ( Figure 3E ) . Interestingly , the avidity effect of multiple filaments in a fascin bundle is apparent even with fewer arms than the wild - type tetramer . The positive correlation between processive elongation and Ena arms is consistent with a recent study on chimeric human VASP with Dictyostelium GAB domains on single actin filaments ( Brühmann et al . , 2017 ) . Tetrameric Ena is more effective at forming filopodia in Drosophila culture cells Ena Δ L Tetramer is significantly better at processive actin filament as - sembly than either Ena Δ L Dimer or Ena Δ L Trimer , where Ena Δ L Tetramer increases the actin elongation rate ∼ 2 - to 2 . 5 - fold and remains pro - cessively associated with trailing barbed ends of fascin bundles for ∼ 25 s ( Figure 3 , B and E ) . To determine whether WT Ena Tetramer is therefore necessary for proper function in cells , we evaluated the 856 | A . J . Harker et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell ability of Ena oligomerization constructs to facilitate filopodia in ML - DmD16 - c3 Drosophila culture cells , derived from third instar larval wing discs ( Figure 4 ) . We knocked down endogenous Ena with dsR - NAi against the 3 ′ UTR ( Figure 4A ) , and then expressed GFP - actin ( Figure 4 , B – D ) and full - length Ena constructs labeled with mCherry . A constitutive pIZ plasmid was used to express the Ena constructs : mCherry - Ena ( referred to as mCherry - Ena Tetramer ) , mCherry - Ena Δ CC - GCN4 ( referred to as mCherry - Ena Dimer ) , or mCherry - Ena Δ CC - Foldon ( referred to as mCherry - Ena Trimer ) ( Figure 4 , E – G , and Supplemental Figure S4A ) . The activity of the different Ena con - structs was analyzed by quantifying filopodia density , through deter - mining the number of filopodia per perimeter of the cell ( Figure 4H ) . Compared to control cells ( 0 . 19 ± 0 . 06 filopodia / micron ) , RNAi - treated cells without exogenous Ena have a 2 . 7 - fold decrease in filopodia density ( 0 . 07 ± 0 . 03 filopodia / micron ) . Strikingly , mCherry - Ena Tetramer forms significantly more filopodia ( 0 . 24 ± 0 . 05 filopodia / micron ) compared to mCherry - Ena Trimer ( 0 . 15 ± 0 . 05 filopodia / micron ) and mCherry - Ena Dimer ( 0 . 15 ± 0 . 04 filopodia / micron ) . There was no correlation between filopodia density and GFP - actin fluores - cence or mCherry fluorescence ( Supplemental Figure S4 , B and C ) . Therefore , Ena tetramers facilitate the production of significantly more filopodia than dimer and trimer constructs following knock - down of endogenous Ena . Kinetic model of Ena shows a direct correlation between processivity and both bundle size and Ena oligomerization We observed that Ena Δ L’s processivity depends on the number of filaments in a fascin bundle ( Figure 2D ) and number of Ena Δ L arms ( Figure 3E ) . Therefore , it is likely that the underlying molecular mechanism for the increased processivity of individual Ena mole - cules on trailing barbed ends depends on Ena’s ability to simultane - ously bind to an elongating barbed end and sides of filaments via its multiple arms ( Figure 1B ) . To investigate this avidity effect , we de - veloped a kinetic model of Ena with varying number of arms , N , binding bundles composed of varying number of actin filaments , n ( Figure 5A and Supplemental Figure S5A ) . Our model considers binding and unbinding kinetics of all N Ena arms on various binding sites of individual actin filaments in a bun - dle , which together dictate the kinetics of the Ena “molecule” as a whole ( Figure 5A ) . An Ena arm initially binds to the trailing barbed end with an on rate of k t on , 1 and unbinds with an off rate of k t off , 1 ( Figure 5A1 ) . The remaining Ena arms are available to bind and un - bind to the side of the trailing filament with a rate k t on and k t off or to the side of other filaments in the bundle with a rate k l on and k l off ( Figure 5 , A2 and A3 ) . A Monte Carlo algorithm was used to inte - grate rates of binding and unbinding of Ena arms over time . Model parameters were optimized using TIRFM off rates for N ∈ ( 2 , 3 , 4 ) and n ∈ ( 1 , 2 , ≥ 3 ) ( Figure 3E ) , as described in the Supplemental Materials . We used the model to characterize Ena’s processive run length at the trailing barbed end . The model shows that increasing both the number of filaments in a bundle and the number of Ena arms in - creases Ena’s processive run length , which strongly supports the avidity hypothesis . The modeling results are in excellent agreement with the trends observed from our TIRFM data ( compare Figure 5B and Figure 3E ) . Using the model , we tested conditions over a range FIGURE 3 : The processive run length increases with the number of Ena Δ L “arms . ” ( A ) Cartoon and domain organizations of Ena Δ L Tetramer , Ena Δ L Trimer , and Ena Δ L Dimer . ( B – E ) Two - color TIRFM visualization of 1 . 5 µM Mg - ATP - actin ( 15 % Alexa488 - actin ) with indicated SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L construct and 130 nM fascin . ( B ) Fold increase of barbed end elongation rates of Ena Δ L Dimer ( orange ) , Ena Δ L Trimer ( purple ) , and Ena Δ L Tetramer ( yellow ) . Error bars , SEM . n ≥ 5 barbed ends from at least two movies . P values ( * ≤ 0 . 05 ) ( C , D ) Kaplan – Meier curves representing average processive run lengths ( τ ) for ( C ) 50 pM MBP - SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L Δ CC - GCN4 or ( D ) 70 pM MBP - SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L Δ CC - Foldon with fascin on single filaments ( red ) , or bundles with 2 ( blue ) and ≥ 3 ( green ) filaments . Error bars , 95 % CI . n ≥ 93 . ( E ) Average processive run length for increasing number of Ena Δ L “arms” on single filaments ( red ) , or fascin bundles with 2 ( blue ) and ≥ 3 ( green ) filaments shown in C and D . Error bars , 95 % CI . P values ( * * * < 0 . 05 , * * < 0 . 001 , * < 0 . 0001 ) . Ena Δ L Tetramer data in B and E are also reported in Figures 1K and 2D , respectively . Volume 30 March 21 , 2019 Ena / VASP processivity on actin bundles | 857 of both k l on and k l off to mimic α - actinin and fimbrin bundles ( Figure 1I ) , where Ena Δ L processivity is not enhanced on trailing barbed ends ( Figure 5C and Supplemental Figure S5 , B – F ) . The model shows a broad regime that results in the same average processive run length on both leading and trailing barbed ends ( Figure 5C , dashed region ) . This indicates that differences between bundlers could be due to diverse association and dissociation rates caused by differences in how CH domain bundlers and fascin bind F - actin . The kinetic model suggests an area of kinetic rates for Ena bind - ing to the side of a leading filament that could account for the speci - ficity of Ena Δ L’s enhanced processivity to fascin bundles . Therefore , we further analyzed the TIRFM experiments to determine the dis - sociation rate of individual Ena Δ L molecules from the sides of actin filaments bundled by different bundling proteins at the resolution that we measured its processivity on barbed ends ( Figure 1I ) . We measured the residence time of Ena Δ L on sides of single filaments and 2 - filament bundles in the presence of fascin , fimbrin , and α - actinin ( Figure 5D ) . Ena Δ L associates ∼ 5 - fold longer to the sides of 2 - filament bundles formed by fascin , but not on 2 - filament bundles formed by fimbrin or α - actinin . This suggests that the specificity for FIGURE 4 : Tetrameric Ena is necessary for proper filopodia density . ( A ) Western blot of endogenous Ena expression in control cells and in Ena 3 ′ UTR RNAi - treated cells . β - Tubulin is a loading control . ( B – D ) Representative fluorescence micrographs of D16 cells with GFP - actin for ( B ) control treatment , ( C ) Ena 3 ′ UTR RNAi , and ( D ) RNAi with transfection of mCherry - Ena Tetramer . White arrows indicate representative filopodia . ( E – G ) Representative fluorescence micrographs of D16 cells transfected with the indicated mCherry - Ena construct . White arrows indicate mCherry - Ena constructs at the tips of filopodia . ( H ) Boxplot of filopodia density , number of filopodia per micron of cell perimeter , for control cells , Ena 3 ′ UTR RNAi , and RNAi transfected with mCherry - Ena Δ CC - GCN4 ( mCherry - Ena Dimer ) , mCherry - Ena Δ CC - Foldon ( mCherry - Ena Trimer ) , and mCherry - Ena Tetramer . n = 3 with at least 10 cells for each experiment . P values ( * < 0 . 0005 ) . Ena’s enhanced processivity on the barbed end involves an increased affinity of Ena’s F - actin binding domain for actin filaments bundled by fascin . Finally , we used the model to estimate rates of Ena - mediated filament elongation . While at least one Ena arm associates with the barbed end , its other arms undergo binding and dissociation events . When free , an arm can bind G - actin from solution and transfer it to the barbed end . The elonga - tion rate of the Ena - bound filament should be proportional to the average time that individual arms are free . From the model , the average time that individual arms re - main unbound while the Ena molecule is in the bound state , freearm τ , increases with N and decreases with n ( Figure 5E ) . This result is consistent with the TIRFM data for the fold increase of actin elongation rate due to Ena Δ L on the leading ( n = 1 in the model ) and trailing barbed ends ( n > 1 in the model ) ( Figures 1K and 3B ) . DISCUSSION Ena’s processivity is enhanced specifically on fascin bundles Ena / VASP proteins are important proces - sive actin elongation factors that are local - ized to diverse F - actin networks composed of filaments bundled by different cross - link - ing proteins , including fascin , fimbrin , and α - actinin . Previously , we found that Ena takes ∼ 3 - fold longer processive runs on trailing barbed ends of fascin - bundled F - actin ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . Here we in - vestigated the mechanism and conserva - tion of Ena / VASP’s processivity at the barbed end of single filaments and fila - ments bundled by different cross - linking proteins , as well as the physiological rele - vance of Ena / VASP tetramerization . We found that although fly Ena Δ L’s processivity is enhanced ∼ 3 - fold on trailing barbed ends in fascin bundles , there is no processiv - ity enhancement on trailing barbed ends of α - actinin or fimbrin bundles ( Figure 1I ) . Fimbrin and α - actinin use two CH domains to bundle F - actin , whereas fascin uses β - trefoil domains . We calculated the radius of gyration for the linker between the FAB and CC do - mains to be ∼ 4 nm , making the distance between two FAB domains ∼ 12 nm including the CC domain . Though a stretched linker could allow Ena to reach two α - actinin filaments ( ∼ 33 nm ) , it does not seem likely . However , the distance between fimbrin filaments could very easily be accounted for with Ena’s FAB - to - FAB distance , which further supports that Ena’s specificity for fascin bundles is due to a property beyond simply filament spacing . Though the exact mechanism for Ena’s specificity for fascin bun - dles remains unclear , we suggest several non – mutually exclusive hypotheses . First , fascin might hold the trailing filament in a specific register with respect to the leading filament and / or could allow for a particular favorable F - actin conformation ( Claessens et al . , 2006 ; Shin et al . , 2009 ) that facilitates easier Ena / VASP binding . Second , fascin could bundle closer to the growing barbed end compared to 858 | A . J . Harker et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell fimbrin or α - actinin , thereby promoting longer processive Ena runs by keeping trailing barbed ends closer to sides of leading filaments . Third , our kinetic model revealed a broad region of Ena binding ki - netics to sides of bundled filaments ( k l on and k l off ) that could explain Ena Δ L’s lack of enhanced processivity on fimbrin and α - actinin bun - dles ( Figure 5C ) . Consistent with this possibility , Ena Δ L has longer lifetimes on sides of 2 - filament fascin bundles compared to 2 - fila - ment bundles formed by fimbrin or α - actinin ( Figure 5D ) . This sug - gests that Ena’s enhanced processivity is facilitated in part by an in - creased affinity of Ena for F - actin bundled by fascin . Alternatively , Ena’s enhanced association with sides of bundled actin filaments could be merely due to an avidity effect of multiple filaments , which is perturbed by competition between Ena and fimbrin or α - actinin , but not fascin . Competition between Ena and fimbrin or α - actinin , CH domain bundling proteins , could be due to similar binding sites on actin filaments . Many actin binding proteins , including those with CH domains and domains related to FAB domains ( WH2 ) , are known to bind in the same target binding cleft of actin ( Dominguez , 2004 , 2009 ) . Finally , although it remains possible that Ena weakly associ - ates directly with fascin , this is unlikely as Ena Δ L’s enhanced proces - sivity remains constant over a range of fascin concentrations ( Sup - plemental Figure S1 ) . Further studies are required to fully understand the mechanisms by which Ena’s processivity is specifically enhanced on actin filaments bundled by fascin . However , this important obser - vation reveals for the first time that bundling proteins and the F - actin networks they form can differentially regulate the activity of proces - sive actin assembly factors , thereby providing a mechanism to allow Ena / VASP proteins to facilitate the assembly of diverse bundled net - works with different dynamics in cells . Understanding how different bundling proteins associate with and help form specific F - actin net - works in cells will therefore be of critical importance . The mechanism of tetrameric Ena acting on fascin bundles for filopodia formation Given that Ena localizes to filopodia with fascin , lamellipodia with fimbrin , and stress fibers with α - actinin , sensitivity to diverse bundles could play an important role in regulating Ena activity in cells . Filopo - dia are unique among these networks with long , straight filaments that emerge from a network capped by capping proteins . Lamellipo - dia have short , branched filaments and stress fibers are contractile , bipolar networks . Thus , filopodia are the ideal network for enhanced Ena / VASP processivity facilitating elongation of longer filaments that requires stronger competition against capping protein to form a protrusive network . It has been established that Ena / VASP proteins have enhanced processive elongation activity when clustered ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 , 2011 ) , which is likely critical for filopodia assembly . Ena / VASP can form clusters by associating with lamellipo - din ( Hansen and Mullins , 2015 ) or IRSp53 ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ; Disanza et al . , 2013 ) . Yet , fluorescence recovery after photobleach - ing ( FRAP ) experiments have shown that Ena / VASP clusters at the leading edge turn over rapidly ( Applewhite et al . , 2007 ) as individual molecules exchange . We have found that the activity of unclustered FIGURE 5 : Kinetic model of Ena / VASP on actin bundles shows that processivity positively correlates with both number of Ena arms and bundle size . ( A ) Modeling schematics showing ( from left to right ) . 1 ) An Ena arm’s GAB domain binds the trailing barbed end with binding rate k t on , 1 . 2 ) Once the GAB domain is bound , the FAB domain from the other arms binds to sides of either the trailing filament ( k t on ) or leading filaments ( k l on ) . 3 ) Arms can be bound to the trailing filament , while others bind leading filaments . ( B ) Bar graph of the average processive run length as a function of number of Ena arms and bundle size . Error bars , SEM . ( C ) Heat map showing average Ena run length in the case of 3 - filament bundles and four Ena arms , with systematic variations of k l on and k l off in the simulations . Diamond denotes optimized rates for fascin bundles , and region within dotted line shows potential rates for α - actinin and fimbrin . ( D ) Average lifetime for SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena Δ L association to the sides of single filaments ( red ) and 2 - filaments bundled ( blue ) by fascin , fimbrin , or α - actinin . Error bars , 95 % CI . P values ( * < 0 . 0001 ) . ( E ) Average time between binding events ( τ freearm ) for varying arm number and bundle size . Volume 30 March 21 , 2019 Ena / VASP processivity on actin bundles | 859 Ena / VASP molecules is enhanced severalfold on actin filaments bun - dled by fascin and is conserved from worms to flies to humans , sug - gesting that individual Ena / VASP molecules may also have critical cellular roles . For example , the increased residence time on trailing barbed ends of individual Ena / VASP molecules could play a critical role in a feedback mechanism between Ena / VASP and fascin in emerging filopodia ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . Ena / VASP - associated barbed ends elongate faster , assembling longer actin filaments that contain more fascin binding sites , which subsequently enhance Ena / VASP’s processivity . Within a nascent filopodia , different length fila - ments could be initially bundled by fascin . Ena / VASP’s rapid turnover in clusters could be partially due to tetramers leaving the clusters to elongate trailing barbed ends once fascin bundles emerge . Our hy - pothesis is that single tetramers act in the nascent filopodia to help the trailing barbed ends catch up to the leading barbed end . This would allow for all the filaments to reach the same length , resulting in mature filopodia with uniform thickness and aligned barbed ends . Avidity promotes enhanced Ena processivity on fascin bundles We hypothesize that avidity between multiple actin filaments in a fas - cin bundle and multiple Ena arms promotes the formation of long fi - lopodia filaments . We investigated the avidity effect by testing how the number of filaments in a fascin bundle and number of Ena Δ L arms affects Ena Δ L’s processive run length . Our results strongly indicate that avidity plays a major role , as there is an ∼ 2 - fold increase in Ena Δ L’s residence time on trailing barbed ends in 2 - filament bundles and an additional ∼ 1 . 5 - fold increase on bundles with three or more filaments compared to single filament barbed ends ( Figure 2 , B – D ) . Similarly , the residence time of both VASP and UNC - 34 is longer on trailing barbed ends and is correlated with the number of actin filaments in a fascin bundle ( Figure 2 , E – G ) . Furthermore , the residence time of Ena Δ L Trimer and Ena Δ L Tetramer is ∼ 4 . 5 - and ∼ 10 - fold longer than Ena Δ L Dimer on fascin bundles with three or more filaments ( Figure 3 , C – E ) . A recent study measuring processive elongation using chimeric human VASP with Dictyostelium GAB domains on single filaments ( Brühmann et al . , 2017 ) supports our conclusions that enhanced elon - gation and processive run length are positively correlated with the number of Ena arms . Observing this positive correlation under more “physiological conditions , ” a construct using Ena’s unmodified EVH2 domains and on fascin bundles , indicates that these properties are relevant for Ena’s activity in cells and specifically for filopodia . We further tested the avidity hypothesis by developing a kinetic model that incorporates Ena with differing number of arms binding to single or multiple filaments ( Figure 5 ) . Previous models have fo - cused exclusively on modeling the kinetics of Ena / VASP - mediated barbed end elongation of single actin filaments ( Hansen and Mull - ins , 2010 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2011 ; Brühmann et al . , 2017 ) . VASP - mediated single filament elongation rates were shown to increase linearly with the number of VASP arms in solution as predicted by the model ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2011 ) . However , this model over - looks the binding kinetics of arms that are not associated with the barbed end . Hence , we developed a kinetic model that explicitly incorporates the binding and unbinding rates of each Ena arm on multiple filaments ( Figure 5A ) . After an Ena arm binds to the barbed end ( k t on , 1 ) , the remaining arm ( s ) are free to bind to the side of the leading filament ( s ) ( k l on ) or the trailing filament ( k l on ) . We quantified the processive run length for various numbers of bundled filaments and Ena arms . The model demonstrates that the avidity effect of Ena emerges from an effective increase in local concentration of F - actin that al - lows for more FAB binding sites and from multiple Ena arms with available FAB domains . The avidity effect results in longer residence times near the trailing barbed end . Importantly , if an arm dissociates from the trailing barbed end , Ena will continue to processively elon - gate the barbed end and not diffuse away given that other arms’ FAB domains are associated with nearby actin filaments . Further - more , our model that includes multiple arms binding to multiple actin filaments still has a linear correlation of elongation rates with number of Ena arms on single filaments ( Figure 5E ) , as predicted by a previous model ( Brühmann et al . , 2017 ) . The freearm τ is linear with re - spect to increasing additional Ena arms on single filaments , but with an increasing number of filaments there are diminishing returns by adding more Ena arms . τ freearm peaks at a tetramer on larger bundles , which we speculate may provide an additional argument for why a tetramer of Ena / VASP is evolutionarily preferred . We also observe that an Ena tetramer is more effective at forming filopodia in Drosophila culture cells compared to dimer and trimer constructs ( Figure 4 ) . Since the tetramer has increased residence time on trail - ing barbed ends and increases actin’s elongation rate above the dimer and trimer , this suggests that the tetramer is necessary for proper actin elongation rates and competition with capping protein to allow for the formation of the correct number of filopodia . MATERIALS AND METHODS TIRFM TIRFM images were collected at 250 ms intervals with a cellTIRF 4Line system ( Olympus , Center Valley , PA ) fitted to an Olympus IX - 71 microscope with through - the - objective TIRF illumination and an iXon EMCCD camera ( Andor Technology , Belfast , UK ) . Mg - ATP - actin ( 15 % Oregon Green or Alexa 488 labeled ) was mixed with polymerization TIRF buffer ( 10 mM imidazole [ pH 7 . 0 ] , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid [ EGTA ] , 50 mM dithiothreitol [ DTT ] , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 50 μM CaCl 2 , 15 mM glucose , 20 μg / ml catalase , 100 μg / ml glucose oxidase , and 0 . 5 % [ 400 cP ] methylcellulose ) to induce F - actin assembly and any additional actin binding proteins . This mixture was transferred to a flow cell for imaging at room tem - perature . For two - color TIRFM , we cyclically imaged labeled actin ( 1 frame , 488 nm excitation for 50 ms ) and SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena / VASP ( 1 frame , 561 nm excitation for 50 ms ) ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . D16 cell culture ML - DmD16 - c3 ( DGRC ) cells were cultured in Schneider’s media with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Gibco , Waltham , MA ) , Anti - Anti ( Gibco , Waltham , MA ) , and 10 μg / ml recombinant human insulin ( Gibco , Waltham , MA ) , transfected with FugeneHD ( Promega , Madison , WI ) , and imaged on extracellular matrix ( ECM ) - coated glass - bottom dishes after 48 – 72 h . ECM was harvested from ML - DmD17 - c3 ( DGRC , Bloomington , IN ) ( Currie and Rogers , 2011 ) . All imaging was performed on a TIRF system mounted on an inverted micro - scope ( Ti - E ; Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) using a 100X / 1 . 49NA oil immer - sion TIRF objective driven by Nikon Elements software unless noted otherwise . Images were captured using an Orca - Flash 4 . 0 ( Hama - matsu , Hamamatsu , Japan ) and were processed for brightness and contrast using ImageJ ( Schneider et al . , 2012 ) analysis . We quanti - fied > 30 cells using CellGeo ( Tsygankov et al . , 2014 ) . Filopodia were quantified with the criteria of > 0 . 78 μm long and < 0 . 91 μm wide . Protein expression was quantified by Western blot of D16 whole cell lysate . Primary mouse antibodies against Ena ( 5G2 ; Drosophila Studies Hybridoma Bank ) and tubulin ( 12G10 ; Drosophila Studies Hybridoma Bank ) were used at 1 : 200 and 1 : 500 , respectively . Pri - mary rabbit antibody against mCherry ( ab167453 ; Abcam ) was used at 1 : 500 . Secondary anti - mouse HRP ( Cell Signaling ) and anti - rabbit HRP ( Sigma ) were used at 1 : 5000 . 860 | A . J . Harker et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Plasmid construction Enabled ( Ena Δ L ) constructs were prepared by removing the 6x - His tag from the C - terminus of previously described Ena Δ L constructs ( MBP - SNAP - Ena Δ L or MBP - Ena Δ L ) ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) and in - sertion into a MBP containing plasmid ( pet21A ) by standard restric - tion digest and infusion ( Clontech , Mountain View , CA ) following PCR amplification ( iProof ; Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . Ena Δ L Dimer and Ena Δ L Trimer constructs were prepared by removing the coiled - coil domain and adding a Foldon domain ( Güthe et al . , 2004 ; Papaniko - lopoulou et al . , 2004 ) ( MBP - SNAP - Ena Δ L Δ CC - Foldon ) or GCN4 do - main ( Harbury et al . , 1993 ) ( MBP - SNAP - Ena Δ L Δ CC - GCN4 ) from MBP - SNAP - Ena Δ L . UNC - 34 was cloned from worm cDNA and in - serted into a pet21A vector with MBP - SNAP ( New England Biolabs , Ipswich , MA ) at Xma I / Pac I sites , while also including a flexible linker ( GGSGGS ) in the forward primer sequence of SNAP constructs . Singed and VASP constructs were cloned from fly and human cDNA libraries , respectively . VASP was inserted into a MBP - SNAP and SNAP containing vector , while Singed was inserted into a pGEX KT Ext plasmid containing GST with a thrombin cleavage site at Xba I / Xho I sites . Plasmids for transfection of mCherry - Ena Δ CC - GCN4 and mCherry - Ena Δ CC - Foldon were cloned into a pIZ - mCherry - Ena ( Bilancia et al . , 2014 ) construct using infusion ( Clon - tech , Mountain View , CA ) . The RNA interference ( RNAi ) was designed using Primer3Plus ( Untergasser et al . , 2012 ) targeting the 3 ′ UTR of enabled using forward primer 5 ′ TAATACGACTCAC - TATAGGGAGACCACGTGATGGCATGTGCATAGGC3 ′ and reverse primer 5 ′ TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG AGACCACTGCTGAAGACT TGCTGGTTC3 ′ . The 3 ′ UTR was extracted from w1118 strain fly genome , and the DNA region of interest was isolated by PCR ampli - fication and placed in a bluescript SK vector . Double - stranded DNA ( dsDNA ) was produced using PCR amplification , and dsRNA was produced from the resulting dsDNA using the MEGAscript T7 Tran - scription kit ( Invitrogen , Waltham , MA ) . Protein expression and purification Recombinant Ena / VASP proteins were purified by expressing in Escherichia coli strain BL21 - Codon Plus ( DE3 ) - RP ( Agilent Technologies , Santa Clara , CA ) with 0 . 25 mM isopropyl β - d - 1 - thiogalactopyranoside for 16 h at 16°C . Cells were lysed with an Emulsi - Flex - C3 ( Avestin , Ottawa , Canada ) in extraction buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 200 mM NaCl , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 1 mM DTT ) with 0 . 5 μM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and complete , EDTA - free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ) and were clarified . The extract was incubated for 1 h at 4°C with amylose resin ( New England Biolabs , Ipswich , MA ) and was washed with extraction buffer ; then Ena / VASP was batch eluted with elu - tion buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 200 mM NaCl , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 1 mM DTT , 40 mM maltose ) . Ena / VASP was incubated overnight with and without 1 μM TEV protease to cleave MBP and filtered on a Superdex 200 10 / 300 GL or Superose 6 Increase 10 / 300 GL column ( GE Healthcare , Little Chalfont , UK ) where they eluted as stable oligomers . Ena / VASP constructs were dialyzed against SNAP buffer ( 20 mM HEPES [ pH 7 . 4 ] , 200 mM KCl , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 , 10 % glycerol , and 0 . 1 mM DTT ) . SEC - MALS was performed using DAWN HELEOS II and Optilab T - rEX ( Wyatt Technology , Goleta , CA ) with a Superdex 200 Increase 10 / 300 GL column and Akta FPLC ( GE Healthcare , Little Chalfont , UK ) . SEC - MALS data were analyzed using Astra 6 . 0 ( Wyatt Technology , Goleta , CA ) . SNAP - tagged proteins were labeled with BG - 549 ( New England Biolabs , Ipswich , MA ) following the manufacturers’ protocols . Concentra - tions of SNAP - tagged proteins were determined by densitometry of Coomassie - stained bands on SDS − PAGE gels compared with standards . Ena / VASP was flash - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80°C . N - terminal SNAP and MBP tags did not affect Ena / VASP’s activity ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . Actin was purified from rabbit skeletal muscle acetone powder ( Pel - Freez , Rogers , AR ) or self - prepared chicken skeletal muscle acetone powder by a cycle of polymerization and depolymerization and gel filtration ( Spudich and Watt , 1971 ) . Gel - filtered actin was labeled with Oregon green ( Kuhn and Pollard , 2005 ) on Cys374 or Alexa 488 carboxylic acid succinimidyl ester on lysine residues ( Kellogg et al . , 1988 ; Vignjevic et al . , 2006b ) . Human fascin , human α - actinin IV , and Schizosac - charomyces pombe fimbrin were expressed in bacteria and purified as described ( Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ; Skau and Kovar , 2010 ; Li et al . , 2016 ) . Singed was purified in the same manner as previ - ously reported for human fascin ( Vignjevic et al . , 2003 ) . Glass preparation Microscope slides and coverslips ( # 1 . 5 ; Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) were washed for 30 min with acetone and for 10 min with 95 % ethanol , sonicated for 2 h with Helmanex III detergent ( Hellma Ana - lytics , Müllheim , Germany ) , incubated for 2 h with piranha solution ( 66 . 6 % H 2 SO 4 , 33 . 3 % H 2 O 2 ) , washed with deionized water , and dried . Glass then was incubated for 18 h with 1 mg / ml mPeg - Silane ( 5000 MW ) in 95 % ethanol , pH 2 . 0 . Parallel strips of double - sided tape were placed on the coverslip to create multiple flow chambers ( Zimmermann et al . , 2016 ) . Calculation of residence time and elongation rates To calculate Ena / VASP’s residence time on barbed ends , SNAP ( 549 ) - Ena / VASP fluorescent spots associated with the barbed end were manually tracked using MTrackJ ( Meijering et al . , 2012 ) in ImageJ . Spots that did not move were not scored , because they were as - sumed to be adsorbed to the glass . Events that contained joined barbed ends with no clear leading or trailing barbed bend were not included in the average lifetime calculation . Residence times for single SNAP - 549 - Ena ( Δ L ) tetramers were determined by fitting a Kaplan − Meier ( Kaplan and Meier , 1958 ) survival curve with a single exponential equation , f ( x ) = x0 * exp ( − x / T1 ) to calculate the average lifetime . Kaplan − Meier survival curves were used to account for pro - cessive runs that started before imaging began or ends after imag - ing terminated . Log rank statistical significance tests were done us - ing Prism 7 ( GraphPad Software , San Diego , CA ) . Barbed end elongation rates were calculated by measuring filament lengths over time with ImageJ software . Multiple filament lengths were plot - ted over time , and the distribution was fitted with a linear equation using KaleidaGraph 4 . 5 ( Synergy Software , Reading , PA ) . To calcu - late the number of filaments in a bundle , the TIRFM movie was used to follow the history of the filaments . This could most accurately differentiate between two - filament bundles and three or more fila - ment bundles . Owing to photobleaching of the filaments over time , the actin fluorescence was not used to determine the number of fila - ments within the bundle . Fluorescence spectroscopy Bulk actin assembly was measured from the fluorescence of pyrene - actin with a Safire2 or Infinite M200 Pro ( Tecan Systems , Männedorf , Switzerland ) fluorescent plate reader ( Neidt et al . , 2008 ) . Briefly , 5 μM unlabeled Mg - ATP - actin was preassembled into seeds for 1 h by adding 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 10 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 0 . The assay measures the elongation rate of actin by the addition of 20 % pyrene - labeled Mg - ATP - actin monomers and actin binding proteins to be assayed . Final protein concentrations are indicated in the figure legends . Volume 30 March 21 , 2019 Ena / VASP processivity on actin bundles | 861 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Elena Solomaha of the University of Chicago BioPhysics Core Facility for performing SEC - MALS and Jonathan Winkelman for cloning VASP and UNC - 34 . We thank Caitlin Anderson , Katie Homa , Cristian Suarez , and other members of the D . R . K . laboratory for helpful discussions . We thank the Drosophila Genomics Re - source Center , supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant 2P40OD010949 , for Drosophila cells . This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No . DGE - 1144082 and DGE - 1746045 ( to A . J . H . ) , NIH Molecular and Cellular Biology Training Grant T32 GM007183 ( to A . J . H . ) , NIH Grant RO1 GM079265 ( to D . R . K . ) , Department of Defense Army Research Office MURI grant W911NF1410403 ( to G . A . V . and D . R . K . ) , and the University of Chicago Materials Research Science and Engineering Center , funded by National Science Foundation award DMR - 1420709 ( to G . A . V . and D . R . K . ) . Acknowledgment is made to the computational resources provided by the Research Computing Center at The Uni - versity of Chicago . REFERENCES Applewhite DA , Barzik M , Kojima S - I , Svitkina TM , Gertler FB , Borisy GG ( 2007 ) . Ena / VASP proteins have an anti - capping independent function in filopodia formation . Mol Biol Cell 18 , 2579 – 2591 . Bachmann C , Fischer L , Walter U , Reinhard M ( 1999 ) . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetrameriza - tion , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J Biol Chem 274 , 23549 – 23557 . Ball LJ , Jarchau T , Oschkinat H , Walter U ( 2001 ) . EVH1 domains : structure , function and interactions . FEBS Lett 513 , 45 – 52 . Barzik M , Kotova TI , Higgs HN , Hazelwood L , Hanein D , Gertler FB , Schafer DA ( 2005 ) . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the pres - ence of barbed end capping proteins . J Biol Chem 280 , 28653 – 28662 . Bear JE , Gertler FB ( 2009 ) . Ena / VASP : towards resolving a pointed contro - versy at the barbed end . J Cell Sci 122 , 1947 – 1953 . Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , Strasser GA , Maly IV , Chaga OY , Cooper JA , Borisy GG , et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . Bilancia CG , Winkelman JD , Tsygankov D , Nowotarski SH , Sees JA , Comber K , Evans I , Lakhani V , Wood W , Elston TC , et al . ( 2014 ) . Enabled nega - tively regulates Diaphanous - driven actin dynamics in vitro and in vivo . Dev Cell 28 , 394 – 408 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Urbanke C , Resch GP , Small JV , Faix J ( 2008 ) . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin filament elongation . EMBO J 27 , 2943 – 2954 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Vinzenz M , Stradal TEB , Small JV , Curth U , Dickinson RB , Faix J ( 2011 ) . Molecular mechanism of Ena / VASP - mediated actin - filament elongation . EMBO J 30 , 456 – 467 . Brühmann S , Ushakov DS , Winterhoff M , Dickinson RB , Curth U , Faix J ( 2017 ) . Distinct VASP tetramers synergize in the processive elongation of individual actin filaments from clustered arrays . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114 , E5815 – E5824 . Campellone KG , Welch MD ( 2010 ) . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 237 – 251 . Cant K , Knowles BA , Mooseker MS , Cooley L ( 1994 ) . Drosophila singed , a fascin homolog , is required for actin bundle formation during oogenesis and bristle extension . J Cell Biol 125 , 369 – 380 . Chereau D , Dominguez R ( 2006 ) . Understanding the role of the G - actin - binding domain of Ena / VASP in actin assembly . J Struct Biol 155 , 195 – 201 . Claessens MMAE , Bathe M , Frey E , Bausch AR ( 2006 ) . Actin - binding pro - teins sensitively mediate F - actin bundle stiffness . Nat Mater 5 , 748 – 753 . Currie JD , Rogers SL ( 2011 ) . Using the Drosophila melanogaster D17 - c3 cell culture system to study cell motility . Nat Protoc 6 , 1632 – 1641 . Disanza A , Bisi S , Winterhoff M , Milanesi F , Ushakov DS , Kast D , Marighetti P , Romet - Lemonne G , Müller HM , Nickel W , et al . ( 2013 ) . CDC42 switches IRSp53 from inhibition of actin growth to elongation by clustering of VASP . EMBO J 32 , 2735 – 2750 . Dominguez R ( 2004 ) . Actin - binding proteins – - a unifying hypothesis . Trends Biochem Sci 29 , 572 – 578 . Dominguez R ( 2009 ) . Actin filament nucleation and elongation factors— structure – function relationships . Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 44 , 351 – 366 . Dominguez R , Holmes KC ( 2011 ) . Actin structure and function . Annu Rev Biophys 40 , 169 – 186 . Edwards RA , Bryan J ( 1995 ) . Fascins , a family of actin bundling proteins . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 32 , 1 – 9 . Faix J , Rottner K ( 2006 ) . The making of filopodia . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 , 18 – 25 . Ferron F , Rebowski G , Lee SH , Dominguez R ( 2007 ) . Structural basis for the recruitment of profilin - actin complexes during filament elongation by Ena / VASP . EMBO J 26 , 4597 – 4606 . Fleming T , Chien S - C , Vanderzalm PJ , Dell M , Gavin MK , Forrester WC , Garriga G ( 2010 ) . The role of C . elegans Ena / VASP homolog UNC - 34 in neuronal polarity and motility . Dev Biol 344 , 94 – 106 . Gateva G , Tojkander S , Koho S , Carpen O , Lappalainen P ( 2014 ) . Palladin promotes assembly of non - contractile dorsal stress fibers through VASP recruitment . J Cell Sci 127 , 1887 – 1898 . Gupton SL , Gertler FB ( 2007 ) . Filopodia : the fingers that do the walking . Sci STKE 2007 , re5 . Güthe S , Kapinos L , Möglich A , Meier S , Grzesiek S , Kiefhaber T ( 2004 ) . Very fast folding and association of a trimerization domain from bacte - riophage T4 fibritin . J Mol Biol 337 , 905 – 915 . Haffner C , Jarchau T , Reinhard M , Hoppe J , Lohmann SM , Walter U ( 1995 ) . Molecular cloning , structural analysis and functional expression of the proline - rich focal adhesion and microfilament - associated protein VASP . EMBO J 14 , 19 – 27 . Hanein D , Volkmann N , Goldsmith S , Michon A - M , Lehman W , Craig R , DeRosier D , Almo S , Matsudaira P ( 1998 ) . An atomic model of fimbrin binding to F - actin and its implications for filament crosslinking and regulation . Nat Struct Mol Biol 5 , 787 – 792 . Hansen SD , Mullins RD ( 2010 ) . VASP is a processive actin polymerase that requires monomeric actin for barbed end association . J Cell Biol 191 , 571 – 584 . Hansen SD , Mullins RD ( 2015 ) . Lamellipodin promotes actin assembly by clustering Ena / VASP proteins and tethering them to actin filaments . Elife 2015 , 4 , doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 06585 . Harbury PB , Zhang T , Kim PS , Alber T ( 1993 ) . A switch between two - , three - , and four - stranded coiled coils in GCN4 leucine zipper mutants . Science 262 , 1401 – 1407 . Havrylenko S , Noguera P , Abou - Ghali M , Manzi J , Faqir F , Lamora A , Guérin C , Blanchoin L , Plastino J ( 2015 ) . WAVE binds Ena / VASP for enhanced Arp2 / 3 complex – based actin assembly . Mol Biol Cell 26 , 55 – 65 . Jansen S , Collins A , Yang C , Rebowski G , Svitkina T , Dominguez R ( 2011 ) . Mechanism of actin filament bundling by fascin . J Biol Chem 286 , 30087 – 30096 . Kaplan EL , Meier P ( 1958 ) . Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations . J Am Stat Assoc 53 , 457 – 481 . Kellogg DR , Mitchison TJ , Alberts BM ( 1988 ) . Behaviour of microtubules and actin filaments in living Drosophila embryos . Development 103 , 675 – 686 . Krugmann S , Jordens I , Gevaert K , Driessens M , Vandekerckhove J , Hall A ( 2001 ) . Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr Biol 11 , 1645 – 1655 . Kuhn JR , Pollard TD ( 2005 ) . Real - time measurements of actin filament polymerization by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . Biophys J 88 , 1387 – 1402 . Kuhnel K , Jarchau T , Wolf E , Schlichting I , Walter U , Wittinghofer A , Strelkov SV ( 2004 ) . The VASP tetramerization domain is a right - handed coiled coil based on a 15 - residue repeat . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 , 17027 – 17032 . Li Y , Christensen JR , Homa KE , Hocky GM , Fok A , Sees JA , Voth GA , Kovar DR ( 2016 ) . The F - actin bundler α - actinin Ain1 is tailored for ring assem - bly and constriction during cytokinesis in fission yeast . Mol Biol Cell 27 , 1821 – 1833 . Mattila PK , Lappalainen P ( 2008 ) . Filopodia : molecular architecture and cel - lular functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 , 446 – 454 . Meijering E , Dzyubachyk O , Smal I ( 2012 ) . Methods for cell and particle tracking . Methods Enzymol 504 , 183 – 200 . Neidt EM , Skau CT , Kovar DR ( 2008 ) . The cytokinesis formins from the nematode worm and fission yeast differentially mediate actin filament assembly . J Biol Chem 283 , 23872 – 23883 . Papanikolopoulou K , Forge V , Goeltz P , Mitraki A ( 2004 ) . Formation of highly stable chimeric trimers by fusion of an adenovirus fiber shaft fragment with the foldon domain of bacteriophage T4 fibritin . J Biol Chem 279 , 8991 – 8998 . 862 | A . J . Harker et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Pasic L , Kotova T , Schafer DA ( 2008 ) . Ena / VASP proteins capture actin fila - ment barbed ends . J Biol Chem 283 , 9814 – 9819 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disas - sembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . Pollard TD , Cooper JA ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 . Reinhard M , Halbrugge M , Scheer U , Wiegand C , Jockusch BM , Walter U ( 1992 ) . The 46 / 50 kDa phosphoprotein VASP purified from human plate - lets is a novel protein associated with actin filaments and focal contacts . EMBO J 11 , 2063 – 2070 . Schneider CA , Rasband WS , Eliceiri KW ( 2012 ) . NIH Image to ImageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat Methods . Available at www . nature . com / articles / nmeth . 2089 ( accessed July 30 , 2018 ) . Sebé - Pedrós A , Burkhardt P , Sánchez - Pons N , Fairclough SR , Lang BF , King N , Ruiz - Trillo I ( 2013 ) . Insights into the origin of metazoan filopodia and microvilli . Mol Biol Evol 30 , 2013 – 2023 . Sheffield M , Loveless T , Hardin J , Pettitt J ( 2007 ) . C . elegans Enabled exhib - its novel interactions with N - WASP , Abl , and cell - cell junctions . Curr Biol 17 , 1791 – 1796 . Shin H , Drew KRP , Bartles JR , Wong GCL , Grason GM ( 2009 ) . Cooperativity and frustration in protein - mediated parallel actin bundles . Phys Rev Lett 103 , 238102 . Sjöblom B , Salmazo A , Djinovic´ - Carugo K ( 2008 ) . Alpha - actinin structure and regulation . Cell Mol Life Sci 65 , 2688 – 2701 . Skau CT , Kovar DR ( 2010 ) . Fimbrin and tropomyosin competition regu - lates endocytosis and cytokinesis kinetics in fission yeast . Curr Biol 20 , 1415 – 1422 . Smith MA , Blankman E , Gardel ML , Luettjohann L , Waterman CM , Beckerle MC ( 2010 ) . A zyxin - mediated mechanism for actin stress fiber mainte - nance and repair . Dev Cell 19 , 365 – 376 . Spudich JA , Watt S ( 1971 ) . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contrac - tion . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - tropo - nin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J Biol Chem 246 , 4866 – 4871 . Svitkina TM , Bulanova EA , Chaga OY , Vignjevic DM , Kojima S , Vasiliev JM , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 , 409 – 421 . Tsygankov D , Bilancia CG , Vitriol EA , Hahn KM , Peifer M , Elston TC ( 2014 ) . CellGeo : a computational platform for the analysis of shape changes in cells with complex geometries . J Cell Biol 204 , 443 – 460 . Untergasser A , Cutcutache I , Koressaar T , Ye J , Faircloth BC , Remm M , Rozen SG ( 2012 ) . Primer3—new capabilities and interfaces . Nucleic Acids Res 40 , e115 . Vignjevic D , Kojima S , Aratyn Y , Danciu O , Svitkina T , Borisy GG ( 2006a ) . Role of fascin in filopodial protrusion . J Cell Biol 174 , 863 – 875 . Vignjevic D , Peloquin J , Borisy GG ( 2006b ) . In vitro assembly of filopodia - like bundles . Methods Enzymol 406 , 727 – 739 . Vignjevic D , Yarar D , Welch MD , Peloquin J , Svitkina T , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) . Formation of filopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 , 951 – 962 . Winkelman JD , Bilancia CG , Peifer M , Kovar DR ( 2014 ) . Ena / VASP Enabled is a highly processive actin polymerase tailored to self - assemble parallel - bundled F - actin networks with Fascin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 4121 – 4126 . Yang S , Huang F - K , Huang J , Chen S , Jakoncic J , Leo - Macias A , Diaz - Avalos R , Chen L , Zhang JJ , Huang X - Y ( 2013 ) . Molecular mechanism of fascin function in filopodial formation . J Biol Chem 288 , 274 – 284 . Zimmermann D , Morganthaler AN , Kovar DR , Suarez C ( 2016 ) . In vitro bio - chemical characterization of cytokinesis actin - binding proteins . In : Yeast Cytokinesis , New York : Humana Press , 151 – 179 .