Participation through substituting and refusing Sarah Robinson School of Applied Psychology , University College Cork , Cork , Ireland sarah . robinson @ ucc . ie Nicola J . Bidwell School of Applied Psychology , University College Cork , Cork , Ireland nicola . bidwell @ ucc . ie Laura Maye School of Computer Science and Information Technology , University College Cork , Cork , Ireland laura . maye @ ucc . ie Nadia Pantidi Computational Media Innovation Centre ( CMIC ) , Victoria University of Wellington , Wellington , New Zealand nadia . pantidi @ vuw . ac . nz Conor Linehan School of Applied Psychology , University College Cork , Cork , Ireland conor . linehan @ ucc . ie ABSTRACT Asking participants to explore and critique prototype technologies by using them in the real - world settings of their communities is a common approach to democratizing design decisions . We report on a project that sought to seed a rural community radio station , and simultaneously test and refine an innovative radio technology . Living on a remote Irish island , community members saw value in the local radio contributing to the island’s sustainability and oral history preservation . The novel , but not yet stable , prototype radio platform , however , did not enable them to produce content within the time constraints and quality requirements they considered vital to their goals . In response community members substituted the prototype platform with a more stable and familiar setup . We reflect on participants’ refusal and argue that their technology substitution helped us not only to understand user and technical needs , but also meanings about participation that are integral to ensuring the genuine design democratisation . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Empirical studies in HCI . KEYWORDS Rural HCI , community radio , peer to peer platform , community participation , refusal , non - use ACM Reference Format : Sarah Robinson , Nicola J . Bidwell , Laura Maye , Nadia Pantidi , and Conor Linehan . 2020 . Participation through substituting and refusing . In Proceed - ings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Other - wise - Vol . 2 ( PDC ’20 : Vol . 2 ) , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3384772 . 3385148 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . PDC ’20 : Vol . 2 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia © 2020 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7606 - 8 / 20 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3384772 . 3385148 1 INTRODUCTION When participants substitute a technology with an alternative dur - ing ‘in the wild’ participatory research their choice not only exposes interface and technical requirements , but also articulates meanings about participation . In this paper we reflect on some meanings a rural community articulated by substituting another technology in place of that which our project intended to use , and on processes of refusal enacted in the community . Our collaboration with inhab - itants of a remote island aimed to enable community members to use an innovative radio platform to set up , create and broadcast local radio . The community context differed from the context in which the radio technology was originally designed and trialed ; and , our analyses corresponds with views held in participatory design ( PD ) , that articulation and design are continually ongoing and blend with use and maintenance e . g . [ 11 . , 13 . , 17 . ] . We focus on processes and relations in the collaboration and the ways these serve certain social goals . Our approach is participatory and gen - erative , based on the premise that “diverse notions of value may surface or be generated in spaces of social design research where different forms of valorisation encounter one another” [ 14 . ] 1 . 1 Related Work Our review first reflects on recent attention on what participa - tion means in PD , and then summarizes studies about technology non - use . Over the past ten years questions about what constitutes participation with respect to the complexity of communities have been raised ( e . g . [ 1 . , 7 . , 13 . ] ) . Often , the meaning of participation is assumed , and unpacked only in relation to specific design processes and the mutual learning between users and designers [ 1 . ] . Ander - son et al . argue that participation should be considered a “matter of concern” not simply a “matter of fact” [ 1 . ] . Mirroring concerns raised in participatory development two decades ago [ 8 . ] , there is increased reflection on who actually initiates , directs and benefits from participatory processes , who can legitimately represent user groups and communities , and how voluntary participation is . Bannon et al . argue that meaningful participation is , in fact , min - imal when designers drive PD methods and do not attend to the politics of participation [ 2 . ] . Much work in PD has explored ways of reconfiguring design relations in light of disparities of power ( e . g . [ 4 . , 25 . ] ) . For instance , various authors advocate for involv - ing participants in defining methods and tools , for techniques to 143 PDC ’20 : Vol . 2 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia Sarah Robinson et al . explore different forms of participation and of sharing control in design processes e . g . [ 23 . ] . Paradoxically , the pressure to succeed in PD often means design research contributions “do not address the uncertainties of practising participation , precisely because suc - ceeding in participation is considered to be of the essence in PD” [ 1 . ] . Yet unpacking the difficulties and ambiguities of participation offers new potential for practice [ 1 . ] . If design is ongoing then the meaning of participation must also be considered over time . Many reports of PD focus on isolated instances of design events and rarely unpack all the activities that occur in long - term projects in between these events [ 9 . ] . Significant time is required to access people , especially in marginalized set - tings , to traverse social distances , and to establish trust [ 7 . ] . Much research in PD emphasises value based design e . g . [ 10 . , 12 . , 19 . ] and the importance of trust between researchers and communi - ties as a “key element of success” [ 26 . ] . In fact , while trust is often constructed as a precursor to design , Clarke et al . [ 7 . ] suggest un - derstanding specific experiences of distrust can support designers in determining how best to proceed . This is particularly true when prior research engagements have eroded trust . Nathan et al . [ 18 . ] suggest this can sometimes occur when academic narratives of “common good” render invisible community needs and advocate for a continuous reflexive probing the usefulness of technology and research by asking “Good for whom ? ” Community engagement lit - erature suggests that communities can also refuse to engage when their needs have not been prioritised , and the costs of use outweigh the benefits [ 6 . ] . In small communities , people can be cautious about “even revealing basic information , because of anticipated consequences , ” despite feeling pride of place , and can refuse to engage in ways that may have consequences for them [ 16 . ] . Despite this recognition of what varying meanings of partici - pation in community contexts and what refusal may denote , the majority of studies on technology non - use tend to focus on users as individual people . Studies of non - use range from social media to self - service e - gate systems at European airports ( e . g . [ 3 . , 20 . ] ) and long - term refusal or abandonment of assistive technologies [ 24 . ] . In the field of HCI , non - use has been proposed as a design resource [ 15 . ] or considered as an activity that expresses particular values and is “active , meaningful , motivated , considered , structured , spe - cific , nuanced , directed and productive” [ 21 . ] . Knowles and Hansen , for example , found non - use by older adults can suggest a discomfort with digitisation of previously professional tasks ; insufficient time and energy to become technologically proficient ; and deliberate resistance to a technology perceived as eroding something of value to them [ 15 . ] . In this respect , we argue that non - use can equally be seen as an action that is informative about participation . In this paper , we consider various aspects of refusal in a project with members of a community inhabiting an Irish island , which we call West Island . Their refusal includes non - use and substitution of technology that aimed to lower the barriers to start and sustain a radio station . We will explore this through a thematic analysis of ethnographic fieldnotes . 1 . 2 The Case of West Island West Island is one of six collaborating communities in an innovation project that seeks to create regional and European - wide networks of radio stations that can pool community - level resources , co - innovate collaborative media services and increase the permeability and im - pact of those stations through a combination of existing digital and nondigital technologies . The wider project involves seven academic , technology and community partners working across six commu - nity contexts in three countries . The core project intends to pilot a new peer - to - peer platform for community radio that uses both FM and digital technologies through a PD approach . The current paper focuses on the priorities expressed by community members in West Island as the project unfolded , and what the expressed priorities of this community can teach us about participation through acts of agentic refusal . The project’s primary intermediary in Ireland is a local commu - nity organisation ( CO ) responsible for community development of people living on West Island . West Island has a year - round popula - tion of just under 200 people , which trebles in the summer months . It is connected by regular ferry to the mainland throughout the year . The island population has been declining for generations , and a primary goal of the CO is to sustain the population and keep the community viable , “through a range of initiatives which as well as creating employment , also serve to improve the quality of life for islanders , whilst also striving to protect the island’s unique natural environment . ” The CO was interested in engaging in the project to preserve the oral history of the island and include people in community activities . As part of this project , the CO has oversight of deploying and piloting the technology . Project partners introduced the radio technology to commu - nity members 6 months into the project over three remote train - ing / demo sessions which took on average one hour and involved introductions and walkthroughs of the radio scheduling system and different types of radio content . The community radio broadcasts pre - recorded and live content - ranging from music , interviews , oral histories , current affairs and the local Church service - on thirty Sundays throughout the year . We , the authors , are academic partners of the EU project , re - sponsible for facilitating the research process . The first author is employed part - time by the CO , and part - time by the Irish university to conduct ethnographic research as part of the PD process . She has been a participant - observer in the community for a year , interview - ing community members and taking field notes about needs and engagement in the community radio process . In this paper the term community is not unpacked further given insider confidentiality issues that arise in small communities of West islands size [ 22 . ] , where anonymity is challenging and people feel sharing , even basic information can have local consequences [ 16 . ] . 2 UNDERSTANDING REFUSAL AND SUBSTITUTION We begin our analysis by exploring processes of refusal that emerged in West Island’s engagement in the project 10 months after the first introduction of the radio technology . 2 . 1 Researcher - community relationship and trust While the technology was introduced by our colleagues based in another European context , we emphasised research . 144 Participation through substituting and refusing PDC ’20 : Vol . 2 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia There seems to be a bit of suspicion about research , and fear about being " researched " - so I’ve been trying to have informal chats and participate in community activities . People were initially reluctant to partici - pate in interviews , and Brian advised me not to ask certain community people until I had gained their trust . ( Fieldnotes , February 2019 ) . The research team decided to gather insights about West Island’s needs through interviews but , from the start , members were cau - tious about engagement and adopted a watch and wait approach . Their responses indicated a fear of upsetting the island’s status quo by voicing concerns not usually openly shared . Members would speak off - the - record but did not want opinions shared in audio - records or field notes . They were suspicious about what would happen to their audio content if interviews were recorded and how to protect their identity and place in the community , in instances where they felt it could be exposed . As one community member said : Keeping the peace is the challenge . There are cer - tain relationships that must be maintained – and this means that saying what you really think is very diffi - cult . ( Field notes , March 2019 ) . Throughout our visits , community members commented about whether we ( the researchers ) were down a lot or not , “You haven’t been down for a while” or “You’ve been here a lot lately . ” In each encounter , there was a sense that members were trying to under - stand if we were committed or not , and whether or not , we were sincere or self - serving . Did we care about the community needs or our own ? At the same time as community members tried to assess re - searchers’ commitments in the project , and to them ; they also re - ferred to past experiences of engaging with external parties . They used a local term to denote people that would come and give in - structions or advice as an “outside expert” and then disappear again once a project was over , all the time positioning the community as passive . This term also referred to people that dominate or take over and don’t leave room for the community to participate . Mov - ing past layers of previous encounters with outsiders was a chal - lenge , indicating the importance of these encounters in configuring community participation . One community member also suggested , “Sometimes as islanders we feel like animals in a zoo , ” indicating an almost orientalist positioning in previous engagements with outsiders . 2 . 2 Community organization accountability to community From the start of our fieldwork , it became obvious that the CO was accountable to the island community . Some locals were initially skeptical about the radio project , indicating that the CO should be putting resources and time into priorities like broadband or livelihoods , rather than channeling energy into radio . When I started talking about community radio , people would say what are you on about that for , what you should be spending your time on is getting us broad - band . ( Community worker , field notes June 2019 ) . The CO , on the other hand , believed that the radio could support the local community in ways the community had not yet realized . For the community to realize its potential the CO believed that the radio had to impress them and be of relevance and interest . As one community volunteer said : “It’s like an amateur drama , when the lights go up , everything must work . ” Proving the value of community radio in the initial stages was deemed important and reputational . In response , the CO sought advice from people with commercial and community media exper - tise to support a realization of radio , based on pre - existing ideas . The CO had expectations about high sound quality , common in the Irish context , which has a rich heritage and tradition of radio and felt it important to mirror this in the community radio . 2 . 3 Community and the radio platform The project’s radio platform comprises an android phone housed in a plastic bucket beside the radio antenna . The idea is that scheduled content ( both live and pre - recorded ) can be updated to the android phone through using a cloud server . The android phone is con - nected to an FM transmitter via a headphone jack . Live broadcasts are enabled through telephony technology , in which the android phone automatically calls station hosts when they were scheduled to broadcast , providing them with an option to go live on air . The station only requires an android phone to manage content , and the host needs only a basic phone ( e . g . a landline ) to live broadcast . The antenna , android phone and FM transmitter were placed at the top of the highest hill to ensure transmission across the island and surrounding areas . Community expectations were that “everything must work” but everything did not work in initial trials of use . Firstly , the hardware ( antenna ) broke in high winds . The installation involved a num - ber of days work for local volunteers in bad weather and when it snapped , morale was low . Support came from a local community radio station who provided a sturdy aluminum mast suitable for the island location . Housing the phone next to the antenna meant accessing it in - volved an hour’s hike , sometimes in bad weather , or a 20 - minute drive on rough terrain . In early iterations of use , the phone had to be refreshed regularly and community volunteers travelled up and down the hill while trying to broadcast , up to three times in one broadcast . When they tried to upload songs on the phone it also failed . They became frustrated with the unreliability of the radio platform , whilst trying to honor broadcasting commitments . They decided they could not establish a community radio station and pilot the platform simultaneously , substituting the platform with other technology that enabled reliability and the sound quality that they wanted . They prioritized reliability and using a sound desk from previous theatre work , with free online software and a computer . It was conjured up by community - based volunteers with sound and media experience . The system continued to be techni - cally operated by volunteer media professionals , which appeared to suit community members as radio production was demanding on their time . In short , this was a simple solution for them , that was less demanding and taxing than piloting the new radio platform . In a later meeting , members asked “ why isn’t it [ the platform ] working here ? ” They expected the platform to be reliable from 145 PDC ’20 : Vol . 2 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia Sarah Robinson et al . the start , as it worked in other contexts . From the developer’s perspective , the community were not using the radio platform in the manner to which it was intended – that is , they were streaming directly to the phone rather than scheduling content through the cloud scheduling system , nor had they put pre - recorded content on the phone , suggesting that those who had taken the training were not sufficiently equipped to become self - sufficient in its use . 3 DISCUSSION Above , we presented how technology refusal and substitution emerged during West Island’s engagement in the project . In the next sections , we consider the importance of community position - ing in participation and reflect on why substitution of technology occurred in West Island . We argue that acts of refusal and substi - tution are key elements that can not only support participation in technological design but shed light to meanings of participation as a process . 3 . 1 Community positioning We suggest that acts of refusal and substitution are active agentic ways in which the community engaged during deployment of the radio platform . Firstly , the invitation for the community to partic - ipate in research came through the gatekeeper organization , the CO . However , the gatekeeper did not have the initial support of the wider island community . They believed this would change once the radio started and the community could see its benefit . We wanted to understand the needs of the community and asked to conduct inter - views . Like many rural small communities , West Island community members valued maintaining social harmony . Previous research encounters positioned them as passive actors , rather than as agentic experts on community needs making them continuously question , “Good for whom ? ” as indicated by Nathan et al . [ 18 . ] . Refusal in the research process suggested previous encounters , but also the fear that revealing information would have local consequences , similar to Light and colleague’s [ 16 . ] findings suggesting the im - portance of building and maintaining trust throughout the design and research process . This ensures that reflexivity is essential and in this project , now means the use of researcher intuition to guide what can be shared , similar to approaches elsewhere [ 5 . ] as well as anonymized surveys to overcome fears of local consequences of sharing information . The opportunity to participate in the project was seized by the CO , seeing it as a way to support ongoing community needs such as documenting oral histories and social inclusion . However , this was in conflict with initial community reactions . The CO was both accountable to the community , as well as for piloting the radio platform as part of the project . These commitments were in tension and difficult to balance , particularly when the platform was per - ceived as unstable and when support was not available in the way the CO had envisaged , leading to substitution . This suggests the importance of initial invitations into communities and managing conflicting commitments of community partners during the design process . 3 . 2 Substituting technology Substitution revealed that managing the burdens of simultaneous design of radio content and piloting the radio platform with remote support were too much . Community members opted to design con - tent , when introducing community radio in a remote context , rather than prioritize “the everyday work of making IT work” involved in piloting a prototype radio platform [ 11 . ] . Dittricll et al . [ 11 . ] find that this everyday work is often overlooked and under - resourced but is central to the design process . Our case study suggests that when design involves multi - levels , people may focus on something that is most achievable for them . This shares similarities with non - use in other settings , where people will not use technology that requires more time and resources than they have to become tech - nologically proficient [ 15 . ] or when their responses are positioned “purely as expressions of potential interest or potential adoption” of a novel technology [ 21 . ] . Acts of technology substitution can contribute important dimen - sions to reflecting on participatory methods and democratizing design decisions . A common way to involve participants is en - abling them to explore and critique prototype technologies in their settings . While this process offers a way for people to make sug - gestions based on real world experience , paradoxes emerge when unstable prototypes compromise the ability of people to explore them in meaningful ways . We learn from this experience that user and technical needs include a minimum stable platform that can offer reliable broadcasting . Reliability is linked to community pride , as well as legal requirements of a broadcasting licence [ 17 . ] , which contribute to technology substitution in this instance . What we also find is that the technology was not used in the intended manner perhaps indicating that initial training was not sufficient to enable community members to become self - sufficient in its use , or that complexity of learning this new system was too much whilst also trying to initiate a community radio process . Rather than ask for more training the community members rely on experts within their community to substitute . Reliability is more than the technological reliability then , but is also linked to relational reliability , in which experts within or close to the community are trusted more than remote developers . This extends understandings of trust in design and indicates that establishing participation between remote de - velopers and community members can be hindered or helped by community experts . The face to face interactions of local experts also was key in this instance , as well as understandings that support would be enduring rather than primarily project duration . 4 CONCLUSION This empirical example of non - use and refusal during a design process with a rural island community suggests that when a tech - nology intended for co - design is substituted , there is vital learning , involving both design considerations for the technology itself ( re - mote access , minimum stability for broadcasting ) , as well as values and qualities of participation ( trust , social harmony , face to face in - teraction ) that the community require for engagement . We suggest that being substituted can inform PD through reflexive processes similar to those suggested by Nathan and colleagues [ 18 . ] . Unlike current research on non - use which focuses on individual users , our approach is based on collective or community non - use and seeks 146 Participation through substituting and refusing PDC ’20 : Vol . 2 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia to inform contemporary debates to reimagine PD through under - standing acts of refusal and substitution as illustrative of design and participation outcomes . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The Grassroot Wavelengths Project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under Grant Agreement No 780890 REFERENCES [ 1 . ] Lars Bo Anderson , Peter Danholt , Kim Halskov , Nicoli Broderson Hansen , and PeterLauritsen . 2015 . Participationasamatterofconcerninparticipatorydesign . Participation as a matter of concern in participatory design 3 – 4 , 11 : 250 – 261 . [ 2 . ] Liam Bannon , Jeffrey Bardzell , and Susanne Bødker . 2018 . Reimagining participa - tory design . Interactions : 26 – 32 . [ 3 . ] E . P Baumer , M . G Ames , J . R Brubaker , J . Burrell , and P Dourish . 2014 . Refusing , limiting , departing : whyweshouldstudytechnologynon - use . In CHI’14Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 65 – 68 . [ 4 . ] M Brereton and J . Buur . 2008 . New Challenges for design participation in the era of ubiquitous computing . Co - Design 4 , 2 : 101 – 113 . [ 5 . ] Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir and Phoebe Sengers . 2009 . Ubicomp from the edge of the North Atlantic : Lessons from fishing villages in Iceland and Newfoundland . In Ubicomp’09 workshop . Ubicomp ’09 workshop . [ 6 . ] Alan Chamberlain , Andy Crabtree , and Mark Davies . 2013 . Community engage - ment for research : contextual design in rural CSCW system development . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Communities and Technologies , 131 – 139 . [ 7 . ] Rachel Elizabeth Clarke , Jo Briggs , Andrea Armstrong , Alistair MacDonald , John Vines , Emma Flynn , and Karen Salt . 2019 . Socio - materiality of trust : co - design with a resource limited community organisation . CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts 4 : 1 – 20 . [ 8 . ] B Cooke and U Kothari . 2001 . Participation : The new tyranny ? Zed Books , London & New York . [ 9 . ] PDalsgaardandK . Halskov . 2012 . Reflectivedesigndocumentation . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 423 – 437 . [ 10 . ] J . DavisandL . P . Nathan . 2015 . ValueSensitiveDesign : Applications , Adaptations and Critiques . In Handbook of Ethics , Values , and Technological Design . Springer , Dordrecht , 11 – 40 . [ 11 . ] Yvonne Dittricll , Sara Erikseji , and Christina Hanssoni . 2002 . PD in the Wild ; Evolving practices of Design in Use . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference 23 - 25 June 2002 , 124 – 134 . [ 12 . ] B . Friedman and P . H Jr . Kahn . 2002 . Human values , ethics , and design . In The human - computer interaction handbook . CRC Press , Boca Raton , Florida , USA , 1209 – 1233 . [ 13 . ] HelenaKarastiandKarenS . Baker . 2008 . CommunityDesign : growingone’sown information infrastructure . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , 217 – 220 . [ 14 . ] L Kimbell and G . Julier . 2019 . Confronting bureaucracies and assessing value in the co - production of social design research . CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts 15 , 1 : 8 – 23 . [ 15 . ] Bran Knowles and Vicki L . Hanson . 2018 . The Wisdom of Older Technology ( Non - ) Users . Communications of the ACM 61 , 3 : 72 – 77 . [ 16 . ] Anne Light , Kate Howland , Tom Hamilton , and David A . Harley . 2017 . The Meaning of Place in Supporting Sociality . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 1141 – 1152 . [ 17 . ] T Lodato and C Di Salvo . 2018 . Institutional constraints : the forms and limits of participatory design in the public realm . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference , 5 : 1 - 5 : 12 . [ 18 . ] L . P . Nathan , M Kaczmarek , S Cheng , and R Mann . 2017 . Good for whom ? : Un - settling research practice . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technologies , 290 – 297 . [ 19 . ] L . P Nathan , P . V . Klasnja , and B . Friedman . 2007 . Value scenarios : a technique for envisioning systemic effects of new technologies . In CHI’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , 2585 – 2590 . [ 20 . ] A . M Oostveen . 2014 . Non - use of automated border control systems : identify - ing reasons and solutions . In Proceedings of the 28th International BCS Human Computer Interaction Conference on HCI 2014 - Sand , Sea and Sky - Holiday HCI , 228 – 233 . [ 21 . ] S Satchell and P . Dourish . 2009 . Beyond the user : use and non - use in HCI . In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Australian Computer - Human Interaction Special Interest Group : Design : Open 24 / 7 , 9 – 16 . [ 22 . ] B Saunders , J Kitzinger , and C . Kitzinger . 2015 . Anonymising interview data : Challenges and compromise in practice . Qualitative Research 15 , 5 : 616 – 632 . [ 23 . ] JohnVines , RachelClarke , PeteWright , JohnMcCarthy , andPatrickOlivier . 2013 . Configuring participation : on how we involve people in design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 429 – 438 . [ 24 . ] R Wessels , B Dijcks , M Soede , G . J Gelderblom , and L De Witte . 2003 . Non - use of provided assistive technology devices , a literature overview . Technology and disability . Technology and disability 15 , 4 : 231 – 238 . [ 25 . ] H . Winschiers - Theophilus , S Chivuno - Kuria , G . K Kapuire , N . J Bidwell , and E . Blake . 2010 . Being participated : a community approach . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 1 – 10 . [ 26 . ] Heike Winshiers - Theophilus , Tariq Zaman , and Alvin Yeo . 2015 . Reducing white elephant ICT4D projects : a community - researcher engagement . In ( pp . 99 - 107 ) . ACM . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Communities and Technologies , 99 – 107 . 147