Reasoning and Learning by Analogy Introduction Dedre Gentner Keith J . Holyoak Analogy is a powerful cognitive mechanism that people use to make inferences and learn new abstractions . The history of work on analogy in modern cognitive science is sketched , focusing on contributions from cognitive psy - chology , artificial intelligence , and philosophy of science . This review sets the stage for the 3 articles that follow in this Science Watch section . p eople live in a world of perpetual novelty , in which no experience is ever exactly repeated . Yet para - doxically , many would agree that there is nothing new under the sun . " The " illusion of familiarity , " as it might be called , depends on the power of the human mind to find - - and , if necessary , to create - - similarities between past experiences and the present situation . Per - ceived similarities enable one to organize objects and events into familiar categories - - cats and dogs , friend - ships and love affairs . But how do categories first get formed ? One basic mechanism is analogy - - the process of understanding a novel situation in terms of one that is already familiar . The familiar situation - - often termed the base or source analog - - provides a kind of model for making inferences about the unfamiliar situation - - the target analog . In the course of reasoning by analogy , the novel target comes to be seen as another example of " the same kind of thing " as the familiar analog . And the analogy between two specific situations may provide the " seed " for learning a more general category or schema that encompasses both . The power of analogy to create similarities makes it a tool for a wide range of purposes , including solving problems , constructing explanations , and building argu - ments . Consider an example from recent history ( Spell - man & Holyoak , 1992 ) . In order to muster support for the U . S . - led drive to liberate Kuwait after it was captured by Iraq , President George Bush explicitly compared Sad - dam Hussein to Adolf Hitler and the Persian Gulf crisis to events that led to World War II a half century earlier . By drawing the analogy between Saddam Hussein and Hitler , President Bush encouraged a reasoning process that led to the construction of a coherent system of roles for the players in the Gulf situation . Once the analogical Northwestern University University of California , Los Angeles correspondences were established ( with Iraq identified as an expansionist dictatorship like Germany , Kuwait as its first victim , Saudi Arabia as the next potential victim , and the United States as the main defender of the Gulf states ) , the clear analogical inference was that both self - interest and moral considerations required immediate military intervention by the United States . How does analogy actually operate ? How is it con - nected with judgments of similarity ? What roles does it play in everyday reasoning and decision making ? Can an understanding of analogy provide insights of use to clini - cal psychologists and educators ? This section of Science Watch features three articles that address these questions . These articles provide distinct but interrelated perspec - tives on a research topic that over the past two decades has been a major " success story " in the interdisciplinary field of cognitive science . The progress in understanding analogy is manifested in several ways . First , the study of analogy has been energized by fruitful collaborations between researchers in psychology and artificial intelli - gence , with significant influences from philosophy , lin - guistics , and history of science . Second , the empirical and computational work has led to a substantial degree of convergence between researchers in the field , indicat - ing the stability of many of the fundamental theoretical assumptions . Finally , theories of analogy have been ex - tended to account for data in areas that are near relatives , such as metaphor and mundane similarity , as well as to Editor ' s note . Lyle E . Bourne served as action editor for this Science Watch section . Author ' s note . Order of authorship was determined alphabetically . Preparation of this article was supported by National Science Foundation Grants SBR - 95 - 11757 and SBR - 95 - 11504 and Office of Naval Research Grant N00014 - 89 - J1272 . We thank Janet Kolodner and Paul Thagard for their valuable comments on this article . The authors of this Science Watch section thank Mark Keane , Brian Ross , and Colleen Seifert for their thorough and helpful reviews of the articles included in this section . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to either Dedre Gentner , Department of Psychology , Northwestern Univer - sity , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 , or Keith J . Holyoak , Department of Psychology , University of California , Los Angeles , Franz Hall , Los Angeles , CA 90095 - 1563 . Electronic mail may be sent via Internet to gentner @ nwu . edu or holyoak @ psych . ucla . edu . 32 January 1997 • American Psychologist Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0003 - 066X / 97 / $ 2 . 00 Vol . 52 , No . 1 , 32 - 34 areas that are more distant cousins , such as categorization and decision making . Modern views of analogy can be traced to such pioneering influences as the philosopher Mary Hesse ( 1966 ) , whose treatise on analogy in science argued that analogies are powerful forces in discovery and concep - tual change . For some time , howevel ; most psychological work on analogy focused on four - term analogy problems of the sort used in intelligence tests ( e . g . , " foot is to leg as arm is to what ? " ) rather than on the richer analogies used in science and everyday life . In the early 1980s , two research projects in psychology began to take a broader view of analogy . Gentner ( 1982 , 1983 ; Gentner & Gent - ner , 1983 ) began working on mental models and analogy in science . She was struck by the idea that in analogy , the key similarities lie in the relations that hold within the domains ( e . g . , the flow of electrons in an electrical circuit is analogically similar to the flow of people in a crowded subway tunnel ) rather than in features of indi - vidual objects ( e . g . , electrons do not resemble people ) . Moreover , analogical similarities often depend on higher order relations - - relations between relations . For exam - ple , adding a resistor to a circuit causes ( a higher order relation ) a decrease in the flow of electricity , just as adding a narrow gate in a subway tunnel would decrease the rate at which people could pass through . In her struc - ture - mapping theory , Gentner set forth the view that anal - ogy entails finding a structural alignment , or a mapping , between domains . This alignment between two represen - tational structures is characterized by structural parallel - ism ( consistent , one - to - one correspondences between mapped elements ) and systematicity - - an implicit prefer - ence for deep , interconnected systems of relations gov - erned by higher order relations , such as causal , mathemat - ical , or functional relations . Holyoak ( 1985 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Holy - oak & Koh , 1987 ) became convinced that analogy offered a richer approach to problem solving than those that were then available . His focus on problem solving led him to a strong concern for the role of pragmatics in analogy - - how current goals and context guide the interpretation of an analogy . Holyoak and Thagard ( 1989 ) developed a multiconstraint approach to analogy in which similarity , structural parallelism , and pragmatic factors interact to produce an interpretation . In addition , Holyoak ' s re - search on problem solving provided evidence that anal - ogy can provide the seed for forming new relational cate - gories , by abstracting the relational correspondences be - tween examples into a schema for a class of problems . Analogy was viewed as a central part of human induction ( Holland , Holyoak , Nisbett , & Thagard , 1986 ) . At the same time , researchers in artificial intelli - gence began to grapple with the use of complex analogies in reasoning and learning ( Winston , 1980 ) . Schank and his colleagues were exploring the role of experience in understanding ( Schank , 1982 ) and the relationship be - tween understanding , learning , and memory ( Kolodner , 1983 ) . This exploration soon led to a more general focus on the role of experience in reasoning and the relation - ships among reasoning , learning , and memory . Case - based reasoning ( e . g . , Kolodner , 1993 ; Kolodner & Simpson , 1989 ; Schank , Kass , & Riesbeck , 1994 ) was born from these explorations as a methodology for com - puter reasoning and as a plausible model of human rea - somng . In contrast to rule - based approaches to reasoning ( the dominant approach in artificial intelligence at the time ) , case - based reasoning emphasized the usefulness of retrieving and adapting cases or analogs stored in long - term memory when deriving solutions to novel problems . During recent years , the efforts of many cognitive scientists have contributed to an emerging consensus on many issues concerning analogy ( e . g . , Halford , 1993 ; Keane , Ledgeway , & Duff , 1994 ; Ross , 1989 ) . The pro - cess of analogical thinking can be usefully decomposed into several basic constituent processes . One or more relevant analogs stored in memory must be accessed . A familiar analog must be mapped to the target analog to identify systematic correspondences between the two , thereby aligning the corresponding parts of each analog . The resulting mapping allows analogical inferences to be made about the target analog , thus creating new knowl - edge to fill gaps in understanding . These inferences need to be evaluated and possibly adapted to fit the unique requirements of the target . Finally , in the aftermath of analogical reasoning , learning can result in the generation of new categories and schemas , the addition of new in - stances to memory , and new understandings of old in - stances and schemas that allow them to be better accessed in the future . All current theories of analogy deal with some sub - set of these basic component processes . In various ways and with differing emphases , all these theories make use of some combination of structural information about the form of the analogs and pragmatic information about the goals that triggered the reasoning episode . Theories of analogy have been instantiated in computer simulations . The output of a simulation can be compared to human performance with analogies , providing empirical ground - ing for the theoretical principles underlying the computer model . The three articles that follow illustrate some of the current research and theories of analogy use . Each article emphasizes particular issues and approaches . Holyoak and Thagard ( 1997 ) provide a number of examples of how analogies are used in contexts ranging from political debate to psychotherapy . They discuss these examples in terms of their multiconstraint theory , which posits a small number of basic principles that interact to guide analogi - cal mapping and other aspects of analogy use . Gentner and Markman ( 1997 ) describe the structure - mapping the - ory , which emphasizes the structural principles on which mapping is based . They show how the structure - mapping theory provides insights into how similarities can be ac - tively created as two analogs are aligned with one another . Kolodner ( 1997 ) provides an overview of the case - based reasoning approach as it applies to human and artificial intelligence and discusses some of its implications for design of educational practices and educational software . January 1997 • American Psychologist 33 Whereas the first two articles emphasize work on the mapping process , Kolodner ' s article focuses on how cases are retrieved and adapted . Each article sketches some of the computer simulations that have been devel - oped to test theories of analogy and also raises some unanswered questions that invite further research . REFERENCES Gentner , D . ( 1982 ) . Are scientific analogies metaphors ? In D . S . Miall ( Ed . ) , Metaphor : Problems and perspectives ( pp . 106 - 132 ) . Brigh - ton , England : Harvester Press . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework . Cog - nitive Science , 7 , 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D , R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 99 - 129 ) . HiUsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 - 56 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 - 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 - 38 . Halford , G . S . ( 1993 ) . Children ' s understanding : The development of mental models . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hesse , M . ( 1966 ) . Models and analogies in science . Notre Dame , IN : Notre Dame University Press . Holland , J . H , , Holyoak , K . J . , Nisbett , R . E . , & Thagard , P . ( 1986 ) . Induction : Processes of inference , learning , and discovery . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Holyoak , K . J . ( 1985 ) . The pragmatics of analogical transfer . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 19 , pp . 59 - 87 ) . New York : Academic Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 332 - 340 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 , 295 - 355 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1997 ) . The analogical mind . American Psychologist , 52 , 35 - 44 . Keane , M . T . , Ledgeway , T . , & Duff , S . ( 1994 ) . Constraints on analogi - cal mapping : A comparison of three models . Cognitive Science , 18 , 387 - 438 . Kolodner , J . L . ( 1983 ) . Reconstructive memory : A computer model . Cognitive Science , 7 , 281 - 328 . Kolodner , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Case - based reasoning . San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufmann , Kolodner , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Educational implications of analogy : A view from case - based reasoning . American Psychologist , 52 , 57 - 66 . Kolodner , J . L . , & Simpson , R . L . ( 1989 ) . The MEDIATOR : Analysis of an early case - based problem solver . Cognitive Science , 13 , 507 - 549 . Ross , B . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superficial similarities : Differ - ent effects on the access and use of earlier problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 456 - 468 . Schank , R . C . ( 1982 ) . Dynamic memory . New York : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Schank , R . C . , Kass , A . , & Riesbeck , C . K . ( 1994 ) . Inside case - based explanation . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Spellman , B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1992 ) . If Saddam is Hitler then who is George Bush ? Analogical mapping between systems of social roles . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 913 - 933 . Winston , P . H . ( 1980 ) . Learning and reasoning by analogy . Communica - tions of the ACM , 23 , 689 - 703 . 34 January 1997 • American Psychologist