1 The Myriad Roles of Anillin during Cytokinesis Alisa J . Piekny 1 and Amy Shaub Maddox 2 1 . Department of Biology , Concordia University , 7141 Sherbrooke St . W , Montréal , QC , Canada H4B 1R6 2 . Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer , Department of Pathology and Cell Biology , P . O . Box 6128 , Station Centre - Ville , Montréal , QC , Canada H3C 3J7 Corresponding authors : AJP : apiekny @ alcor . concordia . ca , ASM : amy . maddox @ umontreal . ca 2 Abstract : Anillin is a highly conserved multidomain protein that interacts with cytoskeletal components as well as their regulators . Throughout phylogeny , Anillins contribute to cytokinesis , the cell shape change that occurs at the end of meiosis and mitosis to separate a cell into daughter cells . Failed cytokinesis results in binucleation , which can lead to genomic instability . Study of Anillin in several model organisms has provided us with insight into how the cytoskeleton is coordinated to ensure that cytokinesis occurs with high fidelity . Here we review Anillin’s interacting partners and the relevance of these interactions in vivo . We also discuss questions of how these interactions are coordinated , and finally provide some perspective regarding Anillin’s role in cancer . Keywords : cytoskeleton ; cytokinesis ; Rho ; F - actin ; cellularization Abbreviations : F - actin ( filamentous actin ) , GEF ( guanine nucleotide exchange factor ) , GAP ( GTPase activating protein ) , PH ( pleckstrin homology ) , AH ( Anillin homology ) , SH3 ( Src homology 3 ) , TCA ( trichloroacetic acid ) , FRET ( fluorescence / Förster resonance energy transfer ) , NLS ( nuclear localization signal ) , APC ( anaphase promoting complex ) , D - box ( destruction box ) , SIN ( septation initiation network ) , RNAi ( RNA - mediated interference ) 1 . Introduction Cell shape is dictated in large part by the actomyosin ( F - actin and non - muscle myosin II ) cytoskeleton , and its myriad associations with the plasma membrane . Many temporal and spatial cues that govern the dynamics of actin , myosin and thus cell shape come from the microtubule cytoskeleton . Cytokinesis , a particularly dramatic cell shape change , is the physical division of one cell into two daughter cells . During cytokinesis , the cell faces several challenges . First , the cell equator must be specified by microtubules of the anaphase spindle , so that cytokinesis is spatially and temporally coordinated with chromosome segregation ( reviewed in [ 1 , 2 ] ) . Second , the small GTPase Rho must be locally activated by the GEF Ect2 and GAP Cyk - 4 [ 3 ] . Rho activity elicits the assembly and constriction of a contractile ring rich in actin filaments and active myosin . This ring must function efficiently to narrow the cytoplasmic connection between the nascent daughter cells . Last , the daughter cells must permanently separate at the cell - cell bridge ( midbody ) . Anillin is a conserved multidomain protein , which , due its many interactions , is a prime candidate for scaffolding and organizing the cytoskeleton and its regulators in all the above events ( also recently reviewed in [ 4 - 6 ] ) . 2 . Roles of Anillin as revealed by binding partners 2 . 1 Actin Anillin was first isolated from Drosophila embryo extracts by virtue of its binding to phalloidin - stabilized F - actin ( Table 1 ) . This association was specific for F - actin , since Anillin was not enriched among proteins bound to a G - actin column [ 7 ] . The antibody raised against “Antigen 8” ( Anillin ) recognized contractile structures including cellularization furrows ( Fig . 1 ) in Drosophila stage 14 embryos and cytokinetic rings later in development . Drosophila Anillin was cloned and found to be encoded by the scraps gene [ 8 ] . 3 Anillin is also capable of bundling actin filaments . While amino acids 258 - 340 of Drosophila Anillin are sufficient for F - actin binding , amino acids 246 - 371 bundle actin filaments . A small fragment with strong ( salt - resistant ) F - actin bundling activity was found to be monomeric by analytical ultraceltrifugation , suggesting this single domain has two F - actin binding sites . However , this fragment could dimerize after binding F - actin [ 9 ] . Anillin’s ability to bind and bundle F - actin is conserved , as Xenopus Anillin also robustly bundles F - actin ( amino acids 245 - 418 ; [ 10 ] ) . F - actin and Anillin are recruited independently to the contractile ring in human and Drosophila cultured cells , as well as to meiotic rings in Drosophila spermatogenesis [ 11 - 14 ] . However , F - actin increases the efficiency of Anillin targeting to the cell equator in both systems ( in terms of timing or spatial accuracy ) [ 13 - 15 ] . Importantly , Anillin does not bind all F - actin in the cell . Rather , it is specific to cell division - related contractile structures ( Fig . 2 ) and , for example , is absent from the apically constricting cells during Drosophila dorsal closure [ 9 ] and stress fibers in interphase mammalian cultured cells ( [ 10 ] and A . S . Maddox , unpublished observations ) . Anillin has been widely implicated in “organizing contractility” ( see 2 . 2 - 2 . 3 , 2 . 5 - 2 . 6 ) , but its direct effects on F - actin organization are poorly understood . F - actin was assumed to become delocalized as Anillin depleted cells undergo lateral furrow oscillations ( see 2 . 2 ) , but it was only recently shown that Anillin depletion allows F - actin , like myosin , outside the equator in Drosophila spermatocytes that fail cytokinesis [ 12 ] . It is not known whether Anillin regulates the formation of parallel or antiparallel actin bundles in cells . By regulating actin bundling , Anillin may increase the efficiency of actomyosin contractility . Anillin also interacts indirectly with F - actin via binding to the formin mDia2 ( amino acids 1 - 91 of human Anillin and 156 - 533 of mDia2 , which includes the DID region ) possibly to stabilize formin in the active conformation after it binds RhoA [ 16 ] . The formin - Anillin interaction is important for the cortical localization of mDia2 and for the success of cytokinesis [ 16 ] . This interaction likely explains why depletion of mDia2 causes the ectopic localization of RhoA , F - actin , myosin and Anillin and results in cell oscillations similar to those that occur following loss of Anillin [ 17 ] . Thus , Anillin may not only organize actin , but also promote its polymerization in the contractile ring . 2 . 2 Myosin While Anillin interacts indirectly with myosin via F - actin , there is also a direct interaction between Anillin and non - muscle myosin II ( Table 1 ) . Approximately 100 amino acids near the N - terminus ( residues 143 - 245 ) of Xenopus Anillin are necessary and sufficient for binding myosin . This interaction is independent of F - actin ( it was assessed in the presence of the actin - depolymerizing drug Cytochalasin D ) and requires an activating phosphorylation of myosin regulatory light chain [ 18 ] . In vertebrates , Drosophila and C . elegans , Anillin ( ANI - 1 in C . elegans ) and myosin are recruited to the contractile ring independently [ 13 , 18 , 19 ] . The only clear exception to this rule is in the fission yeast S . pombe , wherein the Anillin - like protein Mid1 is required for the equatorial recruitment of myosin , and all other contractile ring proteins . 4 If the interaction between Anillin and myosin does not serve the purpose of recruitment in metazoan cells , what is its role ? One of Anillin’s key functions is to “organize” myosin . Drosophila Anillin is required for the organization of myosin into discrete , intact rings throughout the cellularization front ( [ 8 ] ; Fig . 1 ) . Depletion of Drosophila or human Anillin from cultured cells perturbs the temporal and spatial stability of myosin at the cell equator during cytokinesis [ 12 , 13 , 18 , 20 - 22 ] . C . elegans Anillin ( ANI - 1 ) organizes myosin into dynamic foci during polarity establishment and cytokinesis [ 19 , 23 ] and promotes asymmetric furrow ingression in the zygote ( Fig . 3 ; [ 24 ] ) . C . elegans ANI - 2 is required for the integrity of the myosin - rich , potentially contractile lining of the C . elegans oogenic gonad [ 19 ] . Specifically , Anillin may increase the effective processivity of non - muscle myosin II , which is known to have extremely low intrinsic processivity , by coordinating myosin with bundled F - actin and increasing its chance of encountering an actin track [ 25 ] . Neither of the predicted [ 15 , 18 ] myosin - or actin - binding domains of human Anillin is required for its localization to the equatorial cortex [ 21 ] . A truncation lacking both of these domains localizes properly , but fails to replace the function of depleted endogenous Anillin . Specifically , cytokinesis failure results from a lateral oscillation behavior during which the polar regions of the cell become aberrantly contractile and push cytoplasm across the equator ( Fig . 4 ; [ 21 ] ) . This contractile behavior in the polar regions of the cell likely is caused by the mislocalization of myosin outside the cell equator during these oscillations ( Fig . 4 ) . Interestingly , while this abnormal oscillation occurs in cells expressing Anillin that cannot bind actin or myosin , the truncated protein itself does not leave the equator to follow myosin to the poles . This suggests that C - terminal domains of Anillin ( see 2 . 3 , 2 . 5 - 2 . 8 ) are sufficient for equatorial targeting , and that the N - terminal domains organize contractility ( Fig . 2 ; see 2 . 2 ) . 2 . 3 Septins Anillin also interacts with the septins ( Table 1 ) , which comprise a conserved family of GTP - binding proteins that heterooligomerize into nonpolar rods and further associate to generate filaments and sheets [ 26 ] . Like Anillin , septins are enriched in contractile structures in many cellular contexts [ 27 ] . Specifically during cytokinesis and cellularization , this localization depends on association with Anillin ( Fig . 2 ) . Direct interaction between septins and Anillin was demonstrated using a minimal reconstituted heterooligomer of human septins 2 , 6 and 7 that bound Xenopus Anillin in vitro [ 10 ] . Septin binding activity is conferred by the C - terminal third of Anillin , which encompasses the terminal PH domain ( Fig . 5 ) and the upstream sequence known as the “Anillin Homology Domain” named due to phylogenetic conservation [ 15 , 19 ] . A smaller region ( the PH domain plus the adjacent N - terminal 46 amino acids ) is sufficient for association with ectopic septin - containing structures in mammalian cells [ 15 ] . In Drosophila embryos expressing Anillin variants with mutations in the predicted septin - binding domain , and cultured cells and spermatocytes depleted of Anillin , the maintenance and organization of septins ( Peanut and Sept2 ) on cellularization furrows ( Fig . 1 ) and contractile rings is perturbed [ 8 , 12 , 13 ] . The reciprocal relationship is also true : Peanut is required to maintain and organize Anillin on cellularization furrows [ 28 ] . In human cells depleted of Anillin , an Anillin truncation lacking the AH domain , which may mediate interaction with septins , mislocalizes to the poles of the cell during oscillations , similar to myosin [ 21 ] . An 5 Anillin truncation lacking the PH domain , another region involved in septin interactions , cannot localize to the cortex and elicits defects even in the presence of endogenous Anillin [ 21 ] . Conversely , C . elegans Anillin ( ANI - 1 ) is required for septin enrichment in the contractile ring but septins are dispensable for quantitatively normal recruitment of Anillin to the contractile ring ( [ 19 ] ; A . S . Maddox , unpublished observations ) . However , C . elegans septins are required for Anillin’s asymmetric localization during ring closure [ 24 ] suggesting that throughout phylogeny , septins and Anillin are interdependent for their recruitment and organization . Indeed , the S . pombe Anillin - like protein Mid2 depends on septins for its equatorial localization [ 29 ] . Mid2 is not required for the recruitment of septins to the division plane , but does affect their dynamics ; in mid2 mutants , septins exchange abnormally quickly at the cell equator and localize aberrantly to the nascent cell - cell boundary [ 30 ] . These effects on septin dynamics help explain Mid2’s importance for timely septation [ 29 , 30 ] . Septins can directly interact with lipids [ 31 , 32 ] , and septin sheets have been observed in close apposition to the plasma membrane [ 33 ] . Thus , it is possible that septins , via Anillin , help link the actin cytoskeleton to the membrane . Since septins form repeating linear arrays , a septin - Anillin - F - actin or septin - Anillin - myosin linkage could generate higher - order organization of the cortical cytoskeleton . 2 . 4 CD2AP Human and Drosophila Anillins interact with CD2AP ( cluster of ( leukocyte ) differentiation 2 - associated protein ; Cindr in Drosophila ; Table 1 ) , adaptor proteins implicated in membrane trafficking and actin remodeling ( see references within [ 34 ] ) . CD2AP localizes to the spindle midzone in anaphase and the center of the midbody in telophase in human cells ; its first two SH3 domains are necessary and sufficient for this localization [ 34 ] . Cindr localizes to the contractile ring and transiently to ring canals in multiple tissues [ 35 ] . In both species , SH3 domains of CD2AP / Cindr bind conserved motifs in the N - terminus of Anillin , and Cindr additionally binds the C - terminus of Drosophila Anillin ( Table 1 ) . Depletion of CD2AP / Cindr leads to binucleation [ 34 ] , but its role in cytokinesis and whether this role is mediated by an interaction with Anillin are unknown . Since the N - terminal SH3 binding motifs partially overlap with the myosin - binding domain , it is possible that CD2AP competes with myosin for binding and thus affects cytoskeletal organization by Anillin . 2 . 5 Rho Human Anillin interacts with RhoA ( Table 1 ) via its AH domain [ 21 ] . It is not known if homologues also interact with RhoA , but the AH region throughout metazoa bears some homology with Rhotekin , a well - established RhoA - GTP binding protein . Anillin may regulate RhoA’s discrete equatorial cortical localization during cytokinesis , since Anillin also closely associates with the plasma membrane , either directly or via the septins ( see 2 . 3 ) . Anillin and Rho closely colocalize in the contractile ring and the ingressing furrow ( Fig . 2 ) . While depletion or inhibition of RhoA blocks contractile ring assembly ( and ingression ) [ 36 - 39 ] , Anillin depletion from most cell types results in much less severe phenotypes ( contractile rings form and partially ingress ) . Depletion of Anillin from Drosophila spermatocytes dramatically reduces 6 equatorial Rho and F - actin [ 12 ] and human Anillin is required for a population of endogenous RhoA that persists following TCA fixation , [ 21 , 22 ] . The highly conserved AH domain in the C - terminus of Anillin is required for stabilizing RhoA localization in vivo , and can bind directly to RhoA in vitro [ 21 ] . Furthermore , Anillin and RhoA can be co - immunoprecipitated , and over - expression of Anillin causes an increase in active RhoA [ 40 ] . The dramatic effect of Anillin depletion on Rho localization implies that TCA - fixable Rho does not reflect the entire population of active Rho that promotes contractile ring assembly . Nevertheless , these results suggest that Anillin contributes to the generation of active RhoA and stabilizes it in the cleavage plane . 2 . 6 Ect2 In further support for the idea that Anillin regulates or stabilizes RhoA localization , Anillin also interacts with Ect2 ( Table 1 ) , an activator of RhoA ( A . J . Piekny , unpublished observations ) . This interaction occurs independently of RhoA and requires the AH domain of Anillin and the PH domain of Ect2 , which is essential for Ect2’s GEF activity [ 41 ] . Interestingly , a mutation in the PH region of Ect2 that decreases association with Anillin also decreases Ect2’s association with the plasma membrane and the production of Rho - GTP . This suggests that by binding both RhoA and its upstream regulator Ect2 , Anillin ensures the efficient production or stable localization of active RhoA in the division plane . It is not known whether these proteins interact simultaneously , sequentially or in a competitive manner . Also , since the Ect2 - Anillin interaction appears to be enhanced by Ect2’s lipid binding , it is not clear how membrane association contributes to this interaction and to RhoA - GTP production or localization . However , this evidence supports the idea that Rho activation mainly occurs at the membrane . Since Ect2 also binds the Rho GAP Cyk - 4 in the central spindle , perhaps the population of Ect2 close to the membrane , and not that in association with the central spindle , generates active RhoA to form the contractile ring . In the absence of Anillin , there may be sufficient Ect2 close to the membrane to generate enough active RhoA to initiate contractile ring formation , however , the ring may become unstable due to insufficient levels ( and perhaps uneven distribution ) of active RhoA ( A . J . Piekny , unpublished observations ) . 2 . 7 Cyk - 4 Anillin may also determine the division plane through interactions with the central spindle , antiparallel bundled microtubules that form between segregating chromosomes in anaphase ( reviewed in [ 42 ] ) . Initially the central spindle is formed deep in the centre of the cell , but it quickly expands to reach the overlying cortex . Drosophila Anillin can interact with the central spindle protein Cyk - 4 ( also known as RacGAP50C ( Drosophila ) and MgcRacGAP ( mammalian ) ; Table 1 ) [ 20 , 43 ] . The 310 C - terminal amino acids of Anillin directly interact with the N - terminus of RacGAP50C in vitro [ 20 ] . RacGAP50C also interacts with Ect2 via a domain distinct from its Anillin binding region [ 20 ] . In addition , fixed FRET studies demonstrate that Anillin and RacGAP50C directly interact in vivo [ 43 ] . The central spindle no longer extends to the cortex in Anillin - depleted cells in larval brains [ 43 ] , and often looks distorted and improperly positioned in human cells [ 22 ] . Although it is not clear whether Anillin could bind Cyk - 4 that is simultaneously bound to Ect2 and to Pavarotti / MKLP1 / Zen - 4 7 ( complexed with Cyk - 4 as centralspindlin ) , an exciting possibility is that Anillin helps position the division plane by anchoring the middle of the anaphase spindle to the overlying cortex ( Fig . 2 ; also see review [ 4 ] ) . To date there is no published evidence that Anillin directly interacts with Cyk - 4 in other organisms . However , considering the observed pair - wise interactions : Cyk - 4 - Ect2 , Cyk - 4 - MKLP1 / Zen - 4 , Anillin - Cyk4 , Anillin - Ect2 , Cyk - 4 - Rho , Ect2 - Rho and Anillin - Rho , it is likely that this signaling module exists in one form or another throughout phylogeny . 2 . 8 Microtubules In addition to interactions between Anillin and proteins on the central spindle , there is also evidence that Anillin binds microtubules ( Table 1 ) . Anillin was isolated from Drosophila extracts on the basis of its affinity for both F - actin and microtubules [ 44 ] . Furthermore , the Anillin - rich structures that form following Latrunculin A treatment of Drosophila S2 cells often colocalize with the plus ends of microtubules . These peripheral microtubules are required to limit localization of the ectopic structures to the equatorial plane [ 13 ] . Regardless of whether the interaction is direct , Anillin – microtubule association may reflect a role for Anillin in communicating the position of the mitotic spindle to the overlying cortex thus ensuring robust contractile ring formation . 2 . 9 Plasma membrane / lipids Early in Anillins’ history , it was proposed that they could bind lipids of the plasma membrane by virtue of their PH domain , a structurally conserved protein - and lipid - binding motif ( Fig . 5 ) [ 45 ] . In support of this function , deletion of the PH region from over - expressed human Anillin constructs prevented Anillin from localizing to the cortex [ 15 , 21 ] . The high degree of conservation within the PH domain among Anillins also supports the idea that this region has an important , conserved function . However , this region is implicated in binding septins ( see 2 . 3 ) , which themselves can bind lipids ; thus , deleting the PH region could affect Anillin’s cortical localization by perturbing septin interaction . Currently , it is unknown whether the PH domain of any Anillin can bind directly to lipids . An amphipathic helix located adjacent to the NLS in the C - terminus ( but far from the PH domain ) of the S . pombe Anillin - like protein Mid1 is necessary and sufficient to direct plasma membrane localization and equatorial enrichment [ 46 ] . The membrane targeting activity of the amphipathic helix is increased by Mid1 dimerization . Although it is not known if metazoan Anillins can dimerize ( see 2 . 12 ) , it is possible that Anillins use more than one relatively weak lipid - binding motif ( in cis or in trans ) to accomplish high affinity membrane association . 2 . 10 Clp1 / Cdc14 In S . pombe , the Anillin - like protein Mid1 interacts with the Clp1 / Flp1 phosphatase ( related to the budding yeast Cdc14 ) , which counteracts the activities of the mitotic kinase Cdc2 , and is crucial for mitotic exit and cytokinesis ( see references within [ 47 ] ) . Mid1 was detected by mass spectrometry in a tandem affinity purification of Clp1 and its associated proteins , and this 8 interaction was confirmed by co - immunoprecipitation , yeast two - hybrid and in vitro binding assays [ 47 ] . Clp1’s recruitment to the contractile ring is dependent on binding to an internal region ( amino acids 331 - 534 ) of Mid1 . Absence of Clp1 in the contractile ring perturbs the stable cortical localization of myosin and Cdc15 ( a cytoskeleton - membrane scaffold protein ; reviewed in [ 48 ] ) . A low incidence of cytokinesis failure occurs in clp1 null cells , possibly because the dephosphorylation it catalyses can still occur via another phosphatase . However , Clp1 becomes necessary for the fidelity of cytokinesis when combined with other perturbations , illustrating the requirement for proper kinetics of myosin and other contractile ring structural proteins . Metazoan Cdc14 homologues have been implicated in cytokinesis ( reviewed in [ 49 ] ) but it is not known whether these roles are mediated by an interaction between the phosphatase and Anillin . 2 . 11 Importins Drosophila and human Anillins have nuclear localization sequences ( NLSs ) [ 9 , 15 ] . One way that an NLS leads to nuclear localization is by binding to nuclear import proteins such as the importins that guide target proteins through nuclear pores ( reviewed in [ 50 ] ) . The 400 C - terminal amino acids of Drosophila Anillin can directly bind to importins alpha and beta in vitro ( Table 1 ) [ 51 ] . As is the case for established NLS - importin interactions , RanGTP can disrupt this interaction by competing for importin binding . Mutagenic studies demonstrated that the more archetypal NLS ( amino acids 989 - 999 in Drosophila Anillin ) was necessary for importin - Anillin binding . These findings may reflect the interphase nuclear localization of Drosophila and human Anillins ( see section 3 ; Fig . 2 ) [ 9 , 15 , 22 , 40 , 52 ] . However , a second NLS in the N - terminus of human Anillin is the predominant site for nuclear localization [ 15 ] and this site is not essential for Anillin’s role in cytokinesis [ 21 ] . Considering that the C . elegans homologues ( ANI - 1 and ANI - 2 ) lack NLS sequences [ 19 ] , it is not clear how Anillin’s nuclear localization contributes to its function . Anillin’s interaction with importins may primarily regulate septin binding rather than nuclear localization . 2 . 12 Intramolecular interactions As a cytoskeletal crosslinker and a scaffold of regulatory machinery in the contractile ring , multimerization of Anillin could bring its partners together with higher affinity and / or diversity . Support for the idea Anillin self - associates comes from observations that Anillin truncations ( eg . lacking the PH domain , or unable to bind Rho ) can localize to the cell equator more robustly in the presence of endogenous Anillin than following its depletion ( [ 20 ] ; A . J . Piekny unpublished observations ) . If Anillin could dimerize , what functions would this affect ? If localization depends on a low - affinity interaction , then dimerization would place two such interaction domains in proximity and thus increase binding affinity . If Anillin binds to Rho , Cyk - 4 and Ect2 individually or simultaneously , its dimerization could promote efficient interaction between these partners , and thus Rho GTPase cycling . While F - actin bundling activity resides in a small region of Anillin that is monomeric [ 9 ] , full - length Anillin bridges F - actin bundles , myosin and septins , and dimerization of Anillin could promote higher orders of cytoskeletal organization . 9 How could Anillin dimerize ? Dimerization is commonly conferred by an extended coiled - coil region that interacts with the sister polypeptide . A small fragment in the middle of Drosophila Anillin ( amino acids 354 - 693 ) is predicted to be 38 kilodaltons ( kDa ) but has the electrophoretic mobility of a 55 kDa protein , supporting the idea that it has an elongated coiled coil structure [ 9 ] . Furthermore , full - length Anillins across phylogeny have a predicted molecular weight close to 130 kDa , but the proteins migrate as multiple bands near 190 kDa by SDS - PAGE , possibly due to adopting an elongated conformation . The COILS algorithm strongly predicts coiled - coil at the beginning of the Anillin Homology domain in Drosophila , C . elegans ( ANI - 1 ) , Xenopus , mouse and human Anillins , and the mammalian Anillins have additional predicted coils throughout the “middle” of the protein . It would be interesting to test whether deletion of these domains affects Anillin function . A truncation of human Anillin lacking amino acids 460 - 608 , but retaining the coiled coil between residues 700 - 800 , can rescue depletion of endogenous Anillin during cytokinesis [ 21 ] . This supports the idea that the coiled coil contributes to Anillin’s function , and suggests that much of the middle of the protein , which has no assigned function , is not essential . It is also possible that Anillin undergoes intramolecular interactions in cis . Perhaps cell cycle phase - dependent modifications ( such as phosphorylation ; see below ) cause Anillin to fold upon itself , inhibiting its anaphase - specific scaffolding activities . Upon entry into anaphase , phosphorylation , dephosphorylation , or competitive interaction with a contractile ring component could alter Anillin’s crosslinking behavior . S . pombe Mid1 sediments through a sucrose gradient as large oligomers [ 46 ] , but no other Anillins have been directly demonstrated to self - associate . As researchers continue to study Anillin in cells using functional and dysfunctional transgenes , it is important to know whether exogenous and endogenous Anillin interact . The knowledge of whether Anillin self - associates will also be valuable for computational modeling of the contractile processes that Anillin seems to coordinate . 2 . 13 Anillin as a scaffold From the interaction studies enumerated above , Anillin appears to be a very busy and very crowded protein ( Table 1 ) . The evidence that it associates with so many partners fosters hypotheses that Anillin bridges these partners to each other , coordinating them in time and space ( Fig . 2 ) . Anillin itself is not known to form filaments per se . So does , or could , single Anillin polypeptides bind all of these partners simultaneously ? Anillin can indeed function as a cytoskeletal crosslinker , coupling septin filaments to F - actin in vitro [ 10 ] . Importantly , Anillin , and not other F - actin bundling proteins , promoted the association of septins with F - actin . In mammalian cultured cells , over - expression of an Anillin fragment displaced septins from actomyosin stress fibers and disrupted their organization [ 10 ] . These results suggest that septins contribute to F - actin organization , and this function requires a linker protein such as Anillin . Fluorescence / Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) studies with immunolabeled Anillin and Phalloidin - labeled F - actin demonstrated a close physical interaction in vivo [ 43 ] . The same method revealed that Anillin also contacts GAP50C ( MgcRacGAP / Cyk - 4 ; see 2 . 7 ) . A lack of FRET between GAP50C and F - actin suggests that their interactions with Anillin are 10 mutually exclusive . Alternatively , they may interact with Anillin simultaneously , but due to their orientation , be outside the reach of FRET . In addition to facilitating nuclear localization of Anillin ( see 2 . 11 ) , importins also regulate Anillin’s capacity to crosslink and coordinate cytoskeletons . Binding of Drosophila Anillin to the septin Peanut ( but not Sep2 ) in vitro was inhibited by the inclusion of excess importins [ 51 ] . In embryos , this competition does not displace Anillin or Sep2 from metaphase furrows , but disrupts their organization there and blocks the recruitment of Peanut . This importin - septin competition suggests that in regions of high concentrations of RanGTP , such as in the nucleus or in the vicinity of chromatin during mitosis , Ran binds importins , freeing Anillin to bind septins and organize cortical structures . Conversely , high levels of septins , which occurs in some cancers [ 53 ] could out - compete importin binding and promote retention of Anillin in the cytoplasm . 3 . Cell cycle regulation The localization of Anillin changes dramatically throughout the cell cycle , reflecting either multiple functions for Anillin , or a necessity to sequester it during some stages of the cell cycle ( Fig . 2 ) . In interphase Drosophila and human cultured cells and in S . pombe , Anillin localizes primarily to the nucleus ( Fig . 2 ) [ 9 , 15 , 22 , 54 ] . In early embryos of Drosophila and C . elegans , Anillin does not enter the nucleus during interphase . Instead , it participates in specialized contractile events : metaphase furrows during syncytial divisions in Drosophila ( Fig . 1 ; [ 7 , 9 ] ) and ruffles and the pseudocleavage furrow during polarity establishment of the C . elegans zygote [ 19 ] . During mitosis , concurrent with nuclear envelope breakdown , Anillin localizes to peripheral stress fibers in mammalian cells [ 10 ] , where it may contribute to their disassembly , and to the increasingly round cortex of Drosophila cells [ 9 , 13 , 43 ] . After anaphase onset , Anillin rapidly accumulates at the equatorial cortex where it colocalizes with contractile ring components including RhoA , actin , myosin and the septins ( Fig . 2 ) . Anillin remains enriched in the furrow throughout ingression and accumulates in the midbody ( Fig . 2 ) . During cellularization ( Fig . 1 ) of the Drosophila syncytial blastoderm , nuclei are compartmentalized by furrows that descend into the interior of the embryo . Anillin localizes to the leading edges of this cytokinetic furrow - related structure and is required for the proper rate and extent of its ingression [ 8 , 9 , 51 ] . In G1 phase , human and Drosophila Anillin relocalizes to the nucleus and is targeted by the APC Cdh1 for degradation by the proteasome ( Fig . 2 ) [ 9 , 22 , 34 ] . Ubiquitination occurs at a D - box at the very N - terminus of human Anillin [ 22 ] . Similarly , S . pombe Mid2 is degraded after mitotic exit [ 29 ] . Human Anillin’s interaction with CD2AP may play a role in ubiquitination because CD2AP can also bind to a ubiquitin ligase [ 34 ] . Throughout the remainder of the cell cycle , levels of nuclear Anillin steadily increase [ 9 , 34 ] . Anillin is thought to be absent from cells that have exited the cell cycle [ 9 , 55 ] but has been detected in the nucleus and cytoplasm of many types of terminally differentiated human cells [ 52 ] . Anillin’s varying localization throughout the cell cycle suggests that it is regulated by phosphorylation in a cell cycle phase dependent manner . Human Anillin undergoes mitosis - specific phosphorylation that manifests as retarded electrophoretic mobility and can be reversed by treatment with lambda phosphatase [ 9 , 34 ] . However , it is not known what kinase ( s ) makes these modifications . S . pombe Mid1 is hyperphosphorylated as it exits the nucleus [ 54 ] ; the Polo 11 kinase Plo1 is implicated in this event [ 56 ] . S . pombe Mid2 , which acts later in cytokinesis , is also phosphorylated [ 29 ] . Human , Drosophila and C . elegans Anillins all contain putative sites for Cdk1 , Plk1 and Aurora B and 16 phosphorylation sites in C . elegans ANI - 1 were detected by mass spectrometry ( A . S . Maddox , unpublished observations ) . Since phosphorylation can affect protein conformation , binding partners and activity , phosphorylation of Anillin could regulate its interactions with the components of the cytokinetic machinery discussed above . 4 . Outstanding questions about Anillin 4 . 1 How does Anillin get the to equator ? In S . pombe , Mid1 translocates from the centered nucleus to the overlying cortex where it marks the cell equator [ 57 ] . Since metazoan Anillins also cycle from the nucleus in interphase to the contractile ring in cytokinesis ( Fig . 2 ) , it is tempting to suggest that the above concept also applies in other systems . However , in metazoans , the anaphase spindle , and not the premitotic nucleus , dictates the division plane . Furthermore , Anillin can localize to Rappaport furrows in fused mammalian cells , where there has been no chromatin [ 15 ] . Anillin also localizes to asymmetrically positioned furrows of mono - astral cells stimulated to enter anaphase , in which it is unlikely that the chromatin positions the division plane [ 58 ] . Anillin recruitment to the cell equator depends on Rho and its activator Ect2 in Drosophila and human cells [ 13 , 21 , 22 , 59 ] . Human Anillin bears homology to Rhotekin [ 21 ] ; thus , Anillin is likely a contractile ring - specific Rho effector . Treatment with Latruculin A or depletion of formins demonstrated that F - actin is required for normal Anillin recruitment [ 13 , 14 ] . However , in Drosophila spermatocytes , Anillin localizes to the site of division prior to the detectable enrichment of actin [ 11 ] . Myosin is not required for Anillin localization to the contractile ring [ 13 , 14 , 18 , 19 ] . Furthermore , deletion of either or both the actin - or myosin - binding domains does not abolish Anillin localization [ 15 , 21 ] . Therefore , in metazoa , Rho is likely the primary recruiting factor for Anillin . 4 . 2 What are the roles of Anillin in cytokinesis ? S . pombe Mid1 has the ultimate early role : it localizes to the equatorial cortex before any other contractile ring component and is required for every other component to localize [ 56 ] . Mid1 initially forms “nodes , ” onto which other contractile ring proteins are added , which coalesce to form the contractile ring [ 57 ] and Mid1 is lost from the equatorial cortex before the actomyosin ring constricts [ 60 ] . However , in mid1 mutants , aberrant contractile rings can assemble [ 54 , 56 , 60 ] . The finding that contractile ring assembly defects in mid1 mutants can be rescued by signaling from the SIN ( septation initiation ) pathway [ 61 ] underscores that Mid1 acts in temporal coordination of cytokinesis with chromosome segregation . Furthermore , Mid1 is dispensable for ring positioning if cell - wall deposition is blocked [ 62 ] . Thus , Mid1 may normally help center the ring during its assembly , optimizing contractility to prevail in a tug of war between the cytoskeleton and membrane anchoring to the septum . 12 Metazoan Anillins act early in cytokinesis to coordinate contractile ring assembly and organization . As described above , Anillin crosslinks myosin , septins and F - actin in contractile structures ( Fig . 1 - 4 ; see 2 . 1 - 2 . 3 ) [ 8 , 12 , 13 , 19 , 20 , 63 ] . Interestingly , some of Anillin’s roles in cytokinesis can be compensated for by unrelated mechanisms . Human Anillin becomes crucial for equatorial enrichment of F - actin and myosin ( and thus furrowing ) when the central spindle is perturbed by depletion of the MKLP1 component of centralspindlin [ 21 ] . This result suggests that Anillin and the spindle midzone function redundantly , perhaps in equatorial specification or activation of contractility . C . elegans Anillin ( ANI - 1 ) , normally dispensable for successful cytokinesis , is required for full furrow ingression when the homologous kinesin , ZEN - 4 , is depleted [ 23 ] . Furthermore , C . elegans Anillin ( ANI - 1 ) is required for asymmetry within the division plane , which makes cytokinesis robust to perturbations of contractility [ 24 ] . Drosophila spermatocytes suffer less binucleation following Anillin depletion if cadherins are over - expressed [ 12 ] . This phenomenon has been attributed to the shared ability of Anillin and adherens junctions to bundle F - actin . Inhibition of Anillin by injection of an anti - Anillin antibody in mammalian cells slowed the rate of ring constriction throughout the course of ingression [ 15 ] . Depletion of Anillin from human or Drosophila cultured cells leads to lateral oscillation of the cytokinetic furrow , and eventual failure [ 12 , 13 , 18 , 20 , 22 ] . Therefore , in these systems actomyosin contractility still occurs , but cannot be accurately maintained at the division plane . While the ingression rate has not been measured following Anillin depletion except in C . elegans ( where it is normal ; [ 24 ] ) , the apparent discrepancy between the antibody injection study and the RNAi experiments could reflect that the antibody crosslinks Anillin rather than completely removes its function . In Drosophila embryos , Anillin C - terminal point mutants display abnormal kinetics of ingression of cellularization furrows [ 8 ] . Cellularization relies on the persistent addition of membrane surface area ( which increases 25 fold during this event ) . Therefore , Anillin’s requirement in this process may reflect a role in organizing membrane dynamics via its interactions with septins , rather than modulating contractility . It is also possible that Anillin specifically coordinates membrane dynamics and contractility , coupling the contractile ring to lipids or curvature specific to the cell equator . Anillin may also act late in cytokinesis . Constriction of the contractile ring leads to formation of the midbody ( also known as the Flemming Body ) , an electron dense structure containing components of the central spindle , contractile ring , and membrane trafficking machinery [ 64 ] . Failure to generate this minute cell - cell bridge allows fusion of the nascent daughter cells and binucleation . Depletion of Anillin from Drosophila cultured cells revealed a role in stabilizing the midbody , since depleted cells displayed reduced midzone microtubule integrity and extensive blebbing around the midbody [ 59 , 65 ] . During the regulated cytokinesis failure of postnatal cardiomyocytes , Anillin is poorly focused at the midbody , further suggesting that its proper localization at this late stage is important for cytokinesis completion [ 55 ] . Importantly the RNAi results likely reflect incomplete Anillin depletion , as subsequent RNAi - based studies in Drosophila S2 cells revealed defects before the midbody stage [ 13 ] . It is possible that Anillin acts both early in organizing the contractile ring , and later to stabilize the midbody and facilitate abscission . 4 . 3 Does Anillin have roles outside of cytokinesis ? 13 While Anillin is thought to specifically localize to contractile rings [ 9 ] , there is some evidence that it participates in events other than cytokinesis . Anillin is abundant in the cytoplasm of diverse human tissues , both post - mitotic and self - renewing [ 52 ] , but its roles there are completely uncharacterized . Anillin exits the nucleus of mammalian cultured cells at the onset of mitosis and localizes to stress fibers as they disassemble during mitotic cell rounding [ 10 ] . Furthermore , Anillin over - expression can either promote the assembly of [ 40 ] and to disrupt stress fibers [ 10 ] . The increased motility of cells over - expressing Anillin [ 40 ] suggests that it can promote turnover of interphase actomyosin structures . By contrast , Anillin is highly enriched in the Z discs of myocardial cells , where myosin and actin are stably anchored [ 52 ] . Human Anillin is strongly expressed in neural tissues [ 52 ] where its protein levels are high in the nucleus and cytoplasm , but its role in neurons is not understood . As in the contractile ring , in these other contexts Anillin may act 1 ) by promoting a certain type of cytoskeletal organization or 2 ) by coordinating the actomyosin cytoskeleton with the Rho activation module . 4 . 4 In species with more than one Anillin isoform , is there competition or collaboration among them ? In C . elegans there are three genes with homology to Anillins , encoding a C - terminal PH domain and a stretch of homology upstream ( the Anillin homology domain ) . All three genes are transcribed , but functions are only known for the two longer isoforms : ANI - 1 and ANI - 2 . ANI - 1 is highly expressed in early embryos and important for cytoskeletal organization during polarity establishment and cytokinesis [ 19 , 23 ] . ANI - 2 is present at very low levels in embryos , and is enriched in the oogenic gonad where it is crucial for its syncytial structure and oocyte production [ 19 ] . The abundance and function of ANI - 1 and - 2 have not been explored for any other tissues of the worm , but due to similarities in their C - termini , they may compete for binding partners when both isoforms are present . Drosophila has only one gene for Anillin ( scraps ) , but this gene has at least three different transcripts . A and B isoforms are similar in size and differ via an alternatively spliced exon in their N - terminus ( Flybase ) . Isoform C is identical in its N - terminus to isoform B , but lacks the C - terminal half of the protein . Human Anillin is predicted to produce many alternatively spliced products ( 8 to 14 ; Ensembl ) . Some splice forms are predicted to encode only regions that mediate interaction with RhoA , Cyk - 4 , Ect2 and the septins . Splice variants lacking NLSs would be constitutively cytoplasmic and could alter RhoA activation cytoskeletal organization in interphase and their expression may compete with full - length Anillin for binding partners . It is currently unknown whether the expression of alternative splice forms correlates with differences in tissue or cell types , with quiescent versus renewing cells , or with the prognostic stage of cancers . The observations that various Drosophila Anillin point mutants ( Fig . 5 ) fail in cellularization versus conventional cytokinesis support the idea that certain sequences within Anillin are differentially required among contractile events [ 8 ] . Furthermore , a collection of Anillin truncations expressed in human cells can rescue different aspects of the Anillin depletion phenotype [ 21 ] . In S . pombe , Mid1 and Mid2 localize to the contractile ring during mutually exclusive time intervals , and have completely distinct roles . Mid1 marks the equatorial location of contractile ring assembly and is required for recruitment of all other ring proteins ( see 4 . 2 ) [ 57 ] . 14 Mid2 appears as Mid1 departs , after ring assembly is complete and before ingression [ 60 ] . Therefore , these related Anillin homologues are unlikely to directly interact or compete for interactors . The identity of Anillin homologues in budding yeast is unresolved . Notably , a role for Anillin in specifying or maintaining identity of the division plane ( as is implicated for fission yeast , Drosophila and human Anillins ) is less relevant because the division plane of S . cerevisiae ( the bud neck ) is established long before cytokinesis . Boi1 and Boi2 are closely related proteins that have C - terminal PH domains and localize to the division plane [ 66 , 67 ] . These two potential Anillin homologues function redundantly [ 68 ] ; the presence of two related proteins in this system is likely to simply reflect a recent gene duplication and not a diversification of function . 4 . 5 Does Anillin act in cancer development or progression ? It is not surprising that as a key regulator of cytokinesis , Anillin has been linked to cancer . Profiling diverse human tumours revealed that with the exception of brain tumours , Anillin expression was upregulated from ~ 2 – 6 fold . Furthermore , higher Anillin expression levels correlated with the metastatic potential of tumours [ 52 ] . A separate study showed that Anillin was expressed at 20 - fold higher levels in pancreatic cancers than in normal pancreatic tissue [ 69 ] . While these studies are correlative , they suggest that Anillin over - expression leads to increased cytosolic levels in interphase cells , where it could cause cell shape changes and cell motility that contribute to metastasis . Consistent with this hypothesis , over - expressed Anillin fragments localize to ectopic foci that contain RhoA and septins [ 15 , 21 ] . Anillin over - expression in lung cancer cell lines leads to increased levels of active RhoA and cell motility [ 40 ] . Anillin may also have functions in the nucleus that have not been identified , and over - expression of Anillin could also affect this function . In support of this idea , increased nuclear levels of Anillin have been correlated with poor tumour prognosis [ 40 ] . Importantly , the contractile ring in which Anillin is known to act is an exquisitely regulated organelle that must be incredibly dynamic in order to function properly . It is possible that abnormal Anillin expression is pathogenic simply by affecting the fidelity of cytokinesis . Figure legends Table 1 . The structure of human Anillin is shown , illustrating its protein - protein interaction domains ( NLS sequences are shown as black bars in the N - terminus ) . The amino acids are numbered according to the species used . The interacting proteins are indicated along with the system , the method used and the region of Anillin they interact with . The hypothesized roles of these interactions are indicated along with the original references . Fig . 1 . A schematic of cellularization of the Drosophila embryo syncytial blastoderm . The concerted action of a network of rings and of membrane addition establish plasma membrane ( green ) partitions among all the nuclei ( blue ) . Contractile ring proteins ( red ) localize to the cellularization “front , ” and eventually to discreet ring canals connecting each nascent cell to the yolk in the center of the embryo . A Drosophila embryo is shown that has almost completed cellularization , bearing fluorescently - tagged Anillin on the cellularization front . A maximum 15 intensity projection of several microns of thickness is shown . The red box represents the region depicted above . Image courtesy of Gilles Hickson . Fig . 2 . A schematic of mammalian cells depicting the dynamic changes in Anillin localization and its hypothesized interactions through the cell cycle stages . In S / G2 , Anillin accumulates in the nucleus , likely through interactions with importins . During anaphase , Anillin accumulates in the contractile ring ( shown in transparent red ) . A high - resolution view of Anillin’s interactions with other cytokinesis proteins are shown in the hatched box . At the end of mitosis Anillin re - enters the nucleus , and is degraded in G1 . All proteins depicted are annotated in the figure key . Fig . 3 . Depletion of Anillin ( ANI - 1 ) from C . elegans zygotes results in abnormally symmetric contractile ring closure . Left : The contractile ring , labeled with GFP - tagged myosin , is viewed as if from one pole of the anaphase spindle . Right : The position of the contractile ring is plotted for each point in a time course ( elapsed time ~ 5 minutes ; green = early ; red = late ) . Images courtesy of Li Zhang and Jonas Dorn . Fig . 4 . Kymographs show the changes in localization of GFP tagged myosin over time , as cleavage furrows form and ingress in control and Anillin depleted HeLa cells . In control cells , myosin flows into and enriches in the equatorial plane and later moves into the polar regions of the cell . In Anillin - depleted cells myosin initially accumulates in the equatorial plane , but then relocalizes outside the equator , oscillating dramatically from pole to pole . Kymographs are maximum intensity projections along the axis of the pink lines . The scale bar is 5 µ m . Time elapsed : 16 minutes . Fig . 5 . A ribbon diagram of the predicted structure of the PH domain from human Anillin is shown . Also shown is an alignment of the amino acid sequence of the PH domain between human and Drosophila Anillin . Mutations characterized in Drosophila are indicated [ 8 ] . Image courtesy of Lauren Narcross . Acknowledgements We thank Jonas Dorn , Gilles Hickson , Lauren Narcross , and Li Zhang , for their contribution to figures . A . S . Maddox is supported by funds from the Terry Fox Research Foundation and the FRSQ . A . J . Piekny is supported by funds from the CIHR , NSERC and FQRNT . ASM and AJP are also affiliated with the World Headquarters for Anillin Research , Montréal , QC , Canada . References 1 . Oliferenko , S . , T . G . Chew , and M . K . Balasubramanian , Positioning cytokinesis . Genes Dev , 2009 . 23 ( 6 ) : p . 660 - 74 . 2 . von Dassow , G . , Concurrent cues for cytokinetic furrow induction in animal cells . Trends Cell Biol , 2009 . 19 ( 4 ) : p . 165 - 73 . 3 . Piekny , A . , M . Werner , and M . Glotzer , Cytokinesis : welcome to the Rho zone . Trends Cell Biol , 2005 . 15 ( 12 ) : p . 651 - 8 . 4 . D ' Avino , P . P . , How to scaffold the contractile ring for a safe cytokinesis - lessons from Anillin - related proteins . J Cell Sci , 2009 . 122 ( Pt 8 ) : p . 1071 - 9 . 16 5 . Hickson , G . R . and P . H . O ' Farrell , Anillin : a pivotal organizer of the cytokinetic machinery . Biochem Soc Trans , 2008 . 36 ( Pt 3 ) : p . 439 - 41 . 6 . Zhang , L . and A . S . Maddox , Anillin . Curr Biol , 2010 . 20 ( 4 ) : p . R135 - 6 . 7 . Miller , K . G . , C . M . Field , and B . M . Alberts , Actin - binding proteins from Drosophila embryos : a complex network of interacting proteins detected by F - actin affinity chromatography . J Cell Biol , 1989 . 109 ( 6 Pt 1 ) : p . 2963 - 75 . 8 . Field , C . M . , et al . , Characterization of anillin mutants reveals essential roles in septin localization and plasma membrane integrity . Development , 2005 . 132 ( 12 ) : p . 2849 - 60 . 9 . Field , C . M . and B . M . Alberts , Anillin , a contractile ring protein that cycles from the nucleus to the cell cortex . J Cell Biol , 1995 . 131 ( 1 ) : p . 165 - 78 . 10 . Kinoshita , M . , et al . , Self - and actin - templated assembly of Mammalian septins . Dev Cell , 2002 . 3 ( 6 ) : p . 791 - 802 . 11 . Giansanti , M . G . , S . Bonaccorsi , and M . Gatti , The role of anillin in meiotic cytokinesis of Drosophila males . J Cell Sci , 1999 . 112 ( Pt 14 ) : p . 2323 - 34 . 12 . Goldbach , P . , et al . , Stabilization of the Actomyosin Ring Enables Spermatocyte Cytokinesis in Drosophila . Mol Biol Cell , 2010 . 13 . Hickson , G . R . and P . H . O ' Farrell , Rho - dependent control of anillin behavior during cytokinesis . J Cell Biol , 2008 . 180 ( 2 ) : p . 285 - 94 . 14 . Straight , A . F . , et al . , Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science , 2003 . 299 ( 5613 ) : p . 1743 - 7 . 15 . Oegema , K . , et al . , Functional analysis of a human homologue of the Drosophila actin binding protein anillin suggests a role in cytokinesis . J Cell Biol , 2000 . 150 ( 3 ) : p . 539 - 52 . 16 . Watanabe , S . , et al . , Rho and Anillin - dependent Control of mDia2 Localization and Function in Cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell , 2010 . 17 . Watanabe , S . , et al . , mDia2 induces the actin scaffold for the contractile ring and stabilizes its position during cytokinesis in NIH 3T3 cells . Mol Biol Cell , 2008 . 19 ( 5 ) : p . 2328 - 38 . 18 . Straight , A . F . , C . M . Field , and T . J . Mitchison , Anillin binds nonmuscle myosin II and regulates the contractile ring . Mol Biol Cell , 2005 . 16 ( 1 ) : p . 193 - 201 . 19 . Maddox , A . S . , et al . , Distinct roles for two C . elegans anillins in the gonad and early embryo . Development , 2005 . 132 ( 12 ) : p . 2837 - 48 . 20 . D ' Avino , P . P . , et al . , Interaction between Anillin and RacGAP50C connects the actomyosin contractile ring with spindle microtubules at the cell division site . J Cell Sci , 2008 . 121 ( Pt 8 ) : p . 1151 - 8 . 21 . Piekny , A . J . and M . Glotzer , Anillin is a scaffold protein that links RhoA , actin , and myosin during cytokinesis . Curr Biol , 2008 . 18 ( 1 ) : p . 30 - 6 . 22 . Zhao , W . M . and G . Fang , Anillin is a substrate of anaphase - promoting complex / cyclosome ( APC / C ) that controls spatial contractility of myosin during late cytokinesis . J Biol Chem , 2005 . 280 ( 39 ) : p . 33516 - 24 . 23 . Werner , M . and M . Glotzer , Control of cortical contractility during cytokinesis . Biochem Soc Trans , 2008 . 36 ( Pt 3 ) : p . 371 - 7 . 24 . Maddox , A . S . , et al . , Anillin and the septins promote asymmetric ingression of the cytokinetic furrow . Dev Cell , 2007 . 12 ( 5 ) : p . 827 - 35 . 25 . Higuchi , H . and S . A . Endow , Directionality and processivity of molecular motors . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 2002 . 14 ( 1 ) : p . 50 - 7 . 17 26 . Weirich , C . S . , J . P . Erzberger , and Y . Barral , The septin family of GTPases : architecture and dynamics . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 2008 . 9 ( 6 ) : p . 478 - 89 . 27 . Versele , M . and J . Thorner , Some assembly required : yeast septins provide the instruction manual . Trends Cell Biol , 2005 . 15 ( 8 ) : p . 414 - 24 . 28 . Adam , J . C . , J . R . Pringle , and M . Peifer , Evidence for functional differentiation among Drosophila septins in cytokinesis and cellularization . Mol Biol Cell , 2000 . 11 ( 9 ) : p . 3123 - 35 . 29 . Tasto , J . J . , J . L . Morrell , and K . L . Gould , An anillin homologue , Mid2p , acts during fission yeast cytokinesis to organize the septin ring and promote cell separation . J Cell Biol , 2003 . 160 ( 7 ) : p . 1093 - 103 . 30 . Berlin , A . , A . Paoletti , and F . Chang , Mid2p stabilizes septin rings during cytokinesis in fission yeast . J Cell Biol , 2003 . 160 ( 7 ) : p . 1083 - 92 . 31 . Casamayor , A . and M . Snyder , Molecular dissection of a yeast septin : distinct domains are required for septin interaction , localization , and function . Mol Cell Biol , 2003 . 23 ( 8 ) : p . 2762 - 77 . 32 . Zhang , J . , et al . , Phosphatidylinositol polyphosphate binding to the mammalian septin H5 is modulated by GTP . Curr Biol , 1999 . 9 ( 24 ) : p . 1458 - 67 . 33 . Rodal , A . A . , et al . , Actin and septin ultrastructures at the budding yeast cell cortex . Mol Biol Cell , 2005 . 16 ( 1 ) : p . 372 - 84 . 34 . Monzo , P . , et al . , Clues to CD2 - associated protein involvement in cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell , 2005 . 16 ( 6 ) : p . 2891 - 902 . 35 . Haglund , K . , et al . , Cindr interacts with anillin to control cytokinesis in Drosophila melanogaster . Curr Biol , 2010 . 20 ( 10 ) : p . 944 - 50 . 36 . Drechsel , D . N . , et al . , A requirement for Rho and Cdc42 during cytokinesis in Xenopus embryos . Curr Biol , 1997 . 7 ( 1 ) : p . 12 - 23 . 37 . Jantsch - Plunger , V . , et al . , CYK - 4 : A Rho family gtpase activating protein ( GAP ) required for central spindle formation and cytokinesis . J Cell Biol , 2000 . 149 ( 7 ) : p . 1391 - 404 . 38 . Prokopenko , S . N . , et al . , A putative exchange factor for Rho1 GTPase is required for initiation of cytokinesis in Drosophila . Genes Dev , 1999 . 13 ( 17 ) : p . 2301 - 14 . 39 . Yuce , O . , A . Piekny , and M . Glotzer , An ECT2 - centralspindlin complex regulates the localization and function of RhoA . J Cell Biol , 2005 . 170 ( 4 ) : p . 571 - 82 . 40 . Suzuki , C . , et al . , ANLN plays a critical role in human lung carcinogenesis through the activation of RHOA and by involvement in the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase / AKT pathway . Cancer Res , 2005 . 65 ( 24 ) : p . 11314 - 25 . 41 . Solski , P . A . , et al . , Requirement for C - terminal sequences in regulation of Ect2 guanine nucleotide exchange specificity and transformation . J Biol Chem , 2004 . 279 ( 24 ) : p . 25226 - 33 . 42 . Glotzer , M . , The 3Ms of central spindle assembly : microtubules , motors and MAPs . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 2009 . 10 ( 1 ) : p . 9 - 20 . 43 . Gregory , S . L . , et al . , Cell division requires a direct link between microtubule - bound RacGAP and Anillin in the contractile ring . Curr Biol , 2008 . 18 ( 1 ) : p . 25 - 9 . 44 . Sisson , J . C . , et al . , Lava lamp , a novel peripheral golgi protein , is required for Drosophila melanogaster cellularization . J Cell Biol , 2000 . 151 ( 4 ) : p . 905 - 18 . 45 . Lemmon , M . A . , Membrane recognition by phospholipid - binding domains . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 2008 . 9 ( 2 ) : p . 99 - 111 . 18 46 . Celton - Morizur , S . , et al . , C - terminal anchoring of mid1p to membranes stabilizes cytokinetic ring position in early mitosis in fission yeast . Mol Cell Biol , 2004 . 24 ( 24 ) : p . 10621 - 35 . 47 . Clifford , D . M . , et al . , The Clp1 / Cdc14 phosphatase contributes to the robustness of cytokinesis by association with anillin - related Mid1 . J Cell Biol , 2008 . 181 ( 1 ) : p . 79 - 88 . 48 . Chitu , V . and E . R . Stanley , Pombe Cdc15 homology ( PCH ) proteins : coordinators of membrane - cytoskeletal interactions . Trends Cell Biol , 2007 . 17 ( 3 ) : p . 145 - 56 . 49 . Trautmann , S . and D . McCollum , Cell cycle : new functions for Cdc14 family phosphatases . Curr Biol , 2002 . 12 ( 21 ) : p . R733 - 5 . 50 . Wagstaff , K . M . and D . A . Jans , Importins and beyond : non - conventional nuclear transport mechanisms . Traffic , 2009 . 10 ( 9 ) : p . 1188 - 98 . 51 . Silverman - Gavrila , R . V . , K . G . Hales , and A . Wilde , Anillin - mediated targeting of peanut to pseudocleavage furrows is regulated by the GTPase Ran . Mol Biol Cell , 2008 . 19 ( 9 ) : p . 3735 - 44 . 52 . Hall , P . A . , et al . , The septin - binding protein anillin is overexpressed in diverse human tumors . Clin Cancer Res , 2005 . 11 ( 19 Pt 1 ) : p . 6780 - 6 . 53 . Russell , S . E . and P . A . Hall , Do septins have a role in cancer ? Br J Cancer , 2005 . 93 ( 5 ) : p . 499 - 503 . 54 . Sohrmann , M . , et al . , The dmf1 / mid1 gene is essential for correct positioning of the division septum in fission yeast . Genes Dev , 1996 . 10 ( 21 ) : p . 2707 - 19 . 55 . Engel , F . B . , M . Schebesta , and M . T . Keating , Anillin localization defect in cardiomyocyte binucleation . J Mol Cell Cardiol , 2006 . 41 ( 4 ) : p . 601 - 12 . 56 . Bahler , J . , et al . , Role of polo kinase and Mid1p in determining the site of cell division in fission yeast . J Cell Biol , 1998 . 143 ( 6 ) : p . 1603 - 16 . 57 . Pollard , T . D . and J . Q . Wu , Understanding cytokinesis : lessons from fission yeast . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 2010 . 11 ( 2 ) : p . 149 - 55 . 58 . Hu , C . K . , et al . , Cell polarization during monopolar cytokinesis . J Cell Biol , 2008 . 181 ( 2 ) : p . 195 - 202 . 59 . Somma , M . P . , et al . , Molecular dissection of cytokinesis by RNA interference in Drosophila cultured cells . Mol Biol Cell , 2002 . 13 ( 7 ) : p . 2448 - 60 . 60 . Wu , J . Q . , et al . , Spatial and temporal pathway for assembly and constriction of the contractile ring in fission yeast cytokinesis . Dev Cell , 2003 . 5 ( 5 ) : p . 723 - 34 . 61 . Hachet , O . and V . Simanis , Mid1p / anillin and the septation initiation network orchestrate contractile ring assembly for cytokinesis . Genes Dev , 2008 . 22 ( 22 ) : p . 3205 - 16 . 62 . Huang , Y . , H . Yan , and M . K . Balasubramanian , Assembly of normal actomyosin rings in the absence of Mid1p and cortical nodes in fission yeast . J Cell Biol , 2008 . 183 ( 6 ) : p . 979 - 88 . 63 . Thomas , J . H . and E . Wieschaus , src64 and tec29 are required for microfilament contraction during Drosophila cellularization . Development , 2004 . 131 ( 4 ) : p . 863 - 71 . 64 . Skop , A . R . , et al . , Dissection of the mammalian midbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis mechanisms . Science , 2004 . 305 ( 5680 ) : p . 61 - 6 . 65 . Echard , A . , et al . , Terminal cytokinesis events uncovered after an RNAi screen . Curr Biol , 2004 . 14 ( 18 ) : p . 1685 - 93 . 19 66 . Hallett , M . A . , H . S . Lo , and A . Bender , Probing the importance and potential roles of the binding of the PH - domain protein Boi1 to acidic phospholipids . BMC Cell Biol , 2002 . 3 : p . 16 . 67 . Norden , C . , et al . , The NoCut pathway links completion of cytokinesis to spindle midzone function to prevent chromosome breakage . Cell , 2006 . 125 ( 1 ) : p . 85 - 98 . 68 . Matsui , Y . , et al . , Yeast src homology region 3 domain - binding proteins involved in bud formation . J Cell Biol , 1996 . 133 ( 4 ) : p . 865 - 78 . 69 . Olakowski , M . , et al . , NBL1 and anillin ( ANLN ) genes over - expression in pancreatic carcinoma . Folia Histochem Cytobiol , 2009 . 47 ( 2 ) : p . 249 - 55 .