Dynamin and endocytosis are required for the fusion of osteoclasts and myoblasts The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Shin , Nah - Young , Hyewon Choi , Lynn Neff , Yumei Wu , Hiroaki Saito , Shawn M . Ferguson , Pietro De Camilli , and Roland Baron . 2014 . “Dynamin and endocytosis are required for the fusion of osteoclasts and myoblasts . ” The Journal of Cell Biology 207 ( 1 ) : 73 - 89 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201401137 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201401137 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201401137 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 15034998 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 207 No . 1 73 – 89 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201401137 JCB 73 Correspondence to Roland Baron : Roland _ Baron @ hms . harvard . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : 4OHT , 4 - hydroxytamoxifen ; BMM , bone mar - row macrophage ; CHC , clathrin heavy chain ; CNM , centronuclear myopathy ; CPZ , chlorpromazine ; CTL , control ; Ctsk , cathepsin K ; DKO , double knockout ; M - CSF , macrophage colony stimulating factor ; MDC , monodansylcadaverine ; MNC , multinucleated cell ; NFATc1 , nuclear factor of activated T cells cyto - plasmic 1 ; OCP , osteoclast precursor ; PH , pleckstrin homology ; PRD , proline - rich domain ; RANKL , receptor activator of NF -  B ligand ; TRAP , tartrate - resistant acid phosphatase . Introduction In multicellular organisms , cell – cell fusion is a highly evolu - tionarily conserved process that leads to the formation of multi - nucleated cells including myotubes , syncytiotrophoblasts , and osteoclasts . Multinucleation is required for the specific functions of these cells in muscle , placenta , and bone , respectively . Although it is now well established in Caenorhabditis elegans and in the placenta that cell – cell fusion requires the presence of fusogenic membrane proteins ( Chen et al . , 2007 ; Oren - Suissa and Podbilewicz , 2007 ; Helming and Gordon , 2009 ; Pérez - Vargas et al . , 2014 ) , the precise mechanism by which the plasma membranes of two isotypic cells fuse , thus allowing the merging of their cytosolic and nuclear components into a single multinucleated cell , is still poorly understood . Although fusogens for C . elegans ( Eff - 1 and Aff - 1 ; Mohler et al . , 2002 ; Podbilewicz et al . , 2006 ; Sapir et al . , 2007 ; Pérez - Vargas et al . , 2014 ) and for syncytiotrophoblasts ( syncytins ; Dupressoir et al . , 2012 ) have been identified and characterized , little is known about fusogens in osteoclast precursors ( OCPs ) and myoblasts cell fusion . For instance , despite the identification of several proteins that are possibly involved in the fusion of OCPs ( Mbalaviele et al . , 1995 ; Saginario et al . , 1998 ; Vignery , 2005 ; Yagi et al . , 2005 ; Lee et al . , 2006 ; Chen et al . , 2007 ; Yang et al . , 2008 ; Gonzalo et al . , 2010 ) , their exact role in the cell fusion process has not been characterized . Besides fusogenic proteins , recent studies have revealed a key role for actin reorganization and podosome - like structures in the fusion of both myoblasts and OCPs ( Sens et al . , 2010 ; Abmayr and Pavlath , 2012 ; Oikawa et al . , 2012 ) . Podosomes are highly dynamic structures enriched in F - actin , integrins , and actin - regulating proteins that are involved in many cellular pro - cesses , including cell adhesion , motility , and invasion ( Linder and Aepfelbacher , 2003 ; Jurdic et al . , 2006 ; Murphy and Court - neidge , 2011 ) . Actin - regulatory / scaffolding molecules includ - ing DOCK180 , Rac1 , N - WASP , and TKS5 / Fish ( Pajcini et al . , 2008 ; Gonzalo et al . , 2010 ; Gruenbaum - Cohen et al . , 2012 ; C ell – cell fusion is an evolutionarily conserved pro - cess that leads to the formation of multinucleated myofibers , syncytiotrophoblasts and osteoclasts , allowing their respective functions . Although cell – cell fu - sion requires the presence of fusogenic membrane pro - teins and actin - dependent cytoskeletal reorganization , the precise machinery allowing cells to fuse is still poorly understood . Using an inducible knockout mouse model to generate dynamin 1 – and 2 – deficient primary osteoclast precursors and myoblasts , we found that fusion of both cell types requires dynamin . Osteoclast and myoblast cell – cell fusion involves the formation of actin - rich protrusions closely associated with clathrin - mediated endocytosis in the apposed cell . Furthermore , impairing endocytosis in - dependently of dynamin also prevented cell – cell fusion . Since dynamin is involved in both the formation of actin - rich structures and in endocytosis , our results indicate that dynamin function is central to the osteoclast precursors and myoblasts fusion process , and point to an important role of endocytosis in cell – cell fusion . Dynamin and endocytosis are required for the fusion of osteoclasts and myoblasts Nah - Young Shin , 1 , 2 Hyewon Choi , 1 , 2 Lynn Neff , 1 , 2 Yumei Wu , 3 , 4 Hiroaki Saito , 1 , 2 Shawn M . Ferguson , 3 , 4 Pietro De Camilli , 3 , 4 , 5 and Roland Baron 1 , 2 1 Department of Medicine , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 2 Department of Oral Medicine , Infection and Immunity , Harvard School of Dental Medicine , Boston , MA 02115 3 Department of Cell Biology and 4 Program in Cellular Neuroscience , Neurodegeneration and Repair , Yale School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06510 5 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Chevy Chase , MD 20815 © 2014 Shin et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 74 dynamin is involved in both the formation of invadosome - like actin - rich structures and in the endocytic process , our results indicate that dynamin function is central to the cell – cell fusion process of OCPs and myoblasts . Results Early OCPs express high levels of dynamin Given that in osteoclasts dynamin is involved in the regulation of actin polymerization in podosomes and in bone resorption in vitro , and since actin - based structures and podosomes have been suggested to play a role in cell – cell fusion in myoblasts and in OCPs ( Sens et al . , 2010 ; Oikawa et al . , 2012 ; Shilagardi et al . , 2013 ) , we focused on the potential role of dynamin in osteoclast fusion and differentiation using genetic tools to delete dynamins in early OCPs . We first determined the time course of dynamin expres - sion during early osteoclast differentiation in vitro . Dynamin protein levels increased markedly as early as 1 d after expo - sure to receptor activator of NF - kB ligand ( RANKL ; a cyto - kine required for OCP differentiation ) and declined by day 3 ( Fig . 1 A ) . The expression of CHC and of DC - STAMP , a mol - ecule thought to be involved in OCP fusion , was also high at these early time points ( Fig . 1 A ) . This increase was an immedi - ate response to RANKL , occurring before the increase of the levels of osteoclast differentiation markers such as Src , cathep - sin K , and the  3 integrin , whose expression is up - regulated by the osteoclastogenic transcription factor nuclear factor of acti - vated T cells cytoplasmic 1 ( NFATc1 ; Takayanagi et al . , 2002 ; Kim et al . , 2008 ; Zhao et al . , 2010 ) , and started to increase at day 2 , peaking at day 3 , a time at which both dynamin and DC - STAMP have already markedly decreased ( Fig . 1 A ) . Thus , dynamin expression is induced together with DC - STAMP in early mononuclear fusion - competent ( Oursler , 2010 ) OCPs be - fore the expression of classical osteoclast markers and at the time of active cell – cell fusion . Deletion of dynamin 1 and 2 impairs the fusion of OCPs To identify the role of dynamin in OCPs , we used cells derived from the Cre - ERT ; Dnm1 fl / fl ; Dnm2 fl / fl mice in which both dyna - min 1 and 2 genes are floxed and the Cre recombinase activity is inducible by 4 - hydroxytamoxifen ( 4OHT ) treatment ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) for all our in vitro studies . Conditional double dele - tion of dynamin 1 and 2 was selected for our studies because both isoforms are expressed in osteoclasts ( although dynamin 2 predominates ) and global deletion of dynamin 2 is embryonic lethal ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . Indeed , preliminary studies showed that deletion of dynamin 1 alone had only mild effects on these cells ( unpublished data ) . This strategy allowed us to delete both isoforms and overcome redundant functions of these two closely related dynamins or the use of unspecific pharmacological in - hibitors such as dynasore or dynGo ( Park et al . , 2013 ) . Deletion of the dynamin genes in OCPs was induced in vitro by treating bone marrow macrophages ( BMMs ) isolated from Cre - ERT ; Dnm1 fl / fl ; Dnm2 fl / fl mice with 4OHT ( Dnm - DKO ) , before induction of osteoclast differentiation . To control for the possible Oikawa et al . , 2012 ) have been suggested to contribute to fusion through the formation of these actin - rich structures . We have previously shown that dynamin , a large GTPase best known for its function in the fission of vesicles from the plasma membrane during endocytosis ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ; Takei et al . , 1995 ; Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) , also participates in the regulation of actin remodeling in podo - somes . In the process of vesicle fission , dynamin is thought to form a helical coil that constricts the neck of clathrin - coated pits , physically separating the budding vesicle from the plasma membrane ( for review see Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . In podosomes , dynamin is involved in actin reorganization through interactions with a large number of actin - and membrane - binding proteins that include profilin , cortactin , Abp1 , proteins of the BAR domains superfamily ( Witke et al . , 1998 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Kessels et al . , 2001 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ) , and signaling proteins such as Src , Pyk2 , and Cbl ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ; Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ; Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 , 2009 ; Destaing et al . , 2013 ) . The two functions may be at least partially related , as actin is also found at clathrin - coated endocytic pits ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Krueger et al . , 2003 ; Ferguson et al . , 2009 ; Grassart et al . , 2014 ) , where its assembly precedes the recruitment of dynamin ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ) . Among the three dynamin isoforms encoded by mammalian genomes , dynamin 2 is ubiquitously expressed , and the mice in which dynamin 2 has been deleted in the germline die in early embryonic development ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . In osteoclasts , dynamin 2 is the predomi - nant isoform ( dynamin 1 is expressed at low levels , whereas dynamin 3 is undetectable ) and dynamin GTPase activity mod - ulates the dynamic organization of podosomes and bone resorp - tion ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ; Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 ) . Osteoclasts are multinucleated cells whose function is to resorb bone . They are formed by the asynchronous fusion of OCPs within the monocyte – macrophage lineage , and efficient bone resorption requires multinucleation . Based on the impor - tant role of dynamin in regulating both podosome formation and membrane remodeling as well as a recent report showing that dynamin is required in a post - membrane mixing stage before syncytia formation in primary myoblasts ( Leikina et al . , 2013 ) , we hypothesized that dynamin might also play a role in the fusion of OCPs and thus represent a conserved component of the cell fusion – mediating machinery . To test this hypothesis , we used an inducible knockout mouse model to generate dynamin 1 – and 2 – deficient primary OCPs and myoblasts . Our results show that fusion of both cell types requires dynamin as well as endocy - tosis . At sites where cells are invaded by actin - rich protrusions from adjacent cells , high levels of clathrin - coated endocytic activity are observed . The formation of the actin protrusions and the localized endocytic activity are both impaired in the absence of dynamin , which is required in both fusing cells . Impairing endocytosis independently of dynamin by either depleting the cells of clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) , using pharmacologi - cal agents , or inhibiting the membrane recruitment of clathrin and the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 also prevented cell – cell fusion . Collectively , these results indicate that cell – cell fusion involves dynamin and the formation of invadosome - like actin - rich pro - trusions associated with clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Since 75 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . Figure 1 . Dynamin expression increases in early OCPs , and dynamin depletion impairs osteoclast multinucleation . ( A ) Western blot analysis of BMM cell lysates stimulated with RANKL for the indicated days to evaluate expression levels of dynamin , NFATc1 , Src , cathepsin K , CHC , and actin ( loading control ) during RANKL - induced osteoclast differentiation . ( B ) Western blot analysis of osteoclasts with the indicated antibodies and time points . Cells from littermate control mice Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox were used as a control for tamoxifen treatment . ( C ) Representative images of TRAP - stained osteoclasts differentiated from bone marrow of Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox mice and CreER ; Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox littermates . Osteoclast multinucleation was quantified by counting the number of TRAP + cells with one to two nuclei ( left ) or three or more nuclei ( right ) . The inset is an enlarged view of the boxed region . Data are means ± SD ( error bars ) from five independent experiments . * , P < 0 . 001 . Bars , 200 µm . ( D ) Images of TRAP - stained CTL and DKO osteoclasts after culturing with RANKL for 1 d . Note that DKO cells are round and have less prominent filopodia , compared to CTL cells . Bars , 10 µm . JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 76 cells ( yellow / orange ; Fig . 2 B ) . Dynamin depletion resulted in a markedly decreased OCP fusion efficiency ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) , with most of the cells having only two to three nuclei ( see Fig . 1 C ) . Using a membrane dye ( DiI ) and a cytoplasmic marker ( CellTracker ) , we further confirmed that the efficiency of multi - nucleation ( syncytium formation ) is markedly impaired ( > 80 % , P < 0 . 01 ) in the absence of Dnm1 / 2 . These results show that dynamin is required for efficient fusion of OCPs . In contrast , the number of mononuclear cells showing evidence for prior occurrence of a lipid - mixing event ( mononuclear yellow cells , Fig . 2 D ) or partial lipid - content mixing ( mononuclear yellow cells , Fig . 2 F ) was not significantly affected ( Fig . 2 F ) or even slightly decreased ( Fig . 2 D ) by the deletion of dynamin 1 and 2 when it should have increased if the fusion impairment was posterior to the early mixing of membranes or content . These observations suggest that early lipid mixing or content mixing events may also decrease in the absence of dynamin . We then determined whether dynamin was required in both partners of the OCP cell – cell fusion event by mixing control ( CTL ) and DKO cells in the same culture and measuring syncy - tium formation and lipid mixing efficiency . Interestingly , we observed a similar reduction ( > 80 % , P < 0 . 01 ) in syncytium formation and in the level of lipid mixing as observed with DKO cells , which indicates that dynamin is required in both cell fusion partners ( Fig . 2 , E and F ) . Consistent with the reduced number of TRAP + MNCs formed in these cultures , the resorbed surface generated by Dnm - DKO OCs plated on dentine slices was also reduced by  80 % ( P < 0 . 05 , Fig . 3 A ) . Accordingly , conditional KO mice ( Dnm - DKO ; Ctsk ) generated by crossing osteoclast - specific Ctsk - Cre mice ( Nakamura et al . , 2007 ) with Dnm1 fl / fl ; Dnm2 fl / fl mice ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) and in which dynamin protein level was decreased by 40 – 50 % and 50 – 60 % at days 1 and 2 , respec - tively , in Dnm - DKO ; Ctsk cells ( Fig . S1 B ) showed a significant decrease ( by  15 % , P < 0 . 01 ) in serum levels of cross - linked C - telopeptide of type I collagen ( CTX ) , a marker of osteoclast activity . This indicates that bone resorption is globally decreased in Dnm - DKO ; Ctsk mice ( Fig . 3 B ) . This resulted in an increased bone mass in vivo as shown by micro - CT ( µCT ; Fig . 3 , C and D ) and histomorphometric analysis ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . Most relevant to this study is the markedly decreased number and size of osteoclasts ( Fig . 3 F ) , demonstrating that deletion of dynamin affected both the differentiation and size of osteoclasts in vivo . The increase in bone volume is only moderate however , most likely due to the fact that Ctsk promoter - driven Cre expression occurs later than the initiation of OCP fusion ( see Fig . 1 A ) . Osteoclast size was still affected given that fusion continues to proceed during the lifetime of osteoclasts ( Fig . 1 , A and B ; and Fig . S1 B ) . These results establish the fact that our observations on the role of dynamin in osteoclasts differentiation and func - tion also apply to the in vivo situation . The pleckstrin homology ( PH ) and proline - rich domain ( PRD ) of dynamin are required for OCP fusion Dynamin comprises several functional domains . The dynamin PH domain binds to acidic phospholipids on the cytosolic side effect of 4OHT , BMMs derived from Dnm1 fl / fl ; Dnm2 fl / fl mice were treated with the same concentration of 4OHT . Dynamins were efficiently depleted in Dnm - DKO cells as determined by Western blotting with anti - dynamin antibodies recognizing both dynamin 1 and 2 ( Fig . 1 B ) . Strikingly , whereas the induction of the RANKL target gene and master osteoclastogenic transcription factor NFATc1 was unaffected by deletion of dynamin ( Fig . 1 B ) , demonstrat - ing that RANK signal transduction is not affected by the absence of dynamin , the number of multinucleated cells positive for the osteoclast marker enzyme tartrate - resistant acid phospha - tase ( TRAP ; TRAP + multinucleated cells [ MNCs ] ) formed in vitro in the presence of macrophage colony stimulating factor ( M - CSF ) , and RANKL was markedly reduced in the Dnm - DKO cells ( Fig . 1 C ) . The number of OCPs that remained mononu - clear in these cultures was about threefold higher than in control cultures . The fact that small osteoclasts with few nuclei were predominant in double knockout ( DKO ) cultures may be due to some fusion occurring in this assay before the addition of 4OHT or to only partial deletion of Dnm1 , 2 . It is also possible that some impairment of cytokinesis ( Liu et al . , 2008 ) generated some of the cells with two to three nuclei , decreasing the ap - parent effect of Dnm1 , 2 deletion on OCP fusion . These results demonstrate that dynamin is required for the OCPs to efficiently form multinucleated cells through cell – cell fusion , despite the fact that , like NFATc1 , the expression of DC - STAMP was not affected by dynamin deletion ( Fig . 1 B ) . Although expression of NFATc1 was intact , the expression of several of its target genes and markers of mature osteoclasts , including Src and cathepsin K ( Ctsk ) , was delayed in the Dnm - DKO cells ( Fig . 1 B ) , which suggests that impairing the fusion of OCPs may affect the subsequent differentiation of osteoclasts . Furthermore , the cell morphology was significantly altered in the absence of dyna - min . Control OCPs had a stellar or spindle - shaped morphology with numerous protrusions , whereas Dnm - DKO cells exhibited a rounded and flattened appearance with fewer and shorter extensions ( Figs . 1 D and 6 A ) . Perturbation of dynamin function affects actin polymer - ization and cell migration ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ; Kawada et al . , 2009 ; Destaing et al . , 2013 ) , and indeed , cell migration was significantly decreased ( by 25 – 30 % , P < 0 . 001 ) in Dnm - DKO OCPs ( Fig . S1 A ) . Since OCPs must migrate and meet in order to fuse and form multinucleated cells , we then determined whether the fusion defect could be due to impaired migration , independent of the cell – cell fusion process itself . For this purpose , we plated OCPs at increasingly higher densities to compensate for their defective migration . As expected , multinu - cleation of control cells increased with increasing OCP plating density . In contrast , increasing cell density even up to the point of providing direct cell – cell contact failed to rescue the cell – cell fusion defect of Dnm - DKO cells ( Fig . 2 A ) . These data demon - strate that dynamin is required for OCP cell – cell fusion , indepen - dent of the establishment of cell – cell contacts . To test this hypothesis further , we cocultured equal num - bers of OCPs whose membranes were labeled with either of the lipophilic dyes DiI ( red ) or DiO ( green ) in the presence of M - CSF and RANKL , and determined the percentage of fused 77 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . Figure 2 . Dynamin depletion reduces osteoclast fusion independently of cell migration . ( A ) OCPs were plated at three different densities as indicated , and differentiation was induced by M - CSF and RANKL for 3 d . Images are representative of results from three independent experiments carried out in triplicate . Bar , 20 µm . ( B ) Cell fusion scheme for lipid mix and for content mixing assays for experiments described in C and E . CTL and DKO OCPs were generated as described in the Materials and methods : separated in two pools , labeled with membrane probes DiI ( red ) and DiO ( green ) , or DiI and cytoplasmic probe CellTracker Green ( CT - G ) , and cultured together in the presence of M - CSF and RANKL for 3 – 4 d . ( C ) Representative images of the cells labeled with DiI ( red ) or DiO ( green ) and fused as described in B . Bars , 20 µm . ( D ) The percentages of multinuclear ( three or more nuclei ) and mononuclear yellow cells ( lipid mix ) from assays as in C were determined . Data are mean ± SE ( error bars ) ; * , P < 0 . 01 ) . ( E ) Images of the cells labeled with membrane probe DiI ( red ) , green CellTracker , and DAPI ( blue ) . Arrows and asterisks indicate colabeled mononuclear cells and multinuclear cells , respectively . Bars , 20 µm . ( F ) Quantification of syncytium formation and lipid and content mixing in CTL , DKO , and a mix of CTL and DKO cultures as in E . Data were normalized to those of CTL cells . All data are means ± standard error ( error bars ; n ≥ 3 ) . * , P < 0 . 01 . JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 78 domains in the OCP fusion process , we performed rescue ex - periments in DKO OCPs using lentiviral constructs of dynamin 2 ( Dnm2 ) WT or Dnm2 mutants including a deletion of the PRD domain (  PRD ) , a mutation of the PH domain ( K562E ) , or a mutation in the GTPase domain ( K44A ) , as well as dynamin 1 ( Dnm1 ) WT or an empty vector . Whereas Dnm2 WT efficiently rescued the defective fusion phenotype of Dnm - DKO OCPs ( P < 0 . 001 ) , Dnm1 rescued ( P < 0 . 01 ) significantly less than Dnm2 ( P < 0 . 03 vs . Dnm2 ) . In contrast , the mutants Dnm2 - K562E and Dnm2 -  PRD or Dnm2 - K44A failed to rescue fusion in this assay ( Fig . 4 ) . These results are consistent with the need for of the plasma membrane ( Ferguson et al . , 1994 ; Zheng et al . , 1996 ) , and a defective PH domain inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Lee et al . , 1999 ; Vallis et al . , 1999 ) . The PRD inter - acts with SH3 domain – containing proteins , including several actin - regulatory proteins , and contributes to the localization of dynamin at endocytic sites and to the coordination of dynamin function during endocytosis ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . Accordingly , dynamin lacking the PRD cannot rescue endocytic defects in dynamin - knockout fibroblasts ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . Lastly , the GTPase domain is responsible for GTP binding and hydrolysis . To determine the functional role of each of these Figure 3 . Osteoclast - targeted conditional dynamin deletion in mice decreases osteoclast numbers , size , and bone resorption , resulting in higher bone mass . ( A ) Resorption pits were formed by CTL and Dnm - DKO ; ERT osteoclasts ( OCs ) cultured on dentin slices . The resorbed areas were measured and normalized to the number of osteoclasts on dentin slices . The values are mean ± SD ( error bars ) of triplicates ; dynamin - depleted osteoclasts formed less resorption pits ( P < 0 . 05 ) . ( B ) Serum CTX levels of 6 - wk - old CTL and Dnm - DKO ; Ctsk ( DKO ) mice ( n = 5 ) . Data are means ± SD ( error bars ) . * , in vivo bone resorption was lower in DKO mice ( P < 0 . 01 ) . ( C ) Representative µCT images of femurs from CTL and Dnm - DKO ; Ctsk ( DKO ) mice at 6 wk . Bars , 200 µm . ( D ) µCT analysis of distal femur of CTL and Dnm - DKO ; Ctsk ( DKO ) mice . Results are mean ± SE ( error bars ; female , n = 4 ) . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 . BV / TV , trabecular bone volume ( % bone volume ) ; Tb . N , trabecular number ; Tb . Sp , trabecular spacing . ( E ) Von Kossa staining of tibia sections from 6 - wk - old Dnm - DKO ; Ctsk ( DKO ) mice and littermate controls ( CTL ) showing increased bone mass . Bars , 400 µm . ( F ) Histomorphometric analysis of tibia samples ( n = 5 ) . BV / TV , trabecular bone volume ( % bone volume ) ; N . Ob , number of osteoblasts ; N . Oc , number of osteoclasts . All data are means ± SD ( error bars ) . * , P < 0 . 05 . 79 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . Confocal microscopy confirmed that dynamin is highly en - riched in mononuclear OCPs and expressed at lower levels once the cells become multinucleated ( Fig . 5 A ) , in agreement with our qPCR ( not depicted ) and Western blot data ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . Indeed , fusion - competent OCPs stimulated by RANKL could be distinguished on the basis of their high level of expression of dynamin , CHC , and DC - STAMP as early as 1 d after exposure ( Fig . 5 , B and C ; and Fig . 6 , B and C ) . In addition to these podosome - like structures , confocal analysis of OCPs at day 1 and 2 , a time of active fusion , showed a prominence of markedly elongated dynamin - and F - actin – rich structures protruding from the OCPs and often into the apposing cell at sites of cell – cell contact ( Fig . 5 D , boxed area ) . These structures were also identifiable between day 2 and 3 after exposure to RANKL , when mononuclear or binucleated OCPs fused with already established MNCs . In - terestingly , DC - STAMP was also enriched in these early pre - cursors , where it partially colocalized with CHC ( Fig . 5 E ) . At the time of increased cell fusion , DC - STAMP was found in actin - rich protrusions of OCPs ( Fig . 6 B ) and / or in the membrane of the apposed cell ( Fig . 6 C ) . In contrast , protein interactions of the PRD or PH domains as well as for the GTPase activity ( also supported by the effect of dynasore on OCP fusion ; Fig . S3 ) for the actions of dynamin in OCPs fusion ( Fig . 4 ) . Thus , the entire dynamin function appears to be required for OCP cell – cell fusion . Dynamin deletion alters the formation of actin - rich membrane protrusions at the time of OCP fusion Dynamin is highly enriched in the podosome belt of mature osteoclasts and regulates podosome organization and dynamics ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ; Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 ; Destaing et al . , 2013 ) . Podosomes or podosome - like structures have recently been shown to be associated with the fusion of myoblasts and of OCPs ( Sens et al . , 2010 ; Oikawa et al . , 2012 ) . We therefore ex - amined the behavior of podosomes during OCP fusion in the presence or absence of dynamin . Time - lapse imaging of live osteoclasts expressing GFP - actin and differentiating in the presence of RANKL and M - CSF showed that small clusters of podosomes often appeared at the contact areas between fusing cells ( Fig . S2 ) , as recently observed by Oikawa et al . ( 2012 ) . Figure 4 . Dynamin PRD and PH domains are required for the fusion of OCPs . ( A ) TRAP staining of transduced Dnm - DKO osteoclasts reexpressing vec - tor , dynamin 1 ( Dnm1 ) , dynamin 2 ( Dnm2 ) WT , and Dnm2 mutants including a GTPase mutant K44A , a PH domain mutant K562E , and a splice variant  PRD . Bars , 200 µm . ( B ) Quantification of TRAP - positive cells with more than three nuclei for fusion rescue efficiency . One - way ANOVA ( P < 0 . 001 ) and a Student’s t test were used to analyze the data . a , significantly different from vector ( P < 0 . 001 ) ; b , significantly different from Dnm2 ( P < 0 . 034 ) . JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 80 Ultrastructural analysis of fusion sites by transmission electron microscopy confirmed and extended these observa - tions . In control cells , as with confocal analysis , we frequently observed multiple finger - like actin - rich protrusions ( Fig . 6 A ) extending into the apposing cells , confirming the confocal ob - servations ( see Fig . 5 , A and D ) . These protrusions are highly reminiscent of invadosomes and of the invasive structures seen in fusing myoblasts in Drosophila melanogaster ( Kesper et al . , 2007 ; Berger et al . , 2008 ; Sens et al . , 2010 ) . These protrusive structures had a mean length of 2 µm and a diameter of about 180 nm , and were enriched with packed and longitudinally Dnm - DKO OCPs exhibited markedly fewer and shorter actin - rich protrusions in general and at sites of cell – cell contacts ( Fig . 6 , A and B ) . Importantly , actin , clathrin , dynamin , and DC - STAMP were also enriched at sites of fusion in the apposing cell ( Fig . 5 , C and E ; and Fig . 6 C ) , which confirms our observation that dy - namin is required in both fusing cells ( Fig 2 , E and F ) and sug - gests that the invaded cell’s actin and clathrin machinery might also be involved in the invasion process , which is reminiscent , except for DC - STAMP , of what is observed during the invasion of cells by Listeria ( Bonazzi et al . , 2011 ) . Figure 5 . OCPs express high levels of dynamin and DC - STAMP , and form actin - rich structures at the time of fusion . Immunofluorescence confocal images of OCs in fusion stained with antibodies to dynamin , CHC , DC - STAMP , and rhodamine - phalloidin for F - actin labeling . ( A ) Dynamin - enriched OCPs ( arrows ) fusing with an already multinucleated osteoclasts ( OCL ; asterisk ) in which dynamin levels are low . ( B ) Dynamin and actin are highly enriched in fusing CTL cells , whereas dynamin expression is markedly suppressed in DKO cells ( note that dynamin expression was markedly suppressed ) . ( C ) Accumulation of actin at sites of cell – cell fusion in both the recipient and the fusing cell , where CHC , dynamin , and actin are colocalized . ( D ) Note the prominent filopodia ( box ) enriched with dynamin and actin protrud - ing from a mononuclear cell fusing into a larger multinuclear cell . ( E ) CHC and DC - STAMP are also enriched and colocalized in mononuclear OCPs . Bars , 5 µm . 81 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . Figure 6 . Dynamin - dependent actin - rich protrusions are associated with clathrin - coated vesicles at sites of OCP fusion . ( A ) Electron microscopy images of representative OCPs showing F - actin – rich membrane protrusions extending from one cell into the adjacent cell , similar to confocal images in Fig . 5 D of CTL cells . Bars , 200 nm . The length of protrusive structures of CTL osteoclasts ( OCLs ) is about five times longer than those of DKO cells ( left graph , P < 0 . 01 ) . The number of protrusive structures was 80 % less in DKO cells ( P < 0 . 01 ) . Data were obtained from 38 CTL and 86 DKO cell images in three independent experiments . Error bars indicate SEM . ( B ) Colocalization of dynamin and DC - STAMP on an OCP actin protrusion . Bar , 5 µm . ( C ) The localization of CHC and DC - STAMP around and at tips of the protrusions of osteoclasts in CTL culture ; note the presence of clathrin - coated vesicles near the tip of the protru - sion ( arrows ) . Bar , 0 . 3 µm . ( D ) EM images showing the frequent association of F - actin protrusions and clathrin - coated pits ( arrows ) in the membrane of the invaded cells . Bars , 200 nm . ( E and F ) shRNA - mediated knockdown of CHC was analyzed by Western blotting . TRAP - positive multinucleated osteoclasts were quantified . Data are mean ± SE ( error bars ) . * , P < 0 . 01 . Bar , 200 µm . JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 82 Collectively these results show that dynamin function and clathrin - mediated endocytosis , which appears to be highly en - hanced at sites of cell – cell contacts , are required , directly or in - directly , for the proper fusion of OCPs . Dynamin and endocytosis also play a role in myoblast fusion We then asked whether these observations were specific to OCPs or if they could be extended to the fusion of another cell type , the myoblast . A role for dynamin in myoblast fusion has recently been suggested in vitro using dynasore and shRNA transfection in the C2C12 cell line and primary myoblasts ( Leikina et al . , 2013 ) . Protein levels of dynamin 2 mildly increased , whereas dynamin 1 decreased during myoblast differentiation ( Fig . S4 A ) . Levels of dynamin 3 , typically expressed at low levels ( or ab - sent ) outside the brain ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) , were low irre - spective of the differentiation state of myoblasts . Taking advantage of our double knockout in vivo system , we tested the role of dynamin in the fusion of primary myo - blasts isolated from Dnm - DKO ; ERT mice as we did in our OCP studies . When induced by serum withdrawal from the culture , myoblasts go through a series of developmental steps to form multinucleated myotubes . Interestingly , depletion of dynamin in primary myoblasts ( Dnm - DKO ) resulted in impaired fusion and a decrease of > 60 % ( P < 0 . 01 ) in myotube formation ( Fig . 7 , A and B ) . This observation confirms a specific function for dynamin in the fusion event that is separable from the signaling events that drive myoblast differentiation , similar to our obser - vations in OCPs . We then used the model cell line C2C12 for studies of myoblast fusion to explore whether the importance of dynamin in cell fusion could reflect a role of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis in this process . An efficient knockdown of the dynamin gene by shRNAs markedly reduced myotube formation in C2C12 myoblast differentiation culture ( Fig . S4 B ) , confirming the re - sults of Leikina et al ( 2013 ) . Additionally , confocal and ultra - structural analyses showed that , as observed in OCPs and in Drosophila ( Sens et al . , 2010 ) , fusing mammalian myoblasts also exhibited actin - rich protrusions ( Fig . S4 C ) . We next targeted clathrin - mediated endocytosis inde - pendently from dynamin by knocking down CHC by siRNA transfection . This markedly reduced the number of fused myo - tubes ( Fig . 8 A ) . We also transfected C2C12 cells with the amphiphysin fragment A1 , which prevents clathrin - mediated endocytosis by blocking the recruitment and thus assembly of clathrin ( Slepnev et al . , 1998 , 2000 ) . In A1 - expressing cells , both transferrin uptake ( a reporter of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis ) and cell fusion were impaired ( Fig . 8 B ) . In contrast , in cells expressing an A1 mutant that cannot block clathrin inter - actions ( Slepnev et al . , 2000 ; A1 / HSR / SR / SSR mutant ) , trans - ferrin uptake and cell fusion were not impaired . Similar results were obtained with the pharmacological inhibitors CPZ and MDC , further establishing a role for endocytosis in myoblast fusion ( Fig . S4 D ) . These data demonstrate that dynamin function and endocytic events are also involved in myoblast fusion to form myotubes , as oriented actin filaments ( Fig . 6 A ) . In contrast , the Dnm - DKO cells formed  80 % less ( P < 0 . 01 ) protrusive structures , and these were 80 % shorter ( P < 0 . 01 ) , most often without promi - nent accumulation of actin filaments bundles ( Figs . 5 B and 6 A ) , which suggests that formation and / or extension of these pro - trusions is dynamin dependent . Thus , the confocal and EM analyses suggest that dynamin contributes to the formation of protrusive actin - rich structures that are associated with the fusion of OCPs , whereas the fusion assays demonstrate that fusion is impaired in the absence of dynamin . The actin - based function of dynamin may therefore contribute to the efficient cell – cell fusion of OCPs . Quite strikingly , our EM studies showed not only that fus - ing OCPs generated long actin - rich invasive membrane protru - sions ( Fig . 6 D ) but also that these were frequently associated with the presence of clathrin - coated pits in the apposed recipient cell membranes , often located opposite to the tips of the protru - sion ( Fig . 6 , C and D , arrows ; 20 clathrin - coated pits around the cross - section of 38 protrusions , 9 of which were opposite to the tips ) . These observations suggest a role for both the invading and the invaded cell in the fusion process , as demonstrated by the fact that dynamin is required in both OCPs during the fusion process ( Fig . 2 , E and F ) . We also often observed coated vesi - cles in the vicinity of the protrusions ( Fig . 6 , A and D ) . These observations suggested the possibility that both the dynamin - dependent actin - based mechanisms and the endo - cytic activity at sites where cell contact is established by these protrusions could be involved in the fusion process of OCPs . Endocytosis is also required for the fusion of OCPs Dynamin deletion blocks clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Dnm - DKO fibroblasts ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) and results in a striking accumulation of highly tubulated endocytic pits on the plasma membrane . Accordingly , analysis of confocal micro - scopy z sections revealed a higher abundance of endocytic pits labeled with CHC , endophilin , or DC - STAMP ( approximately twofold , P < 0 . 01 ; Fig . S3 A ) at the plasma membrane of the Dnm - DKO OCPs , as well as decreased intracellular localization of DC - STAMP ( by  60 % , P < 0 . 01 ; Fig . S3 A ) that , in early OCPs , colocalizes partially with CHC ( see Fig . 5 E ) . To determine whether alterations in endocytosis , also a consequence of dynamin depletion , contributed to the impaired OCP cell – cell fusion , we then explored whether perturbations of clathrin - mediated endocytosis by means other than deletion of dynamin would alter OCP fusion in vitro . For this purpose , we targeted the machinery involved in clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis by knocking down CHC by lentiviral shRNA transduction of BMMs . This resulted in a > 90 % decrease in the expression of CHC and markedly decreased OCP fusion ( Fig . 6 E ) . This find - ing was also confirmed by treatment of OCPs with chlorproma - zine ( CPZ ) , which is known to affect hemifusion intermediates ( Chernomordik et al . , 1999 ) , or monodansylcadaverine ( MDC ) , two drugs that have an inhibitory effect , although not entirely specific , on clathrin - mediated endocytosis and that also blocked OCP fusion in vitro ( Fig . S3 B ) . 83 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . both OCPs and myoblasts , independent of its effects on cell migration . Importantly , these effects arising from dynamin deple - tion cannot be attributed to perturbations in RANK signaling and the ensuing expression of marker genes such as NFATc1 and DC - STAMP in OCPs or expression of MHC in myoblasts . Furthermore , we show that the defective fusion in dyna - min 1 – and 2 – deficient cells can be efficiently rescued in vitro by dynamin 2 and dynamin 1 ( albeit less efficiently ) but not by dynamin mutants in which the PRD , the PH , or the GTPase do - mains were deleted or mutated ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ; Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . Such findings are consistent with struc - tural studies ( Damke et al . , 1994 ; Chappie et al . , 2011 ; Faelber et al . , 2011 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ; Destaing et al . , 2013 ) that have established the integrated role of all the dynamin domains and dynamin oligomerization for its mechano - enzyme activity . They suggest that such activity of dynamin , which is required for endocytosis , is also required for the cell – cell fusion process . This is possibly because , as we show here , normal clathrin - mediated endocytosis is itself required for cell – cell fusion . As it is not possible to separate the endocytic versus actin regulatory functions of dynamin , we tested whether inhibition of endocytosis would affect fusion independently of dynamin . Our results , obtained with specific depletion of CHC or preven - tion of clathrin - endocytic adaptor interactions via expression of a truncated amphiphysin ( Slepnev et al . , 2000 ) , as well as with broad action pharmacological inhibitors of endocytosis , they are in the fusion of OCPs to form osteoclasts , which suggests that dynamin and endocytosis dependence might be a general characteristic of cell – cell fusion . Discussion Our results demonstrate that deletion of dynamin 1 and 2 in OCPs and in myoblasts impairs the ability of these two cell types to undergo homotypic fusion to yield multinucleated osteoclasts or myotubes , respectively . Dynamin is involved in the regulation of actin polymerization at podosomes ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ; Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 , 2009 ) and at endocytic sites through direct and indirect interactions with actin - binding / regulating proteins , such as cortactin , profilin , Abp1 , and Rac1 ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Kessels et al . , 2001 ; Schafer et al . , 2002 ; Schlunck et al . , 2004 ; Pirraglia et al . , 2006 ) . The essential role of dynamin for the membrane fission reaction that separates endocytic clathrin - coated pits from the plasma membrane is also tightly interconnected with actin function ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ; Grassart et al . , 2014 ) . Here we show that long invadosome - like actin - rich protrusions are formed between fusing OCPs and fusing mammalian myo - blasts , as previously reported in Drosophila ( Sens et al . , 2010 ; Shilagardi et al . , 2013 ) , and that deletion of dynamin 1 and 2 blunts the formation of these structures and prevents fusion of Figure 7 . Dynamin depletion also prevents primary myoblast fusion . Primary myoblasts isolated from Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox mice and CreER ; Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox littermates were cultured in differentiation medium for 4 d with or without 4OHT . ( A ) Dynamin depletion in creER ; Dnm - Dfl cells after 4OHT treatment is shown by Western blot analysis . ( B ) DNM - DKO myoblasts showed a defect in myotube formation ( phase - contrast mi - croscopy ) , and the syncytium formation extent was quantified and normalized to Dfl cells . Error bars indicate SEM . * , P < 0 . 01 . JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 84 by such protrusions , raising the possibility that protrusions might , by analogy with the events leading to Listeria invasion ( Bonazzi et al . , 2011 ) , be the result not only of pushing forces , but also of “pulling” forces produced by the invaded cell . Simi - lar structures ( cell protrusions facing clathrin - coated pits in the apposed cell ) have been observed in this context ( Bonazzi et al . , 2011 ) and in developing tissues , where they are thought to rep - resent underlying signaling by cell surface bound ligands and receptors ( Bastiani and Goodman , 1984 ) . Indeed , our EM ob - servations are strikingly similar , in fact almost identical , to the demonstrate that endocytosis is indeed required , whether di - rectly or indirectly , for the fusion of both cell types . These observations suggest a fusion process involving both the formation of actin - rich structures at sites of cell – cell fusion , ensuring close contact between the membranes of fusing cells ( Sens et al . , 2010 ) , and endocytosis , possibly contributing to the membrane fusion event itself . In fact , they point to a pre - dominant role of impaired endocytosis in the defect of cell – cell fusion . We frequently observed coated pits opposite to the tip or on the sides of the actin - rich protrusions in the cell penetrated Figure 8 . Inhibition of endocytosis decreases myoblast fusion . ( A ) siRNA knockdown of CHC was analyzed by Western blotting . Images of C2C12 cells transfected with negative control or two different CHC siRNAs were cultured for 96 h in differentiation media . Bar , 20 µm . ( B ) Effect of expression of an amphiphysin fragment that binds both clathrin and AP - 2 , and blocks endocytosis on the fusion of myoblast fusion . C2C12 cells were transfected with HA - tagged fragments of amphiphysin ( green ) : wild - type A1 fragment and mutant fragment A1 / HSR / SR / SSR that doesn’t bind either clathrin or AP - 2 . 24 h after transfection , cells were differentiated for 3 d and then incubated with fluorescent transferrin ( red ) for 15 min before fixation and immunostaining for nuclei and HA - tag . Bars : ( top and bottom ) 10 µm ; ( middle ) 20 µm . 85 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . et al . , 2013 ) are critical for fusion ( Richard et al . , 2011 ; Leikina et al . , 2013 ) . We extend these studies by showing that in pri - mary OCPs , as in myoblasts , dynamin is required for cell fusion to occur . We also extend these findings by showing in vivo that osteoclast - targeted deletion of dynamin 1 and 2 leads to the formation of smaller and functionally impaired OCs . The im - portance of the actin cytoskeletal organization and of podosome - like structures in membrane fusion has also been previously suggested in myoblasts and OCPs ( Chen et al . , 2007 ; Kim et al . , 2007 ; Laurin et al . , 2008 ; Pajcini et al . , 2008 ; Gonzalo et al . , 2010 ; Sens et al . , 2010 ; Oikawa et al . , 2012 ) but a role for dynamin and / or endocytosis has never been identified . In addition , dynamin - interacting molecules—the small GTPase Rac1 and the invadopodia regulator Tks5 / Fish—have been shown to be essential in myoblast and in osteoclast fusion , respec - tively ( Charrasse et al . , 2007 ; Vasyutina et al . , 2009 ; Gonzalo et al . , 2010 ; Haralalka et al . , 2011 ; Oikawa et al . , 2012 ) , but again a link to dynamin function or endocytosis was not previ - ously explored . Finally , Sens et al . ( 2010 ) identified podosome - like inva - sive structures and suggested that these structures facilitated cell membrane juxtaposition and the formation of fusion pores during Drosophila myoblast fusion . More recently , Shilagardi et al . ( 2013 ) have reconstituted in vitro the Drosophila myo - blast fusion process and demonstrated that actin - propelled inva - sive membrane protrusions drive fusogenic protein engagement during cell – cell fusion , and that both are required . Collectively , all these studies suggested a role for actin regulation in fusion , along with a role of fusogenic membrane proteins . However , with the exception of Leikina et al . ( 2013 ) , the involvement of dynamin in the fusion process has not been investigated . We extend these findings by showing for the first time that endocy - tosis is required and that dynamin is required in both fusing cells during the OCP cell – cell fusion event . Our findings could also help understand the fact that muta - tions in the PH domain of dynamin in humans leads to centronu - clear myopathy ( CNM ; Bitoun et al . , 2005 ) , a muscle weakness disease in which myoblasts nuclei remain in the central region of the cytoplasm in the muscle fiber instead of migrating to the periphery of the cells . Our results raise the possibility that this myopathy could be related to the role of dynamin in myoblast fusion . We show here that introduction of one of the mutations ( K562E , related to Charcot - Marie - Tooth [ CMT ] neuropathy disease ) in the dynamin PH domain prevents the rescue of the defective fusion observed in Dnm - DKO ; ERT OCPs , which sug - gests that the fusion process might be altered in the patients harboring this mutation and thereby be linked to the CNM and / or CMT phenotype . As Dnm - DKO mice are not viable , it has not been possible to explore whether muscle defects resembling CNM are observed in vivo in these animals . Further work will be necessary to address this question . Similarly , and since we found that in vivo osteoclast - targeted deletion of dynamin 1 and 2 reduces bone resorption and leads to an increase in bone den - sity , whether patients harboring these mutations also exhibit some form of skeletal phenotype due to defective osteoclasts remains to be explored . Further studies will be required to address these important questions . observations made by Bastiani and Goodman ( 1984 ) during neuronal development in the grasshopper embryo . These authors reported “filopodia” formation from a neuronal growth cone inserting deep into another growth cone and “inducing” coated pit formation ( Bastiani and Goodman , 1984 ) . This asso - ciation of actin - rich protrusion and coated pits may therefore be a general mechanism involved in receptor – ligand - based cell – cell recognition , which would lead to cell – cell fusion only when the ligand and / or the receptor is a fusogen . The fact that we observe in OCPs that DC - STAMP is enriched in the mem - branes and colocalizes in part with CHC could indeed support this hypothesis . Nevertheless , the fact that we find endocytosis to be required suggests the presence of an additional membrane fusion event . Examples of clathrin - coated pits that engulf and then pinch off a protrusion of an adjacent cell ( a process re - ferred to as trans - endocytosis ) have been previously described in non - fusing cells ( Spacek and Harris , 2004 ) , and the absence of dynamin also impairs this reaction ( Hayashi et al . , 2008 ) . Here again the process would lead to cell – cell fusion only if , in addition to the receptor – ligand - based cell – cell recognition , a fusogen was present in the interacting membranes . It is there - fore tempting to speculate that , in the presence of a receptor – ligand cell – cell interaction and of a fusogen in the membranes of one or both apposed cells , the constricting force of dynamin at the double membranes of the pit neck may help to induce fusion . Further studies will be required to test this hypothesis . Furthermore , our data from mixed cultures of DKO and CTL cells clearly shows that dynamin is required in both of the fus - ing cells , i . e . , in the cell generating the actin - rich protrusion ( invading ) and in the cell forming the coated pits ( invaded ) . As demonstrated in the placenta for syncytins and in C . elegans for EFF1 ( Mi et al . , 2000 ; Frendo et al . , 2003 ; Podbilewicz et al . , 2006 ) , the presence of specific fusogens in the plasma membrane of the fusing cells , possibly recognized by receptors at the surface of the apposed cell , plays an es - sential role in ensuring cell – cell recognition , cell – cell fusion , and close interaction of the two membranes . It is possible that this receptor – ligand interaction initiates a receptor - mediated clathrin - and dynamin - dependent endocytic event , ultimately causing fusion of the two membranes . Although internaliza - tion of DC - STAMP has been reported to contribute to OCP fusion ( Mensah et al . , 2010 ) , it cannot be established whether endocytosis is triggering the membrane fusion event itself or is required for signaling events necessary for cell – cell fusion . Independent of which process is indeed occurring , our data firmly establishes that dynamin function and endocytic events are both required for the fusion of both OCPs and myoblasts . Our findings significantly extend several recent observa - tions . Members of the dynamin superfamily of GTPases , includ - ing atlastin , Mfn1 , and Opa1 , have been shown to participate in membrane remodeling events including organelle fusion ( Hoppins et al . , 2007 ; Hu et al . , 2009 ; Orso et al . , 2009 ; Westermann , 2011 ) , which suggests a general involvement of dynamin - like proteins in membrane fusion or fission reactions . Studies of syncytium formation using viral fusogens and myoblasts have suggested that dynamin and its dynasore - sensitive GTPase activity ( although dynasore is not specific for dynamin , see Park JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 86 for 16 h in the presence of M - CSF and 8 µg / ml polybrene and , after 1 d of recovery , selected with antibiotics for transduced cells . Dnm2 shRNA lenti - viral particles were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich , and CHC shRNA con - structs were from OriGene . RNAi For siRNA transfection , BMMs or C2C12 myoblasts in proliferation were transfected with siRNA ( 50 nM / transfection ) using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Cells were trans - fected again the next day and then 6 h after differentiation with RANKL and M - CSF . siRNAs were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies ( Dnm2 ) and Ambion ( CHC ) . Lentiviral shRNAs with a puromycin resistance gene were produced or purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( Dnm2 ) and OriGene ( CHC ) . BMMs or C2C12 myoblasts infected with lentiviruses were selected with puromycin and cultured 3 – 4 d for differentiation . Cells were then har - vested for Western blot analyses or fixed for TRAP or H & E staining . Quantitative RT - PCR analysis Total RNA was extracted from osteoclast cultures by using an RNeasy Mini kit ( QIAGEN ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . RNA was quantified spectrophotometrically and then cDNA was synthesized from 1 µg of total RNA using the SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis kit ( Invitro - gen ) . Quantitative real - time PCR analysis was performed in a 96 - well plate using an iCycler ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . Glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate de - hydrogenase ( GAPDH ) and 18 S ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) were used for normalization . Cell labeling for fusion assay Adherent BMMs were removed from the dish by incubating with 1 mM EDTA in PBS , and the recovered cells were labeled with fluorescent dyes including lipophilic tracers DiI ( red ) or DiO ( green ) or membrane - permeant CellTracker Green CMFDA according to the manufacturer’s protocol ( Life Technologies ) . DiI - and DiO - labeled cells were mixed for fusion efficiency and DiI - and CellTracker Green – labeled cells were used to observe lipid mixing as well as fusion . Mixed cells were seeded on a glass coverslip , cultured with RANKL and m - CSF for 2 d , and fixed with 3 . 7 % formalde - hyde for confocal microscopy . To quantify the efficiency of fusion and lipid mixing using DiI and CellTracker Green , cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI . Cell images were taken from at least 10 randomly chosen fields and analyzed . As in the report of Leikina et al . ( 2013 ) , the efficiency of multinu - cleation ( syncytium formation ) was quantified as the percentage of cell nu - clei in multinucleated osteoclasts compared with the total number of cell nuclei and lipid mixing as a hemifusion marker as the percentage of nuclei in colabeled mononuclear or multinuclear cells compared with the number of singly labeled cells . Bone resorption assay BMMs were plated on dentin slices and cultured for 3 d with M - CSF and RANKL . Dentin slices were washed with water , incubated in 1 N NaOH for 1 min , and sonicated to remove cells . Resorption pits on dentin slices were visualized by 1 % toluidine blue in 1 % sodium borate , and pit surface areas were quantified using the OsteoMeasure program ( OsteoMetrics ) . Results were normalized for osteoclast number , as measured by staining for TRAP activity and counting cells with more than three nuclei . Western blot analysis Cultured cells were washed with ice - cold PBS and lysed in modified ra - dioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer ( 50 mM Tris - Cl , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Nonidet P - 40 , and 0 . 25 % sodium deoxycholate ) containing protease in - hibitors ( Complete ; Roche ) . Cell lysates were incubated for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant was clarified by centrifugation at 13 , 000 rpm for 15 min . 15 – 20 µg of samples were boiled in SDS - containing sample buf - fer under reducing conditions , and proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE and transferred electrophoretically onto nitrocellulose membranes with a semidry system ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . Membranes were blocked by in - cubation with 5 % BSA in TBS with Tween 20 ( TBST ) and then incubated with primary antibodies . Membranes were then washed three times with TBST and incubated with HRP - conjugated secondary antibody diluted in TBST . Membranes were washed three times again with TBST and the pro - tein bands were visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence reagents ( GE Healthcare ) . TRAP staining In brief , differentiated osteoclasts were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS and with 1 : 1 ( vol / vol ) ethanol / acetone before detection of TRAP activity . In conclusion , our results unequivocally demonstrate that dynamin function and endocytosis are required for the fusion of both OCPs and primary myoblasts . Materials and methods Antibodies Antibodies used for immunoblot and immunofluorescence analysis were obtained from the following sources : mouse anti – dynamin 1 / 2 and mouse anti – dynamin 2 were from BD ; rabbit anti – dynamin 2 was described previ - ously ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) ; mouse anti – DC - STAMP , mouse anti - actin , mouse anti – cathepsin K , and rabbit anti – integrin  3 were from EMD Milli - pore ; rabbit anti - Src and mouse anti - NFATc1 were from Santa Cruz Bio - technology , Inc . ; mouse anti - vinculin was from Sigma - Aldrich ; rabbit anti - CHC was from Abcam ; anti – mouse and anti – rabbit IgG - HRP conjugates were from Promega ; and Alexa Fluor 488 – and 546 – conjugated second - ary antibodies were from Invitrogen . Mice The generation of CreER ; Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox mice has been described previously ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . In brief , Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox mice ( C57BL / 6J - 129S1 / Sv ) carrying conditional knockout alleles with exons 2 – 4 ( Dnm1 ) and exon 2 ( Dnm2 ) floxed were crossed with tamoxifen - inducible Cre mice ( B6 ; 129 - Gt ( ROSA ) 26Sortm1 ( cre / Esr1 ) Nat / J ) ( Badea et al . , 2003 ) . To generate Ctsk - Cre ; Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox mice , Dnm1 flox / flox ; Dnm2 flox / flox mice were crossed with Ctsk - Cre mice ( Ctsktm1 ( cre ) Ska / Ctsk + ; C57BL / 6 ) , provided by S . Kato ( University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ; Nakamura et al . , 2007 ) . Genotyping of recombinant mice was performed in - house by PCR analysis . All mice were housed at the Harvard Medical School and experimental protocols were approved by the Harvard Institu - tional Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC ) . Osteoclast culture and targeted deletion of endogenous dynamins For in vitro osteoclast differentiation , primary bone marrow cells were isolated from tibiae and femora of  4 – 8 - week - old mice and cultured under 5 % CO 2 at 37 °C in  - MEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , penicillin ( 100 U / ml ) , and streptomycin ( 100 µg / ml ) in the presence of human M - CSF ( 30 ng / ml ; R & D Systems ) for 3 d on nontreated dishes . The resulting OCPs were lifted with 1 mM EDTA in PBS and replated and cultured on plas - tic dishes or on a glass coverslip with human RANKL ( 10 ng / ml ; R & D Systems ) and human M - CSF . Under these conditions , OCPs form multi - nucleated cells by day 2 and mature OCs with podosome belts by day 3 . Targeted deletion of dynamins in OCs was accomplished by treating BMMs with 300 nM 4 - OH tamoxifen ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in the presence of M - CSF for 1 . 5 d before differentiating with M - CSF and RANKL . The differ - entiated cells were either harvested for Western blotting or fixed with 4 % formaldehyde / PBS and subjected to TRAP staining or immunofluorescence staining . To rescue DKO cells , BMMs derived from dynamin conditional KO mice were infected with lentivirus expressing the respective dynamin protein ( pLenti - GFP - dynamin variants ) or vector only . The endogenous dy - namins were depleted by the addition of 300 nM of 4 - OHT to the culture medium for 2 d before differentiation . Expression levels were determined by Western blot analysis . Inhibitors dynasore , monodansylcadaverine , and chlorpromazine ( all from Sigma - Aldrich ) were treated at day 2 of RANKL and M - CSF stimulation for 6 h before fixation due to their reversible inhibitory effects . Myoblast culture Primary mouse myoblasts were isolated from limbs of 4 – 5 - d - old mice , cul - tured as described ( Rando and Blau , 1994 ) , and differentiated with low serum medium ( 5 % horse serum in DMEM , supplemented with 100 U / ml penicillin and 100 µg / ml streptomycin ) in 37 °C / 5 % CO 2 , changing medium every other day . C2C12 mouse myoblasts were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10 % FBS , penicillin , and streptomycin , and differentiation was induced with 2 % horse serum medium , referred to as DM . Plasmids and lentiviral production and transduction To express Dnm2 WT or mutant constructs in BMMs , mouse N - terminal HA - tagged Dnm2 constructs were cloned into pLenti - GFP ( Addgene ) . To pro - duce lentiviruses , 293T cells were transfected with lentiviral plasmids along with packaging plasmids using X - tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection Re - agent ( Roche ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol , and viral particles were collected after 48 – 72 h . BMMs were transduced with viral particles 87 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . a fixed threshold at 26 % of maximal grayscale value was applied to the femur images . Three - dimensional images were reconstructed from the two - dimensional images from the contoured regions . Statistical analyses Quantitative data are shown as the means ± SD or SEM , and p - values < 0 . 05 were considered statistically significant . Statistical analyses were performed using a Student’s t test or analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) followed by a t test , and p - values of < 0 . 05 were considered significant . Results are representative examples of more than three independent experiments . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows the effect of dynamin depletion on cell motility , dynamin knockout efficiency in osteoclasts derived from Ctsk - cre ; Dnm1 fl / fl Dnm2 fl / fl mice , and impaired osteoclast multinucleation by dynamin inhibitor dyna - sore . Fig . S2 shows the formation of podosome clusters during cell – cell fusion . Fig . S3 shows that intracellular localization of CHC , endophilin , and DC - STAMP is decreased in Dnm - DKO osteoclasts ; and that endo - cytosis inhibitors impair osteoclast fusion . Fig . S4 shows the expression level of dynamin isoforms during myoblast differentiation , the effect of dynamin 2 knockdown on myoblast fusion , the presence of protrusive structures at myoblast cell – cell fusion sites , and the effect of endocytosis inhibitors on myoblast fusion . Table S1 shows histomorphometric analy - sis data from 6 - wk - old Ctsk - cre ; Dnm1 fl / fl Dnm2 fl / fl mice and control litter - mates . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201401137 / DC1 . We thank Dr . William C . Horne for editing , Dr . Francesca Gori and Flavia Pinho for help with lentiviral dynamin constructs , and Dr . Shigeaki Kato for pro - viding Cathepsin K cre mice . Confocal analysis and µCT analysis were per - formed at the Harvard NeuroDiscovery Center and at the MicroCT facility at Harvard School of Dental Medicine , respectively . This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grants to R . Baron ( National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases , RO1AR 054450 , and AR062054 ) and to P . De Camilli ( R37NS036251 ) . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Submitted : 30 January 2014 Accepted : 2 September 2014 References Abmayr , S . M . , and G . K . Pavlath . 2012 . Myoblast fusion : lessons from flies and mice . Development . 139 : 641 – 656 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 068353 Badea , T . C . , Y . Wang , and J . Nathans . 2003 . A noninvasive genetic / pharmaco - logic strategy for visualizing cell morphology and clonal relationships in the mouse . J . Neurosci . 23 : 2314 – 2322 . Baldassarre , M . , A . Pompeo , G . Beznoussenko , C . Castaldi , S . Cortellino , M . A . McNiven , A . Luini , and R . Buccione . 2003 . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 1074 – 1084 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 05 - 0308 Bastiani , M . J . , and C . S . Goodman . 1984 . Neuronal growth cones : specific in - teractions mediated by filopodial insertion and induction of coated vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 81 : 1849 – 1853 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 81 . 6 . 1849 Berger , S . , G . Schäfer , D . A . Kesper , A . Holz , T . Eriksson , R . H . Palmer , L . Beck , C . Klämbt , R . Renkawitz - Pohl , and S . F . Onel . 2008 . WASP and SCAR have distinct roles in activating the Arp2 / 3 complex during myoblast fusion . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 1303 – 1313 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 022269 Bitoun , M . , S . Maugenre , P . Y . Jeannet , E . Lacène , X . Ferrer , P . Laforêt , J . J . Martin , J . Laporte , H . Lochmüller , A . H . Beggs , et al . 2005 . Mutations in dynamin 2 cause dominant centronuclear myopathy . Nat . Genet . 37 : 1207 – 1209 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng1657 Bonazzi , M . , L . Vasudevan , A . Mallet , M . Sachse , A . Sartori , M . C . Prevost , A . Roberts , S . B . Taner , J . D . Wilbur , F . M . Brodsky , and P . Cossart . 2011 . Clathrin phosphorylation is required for actin recruitment at sites of bacterial adhesion and internalization . J . Cell Biol . 195 : 525 – 536 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201105152 Bruzzaniti , A . , L . Neff , A . Sanjay , W . C . Horne , P . De Camilli , and R . Baron . 2005 . Dynamin forms a Src kinase - sensitive complex with Cbl and regu - lates podosomes and osteoclast activity . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 3301 – 3313 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 12 - 1117 Cells were incubated in 0 . 1 M sodium acetate buffer , pH 5 , containing 50 mM sodium tartrate , 2 mM Naphtol AS - MX phosphate ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and 2 mM Fast Red Violet LB salt ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at RT until color devel - oped and then rinsed in distilled water . Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy Cells plated on FBS - coated coverslips or dentin slices were fixed with 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min and washed in PBS . They were treated with ice - cold acetone and blocked with PBS containing 5 % nor - mal serum , 0 . 1 % BSA , and 0 . 05 % saponin . The cells were incubated with primary antibodies diluted in the above buffer for 1 h , washed , and incubated with secondary antibodies ( Alexa Fluor 488 , 568 , or 647 ) for 1 h and washed again . F - actin was labeled with rhodamine phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) and nuclei were labeled with TO - PRO - 3 ( Invitrogen ) . Samples were mounted with FluorSave Reagent ( EMD Millipore ) or Prolong Gold antifade reagent with DAPI ( Invitrogen ) . Images were obtained using a confocal microscope ( LSM510 ; Carl Zeiss ) equipped with a 40× oil - immersion objective lens ( 1 . 3 NA ) or a 63× oil - immersion objective lens ( 1 . 4 NA ) , three visible wavelength lasers , and a META spectral emission detector . Images were taken at room temperature . Images were pro - cessed and analyzed with Photoshop ( Adobe ) and ImageJ ( National Insti - tutes of Health ) . Live - cell imaging To investigate actin podosome dynamics in cell – cell fusion , BMMs were plated on a Lab - Tek chambered coverglass ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , trans - duced with LentiBrite GFP -  - actin lentivirus ( EMD Millipore ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol , and stimulated with M - CSF and RANKL . Brightfield images and GFP images were collected in a 5 % CO 2 humidified atmosphere at 37°C using a spinning disk confocal scanner ( CSU - X1 ; Yok - ogawa ) mounted on an inverted microscope ( IX81 ; Olympus ) . Time - lapse images were taken at 2 - min intervals over 16 h using a 60× 1 . 42 NA ob - jective lens and an iXon3 897 EMCCD camera ( Andor Technology ) . Ac - quired images were processed and analyzed with Photoshop ( Adobe ) and ImageJ . Cell tracking for migration was performed manually using the tracking function of the MTrackJ plugin of ImageJ . Electron microscopy Control and Dnm - DKO cultured on glass coverslips were fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer for 1 h at RT . The cells were postfixed in 1 % OsO 4 , 1 . 5 % K 4 Fe ( CN ) 6 , and 0 . 1 M sodium cacodyl - ate , en bloc stained with 0 . 5 % uranyl magnesium acetate , dehydrated , embedded in Embed 812 , and finally polymerized at 60°C for 24 – 48 h . Ultrathin sections were examined using a transmission electron microscope ( CM10 ; Philips ) at 80 kV , and images were obtained with a Morada megapixel CCD camera ( Olympus ) . Serum CTX Quantitative determination of C - telopeptide fragments of Type I collagen in serum was performed using a Serum CrossLaps ELISA kit from Nordic Bioscience . Histomorphometry For histomorphometric analysis , mice were injected 7 and 2 d before sacri - fice with calcein ( 20 mg / kg of body weight ; Sigma - Aldrich ) and demeclo - cycline ( 40 mg / kg of body weight ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , respectively . The tibiae and femora of 6 - wk - old Dnm1 fl / fl ; Dnm2 fl / fl and Dnm1 fl / fl ; Dnm2 fl / fl ; Ctsk - cre mice were collected and fixed in 3 . 7 % PBS - buffered formaldehyde . For histomorphometric analysis , right tibiae were embedded in methyl meth - acrylate , and toluidine blue and von Kossa stainings were performed on 5 - µm sagittal sections . For TRAP staining , tibiae were embedded in par - affin after decalcification . All histological images were obtained using a microscope ( Eclipse E800 ; Nikon ) with a 20× ( NA 0 . 50 ) objective lens fitted with a camera ( DP71 ) and software ( DP controller ; Olympus ) . Quan - titative bone histomorphometric measurements were performed according to standardized protocols ( Parfitt et al . , 1987 ) using the OsteoMeasure system ( OsteoMetrics ) . µCT imaging and analysis Scanco Medical µCT35 with an isotropic voxel size of 7 µm was used to image the distal femur . Scans were conducted with an x - ray tube potential of 70 kVP , an x - ray intensity of 0 . 145 mA , and an integration time of 600 ms per tomographic projection . From the scans , a region starting 280 µm proximal to the distal femoral growth plate and extending trabecular bone 2 . 1 mm was selected for trabecular bone analysis . A Gaussian filter using JCB • VOLUME 207 • NUMBER 1 • 2014 88 by studies of dynamin 1 - null neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 2175 – 2180 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0712171105 Helming , L . , and S . Gordon . 2009 . Molecular mediators of macrophage fu - sion . Trends Cell Biol . 19 : 514 – 522 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2009 . 07 . 005 Hinshaw , J . E . , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . Dynamin self - assembles into rings sug - gesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature . 374 : 190 – 192 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 374190a0 Hoppins , S . , L . Lackner , and J . Nunnari . 2007 . The machines that divide and fuse mitochondria . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 76 : 751 – 780 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 76 . 071905 . 090048 Hu , J . , Y . Shibata , P . P . Zhu , C . Voss , N . Rismanchi , W . A . Prinz , T . A . Rapoport , and C . Blackstone . 2009 . A class of dynamin - like GTPases involved in the generation of the tubular ER network . Cell . 138 : 549 – 561 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 05 . 025 Itoh , T . , K . S . Erdmann , A . Roux , B . Habermann , H . Werner , and P . De Camilli . 2005 . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell . 9 : 791 – 804 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2005 . 11 . 005 Jurdic , P . , F . Saltel , A . Chabadel , and O . Destaing . 2006 . Podosome and sealing zone : specificity of the osteoclast model . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 : 195 – 202 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2005 . 09 . 008 Kawada , K . , G . Upadhyay , S . Ferandon , S . Janarthanan , M . Hall , J . P . Vilardaga , and V . Yajnik . 2009 . Cell migration is regulated by platelet - derived growth factor receptor endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 : 4508 – 4518 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00015 - 09 Kessels , M . M . , A . E . Engqvist - Goldstein , D . G . Drubin , and B . Qualmann . 2001 . Mammalian Abp1 , a signal - responsive F - actin - binding protein , links the actin cytoskeleton to endocytosis via the GTPase dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 351 – 366 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 2 . 351 Kesper , D . A . , C . Stute , D . Buttgereit , N . Kreisköther , S . Vishnu , K . F . Fischbach , and R . Renkawitz - Pohl . 2007 . Myoblast fusion in Drosophila melano - gaster is mediated through a fusion - restricted myogenic - adhesive struc - ture ( FuRMAS ) . Dev . Dyn . 236 : 404 – 415 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / dvdy . 21035 Kim , S . , K . Shilagardi , S . Zhang , S . N . Hong , K . L . Sens , J . Bo , G . A . Gonzalez , and E . H . Chen . 2007 . A critical function for the actin cytoskeleton in tar - geted exocytosis of prefusion vesicles during myoblast fusion . Dev . Cell . 12 : 571 – 586 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2007 . 02 . 019 Kim , K . , S . H . Lee , J . Ha Kim , Y . Choi , and N . Kim . 2008 . NFATc1 induces osteoclast fusion via up - regulation of Atp6v0d2 and the dendritic cell - specific transmembrane protein ( DC - STAMP ) . Mol . Endocrinol . 22 : 176 – 185 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1210 / me . 2007 - 0237 Krueger , E . W . , J . D . Orth , H . Cao , and M . A . McNiven . 2003 . A dynamin - cortac - tin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimu - lated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 1085 – 1096 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 08 - 0466 Laurin , M . , N . Fradet , A . Blangy , A . Hall , K . Vuori , and J . F . Côté . 2008 . The atypical Rac activator Dock180 ( Dock1 ) regulates myoblast fusion in vivo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 15446 – 15451 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0805546105 Lee , A . , D . W . Frank , M . S . Marks , and M . A . Lemmon . 1999 . Dominant - negative inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis by a dynamin - 1 mutant with a defective pleckstrin homology domain . Curr . Biol . 9 : 261 – 265 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 99 ) 80115 - 8 Lee , S . H . , J . Rho , D . Jeong , J . Y . Sul , T . Kim , N . Kim , J . S . Kang , T . Miyamoto , T . Suda , S . K . Lee , et al . 2006 . v - ATPase V0 subunit d2 - deficient mice exhibit impaired osteoclast fusion and increased bone formation . Nat . Med . 12 : 1403 – 1409 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm1514 Leikina , E . , K . Melikov , S . Sanyal , S . K . Verma , B . Eun , C . Gebert , K . Pfeifer , V . A . Lizunov , M . M . Kozlov , and L . V . Chernomordik . 2013 . Extracellular annexins and dynamin are important for sequential steps in myoblast fusion . J . Cell Biol . 200 : 109 – 123 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201207012 Linder , S . , and M . Aepfelbacher . 2003 . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of in - vasive cells . Trends Cell Biol . 13 : 376 – 385 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0962 - 8924 ( 03 ) 00128 - 4 Liu , Y . W . , M . C . Surka , T . Schroeter , V . Lukiyanchuk , and S . L . Schmid . 2008 . Isoform and splice - variant specific functions of dynamin - 2 revealed by analysis of conditional knock - out cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 19 : 5347 – 5359 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 08 - 0890 Mbalaviele , G . , P . Orcel , C . Morieux , P . J . Nijweide , and M . C . de Vernejoul . 1995 . Osteoclast formation from human cord blood mononuclear cells co - cultured with mice embryonic metatarsals in the presence of M - CSF . Bone . 16 : 171 – 177 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 8756 - 3282 ( 95 ) 80029 - P McNiven , M . A . , L . Kim , E . W . Krueger , J . D . Orth , H . Cao , and T . W . Wong . 2000 . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding Bruzzaniti , A . , L . Neff , A . Sandoval , L . Du , W . C . Horne , and R . Baron . 2009 . Dynamin reduces Pyk2 Y402 phosphorylation and SRC bind - ing in osteoclasts . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 : 3644 – 3656 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00851 - 08 Cao , H . , J . D . Orth , J . Chen , S . G . Weller , J . E . Heuser , and M . A . McNiven . 2003 . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 : 2162 – 2170 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 23 . 6 . 2162 - 2170 . 2003 Chappie , J . S . , J . A . Mears , S . Fang , M . Leonard , S . L . Schmid , R . A . Milligan , J . E . Hinshaw , and F . Dyda . 2011 . A pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer identifies a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke . Cell . 147 : 209 – 222 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 09 . 003 Charrasse , S . , F . Comunale , M . Fortier , E . Portales - Casamar , A . Debant , and C . Gauthier - Rouvière . 2007 . M - cadherin activates Rac1 GTPase through the Rho - GEF trio during myoblast fusion . Mol . Biol . Cell . 18 : 1734 – 1743 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E06 - 08 - 0766 Chen , E . H . , E . Grote , W . Mohler , and A . Vignery . 2007 . Cell - cell fusion . FEBS Lett . 581 : 2181 – 2193 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2007 . 03 . 033 Chernomordik , L . V . , E . Leikina , M . M . Kozlov , V . A . Frolov , and J . Zimmerberg . 1999 . Structural intermediates in influenza haemagglutinin - medi - ated fusion . Mol . Membr . Biol . 16 : 33 – 42 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 096876899294733 Damke , H . , T . Baba , D . E . Warnock , and S . L . Schmid . 1994 . Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 915 – 934 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 127 . 4 . 915 Destaing , O . , S . M . Ferguson , A . Grichine , C . Oddou , P . De Camilli , C . Albiges - Rizo , and R . Baron . 2013 . Essential function of dynamin in the invasive properties and actin architecture of v - Src induced podosomes / invadosomes . PLoS ONE . 8 : e77956 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0077956 Dupressoir , A . , C . Lavialle , and T . Heidmann . 2012 . From ancestral infec - tious retroviruses to bona fide cellular genes : role of the captured syn - cytins in placentation . Placenta . 33 : 663 – 671 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . placenta . 2012 . 05 . 005 Faelber , K . , Y . Posor , S . Gao , M . Held , Y . Roske , D . Schulze , V . Haucke , F . Noé , and O . Daumke . 2011 . Crystal structure of nucleotide - free dynamin . Nature . 477 : 556 – 560 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature10369 Ferguson , S . M . , and P . De Camilli . 2012 . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 : 75 – 88 . Ferguson , K . M . , M . A . Lemmon , J . Schlessinger , and P . B . Sigler . 1994 . Crystal structure at 2 . 2 A resolution of the pleckstrin homology domain from human dynamin . Cell . 79 : 199 – 209 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 94 ) 90190 - 2 Ferguson , S . M . , A . Raimondi , S . Paradise , H . Shen , K . Mesaki , A . Ferguson , O . Destaing , G . Ko , J . Takasaki , O . Cremona , et al . 2009 . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell . 17 : 811 – 822 . ( published erratum appears in Dev . Cell . 2010 . 18 : 332 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 11 . 005 Ford , M . G . , S . Jenni , and J . Nunnari . 2011 . The crystal structure of dynamin . Nature . 477 : 561 – 566 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature10441 Frendo , J . L . , D . Olivier , V . Cheynet , J . L . Blond , O . Bouton , M . Vidaud , M . Rabreau , D . Evain - Brion , and F . Mallet . 2003 . Direct involve - ment of HERV - W Env glycoprotein in human trophoblast cell fusion and differentiation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 : 3566 – 3574 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 23 . 10 . 3566 - 3574 . 2003 Gonzalo , P . , M . C . Guadamillas , M . V . Hernández - Riquer , A . Pollán , A . Grande - García , R . A . Bartolomé , A . Vasanji , C . Ambrogio , R . Chiarle , J . Teixidó , et al . 2010 . MT1 - MMP is required for myeloid cell fusion via regulation of Rac1 signaling . Dev . Cell . 18 : 77 – 89 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 11 . 012 Grassart , A . , A . T . Cheng , S . H . Hong , F . Zhang , N . Zenzer , Y . Feng , D . M . Briner , G . D . Davis , D . Malkov , and D . G . Drubin . 2014 . Actin and dynamin2 dy - namics and interplay during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 205 : 721 – 735 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201403041 Gruenbaum - Cohen , Y . , I . Harel , K . B . Umansky , E . Tzahor , S . B . Snapper , B . Z . Shilo , and E . D . Schejter . 2012 . The actin regulator N - WASp is required for muscle - cell fusion in mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : 11211 – 11216 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1116065109 Haralalka , S . , C . Shelton , H . N . Cartwright , E . Katzfey , E . Janzen , and S . M . Abmayr . 2011 . Asymmetric Mbc , active Rac1 and F - actin foci in the fusion - competent myoblasts during myoblast fusion in Drosophila . Development . 138 : 1551 – 1562 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 057653 Hayashi , M . , A . Raimondi , E . O’Toole , S . Paradise , C . Collesi , O . Cremona , S . M . Ferguson , and P . De Camilli . 2008 . Cell - and stimulus - dependent heterogeneity of synaptic vesicle endocytic recycling mechanisms revealed 89 Dynamin and endocytosis are required for cell fusion • Shin et al . mediates fusion of the anchor cell in C . elegans . Dev . Cell . 12 : 683 – 698 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2007 . 03 . 003 Schafer , D . A . , S . A . Weed , D . Binns , A . V . Karginov , J . T . Parsons , and J . A . Cooper . 2002 . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and fila - ment organization . Curr . Biol . 12 : 1852 – 1857 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 02 ) 01228 - 9 Schlunck , G . , H . Damke , W . B . Kiosses , N . Rusk , M . H . Symons , C . M . Waterman - Storer , S . L . Schmid , and M . A . Schwartz . 2004 . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 256 – 267 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 01 - 0019 Sens , K . L . , S . Zhang , P . Jin , R . Duan , G . Zhang , F . Luo , L . Parachini , and E . H . Chen . 2010 . An invasive podosome - like structure promotes fusion pore formation during myoblast fusion . J . Cell Biol . 191 : 1013 – 1027 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201006006 Shilagardi , K . , S . Li , F . Luo , F . Marikar , R . Duan , P . Jin , J . H . Kim , K . Murnen , and E . H . Chen . 2013 . Actin - propelled invasive membrane protrusions promote fusogenic protein engagement during cell - cell fusion . Science . 340 : 359 – 363 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1234781 Slepnev , V . I . , G . C . Ochoa , M . H . Butler , D . Grabs , and P . De Camilli . 1998 . Role of phosphorylation in regulation of the assembly of endocytic coat complexes . Science . 281 : 821 – 824 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 281 . 5378 . 821 Slepnev , V . I . , G . C . Ochoa , M . H . Butler , and P . De Camilli . 2000 . Tandem arrange - ment of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in amphiphysin 1 and dis - ruption of clathrin coat function by amphiphysin fragments comprising these sites . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 17583 – 17589 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M910430199 Spacek , J . , and K . M . Harris . 2004 . Trans - endocytosis via spinules in adult rat hippocampus . J . Neurosci . 24 : 4233 – 4241 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0287 - 04 . 2004 Takayanagi , H . , S . Kim , T . Koga , H . Nishina , M . Isshiki , H . Yoshida , A . Saiura , M . Isobe , T . Yokochi , J . Inoue , et al . 2002 . Induction and activation of the transcription factor NFATc1 ( NFAT2 ) integrate RANKL signaling in terminal differentiation of osteoclasts . Dev . Cell . 3 : 889 – 901 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 02 ) 00369 - 6 Takei , K . , P . S . McPherson , S . L . Schmid , and P . De Camilli . 1995 . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP -  S in nerve terminals . Nature . 374 : 186 – 190 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 374186a0 Taylor , M . J . , M . Lampe , and C . J . Merrifield . 2012 . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 10 : e1001302 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001302 Vallis , Y . , P . Wigge , B . Marks , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMahon . 1999 . Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 : 257 – 263 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 99 ) 80114 - 6 Vasyutina , E . , B . Martarelli , C . Brakebusch , H . Wende , and C . Birchmeier . 2009 . The small G - proteins Rac1 and Cdc42 are essential for myoblast fusion in the mouse . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 8935 – 8940 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0902501106 Vignery , A . 2005 . Macrophage fusion : the making of osteoclasts and giant cells . J . Exp . Med . 202 : 337 – 340 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20051123 Westermann , B . 2011 . Organelle dynamics : ER embraces mitochondria for fission . Curr . Biol . 21 : R922 – R924 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 10 . 010 Witke , W . , A . V . Podtelejnikov , A . Di Nardo , J . D . Sutherland , C . B . Gurniak , C . Dotti , and M . Mann . 1998 . In mouse brain profilin I and profilin II associ - ate with regulators of the endocytic pathway and actin assembly . EMBO J . 17 : 967 – 976 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / 17 . 4 . 967 Yagi , M . , T . Miyamoto , Y . Sawatani , K . Iwamoto , N . Hosogane , N . Fujita , K . Morita , K . Ninomiya , T . Suzuki , K . Miyamoto , et al . 2005 . DC - STAMP is essential for cell - cell fusion in osteoclasts and foreign body giant cells . J . Exp . Med . 202 : 345 – 351 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20050645 Yang , M . , M . J . Birnbaum , C . A . MacKay , A . Mason - Savas , B . Thompson , and P . R . Odgren . 2008 . Osteoclast stimulatory transmembrane protein ( OC - STAMP ) , a novel protein induced by RANKL that promotes osteoclast differentia - tion . J . Cell . Physiol . 215 : 497 – 505 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcp . 21331 Zheng , J . , S . M . Cahill , M . A . Lemmon , D . Fushman , J . Schlessinger , and D . Cowburn . 1996 . Identification of the binding site for acidic phos - pholipids on the pH domain of dynamin : implications for stimula - tion of GTPase activity . J . Mol . Biol . 255 : 14 – 21 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 1996 . 0002 Zhao , Q . , X . Wang , Y . Liu , A . He , and R . Jia . 2010 . NFATc1 : functions in osteoclasts . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 42 : 576 – 579 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2009 . 12 . 018 protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 187 – 198 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 151 . 1 . 187 Mensah , K . A . , C . T . Ritchlin , and E . M . Schwarz . 2010 . RANKL induces het - erogeneous DC - STAMP ( lo ) and DC - STAMP ( hi ) osteoclast precursors of which the DC - STAMP ( lo ) precursors are the master fusogens . J . Cell . Physiol . 223 : 76 – 83 . Mi , S . , X . Lee , X . Li , G . M . Veldman , H . Finnerty , L . Racie , E . LaVallie , X . Y . Tang , P . Edouard , S . Howes , et al . 2000 . Syncytin is a captive retroviral envelope protein involved in human placental morphogenesis . Nature . 403 : 785 – 789 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35001608 Mohler , W . A . , G . Shemer , J . J . del Campo , C . Valansi , E . Opoku - Serebuoh , V . Scranton , N . Assaf , J . G . White , and B . Podbilewicz . 2002 . The type I membrane protein EFF - 1 is essential for developmental cell fusion . Dev . Cell . 2 : 355 – 362 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 02 ) 00129 - 6 Mooren , O . L . , T . I . Kotova , A . J . Moore , and D . A . Schafer . 2009 . Dynamin2 GTPase and cortactin remodel actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 23995 – 24005 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 024398 Murphy , D . A . , and S . A . Courtneidge . 2011 . The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of podosomes and invadopodia : characteristics , formation and function . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 413 – 426 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3141 Nakamura , T . , Y . Imai , T . Matsumoto , S . Sato , K . Takeuchi , K . Igarashi , Y . Harada , Y . Azuma , A . Krust , Y . Yamamoto , et al . 2007 . Estrogen prevents bone loss via estrogen receptor alpha and induction of Fas ligand in osteo - clasts . Cell . 130 : 811 – 823 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 07 . 025 Ochoa , G . C . , V . I . Slepnev , L . Neff , N . Ringstad , K . Takei , L . Daniell , W . Kim , H . Cao , M . McNiven , R . Baron , and P . De Camilli . 2000 . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 377 – 389 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 150 . 2 . 377 Oikawa , T . , M . Oyama , H . Kozuka - Hata , S . Uehara , N . Udagawa , H . Saya , and K . Matsuo . 2012 . Tks5 - dependent formation of circumferential podo - somes / invadopodia mediates cell - cell fusion . J . Cell Biol . 197 : 553 – 568 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201111116 Oren - Suissa , M . , and B . Podbilewicz . 2007 . Cell fusion during development . Trends Cell Biol . 17 : 537 – 546 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2007 . 09 . 004 Orso , G . , D . Pendin , S . Liu , J . Tosetto , T . J . Moss , J . E . Faust , M . Micaroni , A . Egorova , A . Martinuzzi , J . A . McNew , and A . Daga . 2009 . Homotypic fusion of ER membranes requires the dynamin - like GTPase atlastin . Nature . 460 : 978 – 983 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature08280 Oursler , M . J . 2010 . Recent advances in understanding the mechanisms of os - teoclast precursor fusion . J . Cell . Biochem . 110 : 1058 – 1062 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcb . 22640 Pajcini , K . V . , J . H . Pomerantz , O . Alkan , R . Doyonnas , and H . M . Blau . 2008 . Myoblasts and macrophages share molecular components that contrib - ute to cell - cell fusion . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 1005 – 1019 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200707191 Park , R . J . , H . Shen , L . Liu , X . Liu , S . M . Ferguson , and P . De Camilli . 2013 . Dynamin triple knockout cells reveal off target effects of commonly used dynamin inhibitors . J . Cell Sci . 126 : 5305 – 5312 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 138578 Parfitt , A . M . , M . K . Drezner , F . H . Glorieux , J . A . Kanis , H . Malluche , P . J . Meunier , S . M . Ott , and R . R . Recker . 1987 . Bone histomorphometry : standardization of nomenclature , symbols , and units . Report of the ASBMR Histomorphometry Nomenclature Committee . J . Bone Miner . Res . 2 : 595 – 610 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbmr . 5650020617 Pérez - Vargas , J . , T . Krey , C . Valansi , O . Avinoam , A . Haouz , M . Jamin , H . Raveh - Barak , B . Podbilewicz , and F . A . Rey . 2014 . Structural basis of eukaryotic cell - cell fusion . Cell . 157 : 407 – 419 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 02 . 020 Pirraglia , C . , R . Jattani , and M . M . Myat . 2006 . Rac function in epithelial tube morphogenesis . Dev . Biol . 290 : 435 – 446 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2005 . 12 . 005 Podbilewicz , B . , E . Leikina , A . Sapir , C . Valansi , M . Suissa , G . Shemer , and L . V . Chernomordik . 2006 . The C . elegans developmental fusogen EFF - 1 mediates homotypic fusion in heterologous cells and in vivo . Dev . Cell . 11 : 471 – 481 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 09 . 004 Rando , T . A . , and H . M . Blau . 1994 . Primary mouse myoblast purification , char - acterization , and transplantation for cell - mediated gene therapy . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 1275 – 1287 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 125 . 6 . 1275 Richard , J . P . , E . Leikina , R . Langen , W . M . Henne , M . Popova , T . Balla , H . T . McMahon , M . M . Kozlov , and L . V . Chernomordik . 2011 . Intracellular curvature - generating proteins in cell - to - cell fusion . Biochem . J . 440 : 185 – 193 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1042 / BJ20111243 Saginario , C . , H . Sterling , C . Beckers , R . Kobayashi , M . Solimena , E . Ullu , and A . Vignery . 1998 . MFR , a putative receptor mediating the fusion of macrophages . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 : 6213 – 6223 . Sapir , A . , J . Choi , E . Leikina , O . Avinoam , C . Valansi , L . V . Chernomordik , A . P . Newman , and B . Podbilewicz . 2007 . AFF - 1 , a FOS - 1 - regulated fusogen ,