Dynamical patterning modules : a " pattern language " for development and evolution of multicellular form STUART A . NEWMAN * and RAMRAY BHAT Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , Basic Science Building , New York Medical College , New York , USA ABSTRACT This article considers the role played by a core set of " dynamical patterning modules " ( DPMs ) in the origination , development and evolution of complex organisms . These consist of the products of a subset of the genes of what has come to be known as the " developmental - genetic toolkit " in association with physical processes they mobilize . The physical processes are those characteristic of chemically and mechanically excitable mesoscopic systems like cell aggregates : cohesion , viscoelasticity , diffusion , spatiotemporal heterogeneity based on activator - inhibitor interaction , and multistable and oscillatory dynamics . We focus on the emergence of the Metazoa , and show how toolkit gene products and pathways that pre - existed the metazoans acquired novel morphogenetic functions simply by virtue of the change in scale and context inherent to multicellularity . We propose that DPMs , acting singly and in combination with each other , constitute a " pattern language " capable of generating all metazoan body plans and organ forms . This concept implies that the multicellular organisms of the late Precambrian - early Cambrian were phenotypically plastic , fluently exploring morphospace in a fashion decoupled from both function - based selection and genotypic change . The relatively stable developmental trajectories and morphological phenotypes of modern organisms , then , are considered to be products of stabilizing selection . This perspective solves the apparent " molecular homology - analogy para - dox , " whereby widely divergent modern animal types utilize the same molecular toolkit during development , but it does so by inverting the neo - Darwinian principle that phenotypic disparity was generated over long periods of time in concert with , and in proportion to genotypic change . KEY WORDS : body plan , Cambrian explosion , developmental - genetic toolkit , epithelial - mesenchymal transformation , lateral inhibition , macroevolution , morphogenesis , morphospace Introduction Animal body plans of virtually all the modern Metazoan types emerged relatively suddenly ( “compressed in time” ; Rokas et al . , 2005 ) during the “Cambrian explosion” about 550 - 530 million years ago ( Ma ) ( Conway Morris , 2006 ) . The metazoans , in turn , may have had roots ( Erwin , 2008 ) in the Ediacaran period , 575 - 542 Ma ( Shen et al . , 2008 ) , derived , in part , from simpler sheet - like , or budded , segmented , tube - like multicellular biota found in deposits of the earlier period ( Narbonne , 2004 ; Droser and Gehling , 2008 ) . The early metazoans , variously , had body cavi - ties , multiple tissue layers and appendages , and were elongated and segmented . Significantly , not only was this emergence of disparate forms rapid , it was all but exhaustive . With the possible exception of the bryozoa , which are not seen until the early Int . J . Dev . Biol . 53 : 693 - 705 ( 2009 ) doi : 10 . 1387 / ijdb . 072481sn THE INTERNATIONALJOURNALOF DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY www . intjdevbiol . com * Address correspondence to : Dr . Stuart A . Newman . Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , Basic Science Building , New York Medical College , Valhalla , New York 10595 , USA . e - mail : newman @ nymc . edu Published online : 25 March 2009 . ISSN : Online 1696 - 3547 , Print 0214 - 6282 © 2009 UBC Press Printed in Spain Ordovician some 40 million years later ( though see Passamaneck and Halanych , 2004 ) , exemplars of all the major metazoan bauplans appeared no later than the early Cambrian . Rapid morphological evolution is compatible with classic neo - Darwinian evolutionary mechanisms of random genetic change followed by natural selection , whereby existing structures are modified in their size or shape ( Weiner , 1994 ; Losos et al . , 2006 ) . Nonetheless , the discovery of the phylum - level diversification Abbreviations used in this paper : A / B , apical - basal ; BMP , bone morphogenetic protein ; DPM , dynamical patterning module ; DTF , developmental transcription factor ; ECM extracellular matrix ; ETM , epithelial - mesenchymal transformation ; FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; Hh , hedgehog morphogen ; LALI , local autoactivation - lateral inhibition ; PCP , planar cell polarity , TGF - β , transforming growth factor - β . 694 S . A . Newman and R . Bhat ( with no evident intermediates ) that occurred in the early Cam - brian is not anticipated by this theory ( Müller and Newman , 2005 ) . Even more surprising from the viewpoint of the standard evolu - tionary model has been the realization that the Metazoa have used a highly conserved set of gene products , the so - called developmental - genetic toolkit , to generate diverse body and organ forms since their inception more than half a billion years ago ( Carroll et al . , 2005 ) . If morphological change is supposed to be driven by , and to track , genetic change , why were there not dramatic changes in gene content corresponding to innovation of new organismal architectures ( e . g . , the dorsal location of nerve cord and heart in chordates vs . the ventral location of these structure in annelids and arthropods ; Gerhart , 2000 ) , or of new developmental mechanisms for generating morphologically equivalent structures ( e . g . , segmentation in beetles and fruit flies ; Salazar - Ciudad , 2001b ) ? The unexpected gives way to the paradoxical in the recognition that disparate organisms use homologous genes when making structurally dissimilar but functionally similar structures tradition - ally categorized as analogous ( e . g . , eyes in insects , mollusks and vertebrates ; fly and bird wings ) ( Carroll et al . , 2001 ; Wilkins , 2002 ) . Given that there is nothing eye - like about the twin of eyeless / Pax6 transcription factor ( Gehring , 2002 ) , or heart - like about tinman / Nkx - 2 . 5 ( Schwartz and Olson , 1999 ) , and consider - ing the immense evolutionary and anatomical divergence be - tween Drosophila and the mouse , why are the same gene regu - latory proteins used , correspondingly , to initiate the developmen - tal pathways that produce structures that have the same function , but which are evolutionarily unrelated ( or have been thought so in the past ) ? The conflict between the expectations of the neo - Darwinian model and these recent findings from the fields of paleontology , comparative anatomy and genomics , and develop - mental biology has been termed the “molecular homology - anal - ogy” paradox ( Newman , 2006 ) . In this paper we suggest a way out of these apparent inconsis - tencies by arguing that pre - metazoans were highly plastic entities and that early morphological diversification was an expression of the primitively loose relationship between phenotype and geno - type ( Newman , 2005 ) . Our hypothesis entails organizing the toolkit genes of the presumed pre - metazoan genome into two broad categories . The first of these , which we term the “develop - mental transcription factors” ( DTFs ) , are those gene regulatory molecules which mediate cell type - and region - specific functions : eyeless / Pax6 , tinman / Nkx - 2 . 5 , Hes , Tbox , Hox , Dlx , Pbx and several others ( reviewed in Davidson , 2006 and Newman et al . , in press ) . Our second category of toolkit genes specify products such as cadherins , Notch , Wnt and their ligands , TGF - β / BMP , FGF , Hedgehog , and their receptors , which by mobilizing certain physical processes and effects generic to “soft matter” ( de Gennes , 1992 ) and “excitable media” ( Mikhailov , 1990 ) constitute what we refer to as “dynamical patterning modules” ( DPMs ) for animal development . The relevant physical processes include adhesion and differential adhesion , induced lateral inhibition of an activated state , dynamical oscillation , cell surface and shape polarization , supracellular gradient formation ( reviewed in Forgacs and Newman , 2005 ; Newman and Bhat , 2008 ) . These physical pro - cesses impart a discernable and at least semi - autonomous role to the functions of the gene products ; hence the use of the term " module " ( see , for example , von Dassow et al . , 2000 ; Wimsatt and Schank , 2004 ) . Our rationale for this binary categorization is the following : the several billion years of unicellular evolution that preceded the origin of multicellularity saw the emergence of numerous signal - ing pathways and transcription factors ( King et al . , 2003 ) . With great certainty , cells had acquired the capability to modulate and switch between states in various ways , including by means of multistable transcriptional networks . None of these features , however , are distinguishing for complex multicellular forms like the metazoa . The novelty introduced by multicellularity was the potential for more than one cell type and more than one tissue layer or module to co - exist in the same organism , and for the patterning processes of particular arrangements of such cell types and tissues to be propagated from one generation to the next . Transcription factors , though they are important in determin - ing the states that cells assume , do not , in general , act across cell boundaries ( though there may be exceptions ; Joliot and Prochiantz , 2004 ) . When the effects of cell state dynamics , determined transcrip - tionally or otherwise , are communicated between cells and mani - fested in changes of shape or pattern in the multicellular aggre - gate , processes and forces characteristic of condensed , chemi - cally and mechanically excitable materials are invariably involved ( Newman and Comper , 1990 ; Forgacs and Newman , 2005 ) . We therefore place toolkit gene products that ( along with their down - stream signaling effectors ) mediate cell interaction and thereby mobilize these generic physical processes ( see below ) as DPMs , in a separate category from the DTFs , which mediate the tran - scriptional and gene regulatory aspects of the multicellular pro - cesses . The DPMs involve members of the adhesion and receptor - mediated signaling classes of toolkit genes asserted by Nichols et al . ( 2006 ) to be key elements in the evolution of the metazoans . However , we do not consider signaling and response to the external environment per se , which had many roles in pre - metazoan ancestors , to be decisive in the metazoan - specific burst of morphological diversity . As mentioned above , integral to our definition of DPMs is their role in bringing physical forces and effects , and chemical nonuniformities , to bear on cells within multicellular aggregates and influencing the state of those cells . Concerning the DTFs , as noted by Gehring , “ . . there is no functional necessity to use a particular transcription factor like Pax6 for particular function e . g . , eye morphogenesis , since a transcription factor can regulate any gene , if this gene is endowed with the appropriate regulatory elements in its enhancer or pro - moter” ( Gehring , 2002 ) . We therefore suggest that the conserved relationships between particular DTFs and particular region - or organ - specific developmental pathways represent “frozen acci - dents” of the rapid morphological diversification we postulate . The specific roles of the DPMs , in contrast , are tied to the morphoge - netic and patterning effects they mediate , making them ( as we will show below ) , more decisive for the origination of the Metazoa than the DTFs and the cis - regulatory networks by which they indirectly regulate one another . Specifically , networks and path - ways embodying DPMs , whether or not they incorporate tran - scriptional regulation , constitute the driving principles of the evolution of development . This collection of molecular - physical modules in effect constitutes a “pattern language” 1 ( Alexander et al . , 1977 ) for multicellular form . Pattern of multicellular form 695 In this article we have focused on the molecular - genetic and evolutionary aspects of the major DPMs , and their distinction from the developmental transcription factor - cis - regulatory modules that serve as determinants of cell type . Additional details of the physical aspects of these modules are described in Newman and Bhat ( 2008 ) . Dynamical patterning modules , developmental tran - scription factors and “kernels” Our model for the origination of animal form departs from purely selectionist accounts , since it is based on the idea that a single genotype can be consistent with a variety of multicellular morphologies . While this phenomenon is rare in modern animals ( but see West - Eberhard , 2003 and Borges , 2005 ) , it is well known and extensive in protists ( Bonner , 1967 ) , fungi ( Magee , 1997 ) , bacteria ( Shapiro , 1995 ) and higher plants ( Grime et al . , 1986 ) . Our view is consistent with the interpretation that the Burgess Shale - type fauna of the early Cambrian are “crown group” exem - plars of modern phyla ( Gould , 1989 ) , but also with the more recent suggestion that they are “stem groups” for the phyla , defined , in Conway Morris’s words , as “the series of extinct organisms that possess some , but not ( crucial to note ) all , of the defining characters that delineate a phylum” ( Conway Morris , 2000 ) . If the latter is the case ( see also , Budd and Jensen , 2000 ) , then long periods of natural selection of neo - Darwinian gradualist sort could well have followed before the definitive phyla were in place . Davidson and his coworkers , in contrast , have proposed that the evolution of body plans leading up to the profusion of forms that appeared in the Burgess Shale - type deposits required no novel processes . They postulate that incremental natural selec - tion was at work for tens of millions of years before the Cambrian explosion , but that the pathways and intermediate forms of that evolutionary episode were lost to the fossil record due to their small size and fragility ( Davidson , 2006 ) . By the early Cambrian , in this view , a set of cell type - determining transcription factor networks ( “kernels” ) had long been in place , and as a result of selective forces they had also become incorporated into numer - ous regulatory hierarchies that deployed them regionally during embryogenesis in reliable phylum - specific modes . The seeming burst of morphotypes during the early Cambrian , according to Davidson and his colleagues , arose not from any unique morpho - genetic events that happened during that period , but rather from the appearance of additional cell populations in the already morphologically advanced organisms that permitted previously evolved patterning mechanisms to operate on a larger scale . Davidson and colleagues suggest that morphogenesis and spatial patterning of cells is based on earlier - evolved cell type - specific kernels ( Erwin and Davidson , 2002 ) . An example of such a kernel is the gene network that controls heart formation , which involves regulation of cardiac muscle differentiation by the homeobox - containing transcription factor tinman in Drosophila , and the homologous protein Nkx - 2 . 5 in mammals ( discussed in Davidson , 2006 ) . But while this particular kernel indeed controls cell differentiation , other transcription factors that were similarly recruited early - on into function - specific developmental modules are not associated with specific cell types . The products of the hairy / enhancer of split ( Hes ) family , which are involved in seg - mentation in arthropods , annelids and vertebrates ( Damen et al . , 2005 ; Song et al . , 2004 ; Giudicelli and Lewis , 2007 ) , and the Pbx1 ( Gonzalez - Crespo and Morata , 1996 ; Selleri et al . , 2001 ) and Dlx families ( Panganiban and Rubenstein , 2002 ; Robledo et al . , 2002 ) , which are implicated in marking proximal and distal por - tions , respectively , of insect and vertebrate appendages , function differently . They participate in establishing spatial relationships among tissue domains , as do the products of the well - known Hox class of transcription factors ( Wilkins , 2002 ) . Although products of the DTF class of toolkit genes became linked to DPMs over the course of evolution to form widely used patterning motifs , we do not consider the cell - type differentiation function of transcription factor networks sufficient to explain morphogenesis and pattern formation . Rather , DPMs , by mediat - ing adhesion and tissue multilayering , the generation of spatially nonuniform and temporally periodic cell states , and cell polarity ( with resulting tissue topological and shape transformations ) , were required in order to turn pre - metazoan multicellular aggre - gates into metazoan body plans ( Newman , 1994 ; Newman and Müller , 2000 ; Newman et al . 2006 ) . These physical - genetic pat - terning modules , acting relatively independently and combinato - rially during the early stages of metazoan evolution , provide a plausible basis for the rapid generation of morphological diversity evidenced in the fossil record of the early Cambrian . Components and properties of core dynamical pattern - ing modules In this section we show how a core group of DPMs serve as elements of a pattern language for modern multicellular organ - isms . The DPMs , though emerging simultaneously with multicel - lularity , are nonetheless based on molecules that were present before the split between the architecturally simple poriferans ( sponges ) ( Nielsen , 2008 ) and placozoans ( Miller and Ball , 2005 ) , and the eumetazoans , the evolutionary line that underwent the explosive proliferation of morphologies during the early Cambrian ( Nichols et al . , 2006 ) . Many of the toolkit genes , therefore , arose first in unicellular organisms , taking on their DPM - associated roles by mobilizing physical processes that only come into play at the “mesoscale” 2 in which multicellular aggregates exist . In the following subsections we describe several of the most important DPMs , focusing on their major molecular components . We describe each DPM’s characteristic initial effects on cells and its distinctiveness in this regard from other DPMs . We also provide examples of how DPMs may combine spatiotemporally to mobilize mesoscale physical phenomena ( e . g . , biochemical os - cillation , reaction - diffusion patterning instabilities ) that are novel in a biological context . Each DPM is given a three - letter designa - 1 This term was introduced by the architectural theorist Christopher Alexander to describe what he considers to be the elements of successful design in both the natural and artificial realms ( Alexander et al . , 1977 ; Alexander , 2002 ) . Except for adopting the term , however , we do not , in this paper , explore the significant relationships between Alexander’s “fundamental properties” and the DPMs . 2 A term referring to the “intermediate scale . ” Although it has different referents in different scientific fields , here we use it to refer to condensed materials on a scale ~ 10 - 4 – 10 - 3 m ; i . e . , larger than a typical cell but smaller or equal to a functional unit of a developed organ . 696 S . A . Newman and R . Bhat tion that is also used in Fig . 1 and Table 1 . With regard to downstream signaling effects of the DPMs , we will focus on only the most proximal components of such pathways . In particular , in order to highlight the causal differences between DPMs and their associated transcription factors , the DTFs , we will defer discus - sion of the latter until a subsequent section . Cell - cell adhesion and differential adhesion ( cadherins , lectins ) Cell adhesion is the defining condition of multicellularity . Free - living cells prior to the origin of metazoa contained proteins on their surfaces that had evolved to serve purposes other than adhesion , such as defense against pathogens and recognition and capture of prey ( King et al . , 2003 ) . Some of these either evolved further or , possibly due to changed external conditions , were recruited to mediate colonial existence ( King et al . , 2003 ) and later , true multicellularity ( Nichols et al . , 2006 ) . Because protein - protein association is a property that can be modulated by microenvironmental factors , formerly non - adhesive cells could have acquired a tendency to aggregate , as a result of the effects of changes in the ionic content of the aqueous medium on previously evolved cell - surface molecules ( Kazmierczak and Kempe , 2004 ) . Homologs of cadherins , a ubiquitous class of metazoan cell adhesion proteins that depend on Ca 2 + for their homophilic bind - ing function , are present in choanoflagellates ( King et al . , 2003 , 2008 ; Abedin and King , 2008 ) , a group of organisms that are genetically related to the metazoa ( Wainright et al . , 1993 ; King and Carroll , 2001 ; Snell et al . , 2001 ; Lang et al . , 2002 ) and are their closest living nonmetazoan relatives ( Phillipe et al . , 2004 ) . Choanoflagellates are unicellular , or form small colonies , de - pending on laboratory culture conditions . According to our sce - nario , then , cadherins , cell surface molecules previously evolved to serve other functions , would have taken on the new role of mediating cell - cell adhesion when single cells bearing them encountered permissive environments , thus becoming what were perhaps the first DPMs ( ADH ; see Fig . 1 , top , downward arrow and Table 1 ) . ( This is an example of an “exaptation” in the DPM Characteristic molecules Physical principle Evo - Devo Role ADH cadherins adhesion multicellularity DAD cadherins differential adhesion multilayering LAT Notch lateral inhibition multiple cell types POL Wnt anisotropy lumen formation ; elongation OSC Wnt + Notch + Hes synchronous biochemical oscillation field formation ; segmentation MOR TGF - β / BMP ; Hh diffusion pattern formation ASM FGFs asymmetric interaction induction ; epithelial - mesenchymal interaction TUR MOR + Wnt + Notch chemical waves periodic patterning ECM collagen ; chitin ; fibronectin stiffness ; dispersal + cohesion epithelial elasticity ; skeletogenesis ; epithelial - mesenchymal transformation MIT MAPK mass increase ( differential ) growth APO Bcl - 2 mass decrease ( differential ) cell loss TABLE 1 PROPERTIES OF DYNAMICAL PATTERNING MODULES ( DPMS ) DISCUSSED IN THIS ARTICLE Fig . 1 . Schematic representation of metazoan forms potentially generated by single and combinatorial action of dynamical patterning modules ( DPMs ) . Cells are represented individually in the upper tiers of the diagram , while the middle and lower tiers are shown at the scale of tissues . Beginning at the top , single cells form cell aggregates by the action of the ADH ( adhesion , e . g . cadherins , lectins ) module . The POL ( polarity : Wnt path - way ) module has two versions , apical - basal ( POL a ) and planar ( POL p ) polarity . POL a causes cells to have different surface properties at their opposite ends , leading to struc - turally polarized epithelial sheets and lumens within cell aggregates . POL p , in contrast , causes cells to elongate and intercalate in the plane , which leads to convergent extension and elongation of the cell mass . The LAT ( lateral inhibition : Notch pathway ) module transforms an aggre - gate of homotypic cells into one in which two or more cell types coexist in the same aggregate , while the expression of ADH molecules at different quantitative levels lead to sorting out by the action of the differential adhesion ( DAD ) module . Production of diffusible molecules by cells ca - pable of responding to these same molecules leads to morphogen ( MOR , e . g . , TGF - β / BMP , hedgehog ) gradi - ents , whereas morphogens can also act inductively and asymmetrically ( ASM , e . g . , FGFs ) by being produced by one type of tissue and affecting a different type . Synchro - nous biochemical oscillation ( OSC ) of key components of the Notch and Wnt pathways , for example , in conjunction with the DAD module , can generate segments , the best - studied example of this mechanism involving the ASM module as well . Appropriate feedback relationships among activating and inhibitory morphogens can lead to patterns with repetitive elements by Turing - type reaction - diffusion processes ( TUR ) . The action of the MAPK signaling pathway in the context of multicellular aggregates containing morphogen gradients leads to nonuniform growth by the mitogenesis ( MIT ) module , whereas the apoptosis ( APO ) module leads to differential cell loss . The secretion of extracellular matrix ( ECM , e . g . , collagen , fibronectin ) between cells or into tissue spaces , creates new microenvironments for cell translocation or novel mechanical properties in cell sheets or masses . Pattern of multicellular form 697 terminology of Gould and Vrba , 1982 . ) The glycan - binding C - type lectins , which are employed as Ca 2 + - dependent cell attachment proteins in multicellular organisms ( Kaltner and Gabius 2001 ) , are also produced by choanoflagellates ( King et al . , , 2008 ) and could thus have provided a basis for additional ADH - class DPMs in metazoan ancestors . If subsets of cells within an aggregate contain sufficiently different amounts of cadherin on their surfaces , the subpopula - tions will sort out into islands of more cohesive cells within lakes composed of their less cohesive neighbors ( Steinberg and Takeichi , 1994 ) . Eventually , by random cell movement , the is - lands coalesce and an interface is established across which cells will not intermix ( Steinberg , 1998 ) . The physical basis of this sorting - out of cell populations is similar to phase separation of two immiscible liquids , like oil and water ( Forgacs and Newman , 2005 ) . Because a more cohesive tissue ( one with stronger bonds between its cells ) will always be partly or fully engulfed by a less cohesive one , differential adhesion - driven multilayering acts in a goal - directed fashion ( Steinberg , 1998 ) . The “goal” is the thermo - dynamic one of minimization of free energy ( Steinberg , 1978 ; Forgacs and Newman , 2005 ) . Ancient cadherins , then , acting in an environment that permitted them to mobilize the physical force of adhesion , became not only the mediators of colony formation , but of the automatic development of embryo - like structures con - sisting of distinct cell layers or “compartments , ” in which no interchange or mixing of cells occurs across the common bound - ary ( Crick and Lawrence , 1975 ; Garcia - Bellido , 1975 ) . This major transition in the history of life can thus have occurred with little genetic change relative to the condition of choanoflagellate - like ancestors . As components of the DPM designated ADH , cadherins medi - ate the formation of “solid” 3 cell clusters , with spherical geometry ( due to minimization of surface tension in a mass of isotropic , mobile cells ; Forgacs and Newman , 2005 ) . By bringing differen - tial adhesion into play ( DAD , see Fig . 1 , center , leftward arrow and Table 1 ) , the DPM in which subpopulations of cells express different levels of a cadherin or lectin can cause the clusters to become multilayered . But in contrast to modern organisms , in which differential adhesion is under precise spatiotemporal regu - lation ( e . g . , Godt and Tepass , 1998 ; Gonzales - Reyes and St Johnson , 1998 ; Damon et al . , 2008 ) , the ratio of high - expressing to low - expressing cells would most likely have been unregulated in the earliest such forms , so the resulting organisms would have had many different , poorly defined , morphologies . The following subsection describes how molecules carried over from the unicel - lular ancestors of the metazoa were mobilized in new mecha - nisms to restrict this morphological profligacy . The most straight - forward way this could happen is by a process or pathway that influenced the relative numbers of cells that assume different biosynthetic states . Cell fate choice and lateral inhibition ( the Notch pathway ) The Notch - Delta pathway is an ancient signaling system that depends on the interaction of the single - pass integral membrane protein Notch , which is a receptor for signals that originate outside the cell , and one of a class of other single - pass membrane proteins that act as modulators of Notch activity : Delta , Serrate and Lag2 ( the DSL proteins ) ( Ehebauer et al . , 2006 ) . When Notch is activated , an intracellular portion of it is cleaved off and functions in the nucleus to turn a class of transcriptional repressor proteins into transcriptional activators . Notch’s effects are there - fore entirely dependent on which of the dual - action factors are present in a given cell type . The pathway’s role is therefore not to determine the specific fate of a cell , but rather to cause the cell to choose one of two of its potential fates , whatever those may be . The Notch pathway ( present in sponges ; Nichols et al . , 2006 , placozoans , Srivastava et al . , 2008 and all eumetazoans , but not in choanoflagellates ; King et al . , 2008 ) , has been extensively characterized during multicellular development , where it oper - ates in a juxtacrine fashion . That is , the Notch receptor on one cell interacts with a DSL - class protein on an adjacent cell , and the two cells , though initially equivalent , come to assume different fates . Although the original cells in such a population will express both Notch and DSL proteins , the population is initially in a metastable state . The receptor - ligand interaction serves to kick it into a stable state where one or a small contiguous group of cells increase their DSL levels and the cells surrounding them are Notch - activated and are thereby prevented from assuming the same fate as the central group . For this reason , the Notch pathway is usually referred to as mediating lateral inhibition ( Simpson , 1997 ) . Recent work , however , suggests that Notch can interact with DSL proteins in a cell - autonomous fashion ; that is , the receptor and “ligand” are on the same cell , rather than on adjacent ones ( Sakamoto et al . , 2002 ) . This may , indeed be the ancestral state of the Notch pathway , with a cell switching between one state and another ( consider , for example , sporulation ) due to environmen - tally induced association between its Notch and DSL proteins . Indeed , the transcriptional mediators of Notch - dependent cell state switching ( but not Notch itself ) are present in fungi ( Prevorovsky et al . , 2007 ) . Protein modules found in Notch receptors are present in a choanoflagellate , though they are not all encoded in the same genes ( King et al . , 2008 ) . With the ADH - dependent transition to multicellularity there would have been selective pressure to take the few steps necessary to turn a cell autonomous mechanism into a juxtacrine one , and thereby con - vert cell - state switching into lateral inhibition . The advent of the Notch - related DPM ( LAT ; see Fig . 1 , upper - center , downward arrow and Table 1 ) ( via a change of context and scale , but , in principle , with a minimum of genetic evolution ) allowed the relative numbers of cells of different states in an aggregate to be fairly well controlled . Such patterns will be fine - grained , since the spatial scale of juxtacrine signaling is small . If , however , the alternative cell states in question are associated with different levels of cadherin , the subpopulations will sort - out ( see previous subsection ) and a multilayered aggregate will automatically form . Apical - basal and planar cell polarity ( the Wnt pathway ) As described above , the default morphology of a cell aggre - 3 We use the term “solid” here in the topological sense : lacking internal cavities . We also characterize cell aggregates and parcels of tissue as “liquid - like” throughout this paper , but there we refer to the physical state of a material whose subunits ( cells in this case ) are independently mobile ( Forgacs et al . , 1998 ) . 698 S . A . Newman and R . Bhat gate held together by cadherins ( or any other uniformly distributed cell - cell adhesive protein ) is solid ( i . e . , without a lumen ) and spherical . Wnt , a family of secreted factors that interact with receptors of the Frizzled family , acting through distinct but related pathways , induces cells to become polarized along their apical - basal ( A / B ) axis ( Karner et al . , 2006b ) , or oriented in a plane perpendicular to this axis ( planar cell polarity ; Mlodzik , 2002 ; Karner et al . , 2006a ) . Although these are individual cell behaviors , in a multicellular context they permit cell aggregates to overcome the morphological defaults of solidity and sphericality ( see below ) . Although Wnt genes and their cognate secreted proteins are not present in choanoflagellates ( King et al . , 2008 ) , they and their Frizzled receptors are found in sponges ( Nichols et al . , 2006 ) and placozoans ( Srivastava et al . , 2008 ) . The Wnt pathway has even deeper roots in cellular evolution , however . In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe the protein Pmo25p is essential for polar growth ; in its absence the actin cytoskeleton becomes depolarized and cells adopt a round morphology ( Mendoza et al . , 2005 ) . Pmo25p is a homolog of the metazoan MO25 family of proteins , which in nematode , insect and vertebrate cells act as cofactors of the serine - threonine kinase Lkb - 1 . The latter , by regulating the activity of the cytoplasmic enzyme glycogen syn - thase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) , acts as a fulcrum of the “canonical” ( that is , mediated through the transcriptional co - regulator β - catenin ) Wnt pathway ( Green , 2004 ) . The regulation of A / B polarity by Wnt in the metazoa is thus based on an ancient mechanism of polarity control that existed before the fungi and choanoflagellates split off from each other . Furthermore , even in modern metazoa , this pathway , while induc - ible by the secreted Wnt ligand , remains a property of individual cells . Indeed , the entire A / B polarity program is triggered in isolated animal cells if Lkb - 1 is activated ( Karner et al . , 2006a ) . Polarization along the A / B axis has a clear role in the regulation of cell division in unicellular organisms like S . pombe ( Mendoza et al . , 2005 ) , and the same likely held for the single - celled antecedents of the metazoa . In multicellular aggregates , how - ever , it can mediate some entirely unprecedented morphogenetic effects . If cells are polarized in their distribution of an attachment protein , for example , they will not form a solid mass when aggregated . The energetically most favorable configuration would be achieved when the more adhesive portions of the cell mem - branes bind to each other while the less adhesive regions are freed up to enclose an interior lumen ( Newman , 1998 ; Forgacs and Newman , 2005 ) , as seen in the sponges and all eumetazoans . Alternatively , if cells are polarized in different attachment proteins they can form multiple non - mixing layers , such as seen in the three - layered placozoan , Trichoplax ( Miller and Ball , 2005 ) . The characteristic multicellular organisms of the Precambrian had earlier been described as solid - bodied ( Seilacher , 1992 ) , but the discovery of small , hollow , cell clusters from the Doushantuo Formation , China ( Chen et al . , 2004 ) has qualified this descrip - tion . Although these lumen - containing forms have been termed “embryos” ( Chen et al . , 2004 ; Hagadorn et al . , 2006 ) , the evi - dence is also consistent with their being definitive adult forms of their time . The Wnt pathway is very ancient , likely originating in the Precambrian ( Erwin , 2008 ) . Because A / B polarization accom - panies and appears to be a necessary condition for the formation of interior cavities in cell aggregates , it is plausible that the advent of the DPM enabling A / B polarization helped drive the transition between the Ediacaran biota and those of the Cambrian explosion ( POL a ; Fig . 1 , upper - center , leftward arrow and Table 1 ) . The utilization of β - catenin as a transcriptional co - factor in the POL a DPM and certain other Wnt - mediated functions ( prolifera - tion , alteration of gene expression ) , and its use in the ADH and DAD DPMs as a submembrane component of cadherin - based adhesion complexes , provides the basis of regulated switching among Wnt - based DPMs ( Nelson and Nusse , 2004 ) . Such alter - native deployment of DPMs is important in a variety of complex morphogenetic changes ( Jamora et al . , 2003 ; de Melker et al . , 2004 ) . Planar cell polarity ( PCP ) is also initiated at Frizzled receptors and is therefore usually described as employing the Wnt pathway ( noncanonical in this case , since β - catenin is not involved ) . Despite the involvement of Frizzled , however , Wnt ligand is not involved in all cases of PCP induction ( Veeman et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , like A / B polarization , PCP may be based on a cellular mechanism that predates cell - cell communication . The consequences of PCP in a multicellular context are unintuitive , but highly significant . Elongated cells with anisotropic adhesive properties are predicted on the basis of physical prin - ciples to spontaneously align and intercalate among one another , leading to the tissue mass narrowing in one direction and elongat - ing in the orthogonal direction ( Zajac et al . , 2003 ; Keller et al . , 2008 ) . These cellular rearrangements and tissue reshaping ef - fects are seen in “convergent extension , ” which establishes the elongated body axis during gastrulation in the amphibian embryo , and related phenomena throughout the Metazoa ( Keller , 2002 ) ( POL p ; Fig . 1 , upper - center , rightward arrow and Table 1 ) . The cell polarization effects associated with the Wnt pathways , then , are based on the mobilization of mechanisms of cytoskeletal rearrangement that appear to have evolved to serve single - cell functions . With the arrival of multicellularity , the existence of these mechanisms enabled those tissue masses in which they were present to acquire internal lumens and elongated shapes , i . e . , to move beyond the default solid , spherical morphology of adhesive , mobile cells . They could have done this , we again note , mainly as a result of change in scale and context . Substantial genetic change was not required . Field formation by synchronized biochemical oscillations ( Hes , Notch and Wnt ) A balance of positive and negative feedback interactions in a gene regulatory network can lead to temporal oscillations in concentration of gene products ( Goldbeter , 1996 ; Reinke and Gatfield , 2006 ) . In individual cells , such as the common ancestors of metazoans and choanoflagellates , such oscillations would not have a lasting morphological effect . In a multicellular context , where they can be coordinated across cell boundaries by juxtacrine ( e . g . , Notch pathway ) and short - range paracrine ( e . g . , Wnt path - way ) signaling , however , such oscillations have the potential to drive morphogenetic change . The composite DPM we refer to as OSC ( Table 1 ; Fig 1 , upper - right , left - downward arrow ) is used , for example , in somitogen - esis , the process by which blocks of tissue , the primordia of the vertebrae and associated muscles , form in a progressive spa - tiotemporal order along the central axis of vertebrate embryos . In the presomitic mesoderm of chicken and other vertebrate em - bryos , the expression of certain genes ( particularly that specifying Pattern of multicellular form 699 the Notch pathway mediator Hes1 ) , undergo temporal oscillation with a period similar to the formation of the somites ( Pourquié et al . , 2003 ) . These oscillations then become synchronized by Notch - mediated juxtacrine signaling ( Giudicelli et al . , 2007 ; Kageyama et al . , 2007 ; Riedel - Kruse et al . , 2007 ) . In conjunction with an FGF8 morphogen gradient ( see below ) with its source at one end of the extended embryo , the Hes1 - and associated oscillations provide the basis for the generation of somites in vertebrate embryos ( Pourquié , 2003 ) . The recurrent nature of the oscillatory state is an important feature that may utilized in a developmental system , where , as in somitogenesis , temporal periodicity is converted to spatial peri - odicity . But another key property of oscillators is their ability to become synchronized ( Garcia - Ojalvo et al . , 2004 ; Masamizu et al . , 2006 ) . This highlights a general effect of the OSC DPM that can be developmentally important over durations shorter than the oscillator’s period . The coordination of cell state ( e . g . , with re - spect to the oscillator’s components ) over a broad tissue domain , a phenomenon described in the older embryological literature as a “morphogenetic field” ( reviewed in Haraway , 1976 ; Gilbert , 2006 ) , has long eluded mechanistic explanation but can now be understood as a manifestation of this DPM . While many gene regulatory networks are capable of sustain - ing oscillatory behavior , Hes - type transcriptional modulators are particularly suitable as elements of the OSC DPM . This is be - cause they are downstream effectors of the Notch pathway , a mediator of juxtacrine cell communication in the multicellular context . Interactions of the Notch pathway with the Wnt pathway ( Hofmann et al . , 2004 ; Ishikawa et al . , 2004 ; Hayward et al . , 2006 ) can also mobilize paracrine interactions in the synchronization of Hes oscillations . Hes - type transcription factors are ancient mem - bers of the developmental - genetic toolkit , with two representa - tives in the placozoan genome ( Srivastava et al . 2008 ) . Single - and dual - tissue morphogen gradients ( the TGF - βββββ / BMP superfamily , Hedgehog and FGFs ) Unicellular eukaryotes such as protozoan ciliates have the ability to change their physiological state in response to mol - ecules secreted into the microenvironment by other such cells ( Luporini et al . , 2006 ) . It is a reasonable assumption that this capacity had already evolved in the unicellular progenitors of the metazoa . In the multicellular context , a secreted molecule for which these ancient cells had evolved concentration - dependent responses could serve as a patterning molecule or “morphogen” ( MOR ; Fig . 1 , upper - right , right - downward arrow and Table 1 ) . To perform this function , however , it would need to have the capacity to spread a significant distance across a cluster of cells using their lipid membranes or the extracellular space as a medium for diffusion . The locally acting Wnts have a limited capacity to act as morphogens ( Sick et al . , 2006 ) ; in general they stabilize , rather than specify , cell fate ( Martinez - Arias , 2003 ) . The ability of one or a small group of cells to influence other cells via morphogens enables the generation of heterogeneous patterns on a spatial scale of 100 μ m - 1 mm over tens of hours , consistent with the time - distance - concentration relationships in - herent in macromolecular diffusion ( Crick , 1970 ) . Morphogens fall into two main classes . Some act on cells similar to those that produce them , causing them to assume one of several new states depending on the concentration of morphogen to which they are exposed . Others act on cells that are already different from the producers ( perhaps residing in a separate layer ) , causing them to become different from their unexposed neighbors . Different mor - phogens also move through different media . Those of the TGF - β / BMP and FGF classes diffuse in the aqueous interstices and extracellular matrix at variable rates , dependent on their capacity to bind to specific extracellular molecules , which may themselves be distributed nonuniformly ( Ohkawara et al . , 2002 ) . Molecules of the Hedgehog class of morphogens are alternately tethered to cell membranes by covalently attached lipid moieties and diffusible through the aqueous interstitial phase beyond the membrane ( Goetz et al . , 2006 ) . Because the lipid component of the Hedge - hog morphogens limits their spread ( Guerrero and Chiang , 2007 ) , their diffusion rate is probably intermediate between the TGF - β / BMP class and the very short - range Wnts . While each of these morphogens activates signaling pathways that apparently preexisted the metazoa , the morphogen mol - ecules themselves arose at various times during the metazoan radiation . For example , while demosponges , the most primitive metazoan group , have a Hedgehog - type morphogen , they lack TGF - β / BMP and FGFs ( though they have a receptor homolog for the latter class ; Nichols et al . , 2006 ) . Morphogens of all three classes are present in cnidarians ( Rentzsch et al . , 2006 ; 2008 ; Matus et al . , 2008 ) and echinoderms ( Lapraz et al . , 2006 ; Walton et al . , 2006 ) , while the placozoan Trichoplax appears to only contain the TGF - β / BMP pathway ( Srivastava et al . , 2008 ) . FGFs in arthropods and chordates have multiplied by gene duplication and their receptors are alternatively spliced in such a fashion that an FGF produced by one tissue layer typically only affect cells in a different layer , and not those cells that produce it ( Huang and Stern , 2005 ) . This type of tissue interaction consti - tutes a novel and fruitful developmental principle not seen in other animal groups , nor , generally , with respect to other morphogen systems . In particular , it enables asymmetric interaction between different tissue layers , exemplified by induction and epithelial - mesenchymal interaction ( ASM ; Fig . 1 , left - center , left - downward arrow and Table 1 ) . Morphogen function is inextricably tied to the physical principle of diffusion , a mechanism that signifies a different biological phenomenon in multicellular and unicellular contexts . By the simple effect of setting up molecular gradients across a cluster of initially equivalent but responsive cells , morphogen - based DPMs generated organismal forms that ultimately contained heteroge - neously distributed cell types . Whether or not any given form was functionally compatible with survival was a matter subject to natural selection . But as with the DPMs described earlier , the potential to generate a panoply of morphologies is tied to material properties of the system rather than to incremental selective advantage . Spot , stripe and boundary patterns arising from local autoactivation - lateral inhibition Positively autoregulatory morphogens , that is , those which directly or indirectly stimulate their own synthesis as part of the state change they promote in target cells , will not be maintained as gradients , since in such cases the morphogen will convert the entire cluster into the “induced” type . This effect could have produced variety among organisms during early evolution , but not internal heterogeneity or patterning in any single organism . A 700 S . A . Newman and R . Bhat positively autoregulatory morphogen that became linked , how - ever , in a composite DPM , to a mechanism of lateral inhibition ( like the LAT DPM associated with Notch signaling ) , will induce a zone around any peak of its activity within which no local activa - tion can occur ( Gierer and Meinhardt , 1972 ; Meinhardt and Gierer , 2000 ; Meinhardt , 2008 ) . New peaks of activation would only form at distances sufficiently far from other peaks so that the inhibitor’s effects will have attenuated . Such systems , involving short - range local activation and long - range lateral inhibition ( simi - lar to the chemical pattern forming systems described by Turing , 1952 ) , or formally equivalent local autoactivation - lateral inhibition ( LALI ) systems ( Nijhout 2003 ; Newman and Bhat , 2007 ) , can produce regularly spaced spots or stripes of morphogen concen - tration ( TUR ; Fig . 1 , far - right - center , left downward arrow and Table 1 ) . These , in turn , can induce primordia of skeletal elements ( Newman and Frisch , 1979 ; Hentschel et al . , 2004 ) and other serially repeated structures such as teeth ( Salazar - Ciudad and Jernvall , 2002 ) , feather germs ( Jiang et al . , 2004 ) and hair follicles ( Sick et al . , 2006 ) . Tissue boundary formation ( von Dassow et al . , 2000 ) and axial polarization ( De Robertis , 2006 ) regulated by such mechanisms are more robust than those that depend solely on differential adhesion or diffusion gradients ( Ingolia , 2004 ) . Epithelial elasticity , epithelial - mesenchymal transformation and global organization of cell polarity ( extracellular matrix ) Up to this point we have described “epithelioid” cell clusters in which cells are directly attached to each other . The viscosity of such clusters depends on the ease with which cells slip past one another while maintaining their attachments . ( Cell - cell bonds , even if strong , can have short lifetimes ) . Their elasticity is prima - rily a function of the cytoskeleton , and their cohesivity is deter - mined by the force required to separate the cells . The other major category of cell aggregate or tissue in multicellular metazoan forms is termed “mesenchyme . ” In mesenchymal aggregates the constituent cells secrete a complex macromolecular microenvi - ronment , the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) ( Comper , 1996 ) , and it is the properties of this material that determine the aggregate’s viscoelasticity and cohesivity , collectively , its rheological proper - ties . ECMs are often quite elaborate on the molecular scale and mesenchymes thus have different morphogenetic capabilities from the epithelioid cell aggregates subject to the DPMs dis - cussed above . The most ancient metazoans , the Porifera or marine sponges , produce skeletal structures whose morphology is , in part , a function of environmental factors ( Uriz et al . , 2003 ) . Most sponge cells ( sclerocytes ) reside within an ECM called the “mesohyl , ” which constitutes the bulk of the organism’s body . These cells bind to the ECM via integrin transmembrane proteins ( Wimmer et al . , 1999 ) , as in eumetazoans . Sponges also contain epithelial cells ( Schröder et al . , 2004 ) and homologs of type IV - like collagen ( Boute et al . , 1996 ) , which in eumetazoans forms a major compo - nent of the sheet - like supporting structure for epithelia , the basal lamina . Despite the active remodeling of the internal anatomy of sponges by the continuous movement of their cells ( Bond , 1992 ) , and the presence of most of the molecular ingredients of the major DPMs ( see above ) , poriferans branched off from the metazoan lineage early on , as a morphological dead - end ( Nichols et al . , 2006 ) . One reason for this may have been their great reliance on ECM , a stiff , relatively non - dynamic medium at the mesoscopic scale , as their major morphogenetic component . While sponges produce both metalloproteinases ( Arreguin et al . , 1995 ) and metalloproteinase inhibitors ( Fujita et al . , 2003 ) , two classes of molecules used by eumetazoans to break down and remodel their ECMs , it is possible that these functions never became integrated in these groups of organisms into a composite DPM that would have facilitated the mobilization of other DPMs . In the eumetazoa ECM is employed in a more limited fashion , one that permits the other DPMs to have freer play . Cnidarians have a thin sheet - like mesoglea consisting of separate regions of basement membrane - like and interstitial matrix - like properties ( Zhang et al . , 2007 ) , whereas true interstitial ECM is found only in triploblasts ( Huxley - Jones et al . , 2006 ) . A basement membrane permits an epithelium to behave as an elastic sheet in the direction perpendicular to the plane , though it may retain in - plane liquid - like properties ( Mittenthal and Mazo , 1983 ; Newman , 1998 ) . Elastic sheet epithelia exhibit a range of folding , buckling and wrinkling effects that are not seen in liquid - like epithelioid tissues , and which provide the basis for some modes of gastrulation and for formation of appendages ( Gierer , 1977 ; Forgacs and Newman , 2005 ) . The mesodermal layer of many triploblasts and some cnidarians ( Fritzenwanker et al . , 2004 ; Seipel and Schmid , 2006 ) is com - posed of cells that have undergone epithelial - mesenchymal trans - formation ( EMT ) ( Hay , 2005 ) . This change in the physical state of tissues is enabled by the ECM , which permits cells that are not directly attached to one another to remain part of an integral tissue . Whereas skeletogenesis and elastic sheet behavior are both based on the stiffness of ECM , EMT employs its space - filling properties . Cell polarity , which we have seen above is mediated by the Wnt signaling pathway , can be oriented in preferred directions by interaction with previously deposited ECM ( Thery et al . , 2006 ) . In analogy to the effects of diffusible morphogens in organizing spatial patterns of cell state across a cluster of cells ( see above ) , ECM cues can help determine global patterns of cell polarity in multicellular aggregates . Although ECM molecules and integrins pre - existed the origins of the metazoa – homologs are present in the non - colonial choanoflagellate M . brevicollis ( King et al . , 2008 ) – the emergence of multicellularity recruited these molecules into “internal substrata , ” constituting a distinct DPM ( ECM ; Fig . 1 , bottom - left , left upward arrow and Table 1 ) , with new capacities for generating pattern motifs . Developmental function - dedicated transcription fac - tors as “frozen accidents” Transcriptional regulation is a key determinant of cell state , and the changes thereof , during development . But cells can change their functional states , and embryos their three - dimen - sional forms , independently of transcriptional changes . This sug - gests that the transcription factor and cis - regulatory module - based “kernels” ( Davidson , 2006 ) may not , as claimed , constitute the fundamental constructional elements of metazoan develop - ment . The mutual regulation of transcription factors across cell boundaries involves more than the transcription factors them - selves . Specifically , it is mediated by juxtacrine or paracrine interactions between the cells which , in turn , are critically influ - enced by changing geometrical relationships among the signaling Pattern of multicellular form 701 and responding centers ( Salazar - Ciudad et al . , 2003 ; Salazar - Ciudad , 2006 ) . Certain of the transcription factors included among the “toolkit” gene products ( the developmental transcription factors , or DTFs , in our terminology ) , were tied to functions in single - celled ances - tors that were later utilized in differentiated cells of metazoans ( cell contractility , light sensitivity ) . But in other cases ( participation in segmentation , anteroposterior or proximodistal tissue identity ) they were unlikely to have corresponding functional roots in the unicellular world . Given the scenario we have described above , we can speculate that in the first metazoa , fortuitous associations of one or more DPMs with the DTFs existing at the time produced “generalized” eyes , appendages , heart - like contractile tubes and segments . If , as seems likely , they were loosely interacting , subject to external conditions , and not yet organized into the hierarchical regulatory schemes that came with subsequent evo - lution ( Salazar - Ciudad et al . , 2001a , b ) , these DPM - DTF com - plexes would not have programmed unique , definitive body plans and organs , but rather versions of these morphological motifs that were plastic within populations and even individual proto - organ - isms . In this view , radically different types of eyes ( Gehring , 2002 ) and appendages , and even wholesale inversions of the body axis ( Gerhart , 2000 ) , were possible for organisms of fixed genotype , in different environments and across generations . With subsequent selection for reliability of developmental outcome ( Waddington , 1942 ; Schmalhausen , 1949 ) the “proto” - bodies and - organs resulting from particular DPM - DTF associa - tions would have become uniquely associated with specific pro - grams of gene expression having homologous molecular bases and analogous morphological outcomes ( Newman et al . , 2006 ) . Examples of developmental outcomes based on such “homolo - gous - analogous” DTF - DPM associations across metazoan phyla include skeletogenesis , appendage formation , eye formation , and heart development . Conclusion : a pattern language for development and morphological evolution We have proposed that the developmental mechanisms of biologically modern animals can be understood in terms of a pattern language of metazoan form . The elements of this lan - guage are transformations away from the physical default of an aggregate of undifferentiated cells : topologically solid , geometri - cally spherical , and spatially uniform . The major transformations include ( i ) formation of stable mixtures of cells in more than one biochemical state , ( ii ) stable formation of distinct cell layers , ( iii ) formation of internal cavities , ( iv ) elongation of cell masses , ( v ) generation of nonuniform patterns of cell type , and ( vi ) dispersal of subpopulations of cells without disintegration of the organism . We have further proposed that each pattern - language element is tied to a set of gene activities of the so - called developmental - genetic toolkit many of which pre - evolved the metazoa in single - celled ancestors . The elements of the pattern language , however , are not genes , gene products , or even merely gene networks . They are , rather , what we term dynamical patterning modules or DPMs , in which a complex of the toolkit gene products mobilizes a mesoscale physical process . Thus , cell adhesion is mobilized by cadherins , lateral inhibition enabling maintenance of stable cell mixtures by the Notch pathway , tissue multilayering by differential expression of cadherins , cell polarization , leading to cavity forma - tion and elongation , induced by the Wnt pathway , coordination of cell state by the Notch - and Wnt - dependent synchronization of Hes oscillations , and so forth . The collection of DPMs we have described here is relatively comprehensive , but not exhaustive . Increase and decrease in cell number , for example , have only a quantitative impact on popula - tions of free - living protists . In a multicellular context , however , these processes constitute reciprocal elements of a patterning system in which organismal shape and form are altered , but not cell state ( Salazar - Ciudad et al . , 2003 ; Salazar - Ciudad , 2006 ) . For this reason the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathway , one of whose functions is to mediate proliferation in response to external signals ( Krens et al . , 2006 ) , and the apop - totic pathway , both of which have roots in the premetazoan unicellular world ( Widmann et al . , 1999 ; Blackstone and Green , 1999 ) , can be considered DPMs which modulate the physical mass of a multicellular aggregate ( MIT , Fig . 1 , center - right , left downward arrow , and APO ; Fig . 1 , bottom - center , rightward arrow and Table 1 ) . An additional aspect of our hypothesis is that the earliest metazoan developmental mechanisms did not arise primarily by incremental natural selection . We suggest instead that the change in context and spatial scale inherent to the multicellular state led to the relatively abrupt appearance of such mechanisms . Thus , for example , Notch signaling , which plausibly evolved in unicellu - lar forms to elicit transitions in cell state in response to environ - mental cues , would come to mediate the coexistence of alterna - tive cell states in a single colony , where cells serve as each other’s microenvironmental determinants . Finally , autoregulatory networks of transcription factors and cis - regulatory modules , a major mechanism in the specification of cell fate in modern - day developmental systems ( Davidson , 2006 ) , are nonetheless not central to our concept of a pattern language for multicellular form . To paraphrase the statement by Gehring ( 2002 ) quoted in the introduction to this paper , transcription factors are , in principle , interchangeable in their roles and are not intrinsically connected to the functions of the genes they happen to regulate . This contrasts with the gene products that mediate the DPMs , which perform not one common gene expression - associ - ated function ( transcription ) , but qualitatively different , physically - associated functions ( adhesion , diffusion , geometric polarization , etc . ) . We suggest that the mobilization of physical processes ca - pable of producing patterns and forms ( not only of differentiated cells types , but of cells and tissue modules in three - space : segments , tubes , vesicles , placodes ; Salazar - Ciudad et al . , 2003 ) , was the basis of the Precambrian - Cambrian explosion . The utilization of homologous transcription factors in seemingly analo - gous organ systems across the range of metazoan phyla ( the apparent molecular homology - analogy paradox ; Wilkins , 2002 ; Newman , 2006 ) is , in our view , presumptive evidence for the facile interconvertibility of disparate metazoan body plans once multicellularity had been achieved , but before canalizing evolu - tion ( Waddington , 1942 ; Schmalhausen , 1949 ) had locked phylotypic differences into place ( Newman , 2006 ; Newman et al . , 2006 ) . This implies that a comparative genomic analysis of the origination of metazoan form that does not take into account the generic self - organizing properties of multicellular aggregates 702 S . A . Newman and R . Bhat ( e . g . , Ruiz - Trillo et al . , 2007 ) cannot be entirely successful . In general , the recruitment of toolkit gene products and path - ways into basic and composite DPMs must lead to very different outcomes depending on the topology ( i . e . , connectivity ) and the relative strengths of interaction among the components ( Salazar - Ciudad , 2006 ) . In extreme cases , only certain DPMs might have become active in certain lineages and other DPMs largely fore - closed . We may speculate , for example , that with multicellularity in place , the Wnt - mediated DPM in the ancestors of sponges , via its induction of apical - basal polarity , enabled the generation of multicellular forms with simple and branched interior cavities , but that an overactive integrin - ECM - mediated DPM ( or underactive metalloproteinases ) , may have rendered the tissue microenviron - ment nonpermissive for employment of other DPMs . In the ancestors of the eumetazoa , in contrast , the action of TGF - β / BMP and hedgehog - mediated DPMs readily produced tissue masses nonuniform in cell state , and Notch - mediated lateral inhibition must have stabilized these patterns . One result of this would have been cell aggregates compartmentalized into distinct layers . Then , heterotypic tissue interactions , mediated by FGFs and their receptors , would have promoted the emergence of sophisticated diploblastic forms , such as the Cnidaria . Next , the functional linking of simple DPMs , such as the cadherin and Wnt pathways ( via their common effector , β - catenin ) , and the Notch and Wnt pathways ( via their common mediator , GSK3 β ) , into composite DPMs , opened the way for unprecedented dynamical processes acting on cell masses : global coordination of cell states via synchronized oscillations and reaction - diffusion patterning , to name two important ones . Finally , secreted ECMs , assembled on the mesoscopic scale of multicellular aggregates , became DPMs that mobilized mechanical effects , introducing elastic properties and solid skeletons to tissue masses and sheets . Once estab - lished , the DPMs remained highly conserved across the diploblasts and triploblasts , protostomes and deuterostomes , invertebrates and vertebrates . Development of modern organisms exhibits extensive plastic - ity , permitting alternative outcomes depending on different exter - nalities ( West - Eberhard , 2003 ) . By our hypothesis , development in metazoan ancestors would have been even more plastic , since prior to the evolution of canalizing mechanisms the physical processes mobilized by the various DPMs would have been highly sensitive to environmental conditions ( see also Newman , 1994 ; Newman and Müller , 2000 ; Newman et al . , in press ) . This bears on recent attempts to relate mechanisms of axis formation and arrangement of molecular signaling centers in the embryos of metazoan groups to presumed ancestral relationships among those groups ( e . g . , chordates , tunicates , hemichordates , cephalochordates ; Passamaneck and Di Gregorio , 2005 ; Lowe et al . , 2006 ; Yu et al . , 2007 ) . Because the DPMs could have been deployed combinatorially and non - hierarchically in ancient form the taxonomic relationships among these groups may not be direct , nor would they necessarily conform either to anatomical affinities or a straightforward developmental logic . The deployment of DPMs , in modern metazoa , but even in their primitive ancestors , cannot generate an unlimited array of forms . Despite their potential ( presumably greater in early metazoan evolution than at present ) to transform different anatomies one into the other with little or no genetic change , DPMs are con - strained to mold pre - metazoan cell masses into only those mor - phologies characteristic of chemically and mechanically excitable mesoscopic materials , among these hollow , multilayered , elon - gated , segmented forms . If the “tape of life” were to be replayed ( Gould , 1989 ) things would probably turn out not too differently at the level of bauplan . Comparative anatomists have long recognized that animal bodies share a common morphological phrase book . More re - cently , molecular evolutionists have discovered that the metazoa share a common developmental - genetic vocabulary . Both of these findings , as we have shown , stem from the existence of a pattern language for animal development . The grammar of this language emerged abruptly more than 500 million years ago when a group of proteins and pathways of the unicellular world , by coming to operate on the mesoscale , mobilized the physical laws pertaining to soft - matter and excitable media in the construction of multicellular organisms . Acknowledgments We acknowledge the U . S . National Science Foundation for support . References ABEDIN , M . and KING , N . ( 2008 ) . The premetazoan ancestry of cadherins . Science 319 : 946 - 8 . ALEXANDER , C . ( 2002 ) . The nature of order : An essay on the art of building and the nature of the universe . Center for Environmental Structure , Berkeley , CA . ALEXANDER , C . , ISHIKAWA , S . and SILVERSTEIN , M . ( 1977 ) . A pattern lan - guage : Towns , buildings , construction . Oxford University Press , New York . AMEISEN , J . C . ( 2002 ) . On the origin , evolution , and nature of programmed cell death : A timeline of four billion years . Cell Death Differ 9 : 367 - 393 . ARREGUIN , R . , ARREGUIN , B . , HERNANDEZ - ARANA , A . and RODRIGUEZ - ROMERO , A . ( 1995 ) . Metal content and conformation of the metalloprotease from the marine sponge Spheciospongia vesparia . Biochem Mol Biol Int 36 : 827 - 833 . BLACKSTONE , N . W . and GREEN , D . R . ( 1999 ) . The evolution of a mechanism of cell suicide . Bioessays 21 : 84 - 88 . BONNER , J . T . ( 1967 ) . The cellular slime molds . Princeton University Press , Princeton . BORGES , R . M . ( 2005 ) . Do plants and animals differ in phenotypic plasticity ? J Biosci 30 : 41 - 50 . BOUTE , N . , EXPOSITO , J . Y . , BOURY - ESNAULT , N . , VACELET , J . , NORO , N . , MIYAZAKI , K . , YOSHIZATO , K . and GARRONE , R . ( 1996 ) . Type IV collagen in sponges , the missing link in basement membrane ubiquity . Biol Cell 88 : 37 - 44 . CARROLL , S . B . , GRENIER , J . K . and WEATHERBEE , S . D . ( 2005 ) . From DNA to diversity : Molecular genetics and the evolution of animal design . Blackwell Pub . , Malden , MA . CHEN , J . Y . , BOTTJER , D . J . , OLIVERI , P . , DORNBOS , S . Q . , GAO , F . , RUFFINS , S . , CHI , H . , LI , C . W . and DAVIDSON , E . H . ( 2004 ) . Small bilaterian fossils from 40 to 55 million years before the cambrian . Science 305 : 218 - 222 . COMPER , W . D . ( Ed . ) ( 1996 ) . Extracellular matrix , vol . I . Tissue Function ; II . Molecular Components and Interactions . Amsterdam : Harwood Academic Publishers . CONWAY MORRIS , S . ( 2000 ) . Nipping the Cambrian " explosion " in the bud ? Bioessays 22 : 1053 - 1056 . CONWAY MORRIS , S . ( 2006 ) . Darwin’s dilemma : The realities of the Cambrian ‘explosion’ . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 361 : 1069 - 1083 . CRICK , F . H . C . ( 1970 ) . Diffusion in embryogenesis . Nature . 225 : 420 - 422 . CRICK , F . H . C . and LAWRENCE , P . A . ( 1975 ) . Compartments and polyclones in insect development . Science . 189 : 340 - 347 . DAMON , B . J . , MEZENTSEVA , N . V . , KUMARATILAKE , J . S . , FORGACS , G . and NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Limb bud and flank mesoderm have distinct " physical phenotypes " that may contribute to limb budding . Dev Biol 321 : 319 - 30 . Pattern of multicellular form 703 DAVIDSON , E . H . ( 2006 ) . The regulatory genome : Gene regulatory networks in development and evolution . Elsevier / Academic Press , Amsterdam ; London . DE GENNES , P . G . ( 1992 ) . Soft matter . Science 256 : 495 - 497 . DEQUEANT , M . L . , GLYNN , E . , GAUDENZ , K . , WAHL , M . , CHEN , J . , MUSHEGIAN , A . and POURQUIÉ , O . ( 2006 ) . A complex oscillating network of signaling genes underlies the mouse segmentation clock . Science 314 : 1595 - 1598 . DE MELKER , A . A . , DESBAN , N . and DUBAND , J . L . ( 2004 ) . Cellular localization and signaling activity of beta - catenin in migrating neural crest cells . Dev Dyn 230 : 708 - 726 . DE ROBERTIS , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Spemann’s organizer and self - regulation in amphib - ian embryos . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 296 - 302 . DROSER , M . L . and GEHLING , J . G . ( 2008 ) . Synchronous aggregate growth in an abundant new Ediacaran tubular organism . Science 319 : 1660 - 1662 . EHEBAUER , M . , HAYWARD , P . and ARIAS , A . M . ( 2006 ) . Notch , a universal arbiter of cell fate decisions . Science 314 : 1414 - 5 . ERWIN , D . H . ( 2008 ) . Wonderful Ediacarans , wonderful cnidarians ? Evol Dev 10 : 263 - 264 . ERWIN , D . H . and DAVIDSON , E . H . ( 2002 ) . The last common bilaterian ancestor . Development 129 : 3021 - 3032 . FORGACS , G . , FOTY , R . A . , SHAFRIR , Y . and STEINBERG , M . S . ( 1998 ) . Vis - coelastic properties of living embryonic tissues : A quantitative study . Biophys J 74 : 2227 - 2234 . FORGACS , G . and NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2005 ) . Biological physics of the developing embryo . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . FRITZENWANKER , J . H . , SAINA , M . and TECHNAU , U . ( 2004 ) . Analysis of forkhead and snail expression reveals epithelial - mesenchymal transitions dur - ing embryonic and larval development of Nematostella vectensis . Dev Biol 275 : 389 - 402 . FUJITA , M . , NAKAO , Y . , MATSUNAGA , S . , SEIKI , M . , ITOH , Y . , YAMASHITA , J . , VAN SOEST , R . W . and FUSETANI , N . ( 2003 ) . Ageladine A : An antiangiogenic matrixmetalloproteinase inhibitor from the marine sponge Agelas nakamurai . J Am Chem Soc 125 : 15700 - 15701 . GEHRING , W . J . ( 2002 ) . The genetic control of eye development and its implica - tions for the evolution of the various eye - types . Int J Dev Biol 46 : 65 - 73 . GERHART , J . ( 2000 ) . Inversion of the chordate body axis : Are there alternatives ? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 : 4445 - 4448 . GIERER , A . ( 1977 ) . Physical aspects of tissue evagination and biological form . Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics 10 : 529 - 593 . GIERER , A . and MEINHARDT , H . ( 1972 ) . A theory of biological pattern formation . Kybernetik 12 : 30 - 39 . GILBERT , S . F . ( 2006 ) . Developmental biology , 8 th Ed . Sinauer Associates , Sunderland , Mass . GIUDICELLI , F . , OZBUDAK , E . M . , WRIGHT , G . J . and LEWIS , J . ( 2007 ) . Setting the tempo in development : An investigation of the zebrafish somite clock mecha - nism . PLoS Biol 5 : e150 : 1309 - 1323 . GODT , D . and TEPASS , U . ( 1998 ) . Drosophila oocyte localization is mediated by differential cadherin - based adhesion . Nature 395 : 387 - 391 . GOETZ , J . A . , SINGH , S . , SUBER , L . M . , KULL , F . J . and ROBBINS , D . J . ( 2006 ) . A highly conserved amino - terminal region of Sonic hedgehog is required for the formation of its freely diffusible multimeric form . J Biol Chem 281 : 4087 - 4093 . GOLDBETER , A . ( 1996 ) . Biochemical oscillations and cellular rhythms : The mo - lecular bases of periodic and chaotic behaviour . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . GONZALEZ - CRESPO , S . and MORATA , G . ( 1996 ) . Genetic evidence for the subdivision of the arthropod limb into coxopodite and telopodite . Development 122 : 3921 - 3928 . GONZALEZ - REYES , A . and ST JOHNSTON , D . ( 1998 ) . The Drosophila AP axis is polarised by the cadherin - mediated positioning of the oocyte . Development 125 : 3635 - 3644 . GOULD , S . J . ( 1989 ) . Wonderful life . W . W . Norton , New York . GOULD , S . J . and VRBA , E . ( 1982 ) . Exaptation ; a missing term in the science of form . Paleobiology 8 : 4 - 15 . GREEN , J . B . ( 2004 ) . Lkb1 and GSK3 - beta : Kinases at the center and poles of the action . Cell Cycle 3 : 12 - 14 . GRIME , J . P . , CRICK , J . C . and RINCON , J . E . ( 1986 ) . The ecological significance of plasticity . Symp Soc Exp Biol 40 : 5 - 29 . GUERRERO , I . and CHIANG , C . ( 2007 ) . A conserved mechanism of hedgehog gradient formation by lipid modifications . Trends Cell Biol 17 : 1 - 5 . HAGADORN , J . W . , XIAO , S . , DONOGHUE , P . C . , BENGTSON , S . , GOSTLING , N . J . , PAWLOWSKA , M . , RAFF , E . C . , RAFF , R . A . , TURNER , F . R . , CHONGYU , Y . et al . ( 2006 ) . Cellular and subcellular structure of neoproterozoic animal embryos . Science 314 : 291 - 294 . HARAWAY , D . J . ( 1976 ) . Crystals , fabrics and fields ; metaphors that shape em - bryos . Yale University Press , New Haven . HAY , E . D . ( 2005 ) . The mesenchymal cell , its role in the embryo , and the remarkable signaling mechanisms that create it . Dev Dyn 233 : 706 - 720 . HAYWARD , P . , BALAYO , T . and MARTINEZ ARIAS , A . ( 2006 ) . Notch synergizes with axin to regulate the activity of armadillo in Drosophila . Dev Dyn 235 : 2656 - 2666 . HENTSCHEL , H . G . , GLIMM , T . , GLAZIER , J . A . and NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2004 ) . Dynamical mechanisms for skeletal pattern formation in the vertebrate limb . Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 271 : 1713 - 1722 . HOFMANN , M . , SCHUSTER - GOSSLER , K . , WATABE - RUDOLPH , M . , AULEHLA , A . , HERRMANN , B . G . and GOSSLER , A . ( 2004 ) . Wnt signaling , in synergy with T / TBX6 , controls Notch signaling by regulating Dll1 expression in the presomitic mesoderm of mouse embryos . Genes Dev 18 : 2712 - 2717 . HUANG , P . and STERN , M . J . ( 2005 ) . FGF signaling in flies and worms : More and more relevant to vertebrate biology . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 16 : 151 - 158 . HUXLEY - JONES , J . , ROBERTSON , D . L . and BOOT - HANDFORD , R . P . ( 2007 ) . On the origins of the extracellular matrix in vertebrates . Matrix Biol 26 : 2 - 11 . INGOLIA , N . T . ( 2004 ) . Topology and robustness in the Drosophila segment polarity network . PLoS Biol 2 : 805 - 15 . ISHIKAWA , A . , KITAJIMA , S . , TAKAHASHI , Y . , KOKUBO , H . , KANNO , J . , INOUE , T . and SAGA , Y . ( 2004 ) . Mouse Nkd1 , a Wnt antagonist , exhibits oscillatory gene expression in the PSM under the control of Notch signaling . Mech Dev 121 : 1443 - 1453 . JAMORA , C . , DASGUPTA , R . , KOCIENIEWSKI , P . , FUCHS , E . ( 2003 ) . Links between signal transduction , transcription and adhesion in epithelial bud development . Nature 422 : 317 - 322 . JIANG , T . X . , WIDELITZ , R . B . , SHEN , W . M . , WILL , P . , WU , D . Y . , LIN , C . M . , JUNG , H . S . and CHUONG , C . - M . ( 2004 ) . Integument pattern formation involves genetic and epigenetic controls : Feather arrays simulated by digital hormone models . Int J Dev Biol 48 : 117 - 135 . JOLIOT , A . and PROCHIANTZ , A . ( 2004 ) . Transduction peptides : From technology to physiology . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 189 - 196 . KALTNER , H . and GABIUS , H . J . ( 2001 ) . Animal lectins : From initial description to elaborated structural and functional classification . Adv Exp Med Biol 491 : 79 - 94 . KARNER , C . , WHARTON , K . A . , JR . and CARROLL , T . J . ( 2006a ) . Planar cell polarity and vertebrate organogenesis . Semin Cell Dev Biol 17 : 194 - 203 . KARNER , C . , WHARTON , K . A . and CARROLL , T . J . ( 2006b ) . Apical - basal polarity , Wnt signaling and vertebrate organogenesis . Semin Cell Dev Biol 17 : 214 - 222 . KAZMIERCZAK , J . and KEMPE , S . ( 2004 ) . Calcium build - up in the Precambrian sea : A major promoter in the evolution of eukaryotic life . In Origins , ( ed . SECKBACH , J . ) . Kluwer , Dordrecht , pp . 329 - 345 . KELLER , R . ( 2002 ) . Shaping the vertebrate body plan by polarized embryonic cell movements . Science 298 : 1950 - 1954 . KELLER , R . , SHOOK , D . and SKOGLUND , P . ( 2008 ) . The forces that shape embryos : Physical aspects of convergent extension by cell intercalation . Phys Biol 5 : 15007 . KING , N . and CARROLL , S . B . ( 2001 ) . A receptor tyrosine kinase from choanoflagellates : Molecular insights into early animal evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 15032 - 15037 . KING , N . , HITTINGER , C . T . and CARROLL , S . B . ( 2003 ) . Evolution of key cell signaling and adhesion protein families predates animal origins . Science 301 : 361 - 363 . KING , N . , WESTBROOK , M . J . , YOUNG , S . L . , KUO , A . , ABEDIN , M . , CHAPMAN , J . , FAIRCLOUGH , S . , HELLSTEN , U . , ISOGAI , Y . , LETUNIC , I . et al . ( 2008 ) . The genome of the choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans . Nature 451 : 783 - 788 . 704 S . A . Newman and R . Bhat KRENS , S . F . , SPAINK , H . P . and SNAAR - JAGALSKA , B . E . ( 2006 ) . Functions of the mapk family in vertebrate - development . FEBS Lett 580 : 4984 - 4990 . LANG , B . F . , O’KELLY , C . , NERAD , T . , GRAY , M . W . and BURGER , G . ( 2002 ) . The closest unicellular relatives of animals . Curr Biol 12 : 1773 - 1778 . LAPRAZ , F . , ROTTINGER , E . , DUBOC , V . , RANGE , R . , DULOQUIN , L . , WALTON , K . , WU , S . Y . , BRADHAM , C . , LOZA , M . A . , HIBINO , T . et al . ( 2006 ) . RTK and TGF - β signaling pathways genes in the sea urchin genome . Dev Biol 300 : 132 - 152 . LEE , K . H . , EVANS , S . , RUAN , T . Y . and LASSAR , A . B . ( 2004 ) . Smad - mediated modulation of YY1 activity regulates the BMP response and cardiac - specific expression of a GATA4 / 5 / 6 - dependent chick Nkx2 . 5 enhancer . Development 131 : 4709 - 4723 . LEWIS , J . ( 2003 ) . Autoinhibition with transcriptional delay : A simple mechanism for the zebrafish somitogenesis oscillator . Curr Biol 13 : 1398 - 1408 . LOSOS , J . B . , SCHOENER , T . W . , LANGERHANS , R . B . and SPILLER , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Rapid temporal reversal in predator - driven natural selection . Science 314 : 1111 . LOWE , C . J . , TERASAKI , M . , WU , M . , FREEMAN , R . M . , JR . , RUNFT , L . , KWAN , K . , HAIGO , S . , ARONOWICZ , J . , LANDER , E . , GRUBER , C . et al . ( 2006 ) . Dors - oventral patterning in hemichordates : Insights into early chordate evolution . PLoS Biol 4 : e291 . LUPORINI , P . , VALLESI , A . , ALIMENTI , C . and ORTENZI , C . ( 2006 ) . The cell type - specific signal proteins ( pheromones ) of protozoan ciliates . Curr Pharm Des 12 : 3015 - 3024 . MAGEE , P . T . ( 1997 ) . Which came first , the hypha or the yeast ? Science 277 : 52 - 53 . MATUS , D . Q . , MAGIE , C . R . , PANG , K . , MARTINDALE , M . Q . and THOMSEN , G . H . ( 2008 ) . The Hedgehog gene family of the cnidarian , nematostella vectensis , and implications for understanding metazoan Hedgehog pathway evolution . Dev Biol 313 : 501 - 518 . MARTINEZ ARIAS , A . ( 2003 ) . Wnts as morphogens ? The view from the wing of Drosophila . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 4 : 321 - 325 . MEINHARDT , H . ( 2008 ) . Models of biological pattern formation : From elementary steps to the organization of embryonic axes . Curr Top Dev Biol 81 : 1 - 63 . MEINHARDT , H . and GIERER , A . ( 2000 ) . Pattern formation by local self - activation and lateral inhibition . Bioessays 22 : 753 - 760 . MENDOZA , M . , REDEMANN , S . and BRUNNER , D . ( 2005 ) . The fission yeast MO25 protein functions in polar growth and cell separation . Eur J Cell Biol 84 : 915 - 926 . MIKHAILOV , A . S . ( 1990 ) . Foundations of synergetics I . Springer - Verlag , Berlin . MILLER , D . J . and BALL , E . E . ( 2005 ) . Animal evolution : The enigmatic phylum placozoa revisited . Curr Biol 15 : R26 - R28 . MITTENTHAL , J . E . and MAZO , R . M . ( 1983 ) . A model for shape generation by strain and cell - cell adhesion in the epithelium of an arthropod leg segment . J . Theoret . Biol . 100 : 443 - 483 . MLODZIK , M . ( 2002 ) . Planar cell polarization : Do the same mechanisms regulate Drosophila tissue polarity and vertebrate gastrulation ? Trends Genet 18 : 564 - 571 . MÜLLER , G . B . and NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2005 ) . The innovation triad : An evodevo agenda . J Exp Zoolog B Mol Dev Evol 304 : 487 - 503 . NARBONNE , G . M . ( 2004 ) . Modular construction of early Ediacaran complex life forms . Science 305 : 1141 - 1144 . NELSON , W . J . , and NUSSE , R . ( 2004 ) . Convergence of Wnt , beta - catenin , and cadherin pathways . Science 303 : 1483 - 1487 . NEWMAN , S . A . ( 1993 ) . Is segmentation generic ? Bioessays 15 : 277 - 283 . NEWMAN , S . A . ( 1994 ) . Generic physical mechanisms of tissue morphogenesis : A common basis for development and evolution . J . Evol . Biol . 7 : 467 - 488 . NEWMAN , S . A . ( 1998 ) . Epithelial morphogenesis : A physico - evolutionary interpre - tation . In Molecular basis of epithelial appendage morphogenesis , ( ed . CHUONG , C . - M . ) . R . G . Landes , Austin , TX , pp . 341 - 358 . NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2005 ) . The pre - Mendelian , pre - Darwinian world : Shifting relations between genetic and epigenetic mechanisms in early multicellular evolution . J Biosci 30 : 75 - 85 . NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2006 ) . The developmental - genetic toolkit and the molecular homology - analogy paradox . Biological Theory 1 : 12 - 16 . NEWMAN , S . A . and BHAT , R . ( 2007 ) . Activator - inhibitor dynamics of vertebrate limb pattern formation . Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 81 : 305 - 319 . NEWMAN , S . A . , BHAT , R . and MEZENTSEVA , N . V . Cell state switching networks and dynamical patterning modules : Complementary mediators of plasticity in development and evolution . J . Biosci . , in press ( doi not available ) NEWMAN , S . A . and COMPER , W . D . ( 1990 ) . ‘Generic’ physical mechanisms of morphogenesis and pattern formation . Development 110 : 1 - 18 . NEWMAN , S . A . , FORGACS , G . and MÜLLER , G . B . ( 2006 ) . Before programs : The physical origination of multicellular forms . Int J Dev Biol 50 : 289 - 299 . NEWMAN , S . A . and FRISCH , H . L . ( 1979 ) . Dynamics of skeletal pattern formation in developing chick limb . Science . 205 : 662 - 668 . NEWMAN , S . A . and MÜLLER , G . B . ( 2000 ) . Epigenetic mechanisms of character origination . J . Exp . Zool . B ( Mol . Dev . Evol . ) 288 : 304 - 317 . NICHOLS , S . A . , DIRKS , W . , PEARSE , J . S . and KING , N . ( 2006 ) . Early evolution of animal cell signaling and adhesion genes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 12451 - 12456 . NIELSEN , C . ( 2008 ) . Six major steps in animal evolution : Are we derived sponge larvae ? Evol Dev 10 : 241 - 57 . OHKAWARA , B . , IEMURA , S . , TEN DIJKE , P . and UENO , N . ( 2002 ) . Action range of BMP is defined by its N - terminal basic amino acid core . Curr Biol 12 : 205 - 209 . PANGANIBAN , G . and RUBENSTEIN , J . L . ( 2002 ) . Developmental functions of the Distal - less / Dlx homeobox genes . Development 129 : 4371 - 4386 . PASSAMANECK , Y . J . and DI GREGORIO , A . ( 2005 ) . Ciona intestinalis : Chordate development made simple . Dev Dyn 233 : 1 - 19 . PASSAMANECK , Y . J . and HALANYCH , K . M . ( 2004 ) . Evidence from Hox genes that bryozoans are lophotrochozoans . Evol Dev 6 : 275 - 281 . PHILIPPE , H . , SNELL , E . A . , BAPTESTE , E . , LOPEZ , P . , HOLLAND , P . W . and CASANE , D . ( 2004 ) . Phylogenomics of eukaryotes : Impact of missing data on large alignments . Mol Biol Evol 21 : 1740 - 1752 . POURQUIÉ , O . ( 2003 ) . The segmentation clock : Converting embryonic time into spatial pattern . Science 301 : 328 - 330 . ÖZBUDAK , E . M . and POURQUIÉ , O . ( 2008 ) . The vertebrate segmentation clock : The tip of the iceberg . Curr Opin Genet Dev . , in press . PREVOROVSKY , M . , PUTA , F . and FOLK , P . ( 2007 ) . Fungal csl transcription factors . BMC Genomics 8 : 233 . REINKE , H . and GATFIELD , D . ( 2006 ) . Genome - wide oscillation of transcription in yeast . Trends Biochem Sci 31 : 189 - 191 . RENTZSCH , F . , ANTON , R . , SAINA , M . , HAMMERSCHMIDT , M . , HOLSTEIN , T . W . and TECHNAU , U . ( 2006 ) . Asymmetric expression of the BMP antagonists chordin and gremlin in the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis : Implications for the evolution of axial patterning . Dev Biol 296 : 375 - 387 . RENTZSCH , F . , FRITZENWANKER , J . H . , SCHOLZ , C . B . and TECHNAU , U . ( 2008 ) . FGF signalling controls formation of the apical sensory organ in the cnidarian nematostella vectensis . Development 135 : 1761 - 1769 . ROBLEDO , R . F . , RAJAN , L . , LI , X . and LUFKIN , T . ( 2002 ) . The Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes are essential for craniofacial , axial , and appendicular skeletal development . Genes Dev 16 : 1089 - 1101 . ROKAS , A . , KRUGER , D . and CARROLL , S . B . ( 2005 ) . Animal evolution and the molecular signature of radiations compressed in time . Science 310 : 1933 - 1938 . RUIZ - TRILLO , I . , BURGER , G . , HOLLAND , P . W . , KING , N . , LANG , B . F . , ROGER , A . J . and GRAY , M . W . ( 2007 ) . The origins of multicellularity : A multi - taxon genome initiative . Trends Genet 23 : 113 - 118 . SAKAMOTO , K . , OHARA , O . , TAKAGI , M . , TAKEDA , S . and KATSUBE , K . ( 2002 ) . Intracellular cell - autonomous association of notch and its ligands : A novel mechanism of notch signal modification . Dev Biol 241 : 313 - 326 . SALAZAR - CIUDAD , I . ( 2006 ) . On the origins of morphological disparity and its diverse developmental bases . Bioessays 28 : 1112 - 1122 . SALAZAR - CIUDAD , I . and JERNVALL , J . ( 2002 ) . A gene network model account - ing for development and evolution of mammalian teeth . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 8116 - 8120 . SALAZAR - CIUDAD , I . , JERNVALL , J . and NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2003 ) . Mechanisms of pattern formation in development and evolution . Development 130 : 2027 - 2037 . Pattern of multicellular form 705 SALAZAR - CIUDAD , I . , NEWMAN , S . A . and SOLÉ , R . ( 2001a ) . Phenotypic and dynamical transitions in model genetic networks . I . Emergence of patterns and genotype - phenotype relationships . Evol . & Develop . 3 : 84 - 94 . SALAZAR - CIUDAD , I . , SOLÉ , R . and NEWMAN , S . A . ( 2001b ) . Phenotypic and dynamical transitions in model genetic networks . Ii . Application to the evolution of segmentation mechanisms . Evol . & Develop . 3 : 95 - 103 . SCHMALHAUSEN , I . I . ( 1949 ) . Factors of evolution . Blakiston , Philadelphia . SCHRODER , H . C . , PEROVIC - OTTSTADT , S . , WIENS , M . , BATEL , R . , MULLER , I . M . and MULLER , W . E . ( 2004 ) . Differentiation capacity of epithelial cells in the sponge Suberites domuncula . Cell Tissue Res 316 : 271 - 280 . SCHWARTZ , R . J . and OLSON , E . N . ( 1999 ) . Building the heart piece by piece : Modularity of cis - elements regulating nkx2 - 5 transcription . Development 126 : 4187 - 4192 . SEILACHER , A . ( 1992 ) . Vendobionta and Psammocorallia—lost constructions of precambrian evolution . Journal of the Geological Society , London 149 : 607 - 613 . SEIPEL , K . and SCHMID , V . ( 2006 ) . Mesodermal anatomies in cnidarian polyps and medusae . Int J Dev Biol 50 : 589 - 599 . SELLERI , L . , DEPEW , M . J . , JACOBS , Y . , CHANDA , S . K . , TSANG , K . Y . , CHEAH , K . S . , RUBENSTEIN , J . L . , O’GORMAN , S . and CLEARY , M . L . ( 2001 ) . Require - ment for Pbx1 in skeletal patterning and programming chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation . Development 128 : 3543 - 3557 . SHAPIRO , J . A . ( 1995 ) . The significances of bacterial colony patterns . Bioessays 17 : 597 - 607 . SHEN , B . , DONG , L . , XIAO , S . and KOWALEWSKI , M . ( 2008 ) . The Avalon explosion : Evolution of Ediacara morphospace . Science 319 : 81 - 84 . SICK , S . , REINKER , S . , TIMMER , J . and SCHLAKE , T . ( 2006 ) . Wnt and Dkk determine hair follicle spacing through a reaction - diffusion mechanism . Science 314 : 1447 - 1450 . SIMPSON , P . ( 1997 ) . Notch signalling in development : On equivalence groups and asymmetric developmental potential . Curr Opin Genet Dev 7 : 537 - 542 . SNELL , E . A . , FURLONG , R . F . and HOLLAND , P . W . ( 2001 ) . Hsp70 sequences indicate that choanoflagellates are closely related to animals . Curr Biol 11 : 967 - 970 . SONG , M . H . , HUANG , F . Z . , GONSALVES , F . C . and WEISBLAT , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Cell cycle - dependent expression of a hairy and enhancer of split ( HES ) homolog during cleavage and segmentation in leech embryos . Dev Biol 269 : 183 - 195 . SRIVASTAVA , M . , BEGOVIC , E . , CHAPMAN , J . , PUTNAM , N . H . , HELLSTEN , U . , KAWASHIMA , T . , KUO , A . , MITROS , T . , SALAMOV , A . , CARPENTER , M . L . et al . ( 2008 ) . The Trichoplax genome and the nature of placozoans . Nature 454 : 955 - 960 . STEINBERG , M . S . ( 1978 ) . Specific cell ligands and the differential adhesion hypothesis : How do they fit together ? In Specificity of embryological interac - tions , ( ed . GARROD , D . R . ) . London : Chapman and Hall , pp . 97 - 130 . STEINBERG , M . S . ( 1998 ) . Goal - directedness in embryonic development . Integra - tive Biology 1 : 49 - 59 . STEINBERG , M . S . and TAKEICHI , M . ( 1994 ) . Experimental specification of cell sorting , tissue spreading , and specific spatial patterning by quantitative differ - ences in cadherin expression . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91 : 206 - 209 . SUDHOP , S . , COULIER , F . , BIELLER , A . , VOGT , A . , HOTZ , T . and HASSEL , M . ( 2004 ) . Signalling by the FGFR - like tyrosine kinase , Kringelchen , is essential for bud detachment in Hydra vulgaris . Development 131 : 4001 - 4011 . THERY , M . , RACINE , V . , PIEL , M . , PEPIN , A . , DIMITROV , A . , CHEN , Y . , SIBARITA , J . B . and BORNENS , M . ( 2006 ) . Anisotropy of cell adhesive microenvironment governs cell internal organization and orientation of polarity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 19771 - 19776 . TURING , A . ( 1952 ) . The chemical basis of morphogenesis . Phil . Trans . Roy . Soc . Lond . B 237 : 37 - 72 . URIZ , M . J . , TURON , X . , BECERRO , M . A . and AGELL , G . ( 2003 ) . Siliceous spicules and skeleton frameworks in sponges : Origin , diversity , ultrastructural patterns , and biological functions . Microsc Res Tech 62 : 279 - 299 . VEEMAN , M . T . , AXELROD , J . D . and MOON , R . T . ( 2003 ) . A second canon . Functions and mechanisms of β - catenin - independent Wnt signaling . Dev Cell 5 : 367 - 377 . VON DASSOW , G . , MEIR , E . , MUNRO , E . M . and ODELL , G . M . ( 2000 ) . The segment polarity network is a robust developmental module . Nature 406 : 188 - 192 . WADDINGTON , C . H . ( 1942 ) . Canalization of development and the inheritance of acquired characters . Nature 150 : 563 - 565 . WAINRIGHT , P . O . , HINKLE , G . , SOGIN , M . L . and STICKEL , S . K . ( 1993 ) . Mono - phyletic origins of the metazoa : An evolutionary link with fungi . Science 260 : 340 - 342 . WALTON , K . D . , CROCE , J . C . , GLENN , T . D . , WU , S . Y . and MCCLAY , D . R . ( 2006 ) . Genomics and expression profiles of the Hedgehog and Notch signaling pathways in sea urchin development . Dev Biol 300 : 153 - 164 . WEINER , J . ( 1994 ) . The beak of the finch : A story of evolution in our time . Knopf : New York . WEST - EBERHARD , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Developmental plasticity and evolution . Oxford University Press , Oxford ; New York . WIDMANN , C . , GIBSON , S . , JARPE , M . B . and JOHNSON , G . L . ( 1999 ) . Mitogen - activated protein kinase : Conservation of a three - kinase module from yeast to human . Physiol Rev 79 : 143 - 180 . WILKINS , A . S . ( 2002 ) . The evolution of developmental pathways . Sinauer Associ - ates , Sunderland , Mass . WIMMER , W . , PEROVIC , S . , KRUSE , M . , SCHRODER , H . C . , KRASKO , A . , BATEL , R . and MULLER , W . E . ( 1999 ) . Origin of the integrin - mediated signal transduction . Functional studies with cell cultures from the sponge Suberites domuncula . Eur J Biochem 260 : 156 - 165 . WIMSATT , W . C . and SCHANK , J . C . ( 2004 ) . Generative entrenchment , modularity and evolvability : when genetic selection meets the whole organism . In Modulatiry in development and evolution . ( Eds . G . Schlosser and G . P . Wagner ) . pp . 359 - 394 . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . YU , J . K . , SATOU , Y . , HOLLAND , N . D . , SHIN , I . T . , KOHARA , Y . , SATOH , N . , BRONNER - FRASER , M . and HOLLAND , L . Z . ( 2007 ) . Axial patterning in cephalochordates and the evolution of the organizer . Nature , 445 : 613 - 617 . ZAJAC , M . , JONES , G . L . and GLAZIER , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Simulating convergent extension by way of anisotropic differential adhesion . J Theor Biol 222 : 247 - 259 . ZHANG , X . , BOOT - HANDFORD , R . P . , HUXLEY - JONES , J . , FORSE , L . N . , MOULD , A . P . , ROBERTSON , D . L . , LI , L . , ATHIYAL , M . and SARRAS , M . P . , JR . ( 2007 ) . The collagens of hydra provide insight into the evolution of metazoan extracel - lular matrices . J Biol Chem . 282 : 6792 - 6802 . 706 S . A . Newman and R . Bhat Further Related Reading , published previously in the Int . J . Dev . Biol . See our Special Issue Developmental Morphodynamics edited by Lev Beloussov & Richard Gordon at : http : / / www . ijdb . ehu . es / web / contents . php ? vol = 50 & issue = 2 - 3 Ectopic Meis1 expression in the mouse limb bud alters P - D patterning in a Pbx1 - independent manner Nadia Mercader , Licia Selleri , Luis Miguel Criado , Pilar Pallares , Carlos Parras , Michael L . Cleary and Miguel Torres Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2009 ) In Press Patterning and cell fate in ear development Berta Alsina , Fernando Giraldez and Cristina Pujades Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2009 ) In Press The road to the vertebral formula Moisés Mallo , Tânia Vinagre and Marta Carapuço Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2009 ) In Press Lef1 plays a role in patterning the mesoderm and ectoderm in Xenopus tropicalis Giulietta Roël , Yoony Y . J . Gent , Josi Peterson - Maduro , Fons J . Verbeek and Olivier Destrée Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2009 ) 53 : 81 - 89 The Apical Ectodermal Ridge : morphological aspects and signaling pathways Marian Fernandez - Teran and Maria A . Ros Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2008 ) 52 : 857 - 871 Notch in vertebrates - molecular aspects of the signal Ken - Ichi Katsube and Kei Sakamoto Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2005 ) 49 : 369 - 374 Evo - Devo of amniote integuments and appendages . Ping Wu , Lianhai Hou , Maksim Plikus , Michael Hughes , Jeffrey Scehnet , Sanong Suksaweang , Randall Widelitz , Ting - Xin Jiang and Cheng - Ming Chuong Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2004 ) . 48 : 249 - 270 . Evo - Devo : the long and winding road . Jaume Baguñà and Jordi Garcia - Fernàndez Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2003 ) 47 : 705 - 713 Adaptive walks in a gene network model of morphogenesis : insights into the Cambrian explosion . Ricard V Solé , Pau Fernández and Stuart A Kauffman Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2003 ) 47 : 685 - 693 Segmentation : mono - or polyphyletic ? Elaine C Seaver Int . J . Dev . Biol . ( 2003 ) 47 : 583 - 595 5 yr ISI Impact Factor ( 2008 ) = 3 . 271