Amphiphysin Endophilin A3 LSP1 APPL1 SNX9 Reticulon Flotillin Caveolin Pacsin1 FCHO2 IRSp53 Dynamin ( and dynamin - like proteins ) EHD2 CIP4 Caveolar coat Reticulons Other scaffolding proteins COPII coat COPI coat Endosome PM Clathrin coat Amphipathic helices α - Synuclein Sar1B Arf1 Arf1GAP Endophilin A3 PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding Ca 2 + Cage - like lattice Cavin Caveolin Adaptorprotein PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding See loop insertion See amphipathichelices Epsin K K K K E R R V M M MN N M A F F F L L I G G G N N Q H Y G G G G G AA G A A G G G A A A A AH A Q Q Q Q A K K K K E E E D E ES S S S S SS S S S T T S S S S S TT KK K K K K K R K A VV V V M M M N N F F F F F F VI F F FW W L L L L L L L I I Y Y Y V Y V L L I S S S T Synaptotagmin 1 C2 domain EHD2 Pacsin1 Loop insertion Membrane embedding Caveolar coat ATP and GTPases Dynamin BAR DOMAIN SUPERFAMILY Classic coats Subcellular localization BAR BAR - PH PX - BAR F - BAR N - BAR F - BAR Scaffolding Membrane insertion Lipid composition sensing CHMP3 ESCRT III I - BAR Scaffolds with a curved membrane interface GolgiGolgi ERER PI binding PI binding See loop insertionSee loop insertion NucleusNucleus G Ca 1300 Cell 150 , September 14 , 2012 ©2012 Elsevier Inc . DOI http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 08 . 017 SnapShot : Membrane Curvature Sensors and Generators Hongying Shen , Michelle Pirruccello , and Pietro De Camilli Department of Cell Biology , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , and Program in Cellular Neuroscience , Neurodegeneration and Repair , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06510 , USA See online version for legend and references . gtPase ( membrane insertion ) Adaptor protein ( membrane insertion and scaffold ) cage - like lattice ( scaffold ) COPII Sar1 Sec23 , Sec24 Sec13 , Sec31 COPI Arf1 β , δ , γ , ζ - COP α , β′ , ε - COP Clathrin Arf1 ( for AP1 , 3 , 4 ) APs , epsin , AP180 / CALM , others Clathrin 1300 . e1 Cell 150 , September 14 , 2012 ©2012 Elsevier Inc . DOI http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 08 . 017 SnapShot : Membrane Curvature Sensors and Generators Hongying Shen , Michelle Pirruccello , and Pietro De Camilli Department of Cell Biology , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , and Program in Cellular Neuroscience , Neurodegeneration and Repair , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06510 , USA Cells and intracellular organelles are enclosed by bilayer lipid membranes , whose curvatures define their shape . Generation of bilayer curvature is critical for organelle biogenesis and to mediate vectorial transport from one membrane to another via vesicular or tubular intermediates . Membrane curvature can be driven by lipid perturbations that create asymmetry in the two leaflets of the bilayer , by bilayer binding and / or penetrating proteins , or by forces applied to membranes by the cytoskeleton . This SnapShot provides an overview of the mechanisms through which these proteins generate and / or sense curvature . These two properties are tightly interconnected . Proteins that initiate curvature by inserting a wedge in the bilayer ( for example , amphipathic helices and hydrophobic loops ) will bind preferentially to a precurved bilayer , where bending has created a gap in lipid packing . Likewise , proteins that function primarily as curved scaffolds generally assemble into polymers that propagate curvature , and their binding to the bilayer and their polym - erization are both facilitated by a precurved surface . In some proteins , both scaffold mechanisms and wedge - based mechanisms cooperate . Major mechanisms of protein - driven membrane deformation are listed below . Examples given refer to structures and schematic cartoons shown in the figure . Amphipathic Helices Amphipathic helices , which include the so - called ALPS motif , are α - helical lipid binding motifs with segregation of hydrophobic and polar amino acids on opposite sides of the helix . These helices , which are arranged parallel to the bilayer , partially penetrate it via their hydrophobic face and are well suited for membrane deformation and curvature sens - ing . Examples of proteins that contain amphipathic helices include : Epsin . An adaptor protein in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Amphipathic helix residues = aa 1 – 17 in human epsin 1 . Synuclein . A synaptic vesicle - associated protein that binds synaptic vesicles through its N - terminal amphipathic helix . Amphipathic helix residues = aa 9 – 41 in human α - synuclein . Sar1 . Small GTPase that initiates assembly of the COPII coat implicated in vesicle budding from the ER . Amphipathic helix residues = aa 1 – 25 in human Sar1B . Arf1 . Small GTPase that initiates assembly of the COPI coat and of the clathrin coat in the Golgi complex . Amphipathic helix residues = aa 1 – 18 in human Arf1 . Arf1GAP . GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for Arf1 . By promoting Arf1 - mediated GTP hydrolysis , Arf1GAP facilitates dissociation of coat proteins from Golgi - derived mem - branes . Amphipathic helix residues = aa 199 – 223 in human Arf1GAP . Endophilin . BAR - domain - containing protein implicated in tubular membrane deformation in endocytosis . Amphipathic helix residues = aa 1 – 21 in human endophilin A3 . Loop Insertion Some proteins contain a short peptide loop with hydrophobic residues that inserts into one leaflet of the lipid bilayer . Examples of proteins with loop insertion include : Synaptotagmin 1 . Synaptic vesicle protein . The Ca 2 + - dependent interaction of its cytosolic C2 domain region with the bilayer regulates exocytosis . Its induction of curvature in the plasma membrane via its binding “in trans” to this membrane was proposed to facilitate fusion . EHD2 . ATPase involved in tubular membrane deformation in the endocytic pathway . Pacsin1 . F - BAR - domain - containing protein involved in the endocytic pathway . Membrane Embedding In some proteins , a stretch of hydrophobic residues forms a hairpin embedded in the bilayer rather than a trans - membrane span . The partial penetration of the hairpin in the bilayer , deeper than in the case of loop insertion , is thought to create asymmetry in the bilayer . Some of these proteins may further oligomerize into scaffolds to facilitate mem - brane deformation . Examples include : Reticulons . Endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) proteins involved in the generation of the tubular structure of the ER . Flotillin . Scaffold protein involved in a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Caveolin . Key component of caveolae . Classic Coats Classic coats are polymeric structures that form a cage around a membrane bud or vesicle . Components of the coats generate and / or adapt to membrane curvature both via direct interactions with the cargo proteins and the bilayer and by assembling into a curved polymer . In some cases , the assembly of these coats is generally initiated by a small GTPase that has curvature - generating / sensing properties ( amphipatic helix ) . The small GTPase helps recruit the adaptor layer . The adaptor layer may contain curved surfaces or amphipatic helices . The outer layer is represented by elongated proteins that assemble to form a cage - like structure . COP II Coat . Regulates vesicular transport from the ER to the Golgi complex . COPI Coat . Regulates vesicular transport from the Golgi complex to the ER and between Golgi cisternae . Clathrin Coat . Regulates vesicle budding from the trans - Golgi , the plasma membrane , and the endosomal compartment . Caveolar Coat The high curvature of these membrane buds had been assigned primarily to caveolin ( see above , Membrane Embedding ) . More recently , cavin , a peripheral membrane protein that assembles at their surface , was shown to have a critical role in their formation and stability . Scaffolds with a Curved Membrane Interface Some proteins bind the bilayer via a curved surface . However , polymerization of these proteins , generally into helical structures , helps to impose and propagate curvature . For other proteins , the curved interface is generated by their polymerization into rings or helices . BAR Domain Superfamily BAR ( Bin , amphiphysin and Rvs161 / 167 ) domains are α - helical coiled - coil structures that dimerize into protein modules to generate a positive charged surface with intrinsic curvature . Based on their structures , they can be subgrouped in different families with different intrinsic curvature of their bilayer binding surface : shallow and narrow concave curvature in F - BAR and BAR ( including N - BAR ) , respectively , and convex curvature in I - BAR ( inverse - BAR ) . BAR domains are often closely associated with additional membrane binding modules , such as PH domains and PX domains , which enhance membrane affinity . In N - BAR domains , an amphipathic N - terminal helix facilitates bilayer curvature sens - ing and induction . Examples of BAR proteins include : Amphiphysin . N - BAR - domain - containing accessory factor in endocytosis . LSP1 . One of the main structural components of the eisosomes ; groove - like invaginations of the plasma membrane in fungi . Endophilin . N - BAR - domain containing endocytic protein ( see Amphipathic Helices ) . Cryo - EM analysis of an endophilin polymer revealed that amphipathic helices can interact in trans to stabilize the BAR domain polymer ( see figure ) . APPL1 . Protein of early endosomes with traffic and signaling functions . SNX9 . PX - BAR - domain - containing protein implicated in endocytosis and actin regulation . FBP17 / TOCA1 / CIP4 and Pacsin1 . F - BAR domain proteins , which may coordinate endocytic invaginations with reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . FCHO2 . F - BAR - domain - containing protein involved in an early step of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . IRSp53 . I - BAR protein thought to coordinate actin cytoskeleton rearrangement and filopodia formation . ESCRTIII Subcomplex of the ESCRT system that is implicated in the formation of intraluminal vesicles of multivesicular bodies . CHMP3 , a core component of ESCRTIII that mediates bud invagination and vesicle fission , has a convex bilayer binding surface and further undergoes helical polymerization . 1300 . e2 Cell 150 , September 14 , 2012 ©2012 Elsevier Inc . DOI http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 08 . 017 SnapShot : Membrane Curvature Sensors and Generators Hongying Shen , Michelle Pirruccello , and Pietro De Camilli Department of Cell Biology , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , and Program in Cellular Neuroscience , Neurodegeneration and Repair , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06510 , USA ATPases and GTPases Dynamin . GTPase implicated in endocytic vesicle fission that oligomerizes into spirals defining a curved membrane binding interface . Its GTPase activity , which is dependent on its assembly , leads to vesicle fission EHD2 . ATPase involved in the endocytic pathway , which oligomerizes into rings . Its bilayer binding interface ( see loop insertion ) and its oligomerization define its curvature generating / sensing properties . Acknowledgments Helical wheel diagrams were made with Heliquest . Molecular representations were rendered with PyMOL ( The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System , Version 1 . 5 . 0 . 1 ) . PDB codes for structures are as follows : 2QPT ( EHD1 ) , 3FRT ( CHMP3 ) , 1K5W ( C2 of synaptotagmin 1 ) , 3SNH ( dynamin 1 ) , 1Y2O ( I - BAR domain of IRSp53 ) , 3HAH ( F - BAR domain of Pacsin1 ) , 2Z0V ( N - BAR domain of endophilin A3 ) , 2RAK ( PX - BAR domain of SNX9 ) , 2ELB ( BAR - PH domain of APPL1 ) , 2EFK ( F - BAR domain of CIP4 ) , 2V0O ( F - BAR domain of FCHO2 ) , 2C08 ( N - BAR domain of endophilin A1 ) , 3PLT ( BAR domain of LSP ) , and 1URU ( N - BAR domain of Amphiphysin ) . RefeRences Antonny , B . ( 2011 ) . Mechanisms of membrane curvature sensing . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 80 , 101 – 123 . Drin , G . , Casella , J . F . , Gautier , R . , Boehmer , T . , Schwartz , T . U . , and Antonny , B . ( 2007 ) . A general amphipathic α - helical motif for sensing membrane curvature . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 , 138 – 146 . Farsad , K . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2003 ) . Mechanisms of membrane deformation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 372 – 381 . Frost , A . , Unger , V . M . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2009 ) . The BAR domain superfamily : membrane - molding macromolecules . Cell 137 , 191 – 196 . Gautier , R . , Douguet , D . , Antonny , B . , and Drin , G . ( 2008 ) . HELIQUEST : a web server to screen sequences with specific α - helical properties . Bioinformatics 24 , 2101 – 2102 . Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) . Three ways to make a vesicle . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 187 – 198 . Kozlov , M . M . , McMahon , H . T . , and Chernomordik , L . V . ( 2010 ) . Protein - driven membrane stresses in fusion and fission . Trends Biochem . Sci . 35 , 699 – 706 . McMahon , H . T . , and Gallop , J . L . ( 2005 ) . Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 438 , 590 – 596 . Rothman , J . E . ( 1994 ) . Mechanisms of intracellular protein transport . Nature 372 , 55 – 63 . Shibata , Y . , Hu , J . , Kozlov , M . M . , and Rapoport , T . A . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms shaping the membranes of cellular organelles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 25 , 329 – 354 . Zanetti , G . , Pahuja , K . B . , Studer , S . , Shim , S . , and Schekman , R . ( 2012 ) . COPII and the regulation of protein sorting in mammals . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 20 – 28 .