Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Business Research journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jbusres Building networks into discovery : The link between entrepreneur network capability and entrepreneurial opportunity discovery ☆ Rui Shu a , Shenggang Ren b , ⁎ , Yi Zheng c a Antai College of Economics and Management , Shanghai Jiao Tong University , Shanghai , China b School of Business , Central South University , Changsha , China c Guanghua School of Management , Peking University , Beijing , China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Network capability Opportunity discovery Network centrality Ties strength Power distance A B S T R A C T Social networking is increasingly important to entrepreneurs because it can help them to recognize valuable opportunities . A model of entrepreneur network capability concerning the agent role of nascent entrepreneurs in developing and managing social networks , which is further related to entrepreneurial opportunity discovery , is proposed in this study . Drawing on the tie generation and network management literature , we propose en - trepreneur network capability as a four - dimensional construct , including network orientation , network building , network maintenance , and network coordination . A sample of 212 nascent Chinese entrepreneurs collected at two time points supported the positive relationship between network capability and opportunity discovery after controlling for entrepreneurs ' prior knowledge , cognitive bias , and political skills . Further , the relationship was found to be mediated by enhanced network con ﬁ guration ( i . e . , network centrality ) and moderated by en - trepreneurs ' power distance orientations . Entrepreneurs ' network capability exerted a stronger e ﬀ ect on op - portunity discovery for those of low power distance . The implications of our ﬁ ndings are discussed . Market imperfections provide potential for entrepreneurs to create economic returns by introducing new goods and services , ways of or - ganizing , markets , processes , and raw materials through organizing e ﬀ orts that previously had not existed ( Kirzner , 1979 ; Shane , 2003 ) . When someone makes a “ conjecture that a set of resources is not put to best use ” , entrepreneurial opportunity can be discovered ( Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 , p . 220 ) . As the crucial initial step in the en - trepreneurial process ( Ozgen & Baron , 2007 ; Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) , opportunity discovery has been acknowledged as a central construct and outcome of the agenda of entrepreneurship research be - cause it may result in the formation of new ﬁ rms ( Foss & Foss , 2008 ; Foss , Lyngsie , & Zahra , 2013 ; Shane , 2003 ; Shane , 2012 ) . Opportunity discovery consists of actions initiated by individuals directed at iden - tifying a neglected opportunity ( Foss et al . , 2013 ) . Despite their ob - jective existence ( e . g . , unexplored technologies , processes , and mar - kets ) , entrepreneurial opportunities are not open to everyone . Thus , scholars have been enthusiastic about exploring why some are able to discover new business ideas while others are not ( Baron , 2004 ; Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) . The current literature generally provides two perspectives for un - derstanding the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities ( Arenius & De Clercq , 2005 ; Suddaby , Bruton , & Si , 2015 ) . The ﬁ rst one explores how the internal knowledge of entrepreneurs in ﬂ uences their recogni - tion of opportunities , such as prior knowledge or experience ( Baron & Ensley , 2006 ; Dimov , 2010 ; Ucbasaran , Westhead , & Wright , 2009 ) , creativity ( Gielnik , Frese , Graf , & Kampschulte , 2012 ; Shane & Nicolaou , 2015 ) , and cognitive processes ( De Carolis , Litzky , & Eddleston , 2009 ; De Carolis & Saparito , 2006 ) . The second perspective focuses on how entrepreneurs search for and acquire information from external sources , and social networks have been dominant in this per - spective ( Arenius & De Clercq , 2005 ; Bhagavatula , Elfring , van Tilburg , & van de Bunt , 2010 ; Davidsson & Honig , 2003 ; Ma , Huang , & Shenkar , 2011 ; Ozgen & Baron , 2007 ) . The network - based entrepreneurial research has accumulated rich knowledge about the role of social networks in the discovery of op - portunities . Since information is distributed according to the unique life circumstances of each person ( Venkataraman , 1997 ) , social networks help entrepreneurs to establish information corridors across popula - tions , close knowledge gaps and reduce the uncertainties facing them . Considerable evidence has shown that high - quality network relation - ships or superior network positions facilitate the discovery of en - trepreneurial opportunities ( Arenius & De Clercq , 2005 ; Davidsson & https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2017 . 12 . 048 Received 22 March 2016 ; Received in revised form 25 December 2017 ; Accepted 27 December 2017 ☆ This research was supported by research grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( No . 71372064 ) . ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : shurui @ sjtu . edu . cn ( R . Shu ) , renshenggang1975 @ csu . edu . cn ( S . Ren ) , zhengyi @ pku . edu . cn ( Y . Zheng ) . Journal of Business Research 85 ( 2018 ) 197 – 208 0148 - 2963 / © 2018 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . T Honig , 2003 ; Hoang & Antoncic , 2003 ; Jack , 2010 ; Ma et al . , 2011 ; Street & Cameron , 2007 ) . However , network ties are not born naturally . Research has so far exclusively addressed network characteristics as exogenous variables and has discussed how di ﬀ erent network con ﬁ gurations are linked to entrepreneurial success ( Semrau & Sigmund , 2012 ; Stuart & Sorenson , 2007 ) , but only a few studies have investigated how entrepreneurs proactively construct their networks in the ﬁ rst place ( e . g . , Baron & Tang , 2009 ; Maurer & Ebers , 2006 ) . Previous research has indicated that people generally di ﬀ er in their abilities to proactively and dyna - mically develop and manage entrepreneurial networks in which they can bene ﬁ t from certain types of network ties ( Stuart & Sorenson , 2007 ) . For example , Maurer and Ebers ( 2006 ) compared six bio - technology start - ups , the founders of which were initially similar in their network embeddedness ( essentially consisting of scienti ﬁ c pro - fessionals ) . They found that only some of these start - ups survived and became successful . The founders of the more successful ﬁ rms developed and managed their network ties intentionally , helping new ventures to connect with various communities , such as lawyers and politicians . The founders of the less successful ﬁ rms , in contrast , experienced both re - lational and cognitive locks in their scienti ﬁ c communities , which im - peded their ability to acquire necessary information regarding the market and industry . Unfortunately , this agentic role of entrepreneurs in the entrepreneurial network has not been well conceptualized in the research on entrepreneurial opportunity . In the current study , we developed a framework to capture in - dividual di ﬀ erences in the abilities to develop and manage network ties , de ﬁ ned as entrepreneur network capability ( ENC ) . We propose en - trepreneur network capability as a four - dimensional construct that ex - plains how entrepreneurs motivate , build , maintain and coordinate network ties to facilitate the discovery of opportunities . First , we dis - cuss the theoretical domain of the construct and develop the mea - surement scales . Then , hypotheses concerning the possible e ﬀ ects of entrepreneur network capability on opportunity discovery are pro - posed . In particular , entrepreneur network capability is expected to have a positive in ﬂ uence on opportunity discovery through two paths : a ) an enhanced entrepreneurial structure con ﬁ guration ( i . e . , network centrality ) ; and b ) improved relational quality ( i . e . , tie strength ) . Finally , we examine the potential boundary conditions of network capability on outcomes regarding entrepreneurs ' cultural value by ex - amining the role of power distance orientation . Our research intends to contribute to the entrepreneurship literature by conceptualizing the variations in entrepreneurs ' ability to acquire external support from social networks and establishing the linkages among entrepreneur network capability , entrepreneurial network con - ﬁ gurations and opportunity discovery . Research on opportunity dis - covery has focused on certain individual characteristics that facilitate new venture creation , mainly from the cognitive perspective , such as creativity and propensity for risk ( cf . George , Parida , Lahti , & Wincent , 2016 ) . Although some research has noted the role of traits related to social relationships ( i . e . , social competence , Baron & Tang , 2009 ) , such explorations re ﬂ ect only part of the full picture in one ' s ability to de - velop and manage entrepreneurial networks . Further , rather than dis - cussing the e ﬀ ects of existing network con ﬁ gurations on opportunity discovery , we focus on the agentic role of entrepreneurs in the oppor - tunity discovery process , thus extending our understanding of how superior entrepreneurial networks can be achieved and proactively changed . Finally , our research examines the interesting question of the circumstances under which the role of network capability will be am - pli ﬁ ed or inhibited by discussing the internalized cultural values of entrepreneurs . Since individual culture value exerts signi ﬁ cant in ﬂ u - ence that directs entrepreneurs ' behavior , examining the personal ability - value interaction could better reveal the complicated me - chanism underlying the process of opportunity discovery . 1 . Theories and hypotheses 1 . 1 . Entrepreneur network capability Since no existing theories of network development adequately capture the unique context and challenges faced by nascent en - trepreneurs , we derive our model by integrating and drawing lessons from existing theories of tie generation processes ( e . g . , Nebus , 2006 ) , corporation network management ( e . g . , Möller & Halinen , 1999 ) and social competence ( e . g . , Baron & Markman , 2003 ) . Theories of tie generation focus on the dyadic tie formation process , and these theories have posited that a tie is formed as a result of personal preference ( Farh , Bartol , Shapiro , & Shin , 2010 ; Nebus , 2006 ) . Motivation is the primary factor that in ﬂ uences one ' s intention to engage in a particular behavior ( Vroom , 1964 ) . A person will use social networks to seek information when he / she holds a positive belief or valence toward the role of the network in entrepreneurial activities ( i . e . , network orientation ) . Another important perspective in understanding the ENC is grounded in the network management theory of the ﬁ rm ( i . e . , Möller & Halinen , 1999 ) . Möller and Halinen ( 1999 ) proposed that ﬁ rms were facing a fundamental change from traditional markets to networks of interrelated ﬁ rms under the increasing competitiveness of business environments . To cope with the challenges in managing di ﬀ erent levels of business relationships , ﬁ rms must develop corresponding cap - abilities . For example , ﬁ rms must create a valid strategic view of the networks from which opportunities can be perceived . In addition , ﬁ rms must evaluate the value of each relationship so that they can develop an optimal customer / supplier portfolio . Based on their theoretical frame - works , some of the following studies have also been proposed to ad - dress similar questions . For example , Walter , Auer , and Ritter ( 2006 ) proposed and de ﬁ ned a spin - o ﬀ ﬁ rm ' s abilities to initiate , maintain , and utilize relationships with various external partners . This research had important implications for network capability from a process perspec - tive . The ﬁ nal perspective emphasizes interpersonal communication skills during networking ( Baron & Markman , 2003 ) . Social competence is considered to be one ' s overall e ﬀ ectiveness in interacting with others . Scholars have proposed that entrepreneurs should be able to perceive accurately , to make good ﬁ rst impressions , or to change their attitudes when interacting with contacts ( e . g . , venture capitalists , potential customers ) ( Baron & Markman , 2003 ) . Considering that ENC is an in - dividual characteristic of social interaction , social competence is in - evitable when building and maintaining relationships with others . Combining the above perspectives , we developed the construct of ENC to describe the individual ' s motivation and behaviors in sensing , building , maintaining , and coordinating their network relationships as methods to attain access to entrepreneurial information and resources . Essentially , entrepreneurs with high ENC positively believe in the im - portance of social networking and are prepared to proactively expand their networks , maintain and strengthen their network ties , and ap - propriately utilize and coordinate various relationships . We treat ENC as a composite construct with four dimensions : network orientation , network building , network maintenance , and network coordination ( See Fig . 1 ) . Network orientation is the extent to which a person is willing to depend on social networks in his / her daily socialization . We argue that people with high levels of network orientation would like to maintain the norms of dependence , cooperation , and reciprocation because they tend to believe that friends or social connections can secure their sur - vival in an uncertain society . Research has shown that people with high network orientation capitalize more on interpersonal relationships to bridge resource or information gaps between unlinked or outside sta - keholders ( Su , Yang , Zhuang , Zhou , & Dou , 2009 ) . Once they derive bene ﬁ ts from their connections , they are expected to return the favor a few times over . Network building refers to relational e ﬀ orts to expand social R . Shu et al . Journal of Business Research 85 ( 2018 ) 197 – 208 198