antibodies Review Small - Format Drug Conjugates : A Viable Alternative to ADCs for Solid Tumours ? Mahendra P . Deonarain 1 , 2 , * ID , Gokhan Yahioglu 1 , 2 , Ioanna Stamati 1 , Anja Pomowski 1 , James Clarke 1 , Bryan M . Edwards 1 , Soraya Diez - Posada 1 and Ashleigh C . Stewart 1 1 Antikor Biopharma Ltd . , Stevenage Bioscience Catalyst , Gunnels Wood Road , Stevenage Herts SG12FX , UK ; g . yahioglu @ antikor . co . uk ( G . Y . ) ; i . stamati @ antikor . co . uk ( I . S . ) ; a . pomowski @ antikor . co . uk ( A . P . ) ; j . clarke @ antikor . co . uk ( J . C . ) ; b . edwards @ antikor . co . uk ( B . M . E . ) ; s . diez - posada @ antikor . co . uk ( S . D . - P . ) ; a . stewart @ antikor . co . uk ( A . C . S . ) 2 Department of Chemistry , Imperial College London , Exhibition Road , London SW72AZ , UK * Correspondence : m . deonarain @ antikor . co . uk ; Tel . : + 44 - 01438 - 906 - 780 Received : 16 February 2018 ; Accepted : 8 March 2018 ; Published : 30 March 2018 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) Abstract : Antibody – Drug Conjugates ( ADCs ) have been through multiple cycles of technological innovation since the concept was ﬁrst practically demonstrated ~ 40 years ago . Current technology is focusing on large , whole immunoglobulin formats ( of which there are approaching 100 in clinical development ) , many with site - speciﬁcally conjugated payloads numbering 2 or 4 . Despite the success of trastuzumab - emtansine in breast cancer , ADCs have generally failed to have an impact in solid tumours , leading many to explore alternative , smaller formats which have better penetrating properties as well as more rapid pharmacokinetics ( PK ) . This review describes research and development progress over the last ~ 10 years obtained from the primary literature or conferences covering over a dozen different smaller format - drug conjugates from 80 kDa to around 1 kDa in total size . In general , these agents are potent in vitro , particularly more recent ones incorporating ultra - potent payloads such as auristatins or maytansinoids , but this potency proﬁle changes when testing in vivo due to the more rapid clearance . Strategies to manipulate the PK properties , whilst retaining the more effective tumour penetrating properties could at last make small - format drug conjugates viable alternative therapeutics to the more established ADCs . Keywords : antibody – drug conjugate ; fragment ; alternative scaffold ; penetration ; pharmacokinetics 1 . Introduction There is unlikely to be a better example of multi - disciplinary innovation in oncology therapeutics than in the ﬁeld of Antibody Drug Conjugates ( ADCs ) . With multiple waves of emerging technologies and their implementation into clinical applications , it is a truly exciting time to be in this R & D space . We have seen many reﬁnements from the original concept , practically exempliﬁed 40 or more years ago , with just about every minute aspect being investigated . These reﬁnements include the payload killing mechanism , linker release action , antibody conjugation position , and the overall chemistry to build an ADC which is maximally effective and well - tolerated in humans . There are now 4 approved products with over 100 ADC candidates in clinical trials [ 1 , 2 ] and even more in preclinical development [ 2 , 3 ] , but these are all based on reﬁnements of the same whole immunoglobulin - G ( IgG ) format . The marketed and clinical pipeline is disproportionately biased towards haematological cancers [ 4 ] since treating solid tumours with large macromolecules remains a risk and a challenge [ 5 , 6 ] . This review will focus on an emerging area [ 7 ] where smaller formats are being used to deliver the cytotoxic payload . The superior tumour penetration and rapid systemic clearance properties [ 8 , 9 ] offer an alternative and potentially a wider therapeutic window than the larger ADCs , which take Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / antib7020016 www . mdpi . com / journal / antibodies Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 2 of 19 days to reach peak accumulation and weeks to clear from the body [ 10 , 11 ] . Unlike ADCs which have well understood pharmacokinetics ( PK ) it is not known what the ideal PK proﬁle will be for a small - molecule , peptide , small binding protein or antibody fragment – drug conjugate . What is clear is that the payload will have a greater impact on this PK proﬁle as well as the biophysical properties such as aggregation and target binding , due to it being a more dominating feature of the conjugate complex ( Figure 1 ) . Because of this , the design of the linker payload will need special consideration . Antibodies 2018 , 7 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 19 offer an alternative and potentially a wider therapeutic window than the larger ADCs , which take days to reach peak accumulation and weeks to clear from the body [ 10 , 11 ] . Unlike ADCs which have well understood pharmacokinetics ( PK ) it is not known what the ideal PK profile will be for a small - molecule , peptide , small binding protein or antibody fragment - drug conjugate . What is clear is that the payload will have a greater impact on this PK profile as well as the biophysical properties such as aggregation and target binding , due to it being a more dominating feature of the conjugate complex ( Figure 1 ) . Because of this , the design of the linker payload will need special consideration . Figure 1 . Illustration of the various formats for Antibody ( Fragment ) or alternative scaffold – drug conjugates . The protein or peptide formats are drawn to scale with an MMAE payload using published Protein Database files ( https : / / www . rcsb . org ) as follows : ( a ) IgG - DAR4 , 1igy [ 12 ] , ( b ) SIP - DAR2 ( modelled on 5c2b [ 13 ] ) , ( c ) diabody - DAR4 , 5fcs [ 14 ] , ( d ) Fab - DAR2 , 5n2k [ 15 ] , ( e ) scFv - DAR8 , 5c2b [ 13 ] , ( f ) dAb , VH domain - DAR1 , 5tsj [ 16 ] , ( g ) DARPIn - DAR1 , 4j7w [ 17 ] , ( h ) Adnectin - DAR1 , 3qwr [ 18 ] , ( i ) Affibody - DAR1 , 1lp1 [ 19 ] , ( j ) Knottin - DAR1 1w7z [ 20 ] , ( k ) Bicycle - DAR1 , 5i8m [ 21 ] . The payload used for illustrative purposes is MMAE , 5iyz _ 4q5 [ 22 ] which is hypothetically conjugated to surface residues such as lysines ( IgG , Fab , scFv ) or C - terminal residues such as cysteine ( SIP , Diabody , dAb , alternative scaffolds ) . The molecular weights indicated are for the protein without payload . The focus of this review will be therapeutic drug conjugates , smaller than the IgG - based ADC formats where the payload is a small cytotoxic molecule , with toxin fusion proteins and radio - immuno - conjugates excluded . More general topics such as ADC and payload action will not be covered as they are reviewed adequately elsewhere ( for examples [ 3 , 5 , 7 , 23 ] and within this special issue . 2 . Uptake and Tumour Penetration of Smaller Binding Formats Antibody uptake is a complicated issue , made even more problematical when considering ADCs as the payload being delivered is an active cytotoxic . There are many excellent practical [ 24 , 25 ] and theoretical papers covering this topic [ 26 , 27 ] . Total antibody uptake must be considered separately from tumour penetration . If an ADC - payload does not access and kill all parts of the tumour mass , therapy will be poorly effective despite high overall uptake . Perhaps worse , zones of marginal cytotoxic drug concentrations could foster drug resistance rendering therapy completely ineffective [ 23 , 28 ] . Tumour targeting of a systemically administered antibody involves 4 major steps . Blood flow to the tumour , transport across the capillary wall ( extravasation ) , diffusion through the tissue and binding / internalisation at the cell surface [ 26 ] . Blood flow can be 100 – 1000× faster than the slowest of these steps , extravasation , meaning that the ADC concentration at the perivascular boundary of a Figure 1 . Illustration of the various formats for Antibody ( Fragment ) or alternative scaffold – drug conjugates . The protein or peptide formats are drawn to scale with an MMAE payload using published Protein Database ﬁles ( https : / / www . rcsb . org ) as follows : ( a ) IgG - DAR4 , 1igy [ 12 ] , ( b ) SIP - DAR2 ( modelled on 5c2b [ 13 ] ) , ( c ) diabody - DAR4 , 5fcs [ 14 ] , ( d ) Fab - DAR2 , 5n2k [ 15 ] , ( e ) scFv - DAR8 , 5c2b [ 13 ] , ( f ) dAb , VH domain - DAR1 , 5tsj [ 16 ] , ( g ) DARPIn - DAR1 , 4j7w [ 17 ] , ( h ) Adnectin - DAR1 , 3qwr [ 18 ] , ( i ) Afﬁbody - DAR1 , 1lp1 [ 19 ] , ( j ) Knottin - DAR1 1w7z [ 20 ] , ( k ) Bicycle - DAR1 , 5i8m [ 21 ] . The payload used for illustrative purposes is MMAE , 5iyz _ 4q5 [ 22 ] which is hypothetically conjugated to surface residues such as lysines ( IgG , Fab , scFv ) or C - terminal residues such as cysteine ( SIP , Diabody , dAb , alternative scaffolds ) . The molecular weights indicated are for the protein without payload . The focus of this review will be therapeutic drug conjugates , smaller than the IgG - based ADC formats where the payload is a small cytotoxic molecule , with toxin fusion proteins and radio - immuno - conjugates excluded . More general topics such as ADC and payload action will not be covered as they are reviewed adequately elsewhere ( for examples [ 3 , 5 , 7 , 23 ] and within this special issue . 2 . Uptake and Tumour Penetration of Smaller Binding Formats Antibody uptake is a complicated issue , made even more problematical when considering ADCs as the payload being delivered is an active cytotoxic . There are many excellent practical [ 24 , 25 ] and theoretical papers covering this topic [ 26 , 27 ] . Total antibody uptake must be considered separately from tumour penetration . If an ADC - payload does not access and kill all parts of the tumour mass , therapy will be poorly effective despite high overall uptake . Perhaps worse , zones of marginal cytotoxic drug concentrations could foster drug resistance rendering therapy completely ineffective [ 23 , 28 ] . Tumour targeting of a systemically administered antibody involves 4 major steps . Blood ﬂow to the tumour , transport across the capillary wall ( extravasation ) , diffusion through the tissue and binding / internalisation at the cell surface [ 26 ] . Blood ﬂow can be 100 – 1000 × faster than the slowest of these steps , extravasation , meaning that the ADC concentration at the perivascular boundary of a tumour can be 2 – 3 orders of magnitude lower than the bulk plasma concentration [ 29 ] . The high interstitial pressure within solid tumours hinders local convection meaning that the main method Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 3 of 19 of transport through the tumour is diffusion [ 26 ] . Extravasation and diffusion are faster for smaller molecules ( leading to a larger volume of distribution [ 8 ] ) compared to large antibodies but the long half - life of IgG helps to deliver more absolute antibody to the tumour . Whole IgG has a slower target - independent clearance rate ( days compared to hours / minutes for smaller formats ) due to salvage recycling by the neonatal Fc receptor ( FcRn ) pathway and exclusion from renal ﬁltration ( cut - off ~ 60 – 70 kDa ) . This latter point was practically illustrated by Adams et al . [ 24 ] , supported by modelling from Thurber et al . [ 26 ] , that the uptake for single - chain variable fragments ( scFvs ) can approach that of IgG in nephrectomised mice , due to the impaired renal clearance . Tumour penetration and micro - distribution is another complicated topic as it is inﬂuenced by many factors including dose / systemic clearance , antigen density , extra - cellular matrix structure , receptor internalisation rates , binding afﬁnity , diffusion rate / coefﬁcient and format biophysical size ( hydrodynamic / Stokes’ radius ) [ 30 ] . Modelling of ADCs [ 31 ] and antibodies [ 26 , 29 ] found that high receptor levels hindered penetration due to the target mopping up the ADC diffusing from the capillary . Modelling cytotoxicity has suggested a direct reduction in tumour killing potency and that 10 4 – 10 5 receptors / cell was seen as the maximum [ 31 ] . Consistent with this , slower internalisation rates are needed for highly expressed receptors as this allowed better penetration leading to better efﬁcacy . Monovalent binders , which typify most of the antibody fragments , and alternative scaffolds may help here by having reduced internalisation rates due to no cross - linking . The reverse was seen for low receptor expression . High afﬁnity is important for low receptor expression but anything stronger than 10 nM K D ( equilibrium dissociation constant ) was not favoured for highly - expressing receptors , leading to a front of bound antibody within a tumour with little penetration beyond it ( ‘binding site barrier’ ) [ 32 , 33 ] . Practical [ 32 , 34 , 35 ] and theoretical [ 27 , 29 ] studies support the concept that due to their smaller physical radius and hence faster diffusion and extravasation coefficients , antibody fragments and smaller formats penetrate tumours more rapidly than immunoglobulins . But the trade - off is lower overall uptake due to other major factors such as systemic clearance and endocytic / tumour catabolism , meaning that solid tumours never reach saturation with targeted drug , which is important for cure efficacy [ 36 ] . For cytotoxic therapies , tumour penetration and killing potency is only half of the equation . Tolerability and adverse effects need to be minimised if the required concentrations needed for efﬁcacy are to be obtained in patients . This is where smaller formats can make a difference . The lack of an Fc domain reduces cross - reactivity with Fc - receptors on various normal cells , and the lower overall plasma exposure to normal tissues reduces the likelihood of the payload decoupling and intoxicating non - target cells . These factors can help to increase the overall therapeutic window which for solid tumours needs to be at least 10 - times larger than in haematological cancers to drive the penetration deep into the tumour [ 37 ] . As demonstrated with scFvs , high affinity restricts tumour uptake due to the binding site barrier effect , with the optimal affinity for high overall percentage uptake being 1 . 0 – 0 . 1 nM for HER2 [ 24 ] . However , lower affinities resulted in more even penetration . Primarily , perivascular binding was seen with a 10 pM affinity anti - HER2 scFv whereas 4 - times better penetration was seen for lower affinity scFvs [ 32 ] . In another example , an 8 nM affinity gave more even penetration than 30 pM for CEA scFvs at high doses [ 29 ] . 3 . Antibody Fragment – Drug Conjugates When considering smaller formats of ADCs , antibody fragments are an obvious choice . These can be potentially more stable , especially fragments that do not contain the more thermo - labile CH2 domain . Many ADC patents include claims relating to antibody fragment drug conjugates ( FDCs ) however , without practical examples . Fragment antibody ( Fab ) fragments can have the remnant of the IgG hinge region leaving a natural thiol / disulﬁde conjugation point , but more often than not , C - terminal cysteines are speciﬁcally engineered , following the trend with IgG site - speciﬁc conjugation strategies [ 3 , 5 ] . Thiol or disulﬁde re - bridging technologies for conjugation are well established and Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 4 of 19 extensively reviewed elsewhere [ 38 ] . Next - generation maleimide linkers have addressed the instability seen with thioether bonds in early generation ADCs . Glycan conjugations are not usually followed due to the primarily prokaryotic manufacturing systems used for antibody fragments , but non - natural amino acid incorporation and enzymatic conjugation approaches are still very applicable [ 39 ] . 3 . 1 . Fab – Drug Conjugates The Fab format has largely been superseded by recombinant single - chain formats such as the scFv , diabodies ( head - to - tail dimer of a scFv ) , and single domain antibodies . There have been reports of Fab – Drug Conjugates with low potency payloads such as paclitaxel [ 40 ] or doxorubicin [ 41 ] which have micromolar to low nanomolar potency . These values would be ineffective for an ADC with higher uptake , so it was no surprise that these were also poorly efﬁcacious . Using a current - generation MMAE payload , an anti - HER2 trastuzumab Fab drug conjugate had sub - nanomolar potency in vitro but required alternate day dosing at 20 mg / kg to achieve any sort of tumour growth control [ 42 ] . A Trop2 - targeting Fab - doxorubicin conjugate , of unknown drug to antibody ratio ( DAR ) had a high nM potency and modest in vivo efﬁcacy when given at 6 mg / kg every two days ( equivalent to 2 mg / kg doxorubicin payload ) [ 43 ] , conjugated via a maleimide linker to the Fab thiols . An anti - CD20 Fab with two residual hinge thiols was conjugated to a homogenous DAR 2 using doxorubicin containing sizable ( 2 kDa ) PEG chains . The in vivo pharmacokinetic impact was not investigated , but presumably these PEG chains were needed to overcome the high hydrophobicity of the payload . As expected these Fab drug conjugates were not very potent ( only 20 – 30 % cell kill at 10 µ g / mL , approximately 200 nM range ) resulting in a modest reduction in tumour growth in vivo ( 1 mg / kg equivalent of doxorubicin ) . Although all the animal body weights deteriorated in the study , the conjugate was better tolerated [ 44 ] . Developing a protein - A based solid phase conjugation method , Puthenveetil et al . [ 45 ] produced a trastuzumab Fab drug conjugate , dual labelled with a cleavable and non - cleavable auristatin - based payload ( overall DAR 3 ) . This had an in vitro potency of 0 . 7 – 0 . 9 nM ( 37 – 43 ng / mL ) , similar to the Fab drug conjugate described by Badescu et al . [ 42 ] and likely to have similar weak in vivo efﬁcacy . The most potent Fab drug conjugate to date , with an EC 50 of ~ 100 pM acts as a bispeciﬁc antibody re - targeting cytotoxic T - cells , rather than a conventional ADC [ 46 ] . Here , the payload was dicarboxypropyl ureido pentanedioic acid ( DUPA ) , a small - molecule ligand selective for prostate - speciﬁc membrane antigens . Interestingly , the half - life of the conjugate was extended to around 5 - times the typical 1 h half - life of the unmodiﬁed Fab , resulting in a good PK proﬁle for efﬁcacy especially compared to other small format T - cell engagers of similar molecular weight . This was attributed to the increased hydrophobicity , although no biodistribution data was shown . 3 . 2 . Diabody – Drug Conjugates Kim et al . [ 47 ] provided the ﬁrst comprehensive analysis of a potent antibody fragment drug conjugate using an anti - CD30 diabody with 4 cysteine thiols conjugated to MMAE and MMAF payloads bearing maleimide linkers . The diabody ADC ( using MMAF , which was 4 to 7 - fold more potent than MMAE ) with a DAR of around 4 was compared to an equivalent IgG ADC . Hence , the two formats had comparable DARs and valency . The whole antibody - based ADC was around 4 - fold more potent in vitro but around three times more diabody drug conjugate dose was needed to match the ADCs in vivo efﬁcacy ( 7 . 2 vs . 2 mg / kg ) . Crucially , the diabody – drug conjugate had a faster blood clearance reﬂected by its smaller size , but the 30 - fold lower exposure level only led to a 3 - fold drop in efﬁcacy . The renal clearance expected of such fragments was not evident , suggesting that the payload had a major inﬂuence leading to a re - distribution of conjugate to the liver . Commercially , diabody - like formats are being developed as ADCs , notably Avipep’s ‘Avimers’ [ 48 ] . DARs of 2 and 4 have been obtained on engineered diabodies . Drug candidates such as AVP10 ( lymphoma ) are being developed , but the Company’s lead product is a radio - labelled Avimer AVP04 . Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 5 of 19 3 . 3 . SIP – Drug Conjugates Neri and co - workers have had a great deal of success developing anti - tumour vasculature scFvs and small immuno - proteins ( SIPs - scFvs dimerised using a CH ε 4 - domain , therefore approximately half the size of an IgG ) against ﬁbronectin and similar targets [ 49 – 54 ] . Tumour vascular targets like these are more accessible , stable , and common to many tumour types . The SIP format is favoured due to higher tumour uptake compared to smaller antibody fragments , but has greater speciﬁcity / contrast compared to IgGs . The incorporation of two C - terminal cysteines allows payload conjugation using disulﬁde and other chemistries [ 49 , 50 ] . There are not many examples of ADCs targeting non - internalising antigens as the generally accepted view is that the conjugate needs to be internalised for the payload to be efficiently released to reach the DNA or tubulin target . Neri’s approach for anti - vasculature targeting using high - affinity antibody fragments works well as there are no penetration issues , but the mechanism is subtly different with extracellular payload release and complete vasculature destruction leading to tumour regression . The C - terminal disulfide on the F8 anti - EDA ( fibronectin ) SIP allowed direct coupling of thiol - bearing payloads that have a ‘traceless’ linker . Their observation was that the more exposed the thiol was , the less stable the ADC was , supporting other thiol - positioning and site - specific conjugation ADC ideas [ 50 ] . Using a moderately potent payload , cemadotin , ADCs were made that caused tumour growth delays at 43 mg / kg [ 49 ] . In this mechanism , dying cells release reducing moieties such as GSH and Cys , which can reduce the disulﬁde of the linker - payload , releasing the payload to diffuse into the tumour cell . An ampliﬁcation of this effect happens as more cells die . The bystander effect of killing tumours without targets is likely to be stronger if the drug is released outside the cell . The F8 antibody was also conjugated to the more potent DM1 payload with well - tolerated cures being observed at three doses of 7 mg / kg given three times [ 51 ] . Another non - internalising antibody , F16 ( anti - tenascin - C ) was conjugated to cleavable valine - citrulline - MMAE ( vcMMAE ) via engineered cysteines . The resulting SIP drug conjugate with a DAR 2 , was not as stable as the IgG equivalent in serum and this was further supported by a therapy in tumour bearing mice where the IgG signiﬁcantly outperformed the SIP drug conjugate dosed four times at 7 mg / kg [ 52 ] . However , this approach showed that payloads could be proteolytically released in the extra - cellular space , further opening up the opportunity for targeting solid tumours via easier to access stromal / vasculature targets . A further innovation was the incorporation of N - terminal cysteines ( C - terminal was also possible ) , which generates a 1 , 2 - aminothiol that can be conjugated to aldehyde - bearing payloads forming a thiazolidine linker . Using cemadotin , nanomolar potency ADCs were obtained using an F8 diabody [ 53 ] . A side - by - side comparison of IgG vs . SIP antibody fragment format was made using the F8 antibody and DM1 payload conjugated at a DAR 2 as a C - terminal disulﬁde [ 54 ] . As expected , the SIP – drug conjugate accumulated into the tumour and cleared more rapidly and the 24 h uptake levels were more than 4 - times higher for the IgG ADC . The payload on the ADC was at least 10 - times more stable , but the SIP conjugate was more effective even on a molar basis . The authors attributed the faster drug release leading to higher tumour payload exposure over a shorter period of time ( rather than slow - release as seen with an ADC ) being the reason for the better performance [ 54 ] . Neri has also combined their ADC approach with their more advanced immunocytokine antibody fusion proteins to generate trifunctional antibodies ( F8 diabody - IL2 fusion protein with a cysteine in the linker for thiol payload conjugation ) that have an immunostimulatory function as well as being an ADC . The synergistic behaviour was thought to be due to dying cells having increased immune - stimulatory power . This is called an IDC ( immunocytokine drug conjugate ) . This format was exceptionally potent at around 0 . 5 mg / kg in an F9 teratocarcinoma model [ 55 ] . 3 . 4 . scFv – Drug Conjugates Single - chain Fvs are a versatile fragment format , arguably the corner - stone of many antibody discovery programs . However , even with a DAR as high as 14 : 1 , achieved by conjugating onto oxidized Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 6 of 19 dextran [ 56 ] , a scFv - adriamycin FDC had potency in the low nM range and modest efﬁcacy in vivo suggesting a low delivery rate . Targeted photodynamic therapy ( T - PDT ) can be considered a form of ADC where the payload ( a photosensitiser ) needs to be further activated using light ( usually a laser ) . Quite often , antibody fragments are used to reduce systemic exposure before laser illumination takes place . Such light - activated ADCs could have reduced side - effects compared to conventional ADCs as the cytotoxicity is separated from the tumour targeting . Our team spent many years developing this approach , carefully matching the linker - payload to the format for optimal conjugation [ 57 , 58 ] . However , despite compelling in vivo data ( tumour cures at 4 mg / kg in a HER2 model ) , this could not be translated into a viable oncology drug candidate . Boyle , in collaboration with Neri’s group , also generated strong data with evidence of immune - cell involvement in the therapeutic efﬁcacy [ 59 ] . One advantage of T - PDT is that the photosensitiser can have other useful optical properties that can be used , for example in imaging . These so - called combined therapeutic - diagnostic agents ( ‘theranostic’ ) could have the dual purpose of imaging tumour location as well as destroying them . IR dyes have been favoured for this approach . An anti - EGFR scFv appended with a SNAP tag was site - speciﬁcally coupled to an IR700 dye ( DAR 1 ) to give a visible ﬂuorescent conjugate with photo - immunotoxicity values in the 45 – 66 nM range for EGFR - expressing ovarian cancer cell lines [ 60 ] . Where the photosensitizer had an emission spectrum unsuitable for imaging , dual payload conjugates onto antibody fragments ( photosensitizer and imaging dye ) have been described [ 61 ] . Through our commercial enterprise , Antikor , we have developed exceptionally potent scFv drug conjugates , branded ‘FDC’ for Fragment – Drug Conjugates . Using ideas about payload spatial separation on a small surface , we discovered that high DAR FDCs , only achievable using surface - exposed lysine residues , were exceptionally potent . The FDCs retained their rapid tumour penetration but had a surprisingly slower plasma clearance rate which was not expected for its small size , still below the renal clearance threshold . DARs of 8 – 10 were achieved which apparently precluded renal clearance and redistributed clearance to the liver as seen in ADCs . Nanomolar potencies were seen with moderate cytotoxicity payloads such as dolostatin - 10 and picomolar potencies were seen with MMAE and MMAF in vitro . This lead to tumour cures at more viable drug dosing regimens than seen before ( up to twice per week ) , whilst still being well - tolerated [ 62 ] . More effective tumour penetration was observed compared to comparable ADCs and , despite the high quantity of payload being exposed for a shorter period of time , the high - DAR FDCs were better tolerated [ 63 ] . 3 . 5 . Domain Antibody – Drug Conjugates In the public domain , antibody fragment – drug conjugates using VH or VH - like domains have been disclosed as pilot projects but have not progressed . This includes companies like Ablynx ( nanobody domain antibody technology ) . Crescendo Biologics Humabody - FDCs comprise ~ 15 kDa low - DAR conjugates half - life extended using albumin - binding humabodies to retain the beneﬁts of tumour penetration [ 64 ] . 4 . Scaffold – Drug Conjugates ( SDCs ) The non - antibody binding scaffold ﬁeld is emerging commercially after many years of R & D . There is only one marketed product , Kalbitor ® ( ecallantide ) ( Shire , Cambridge , MA , USA ) a kallikrein inhibitor for the treatment of hereditary angioedema discovered from a library of Kunitz domains [ 65 ] . However , interest has been growing because they promise to solve the problems posed by conventional antibodies such as expensive manufacturing , glycosylation , formulation , penetration , and thermostability . For example , the type - III ﬁbronectin domain scaffolds Adnectin - BMS and Tn3 - MedImmune have melting temperatures of 84 – 100 ◦ C . These scaffolds tend to be smaller than antibody fragments ranging from 6 – 21 kDa , can be expressed at high yield in E . coli , selected by in vitro display and have higher stability [ 65 ] . The majority of applications are for imaging ( due to excellent Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 7 of 19 contrast ratios ) and receptor / ligand inhibition ( VEGF , PD1 , CTLA4 , IL23 , IL6 , chymase , and kalkrein , etc . ) . Only scaffold companies who have disclosed intentions to develop SDCs will be mentioned here . A recent commercial analysis of this space [ 66 ] identiﬁed 84 unique alternative scaffold products in development with 82 % in preclinical / discovery stage and 40 % aimed at oncology . Relatively few ( 6 ) were Scaffold – Drug Conjugates ( SDCs ) . 4 . 1 . Afﬁbody – Drug Conjugates Afﬁbody is a small 6 . 5 kDa , 3 - helix , Staphylococcus protein - A , Z - domain derivative with a serum half - life of around 20 min . These are one of the oldest known non - antibody binding scaffolds ( reported ~ 20 years ago ) and have predominantly been developed as imaging or anti - inﬂammatory agents with clinical candidates [ 67 , 68 ] . Substantial protein engineering and phage display has led to binders with low pM afﬁnity [ 67 ] . Academic afﬁbody SDCs have been described . For example , one targeting HER2 ( ZHER : 342 ) with an Idarubicin payload was described with preliminary in vitro data [ 69 ] . A high afﬁnity anti - HER2 afﬁbody ( ZHER2891 ) was conjugated via a site - speciﬁcally engineered thiol to releasable vcMMAE ( DAR 1 ) . In vitro potencies on high HER2 - expressing cells lines were in the low nM range [ 70 ] . Half - life extended Afﬁbody - SDCs were made by appending an IgG Fc which also induced dimerisation [ 71 ] . The higher afﬁnity species had increased potency in vitro ( 130 pM ) on HER2 - expressing SKBr3 cells . No in vivo data has been shown for these types of conjugates . 4 . 2 . Fibronectin Type III – Drug Conjugates Centyrins , a ~ 100 - residue / 10 kDa , thiol - free scaffold , are based on the type - III ﬁbronectin domain which can bind to targets with sub - nM afﬁnity with high thermal and chemical stability . Towards making stable Centyrin - SDCs , 94 residues of an anti - EGFR , 100 pM afﬁnity Centyrin were mutated to cysteines and conjugated to a releasable and non - releasable derivative of MMAF at a DAR of 1 [ 72 ] . The parental scaffold ( 83v2 ) had a Tm of 71 ◦ C and various mutants were discarded due to reduced stability ( Tm as low as 46 ◦ C ) , poor expression and reduced target binding . The two most potent SDCs ( N7C and E54C ) had an IC 50 of around 0 . 2 nM using vcMMAF as the payload , which was ~ 3 × better over the 83v2 SDC with a C - terminal conjugation tag . This was explained by improved folding or proteolytic stability predicted from the accompanying Centyrin X - ray crystal structure . It remains to be seen if these two mutant - enhanced in vitro properties translate in vivo once tumour penetration and uptake pharmacokinetics come into play [ 72 ] . A similar conjugate carrying a near infra - red imaging payload ( being developed for ﬂuorescence - guided surgery ) demonstrated peak tumour uptake after 6 – 12 h with signiﬁcant tumour retention after 48 h [ 73 ] . No cytotoxic drug – conjugate work has been disclosed on other ﬁbronectin scaffolds such as Adnectins or Tn3 - based scaffolds . 4 . 3 . Cystine Knot – Drug Conjugates Cystine knots are 30 – 50 residue polypeptides that have remarkable chemical - , protease - , and thermal - stability properties , due to their highly - compact structure [ 74 ] . This makes them attractive as delivery vehicles . They also have potential in oral delivery . Inhibitor Cystine knot proteins are known as knottins . An Integrin - binding , internalising knottin EETI - 5F ( ~ 1 nM K D ) has previously been demonstrated to have high contrast as an imaging agent with low normal tissue retention . The knottin - SDC strategy used was to incorporate a non - natural amino acid ( via solid phase synthesis ) bearing an azide chemical group for azide - alkyne conjugation of a gemcitabine payload . Four SDCs were made with various linkers ( ester , carbamate , amide and val - ala - PAB ) . Binding afﬁnity was retained with the releasable peptide linker but the ester linker caused an almost 5 × reduction . In vitro potency on U87MG glioma cells was around 8 × less potent than the free gemcitabine drug ( 8 . 5 – 9 nM ) with the ester linked payload being ineffective . A key observation was that the SDC was able to overcome drug resistance on PANC - 1 pancreatic cancer cells , increasing the potency of gemcitabine from 52 . 8 nM to 2 . 1 nM . No in vivo data was presented [ 75 ] . Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 8 of 19 This work was extended by using cell - free protein synthesis to generate a more ADC - like molecule by appending Fc - domains to the knottin . Copper - free click chemistry was used to attach a more potent MMAF payload for a DAR of 2 . IC 50 values were similar compared to the gemcitabine conjugates ( 9 nM on U87MG cells ) , but tumour growth delay was seen in vivo at 10 mg / kg dosing given twice / week for three weeks [ 76 ] . A synthetic knottin , chlorotoxin ( TM601 ) was conjugated to the broad - spectrum chemotherapy drug cis - platin ( via a succinate link to the free / exposed N - terminal amine ) . TM601 binds to matrix metalloprotease 2 which is up - regulated in gliomas and related cancers . Conjugation to the 3 ε - amino groups were avoided by carrying out the conjugation reaction at pH 7 – 8 which favours α - amino groups . Puriﬁcation and analysis demonstrated a DAR of 1 . The chlorotoxin - SDC had micromolar low potency ( 12 – 14 µ M ) that was poorer than that of free cisplatin ( 2 – 11 µ M ) , suggesting the payload release was ineffective . Compared to the use of more potent payloads , these conjugates cannot compete with more potent conjugates in clinical development . Backbone - cyclised cystine knot proteins , known as cyclotides , are also being developed commercially [ 77 ] but no drug - conjugates have been disclosed . 4 . 4 . DARPin Drug Conjugates The Designed Ankyrin Repeat class of scaffold proteins are well - advanced with 4 clinical - stage products [ 78 ] . These are based on the naturally - occurring ankyrin repeats that can form a continuous binding site whilst displaying high biophysical and protease stability . A high - afﬁnity ( 129 pM ) anti - EpCAM DARPin with a C - terminal cysteine residue for site - speciﬁc conjugation was further functionalised with an N - terminal non - natural amino acid azidohomo - alanine for a second conjugation position . This allowed N - terminal attachment of mouse serum albumin as a half - life extension moiety using copper - free click chemistry . C - terminal thiol conjugation of MMAF ( DAR 1 ) formed a DARPin SDC with a potency of around 400 pM for target - expressing cells . In vivo bio - availability was increased 22 - fold to around 17 . 4 h due to the albumin , but the in vivo efﬁcacy beneﬁts were not explored [ 79 ] . 4 . 5 . Abdurin – Drug Conjugates Unlike most of the alternative binding scaffolds , abdurins retain the ability to bind to the neonatal Fc receptor and have an extended serum half - life . They are a recently - emerging scaffold based on engineered IgG CH2 domains , 1 / 10th the size ( ~ 15 kDa ) , thermo - stable with 3 loops that can be diversiﬁed to form libraries of binders . An anti - ephA2 binder was discovered with 13 nM afﬁnity for the target and 12 nM afﬁnity for human FcRn [ 80 ] . Recently , Abdurin - SDC conjugates were described [ 81 ] using CyPEG conjugation and vcMMAE payload ( DAR 1 ) . Signiﬁcant loss of target and FcRn binding afﬁnity was observed but moderate in vivo efﬁcacy was seen in PC3 xenograft studies . Dimeric conjugates using the Thiobridge technology ( Abzena ) has helped to maintain binding afﬁnities . 5 . Peptide – Drug Conjugates Peptides ( ~ 1 – 3 kDa ) have even faster penetration properties and a more rapid elimination rate compared to the scaffolds and antibodies described above . Their attractive synthetic manufacturing and ability to incorporate stabilising non - natural residues / chemical moieties at ease leads to many exploitable features as drug - conjugates . 5 . 1 . Pentarin – Drug Conjugates Small peptides are known natural receptor ligands and researchers have gone on to develop synthetic derivatives that have discovery and manufacturing advantages . Peptide display has enabled the rapid isolation of binders through many innovative approaches . The pentarin ( pen = penetrate , tar = target ) platform consists of small peptides ( < 2 kDa ) that can be made into pentarin - drug conjugates ( PDC ) , developed by Tarveda ( formerly Blend ) Therapeutics [ 82 ] . Their lead compound is PEN - 221 , a somatostatin receptor - 2 ( SSTR2 ) targeting octreotide peptide analogue coupled to Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 9 of 19 DM1 maytansine . SSTR2 is expressed on neuroendocrine tumours , including small cell lung cancer . Other payloads ( auristatin E and carbazitaxel ) were screened and found to be less effective . DM1 conjugated to the C - terminal side - chain of the disulﬁde - cyclised Tyr 3 - octreotate was selected as PEN - 221 , was selective for the SSTR2 receptor with 22 pM afﬁnity , rapidly internalised and a cytotoxic potency of 136 nM on NCI - H524 cells [ 82 ] . Interestingly , a more labile disulﬁde linker as opposed to a hindered disulﬁde was more efﬁcacious despite being more stable in vivo . Tumour uptake of DM1 was seen to occur rapidly upon dosing , peaking at 2 h . Remarkably , two doses of 2 mg / kg PEN21 were enough to cure H524MD lung cancer tumours ( SSTR2 - expressing ) , whereas two doses of 1 mg / kg were needed to cure HCC33 tumours . PEN221 is now in phase 1 clinical trials for SSTR2 - expressing tumours [ 83 ] . The follow - up compound is PEN866 , a PDC carrying the SN38 payload targeting the heat - shock protein chaperone HSP90 , up - regulated in many cancers , is currently recruiting for a phase 1 / 2a clinical trial for solid cancers ( colon , small cell lung and sarcoma ) sensitive to topoisomerase I inhibitors [ 84 ] . 5 . 2 . ‘Bicycle’ – Drug Conjugates Bicyclic peptide ( ‘bicycles’ ) can be discovered by phage display techniques using peptide libraries with three ﬁxed cysteines cyclised with a reagent such as TBMB . Less rigid than monocyclic peptides , higher afﬁnities and increased stability can be obtained [ 85 ] . Technology discovered and developed by Heinis and Winter [ 86 ] is now being commercialised by Bicycle Therapeutics Ltd . , including Bicycle - Drug Conjugates ( BDCs ) . A bicyclic peptide recognising the MT1 - MMP ( human matrix metalloprotease 14 ) with an afﬁnity of 1 . 5 nM K D was discovered by phage display and chemically synthesised ( incorporating some non - natural amino acids to increase stability ) to include a DOTA chelating group for gadolinium PET imaging . MT1 - MMP is overexpressed in multiple cancers including triple negative breast , non - small cell lung , and soft tissue sarcoma . Rapid tumour accumulation was seen within 1 h , with little uptake elsewhere except for kidney and bladder ( renal clearance route ) [ 87 ] . BT1718 is a BDC based on this bicyclic peptide carrying a DM1 payload via a hindered disulﬁde linker . A number of different linkers were screened before the ﬁnal candidate was selected . It has rodent / cynomolgus species cross - reactivity and plasma stability of more than 20 h . Conjugation of the payload results in BT1718 with an afﬁnity of 3 nM . In a variety of high - expressing MT1 - MMP NSCLC models , efﬁcacy was seen at 3 and 5 mg / kg BDC given twice - weekly for two - four weeks . Complete cures were seen at 10 mg / kg . Similar results were seen in high - expressing MT1 - MMP patient - derived models , all with good tolerability as measured by body weight [ 88 ] . 5 . 3 . RGD Peptide – Drug Conjugates Other key developments have involved conjugates of cytotoxic agents with the RGD - peptides ( Arg – Gly – Asp ) targeting integrin receptors ( which play a key role in cell adhesion ) over - expressed in many solid cancers . The RGD motif was recognised as the minimal recognition sequence that bind to α v β 3 / 5 receptors , which also retain the ability to be internalised . Similar chemistry concepts have been appliedto the linker - payload and attachment . Many RGD - paclitaxel conjugates have been described with IC 50 values ranging from 1 – 100 nM , with tumour cure efﬁcacies at a well - tolerated 36 mg / kg given frequently ( twice / week ) . Similar potencies have been observed for RGD - doxorubicin and RGD - platinum based conjugates and many more have been described , including MMAE - based conjugates [ 89 ] . 6 . Small - Molecule – Drug Conjugates ( SMDCs ) 6 . 1 . CA - IX Ligand – Drug Conjugates The smallest format of drug conjugate would be those containing a small chemical moiety as the targeting ligand . Examples of this include the approved anti - glaucoma drug acetazolamide ( AAZ ) , a ligand for the tumour and hypoxia - associated target carbonic anhydrase IX ( CA - IX ) . Here , SMDCs Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 10 of 19 with a DAR of one using two payloads were evaluated [ 90 ] . The targeting ligand itself enabled rapid tumour targeting with signiﬁcant uptake ( 13 . 4 % of the injected dose per gram of tissue , higher than some antibodies’ peak uptake ) and contrast within 1 h . An AAZ - Duocarmycin conjugate only showed modest tumour growth inhibition , but the AAZ - DM1 was tumouristatic and well tolerated for up to 20 days if administered every day for 7 days ( 70 nmol of DM1 per dose ) . The lack of cures was attributed to the moderate afﬁnity ( ~ 12 nM ) which could be overcome by increasing afﬁnity by dimerization . CA - IX does not signiﬁcantly internalise , so the linker - payload strategy was a disulﬁde - based extracellular release mechanism , which also may account for the reduced potency compared to standard internalising ADCs . A higher afﬁnity bivalent AAZ - DM1 drug conjugate , that demonstrated practically no dissociation and better tumour retention was more efﬁcacious in vivo with 33 % cures when dosed for 7 sequential days at 35 nmol [ 91 ] . Higher doses were not well tolerated . A high afﬁnity AAZ - based CA - IX targeting SMDC ( DAR1 ) was compared directly to a corresponding ADC ( DAR 2 ) using the vcMMAE payload [ 92 ] . An exceptionally high peak uptake ( ~ 40 % ID / g tumour ) and speciﬁcity ratio ( ~ 100 : 1 ) was seen for the SMDC , with superior tumour penetration . Comparing similar payload dosing , the ADC was more efﬁcacious than the SMDC but a signiﬁcant affect was seen with a non - binding ADC . The non - binding SMDC was ineffective demonstrating clear speciﬁcity with the smaller format and a possible slow - release effect of the ADC format . More rapid payload release to match the pharmacokinetics of the SMDC may improve its efﬁcacy . 6 . 2 . PSMA Ligand – Drug Conjugates Endocyte have been innovating and developing SMDCs for a long time . They have published extensively on folate receptor ( expressed on ovarian cancers ) targeting vinca alkaloids and tubulysin payload conjugates . Until recently , their lead product candidate was EC1456 , a folate - tubulysin SMDC . However , in June 2017 , the clinical development of EC1456 was discontinued due to a lack of efﬁcacy and focus was switched to the development of EC1169 , a DUPA conjugate of tubulysin B hydrazide . DUPA is one of the highest afﬁnity small molecular ligands of prostate speciﬁc membrane antigen ( PSMA ) [ 93 ] , and is highly expressed in taxane - exposed metastatic castrate - resistance prostate cancer patients . As of July 2017 , a phase I trial with EC1169 was still recruiting and top - line data was expected at the end of 2017 . However , this product candidate does not appear in Endocyte’s pipeline or feature in their most recent investors’ presentation ( Jeffries conference , 2017 ) where CAR - T and targeted radiotherapy has taken prominence . Very little has been published on EC1169 , although a recent poster at ESMO in 2017 presented Phase 1b data showing that 6 . 5 mg / m 2 was well tolerated [ 94 ] . An extension of this idea was described by Kumar et al . [ 95 ] building a PMSA - targeting SMDC on a PEG scaffold that also incorporated a Gadolinium PET imaging agent ; a theranostic small molecule drug conjugate ( T - SMDC ) . Tumour - speciﬁc uptake was seen 1 h after administration with high kidney uptake . Cell - killing speciﬁcity was also demonstrated in vitro but no absolute potency values were shown for this moderate afﬁnity binding agent ( K D ~ 187 nM ) . 6 . 3 . Folate Ligand – Drug Conjugates Similar examples include vintafolide and etarfolatide , also developed by Endocyte . Both bear a folate analogue for targeting of cells overexpressing the folate receptor . Etarfolatide is then linked to a polydentate ligand , chelating an atom of technetium - 99m which can be used as an imaging agent to identify folate receptor expressing tumours . This is used in conjunction with vintafolide , which contains a folate analogue and a vinblastine payload joined by a dithiol cleavable linker . These SMDCs are currently in phase 2b testing against non - small - cell lung carcinoma and phase 3 testing for platinum - resistant ovarian cancer . However , an ovarian cancer study was abandoned in 2014 due to failure to improve survival [ 96 , 97 ] . Glutamic acid urea derivatives , targeting PSMA , mainly used for Tc - 99m imaging [ 98 ] and via a dendrimer linker to methotrexate ( MTX ) have also been reported [ 99 ] . Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 11 of 19 6 . 4 . Phosphatidylserine Ligand – Drug Conjugates Other new tumour - associated ligands that are being developed as SMDCs include phosphatidylserine ( PS ) , which is abundant in the tumour microenvironment . Molecular Targeting Technologies ( MTTI ) has licensed a technology platform developed at the University of Notre Dame based on zinc ( II ) dipicolylamine ( ZnDPA ) coordination complexes that speciﬁcally target PS . The lead product is ZnDPA conjugated to the topoisomerase I inhibitor SN - 38 through a proprietary enzyme cleavable linker [ 100 ] . 6 . 5 . Asialoglycoprotein Receptor Ligand – Drug Conjugates Asialoglycoprotein receptor ( ASGP - R ) belongs to the C - type lectin family and exhibits high afﬁnity for carbohydrates speciﬁcally galactose and N - acetylgalactosamine ( GalNAc ) . ASGP - R is abundantly expressed in hepatocytes and is an attractive target for receptor mediated drug delivery . Recent published work has described ASGP - R targeted conjugates with both doxorubicin and paclitaxel [ 101 ] . The resulting conjugates displayed high afﬁnity to the target but the doxorubicin conjugates were less toxic in vivo than drug alone . 7 . Discussion and Conclusions As illustrated by the many and varied array of small formats ( Figure 1 ; Table 1 ) , there is a lot of activity and innovation in this space . As a relatively new area , much of it does not get covered in mainstream ADC reviews . It is clear that small - format targeting vehicles are re - emerging commercially after the promising review by Hollinger et al . some 20 years [ 102 ] . A recent pipeline analysis in Nature Biotechnology supports this [ 103 ] . Included in this is the rise and commercial validation of alternative binding scaffolds which address the manufacturing and stability issues often encountered by antibodies and derived fragments , so the attachment of effector functions such as cytotoxic payloads is a natural choice . Other scaffolds that did not really ﬁnd a place in the body of this review include one approach by CytRx who are developing a prodrug payload that attaches to human serum albumin ( HSA ) , to form a drug - conjugate in vivo . Aldoxorubicin ( INNO - 206 ) , reacts with Cys - 34 of HSA . This albumin – drug conjugate allows the passive uptake of doxorubicin and tumour - selective release due to the acid - labile linker . This reduces cardiac toxicity side effects and is in Phase 3 clinical trials for soft tissue sarcoma [ 104 ] . Another example would include receptor - speciﬁc ligands such as Fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) . An FGF - vcMMAE conjugate ( ~ 15 kDa ) for breast , lung and gastric cancer demonstrated nanomolar potency dependent on receptor expression [ 105 ] . There could be many more examples of these to come but the proprietary position would be unclear . Small - format drug conjugates at ﬁrst look seem an ideal solution for solid tumours—better penetration , access to hidden epitopes otherwise inaccessible to larger antibodies , and lower non - target tissue exposure ( especially Fc - receptor binding that leads to thrombocytopenia and neutropenia in ADCs ) [ 106 ] are over - whelming beneﬁts that deserved to be exploited , but these improvements come at the expense of lower absolute uptake , a seemingly conﬂicting property . Small molecule ligands ( e . g . , AAZ or peptides ) overcome this somewhat due to their high peak uptake afforded by their rapid extravasation properties . Therefore , to translate the promising features of small formats and antibody fragments into patient beneﬁts will require a lot of research and development . It’s clear that this area is emerging with very little in vivo data available , especially for the alternative scaffolds . Where antibody fragment examples exist , small - format drug conjugates are generally inferior to ADCs due to lower overall payload delivery ( e . g . , Fabs and some scFv approaches ) . Notable examples are the diabody – drug conjugates described by Seattle Genetics [ 47 ] or highly - loaded scFv – drug conjugates described by Antikor Biopharma [ 62 , 63 ] where the efﬁcacy is starting to be comparable to ADCs . Could it be that the improved penetration is having an effect despite the more rapid elimination ( Figure 2 ) ? However , the patient value in terms of improved clinical tolerability and therapeutic index has yet to be shown . The topic of payload delivery format is indeed contentious . One key paper by Hinrichs Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 12 of 19 et al . [ 107 ] supports the idea that the overall tumour exposure of the payload drives the efﬁcacy as giving the ADC as an equivalent fractionated dose is as effective as fewer large doses , with better tolerability . This idea does not quite align with the concept of high peak dosing being favourable to drive tumour penetration , a key differentiating beneﬁt of smaller format ADCs . However , it was clearly shown that in order to achieve improved penetration of trastuzumab - emtansine , effectively raising the peak concentration using free trastuzumab did improve tumour penetration for many of the arguments described above [ 37 ] . To further complicate our understanding of the whole concept of ‘targeting’ , Neri’s comparison of the two extremes ( small and large ) of drug conjugates [ 92 ] indicated that a signiﬁcant part of the ADC property was the slow - release of the payload . Although surprising , if one can administer more payload systemically to drive the improved penetration and efﬁcacy without eliciting adverse effects , then perhaps we should not be comparing conjugates with the same quantity of payload . Perhaps it’s more informative to compare efﬁcacy at the maximum tolerated dose . This would be more clinically - relevant . Table 1 . Summary of the various small - format drug conjugates in clinical and pre - clinical development . Small Format Carrier Size ( kDa ) Small Format Carrier Target Payload Status [ Reference ] CommercialOrganisation ( If Any ) ~ 0 . 2 N - Acetyl - galactosamine Asialo - glycoprotein receptor doxorubicin , paclitaxel Pre - clinical R & D [ 101 ] ~ 0 . 2 Acetazolamide Carbonic anhydrase IX DM1 , duocarmycin Pre - clinical R & D [ 90 – 92 ] Philogen SA ~ 0 . 3 DUPA PSMA Tubulysin Pre - clinical R & D [ 94 ] Endocyte Inc . ~ 0 . 4 Folate Folate receptor Vinca alkaloid , Tubulysin Pre - clinical R & D [ 96 , 97 ] Endocyte Inc . ~ 0 . 7 Zinc dipicolylamine Phosphatidyl - serine SN38 Pre - clinical R & D [ 100 ] ~ 1 RGD - based peptides Intergrins Various : doxorubicin , vcMMAE , paclitaxel Pre - clinical R & D [ 89 ] 1 . 5 – 2 Bicycle ( bicyclic peptides ) Matrix metallo - protease 14 DM1 BT1718 is in Phase 1 / 2a clinical trials [ 86 – 88 ] Bicycle Therapeutics Ltd . ~ 3 – 5 Pentarin Somatostatinreceptor DM1 PEN - 221 is in Phase 1 / 2a clinical trials [ 82 – 84 ] Tarveda Inc . ~ 3 . 5 – 5 Cystine knots Integrin , Matrix metallo - protease 2 Gemcitabine , MMAF , Cis - platin 5 – 6 . 5 Afﬁbody HER2 Idarubicin , vcMMAE Pre - clinical R & D [ 67 – 69 ] Afﬁbody 7 Nanoﬁtin ( sac 7d ) ND * ND * Pre - clinical R & D [ 108 ] Afﬁlogic ~ 10 – 11 Centyrin EGFR vcMMAF Pre - clinical R & D [ 72 ] Janssen R & D LLP ~ 12 VH ( like ) domains ND * ND * Pre - clinical R & D CrescendoBiologicsLtd . 12 – 14 Afﬁmer ND * ND * Pre - clinical R & D [ 109 ] Avacta PLC ~ 15 – 18 DARPIn EpCAM MMAF Pre - clinical R & D [ 78 , 79 ] Molecular Partners AG ~ 15 Abdurin ephA2 vcMMAE Pre - clinical R & D [ 80 ] IRBM ~ 25 – 27 Single - chain Fv Various : HER2 , CEA , PLAP , Fibronectin , Tenascin - C Adriamycin , photosensitisers , Infra - red dyes , MMAF , vcMMAE , doxorubicin , cemadotin , dolostatin - 10 Pre - clinical R & D [ 56 – 63 ] Antikor Biopharma Ltd . ; Philogen SA Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 13 of 19 Table 1 . Cont . Small Format Carrier Size ( kDa ) Small Format Carrier Target Payload Status [ Reference ] CommercialOrganisation ( If Any ) ~ 55 – 60 Diabody CD30 MMAF Pre - clinical R & D [ 47 , 48 ] Seattle Genetics Inc . Avipep ~ 50 Fab Various : TROP2 , CD20 , HER2 Doxorubicin , vcMMAE , Auristatin Pre - clinical R & D [ 40 – 45 ] Abzena ~ 80 SIP - Small immunoprotein Fibronectin , Tenascin - C Cemadotin , DM1 Pre - clinical R & D [ 49 – 54 ] Philogen SA * ND—Not disclosed . Antibodies 2018 , 7 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 19 ~ 25 – 27 Single - chain Fv Various : HER2 , CEA , PLAP , Fibronectin , Tenascin - C Adriamycin , photosensitisers , Infra - red dyes , MMAF , vcMMAE , doxorubicin , cemadotin , dolostatin - 10 Pre - clinical R & D [ 56 – 63 ] Antikor Biopharma Ltd . ; Philogen SA ~ 55 – 60 Diabody CD30 MMAF Pre - clinical R & D [ 47 , 48 ] Seattle Genetics Inc . Avipep ~ 50 Fab Various : TROP2 , CD20 , HER2 Doxorubicin , vcMMAE , Auristatin Pre - clinical R & D [ 40 – 45 ] Abzena ~ 80 SIP - Small immunoprotein Fibronectin , Tenascin - C Cemadotin , DM1 Pre - clinical R & D [ 49 – 54 ] Philogen SA * ND—Not disclosed . Figure 2 . Schematic illustration of the potential mechanistic and pharmacokinetic differences between an ADC ( e . g . , from [ 110 ] and small format - drug conjugate . Many reports have demonstrated the uptake and clearance properties of large and small targeting agents . This figure proposes how smaller formats my bring certain advantages such as faster plasma clearance and improved penetration . Smaller formats may require more frequent doses as shown here . The importance of the payload cannot be under - estimated . There is a trend moving away from microtubule - inhibiting ( MTI ) - based payloads towards the more potent DNA - damaging agents that also act on non - proliferating cells . Around 40 % of MTI ADCs have been discontinued due to lack of efficacy [ 3 ] . But , increasing the potency of the payload may not be the solution because DNA - damaging agents may have cumulative toxicity ( unlike MTIs ) . Consequently , companies like Immunogen are ‘tuning down’ their payloads in order to find a ‘sweet spot’ leading to a larger therapeutic window [ 5 ] . Without more pre - clinical data in animal models and clinical efficacy / tolerability data , it is too early to say which will be the best small format for payload delivery . This may vary with indication , with tumours that have particular penetration challenges ( e . g . , pancreatic ) benefitting more from such an approach , so strategic development would have to include data where formats were compared in large volume or stromal - dense tumour models in order to select the most promising candidate . Efficacy is only half of the equation : better pre - clinical indicators of toxicity will be needed in order to describe a true therapeutic index that gives clinicians hope that enough of the therapeutic can be administered to humans to reach all parts of the tumour . This confirms the general consensus in oncology drug development , the eventual therapeutic window will need to be demonstrated in man and this will have required a careful choice of indication , target , and payload . Figure 2 . Schematic illustration of the potential mechanistic and pharmacokinetic differences between an ADC ( e . g . , from [ 110 ] and small format - drug conjugate . Many reports have demonstrated the uptake and clearance properties of large and small targeting agents . This ﬁgure proposes how smaller formats my bring certain advantages such as faster plasma clearance and improved penetration . Smaller formats may require more frequent doses as shown here . The importance of the payload cannot be under - estimated . There is a trend moving away from microtubule - inhibiting ( MTI ) - based payloads towards the more potent DNA - damaging agents that also act on non - proliferating cells . Around 40 % of MTI ADCs have been discontinued due to lack of efﬁcacy [ 3 ] . But , increasing the potency of the payload may not be the solution because DNA - damaging agents may have cumulative toxicity ( unlike MTIs ) . Consequently , companies like Immunogen are ‘tuning down’ their payloads in order to ﬁnd a ‘sweet spot’ leading to a larger therapeutic window [ 5 ] . Without more pre - clinical data in animal models and clinical efﬁcacy / tolerability data , it is too early to say which will be the best small format for payload delivery . This may vary with indication , with tumours that have particular penetration challenges ( e . g . , pancreatic ) beneﬁtting more from such an approach , so strategic development would have to include data where formats were compared in large volume or stromal - dense tumour models in order to select the most promising candidate . Efﬁcacy is only half of the equation : better pre - clinical indicators of toxicity will be needed in order to describe a true therapeutic index that gives clinicians hope that enough of the therapeutic can be administered to humans to reach all parts of the tumour . This conﬁrms the general consensus in oncology drug development , the eventual therapeutic window will need to be demonstrated in man and this will have required a careful choice of indication , target , and payload . Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 14 of 19 Conﬂicts of Interest : All the authors are employees and MPD , GY and IS are minor shareholders of Antikor Biopharma Ltd . , a small biotechnology company developing antibody - fragment drug conjugates . References 1 . Available online : https : / / clinicaltrials . gov ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 2 . Available online : https : / / pharma . globaldata . com / ( accessed on 2 November 2017 ) . 3 . Beck , A . ; Goetsch , L . ; Dumontet , C . ; Corvaïa , N . Strategies and challenges for the next generation of antibody - drug conjugates . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 2017 , 16 , 315 – 337 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 4 . Available online : https : / / www . beacon - intelligence . com ( accessed on 2 February 2017 ) . 5 . Lambert , J . M . ; Morris , C . Q . Antibody - Drug Conjugates ( ADCs ) for Personalized Treatment of Solid Tumors : A Review . Adv . Ther . 2017 , 34 , 1015 – 1035 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 6 . Beckman , R . A . ; Weiner , L . M . ; Davis , H . M . Antibody constructs in cancer therapy Protein engineering strategies to improve exposure in solid tumors . Cancer 2007 , 109 , 170 – 179 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 7 . Deonarain , M . P . ; Yahioglu , G . ; Stamati , I . ; Marklew , J . Emerging formats for next - generation antibody drug conjugates . Expert Opin . Drug Discov . 2015 , 10 , 463 – 481 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 8 . Li , Z . ; Krippendorff , B . F . ; Sharma , S . ; Walz , A . C . ; Lav é , T . ; Shah , D . K . Inﬂuence of molecular size on tissue distribution of antibody fragments . MAbs 2016 , 8 , 113 – 119 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 9 . Xenaki , K . T . ; Oliveira , S . ; van Bergen En Henegouwen , P . M . P . Antibody or Antibody Fragments : Implications for Molecular Imaging and Targeted Therapy of Solid Tumors . Front . Immunol . 2017 , 8 , 1287 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 10 . Freise , A . C . ; Wu , A . M . In vivo imaging with antibodies and engineered fragments . Mol . Immunol . 2015 , 67 , 142 – 152 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 11 . Malik , P . ; Phipps , C . ; Edginton , A . ; Blay , J . Pharmacokinetic Considerations for Antibody - Drug Conjugates against Cancer . Pharm . Res . 2017 , 34 , 2579 – 2595 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 12 . Harris , L . J . ; Shaletsky , E . ; McPerson , A . Crystallographic structure of an intact IgG1 monoclonal antibody . J . Mol . Biol . 1998 , 275 , 861 – 872 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 13 . Tu , C . ; Terrabube , V . ; Tam , A . ; Stochaj , W . ; Fennell , B . ; Lin , L . ; Stahl , M . ; LaVallie , E . ; Somers , W . ; Finlay , W . ; et al . Optimization of a SCFV - BASED BIOTHERAPEUTIC by CDR Side - Chain Clash Repair . 2018 . Available online : http : / / www . jbc . org / content / suppl / 2015 / 10 / 29 / M115 . 688010 . DC1 / jbc . M115 . 688010 - 1 . pdf ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 14 . Mosyak , L . ; Root , A . Development of PF - 06671008 , a Highly Potent Anti - P - cadherin / Anti - CD3 Bispeciﬁc DART Molecule with Extended Half - Life for the Treatment of Cancer . Antibodies 2016 , 5 , 6 . 15 . Bloch , Y . ; Bouchareychas , L . ; Merceron , R . ; Składanowska , K . ; Van den Bossche , L . ; Detry , S . ; Govindarajan , S . ; Elewaut , D . ; Haerynck , F . ; Dullaers , M . ; et al . Structural Activation of Pro - inﬂammatory Human Cytokine IL - 23 by Cognate IL - 23 Receptor Enables Recruitment of the Shared Receptor IL - 12R β 1 . Immunity 2018 , 48 , 45 – 58 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 16 . Davies , R . B . ; Smits , C . ; Wong , A . S . W . ; Stock , D . ; Christie , M . ; Sandin , S . ; Stewart , A . G . Cryo - EM analysis of a domain antibody bound rotary ATPase complex . J . Struct . Biol . 2017 , 197 , 350 – 353 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 17 . Seeger , M . A . ; Zbinden , R . ; Flütsch , A . ; Gutte , P . G . ; Engeler , S . ; Roschitzki - Voser , H . ; Grütter , M . G . Design , construction , and characterization of a second - generation DARP in library with reduced hydrophobicity . Protein Sci . 2013 , 22 , 1239 – 1257 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 18 . Ramamurthy , V . ; Krystek , S . R . , Jr . ; Bush , A . ; Wei , A . ; Emanuel , S . L . ; Das Gupta , R . ; Janjua , A . ; Cheng , L . ; Murdock , M . ; Abramczyk , B . ; et al . Structures of adnectin / protein complexes reveal an expanded binding footprint . Structure 2012 , 20 , 259 – 269 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 19 . Högbom , M . ; Eklund , M . ; Nygren , P . A . ; Nordlund , P . Structural basis for recognition by an in vitro evolved afﬁbody . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 3191 – 3196 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 20 . Krätzner , R . ; Debreczeni , J . E . ; Pape , T . ; Schneider , T . R . ; Wentzel , A . ; Olmar , H . ; Sheldrick , G . M . ; Uson , I . Structure of Ecballium elaterium trypsin inhibitor II ( EETI - II ) : A rigid molecular scaffold . Acta Crystallogr . D 2005 , 61 , 1255 – 1262 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 21 . Di Bonaventura , I . ; Jin , X . ; Visini , R . ; Probst , D . ; Javor , S . ; Gan , B . H . ; Michau , D . G . ; Natalello , A . ; Doglia , S . M . ; Köhler , T . ; et al . Chemical space guided discovery of antimicrobial bridged bicyclic peptides against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and its bioﬁlms . Chem . Sci . 2017 , 8 , 6784 – 6798 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 15 of 19 22 . Waight , A . B . ; Bargsten , K . ; Doronina , S . ; Steinmetz , M . O . ; Sussman , D . ; Prota , A . E . Structural Basis of Microtubule Destabilization by Potent Auristatin Anti - Mitotics . PLoS ONE 2016 , 11 , e0160890 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 23 . Drake , P . M . ; Rabuka , D . Recent Developments in ADC Technology : Preclinical Studies Signal Future Clinical Trends . BioDrugs 2017 , 31 , 521 – 531 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 24 . Adams , G . P . ; Schier , R . ; McCall , A . M . ; Simmons , H . H . ; Horak , E . M . ; Alpaugh , R . K . ; Marks , J . D . ; Weiner , L . M . High afﬁnity restricts the localization and tumor penetration of single - chain Fv antibody molecules . Cancer Res . 2001 , 61 , 4750 – 4755 . [ PubMed ] 25 . Beckman , R . A . ; von Roemeling , R . ; Scott , A . M . Monoclonal antibody dose determination and biodistribution into solid tumors . Ther . Deliv . 2011 , 2 , 333 – 344 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 26 . Thurber , G . M . ; Wittrup , K . D . A mechanistic compartmental model for total antibody uptake in tumors . J . Theor . Biol . 2012 , 314 , 57 – 68 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 27 . Orcutt , K . D . ; Adams , G . P . ; Wu , A . M . ; Silva , M . D . ; Harwell , C . ; Hoppin , J . ; Matsumura , M . ; Kotsuma , M . ; Greenberg , J . ; Scott , A . M . ; et al . Molecular Simulation of Receptor Occupancy and Tumor Penetration of an Antibody and Smaller Scaffolds : Application to Molecular Imaging . Mol . Imaging Biol . 2017 , 19 , 656 – 664 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 28 . Tan , Q . ; Saggar , J . K . ; Yu , M . ; Wang , M . ; Tannock , I . F . Mechanisms of Drug Resistance Related to the Microenvironment of Solid Tumors and Possible Strategies to Inhibit Them . Cancer J . 2015 , 21 , 254 – 262 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 29 . Thurber , G . M . ; Schmidt , M . M . ; Wittrup , K . D . Antibody tumor penetration : Transport opposed by systemic and antigen - mediated clearance . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 2008 , 60 , 1421 – 1434 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 30 . Minchinton , A . I . ; Tannock , I . F . Drug penetration into solid tumours . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2006 , 6 , 583 – 592 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 31 . Vasalou , C . ; Helmlinger , G . ; Gomes , B . A mechanistic tumor penetration model to guide antibody drug conjugate design . PLoS ONE 2015 , 10 , e0118977 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 32 . Rudnick , S . I . ; Lou , J . ; Shaller , C . C . ; Tang , Y . ; Klein - Szanto , J . ; Weiner , L . M . ; Marks , J . D . ; Adams , G . P . Inﬂuence of afﬁnity and antigen internalization on the uptake and penetration of Anti - HER2 antibodies in solid tumors . Cancer Res . 2011 , 71 , 2250 – 2259 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 33 . Jain , R . K . Delivery of molecular and cellular medicine to solid tumors . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 2001 , 46 , 149 – 168 . [ CrossRef ] 34 . Yokota , T . ; Milenic , D . E . ; Whitlow , M . ; Schlom , J . Rapid tumor penetration of a single - chain Fv and comparison with other immunoglobulin forms . Cancer Res . 1992 , 52 , 3402 – 3408 . [ PubMed ] 35 . Dennis , M . S . ; Jin , H . ; Dugger , D . Imaging tumors with an albumin - binding Fab , a novel tumor - targeting agent . Cancer Res . 2007 , 67 , 254 – 261 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 36 . Freeman , D . J . ; McDorman , K . ; Ogbagabriel , S . ; Kozlosky , C . ; Yang , B . B . ; Doshi , S . ; Perez - Ruxio , J . J . ; Fanslow , W . ; Starnes , C . ; Radinsky , R . Tumor penetration and epidermal growth factor receptor saturation by panitumumab correlate with antitumor activity in a preclinical model of human cancer . Mol . Cancer 2012 , 11 , 47 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 37 . Cilliers , C . ; Menezes , B . ; Nessler , I . ; Linderman , J . ; Thurber , G . Improved Tumor Penetration and Single - Cell Targeting of Antibody Drug Conjugates Increases Anticancer Efﬁcacy and Host Survival . Cancer Res . 2018 , 78 , 758 – 768 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 38 . Chudasama , V . ; Maruani , A . ; Caddick , S . Recent advances in the construction of antibody - drug conjugates . Nat . Chem . 2016 , 8 , 114 – 119 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 39 . Panowski , S . ; Bhakta , S . ; Raab , H . ; Polakis , P . ; Junutula , J . R . Site - speciﬁc antibody drug conjugates for cancer therapy . MAbs 2014 , 6 , 34 – 45 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 40 . Wang , X . ; Zhu , J . ; Zhao , P . In vitro efﬁcacy of immuno - chemotherapy with anti - EGFR human Fab - Taxol conjugate on A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells . Cancer Biol . Ther . 2007 , 6 , 980 – 987 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 41 . Chen , X . ; Ding , G . ; Gao , Q . ; Sun , J . ; Zhang , Q . ; Du , L . ; Qiu , Z . ; Wang , C . ; Zheng , F . ; Sun , B . ; et al . A human anti - c - Met Fab fragment conjugated with doxorubicin as targeted chemotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma . PLoS ONE 2013 , 8 , e63093 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 42 . Badescu , G . ; Bryant , P . ; Bird , M . ; Henseleit , K . ; Swierkosz , J . ; Parekh , V . ; Tommasi , R . ; Pawlisz , E . ; Jurlewicz , K . ; Farys , M . ; et al . Bridging disulﬁdes for stable and deﬁned antibody drug conjugates . Bioconjug . Chem . 2014 , 25 , 1124 – 1136 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 16 of 19 43 . Mao , Y . ; Wang , X . ; Zheng , F . ; Wang , C . ; Tang , Q . ; Tang , X . ; Xu , N . ; Zhang , H . ; Zhang , D . ; Xiong , L . ; et al . The tumor - inhibitory effectiveness of a novel anti - Trop2 Fab conjugate in pancreatic cancer . Oncotarget 2016 , 7 , 24810 – 24823 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 44 . Zhou , Z . ; Zhang , J . ; Zhang , Y . ; Ma , G . ; Su , Z . Speciﬁc Conjugation of the Hinge Region for Homogeneous Preparation of Antibody Fragment - Drug Conjugate : A Case Study for Doxorubicin - PEG - anti - CD20 Fab’ Synthesis . Bioconjug . Chem . 2016 , 27 , 238 – 246 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 45 . Puthenveetil , S . ; Loganzo , F . ; He , H . ; Dirico , K . ; Green , M . ; Teske , J . ; Musto , S . ; Clark , T . ; Rago , B . ; Koehn , F . ; et al . Natural Product Splicing Inhibitors : A New Class of Antibody - Drug Conjugate ( ADC ) Payloads . Bioconjug . Chem . 2016 , 27 , 1880 – 1888 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 46 . Kim , C . H . ; Axup , J . Y . ; Lawson , B . R . ; Yun , H . ; Tardif , V . ; Choi , S . H . ; Zhou , Q . ; Dubrovska , A . ; Biroc , S . L . ; Marsden , R . ; et al . Bispeciﬁc small molecule - antibody conjugate targeting prostate cancer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2013 , 110 , 17796 – 17801 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 47 . Kim , K . M . ; McDonagh , C . F . ; Westendorf , L . ; Brown , L . L . ; Sussman , D . ; Feist , T . ; Lyon , R . ; Alley , S . C . ; Okeley , N . M . ; Zhang , X . ; et al . Anti - CD30 diabody - drug conjugates with potent antitumor activity . Mol . Cancer Ther . 2008 , 7 , 2486 – 2497 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 48 . Available online : http : / / www . avipep . com . au / technology / background - on - avibodies / ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 49 . Bernardes , G . J . ; Casi , G . ; Trüssel , S . ; Hartmann , I . ; Schwager , K . ; Scheuermann , J . ; Neri , D . A traceless vascular - targeting antibody - drug conjugate for cancer therapy . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 2012 , 51 , 941 – 944 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 50 . Steiner , M . ; Hartmann , I . ; Perrino , E . ; Casi , G . ; Brighton , S . ; Jelesarov , I . ; Bernardes , G . J . L . ; Neri , D . Spacer length shapes drug release and therapeutic efﬁcacy of traceless disulﬁde - linked ADCs targeting the tumor neovasculature . Chem . Sci . 2013 , 4 , 297 – 302 . [ CrossRef ] 51 . Perrino , E . ; Steiner , M . ; Krall , N . ; Bernardes , G . J . ; Pretto , F . ; Casi , G . ; Neri , D . Curative properties of noninternalizing antibody - drug conjugates based on maytansinoids . Cancer Res . 2014 , 74 , 2569 – 2578 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 52 . G é bleux , R . ; Stringhini , M . ; Casanova , R . ; Soltermann , A . ; Neri , D . Non - internalizing antibody - drug conjugates display potent anti - cancer activity upon proteolytic release of monomethyl auristatin E in the subendothelial extracellular matrix . Int . J . Cancer 2017 , 140 , 1670 – 1679 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 53 . Casi , G . ; Huguenin - Dezot , N . ; Zuberbühler , K . ; Scheuermann , J . ; Neri , D . Site - speciﬁc traceless coupling of potent cytotoxic drugs to recombinant antibodies for pharmacodelivery . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2012 , 134 , 5887 – 5892 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 54 . G é bleux , R . ; Wulhfard , S . ; Casi , G . ; Neri , D . Antibody Format and Drug Release Rate Determine the Therapeutic Activity of Noninternalizing Antibody - Drug Conjugates . Mol . Cancer Ther . 2015 , 14 , 2606 – 2612 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 55 . List , T . ; Casi , G . ; Neri , D . A chemically deﬁned trifunctional antibody - cytokine - drug conjugate with potent antitumor activity . Mol . Cancer Ther . 2014 , 13 , 2641 – 2652 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 56 . Chen , L . ; Liu , Y . H . ; Li , Y . H . ; Jiang , Y . ; Xie , P . L . ; Zhou , G . H . ; Li , G . C . Anti - hepatoma human single - chain Fv antibody and adriamycin conjugates with potent antitumor activity . Int . Immunopharmacol . 2014 , 18 , 20 – 26 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 57 . Kuimova , M . K . ; Bhatti , M . ; Deonarain , M . ; Yahioglu , G . ; Levitt , J . A . ; Stamati , I . ; Suhling , K . ; Phillips , D . Fluorescence characterisation of multiply - loaded anti - HER2 single chain Fv - photosensitizer conjugates suitable for photodynamic therapy . Photochem . Photobiol . Sci . 2007 , 6 , 933 – 939 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 58 . Bhatti , M . ; Yahioglu , G . ; Milgrom , L . R . ; Garcia - Maya , M . ; Chester , K . A . ; Deonarain , M . P . Targeted photodynamic therapy with multiply - loaded recombinant antibody fragments . Int . J . Cancer 2008 , 122 , 1155 – 1163 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 59 . Palumbo , A . ; Hauler , F . ; Dziunycz , P . ; Schwager , K . ; Soltermann , A . ; Pretto , F . ; Alonso , C . ; Hofbauer , G . F . ; Boyle , R . W . ; Neri , D . A chemically modiﬁed antibody mediates complete eradication of tumours by selective disruption of tumour blood vessels . Br . J . Cancer 2011 , 104 , 1106 – 1115 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 60 . Bauerschlag , D . ; Meinhold - Heerlein , I . ; Maass , N . ; Bleilevens , A . ; Bräutigam , K . A . ; Rawashdeh , W . ; Di Fiore , S . ; Haugg , A . M . ; Gremse , F . ; Steitz , J . ; et al . Detection and Speciﬁc Elimination of EGFR ( + ) Ovarian Cancer Cells Using a Near Infrared Photoimmunotheranostic Approach . Pharm . Res . 2017 , 34 , 696 – 703 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 17 of 19 61 . Pye , H . ; Butt , M . A . ; Reinert , H . W . ; Maruani , A . ; Nunes , J . P . ; Marklew , J . S . ; Qurashi , M . ; Funnell , L . ; May , A . ; Stamati , I . ; et al . A HER2 selective theranostic agent for surgical resection guidance and photodynamic therapy . Photochem . Photobiol . Sci . 2016 , 15 , 1227 – 1238 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 62 . Deonarain , M . P . ; Yahioglu , G . ; Stamati , I . ; Saouros , S . ; Kapadnis , P . D . Biological Materials and Uses Thereof . PCT Patent WO 2 , 016 , 046 , 574 , 31 March 2016 . 63 . Deonarain , M . P . Fragment Antibody Fragment Drug Conjugates ( FDCs ) : A unique drug class or just smaller ADCs ? In Proceedings of the Protein Engineering Summit ( PEGS ) Conference , Lisbon , Portugal , 13 – 17 November 2017 . 64 . Rapid Optimal Assembly of Building Blocks to Create Humabody®Products . Available online : https : / / www . crescendobiologics . com / humabody / humabody - therapeutics / ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 65 . Vazquez - Lombardi , R . ; Phan , T . G . ; Zimmermann , C . ; Lowe , D . ; Jermutus , L . ; Christ , D . Challenges and opportunities for non - antibody scaffold drugs . Drug Discov . Today 2015 , 20 , 1271 – 1283 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 66 . Non - Antibody Protein Scaffolds : Drugs and Diagnostics Market , 2017 - 2030 . Available online : https : / / www . rootsanalysis . com / reports / view _ document / non - antibody - protein - scaffolds - drugs - and - diagnostics - market - 2017 - 2030 / 181 . html ( accessed on 31 January 2018 ) . 67 . Ståhl , S . ; Gräslund , T . ; Eriksson Karlström , A . ; Frejd , F . Y . ; Nygren , P . Å . ; Löfblom , J . Afﬁbody Molecules in Biotechnological and Medical Applications . Trends Biotechnol . 2017 , 35 , 691 – 712 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 68 . Frejd , F . Y . ; Kim , K . T . Afﬁbody molecules as engineered protein drugs . Exp . Mol . Med . 2017 , 24 , e306 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 69 . Ghanemi , M . ; Pourshohod , A . ; Ghaffari , M . A . ; Kheirollah , A . ; Amin , M . ; Zeinali , M . ; Jamalan , M . Speciﬁc targeting of HER2 - positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma line HN5 by Idarubicin - ZHER2 afﬁbody conjugate . Curr . Cancer Drug Targets 2017 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 70 . Sochaj - Gregorczyk , A . M . ; Serwotka - Suszczak , A . M . ; Otlewski , J . A Novel Afﬁbody - Auristatin E Conjugate With a Potent and Selective Activity against HER2 + Cell Lines . J . Immunother . 2016 , 39 , 223 – 232 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 71 . Sochaj - Gregorczyk , A . M . ; Ludzia , P . ; Kozdrowska , E . ; Jakimowicz , P . ; Sokolowska - Wedzina , A . ; Otlewski , J . Design and In Vitro Evaluation of a Cytotoxic Conjugate Based on the Anti - HER2 Afﬁbody Fused to the Fc Fragment of IgG1 . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2017 , 18 , 1688 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 72 . Goldberg , S . D . ; Cardoso , R . M . ; Lin , T . ; Spinka - Doms , T . ; Klein , D . ; Jacobs , S . A . ; Dudkin , V . ; Gilliland , G . ; O’Neil , K . T . Engineering a targeted delivery platform using Centyrins . Protein Eng . Des . Sel . 2016 , 29 , 563 – 572 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 73 . Mahalingam , S . M . ; Dudkin , V . Y . ; Goldberg , S . ; Klein , D . ; Yi , F . ; Singhal , S . ; O’Neil , K . T . ; Low , P . S . Evaluation of a Centyrin - Based Near - Infrared Probe for Fluorescence - Guided Surgery of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Positive Tumors . Bioconjug . Chem . 2017 , 28 , 2865 – 2873 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 74 . Kintzing , J . R . ; Cochran , J . R . Engineered knottin peptides as diagnostics , therapeutics and drug delivery vehicles . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 2016 , 34 , 143 – 150 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 75 . Cox , N . ; Kintzing , J . R . ; Smith , M . ; Grant , G . A . ; Cochran , J . R . Integrin - Targeting Knottin Peptide - Drug Conjugates Are Potent Inhibitors of Tumor Cell Proliferation . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 2016 , 55 , 9894 – 9897 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 76 . Currier , N . V . ; Ackerman , S . E . ; Kintzing , J . R . ; Chen , R . ; Filsinger Interrante , M . ; Steiner , A . ; Sato , A . K . ; Cochran , J . R . Targeted Drug Delivery with an Integrin - Binding Knottin - Fc - MMAF Conjugate Produced by Cell - Free Protein Synthesis . Mol . Cancer Ther . 2016 , 15 , 1291 – 1300 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 77 . Available online : http : / / www . cyclogenix . com ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 78 . Plückthun , A . Designed ankyrin repeat proteins ( DARPins ) : Binding proteins for research , diagnostics , and therapy . Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 2015 , 55 , 489 – 511 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 79 . Simon , M . ; Frey , R . ; Zangemeister - Wittke , U . ; Plückthun , A . Orthogonal assembly of a designed ankyrin repeat protein - cytotoxin conjugate with a clickable serum albumin module for half - life extension . Bioconjug . Chem . 2013 , 24 , 1955 – 1966 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 80 . Ullman , C . ; Mathonet , P . ; Oleksy , A . ; Diamandakis , A . ; Tomei , L . ; Demartis , A . ; Nardi , C . ; Sambucini , S . ; Missineo , A . ; Alt , K . ; et al . High Afﬁnity Binders to EphA2 Isolated from Abdurin Scaffold Libraries ; Characterization , Binding and Tumor Targeting . PLoS ONE 2015 , 10 , e0135278 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 81 . Peretti , S . Abdurin - Drug Conjugates : A New Generation of Targeted Therapeutics . In Proceedings of the Protein Engineering Summit ( PEGS ) Conference , Lisbon , Portugal , 13 – 17 November 2017 . Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 18 of 19 82 . White , B . H . ; Bazinet , P . ; Whalen , K . Discovery of PEN - 221 , an SSTR2 - targeting maytansinoid conjugate with potent activity in vitro and in vivo . In Proceedings of the American Association for Cancer Research Annual Conference , Washington , DC , USA , 1 – 5 April 2017 . 83 . PEN221 Clinical Trial . Available online : https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT02936323 ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 84 . PEN 866 Clinical Trial . Available online : https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT03221400 ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 85 . Deyle , K . ; Kong , X . D . ; Heinis , C . Phage Selection of Cyclic Peptides for Application in Research and Drug Development . Acc . Chem . Res . 2017 , 50 , 1866 – 1874 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 86 . Heinis , C . ; Rutherford , T . ; Freund , S . ; Winter , G . Phage - encoded combinatorial chemical libraries based on bicyclic peptides . Nat . Chem . Biol . 2009 , 5 , 502 – 507 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 87 . Teufel , D . ; Eder , M . ; Pavan , S . Bicyclic Peptides for Positron Emission Tomography ( PET ) Imaging of MT1 - MMP Expressing Tumors . In Proceedings of the American Association for Cancer Research Annual Conference , Washington , DC , USA , 1 – 5 April 2017 . 88 . Harrison , H . ; Bennett , G . ; Blakeley , D . BT1718 , a novel bicyclic peptide - maytansinoid conjugate targeting MT1 - MMP for the treatment of solid tumours : Design of bicyclic peptide and linker selection . In Proceedings of the American Association for Cancer Research Annual Conference , Washington , DC , USA , 1 – 5 April 2017 . 89 . Katsamakas , S . ; Chatzisideri , T . ; Thysiadis , S . ; Sarli , V . RGD - mediated delivery of small - molecule drugs . Future Med . Chem . 2017 , 9 , 579 – 604 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 90 . Krall , N . ; Pretto , F . ; Decurtins , W . ; Bernardes , G . J . ; Supuran , C . T . ; Neri , D . A small - molecule drug conjugate for the treatment of carbonic anhydrase IX expressing tumors . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 2014 , 53 , 4231 – 4235 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 91 . Krall , N . ; Pretto , F . ; Neri , D . A bivalent small molecule - drug conjugate directed against carbonic anhydrase IX can elicit complete tumour regression in mice . Chem . Sci . 2014 , 5 , 3640 – 3644 . [ CrossRef ] 92 . Cazzamalli , S . ; Dal Corso , A . ; Widmayer , F . ; Neri , D . Chemically Deﬁned Antibody and Small Molecule - Drug Conjugates for in Vivo Tumor Targeting Applications : A Comparative Analysis . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2018 , 140 , 1617 – 1621 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 93 . Kularatne , S . A . ; Wang , K . ; Santhapuram , H . K . ; Low , P . S . Prostate - speciﬁc membrane antigen targeted imaging and therapy of prostate cancer using a PSMA inhibitor as a homing ligand . Mol . Pharm . 2009 , 6 , 780 – 789 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 94 . Morris , M . ; Vogelzang , N . J . ; Sartor , O . ; Armour , A . ; Groaning , M . 793PD Phase 1 study of the PSMA - targeted small - molecule drug conjugate EC1169 in patients with metastatic castrate - resistant prostate cancer ( mCRPC ) . Ann . Oncol . 2017 , 28 ( Suppl . 5 ) , 370 . [ CrossRef ] 95 . Kumar , A . ; Mastren , T . ; Wang , B . ; Hsieh , J . T . ; Hao , G . ; Sun , X . Design of a Small - Molecule Drug Conjugate for Prostate Cancer Targeted Theranostics . Bioconjug . Chem . 2016 , 27 , 1681 – 1689 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 96 . Vergote , I . ; Leamon , C . P . Vintafolide : A novel targeted therapy for the treatment of folate receptor expressing tumors . Ther . Adv . Med . Oncol . 2015 , 7 , 206 – 218 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 97 . Maurer , A . H . ; Elsinga , P . ; Fanti , S . ; Nguyen , B . ; Oyen , W . J . ; Weber , W . A . Imaging the folate receptor on cancer cells with 99mTc - etarfolatide : Properties , clinical use , and future potential of folate receptor imaging . J . Nucl . Med . 2014 , 55 , 701 – 704 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 98 . Vallabhajosula , S . ; Nikolopoulou , A . ; Babich , J . W . ; Osborne , J . R . ; Tagawa , S . T . ; Lipai , I . ; Solnes , L . ; Maresca , K . P . ; Armor , T . ; Joyal , J . L . ; et al . 99mTc - labeled small - molecule inhibitors of prostate - speciﬁc membrane antigen : Pharmacokinetics and biodistribution studies in healthy subjects and patients with metastatic prostate cancer . J . Nucl . Med . 2014 , 55 , 1791 – 1798 . [ PubMed ] 99 . Huang , B . ; Otis , J . ; Joice , M . ; Kotlyar , A . ; Thomas , T . P . PSMA - targeted stably linked “dendrimer - glutamate urea - methotrexate” as a prostate cancer therapeutic . Biomacromolecules 2014 , 15 , 915 – 923 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 100 . Liu , Y . W . ; Shia , K . S . ; Wu , C . H . ; Liu , K . L . ; Yeh , Y . C . ; Lo , C . F . ; Chen , C . T . ; Chen , Y . Y . ; Yeh , T . K . ; Chen , W . H . ; et al . Targeting Tumor Associated Phosphatidylserine with New Zinc Dipicolylamine - Based Drug Conjugates . Bioconjug . Chem . 2017 , 28 , 1878 – 1892 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Antibodies 2018 , 7 , 16 19 of 19 101 . Ivanenkov , Y . A . ; Majouga , A . G . ; Petrov , R . A . ; Petrov , S . A . ; Kovalev , S . V . ; Maklakova , S . Y . ; Yamansarov , E . Y . ; Saltykova , I . V . ; Deyneka , E . V . ; Filkov , G . I . ; et al . Synthesis and biological evaluation of novel doxorubicin - containing ASGP - R - targeted drug - conjugates . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 2017 , 28 , 503 – 508 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 102 . Holliger , P . ; Hudson , P . J . Engineered antibody fragments and the rise of single domains . Nat . Biotechnol . 2005 , 23 , 1126 – 1136 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 103 . Sheridan , C . Ablynx nanobody fragments go places antibodies cannot . Nat . Biotechnol . 2017 , 35 , 1115 – 1117 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 104 . Sachdev , E . ; Sachdev , D . ; Mita , M . Aldoxorubicin for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma . Expert Opin . Investig . Drugs 2017 , 26 , 1175 – 1179 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 105 . Lobocki , M . ; Zakrzewska , M . ; Szlachcic , A . ; Krzyscik , M . A . ; Sokolowska - Wedzina , A . ; Otlewski , J . High - Yield Site - Speciﬁc Conjugation of Fibroblast Growth Factor 1 with Monomethylauristatin E via Cysteine Flanked by Basic Residues . Bioconjug . Chem . 2017 , 28 , 1850 – 1858 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 106 . Masters , J . C . ; Nickens , D . J . ; Xuan , D . ; Shazer , R . L . ; Amantea , M . Clinical toxicity of antibody drug conjugates : A meta - analysis of payloads . Investig . New Drugs 2018 , 36 , 121 – 135 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 107 . Hinrichs , M . J . M . ; Ryan , P . M . ; Zheng , B . ; Aﬁf - Rider , S . ; Yu , X . Q . ; Gunsior , M . ; Zhong , H . ; Harper , J . ; Bezabeh , B . ; Vashishy , K . ; et al . Fractionated Dosing Improves Preclinical Therapeutic Index of Pyrrolobenzodiazepine - Containing Antibody Drug Conjugates . Clin . Cancer Res . 2017 , 23 , 5858 – 5868 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 108 . Available online : http : / / www . afﬁlogic . com / nanoﬁtin - drug - conjugates ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 109 . Available online : https : / / www . avacta . com / pipeline ( accessed on 5 January 2018 ) . 110 . Erickson , H . K . ; Lewis Phillips , G . D . ; Leipold , D . D . ; Provenzano , C . A . ; Mai , E . ; Johnson , H . A . ; Gunter , B . ; Audette , C . A . ; Gupta , M . ; Pinkas , J . ; et al . The effect of differentlinkers on target cell catabolism and pharmacokinetics / pharmacodynamics of trastuzumab maytansinoid conjugates . Mol . Cancer Ther . 2012 , 11 , 1133 – 1142 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] © 2018 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .