Sharing , Re - Use and Circulation of Resources in Cooperative Scientific Work Abstract This one - day workshop aims to stimulate research on the sharing and reuse of scientific resources in cooperative scientific work . As science trends toward increasing geographic and temporal scales , larger collaborations , and greater interdisciplinarity , scientific resources increasingly need to be more mobile and integrated with computer supported information and communication environments . Sharing , reuse and circulation of resources become a central challenge and critical component of cooperative scientific work . We interpret sharing broadly to include circulating scientific materials in any way that makes them available to other scientists . We include a variety of resources such as data , software , materials and specimens , workflows , technical know - how , clinical and laboratory protocols , and algorithms . We explore a range of sharing and reuse practices past and present , what motivates and limits them , how sharing can be done more effectively , what tools and techniques facilitate or constrain it , and how this relates to systems and science policy . Introduction Science is a leading edge example of cooperation supported by information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) and increasingly the practice of science is entangled with the use and development of Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CSCW’14 Companion , February 15 – 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2541 - 7 / 14 / 02 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556420 . 2558853 Theresa Velden School of Information University of Michigan 105 S State Street Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA tvelden @ umich . edu Matthew J . Bietz Department of Informatics University of California , Irvine Donald Bren Hall 5042 Irvine , CA 92697 - 3440 mbietz @ uci . edu E . Ilana Diamant 317 Sieg Hall University of Washington Dept . of Human Centered Design & Engineering ( HCDE ) ilanadm @ uw . edu James D . Herbsleb School of Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Avenue Pittsburgh , PA 15213 jdh @ cs . cmu . edu James Howison School of Information University of Texas at Austin Austin , Texas 78701 - 1213 jhowison @ ischool . utexas . edu David Ribes Communication , Culture & Technology ( CCT ) Georgetown University 3520 Prospect St . NW , Suite 311Washington , DC , 20057 dr273 @ georgetown . edu Stephanie B . Steinhardt Department of Communication Cornell University Ithaca , NY 14850 sbg94 @ cornell . edu Author Keywords Scientific collaboration ; sharing ; circulation ; reuse ACM Classification Keywords K . 4 . 3 Organizational Impacts : Computer - supported collaborative work CSCW 2014 • Workshop Summary February 15 – 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA 347 ICTs . Think for example of the invention of the World Wide Web by Tim Berners Lee at CERN to solve the information management needs of large , distributed , and dynamically evolving research collaborations in high energy physics . In spite of great technical advances and significant investments in the development of systems to support large - scale distributed cooperative scientific work ( cyberscience ) , a remaining puzzle is the interaction of technology and social practices : how do computer - support systems facilitate sharing and circulation ? In what cases do they fail to do so ? Are there cases where sharing should be constrained rather than facilitated ? Efforts to develop cyberinfrastructures must consider the diversity of the target scientific communities , their cultures and practices , and “the complex interaction of technological and social issues with the user community” [ 7 ] . CSCW researchers play a critical role in bridging social analysis and systems design [ 3 ] and there has been a history of CSCW workshops on scientific collaboration and cyberinfrastructure studies in alternate years since 2008 1 . The focus of the most recent 2012 workshop was on data intensive scientific work and opportunities of collaborative knowledge work in science and engineering enabled by the sharing of data . The 2014 workshop will expand upon this focus on data by broadening the analysis to the sharing and 1 CSCW 2008 : Designing Cyberinfrastructure to Support Science http : / / cscw2008w4 . org / ; CSCW 2010 : The Changing Dynamics of Scientific Collaborations http : / / www . sci . utah . edu / cscw2010 / ; CSCW 2012 : Data - Intensive Collaboration in Science and Engineering ( DICOSE ‘12 ) http : / / www . dicose . org reuse of a wide range of scientific resources as outlined below . Workshop Theme and Goals While there is significant attention being paid to scientific data sharing [ 2 , 8 , 11 ] , the time is right to broaden our inquiry to include the circulation and reuse of other materials and know - how in cooperative science . This workshop will explore sharing and reuse in research with a focus on the use and creation of resources in addition to data such as software , materials and specimens , workflows , technical know - how , clinical and laboratory protocols , and algorithms encouraging comparisons across different materials and fields . The goal of the workshop is to stimulate CSCW research toward understanding the range of practices of sharing , reuse , and circulation and what motivates and limits them , how they can be done more effectively and what tools and techniques facilitate or constrain them , and more widely how those practices relate to systems and science policy . The wealth of case studies presented at the session on ‘Collaboration and Sharing in Scientific Work’ at CSCW’13 [ 5 , 6 , 9 , 10 ] along with related work presented at previous CSCW conferences [ 1 , 4 , 8 , 11 ] indicate the timeliness of bringing researchers together who study the sharing , reuse , and circulation of scientific resources . This workshop will provide the opportunity to network and get to know each other , share research experiences and findings , identify current themes and topics , reflect on and synthesize results , and explore the space of still open questions . Program 8 : 00 - 8 : 30 ARRIVAL 8 : 30 - 9 : 00 : Introduction Workshop overview and brief introductions of participants 9 : 00 - 10 : 15 Thematic Stories Presentations and discussions of thematic stories ; collection of topics with potential to be of broader relevance across individual stories 10 : 15 - 10 : 30 COFFEE BREAK 10 : 30 - 11 : 30 Thematic Stories ( cont’d ) 11 : 30 - 1 : 00 LUNCH 1 : 00 - 2 : 30 Emerging Themes Synthesize themes elicited from thematic stories and evaluate as focal points for special issue and / or open research questions . 2 : 30 - 3 : 30 Project Ideas Identification of open research questions and brainstorming of project ideas and matching with potential funding sources 4 : 00 – 6 : 00 Excursion 3 : 30 - 4 : 00 COFFEE BREAK 4 : 00 - 6 : 00 Excursion Evening : dinner / cocktails CSCW 2014 • Workshop Summary February 15 – 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA 348 Workshop Format This workshop will be a one - day workshop . The number of participants will be restricted to 25 ( including organizers ) to facilitate brainstorming and discussions among all participants without requiring breakout sessions . The morning will be dedicated to exploring themes of potential broader significance that emerge from across our various research efforts . Based on the position statements submitted by all workshop participants , we will invite seven participants to prepare for and present at the workshop a thematic story , a narrative that highlights a surprising or meaningful insight , drawn from either research experiences or stories found in the literature . In the discussion of each of these stories we will explore their significance , how they compare to other observations , and their relevance to developing a broader understanding of sharing and re - use behaviors in scientific work . In the afternoon we will review and synthesize the themes that emerged from the discussions in the morning’s thematic stories session . In the first afternoon session we aim to collect and assess themes to identify topics that may serve as focal points in a special journal issue and / or constitute important open research questions . We will then move on to brainstorm how open questions can be turned into fundable research proposals and what funding organizations may be interested in funding the proposed research . The finale of the workshop will be a late afternoon excursion to American Visionary Art Museum . This activity is designed to help overcome the all - too - common late afternoon lull in events of this kind , by re - energizing the group members and encouraging exchange and creation of new connections among workshop participants through informal conversations . Participation In this workshop we seek to bring together students and researchers at different levels of seniority and from various disciplinary backgrounds who pursue an active research program in the domain . We will also reach out to officers of funding agencies and foundations that may be interested in the workshop theme along with people in the science policy domain . Background of Workshop Organizers Matthew J . Bietz is an assistant project scientist in the Department of Informatics at the University of California , Irvine . He received his Ph . D . from the School of Information at the University of Michigan in 2008 . He has studied collaboration , data sharing , and the development of cyberinfrastructure in a number of scientific and engineering fields including HIV / AIDS research , genomics , oceanography , astronomy , software engineering , and planetary science . E . Ilana Diamant is a post - doctoral research associate at the University of Washington’s department of Human Centered Design & Engineering ( HCDE ) . She uses ethnographic and network analytic methods to examine distributed IT development , with a focus on cyber - infrastructure technologies , open - source - software ( OSS ) and online communities . James Herbsleb is a professor in the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University . His research interests focus on complex socio - technical systems , where networks of people interact with and through technology to create and inhabit ecosystems . Outcomes We aim to accomplish the following concrete outcomes : First , to evaluate the potential for a special journal issue ( for example of JCSCW ) that would review the state - of - the - art of investigations into sharing and re - use of scientific resources in scientific work given current computer supported information environments . Second , to develop a collection of open research questions and ideas for fundable proposals , identify potential funding sources , and facilitate networking between researchers to help seed potential new collaborations . Third , to create an ad hoc ‘crowdsourced’ collection of relevant references that we as researchers in this area are drawing on . The workshop outcomes will be documented at the workshop website at https : / / sites . google . com / site / cscw14workshop / . CSCW 2014 • Workshop Summary February 15 – 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA 349 James Howison is an assistant professor in the School of Information the University of Texas at Austin . He received his Ph . D . in Information Science and Technology from the Information School at Syracuse University in 2009 . His research focuses on technology and human collaboration , especially open source software development and software work in science . He aims to contribute to conversations in CSCW , Information Systems and Science Policy . David Ribes is an assistant professor in the Communication , Culture and Technology ( CCT ) program at Georgetown University . He is a sociologist of science who focuses on the development and maintenance of research infrastructure ; its relation to long - term changes in the conduct of science ; and epistemic transformations in objects of research . David has a degree in sociology and science and technology studies ( STS ) . His methods are ethnographic and archival . Stephanie B . Steinhardt is a Ph . D . student in the Communication Department at Cornell University . Her work employs both ethnographic and computational methods to better understand the relationship between large - scale investments in science technologies and changes in collaborative practice , organization , labor politics and forms of governance . Theresa Velden is a research fellow at the University of Michigan School of Information . She received her PhD in Information Science from Cornell University in 2011 . She uses ethnographic and network analytic methods to study scientific communities to explain differences in the adoption of web based technologies and cyberinfrastructure across the sciences . Her paper on “Explaining field differences in openness and sharing in scientific communities” at CSCW 2013 was awarded a best paper nomination . References [ 1 ] Bietz , M . J . , Ferro , T . , Lee , C . P . ( 2012 ) . Sustaining the development of cyberinfrastructure : an organization adapting to change . In Proceedings of CSCW’12 , 901 – 910 . ACM . [ 2 ] Birnholtz , J . P . and Bietz , M . ( 2003 ) Data at work : supporting sharing in science and engineering . In Proceedings of Int . ACM SIGGROUP . ACM . [ 3 ] Edwards , P . N . , Jackson , S . J . , Bowker , G . C . , & Knobel , C . ( 2007 ) . Understanding infrastructure : dynamics , tensions , and design . NSF Report of a Workshop : History and theory of infrastructure : lessons for new scientific cyberinfrastructures . [ 4 ] Howison , J & Herbsleb , J . , D . ( 2011 ) . Scientific software production : incentives and collaboration . In Proceedings of CSCW’11 , 513 - 522 . ACM . [ 5 ] Howison , J . , & Herbsleb , J . D . ( 2013 ) . Incentives and integration in scientific software production . In Proceedings of CSCW’13 , 459 - 470 . ACM . [ 6 ] Huang , X . , Ding , X . , Lee , C . P . , Lu , T . , & Gu , N . ( 2013 ) . Meanings and boundaries of scientific software sharing . In Proceedings of CSCW’13 , 423 - 434 . ACM . [ 7 ] National Science Foundation Cyberinfrastructure Council ( 2007 ) . Cyberinfrastructure Vision for 21st Century Discovery . National Science Foundation , Washington , D . C . [ 8 ] Oleksik , G . , Milic - Frayling , N . , and Jones , R . ( 2012 ) Beyond data sharing : artifact ecology of a collaborative nanophotonics research centre . In Proceedings of CSCW’12 , 1165 – 1174 . ACM . [ 9 ] Rolland , B . , & Lee , C . P . ( 2013 ) . Beyond trust and reliability : reusing data in collaborative cancer epidemiology research . In Proceedings of CSCW’13 , 435 - 444 . ACM . [ 10 ] Velden , T . ( 2013 ) . Explaining field differences in openness and sharing in scientific communities . In Proceedings of CSCW’13 , 445 - 458 . ACM . [ 11 ] Vertesi , J . , and Dourish , P . ( 2011 ) The value of data : considering the context of production in data economies . In Proceedings of CSCW’11 , 533 – 542 . ACM CSCW 2014 • Workshop Summary February 15 – 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA 350