Postcolonial Interculturality Lilly Irani & Paul Dourish Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences University of California , Irvine 5029 Donald Bren Hall Irvine , CA 92697 - 3440 { lirani , jpd } @ ics . uci . edu ABSTRACT Understanding intercultural collaboration is a thorny problem in CSCW and organizational studies that grows ever more important as globalization increases intercultural interactions among individuals , groups , and technologies . We suggest that Postcolonial Studies may offer richer frameworks for analysis than taxonomic models of culture such as Hofstede’s dimensions of difference . A postcolonial perspective sees culture as dynamic and always changing , stressing the importance of colonial histories , uneven economic relations , and local knowledge systems in framing and designing information technologies . Author Keywords Cross - cultural collaboration , theory ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Working through cultural difference has long been recognized as an challenge of organizational interaction , whether interactions are parts of temporary partnerships , remote collaboration at great distances , or diverse colocated teams . Guides to “foreign” cultures include characterizations of broadly held habits and values , such as greetings , ceremonies , and attitudes towards authority . Geert Hofstede’s work dimensionalizes attributes of cultures to predict how culture as “the software of the mind” might condition the behaviors of foreign others . Yet in a world of globalization , shaped by networks of transporation and capital , as well as economic and social histories of colonialism , the viability of drawing borders around cultures and identifying an individual with one culture or another is increasingly tenuous . Consider this scenario , fictional but based on fact : Sanjoy works at Google’s Indian facility , located in Bangalore . There , he works on creating Internet - based tools , part of the Google internet suite , that are designed specifically for the Indian technical and cultural context . To do so , he works closely with colleagues from Google’s research and development facilities in Mountain View , California . This is relatively easy for him , because he himself worked there until recently . He grew up in Silicon Valley ; his father , who graduated with a degree in aerospace engineering from IIT Delhi in the early 1960s , emigrated to the United States to pursue the opportunities that his engineering education afforded him there , and Sanjoy grew up as an Indian - American . Now , with the growth of the information technology sector in India , Sanjoy had the opportunity to move his family back “home” while still working for a US - based company . Bangalore is a very different place than Silicon Valley , but the density of information technology companies and people is very familiar to him . What sorts of stories might this scenario open up for us ? It might lead us to talk about recent trends in outsourcing and offshoring and the movement of engineering jobs from the industrialized West to other parts of the world , as well as the anxieties those job flows can trigger in the West . It might lead us to talk about the complexities of international collaborations in software development , where a single organization engages in efforts that combine the activities of people the world over in a 24 - hour cycle . It might lead us to talk about the transnational migrations of people , technology , and capital , and the historical circumstances that have shaped them . It might lead us to talk about the difficulties of design for different cultural contexts , and the ways in software development methodologies , application needs , and design strategies can be imported and exported . Most importantly , it might lead us to recognize that these questions cannot easily be separated . How might we analyze such stories , and why are these analyses important to the development of collaboration in a transnational world ? In this paper , we examine this new global configuration of technology , cultural practices , economic relations , and narratives of development under an interdisciplinary rubric we label “postcolonial computing . ” This approach is shaped by research within three fields : Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) , and Postcolonial Studies . From CSCW we draw on ideas about how to approach interactive systems design in culturally complex settings . From STS we draw on theories about the relationship of culture to knowledge and what it means to know . From Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . IWIC’09 , February 20 – 21 , 2009 , Palo Alto , California , USA . ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 502 - 4 / 09 / 02 . 249 Postcolonial Studies we use the theoretical lens shaped by examinations of encounters between the “developed” world and “emerging” nations within the historic , cultural , and economic contexts brought about in the time during and since colonization of the latter by the former . We explore how theories and experiences from these three fields may reveal new aspects of problems increasingly evident in the new technocultural encounters of globalization . We understand the “postcolonial” here not as the historical period after European colonialism , but rather as an approach to thinking about how local practice operates in contemporary transnational contexts affected by histories , relations , and logics of colonialism . The lens of postcolonial analysis calls our attention to complex , historicized encounters among actors with different locations , varied forms of power , and disparate readings of modernity . Ex - colonial people and nations function in a variety of ways in many interconnected global economies . As anthropologist Aihwa Ong comments [ 19 ] : In many parts of the world , we must move beyond an analysis based on colonial nostalgia or colonial legacies to appreciate how economic and ideological modes of domination have been transformed in excolonial countries , as well as how those countries’ positioning in relation to the global political economy has been transformed . We draw upon this aspect of postcolonial studies – “how economic and ideological modes of domination have been transformed” – to see how these always transforming modes of domination , such as neoliberalism and development projects [ 12 ] , shape intercultural relations . In what follows , we look at how interculturality has been dealt with in systems design and studies of culture in groups , and suggest how postcolonial theory suggests new aspects of intercultural encounter relevant to collaboration . TAXONOMIZING CULTURES Collaboration is always challenging ; collaboration at a distance is more so [ 18 ] . Attempts to anticipate and make sense of conflicts and surprises in international collaborations sometimes diagnose cultural differences as the cause . ICT researchers faced with such questions often draw on the work of Geert Hofstede [ 13 ] in grappling with cultural differences in organizations and with respect to design [ 5 , 8 ] . Hofstede , a social psychologist , studied international IBM employees in the 1970s and argued for the existence of several dimensions along which national cultures could be measured and differentiated . While the promise of quantifiability and generality has made Hofstede’s framework popular in organizational behavior and social informatics , many studies have found the Hofstede’s dimensions analytically weak in explaining observed conflicts [ 6 ] and differences in technology use [ 7 ] . The tension between Hofstede’s work and the perspective we take here lies largely in the distinction between two uses of the concept of “culture” – one taxonomic and one generative . The taxonomic view takes culture as a means to distinguish and classify people , activities , and settings – to be able to speak of Latin versus Asian cultures , for instance , in terms of systematic differences . The focus on “cultural difference” as a topic for system design reflects this view [ 5 , 15 ] . The taxonomic view , though , suffers from a range of problems . These cultural categories are frequently rooted in geographical separation , but where does one cultural zone end and the next one begin ? How can we account for the global traffic in cultural concepts that characterize contemporary ( and not - so - contemporary ) living [ 3 , 16 ] ? How do we account for cultural categories that go beyond ethnicity and geographical particularism ? Taxonomic models such as Hofstede’s can also be limited by a focus on the culture of an individual . Hofstede’s model is that culture is “software for the mind , ” shared by people of the same nation [ 14 ] . This presumes that culture is a characteristic that is acquired rather than an active , ongoing construction that may change over a life course . Though he acknowledges variance within nations , he provides averages among his provided dimensions as the expected value of an individual . Hofstede’s framework cannot speak to the resistances and norm - shifting of technologies , social movements , or even everyday reconfigurations of practice that are consequential to understanding technology and its meanings in practice . By taking a synchronic snapshot and generalizing not only across people but across time , psychological frameworks like Hofstede’s also elide the ways cultural differences and preferences , especially with respect to material cultures , can be rooted in the particularities of local , material infrastructure , politics , and histories . It is precisely those particularities that those designing and analyzing technologies require . Hofstede also problematically relies on nation - states as a foundation for analysis . Nations cannot be taken as analytically independent of technology when technologies such as language and radio have been instrumental in the imagination , creation , and maintenance of the nation - states [ 17 ] on which Hofstede grounds his analysis . Indonesia , for example , has many languages and cultural groupings constructed as a common group through film , radio , and the Melayu language , reflecting Anderson’s analysis of nation - states as “imagined communities” of heterogeneity rather than stable , homogeneous groupings [ 2 ] . Media technologies can change the very national cultures designers seek to understand through Hofstede’s national models of difference . In contemporary anthropology , taxonomic notions of culture have given way to generative notions of culture . This view sees culture is a lens through which people collectively encounter the world , a system of interpretive signification which renders the world inter - subjectively meaningful . From this view , an individual may participate in many cultures – cultures of ethnicity , nationhood , profession , class , gender , kinship , and history – each of which , with their logics and narratives , frame the experience of everyday life . Always 250 reproduced in social interaction , suxh cultures are dynamic and changing . DYNAMICS OF CULTURE Recognizing the rigidities and problems of culture as taxonomy , we suggest an approach that strives to understand how relationships , technological objects and knowledge practices of everyday life arise as contingent , processual and dynamic materializations whose boundaries are not set in advance . We argue that postcolonial studies offers a richer , more complex account of cross - cultural encounters and hybridizations that include conflicts , hidden resistances , and even cooperation and complicity [ 9 ] at many different scales – not just that of the individual in the nation - state . These dynamics blur and shift “borders” between cultures . This allows us to see similarities , differences , and ways in which those comparisons are not fundamental attributes of people or groups , but instead different positions in relation to multiple flows of people , capital , discourses , and media – flows and phenomena that can change and be changed over time . Rather than seeing cultures only as geographic or ethnic categories of habits , traditions , and values , Postcolonial Studies and STS bring other aspects of intercultural encounters into focus . These perspectives may lend themselves less to quantitative characterizations , but they give a richer account of the how and why of intercultural collaboration , conflict , and practice . Power relations While Hofstede’s framework characterizes national cultures according to “power distance” – the level of deference accorded those in formal authority roles – it has little to say about how forms of authority or , more generally , power emerge in collaborative contexts . Authority cannot be separated from conditions such as uneven economic , legal , and racial relations that ground transnational cultural life . Postcolonial histories also tell us that power cannot be analyzed only at the nation - state level . Colonial encounters were not simply encounters between the dominators and the dominated . Colonizers did not have an exclusive hold on power , though colonial administrators often misrecognized resistance and non - compliance as incivility or inability to perform [ 11 ] . These histories suggest that while structures and institutions are important , many complex factors might become especially consequential in international encounters . Modernization Projects Many excolonial countries came to be independent through nationalist movements that simulataneously valorized local cultures and worked towards becoming some conception of a modern nation . This work to construct the identities of emergent , postcolonial nation - states involved diverse , modernizing projects . These modernizing projects are an important aspect of the historical backdrop of many transnational encounters . In India , for example , understanding of technology was one way that British colonizers judged the civility and , essentially , the human worth of so - called natives [ 1 ] . This history of colonial judgement influenced debates about the role of industry and science in India’s postcolonial economies – could India become “‘modern without being Western’” [ 4 ] ? In the decades that followed , India was the site where entrepreneurialism , hierarchy , and the role of technologiy were contested by politicians , publics , technologists , and even Non - Resident Indians . There was no unitary modernizing project . Instead , there was a contest between many such projects , all of which emerged in response to complex , historical postcolonial contexts , marbled with concerns of caste , nationalism , class [ 4 ] . In studies of technology and collaboration , then , the meanings , uses , and appropriateness of the technology are influenced by factors beyond the site and moment of collaboration into cultural histories contesting technology and social formations . Hybridity In grappling with the entailments of colonial encounters , postcolonial historians , anthropologists , and theorists have recognized the ways new cultural forms can emerge from contact – “a novel form of cross - communication between speakers of different ideological / cultural languages” [ 9 ] . In some cases , pidgin languages emerge from these contacts . These languages are sufficient for the work being done even though ontological experiences of the world remain incommensurable and unresolved . Marilyn Strathern describes a dispute over enviornmental impact between Papua New Guineans and Western mining companies in which the dispute was resolved not by coming to see the situation the same way , but when the mining company publicly acknowledged that PNG plaintiffs did not accept Western science [ 20 ] . The plaintiffs simply wanted their ontology acknowledged and legitimized , rather than subsumed . But in other cases , new cultural hybrids emerge that have their own coherence and are not resolvable to the cultural forms they draw upon . To be Asian - American is not sometimes being “Asian” and sometimes being “American . ” The cultural history of this identity group has its own history , developed for over a century in the United States . Of course , many intercultural encounters have much shorter histories , or are even ephemeral . Cultural theories such as structuration , used prominently in CSCW and organizational sociology , may offer a starting point for understanding how hybrid cultures emerge . Structuration describes culture as dynamic , always reproduced through interactions between agentic individuals [ 10 ] . Culture changes and responds to interruptions and historical events . A postcolonial perspective on intercultural collaboration highlights the relevance of cultural change and dynamics in understanding intercultural encounters . CONCLUSION We have argued that culture as taxonomies of people that predict values , behaviors , and habits is fundamentally limited in the face of globalization . Instead , we look to the analytical 251 tools of Postcolonial Studies in understanding intercultural encounters – the coming together of people with disparate backgrounds , histories , and epistemologies . Postcolonial theory brings certain kinds of research questions around intercultural collaboration into focus : • How do authority claims get made and contested in decision making processes or knowledge production when contestations may not be recognizable as such ? • How do historically and locally particular causes of conflict warrant new ways of thinking about team formation , norming , and conflict resolution ? • What kinds of assumptions interpersonal relations are tacit in “best practice” processes such as stuctured brainstorming ? How does the introduction and adoption of such processes in turn change cultures ? • How do hybrids team norms emerge when they do and how does that affect collaborative work ? Thinking about differences in cultural locations informed by postcolonial histories can enrich understandings of intercultural encounters , in part through the recognition that nobody represents a pure national culture . Instead , people are subject to and identify with culturally constructed categories such as gender , ethnicity , nationality , race , institutional affiliation , or subculture in complex ways that shape their interpretations and actions in the world . Transnationals , the very poor , the highly educated , and even researchers become unique and intelligible actors in a postcolonial , dynamic model of culture . REFERENCES 1 . Adas , M . Machines as the Measure of Men : Science , Technology , and Ideologies of . Cornell University Press , Ithaca , NY , 1989 . 2 . Anderson , B . Imagined Communities : Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism . Verso , 1991 . 3 . Appadurai , A . Modernity at Large : Cultural Dimensions of Globalization . University of Minnesota Press , 1996 . 4 . Chakravartty , P . Telecom , National Development and the Indian State : a Postcolonial Critique . Media Culture Society 26 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 227 - 249 . 5 . Choi , B . et al . A qualitative cross - national study of cultural influences on mobile data service design . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM , Portland , Oregon , USA , 2005 , 661 - 670 . 6 . Easterbrook , S . M . et al . A Survey of Empirical Studies of Conflict . CSCW : Cooperation or Conflict ( 1993 ) , 1 - 68 . 7 . Ess , C . and Sudweeks , F . Culture and Computer - Mediated Communication : Toward New Understandings . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 11 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 179 - 191 . 8 . Fussell , S . R . and Zhang , Q . Culture and collaborative technologies . CHI ' 07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM , San Jose , CA , USA , 2007 , 2845 - 2848 . 9 . Gandhi , L . Postcolonial Theory : A Critical Introduction . Columbia University , 1998 . 10 . Giddens , A . Central Problems in Social Theory : Action , Structure , and Contradiction in Social Analysis . University of California Press , 1979 . 11 . Goh , D . P . S . States of Ethnography : Colonialism , Resistance , and Cultural Transcription in Malaya and the Philippines , 1890s – 1930s . Comparative Studies in Society and History 49 , 01 ( 2006 ) , 109 - 142 . 12 . Gupta , A . Postcolonial Developments : Agriculture in the Making of Modern India . Duke University Press , 1998 . 13 . Hofstede , G . Culture ' s Consequences : International Differences in Work - Related Values . Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA , 1984 . 14 . Hofstede , G . J . Cultures and Organizations : Software for the Mind . McGraw - Hill , 2005 . 15 . Marcus , A . and Gould , E . W . Crosscurrents : cultural dimensions and global Web user - interface design . interactions 7 , 4 ( 2000 ) , 32 - 46 . 16 . Marcus , G . E . Ethnography in / of the World System : The Emergence of Multi - Sited Ethnography . Annual Review of Anthropology 24 , ( 1995 ) , 95 - 117 . 17 . Mrazek , R . " Let Us Become Radio Mechanics " : Technology and National Identity in Late - Colonial Netherlands East Indies . Comparative Studies in Society and History 39 , 01 ( 1997 ) , 3 - 33 . 18 . Olson , G . M . and Olson , J . S . Distance Matters . Human - Computer Interaction 15 , 2 / 3 ( 2000 ) , 139 - 178 . 19 . Ong , A . Flexible Citizenship : The Cultural Logics of Transnationality . Duke University Press , 1998 . 20 . Strathern , M . Commons and Borderlands : Working Papers on Interdisciplinarity , Accountibility and the Flow of Knowledge . Sean Kingston Publishing , 2003 . 252