1 Diversity and Inclusion : Evidence from Corporate Inventors Chunfang Cao Sun Yat - sen University E - mail : caochf @ mail . sysu . edu . cn Xiaohui Li Hong Kong Polytechnic University E - mail : xiaoh . li @ connect . polyu . hk Xiaoyang Li Deakin University E - mail : xiaoyang . li @ deakin . edu . au Cheng Zeng * Hong Kong Polytechnic University E - mail : chengzeng @ polyu . edu . hk Xuan Zhou Deakin University E - mail : x . zhou @ deakin . edu . au This version : October 2021 * Corresponding author . Address : M760 , Li Ka Shing Tower , Hong Kong Polytechnic University , Hung Hom , Hong Kong . Telephone number : + 852 - 2766 - 4072 . We thank the comments from Kewei Hou ( the Editor ) , the anonymous reviewer , Sreedhar Bharath , Murray Frank , Angie Low , Marcin Kacperczyk , Ambrus Kecskes , Chris Malloy , Ahemd Tahoun , and Liandong Zhang , as well as seminar participants at Deakin University , Nanjing University , New York University ( Shanghai ) and Renmin University of China . All errors are our own . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 2 Diversity and Inclusion : Evidence from Corporate Inventors ABSTRACT Inclusion is often considered a crux of diversity m anagement . However , little is known about how board diversity affects corporate performance through organizational inclusive behavior . Using the inventor - level patenting data , we find that firms with more ethnic minority directors attract more productive ethnic minority inventors and promote greater collaboration among inventors , leading to more patents and patents with greater market value . Our findings are robust to a battery of sensitivity tests . Overall , our study offers new evidence that racially diverse boards cultivate inclusive environment for inventors to succeed . Keywords : Innovation ; Board Diversity ; Inventor Collaboration ; Minority Inventor JEL classification : G34 , O32 , M14 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 3 “Our Board as a whole reflects a range of viewpoints , backgrounds and expertise because we believe that diversity is a core attribute of a well - functioning board . ” - - - - Verizon’s Statement on Board of Directors 1 . Introduction Diversity initiatives have become increasingly popular among U . S . firms over the past few decades . Many firms tout their commitment to employee diversity , sometimes appointing racial minorities to their boards . However , while many firms are better about creating diversity , they have not yet figured out how to make the environment inclusive—that is , create an atmosphere in which all people feel valued and respected and have access to the same opportunities . According to the Washington Post analysis of data the Labor Department began collecting in the 1970s , minority hires have overtaken white hires since 2018 . 1 Meanwhile , the number of workplace discrimination cases has also reached record high in the U . S . Race claims are among the most commonly filed and have the lowest rate of success . 2 Under the backdrop that innovation activities are increasingly often carried out by teams of diverse inventors ( Kerr and Kerr , 2015 ) , we explore the influence of ethnic make - up of corporate boards on firms’ innovation outcomes . A number of papers have studied the role of board diversity in spurring innovation but failed to reach conclusive evidence ( see , e . g . , Faleye , Hoitash , and Hoitash , 2011 ; Balsmeier , Fleming , and Manso , 2017 ; Kang et al . , 2018 ; Bernile , Bhagwat , and Yonker , 2018 ) . These studies , however , make little attempt to identify the detailed channels that lead to innovation output . Yet identifying the channels of influence is critical to understand how to promote innovation in firms . Our 1 https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / business / economy / for - the - first - time - ever - most - new - working - age - hires - in - the - us - are - people - of - color / 2019 / 09 / 09 / 8edc48a2 - bd10 - 11e9 - b873 - 63ace636af08 _ story . html 2 https : / / www . vox . com / policy - and - politics / 2019 / 2 / 28 / 18241973 / workplace - discrimination - cpi - investigation - eeoc Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 4 study attempts to fill this literature void by examining how minority directors interplay with minority inventors in affecting corporate innovation . We expect ethnically diverse boards to foster corporate innovation through creating an inclusive work environment for minority inventors . Research on organizational demography suggests that being in the minority has significant effects on individuals’ affective experiences in the workplace , including feelings of isolation from networks of information and opportunity ( Cox , 1994 ; Smith , 2002 ) and lack of identification in one - on - one relationships ( Chrobot - Mason , 2004 ; Jones and Schaubroeck , 2004 ; Mor Barak and Levin , 2002 ) . These experiences of exclusion may affect their general sense of well - being , job satisfaction , organizational commitment as well as their long - term tenure and retention in the organization ( e . g . , Ensher , Grant - Vallone , and Donaldson , 2001 ; Foley , Hang - Yue , and Wong , 2005 ; Mor Barak , Findler , and Wind , 2003 ) . Minority directors can change employees’ perceptions of firm’s diversity climate and the degree of how minority employees feel valued and respected . By examining senior Human Resources ( HR ) officers from 260 U . S . organizations , Nishii , Gotte , and Raver ( 2007 ) document that the racial / ethnic diversity of upper management are positively associated with the adoption of diversity management practices , which can help attract minority employees ( Cox , 1994 ) . Moreover , the presence of minority directors can help change employees’ perceptions of the relative lack of competence of the minority employees , thus reducing biases against those employees within the organization ( Morrison , 1992 ; Perry , Davis - Blake , and Kulik , 1994 ) . For example , racial / ethnic minorities in upper management may promote the integration of these individuals throughout the organization and support their interests and values in the decision - making process ( Nishii , Gotte , and Raver , 2007 ; Wilkins and Keiser , 2006 ) . 3 Nishii , Gotte , and Raver ( 2007 ) find that the management team diversity enhances 3 Rosalind Brewer , an African American businesswoman , became Chief Operating Officer and director for Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 5 the access of women and racial / ethnic minorities to organizations and the fairness in treating these minority employees . In addition , Zatzick , Elvira , and Cohen ( 2003 ) find that turnover among minority employees decreases as same - race representation in the job level above their own increases . Moreover , drawing on intergroup relations theory , we argue that minority directors can improve the quality of intergroup relations . People tend to categorize those who are of different races as out - group members ( see Yzerbyt and Demoulin , 2010 , for a review ) . There is extensive evidence that people view out - group members in a less positive light than in - group members ( Dovidio and Gaertner , 2010 ) . As people identify more strongly with a particular social group , they experience a heightened sense of similarity with fellow group members ( e . g . , in terms of attitudes and behaviours ) , a phenomenon that has been termed the “in - group homogeneity effect” ( Yzerbyt and Demoulin , 2010 ) . Within firms , intergroup bias regularly manifests as a tendency to discount the achievements of out - group members ( McDonald , Keeves , and Westphal , 2018 ) . Minority directors are more likely to help minority employees overcome the out - group bias by providing more support ( Foley et al . , 2006 ; Jeanquart - Barone , 1996 ; Winfield and Rushing , 2005 ) and fostering interpersonal attraction and liking ( Mehra , Kilduff , and Brass , 1998 ) . Overall , employees who believe to be accepted and respected in the organization with minority directors would have a higher degree of job satisfaction ( Lawler , 1994 ; Roberts and O’Reilly , 1979 ) and commitment to the organization ( O’Reilly , Caldwell , and Barnett , 1989 ) , which lead to a higher level of innovativeness ( Eisenberger , Fasolo , and Davis - LaMastro , 1990 ) . Starbucks in 2017 . After assuming her role , she instituted racial bias trainings for employees in 8 , 000 stores . In 2021 , she helped launch new initiatives to link executive pay to efforts to increase diversity at the company with a target of employing 30 % Black , indigenous and people of colour employees at the corporate level and 40 % in retail and manufacturing by 2025 . Moreover , California passed a landmark bill , Assembly Bill No . 979 , in 2020 , which requires a publicly held corporation with principal executive offices located in California to have a minimum of one director from an underrepresented community . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 6 We begin our analysis by examining whether firms with more ethnically diverse boards are more innovative . We find strong evidence that both the presence of minority directors and the diversity composition of boards are positively associated with a firm’s innovation outcomes . We then proceed to investigate the channels through which ethnically diverse boards help foster innovation . To this end , we gather inventor information associated with each patent from the U . S . Patent Inventor Database ( 1975 - 2010 ) . 4 We first show that patents generated by firms with minority directors involve 10 % more inventors , which corresponds to a more collaborative and inclusive environment . 5 The above results are based on information for all inventors in a firm . We take one step further to identify individual inventors’ ethnicity based on their surnames and race tabulation according to the 2000 U . S . decennial census . 6 We provide direct evidence that more ethnically diverse boards are associated with greater minority inventor participation and closer collaboration between minority inventors and white inventors . Relative to a firm without any minority director , the fraction of minority inventors is 2 . 24 percentage points greater in a firm with at least one minority director . This effect is significant in economic terms , given that only 6 % of inventors are minorities in our sample . One of the most critical issues facing firms is how to motivate the employees to work hard and continue to improve their performance . This issue becomes imperative considering that over half of the inventors have only one awarded patent in the database . At individual inventor level , we find that minority inventors enjoy continued success when they work for firms with more minority directors . In particular , a minority inventor is 25 % more likely to file for more patents three years after the inventor files for a patent when they work for 4 See Li et al . ( 2014 ) for a detailed description of this database . 5 We also find that this collaboration variable contributes to firm patent counts . 6 We use people’s surnames to infer their race due to the large number of inventors in the sample . See , e . g . , Pan , Siegel , and Yue Wang ( 2015 ) for a similar treatment of CEOs ; Merkley , Michaely , and Pacelli ( 2017 ) for sell side analysts . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 7 firms with at least one minority director . Not all patents mean the same for firms . We find that minority inventors create value for firms through patenting . At patent level , using the monetary value measure of patents in Kogan et al . ( 2017 ) , we show that patents that are developed by at least some minority inventors create 4 . 5 % more wealth to shareholders . This figure increases to 7 . 8 % when these minority inventors work for firms with at least one minority director . These results are consistent with Akerlof and Kranton ( 2005 ) who argue that the ability of organizations to place workers into positions with which they identify as if they belong is critical to what makes organizations successful . One potential concern with our analysis is that the endogenous matching between board of directors and firm innovation . For instance , firms intending to innovate may choose more minority directors to facilitate such a process . In this case , the positive relation between innovation and board diversity may capture a selection effect as opposed to a treatment effect . Another concern is that unobserved factors , such as changing societal value and culture , can influence firms’ choice to appoint minority board members and hire minority employees to work on innovation . To address this concern , we first perform a difference - in - differences ( DID ) analysis based on the addition of minority directors , which results in immediate increase in the fraction of minority inventors and inventor collaboration . We form a control group using propensity score matching method . The DID estimation results suggest that firms improve innovation output , inventor collaboration and minority inventor participation relative to their close peers after they add minority directors to their boards . Despite the above efforts , it is still possible that a firm’s board diversity captures some unobserved firm characteristics that might simultaneously affect the firm’s ability to innovate . We attempt to circumvent this endogeneity concern by using an instrumental variable ( IV ) analysis . We instrument for board ethnic diversity using a plausibly exogenous Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 8 shock to the supply of minority directors available for a firm . Specifically , we use the number of nonlocal minority directors that reside within a non - stop flight from the firm headquarter as well as the associated fraction and diversity of minority directors from county within a non - stop flight . The instruments build on the previous work of Giroud ( 2013 ) , Bernstein , Giroud , and Townsend ( 2016 ) , and especially , Bernile , Bhagwat , and Yonker ( 2018 ) . Bernile , Bhagwat , and Yonker ( 2018 ) document that a one standard deviation increase in the number of non - stop flights is associated with a ten - fold increase in the number of directors that serve on boards of firms headquartered in the given county . Using the nonlocal supply of minority directors as instruments in two - stage least squares ( 2SLS ) regressions , we find further support for our main analysis . To shed further light on the human capital channel , we examine the effects of state - level statute variations that alter firms’ incentives to invest in human capital . Companies often enhance their innovation by training and developing inventors . These investments nevertheless leave firms vulnerable when key employees depart , taking this knowledge with them . Non - compete covenants ( NCCs ) are clauses in contracts that expressly forbid individuals from competing with their former employers . By restricting employee mobility , NCCs help ensure that companies reap the rewards of the investment , thereby promoting innovation - enhancing activities ( Garmaise , 2011 ) . We show that firms with more ethnic directors produce more patents in states with stronger enforcement of NCCs . In sum , our results suggest that minority directors are especially beneficial to innovation when firms are greatly incentivized to invest in inventors . To provide additional evidence on channels , we link our board diversity measures to other aspects of corporate diversity initiatives . We show that firms with more minority directors tend to promote more women and minority employees within firms and are more likely to work with minorities as subcontractors . This result helps explain why firms with Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 9 more diverse boards tend to promote collaboration among inventors from different ethnic groups . We construct ethnic diversity measures separately for executive directors and independent directors . The results show that diversity measures for both executive directors and independent directors are associated with greater patent counts , greater inventor collaboration and higher level of participation of minority inventors . Further , to understand if our results are driven by the presence of ethnic directors or the dominance of a certain group of ethnic directors , we repeat our main regression for firms with only one minority director and those with multiple - race minority directors . Our results show that the presence of minority directors , regardless of whether they are from the same race , fosters corporate innovation . Moreover , we examine how minority directors affect the performance of solo inventors and inventor teams . Our results suggest that minority directors exert a more profound influence on the performance of minority inventor teams compared to that of minority solo inventors . 7 In addition , we explore how board diversity relates to research and development ( R & D ) expenditures , which have been shown to strongly drive innovation . We show that firms with more diverse boards invest more in R & D expenditures . The effects are statistically significant and economically large . Compared with a firm without any minority director , a firm with at least one minority director spends 3 percentage points more money on R & D scaled by annual sales . Lastly , one might question that our results only apply to larger firms which tend to have larger board ( and therefore more likely to have minority directors ) and produce more patents . We address this concern by showing that our results hold true for both small and large firms . This study mainly contributes to two streams of literature . First and foremost , a large 7 We appreciate the anonymous reviewer for suggesting the above two tests . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 10 body of literature has examined the effects of board director compositions on firm policy and performance ( e . g . , Carter , Simkins , and Simpson , 2003 ; Adams and Ferreira , 2009 ; Adams , Hermalin , and Weisbach , 2010 ; Carter et al . , 2010 ; Anderson et al . , 2011 ; Ahern and Dittmar , 2012 ; Masulis , Wang , and Xie , 2012 ; Cook and Glass , 2015 ; Garcia - Meca , Garcia - Sanchez , and Martinez - Ferrero , 2015 ; Giannetti , Liao , and Yu , 2015 ; Byoun , Chang , and Kim , 2016 ; Coles , Daniel , and Naveen , 2016 ; Bernile , Bhagwat , and Yonker , 2018 ; Giannetti and Zhao , 2019 ; and Griffin , Li , and Xu , 2019 ) . We differ from these papers by focusing on the channels through which ethnic diversity of board directors affects corporate innovation . Specifically , we present direct evidence on how directors’ ethnicity profile affects inventor ethnicity composition , performance , retention , and collaboration . Second , a growing body of literature investigates how corporate governance affects innovation ( see , e . g . , Manso , 2011 ; Hirshleifer , Low , and Teoh , 2012 ; Aghion , Van Reenen , and Zingales , 2013 ; Atanassov , 2013 ; Baranchuk , Kieschnick , and Moussawi , 2014 ; Chemmanur , Loutskina , and Tian , 2014 ; Seru , 2014 ; Chemmanur et al . , 2018 ) . Some recent papers focus on the monitoring and advising role of boards in fostering innovation ( see , e . g . , Miller and del Carmen Triana , 2009 ; Faleye , Hoitash , and Hoitash , 2011 ; Balsmeier , Fleming , and Manso , 2017 ; Kang et al . , 2018 ; An et al . , 2019 ) . We contribute to the literature by digging into the black box of how patents are actually produced through the lens of inventor diversity and collaboration . The rest of the paper proceeds as follows . In Section 2 , we describe our data , sample , and variables , and provide summary statistics . Section 3 analyzes the relation between board diversity and innovative outcomes and explores several channels . We also present some tests to deal with the endogenous matching between board of directors and innovation . We provide some additional results in Section 4 . Finally , Section 5 concludes . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 11 2 . Data , Variables , and Summary Statistics 2 . 1 . Sample construction We obtain information on ethnicity and gender of directors from the Institutional Shareholder Services ( ISS ) database , which gathers information from proxy statements and company annual reports . Four ethnic groups are identified in the ISS database : Asian , African American , Hispanic , and White . Due to the limited coverage of ethnicity information in ISS , we supplement the data by manually collecting information on director ethnicity from multiple sources , including : 1 ) LexisNexis corporate news , 2 ) the Notable Names Database ( NNDB ) and 3 ) Google . 8 The patent statistics are mainly obtained from the NBER patent database , which includes detailed information on patents submitted to the U . S . Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) from 1976 to 2006 ( Hall , Jaffe , and Trajtenberg , 2001 ) . For more recent years , we use the Bhaven Sampat’s patent and citation data . 9 The combined dataset provides detailed patent - level records on more than 3 million patents granted by USPTO between 1976 and 2010 . We match each patent with the inventors’ information using the U . S . Patent Inventor Database ( Li et al . , 2014 ) . This database provides detailed patent - inventor data from the period of 1975 - 2010 , including names of corporate assignees , grant and application dates , technology classes , forward citations , and names for each individual inventor . We obtain firms’ accounting information from Compustat and exclude firms in financial sector with the SIC code in the 6000s and firm - year observations with insufficient 8 About 47 % of directors in ISS have nonmissing information on ethnicity . We use individual photos posted on company websites and Google images and last names to obtain another 25 % of directors’ ethnicity information . We use the algorithm in Han and Jain ( 2014 ) to identify race based on pictures . We only retain firm - year observations for which we can determine all directors’ ethnicity information . 9 For more information on the NBER Patent Data Project , please refer to Hall , Jaffe , and Trajtenberg ( 2001 ) . The data used in this paper were downloaded from https : / / sites . google . com / site / patentdataproject / . Sampat’s data can be accessed using http : / / thedata . harvard . edu / dvn / dv / boffindata . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 12 data for empirical analyses . The process above yields an unbalanced sample of 5 , 670 firm - year observations with complete director ethnicity and control variable information from 1996 to 2007 . 10 The sample selection procedure and sample distribution are reported in Appendix . In the Appendix A , we explain how we end up with a sample of 5 , 670 observations . Furthermore , we report the number of firms by year over the sample period and report the number of firm - year observations by industry . At the director level , we have information on 55 , 681 directors , of which 4 , 825 are minority directors . 2 . 2 . Variables 2 . 2 . 1 . Measuring board ethnic diversity We construct several measures on board diversity : 1 ) Ethnic Dummy , an indicator variable that equals one if the board of the firm consists of at least one minority ( i . e . , African American , Hispanic , and Asian ) director , and otherwise zero . This variable measures the presence of minority directors . 2 ) Ethnic Fraction , which is calculated as the number of minority directors divided by total number of directors . This variable measures the intensity of minority director presence . 3 ) Ethnic HHI , a Herfindahl - based index calculated as follows : Ethnic HHI = ∑ 𝑠 𝑖2 𝑛 1 where s 𝑖 is the fraction of directors of ethnic group i among all board directors . A higher value of Ethnic HHI corresponds to lower ethnic diversity . This variable measures the degree of ethnic diversity of the board . 2 . 2 . 2 . Measuring corporate innovation 10 We stop at 2007 because our patent and inventor data are available through 2010 . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 13 We use two variables to measure corporate innovation output . The first is the natural logarithm of one plus a firm’s total number of patent applications in a given year . 11 Patent counts , however , imperfectly capture innovation success , because different patents vary substantially in their technological and economic significance ( Hirshleifer , Low , and Teoh , 2012 ) . We therefore follow Hall , Jaffe , and Trajtenberg ( 2001 ) and use the number of forward citations of a patent to measure its quality ( importance ) as a robustness check . 2 . 2 . 3 Measuring inventor collaboration We construct a measure regarding inventor collaboration by calculating the average number of inventors per patent . Given that inventors often have choices of whom to collaborate and which knowledge to combine in the course of , if inventors are more willing to collaborate with others in developing patents , we would expect a higher value of the collaboration measure . As a robustness check , we also use the total number of active inventors to measure inventor collaboration . We then provide a direct link between board diversity and inventor team diversity . Due to the limited individual information and a large number of inventors , we do not have a precise method to identify their races and it is quite common to identify race from a person’s last names ( see Mateos , 2007 , for a review ) . Recent papers classify analysts’ races ( Borochin , Chhaochharia , and Kumar , 2021 ) and entrepreneurs’ race / ethnicity ( Duan et al . , 2020 ) by matching their last names with surnames in a race / ethnicity database derived from the U . S . Census Bureau’s 2010 Census . We are also aware of a related approach used by Pan , Siegel , and Yue Wang ( 2020 ) who use executives’ last names to identify their country of ancestry and culture heritage . Following the approach of Duan et al ( 2020 ) and Borochin , 11 We set the number of patents and citation counts to zero for firms without available patent or citation information from the NBER database . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 14 Chhaochharia , and Kumar ( 2021 ) , we classify inventors’ races based on their surnames . For this purpose , we rely on the 2000 U . S . population census report ( U . S . Census Bureau , 2000 ) , which records name responses from almost 270 million people as well as their races . 12 It is then apparent that there are surnames that can be characterized as strongly Hispanic last names , such as Garcia , Rodriquez , Martinez , Hernandez , Lopez , and Gonzales . According to the census , each of these surnames has been overwhelmingly used by the Hispanic population ( over 90 % ) . We find similar albeit weaker patterns for certain names associated with African American and Asian population . We use the 50 % threshold to link a surname to an ethnic group if 50 % of the population using that particular surname is of one ethnic group . 13 For instance , according to the census , out of all the people who use the surname “Lee” , 40 . 09 % are white , 17 . 41 % are African American , and 37 . 83 % are Asian . Based on our criterion of 50 % , “Lee” does not credibly correspond to an ethnic group and is therefore left out of our sample . As can be seen from this example , our approach of ethnic group classification is not perfect . However , we are not aware of any systematic bias this approach could induce against our findings . We construct two variables to capture the intensity of minority inventor participation in corporate innovation . The first variable is the percentage of minority inventors out of all distinct inventors . Note that only inventors who file a patent that is eventually granted are recorded in the database . Therefore , this variable measures the portion of active minority inventors . The other variable , which is used in the robustness test , is the total number of distinct minority inventors for a firm . At the inventor level , we obtain information on 12 Specifically , we match inventors’ last names to the 2000 U . S . Census database . The 2000 U . S . Census database contains the frequencies of self - reported ethnic background for all last names used by at least 100 Census respondents . When completing the 2000 Census , individuals were prompted to report their first and last names , and to self - categorize as white , African American , Hispanic , Asian and Pacific Islander , American Indian and Alaskan Native or multiracial . In our study , we focus on three minority groups of Asian , African American and Hispanic ( Borochin , Chhaochharia , and Kumar , 2021 ) , which comprise the largest proportion of the ethnic minorities in the US . 13 In a robustness check , we use 66 . 6 % ( i . e . , the upper tercile ) threshold to classify a surname into a racial group and our results continue to hold . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 15 207 , 386 inventors ( 27 , 434 minority inventors ) , who produce 115 , 113 patents in total . 2 . 2 . 4 . Control variables To analyze the effect of board diversity on innovation output , we control for an array of firm characteristics that have been documented as important determinants of innovation . They include firm size ( the natural logarithm of sales ) , stock return ( stock returns over the fiscal year ) , asset tangibility ( net properties , plants , and equipment ( PPE ) divided by total assets ) , cashflow , leverage , industry concentration measure ( the Herfindahl index based on sales ) and its square term , institutional ownership , and R & D intensity ( R & D expenditures divided by sales ) . Furthermore , we control for several board - related characteristics . The first variable is the standard deviation of directors’ age which can capture the diversity of experiences among board members . The second variable is the fraction of female directors measuring the gender composition of a board , and the third variable is the total number of directors to help control for the alternative hypothesis that diversity effect is an artifact of size effect . The fourth variable is the fraction of independent directors , controlling for board independence . We also control two control variables on CEO characteristics , including a dummy variable for minority CEO and a dummy variable for female CEO . To mitigate the effect of outliers , all variables except dummy variables are winsorized at the 1 st and 99 th percentiles . More detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . 2 . 3 . Summary statistics and univariate analysis Table 1 presents summary statistics for our variables of interest . The firms covered in ISS are relatively large firms . On average , a firm in our sample has 20 . 3 granted patents per year , and each patent receives about 6 citations . For a typical granted patent , there are about Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 16 1 . 33 inventors involved , and each inventor produces approximately 0 . 6 patents in a given year . Moreover , in our sample , 6 % of inventors are non - white . Regarding the board , 56 % of firm - years have non - white directors sitting on boards , who account for 8 . 1 % of all directors in total . Our sample is broadly consistent with Anderson et al . ( 2011 ) who report the fraction of ethnic directors to be 6 . 5 % in their sample . In results not tabulated here , we find that the fraction of firms with at least one minority director grew from about 45 % in 1996 to around 67 % in 2007 , and the share of minority directors increased from about 6 % in 1996 to about 10 % in 2007 . This trend indicates that more and more firms are adding minority members to their boards . [ Insert Table 1 about here ] Table 2 reports the results of univariate analysis comparing firm with and without minority directors . Across all innovation outcome variables , firms with at least one minority director perform better than those without any minority directors , and the differences are all statistically significant at the 1 % level . Compared with firms without any minority directors , those firms with at least one minority director produce 13 more patents and receive 46 more citations . These findings lend some preliminary support to our conjecture that the presence of ethnic - diverse board leads to better outcomes of corporate innovation . Moreover , the raw number and fraction of minority inventors are both higher for firms with ethnic - diverse boards , suggesting that the presence of a diverse board is more likely to attract minority inventors . While the univariate analysis is informative , we will investigate the relations in a multivariate analysis framework . [ Insert Table 2 about here ] Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 17 3 . Empirical Analysis In this section , we investigate the effects of having minority board members on a firm’s innovation activities , including innovation outcome , inventor collaboration and participation of minority inventors . To test the above questions , we estimate the following parsimonious regression model : Innovation Activities 𝑖 , t + 3 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 Board Diversity 𝑖 , 𝑡 + 𝑋𝛾 + 𝜀 ( 1 ) where for firm i in year t , β estimates the effect of ethnic diversity on innovative outcomes . Since it takes time for a patent to get approved , we examine a three - year lead - lag relation in order to better capture the relation . The vector X includes board - , firm - , and industry - level characteristics from 1996 to 2007 . Year dummies and 3 - digit SIC industry dummies are included to control for year - and industry - fixed effects . We choose to include industry fixed effects rather than firm fixed effects because the variable “Ethnic dummy” does not change often for individual firms and we are more interested in the cross - sectional rather than the time - series effects . Later when we examine inventor and patent outcomes , we will control for firm fixed effects . 14 The standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . 3 . 1 . Baseline results Table 3 presents our baseline multivariate regression results . Columns ( 1 ) - ( 3 ) report the results with patent counts as the dependent variable . We find that the coefficient estimate of Ethnic dummy is positive and significant at the 1 % level , suggesting a positive association between board ethnic diversity and corporate innovation output . The economic 14 In Tables 5 and 6 , on average , the within - firm standard deviation of the key variables of intertest , Minority inventor dummy and Minority inventor participation , are 0 . 379 and 0 . 445 , respectively , whereas the averaged within - firm standard deviation of Ethnic dummy , Ethnic fraction and Ethnic HHI ranges from 0 . 045 to 0 . 176 only . The relatively large within - firm variations of Minority inventor dummy and Minority inventor participation allow us to use firm fixed effects to control for unobserved time - invariant firm characteristics . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 18 significance is considerable . Relative to a firm without any minority directors , a firm with at least one generates about 32 % ( e 0 . 275 - 1 ) more patents according to the point estimate in column ( 1 ) . This finding is reaffirmed by the positive coefficient estimate on Ethnic fraction and the negative coefficient on Ethnic HHI . Both estimates indicate that , as the board becomes more homogenous in terms of ethnic diversity , the firm becomes less innovative . The result in column ( 2 ) implies that a 10 percentage - point increase in the fraction of a firm’s minority directors would increase the patent output by about 12 % . The magnitude of the point estimate is greater than other control variables , which implies a substantial effect . Results about control variables are mostly consistent with our expectation . Larger firms and firms with greater R & D intensity are more innovative . Firms with higher stock returns and with more cash flows tend to generate more patents . After controlling for other explanatory variables , the asset tangibility measure , leverage , the institutional ownership , and industry concentration measures are not significantly related to firms’ innovation output . After controlling for the board ethnic diversity variables , the standard deviation of directors’ age has a negative effect on firm’s innovation output , which indicates that boards with directors of wider age gaps can hurt firms’ innovation . The other two variables including the fraction of female directors and the size of the board are not statistically significant at a conventional level . Overall , our baseline results suggest that board ethnic diversity is positively related to a firm’s innovation output . Columns ( 4 ) - ( 6 ) report the results when we regress inventor collaboration on board diversity measures , where inventor collaboration is measured by the average number of inventors per patent . In particular , we find that patents filed by firms with greater board diversity measures tend to involve a greater number of inventors on average . According to the estimate in column ( 4 ) , relative to a firm without any minority directors , patents generated by a firm with at least one involves 10 % more inventors . This evidence reveals Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 19 that inventors working for firms with more minority directors are more likely to collaborate with each other when they develop patents . Columns ( 7 ) - ( 9 ) report the results of regressing participation of minority inventors on board ethnic diversity , where the dependent variable is the fraction of minority inventors . The results indicate that firms with more minority directors also employ more minority inventors . The point estimate in column ( 7 ) indicates that , relative to a firm without any minority directors , the fraction of minority inventors is 2 . 24 percentage points greater in a firm that has at least one minority director . Note that an inventor appearing in a particular year can only be included in the database if he or she files a patent that year . The results in column ( 8 ) suggest that a 10 - percentage - point increase of the fraction of minority directors would increase the fraction of minority inventors by about 1 percentage point . These figures are non - negligible , given that merely 6 % of active inventors are classified as minorities in our sample . The results in Table 3 suggest that board ethnic diversity has a positive impact on a firm’s innovation output . 15 This effect is attributed to more collaborative research environment and greater participation of inventors of different racial groups . [ Insert Table 3 about here ] 3 . 2 . Using alternative dependent variables In this subsection , we repeat the regressions in Table 3 using alternative dependent variables . The results are reported in Table 4 . Columns ( 1 ) - ( 3 ) report the regression results in which the citation counts serve as the dependent variable . Consistent with the patent 15 Firms operating in states with more ethnic minority groups likely hire more ethnic directors or inventors . If ethnic inventors also perform better than non - ethnic inventors , the results may be driven by such a matching between local ethnic intensity , directors , and inventors . To alleviate such concerns , we include state - year fixed effects to control for state - specific time - varying factors . The untabulated result shows that our baseline results are robust to controlling for state - year fixed effects , assuring us that our results are not spuriously picking up the effects of geographical effects . We appreciate the anonymous reviewer for this suggestion . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 20 count results , we find that ethnic diversity is positively associated with the quality of innovation output . The result in column ( 1 ) suggests that a firm with at least one minority director receives about 40 % more citations than a firm without any minority directors . The coefficient estimates in columns ( 1 ) to ( 3 ) in Table 4 are greater than those in columns ( 1 ) to ( 3 ) in Table 3 , which imply that the effects of board diversity on citations arise not only from greater number of patents but also from the fact that each patent generates more citations . Columns ( 4 ) - ( 6 ) report the regression results in which inventor collaboration is measured as the total number of inventors in a firm . Relative to a firm without any minority directors , a firm with at least one minority director employs about 38 % more inventors according to the point estimate in column ( 4 ) . The results in columns ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) suggest that board ethnic diversity is associated with more active inventors . For instance , according to the point estimate in column ( 5 ) , a 10 percentage - point increase in the fraction of minority directors would increase the firm’s inventor workforce by about 13 % . These results are consistent with those reported in columns ( 4 ) - ( 6 ) of Table 3 . Columns ( 7 ) - ( 9 ) present the results in which total number of minority inventors in a firm is used to measure the degree of participation of minority inventors . Holding other things constant , firms with at least one minority director employ about 25 % more minority inventors . Results in columns ( 7 ) - ( 9 ) suggest that minority inventors actually play an important role in firms with ethnically diverse boards . [ Insert Table 4 about here ] 3 . 3 . Inventor performance Attracting and developing skilled employees plays an important role in a firm’s success . This becomes especially critical for innovation because patent application process is Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 21 lengthy and complex ( Lerner and Seru , 2017 ) and inventor turnover rate is high ( Li et al . , 2014 ) . In our sample , about 55 % of the inventors have only one patent in our entire sample ; less than 40 % of the inventors file multiple patents within one firm . We ask the questions whether minority directors can better improve their future performance . Specifically , we examine the probability that an inventor will file additional patents for the same firm in a three - year span after he or she filed a patent in a given year . We use inventor level regression to carry out the analysis which allows us to control for firm and year fixed effects . We create a “Minority inventor dummy” to distinguish minority inventors from white inventors and interact this dummy variable with the three variables capturing minority director presence . The results are reported in Table 5 . In column ( 1 ) , results reveal that inventors working for firms with minority directors file more patents in the subsequent three years . In columns ( 2 ) to ( 4 ) , we find that minority inventors have more successful innovative performance in the subsequent three years relative to non - minority inventors when they work for firms with more minority directors . [ Insert Table 5 about here ] 3 . 4 . Patent’s economic value and minority inventor participation Citations measure the technological importance of patents , but not necessarily the monetary value . Kogan et al . ( 2017 ) construct new measures of patents’ economic value based on the stock market response to news about patent release . They show that their new measures are closely related to the future citations of patents and firm growth . In this section , we use the measures in Kogan et al . ( 2017 ) to proxy for patents’ economic importance and test whether minority directors and minority inventors affect the patent value . In Table 6 , we report patent - level regression results to explain the market value of patents controlling for firm and year fixed effects . Results in column ( 1 ) show that after Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 22 controlling for the future citations , patents developed by teams with at least one minority inventor generate 4 . 6 % more wealth to shareholders than patents developed by white - only inventor ( s ) . In columns ( 2 ) to ( 4 ) , we further add interaction terms between the minority inventor dummy with the three board diversity variables . The results indicate that patents developed by some minority inventors are particularly more valuable when they work for firms with more minority directors . [ Insert Table 6 about here ] 3 . 5 . Dealing with endogeneity One potential concern with our analysis is the endogenous matching between board of directors and innovative firms . For instance , firms attempting to innovate may choose more minority directors to facilitate such endeavors . In this case , the positive relation between innovation and board diversity may capture a selection effect rather than a treatment effect . Another concern is that unobserved factors , such as changing societal value and culture , can influence firms’ choice to appoint minority board members and hire minority employees to work on innovation . In this section , we employ several approaches to address the endogeneity problems . 3 . 5 . 1 . Difference - in - differences estimation To alleviate the endogeneity concern , we opt for a control group of firms as benchmarks and employ a difference - in - differences approach . Our treatment sample consists of all firm - year observations adding at least one minority director to the board during the sample period , while the control group consists of firms without any minority directors throughout the sample period . We use a propensity score matching ( PSM ) method to identify our control sample . We calculate the propensity score for each firm in the year Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 23 before adding minority director as the probability of having at least one minority director in next year . This approach ensures that the differences between treatment and control firms are largely indistinguishable along a set of characteristics , except for the presence of minority directors . Specifically , we regress the Ethnic Dummy on the control variables used in Equation ( 1 ) . The propensity score is the predicted value from the above regression . We conduct the matching without replacements and we do not require control firms to have observations available in the same year as the treatment firms . We form pairs of treated firms with control firms whose propensity scores differ by at most a pre - specified amount ( the caliper width , which is the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score ) . A tighter caliper width would ensure closer matches but leave fewer observations . Following Lehmann ( 2019 ) , we construct the control sample based on the caliper width of 0 . 05 . 16 To evaluate covariate balance , we follow Rosenbaum and Rubin ( 1985 ) and use the standardized mean difference , which is the difference in the mean of a covariate between the treated and control groups , scaled by the pooled standard deviation of the covariate 17 . According to Rubin ( 2001 ) , the absolute standardized difference of means should be less than 0 . 25 after matching in order for the results of the regressions using the matched sample to be trustworthy . The standardized differences of means reported in Panel A Table 7 indicate that none of the covariates is near the threshold of 0 . 25 , indicating desirable matching outcomes . We run difference - in - differences regressions to compare the changes in innovation between non - diverse board firms ( the control group ) and firms that add new minority 16 Stuart ( 2010 ) provides a discussion on the choice of caliper size . She suggests that imposing a caliper of 20 % removes almost 98 % of the bias in a normally distributed covariate . There has been little research into the optimal caliper width . When we relax the caliper from 0 . 05 to 0 . 10 , 0 . 20 , and 0 . 25 , we are able to expand the sample size from 1 , 012 , to 1166 , 1277 , and 1411 , respectively . When we perform the DID analysis using these expanded samples , the sign , magnitude , and the statistical significance of the variable of interest remain largely the same . 17 As Austin ( 2009 ) points out , the standardized difference is not influenced by sample size , unlike t - tests . Therefore , the standardized difference is better equipped to evaluate the balance between the treatment and control groups in the matched and unmatched samples . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 24 directors for the first time ( the treatment group ) . The specification is as follows : Innovation Activities 𝑖 , t + 3 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 1 Treat 𝑖 , 𝑡 + 𝛽 2 Post 𝑡 + 𝛽 3 Treat * Post 𝑡 + 𝑋𝛾 + 𝜀 𝑡 ( 2 ) where Treat is a dummy variable that equals one if the firm has at least one ethnic minority director on board . Post is a dummy variable taking a value of one if the firm year falls in the period of having at least one minority director . If an ethnically diverse board does improve innovative outcomes , we should observe a significantly positive coefficient on Treat * Post . We present the regression results in Panel B . The results show that the coefficients on Treat * Post are positive and significant , suggesting that a firm becomes more innovative and collaborative after it adds ethnic minority directors , compared with a sample of carefully chosen control firms . The economic significance is considerable . The results reported in column ( 1 ) Panel B of Table 7 suggest that , relative to firms without any minority director , a firm generates about 41 % ( e 0 . 346 - 1 ) more patents following the appointment of minority director ( s ) . According to the estimate in column ( 2 ) , relative to firms without any minority director , patents generated by a firm after appointing at least one involves 23 % more inventors . The point estimate in column ( 3 ) indicates that , relative to firms without any minority director , the fraction of minority inventors is 3 . 45 percentage points greater after a firm has appointed at least one minority director . [ Insert Table 7 about here ] 3 . 5 . 2 . IV estimation In this subsection , we adopt the instrumental variable ( IV ) approach . Bernile , Bhagwat , and Yonker ( 2018 ) show that physical distance between firms and potential directors greatly reduces the likelihood of a firm - director match , but geographical distance between firm headquarters and director domiciles becomes less important as the frequency of non - stop Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 25 flights between those locations increases . We collect the county domicile information of directors by conducting “people searches” in the LexisNexis Public Records Database and obtain their historical addresses in detail , including zip codes and the effective dates following prior literature such as Yonker ( 2017 ) and Pool , Stoffman , and Yonker ( 2015 ) . Next , we identify counties within non - stop flights from the firm headquarters using airline route data from the T - 100 Domestic Segment Database compiled through Form 41 of the U . S . Department of Transportation ( DOT ) . This database includes information about all flights between any two airports in the U . S . ( Giroud , 2013 ; Bernstein , Giroud , and Townsend , 2016 ) . Lastly , by matching non - stop flights connected county pairs with director residence information , we are able to identify those nonlocal minority directors who reside in counties within non - stop flights from the firm headquarters . Our main instrumental variables include : 1 ) the number of nonlocal minority directors in the U . S . who reside in a county within a non - stop flight between the director residence and the firm headquarters ; 2 ) the ethnic fraction of nonlocal directors from counties within non - stop flights connection ; and 3 ) the ethnic Herfindahl index of nonlocal directors from counties within non - stop flights connection . The variation in the instruments comes from cross - sectional and time - series variation in the supply of nonlocal minority directors available to firms via non - stop flight routes . Such variation is plausibly exogenous as airlines’ decisions about routes and minority directors’ dwelling decisions are outside of the focal firm’s control . The first stage results , as shown in Panel A of Table 8 , indicate that the instruments are significantly associated with the board diversity variables . The identifying assumption that the potential supply of minority directors can only affect a focal firm’s innovation performance through changing the firm’s board diversity can reasonably hold . The magnitude of the effect is economically sizeable . For instance , an increase of 10 minority directors from counties within a non - stop flight connecting to the firm headquarter country Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 26 is associated with a 1 . 9 percentage - point increase of the fraction of minority directors . However , we acknowledge that our choice of instruments is subject to the weak instrument criticism . For instance , the Cragg - Donald Wald F - statistic in Column ( 1 ) of Table 8 is only slightly above the threshold value for weak instrument test according to Stock , Wright , and Yogo ( 2002 ) . We also perform the weak instrument test based on Montiel Olea and Pflueger ( 2013 ) . We report the F - statistics and the critical value for τ = 10 % with 5 % confidence level in the bottom of Table 8 . All test statistics reject the null hypothesis of the instruments are weak at 5 % confidence level . The tests imply that our instruments are relatively strong in the sense that the bias is no more than 10 % of the worst - case bias . Taken together , our IV results should be viewed as another piece of suggestive rather than definitive evidence . In general , finding good instruments for firms’ choice of directors remains a fruitful avenue for future research . We present the second stage regression results for the three key outcome variables in Panel B of Table 8 . Compared with the results in Table 3 , the signs of the coefficients on all board diversity variables remain unchanged , but the magnitude and hence the economic significance increases substantially . The insignificant results from Hansen J - statistics of over - identifying restrictions indicate that we fail to reject the null that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term . According to the IV estimation results , firms with at least one minority director produce about 64 % more patents than firms without any minority directors . The same pattern of results applies to inventor collaboration and minority inventor participation . [ Insert Table 8 about here ] 4 . Further Analysis In this section , we perform more tests to shed light on the mechanisms that help explain Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 27 the effects of board diversity on innovation . 4 . 1 . Incentives to invest in inventors Human capital is arguably the most important asset that a firm needs to invest in , develop , and retain . However , human capital is mobile . Firms therefore worry that employees might appropriate their value by either leaving or threatening to leave . Employers will be reluctant to invest in developing specialized training—given that employees may be unable to compensate employers in advance for access to such training ( Acemoglu and Pischke , 1999 ) —if employees can easily transfer the benefits of such investments to a competitor by taking a new job . Employment contracts often contain a non - compete covenant ( NCC ) . By signing such a contract , employees agree not to use or release the firm’s confidential information . This clause helps to protect the firm’s ownership in intellectual property . Even though patents are protected by law and the rights to a patented invention generally belong to the inventor’s employer , NCCs are very important . For instance , courts often consider an invention to have occurred when the inventor first conceives of the complete invention ( Gilson , 1999 ) . Hence , an employee who leaves his employer before fully developing an invention can still retain the property rights to it . With these agreements in place , the firm can usually reap the rewards of the investments in human capital because employees cannot benefit elsewhere from their human capital . The preponderance of empirical evidence supports that non - competes and their enforceability can spur firm - level investment and human capital development . For instance , non - competes and their enforceability are associated with more firm - sponsored training of workers ( Starr , 2019 ) , increases in net capital investment rates ( Conti , 2014 ) , and the exploration of new fields ( Arts and Fleming , 2018 ) . Though non - compete clauses have become common , their enforcement varies from Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 28 state to state . At the extreme , several states have statutes or precedents that essentially preclude their enforcement . We adopt an index developed by Garmaise ( 2011 ) to measure the degree of state - level non - competition enforceability . The states with non - compete protection score greater than or equal to 5 are coded as “Strong NCC” and “Weak NCC” otherwise . We partition our sample into Strong NCC states and Weak NCC states to examine whether our results vary by states . We then re - estimate equation ( 1 ) for the two groups separately . The results in Table 9 show that the positive relation between board ethnicity and innovation is more pronounced in firms headquartered in states with strong NCC . This evidence confirms our conjecture that the positive effect of minority directors on innovation is stronger if firms have greater incentives to invest in inventors . In contrast , among firms in the weak NCC states , the coefficients on ethnic board variables are not significantly different from zero and are much smaller in magnitude . [ Insert Table 9 about here ] 4 . 2 . Corporate diversity initiatives and board diversity In the above analysis , we find that firms with more diverse boards tend to employ more minority inventors and promote more collaboration among inventors . In this subsection , we examine whether this result can be applied more generally in other settings . We obtain data on a firm’s diversity performance from the KLD Research & Analytics , Inc . ( KLD ) database . It collects information on a firm’s diversity initiatives along eight dimensions . Each dimension is associated with positive ( strength ) and negative ( concern ) indicators . If the firm conducts a good deed ( a harm ) listed as a strength ( concern ) indicator , it gains ( loses ) one point . Thus , a higher KLD score corresponds to better firm diversity performance . We focus on two aspects : ( 1 ) woman / minority promotion , and ( 2 ) women and minorities as subcontractors . The KLD rates the strengths of a firm’s diversity of promotion Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 29 by assessing whether “The company has made notable progress in the promotion of women and minorities , particularly to line positions with profit - and - loss responsibilities in the corporation . ” The KLD rates contracting by assessing whether “The company does at least 5 % of its subcontracting , or otherwise has a demonstrably strong record on purchasing or contracting , with women - and / or minority - owned businesses . ” We eschew KLD’s diversity ratings on CEO and Board of directors , which overlap with our board diversity measures . We regress a firm’s diversity score on our board diversity variables and present the results in Table 10 . Our results show that firms with more diverse boards also perform better in these two aspects of corporate diversity initiatives . Also , we find that boards with more female representation score higher on diversity initiatives , but boards with greater dispersion in director age are not significantly correlated with the dependent variables . [ Insert Table 10 about here ] 4 . 3 . Executive directors versus independent directors We construct ethnic diversity measures separately for two groups of directors : executive directors and independent directors . Executive directors are more involved with day - to - day operations while independent directors play the role of monitor and offering advice . Our proposed mechanisms should be more applicable to executive directors whose presence and function exert direct influence on rank and file employees . We estimate the ethnic diversity measures for each group of directors and report the results in Table 11 . The results show that diversity measures for both groups of directors are associated with greater patent counts , greater inventor collaboration and more minority inventor participation in general and the coefficients are not significantly different . [ Insert Table 11 about here ] Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 30 4 . 4 . Single - versus multiple - race minority directors To further distinguish whether the results are driven by diversity , the presence of ethnic directors , or both , we conduct a new test . Instead of using the board ethnic dummy , we create two dummy variables : i ) firms with only one minority director ( Ethnic dummy 1 ) , and ii ) firms with at least two minority directors and all minority directors are from different races ( Ethnic dummy 2 ) . In our sample , 43 . 93 % of firm - years have only one minority director , and 12 . 20 % of firm - years have at least two minority directors and all minority directors are from different race . There is no firm - year having at least two minority directors but all directors sharing the same race . As a robustness check , we also define two count variables : i ) the number of minority directors when a firm has minority directors from the same race ( Ethnic number 1 ) ; and ii ) the number of minority directors when a firm has minority directors from different races ( Ethnic number 2 ) . Table 12 reports the results . The results suggest that the presence of minority directors , regardless of whether they are from the same race , fosters corporate innovation . [ Insert Table 12 about here ] 4 . 5 . Solo Inventors versus Inventor Teams It would be possible that our minority inventor participation variable picks up the effect of inventor teams and innovative performance may be different between teams and solo inventors . We further explore how minority directors affect the performance of solo inventors and inventor teams . We partition our sample into solo inventors and inventor team to examine whether our results vary by inventor collaboration . We then re - estimate equation ( 1 ) for the two groups separately . In Panel A of Table 13 , we find positive relations between board ethnicity and innovation for minority solo inventors and minority inventor teams . In Panel B , we find positive relations between board ethnicity and innovation for white solo Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 31 inventors and white inventor teams . The results indicate that ethnically diverse directors tend to have a more profound impact on the performance of inventor teams than solo inventors . This effect is more noticeable for minority teams and minority solo inventors . [ Insert Table 13 about here ] 4 . 6 . R & D expenditures and board diversity Patents measure a firm’s innovation outputs . In this subsection , we turn our attention to a firm’s R & D expenditures , which are key inputs to produce patents . We regress three measures of a firm’s R & D intensity , R & D expenditures scales by sales and assets , and the logarithm of the amount of R & D expenditures , on our board diversity measures . The results , reported in Table 14 , show that firms with more ethnically diverse boards devote more resources to R & D . According to the point estimate in column ( 1 ) , compared with firms without any minority directors , firms with at least one spend 3 percentage points more on R & D / Sales . This is a substantial number , given that the sample average number for R & D / Sales is only 4 . 5 % . We find similar results when we use R & D scaled by total assets and the logarithm of R & D expenditures . [ Insert Table 14 about here ] 4 . 7 . The effect of size One might question that our results are mostly driven by large firms . Large firms dominate the patenting in the US and tend to have bigger boards and hence are more likely to have minority directors . We address this concern by performing our analysis on a sample of firms with annual sales above ( i . e . , larger firms in our sample ) and below sample median ( i . e . , smaller firms in our sample ) separately . The results in Table 15 are reassuring as we find that most of our results continue to hold for smaller firms . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 32 [ Insert Table 15 about here ] 5 . Conclusions Minorities , who represent over 40 percent of the American population , only hold 16 percent of the board seats in Fortune 500 companies , according to the study by the Alliance for Board Diversity in 2018 . 18 This situation has improved only marginally over the past twenty years . Meanwhile , innovation has become a popular strategy to enhance a firm’s competency but how to better foster innovation remains a major challenge for firms . In this study , we analyze a large sample of firms covered by the NBER Patent Database and the ISS Database on director ethnicity between 1996 and 2007 . We present strong evidence that board diversity is positively associated with innovation outcomes , after we control for various board - , firm - , and industry - level characteristics . Moreover , we find that firms with more minority board directors tend to employ more active inventors , attract more minority inventors , promote collaboration among inventors , and help inventors produce more valuable patents . Further analysis shows that firms with more diverse boards also adopt other diversity initiatives , including promoting minority employees and subcontracting with minorities . We employ several methods to address the endogenous matching problem between board diversity and innovation , such as using a difference - in - differences strategy , and estimating using an IV approach . Our conclusions continue to hold . Taken together , we provide some of the first large - sample empirical evidence that ethnically diverse board of directors can leave its mark on corporate innovation through influences on inventors . 18 https : / / www . catalyst . org / wp - content / uploads / 2019 / 01 / missing _ pieces _ report _ 01152019 _ final . pdf Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 33 Reference Acemoglu , D . , and Pischke , J . S . , 1999 . The structure of wages and investment in general training . Journal of Political Economy , 107 , 539 - 572 . Adams , R . B . , and Ferreira , D . , 2009 . Women in the boardroom and their impact on governance and performance , Journal of Financial Economics , 94 , 291 – 309 . Adams , R . B . , Hermalin , B . E . , and Weisbach , M . S . , 2010 . The role of boards of directors in corporate governance : A conceptual framework and survey , Journal of Economic Literature , 48 , 58 – 107 . Aghion , P . , Van Reenen . J . , and Zingales , L . , 2013 . Innovation and institutional ownership , American Economic Review , 130 , 277 – 304 . Ahern , K . R . , and Ditmar , A . K . , 2012 . The changing of the boards : The impact on firm valuation of mandated female board representation , Quarterly Journal of Economics , 127 , 137 – 197 . Akerlof , G . A . , and Kranton , R . E . , 2005 . Identity and the economics of organizations , Journal of Economic Perspectives , 19 , 9 – 32 . An , H . , Chen , C . R . , Wu , Q . , and Zhang , T . , 2019 . Corporate innovation : Do diverse boards help ? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , forthcoming . Anderson , R . C . , Reeb , D . M . , Upadhyay , A . , and Zhao , W . , 2011 . The economics of director heterogeneity , Financial Management , 40 , 5 – 38 . Arts , S . , and Fleming , L . , 2018 . Paradise of novelty - or loss of human capital ? Exploring new fields and inventive output . Organization Science , 29 , 989 - 1236 . Atanassov , J . , 2013 . Do hostile takeovers stifle innovation ? Evidence from antitakeover legislation and corporate patenting , Journal of Finance , 68 , 1097 – 1131 . Austin , P . C . , 2009 . Balance diagnostics for comparing the distribution of baseline covariates between treatment groups in propensity - score matched samples . Statistics in Medicine , 28 , 3083 - 3107 . Balsmeier , B . , Fleming , L . and Manso , G . , 2017 . Independent boards and innovation , Journal of Financial Economics , 123 , 536 – 557 . Baranchuk , N . , Kieschnick , R . , and Moussawi , R . , 2014 . Motivating innovation in newly public firms , Journal of Financial Economics , 111 , 578 – 588 . Bernile , G . , Bhagwat , V . , and Yonker , S . E . , 2018 . Board diversity , firm risk , and corporate policies , Journal of Financial Economics , 127 , 588 – 612 . Bernstein , S . , Giroud , X . , and Townsend , R . , 2016 . The impact of venture capital monitoring , Journal of Finance , 71 , 1591 – 1622 . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 34 Borochin , P . , V . Chhaochhairia , and A . Kumar , 2021 . Minority analysts , diversity , and market behaviour . Working paper . Byoun , S , Chang , K . , and Kim , Y . S . , 2016 . Does corporate board diversity affect corporate payout policy ? Asia - Pacific Journal of Financial Studies , 45 , 48 – 101 . Carter , D . A . , Simkins , B . J . , and Simpson , W . G . , 2003 . Corporate governance , board diversity , and firm value , Financial Review , 38 , 33 – 53 . Carter , D . A . , D ' Souza , F . , Simkins , B . J . , and Simpson , W . G . , 2010 . The gender and ethnic diversity of US boards and board committees and firm financial performance , Corporate Governance : An International Review , 18 , 396 – 414 . Chemmanur , T . J . , Loutskina , E . , and Tian , X . , 2014 . Corporate venture capital , value creation , and innovation , Review of Financial Studies , 27 , 2434 – 2473 . Chemmanur , T . J . , Kong , L . , Krishnan , K . , and Yu , Q . , 2018 . Top management human capital , inventor mobility , and corporate innovation , Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , forthcoming . Chrobot - Mason , D . , 2004 . Managing racial differences : The role of majority managers’ ethnic identity development on minority employee perceptions of support . Group and Organization Management , 29 , 5 - 31 . Coles , J . , Daniel , N . D . , and Naveen , L . , 2016 . Board groupthink , Working Paper . Conti , R . , 2014 . Do Non - competition agreements lead firms to pursue risky R & D projects ? Strategic Management Journal , 35 , 1230 - 1248 . Cook , A . , and Glass , C . , 2015 . Do minority leaders affect corporate practice ? Analyzing the effect of leadership composition on governance and product development , Strategic Organization , 13 , 117 – 140 . Cox T , Jr . , 1994 . Cultural diversity in organizations : Theory , research , and practice . San Francisco : Berrett - Koehler . Dovidio , J . F . and Gaertner , S . L . , 2010 . Intergroup bias . Duan , Y . , Hsieh , T . S . , Wang , R . R . and Wang , Z . , 2020 . Entrepreneurs’ facial trustworthiness , gender , and crowdfunding success . Journal of Corporate Finance , forthcoming . Eisenberger , R . , Fasolo , P . , and Davis - LaMastro , V . , 1990 . Perceived organizational support and employee diligence , commitment , and innovation . Journal of Applied Psychology , 75 , 51 – 59 . Ensher , E . A . , Grant ‐ Vallone , E . J . and Donaldson , S . I . , 2001 . Effects of perceived discrimination on job satisfaction , organizational commitment , organizational citizenship behavior , and grievances . Human Resource Development Quarterly , 12 , 53 – 72 . Faleye , O . , Hoitash , R . , and Hoitash , U . , 2011 . The costs of intense board monitoring , Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 35 Journal of Financial Economics , 101 , 160 – 181 . Foley , S . , Hang - Yue , N . and Wong , A . , 2005 . Perceptions of discrimination and justice : are there gender differences in outcomes ? Group & Organization Management , 30 , 421 - 450 . Foley , S . , Linnehan , F . , Greenhaus , J . H . and Weer , C . H . , 2006 . The impact of gender similarity , racial similarity , and work culture on family - supportive supervision . Group & Organization Management , 31 , 420 – 441 . Garcia - Meca , E . , Garcia - Sanchez , I . , and Martinez - Ferrero , J . , 2015 . Board diversity and its effects on bank performance : An international analysis , Journal of Banking and Finance , 53 , 202 – 214 . Garmaise , M . J . , 2011 . Ties that truly bind : Noncompetition agreements , executive compensation , and firm investment , Journal of Law , Economics , and Organization , 27 , 376 – 425 . Giannetti , M . , and Zhao , M . , 2019 . Board ancestral diversity and firm performance volatility , Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 54 , 1117 – 1155 . Giannetti , M . , Liao , G . , and Yu , X . 2015 . The brain gain of corporate boards : Evidence from China , Journal of Finance , 70 , 1629 – 1682 . Gilson , R . J . , 1999 . The legal infrastructure of high technology industrial districts : Silicon Valley , Route 128 , and covenants not to compete , New York University Law Review , 74 , 575 – 629 . Giroud , X . , 2013 . Proximity and investment : Evidence from plant - level data , Quarterly Journal of Economics , 128 , 861 – 915 . Griffin , D . , K . Li , and T . Xu , 2019 . Board gender diversity , corporate innovation , and firm value : International evidence , Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , forthcoming . Hall , B . , Jaffe , A . , and Trajtenberg , M . , 2001 . The NBER patent citation data file : Lessons , insights and methodological tools , NBER Working Paper . Han , H . , and Jain , A . K . , 2014 . Age , gender and race estimation from unconstrained face images , MSU Technical Report : MSU - CSE - 14 - 5 . Hirshleifer , D . , Low , A . , and Teoh , S . H . , 2012 . Are overconfident CEOs better innovators ? Journal of Finance , 67 , 1457 – 1498 . Jeanquar - Barone , S . , 1996 . Implications of racial diversity in the supervisor ‐ subordinate relationship . Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 26 , 935 – 944 . Jones , J . R . , and Schaubroeck , J . , 2004 . Mediators of the relationship between race and organizational citizenship behavior . Journal of Managerial Issues , 16 , 505 – 529 . Kang , J . , Liu , W . , Low , A . , and Zhang , L . , 2018 . Friendly boards and innovation , Journal of Empirical Finance , 45 , 1 – 25 . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 36 Kerr , S . , and Kerr , W . , 2015 . Global collaborative patents , NBER Working Paper . Kogan , L . , Papanikolaou , D . Seru , A . , and Stoffman , N . , 2017 . Technological innovation , resource allocation , and growth , Quarterly Journal of Economics , 132 , 665 – 712 . Lawler , E . , 1994 . Motivation in work organizations . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Lehmann , N . , 2019 . Do corporate governance analysts matter ? Evidence from the expansion of governance analyst coverage . Journal of Accounting Research , 57 , 721 – 761 . Lerner , J . , and Seru , A . , 2017 . The Use and Misuse of Patent Data : Issues for Corporate Finance and Beyond , Working Paper . Li , G . , Lai , R . , D ' Amour , A . , Doolin , D . , Sun , Y . , Torvik , V . , Yu , A . , and Fleming , L . , 2014 . Disambiguation and co - authorship networks of the US patent inventor database ( 1975 ~ 2010 ) , Research Policy , 43 , 941 – 955 . Lunt , M . , 2014 . Selecting an appropriate caliper can be essential for achieving good balance with propensity score matching . American Journal of Epidemiology , 179 ( 2 ) , 226 – 235 . Manso , G . , 2011 . Motivating innovation , Journal of Finance , 66 , 1823 – 1860 . Masulis , R . , Wang , C . , and Xie , F . , 2012 . Globalizing the boardroom : The effect of foreign directors on corporate governance and firm performance , Journal of Accounting and Economics , 53 , 527 – 551 . Mateos , P . , 2007 . A review of name ‐ based ethnicity classification methods and their potential in population studies . Population , Space and Place , 13 ( 4 ) , 243 – 263 . McDonald , M . L . , G . D . Keeves , J . D . Westphal . , 2018 . One step forward , one step back : White male top manager organizational identification and helping behaviour toward other executives following the appointment of a female or racial minority CEO . Academy of Management Journal , 61 , 405 – 439 . Mehra , A . , Kilduff , M . and Brass , D . J . , 1998 . At the margins : A distinctiveness approach to the social identity and social networks of underrepresented groups . Academy of Management Journal , 41 , 441 – 452 . Merkley , K . , Michaely , R . , and Pacelli , J . , 2017 . Cultural diversity on wall street : Evidence from sell - side analysts’ forecasts , Working Paper . Miller , T . and del Carmen Triana , M . , 2009 . Demographic diversity in the boardroom : Mediators of the board diversity – firm performance relationship . Journal of Management studies , 46 ( 5 ) , 755 – 786 . Montiel Olea , J . L . , and Pflueger , C . , 2013 . A robust test of weak instruments . Journal of Business and Economic Statistics , 31 ( 3 ) , 358 – 369 . Mor Barak , M . E . , Findler , L . and Wind , L . H . , 2003 . Cross - cultural aspects of diversity and Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 37 well - being in the workplace : An international perspective . Journal of Social Work Research and Evaluation , 4 , 145 – 169 . Mor - Barak , M . , and Levin , A . , 2002 . Outside of the corporate mainstream and excluded from the work community : A study of diversity , job satisfaction and well - being . Journal of Community , Work , and Family , 5 , 133 – 157 . Morrison , A . M . , 1992 . A glass ceiling survey : Benchmarking barriers and practices . Greensboro , NC : Center for Creative Leadership . Nishii , L . H . , Gotte , A . , and Raver , J . L . , 2007 . Upper echelon theory revisited : The relationship between upper echelon diversity , the adoption of diversity practices , and organizational performance . Working Paper . O’Reilly , C . A . , Caldwell , D . F . , and Barnett , W . P . , 1989 . Work group demography , social integration , and turnover . Administrative Science Quarterly , 34 , 21 – 37 . Pflueger , C . E . , and Wang , S . , 2015 . A robust test for weak instruments in Stata . The Stata Journal , 15 ( 1 ) , 216 – 225 . Pan , Y . , Siegel , S . and Yue Wang , T . , 2020 . The cultural origin of CEOs’ attitudes toward uncertainty : Evidence from corporate acquisitions . The Review of Financial Studies , 33 ( 7 ) , 2977 – 3030 . Perry , E . L . , Davis - Blake , A . , and Kulik , C . T . , 1994 . Explaining gender - based selection decision : A synthesis of contextual and cognitive approaches . Academy of Management Review , 19 , 786 – 820 . Pool , V . K . , Stoffman , N . and Yonker , S . E . , 2015 . The people in your neighborhood : Social interactions and mutual fund portfolios . The Journal of Finance , 70 , 2679 – 2732 . Roberts , K . H . , and C . A . O’Reilly . , 1979 . Some correlated of communication roles in organizations . Academy of Management Journal , 22 , 42 – 57 . Rosenbaum , P . R . and Rubin , D . B . , 1985 . Constructing a control group using multivariate matched sampling methods that incorporate the propensity score . The American Statistician , 39 , 33 – 38 . Rubin , D . B . , 2001 . Estimating the causal effects of smoking . Statistics in Medicine , 20 , 1395 – 1414 . Seru , A . , 2014 . “Firm boundaries matter : Evidence from conglomerates and R & D activity” , Journal of Financial Economics , 111 , 381 – 405 . Smith , R . A . , 2002 . Race , Gender and Authority in the Workplace . Annual Review of Sociology , 28 , 509 – 542 . Stock , J . , H . , Wright , J . H . and Yogo , M . , 2002 . A survey of weak instruments and weak identification in generalized method of moments . Journal of Business and Economic Statistics , 20 ( 4 ) , 518 – 529 . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 38 Stock , J . and Yogo , M . , 2005 . Asymptotic distributions of instrumental variables statistics with many instruments . Vol . 6 . Chapter . Starr , E . , 2019 . Consider this : Training , wages , and the enforceability of covenants not to compete . Industrial and Labor Relation Review , 72 , 783 – 817 . Stuart , E . A . , 2010 . Matching methods for causal inference : A review and a look forward . Statistical Science , 25 , 1 – 21 . U . S . Census Bureau , 2000 . Technical documentation : Demographic aspects of surnames – census 2000 . Wilkins , V . M . , and Keiser , L . R . , 2006 . Linking passive and active representation by gender : The case of child support agencies . Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory , 16 , 87 – 102 . Winfield , I . and Rushing , B . , 2005 . Bridging the border between work and family : The effects of supervisor ‐ employee similarity . Sociological Inquiry , 75 , 55 – 80 . Yonker , S . E . , 2017 . Do managers give hometown labor an edge ? The Review of Financial Studies , 30 , 3581 – 3604 . Yzerbyt , V . , and Demoulin , S . , 2010 . Intergroup relations . In S . T . Fiske , D . T . Gilbert , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social psychology , 1024 – 1083 . Zatzick C . D , Elvira M . M . , and Cohen L . E . , 2003 . When is more better ? The effects of racial composition on voluntary turnover . Organization Science , 14 , 483 – 496 . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 39 Table 1 Summary Statistics Table 1 presents summary statistics for the main variables used in regression analysis . All variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . Variables N Mean SD Patents 5 , 670 20 . 302 37 . 822 Citations 5 , 670 111 . 860 256 . 322 Inventors per patent 5 , 670 1 . 331 1 . 402 Number of inventors 5 , 670 36 . 576 66 . 779 % Minority inventors 5 , 670 5 . 978 9 . 762 Minority inventors 5 , 670 4 . 838 9 . 797 R & D / Asset 6 , 631 0 . 026 0 . 049 R & D / Sales 6 , 631 0 . 045 0 . 250 Ln ( R & D ) 6 , 631 2 . 159 2 . 360 Minority Promotion 4 , 939 0 . 273 0 . 446 Contracting with minority 4 , 662 0 . 130 0 . 337 Ethnic dummy 5 , 670 0 . 561 0 . 496 Ethnic fraction 5 , 670 0 . 081 0 . 090 Ethnic HHI 5 , 670 0 . 864 0 . 140 Director Age SD 5 , 670 7 . 579 2 . 366 % Female directors 5 , 670 0 . 105 0 . 090 Board size 5 , 670 9 . 820 2 . 585 % Outside directors 5 , 670 0 . 686 0 . 172 CEO ethnic dummy 5 , 670 0 . 043 0 . 202 Female CEO dummy 5 , 670 0 . 027 0 . 162 Ln ( sales ) 5 , 670 7 . 853 1 . 434 Leverage 5 , 670 0 . 245 0 . 170 PPE / Assets 5 , 670 0 . 307 0 . 220 Stock return 5 , 670 0 . 074 0 . 775 Cashflow 5 , 670 0 . 103 0 . 079 Institutional ownership 5 , 670 0 . 510 0 . 342 Industry HHI 5 , 670 0 . 023 0 . 048 Industry HHI 2 5 , 670 0 . 003 0 . 013 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 40 Table 2 Univariate Analysis Table 2 reports the results of univariate analysis for some outcome variables based on whether a firm has at least one minority director . Ethnic dummy = 0 A Ethnic dummy = 1 B Diff . ( A - B ) t - stats Patents 13 . 064 25 . 957 - 12 . 893 * * * - 12 . 92 Citations 86 . 215 131 . 898 - 45 . 683 * * * - 6 . 68 Inventors per patent 1 . 213 1 . 423 - 0 . 210 * * * - 5 . 62 Number of inventors 23 . 029 47 . 161 - 24 . 131 * * * - 13 . 723 % Minority inventors 4 . 741 6 . 944 - 0 . 022 * * * - 8 . 49 Minority inventors 2 . 887 6 . 363 - 3 . 475 * * * - 13 . 46 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 41 Table 3 Baseline Regressions This table reports estimation results of the baseline regressions . The dependent variables are patent counts , the average number of inventors per patent ( in logs ) and the fraction of minority inventors . All regressors are lagged by three years . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) % Minority inventors ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 275 * * * 0 . 097 * * * 2 . 241 * * * ( 3 . 74 ) ( 3 . 86 ) ( 4 . 39 ) Ethnic fraction 1 . 102 * * * 0 . 345 * * * 8 . 148 * * * ( 2 . 92 ) ( 2 . 75 ) ( 2 . 96 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 810 * * * - 0 . 250 * * * - 5 . 548 * * * ( - 3 . 15 ) ( - 2 . 90 ) ( - 3 . 02 ) Director Age SD - 0 . 051 * * * - 0 . 052 * * * - 0 . 052 * * * - 0 . 014 * * * - 0 . 014 * * * - 0 . 014 * * * - 0 . 040 - 0 . 050 - 0 . 051 ( - 3 . 51 ) ( - 3 . 55 ) ( - 3 . 56 ) ( - 2 . 66 ) ( - 2 . 72 ) ( - 2 . 72 ) ( - 0 . 40 ) ( - 0 . 50 ) ( - 0 . 51 ) % Female director 0 . 032 0 . 041 0 . 026 0 . 128 0 . 136 0 . 132 0 . 869 1 . 020 0 . 982 ( 0 . 09 ) ( 0 . 11 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 90 ) ( 0 . 94 ) ( 0 . 92 ) ( 0 . 37 ) ( 0 . 43 ) ( 0 . 41 ) Board size 0 . 003 0 . 012 0 . 010 0 . 007 0 . 010 * 0 . 010 * - 0 . 038 0 . 031 0 . 021 ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 75 ) ( 0 . 65 ) ( 1 . 35 ) ( 1 . 90 ) ( 1 . 82 ) ( - 0 . 41 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 24 ) % Outside directors 0 . 110 0 . 155 0 . 140 0 . 116 0 . 133 * 0 . 128 * 0 . 907 1 . 297 1 . 209 ( 0 . 52 ) ( 0 . 74 ) ( 0 . 66 ) ( 1 . 53 ) ( 1 . 76 ) ( 1 . 70 ) ( 0 . 67 ) ( 0 . 96 ) ( 0 . 89 ) CEO ethnic dummy - 0 . 017 - 0 . 054 - 0 . 053 0 . 064 0 . 057 0 . 058 2 . 614 * * * 2 . 414 * * 2 . 499 * * * ( - 0 . 15 ) ( - 0 . 47 ) ( - 0 . 46 ) ( 1 . 54 ) ( 1 . 30 ) ( 1 . 35 ) ( 2 . 77 ) ( 2 . 54 ) ( 2 . 62 ) Female CEO dummy 0 . 086 0 . 082 0 . 078 0 . 013 0 . 011 0 . 010 0 . 807 0 . 767 0 . 736 ( 0 . 64 ) ( 0 . 60 ) ( 0 . 57 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 21 ) ( 0 . 82 ) ( 0 . 76 ) ( 0 . 73 ) Ln ( Sales ) 0 . 405 * * * 0 . 414 * * * 0 . 409 * * * 0 . 068 * * * 0 . 072 * * * 0 . 071 * * * 0 . 965 * * * 1 . 050 * * * 1 . 027 * * * ( 10 . 80 ) ( 11 . 05 ) ( 10 . 86 ) ( 5 . 23 ) ( 5 . 56 ) ( 5 . 41 ) ( 4 . 03 ) ( 4 . 38 ) ( 4 . 24 ) Leverage - 0 . 235 - 0 . 220 - 0 . 228 - 0 . 035 - 0 . 030 - 0 . 032 - 2 . 080 - 1 . 956 - 2 . 010 ( - 0 . 93 ) ( - 0 . 86 ) ( - 0 . 90 ) ( - 0 . 39 ) ( - 0 . 33 ) ( - 0 . 35 ) ( - 1 . 43 ) ( - 1 . 33 ) ( - 1 . 36 ) PPE / Asset 0 . 111 0 . 096 0 . 091 - 0 . 007 - 0 . 012 - 0 . 013 - 2 . 673 - 2 . 800 - 2 . 829 ( 0 . 39 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 32 ) ( - 0 . 07 ) ( - 0 . 12 ) ( - 0 . 13 ) ( - 1 . 49 ) ( - 1 . 53 ) ( - 1 . 56 ) R & D / Sales 0 . 832 * * * 0 . 845 * * * 0 . 839 * * * 0 . 195 * * 0 . 200 * * 0 . 199 * * 3 . 603 * * 3 . 717 * * 3 . 688 * * ( 3 . 42 ) ( 3 . 39 ) ( 3 . 40 ) ( 2 . 32 ) ( 2 . 30 ) ( 2 . 30 ) ( 2 . 08 ) ( 2 . 06 ) ( 2 . 06 ) Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 42 Stock return 0 . 043 * 0 . 047 * 0 . 045 * 0 . 005 0 . 007 0 . 007 - 0 . 226 - 0 . 191 - 0 . 198 ( 1 . 76 ) ( 1 . 91 ) ( 1 . 87 ) ( 0 . 55 ) ( 0 . 70 ) ( 0 . 67 ) ( - 1 . 09 ) ( - 0 . 92 ) ( - 0 . 95 ) Cashflow 0 . 847 * * 0 . 837 * * 0 . 831 * * 0 . 077 0 . 073 0 . 072 2 . 453 2 . 368 2 . 329 ( 2 . 22 ) ( 2 . 18 ) ( 2 . 17 ) ( 0 . 53 ) ( 0 . 51 ) ( 0 . 50 ) ( 0 . 89 ) ( 0 . 85 ) ( 0 . 83 ) Institutional ownership 0 . 031 0 . 017 0 . 016 0 . 088 * * 0 . 083 * 0 . 083 * 0 . 732 0 . 628 0 . 623 ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 14 ) ( 0 . 13 ) ( 2 . 04 ) ( 1 . 93 ) ( 1 . 93 ) ( 0 . 97 ) ( 0 . 82 ) ( 0 . 82 ) Industry HHI 5 . 043 4 . 895 4 . 822 3 . 138 * 3 . 098 * 3 . 076 * 18 . 381 17 . 408 17 . 076 ( 1 . 42 ) ( 1 . 38 ) ( 1 . 36 ) ( 1 . 75 ) ( 1 . 72 ) ( 1 . 71 ) ( 0 . 62 ) ( 0 . 59 ) ( 0 . 58 ) Industry HHI 2 - 11 . 671 * - 11 . 482 * - 11 . 297 * - 7 . 470 * * - 7 . 430 * - 7 . 376 * - 40 . 224 - 39 . 188 - 38 . 294 ( - 1 . 77 ) ( - 1 . 74 ) ( - 1 . 71 ) ( - 1 . 96 ) ( - 1 . 94 ) ( - 1 . 93 ) ( - 0 . 79 ) ( - 0 . 76 ) ( - 0 . 74 ) Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 658 0 . 657 0 . 657 0 . 575 0 . 573 0 . 574 0 . 412 0 . 408 0 . 408 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 43 Table 4 Alternative Dependent Variables This table reports estimation results of the baseline regressions using alternative dependent variables , including citation counts , the number of inventors ( in logs ) and the number of minority inventors ( in logs ) . All regressors are lagged by three years . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Ln ( Citations + 1 ) Ln ( Number of Inventors + 1 ) Ln ( Minority inventors + 1 ) ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 339 * * * 0 . 325 * * * 0 . 223 * * * ( 3 . 45 ) ( 3 . 84 ) ( 4 . 23 ) Ethnic fraction 1 . 465 * * * 1 . 215 * * * 0 . 953 * * * ( 2 . 87 ) ( 2 . 82 ) ( 3 . 47 ) Ethnic HHI - 1 . 071 * * * - 0 . 910 * * * - 0 . 670 * * * ( - 3 . 09 ) ( - 3 . 09 ) ( - 3 . 58 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 635 0 . 634 0 . 634 0 . 665 0 . 663 0 . 663 0 . 596 0 . 594 0 . 594 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 44 Table 5 Effect of Board Diversity on Inventor Performance This table reports estimation results of the effects of board ethnic diversity on inventors’ continued innovation output with the same firm . The dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals one if an inventor produces at least one more patent in the subsequent three years for the same firm . Minority inventor dummy is a dummy variable that equals one if the inventor is an ethnical minority . Other variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and firm fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . At least one more patent in subsequent three years for the same firm ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 005 * 0 . 002 ( 1 . 69 ) ( 0 . 78 ) Ethnic fraction 0 . 037 * * ( 2 . 31 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 020 * ( - 1 . 91 ) Ethnic dummy * Minority inventor dummy 0 . 008 * * ( 2 . 24 ) Ethnic fraction * Minority inventor dummy 0 . 076 * * * ( 4 . 32 ) Ethnic HHI * Minority inventor dummy - 0 . 049 * * * ( - 4 . 46 ) Minority inventor dummy 0 . 005 * * * - 0 . 001 - 0 . 004 0 . 045 ( 3 . 37 ) ( - 0 . 22 ) ( - 1 . 38 ) ( 5 . 01 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Firm FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes N 559 , 538 559 , 538 559 , 538 559 , 538 R 2 0 . 044 0 . 044 0 . 044 0 . 044 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 45 Table 6 Effect of Minority Inventor Participation on Patent Value This table reports estimation results of the effects of minority inventor participation in a patent on the patent’s market value . The dependent variable is a patent’s market value estimated in Kogan et al . ( 2017 ) . Minority inventor participation is a dummy variable that equals one if the patent involves at least one minority inventor . Other variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and firm fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Ln ( Patent’s market value ) ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Ethnic dummy - 0 . 053 - 0 . 085 ( - 1 . 02 ) ( - 1 . 53 ) Ethnic fraction 0 . 002 ( 0 . 02 ) Ethnic HHI 0 . 036 ( 0 . 55 ) Ethnic dummy * Minority inventor participation 0 . 078 * * * ( 3 . 77 ) Ethnic fraction * Minority inventor participation 0 . 202 * * ( 2 . 17 ) Ethnic HHI * Minority inventor participation - 0 . 152 * * ( - 2 . 46 ) Minority inventor participation 0 . 045 * * * - 0 . 013 0 . 019 0 . 165 * * * ( 3 . 15 ) ( - 0 . 80 ) ( 1 . 50 ) ( 2 . 86 ) Ln ( Citations + 1 ) 0 . 067 * * * 0 . 067 * * * 0 . 067 * * * 0 . 067 * * * ( 9 . 98 ) ( 9 . 97 ) ( 9 . 85 ) ( 9 . 88 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Firm FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes N 279 , 837 279 , 837 279 , 837 279 , 837 R 2 0 . 693 0 . 693 0 . 693 0 . 693 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 46 Table 7 Corporate Innovation and Board Diversity : Difference - in - differences Analysis This table reports difference - in - differences estimation results of the effects of ethnic board diversity on corporate innovation . Treat is a dummy variable that equals one if the firm has at least one minority director on the board . Post is a dummy variable taking a value of one if the firm year falls in the period of having at least one minority director . The control and treatment groups are matched using the propensity score matching . Panel A presents the covariate balance diagnostics and Panel B reports the DID results . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Panel A : Covariate balance diagnostics Pre - matched Sample Post - matched Sample Treated Control Standardized diff . Treated Control Standardized diff . Director Age SD 7 . 69 8 . 13 - 0 . 183 7 . 64 7 . 72 - 0 . 036 % Female director 0 . 11 0 . 06 0 . 569 0 . 08 0 . 08 0 . 025 Board size 9 . 87 8 . 34 0 . 717 8 . 68 8 . 81 - 0 . 065 % Outside directors 0 . 69 0 . 63 0 . 353 0 . 67 0 . 67 - 0 . 015 CEO ethnic dummy 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 225 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 216 Female CEO dummy 0 . 03 0 . 02 0 . 074 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 001 Ln ( Sales ) 7 . 89 6 . 94 0 . 815 7 . 28 7 . 22 0 . 053 Leverage 0 . 24 0 . 22 0 . 069 0 . 21 0 . 21 - 0 . 046 PPE / Asset 0 . 27 0 . 31 - 0 . 175 0 . 29 0 . 30 - 0 . 040 R & D / Sales 0 . 04 0 . 05 - 0 . 080 0 . 06 0 . 07 - 0 . 038 Stock return 0 . 07 0 . 09 - 0 . 037 0 . 06 0 . 09 - 0 . 065 Cashflow 0 . 11 0 . 10 0 . 035 0 . 11 0 . 12 - 0 . 016 Institutional ownership 0 . 56 0 . 49 0 . 228 0 . 56 0 . 54 0 . 064 Industry HHI 0 . 02 0 . 02 - 0 . 115 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 029 Industry HHI 2 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 081 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 024 Panel B : Difference - in - differences results Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) % Minority inventors ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) Treat 0 . 078 - 0 . 028 1 . 112 ( 0 . 41 ) ( - 0 . 36 ) ( 1 . 49 ) Post - 0 . 057 - 0 . 094 * * * - 1 . 517 * ( - 0 . 58 ) ( - 2 . 98 ) ( - 1 . 73 ) Treat * Post 0 . 346 * * 0 . 210 * * * 3 . 447 * * * ( 2 . 24 ) ( 2 . 84 ) ( 2 . 72 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes N 1 , 012 1 , 012 1 , 012 R 2 0 . 556 0 . 484 0 . 351 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 47 Table 8 Corporate Innovation and Board Diversity : IV Estimation This table reports IV estimation results of the effects of board ethnic diversity on corporate innovation . The IVs include the number , fraction and diversity of minority directors residing in counties with non - stop flight connections to the focal firm . Panel A presents the first - stage regression results and Panel B reports the second - stage results . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Panel A : First stage regressions Ethnic dummy Ethnic fraction Ethnic HHI ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 30 # of minority directors - 0 . 024 0 . 019 * * * - 0 . 026 * * in non - stop flight counties ( - 0 . 61 ) ( 2 . 60 ) ( - 2 . 34 ) Ethnic fraction 0 . 861 * * * 0 . 110 * - 0 . 203 * * in non - stop flight counties ( 2 . 69 ) ( 1 . 83 ) ( - 2 . 22 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 078 * * - 0 . 018 * * * 0 . 028 * * * in non - stop flight counties ( - 2 . 22 ) ( - 2 . 69 ) ( 2 . 85 ) Director Age SD - 0 . 013 * * * - 0 . 002 * * * 0 . 003 * * * ( - 4 . 92 ) ( - 4 . 66 ) ( 4 . 31 ) % Female director 0 . 437 * * * 0 . 102 * * * - 0 . 156 * * * ( 5 . 55 ) ( 6 . 88 ) ( - 6 . 92 ) Board size 0 . 038 * * * 0 . 002 * * * - 0 . 005 * * * ( 13 . 50 ) ( 4 . 03 ) ( - 5 . 97 ) % Outside directors 0 . 272 * * * 0 . 026 * * * - 0 . 055 * * * ( 7 . 02 ) ( 3 . 64 ) ( - 4 . 96 ) CEO ethnic dummy 0 . 372 * * * 0 . 126 * * * - 0 . 170 * * * ( 13 . 61 ) ( 24 . 63 ) ( - 21 . 74 ) Female CEO dummy - 0 . 039 - 0 . 006 0 . 003 ( - 1 . 15 ) ( - 0 . 92 ) ( 0 . 32 ) Ln ( Sales ) 0 . 096 * * * 0 . 016 * * * - 0 . 027 * * * ( 16 . 42 ) ( 14 . 26 ) ( - 16 . 19 ) Leverage 0 . 054 - 0 . 000 - 0 . 010 ( 1 . 27 ) ( - 0 . 00 ) ( - 0 . 80 ) PPE / Asset - 0 . 050 0 . 002 - 0 . 008 ( - 1 . 02 ) ( 0 . 19 ) ( - 0 . 56 ) R & D / Sales 0 . 111 * * * 0 . 016 * * * - 0 . 029 * * * ( 4 . 32 ) ( 3 . 38 ) ( - 3 . 97 ) Stock return 0 . 022 * * 0 . 002 - 0 . 004 ( 1 . 99 ) ( 0 . 84 ) ( - 1 . 17 ) Cashflow - 0 . 054 - 0 . 005 0 . 000 ( - 0 . 65 ) ( - 0 . 35 ) ( 0 . 01 ) Institutional ownership - 0 . 012 0 . 010 * * * - 0 . 016 * * * ( - 0 . 62 ) ( 2 . 82 ) ( - 2 . 85 ) Industry HHI 0 . 464 0 . 243 - 0 . 410 ( 0 . 42 ) ( 1 . 17 ) ( - 1 . 29 ) Industry HHI 2 - 1 . 479 - 0 . 520 0 . 910 ( - 0 . 58 ) ( - 1 . 09 ) ( 1 . 25 ) Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 428 0 . 390 0 . 411 Cragg - Donald F - statistic 11 . 040 21 . 896 22 . 524 Montiel - Pflueger critical value for τ = 10 % 8 . 525 8 . 525 8 . 525 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 48 Panel B : Second stage regressions Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) % Minority inventors ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 496 * * * 0 . 285 * * * 1 . 128 * * * ( 3 . 32 ) ( 2 . 65 ) ( 3 . 18 ) Ethnic fraction 3 . 486 * * 3 . 120 * * * 17 . 091 * ( 2 . 29 ) ( 2 . 81 ) ( 1 . 71 ) Ethnic HHI - 2 . 164 * * * - 2 . 099 * * * - 11 . 532 * ( - 2 . 78 ) ( - 2 . 92 ) ( - 1 . 71 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 632 0 . 644 0 . 631 0 . 547 0 . 559 0 . 568 0 . 519 0 . 490 0 . 490 Hansen J - statistics p - value 0 . 830 0 . 987 0 . 990 0 . 633 0 . 690 0 . 626 0 . 621 0 . 640 0 . 698 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 49 Table 9 Corporate Innovation and Board Diversity : Non - compete Covenants This table reports estimation results of effects of board ethnic diversity on innovation in states with strong and weak NCC . All regressors are lagged by three years . Strong ( Weak ) NCC is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm is headquartered in a state whose noncompetition agreement enforceability index in Garmaise ( 2011 ) is greater than or equal to 5 , and zero otherwise . Other variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Strong NCC States Weak NCC States Strong NCC States Weak NCC States Strong NCC States Weak NCC States ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 390 * * * 0 . 175 ( 3 . 77 ) ( 1 . 62 ) Ethnic fraction 1 . 553 * * * 0 . 648 ( 2 . 98 ) ( 1 . 17 ) Ethnic HHI - 1 . 134 * * * - 0 . 473 ( - 3 . 28 ) ( - 1 . 23 ) Director Age SD - 0 . 046 * * - 0 . 043 * - 0 . 049 * * - 0 . 044 * - 0 . 049 * * - 0 . 044 * ( - 2 . 28 ) ( - 1 . 80 ) ( - 2 . 37 ) ( - 1 . 83 ) ( - 2 . 38 ) ( - 1 . 83 ) % Female director - 0 . 396 0 . 305 - 0 . 403 0 . 340 - 0 . 418 0 . 327 ( - 0 . 69 ) ( 0 . 60 ) ( - 0 . 69 ) ( 0 . 67 ) ( - 0 . 72 ) ( 0 . 64 ) Board size - 0 . 003 0 . 017 0 . 008 0 . 022 0 . 006 0 . 022 ( - 0 . 13 ) ( 0 . 76 ) ( 0 . 42 ) ( 1 . 00 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 97 ) % Outside directors - 0 . 043 0 . 352 - 0 . 007 0 . 383 - 0 . 027 0 . 375 ( - 0 . 15 ) ( 1 . 11 ) ( - 0 . 02 ) ( 1 . 21 ) ( - 0 . 09 ) ( 1 . 18 ) CEO ethnic dummy 0 . 073 - 0 . 162 0 . 033 - 0 . 178 0 . 029 - 0 . 174 ( 0 . 50 ) ( - 1 . 03 ) ( 0 . 21 ) ( - 1 . 08 ) ( 0 . 19 ) ( - 1 . 07 ) Female CEO dummy 0 . 184 - 0 . 040 0 . 203 - 0 . 054 0 . 188 - 0 . 054 ( 1 . 16 ) ( - 0 . 21 ) ( 1 . 25 ) ( - 0 . 28 ) ( 1 . 17 ) ( - 0 . 27 ) Ln ( Sales ) 0 . 401 * * * 0 . 411 * * * 0 . 418 * * * 0 . 417 * * * 0 . 412 * * * 0 . 414 * * * ( 7 . 05 ) ( 7 . 62 ) ( 7 . 37 ) ( 7 . 67 ) ( 7 . 21 ) ( 7 . 57 ) Leverage - 0 . 630 * 0 . 166 - 0 . 602 0 . 176 - 0 . 601 0 . 167 ( - 1 . 75 ) ( 0 . 44 ) ( - 1 . 64 ) ( 0 . 47 ) ( - 1 . 64 ) ( 0 . 44 ) PPE / Asset 0 . 290 - 0 . 316 0 . 204 - 0 . 298 0 . 217 - 0 . 308 ( 0 . 76 ) ( - 0 . 67 ) ( 0 . 53 ) ( - 0 . 63 ) ( 0 . 57 ) ( - 0 . 65 ) Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 50 R & D / Sales 0 . 657 * * * 1 . 129 * * 0 . 659 * * * 1 . 155 * * 0 . 658 * * * 1 . 147 * * ( 3 . 64 ) ( 2 . 45 ) ( 3 . 62 ) ( 2 . 52 ) ( 3 . 64 ) ( 2 . 50 ) Stock return 0 . 002 0 . 078 * * * 0 . 006 0 . 081 * * * 0 . 005 0 . 080 * * * ( 0 . 04 ) ( 2 . 72 ) ( 0 . 13 ) ( 2 . 88 ) ( 0 . 12 ) ( 2 . 83 ) Cashflow 0 . 682 0 . 825 0 . 669 0 . 817 0 . 666 0 . 814 ( 1 . 25 ) ( 1 . 56 ) ( 1 . 22 ) ( 1 . 53 ) ( 1 . 21 ) ( 1 . 53 ) Institutional ownership 0 . 087 - 0 . 223 0 . 068 - 0 . 233 0 . 066 - 0 . 235 ( 0 . 50 ) ( - 1 . 18 ) ( 0 . 39 ) ( - 1 . 23 ) ( 0 . 38 ) ( - 1 . 24 ) Industry HHI 2 . 355 12 . 902 * * 2 . 162 12 . 713 * * 2 . 160 12 . 683 * * ( 0 . 47 ) ( 2 . 37 ) ( 0 . 42 ) ( 2 . 35 ) ( 0 . 42 ) ( 2 . 35 ) Industry HHI 2 - 7 . 262 - 22 . 604 * * - 7 . 174 - 22 . 126 * * - 7 . 138 - 22 . 024 * * ( - 0 . 79 ) ( - 2 . 19 ) ( - 0 . 75 ) ( - 2 . 16 ) ( - 0 . 75 ) ( - 2 . 15 ) Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 2 , 868 2 , 802 2 , 868 2 , 802 2 , 868 2 , 802 R 2 0 . 703 0 . 675 0 . 699 0 . 674 0 . 700 0 . 674 p - value equality 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 01 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 51 Table 10 Board Ethnic Diversity and Corporate Diversity Initiatives This table reports estimation results of the effects of board ethnic diversity on firm diversity policy initiatives . The dependent variables are from the KLD database defined as follows . Minority promotion : The company has made notable progress in the promotion of women and minorities , particularly regarding line positions with profit - and - loss responsibilities in the corporation . Minority Contracting : The company does at least 5 % of its subcontracting or otherwise has a demonstrably strong record on purchasing or contracting , with women - and / or minority - owned businesses . All regressors are lagged by one year . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Minority Promotion Minority Contracting ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 149 * 0 . 345 * * ( 1 . 77 ) ( 2 . 08 ) Ethnic fraction 0 . 954 * * 2 . 438 * * * ( 2 . 47 ) ( 4 . 12 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 704 * * * - 1 . 761 * * * ( - 2 . 63 ) ( - 3 . 96 ) Director Age SD 0 . 010 0 . 010 0 . 011 - 0 . 049 - 0 . 050 - 0 . 050 ( 0 . 52 ) ( 0 . 50 ) ( 0 . 54 ) ( - 1 . 42 ) ( - 1 . 44 ) ( - 1 . 45 ) % Female director 2 . 462 * * * 2 . 413 * * * 2 . 401 * * * 1 . 666 * * 1 . 533 * 1 . 532 * ( 5 . 44 ) ( 5 . 34 ) ( 5 . 31 ) ( 2 . 05 ) ( 1 . 85 ) ( 1 . 83 ) Board size - 0 . 001 0 . 003 0 . 001 0 . 039 0 . 047 * 0 . 044 * ( - 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 17 ) ( 0 . 08 ) ( 1 . 42 ) ( 1 . 79 ) ( 1 . 66 ) % Outside directors 0 . 558 * 0 . 552 * 0 . 542 * 1 . 018 * * 1 . 025 * * 0 . 994 * ( 1 . 87 ) ( 1 . 86 ) ( 1 . 83 ) ( 1 . 99 ) ( 2 . 00 ) ( 1 . 93 ) CEO ethnic dummy 0 . 237 * 0 . 150 0 . 164 0 . 368 * 0 . 154 0 . 189 ( 1 . 74 ) ( 1 . 04 ) ( 1 . 17 ) ( 1 . 67 ) ( 0 . 70 ) ( 0 . 87 ) Female CEO dummy 0 . 237 0 . 233 0 . 235 0 . 275 0 . 249 0 . 243 ( 1 . 63 ) ( 1 . 61 ) ( 1 . 62 ) ( 1 . 25 ) ( 1 . 15 ) ( 1 . 12 ) Ln ( Sales ) 0 . 174 * * * 0 . 170 * * * 0 . 165 * * * 0 . 708 * * * 0 . 692 * * * 0 . 681 * * * ( 3 . 93 ) ( 3 . 87 ) ( 3 . 73 ) ( 8 . 76 ) ( 8 . 69 ) ( 8 . 46 ) Leverage - 0 . 371 - 0 . 353 - 0 . 367 - 0 . 850 - 0 . 801 - 0 . 858 ( - 1 . 28 ) ( - 1 . 22 ) ( - 1 . 27 ) ( - 1 . 46 ) ( - 1 . 39 ) ( - 1 . 48 ) PPE / Asset - 0 . 089 - 0 . 092 - 0 . 099 0 . 585 0 . 586 0 . 593 ( - 0 . 25 ) ( - 0 . 26 ) ( - 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 99 ) ( 0 . 99 ) ( 1 . 00 ) Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 52 R & D / Sales 0 . 050 0 . 048 0 . 043 0 . 655 * * * 0 . 651 * * * 0 . 648 * * * ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 5 . 05 ) ( 4 . 97 ) ( 4 . 96 ) Stock return 0 . 062 0 . 065 0 . 065 - 0 . 022 - 0 . 012 - 0 . 011 ( 1 . 45 ) ( 1 . 52 ) ( 1 . 54 ) ( - 0 . 31 ) ( - 0 . 17 ) ( - 0 . 15 ) Cashflow - 0 . 678 - 0 . 673 - 0 . 679 - 2 . 247 * * - 2 . 234 * * - 2 . 267 * * ( - 1 . 22 ) ( - 1 . 22 ) ( - 1 . 23 ) ( - 2 . 42 ) ( - 2 . 38 ) ( - 2 . 42 ) Institutional ownership - 0 . 063 - 0 . 068 - 0 . 073 - 0 . 223 - 0 . 247 - 0 . 259 ( - 0 . 44 ) ( - 0 . 49 ) ( - 0 . 52 ) ( - 0 . 78 ) ( - 0 . 86 ) ( - 0 . 90 ) Industry HHI - 4 . 325 - 4 . 412 - 4 . 509 - 0 . 830 - 2 . 496 - 2 . 408 ( - 0 . 58 ) ( - 0 . 59 ) ( - 0 . 61 ) ( - 0 . 05 ) ( - 0 . 15 ) ( - 0 . 14 ) Industry HHI 2 5 . 124 5 . 801 6 . 108 - 18 . 108 - 13 . 442 - 13 . 590 ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 36 ) ( - 0 . 40 ) ( - 0 . 31 ) ( - 0 . 32 ) Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 4 , 340 4 , 340 4 , 340 3 , 121 3 , 121 3 , 121 R 2 0 . 165 0 . 166 0 . 166 0 . 375 0 . 381 0 . 382 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 53 Table 11 Executive Directors versus Independent Directors This table reports estimation results of the effects of board ethnic diversity on corporate innovation . We construct Ethnic dummy , Ethnic fraction and Ethnic HHI variables separately for the executive director group ( E ) and the independent director group ( I ) . All regressors are lagged by three years . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) % Minority inventors ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Ethnic dummy ( E ) 0 . 132 * 0 . 067 * * 1 . 681 * ( 1 . 84 ) ( 2 . 30 ) ( 1 . 89 ) Ethnic dummy ( I ) 0 . 159 * * * 0 . 072 * * * 1 . 938 * * * ( 2 . 85 ) ( 3 . 05 ) ( 2 . 97 ) Ethnic fraction ( E ) 0 . 202 0 . 152 * * 5 . 502 * * ( 1 . 25 ) ( 2 . 24 ) ( 2 . 57 ) Ethnic fraction ( I ) 0 . 432 * * 0 . 203 * * 7 . 079 * ( 2 . 01 ) ( 2 . 22 ) ( 1 . 95 ) Ethnic HHI ( E ) - 0 . 372 * * - 0 . 148 * * - 3 . 163 * ( - 2 . 47 ) ( - 2 . 43 ) ( - 1 . 78 ) Ethnic HHI ( I ) - 0 . 383 * * * - 0 . 163 * * - 5 . 113 * * ( - 2 . 61 ) ( - 2 . 55 ) ( - 2 . 39 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 654 0 . 653 0 . 654 0 . 591 0 . 590 0 . 591 0 . 318 0 . 319 0 . 317 Wald tests p - value 0 . 75 0 . 38 0 . 95 0 . 88 0 . 65 0 . 86 0 . 82 0 . 71 0 . 50 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 54 Table 12 Single - versus Multiple - race Minority Directors This table reports estimation results of the effects of board ethnic diversity on corporate innovation . The dependent variables are patent counts , the average number of inventors per patent ( in logs ) and the fraction of minority inventors . Ethnic dummy 1 is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm has only one minority director , and zero otherwise . Ethnic dummy 2 is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm has at least two minority director which are from different races , and zero otherwise . Ethnic number 1 is the total number of minority directors when a firm has minority directors from the same race . Ethnic number 2 is the total number of minority directors when a firm has minority directors from different races . All regressors are lagged by three years . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) % Minority inventors ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Ethnic dummy 1 0 . 268 * * * 0 . 097 * * * 0 . 416 * * * ( 3 . 64 ) ( 3 . 78 ) ( 4 . 66 ) Ethnic dummy 2 0 . 337 * * * 0 . 098 * * 0 . 368 * * * ( 2 . 96 ) ( 2 . 42 ) ( 2 . 84 ) Ethnic number 1 0 . 269 * * * 0 . 097 * * * 0 . 416 * * * ( 3 . 65 ) ( 3 . 79 ) ( 4 . 67 ) Ethnic number 2 0 . 332 * * * 0 . 097 * * 0 . 362 * * * ( 2 . 92 ) ( 2 . 38 ) ( 2 . 80 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 658 0 . 561 0 . 534 0 . 658 0 . 561 0 . 534 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 55 Table 13 Solo Inventors versus Inventor Teams This table examines how minority directors affect performance of solo inventors and inventor teams . The dependent variable is patent counts . All regressors are lagged by three years . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Panel A : Comparison between minority solo inventors and minority inventor teams Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Minority Team Minority Solo Minority Team Minority Solo Minority Team Minority Solo ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 222 * * * 0 . 072 * * * ( 4 . 24 ) ( 2 . 74 ) Ethnic fraction 0 . 992 * * * 0 . 368 * * ( 3 . 60 ) ( 2 . 42 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 698 * * * - 0 . 254 * * ( - 3 . 73 ) ( - 2 . 49 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 585 0 . 583 0 . 584 0 . 438 0 . 438 0 . 438 Panel B : Comparison between white solo inventors and white inventor teams Ln ( Patents + 1 ) White Team White Solo White Team White Solo White Team White Solo ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 251 * * * 0 . 144 * * * ( 3 . 62 ) ( 2 . 94 ) Ethnic fraction 1 . 014 * * * 0 . 601 * * ( 2 . 84 ) ( 2 . 37 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 754 * * * - 0 . 454 * * * ( - 3 . 13 ) ( - 2 . 64 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 5 , 670 R 2 0 . 635 0 . 633 0 . 634 0 . 596 0 . 595 0 . 595 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 56 Table 14 Board Diversity and Corporate R & D Investments This table reports estimation results of the effects of board ethnic diversity on firms’ R & D expenditures . All regressors are lagged by one year . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . R & D / Sales R & D / Assets Ln ( R & D ) ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 029 * 0 . 005 * * * 0 . 289 * * * ( 1 . 82 ) ( 2 . 64 ) ( 4 . 13 ) Ethnic fraction 0 . 120 * * 0 . 023 * * 1 . 122 * * * ( 2 . 07 ) ( 2 . 40 ) ( 3 . 37 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 101 * * - 0 . 018 * * - 0 . 853 * * * ( - 2 . 20 ) ( - 2 . 55 ) ( - 3 . 53 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 6 , 631 6 , 631 6 , 631 6 , 631 6 , 631 6 , 631 6 , 631 6 , 631 6 , 631 R 2 0 . 174 0 . 174 0 . 174 0 . 524 0 . 524 0 . 524 0 . 778 0 . 777 0 . 777 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 57 Table 15 Robustness Tests for Size Effects This table repeats the regressions for Table 3 for small and large firms , respectively . All regressors are lagged by three years . Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B . All regressions include year and 3 - digit SIC code industry fixed effects . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity . * , * * , and * * * correspond to significance at the 10 % , 5 % , and 1 % levels , respectively . Panel A : Sample of firms with below median sales Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) % Minority inventors ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 212 * * * 0 . 066 * * * 0 . 376 * * * ( 4 . 51 ) ( 3 . 07 ) ( 5 . 07 ) Ethnic fraction 0 . 300 0 . 128 0 . 948 * * ( 1 . 12 ) ( 1 . 05 ) ( 2 . 24 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 361 * * - 0 . 122 - 0 . 847 * * * ( - 2 . 02 ) ( - 1 . 50 ) ( - 3 . 00 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 R 2 0 . 597 0 . 594 0 . 594 0 . 558 0 . 557 0 . 557 0 . 484 0 . 480 0 . 480 Panel B : Sample of firms with above median sales Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) % Minority inventors ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Ethnic dummy 0 . 250 * * 0 . 102 * * * 0 . 327 * * * ( 2 . 51 ) ( 4 . 48 ) ( 4 . 33 ) Ethnic fraction 1 . 076 * * 0 . 237 * * 0 . 683 * ( 2 . 11 ) ( 2 . 06 ) ( 1 . 80 ) Ethnic HHI - 0 . 728 * * - 0 . 171 * * - 0 . 520 * * ( - 2 . 16 ) ( - 2 . 31 ) ( - 2 . 12 ) Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes N 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 2 , 835 R 2 0 . 764 0 . 763 0 . 763 0 . 671 0 . 669 0 . 669 0 . 655 0 . 653 0 . 653 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 58 Appendix A : Sample Selection and Distribution Panel A : Sample selection procedure Observations All firm - year observations for U . S firms from the Institutional Shareholder Services ( ISS ) database during 1996 - 2007 16 , 261 Less : Observations with missing patent information from NBER patent database ( 2 , 499 ) Firms with missing information on all directors’ race information ( 7 , 822 ) Observations with missing data on all controls in regression ( 270 ) Final sample 5 , 670 Panel B : Sample distribution by year Year N Year N 1996 249 2002 520 1997 371 2003 482 1998 550 2004 471 1999 640 2005 439 2000 622 2006 433 2001 603 2007 292 Panel C : Sample distribution by industry Industry N Percent ( % ) Mining / Construction 88 1 . 55 Food 204 3 . 60 Textiles / Print / Publish 397 7 . 00 Chemicals / Pharmaceuticals 623 10 . 99 Extractive 264 4 . 66 Manufacturing Rubber / Glass / Etc . 116 2 . 05 Metal 240 4 . 23 Machinery / Electrical Equipment / Computers 865 15 . 26 Transport Equipment 218 3 . 84 Instruments 279 4 . 92 Miscellaneous manufacturers 38 0 . 67 Transportation 257 4 . 53 Utilities 510 8 . 99 Retail Wholesale 130 2 . 29 Miscellaneous retail 366 6 . 46 Restaurant 76 1 . 34 Financial 388 6 . 84 Insurance / Real Estate 20 0 . 35 Services 571 10 . 07 Others 20 0 . 35 Total 5 , 670 100 . 00 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157 59 Appendix B : Variable Definitions Variable Definition Ln ( Patents + 1 ) Natural logarithm of one plus a firm’s total number of patents filed ( and eventually granted ) Ln ( Citations + 1 ) Natural logarithm of one plus a firm’s total number of citations received on the firm’s patents filed ( and eventually granted ) Ln ( Number of inventors + 1 ) Natural logarithm of the total number of active inventors Ln ( Inventors per patent + 1 ) Natural logarithm of the average number of inventors for each patent ; we take the firm average over all of its patents in a given year % Minority inventors Number of distinct non - white inventors divided by total number of no - repeat inventors for a firm in a given year Ln ( Minority inventors + 1 ) Natural logarithm of one plus the number of distinct non - white inventors for a firm in a given year R & D / Asset R & D expenditures / Total assets R & D / Sales R & D expenditures / sales Ln ( R & D ) Ln ( R & D expenditures + 1 ) Minority Promotion The company has made notable progress in the promotion of women and minorities , particularly to line positions with profit - and - loss responsibilities in the corporation Minority Contracting The company does at least 5 % of its subcontracting , or otherwise has a demonstrably strong record on purchasing or contracting , with women - and / or minority - owned businesses Ethnic Dummy = 1 if there is at least one non - white director , and otherwise 0 Ethnic Fraction Number of non - white directors divided by total number of directors Ethnic HHI Herfindahl - Hirschman Index , computed as ∑ 𝑠 𝑖2 𝑛1 , where s is number of given ethnic directors scaled by total number of directors . Ethnic directors include Asian , African American , and Hispanic Director Age SD Standard deviation of board directors’ age % Female directors Fraction of female directors on board Board size The number of board members % Outside directors Fraction of independent directors on board CEO ethnic dummy = 1 if CEO is non - white director , and otherwise 0 Female CEO dummy = 1 if CEO is female , and otherwise 0 Ln ( Sales ) Natural logarithm of annual sales Leverage Ratio of the sum of long - term debt and short - term debt to assets Cashflow Measured as earnings before interest scaled by total assets Stock return Stock returns over the fiscal year PPE / Assets Net properties , plants , and equipment divided by total assets Institutional ownership Institutional holdings ( percent ) for firm i over fiscal year t , calculated as the arithmetic mean of the four quarterly institutional holdings reported through form 13F Industry HHI Herfindahl index of three - digit standard industrial classification ( SIC ) industry j where firm i belongs , measured at the end of fiscal year t Industry HHI 2 The square term of the industry Herfindahl index Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3936157