Taking a Broad Perspective Before Brainstorming Ajeeta Deuja , Nicholas W . Kohn , Paul B . Paulus , and Runa M . Korde The University of Texas at Arlington Three studies examined the role of prior consideration of categories on a brainstorming task . Participants were asked to generate abstract categories before they brainstormed either in groups or individually in Experiment 1 . It was expected that generating categories before ideation would be beneﬁcial . However , it was found that category generation harmed the group ideation process . Prior category generation reduced clustering of ideas within categories for groups , which might have led to a decrease in productivity . The last two experiments examined whether groups would beneﬁt by brainstorming one category at a time because this might increase clustering . It was found that sequential category brainstorming helped increase productivity during the ideation process and increased clustering . These studies demonstrate that a prior categorization phase can facilitate subsequent brainstorming because it enhances sub - sequent clustering of ideas within categories . Keywords : group creativity , brainstorming , categorization , task structure Brainstorming is a popular technique for en - hancing the number of ideas individuals and groups can generate ( Sutton & Hargadon , 1996 ) . By following the four rules of brain - storming suggested by Osborn ( 1957 ) , one can enhance both the number of ideas and the num - ber of good ideas ( those rated above average in novelty ; Meadow , Parnes , & Reese , 1959 ; Parnes & Meadow , 1959 ; Paulus , Kohn , & Ar - ditti , 2011 ) . However , brainstorming in face - to - face groups has been found to be less effective than brainstorming alone ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Mullen , Johnson , & Salas , 1991 ) . Much research has examined the factors responsible for this production loss in groups and ways in which to enhance group brainstorming ( Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Paulus & Coskun , 2012 ) . For example , studies have also shown that when groups exchange ideas by means of computer systems or writing , group brainstorming can be more effective than solitary brainstorming ( Derosa , Smith , & Hantula , 2007 ; Paulus & Yang , 2000 ) . In “real world groups” the creative process is likely to involve a number of phases including determination of the problem , discus - sion of different aspects or categories of the problem , generating ideas about the different aspects of the problem and selecting the best ideas for further discussion and possible imple - mentation ( cf . , Basadur , Basadur , & Licina , 2012 ) . A few studies have recently examined the selection process after brainstorming ( e . g . , Putman & Paulus , 2009 ; Rietzschel , Nijstad , & Stroebe , 2006 ) . However , one issue that has received little empirical attention is the category generation phase of the creative idea generation process . No studies have examined how having participants ﬁrst determine categories of a prob - lem relates to subsequent brainstorming . This is the focus of the present series of experiments . There are two models that have focused on the cognitive processes in group brainstorming that are relevant to understanding the role of categories in brainstorming ( Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Paulus & Brown , 2003 , 2007 ) . The This article was published Online First May 12 , 2014 . Ajeeta Deuja , Nicholas W . Kohn , Paul B . Paulus , and Runa M . Korde , Department of Psychology , The University of Texas at Arlington . The research reported in this article was supported by collaborative Grant BCS 0729305 to the ﬁrst author from the National Science Foundation , which included support from the Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Anal - ysis and collaborative grants from the National Science Foundation ( CreativeIT 0855825 and INSPIRE BCS 1247971 ) . Any opinions , ﬁndings , and conclusions or rec - ommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation . Correspondence concerning this article should be ad - dressed to Paul B . Paulus , Department of Psychology , Uni - versity of Texas at Arlington , Arlington , TX 76019 - 0528 . E - mail : paulus @ uta . edu T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice © 2014 American Psychological Association 2014 , Vol . 18 , No . 3 , 222 – 236 1089 - 2699 / 14 / $ 12 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / gdn0000008 222 Search for Ideas in Associative Memory ( SIAM ) and cognitive - social - motivational mod - els highlight the importance of the search of different domains of memory or semantic cate - gories related to an issue . Some categories may be quite salient and easily tapped for search , but others may require some priming from collab - orators or a facilitator . Taylor and Greve ( 2006 ) have suggested that if participants are knowl - edgeable about a large number of categories , they have a wider selection of categories to combine . There is evidence to suggest that priming categories is beneﬁcial . Coskun , Paulus , Brown , and Sherwood ( 2000 ) found that presenting more categories to brainstormers enhanced the number of ideas generated . Rietzschel , Nijstad , and Stroebe ( 2007 ) found that priming four speciﬁc categories with questions led to higher productivity and originality within the primed subcategories but not overall productivity . Ni - jstad , Stroebe , and Lodewijkx ( 2002 ) found that presenting ideas from broad range of categories enhanced the range of ideas but not the number of ideas . Presenting ideas from only a couple semantic categories led to generation of more ideas in those speciﬁc categories . Based on these three studies , it appears that the effects of priming categories are dependent upon the priming manipulation . Priming from many cat - egories produces a wide variety of ideas , but priming from a few categories boosts category depth and possibly originality . Generating an a priori list of categories might have beneﬁts beyond just priming certain cate - gories . According to the cognitive models ( Ni - jstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Nijstad et al . , 2002 ; Paulus & Brown , 2007 ) doing so reduces the task demands of brainstorming , which involve generating search cues ( i . e . , categories ) to probe long - term memory and switching multiple times among these cues . This switching process can slow the brainstorming process and may also in - ﬂuence the motivation to continue brainstorming . Another beneﬁt of prior category generation is that it may increase the clustering of ideas as they are generated within speciﬁc categories ( Rietzschel et al . , 2007 ) . The ﬂow of ideas may be optimal if categories are considered one at a time since this will minimize the frequency of shifting among categories ( Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Nijstad et al . , 2002 ) . Consistent with this perspective , Baruah and Paulus ( 2011 ) found that clustering of ideas within categories en - hanced the number of ideas generated . They compared groups in which each member was provided the same three categories on which to focus during brainstorming to groups in which each person focused on a separate category . The shared focus groups increased clustering as well as the quantity of ideas generated . Thus , gener - ating a number of categories before brainstorm - ing might help groups cluster more of their ideas and increase the number of ideas gener - ated during the brainstorming task . Prior research by Ward ( 2008 ) also supports the beneﬁt of prior consideration of broader categories . He asked participants to develop a new sport and write down everything that came to mind when they developed the new sport . Ward found that individuals who take abstract approaches ( e . g . , something that requires a ball ) had more original ideas compared with the par - ticipants who based their ideas on a concrete sport ( e . g . , basketball ) . His ﬁndings suggest that exploring the different abstract categories stored within one’s knowledge might help par - ticipants later generate more original ideas . In another study , Ward , Patterson , and Sifonis ( 2004 ) found that when participants were asked to imagine life on other planets they generated more original ideas when they were instructed to consider abstract features rather than speciﬁc features . However , reliance on speciﬁc in - stances may lead to more useful ideas ( Ward , 2008 ; Ward & Kolomyts , 2010 ) . Similarly , Mumford , Reiter - Palmon , and Redmond ( 1994 ) found that asking students to consider the im - portant factors before an idea generation task enhanced the originality and quality of the so - lutions suggested . Experiment 1 To explore the impact of prior generation of categories on subsequent generation of ideas we used an electronic brainstorming ( EBS ) para - digm for the generation of categories and sub - sequent generation of ideas . The EBS paradigm reduces the production blocking ( inability to express ideas as they occur in one’s mind ) that is present in face - to - face brainstorming ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Gallupe , Bastianutti , & Coo - per , 1991 ) . As group size increases to eight or more , EBS can even enhance the number of ideas generated by groups compared with sim - 223 TAKING A BROAD PERSPECTIVE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . ilar number of individuals ( nominal groups ) ( Dennis & Williams , 2005 ; DeRosa et al . , 2007 ; Paulus , Kohn , Arditti , & Korde , 2013 ) . How - ever , for small groups the evidence is a mixed , with some studies showing enhanced perfor - mance in groups ( Dugosh , Paulus , Roland , & Yang , 2000 ) whereas others ﬁnd lower perfor - mance in groups ( DeRosa et al . , 2007 ; Kohn & Smith , 2011 ) . The aim of this experiment was to increase the productivity in brainstorming by allowing participants to generate categories before a brainstorming phase . In the categorization con - ditions , the participants were asked to generate abstract categories in groups of three . These categories were expected to prime the partici - pants and enable them to generate a higher number of ideas in a later brainstorming phase . After generating these abstract categories , the participants all brainstormed on the same topic . This brainstorming phase was done either indi - vidually or in groups of three . The categoriza - tion phase was expected to increase generation of ideas for both individuals and groups . It was anticipated that individuals might beneﬁt more from prior categorization than groups . Individ - uals may be better able to focus on one category at a time . With group brainstorming members are likely to be focusing on different categories . The hypotheses for this experiment were : Hypothesis 1 : Participants in categoriza - tion conditions should be able to explore categories to a greater extent because of the prior generation of categories or search cues . As a result they should generate more ideas and a greater number of ideas in each category ( category depth ) . Hypothesis 2 : Based on Derosa et al . ( 2007 ) participants who brainstorm indi - vidually will generate more ideas across a wider range of categories ( variety ) than an interactive group . Hypothesis 3 : The prior categorization task may be of greater beneﬁt to individual performers than to groups . Hypothesis 4 : Based on the research by Ward and by Mumford et al . ( 1994 ) prior categorization may increase originality of ideas . Hypothesis 5 : Idea clustering will predict the quantity of idea generation in the in - teractive group conditions . Method Participants . In total , 267 undergraduate students participated in the experiment . Fifteen participants were eliminated because they did not follow the instructions . There were 93 men and 159 women in the experiment . The age range of the participants was between 17 and 55 , with a mean age of 21 . 57 years . They were given credits for participating in this experiment as a requirement for their psychology class . There were 21 groups in each condition . Design and procedure . A 2 ( Categoriza - tion vs . No Categorization ) (cid:2) 2 ( Group vs . Individual ) design was used for this experiment . The four conditions were Categorization Group , Categorization Individual , No Categorization Group , and No Categorization Individual . The No Categorization Individual condition re - quired only individual participants , whereas all other conditions required a total of three partic - ipants to be present for the experiment . The brainstorming data from three individuals tested separately were later combined to form a nom - inal group . An EBS procedure was used for this experiment . The group chat feature of AOL Instant Messenger ( AIM ) was used for the group conditions , as it enabled all three partic - ipants to type simultaneously in the same win - dow and view the ideas generated by the other participants . For the individual conditions , the regular instant messaging feature of AIM was used that only allowed conversation between the participant and the experimenter . The ﬁrst part of the experiment was the cat - egorization phase . Because of the complexity of the task , participants in the categorization con - ditions were given a categorization task practice session . This was done individually or in a group , dependent upon their condition . In this 1 - min practice session participants were asked to generate categories for the topic “Reform America’s Healthcare System . ” They were then given the experimental topic , “List all the pos - sible ways in which the University can be im - proved” ( university problem ) . Participants in the categorization conditions were asked to gen - erate categories in groups of three for 5 min . They were asked not to provide each other with 224 DEUJA , KOHN , PAULUS , AND KORDE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . any feedback during this time . Participants in the no - categorization conditions were given a packet of mazes ( as a ﬁller task ) for the ﬁrst 5 min of the experiment . They were told to rate each maze according to its difﬁculty level after completion . The ﬁller task was done individu - ally . The second part of the experiment consisted of a 20 - min brainstorming session . Participants in the group conditions completed this phase in groups of three , whereas participants in the in - dividual conditions completed this phase indi - vidually . All participants were instructed to gen - erate speciﬁc ideas in response to the university problem . Participants in the categorization condi - tions were given a list of the categories that they had generated in the ﬁrst part of the experiment . They were told , Your experimenter will give you a list of categories that you and the other participants just generated in the ﬁrst phase of the experiment . You are welcome to use these categories to help you to think of speciﬁc ideas to the topic ; however , you are not limited to generating ideas only in these categories . They were also instructed not to provide each other with any comments or feedback . They were provided with a postexperiment question - naire after the brainstorming session to collect demographic information . Dependent variables . The dependent vari - ables measured in this experiment were the number of ideas generated , the variety of ideas , the category depth , originality , and the cluster - ing of ideas . Each idea generated by the partic - ipants was coded for the category to which they belonged . Two coders independently coded the ideas for the speciﬁc categories . The primary coder coded each idea that was generated by the participants in all conditions . The secondary coder coded 25 % of the ideas within each con - dition . Interrater reliability was (cid:3) (cid:4) . 85 ( p (cid:5) . 001 ) . The variety of ideas was calculated by summing the total number of categories ex - plored during the brainstorming phase . Cate - gory depth was calculated by dividing the num - ber of ideas generated by the variety of ideas . Individual clustering was also assessed at the group level to determine how often participants repeated ideas in the same category . Two raters independently rated all the ideas on a scale of 1 ( being a very common idea ) to 5 ( being a very original and unique idea ) for originality for half of the participants . The interrater reliability was Cronbach’s (cid:6) (cid:4) . 77 . Individual clustering was calculated using the formula for the adjusted ratio of clustering ( ARC ) developed by Roenker , Thompson , and Brown ( 1971 ) . The number of category repeti - tions was examined at the individual level to calculate ARC . In other words , we examined the number of ideas a participant generated within a category before moving on to the next one ( irrespective of the categories that his peers were exploring ) . This measure was examined only for the interactive group conditions be - cause this measure is not meaningful for nom - inal groups . Results To assess Hypotheses 1 , 2 , and 3 , a series of 2 (cid:2) 2 analysis of variances ( ANOVAs ) were conducted . The result of a 2 ( Categori - zation manipulation : Categorization vs . No Categorization ) (cid:2) 2 ( Brainstorming Setting : Individual vs . Group ) ANOVA for quantity of ideas revealed a main effect for brainstorming setting , F ( 1 , 80 ) (cid:4) 14 . 06 , MSE (cid:4) 489 . 08 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 15 . Participants in the individual conditions ( M (cid:4) 82 . 29 , SE (cid:4) 3 . 41 ) generated more ideas than those in the group conditions ( M (cid:4) 64 . 19 , SE (cid:4) 3 . 42 ) ; d (cid:4) 0 . 78 . In addi - tion , there was a signiﬁcant interaction effect , F ( 1 , 80 ) (cid:4) 9 . 85 , MSE (cid:4) 489 . 08 , p (cid:4) . 002 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 11 . Post hoc analyses revealed that the No Categorization Group and No Categoriza - tion Individual conditions generated approxi - mately the same number of ideas ( see Table 1 for means and SD s ) . However , the Categori - zation Individual condition generated signiﬁ - cantly more ideas than the Categorization Group condition ; d (cid:4) 1 . 37 . In addition , the No Categorization Group condition generated more ideas than the Categorization Group condition ( d (cid:4) 1 . 30 ) , but there were no sig - niﬁcant differences between the two individ - ual conditions . A similar 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA was done for brain - storming variety . There was a signiﬁcant main effect for brainstorming setting , F ( 1 , 80 ) (cid:4) 7 . 55 , MSE (cid:4) 7 . 95 , p (cid:4) . 007 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 09 . Participants in the individual conditions ( M (cid:4) 21 . 91 , SE (cid:4) . 44 ) generated a greater variety of ideas than those in the group conditions ( M (cid:4) 20 . 21 , SE (cid:4) . 44 ) ; d (cid:4) 0 . 57 . Furthermore , there was a signiﬁcant interac - 225 TAKING A BROAD PERSPECTIVE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . tion , F ( 1 , 80 ) (cid:4) 7 . 13 , MSE (cid:4) 7 . 95 , p (cid:4) . 009 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 08 . Post hoc analyses showed that the participants in the No Categorization Group and No Categorization Individual conditions explored approximately the same number of categories . However , the groups in the Categorization Indi - vidual condition explored signiﬁcantly more cat - egories than those in the Categorization Group condition ; d (cid:4) . 83 . Similarly , the participants in the No Categorization Group condition explored more categories than those in the Categorization Group condition ; d (cid:4) 1 . 12 . Another 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA assessed the effects for category depth . There was a signiﬁcant main ef - fect for brainstorming setting , F ( 1 , 80 ) (cid:4) 10 . 70 , MSE (cid:4) . 68 , p (cid:4) . 002 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 12 . Participants in the individual conditions ( M (cid:4) 3 . 72 , SE (cid:4) . 13 ) ex - hibited more category depth than those in the group conditions ( M (cid:4) 3 . 13 , SE (cid:4) . 13 ) ; d (cid:4) 0 . 69 . Furthermore , there was a signiﬁcant interaction , F ( 1 , 80 ) (cid:4) 6 . 53 , MSE (cid:4) . 68 , p (cid:4) . 013 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 08 . The post hoc analyses revealed that the partici - pants in the No Categorization Group and No Categorization Individual conditions had approx - imately the same category depth . However , the participants in the Categorization Individual con - dition had a signiﬁcantly greater category depth than those in the Categorization Group condition ; d (cid:4) . 65 . In addition , the participants in the No Categorization Group condition had more cate - gory depth than those in the Categorization Group condition ; d (cid:4) 1 . 20 . To assess Hypothesis 4 , a 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA evaluated the average originality of ideas . There were no main effects for the categorization ma - nipulation ( F (cid:5) . 16 ) , brainstorming setting ( F (cid:5) . 78 ) , or their interaction ( F (cid:5) . 01 ) . To assess Hypothesis 5 , an independent t test on individual clustering revealed that there was more clustering in the No Categorization Group condition than in the Categorization Group con - dition , t ( 40 ) (cid:4) 4 . 12 , p (cid:5) . 001 ( see Table 1 for means and SD s ) . A regression analysis showed that individual clustering signiﬁcantly predicted brainstorming quantity , B (cid:4) 90 . 87 , t ( 40 ) (cid:4) 2 . 31 , p (cid:4) . 026 , sr 2 (cid:4) . 118 for these two con - ditions . Discussion The participants in the individual conditions displayed a greater quantity and variety of ideas as well as more category depth when compared with those in the group conditions . This out - come supported the hypothesis ( Hypothesis 2 ) that participants who brainstorm individually should generate more ideas than the participants in the group condition . Contrary to Hypothesis 4 prior categorization did not increase original - ity of ideas . As expected ( Hypothesis 3 ) , par - ticipants in the individual conditions beneﬁtted more from categorization than those in the group conditions—more ideas , more variety , and more category depth . However , unexpect - edly this increase in productivity for the Cate - gorization Individual condition compared with No Categorization Individual condition did not reach signiﬁcance . Furthermore , post hoc anal - yses showed that productivity in the groups was actually impaired by the categorization task . The participants in the Categorization Group condition showed a decrease in the number of ideas , the variety of ideas , and their category depth compared with the No Categorization Group condition . When brainstorming in an EBS group , participants may experience more distraction because of the varied and unex - pected ideas presented by other participants ( Dennis & Williams , 2005 ) . Because the partic - ipants in the Categorization Group condition might have been brainstorming ideas from a different primed category than the category their peers submitted , they might have experi - enced even more distraction . This distraction Table 1 Experiment 1 Quantity , Variety , Category Depth , and Clustering of Brainstorming Ideas by Condition Condition Quantity ( SD ) Variety ( SD ) Category depth ( SD ) Clustering ( SD ) No Categorization Individual 75 . 10 ( 17 . 41 ) 21 . 67 ( 2 . 08 ) 3 . 45 ( . 67 ) Categorization Individual 88 . 43 ( 27 . 85 ) 21 . 33 ( 2 . 58 ) 3 . 40 ( . 85 ) No Categorization Group 72 . 90 ( 21 . 22 ) 22 . 24 ( 2 . 64 ) 3 . 91 ( . 93 ) . 15 ( . 06 ) Categorization Group 54 . 67 ( 21 . 12 ) 18 . 81 ( 3 . 44 ) 2 . 85 ( . 84 ) . 06 ( . 08 ) Note . There were 21 groups in each of the four conditions . 226 DEUJA , KOHN , PAULUS , AND KORDE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . provides for multiple competing search cues ( those from the category list and those from their peers ) . This could increase the amount of category switching and decrease productivity . Consistent with Hypothesis 5 , individual cluster - ing predicted the quantity of ideas for groups in the second phase of the experiment . The fact that clustering was signiﬁcantly greater in the No Cat - egorization Group condition than in the Categori - zation Group condition supports the explanation that participants in the Categorization Group con - dition suffered from being distracted by multiple search cues or strategies . Experiment 2 Experiment 2 was designed to assess the pos - sibility that asking participants to brainstorm on only one category at a time would increase clustering and productivity in the brainstorming session . Although groups are aware of the ex - istence of many categories , they might concen - trate only on some of the dominant ones ( Larey & Paulus , 1999 ) . Therefore , providing partici - pants with one category at a time might help them focus on all of the individual categories and therefore generate more ideas in these cat - egories . Additionally , this should reduce the number of search cue switches and the costs associated with this switching ( Nijstad & Stro - ebe , 2006 ) . This systematic focus should lead to enhanced idea generation because of an increase in category depth . Furthermore , the sequential process should reduce the potential distracting effect of multiple search cues in the group con - ditions . Coskun et al . ( 2000 ) and Dennis , Valacich , Connolly , and Wynne ( 1996 ) found that groups generate more ideas when brainstorming one category at a time than when brainstorming on all categories simultaneously . Coskun et al . ( 2000 ) found that when participants were pre - sented with categories sequentially , they would focus their ideas on the speciﬁc category being presented to them . This led them to generate ideas more or less equally in all of the catego - ries provided to them . Furthermore , providing participants 10 categories led them to generate more ideas than providing them with only two categories in the sequential task , with time al - lotted the same in both conditions . Coskun and Yilmaz ( 2009 ) also found that the participants in a sequential condition generated more ideas in a brainstorming task than did the participants in the nonsequential condition . Because the partici - pants were cued with categories every 5 min , the sequential participants steadily generated ideas throughout the 30 min of the brainstorming task . These ﬁndings suggest that providing participants with different categories in short time intervals should help them generate more ideas . In Experiment 1 , we did not observe a pre - dicted beneﬁt of categorization in terms of in - creasing the originality of ideas , perhaps be - cause participants did not brainstorm ideas one category at a time . Previous studies ( Hong & Milgram , 2010 ; Milgram , Moran , Sawyers , & Fu , 1987 ) found that very typical ideas come early during ideation and very original ideas come later . This may be enhanced when partic - ipants focus on one category at a time . Thus , in this study we examined the originality of ideas as a function of time and output order . Therefore , Experiment 2 included a Catego - rization Sequential Group condition . Partici - pants in this condition generated categories in the ﬁrst phase of the experiment , but instead of receiving the entire category list at the begin - ning of the second phase , the participants were provided with the individual categories sequen - tially . Speciﬁcally , they were given one cate - gory every 2 min of the brainstorming session for a total of 10 categories during the brain - storming phase . Groups were only provided 10 of their categories so as to increase the likeli - hood that domains were more exhaustively probed as well to as reduce the costs associated with category switching . The No Categorization Group condition and a modiﬁed version of the Categorization Group condition from Experi - ment 1 were also included in Experiment 2 . It was predicted that : Hypothesis 1 : Participants in the Categori - zation Sequential condition should gener - ate more ideas and display more category depth in the brainstorming phase compared with the participants in the other two conditions . Hypothesis 2 : Participants in the Categori - zation Sequential condition should display a lower variety of ideas compared with those in the other conditions because they will concentrate more on the categories provided to them and less on other categories . 227 TAKING A BROAD PERSPECTIVE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Hypothesis 3 : The amount of clustering in the Categorization Sequential condition should be greater than that in the other two conditions , resulting in the generation of more ideas . Hypothesis 4 : Idea clustering will predict idea generation . Hypothesis 5 : Originality of ideas will in - crease with output order ( later ideas more original ) . For the Categorization Sequen - tial condition , there will be a temporal ef - fect in which originality will increase the longer participants spend within each category . Method Participants . In total , 108 undergraduate students participated in Experiment 2 . These participants are different from the participants in Experiment 1 . They received credit for their participation , which was required for their psy - chology course . In total , 24 participants’ data had to be eliminated because they did not show up in groups of three and could not be run as an intact group . Three other participants had to be eliminated because they did not follow the in - structions provided to them . Therefore , the data provided by 84 participants were used in the data analyses . There were 58 women and 26 men . The age range of the participants was from 16 to 38 , with a mean age of 19 . 9 years . There were 10 groups in No Categorization and Se - quential conditions and 9 groups in the Catego - rization condition . Design and procedure . The experiment consisted of three group conditions—No Cate - gorization , Categorization , and Categorization Sequential . All conditions consisted of interac - tive groups of three and involved the university problem . The No Categorization condition was same as in Experiment 1 . The participants in the Categorization Sequential condition ﬁrst prac - ticed the categorization phase by generating cat - egories to a practice topic ( “Reform America’s Healthcare System” ) for 1 min . They then gen - erated categories to the actual topic ( “Ways to improve the University” ) for 5 min . Participants next participated in a 3 - min brainstorming ses - sion using the practice topic . Finally , partici - pants brainstormed on the actual topic . During the brainstorming phase , the experimenter pro - vided the groups with one category every 2 min . These categories were randomly selected from the original list ( every group generated at least 10 categories—three categories were selected from two of the group members and four from the third member ) . This set of 10 randomly selected categories was provided in the AIM group chat window so that all three group mem - bers could view it . Participants were instructed that , “The experimenter will provide you with a different category every two minutes . Please try to generate ideas in that category . However , feel free to generate ideas in any other categories that you can think of . ” The Categorization con - dition was modiﬁed to match the Categorization Sequential condition . Rather than providing the participants with a list of all categories that they had previously generated , each group member was provided with a list of 10 randomly selected categories from the original list . In addition , a 3 - min practice session was added before the brainstorming phase in which the participants brainstormed on the topic “Reform America’s Healthcare System . ” Dependent variables . The dependent vari - ables in this experiment were the number of ideas generated , the variety of ideas , the cate - gory depth , the clustering of ideas , and origi - nality . Each idea generated by the participants was coded for the category to which they be - longed as well as the originality of the idea . Similar to Experiment 1 , the primary coder evaluated each idea that was generated by the participants in all conditions . The secondary coder coded 25 % of the ideas within each condition . Interrater reliability for category was found to be (cid:3) (cid:4) . 80 ( p (cid:5) . 001 ) . Interrater reliability for originality , as measured by Cronbach’s (cid:6) was . 86 . Results To assess Hypotheses 1 , 2 , and 3 , a series of ANOVAs examined differences in quantity , va - riety , and clustering . A one - way ANOVA for the total quantity of ideas revealed a signiﬁcant difference among the conditions , F ( 2 , 25 ) (cid:4) 3 . 97 , MSE (cid:4) 562 . 72 , p (cid:4) . 032 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 24 . Post hoc analyses indicated that the participants in the Categorization Sequential condition gener - ated signiﬁcantly more ideas than those in the Categorization condition , p (cid:4) . 030 , d (cid:4) 1 . 24 ( see Table 2 for means and SD s ) . An ANOVA 228 DEUJA , KOHN , PAULUS , AND KORDE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . for the differences among the conditions for variety revealed a signiﬁcant difference in vari - ety , F ( 2 , 25 ) (cid:4) 12 . 32 , MSE (cid:4) 7 . 71 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 50 . The participants in the No Categori - zation ( p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:4) 2 . 03 ) and Categorization ( p (cid:4) . 004 , d (cid:4) 1 . 70 ) conditions displayed a wider variety than those in the Categorization Sequential condition . An ANOVA to assess the difference in category depth displayed by the participants in the three conditions was also signiﬁcant , F ( 2 , 25 ) (cid:4) 15 . 15 , MSE (cid:4) 1 . 68 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 55 . It revealed that the participants in the Categorization Sequential condition had more category depth than the participants in the Categorization ( p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:4) 2 . 07 ) and the No Categorization ( p (cid:4) . 001 , d (cid:4) 1 . 80 ) conditions . An ANOVA also revealed signiﬁcant clustering differences among the conditions , F ( 2 , 25 ) (cid:4) 51 . 91 , MSE (cid:4) . 012 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 81 . The participants in the Categorization Sequential condition clustered more to their own ideas than those in the Categorization ( p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:4) 3 . 73 ) and the No Categorization ( p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:4) 3 . 57 ) conditions . Supporting Hypothesis 4 , there was a positive correlation between clustering and quantity , r ( 26 ) (cid:4) . 57 , p (cid:4) . 002 . An ANOVA found no signiﬁcant differences between the three conditions on the average originality of their ideas , F ( 2 , 25 ) (cid:4) 0 . 56 , MSE (cid:4) . 04 , p (cid:4) . 58 . To test Hypothesis 5 and examine if the order in which an idea is gener - ated from a category affects the originality of an idea , each idea was assigned an output order ( ﬁrst idea receives a “1” ; second idea receives a “2” ; etc . ) . A linear regression analyzed how the output order and condition predicted the origi - nality of each idea . Terms for model included : output order ( centered ) , Categorization ( coded as 1 for categorization condition , 0 for the other conditions ) , Categorization Sequential ( coded as 1 for categorization sequential condition , 0 for the other conditions ) , interaction of Catego - rization and output order , and the interaction of Categorization Sequential and output order . Be - cause of dummy coding , variables were entered in three blocks , with dummy - coded condition variables added in Block 2 and dummy - coded interaction terms added in Block 3 . The full model explained a signiﬁcant amount of origi - nality variance ; R 2 (cid:4) . 092 , F ( 5 , 2541 ) (cid:4) 51 . 57 , MSE (cid:4) 1 . 255 , p (cid:5) . 001 ( see Table 3 for pre - dictors ) . The interaction between output order and condition ( two terms ) signiﬁcantly in - creased the variance explained by the model , (cid:8) R 2 (cid:4) . 008 , F ( 2 , 2541 ) (cid:4) 11 . 31 , p (cid:5) . 001 . The interaction ( illustrated in Figure 1 ) shows that for all conditions , originality increases with out - put order , but that it increases the least for the Categorization Sequential condition . The unique procedure of the Categorization Sequential condition allowed us to conduct ad - ditional temporal analyses of how participants generated ideas within each primed category . Each primed category ( 2 min block ) was di - vided into four time quadrants [ Q1 : 0 – 30 s ; Q2 : 31 – 60 s ; Q3 : 61 – 90 s ; and Q4 : 91 – 120 s ] . Only the ideas that matched the primed category were analyzed . A 4 ( time quadrant ) repeated mea - sures ANOVA found no differences between the quadrants for quantity , F ( 3 , 297 ) (cid:4) 0 . 95 , Table 2 Experiment 2 Quantity , Variety , Category Depth , and Clustering of Brainstorming Ideas by Condition Condition Quantity ( SD ) Variety ( SD ) Category depth ( SD ) Clustering ( SD ) Average originality ( SD ) Categorization Sequential Group 101 . 70 ( 29 . 06 ) 16 . 20 ( 3 . 01 ) 6 . 38 ( 1 . 88 ) . 54 ( . 15 ) 2 . 83 ( 0 . 27 ) No Categorization Group 83 . 33 ( 21 . 22 ) 22 . 22 ( 2 . 91 ) 3 . 76 ( 0 . 83 ) . 10 ( . 08 ) 2 . 93 ( 0 . 21 ) Categorization Group 71 . 33 ( 18 . 93 ) 20 . 78 ( 2 . 33 ) 3 . 41 ( 0 . 77 ) . 11 ( . 05 ) 2 . 83 ( 0 . 11 ) Note . There were 10 Categorization Sequential groups , 9 No Categorization groups , and 9 Categorization groups . Table 3 Regression Table : Output Order and Condition Predicting Idea Originality Predictors B SE Intercept 2 . 923 (cid:2)(cid:2) . 042 Output order . 109 (cid:2)(cid:2) . 014 Categorization . 095 . 066 Sequential categorization (cid:9) . 335 (cid:2)(cid:2) . 055 Categorization (cid:2) Output Order . 057 (cid:2) . 023 Sequential Categorization (cid:2) Output Order (cid:9) . 033 (cid:2) . 016 Note . Output order was centered at the mean . (cid:2) p (cid:5) . 05 . (cid:2)(cid:2) p (cid:5) . 01 . 229 TAKING A BROAD PERSPECTIVE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . MSE (cid:4) 1 . 53 , p (cid:4) . 42 . A 4 ( time quadrant ) repeated measures ANOVA revealed a signiﬁ - cant effect of time for average originality , F ( 3 , 234 ) (cid:4) 33 . 15 , MSE (cid:4) 0 . 38 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 30 . Average originality for Q1 was signiﬁcantly lower than Q2 ( p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:4) . 87 ) , Q3 ( p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:4) . 1 . 17 ) , and Q4 ( p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:4) 1 . 11 ) . Average originality for Q2 was signiﬁcantly lower than Q3 ; p (cid:4) . 02 , d (cid:4) . 38 ( see Figure 1 for an illustration of these two analyses ) . Discussion Participants in the Categorization Sequential condition generated signiﬁcantly more ideas than those in the Categorization condition ( 52 % more ideas ) but not signiﬁcantly more than those in the No Categorization condition ( only 28 % more ideas ) . Thus , Hypothesis 1 was only partially supported , as it was expected that the participants in the Categorization Sequential condition would generate signiﬁcantly more ideas than those in both of the other conditions . As predicted the participants in the Categoriza - tion Sequential condition also displayed signif - icantly more category depth than those in the other two conditions ( Figure 2 ) . Supporting Hypothesis 2 , participants in the Categorization Sequential condition displayed a lower variety of ideas than those in the other two conditions . These participants were only presented with 10 of the categories that they had previously generated . They might have allotted more attention to these categories , leading to a decrease in the variety of ideas . As a trade - off , however , the category depth was increased in the Categorization Sequential condition , proba - bly because these participants were focused on the presented categories and were not distracted by other categories , consistent with the ﬁndings of Rietzschel et al . ( 2007 ) . Because all three participants within each session were generat - ing ideas in the same category , they may have experienced less distraction ( i . e . , fewer compet - ing search cues ) . In the other two conditions , different participants were generating ideas in different categories , which might have served as a distraction ( Baruah & Paulus , 2011 ) . Present - ing categories sequentially may have eliminated this distraction and increased idea generation . In support of Hypothesis 3 , the participants in the Categorization Sequential condition clustered more than the participants in the other two con - ditions , and consistent with Hypothesis 4 clus - tering predicted number of ideas generated . Supporting Hypothesis 5 , originality did in - crease with output order for all conditions . This ﬁnding supports earlier research ( Hong & Mil - gram , 2010 ; Milgram et al . , 1987 ) that showed one is likely to ﬁnd the most original ideas later in a session . Interestingly this output order ef - fect was weakest for the Categorization Sequen - tial condition . The Categorization Sequential procedure was successful in signiﬁcantly in - creasing the number of ideas , but not the aver - Figure 1 . Originality of ideas as a function of output order and condition for Experiment 2 . 230 DEUJA , KOHN , PAULUS , AND KORDE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . age originality of ideas . However , ideas gener - ated later within each category time period were more original . Thus , the sequential condition does have the potential to lead to the generation of more novel ideas . Experiment 3 It has been suggested that priming by categories can lead to cognitive stimulation . This might lead participants to be more productive because they are better able to retrieve information from their knowl - edge . However , priming can either be done by in - structing participants to generate categories or by providing them with a list of previously compiled categories . Previous ﬁndings indicate that when in - dividuals are exposed to the ideas of other partici - pants , they generate more ideas ( Dugosh et al . , 2000 ) . Furthermore , when they are primed with ideas in the categories that are generated by other participants , they are cognitively stimulated and gen - erate more ideas ( Leggett , 1997 ) . In contrast to the present series of experiments , previous research on sequential brainstorming did not have participants generate categories on their own ( Coskun et al . , 2000 ; Coskun & Yilmaz , 2009 ; Dennis et al . , 1996 ) . Because they received categories that they might not have otherwise ex - plored , they had the beneﬁt of using their self - generated cues as well as additional cues or cate - gories . Theoretically , this should enable them to have more ideas as well as a greater variety of ideas . Experiments 1 and 2 have concentrated on priming participants by helping them generate their own cues ( create categories ) before brain - storming . Although this might be beneﬁcial , it may be even more beneﬁcial to provide additional categories that the participants might not have considered . Previous research has not distin - guished between these two different strategies of priming in brainstorming . Experiment 3 included all three conditions from Experiment 2 and two yoked conditions to distinguish between the two different strategies . In the yoked conditions , the participants were provided with the categories that were gener - ated by a different group . The following hy - potheses were assessed : Hypothesis 1 : The participants in the se - quential conditions should generate more ideas , have greater category depth , lower variety , and have more clustering during the brainstorming phase than the partici - pants in the nonsequential conditions . Figure 2 . Quantity and average originality of ideas brainstormed during each primed block in the Sequential Categorization condition . 231 TAKING A BROAD PERSPECTIVE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Hypothesis 2 : The participants in the yoked conditions should have more ideas , more variety , and greater category depth than the participants in the other conditions because they have the additional beneﬁt of being primed with categories they might have otherwise not explored . Hypothesis 3 : The participants in the Yoked Sequential Group should have the most ideas and the greatest category depth because they should have the beneﬁts of brainstorming sequentially as well as being primed with categories they might have otherwise not explored . Hypothesis 4 : Idea clustering should pre - dict the quantity of ideas generated . Method Participants . In total , 252 undergraduate students participated in the experiment . They received credits for their participation , which was required for their psychology course . In total , 27 participants were eliminated because they did not follow the experiment instructions provided to them . Therefore , the data provided by 225 participants were used in the data anal - yses . There were 151 women and 72 men . The age of the participants ranged from 16 to 47 years , with a mean age of 20 . 3 years . Design and procedure . A 2 ( Categoriza - tion vs . Yoked ) (cid:2) 2 ( Sequential vs . Nonsequen - tial ) design was used for Experiment 3 . Further - more , a No Categorization condition was added as a control . All conditions required three par - ticipants per group because all conditions used interactive group brainstorming . The No Cate - gorization , Categorization , and Categorization Sequential conditions were identical to those of Experiment 2 . In the yoked conditions , a list of categories was displayed for the participants using the AIM group chat feature on their screens for 5 min . These categories had been previously gen - erated by groups of participants in the catego - rization conditions . These categories were dis - played to the participants in the yoked conditions at approximately the same time as the participants in the categorization conditions . The group members were informed that a pre - vious group of undergraduate students gener - ated this category list for the university prob - lem . The brainstorming phase for the Yoked Nonsequential and Yoked Sequential conditions was similar to the second phase of the Catego - rization Nonsequential and the Categorization Sequential conditions , respectively . Participants in the Yoked Nonsequential condition were pro - vided with a list of 10 random categories and brainstormed for 20 min without interruption . The participants in the Yoked Sequential con - dition were provided with one category every 2 min on their screen while they were brainstorm - ing . All participants were given a postexperi - mental questionnaire at the end of the experi - ment to collect demographic information . Dependent variables . The dependent vari - ables in this experiment were the number of ideas , variety of ideas , category depth , and individual clustering . As in Experiments 1 and 2 , each idea generated by the participants was coded for the category to which they belonged . The primary and secondary coders used the same coding methods as the previous studies . The primary coder evalu - ated each idea that was generated by the partici - pants in all conditions and the secondary coder coded 25 % of the ideas within each condition . Interrater reliability was found to be (cid:3) (cid:4) . 88 ( p (cid:5) . 001 ) . Results A series of 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVAs were run to test Hypotheses 1 , 2 , and 3 . A 2 ( Categorization condition : Categorization vs . Yoked ) (cid:2) 2 ( Brainstorming condition : Sequential vs . Non - sequential ) ANOVA for quantity of ideas re - vealed a marginal main effect for brainstorming condition ; F ( 1 , 56 ) (cid:4) 3 . 04 , MSE (cid:4) 1002 . 86 , p (cid:4) . 087 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 05 . Groups in the sequential conditions ( M (cid:4) 89 . 27 , SE (cid:4) 5 . 79 ) generated marginally more ideas than those in the nonse - quential conditions ( M (cid:4) 75 . 00 , SE (cid:4) 5 . 79 ) ; d (cid:4) 0 . 45 . There was no signiﬁcant effect of categorization condition or a signiﬁcant interac - tion ; F s (cid:5) 1 . 15 . A 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA for brainstorming variety yielded a signiﬁcant main effect for brainstorm - ing condition , F ( 1 , 56 ) (cid:4) 36 . 55 , MSE (cid:4) 7 . 24 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 40 . Groups in the nonsequential conditions ( M (cid:4) 19 . 76 , SE (cid:4) . 49 ) generated a greater variety of ideas than those in the sequen - tial conditions ( M (cid:4) 15 . 57 , SE (cid:4) . 49 ) ; d (cid:4) 1 . 57 . There was no signiﬁcant effect of catego - 232 DEUJA , KOHN , PAULUS , AND KORDE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . rization condition or a signiﬁcant interaction ; F ’s (cid:5) 1 . 35 . A 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA for category depth revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for brainstorming con - dition , F ( 1 , 56 ) (cid:4) 22 . 37 , MSE (cid:4) 2 . 69 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 29 . Groups in the sequential condi - tions ( M (cid:4) 5 . 77 , SE (cid:4) . 30 ) exhibited more category depth than those in the nonsequential conditions ( M (cid:4) 3 . 76 , SE (cid:4) . 30 ) ; d (cid:4) 1 . 20 . Furthermore , there was a marginally signiﬁcant interaction , F ( 1 , 56 ) (cid:4) 3 . 37 , MSE (cid:4) 2 . 69 , p (cid:4) . 0671 (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 06 . The post hoc analyses showed that the Categorization Nonsequential condition had a slightly lower category depth ( M (cid:4) 3 . 55 , SE (cid:4) . 42 ) than the Yoked Nonsequential con - dition ( M (cid:4) 3 . 97 , SE (cid:4) . 42 ) ; d (cid:4) . 35 . However , the Categorization Sequential condition ( M (cid:4) 6 . 33 , SE (cid:4) . 42 ) displayed signiﬁcantly more category depth than the Yoked Sequential con - dition ( M (cid:4) 5 . 20 , SE (cid:4) . 42 ) ; d (cid:4) . 57 . There was not a signiﬁcant effect of categorization condition ; F (cid:5) . 75 . A 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA for individual clustering found a signiﬁcant main effect for brainstorm - ing condition , F ( 1 , 56 ) (cid:4) 162 . 78 , MSE (cid:4) . 01 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 74 . As predicted , groups in the sequential conditions ( M (cid:4) . 47 , SE (cid:4) . 02 ) exhibited more clustering than those in the non - sequential conditions ( M (cid:4) . 13 , SE (cid:4) . 02 ) ; d (cid:4) 3 . 31 . There was no signiﬁcant effect of catego - rization setting or a signiﬁcant interaction ; F s (cid:5) 1 . 10 . Supporting Hypothesis 4 , a regression analysis showed that individual clustering sig - niﬁcantly predicted brainstorming quantity , B (cid:4) 58 . 42 , t ( 73 ) (cid:4) 3 . 29 , p (cid:4) . 002 , sr 2 (cid:4) . 13 for all the conditions . One - way ANOVAs were conducted to exam - ine the differences between the No Categoriza - tion condition and the other conditions . A one - way ANOVA for the total quantity of ideas did not reveal a signiﬁcant difference among the conditions , F ( 4 , 70 ) (cid:4) 1 . 57 , MSE (cid:4) 1049 . 51 , p (cid:4) . 193 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 08 . However , post hoc analyses showed that the participants in the Categoriza - tion Sequential condition generated signiﬁ - cantly ( p (cid:4) . 029 ) more ideas than those in the No Categorization condition ; d (cid:4) . 71 . There was a signiﬁcant difference in brainstorming variety , F ( 4 , 70 ) (cid:4) 10 . 97 , MSE (cid:4) 7 . 86 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 39 . The participants in the Catego - rization Sequential and Yoked Sequential con - ditions displayed a lower variety of ideas than those in the No Categorization , Categorization Nonsequential , and Yoked Categorization con - ditions ; d s (cid:10) 1 . 15 . The ANOVA for category depth was also signiﬁcant , F ( 4 , 70 ) (cid:4) 10 . 13 , MSE (cid:4) 2 . 42 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:7) 2 (cid:4) . 37 . It revealed that the participants in the Categorization Se - quential condition had more category depth than the participants in the remaining four con - ditions ; d s ranged from . 57 to 1 . 61 . Further - more , participants in the Yoked Sequential con - dition displayed more category depth than the participants in the No Categorization , Categori - zation Nonsequential , and Yoked Categoriza - tion conditions ; d s ranged from . 90 to 1 . 51 ( Table 4 ) . Discussion Consistent with our predictions and Experi - ment 2 , sequential presentation of categories affected idea generation . Participants in the se - quential conditions had a marginally greater brainstorming quantity and signiﬁcantly less va - riety than the participants in the nonsequential conditions . As a result , participants in the se - quential conditions had signiﬁcantly greater cat - egory depth . This combined with the ﬁnding that sequential conditions had more clustering supports our hypothesis that using one category at a time ( sequential ) leads to a more exhaustive Table 4 Experiment 3 Quantity , Variety , Category Depth , and Clustering of Brainstorming Ideas by Condition Condition Quantity ( SD ) Variety ( SD ) Category Depth ( SD ) Clustering ( SD ) Categorization Nonsequential 71 . 53 ( 24 . 19 ) 20 . 00 ( 2 . 00 ) 3 . 55 ( 1 . 04 ) . 12 ( . 08 ) Categorization Sequential 94 . 47 ( 38 . 55 ) 15 . 00 ( 2 . 75 ) 6 . 33 ( 2 . 44 ) . 49 ( . 14 ) Yoked Nonsequential 78 . 47 ( 31 . 66 ) 19 . 53 ( 2 . 45 ) 3 . 97 ( 1 . 33 ) . 13 ( . 08 ) Yoked Sequential 84 . 07 ( 30 . 63 ) 16 . 13 ( 3 . 38 ) 5 . 20 ( 1 . 40 ) . 45 ( . 10 ) No Categorization 68 . 13 ( 35 . 16 ) 20 . 07 ( 3 . 22 ) 3 . 27 ( 1 . 14 ) . 10 ( . 09 ) Note . There were 15 groups in each of the ﬁve conditions . 233 TAKING A BROAD PERSPECTIVE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . search of each cue . As a result , groups are more likely to generate more ideas ( quantity ) while sacriﬁcing breadth of ideas ( variety ) . However , contrary to our predictions , we did not ﬁnd any additional beneﬁt of presenting categories gen - erated by others ( yoked categories ) . We had anticipated that these yoked categories might have additional stimulation value . Apparently , the source of the category is not as important as whether the categories are presented all at once or one at a time . Our results are consistent with previous studies that demonstrated a beneﬁt of presenting participants with sequential catego - ries ( Coskun et al . , 2000 ; Dennis et al . , 1996 ) . The categories in the Coskun et al . ( 2000 ) study were random high frequency ones that were not generated by the participants themselves . In the Dennis et al . ( 1996 ) experiments participants were presented with questions or category names that were deemed most relevant . Our ﬁndings indicate that the beneﬁt of sequential category presentation is not limited to the pre - sentation of such high frequency categories but can be obtained by any self - or other - generated categories . However , because category depth in the Yoked Sequential condition was less than the Categorization Sequential condition , it is possible that the participants in the yoked con - dition were simply not as motivated to fully explore these domains because it might not have been personally relevant to them . The amount of clustering predicted the quan - tity of ideas in accordance with Experiments 1 and 2 , supporting Hypothesis 4 . The amount of clustering does predict the quantity of ideas brainstormed . The sequential conditions exhib - ited signiﬁcantly more clustering than the yoked conditions , and as a result , the sequential con - ditions brainstormed ( marginally signiﬁcant ) more ideas . In summary , it appears that having partici - pants start at an abstract level ( categorization ) can boost brainstorming productivity when they use these categories in a nonrandom way . Going through self - or other - generated cues , one - at - a - time , allows groups to probe long - term memory to search for ideas without getting distracted with other cues . This leads to greater category depth and as a result , a greater number of ideas . If groups were given more time to exhaust each category cue and / or allowed to generate ideas to each of their categories ( instead of just 10 ) , we might observe an even greater beneﬁt of se - quential brainstorming to one’s self - generated categories . However , in a follow - up experiment we found that providing participants 10 of the categories or all of the categories they had gen - erated during the idea generation phase does not make a difference in the number of ideas they generated in the relatively short time period provided in this experiment . It appears that dur - ing this time period they are only able to access a limited number of categories . In a longer session , providing more categories may be ben - eﬁcial , especially if they are presented sequen - tially . Conclusions Collectively , the experiments have demon - strated a method to enhance brainstorming . Having individuals ﬁrst generate abstract cate - gories ( Experiment 1 ) led to a 21 % increase in the number of ideas . Having groups ﬁrst gener - ate abstract categories and then use these cate - gories one at a time leads to an increase in the number of ideas compared with when the groups do not engage in the abstraction process at all ( Experiment 2 : 28 % ; Experiment 3 : 39 % ) . The intent of brainstorming is to generate as many ideas as possible so that there is an in - creased chance of ﬁnding a potential good so - lution ( s ) ( Osborn , 1957 ) . Therefore , it is the authors’ recommendation that individual and group brainstorming sessions ﬁrst start by gen - erating abstract domains of ideas . There is some suggestion in the literature that prior consider - ation of broader issues before idea generation may increase originality of ideas ( e . g . , Mum - ford et al . , 1994 ; Ward & Kolomyts , 2010 ) . However , we did not ﬁnd any beneﬁt of prior categorization for average originality of ideas in Experiments 1 and 2 . The reason for the lack of effect on originality in this type of research is that the brainstorming task focuses on generat - ing ideas without regard to quality . The tasks used in the Ward studies and by Mumford et al . ( 1994 ) did not have such an emphasis . It would be of interest to examine this issue more sys - tematically with a range of creativity tasks and instructions . In addition to suggesting recommendations for enhancing brainstorming , our studies pro - vide general support for the cognitive models of brainstorming ( Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Paulus & Brown , 2003 , 2007 ) . The SIAM model ( Ni - 234 DEUJA , KOHN , PAULUS , AND KORDE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . jstad & Stroebe , 2006 ) states that an effortful process in working memory leads to the assem - bly of a search cue . Ideas are generated by probing long - term memory with these search cues . Thus , this model and others ( e . g . , Brown , Tumeo , Larey , & Paulus , 1998 ) predict that more clustering of semantically related ideas should lead to more ideas . Our results support these predictions in two ways . First , our analy - ses demonstrate that clustering ( as measured by ARC ) signiﬁcantly predicts the number of ideas generated . Second , we showed that category switching harms productivity ( Experiment 1 ) whereas focusing on a single search cue at a time boosts productivity ( Experiments 2 and 3 ) . Furthermore , as participants spend more time in a category , they generated more original ideas ( Experiment 3 ) . Collectively , the data from these studies as well as prior studies demon - strate the beneﬁt of a priori generating search cues and the importance of exhausting a search cue before moving on to the next search cue . References Baruah , J . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 2011 ) . Category assign - ment and relatedness in the group ideation process . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 47 , 1070 – 1077 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2011 . 04 . 007 Basadur , M . , Basadur , T . , & Licina , G . ( 2012 ) . Or - ganizational development . In M . Mumford ( Ed . ) , Handbook of organizational creativity ( pp . 667 – 703 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 374714 - 3 . 00026 - 4 Brown , V . , Tumeo , M . , Larey , T . S . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 1998 ) . Modeling cognitive interactions during group brainstorming . Small Group Research , 29 , 495 – 526 . Coskun , H . , Paulus , P . B . , Brown , V . , & Sherwood , J . J . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stimulation and problem presentation in idea - generation groups . Group Dy - namics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 4 , 307 – 329 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 1089 - 2699 . 4 . 4 . 307 Coskun , H . , & Yilmaz , O . ( 2009 ) . A new dynamical model of brainstorming : Linear , nonlinear , contin - uous ( simultaneous ) an impulsive ( sequential ) cas - es . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 53 , 253 – 264 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmp . 2009 . 03 . 003 Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Connolly , T . , & Wynne , B . E . ( 1996 ) . Process structure in elec - tronical brainstorming . Information Systems Re - search , 7 , 268 – 277 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 7 . 2 . 268 Dennis , A . R . , & Williams , M . L . ( 2005 ) . A meta - analysis of group size effects in electronic brain - storming . International Journal of e - Collabora - tion , 1 , 24 – 42 . doi : 10 . 4018 / jec . 2005010102 DeRosa , D . M . , Smith , C . L . , & Hantula , D . A . ( 2007 ) . The medium matters : Mining the long - promised merit of group interaction in creative idea generation tasks in a meta - analysis of the electronic group brainstorming literature . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 , 1549 – 1581 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2005 . 07 . 003 Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 497 – 509 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 53 . 3 . 497 Dugosh , K . L . , Paulus , P . B . , Roland , E . J . , & Yang , H . C . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stimulation in brainstorm - ing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 , 722 – 735 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 79 . 5 . 722 Gallupe , R . B . , Bastianutti , L . M . , & Cooper , W . H . ( 1991 ) . Unblocking Brainstorms . Journal of Ap - plied Psychology , 76 , 137 – 142 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 76 . 1 . 137 Hong , E . , & Milgram , R . M . ( 2010 ) . Creative think - ing ability : Domain generality and speciﬁcity . Cre - ativity Research Journal , 22 , 272 – 287 . Kohn , N . W . , & Smith , S . M . ( 2011 ) . Collaborative ﬁxation : Effects of others’ ideas on brainstorming . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 359 – 371 . doi : 10 . 1002 / acp . 1699 Larey , T . S . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 1999 ) . Group prefer - ence and convergence strategies in small groups : A content analysis of group brainstorming perfor - mance . Creativity Research Journal , 12 , 175 – 184 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1203 _ 2 Leggett , K . L . ( 1997 ) . The effectiveness of categori - cal priming in brainstorming ( master’s thesis ) . Available from dissertations and theses database ( UMI No . 1388884 ) . Meadow , A . , Parnes , S . J . , & Reese , H . ( 1959 ) . Inﬂuence of brainstorming instructions and prob - lem sequence on a creative problem solving test . Journal of Applied Psychology , 43 , 413 – 416 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0043917 Milgram , R . M . , Moran , J . D . , Sawyers , J . K . , & Fu , V . R . ( 1987 ) . Original thinking in Israeli preschool children . School Psychology International , 8 , 54 – 58 . Mullen , B . , Johnson , C . , & Salas , E . ( 1991 ) . Produc - tivity loss in brainstorming groups : A meta - analytic integration . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 12 , 3 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15324834 basp1201 _ 1 Mumford , M . D . , Reiter - Palmon , R . , & Redmond , M . R . ( 1994 ) . Problem construction and cognition : Applying problem representations in ill - deﬁned problems . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Problem ﬁnding , problem solving , and creativity ( pp . 3 – 39 ) . Nor - wood , NJ : Ablex Publishing Company . Nijstad , B . A . , & Stroebe , W . B . ( 2006 ) . How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and Social Psy - 235 TAKING A BROAD PERSPECTIVE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . chology Review , 10 , 186 – 213 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15327957pspr1003 _ 1 Nijstad , B . A . , Stroebe , W . B . , & Lodewijkx , H . F . M . ( 2002 ) . Cognitive stimulation and interfer - ence in groups : Exposure effects in an idea gen - eration task . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 , 535 – 544 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 1031 ( 02 ) 00500 - 0 Osborn , A . F . ( 1957 ) . Applied imagination : Princi - ples and procedures of creative thinking . New York , NY : Scribner . Parnes , S . J . , & Meadow , A . ( 1959 ) . Effects of ‘brainstorming’ instructions on creative problem solving by trained and untrained subjects . Journal of Educational Psychology , 50 , 171 – 176 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0047223 Paulus , P . B . , & Brown , V . ( 2003 ) . Ideational cre - ativity in groups : Lessons from research on brain - storming . In P . B . Paulus & B . Nijstad ( Eds . ) Group creativity : Innovation through collabora - tion ( pp . 110 – 136 ) . New York , NY : Oxford Uni - versity Press . doi : 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 97801 95147308 . 003 . 0006 Paulus , P . B . , & Brown , V . R . ( 2007 ) . Toward more creative and innovative group idea generation : A cognitive - social motivational perspective of brain - storming . Social & Personality Psychology Com - pass , 1 , 248 – 265 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1751 - 9004 . 2007 . 00006 . x Paulus , P . B . , & Coskun , H . ( 2012 ) . Group creativity . In J . M . Levine ( Ed . ) , Group processes ( pp . 215 – 239 . ) New York , NY : Psychology Press . Paulus , P . B . , Kohn , N . W . , & Arditti , L . E . ( 2011 ) . Effects of quantity and quality instructions on brain - storming . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 45 , 38 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2011 . tb01083 . x Paulus , P . B . , Kohn , N . W . , Arditti , L . , & Korde , R . M . ( 2013 ) . Understanding the group size ef - fect in electronic brainstorming . Small Group Research , 44 , 332 – 352 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 10464 96413479674 Paulus , P . B . , & Yang , H . C . ( 2000 ) . Idea generation in groups : A basis for creativity in organizations . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 82 , 76 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1006 / obhd . 2000 . 2888 Putman , V . L . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 2009 ) . Brainstorm - ing , brainstorming rules and decision making . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 43 , 29 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2009 . tb01304 . x Rietzschel , E . F . , Nijstad , B . A . , & Stroebe , W . ( 2006 ) . Productivity is not enough : A comparison of interactive and nominal brainstorming groups on idea generation and selection . Journal of Ex - perimental Social Psychology , 42 , 244 – 251 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2005 . 04 . 005 Rietzschel , E . F . , Nijstad , B . A . , & Stroebe , W . ( 2007 ) . Relative accessibility of domain knowl - edge and creativity : The effects of knowledge ac - tivation on the quantity and originality of gener - ated ideas . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 43 , 933 – 946 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2006 . 10 . 014 Roenker , D . L . , Thompson , C . P . , & Brown , S . C . ( 1971 ) . Comparisons of measures for the estima - tions of clustering in free recall . Psychological Bulletin , 76 , 45 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0031355 Sutton , R . I . , & Hargadon , A . ( 1996 ) . Brainstorming groups in context : Effectiveness in a product de - sign ﬁrm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 , 685 – 718 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2393872 Taylor , A . , & Greve , H . R . ( 2006 ) . Superman or the fantastic four ? Knowledge combination and expe - rience in innovative teams . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 49 , 723 – 740 . doi : 10 . 5465 / AMJ . 2006 . 22083029 Ward , T . B . ( 2008 ) . The role of domain knowledge in creative generation . Learning and Individual Dif - ferences , 18 , 363 – 366 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2007 . 07 . 002 Ward , T . B . , & Kolomyts , Y . ( 2010 ) . Cognition and creativity . In J . C . Kaufman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) The Cambridge handbook of creativity ( pp . 93 – 112 ) . Cambridge , United Kingdom : Cam - bridge University Press . doi : 10 . 1017 / CBO 9780511763205 . 008 Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , & Sifonis , C . ( 2004 ) . The role of speciﬁcity and abstraction in creative idea generation . Creativity Research Journal , 16 , 1 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1601 _ 1 Received August 12 , 2013 Revision received February 20 , 2014 Accepted March 10 , 2014 (cid:2) 236 DEUJA , KOHN , PAULUS , AND KORDE T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a l li e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i s s e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y .