1 Pten , Pi3K and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 dynamics modulate pulsatile actin branching in Drosophila retina morphogenesis Jacob Malin 1 , Christian Rosa Birriel 1 & Victor Hatini 1 * 1 Tufts University School of Medicine , Department of Developmental , Molecular & Chemical Biology , Program in Cell , Molecular and Developmental Biology , Program in Genetics and Program in Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics , 150 Harrison Avenue , Boston , MA 02111 , United States * Corresponding authors : a Victor . Hatini @ tufts . edu 2 ABSTRACT Epithelial remodeling of the Drosophila retina depends on the pulsatile contraction and expansion of apical contacts between the cells that form its hexagonal lattice . Phosphoinositide PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( PIP 3 ) accumulates around tricellular adherens junctions ( tAJs ) during contact expansion and dissipates during contraction , but with unknown function . Here we found that manipulations of Pten or Pi3K that either decreased or increased PIP 3 resulted in shortened contacts and a disordered lattice , indicating a requirement for PIP 3 dynamics and turnover . These phenotypes are caused by a loss of protrusive branched actin , resulting from impaired activity of the Rac1 Rho GTPase and the WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) . We additionally found that during contact expansion , Pi3K moves into tAJs to promote the cyclical increase of PIP 3 in a spatially and temporally precise manner . Thus , dynamic regulation of PIP 3 by Pten and Pi3K controls the protrusive phase of junctional remodeling , which is essential for planar epithelial morphogenesis . 3 Graphical Abstract : Control of contact length by Pi3K , Pten and PIP 3 . Pi3K regulates the transition from contraction to expansion through its tension - dependent localization to tAJs and modulation of its lipid phosphatase activity . Pten localizes uniformly to regulate PIP 3 turnover and attenuate PIP 3 production . ( A ) Tension shortens contacts , concentrates Pi3K at four spots at a distance from tAJs , and inhibits Pi3K’s lipid phosphatase function . ( B ) High tension ultimately disassembles contractile networks allowing Pi3K to flow toward tAJs , produce PIP 3 and activate the WRC to promote actin branching and contact expansion . ( C ) High protrusion in expanded contacts disperses the WRC and disassembles the branched actin network . ( D ) Branched actin disassembly allows the assembly and contraction of an actomyosin network , which increases tension and contracts the contact leading to the flow of Pi3K away from tAJs and inhibition of its lipid phosphatase function , thus completing the cycle . 4 INTRODUCTION The Drosophila retina is a model for understanding epithelial morphogenesis ( Cagan and Ready , 1989 ) . The retina’s apical epithelium is composed of approximately 800 ommatidia containing stereotypically shaped and arranged cell types ( Cagan , 2009 ; Carthew , 2007 ; Johnson , 2021 ) . Pulsatile changes in cell junction length , depending on both contractile actomyosin and protrusive branched actin networks , are essential to ommatidial morphogenesis ( Blackie et al . , 2021 ; Blackie et al . , 2020 ; Chan et al . , 2017 ; Del Signore et al . , 2018 ; Galy et al . , 2011 ; Hayashi and Carthew , 2004 ; Letizia et al . , 2019 ; Malin et al . , 2022 ; Zallen et al . , 2002 ) . The role of contractile actomyosin pulsing has received considerable attention in similar systems ( Heer and Martin , 2017 ) . More recently understood is the role of protrusive forces as cell contacts expand , regulated by the WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) , which activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to promote actin branching ( Del Signore et al . , 2018 ; Rottner et al . , 2021 ) . Inhibition of either actin branching or actomyosin contractility impairs this balance between expansion and contraction , leading to changes in cell shape and arrangement ( Del Signore et al . , 2018 ) . Thus , a major goal is to determine the mechanisms that cyclically activate and inactivate cytoskeletal networks that govern both protrusion and contraction . During eye epithelial remodeling , cell contacts cycle through contractile and protrusive pulses . A central player in this process is the homophilic adhesion molecule Sidekick ( Sdk ) ( Letizia et al . , 2019 ; Malin et al . , 2022 ) . Sdk dynamically associates with tAJs , where it toggles between interacting with contractile and protrusive effectors . To expand junctions , Sdk binds the WRC , which promotes actin branching and protrusion . As the contacts expand , Sdk exchanges interactions with the WRC for Polychaetoid ( Pyd ) , the fly Zonula Occludens - 1 ( ZO - 1 ) protein . Pyd then connects the junctional actomyosin networks to the tAJs to contract the junctions . As tension rises and contacts contract , Sdk exchanges interactions with Pyd for the WRC to initiate the next expansion cycle . While we know that Sdk recruits the WRC , it is likely that additional coincident signals activate the WRC to generate protrusion . We previously discovered that the phosphoinositide PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( PIP 3 ) accumulates at tAJs of expanding cell contacts ( Del Signore et al . , 2018 ) . In vitro , PIP 3 synergizes with other signals to stimulate WRC - dependent actin branching , suggesting that it could regulate contact expansion ( Chen et al . , 2017 ; Hume et al . ; Koronakis et al . , 5 2011 ; Mendoza , 2013 ; Mendoza et al . , 2011 ; Schaks et al . , 2018 ) . In this context , Rac1 controls the allosteric activation of the WRC , and PIP 3 can activate Rac1 through intermediary Rac GTPase exchange factors ( Cantley , 2002 ) . PIP 3 levels are regulated by the phosphatase and tensin homolog ( Pten ) and the class 1A phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( Pi3K ) , which respectively decrease and increase its levels through dephosphorylation and phosphorylation , converting it to and from PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( PIP 2 ) ( Auger et al . , 1989 ; Li et al . , 1997 ; Traynor - Kaplan et al . , 1988 ; Whitman et al . , 1988 ) . Pten and Pi3K are highly studied proteins that regulate cell growth , metabolism , and survival , and influence cancer progression ( Gao et al . , 2000 ; Goberdhan et al . , 1999 ; Huang et al . , 1999 ; Oldham et al . , 2002 ) . In these processes , they have multiple known effectors , with Pten dephosphorylating multiple proteins in addition to PIP 3 ( Chalhoub and Baker , 2009 ; Qi et al . , 2020 ) . Thus , it is important to analyze the relationship between these actors and their mechanism of action . While epithelial cell contacts are shortened in pten mutants , the importance of Pten to protrusive forces has never been examined ( Bardet et al . , 2013 ) . In the regulation of F - actin dynamics , Pten , Pi3K and PIP 3 often exhibit highly specific subcellular distribution . For example , high Pi3K and PIP 3 levels promote protrusion at lamellipodia of motile cells , while high Pten and PIP 2 levels promote contraction at the rear and sides ( Funamoto et al . , 2002 ) . Likewise , in certain epithelia , Pten associates with a protein located at the subapical AJs ( Bazooka / Par3 ) and produces PIP 2 , which specifies an apical identity while PIP 3 specifies basolateral identity ( von Stein et al . , 2005 ) . Selective recruitment of Pi3K to edges of newly formed AJs has also been shown in vertebrates ( Kovacs et al . , 2002 ; Perez et al . , 2008 ; Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ) . However , in junction remodeling during planar epithelial morphogenesis , the relative localization of Pten , Pi3K and PIP 3 has never been fully elucidated and the interactions between these factors are therefore unclear . This study addresses this open question by examining both protrusive and contractile cytoskeletal elements and probing the function of Pten , Pi3K , and Rac1 in relation to PIP 3 . We show that Pten and Pi3K dynamically modulate PIP 3 as well as cytoskeletal and mechanical forces that shape the epithelium , and through live imaging , reveal the subcellular organization of this system over time . We also provide evidence that PIP 3 dynamics modulate Rac1 function , that Rac1 amplifies Pi3K function , and that both PIP 3 and Rac1 activate the WRC , actin branching , and contact expansion . 6 We propose that PIP 3 dynamics regulate contact length pulsing by controlling the cytoskeletal transition from contraction to expansion . RESULTS pten controls epithelial remodeling of the retina To examine pten’s role in eye epithelial remodeling , we generated eyes that were entirely mutant for three independent pten mutant alleles : pten 3 , pten c494 and pten 2L100 ( Devergne et al . , 2014 ; Goberdhan et al . , 1999 ; Oldham et al . , 2002 ; Stowers and Schwarz , 1999 ) . Consistent with previous reports , our data below indicate that pten 3 and pten c494 are strong alleles while pten 2L100 is a hypomorph ( Goberdhan et al . , 1999 ; Huang et al . , 1999 ; Oldham et al . , 2002 ) . In wild - type ( WT ) , ommatidia form a regular hexagonal array with a small variation in edge length of each hexagon ( Fig . 1A - B’ , D ) . Scanning electron microscopy revealed that , in contrast to the regular shape and tessellation of ommatidia in WT adults , a fraction of ommatidia in pten mutant eyes were irregularly shaped and some were fused to one another ( Fig . 1C - C’ ) . To determine the effects of pten loss on epithelial organization , we examined eyes at 36 - 42h after puparium formation ( APF ) after cells acquired stable shapes ( Fig . 1E - G ) . In pten 3 , pten c494 and pten 2L100 mutants , ommatidia maintained their structure but formed quadrilaterals and pentagons in addition to hexagons ( Fig . S1A ) . Defects in cell arrangements included clustering of multiple mechanosensory bristles ( Fig . 1F orange arrowheads , Fig . S1B ) and clustering of lattice cells ( LCs ) around bristles , resulting in cellular “rosettes” , a phenotype that can arise from impaired intercalation ( Fig . 1E - G yellow arrowheads , Fig . S1C ) ( Bao and Cagan , 2005 ; Johnson et al . , 2011 ; Johnson et al . , 2008 ; Letizia et al . , 2019 ; Malin et al . , 2022 ; Seppa et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , some 3° LCs failed to occupy the corners of ommatidia , while others were missing , with remaining LCs occupying both the lattice edge and corner ( Fig . 1E - G blue arrowheads , Fig . S1D ) . Also common was the partial or complete loss of LC - LC contacts and formation of contacts between 1° cells of adjacent ommatidia ( Fig . 1E - G magenta arrowheads , Fig . S1D ) . To determine whether pten acts autonomously , we generated marked pten 3 and pten 2L100 mutant cells and asked whether the cellular defects were confined to the clones ( Fig . S1E - G ) . We found that the characteristic 7 intercalation and cellular arrangement defects were largely confined to the pten mutant clones indicating that pten acts autonomously . We also found defects adjacent to the clones at a lower frequency . These autonomous and non - autonomous defects suggest that pten controls force dynamics and transmission necessary for epithelial remodeling . As the remodeling defects in pten 3 and pten c494 eyes were more severe compared with pten 2L100 eyes , we used the pten 3 allele in subsequent experiments . pten controls fluctuations of LC - LC contact length During lattice remodeling , the LC - LC contacts expand and contract repeatedly . These dynamics arise from the alternate generation of protrusive and contractile forces at the level of individual LC - LC contacts ( Del Signore et al . , 2018 ) . When LCs are pruned , their neighbors rapidly reestablish contact ( Fig . 1H , Movie 1 ) . To determine whether pten affects these dynamics , we live imaged pten mutant eyes expressing α - Catenin : : Venus to observe cell outlines at the level of AJs . We observed minimal expansion and contraction of LC - LC contacts and temporary or permanent 1° - 1° contacts formed upon cell pruning and sometimes spontaneously ( Fig . 1I , Movie 1 ) . We then measured the length of LC - LC contacts over time . We excluded contacts that failed to expand following contraction and those that were being lost and replaced with 1° - 1° contacts . We found that in pten mutants , the mean length , pulse amplitude , and pulse frequency of the LC - LC contacts decreased significantly compared with WT ( Fig . 1J - K , M ) . However , the pulse amplitude normalized to average contact length was not significantly different from WT , indicating that the shortened contacts in pten mutants were still pulsing ( Fig . 1L ) . These contact pulsing defects suggest that pten plays a role in rebalancing the opposing contractile and protrusive forces that contract and expand the LC - LC contacts . pten controls protrusive and contractile dynamics of LC - LC contacts To better understand how Pten controls cytoskeletal dynamics , we compared F - actin and MyoII dynamics between WT eyes and pten mutant eyes . In time - lapse movies , we measured the length of LC - LC contacts and signal intensities of F - actin at the vertices and MyoII along the entire contacts where they concentrate most strongly . We 8 detected F - actin using the actin - binding domain of Utrophin tagged with GFP ( Utr : : GFP ) and MyoII with Spaghetti Squash ( Sqh ) , the regulatory light chain of non - muscle Myosin II , tagged with GFP ( Sqh : : GFP ) ( Fig . 2A - D , Movies 2 ) . We then computed the time - resolved Pearson’s cross - correlation between the signal intensity of either F - actin or MyoII and contact length ( Fig . 2E - H ) . In WT , protrusive F - actin accumulated during contact expansion and peaked just prior to maximal expansion , while MyoII accumulated during contact contraction and peaked just prior to maximal contraction , consistent with previous reports ( Del Signore et al . , 2018 ; Malin et al . , 2022 ) . In pten mutant eyes , the positive correlation between F - actin accumulation and contact length decreased significantly compared with WT ( Fig . 2E - F , I ) . Additionally , the negative correlation between MyoII and contact length decreased as well ( Fig . 2G - H , J ) . Moreover , the pulse amplitude of F - actin decreased , although the pulse amplitude of MyoII was not significantly different from WT ( Fig . 2K - L ) . During periods of contraction , the parallel cables of MyoII that form along the LC - LC contacts were frequently further apart than in WT , suggesting that these contacts were either under greater tension , reduced protrusion , or both ( Fig . 2C - D , red arrows ) . Because contractile and protrusive dynamics are mutually dependent in this system , disrupting one network may disrupt the other . The reduction in F - actin pulsing suggested a direct effect on actin branching and protrusive force . Overall , we find that pten affects both protrusive actin branching and contractile MyoII dynamics , supporting a role for pten in rebalancing the opposing forces generated by these networks . pten affects localization and dynamics of protrusive regulators at LC - LC contacts The disruption of protrusive F - actin and contractile MyoII dynamics in pten mutant eyes may arise from disruption of the WRC , which regulates actin branching , or Rho1 GTPase signaling , which regulates actomyosin contractility , or both . The persistent accumulation of MyoII and the diminished pulsing of F - actin at LC - LC contacts suggested that F - actin assembly is affected . We therefore examined the dynamic accumulation of the WRC subunit Abi , which activates Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin branching , at LC - LC contacts of pten mutant eyes compared with WT ( Fig . 3A - B , Movie 3 ) . To monitor WRC dynamics , we generated GFP - tagged Abi ( GFP : : Abi ) controlled by the ubiquitin promoter ( Akbari et al . , 2009 ) . We found strong pulse amplitudes of Abi at vertices during contact expansion in WT and significantly decreased 9 pulse amplitudes and frequencies in pten mutant eyes ( Fig . 3C - D ) . The time - shifted correlation between contact length and Abi levels at vertices also decreased in pten eyes compared with WT ( Fig . 3E - G ) . These results highlight the role of the WRC at tAJs in controlling actin branching and protrusive force generation . They suggest that the defects in contact length pulsing , at least in part , arise from defects in WRC accumulation and actin branching at tAJs . The diminished amplitude of contact expansion may also arise from increased contraction . To distinguish between these possibilities , we measured the initial recoil velocities of vertices after ablating a small central region of LC - LC contacts in WT and pten mutant eyes as a proxy for tension along these contacts ( Colombelli and Solon , 2013 ; Rauzi and Lenne , 2015 ) ( Fig 3H - I ) . We found no difference in the recoil velocities between WT and pten mutant eyes , indicating that pten loss does not increase tension at LC - LC contacts ( Fig . 3J - L ) . This result implies that Pten primarily promotes WRC activation and actin branching to support protrusive dynamics and contact expansion . Pten’s lipid phosphatase activity is required for epithelial remodeling Because prior research implicated PIP 3 in epithelial remodeling , and the pten c494 allele eliminates Pten’s phosphatase activity , we hypothesized that Pten primarily affects the epithelium through its lipid phosphatase function ( Bardet et al . , 2013 ; Del Signore et al . , 2018 ; Di Paolo and De Camilli , 2006 ; Huang et al . , 1999 ) . Point mutants of vertebrate PTEN ( C124S and G129E ) were previously shown to impair both its lipid and protein phosphatase activity or only its lipid phosphatase activity , respectively ( Liliental et al . , 2000 ; Myers et al . , 1998 ; Qi et al . , 2020 ) . We introduced the equivalent point mutations ( C132S and G137E , respectively ) in Drosophila Pten to determine if Pten modulates PIP 3 dynamics to control epithelial remodeling . We then used the MARCM technique to express each variant in pten mutant clones to determine if they could rescue the pten clonal phenotypes . We found that WT Pten rescued the pten clonal phenotypes , while pten C132S and pten G137E point mutants were unable to rescue these phenotypes ( Fig . S2A - E , G ) . However , the clonal phenotypes were less severe in the pten clones expressing the pten G137E variant retaining protein phosphatase activity , suggesting that Pten’s protein phosphatase activity contributes to Pten function ( Fig . S2C - D , G ) . Additionally , even the catalytically dead pten C132S variant accomplished minimal rescue , suggesting that Pten may have 10 an additional non - catalytic function in the process ( Fig . S2D , G ) . Together , these results indicate that Pten’s lipid phosphatase activity is essential for eye epithelial remodeling but suggest additional roles for other functions of Pten , including its protein phosphatase activity . Pten affects PIP 3 dynamics Since we found that Pten’s lipid phosphatase activity is required for proper epithelial remodeling , we examined Pten’s effects on PIP 3 in developing eyes . We employed the PH domain of Grp1 fused to GFP ( Grp1 - PH : : GFP or GPH ) to monitor PIP 3 in pten mutant clones and eyes ( Britton et al . , 2002 ) . As expected , PIP 3 levels were elevated in pten mutant clones compared with WT cells ( Fig . 4A ) . To avoid confounding non - autonomous effects , we compared PIP 3 dynamics in WT eyes with pten mutant eyes . Similar to WRC pulses , PIP 3 pulses and contact expansion pulses co - occurred in WT eyes ( Fig . 4B , Movie 4 ) . In the pten mutant eyes , we found decreased pulse amplitude and increased pulse frequency of PIP 3 ( Fig . 4C - E , Movie 4 ) . Moreover , the positive time - shifted correlation between PIP 3 and contact length was abolished in pten eyes . In WT , PIP 3 levels peaked 3 minutes before maximal contact expansion , while in pten mutants there was no such peak ( Fig . 4F - I ) . Thus , PIP 3 ’s predictable pulsed dynamics were eliminated in pten mutants and remained mostly static . Pi3K affects eye epithelial remodeling To further determine the role of PIP 3 dynamics in epithelial remodeling , we examined the role of Pi3K , the enzyme that phosphorylates PIP 2 to PIP 3 . We asked whether increasing Pi3K activity could mimic the pten mutant phenotype and if loss or downregulation of Pi3K function affects epithelial remodeling . Active Pi3K consists of a catalytic subunit , Pi3K92E ( Pi3K - cat ) , and a regulatory subunit , Pi3K21B ( Pi3K - reg ) ( Leevers et al . , 1996 ; Weinkove et al . , 1997 ) . To increase Pi3K activity , we expressed a constitutively active , membrane - tethered Pi3K - cat ( PI3K - cat . CAAX ) ( Leevers et al . , 1996 ) . To decrease Pi3K activity , we used a Pi3K - reg deletion mutant generated using gene editing and eyes and clones depleted of Pi3K - cat using RNA - mediated interference ( RNAi ) ( Trivedi et al . , 2020 ) . We confirmed the increase or 11 decrease of Pi3K function by monitoring PIP 3 levels with GPH in Pi3K - cat . CAAX - and Pi3K - cat RNAi - expressing clones and Pi3K - reg mutant clones ( Fig . S3A - C , K - L ) . We found that increasing Pi3K - cat function led to pinched contacts and defects similar to those in pten mutant eyes , such as rosettes and clustered bristles . However , the aberrant 1° - 1° contacts common in pten mutant eyes were rare ( Fig . S3A , D , K ) . Depleting Pi3K - cat function also caused epithelial remodeling defects , with some similar to those in pten mutants , including rosettes and aberrant 1° - 1° contacts ( Fig . S3E , L ) . Similar defects were also found in Pi3K - reg mutant eyes ( Fig . S3F ) . As both the increase and decrease of Pi3K and PIP 3 levels caused defects in cytoskeletal regulation , we examined PIP 3 dynamics in clones with increased and decreased Pi3K activity . We found that PIP 3 pulsing and correlation with contact length were reduced in Pi3K - cat . CAAX clones ( Fig . 5A - B , Movie 5 ) . In Pi3K - depleted clones , PIP 3 fluctuations appeared reduced as well ( Fig . S3J , Movie 5 ) . We additionally measured the amplitude of contact length pulsing in these clones and in PI3K - reg mutant eyes . Contact length amplitude was reduced in PI3K - reg mutants compared to WT and showed a trend toward reduction in both PI3K - cat . CAAX - and PI3K - cat RNAi - expressing clones ( Fig . 5C - D , Fig . S3K - N ) . To further characterize the Pi3K loss - of - function phenotype , we examined F - actin , MyoII , and WRC dynamics in Pi3K - reg mutant eyes ( Movie 6 ) . Similar to pten mutant eyes , we found decreased correlations between contact length and the WRC ( Fig 5E ) , F - actin and MyoII ( Fig . 5F ) . Finally , to further test Pten’s relationship with Pi3K , we generated pten mutant clones expressing Pi3K - cat RNAi . Depleting Pi3K - cat function partially rescued the pten phenotype , further indicating a role for PIP 3 in this process ( Fig . S2F - G ) . These results demonstrate that Pi3K regulates force generation and transmission and suggest that PIP 3 cycling , in addition to overall levels , is required for proper epithelial remodeling . Pten affects Rac1 function while Rac1 affects PIP 3 and protrusive dynamics Because pten mutants disrupt PIP 3 , the WRC , and protrusive dynamics and because Rac1 and PIP 3 are known to activate the WRC in vitro , we tested Rac1 function in this process ( Fig . 6A - B , Movie 7 ) . We found that the amplitude and frequency of Rac1 fluctuations were reduced in pten mutants compared with WT , indicating impaired dynamics ( Fig . 6C - 12 D ) . Additionally , we found a slight but significant positive correlation between Rac1 and LC - LC contact length in WT . This correlation was abolished in pten mutants ( Fig . 6E - G ) . It was previously shown that rac1 , rac2 mutant retinae have defects in epithelial organization ( Martin - Bermudo et al . , 2015 ) . Considering this role of rac genes and their potential interaction with pten , we overexpressed Rac1 and investigated its effects on epithelial remodeling . Broad Rac1 expression resulted in epithelial remodeling defects and altered mechanical and cytoskeletal dynamics . The apical area of epithelial cells was enlarged and cells dynamically expanded and relaxed , in contrast to the static , pinched LC - LC contacts observed in pten eyes . While in WT , PIP 3 , Abi , and F - actin are dynamically enriched at vertices and LC - LC contacts , in Rac1 expressing eyes they concentrated more strongly at vertices and additionally localized along the entire cell perimeter at the level of AJs . Moreover , PIP 3 accumulated in pulses along the apical cell area , implying that Rac1 activates Pi3K and PIP 3 production . Together , these effects suggest that Rac1 and PIP 3 activate the WRC and protrusive F - actin dynamics in part through the activation of Pi3K in a positive feedback mechanism ( Fig . 6H - J , Movie 8 ) . The overexpansion of LCs often led to tears in the epithelium that coincided with waves of PIP 3 , Abi and F - actin along the rupturing cell perimeter ( Fig . S4A - C , Movie 9 ) . Clonal overexpression of Rac1 induced similar epithelial tears and fused cells ( Fig . S3D ) . Overexpressing Rac1 in SCAR mutant clones decreased the number of ruptured cells , with fewer than half the eyes observed exhibiting this phenotype likely due to residual SCAR function in the clones ( Fig . S3E ) . Rac1 overexpression in pten clones failed to induce ruptures ( Fig . S3F ) . These results suggest that Rac1 acts through the WRC to promote protrusive F - actin dynamics and apical area expansion and requires proper PIP 3 dynamics to function . Overall , our findings show that Pi3K dynamics promote Rac1 function , which in turn influences WRC activation , actin branching , and protrusive force generation . In addition to activating the WRC and protrusive dynamics indirectly through Rac1 , PIP 3 dynamics can activate the WRC directly and thus cooperate with Rac1 to maximally activate the WRC . Rac1 also appears to sustain and amplify the PIP 3 signal , to promote actin branching and pulsatile LC - LC contact expansion . 13 Pten and Pi3K localize dynamically in the vicinity of LC - LC contacts If Pi3K and Pten directly affect LC - LC contact pulsing , they would likely localize to or near these contacts and associated tAJs . Pi3K - reg is primarily responsible for the spatiotemporal activation of Pi3K ( Fruman , 2010 ) . Therefore , to identify the sites of Pi3K activation , we generated a GFP - tagged Pi3K - reg ( Pi3K - reg : : GFP ) driven by the ubiquitin promoter . We found that Pi3K - reg : : GFP accumulated dynamically at the level of AJs . During early expansion , Pi3K - reg : : GFP localized to four spots on either side of tAJs . As the contacts expanded , the domain of Pi3K - reg localization expanded and moved toward the tAJs ( Fig . 7A , Movie 10 ) . To quantify this , we measured the temporal correlation between Pi3K at or adjacent to vertices and overall contact length and found that the adjacent - to - vertex correlation peaked earlier than the at - vertex correlation ( Fig . 7B ) . Pi3K both at and adjacent to the vertex correlated strongly with F - actin ( Fig . 7C ) . Therefore , Pi3K localization around tAJs is po mediate LC - LC contact expansion by promoting protrusive dynamics and pushing the plasma membrane outward . To further investigate this process , we used immunostaining to examine Pi3K - reg : : GFP localization relative to E - cad and Sdk , which marks tAJs ( Malin et al . , 2022 ) . When Pi3K - reg localized in spots at a distance from tAJs , it colocalized strongly with E - cad . In addition , Pi3K - reg localized with or partially overlapped with Sdk at tAJs ( Fig . 7D ) . Pten activation requires membrane localization through its PDZ domain binding motif and phospholipid binding ( Das et al . , 2003 ; Jang et al . , 2021 ) . We created a GFP : : Pten reporter driven by the ubiquitin promoter to identify the membrane sites where Pten counteracts Pi3K . We tagged the Pten2 isoform , which localizes to apical junctions ( Maehama et al . , 2004 ; Pickering et al . , 2013 ; von Stein et al . , 2005 ) . We found that Pten accumulated in a diffuse pattern both at and surrounding LC - LC contacts ( Fig . 8E , Movie 12 ) . Although Pten localization was dynamic and correlated with F - actin levels , Pten distribution was relatively uniform during both contact expansion and contraction ( Fig . 8F - G ) . These results suggest that changes in PIP 3 levels are caused primarily by fluctuations in Pi3K levels around tAJs , while PIP 3 turnover requires both Pi3K and Pten . 14 DISCUSSION After the initial cellular organization of ommatidia through the cell - specific distribution of adhesion molecules , continuous cell movement is required for the precise geometry of the eye to develop . Regular pulses of contraction and expansion of cell contacts are characteristic of this movement . Here , we show that Pten and Pi3K regulate oscillating levels of PIP 3 at apical junctions and this is necessary for normal pulsing shape changes and morphogenesis . The function of PIP 3 is to generate protrusive force and elongate contacts by activating the WRC and thereby promoting actin branching . The dependence of protrusion on dynamic changes in PIP 3 combined with the proximity of Pi3K and Pten to each other near junctions makes this system uniquely suited to precise temporal control of protrusion . We provide evidence that phosphoinositides controlled by Pten and Pi3K affect Rac1 function and propose that PIP 3 cooperates with Rac1 to activate the WRC and protrusive actin branching to control cytoskeletal and contact length pulsing . Technical considerations While phosphoinositides are widely studied , little of this research relates to planar epithelial morphogenesis . In addition to looking at cell shape , we utilized live imaging of cytoskeletal indicators of both contractile and protrusive forces , as the control of protrusion in planar epithelial development remains largely unexplored . Dynamic imaging of PIP 3 allowed us to quantify its cyclical ebb and flow in addition to simple levels . We used engineered point mutants to differentiate between the lipid phosphatase and protein phosphatase functions of Pten . In addition , we directly investigated Pi3K function using a novel null mutation generated by gene editing ( Trivedi et al . , 2020 ) and verified it by loss of PIP 3 and the associated phenotype . Further , by generating a Pi3K - reg mutant clones , we showed the feasibility of studying Pi3K - null clones . This contrasts with previous work relying on dominant - negative suppression of Pi3K function in which residual function or unanticipated effects remain a consideration . Genetic tests for expressing Rac1 in SCAR and pten mutant clones imply that Pten and SCAR are important for the function of Rac1 . Taken together these approaches provide new insight into the role of Pten , Pi3K , and PIP 3 in regulating protrusive forces and planar epithelial morphogenesis . 15 Our results show that in pten mutants cell contacts are pinched and fail to lengthen , a result that echoes an earlier study of notum development ( Bardet et al . , 2013 ) . In that case , the mechanism of this effect was linked to persistent and elevated contractility . However , since that time , the importance of protrusive forces in contact remodeling has been demonstrated , including strong pulsatile PIP 3 accumulation coinciding with the accumulation of the WRC and protrusive F - actin ( Del Signore et al . , 2018 ; Malin et al . , 2022 ; Patel et al . , 2008 ) . This observation aligns with literature linking PIP 3 with WRC activation in other contexts ( Chen et al . , 2017 ; Hume et al . ; Koronakis et al . , 2011 ; Mendoza , 2013 ; Mendoza et al . , 2011 ; Schaks et al . , 2018 ) . Taken together they suggest that the pten phenotype is caused by dysregulation of protrusive forces , even though the contacts are shortened . Key results supporting this idea in our system are that the WRC does not accumulate in pten mutants , there is no evidence for changes in MyoII levels and , although contacts are pinched , when laser ablated their initial recoil velocity does not change , indicating no change in contractile forces . Therefore , our results put Pten’s function in planar epithelial morphogenesis in a new light , establishing its role in regulating protrusive forces in this context . Because Pten can act through many intermediaries and has both lipid and protein phosphatase activity , investigating its mechanism of action is important . Our results confirm the importance of PIP 3 in this system . Specifically , we show that a pten point mutant with a deficient lipid phosphatase function fails to rescue the pten phenotype . In addition , we examine the role of Pi3K , which opposes Pten in the cycle of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation that regulates PIP 3 levels . Mutations affecting Pi3K also show epithelial remodeling defects . Moreover , we show a partial rescue of the pten mutant phenotype by perturbing Pi3K’s catalytic subunit . Though our results leave open the possibility of other effects through Pten’s protein phosphatase activity , they establish the importance of PIP 3 regulation by Pten and Pi3K in the observed phenotypes . Strikingly , we found that genetic manipulations that either increased or decreased levels of PIP 3 resulted in similar phenotypes . In phenotypes in which PIP 3 levels were constitutively low due to reduced Pi3K activity , contacts were shortened due to a deficit in protrusion . However , with the elevated PIP 3 levels in pten mutants or with constitutively active Pi3K , LC - LC contacts were also short or lost , with a decrease of WRC accumulation and consequently 16 branched actin . This is opposite to what would be expected given the ability of PIP 3 to activate the WRC and protrusive dynamics ( Chen et al . , 2010 ; Hume et al . ; Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ; Oikawa et al . , 2004 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ) . It has been noted in other contexts that there exists continuous turnover of various phosphoinositides and it remains an open question if this turnover is integral to their mechanism of action ( Di Paolo and De Camilli , 2006 ) . The current results reveal that high levels of PIP 3 alone are not sufficient for marshaling protrusive forces in this system , and that dynamism of PIP 3 is also critical . Speculatively , this dependence could optimize the sensitivity of the system and its ability to rebalance mechanical forces , as turnover would allow the balance of different phosphoinositides to rapidly shift . Alternatively , the mechanisms needed for proteins to continuously regenerate their activity in the ongoing process of remodeling actin networks may intrinsically require phosphoinositide levels to fluctuate . In contracted contacts under high tension , Pi3K - reg localizes at four spots at some distance from the tAJs , and PIP 3 levels are low , indicating low Pi3K lipid - kinase activity . During expansion , Pi3K - reg’s localization spreads away from these spots , concentrating at tAJs as PIP 3 levels peak . Thus , Pi3K - reg’s distribution and its lipid kinase function change with tension . Pten , in contrast , does not detectably shift distribution through the pulse cycle , but its levels increase with increasing F - actin . The specific mechanisms that regulate Pi3K and Pten distribution here are unknown , but the proteins are clearly correlating with oscillations in mechanical forces . Likewise , during pulsing , Sdk concentrates at tAJs in response to tension and associates with the WRC to reduce tension and promote contact expansion . Pyd , on the other hand , accumulates following maximal contact expansion to increase tension and promote contraction ( Malin et al . , 2022 ) . Pi3K and Pten join Sdk and Pyd as elements that change in response to pulsing and are moreover molecular effectors of mechanical forces that generate pulsing . Thus , Pi3K and Pten appear as integral components to the feedback loops that generate and maintain pulsing shape changes . Although they exhibit different patterns of distribution that vary with the pulse cycle , both Pi3K and Pten are enriched at and near a subset of cell contacts at the level of tAJs . The spatial proximity between the two proteins is consistent with their capacity to temporally control PIP 3 . This is an interesting contrast with other systems in which Pi3K and Pten do not colocalize but are rather separated to define distinct subcellular domains . During epithelialization , Pten 17 localizes apically , while Pi3K localizes basolaterally , to define the apicobasal axis ( Martin - Belmonte et al . , 2007 ; Pinal et al . , 2006 ; von Stein et al . , 2005 ) . In motile cells , Pi3K localizes at the lamellipodium while Pten is at the rear and sides to coordinate protrusions with contractions ( Funamoto et al . , 2002 ; Iijima et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , the proximity of Pi3K and Pten at apical junctions positions them for precise temporal regulation of PIP 3 pulsatile dynamics in this location . Our data support the idea that PIP 3 regulates the WRC both directly and at least in part indirectly through Rac1 activation . Loss of pten reduces the pulsing of Rac1 levels , suggesting that PIP 3 activates Rac1 . This would be consistent with the documented roles of PIP 3 and Rac1 in promoting the formation of lamellipodia and with current models of WRC activation ( Chen et al . , 2017 ; Chen et al . , 2010 ; Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . We also found that overexpressing Rac1 induced protrusive F - actin and PIP 3 accumulation causing expansion and rupture of cells ' apical area . This is in contrast to manipulations that raised PIP 3 levels directly that did not increase protrusion . Together these data suggest that PIP 3 could activate both a GEF for Rac1 at apical junctions and that Rac1 itself might then activate Pi3K to sustain its activation and generate a pulse of WRC activation and actin branching ( Kovacs et al . , 2002 ; Nakagawa et al . , 2001 ; Perez et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , Rac1 could act not only as an effector of PIP 3 in activating the WRC , but also a feedback amplifier of PIP 3 signaling and through these actions together would have the capacity to robustly promote actin branching at apical junctions . In sum , we show that Pten and Pi3K affect PIP 3 pulsing to control cytoskeletal and mechanical pulsing . Characterization of multiple genetic conditions indicates that dynamic changes in PIP 3 levels are essential for promoting protrusion . PIP 3 pulsing activates the WRC and actin branching , and this system utilizes Rac1 to promote protrusive dynamics and reinforce PIP 3 production through positive feedback . Additionally , Pten levels and both the distribution and the activity of Pi3K are regulated with cycles of contact expansion and contraction , suggesting regulation by mechanical signals . Together these results reveal the importance of Pten , Pi3K and PIP 3 in generating protrusive forces at tAJs to control planar epithelial morphogenesis . 18 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank E , Hafen , Daniel St Johnston , T . Millard , R . Padinjat , F . Pichaud , A . Martin , J . Treisman and J . Zallen for generous gifts of fly strains , and J . Treisman for antibodies , the Bloomington Stock Center , the Vienna Drosophila Research Center , and the Kyoto Stock Center for fly strains , the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for antibodies , and G . Rong and the Institute for Chemical Imaging of Living System ( CILS ) at Northeastern University for assistance with multi - photon imaging . We thank K . G . Commons for her critical reading of the manuscript and editorial suggestions . This work was supported by a grant from the National Institute of Health to V . H . ( R01 GM129151 ) . Author Contribution : Conceptualization , V . Hatini ; Investigation and Resources , J . Malin , C . Rosa and V . Hatini ; Formal Analysis , J . Malin ; Writing Original Draft , V . Hatini ; Manuscript Review and Editing , J . Malin , C . Rosa and V . Hatini ; Supervision , V . Hatini ; Funding Acquisition , V . Hatini . Data availability : All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the article and / or the supplementary materials . All image data will be deposited in the Tufts Metaverse database and given an accession number prior to publication . Image data and other supporting data of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request . Requests for reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact , Victor Hatini ( victor . hatini @ tufts . edu ) . 19 METHODS Fly strains To examine the pten loss - of - function phenotypes , we employed the pten c494 , pten 3 , and pten 2L100 alleles recombined to an FRT40A site to generate genetically marked mutant clones and fully mutant eyes . We used pten C494 / 3 / 2L100 FRT40A ; α - Catenin : : Venus CPTI ( α - Cat : : Venus ) to examine pten ’s role in epithelial rearrangements and pten 3 FRT40A with cytoskeletal reporters on chromosome III to examine pten ’s role in cytoskeletal control . To determine if Pten’s lipid phosphatase or protein phosphatase activity affects epithelial remodeling , we constructed UAS - GFP : : Pten2 ( C132S ) , a point mutant that disrupts both the protein phosphatase and lipid phosphatase activities , UAS - GFP : : Pten2 ( G137E ) , a point mutant that preferentially disrupts the lipid phosphatase activity , and WT UAS - GFP : : Pten2 . We selected UAS insertions on the third chromosome with similar expression levels to determine if these variants can rescue the pten clonal phenotypes using the MARCM technique . To examine Pten and Pi3K - reg protein distribution and dynamics , we employed UAS - GFP : : Pten2 and constructed a Ubi - GFP : : Pten2 and Ubi - Pi3K - reg : : GFP . Additionally , we constructed Ubi - GFP : : Abi to track the dynamics of the WRC . Fly lines from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center : ( 1 ) UAS - Lifeact : : Ruby , ( 2 ) sqh AX3 / FM7c ; Sqh - Sqh : : GFP , ( 3 ) tGPH ; Sb / TM3 , ( 4 ) tGPH ( III ) , ( 5 ) Rac1 - GFP : : Rac1 ( III ) , ( 6 ) y w , UAS - Pi3K92E . CAAX , ( 7 ) UAS - Pi3K92E RNAi ( III ) , ( 8 ) UAS - Rac1 ( II ) , ( 9 ) UAS - Rac1 ( III ) , ( 10 ) GMR - GAL4 ( III ) , ( 11 ) , Ey - GAL4 ( II ) , ( 12 ) UAS - dicer ( II ) , ( 13 ) , UAS - dicer ( III ) , ( 14 ) hsFLP ( II ) , ( 15 ) Ey - FLP ( II ) , ( 16 ) GMR - Hid FRT40A / Cyo - GFP ; Ey - GAL4 UAS - FLP , ( 17 ) w Ey - FLP ; GMR - myrRFP FRT40A , ( 18 ) SCAR D 37 FRT40A , and ( 19 ) pw + 21C , pw + 36F , FRT40A . α - Cat : : Venus CPTI002596 was obtained from the Kyoto stock center . Additional stocks used : ( 1 ) Sqh - UtrABD : : GFP ( III ) , ( 2 ) sqh AX3 ; sqh - UtrABD : : GFP , Sqh - Sqh : : mCherry ( II ) , ( 3 ) Sp / CyO ; Sqh - UtrAbd : : GFP , Sqh - Sqh : : mCherry / MKRS , and ( 4 ) Sqh - UtrABD : : mCherry ( II ) ( gifts of A . Martin ) , ( 5 ) UAS - Lifeact : : Ruby ; GMR - GAL4 ( previously described by Del Signore et al . ) , ( 6 ) Ubi - Ecad : : GFP , ( 7 ) Shg - Shg : : mCherry ; tGPH , ( 8 ) Ey - GAL4 ; UAS - dicer ( 9 ) UAS - dicer ; GMR - GAL4 . The following stocks were gifts as indicated : Ey - FLP , UAS - GFP ; tub - GAL80 FRT40A ; Ubi - GAL4 ( J . Treisman ) , pten 3 FRT40A and pten 2L100 FRT40A ( E . Hafen ) , pten c494 FRT 40A ( D . St Johnston ) , Pi3K21B D indels ( 2 , 9 ) ( P . Raghu ) . A 20 Pi3K21B D 2 , 9 FRT40A recombinant was created using indel ( 2 , 9 ) . Fly lines that were generated in this study : ( 1 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; α - Cat : : Venus , ( 2 ) pten 2L100 FRT40A ; α - Cat : : Venus , ( 3 ) pten c494 FRT40A ; α - Cat : : Venus , ( 4 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; Ubi - Abi : : GFP , ( 5 ) pten 3 FRT 40A ; Sqh - Sqh : : GFP , ( 6 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; Sqh - Utr : : GFP , ( 7 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; tGPH , ( 8 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; Rac1 - GFP : : Rac1 ( BL - 52285 ) , ( 9 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; UAS - GFP : : Pten2 , ( 10 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; UAS - GFP : : Pten2 C132S , ( 11 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; UAS - GFP : : Pten2 G137E , ( 12 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; UAS - Pi3K92E RNAi , ( 13 ) FRT40A ; UAS - GFP : : Pten2 , ( 14 ) Pi3K21B D 2 , 9 FRT40A , ( 15 ) Pi3K21B D 2 , 9 FRT40A ; a - Cat : : Venus , ( 16 ) Pi3K21B D 2 , 9 FRT40A ; Sqh - Utr : : GFP , Sqh - Sqh : : mCherry , ( 17 ) Pi3K21B D 2 , 9 FRT40A ; Ubi - GFP : : Abi , ( 18 ) Pi3K21B D 2 , 9 FRT40A ; tGPH , ( 19 ) y w , UAS - Pi3K92E . CAAX ( BL - 8294 ) ; Ey - FLP , ( 20 ) hsFLP ; UAS - Pi3K92E . RNAi ( BL - 27690 ) , ( 21 ) ubi - Ecad : : GFP ; Act > > GAL4 , UAS - RFP , ( 22 ) tGPH ( BL - 8163 ) ; Act > > GAL4 UAS - RFP , ( 23 ) UAS - Rac1 ( BL - 58816 ) ; Sqh - Utr : : GFP , Sqh - Sqh : : mCherry , ( 24 ) tGPH ; UAS - Rac1 ( 25 ) Sqh - UtrABD : : mCh ; GMR - GAL4 , ubi - GFP : : Abi , ( 26 ) SCAR D 37 FRT40A ; UAS - Rac1 ( BL - 28874 ) , ( 27 ) pten 3 FRT40A ; UAS - Rac1 , ( 28 ) FRT 40A ; UAS - Rac1 . Genetic analysis GMR - GAL4 and Ey - GAL4 lines were used to broadly express UAS - transgenes in the eye ( Wernet et al . , 2003 ) . The FLP / FRT ( Xu & Rubin , 1995 ) and MARCM techniques ( Lee and Luo , 2001 ) were used to generate genetically marked clones by FLP - mediated mitotic recombination . We used the Eyeless - GAL4 / UAS - FLP ( EGUF ) technique , by which the retina is rescued from Hid - mediated apoptosis if mutant cells can create viable tissue , to generate entirely mutant eyes ( Stowers and Schwarz , 1999 ) . The FLP - Out / GAL4 technique was used to express desired transgenes in genetically marked clones . y w Ey - FLP ; Ubi - mRFP , FRT40A was used to generate pten or Pi3K - reg mutant FLP / FRT clones , Ey - FLP , UAS - GFP ; tub - GAL80 FRT40A ; Ubi - GAL4 to generate MARCM clones and GMR - Hid FRT40A ; Ey - GAL4 , UAS - FLP to generate entirely mutant eyes . Mitotic and FLP - out clones were induced by a heat shock for 30 minutes at 34°C . Molecular biology and construction of genetically encoded reporters We generated several new reporters driven by the ubiquitin promoter including Ubi - GFP : : Pten2 , Ubi - 21 Pi3K21B : : GFP , and Ubi - GFP : : Abi , and several UAS - driven transgenes including UAS - GFP : : Pten2 , UAS - GFP : : Pten ( C132S ) , and UAS - GFP : : Pten ( G137E ) and UAS - PI3K21B : : GFP . The pten open reading frame ( ORF ) was amplified from cDNA clone IP16020 ( RRID : DGRC _ 1603573 ) , the Pi3K21B ORF from LD42724 ( RRID : DGRC _ 5517 ) , and the Abi ORF from LD37010 ( RRID : DGRC _ 2550 ) . The PCR products were inserted into pENTR plasmids by TOPO cloning . All expression clones were generated by the Gateway technology ( Walhout et al . 2000 ) using the Drosophila Gateway Vector Collections ( gift of T . Murphy and C . - Y . Pay ) using the Clonase II reaction to fuse the ORFs in frame with a desired fluorescent protein . Site - directed mutagenesis using Agilent Technologies QuickChange II was performed to mutate Pten by substituting the cysteine at position 132 to serine to generate UAS - GFP : : Pten2 C132S or by substituting the glycine at position 137 to glutamine to generate UAS - GFP : : Pten2 G137E . Ubi - Pi3K21B : : GFP was inserted at the P { CaryP } attP2 site ( estimated at 68A4 ) by PhiC31 - mediated recombination . We introduced an AttB site to pUGW using site - directed mutagenesis using a New England Biolabs NEB Q5 Site - directed mutagenesis kit ( Akbari et al . , 2009 ) . Transgenic fly lines carrying these transgenes were established by standard methods by BestGene , Inc . Method detail Immunofluorescence White prepupae ( 0h APF ) were selected and aged on glass slides in a humidifying chamber at 25°C . Pupal eyes were dissected in phosphate - buffered saline , fixed for 35 minutes in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS , and stained with antibodies in PBS with 3 % BSA , 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 , and 0 . 01 % Sodium Azide . Primary antibodies used were rat anti - E - cad ( DSHB # DCAD2 , 1 : 100 ) , mouse anti - Dlg ( DSHH # 4F3 , 1 : 500 ) , and guinea pig anti - Sdk ( Astigarraga et al . , 2018 ) . Alexa647 and Alexa488 ( Molecular Probes ) and Cy3 and Cy5 ( Jackson ImmunoResearch ) conjugated secondary antibodies were used at 1 : 150 . 22 Sample preparation for live imaging Pupae were selected and aged as described above . Larvae and pupae expressing UAS - Rac1 were aged for 48h at 18°C and then shifted to 25°C ( for quantification of polarity ) or 30°C ( for qualitative observations of ruptures in GFP : : Abi , Utr : : mCh eyes ) for 4 hours before imaging to conditionally increase transgene expression . Live imaging of pupal eyes was conducted as previously described ( Del Signore et al . , 2018 ) . Prior to imaging , the operculum and surrounding pupal case were peeled carefully to expose the eyes . Pupae were inserted in a slit created in an agarose block with one eye facing the coverslip . The agarose block was fitted with a custom - made rubber gasket and capped with a custom - built humidified chamber . Confocal imaging Image data were collected on a Zeiss LSM800 laser scanning confocal microscope with Airscan . For analysis of epithelial remodeling and protein dynamics , an image stack was obtained every 1 minute unless otherwise noted with pinhole size = 1 AU using a 63X , 1 . 4 NA , plan Apochromat oil immersion objective , with a laser intensity of 0 . 2 - 1 % , 0 . 7 μm per optical section with a 10 - 50 % overlap between sections , using a bidirectional scan at a speed of 7 without averaging . Laser nano - ablation Laser nano - ablations to measure bond tension were performed using a Zeiss LSM880 NLO with a near - infrared InSight X3 multi - photon tunable laser ( 680 - 1300nm ) using a 740nm multiphoton excitation . Samples were imaged with α - Cat : : Venus to identify the junctions for ablation using a 63X oil immersion objective ( NA 1 . 4 ) . A field size of 1x8 pixels was ablated in the center of LC - LC contacts using a 30 - 40 % laser output , at a scan speed of one , with one iteration . Images were collected every 0 . 5 seconds for 120 seconds and ablations were performed 3 seconds after the beginning of each experiment . To determine the initial recoil velocity ( V max ) , we measured the distance between vertices of the ablated cell - cell contacts in Fiji and plotted it as a function of time using Prism 9 ( GraphPad ) . V max was determined using 23 a fitting function f ( t ) as follows : f ( t ) = A · ( 1 - e - t / τ ) and V max = df ( 0 ) / dt = A / τ where A is the total retraction amplitude and τ the decay rate constant . Quantification and Statistical Analysis Quantitative assessment of eye phenotypes We processed images and counted features using Fiji . We created Regions of Interest ( ROIs ) in the center of retinas in which to count cellular defects . Then we used the Cell Counter tool to count defects within the area . In addition , we counted the total number of edges , vertices , and ommatidia within the ROI . The following defects were normalized to the number of edges : 1 ) A missing LC , defined as any edge with only one bristle and one lattice cell , or two lattice cells and no bristles . 2 ) A separation , defined as any edge along which 1° cells from two different ommatidia were in direct contact . 3 ) An extra LC , defined as any edge with more than three lattice cells , or two bristles and more than two LCs . The following defects were normalized to the number of vertices : 1 ) A rosette , defined as a bristle with four LCs contacting it instead of the normal three . 2 ) A missing 3° LC , defined as a vertex at which a 3° LC was missing and where a contact between multiple secondary cells was formed . 3 ) A misplaced bristle , defined as an edge with a bristle in the middle . Statistical differences between conditions were examined using a Chi - Square Test . For counting numbers of rosettes in FLP / FRT and MARCM clones , a vertex was considered WT if the vertex and all adjacent secondary cells were WT , mutant if all cells were mutant , and mixed otherwise . Analysis of contact dynamics We examined contact dynamics at ~ 28h APF at the end of the pruning stage , when some , but not all , ommatidial edges had 2 or more 2° cells . We processed images in ZEN 2 . 6 and Fiji , using ZEN’s Z - Stack Alignment method and applying a Gaussian blur ( sigma = 1 . 3 ) . We took maximal intensity projections of 3 - 5 slices for images featuring GPH and Rac1 : : GFP and of all 10 slices for other reporters . Individual LC - LC contacts along horizontal edges were traced manually at 1 - minute intervals for 60 minutes using a Fiji plugin with a line segment selection producing 40 - 24 60 ROIs per contact . A custom Fiji " Junction Analyzer " script measured the length of each ROI . Then , a Python script operating on the extracted length values calculated the features of the pulsing . The data were smoothed using a Gaussian filter with sigma = 2 . Pulse amplitudes were taken using the absolute value of the difference between adjacent local maxima and minima . This value was divided by the average contact length to get the normalized amplitude . Pulse frequencies were taken using the number of minutes between maxima . Values for a given contact were averaged to produce an average amplitude or frequency per contact . Statistics were performed on average amplitudes and frequencies per contact using a Kruskal - Wallis test with Dunn ' s Multiple Comparison test in Prism ( Version 9 . 5 . 0 ) . Time - shifted Pearson’s correlation analysis Contact dynamics were analyzed by manual tracing with a line segment selection ( width = 5px ) . Vertices were automatically placed at both ends of these line segments as circular ROIs ( diameter = 6px ) . Contact length , pixel mean , and total intensity and background for each channel at each time point were collected using the Junction Analyzer Fiji macro . For Sqh : : GFP , Rac1 : : GFP , and GFP : : Pten2 , and Grp1 - PH : : GFP ( GPH ) , analysis was based on the mean intensity over the full contact length , while for Utr : : GFP , GFP : : Abi , and Pi3K - reg : : GFP , it was based on the mean intensity at the vertices . Time - resolved Pearson’s cross - correlations ( time windows from + / - 19 minutes ) were compared between the mean fluorescent marker intensities and contact length using 40 - 60 min long movies and calculated using a custom Python script along with packages NumPy and SciPy . Data presented are the average Pearson’s correlations of individual contacts as noted in figure legends and are presented as the mean correlation ( R ) + / - SD . A one - sample t - test was used to calculate whether average Pearson R - values and time shifts were significantly different from zero . To calculate whether the peak average R - value differed from the average R - value at a time shift of 0 , a paired t - test was used . An unpaired t - test was used for comparisons between groups to analyze normally distributed data , while the Mann - Whitney u test was used to analyze non - normally distributed data . 25 Quantification of contact polarity in Rac1 overexpression eyes We processed images in ZEN and Fiji as described above , with multiple maximal intensity projections of 3 - 5 slices taken for each image to focus on different patches of cells . Levels of reporters at tAJs were measured in Fiji by averaging the mean intensity at two circular ROIs of size 12 , one placed at each vertex . Levels of reporters at bAJs were measured using a single circular ROI , defaulting to size 12 but reduced in size if necessary to avoid overlapping with the tAJ ROIs . We then took the ratio between the intensity at tAJs and bAJs . Comparisons between genotypes were performed with an unpaired t - test for normally distributed data and a Mann - Whitney u test for non - normally distributed data . 26 LITERATURE CITED : Akbari , O . S . , D . Oliver , K . Eyer , and C . Y . Pai . 2009 . An Entry / Gateway cloning system for general expression of genes with molecular tags in Drosophila melanogaster . BMC Cell Biol . 10 : 8 . Astigarraga , S . , J . Douthit , D . Tarnogorska , M . S . Creamer , O . Mano , D . A . Clark , I . A . Meinertzhagen , and J . E . Treisman . 2018 . Drosophila Sidekick is required in developing photoreceptors to enable visual motion detection . Development . 145 . Auger , K . R . , L . A . Serunian , S . P . Soltoff , P . Libby , and L . C . Cantley . 1989 . PDGF - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation stimulates production of novel polyphosphoinositides in intact cells . Cell . 57 : 167 - 175 . Bao , S . , and R . Cagan . 2005 . Preferential adhesion mediated by Hibris and Roughest regulates morphogenesis and patterning in the Drosophila eye . Dev Cell . 8 : 925 - 935 . Bardet , P . L . , B . Guirao , C . Paoletti , F . Serman , V . Leopold , F . Bosveld , Y . Goya , V . Mirouse , F . Graner , and Y . Bellaiche . 2013 . PTEN controls junction lengthening and stability during cell rearrangement in epithelial tissue . Dev Cell . 25 : 534 - 546 . Blackie , L . , M . Tozluoglu , M . Trylinski , R . F . Walther , F . Schweisguth , Y . Mao , and F . Pichaud . 2021 . A combination of Notch signaling , preferential adhesion and endocytosis induces a slow mode of cell intercalation in the Drosophila retina . Development . 148 . Blackie , L . , R . F . Walther , M . F . Staddon , S . Banerjee , and F . Pichaud . 2020 . Cell - type - specific mechanical response and myosin dynamics during retinal lens development in Drosophila . Mol Biol Cell . 31 : 1355 - 1369 . Britton , J . S . , W . K . Lockwood , L . Li , S . M . Cohen , and B . A . Edgar . 2002 . Drosophila ' s insulin / PI3 - kinase pathway coordinates cellular metabolism with nutritional conditions . Dev Cell . 2 : 239 - 249 . Cagan , R . 2009 . Principles of Drosophila eye differentiation . Curr Top Dev Biol . 89 : 115 - 135 . Cagan , R . L . , and D . F . Ready . 1989 . The emergence of order in the Drosophila pupal retina . Dev Biol . 136 : 346 - 362 . Cantley , L . C . 2002 . The phosphoinositide 3 - kinase pathway . Science . 296 : 1655 - 1657 . Carthew , R . W . 2007 . Pattern formation in the Drosophila eye . Curr Opin Genet Dev . 17 : 309 - 313 . Chalhoub , N . , and S . J . Baker . 2009 . PTEN and the PI3 - kinase pathway in cancer . Annu Rev Pathol . 4 : 127 - 150 . Chan , E . H . , P . Chavadimane Shivakumar , R . Clement , E . Laugier , and P . F . Lenne . 2017 . Patterned cortical tension mediated by N - cadherin controls cell geometric order in the Drosophila eye . Elife . 6 . Chen , B . , H . T . Chou , C . A . Brautigam , W . Xing , S . Yang , L . Henry , L . K . Doolittle , T . Walz , and M . K . Rosen . 2017 . Rac1 GTPase activates the WAVE regulatory complex through two distinct binding sites . Elife . 6 . Chen , Z . , D . Borek , S . B . Padrick , T . S . Gomez , Z . Metlagel , A . M . Ismail , J . Umetani , D . D . Billadeau , Z . Otwinowski , and M . K . Rosen . 2010 . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature . 468 : 533 - 538 . 27 Colombelli , J . , and J . Solon . 2013 . Force communication in multicellular tissues addressed by laser nanosurgery . Cell Tissue Res . 352 : 133 - 147 . Das , S . , J . E . Dixon , and W . Cho . 2003 . Membrane - binding and activation mechanism of PTEN . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 100 : 7491 - 7496 . Del Signore , S . J . , R . Cilla , and V . Hatini . 2018 . The WAVE Regulatory Complex and Branched F - Actin Counterbalance Contractile Force to Control Cell Shape and Packing in the Drosophila Eye . Dev Cell . 44 : 471 - 483 e474 . Devergne , O . , K . Tsung , G . Barcelo , and T . Schupbach . 2014 . Polarized deposition of basement membrane proteins depends on Phosphatidylinositol synthase and the levels of Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 111 : 7689 - 7694 . Di Paolo , G . , and P . De Camilli . 2006 . Phosphoinositides in cell regulation and membrane dynamics . Nature . 443 : 651 - 657 . Fruman , D . A . 2010 . Regulatory subunits of class IA PI3K . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol . 346 : 225 - 244 . Funamoto , S . , R . Meili , S . Lee , L . Parry , and R . A . Firtel . 2002 . Spatial and temporal regulation of 3 - phosphoinositides by PI 3 - kinase and PTEN mediates chemotaxis . Cell . 109 : 611 - 623 . Galy , A . , A . Schenck , H . B . Sahin , A . Qurashi , J . A . Sahel , C . Diebold , and A . Giangrande . 2011 . CYFIP dependent actin remodeling controls specific aspects of Drosophila eye morphogenesis . Dev Biol . 359 : 37 - 46 . Gao , X . , T . P . Neufeld , and D . Pan . 2000 . Drosophila PTEN regulates cell growth and proliferation through PI3K - dependent and - independent pathways . Dev Biol . 221 : 404 - 418 . Goberdhan , D . C . , N . Paricio , E . C . Goodman , M . Mlodzik , and C . Wilson . 1999 . Drosophila tumor suppressor PTEN controls cell size and number by antagonizing the Chico / PI3 - kinase signaling pathway . Genes Dev . 13 : 3244 - 3258 . Hayashi , T . , and R . W . Carthew . 2004 . Surface mechanics mediate pattern formation in the developing retina . Nature . 431 : 647 - 652 . Heer , N . C . , and A . C . Martin . 2017 . Tension , contraction and tissue morphogenesis . Development . 144 : 4249 - 4260 . Huang , H . , C . J . Potter , W . Tao , D . M . Li , W . Brogiolo , E . Hafen , H . Sun , and T . Xu . 1999 . PTEN affects cell size , cell proliferation and apoptosis during Drosophila eye development . Development . 126 : 5365 - 5372 . Hume , P . J . , D . Humphreys , and V . Koronakis . WAVE regulatory complex activation . Methods Enzymol . 540 : 363 - 379 . Iijima , M . , Y . E . Huang , and P . Devreotes . 2002 . Temporal and spatial regulation of chemotaxis . Dev Cell . 3 : 469 - 478 . Jang , H . , I . N . Smith , C . Eng , and R . Nussinov . 2021 . The mechanism of full activation of tumor suppressor PTEN at the phosphoinositide - enriched membrane . iScience . 24 : 102438 . Johnson , R . I . 2021 . Hexagonal patterning of the Drosophila eye . Dev Biol . 478 : 173 - 182 . 28 Johnson , R . I . , A . Sedgwick , C . D ' Souza - Schorey , and R . L . Cagan . 2011 . Role for a Cindr - Arf6 axis in patterning emerging epithelia . Mol Biol Cell . 22 : 4513 - 4526 . Johnson , R . I . , M . J . Seppa , and R . L . Cagan . 2008 . The Drosophila CD2AP / CIN85 orthologue Cindr regulates junctions and cytoskeleton dynamics during tissue patterning . J Cell Biol . 180 : 1191 - 1204 . Koronakis , V . , P . J . Hume , D . Humphreys , T . Liu , O . Horning , O . N . Jensen , and E . J . McGhie . 2011 . WAVE regulatory complex activation by cooperating GTPases Arf and Rac1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 108 : 14449 - 14454 . Kovacs , E . M . , R . G . Ali , A . J . McCormack , and A . S . Yap . 2002 . E - cadherin homophilic ligation directly signals through Rac and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase to regulate adhesive contacts . J Biol Chem . 277 : 6708 - 6718 . Lebensohn , A . M . , and M . W . Kirschner . 2009 . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident signals controls actin assembly . Mol Cell . 36 : 512 - 524 . Lee , T . , and L . Luo . 2001 . Mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker ( MARCM ) for Drosophila neural development . Trends Neurosci . 24 : 251 - 254 . Leevers , S . J . , D . Weinkove , L . K . MacDougall , E . Hafen , and M . D . Waterfield . 1996 . The Drosophila phosphoinositide 3 - kinase Dp110 promotes cell growth . EMBO J . 15 : 6584 - 6594 . Letizia , A . , D . He , S . Astigarraga , J . Colombelli , V . Hatini , M . Llimargas , and J . E . Treisman . 2019 . Sidekick Is a Key Component of Tricellular Adherens Junctions that Acts to Resolve Cell Rearrangements . Dev Cell . 50 : 313 - 326 e315 . Li , J . , C . Yen , D . Liaw , K . Podsypanina , S . Bose , S . I . Wang , J . Puc , C . Miliaresis , L . Rodgers , R . McCombie , S . H . Bigner , B . C . Giovanella , M . Ittmann , B . Tycko , H . Hibshoosh , M . H . Wigler , and R . Parsons . 1997 . PTEN , a putative protein tyrosine phosphatase gene mutated in human brain , breast , and prostate cancer . Science . 275 : 1943 - 1947 . Liliental , J . , S . Y . Moon , R . Lesche , R . Mamillapalli , D . Li , Y . Zheng , H . Sun , and H . Wu . 2000 . Genetic deletion of the Pten tumor suppressor gene promotes cell motility by activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 GTPases . Curr Biol . 10 : 401 - 404 . Maehama , T . , N . Kosaka , F . Okahara , K . Takeuchi , M . Umeda , J . E . Dixon , and Y . Kanaho . 2004 . Suppression of a phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase signal by a specific spliced variant of Drosophila PTEN . FEBS Lett . 565 : 43 - 47 . Malin , J . , C . Rosa Birriel , S . Astigarraga , J . E . Treisman , and V . Hatini . 2022 . Sidekick dynamically rebalances contractile and protrusive forces to control tissue morphogenesis . J Cell Biol . 221 . Martin - Belmonte , F . , A . Gassama , A . Datta , W . Yu , U . Rescher , V . Gerke , and K . Mostov . 2007 . PTEN - mediated apical segregation of phosphoinositides controls epithelial morphogenesis through Cdc42 . Cell . 128 : 383 - 397 . Martin - Bermudo , M . D . , P . L . Bardet , Y . Bellaiche , and M . Malartre . 2015 . The vav oncogene antagonises EGFR signalling and regulates adherens junction dynamics during Drosophila eye development . Development . 142 : 1492 - 1501 . Mendoza , M . C . 2013 . Phosphoregulation of the WAVE regulatory complex and signal integration . Semin Cell Dev Biol . 24 : 272 - 279 . Mendoza , M . C . , E . E . Er , W . Zhang , B . A . Ballif , H . L . Elliott , G . Danuser , and J . Blenis . 2011 . ERK - MAPK drives lamellipodia protrusion by activating the WAVE2 regulatory complex . Mol Cell . 41 : 661 - 671 . 29 Myers , M . P . , I . Pass , I . H . Batty , J . Van der Kaay , J . P . Stolarov , B . A . Hemmings , M . H . Wigler , C . P . Downes , and N . K . Tonks . 1998 . The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN is critical for its tumor supressor function . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 95 : 13513 - 13518 . Nakagawa , M . , M . Fukata , M . Yamaga , N . Itoh , and K . Kaibuchi . 2001 . Recruitment and activation of Rac1 by the formation of E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion sites . J Cell Sci . 114 : 1829 - 1838 . Oikawa , T . , H . Yamaguchi , T . Itoh , M . Kato , T . Ijuin , D . Yamazaki , S . Suetsugu , and T . Takenawa . 2004 . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 binding is necessary for WAVE2 - induced formation of lamellipodia . Nat Cell Biol . 6 : 420 - 426 . Oldham , S . , H . Stocker , M . Laffargue , F . Wittwer , M . Wymann , and E . Hafen . 2002 . The Drosophila insulin / IGF receptor controls growth and size by modulating PtdInsP ( 3 ) levels . Development . 129 : 4103 - 4109 . Patel , F . B . , Y . Y . Bernadskaya , E . Chen , A . Jobanputra , Z . Pooladi , K . L . Freeman , C . Gally , W . A . Mohler , and M . C . Soto . 2008 . The WAVE / SCAR complex promotes polarized cell movements and actin enrichment in epithelia during C . elegans embryogenesis . Dev Biol . 324 : 297 - 309 . Perez , T . D . , M . Tamada , M . P . Sheetz , and W . J . Nelson . 2008 . Immediate - early signaling induced by E - cadherin engagement and adhesion . J Biol Chem . 283 : 5014 - 5022 . Pickering , K . , J . Alves - Silva , D . Goberdhan , and T . H . Millard . 2013 . Par3 / Bazooka and phosphoinositides regulate actin protrusion formation during Drosophila dorsal closure and wound healing . Development . 140 : 800 - 809 . Pinal , N . , D . C . Goberdhan , L . Collinson , Y . Fujita , I . M . Cox , C . Wilson , and F . Pichaud . 2006 . Regulated and polarized PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 accumulation is essential for apical membrane morphogenesis in photoreceptor epithelial cells . Curr Biol . 16 : 140 - 149 . Qi , Y . , J . Liu , J . Chao , P . A . Greer , and S . Li . 2020 . PTEN dephosphorylates Abi1 to promote epithelial morphogenesis . J Cell Biol . 219 . Rauzi , M . , and P . F . Lenne . 2015 . Probing cell mechanics with subcellular laser dissection of actomyosin networks in the early developing Drosophila embryo . Methods Mol Biol . 1189 : 209 - 218 . Ridley , A . J . , H . F . Paterson , C . L . Johnston , D . Diekmann , and A . Hall . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell . 70 : 401 - 410 . Rottner , K . , T . E . B . Stradal , and B . Chen . 2021 . WAVE regulatory complex . Curr Biol . 31 : R512 - R517 . Schaks , M . , S . P . Singh , F . Kage , P . Thomason , T . Klunemann , A . Steffen , W . Blankenfeldt , T . E . Stradal , R . H . Insall , and K . Rottner . 2018 . Distinct Interaction Sites of Rac GTPase with WAVE Regulatory Complex Have Non - redundant Functions in Vivo . Curr Biol . 28 : 3674 - 3684 e3676 . Seppa , M . J . , R . I . Johnson , S . Bao , and R . L . Cagan . 2008 . Polychaetoid controls patterning by modulating adhesion in the Drosophila pupal retina . Dev Biol . 318 : 1 - 16 . Stowers , R . S . , and T . L . Schwarz . 1999 . A genetic method for generating Drosophila eyes composed exclusively of mitotic clones of a single genotype . Genetics . 152 : 1631 - 1639 . 30 Suetsugu , S . , S . Kurisu , T . Oikawa , D . Yamazaki , A . Oda , and T . Takenawa . 2006 . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J Cell Biol . 173 : 571 - 585 . Traynor - Kaplan , A . E . , A . L . Harris , B . L . Thompson , P . Taylor , and L . A . Sklar . 1988 . An inositol tetrakisphosphate - containing phospholipid in activated neutrophils . Nature . 334 : 353 - 356 . Trivedi , D . , V . Cm , K . Bisht , V . Janardan , A . Pandit , B . Basak , S . H , N . Ramesh , and P . Raghu . 2020 . A genome engineering resource to uncover principles of cellular organization and tissue architecture by lipid signaling . Elife . 9 . von Stein , W . , A . Ramrath , A . Grimm , M . Muller - Borg , and A . Wodarz . 2005 . Direct association of Bazooka / PAR - 3 with the lipid phosphatase PTEN reveals a link between the PAR / aPKC complex and phosphoinositide signaling . Development . 132 : 1675 - 1686 . Weinkove , D . , S . J . Leevers , L . K . MacDougall , and M . D . Waterfield . 1997 . p60 is an adaptor for the Drosophila phosphoinositide 3 - kinase , Dp110 . J Biol Chem . 272 : 14606 - 14610 . Wernet , M . F . , T . Labhart , F . Baumann , E . O . Mazzoni , F . Pichaud , and C . Desplan . 2003 . Homothorax switches function of Drosophila photoreceptors from color to polarized light sensors . Cell . 115 : 267 - 279 . Whitman , M . , C . P . Downes , M . Keeler , T . Keller , and L . Cantley . 1988 . Type I phosphatidylinositol kinase makes a novel inositol phospholipid , phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate . Nature . 332 : 644 - 646 . Yamada , S . , and W . J . Nelson . 2007 . Localized zones of Rho and Rac activities drive initiation and expansion of epithelial cell - cell adhesion . J Cell Biol . 178 : 517 - 527 . Zallen , J . A . , Y . Cohen , A . M . Hudson , L . Cooley , E . Wieschaus , and E . D . Schejter . 2002 . SCAR is a primary regulator of Arp2 / 3 - dependent morphological events in Drosophila . J Cell Biol . 156 : 689 - 701 . FIGURE LEGEND Figure 1 : pten affects contact pulsing , epithelial remodeling and ommatidial structure ( A ) Left : Major steps in lattice remodeling . Secondary ( 2° ) , tertiary ( 3 ) and mechanosensory bristle cells surround cone and primary ( 1° ) cells . Right : Types of LCs , periods of expansion and contraction and contracted or expanded LC - LC contacts in this and subsequent figures . ( B - C ) Ommatidia in adult ( B - B’ ) WT or ( C - C’ ) pten mutant eyes . ( D - G ) Cellular defects in different pten mutant alleles compared with WT , 36 - 40h APF . ( D ) WT ; each bristle and 3° LC connects to three 2° LCs . ( E ) pten 2L100 ; common defects include cellular rosettes ( yellow arrowheads ) and LC - LC contacts lost and replaced by 1° - 1° contacts ( magenta arrowheads ) . ( F - G ) pten 3 and pten c494 ; defects are similar to pten 2L100 but more severe . Refer to Fig . S1A - D for quantification of specific defects . ( H ) Snapshots of a lattice edge and a kymograph of a single LC - LC 31 contact at 2 - minute intervals in a WT eye , 26 - 28 AFP . When a cell prunes from the lattice , a new contact is immediately established between adjacent cells . LC - LC contacts expand and contract repeatedly over periods of 10 - 20 minutes . ( I ) Cellular dynamics in a pten eye . Above : Snapshots of a LC being pruned from the lattice . After its delamination , adjacent cells remain separated , creating a contact between two 1° cells ( white arrowheads ) that is repaired over the next hour . Below : Snapshots and kymograph of a pulsing LC - LC contact . Compared with WT , expansions and contractions are small and uncoordinated , and the contact remains short . ( J - M ) Quantifications of contact length pulses in WT and pten mutant eyes . ( J ) Mean contact length . ( K ) Pulse amplitude . ( L ) Pulse amplitude normalized to mean contact length . ( M ) Pulse frequency . Statistics were performed using a Mann - Whitney u test , n = 20 WT , 30 pten contacts from 2 - 3 eyes . * p > . 05 , * * * * p > . 0001 . Scale bars 5 μm in this and subsequent figures . Figure 2 : pten affects contractile and protrusive dynamics during contact pulsing ( A - D ) Dynamics of ( A - B ) F - actin and ( C - D ) MyoII in ( A , C ) WT and ( B , D ) pten mutants , 26 - 28h APF . ( E - H ) Time - shifted Pearson’s correlations between contact length and levels of ( E - F ) F - actin and ( G - H ) MyoII in the above two genotypes . In this and subsequent graphs , the black line is the mean R - value and gray bar the SD . For each graph , n = 30 contacts were pooled from 3 eyes . ( E ) Length vs . F - actin , WT . Peak R - value is . 52 at a shift of - 2 . ( F ) Length vs F - actin , pten . Peak R - value is . 13 at a shift of - 7 . ( G ) Length vs . MyoII , WT . Peak R - value is - . 48 at a shift of - 1 . ( H ) Length vs MyoII , pten . Peak R - value is - . 14 at a shift of - 2 . ( I - J ) Comparisons of correlations between length and ( I ) F - actin or ( J ) MyoII for individual WT and pten contacts at time - shift of WT peak R - value . n = 30 contacts per genotype pooled from 3 eyes . ( K - L ) Comparison of pulse amplitudes of ( K ) F - actin and ( L ) MyoII normalized to reporter levels over 60 minutes at vertices of individual contacts . Statistics : Mann - Whitney u test , * * * p < . 001 , * * * * p < . 0001 . Figure 3 : pten affects Abi dynamics during eye epithelial remodeling ( A - B ) Dynamics of Abi in ( A ) WT eyes and ( B ) pten mutant eyes . ( C ) Comparison of pulse amplitude of Abi at vertices normalized to mean Abi . N = 30 WT , 30 pten contacts pooled from 3 - 4 eyes per genotype . Unpaired t - test with Welch’s 32 correction , p > . 0001 . ( D ) Comparison of Abi pulse frequency . Mann - Whitney u test , p = . 0209 . ( E - F ) Time - shifted correlations between contact length and Abi levels in WT and pten eyes . ( E ) WT . Peak R - value is . 39 at a shift of - 3 . ( F ) pten . Peak R - value is . 21 at a shift of - 3 . ( G ) Comparison of R - values at a shift of - 3 in both genotypes . Unpaired t - test , p > . 0001 . ( H - I ) Snapshots and kymographs of laser ablations of LC - LC contacts in ( H ) a WT eye and ( I ) a pten eye . Yellow stars mark sites of ablation . ( J - K ) Recoil curves of 10 ablations each from ( J ) a single WT eye and ( K ) a single pten eye . ( L ) The initial recoil velocity ( V max ) of individual contacts pooled across 3 eyes in WT compared with pten mutants . Unpaired t - test , n = 18 - 25 contacts . Figure 4 : pten affects PIP 3 dynamics during eye epithelial remodeling ( A ) Levels and localization of PIP 3 in pten mutant clones , 28 - 30h APF . ( B - C ) PIP 3 dynamics in ( B ) WT eyes and ( C ) pten mutant eyes . ( D ) Comparison of pulse amplitude of PIP 3 normalized to mean PIP 3 . N = 20 WT , 29 pten contacts pooled from 2 - 3 eyes per genotype . Unpaired t - test with Welch’s correction , p < . 0001 . ( E ) Comparison of PIP 3 pulse frequency . Unpaired t - test , p = . 04975 . ( F - G ) Time - shifted correlations between contact length and PIP 3 levels in WT and pten eyes . ( F ) WT . Peak R - value is . 54 at a shift of - 3 . ( G ) pten . Peak R - value is . 02 at a shift of + 13 . ( H ) Comparisons of R - values at a shift of - 3 vs . a shift of 0 in WT . Paired t - test , p = . 0002 . ( I ) Comparison of R - values at a shift of - 3 in both genotypes . Unpaired t - test , p = . 0002 . Figure 5 : Pi3K Loss - and gain - of - function disrupt eye epithelial remodeling ( A ) PIP 3 pulsing in clones expressing Pi3K - cat . CAAX ( B ) PIP 3 pulse amplitudes normalized to total PIP 3 in clones compared with WT regions . Mann - Whitney u test , p < . 0001 , n = 16 - 22 contacts pooled from 4 eyes . ( B’ ) Time - shifted correlations between contact length and PIP 3 in clone regions expressing Pi3K - cat . CAAX ( peak correlation . 17 at a shift of - 5 ) . ( C ) LC - LC contact dynamics in Pi3K - reg mutant eyes . ( D ) Quantification of ( D ) absolute and ( D’ ) normalized pulse amplitudes in Pi3K - reg eyes compared with WT . Mann - Whitney u - test , n = 20 contacts * * * * p < . 0001 . ( E - F ) Dynamics of ( E ) the WRC and ( F ) F - actin and MyoII in Pi3K - reg eyes . ( E’ , F’ ) Time - shifted correlations between contact length and ( H’ ) the WRC ( peak 33 correlation - . 11 at shift of + 2 ) , ( F’ ) F - actin ( peak correlation . 15 at a shift of + 4 ) , and ( F’’ ) MyoII ( peak correlation . 30 at a shift of - 3 ) . Figure 6 : pten affects Rac1 signaling , which affects the WRC and protrusive F - actin dynamics ( A - B ) Rac1 : : GFP dynamics in ( A ) a WT and ( B ) a pten mutant eye . ( C - D ) Comparisons of pulse ( C ) amplitudes and ( D ) frequencies of Rac1 at contact vertices in the two genotypes . ( T - test , n = 28 WT , 20 pten , * p < . 05 , * * * p < . 001 ) . ( E - F ) Time - shifted correlations between contact length and Rac1 levels in WT and pten . ( E ) WT : peak R - value = . 21 at a shift of 0 , significantly different from R - value of 0 , one - sample t - test , p = . 0108 , n = 28 contacts from 3 eyes ( F ) pten : peak R - value = . 16 at a shift of + 1 , no significant difference from R - value of 0 , one sample t - test , p = . 1493 , n = 20 contacts from 2 eyes . ( G ) Comparison between R - values at 0 for both genotypes , unpaired t - test , p = . 6800 . ( H - J ) Dynamics of ( H ) PIP 3 ( I ) the WRC and ( J ) F - actin in eyes overexpressing Rac1 . Ordinary patterns of accumulation along with contact expansion and contraction are abolished . ( K - M ) Quantifications of localization of ( K ) PIP 3 , ( L ) the WRC and ( M ) F - actin in eyes overexpressing Rac1 . All three molecules are more concentrated at vertices in Rac1 - overexpressing eyes compared with control . Unpaired t - tests , * * p < . 01 , * * * * p < . 0001 . n = 29 - 66 contacts pooled from 2 - 4 eyes per genotype . Figure 7 : Pi3K - reg accumulates preferentially and dynamically along LC - LC contacts ( A ) Pi3K - reg : : GFP and F - actin dynamics in a WT eye . Pi3K - reg localizes to vertices in expanded contacts , and in spots around the vertex in contracted contacts ( white arrows ) . ( B ) Time - shifted correlations between contact length and Pi3K - reg ( B ) directly at the vertex ( peak R - value . 54 at a shift of 0 ) and ( B’ ) adjacent to the vertex , ( peak R - value . 34 at a shift of - 3 ) . ( C ) Time - shifted correlations between F - actin and Pi3K - reg ( C ) at the vertex ( peak R - value = . 58 at a shift of + 1 ) and ( C’ ) adjacent to the vertex ( peak R - value = . 55 at a shift of 0 ) . N = 30 contacts pooled from 3 eyes for each correlation . ( D ) Two rows of cells expressing Pi3K - reg : : GFP and stained for Sdk and E - cad . White arrowheads : colocalization between Pi3K and E - cad . Orange arrowheads : colocalization between Pi3K and Sdk . ( E ) GFP : : Pten and F - actin dynamics in a WT eye . ( F - G ) Time correlations of Pten levels with ( F ) contact length and ( G ) F - actin . Pten does not show a strong 34 correlation with contact length ( peak R - value . 10 at shift of - 9 ) but does correlate with F - actin ( peak R - value . 67 at a shift of 0 ) . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS Supplemental Figure 1 : Quantification of lattice defects in pten mutant eyes and clones compared with WT ( A - D ) Quantification of counts of specific defect types in the pten mutants compared with WT . pten mutant eyes exhibit more ( A ) ommatidia that are not six - sided , ( B ) vertices with multiple bristles , ( C ) cellular rosettes and ( D ) edges missing LCs and / or exhibiting aberrant 1° - 1° contacts . χ 2 tests ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . ( E ) A negatively marked pten mutant clone generated using the FLP / FRT system ( outlined in yellow ) . Yellow arrowheads mark cellular rosettes ; purple arrowheads mark aberrant 1° - 1° contacts . ( F - G ) Quantifications of the mutant and WT cell composition of ( F ) rosettes and ( G ) aberrant edges in eyes containing pten 2L100 and pten 3 mutant clones compared with WT . Supplemental Figure 2 : Pten lipid phosphatase activity is required for epithelial remodeling ( A - D ) GFP - marked pten clones in a background expressing ( A ) no transgene , ( B ) WT Pten , ( C ) Pten G137E deficient for protein and lipid phosphatase activity , and ( D ) Pten C132S deficient for lipid phosphatase activity only . ( E ) A GFP - marked clone in a WT background expressing WT Pten as a positive control . ( F ) GFP - marked pten clones with RNAi - mediated depletion of Pi3K - cat . ( G ) Counts of cellular rosettes in clones of the above five genotypes as a proxy for overall lattice disorganization . WT Pten accomplishes a nearly complete rescue of the pten phenotype , while the G137E and C132S variants provide little to no rescue . RNAi depletion of Pi3K - cat accomplishes a partial rescue as well . Supplemental Figure 3 : Effects of Pi3K on lattice remodeling and PIP 3 levels ( A - C ) 28h APF clones in three genotypes affecting Pi3K function , all expressing tubulin - GPH . ( A ) Act > Pi3K - cat . CAAX ( B ) Act > Pi3K - cat . RNAi ( C ) Pi3K - reg - / - . ( D - F ) Cellular defects in three genotypes affecting Pi3K function , 34 - 38h APF . ( A ) 35 Ey > Pi3K - cat . CAAX . ( B ) Ey > Pi3K - cat . RNAi . ( C ) Pi3K - reg mutant eye . ( G - I ) Quantification of counts of specific defect types in the above genotypes compared with WT . Both overexpression and depletion of Pi3K function increase the numbers of ( G ) edges missing LCs , ( H ) vertices with multiple bristles , and ( I ) cellular rosettes . ( J ) Dynamics of PIP 3 in a clone expressing Act > Pi3K - cat RNAi . In addition to overall low levels , PIP 3 pulsing is reduced . ( K - L ) Clones expressing E - cad : : GFP and ( K , K’ ) Act > Pi3K - cat . CAAX or ( L , L’ ) Act > Pi3K - cat . RNAi , displaying ( K , L ) cellular defects and ( K’ , L’ ) reduced LC - LC contact length pulsing . Quantification of ( M - N ) absolute and ( M’ - N’ ) normalized pulse amplitudes in clones expressing ( M ) Pi3K - cat . CAAX and ( N ) Pi3K - cat RNAi compared with adjacent WT regions . Unpaired t - test , n = 9 - 18 contacts * p < . 05 . Supplemental Figure 4 : Large - scale tissue disruptions in Rac1 - overexpressing eyes ( A ) Snapshots of an expanding tissue rupture . Expansions of the rupture are accompanied by F - actin bursts , while MyoII extends into the hole formed by the rupture . ( B ) Snapshots of another rupture showing enrichment of both Abi and F - actin at its edges as they expand . ( C ) Snapshots of a rupture with labeled PIP 3 enriched at breaking contacts . ( D ) GFP - marked clones overexpressing Rac1 . Arrowheads mark ruptured cells . ( E ) GFP - marked clones overexpressing Rac1 in a SCAR - / - background . An arrowhead marks a ruptured cell . ( F ) GFP - marked clones overexpressing Rac1 in a pten - / - background . There are no ruptured cells and few surviving mutant LCs , though non - autonomous defects persist in surrounding ommatidia . Supplemental movie 1 : Cellular dynamics in WT compared with pten mutant eyes . ( Corresponds to Fig . 2 ) Left : Time - lapse of a WT eye showing normal dynamics of repeated cell contact expansion and contraction during lattice remodeling ( white arrowhead ) . When a LC is pruned from the lattice , contact between adjacent cells is reestablished immediately ( yellow arrowhead ) . Right : A pten mutant eye with a disordered ommatidium demonstrating pinched contacts that fail to expand and contract ( white arrowhead ) and separations between LCs following cell pruning that take up to an hour to repair ( yellow arrowhead ) . 36 Supplemental movie 2 : F - actin and MyoII dynamics in WT compared with pten mutant eyes . ( Corresponds to Fig . 3 ) Far left : Time - lapse of a WT eye showing dynamics of F - actin . Note F - actin accumulation while the contact is expanding and disassembly during contraction . Middle left : Time - lapse of a pten eye showing F - actin dynamics . Middle right : Time - lapse of a WT eye showing dynamics of MyoII . Note accumulation of MyoII in contracting contact and lower MyoII levels in expanding contact . Far right : Time - lapse of a pten eye showing dynamics of MyoII . MyoII appears in more clearly defined cables than in WT but does not accumulate and dissipate along with contact expansion and contraction , respectively . Supplemental movie 3 : WRC dynamics in WT compared with pten mutant eyes ( Corresponds to Fig . 4 ) Left : Time - lapse of a WT eye showing dynamics of the WRC . Note accumulation while the contact is expanding and dispersal during contraction . Right : Time - lapse of a pten eye showing dynamics of the WRC . Supplemental movie 4 : PIP 3 dynamics in WT compared with pten mutant eyes ( Corresponds to Fig . 5 ) Left : Time lapse of a WT eye showing dynamics of PIP 3 with E - cad for cell outlines . Note accumulation while the contact is expanding and dispersal during contraction . Center : The same ommatidium with only PIP 3 . Right : Time - lapse of a pten eye showing PIP 3 dynamics . Supplemental movie 5 : PIP 3 dynamics in clones with increased or reduced Pi3K - cat activity . ( Corresponds to Fig . 6 ) Left : Time lapse of PIP 3 dynamics in a clone expressing Pi3K - cat . CAAX ( marked in red ) and adjacent WT region . Right : Time lapse of PIP 3 dynamics in a clone expressing Pi3K - cat RNAi ( marked in red ) and adjacent WT region . Details show close - ups of rows of clone cells . Supplemental movie 6 : Dynamics of cells and regulators of protrusion in Pi3K - reg mutant eyes ( Corresponds to Fig . 6 ) Left : An ommatidium from a Pi3K - reg mutant eye in which LC - LC contacts fail to expand and contract . Center : Time lapse 37 of F - actin dynamics in a Pi3K - reg mutant eye . Right : Time lapse of WRC dynamics in a Pi3K - reg mutant eye . Supplemental movie 7 : Rac dynamics in WT compared with pten mutant eyes ( Corresponds to Fig . 7 ) Left : Time lapse of a WT eye showing dynamics of Rac1 . Note accumulation while the contact is expanding and dispersal during contraction . Right : Time - lapse of a pten eye showing dynamics of Rac1 . Supplemental movie 8 : Abnormal dynamics of F - actin , the WRC and PIP 3 in eyes overexpressing Rac1 ( Corresponds to Fig . 7 ) Dynamics of F - actin ( Left ) , the WRC ( Center ) and PIP 3 ( Right ) in eyes overexpressing Rac1 . Fluctuations of contact length are reduced , and all three molecules remain overly concentrated at contact vertices . Supplemental movie 9 : Tissue ruptures in eyes overexpressing Rac1 ( Corresponds to Fig . 7 ) Top : Tissue rupture expanding in an eye with labeled F - actin and MyoII . Middle : Tissue rupture forming and expanding in an eye with labeled Abi and F - actin . Bottom : Tissue rupture forming in an eye expressing tagged Grp1 - PH to label PIP 3 . Supplemental movie 10 : Dynamics of Pi3K - reg and Pten ( Corresponds to Fig . 8 ) Left : An ommatidium in an eye expressing tagged Lifeact to detect F - actin and Pi3K - reg . Note accumulation of Pi3K at vertices in expanded contacts and in dimmer spots adjacent to vertices in contracted contacts . Right : An ommatidium in an eye expressing tagged Lifeact and Pten . 38 Figure 1 39 Figure 2 40 Figure 3 41 Figure 4 42 Figure 5 43 Figure 6 44 Figure 7 45 Figure S1 46 Figure S2 47 Figure S3 48 Figure S4