REVIEWS Functional roles for noise in genetic circuits Avigdor Eldar 1 { & Michael B . Elowitz 1 The genetic circuits that regulate cellular functions are subject to stochastic fluctuations , or ‘noise’ , in the levels of their components . Noise , far from just a nuisance , has begun to be appreciated for its essential role in key cellular activities . Noise functions in both microbial and eukaryotic cells , in multicellular development , and in evolution . It enables coordination of gene expression across large regulons , as well as probabilistic differentiation strategies that function across cell populations . At the longest timescales , noise may facilitate evolutionary transitions . Here we review examples and emerging principles that connect noise , the architecture of the gene circuits in which it is present , and the biological functions it enables . We further indicate some of the important challenges and opportunities going forward . C ircuits of interacting genes and proteins implement the regulation and differentiation programs that are the basis of life . Over the past decade , experimental studies have established that many of these circuits’ most critical molecular components show substantial , unavoidable stochastic fluctuations , or noise , in their levels and activities . As a result , even genetically identical cells in a homogeneous environment can behave quite differently from one another . As animpediment to thedesign of deterministic circuits , noise is a nuisance . But a new wave of studies is showing how noise can , and does , provide critical functions that would be difficult or impossible to achieve by ( hypothetical ) deter - ministic gene circuits . Although the potential importance of noise for biological function was appreciated many decades ago , the development of single - cell - analysis methods in the past decade allowed the direct observation of noise in diverse organisms . Recent reviews on noise in gene circuits have focused on the sources of noise in gene expression and its mathematical representation 1 , 2 , on ways to analyse noise in the con - text of dynamic circuits 3 , and on the advantages of phenotypic vari - ability 4 , 5 . Here we will focus on the types of dynamic behaviours that noise enables and the functional roles they have in the cell . These issues can be analysed at three distinct levels . First , noise can enable certain useful physiological regulation mechanisms , such as coordi - nating the expression of a large set of genes . Second , at the population level , noise permits a wide range of probabilistic differentiation strat - egies from microbial to multicellular organisms . Third , noise can facilitate evolutionary adaptation and developmental evolution . We will first briefly review recent work that has characterized the types and timescales of fluctuations , particularly with respect to gene expression , and then address the functional roles of noise at each of these three levels . Gene expression noise Many biochemical processes in the cell involve low molecule numbers or infrequent interactions and therefore give rise to stochastic fluctua - tions . Such effects have a critical role in diverse processes including cytoskeletal dynamics , cell polarization , signal transduction and neural activity . However , gene expression is undoubtedly the best studied example as it is both central to almost all cellular functions and , owing to the low copy number ( 1 – 2 per cell ) of most genes , especially susceptible to noise 1 – 3 ( Fig . 1a – d ) . In fact , molecular noise isunavoidable . Newtheoreticalworkhasprovidedfundamentallimits to how well any feedback system can perform in reducing noise , and has shown that even an optimal noise - reducing feedback circuit reduces noise only with the fourth root of the number of control molecules 6 . Gene expression noise can be characterized by the distribution of protein levels in individual cells and by the timescale of fluctuations , that is , the time over which a cell remains at a given position in the distribution ( correlation time ) . Recent experimental and theoretical work has converged on a simple framework to understand gene expression noise 7 – 10 ( Fig . 1e ) . This framework is based on three key concepts . The first concept is that of bursts . Proteins do not trickle out at a uniform rate , but rather are produced in stochastic bursts . This is both because each individual messenger RNA is typically translated many times to produce many proteins and also because the gene’s promoter can stochastically switch between long - lived ‘off’ and ‘on’ states , resulting in bursts of mRNA production amplified to generate corresponding protein bursts . Whereas the mean level of expression is set by the product of promoter activity , transcription , and trans - lation , noise depends predominantly on the first two of these pro - cesses , which work at lower molecule numbers . Examples of bursting exist in a variety of systems , including bacteria 11 – 14 , yeast 15 , 16 , mam - malian cells 17 and developing embryos 18 . The second is time averaging . When the protein lifetime is longer than the interval between protein production bursts ( as it often is ) , the accumulation of proteins over time tends to average out the variability generated by bursty expression , effectively buffering the protein concentration . The third is propagation . Rates of gene expression are influenced directly by the levels and states of transcription factors and other upstream components that are themselves subject to bursting and time averaging . As a result , fluctuations in the expression of one gene propagate to generate fluctuations in downstream genes . In fact , this effect can be used to infer active regulatory interactions 19 , 20 . In bac - teria , slowupstreamfluctuationsinratesofgeneexpressiongiveriseto aneffectivecellular‘memory’over cell - cycletimescales 21 . Mammalian cells show similar behaviour for some genes , although others fluctuate more rapidly 22 . A simple way to visualize and quantify the relative importance of noise - generating bursts ( intrinsic noise ) versus noise propagation ( extrinsic noise ) is to analyse the expression of two distinguishable , but identically regulated fluorescent protein reporters in the same cell ( Fig . 1a ) 23 – 25 . Uncorrelated fluctuations result from bursting and 1 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Caltech M / C 114 - 96 , 1200 East California Boulevard , Pasadena , California 91125 , USA . { Present address : Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv 69978 , Israel . Vol 467 j 9 September 2010 j doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09326 167 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2010 time averaging , whereas correlated fluctuations reflect propagation of upstream components . Noise and gene expression coordination Whereas it is clear how noise can disrupt otherwise precise genetic programs , it is less obvious whether it can , counter - intuitively , improve cellular regulation . A recent paper 26 examined such a case . Cai et al . studied how yeast co - regulate a large set of target genes in responsetocalciumusingthestochasticnuclear - localizationdynamics of the transcription factor Crz1 27 ( Fig . 2a ) . Surprisingly , Crz1 localizes to the nucleus in short stochastic bursts lasting 1 – 2min . These bursts involve the simultaneous translocation of many Crz1 molecules to the nucleus . Calcium levels , the input to this system , affect the average frequency but not the average duration or amplitude of these bursts . Thus , the operation of the system is based on frequency - modulation regulation of stochastic nuclear localization bursts . Frequency - modulation regulation can provide a functional advant - age to cells , enabling coordinated ( proportional ) control of a large regulon . To see why , first consider a simpler , alternative amplitude - modulation scheme , in which an increase in calcium leads to a corres - ponding increase in the fraction of Crz1 molecules localized to the nucleus . In this hypothetical system , which corresponds to the mean behaviourofthecellpopulation , twopromotersthatresponddifferently ( with different affinities or cooperativities ) to nuclear Crz1 ( Fig . 2b ) will have different expression ratios depending on the level of calcium ( Fig . 2c ) . Their expression is thus ‘uncoordinated’ . In contrast , frequency - modulationregulationmaintainstheproductsofthesegenes at fixed proportions across a wide range of expression levels . The explanation is shown schematically in Fig . 2d : each burst has the same characteristics ( on average ) . Increasingcalciumincreasesthenumber of bursts per unit time—the fraction of time that all promoters are ‘on’— without changing the relative level of expression of different genes . Analysing many endogenous targets verified that the Crz1 regulon was indeed coordinated through this mechanism . The authors also found that other stress - responsive transcription factors , such as Msn2 , show stochastic bursts of nuclear localization that are uncorrelated with those of Crz1 when observed in the same cell . From a theoretical point of view , frequency - modulation regu - lation is interesting as an example of a system in which the mean response to the distribution of signal levels is very different from the response to the mean of the signal levels 10 . It is important to note that this frequency - modulation strategy provides coordination across target genes , but does not reduce noise in their expression . In fact , bursts of nuclear localization constitute an additional , extrinsic , source of noise in the expression of target genes . The use of stochastic bursts rather than a deterministic oscillator to implement frequency modulation indicates that regularity is not critical in this context , probably because expression noise is time averaged over the much longer cell cycle . Finally , recent work indicates that other dynamic regulatory modes may also occur , such as control of the fraction of cells in a population that show nuclear – cytoplasmic oscillations 28 . Functional roles of noise in probabilistic differentiations One of the key functional advantages of noise is its ability to enable probabilistic differentiation of otherwise identical cells . This permits a number of cellular strategies such as bet - hedging and division of labour that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to implement in a deterministic system 5 . Recent work has identified a number of a b c d e m R N A ‘On’ ‘Off’ P r o t e i n T a r g e t m R N A 0 20 40 0 50 100 150 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 10 20 Bursting Time - averaging Propagation Time ( cell cycles ) X X Translation Target gene activation Degradation Promoter state : ‘on’ ‘off’ Figure 1 | Geneexpressionnoiseisubiquitous , andaffectsdiversesystems at several levels . a , E . coli expressing two identical promoters driving two different fluorescent proteins , in red and green , respectively . Because of noise , the ratio of red to green intensity differs from cell to cell 22 . b , A clonal population of B . subtilis cells differentiate into different fates in the same conditions . Here , some cells grow vegetatively or sporulate ( green fluorescence ) , others have completed sporulation ( white ) , and one has differentiated into a state of genetic competence ( red fluorescence ) . Image provided by G . Su¨el . c , Mouse embryonic stem cells show relatively homogeneous expression of Oct4 ( red nuclear protein staining ) , but heterogeneous expression of Nanog ( green nuclear protein staining ) . Image provided by F . Tan . d , The C . elegans skn - 1 mutant shows noise - driven partial penetrance . Two genetically identical embryos are shown . One has developed a gut ( elt - 2 RNA staining , red ) whereas the other has not ( nuclei in blue ) . Image provided by A . Raj . e , Mechanisms that shape noise in gene expression . Noise is characterized by bursty expression of mRNA ( top ) . Proteins typically have longer lifetimes than bursts , leading them to time - average or ‘buffer’ these bursts ( middle ) . Finally , noise in one gene can propagate to generate further noise in the expression of downstream genes ( bottom ) . N u c l ea r C r z 1 N u c l ea r C r z 1 G e n e e x p r e ss i o n G e n e e x p r e ss i o n [ Ca 2 + ] [ Ca 2 + ] AB G e n e e x p r e ss i o n AB AB Crz1P Crz1 Calcineurin Ca 2 + A B a b c d [ C a 2 + ] Time Time Time Protein A produced Protein B produced Uncoordinated Coordinated Target gene responses Nuclear Crz1 Amplitude - modulation regulation Frequency - modulation regulation Figure 2 | Frequency modulation of stochastic nuclear localization bursts enables coordination of gene regulation . a , In yeast , calcium activates calcineurin , which in turn dephosphorylates the phosphorylated form of Crz1 ( Crz1 P ) transcription factor , causing its localization to the nucleus where it activates over 100 target genes ( two are indicated schematically ) . b , Response curves showing expression of the two hypothetical target genes as a function of nuclear Crz1 level . As shown here , target promoters may vary in the effective affinity and sharpness of response to Crz1 . c , d , Regulation of the two target genes in amplitude - modulation and frequency - modulationschemes . c , Inamplitude - modulationregulation , low levels of calcium lead to more expression of B than A , whereas the reverse is true at high levels ( green and blue dots indicate newly produced proteins of genes A and B , note the step in calcium , above ( red ) ) . The resulting gene expression profiles ( normalized to their own maxima ) therefore differ between genes . d , In a frequency - modulation model , each burst yields ( on average ) the same number of proteins from each gene ( blue and green dots ) . Increased calcium levels increase the frequency of bursts and thus the total level of expression of both A and B without affecting their ratio . Gene expression therefore follows the frequency response , regardless of the differences between promoters , enforcing coordination . REVIEWS NATURE j Vol 467 j 9 September 2010 168 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2010 overlapping modes of probabilistic differentiation and begun to elucidate the role that noise has in the underlying gene circuits . These systems can be classified according to their dynamical char - acteristics ( Fig . 3a ) . Stochastic state - switching systems switch between metastable states and are often based on positive feedback loops . Noise - triggered excitable differentiation systems allow cells to probabilistically enter a state , but return to the original state after a defined time . These systems use a combination of positive and nega - tive feedback loops . In procrastinating differentiation systems , indi - vidual cells gradually and variably build up the level of a key regulator to generate a broad distribution of delays before committing to a new , markedly different fate . Stochastic state switching Cells show a rich diversity of stochastic state - switching systems in the context of physiology , development , stress response , cancer and pathogenicity 4 . Theoretical and experimental analysis has shown that random switching between states can be advantageous in un - predictable environments and is optimal when the switching rate is tuned to the typical timescale for environmental fluctuations 29 – 32 . For example , Escherichia coli switch spontaneously in and out of a slow - growing‘persister’stateinwhichtheyareinsensitivetoantibiotics 33 . At thesametime , syntheticbiologyandotherstudieshaveestablishedthat positive feedback loops are sufficient to generate such transitions 34 , 35 . These observationsprovoke the question of how actual state - switching circuits function . Noise can lead to the coexistence of distinct states in positive feed - back systems even without bistability per se . In yeast , a synthetic auto - regulatory transcription factor was recently shown to generate a bimodal distribution of activation levels in a cell population without a significantly nonlinear response function . To et al . showed that bimodality results when the transcription factor is both unstable and produced in a burst - like fashion 36 . The bursts enable spontaneous tran - sitions to the high - expressing state , whereas the instability of the tran - scription factor enables a stochastic return to the low - expressing state . Thus , co - existing states can be generated in a remarkably simple way . Perhaps the most comprehensively analysed bistable system ( see refs 37 and 38 from the 1950s ) is the lactose utilization system , governed by the lac operon , the expression of which is bistable when induced by non - metabolizable lactose analogues such as thio - methylgalactoside ( TMG ) . The lac operon is repressed by tetramers of LacI , which simultaneously bind to two sites in the lac promoter , forming a DNA loop ( Fig . 3b ) . Inducers inhibit LacI binding to DNA , allowing lac operon transcription . Bistability arises from positive feedback : addition of TMG induces the expression of the lac operon including the LacY transporter , leading to higher intracellular TMG concentrations , which result in further induction 39 ( Fig . 3b ) . Examination of lac expression 8 , 11 , 12 has indicated that noise in the ‘off’ state stems from rare lac transcription events ( less than one per cell cycle ) that lead to small bursts of proteins . A recent paper by Choi et al . has re - examined the noise characteristics of lac in the context of state switching from ‘off’ to ‘on’ states 40 . They determined first the threshold of LacY needed to engage the positive feedback . By pre - inducing LacY and letting it dilute out by cell growth before adding inducer , they identified a sharp threshold at , 375 LacY proteins , far above LacY levels in the ‘off’ state . How can these cells ever build up enough LacY to cross the threshold ? The answer lies in the dynamics of the LacI - mediated loops ( Fig . 3b ) . Most of the time , LacI dissoci - ates from at most one site , but quickly reassociates because it remains bound at a neighbouring site , producing brief , basal bursts of expression . Very rarely , however , LacI will dissociate from both operators simultaneously , leading to a much longer burst 41 . When inducer is present , the duration of this large burst is extended further , enabling transition to the ‘on’ state . This example shows clearly that cell - state transitions can depend on rare stochastic events at the level of the promoter . A number of issues remain unclear even in this well - characterized system . For example , how is the ‘off’ state maintained throughout the cell cycle when replication suddenly doubles the number of lac operons ? The issue of promoter state switching and stability is particularly pertinent to eukaryotic cells , where recent work showed that eukar - yotic promoter - switching events may arise from infrequent changes in the position of nucleosomes in the promoter 42 , 43 . Recent work indicates that cancer cells show a stochastic persistence phenotype . Individual cells within clonal populations can spontaneously and reversibly switch to a long - lived , drug - tolerant state 44 . Intriguingly , stochastic switching to persistence depends on histone - modifying enzymes , andthe appearance of persisters can therefore be eliminated by inhibiting these histone modifications . Noise - triggered excitable circuits for transient differentiation Bistablesystemstypicallygenerateanexponentialdistribution ofdura - tions for both states ( Fig . 3a , left ) . But some cell types probabilistically State switching Excitability Time Time Time Procrastination lacY a b Increasing FGF signalling Stochasticdifferentiation Spatial sorting Instructivesignalling Differentiation c f d e Stem cell sub - states Cellfates Nanog Gata6 DAPI Frequentsmall burst Rare large burst Inducer Lac repressor Pump Figure 3 | Probabilistic differentiation . a , Schematic illustrations of three distinct modes of probabilistic differentiation ( top ) and corresponding time traces ( below ) , as indicated . b , Noise in the lac system . Top , schematic view of the lac - positive feedback loop : increased expression of the LacY transporter ( green cylinder ) increases intracellular inducer levels ( light blue circle ) , inhibiting the LacI repressor ( dark blue ) and further increasing expression . Bottom , lacY expression is blocked upon simultaneous binding of LacI to two operator sites on the lac promoter , which forms a DNA loop . Unbinding from one of these sites leads to transcription of at most one mRNA before re - looping , causing small increases in LacY . More rarely , LacI will be completely released from both sites , resulting in a large burst of mRNA and proteins that may lead to a switch of the positive feedback loop . c – f , Probabilistic differentiation in embryonic stem cells . c , Expression of Nanog ( red ) and Gata6 ( green ) in individual cells in the inner cell mass of a mouseembryo . Notethe predominantlyexclusivebutspatiallydisorganized expression of the two genes . DAPI , 4 9 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole . Image adapted with permission from ref . 59 . d , e , Two models for patterning of the inner cell mass ( ICM ) . d , In a positional model cell , fate is determined by position through signalling from neighbouring cells . e , In the stochastic sorting model , cells first differentiate randomly , and subsequently move to appropriatepositionsbasedontheiridentity . f , Stemcellpopulationsarenot homogeneous but rather consist of a dynamic distribution of sub - states ( dim green and red circles ) . Some sub - states resemble the differentiated states to which they are more prone to differentiate ( bright green and red circles ) . NATURE j Vol 467 j 9 September 2010 REVIEWS 169 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2010 initiate transient differentiation episodes that last for a well - defined period of time . The dynamical mechanism of excitability enables such behaviours ( Fig . 3a , middle ) . An excitable system shows a large - amplitude , transientandstereotypeddynamicresponsetoathreshold - crossingperturbation , muchasatoiletgoesthroughaspecificsequence of events ( flush ) in response to a sufficiently large press of its handle . Recently , itwasshownthatdifferentiationintoageneticallycompetent statein Bacillussubtilis fitsthedescriptionofanoise - triggeredexcitable system ( Fig . 1b ) . The master regulator ComK positively autoregulates its own expression , facilitating rapid activation of the system 45 , which leads to downregulation of ComS , an indirect inhibitor of ComK degradation , forming a slow negative feedback loop 46 . Whereas the positive feedback controls the threshold , and thus the frequency of initiation , the negative feedback controls the duration of competence events . Thus , the system enables independent tuning of its two key properties 47 . Recent work has shown how noise affects both the ini - tiation and duration of competence . Noise is required for initiation , as shown recently in two different ways . Su¨el et al . used a global strategy , specifically blocking septation to produce elongated bacterial filaments 47 . Because the absolute number of copies of any molecular species is proportional to the size of the filament , protein fluctuations , but not mean protein concen - trations , are reduced . Maamar et al . specifically increased comK tran - scription and decreased its translation to reduce noise without changing mean expression level 48 . Both methods led to a reduction in the rate of competence initiation with less noise , as predicted by noise - dependent models . These two approaches are complementary : the first ( recently applied in yeast cells 49 ) quantifies the global effects of noise , whereas the second can be used to test candidate noise sources . In addition to allowing probabilistic initiation of competence epi - sodes , noise also increases variability in their duration . A recent paper showed how variability in the duration of competence episodes depends on the architecture of the ComS negative feedback loop 50 . Whereas in the endogenous system ComK represses its own activator ( ComS ) , an alternative negative feedback design can allow ComK to activate its own inhibitor . These two designs , which are similar in the deterministic limit , can behave very differently when one considers noise . In the wild - type system , competence episodes end when ComS levels are very low and subject to relatively large fluctuations , leading to substantial variability in duration . In the alternative system , com - petence episodes end at high levels of the inhibitor , which are rela - tively less susceptible to noise , leading to more uniform durations . Indeed , synthetic circuits of the second type were functional and showed the same mean duration as wild type , but reduced variability . This indicates that variability might be adaptive . What function could such variability provide ? One advantage of variable durations is that they enable cells to take up DNA more efficiently across a broad range of extracellular DNA concentrations . Variability could therefore be advantageous when environmental DNA concentration is unpredictable . Procrastinating differentiation Many terminal differentiation processes show large variability in the time from sensing an initial inducing signal to the final commitment to their new fate . Recent work has analysed several such systems , including the transformation of bacterial cells to spores ( bacterial sporulation ) 51 , 52 , meiosis during yeast sporulation 53 , and , perhaps most irreversibly , the initiation of cell death ( apoptosis ) in mam - malian cells 54 . In each case , individual cells initiate differentiation at widely varying times owing to the variable rate of accumulation of a master regulator before commitment . This variable ‘procrastination’ strategy enables cells to defer commitment for differing lengths of time . It could be advantageous when the environment has a signifi - cant probability of reverting to a condition that no longer favours differentiation . Procrastinating differentiation requires a noisy initiation process with a long correlation time . Two recent papers suggest that this long correlationtimestemsfrompersistentextrinsicvariation . Nachman et al . examined the onset of sporulation in yeast 53 , controlled by the variableaccumulationofthemasterregulatorIme1 . Theyshowedthat the accumulation rate depended on cell size , which shows significant cell - to - cell variability but is constant throughout the initiation pro - cess , resulting in stable differences between cells . Similarly , Spencer et al . used time - lapse microscopy to study temporal variability in the activation of apoptosis 54 . They found that stable differences between cells , specifically in the rate of caspase - mediated activation of the pro - apoptotic protein BID , explained much of this variability . Sister - cell correlations in the timing of apoptosis were increased when protein synthesis was inhibited , indicating that new protein production is necessary to erase these stable correlations . Positive feedback may also extend the correlation time of fluctua - tions , even without bistability . Two cells that start out with different component levels can accumulate master regulators at different rates . For example , positive feedback of the sporulation master - regulator Spo0A on its own rate of accumulation was recently shown to be important for generating variability in sporulation timing 51 . It will be interesting ( but not urgent ) to develop a more comprehensive picture of how timing and variability are regulated together in procrastinated differentiation systems . Probabilistic differentiation in stem cells Through their dual capacity to both self - renew ( proliferate ) and differentiate , stem cells enable regulation of cell type and number during development . It has long been recognized that fate choice can occur in an apparently stochastic fashion 55 . For example , in neural differentiation , only a fraction of cells in an apparently equi - valent population adopt the neural fates 56 . Transforming growth factor b ( TGF - b ) signals were shown to control the size of this frac - tion . Recent work is beginning to indicate a heterogeneous and dynamic picture of the stem cell state , in which cell – cell variability functionally impacts the determination of individual cell fates in response to stimuli . A prime example is found in the early mouse embryo , where the inner cell mass gives rise to distinct epiblast and primitive endoderm lineages . The epiblast develops into embryonic tissues and expresses the pluripotency regulator Nanog , whereas the primitive endoderm produces extraembryonic tissue andexpresses thetranscription factor Gata6 . Before any morphological separation between the two fates , individual cells begin to express only one transcription factor or the other , but not both , in a heterogeneous ‘salt and pepper’ fashion 57 , 58 ( Fig . 3c ) . Intercellular signalling ( through the FGF pathway ) seems to bias the relative frequencies of the two states ( Fig . 3e , bottom ) , but maintains the early binary distinction between them 59 . These and other results have indicated a noise - dependent developmental pat - terning mechanism . Cell fates are initially specified in a stochastic and spatially disorganized manner ( though lineage - biased 60 ) ; subse - quently , cells of the same type ‘sort out’ to generate the correct spatial arrangement ( Fig . 3e ) . This contrasts with more deterministic models in which spatial position or lineage history determines cell fate ( Fig . 3d ) . However , the small number of cells in the inner cell mass provokes a further question : is the stochastic cell - fate - determination process cell autonomous , and therefore subject to binomial fluctua - tions in the number of cells of each fate ? Or , might further feedback loops and a period of reversibility of the two fates 59 enable the embryo toregulatethepercentageofeachcelltype ? Interestingly , similarissues are also being explored in simpler systems , such as fruiting body formation in Dictyostelium discoideum 61 . In vitro , stem cell populations show similar heterogeneity to their in vivo counterparts . For example , in embryonic stem cells , Nanog levels are distributed bimodally 62 , 63 ( Fig . 1c ) . Cells from both high and low Nanog sub - populations self - renew and , under appropriate conditions , differentiate , but with differing propensities ( Fig . 3f ) . REVIEWS NATURE j Vol 467 j 9 September 2010 170 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2010 Cells also slowly switch between sub - states over long timescales 63 , 64 ( , 1 week or more ) . Such dynamics seem to be quite general , as they have been observed in other genes in embryonic stem cells and in other stem cell types , such as haematopoietic progenitors 65 . Moreover , recent work has now identified further sub - states within the embryonic stem cell population that differ not just in gene expression but also in function , making different contributions to embryonic and extraembryonic tissues when introduced into embryos 66 . Together these data indicate a dynamically heterogeneous view of the stem cell ‘state . ’ In the context of probabilistic differentiation during development , slow fluctuations in gene expression levels or between sub - states could help coordinate two related objectives . On short timescales , a signal could induce a response , such as differentiation , in a fraction of otherwise identical cells . On a longer timescale , re - equilibration would maintain a fully responsive stem cell population that could again be fractionally induced . Understanding this and other potential roles for stem cell fluctuations will require comprehensive knowledge of what states and transitions occur within the stem cell type , which proteins are fluctuating and how they work together to affect cell fate decisions . Noise and evolution In addition to its roles in physiology and differentiation , noise can also have an integral role in evolution by expanding the range of phenotypes that can result from a given genotype . This effect can be seen both in the evolution of quantitative phenotypes and in qualitative transitions such as those that occur in the evolution of development . Here we discuss examples of both . First consider a simple quantitative phenotype , such as the level of expression of a gene in a unicellular organism . This phenotype is characterized by both its mean and its noise ( variability between indi - viduals ) , bothofwhicharegeneticallycontrolledandsubjecttoevolu - tionary selection . Fluctuating environments present an obvious selection for increased noise 29 – 31 . But how do noise traits respond to a simple directional selection on gene expression level ? Interestingly , the result depends on the strength of selection . A tight threshold selection leads to increased noise ( as well as increased mean ) in expression ( Fig . 4a , c ) . Incontrast , alowerthreshold , whichstillselects for increased mean expression , selects for lower noise ( Fig . 4b , c ) . Based on these general results , one might expect increased phenotypic noise during periods of adaptation to new environments , followed by reduction in noise when selection becomes stabilizing 67 . Actual results in real organisms could deviate from this idealized modelformanyreasons . Arecentlaboratorystudyexaminedfluorescent protein expression as a phenotype in E . coli 68 . The reporter gene was subjected to rounds of mutagenesis and selection for high expression in individual cells . The authors indeed found increases in mean expression or noise in individual clones under tight selection . Developments in laboratory evolution approaches will be able to elucidate further the relationship between evolutionary selection and noise . Noise in developmental evolution Many mutations cause qualitative changes in development but do so only in a fraction of individuals , even in an isogenic population . For example , recent work showed how mutations in the Caenorhabditis elegans gut - development pathway generated partially penetrant effects owing to noise 69 ( Fig . 1d ) . Partial penetrance has also been observed in isogenic Arabidopsis thaliana mutant populations 70 . The prevalence of such effects provokes the fundamental question of what role noise - dependent partially penetrant mutant phenotypes might have in developmental evolution . To address this question , we recently analysed B . subtilis sporula - tion , arguably one of the simplest developmental systems 71 . Early in sporulation , the cell divides asymmetrically into two compartments . The smaller forespore compartment will develop into a spore with the help of the larger , ‘mother cell’ compartment . Signalling from the forespore to the mother cell is required to initiate mother - cell - spe - cific gene expression . Mutations that attenuate this signal generate a mixture of discrete sporulation morphologies with variable numbers of chromosomes and compartments . ( Extra compartments arise because in the absence of a signal the mother cell divides asymmet - rically again , see Fig . 4d . ) At very low penetrance ( , 1 % ) , cells undergo both a further replication and a further division , and two ‘twin’ forespores successfully develop within a single mother cell ( Fig . 4d ) . Whereas twin sporulation was not previously observed in Bacillus it does appear in some Clostridia species , indicating that it could be adaptive under some conditions 72 . In wild - type cells , the signalling step occurs fast , immediately inhibiting division and replication in the mother cell and thereby 0 WT F i t n e ss 2 a d e f b c Evolutionary time P h e n o t y p i c n o i s e < σ > LooseTight Selection : Quantitative phenotype F r ac t i o n o f ce ll s o r o r g a n i s m s Quantitative phenotype Normal sporulation ( single spore per cell ) Twin sporulation ( two spores per cell ) 100 % normal spores Initial genotype Intermediategenotype Final genotype 100 % twins Partially penetrant mixture C h r o m o s o m e s 2 2 30 2 3 C o m p a r t m e n t s WT X Evolutionary time Loose directionalselection Tight directionalselection < > σ Figure 4 | Rolesofnoiseinevolution . a – c , How genetically controllednoise in a quantitative trait could respond to directional selection . a , Directional selection for values of the trait above a threshold ( black line and arrow ) can lead to reduced noise when the threshold is low . Thus , the noisier distribution ( blueline ) haslessareaabovethethreshold ( cross - hatch ) thana less noisy distribution ( green line , grey shading ) with the same mean . b , By contrast , when selection is tighter , the noisier distribution is favoured , as shown by the larger above - threshold area under the blue distribution compared to the green distribution . c , Over evolutionary timescales , noise ( s , defined as the standard variation of the distribution ) would thus be expectedtoincreaseundertightselectionanddecreaseunderweakselection . In both cases , selection would also increase the mean value of the trait ( not shown ) . d – f , Noise enables the generation of partially penetrant alternative cell fates , which facilitate discrete evolutionary changes . d , Wild - type B . subtilis cells ( top ) contain two chromosomes ( yellow circles ) when they initiate sporulation by an asymmetric division ( red line ) . This event leads to differentiation of the forespore ( smaller compartment ) followed by the mother cell ( larger compartment ) , and eventually results in formation of a single spore ( white circle ) . Mutations can increase the frequency with which cells acquire an extra chromosome ( yellow lightning ) and / or an extra compartment ( red lightning ) . Cells with both characteristics form two mature spores from a single sporulating cell ( twins ) . e , Depending on the number of chromosomes and compartments , single cells show four distinct fates , eachofwhichhasaspecificfitness ( thecornersofthesquare ) , assumed to be proportional to the expected number of spores it will produce . Evolution from mono - spores to twins would be difficult with a single mutation ( curved arrow ) as it would have to affect both septation and replication . However , several mutations affecting the penetrance of extra chromosomes and extra compartments can allow a gradual increase in the mean fitness of the population ( path with multiple arrows ) . WT , wild type . f , This allows a gradual evolutionary transition from a homogenous population of mono - spores , to a partially penetrant intermediate population of multiple fates , to a homogenous population of twin spores . NATURE j Vol 467 j 9 September 2010 REVIEWS 171 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2010 guaranteeing normal sporulation . When signalling is attenuated by the mutation , however , noise enables alternative event sequences and hence alternative phenotypes ( including twins ) in some cells ( Fig . 4d ) . Time - lapse analysis of sporulation in individual mutant cells showed that most of this noise was not variation in the signalling step itself . Evidently other sources of noise , which normally do not affect development , do contribute to fate variability in the mutant . The penetrance of the twin fate can be strongly and deliberately enhanced ( to , 50 % ) by additional mutations that increase the probability of chromosome replication and septation . In conditions that select for twins , evolution to a fully penetrant twin phenotype would require simultaneous changes in several pro - cesses ( for example , replication and division ) , which are individually deleterious or non - advantageous ( Fig . 4e ) . However , owing to partial penetrance , twins can evolve gradually through smaller mutations that progressively increase the penetrance of the twin fate and thereby increase overall fitness ( Fig . 4e , f ) . In fact , this is a plausible evolu - tionary mechanism for twin formation as a distantly related Clostridia species forms twins in a qualitatively similar manner to these B . subtilis mutants , and does so in a partially penetrant manner . Outlook Noise is not merely a quirk of biological systems , but a core part of how they function and evolve 5 . However , critical questions about the function of noise in gene circuits remain unanswered . First , how does noise originate ? Despite our understanding of bursting in bacterial and eukaryotic gene expression , further regula - tory layers could , and probably do , have a big impact . For example , microRNA has a critical role in regulating diverse processes and could substantially alter the noise characteristics of its regulated genes 73 , 74 owing to its direct interaction with mRNA targets and expected burst - like production . Perhaps most importantly , the effect of epigenetic chromatin modifications on the stability and transition rates of promoter - activity states requires further investigation . Second , which systems use noise in physiological processes ? Stochastic burst - modulated regulatory systems could be used quite generally for coordination . For example , membrane potential spikes with regulated frequency ( or duration ) have been shown to be part of the response to glucose in pancreatic b cells 75 . Stochastic bursting could enable coordination at other physiological levels , such as in metabolic networks and hormone regulation of tissues . Improved ability to monitor diverse biochemical reactions in individual living cells should help to identify new burst - modulated or noise - driven systems . Third , a better understanding of probabilistic differentiation pro - cesses will require knowledge of the cellular states and sub - states that occurinseeminglyhomogeneouscelltypes . Single - celltranscriptional profiling 76 , RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization 17 and other tech - niques may be able to provide a broader ‘snapshot’ of cellular states , whereasmorecomprehensiveuseoffluorescentproteinreportersmayprovideinsightintodynamicvariation . In complex systems , such as stem cells , a major challenge is to disentangle the relative effects of noise , intercellular signalling , intracellular regulatory dynamics and chromatin effects to understand both how and why cells switch dynamically among states or sub - states . Last , recent studies are beginning to indicate that the role of noise could extend to the evolutionary level . However , more laboratory evolution experiments and evolution - of - development analyses will be required to address this issue 77 . In some cases , such as the evolu - tion of drug resistance in cancer , the importance of noise in the evolution of new traits must be carefully compared to alternative effects , such as those of micro - environmental niches 78 or genetic heterogeneity . The fundamental principles governing when and how genetic cir - cuits can usefully employ noise are beginning to emerge . As the earlier examples show , the question of how cells and organisms use and control random variation in their own components to grow , develop and evolve goes right to the heart of many fundamental biological problems . We anticipate that future work will continue to reveal unexpected , and essential , roles for noise in diverse bio - logical systems . 1 . Maheshri , N . & O’Shea , E . K . Living with noisy genes : how cells function reliably with inherent variability in gene expression . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 413 – 434 ( 2007 ) . 2 . Raj , A . & van Oudenaarden , A . Nature , nurture , or chance : stochastic gene expression and its consequences . Cell 135 , 216 – 226 ( 2008 ) . 3 . Locke , J . & Elowitz , M . Using movies to analyse gene circuit dynamics in single cells . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 7 , 383 – 392 ( 2009 ) . 4 . Davidson , C . & Surette , M . Individualityinbacteria . Annu . Rev . Genet . 42 , 253 – 268 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Losick , R . & Desplan , C . Stochasticity and cell fate . Science 320 , 65 – 68 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Lestas , I . , Vinnicombe , G . & Paulsson , J . Fundamentallimitsonthesuppressionof molecular fluctuations . Nature doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09333 ( this issue ) . 7 . McAdams , H . H . & Arkin , A . Stochasticmechanismsingeneexpression . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 814 – 819 ( 1997 ) . 8 . Friedman , N . , Cai , L . & Xie , X . Linking stochastic dynamics to population distribution : an analytical framework of gene expression . Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 168302 ( 2006 ) . 9 . Paulsson , J . Summing up the noise in gene networks . Nature 427 , 415 – 418 ( 2004 ) . 10 . Paulsson , J . , Berg , O . & Ehrenberg , M . Stochastic focusing : fluctuation - enhanced sensitivity of intracellular regulation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 7148 ( 2000 ) . 11 . Golding , I . , Paulsson , J . , Zawilski , S . M . & Cox , E . C . Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual bacteria . Cell 123 , 1025 – 1036 ( 2005 ) . 12 . Yu , J . , Xiao , J . , Ren , X . , Lao , K . & Xie , X . S . Probinggeneexpressioninlivecells , one protein molecule at a time . Science 311 , 1600 – 1603 ( 2006 ) . 13 . Cai , L . , Friedman , N . & Xie , X . S . Stochasticproteinexpressioninindividualcellsat the single molecule level . Nature 440 , 358 – 362 ( 2006 ) . 14 . Ozbudak , E . M . , Thattai , M . , Kurtser , I . , Grossman , A . D . & van Oudenaarden , A . Regulation of noise in the expression of a single gene . Nature Genet . 31 , 69 – 73 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Zenklusen , D . , Larson , D . R . & Singer , R . H . Single - RNA counting reveals alternative modes of gene expression in yeast . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1263 – 1271 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Blake , W . J . , KÆrn , M . , Cantor , C . R . & Collins , J . J . Noise in eukaryotic gene expression . Nature 422 , 633 – 637 ( 2003 ) . 17 . Raj , A . , Peskin , C . , Tranchina , D . , Vargas , D . & Tyagi , S . StochasticmRNAsynthesis in mammalian cells . PLoS Biol . 4 , e309 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Pare´ , A . et al . Visualization of individual Scr mRNAs during Drosophila embryogenesis yields evidence for transcriptional bursting . Curr . Biol . 19 , 2037 – 2042 ( 2009 ) . 19 . Dunlop , M . , Cox , R . III , Levine , J . , Murray , R . & Elowitz , M . Regulatory activity revealed by dynamic correlations in gene expression noise . Nature Genet . 40 , 1493 – 1498 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Cox , C . , McCollum , J . , Allen , M . , Dar , R . & Simpson , M . Using noise to probe and characterize gene circuits . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10809 – 10814 ( 2008 ) . 21 . Rosenfeld , N . , Young , J . W . , Alon , U . , Swain , P . S . & Elowitz , M . B . Gene regulation at the single - cell level . Science 307 , 1962 – 1965 ( 2005 ) . 22 . Sigal , A . etal . Variabilityandmemoryofproteinlevelsinhumancells . Nature 444 , 643 – 646 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Elowitz , M . B . , Levine , A . J . , Siggia , E . D . & Swain , P . S . Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 , 1183 – 1186 ( 2002 ) . 24 . Bar - Even , A . et al . Noise in protein expression scales with natural protein abundance . Nature Genet . 38 , 636 – 643 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Newman , J . et al . Single - cell proteomic analysis of S . cerevisiae reveals the architecture of biological noise . Nature 441 , 840 – 846 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Cai , L . , Dalal , C . K . & Elowitz , M . B . Frequency - modulated nuclear localization bursts coordinate gene regulation . Nature 455 , 485 – 490 ( 2008 ) . This paper reports that the yeast calcium - response system uses frequency modulation of stochastic nuclear localization bursts of the Crz1 transcription factor to enable coordination ( proportional expression ) across large regulons . 27 . Cyert , M . Genetic analysis of calmodulin and its targets in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Annu . Rev . Genet . 35 , 647 – 672 ( 2001 ) . 28 . Shankaran , H . et al . Rapid and sustained nuclear – cytoplasmic ERK oscillations induced by epidermal growth factor . Mol . Syst . Biol . 5 , 332 doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2009 . 90 ( 2009 ) . 29 . Thattai , M . & van Oudenaarden , A . Stochastic gene expression in fluctuating environments . Genetics 167 , 523 – 530 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Kussell , E . & Leibler , S . Phenotypicdiversity , populationgrowth , andinformationin fluctuating environments . Science 309 , 2075 – 2078 ( 2005 ) . 31 . Wolf , D . , Vazirani , V . & Arkin , A . Diversity in times of adversity : probabilistic strategies in microbial survival games . J . Theor . Biol . 234 , 227 – 253 ( 2005 ) . 32 . Acar , M . , Mettetal , J . T . & vanOudenaarden , A . Stochasticswitchingasasurvival strategy in fluctuating environments . Nature Genet . 40 , 471 – 475 ( 2008 ) . A synthetic study demonstrating that the rate of stochastic switching between phenotypic states is optimized when it matches the rate of environmental fluctuations . REVIEWS NATURE j Vol 467 j 9 September 2010 172 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2010 33 . Balaban , N . Q . , Merrin , J . , Chait , R . , Kowalik , L . & Leibler , S . Bacterialpersistenceas a phenotypic switch . Science 305 , 1622 – 1625 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Gardner , T . S . , Cantor , C . R . & Collins , J . J . Construction of agenetic toggle switch in Escherichia coli . Nature 403 , 339 – 342 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Kashiwagi , A . , Urabe , I . , Kaneko , K . & Yomo , T . Adaptive response of a gene network to environmental changes by fitness - induced attractor selection . PLoS ONE 1 , e49 ( 2006 ) . 36 . To , T . & Maheshri , N . Noise can induce bimodality in positive transcriptional feedback loops without bistability . Science 327 , 1142 ( 2010 ) . 37 . Novick , A . & Weiner , M . Enzyme induction as an all - or - none phenomenon . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 43 , 553 – 566 ( 1957 ) . 38 . Benzer , S . Induced synthesis of enzymes in bacteria analyzed at the cellular level . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 11 , 383 – 395 ( 1953 ) . 39 . Ozbudak , E . M . , Thattai , M . , Lim , H . N . , Shraiman , B . I . & Van Oudenaarden , A . Multistability in the lactose utilization network of Escherichia coli . Nature 427 , 737 – 740 ( 2004 ) . 40 . Choi , P . J . , Cai , L . , Frieda , K . & Xie , X . S . Astochasticsingle - moleculeeventtriggers phenotype switching of a bacterial cell . Science 322 , 442 – 446 ( 2008 ) . This detailed analysis of stochastic state transitions in the lac operon identified stochasticpromoterstateswitchingastheoriginofphenotypicchangesin E . coli . 41 . Elf , J . , Li , G . W . & Xie , X . S . Probing transcription factor dynamics at the single - molecule level in a living cell . Science 316 , 1191 – 1194 ( 2007 ) . 42 . Boeger , H . , Griesenbeck , J . & Kornberg , R . D . Nucleosome retention and the stochastic nature of promoter chromatin remodeling for transcription . Cell 133 , 716 – 726 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Degenhardt , T . et al . Population - level transcription cycles derive from stochastic timing of single - cell transcription . Cell 138 , 489 – 501 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Sharma , S . et al . A chromatin - mediated reversible drug - tolerant state in cancer cell subpopulations . Cell 141 , 69 – 80 ( 2010 ) . A small sub - population resists drug treatment with no genetic variability . Specific inhibitors eliminate the resistant sub - population while keeping the larger sensitive population . 45 . Maamar , H . & Dubnau , D . Bistability in the Bacillus subtilis K - state ( competence ) system requires a positive feedback loop . Mol . Microbiol . 56 , 615 – 624 ( 2005 ) . 46 . Su¨el , G . M . , Garcia - Ojalvo , J . , Liberman , L . M . & Elowitz , M . B . An excitable gene regulatory circuit induces transient cellular differentiation . Nature 440 , 545 – 550 ( 2006 ) . 47 . Su¨el , G . M . , Kulkarni , R . P . , Dworkin , J . , Garcia - Ojalvo , J . & Elowitz , M . B . Tunability andnoisedependenceindifferentiationdynamics . Science 315 , 1716 – 1719 ( 2007 ) . 48 . Maamar , H . , Raj , A . & Dubnau , D . Noiseingeneexpressiondeterminescellfatein Bacillus subtilis . Science 317 , 526 – 529 ( 2007 ) . By reciprocally perturbing transcription and translation rates , the authors showed that noise in the expression of a master transcription factor directly regulates the frequency of differentiation into the competent state . 49 . Di Talia , S . , Skotheim , J . , Bean , J . , Siggia , E . & Cross , F . The effects of molecular noise and size control on variability in the budding yeast cell cycle . Nature 448 , 947 – 951 ( 2007 ) . 50 . C¸ag˘atay , T . , Turcotte , M . , Elowitz , M . , Garcia - Ojalvo , J . & Su¨el , G . M . Architecture - dependentnoisediscriminatesfunctionallyanalogousdifferentiationcircuits . Cell 139 , 512 – 522 ( 2009 ) . Two seemingly equivalent architectures for the competence transient differentiation system differ principally in their variability , with the wild - type version more sensitive to noise , enhancing the range of environments in which the system can function . 51 . Veening , J . W . et al . Bet - hedging and epigenetic inheritance in bacterial cell development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 4393 – 4398 ( 2008 ) . 52 . Fujita , M . & Losick , R . Evidence that entry into sporulation in Bacillus subtilis is governed by a gradual increase in the level and activity of the master regulator Spo0A . Genes Dev . 19 , 2236 – 2244 ( 2005 ) . 53 . Nachman , I . , Regev , A . & Ramanathan , S . Dissecting timing variability in yeast meiosis . Cell 131 , 544 – 556 ( 2007 ) . 54 . Spencer , S . L . , Gaudet , S . , Albeck , J . G . , Burke , J . M . & Sorger , P . K . Non - genetic origins of cell - to - cell variability in TRAIL - induced apoptosis . Nature 459 , 428 – 432 ( 2009 ) . 55 . Suda , T . , Suda , J . & Ogawa , M . Single - cell origin of mouse hemopoietic colonies expressing multiple lineages in variable combinations . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 6689 ( 1983 ) . 56 . Shah , N . , Groves , A . & Anderson , D . Alternative neural crest cell fates are instructively promoted by TGF b superfamily members . Cell 85 , 331 – 343 ( 1996 ) . 57 . Chazaud , C . , Yamanaka , Y . , Pawson , T . & Rossant , J . Early lineage segregation between epiblast and primitive endoderm in mouse blastocysts through the Grb2 - MAPK pathway . Dev . Cell 10 , 615 – 624 ( 2006 ) . 58 . Dietrich , J . E . & Hiiragi , T . Stochastic patterning in the mouse pre - implantation embryo . Development 134 , 4219 – 4231 ( 2007 ) . 59 . Yamanaka , Y . , Lanner , F . & Rossant , J . FGF signal - dependent segregation of primitive endoderm and epiblast in the mouse blastocyst . Development 137 , 715 – 724 ( 2010 ) . 60 . Morris , S . A . et al . Origin and formation of the first two distinct cell types of the inner cell mass in the mouse embryo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 6364 – 6369 ( 2010 ) . The above two references show that differentiation in the early mouse embryo seems to occur through a stochastic process with a lineage bias , supporting the stochastic sorting model of patterning . 61 . Kay , R . R . & Thompson , C . R . L . Forming patterns in development without morphogen gradients : scattered differentiation and sorting out . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 , doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a001503 ( 2009 ) . 62 . Singh , A . M . , Hamazaki , T . , Hankowski , K . E . & Terada , N . A heterogeneous expression pattern for Nanog in embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 25 , 2534 – 2542 ( 2007 ) . 63 . Chambers , I . et al . Nanog safeguards pluripotency and mediates germline development . Nature 450 , 1230 – 1234 ( 2007 ) . 64 . Kalmar , T . et al . Regulated fluctuations in nanog expression mediate cell fate decisions in embryonic stem cells . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000149 ( 2009 ) . 65 . Chang , H . , Hemberg , M . , Barahona , M . , Ingber , D . & Huang , S . Transcriptome - wide noise controls lineage choice in mammalian progenitor cells . Nature 453 , 544 ( 2008 ) . 66 . Canham , M . A . , Sharov , A . A . , Ko , M . S . H . & Brickman , J . M . Functional heterogeneity of embryonic stem cells revealed through translational amplification of an early endodermal transcript . PLoS Biol . 8 , e1000379 ( 2010 ) . 67 . Hill , W . & Zhang , X . Effects on phenotypic variability of directional selection arising through genetic differences in residual variability . Genet . Res . 83 , 121 – 132 ( 2004 ) . 68 . Ito , Y . , Toyota , H . , Kaneko , K . & Yomo , T . How selection affects phenotypic fluctuation . Mol . Syst . Biol . 5 , doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2009 . 23 ( 2009 ) . 69 . Raj , A . , Rifkin , S . , Andersen , E . & van Oudenaarden , A . Variability in gene expression underlies incomplete penetrance . Nature 463 , 913 – 918 ( 2010 ) . 70 . Queitsch , C . , Sangster , T . A . & Lindquist , S . Hsp90 as a capacitor of phenotypic variation . Nature 417 , 618 – 624 ( 2002 ) . 71 . Eldar , A . et al . Partial penetrance facilitates developmental evolution in bacteria . Nature 460 , 510 – 514 ( 2009 ) . Single - cell analysis of a bacterial developmental pathway reveals how new morphologies can be produced at low penetrance and then stabilized by additional mutations , providing a gradual pathway for discrete evolutionary transitions . 72 . Angert , E . R . Alternatives to binary fission in bacteria . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 3 , 214 – 224 ( 2005 ) . 73 . Mehta , P . , Goyal , S . & Wingreen , N . A quantitative comparison of sRNA - based and protein - based gene regulation . Mol . Syst . Biol . 4 , doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2008 . 58 ( 2008 ) . 74 . Levine , E . , Zhang , Z . , Kuhlman , T . & Hwa , T . Quantitative characteristics of gene regulation by small RNA . PLoS Biol . 5 , e229 ( 2007 ) . 75 . Valdeolmillos , M . , Gomis , A . & Sanchez - Andres , J . Invivo synchronousmembrane potential oscillations in mouse pancreatic b - cells : lack of co - ordination between islets . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) 493 , 9 – 15 ( 1996 ) . 76 . Tang , F . et al . mRNA - Seq whole - transcriptome analysis of a single cell . Nature Methods 6 , 377 – 382 ( 2009 ) . 77 . Beaumont , H . , Gallie , J . , Kost , C . , Ferguson , G . & Rainey , P . Experimentalevolution of bet hedging . Nature 462 , 90 – 93 ( 2009 ) . 78 . Snijder , B . et al . Population context determines cell - to - cell variability in endocytosis and virus infection . Nature 461 , 520 – 523 ( 2009 ) . Acknowledgements We thank G . Su¨el , A . Raj , F . Tan and J . Rossant for providing images . We thank N . Wingreen , D . J . Anderson , R . Kishony , J . - G . Ojalvo , G . Su¨el , H . Y . KuehandmembersoftheElowitzlaboratoryfordiscussions . WorkinM . B . E . ’s laboratory was supported by NIH grants R01GM079771 , P50 GM068763 , NSF CAREER Award 0644463 and the Packard Foundation . A . E . was supported by EMBO , the International Human Frontier Science Organization and a Baxter fellowship . Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of this article at www . nature . com / nature . Correspondence should be addressed to M . E . ( melowitz @ caltech . edu ) . NATURE j Vol 467 j 9 September 2010 REVIEWS 173 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ©2010