Content Prototyping – An Approach for Engaging Non - Technical Users in Participatory Design Abstract . Many in the developing world have little to no experience with computers - they have never used software as part of their daily lives and jobs , so there is always a challenge for how this class of users can be engaged in Par - ticipatory Design in a manner that the value of their participation is not limited by their computing experience . This paper looks at previous work that ad - dressed this challenge , and introduces an approach called content prototyping , which is an adaptation of existing practices to fit the needs of non - technical us - ers . We also discuss the lessons learned from using this approach , and give rec - ommendations for related projects in the developing world . Keywords : HCI4D , Prototyping , Low - Literacy 1 Introduction One of the goals in designing new technology for use in developing countries is to design such that the technology integrates into existing cultural structures and com - munity ecosystems , and it is only through the guidance of people belonging to the particular cultural groups that this can be achieved , as they have the best understand - ing of the context in which the technology would be used [ 8 ] . This guidance can be achieved by involving prospective users in the design process through participatory design [ 15 ] . However , for users to be in a position to make such a contribution , they need to fully understand what the new technology is capable of , and be able to visual - ize how it may integrate into their daily lives . These questions arise , therefore : how can we co - design new technologies with us - ers who have little to no technology experience ? What methods can be used to con - duct participatory design in such a manner that users’ limited technology exposure does not become a hindrance to their ability to contribute to the design process ? This paper explores answers to these questions through lessons drawn from previ - ous work in the field of HCI for Development ( HCI4D ) , and introduces an approach termed ‘Content Prototyping’ , wherein we recommend that designers seek to develop prototypes that fit their users’ current realm of understanding and experience , instead of typical prototypes which inexperienced users may have difficulty conceptualising . The core of our proposed method of increasing user participation is asking the ques - tion : what representation of the design concept can inexperienced users relate to ? 2 User Centered Design User Centred Design ( UCD ) is a broad methodology based on focusing on the user from the beginning to the end of the design process , ensuring that the needs , wants , and limitations of users are given extensive attention throughout the design process [ 1 ] . In UCD , users are kept at the centre of the design process , and have a direct influ - ence on how design takes shape [ 1 ] . One form of UCD that has gained strong ac - ceptance over the years is Participatory Design ( PD ) [ 1 , 12 ] , which permits joint de - sign between the designer and the user , essentially making users co - designers . However , the success of PD is based upon the assumption that users have experi - ence with digital technology [ 9 ] , and can appreciate what the technology can do for them . This is hardly the case for most developing world users [ 3 , 5 ] . Because of their limited exposure to technology , such users would not be able to contribute to the de - sign process as they would have limited understanding of how the technology can integrate into their daily lives and jobs , much as they would not have enough compu - ting experience against which to judge what is good or bad technology [ 10 ] . In classical PD , prototyping is used to elicit user input on design ideas , where users are presented with prototypes of differing fidelity , and their feedback is used to in - form design and motivate refinement of design ideas [ 6 ] . Normally , users would be started off with low - fidelity prototypes such as paper prototypes , where design ideas are represented on paper ( typically paper - based simulation of user interface elements [ 8 ] ) . However , previous research in the developing world has revealed that users with low computer proficiency levels have difficulty interacting with low - fidelity proto - types because : it’s difficult for them to conceptualise prototypes and abstract design concepts , e . g . , associating paper sketches with software [ 9 ] , so they mostly misinter - pret and misunderstand design abstractions [ 11 ] , and they also tend to then comment on the prototype , not the design concept being presented [ 10 ] . This means that PD techniques must be refined to be appropriate to the ( computer ) literacy and experience of prospective users , so as to encourage their interest in the process and increase the value of their participation . 3 Related Work Different approaches that have been used to encourage participation of non - experienced users in design are discussed below , which are the works based on whose guidance we developed the idea of content prototyping . 3 . 1 Simple Technology Artifacts with Instant Utility According to Ramachandran et al . [ 14 ] , one way of getting users with little expo - sure to technology involved in the design process is by introducing simple technology artifacts whose capability is immediately obvious , and presenting these to the users at an early stage in the design process . This approach helps stimulate dialog between the users and the designers within the users’ context , and gives a platform for users to easily contribute their local knowledge and expertise to the design process in a man - ner that they wouldn’t if a typical low or high fidelity prototype were used [ 10 ] . So the introduction of simple technology artifacts with immediately obvious capability in early stages of design works better than the introduction of low fidelity prototypes at the same stage . 3 . 2 Scenarios of Use “Scenarios give detailed realistic examples of how users may carry out their tasks in a specified context with the future system . The primary aim of scenar - io building is to provide examples of future use as an aid to understanding and clarifying user requirements and to provide a basis for later usability testing” [ 13 ] . When users are presented with usage scenarios that relate to their current work or daily life , it becomes possible for them to envisage the use of the technology in their existing structures , and hence they are able to participate in the design process . 3 . 3 Progressive Design : Increasing Participation Through Experience Maunder et al . [ 10 ] and Kam et al . [ 7 ] recommend progressively improving the user’s technology experience to get them ready to participate in the design process . The designers would engage with the users in their natural work environment , developing the users to a point where they are comfortable with basic technology , while also building supportive structures within their environment to get them to a suitable level where they will be able to participate in the design process . The authors indicate that this approach ( termed Progressive Design [ 4 ] ) “would ensure the progression and development of the users’ knowledge base and skill set , thereby enabling the user to better understand the technology , the benefits it offers and how to utilize it effective - ly… . the result is an empowered , confident , motivated user that is able to actively participate in every phase of the design process , ” [ 10 ] . 4 Context and Stakeholders In developing countries , the shortage of health facilities and qualified health profes - sionals is supplemented by employing Community Health Workers ( CHWs ) , who operate within different rural villages . CHWs are trained by nursing sisters and other public health professionals who are based in the rural health centers , but the primary challenge to their training process is that CHWs are illiterate , and cannot consume textual content . Our goal was to assist this training process by introducing a local content creation model wherein the trainers would create non - textual digital content for the CHWs . We worked together with health centers in Lesotho and Sierra Leone . To understand the CHWs’ training context we conducted interviews , user observa - tion , and contextual inquiry . These were followed by persona definition ( of trainers and CHWs ) , task analysis and the design of the local content creation model . In the content creation model , there would be a computer application developed , which would be used by trainers to create non - textual content for CHWs ( using images and recorded voice ) , and the content would be shared to CHWs via Bluetooth when they visited the health center for their monthly training sessions . Our study of the user space and context revealed to us that most trainers have low computer proficiency skills , mostly acquainted with basic office applications and web browsers , and all the CHWs involved in the project had never used a computer before , but all of them owned mobile phones . 5 Methodology A deep understanding of the users led us to rethink the classical prototyping ap - proach we had initially planned to use . The classical approach would be to start de - signing a technology ( software ) that implements the content creation model , starting with low fidelity prototypes , and then go back to the trainers and CHWs with the low fidelity prototypes for them to give us feedback on the design . However , at this stage , we were unsure whether the trainers understood what the introduction of a new tech - nology could mean for them , and how they could integrate it into their daily work . We needed to communicate the possibility of integrating a technology into the training process in a manner that they would understand and relate to [ 10 ] . Additionally , we had already established that CHWs are major role players in the flow of health infor - mation from the health trainers , via themselves , and on to the communities they serve . Therefore , we also decided that it would be important to involve them in the design process , to give them a say on the content that they would not only consume , but also distribute . Input from the CHWs would be especially valuable from a local cultural perspective . A low fidelity prototype of a computer application ( even a fully devel - oped software prototype ) would not make sense to a village woman ( a CHW ) who had never used a computer before , and was never going to interact with the software , only the content produced . 5 . 1 The ‘Content Prototype’ Approach We decided to postpone designing an application and introduced what we term a “content prototype” to mimic the concept of “a simple technology artifact with in - stant utility” [ 14 ] , to develop the trainers’ and CHWs’ mentality to the possibility of using technology in training [ 4 , 7 , 10 ] , as well as to present them with usage scenarios for digital content in their existing training process [ 13 ] . To achieve this , we would present sample content to the users , the kind that would be produced in the content creation model we had designed , and use this content as a platform to start the conversation around the idea of digital training content and the process of creating it . We envisaged that both health trainers and CHWs would relate better to digital version of the content they already knew , than a paper prototype of an application whose use they may not clearly understand . With sample content presented first , we believed that introducing software later on would make sense to them ( the trainers especially ) as “a tool that creates the useful content we saw earlier” . Moreover , based on the work of Ramachandran et al . [ 14 ] , the expectation from this early stage prototyping using the “simple technology artifact with instant utility , ” the content prototype in our case , is that we would be able to attract the users’ interests in the technology ( in this case being the digital content produced for consumption on mobile phones ) , expose local attitudes towards the technology , elicit design ideas for subsequent stages in the design process , stimulate dialog between the users and the designers within the users’ context , and to give a platform for users to easily contribute their local knowledge and expertise to the de - sign process . 5 . 2 How Does Content Prototyping Compare to Other PD Approaches ? Content Prototyping is based on recommendations from other designers who have used PD in developing world projects , but centers on the question : what representa - tion of the design concept can users relate to the best ? In this case digital samples of existing content would be the best representation of the idea of digitizing available content into multimedia formats . 5 . 3 Creating The Content Prototype We revisited the content used in training ( image books , flash cards , posters ) and translated some of it into sample digital content ( mock - up multimedia content ) , re - sembling the kind that the trainers would produce according to the content creation model we were proposing . We extracted some of the images on the posters and image books and used them to create sample content in the form of “mobile multimedia” or “mobile videos” . Most posters and image books are made of a few images accompanied by a line of text that describes the concept represented , as in Figure 1 . Per concept , we placed an image on a separate slide , then recorded the descriptive line in voice - over in the local language ; then saved the overall presentation as a PowerPoint show . This meant that when the trainer opened the PowerPoint show , they would see , in full screen per slide , an image showing with voice - over playing . On the slides , we framed the images with a mobile phone in a person’s hand to demonstrate that the videos ( series of images with voice over ) would play on mobile phones , as shown in Figure 1 . 5 . 4 Introducing The Content Prototype When the content prototypes had been created , we introduced them to the trainers and CHWs . We first held a meeting with the health trainers , where we made an intro - duction and then started playing the samples that were created . Additionally , the day after meeting the trainers , we held a focus group meeting with 20 CHWs to present them with the sample content . We did not make the introduction of the content in this meeting , but the chief nurse at the health center did , explaining to them what the con - tent meant ( which showed that she had understood it clearly from the meeting we held the previous day ) . She explained the concept in the simplest terms , and got the CHWs excited even before seeing the content . After the briefing and the playback of the content , we got into a discussion facilitated by one of the junior nurses at the health centre . Figure 1 - Left : A page from an image book . Right : Four PowerPoint slides , showing a mock - up video made from the image book . Descriptive voice was recorded over each slide 5 . 5 Feedback from The Content Prototype The results of our ‘early - stage prototyping’ by the use of our content prototypes are compliant with those reported by Ramachandran et al . [ 14 ] . The sample content helped to ground our interactions with the users ( both trainers and CHWs ) , and started a conversation about the possible use of mobile digital content , how it would be used , CHWs’ familiarity with mobile technology , etc . Seeing the mock - up multimedia ver - sion of their already existing content gave the health trainers an idea of what digital content could do for them . The mock - up content enabled them to express to us what is most important to them , and gave them an opportunity to ask more questions and express their concerns . Beyond this , we , the researchers , also gained more clarity and insight from their comments for the next stages in the design process . Feedback from The Trainers : The first opportunity spotted by the chief trainer from Lesotho was that through mobile digital content , CHWs would be able to retain information more . She recalled that on several occasions , they would give instructions to the CHWs on what to do for patients in the villages , and the CHWs would get the procedures wrong due to forgetfulness . Beyond training , she also saw the potential of the mobile digital content helping them give elaborate instructions to CHWs . While on the subject of getting procedures right , she suggested that it would be useful if the content produced would include moving pictures , i . e . videos clips . She indicated that sometimes they would wish to demonstrate a procedure to the CHWs , e . g . , how to inject a patient . Her overall opinion was that the use of digital content would make their work easier . The chief trainer went on to say that they would be happy to use such content because of its clarity and simplicity – two aspects they seek to ensure in the materials they give to their CHWs . Apart from seeing the potential borne in the use of multimedia content , she also expressed an interest in being able to create or modify the digital content . She emphasized that for their CHWs , it would be best if the voice recordings were in the local language spoken by the CHWs . We informed her that we would provide software that allows them ( the trainers ) to create such digi - tal content on their own , at which her primary concern was how easy the software would be to use . Feedback from Community Health Workers : When asked for their opinions on the introduction of digital content , the CHWs’ main comment was that the content would be useful only when the voice is recorded in the local language ( Sesotho in Lesotho ) . They indicated that if the content is in Sesotho , they could use it to counsel their patients . CHWs also saw the opportunity to have medical information with them at all times , seeing that the content “in their pocket” ( meaning their phones ) , could make it easy to refer to the content in cases of emergency . Lastly , the CHWs believed that having phones that contained health information would elevate their status in their communities , so they were looking forward to having them . Evidence of A Two Layered User Base : The trainers saw the potential to dissem - inate information and instructions to the CHWs more effectively , while the CHWs saw the potential to do their jobs in the community more effectively , and the platform to share content in their communities . This revealed to us that our two sets of users have , to a certain extent , different goals and perceptions , and that our design should embrace these differences . The content prototype enabled this revelation . 6 Discussion The centre of content prototyping as a method is identifying an understandable arti - fact , which users can relate to , and use it to guide participatory design exercises . In our case this was sample digital content . When designing for users of low computer proficiency , our experience and that of other researchers is that low - fidelity proto - types can be problematic , as the users cannot relate to them and may not immediately see what fully functional software could do for them or how it may integrate into their daily work [ 10 ] . In our case , the trainers of CHWs do understand the content commu - nicated to their trainees more than they do software , so we chose to use samples of digital content to elicit their needs , interests and concerns . Seeing the content proto - types , the trainers were able to visualize how digital content could assist their existing processes , and even expressed interest in creating such content themselves . This manner of content prototyping also helped engage the CHWs in the early stages of the design process ; an opportunity they would not have had if our first proto - type were a software prototype , or a low - or high - fidelity prototype of a computer application . The CHWs were able to contribute to early discussions and played a role in influencing the decisions made in the design . Later on in the project , the CHWs’ feeling of involvement in the project also encouraged their adoption , appropriation , and ownership of the digital content , as also observed by other researchers , e . g . , [ 2 ] . 7 Conclusion Maunder et al . [ 10 ] discussed the challenges of using techniques like paper prototyp - ing with people who have limited technology experience , and along with Ramachan - dran et al . [ 14 ] , recommend the use of simple technology artifacts with instant utility , introduced early in the design process to expose users to the technology and to elicit requirements and contextual issues from the users’ interaction with the technology artifact . Other researchers recommend depicting technology usage scenarios to devel - op ideas around the use of the technology in everyday life , while other recommenda - tions involve progressively preparing the user for participation in the design process by exposing them to technology bit by bit . We adopted all these recommendations in our design , but instead of introducing a technology , we introduced “content prototypes , ” which were a representation of the output that a computer application would produce . This was identified as a representa - tion of the design idea that our users would relate to the best . We learned from this that our two layers of users ( content creators - the trainers , and CHWs - content con - sumers / distributors ) were able to participate in the design process as they could relate to the content prototype . We make a further recommendation therefore , alongside those made by other re - searchers whose work guided this approach , that where a technology being designed will produce a certain product , it is beneficial to deploy content ( or output ) prototypes and design the way back from output to output - producing software . References 1 . Abras , C . , Maloney - Krichmar , D . , and Preece , J . User - Centered Design . Berkshire Encyclopedia of Human - Computer Interaction , 2004 , 753 – 767 . 2 . Anokwa , Y . , Smyth , T . , Ramachandran , D . , et al . Stories from the Field : Re - flections on HCI4D Experience . Information Technologies & International Development 5 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 101 – 115 . 3 . Blake , E . and Tucker , W . Socially Aware Software Engineering for the De - veloping World . IST - Africa 2006 , ( 2006 ) . 4 . Chin , G . and Rosson , M . B . Progressive design . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’98 , ACM Press ( 1998 ) , 611 – 618 . 5 . Gitau , S . , Diga , K . , Bidwell , N . , and Marsden , G . Beyond being a Proxy Us - er : A look at NGOs ‘ Potential Role in ICT4D Deployment . Proceedings of the 4th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Information and Communica - tion Technologies and Development - ICTD ’10 , ( 2012 ) . 6 . Jones , M . and Marsden , G . Mobile interaction design . John Wiley and Sons , 2006 . 7 . Kam , M . , Ramachandran , D . , Raghavan , A . , Chiu , J . , Sahni , U . , and Canny , J . Practical considerations for participatory design with rural school children in underdeveloped regions . Proceeding of the 2006 conference on Interaction design and children - IDC ’06 , ACM Press ( 2006 ) , 25 . 8 . Maguire , M . Methods to support human - centred design . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 55 , 4 ( 2001 ) , 587 – 634 . 9 . Marsden , G . , Maunder , A . , and Parker , M . People are people , but technology is not technology . Philosophical transactions . Series A , Mathematical , physi - cal , and engineering sciences 366 , 1881 ( 2008 ) , 3795 – 804 . 10 . Maunder , A . , Marsden , G . , Gruijters , D . , and Blake , E . Designing interactive systems for the developing world - reflections on user - centred design . 2007 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development , IEEE ( 2007 ) , 1 – 8 . 11 . Medhi , I . , Sagar , A . , and Toyama , K . Text - Free User Interfaces for Illiterate and Semiliterate Users . Information Technologies and International Devel - opment 4 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 37 – 50 . 12 . Nielsen , J . and Bødker , M . Collaborating with users . Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Australian Computer - Human Interaction Special Interest Group on Design : Open 24 / 7 - OZCHI ’09 , ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 325 . 13 . Nielsen , J . Paper versus computer implementations as mock up scenarios for heuristic evaluation . Human - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT ’90 ) , ( 1991 ) , 10 . 14 . Ramachandran , D . , Kam , M . , Chiu , J . , Canny , J . , and Frankel , J . F . Social dynamics of early stage co - design in developing regions . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’07 , ACM Press ( 2007 ) , 1087 . 15 . Winschiers , H . The Challenges of Participatory Design in a Intercultural Con - text : Designing for Usability in Namibia . PDC - 06 Proceedings of the Partici - patory Design Conference , ( 2006 ) , 73 – 76 .