Carriers Break Barriers in Drug Delivery : Endocytosis and Endosomal Escape of Gene Delivery Vectors Published as part of the Accounts of Chemical Research special issue “ Nanomedicine and Beyond ” . Isabelle M . S . Degors , † Cuifeng Wang , ‡ Zia Ur Rehman , § and Inge S . Zuhorn * , † † Department of Biomedical Engineering , University Medical Center Groningen , University of Groningen , A . Deusinglaan 1 , 9713 AV Groningen , The Netherlands ‡ School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New Drug Design and Evaluation , Sun Yat - sen University , Guangzhou 510006 , P . R . China § Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering , Kohat University of Sciences and Technology ( KUST ) , Kohat 26000 , Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , Pakistan CONSPECTUS : Over the past decades , major e ﬀ orts were undertaken to develop devices on a nanoscale level for the e ﬃ cient and nontoxic delivery of molecules to tissues and cells , for the purpose of either diagnosis or treatment of disease . The application of such devices in drug delivery has proven to be bene ﬁ cial for matters as diverse as drug solubility , drug targeting , controlled drug release , and transport of drugs across cellular barriers . Multiple nanotherapeutics have been approved for clinical treatment , and more products are being evaluated in preclinical and clinical trials . However , many biological barriers hinder the medical application of nanocarriers . There are two main classes of barriers that need to be overcome by drug nanocarriers : extracellular and intracellular barriers , both of which may capture and / or destroy therapeutics before they reach their target site . This Account discusses major biological barriers that are confronted by nanotherapeutics , following their systemic administration , focusing on cellular entry and endosomal escape of gene delivery vectors . The use of pH - responsive materials to overcome the endosomal barrier is addressed . Historically , cell biologists have studied the interaction between cells and pathogens in order to unveil the mechanisms of endocytosis and cell signaling . Meanwhile , it is becoming clear that cells may respond in similar ways to arti ﬁ cial drug delivery systems and , consequently , that knowledge on the cellular response against both pathogens and nanoparticulate systems will aid in the design of improved nanomedicine . A close collaboration between bioengineers and cell biologists will promote this development . At the same time , we have come to realize that tools that we use to study fundamental cellular processes , including metabolic inhibitors of endocytosis and overexpression / downregulation of proteins , may cause changes in cellular physiology . This calls for the implementation of re ﬁ ned methods to study nanocarrier − cell interactions , as is discussed in this Account . Finally , recent papers on the dynamics of cargo release from endosomes by means of live cell imaging have signi ﬁ cantly advanced our understanding of the transfection process . They have initiated discussion ( among others ) on the limited number of endosomal escape events in transfection , and on the endosomal stage at which genetic cargo is most e ﬃ ciently released . Advancements in imaging techniques , including super - resolution microscopy , in concert with techniques to label endogenous proteins and / or label proteins with synthetic ﬂ uorophores , will contribute to a more detailed understanding of nanocarrier - cell dynamics , which is imperative for the development of safe and e ﬃ cient nanomedicine . 1 . INTRODUCTION Overcoming biological barriers remains a major challenge in the e ﬀ ective delivery of therapeutic agents to diseased sites . Indeed , such barriers exist in the process of accomplishing an appropriate biodistribution , but also in cellular uptake and intracellular routing . Approaches to overcome these barriers have received signi ﬁ cant attention over the past decades . Among others , advances in nanotechnology have improved the delivery of therapeutics via nanosized carriers to desired tissues and cells . In the ﬁ eld of gene delivery , nanoparticles have been translated to the clinic as a promising platform . However , most of the nanocarriers , belonging to the class of nonviral vectors , are still primarily in a developing , preclinical stage because of their relative delivery ine ﬃ ciency , when compared to viral vectors . 1 , 2 Apart from being confronted with various extracellular hurdles , additional barriers arise for nanocarriers when they encounter the target cells . E ﬀ ective internalization Received : April 10 , 2019 Article pubs . acs . org / accounts Cite This : Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX © XXXX American Chemical Society A DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX This is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non - Commercial No Derivative Works ( CC - BY - NC - ND ) Attribution License , which permits copying and redistribution of the article , and creation of adaptations , all for non - commercial purposes . D o w n l o a d e d by 109 . 94 . 173 . 100 a t 13 : 45 : 50 : 921 on J un e 25 , 201 9 fr o m h tt p s : / / pub s . ac s . o r g / do i / 10 . 1021 / ac s . acc oun t s . 9b00177 . and subsequent release of their cargo , requiring translocation across endosomal and / or nuclear membranes , constitute an additional parameter in determining therapeutic e ﬃ ciency , and hence , potential clinical impact . Therefore , special properties are required for nanocarriers to cope with refractory extra - and intracellular conditions , both in vivo and in vitro , which also include issues of ( transient ) stability and low cytotoxicity . A better understanding of nanocarrier − cell interactions will help to increase the e ﬃ cacy , safety , and clinical translation of nanocarriers . 2 . CELLULAR UPTAKE OF GENE DELIVERY VECTORS Gene delivery with nonviral vectors , including lipoplexes and polyplexes , still su ﬀ ers from limited e ﬃ ciency compared to viral gene delivery . To optimize nonviral gene delivery , a detailed understanding of the mechanisms through which the genetic cargo is delivered into a cell is vital . In 1995 , Wrobel and Collins showed that lipoplexes , i . e . , complexes between cationic lipids and nucleic acids , do not fuse with the plasma membrane of cells to deliver their genetic cargo into the cytoplasm , but become internalized via the process of endocytosis . 3 In order to achieve a therapeutic e ﬀ ect , the nucleic acids need to reach the desired cell compartment , i . e . , the nucleus for DNA or the cytosol for RNA . As a result , the endosomal membrane constitutes a barrier for the release of genetic cargo from endocytosed gene vectors into the cytosol ( Figure 1 ) . 2 . 1 . Endocytosis of Gene Delivery Vectors Typically , endocytosis is subdivided in pinocytosis and phagocytosis , where pinocytosis includes clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , caveolae - mediated endocytosis , ﬂ uid phase endocytosis , and macropinocytosis . How these di ﬀ erent pathways are regulated is largely unclear , and is dependent on cell type and cell state . 4 By the use of biochemical and genetic approaches to inhibit endocytosis , and monitoring simultaneously clathrin - mediated endocytosis of transferrin , Zuhorn et al . showed that CME is the major entry pathway for SAINT - 2 / DOPE lipoplexes in COS - 7 cells . 5 This was the ﬁ rst report in which a speci ﬁ c type of endocytosis , namely , CME , was linked to productive transfection with lipoplexes . Later , branched PEI ( BPEI ) polyplexes were shown to enter HeLa cells via multiple Figure 1 . Endocytosis of gene delivery particles . ( 1 ) Binding of gene delivery particles to the cell surface , through electrostatic interactions between the positively charged particles and the negatively charged cell surface and / or ligand − receptor interaction , results in their endocytosis . ( 2 ) Interaction of the particles with the endosome causes destabilization of the particles and the endosomal membrane . ( 3 ) Genetic cargo that has dissociated from the particle is released into the cytosol through the endosomal membrane destabilization . Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX B endocytic pathways , including CME , macropinocytosis , and caveolae . 6 − 8 ( Nontargeted ) lipoplexes and polyplexes have been shown to bind to cells via adhesion receptors , including integrins and syndecans . 9 − 12 To improve delivery to speci ﬁ c cell types , functionalization of the nanoparticle surface with ligands that target cell - speci ﬁ c receptors is successfully used in vitro as well as in vivo . 13 − 16 2 . 2 . Re ﬁ ned Methods to Study Endocytosis Chemical inhibitors of endocytosis are widely used to study the involvement of speci ﬁ c uptake routes . They act quickly , and their action is often reversible . However , chemical inhibitors of endocytosis almost never completely nor speci ﬁ cally block one endocytic pathway , and may induce cellular toxicity . 17 For example , Pitstop 2 , a clathrin inhibitor , was shown to also inhibit clathrin - independent endocytosis . 18 Therefore , the e ﬀ ect of an endocytosis inhibitor on the uptake of a speci ﬁ c nanocarrier should be compared to its e ﬀ ect on the uptake of reference substances . 19 , 20 Also , colocalization of a nanocarrier with reference substances may be helpful in determining its route of entry . Transferrin is a bona ﬁ de cargo for the clathrin - mediated endocytosis pathway . However , the possibility of direct binding of transferrin to the nanoparticle under investigation , which could result in false - positive colocalization , should be excluded . In addition , one should take into account the di ﬀ erence in kinetics between transferrin and nanocarrier uptake . Typically , transferrin uptake reaches near maximum levels after 10 min of incubation , 21 while nanoparticles ( ∼ 100 nm ) reach maximum uptake after several hours . Importantly , colocalization of nanoparticles with clathrin , especially after prolonged incubation times , is not a proof for the involvement of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , because clathrin is also involved in the pinching o ﬀ of vesicles from sorting endosomes , i . e . , in the further processing of endosomes that occurs after the internalization event at the plasma membrane . Cholera toxin B is often used as a marker cargo for caveolar endocytosis , but can also be internalized via routes that do not involve caveolae . 22 , 23 Since caveolae seem to be instrumental in the uptake of excess glycosphingolipids , the glycosphingolipid lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) may be a better marker for caveolar endocytosis . 24 Next to the use of marker cargoes for speci ﬁ c routes of endocytosis , colocalization studies by means of overexpression of ﬂ uorescent fusion proteins of key endocytic regulators or immunostaining for these regulators can be helpful in determining routes of uptake for nanocarriers . In addition , downregulation of endocytic proteins and overexpression of dominant negative forms is being used to pinpoint the involvement of speci ﬁ c routes of uptake . However , over - expression of wildtype and dominant negative forms of proteins , by means of plasmid constructs that are typically under the control of strong promotors such as the CMV promotor , may cause artifacts . 25 , 26 For example , overexpression of caveolin - GFP may result in its accumulation in endolyso - somes without prior localization in caveolae , which has been mistaken for localization in caveolae - positive endosomes . 27 The CRISPR / Cas9 genome editing technique allows for the expression of genes under the control of their natural promotor , preventing cellular defects that may occur due to protein overexpression . Shvets et al . used CRIPSR / Cas9 to generate double genome - edited cells , expressing caveolin1 - GFP and cavin 1 - mCherry . 28 Because both caveolin and cavin proteins are needed to form caveolae , the combined presence of caveolin and cavin in vesicles , reveals the presence of intact caveolar vesicles . The ﬂ uorescent tagging of endogenous endocytic proteins by means of CRISPR / Cas9 permits the visualization of endocytosis under physiological conditions . However , this method is limited to genetically encoded ﬂ uorophores , i . e . , ﬂ uorescent proteins . This may be disadvanta - geous because a “ bulky ” ﬂ uorescent tag may hinder interactions of the ﬂ uorescently tagged protein with cellular components , thereby disturbing its physiological function . In order to label intracellular proteins with ( smaller ) synthetic ﬂ uorophores , cells can be genetically encoded with SNAP - tag , and - subsequently - be incubated with membrane - permeable benzylguanine - ﬂ uorophores , leading to the for - mation of a covalent bond between the SNAP - tag and the benzylguanine - ﬂ uorophore . 29 Introduction of a disul ﬁ de bond in between the benzylguanine group and the ﬂ uorophore gives the possibility to cleave the ﬂ uorophore from the protein by means of a reducing agent . A cell - impermeable reducing agent can then be used to cleave the label that is present extracellularly , permitting speci ﬁ c labeling of the intracellular pool of SNAP - tagged protein . Bitsikas et al . used a GPI - anchored SNAP - tag construct to detect internalized GPI - AP with very high e ﬃ ciency and low background . 30 Moreover , spectroscopic properties of synthetic ﬂ uorophores are often better than that of ﬂ uorescent proteins , which is especially important for applications in live cell imaging . In the same work , Bitsikas et al . used biotinylation of the entire pool of plasma membrane proteins to de ﬁ ne all primary endocytic vesicles . They showed that ∼ 95 % of endocytic vesicles originated from clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Moreover , they showed that CME is the main pathway for uptake of GPI - anchored proteins , which is commonly believed to occur via the CLIC / GEEC pathway . 31 Inhibition of CME , through overexpression of C - terminal AP180 ( AP180 / C ) or dominant - negative dynamin ( K44A ) , led to a reduction in uptake of the GPI - anchored protein CD59 . Strikingly , in cells overexpressing an AP2 mutant de ﬁ cient in binding the transferrin receptor , transferrin uptake was signi ﬁ cantly reduced , whereas the uptake of CD59 was signi ﬁ cantly increased . Since GPI - anchored proteins lack the cytosolic domains that are typically recognized by adaptor proteins to recruit receptors to coated pits in receptor - mediated endocytosis , they reasoned that GPI - APs are normally excluded from coated pits by steric crowding e ﬀ ects . These data suggest that elimination of adaptor protein - mediated recruitment of receptors to coated pits alleviates the steric exclusion of GPI - anchored proteins . Thus , perturbations of coated pit formation may have a more severe impact on high a ﬃ nity proteins , such as the transferrin receptor , than low a ﬃ nity proteins , such as CD59 . 30 Taking into account the perturbations of physiological processes that may be induced by the commonly used methods to study endocytosis , a thorough ( re ) investigation of the cellular tra ﬃ cking pathways of gene delivery vectors by means of the aforementioned re ﬁ ned methods , including the execution of proper controls , is warranted . Paradoxically , transfection of cells ( by means of gene delivery vectors ) is a method that is widely used in the study of endocytosis , and may cause signi ﬁ cant ( temporary ) changes in endocytic processes . For example , transfection of cells with PEI polyplexes was shown to cause a reduction in the number of early endosomes . 32 Moreover , transfection with both lip - oplexes and polyplexes has been linked to the induction of autophagy . 33 Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX C 3 . INTRACELLULAR PROCESSING OF GENE DELIVERY DEVICES The processing of endosomes within the various uptake pathways di ﬀ ers and may consequently in ﬂ uence opportunities for endosomal escape and release of cargo into the cytoplasm , as mediated by gene vectors . Especially , because the mechanisms of endosomal escape di ﬀ er between di ﬀ erent types of gene vectors . For instance , the endosomal escape of lipoplexes involves lipid mixing between cationic lipids in the lipoplex with anionic lipids in the endosomal membrane , and is pH - independent . 34 On the contrary , the endosomal escape of polyplexes , i . e . , complexes between cationic protonatable polymers and nucleic acids , is dependent on endosomal acidi ﬁ cation . Speci ﬁ cally , the endosomal escape of polyplexes has been suggested to result from their H + bu ﬀ ering capacity resulting in enhanced Cl - accumulation within the endosome and eventually osmotic lysis of the endosomal membrane ( proton sponge e ﬀ ect ) . 35 While branched PEI ( BPEI ) polyplexes were shown to enter HeLa cells via CME , macropinocytosis , and caveolae , only the uptake of polyplexes via caveolae resulted in productive transfection . 8 Transfection by polyplexes via a pH neutral caveolar pathway would not be supportive for the fact that polyplex - mediated endosomal escape of genetic cargo is dependent on endosomal acid - Figure 2 . Endosomal escape mediated by gene delivery particles . ( A ) In lipoplex - mediated gene delivery , ODN ( green ) release from multiple endosomes results in gradual accumulation of ODNs in the nucleus . ( B ) In polyplex - mediated gene delivery , a burst release of the genetic cargo from typically only one or two endosomes per cell , with a complete discharge of the nucleic acid content from the endosome into the cytosol , results in instantaneous accumulation of ODNs in the nucleus . ( A , B ) Graphs show the ﬂ uorescence intensity of particles , cytoplasm and nucleus over time . Adapted with permission from ref 49 . Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society . ( C ) Glycoplexes ( green ) are initially present in early and late endosomes ( red ) . They are released intact in the cytosol where they disassemble . Adapted with permission from ref 57 . Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society . Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX D i ﬁ cation , i . e . , the proton sponge theory . However , it has been shown that endosomes from distinct endocytic pathways may merge , which would allow for acidi ﬁ cation of vesicles originally derived from caveolae . 36 Remarkably , when polyplex - containing endosomes in the CME pathway were halted , by means of PKA inhibition , at a stage between early and late endosomes , they contributed to the overall transfection . 8 Speci ﬁ cally , localization of BPEI polyplexes in transferrin − / rab9 − / LAMP1 − endosomal com - partments resulted in e ﬀ ective endosomal escape of genetic cargo . 8 Probably , polyplex - mediated endosomal swelling and / or polyplex dissociation within the CME pathway is too slow to induce endosomal escape prior to polyplex accumulation in degradative lysosomal compartments . Therefore , “ freezing ” the endosomal processing , by means of PKA inhibition , at a prelysosomal stage broadens the window of opportunity for release of genetic cargo from polyplex - containing endosomes within the CME pathway , thereby enhancing transfection e ﬃ ciency . A similar intracellular compartment , i . e . , maturing endosomes , was found as the site for endosomal escape of Figure 3 . Old and new model for cationic lipid - mediated endosomal escape of genetic cargo . The fusion pore model ( left column ) proposes that nucleic acid release into cytosol occurs through fusion of the lipoplex with the endosome membrane , initiated by ﬂ ip - ﬂ op of anionic PS lipids from the outer lea ﬂ et of the endosome to the inner lea ﬂ et . The transient pore model ( right column ) proposes that nucleic acid release into cytosol occurs via transient pores in the endosome membrane . LBPA in the inner lea ﬂ et of the endosome membrane may play a role in membrane permeabilization . Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX E siRNA in lipoplex - and LNP - mediated delivery . 37 , 38 Appa - rently , irrespective of the di ﬀ erent mechanisms that are involved in endosomal escape mediated by lipoplexes and polyplexes , the compartment that allows for their e ﬀ ective escape seems to be the same , which may suggest a common denominator in the two seemingly distinct mechanisms . The coformulation of drugs that halt gene vectors at a “ release - prone ” endosomal stage may be useful in the development of improved gene delivery vectors . Likewise , osmotic lysis of endosomes , for example via nigericin - mediated K + / H + exchange , 39 may facilitate endosomal escape . 4 . ENDOSOMAL ESCAPE OF GENE DELIVERY DEVICES 4 . 1 . Lipoplex - Mediated Endosomal Escape In the early days of nonviral gene delivery research , structure − function - activity relationships were primarily found by determining the physicochemical characteristics of lipoplexes and correlating those with transfection performance . 40 − 43 Major insight in the mechanism of lipoplex - mediated trans - fection was given by the investigation of lipid conformation by small - angle X - ray scattering ( SAXS ) . Koltover et al . showed that an inverted hexagonal phase of lipoplexes , as opposed to a lamellar phase , stimulated DNA release from lipoplexes upon their incubation with anionic vesicles , which served as a mimic of the endosomal membrane . 44 They proposed a correlation between nonlamellar lipid organization in lipoplexes with transfection e ﬃ ciency . The correlation between a nonbilayer phase of the lipoplex and its high transfection activity is still being reported in literature , 45 , 46 but does not seem to be a general ﬁ nding . For example , Tassler et al . found that lysine - based amino - functionalized lipids , that varied in their chain length and ( un ) saturation , formed cubic or lamellar lipoplexes . The lamellar lipoplexes were the most e ﬃ cient in trans - fection . 47 Logically , for e ﬃ cient transfection , a lipoplex should induce nonbilayer phase structures upon interaction with anionic lipids at the endosome membrane but does not need to be in a nonbilayer conformation by itself . Indeed , Zuhorn et al . reported a correlation between the nonlamellar lipid phase of lipoplexes after incubation with anionic vesicles , and high in vitro transfection e ﬃ ciency . This was supported by an e ﬃ cient endosomal escape of genetic cargo , as measured by the nuclear accumulation of oligonucleotides ( ODNs ) in cells . 48 Overall , it is important to con ﬁ rm the endosomolytic potential of nanocarriers , as determined by certain biophysical and / or structural characteristics , using cell - based assays to quantify the endosomal escape of nucleic acids . Recently , by taking a live cell imaging approach to determine the intracellular processing of nonviral gene vectors , an important breakthrough in elucidation of the endosomal escape of nucleic acids was achieved . Speci ﬁ cally , incubation of HeLa cells with Lipofectamine2000 lipoplexes , comprising ﬂ uorescently labeled lipids and nucleic acid cargo ( ODNs ) , revealed ODN release from multiple endosomes resulting in a gradual accumulation of ODNs in the nucleus ( Figure 2A ) . 49 Release of genetic cargo from endosomes into the cytosol was suggested to occur via transient pores ( Figure 3 ; right column ) , 49 and not through fusion of the lipoplex with the endosome membrane ( Figure 3 ; left column ) . 34 Using a similar live cell imaging approach , Wittrup et al . showed the release of siRNA from endosomes in lipoplex - and LNP - mediated delivery . They observed between one and ﬁ ve release events per cell over several hours , with an incomplete release of genetic cargo from endosomes . 37 The identi ﬁ cation of a release - prone endocytic compart - ment , as discussed above , has initiated discussion on the involvement of a speci ﬁ c class of anionic lipids in mediating endosomal escape . Durymanov and Reineke questioned why lipoplexes release their genetic payload from maturing endosomes , 50 because the anionic phosphatidyl serine ( PS ) lipid content in maturing endosomes is less than in early endosomes , 51 while anionic PS at the cytoplasmic lea ﬂ et of the endosome has been held responsible for inducing endosomal escape ( Figure 3 ; left column ) . 34 They suggest that LBPA at the limiting membrane of multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) is the mostly likely candidate for inducing endosomal release of genetic cargo ( Figure 3 ; right column ) . To our knowledge , no studies have ( yet ) been undertaken to investigate the lipid compositions of endosomes from di ﬀ erent endocytic pathways and / or at di ﬀ erent stages of maturation in relation to delivery e ﬃ ciency by speci ﬁ c carrier systems . Recent advances in mass spectrometry for lipidomics make it feasible to embark on such studies . 4 . 2 . Polyplex - Mediated Endosomal Escape Polyplexes are considered to escape from endosomes through the proton sponge e ﬀ ect , an osmotically induced swelling of the endosome , triggered by the proton bu ﬀ ering capacity of the polyplexes , which results in rupturing of the endosomal membrane . 35 However , increasing evidence indicates that the proton sponge e ﬀ ect is not the only reason for polyplex - mediated endosomal escape of genetic cargo . Although PEGylation is a useful strategy to prolong the circulation time of nanoparticles in vivo by avoiding their rapid capture and clearance by undesired tissues and cells , such as macrophages , it also compromises endosomal release , known as the “ PEG dilemma ” . It has been well documented that the use of polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) in order to create long - circulating nanoparticles , inhibits the endosomal escape of lipoplexes as well as polyplexes . 52 − 55 For lipoplexes this is expected as a hydrophilic PEG layer will prevent the intimate contact between lipoplex and endosome membrane , that is required for lipid mixing and , consequently , endosomal escape . However , PEGylation of polyplexes is not expected to in ﬂ uence the proton bu ﬀ ering capacity of the polymers . Therefore , since PEG prevents endosomal escape of polyplexes , it seems reasonable to suggest that in addition to the proton sponge e ﬀ ect an intimate contact between polymers and the endosomal membrane is required for endosomal destabilization and nucleic acid release into the cytosol . Indeed , protonation of polymers will - next to endosome swelling - also cause polymer swelling due to electrostatic repulsion between the protonated polymers . These protonated polymers will show enhanced electrostatic interaction with the endosomal membrane . Coarse - grained molecular dynamics simulations showed that adsorption of polymers to a membrane under tension , as induced by osmotic swelling and the increase in polymer size , may lower the critical stress that disrupts the membrane . 56 Therefore , cooperation of osmotic pressure and local membrane permeation by ( expanded ) polymer chains likely is responsible for e ﬃ cient endosomal rupture . By means of live cell imaging on a spinning disk confocal microscope , Rehman et al . showed the involvement of an endosomal burst in polyplex - mediated delivery of nucleic acids , Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX F providing direct evidence for osmotic rupture of endosomes through the so - called proton sponge e ﬀ ect . 49 Speci ﬁ cally , incubation of cells with LPEI polyplexes , comprising ﬂ uorescently labeled polymers and ODNs , presented a burst release of the genetic cargo from typically only one or two endosomes per cell , with a complete discharge of the nucleic acid content from the endosome into the cytosol ( Figure 2B ) . Interestingly , a seemingly vectorial release of genetic cargo from a polyplex - containing endosome was observed , hinting to the involvement of local destabilization of the endosomal membrane . 49 On the contrary , by means of super - resolution imaging ( STORM ) of ﬁ xed cells , intact cationic glycogen - siRNA complexes ( glycoplexes ) were shown to be released from endosomes , while glycoplex disassembly occurred in the cytosol ( Figure 2C ) . 57 Because glycoplexes behave as rigid globular spheres , association of glycogen chains with the endosomal membrane likely is prevented . It was therefore concluded that endosome rupture by glycoplexes is exclusively determined by endosome swelling , i . e . , without a role for permeation of the endosomal membrane by expanded polymers . 57 Whether local destabilization of the endosome membrane by positively charged ( expanded ) polymer ( chains ) facilitates the endosomal rupture induced by polyplexes remains unclear , and may be dependent on cell type , carrier type , and / or type of cargo . The combination of super resolution microscopy with live cell imaging will provide exciting opportunities to study nanocarrier − cell interactions , which is expected to give even more detailed information on the dynamics of endocytosis and cargo release from endo - somes . 58 5 . STIMULI - RESPONSIVE MATERIALS FOR NANOCARRIER STABILITY IN CIRCULATION AND CONTROLLED RELEASE OF CARGO AT THE TARGET SITE Over the past decades , numerous nanoparticle platforms have been investigated for drug delivery , including liposomes , polymeric nanoparticles , dendrimers , and inorganic / semi - inorganic nanoparticles . Although these materials ( mostly polymers and lipids ) account for > 80 % of the therapeutic nanoparticles that are in clinical use , there now is a tendency to develop stimuli - responsive nanoparticle platforms that are sensitive to speci ﬁ c signals and that may contribute to site - speci ﬁ c drug delivery . 59 Exogenous stimuli - responsive drug delivery systems respond to noninvasive physical triggers , including light , heat , ultrasound , and magnetic ﬁ eld , while Figure 4 . Stimuli - responsive nanomaterials for gene delivery . ( A ) Nanocarrier coated with PEG via an acid - or reduction - labile linker . Removal of the PEG coating occurs at acidic pH ( in endosome ) or in a reducing environment ( in endosome ? , cytosol , nucleus ) , respectively . 61 , 63 , 73 ( B ) Polyplex with pH - sensitive PEI . Low molecular weight PEI chains are linked via acid - labile bonds . Upon acidi ﬁ cation ( in endosome ) , the cross - linker is degraded . This approach combines the advantages of high molecular weight PEI ( high transfection e ﬃ cacy ) and low molecular weight PEI ( low cytotoxicity ) . 62 ( C ) Ionizable lipid . At acidic pH , the lipids are positively charged , inducing electrostatic interaction with negatively charged nucleic acids . At physiological pH , the lipid − nucleic acid complex has a near - neutral charge , promoting long blood circulation time . At acidic pH ( in endosome ) , the lipids become positively charged and destabilize the endosomal membrane , leading to the release of nucleic acids in the cytosol . 64 − 67 ( D ) pH - Responsive thermogelling polymer . The polymer is water - soluble at 4 ° C and forms a solid gel at 37 ° C , at physiological pH . Encapsulation of nucleic acids occurs at the sol − gel transition . At acidic pH ( in endosome ) , the pH - sensitive moiety ( red ) is protonated and the gel solubilizes , releasing its cargo . 69 ( E ) pH - Responsive block copolymer . The copolymer consists of a hydrophilic pH - insensitive polymer ( green ) and a polymer that is hydrophobic at neutral pH , whereas it becomes protonated and turns hydrophilic at a low pH ( pH < p K a ) . 71 Block copolymers are loaded with nucleic acids through a pH switch method . At endosomal pH , the copolymer turns hydrophilic , which will lead to complex dissociation . 70 − 72 Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX G endogenous stimuli - responsive systems respond to speci ﬁ c biochemical conditions , such as a change in pH , redox state , or the presence of speci ﬁ c enzymes . 60 Distinct enveloped viruses that enter cells via endocytosis , exploit this pathway by a required pH - dependent change in one of the viral proteins ( such as hemagglutinin ( HA ) protein of the in ﬂ uenza virus ) that facilitates fusion between the viral envelope and the endosomal membrane , thereby causing endosomal escape of the viral RNA and / or DNA . Inspired by this strategy , a concept for applying pH - sensitive nanoparticles has been proposed , involving nanoparticles that are stable at physio - logical pH , but dissociate at mild acidic pH . For example , pH - sensitive nanocarriers can be prepared from lipids or polymers that contain acid - labile bonds that trigger particle dissociation and drug release upon a decrease in pH ( Figure 4 A , B ) . 61 − 63 Such a decrease in pH occurs , e . g . , in the interstitial ﬂ uid of tumors or within endosomes upon endosomal maturation . The use of acid - labile nanocarrier components may provide a potential solution for the “ PEG dilemma ” , i . e . , the prolongation of blood circulation time of gene vectors upon their pegylation that goes at the expense of their endosomal escape capacity . Chan et al . recently reported that PEGylated cationic liposomes containing a new acid - labile PEG - lipid were able to destabilize the endosomal membrane and induce e ﬃ cient transfection . 63 5 . 1 . Ionizable Lipids in Lipid Nanoparticle ( LNP ) Systems for Gene Delivery Recent development of lipids and polymers that display pH - induced structural changes aim for the generation of nanocarriers that are stable in the blood circulation thanks to their ( near ) neutral charge at physiological pH , for in vivo gene delivery purposes . A low pH - induced membrane - destabilizing activity provides those carriers with the necessary endo - somolytic activity to release their genetic cargo into the cytoplasm . Cullis and co - workers developed lipid nanoparticles ( LNPs ) with ionizable aminolipids , e . g . , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - 3 - dimethylammonium propane ( DODAP ) and heptatriaconta - 6 , 9 , 28 , 31 - tetraen - 19 - yl 4 - ( dimethylamino ) butanoate ( DLin - MC3 - DMA ) , that change to a cationic form under acidic conditions . 64 , 65 At acidic pH the aminolipids e ﬀ ectively complex ( negatively charged ) nucleic acids ( DNA , RNA ) . When , after complex formation , the pH is neutralized ( ∼ pH 7 ) , the complexes exhibit a near - neutral surface charge , which prolongs their blood circulation time . Due to endosomal acidi ﬁ cation during the endocytic processing of the complexes , the aminolipids again become cationic ( Figure 4C ) . Close proximity between the LNP and the endosomal membrane allows for lipid mixing and the formation of ion pairs between the cationic lipids and anionic lipids within the endosome , which induces inverted nonbilayer conformations that exert a membrane - destabilizing e ﬀ ect . This will result in the release of the genetic cargo into the cytoplasm . Although the ionizable lipids DLin - KC2 - DMA and DLin - KC4 - DMA showed com - parable p K a values , and bilayer - to - hexagonal H II transition temperatures ( T BH ) when mixed with anionic lipids , they showed a > 30 - fold di ﬀ erence in in vivo transfection activity . 66 In this study , the T BH was determined by di ﬀ erential scanning calorimetry of a suspension of ionizable lipids premixed with the anionic lipid DSPS . However , premixing of cationic ( ionizable ) lipids and anionic lipids may not properly re ﬂ ect the situation in cells where the cationic lipids ﬁ rst need to gain access to the LNP − endosomal membrane interface . This property is likely in ﬂ uenced by the length and ﬂ exibility of the spacer between the charged lipid headgroup and the lipid tails , as DLin - KC2 - DMA and DLin - KC4 - DMA only di ﬀ er in spacer group . 66 As previously mentioned , cell - based assays to quantify the endosomal escape of genetic cargo are important to con ﬁ rm the endosomolytic potential of nanocarriers , as determined by physicochemical analyses , and are instrumental in screening gene delivery vectors for transfection activity . Recently , Sato et al . synthesized a new pH - sensitive cationic lipid YSK05 that was incorporated in LNPs for gene silencing . With their LNP formulation , that required prior complexation of siRNA with protamine for e ﬃ cient loading with siRNA , they achieved in vitro ( in HeLa cells ) and in vivo ( by direct tumor injection ) siRNA - mediated gene silencing . 67 Likewise , pH - sensitive amino lipids have been successfully employed for DNA delivery . 68 5 . 2 . pH - Sensitive Block Copolymers for Gene Delivery Next to pH - sensitive lipids , pH - sensitive block copolymers are investigated for drug delivery purposes . Recently , block copolymers with poly ( N , N ′ - diethylaminoethyl methacrylate ) ( PDEAEM ) were prepared to increase the hydrophilicity of the polymer and improve drug loading . These block copolymers formed hydrogels at body temperature , and drug release from these gels was in ﬂ uenced by the environmental pH ( Figure 4D ) . 69 The diblock copolymer poly ( 2 - methacry - loyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine ) - b - poly ( 2 - ( diisopropylamino ) - ethyl methacrylate ) ( PMPC - PDPA ) was successfully employed for siRNA delivery . 70 PDPA has a p K a of 6 . 4 . It is hydrophobic at neutral pH , whereas it becomes protonated and turns hydrophilic at a pH < 6 . 4 . 71 Similar to LNPs containing ionizable aminolipids , PMPC - PDPA block copolymers could be loaded with siRNA at acidic pH . It is postulated that after their uptake by cells , the polymers become hydrophilic at endosomal pH , which will lead to complex dissociation ( Figure 4E ) . This will lead to release of the genetic cargo , and at the same time generate osmotic stress within the endosomes , that in turn will lead to endosomal rupture and release of the genetic cargo in the cytoplasm . However , inclusion of the pore forming drug amphotericin B was required to obtain e ﬀ ective endosomal escape of siRNA when using another PDPA block copolymer for delivery , i . e . , poly ( 2 - ( dimethylamino ) ethyl methacrylate PDMA − PDPA , 72 indicating that here PDPA - generated osmotic stress was not su ﬃ cient for inducing endosomal disruption . Alternatively , dual responsive systems that combine , e . g . , pH - and redox - responsiveness may improve endosomal destabilization . Zhu et al . made a pH / redox dual - responsive mPEG − PLA - PHis - ssOEI polyplex . 73 The structure change of this polyplex at low pH led to exposure of the redox cleavable disul ﬁ de bridges , promoting complex dissociation and endosome membrane destabilization . Of note , the N / P ratio turned out to be an important determinant for complex dissociation , because at high N / P ratio ( 10 ) enhanced nucleic acid binding due to protonation at low pH , counteracted the complex dissociation induced by the hydrophobic − hydrophilic switch of the polymer . 73 6 . CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES The exact parameters that would determine and / or predict the quality of a perfect drug / gene nanocarrier , ready for clinical use , remain largely enigmatic and di ﬃ cult to de ﬁ ne . Clearly , issues of concern are stability , high - e ﬃ ciency , low - cytotoxicity , large payload , potency of production scale - up , economics , etc . Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX H Even though major e ﬀ orts have been undertaken over the past decades to develop nanoscale materials for the delivery of ( therapeutic ) molecules , for disease diagnosis and treatment , the outcome has not yet met the expectations . As an example , of nonviral vectors only a few modi ﬁ ed lipid - and polymer - based nanocarriers have entered the clinical trial phase , while viral vectors constitute approximately 70 % of the clinical trials . 1 , 2 Though safety concerns partly restrict the application , low e ﬃ ciency seems a major limitation for nonviral vectors so far . Many in vitro well - evaluated nonviral vectors fail to cross the biological barriers in vivo , therefore resulting in low e ﬃ ciency . Improvement of physical - chemical and biological activity of nonviral vectors is therefore still urgently needed . In nature , several pathogens and secreted toxins use speci ﬁ c strategies for crossing extracellular and intracellular biological barriers in order to enter host cells . The molecular mechanisms that are involved in the host cell invasion by pathogens have inspired the development of biomimetic nanocarriers for drug delivery . Various studies have estimated that optimized surface modi ﬁ cation with pathogen - derived molecules improves selective delivery in the biological system . The development of biomimetic nanocarriers for drug / gene delivery is a rapidly emerging ﬁ eld , which exploits advantages of molecular mechanism used by pathogens . However , this concept is still in progress , and whether safety poses a risk in copying these strategies requires further studies . An increase in knowledge on how pathogens control host cell signaling and invasion , and advances in the synthesis of novel material may hold a promising and bright future for nanotechnology , especially the development of stimuli - responsive materials such as a sensitivity toward pH , temperature , redox , or magnetic ﬁ eld . These innovative materials should lead to a new ﬁ eld of site - speci ﬁ c and / or programmable drug delivery . The use of new tools for the exploration of nanocarrier − cell interactions in vitro and in vivo , including re ﬁ ned methods to study endocytosis , and advances in ﬂ uorescence labeling strategies and high resolution microscopy techniques will be particularly helpful in moving the nanomedicine ﬁ eld forward . ■ AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author * E - mail : i . zuhorn @ umcg . nl . ORCID Cuifeng Wang : 0000 - 0003 - 4198 - 909X Inge S . Zuhorn : 0000 - 0002 - 7695 - 915X Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . Biographies Isabelle M . S . Degors is a PhD student in Dr . Inge Zuhorn ’ s group at the University Medical Center Groningen . She studies mechanisms of nonviral gene delivery , focusing on the endosomal escape of genetic cargo and the subsequent cellular responses . Cuifeng Wang did her PhD in the lab of Dr . Inge Zuhorn on pathogen - inspired gene delivery systems , being a recipient of a Chinese Research Council ( CSC ) fellowship . Her current work at the School of Pharmaceutical Sciences at Sun Yat - Sen University ( Guangzhou , China ) in the lab of Prof . Min Feng focuses on the development of drug delivery systems for cancer therapy . Zia ur Rehman did his PhD in the lab of Dr . Inge Zuhorn on the interaction between gene vectors and mammalian cells , exploiting live cell imaging . He currently is assistant professor at Kohat University of Sciences and Technology in Pakistan . Inge S . Zuhorn is an associate professor at the department of Biomedical Engineering at the University Medical Center Groningen in The Netherlands . Her research focuses on nanoparticle − cell interactions in nonviral gene delivery and targeted drug delivery across the blood - brain barrier . ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I . S . Z . and I . M . S . D . are supported by the Dutch Technology Foundation TTW , which is part of The Netherlands Organisation for Scienti ﬁ c Research ( NWO ) , and which is partly funded by the Ministry of Economic A ﬀ airs . ■ REFERENCES ( 1 ) Yin , H . ; Kanasty , R . L . ; Eltoukhy , A . A . ; Vegas , A . J . ; Dorkin , J . R . ; Anderson , D . G . Non - Viral Vectors for Gene - Based Therapy . Nat . Rev . Genet . 2014 , 15 ( 8 ) , 541 − 555 . ( 2 ) Ginn , S . L . ; Amaya , A . K . ; Alexander , I . E . ; Edelstein , M . ; Abedi , M . R . Gene Therapy Clinical Trials Worldwide to 2017 : An Update . J . Gene Med . 2018 , 20 ( 5 ) , e3015 . ( 3 ) Wrobel , I . ; Collins , D . Fusion of Cationic Liposomes with Mammalian Cells Occurs after Endocytosis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta , Biomembr . 1995 , 1235 ( 2 ) , 296 − 304 . ( 4 ) Liberali , P . ; Ra ̈ mo ̈ , P . ; Pelkmans , L . Protein Kinases : Starting a Molecular Systems View of Endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 2008 , 24 ( 1 ) , 501 − 523 . ( 5 ) Zuhorn , I . S . ; Kalicharan , R . ; Hoekstra , D . Lipoplex - Mediated Transfection of Mammalian Cells Occurs through the Cholesterol - Dependent Clathrin - Mediated Pathway of Endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 2002 , 277 ( 20 ) , 18021 − 18028 . ( 6 ) Rejman , J . ; Bragonzi , A . ; Conese , M . Role of Clathrin - and Caveolae - Mediated Endocytosis in Gene Transfer Mediated by Lipo - and Polyplexes . Mol . Ther . 2005 , 12 ( 3 ) , 468 − 474 . ( 7 ) von Gersdorff , K . ; Sanders , N . N . ; Vandenbroucke , R . ; De Smedt , S . C . ; Wagner , E . ; Ogris , M . The Internalization Route Resulting in Successful Gene Expression Depends on Both Cell Line and Polyethylenimine Polyplex Type . Mol . Ther . 2006 , 14 ( 5 ) , 745 − 753 . ( 8 ) Rehman , Z . ur ; Hoekstra , D . ; Zuhorn , I . S . Protein Kinase A Inhibition Modulates the Intracellular Routing of Gene Delivery Vehicles in HeLa Cells , Leading to Productive Transfection . J . Controlled Release 2011 , 156 ( 1 ) , 76 − 84 . ( 9 ) Zuhorn , I . S . ; Kalicharan , D . ; Robillard , G . T . ; Hoekstra , D . Adhesion Receptors Mediate Efficient Non - Viral Gene Delivery . Mol . Ther . 2007 , 15 ( 5 ) , 946 − 953 . ( 10 ) Kopatz , I . ; Remy , J . S . ; Behr , J . P . A Model for Non - Viral Gene Delivery : Through Syndecan Adhesion Molecules and Powered by Actin . J . Gene Med . 2004 , 6 ( 7 ) , 769 − 776 . ( 11 ) Ruponen , M . ; Ro ̈ nkko ̈ , S . ; Honkakoski , P . ; Pelkonen , J . ; Tammi , M . ; Urtti , A . Extracellular Glycosaminoglycans Modify Cellular Trafficking of Lipoplexes and Polyplexes . J . Biol . Chem . 2001 , 276 ( 36 ) , 33875 − 33880 . ( 12 ) Rehman , Z . ur ; Sjollema , K . A . ; Kuipers , J . ; Hoekstra , D . ; Zuhorn , I . S . Nonviral Gene Delivery Vectors Use Syndecan - Dependent Transport Mechanisms in Filopodia To Reach the Cell Surface . ACS Nano 2012 , 6 ( 8 ) , 7521 − 7532 . ( 13 ) Zhang , J . ; Du , Z . ; Pan , S . ; Shi , M . ; Li , J . ; Yang , C . ; Hu , H . ; Qiao , M . ; Chen , D . ; Zhao , X . Overcoming Multidrug Resistance by Codelivery of MDR1 - Targeting SiRNA and Doxorubicin Using EphA10 - Mediated PH - Sensitive Lipoplexes : In Vitro and In Vivo Evaluation . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2018 , 10 ( 25 ) , 21590 − 21600 . ( 14 ) Durymanov , M . O . ; Beletkaia , E . A . ; Ulasov , A . V . ; Khramtsov , Y . V . ; Trusov , G . A . ; Rodichenko , N . S . ; Slastnikova , T . A . ; Vinogradova , T . V . ; Uspenskaya , N . Y . ; Kopantsev , E . P . ; Rosenkranz , A . A . ; Sverdlov , E . D . ; Sobolev , A . S . Subcellular Trafficking and Transfection Efficacy of Polyethylenimine - Poly - Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX I ethylene Glycol Polyplex Nanoparticles with a Ligand to Melano - cortin Receptor - 1 . J . Controlled Release 2012 , 163 ( 2 ) , 211 − 219 . ( 15 ) Kang , S . ; Lu , K . ; Leelawattanachai , J . ; Hu , X . ; Park , S . ; Park , T . ; Min , I . M . ; Jin , M . M . Virus - Mimetic Polyplex Particles for Systemic and Inflammation - Specific Targeted Delivery of Large Genetic Contents . Gene Ther . 2013 , 20 ( 11 ) , 1042 − 1052 . ( 16 ) Zou , Y . ; Zheng , M . ; Yang , W . ; Meng , F . ; Miyata , K . ; Kim , H . J . ; Kataoka , K . ; Zhong , Z . Virus - Mimicking Chimaeric Polymersomes Boost Targeted Cancer SiRNA Therapy In Vivo . Adv . Mater . 2017 , 29 ( 42 ) , 1703285 . ( 17 ) Dutta , D . ; Donaldson , J . G . Search for Inhibitors of Endocytosis . Cell . Logist . 2012 , 2 ( 4 ) , 203 − 208 . ( 18 ) Dutta , D . ; Williamson , C . D . ; Cole , N . B . ; Donaldson , J . G . Pitstop 2 Is a Potent Inhibitor of Clathrin - Independent Endocytosis . PLoS One 2012 , 7 ( 9 ) , e45799 . ( 19 ) Vercauteren , D . ; Vandenbroucke , R . E . ; Jones , A . T . ; Rejman , J . ; Demeester , J . ; De Smedt , S . C . ; Sanders , N . N . ; Braeckmans , K . The Use of Inhibitors to Study Endocytic Pathways of Gene Carriers : Optimization and Pitfalls . Mol . Ther . 2010 , 18 ( 3 ) , 561 − 569 . ( 20 ) Georgieva , J . V . ; Kalicharan , D . ; Couraud , P . - O . ; Romero , I . A . ; Weksler , B . ; Hoekstra , D . ; Zuhorn , I . S . Surface Characteristics of Nanoparticles Determine Their Intracellular Fate in and Processing by Human Blood - Brain Barrier Endothelial Cells in Vitro . Mol . Ther . 2011 , 19 ( 2 ) , 318 − 325 . ( 21 ) Iacopetta , B . J . ; Morgan , E . H . The Kinetics of Transferrin Endocytosis and Iron Uptake from Transferrin in Rabbit Retic - ulocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 1983 , 258 ( 15 ) , 9108 − 9115 . ( 22 ) Torgersen , M . L . ; Skretting , G . ; van Deurs , B . ; Sandvig , K . Internalization of Cholera Toxin by Different Endocytic Mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 2001 , 114 , 3737 − 3747 . ( 23 ) Hansen , G . H . ; Dalskov , S . - M . ; Rasmussen , C . R . ; Immerdal , L . ; Niels - Christiansen , L . - L . ; Danielsen , E . M . Cholera Toxin Entry into Pig Enterocytes Occurs via a Lipid Raft - and Clathrin - Dependent Mechanism . Biochemistry 2005 , 44 ( 3 ) , 873 − 882 . ( 24 ) Choudhury , A . ; Dominguez , M . ; Puri , V . ; Sharma , D . K . ; Narita , K . ; Wheatley , C . L . ; Marks , D . L . ; Pagano , R . E . Rab Proteins Mediate Golgi Transport of Caveola - Internalized Glycosphingolipids and Correct Lipid Trafficking in Niemann - Pick C Cells . J . Clin . Invest . 2002 , 109 ( 12 ) , 1541 − 1550 . ( 25 ) Moriya , H . Quantitative Nature of Overexpression Experi - ments . Mol . Biol . Cell 2015 , 26 ( 22 ) , 3932 − 3939 . ( 26 ) Prelich , G . Gene Overexpression : Uses , Mechanisms , and Interpretation . Genetics 2012 , 190 ( 3 ) , 841 − 854 . ( 27 ) Hayer , A . ; Stoeber , M . ; Ritz , D . ; Engel , S . ; Meyer , H . H . ; Helenius , A . Caveolin - 1 Is Ubiquitinated and Targeted to Intra - lumenal Vesicles in Endolysosomes for Degradation . J . Cell Biol . 2010 , 191 ( 3 ) , 615 − 629 . ( 28 ) Shvets , E . ; Bitsikas , V . ; Howard , G . ; Hansen , C . G . ; Nichols , B . J . Dynamic Caveolae Exclude Bulk Membrane Proteins and Are Required for Sorting of Excess Glycosphingolipids . Nat . Commun . 2015 , 6 ( 1 ) , 6867 . ( 29 ) Cole , N . B . Site - Speci ﬁ c Protein Labeling with SNAP - Tags . In Current Protocols in Protein Science ; John Wiley & Sons , Inc . : Hoboken , NJ , 2013 ; Vol . 73 , pp 30 . 1 . 1 − 30 . 1 . 16 . ( 30 ) Bitsikas , V . ; Corre ̂ a , I . R . ; Nichols , B . J . Clathrin - Independent Pathways Do Not Contribute Significantly to Endocytic Flux . Elife 2014 , 3 , e03970 . ( 31 ) Sabharanjak , S . ; Sharma , P . ; Parton , R . G . ; Mayor , S . GPI - Anchored Proteins Are Delivered to Recycling Endosomes via a Distinct Cdc42 - Regulated , Clathrin - Independent Pinocytic Pathway . Dev . Cell 2002 , 2 ( 4 ) , 411 − 423 . ( 32 ) Jonker , C . ; de Heus , C . ; Faber , L . ; ten Brink , C . ; Potze , L . ; Fermie , J . ; Liv , N . ; Klumperman , J . An Adapted Protocol to Overcome Endosomal Damage Caused by Polyethylenimine ( PEI ) Mediated Transfections . Matters 2017 , 3 ( 12 ) , e201711000012 . ( 33 ) Roberts , R . ; Al - Jamal , W . T . ; Whelband , M . ; Thomas , P . ; Jefferson , M . ; Van Den Bossche , J . ; Powell , P . P . ; Kostarelos , K . ; Wileman , T . Autophagy and Formation of Tubulovesicular Autophagosomes Provide a Barrier against Nonviral Gene Delivery . Autophagy 2013 , 9 ( 5 ) , 667 − 682 . ( 34 ) Xu , Y . ; Szoka , F . C . J . Mechanism of DNA Release from Cationic Liposome / DNA Complexes Used in Cell Transfection . Biochemistry 1996 , 35 , 5616 − 5623 . ( 35 ) Boussif , O . ; Lezoualc ’ h , F . ; Zanta , M . A . ; Mergny , M . D . ; Scherman , D . ; Demeneix , B . ; Behr , J . P . A Versatile Vector for Gene and Oligonucleotide Transfer into Cells in Culture and in Vivo : Polyethylenimine . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1995 , 92 ( 16 ) , 7297 − 7301 . ( 36 ) Sharma , D . K . ; Choudhury , A . ; Singh , R . D . ; Wheatley , C . L . ; Marks , D . L . ; Pagano , R . E . Glycosphingolipids Internalized via Caveolar - Related Endocytosis Rapidly Merge with the Clathrin Pathway in Early Endosomes and Form Microdomains for Recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 2003 , 278 ( 9 ) , 7564 − 7572 . ( 37 ) Wittrup , A . ; Ai , A . ; Liu , X . ; Hamar , P . ; Trifonova , R . ; Charisse , K . ; Manoharan , M . ; Kirchhausen , T . ; Lieberman , J . Visualizing Lipid - Formulated SiRNA Release from Endosomes and Target Gene Knockdown . Nat . Biotechnol . 2015 , 33 ( 8 ) , 870 − 876 . ( 38 ) Gilleron , J . ; Querbes , W . ; Zeigerer , A . ; Borodovsky , A . ; Marsico , G . ; Schubert , U . ; Manygoats , K . ; Seifert , S . ; Andree , C . ; Sto ̈ ter , M . ; Epstein - Barash , H . ; Zhang , L . ; Koteliansky , V . ; Fitzgerald , K . ; Fava , E . ; Bickle , M . ; Kalaidzidis , Y . ; Akinc , A . ; Maier , M . ; Zerial , M . Image - Based Analysis of Lipid Nanoparticle − Mediated SiRNA Delivery , Intracellular Trafficking and Endosomal Escape . Nat . Biotechnol . 2013 , 31 ( 7 ) , 638 − 646 . ( 39 ) Rangasamy , L . ; Chelvam , V . ; Kanduluru , A . K . ; Srinivasarao , M . ; Bandara , N . A . ; You , F . ; Orellana , E . A . ; Kasinski , A . L . ; Low , P . S . New Mechanism for Release of Endosomal Contents : Osmotic Lysis via Nigericin - Mediated K + / H + Exchange . Bioconjugate Chem . 2018 , 29 ( 4 ) , 1047 − 1059 . ( 40 ) Zuidam , N . J . ; Hirsch - Lerner , D . ; Margulies , S . ; Barenholz , Y . Lamellarity of Cationic Liposomes and Mode of Preparation of Lipoplexes Affect Transfection Efficiency . Biochim . Biophys . Acta , Biomembr . 1999 , 1419 ( 2 ) , 207 − 220 . ( 41 ) Simberg , D . ; Danino , D . ; Talmon , Y . ; Minsky , A . ; Ferrari , M . E . ; Wheeler , C . J . ; Barenholz , Y . Phase Behavior , DNA Ordering , and Size Instability of Cationic Lipoplexes . J . Biol . Chem . 2001 , 276 ( 50 ) , 47453 − 47459 . ( 42 ) Smisterova ́ , J . ; Wagenaar , A . ; Stuart , M . C . ; Polushkin , E . ; ten Brinke , G . ; Hulst , R . ; Engberts , J . B . ; Hoekstra , D . Molecular Shape of the Cationic Lipid Controls the Structure of Cationic Lipid / Dioleylphosphatidylethanolamine - DNA Complexes and the Efficiency of Gene Delivery . J . Biol . Chem . 2001 , 276 ( 50 ) , 47615 − 47622 . ( 43 ) Zuhorn , I . S . ; Oberle , V . ; Visser , W . H . ; Engberts , J . B . F . N . ; Bakowsky , U . ; Polushkin , E . ; Hoekstra , D . Phase Behavior of Cationic Amphiphiles and Their Mixtures with Helper Lipid Influences Lipoplex Shape , DNA Translocation , and Transfection Efficiency . Biophys . J . 2002 , 83 ( 4 ) , 2096 − 2108 . ( 44 ) Koltover , I . ; Salditt , T . ; Radler , J . O . ; Safinya , C . R . An Inverted Hexagonal Phase of Cationic Liposome - DNA Complexes Related to DNA Release and Delivery . Science ( 80 - . ) 1998 , 281 ( 5373 ) , 78 − 81 . ( 45 ) Parvizi , P . ; Jubeli , E . ; Raju , L . ; Khalique , N . A . ; Almeer , A . ; Allam , H . ; Manaa , M . Al ; Larsen , H . ; Nicholson , D . ; Pungente , M . D . ; Fyles , T . M . Aspects of Nonviral Gene Therapy : Correlation of Molecular Parameters with Lipoplex Structure and Transfection Efficacy in Pyridinium - Based Cationic Lipids . Int . J . Pharm . 2014 , 461 ( 1 − 2 ) , 145 − 156 . ( 46 ) Mohammed - Saeid , W . ; Soudy , R . ; Tikoo , R . ; Kaur , K . ; Verrall , R . E . ; Badea , I . Design and Evaluation of Gemini Surfactant - Based Lipoplexes Modified with Cell - Binding Peptide for Targeted Gene Therapy in Melanoma Model . J . Pharm . Pharm . Sci . 2018 , 21 ( 1 ) , 363 − 375 . ( 47 ) Tassler , S . ; Pawlowska , D . ; Janich , C . ; Giselbrecht , J . ; Drescher , S . ; Langner , A . ; Wo ̈ lk , C . ; Brezesinski , G . Lysine - Based Amino - Functionalized Lipids for Gene Transfection : 3D Phase Behaviour and Transfection Performance . Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 2018 , 20 ( 25 ) , 17393 − 17405 . Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX J ( 48 ) Zuhorn , I . S . ; Bakowsky , U . ; Polushkin , E . ; Visser , W . H . ; Stuart , M . C . A . ; Engberts , J . B . F . N . ; Hoekstra , D . Nonbilayer Phase of Lipoplex - Membrane Mixture Determines Endosomal Escape of Genetic Cargo and Transfection Efficiency . Mol . Ther . 2005 , 11 ( 5 ) , 801 − 810 . ( 49 ) Rehman , Z . ur ; Hoekstra , D . ; Zuhorn , I . S . Mechanism of Polyplex - and Lipoplex - Mediated Delivery of Nucleic Acids : Real - Time Visualization of Transient Membrane Destabilization without Endosomal Lysis . ACS Nano 2013 , 7 ( 5 ) , 3767 − 3777 . ( 50 ) Durymanov , M . ; Reineke , J . Non - Viral Delivery of Nucleic Acids : Insight Into Mechanisms of Overcoming Intracellular Barriers . Front . Pharmacol . 2018 , 9 , 971 . ( 51 ) Kobayashi , T . ; Beuchat , M . - H . ; Chevallier , J . ; Makino , A . ; Mayran , N . ; Escola , J . - M . ; Lebrand , C . ; Cosson , P . ; Kobayashi , T . ; Gruenberg , J . Separation and Characterization of Late Endosomal Membrane Domains . J . Biol . Chem . 2002 , 277 ( 35 ) , 32157 − 32164 . ( 52 ) Rejman , J . ; Wagenaar , A . ; Engberts , J . B . F . N . ; Hoekstra , D . Characterization and Transfection Properties of Lipoplexes Stabilized with Novel Exchangeable Polyethylene Glycol − Lipid Conjugates . Biochim . Biophys . Acta - Biomembr . 2004 , 1660 ( 1 − 2 ) , 41 − 52 . ( 53 ) Lechanteur , A . ; Furst , T . ; Evrard , B . ; Delvenne , P . ; Hubert , P . ; Piel , G . PEGylation of Lipoplexes : The Right Balance between Cytotoxicity and SiRNA Effectiveness . Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 2016 , 93 , 493 − 503 . ( 54 ) Walker , G . F . ; Fella , C . ; Pelisek , J . ; Fahrmeir , J . ; Boeckle , S . ; Ogris , M . ; Wagner , E . Toward Synthetic Viruses : Endosomal PH - Triggered Deshielding of Targeted Polyplexes Greatly Enhances Gene Transfer in Vitro and in Vivo . Mol . Ther . 2005 , 11 ( 3 ) , 418 − 425 . ( 55 ) Wang , T . ; Chen , Q . ; Lu , H . ; Li , W . ; Li , Z . ; Ma , J . ; Gao , H . Shedding PEG Palisade by Temporal Photostimulation and Intra - cellular Reducing Milieu for Facilitated Intracellular Trafficking and DNA Release . Bioconjugate Chem . 2016 , 27 ( 8 ) , 1949 − 1957 . ( 56 ) Tian , W . ; Ma , Y . Insights into the Endosomal Escape Mechanism via Investigation of Dendrimer − Membrane Interactions . Soft Matter 2012 , 8 ( 23 ) , 6378 − 6384 . ( 57 ) Wojnilowicz , M . ; Glab , A . ; Bertucci , A . ; Caruso , F . ; Cavalieri , F . Super - Resolution Imaging of Proton Sponge - Triggered Rupture of Endosomes and Cytosolic Release of Small Interfering RNA . ACS Nano 2019 , 13 ( 1 ) , 187 − 202 . ( 58 ) Godin , A . G . ; Lounis , B . ; Cognet , L . Super - Resolution Microscopy Approaches for Live Cell Imaging . Biophys . J . 2014 , 107 ( 8 ) , 1777 − 1784 . ( 59 ) Cheng , R . ; Meng , F . ; Deng , C . ; Klok , H . - A . ; Zhong , Z . Dual and Multi - Stimuli Responsive Polymeric Nanoparticles for Pro - grammed Site - Specific Drug Delivery . Biomaterials 2013 , 34 ( 14 ) , 3647 − 3657 . ( 60 ) Do , H . D . ; Couillaud , B . M . ; Doan , B . - T . ; Corvis , Y . ; Mignet , N . Advances on Non - Invasive Physically Triggered Nucleic Acid Delivery from Nanocarriers . Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2019 , 138 , 3 − 17 . ( 61 ) Nie , Y . ; Gu ̈ nther , M . ; Gu , Z . ; Wagner , E . Pyridylhydrazone - Based PEGylation for PH - Reversible Lipopolyplex Shielding . Biomaterials 2011 , 32 ( 3 ) , 858 − 869 . ( 62 ) Fang , G . ; Zeng , F . ; Yu , C . ; Wu , S . Low Molecular Weight PEIs Modified by Hydrazone - Based Crosslinker and Betaine as Improved Gene Carriers . Colloids Surf . , B 2014 , 122 , 472 − 481 . ( 63 ) Chan , C . - L . ; Majzoub , R . N . ; Shirazi , R . S . ; Ewert , K . K . ; Chen , Y . - J . ; Liang , K . S . ; Safinya , C . R . Endosomal Escape and Transfection Efficiency of PEGylated Cationic Liposome − DNA Complexes Prepared with an Acid - Labile PEG - Lipid . Biomaterials 2012 , 33 ( 19 ) , 4928 − 4935 . ( 64 ) Semple , S . C . ; Klimuk , S . K . ; Harasym , T . O . ; Dos Santos , N . ; Ansell , S . M . ; Wong , K . F . ; Maurer , N . ; Stark , H . ; Cullis , P . R . ; Hope , M . J . ; Scherrer , P . Efficient Encapsulation of Antisense Oligonucleo - tides in Lipid Vesicles Using Ionizable Aminolipids : Formation of Novel Small Multilamellar Vesicle Structures . Biochim . Biophys . Acta , Biomembr . 2001 , 1510 ( 1 − 2 ) , 152 − 166 . ( 65 ) Tam , Y . ; Chen , S . ; Cullis , P . Advances in Lipid Nanoparticles for SiRNA Delivery . Pharmaceutics 2013 , 5 ( 4 ) , 498 − 507 . ( 66 ) Semple , S . C . ; Akinc , A . ; Chen , J . ; Sandhu , A . P . ; Mui , B . L . ; Cho , C . K . ; Sah , D . W . Y . ; Stebbing , D . ; Crosley , E . J . ; Yaworski , E . ; Hafez , I . M . ; Dorkin , J . R . ; Qin , J . ; Lam , K . ; Rajeev , K . G . ; Wong , K . F . ; Jeffs , L . B . ; Nechev , L . ; Eisenhardt , M . L . ; Jayaraman , M . ; Kazem , M . ; Maier , M . A . ; Srinivasulu , M . ; Weinstein , M . J . ; Chen , Q . ; Alvarez , R . ; Barros , S . A . ; De , S . ; Klimuk , S . K . ; Borland , T . ; Kosovrasti , V . ; Cantley , W . L . ; Tam , Y . K . ; Manoharan , M . ; Ciufolini , M . A . ; Tracy , M . A . ; de Fougerolles , A . ; MacLachlan , I . ; Cullis , P . R . ; Madden , T . D . ; Hope , M . J . Rational Design of Cationic Lipids for SiRNA Delivery . Nat . Biotechnol . 2010 , 28 ( 2 ) , 172 − 176 . ( 67 ) Sato , Y . ; Hatakeyama , H . ; Sakurai , Y . ; Hyodo , M . ; Akita , H . ; Harashima , H . A PH - Sensitive Cationic Lipid Facilitates the Delivery of Liposomal SiRNA and Gene Silencing Activity in Vitro and in Vivo . J . Controlled Release 2012 , 163 ( 3 ) , 267 − 276 . ( 68 ) Sun , D . ; Sun , Z . ; Jiang , H . ; Vaidya , A . M . ; Xin , R . ; Ayat , N . R . ; Schilb , A . L . ; Qiao , P . L . ; Han , Z . ; Naderi , A . ; Lu , Z . - R . Synthesis and Evaluation of PH - Sensitive Multifunctional Lipids for Efficient Delivery of CRISPR / Cas9 in Gene Editing . Bioconjugate Chem . 2019 , 30 ( 3 ) , 667 − 678 . ( 69 ) Agarwal , A . ; Unfer , R . ; Mallapragada , S . K . Investigation Ofin Vitro Biocompatibility of Novel Pentablock Copolymers for Gene Delivery . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , Part A 2007 , 81A ( 1 ) , 24 − 39 . ( 70 ) Yu , H . ; Zou , Y . ; Jiang , L . ; Yin , Q . ; He , X . ; Chen , L . ; Zhang , Z . ; Gu , W . ; Li , Y . Induction of Apoptosis in Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer by Downregulation of MDM2 Using PH - Responsive PMPC - b - PDPA / SiRNA Complex Nanoparticles . Biomaterials 2013 , 34 ( 11 ) , 2738 − 2747 . ( 71 ) Lomas , H . ; Du , J . ; Canton , I . ; Madsen , J . ; Warren , N . ; Armes , S . P . ; Lewis , A . L . ; Battaglia , G . Efficient Encapsulation of Plasmid DNA in PH - Sensitive PMPC - PDPA Polymersomes : Study of the Effect of PDPA Block Length on Copolymer - DNA Binding Affinity . Macromol . Biosci . 2010 , 10 ( 5 ) , 513 − 530 . ( 72 ) Yu , H . ; Zou , Y . ; Wang , Y . ; Huang , X . ; Huang , G . ; Sumer , B . D . ; Boothman , D . A . ; Gao , J . Overcoming Endosomal Barrier by Amphotericin B - Loaded Dual PH - Responsive PDMA - b - PDPA Micelleplexes for SiRNA Delivery . ACS Nano 2011 , 5 ( 11 ) , 9246 − 9255 . ( 73 ) Zhu , J . ; Qiao , M . ; Wang , Q . ; Ye , Y . ; Ba , S . ; Ma , J . ; Hu , H . ; Zhao , X . ; Chen , D . Dual - Responsive Polyplexes with Enhanced Disassembly and Endosomal Escape for Efficient Delivery of SiRNA . Biomaterials 2018 , 162 ( 2018 ) , 47 − 59 . Accounts of Chemical Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . accounts . 9b00177 Acc . Chem . Res . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX K