68 Copyright © 2011 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 4 INTRODUCTION Knowledge Management is composed of the activities , methods , processes , and software that validate , evaluate , integrate , and disseminate information for learning and decision making ( Rhem , 2005 ) . A Knowledge Management System ( KMS ) is an information system that improves the organizational process of creating , storing , retrieving , transferring , and applying knowledge ( Leidner & Alavi , 2001 ) . Carlos Solis Lero , Ireland Nour Ali Lero , Ireland Managing Requirements Elicitation Knowledge using a Spatial Hypertext Wiki ABSTRACT Wikis have been widely used as knowledge management tools . However , most of them do not support the conversion process of knowledge in an appropriate way . Specifically , they do not support brainstorming and creativity techniques , which are needed to convert tacit knowledge into explicit . This chapter presents how a wiki tool called the Spatial Hypertext Wiki ( ShyWiki ) can be used for supporting collaborative requirements elicitation following the knowledge creation spiral of Nonaka . The knowledge conversions in the spiral ( socialization , externalization , combination , and internalization ) and the knowledge types in each conversion are related to different activities in requirements elicitation , which can be performed through ShyWiki . ShyWiki allows stakeholders to collaborate by creating , brainstorming , structuring and reorganizing requirements contained in notes . In this way , the requirements negotiation and prioritization process can be done through the wiki pages which are seen as virtual boards that hold hypertext notes . DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 60960 - 509 - 4 . ch004 69 Managing Requirements Elicitation Knowledge using a Spatial Hypertext Wiki One of the most accepted models for knowl - edge management is the knowledge creation spiral of Nonaka and Takeuchi , which describes how knowledge is converted into different types of knowledge ( Nonaka and Takeuchi , 1995 ) . The diversity of existing types of knowledge such as tacit , explicit , unstructured and structured force organizations to use several knowledge manage - ment approaches in order to deal in an effective way with the conversion between the types of knowledge ( Leidner & Alavi , 2001 ) . The concept of tacit knowledge was defined by Polanyi ( 1967 ) as knowledge that cannot be easily shared , and is composed of intuitions , unarticulated mental models , or technical skills . Explicit knowledge is the one that is documented and can be processed by computers ( Nonaka & Takeuchi , 1995 ) . In any project , Requirements Elicitation ( RE ) is a critical phase due to the fact that most soft - ware project failures are caused from inadequate requirements ( Hofmann & Lehner , 2001 ) . The RE phase is the first step in the requirements engineer - ing process , where the requirements or the needs of a system are discovered ( Sommerville & Sawyer , 2004 ) . Requirements elicitation is a creative pro - cess in which all stakeholders collaborate in the creation of the needs that describe a new system ( Robertson , 2001 ) . The stakeholders involved in the requirements elicitation process must under - stand a domain , and the problems that the differ - ent stakeholders want to solve using a software system . Some of the proposed needs will become system requirements after their negotiation and prioritization ( Sommerville & Sawyer , 2004 ) . In requirements elicitation , diverse methods are used such as interviews , workshops , brainstorming , and protocol analysis ( Davis et . al . , 2006 ) . Tacit knowledge is related to undocumented work practices that workers use to take decisions . When stakeholders try to express their require - ments of a system , they are converting part of their tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge . From this point of view , requirements elicitation is a knowledge intensive process which involves converting , managing and sharing different types of knowledge among different stakeholders . Recently , wikis have emerged as an effective hypertext technology for enabling organizations and individuals to manage knowledge . The ad - vantage of using wikis , is that the knowledge management tasks such as capturing , searching , and sharing knowledge can be performed in an open , collaborative , incremental and distributed way ( Decker et . al . , 2007 ) , ( Leuf & Cunningham , 2001 ) . Wikis are based on the principles of easy of use , incremental content creation , open struc - ture for editing and evolution , and self organized structure ( Cunningham , 2006 ) . The content in a wiki page is defined by using a simple markup language , which allows the user to format the content and create hyperlinks . In this way , users do not have to be technical experts in the edition and design of hypertext . However , most wikis do not support the conversion process of knowledge in an appropriate way . Specifically , they do not support brainstorming and creativity techniques , which are needed to convert tacit knowledge into explicit . This is an important characteristic that would improve and extend the use of wikis in requirements elicitation . This chapter presents the use of the Spatial Hy - pertext Wiki ( ShyWiki ) , a wiki which uses spatial hypertext for representing its content ( Solis and Ali , 2008a , 2008b ) , for supporting requirements elicitation through the knowledge creation spiral of Nonaka . In ShyWiki , each wiki page can be seen as a virtual board composed of a set of notes . ShyWiki provides a flexible hypertext model that can represent the different types of knowledge involved in the knowledge creation spiral , and supports iterative knowledge creation . ShyWiki users are able to capture tacit knowledge by brain - storming using the virtual board , and represent explicit knowledge which they can incrementally structure by using spatial hypertext . The later is supported by allowing stakeholders to add , move , or group notes , and by defining templates and their instances . 14 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / managing - requirements - elicitation - knowledge - using / 52877 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , Business - Technology - Solution , InfoSci - Software Technologies , Science , Engineering , and Information Technology , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Computer Science and Information Technology , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content Test Case Reduction Using Data Mining Technique Ahmad A . Saifan , Emad Alsukhni , Hanadi Alawneh and Ayat AL Sbaih ( 2016 ) . International Journal of Software Innovation ( pp . 56 - 70 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / test - case - reduction - using - data - mining - technique / 166543 ? camid = 4v1a Informationbase - A New Information System Layer Dragan Kovach and Kresimir Fertalj ( 2002 ) . Optimal Information Modeling Techniques ( pp . 239 - 247 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / informationbase - new - information - system - layer / 27841 ? camid = 4v1a Evolution of Security Engineering Artifacts : A State of the Art Survey Michael Felderer , Basel Katt , Philipp Kalb , Jan Jürjens , Martín Ochoa , Federica Paci , Le Minh Sang Tran , Thein Than Tun , Koen Yskout , Riccardo Scandariato , Frank Piessens , Dries Vanoverberghe , Elizabeta Fourneret , Matthias Gander , Bjørnar Solhaug and Ruth Breu ( 2014 ) . International Journal of Secure Software Engineering ( pp . 48 - 98 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / evolution - of - security - engineering - artifacts / 121682 ? camid = 4v1a A Pattern - Based and Tool - Supported Risk Analysis Method Compliant to ISO 27001 for Cloud Systems Azadeh Alebrahim , Denis Hatebur , Stephan Fassbender , Ludger Goeke and Isabelle Côté ( 2015 ) . International Journal of Secure Software Engineering ( pp . 24 - 46 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / a - pattern - based - and - tool - supported - risk - analysis - method - compliant - to - iso - 27001 - for - cloud - systems / 123453 ? camid = 4v1a