Motif Dynamics in Signed Directional Complex Networks Youngjai Park , 1 Mi Jin Lee , 1 , ∗ and Seung - Woo Son 1 , 2 , † 1 Department of Applied Physics , Hanyang University , Ansan 15588 , Korea 2 Asia Paciﬁc Center for Theoretical Physics ( APCTP ) , Pohang 37673 , Korea ( Dated : January 18 , 2022 ) Complex networks evolve and vary their structure as time goes by . In particular , the links in those networks have both a sign and a directionality . To understand their structural principles , we measure the network motifs , which are patterns that appear much more than one would expect in randomized networks , considering both link properties . We propose motif dynamics , which is a study to investigate the change in the number of motifs , and applied the motif dynamics to an open evolving network model and empirical data . We conﬁrm that a non - cyclic motif has a greater correlation with the system size than a cyclic structural motif . Furthermore , the motif dynamics can give us insight into the friendship between freshmen in a university . Keyworks : Network motifs , Signed directional complex networks , Temporal networks I . INTRODUCTION Complex systems such as brain , ecosystem , ﬁnancial market , and our society continue to undergo change in time with interacting with their surrounded environ - ment [ 1 – 3 ] . It can be considered as an open evolving complex network , where a node is each neuron , species , or individual , and a connecting link indicates a signal path , a biomass ﬂow , or an interaction between paired nodes . Depending on the types of interactions , one can assign the link additional attributes such as direction ( in - coming / outgoing ) , weight ( intensity of interaction ) , and sometimes with its + / − sign [ 4 – 6 ] . The complicated in - teractions described with the various types of links give rise us to the intriguing emergent phenomena such as a formation of the giant component , which corresponds to the outbreaks in epidemics and neuronal avalanches in our brain . Starting from investigation of basic properties such as the ( in - / out - ) degree distribution , weight distribution , and averaged quantities of interest , many researchers have tried to understand the emergent patterns . Usually , the investigations have been undertaken at a macroscopic level . Recently , the understanding at a microscopic scale also have been emphasized as well , because eventually the accumulated eﬀect of the local structure ( small in - teraction pattern ) brings the macroscopic observation . As one of the ways to ﬁgure out the local structure , the network motif analysis is suggested [ 7 – 9 ] . The motifs in network science are statistically signiﬁcant subnetworks , which contain speciﬁc interaction patterns among the small number of nodes . For instance , let us consider the triplet nodes in a network with undirectional ( symmet - ric ) links . Then , the possible motifs in the triplet are an open and a closed triangle with two and three links , re - spectively . The frequency of the motif of a triplet is often ∗ mijinlee @ hanyang . ac . kr † sonswoo @ hanyang . ac . kr estimated by the clustering coeﬃcient , the well - known global measurement of networks [ 10 – 12 ] . The motif is naturally extended to the directional ( asymmetric ) and signed link even though the handling of complexity in - credibly increases . In this paper , we take account into a link with a direc - tion ( asymmetric relation ) as well as a + / − sign ( positive or negative inﬂuence ) in an open evolving system , moti - vated by the ecological system [ 13 ] . In this system , the meaning of a link completely varies with the sign . In the past decade , a number of studies have considered only the direction or only the sign with links in various ﬁelds for motif analysis [ 14 – 17 ] . Since there exists the diﬀerence of roles between a positive and negative link , we count in both the direction and sign of links . By inspecting the frequency or abundance of each motif in a network , we are aiming at understanding what interaction patterns mainly contribute to the emergent behaviors . Further - more , the motif abundance is also traced as time goes by , since we consider the open evolving system where the interaction patterns change in time . We call the tempo - ral change a motif dynamics . That is , we try to ﬁgure out the emergent pattern of open evolving networks in terms of the motif dynamics [ 18 , 19 ] . To analyze the motif dynamics , we ﬁrst reduce all the possible motifs to 22 types consisting of three nodes with only uni - directional ( asymmetric ) links . To evaluate the signiﬁcance of the motif abundance , we compute the Z - score , and then the motif dynamics is characterized by the temporal behavior of Z - score . We apply this setup to both a theoretical model network and empirical data . The model network is of mimicking the ecological sys - tem [ 13 , 20 – 24 ] , and the empirical data are collected from KONECT [ 25 ] , which contains many kinds of network data sets in a variety of domains . We ﬁnd that partic - ular motifs mainly devote to the network growth , and that the motif dynamics can be interpreted in various contexts depending on networks . We expect that analy - sis with the motif dynamics helps us to understand bet - ter our surrounding complex systems . Furthermore , this approach provides a new insight into complex systems a r X i v : 2 0 12 . 06255v1 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 11 D ec 2020 2 management by considering signs of interactions . This paper is organized as follows : The explanations of the motif and Z - score are portrayed in Sec . II . In Sec . III A , motif dynamics on an open evolving model are described . Z - scores of non - cyclic and cyclic motifs are compared to test the non - cyclic dominance in em - pirical data in Sec . III B . Section III C is focused on a friendship network data among university freshmen and its motif dynamics . Further discussion is in Sec . IV . II . METHODS A network motif is a frequently observed subnet - work pattern in a given signed directional network G ( N , L ) with N nodes and L links . The motif set M ( n , l ) ⊆ G ( N , L ) is a set of motifs having n < N nodes and l < L links . We are not concerned with all the motifs , but speciﬁc and contributive ones to the system . To evaluate it , we compute the expected appearance of a motif m ∈ M ( n , l ) compared with those in the random - ized networks , namely , the Z - score of the frequency or abundance Z ( m ) deﬁned as Z ( m ) = O ( m ) − ¯ O null ( m ) σ null ( m ) , ( 1 ) where O ( m ) is the number of the observation / appearance ( abundance ) of a speciﬁc motif m in a given original net - work , and ¯ O null ( m ) and σ null ( m ) are the average abun - dance and its standard deviation in the randomized net - works , respectively . Thus , Eq . ( 1 ) means how signiﬁ - cantly the motif m is observed comparing to other net - works which have the same number of nodes and links . The utilization of the Z - score also helps us to compare the tendency of the motif abundance across diﬀerent net - works with diﬀerent sizes at a diﬀerent time . Motifs provide insight of important functional struc - ture in a system , but detecting the important structure involves the computationally challenging problem . More - over , we consider the direction and sign of the link , so the cardinality of M ( n , l ) becomes even larger than in a network with either signed or directional links . For sim - plicity , we pay attention to open or closed triplets , i . e . , M ( 3 , 2 ) and M ( 3 , 3 ) . The triplets play roles as funda - mental building blocks in constituting the system . While constructing the sets , the bidirectional links are excluded because there are 132 types of motifs if we consider the bidirectional links . It is unlikely to understand all the meaning of 132 motifs . Following this criteria , we col - lect 22 signed directional motifs as shown in Figs . 1 ( b ) and 1 ( c ) . If one takes only the direction apart from the sign into account , there are only ﬁve motifs considering the mirror and rotational symmetry [ Fig . 1 ( a ) ] . The ex - panded number of the motifs means that the eﬀective role of a link varies depending on its sign even on the same connectivity structure as in an unsigned case . For example , the feedback loop of positive links with three nodes makes the structure robust . However , a negative FIG . 1 . All the possible motifs with three nodes . ( a ) There exist 5 unsigned directional motifs , and 22 signed directional motifs composed of 10 motifs and 12 motifs belonging to M ( 3 , 2 ) and M ( 3 , 3 ) . The blue line represents a positive ( + ) inﬂuence on a target , and the orange one indicates a negative ( − ) inﬂuence . feedback loop with three nodes can cause the collapse of the system , despite the same structure if we only consider the direction [ 16 ] . To obtain the statistical signiﬁcance of the motif abun - dance , we need a null model to compare in Eq . ( 1 ) con - structing randomized networks by rewiring links . The rewiring process in the signed and directional network is based on the proposed method to avoid self - / multi - links [ 14 , 26 ] . One can perform the rewiring process considering four conservation conditions : i ) nothing to keep , ii ) degree as in undirectional networks , iii ) in - / out - degree , or iv ) in - / out - degree with sign . In this study , to inspect the signed directional motifs , we implement the rewiring with keeping the sign and directionality se - quence for every node in order to compare the origi - nal network with randomized networks under the same macroscopic conditions . III . RESULTS A . Open evolving network model Multiple species in an ecosystem have inﬂuence on or get inﬂuenced by each other in positive , negative , or neu - tral ways , that leads to which species survive in the sys - tem . According to a relationship between two diﬀerent species based on the inﬂuence , several typical relation - ships are observed in the ecosystem such as competition , mutualism , and neutralism [ 27 , 28 ] . This inﬂuenceable structure across species is represented as a complex net - work . Every single species corresponds to a node , and the interaction between them is described as a link . In par - ticular , the signed directional link is adopted to describe 3 FIG . 2 . Motif dynamics over the network size . ( a ) The ﬁve types of unsigned directional motifs consist of three open triangle types and two closed triangle types when the model grows up at a diverging phase . ( b ) Each panel displays the motif dynamics . The solid line represents the ensemble average and the shading area indicates its standard deviation . In the open evolving model , the Z - scores of closed triangles increases as the network grows , but those of open triangles decrease . the inﬂuence from / on species around a node of interest in a positive / negative / neutral way . w ij > 0 ( < 0 ) denotes the positive ( negative ) inﬂuence of a node i to a node j , and w ij (cid:54) = w ji in general . The total inﬂuence exerted on a species ( node ) i is relevant to its ﬁtness and survivability . It is constantly changing in time as the system experiences the extinction of existing species and introduction of invasive ones . To portray the situation , an open evolving network model has been proposed [ 13 ] . The total inﬂuence is deﬁned as a ﬁtness of node i given by f i = (cid:80) j w ji , where w ji is an weighted incoming edges in the viewpoint of node i . In this model , the weight w ji is randomly drawn from the normal distribution , and the direction is also assigned at random . A new invasive species with k links is intro - duced into the system every time step and interacts with the k randomly selected resident species . A species with f i ≤ 0 goes extinct , and the ﬁtness of species connected with the extinct one is recalculated . The extinction and recalculation iterate until no more extinction occurs . We adopt the aforementioned model and generate synthetic ecosystems . One of the important results in this model is an emergence of the diverging phase in terms of system size , in 5 (cid:46) k (cid:46) 18 . Since large networks are convenient to analyze statistically , k = 10 models are investigated . We collect the motifs belonging to M ( 3 , 2 ) and M ( 3 , 3 ) in Figs . 1 ( b ) and 1 ( c ) of the synthetic ecosystems . We an - alyze the motif dynamics by means of Z - score in Eq . ( 1 ) and which types of interaction structure mainly con - tribute to the diverging phase . During the simulation , the network size N ( t ) linearly increases as time t , so N ( t ) is nearly equivalent to t in Figs . 2 and 3 . Figure 2 shows the results of unsigned directional motifs and signed di - rectional motifs are displayed in Fig . 3 . As a ﬁrst step to understand the motif dynamics , we inspect the simple unsigned directional motifs in Fig . 2 . The unsigned directional motifs are combinations of the signed directional ones . For example , the motifs 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 labeled in Fig . 1 ( b ) degenerate into the ﬁrst left - most one in Fig . 1 ( a ) , and then Z - score in Fig . 2 ( b ) is calculated from the randomization conserving only in - / out - degree . The abundance of a motif changes in a network size and link density . Interestingly , distinct be - haviors of open and closed triplets are observed in our simulation . As the network grows , the closed ones are discovered more and more , contrasted with the remark - ably decreasing tendency of the open triplets as shown in Fig . 2 ( b ) . One may think that the large k makes the dense connectivity in the network . In this model , how - ever , the large k does not guarantee the creation of the closed triplet because the node deletion ( extinction of species ) frequently occurs at k (cid:38) 18 , which leads to a bunch of the removal of the associated links . Hence , the increasing tendency of closed triplets is a nontrivial ﬁnd - ing . From the fact that the unsigned directional closed - triplet is correlated with the growth of the giant com - ponent , the closed triplet is worth to be investigated in detail . The two motifs of the closed one in Fig . 2 ( a ) are subdivided into twelve motifs m ∈ M ( 3 , 3 ) when the sign is considered as in Fig . 3 ( a ) . Interestingly , the in - creasing pattern observed in Fig . 2 ( b ) is not always ob - served : some motifs appear signiﬁcantly , and others do not . Usually , the motifs with more than two positive - signed links ( i . e . , the majority ) tend to show the notable increasing pattern and large value of Z - score in large N [ see the panels in the respective upper line in Figs . 3 ( a ) and 3 ( b ) ] . The motif 13 and 22 have the same structural feature except for a sign imposed on links , but their motif dynamics are remarkably diﬀerent . The result of the dif - ferent tendencies by the fraction of positive links seems quite reasonable . Owing to the model characteristic that a species having f i > 0 survives , the negative link seldom exists . In order to make networks grow without shrink - age , the extinction ( node deletion ) has to rarely happen , and then the least negative links are beneﬁcial to system . Unlike the case of M ( 3 , 3 ) , we conﬁrm that all the mo - tifs m ∈ M ( 3 , 2 ) maintain the decreasing tendency ( not shown in this paper ) . 4 FIG . 3 . Singed motif dynamics in the model . ( a ) 12 closed triangle motifs with sign , M ( 3 , 3 ) . ( b ) Each panel displays the Z - score change as the network size increases . The solid line represents the ensemble average and the shading area indicates its standard deviation . The motifs in the upper row of ( b ) , which contain more positive links , become abundant as network grows . B . Non - cyclic motif in the networks In Sec . III A , there is one more interesting ﬁnding that the feedforward motif ( motif 13 ) has a greater correlation with N than the feedback structure ( motif 11 ) [ Fig . 3 ] . The two motifs have the positive links only in common but the diﬀerent structure in terms of directionality as cyclic and non - cyclic structures for the motif 11 and 13 , respectively . It is probably caused from the vulnerability against node deletion which is inherent in the feedback structure like the motif 11 . When one node disappears , the ﬁtness of the other nodes decreases in the cyclic struc - ture , leading to a cascading failure . In contrast , it is well known that the non - cyclic motif is stable against external ﬂuctuations [ 29 ] . We conﬁrm that the motif signiﬁcance of the non - cyclic structure ( motif 13 ) is higher than that of the cyclic structure ( motif 11 ) by examining and compar - ing the Z - score even in empirical data . We utilze data provided from the KONECT dataset [ 25 ] : “Friendship in a university” ( we call it “Friendship data” ) [ 30 ] , “Chess game” [ 31 ] , and “Wikipedia election” [ 32 , 33 ] . In the “Friendship data” , nodes are freshmen in a university in the Netherlands , and links are rating scores to their classmates . The rating score ranges from - 1 to 3 ( see in Sec . III C in more detail ) . In the “Chess game” , a node represents a player , and the result of a match between two players is a link . The direction of the link is de - ﬁned as white - to - black since white moves ﬁrst , and the weight is expressed as 1 if white wins , 0 if draw , and - 1 if white loses . The “Wikipedia election” contains the vot - ing records of an administrator’s election in Wikipedia . A node represents a voter , and a link is marked as 1 ( - 1 ) with a vote for ( against ) the candidate . For comparison , we plot the relative Z - score in Fig . 4 . One can see that the non - cyclic motif has the higher sig - niﬁcance than that of the cyclic motif as expected . The signiﬁcant observation of the non - cyclic motif may be one of the indices of the robustness of the system . C . Friendship network among university freshmen We additionally analyze the meaning of the motif dy - namics in the context of the empirical data . To do so , we use the “Friendship data” introduced in Sec . III B . Friendshipdata Chessgame Wikipediaelection 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 R e l a t i v e Z - s c o r e Non - cyclic motif Cyclic motif FIG . 4 . The relative Z - scores of cyclic ( green ) and non - cyclic ( blue ) motifs in the three empirical network data . The non - cyclic motif appears more frequently in all the three as well as a model network . In order to represent the relative pro - portions , we examine the relative Z - score normalizing by the Z - score of motif 13 . 5 FIG . 5 . The Z - score change of a motif 16 in a friendship network among university freshmen in the Netherlands as time goes by . ( a ) The visualization of the network data in a timeline : nodes mean the university freshmen and links represent the relationship between two students depending on their rating score ( positive : blue , negative : orange ) . ( b ) Z - score change of the motif 16 as time goes by : there is a rise and fall like the dramatic structure ( exposition , inciting incident , rising action , climax , falling action , resolution , and denouement ) . At the twelve week , the conﬂict structure ( motif 16 ) rise high and the Z - score goes down around the end of the semester . The inset is about the motif if we do not consider the sign . It is insuﬃcient to explain the conﬂict among the freshmen . A university in the Netherlands conducted a survey of freshmen during 1994 and 1995 [ 30 ] . In the survey , fresh - men were asked to rate their friendship except for them - selves with the integer - valued score ranging from - 1 to 3 . From the response to the survey , the friendship network is constructed with a node and a link being a freshman and a rating score to a friend , respectively . The net - work satisﬁes both the interaction type ( social interac - tion ) and the form ( the temporal network with the signed weight ) similarly to those of the ecological model network in Sec . III A . The survey conducted 7 times starting from the be - ginning of a semester during the given period with the diﬀerent intervals . As time goes , the giant component is formed with a larger size because more students par - ticipate in the survey as seen in Fig . 5 ( a ) . A meaning of a motif is interpreted in various ways depending on a context of a network . We put focus on the motif 16 in Fig . 1 ( c ) , because the structure implies a conﬂict re - lationship among three students : two students like the other student simultaneously , but one student of the two dislikes the other of the two . We try to understand the meaning of the motif dynamics , so only concentrate on analyzing the dynamics of the motif 16 of interest rather than all the motifs in M ( 3 , 2 ) and M ( 3 , 3 ) . The dynamics of the motif 16 shows a quite interest - ing pattern as seen in Fig . 5 ( b ) . It follows the well - known conﬂict structure , a rise and fall , in novels : exposition , inciting incident , rising action , climax , falling action , res - olution , and denouement [ 34 ] . At the beginning of the semester , this conﬂict structure arises , and the maximum value of Z - score is around the twelve week at the end of the semester . This motif structure appears less and less remarkably during the vacation ( after the twelve week ) . We guess that the conﬂict may be resolved indeed or fade out as the students move away from each other . In the in - set , the motif ignoring sign does not show this tendency . The negative value of Z - score for the motif 16 means that the motif itself are rarely discovered as compared with other motifs because the negative links are natu - rally rare . However , the result in Fig . 5 ( b ) tells us that some motifs have their own epic , which can be easy to be ignored but sometimes give important information , e . g . , bullying phenomena at school . The bullying happens in conﬁdence mostly , so the motif being able to portray the bullying is less likely to be observed in a student network . Analyzing the bullying motif may help to understand the situation . IV . CONCLUSIONS In our surroundings , the interactions in various sys - tems can include a positive or negative eﬀect on others . The interaction is represented as a link in complex net - works , and the eﬀect is in a form of a sign on the link . In this paper , we have tried to understand how the lo - cal interaction structure aﬀects the emergent behavior of a network , and narrowed the question to what mo - tifs mainly devote to the growth of the giant component 6 ( network itself , herein ) . Especially , we have considered the sign and direction of a link , simultaneously . To quantitatively measure the signiﬁcant abundance of motif , we have calculated the Z - score . We have ﬁrst investigated the motif dynamics in a synthetic ecological system and found that the closed triplets motifs m ∈ M ( 3 , 3 ) with more than two positive links are correlated with the growth of the network . Here , the non - cyclic motif has the highest abundance which may be related to the stability of the system , and we have conﬁrmed the higher abundances of the non - cyclic motifs than that of the cyclic motifs in other empirical data . As a further understanding of motif dynamics , we have looked into the dynamics of motif of interest , that is , the conﬂict motif in the friendship network . The dynamics has been able to be interpreted properly under the cir - cumstances . From this result , we have concluded that some motifs are worth to be deeply analyzed depending on networks , although they do not have signiﬁcant abun - dances . For future works , we will investigate the relation be - tween the motif abundance and the stability or robust - ness of the system in more realistic models . If one reveals the direct connection between the abundance of the non - cyclic motifs and the system robustness , it ensures that the real systems evolve towards the higher abundance of the non - cyclic structural motif to enhance the stability of their whole structure . It also leads to the new design and proposal of growing successful strategies of networks . V . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the National Research Foundation ( NRF ) of Korea through the Grant No . NRF - 2020R1A2C2010875 funded by the Korea govern - ment . [ 1 ] A . Paranjape , A . R . Benson , and J . Leskovec , in Pro - ceedings of the Tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining ( 2017 ) pp . 601 – 610 . [ 2 ] A . Li , S . P . Cornelius , Y . - Y . Liu , L . Wang , and A . - L . Barab´asi , Science 358 , 1042 ( 2017 ) . [ 3 ] G . Cencetti , F . Battiston , B . Lepri , and M . Karsai , arXiv preprint arXiv : 2010 . 03404 ( 2020 ) . [ 4 ] A . R . Benson , D . F . Gleich , and J . Leskovec , Science 353 , 163 ( 2016 ) . [ 5 ] L . Peel , J . - C . Delvenne , and R . Lambiotte , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 , 4057 ( 2018 ) . [ 6 ] A . Kirkley , G . T . Cantwell , and M . Newman , Physical Review E 99 , 012320 ( 2019 ) . [ 7 ] S . Itzkovitz , R . Milo , N . Kashtan , G . Ziv , and U . Alon , Physical review E 68 , 026127 ( 2003 ) . [ 8 ] R . J . Prill , P . A . Iglesias , and A . Levchenko , PLoS Biol 3 , e343 ( 2005 ) . [ 9 ] J . Grilli , G . Barab´as , M . J . Michalska - Smith , and S . Allesina , Nature 548 , 210 ( 2017 ) . [ 10 ] R . D . Luce and A . D . Perry , Psychometrika 14 , 95 ( 1949 ) . [ 11 ] D . J . Watts and S . H . Strogatz , nature 393 , 440 ( 1998 ) . [ 12 ] J . - P . Onnela , J . Saram¨aki , J . Kert´esz , and K . Kaski , Physical Review E 71 , 065103 ( 2005 ) . [ 13 ] T . Shimada , Scientiﬁc reports 4 , 4082 ( 2014 ) . [ 14 ] R . Milo , S . Shen - Orr , S . Itzkovitz , N . Kashtan , D . Chklovskii , and U . Alon , Science 298 , 824 ( 2002 ) . [ 15 ] O . Sporns and R . K¨otter , PLoS Biol 2 , e369 ( 2004 ) . [ 16 ] U . Alon , Nature Reviews Genetics 8 , 450 ( 2007 ) . [ 17 ] G . Facchetti , G . Iacono , and C . Altaﬁni , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 20953 ( 2011 ) . [ 18 ] Y . J . Kim , M . Roh , S . - Y . Jeong , and S . - W . Son , Journal of the Korean Physical Society 65 , 1709 ( 2014 ) . [ 19 ] Y . J . Kim , M . Roh , and S . - W . Son , Journal of the Korean Physical Society 64 , 341 ( 2014 ) . [ 20 ] Y . Murase , T . Shimada , and N . Ito , New Journal of Physics 12 , 063021 ( 2010 ) . [ 21 ] Y . Murase , T . Shimada , N . Ito , and P . A . Rikvold , in Proceedings of the International Conference on Social Modeling and Simulation , plus Econophysics Colloquium 2014 ( Springer , Cham , 2015 ) pp . 175 – 186 . [ 22 ] F . Ogushi , J . Kert´esz , K . Kaski , and T . Shimada , Sci - entiﬁc Reports 7 , 1 ( 2017 ) . [ 23 ] Y . Murase and P . A . Rikvold , New Journal of Physics 20 , 083023 ( 2018 ) . [ 24 ] F . Ogushi , J . Kert´esz , K . Kaski , and T . Shimada , Royal Society open science 6 , 181471 ( 2019 ) . [ 25 ] J . Kunegis , in Proc . Int . Conf . on World Wide Web Com - panion ( 2013 ) pp . 1343 – 1350 . [ 26 ] F . Iorio , M . Bernardo - Faura , A . Gobbi , T . Cokelaer , G . Jurman , and J . Saez - Rodriguez , BMC bioinformatics 17 , 542 ( 2016 ) . [ 27 ] W . Z . Lidicker Jr , Bioscience 29 , 475 ( 1979 ) . [ 28 ] S . Sahney , M . J . Benton , and P . A . Ferry , Biology letters 6 , 544 ( 2010 ) . [ 29 ] H . J . Park , Y . Pichugin , and A . Traulsen , bioRxiv ( 2020 ) . [ 30 ] G . G . Van de Bunt , M . A . Van Duijn , and T . A . Snijders , Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory 5 , 167 ( 1999 ) . [ 31 ] “Chess network dataset – KONECT , ” ( 2016 ) . [ 32 ] “Wikipedia elections network dataset – KONECT , ” ( 2016 ) . [ 33 ] J . Leskovec , D . Huttenlocher , and J . Kleinberg , in Proc . Int . Conf . on Weblogs and Social Media ( 2010 ) . [ 34 ] G . Freytag and E . J . MacEwan , Freytag’s technique of the drama : an exposition of dramatic composition and art ( Scott , Foresman and Company , 1908 ) .