CHARACTERIZATION OF COATING SYSTEM INTERPHASES WITH PHASE IMAGING AFM by T . Nguyen , X . Gu , M . VanLandingham , M . Giraud , and R . Dutruc - Rosset Building and Fire Research Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Gaithersburg , MD 20899 - 8621 USA and R . Ryntz , Visteon Corporation Dearborn , MI 48121 USA and D . Nguyen PPG Industries , Inc . Allison Park , PA 15101 USA Reprinted from the 24th Annual Meeting of the Adhesion Society . Proceedings . , The Adhesion Society , February 2001 , Williamsburg , VA . Adhesion Society , Blacksburg , VA , Emerson , J . A . , Editor , 68 - 70 pp , 2001 . NOTE : This paper is a contribution of the National Institute of Standards and Technology and is not subject to copyright . CHARACTERIZATION OF COATING SYSTEM INTERPHASES WITH PHASE IMAGING AFM T . Nguyen , X . Gu , M . VanLandingham , M . Giraud , R . Dutruc - Rosset , R . Ryntz * , and D . Nguyen * * National Institute of Standards and Technology , Gaithersburg , MD 20899 * Visteon Corporation , Dearborn , MI 48121 * * PPG Industries , Inc . , Allison Park , PA 15101 INTRODUCTION The interface / interphase between a polymer film and a substrate controls the adhesion and durability of a variety of polymeric systems including adhesives and coatings on plastics and metals . Interphase formation is affected by processing conditions that control chemical kinetics , diffusion , and volumetric changes . In addition , the interphase often includes impurities , unreacted molecules , and additives . The resulting interphase can be a very complex structure , which is not easily analyzed . This study presents examples to demonstrate the usefulness of phase shift in tapping mode atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) for the characterization of polymeric interfaces / interphases . Tapping mode AFM is particularly attractive for polymer surface and interface studies because it exploits the high - resolution of the contact mode while minimizing sample damage due to the lateral forces inherent to contact mode . In tapping mode , the cantilever on which the tip is mounted is oscillated at a frequency near its resonance , typically , a few hundred kHz , so that the tip makes contact with the sample only for a short duration in each oscillation cycle . As the tip approaches the sample , the tip - sample interactions alter the amplitude , resonance frequency , and phase angle of the oscillating cantilever . Detection of phase changes of the cantilever probe during scanning provides an image , called a phase image . Phase changes during scanning are related to energy dissipation during tip - sample interactions [ 1 ] , and can result from changes in a number of parameters including topography , sample - tip interactions , deformation of sample - tip contact area , and experimental conditions [ 2 - 4 ] . The phase image often provides significantly more contrast than the topographic images , and is useful for compositional mapping of surfaces and interfaces of polymeric materials [ 5 ] . EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS * * Three types of interfaces were investigated : film / air ( film surface exposed to air ) , film / substrate ( film surface exposed to the substrate ) and cross sections . For film / air interface , both thin and thick films were investigated , and for film / substrate , only thick film was used . Thin films ( < 15 nm ) were prepared by spin coating of 0 . 08 % mass fraction of the polymers in solvent on cleaned silicon wafers using a spinner . Thick film samples were prepared by applying polymer solutions to the substrates by draw down or spraying . Cross sections of thermoplastic olefin ( TPO ) bulk and TPO / paint systems were prepared following the usual procedures for preparing cross sections for microscopic study . Strips of PTO and painted TPO were imbedded in a molding compound . Cross sections were obtained by cutting the embedded samples with a diamond saw , and followed with several polishing steps . Final polish was with a 0 . 25 µ m diamond paste . Unless otherwise stated , AFM measurements were performed using the Dimension 3100 Digital Instruments under ambient conditions . Both AFM topographic ( height ) and phase images were taken in tapping mode . For most of the images , a set point amplitude of between 50 % and 70 % of the free amplitude was used . Silicon tips having a drive frequency of about 300 kHz and a radius of approximately 5 nm were used . To obtain mechanical responses of different regions of the surface , nanoscale indentation was performed using the same silicon tip . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION One example to illustrate the advantage of phase over height AFM imaging for nanoscale characterization of polymer interfaces is illustrated in Figure 1 . This sample was prepared by applying a thick film ( ~ 300 µ m ) of a stoichiometric amine / epoxy on silicon wafer . The epoxy was a low viscosity resin comprising a 190 g / mol epoxide equivalent mass material and reactive diluents ; the curing agent was a polyalkoxyamine . After completely curing , the films were lifted up , and these images were taken from the surface that was in contact with the silicon substrate during film formation . The height image barely shows the dark and bright regions corresponding to the valleys and hills of the surface . However , the phase image clearly reveals the microstructure of the film , which consists of the nodular domains surrounding by the matrix regions . Similar microstructure has been observed in other amine - cured epoxies [ 6 , 7 ] . The domain has been attributed to the high - crosslinked region and the matrix as due to the low molecular mass material . Although still showing an heterogeneous structure , the microstructure of the surface facing the air ( not shown ) is much less defined than that of the surface facing the substrate . This observation suggests that the surface chemical composition of the film at the film / substrate interface is different from that at the film / air interface . One contributing factor may be the depletion of amine on the air / surface due to amine - CO 2 side reactions [ 8 ] and preferential adsorption of amines on the hydrophilic silicon substrate side [ 9 ] . Both processes would affect film surface chemical composition and microstructure . The result is also consistent with the extensive literature that the film / air interface is generally enriched with a lower - surface free energy component to minimize the polymer - air interfacial energy . The observed microstructural difference between the interior and exterior surfaces has strong implication in epoxy / substrate adhesion and wettability , paintability , and glueability of epoxy surfaces . Figure 1 . 500 nm x 500 nm height ( left ) and phase ( right ) AFM images of the amine - epoxy film surface that was in contact with a silicon substrate during cure . Poly ( vinylidene fluoride ) ( PVDF ) blended with amorphous polymers to improve the optical property is commonly used for industrial coatings . One example of the use of phase imaging for interfacial microstructure study of PVDF blends is displayed in Figure 2 . This sample was a blend of 50 / 50 mass fraction of PVDF and PMMA - co - PEA ( poly ( methylmethacrylate ) - poly ( ethylacrylate ) copolymer ) applied to a glass substrate at 246 o C for 10 min and cooled down slowly to 24 o C . The films were peeled off after immersing the coated glass plates in boiled water for 10 min . These images were taken from the surface that was in contact with the glass substrate . Both height and phase images for the large - size scan ( Figure 2a ) exhibit similar topographic features , showing the presence of 200 nm to 300 nm deep holes on the surface . a b Figure 2 : ( a ) 25 µ m x 25 µ m and ( b ) 1 µ m x 1 µ m AFM images of the surface that was in contact with glass substrate for a 50 / 50 blend of PVDF / PMMA - co - PEA film . ( In both a and b , height image is on the left and phase image is on the right . ) However , the fine microstructure at the film / glass interface of this film is best visualized in the magnified phase image displayed in Figure 2b for the smooth area away from the holes . It reveals the nanofibrils oriented in orthogonal directions . It should be mentioned that both height and phase image results show that the surface exposed to air of these films ( not shown ) is covered almost completely with crystallites of the PVDF . The result indicates a large difference in chemical composition and microstructure between the film / air and film / substrate interfaces . This difference has a strong implication in the adhesion , wettability , and cleanability of PVDF - base coatings . Thermoplastic olefins consisting of polypropylene blending with rubber are used increasingly in the automotive industry [ 10 ] . Molded TPO surface tends to have a poor adhesion with paints used to increase the durability and enhance the appearance of exterior TPO parts . For that reason , primer is commonly used for painting TPOs . The following two examples demonstrate the use of phase imaging AFM for characterization of TPO and its interphases with coatings . Figures 3a and 3b are the height and phase images of the polished surface of bulk TPO . The height image exhibits the bright and dark areas , corresponding to the peak and valleys , respectively , of the surface . However , the phase image shows the presence of dark particles having a dimension ranging from 50 nm to a few micrometers embedded in a matrix . Analyses of the force curves ( Figures 3c and 3d ) obtained by nanoindentation on the particle and on the matrix indicate that the particle has characteristics of a compliant material while the matrix behaves as an elastic body . Similar behaviors have been observed for hard / soft polymer blends [ 2 , 11 ] . Based on the combined phase image and force curve results , the dark particles are assigned to the rubber material and the bright matrix is the bulk polypropylene . a b c d Figure 3 . ( a ) Height and ( b ) phase AFM images of a polished bulk TPO , ( c ) force curve of the dark particle , and ( d ) force curve of the bright matrix of Figure 3b . The good contrast of the phase image would allow an effective investigation of rubber particle size and distribution in the TPO bulk material as a function of processing conditions . An example is illustrated in Figures 4a and 4b , which show height and phase images of polished cross sections for good - adhesion and poor - adhesion TPO / paint systems . The paint layers consist of a primer in contact with the TPO substrate , a basecoat and a topcoat . While the height images exhibit little difference in the polished surface structure between the two specimens , the phase images show the presence of numerous rubber particles near the TPO / paint interphase of the good - adhesion system . This phase image result is consistent with a recent fluorescence and Raman imaging study , which provided evidence of rubber migration to the TPO surface after primer application [ 12 ] . However , phase images of Figure 4b , and also at higher magnifications , show little evidence of rubber particles near in the TPO surface of the poor - adhesion TPO / paint system . a b Figure 4 . Height ( left ) and phase ( right ) AFM images of ( a ) good - adhesion TPO / paint system , and ( b ) poor - adhesion TPO / paint system . Another example to demonstrate the usefulness of phase imaging AFM is illustrated in Figure 5 . This is a patterned self - assembled monolayer ( SAM ) sample consisting of hydrophilic regions separated by hydrophobic regions . The images were taken using a NIST - developed relative humidity ( RH ) chamber attached to the AFM . Except for the high spots of the surface defects , the height images are essentially featureless at low or high RH . However , the phase images at different RH levels reveal the bright hydrophilic regions separated by the hydrophobic areas . Further , the phase image contrast difference increases with increasing RH . AFM using chemically - modified tips are increasingly used for probing surface chemical heterogeneity [ 13 ] . However , most studies are carried out in liquid to eliminate the effects of environment - induced capillary forces . This study provides the first evidence to indicate that indeed AFM can be used in air to effectively probe hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains of polymer interfaces . CONCLUSIONS While the contrast mechanism in phase imaging in tapping mode AFM is not well understood , the examples given in this study have demonstrated that the enhanced contrast of phase imaging often allows for distinguishing different material phases and constituents in the polymer interface region . < 1 % RH 14 % RH 60 % RH 90 % RH Figure 5 . Height and phase AFM images of a patterned SAM taken at different relative humidities , showing the effect of moisture on the phase image contrast . ( In each RH , height image is on the left and phase image is on the right . ) * * Certain commercial product or equipment is described to specify adequately the experimental procedure . In no case does such identification imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST , nor does it imply that it is necessarily the best available for the purpose . REFERENCES 1 . P . Cleveland , B . Anczykowski , A . E . Schmid , and V . B . Elings , Appl . Phys . Lett . 72 , 2613 ( 1998 ) . 2 . G . Bar , Y . Thomann , R . Brandsch , M . H . Whamgho , Langmuir 13 , 3807 ( 1997 ) . 3 . S . N . Magonov , V . B . Elings , and V . S . Papkov , Polymer 38 , 297 ( 1997 ) . 4 . D . Raghavan , X . Gu , M . VanLandingham , and T . Nguyen , Langmuir 16 , 9448 ( 2000 ) . 5 . S . N . Magonov and M . G . Heaton , Am . Laboratory 30 , May ( 1998 ) . 6 . M . Giraud , T . Nguyen , X . Gu , and M . VanLandingham , In this Proceeding . 7 . M . R . VanLandingham , R . F . Eduljee , and J . W . Gillespie , Jr . , J . Appl . Polym . Sci . 71 , 669 ( 1999 ) . 8 . J . . P . Bell , J . A . Reffner , S . Petrie , J . Appl . Polym . Sci . 21 , 1095 ( 1977 ) . 9 . G . R . Palmese and R . L . McCullough . J . Appl . Polym . Sci . 46 , 1863 ( 1992 ) . 10 . R . A . Ryntz , Adhesion to Plastics , Molding and Paintability ( Global Press , 1998 ) , p . 95 . 11 . D . Raghavan , X . Gu , T . Nguyen , M . VanLandingham , and A . Karim , Macromolecules 33 , 2573 ( 2000 ) . 12 . H . R . Morris , J . F . Turner , B . Munro , R . A . Ryntz , and P . J . Treado , Langmuir 15 , 2961 ( 1999 ) . 13 . A . Noy , D . Vezenov and C . Lieber , Ann . Rev . Mater . Sci . 27 , 381 ( 1997 ) .