Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences ( 2023 ) 80 : 355 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 023 - 05007 - z REVIEW Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing Flora Crozet 1 · Romain Levayer 1 Received : 31 August 2023 / Revised : 11 October 2023 / Accepted : 16 October 2023 © The Author ( s ) 2023 Abstract The coupling between mechanical forces and modulation of cell signalling pathways is essential for tissue plasticity and their adaptation to changing environments . Whilst the number of physiological and pathological relevant roles of mecha - notransduction has been rapidly expanding over the last decade , studies have been mostly focussing on a limited number of mechanosensitive pathways , which include for instance Hippo / YAP / TAZ pathway , Wnt / β - catenin or the stretch - activated channel Piezo . However , the recent development and spreading of new live sensors has provided new insights into the contri - bution of ERK pathway in mechanosensing in various systems , which emerges now as a fast and modular mechanosensitive pathway . In this review , we will document key in vivo and in vitro examples that have established a clear link between cell deformation , mechanical stress and modulation of ERK signalling , comparing the relevant timescale and mechanical stress . We will then discuss different molecular mechanisms that have been proposed so far , focussing on the epistatic link between mechanics and ERK and discussing the relevant cellular parameters affecting ERK signalling . We will finish by discussing the physiological and the pathological consequences of the link between ERK and mechanics , outlining how this interplay is instrumental for self - organisation and long - range cell – cell coordination . Keywords ERK · EGFR · Mechanics · Mechanotransduction · Morphogenesis · Growth · Signalling · Self - organisation · Cancer Introduction Cells and tissues are constantly subjected to a wide range of mechanical stresses which they cope with and timely adapt to . This extensive plasticity to environment changing is essential for tissue morphogenesis , homeostasis , and tis - sue regeneration . This potential is largely achieved through mechanotransduction [ 1 , 2 ] , the ability of cells to probe and convert stimuli from their mechanical environment into bio - chemical signals that influence cell decision - making , includ - ing differentiation , proliferation , and survival . Numerous studies have focussed on characterising mechanisms and pathways mediating stress sensing and intracellular force transduction , providing the cellular and the molecular bases that couple mechanical stimuli to ensuing cellular outcomes . To date , these studies have been restricted to a small number of force - induced pathways , including effectors with a pri - mary sensor role via stress - induced conformational change , or a more downstream involvement in relaying mechanical inputs . These include YAP / TAZ [ 3 – 5 ] , stretch - activated Piezo channel [ 6 – 8 ] , JNK ( c - Jun N - terminal Kinase ) [ 9 , 10 ] , β - catenin and Wnt pathway [ 11 , 12 ] or P53 [ 13 , 14 ] . Significantly , the ERK ( Extracellular Regulated Kinase ) pathway is now emerging as an additional player in the mechanotransduction ecosystem . ERK1 – 2 is a conserved and widely expressed serine / threonine MAPK , and a cen - tral integrator of growth factor and mitogen signals that regulate many cellular functions from proliferation , sur - vival , differentiation to cell migration [ 15 ] . Its activation is an integral part of a phosphorylation cascade initiated by the phosphorylation of the intracellular domain of membrane RTK receptors upon ligand binding , followed by activation of Ras GTPases , RAF and MEK , leading to the recruitment of a myriad of downstream ERK effec - tors , with cellular outcomes depending on stimulus / cel - lular contexts and the dynamics of ERK activity [ 16 ] . The connexion between mechanical stress and ERK activity variation was first explored in the late 1990s and early Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences * Romain Levayer romain . levayer @ pasteur . fr 1 Department of Developmental and Stem Cell Biology , Institut Pasteur , Université de Paris Cité , CNRS UMR 3738 , 25 Rue du Dr . Roux , 75015 Paris , France F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 2 of 19 2000s in a variety of cell cultures . By subjecting cells to different types of mechanical strains and substrate stiff - ness , and using traditional immunodetection techniques to measure ERK activity , they pioneered the emerging role of ERK as a mechanotransducer [ 17 – 25 ] . Nowadays , the recent and rapid development of new live sensors of ERK activity and imaging techniques has enhanced our current understanding of ERK involvement in mechanotransduc - tion [ 26 ] . Notably , development of live single - cell report - ers of ERK activity with high sensitivity and versability , initially FRET - based biosensors [ 27 , 28 ] , followed by Kinase Translocation Reporters ( KTRs ) [ 29 , 30 ] , have enabled qualitative and quantitative single - cell analyses of ERK activity dynamics , with the advantage of subcellu - lar compartment assessment for FRET - based sensors , and higher dynamic range and multiplexed imaging options for KTRs . In parallel , the design of optogenetic tools driv - ing synthetic stimulation of ERK pathway components has led to better understanding of the downstream decoding mechanisms of ERK activity dynamics in multicellular systems , and to the dissection of the signalling step inte - grating mechanical stress [ 31 – 35 ] . In this review , we discuss the emerging implications of the ERK pathway in mechanotransduction . We first present an overview of in vivo and in vitro contexts that have estab - lished a clear link between ERK activity , mechanical stress , tissue / cell deformation and shape and provide a systematic comparison of the mechanical stimuli and timescale asso - ciated with ERK variations . We then explore the key cel - lular parameters sensed , along with the different molecular mechanisms associated with mechanically induced ERK modulation . We then discuss the in vivo physiological and pathological functions of ERK mechanotransduction , high - lighting the novel properties emerging from fast modulation of ERK by mechanical inputs . This review can also be com - plemented by other excellent recent reviews covering the link between ERK mechanics and self - organisation [ 36 – 38 ] . Characterisation of ERK responses to mechanics in vitro and in vivo ERK activity has been linked to mechanics in a variety of cellular and tissue contexts and documented to respond to a wide range of mechanical cues . This includes response to cell / tissue strain in different axis and tissue / cell morphology , not only in cell culture , but also in in vivo settings ( Table 1 ) . We herein document them as comprehensively as possible , with a concise description of the different perturbative approaches used to trigger mechanical stress . The ration - ale is to establish whether a general mechanism is shared regarding mechanical modulation of ERK activation . Mechanical perturbations modulating cell / tissue strain With regard to mechanically induced cell / tissue deforma - tion , ERK has been reported to respond to the three stand - ard mechanical stresses , namely tension [ 19 , 33 , 39 – 42 ] , compression [ 20 , 39 , 43 ] and shear [ 17 , 18 ] . Briefly , ten - sile stress is defined by forces per unit of area generated by outward forces ( pulling ) that will tend to stretch an object , compressive stress is associated with inward forces ( pushing ) that will tend to squeeze an object , whilst shear stress is generated by forces applied parallel to the object which will tend to deform a rectangle into a parallelogram . In vitro tissue / cell deformation The connexion established between tension stress and ERK activity modulation has been massively evidenced with in vitro devices featuring stretchable polymer sub - strates on which cells are previously seeded . Cyclic or constant uniaxial stretch is applied to the elastic substrate to deform the cells , and ERK activity is monitored before and after stress ( Fig . 1A top ) . In these settings , various cell types display ERK sensitivity to tensile stress : from epithelia [ 33 , 42 ] , fibroblasts [ 40 , 41 ] , osteoblasts [ 44 ] , to preadipocytes [ 19 ] . 50 % uniaxial stretch of elastic sili - con chambers for 30 min triggers a rapid increase in ERK activity ( peaking within 15 min ) in human urothelial cells [ 45 ] . Similarly , a 5 - min 50 % uniaxial stretch of human foreskin fibroblasts induces ERK activation on stress fibres in a myosin - II inhibition context [ 40 ] . In MDCK ( Madin – Darby Canine Kidney ) cells , an increase in ERK activity is measured after 5 min of substrate stretch ( and 1 min for EGFR phosphorylation ) , and ERK activity gradually rises with the degree of stretch ( statistically sig - nificant at 30 % , 40 % and 50 % stretch ) [ 33 ] . Alternatively , a statistically significant increase in phospho - ERK was observed after 1 h of cyclic stretch ( 10 % elongation ) in human dermal fibroblasts plated on flexible silicone rubber plates [ 41 ] . Although the degree and the duration of defor - mation vary from one system to another , ERK response to mechanical stretching appears to be a robust cellular property shared by different cell lines in vitro . Interestingly , ERK activity also responds to negative strain and hydrostatic pressure in cultured epithelial cells . This was evidenced by subjecting human bronchial epi - thelial cells to apical – basal compressive stress ( 20 cm H 2 O ~ 2 kPa transcellular pressure ) , a stress similar to the one experienced during airway constriction in vivo [ 20 ] . Compressive stress triggers a ~ 10 % reduction in the thickness of bronchial epithelial cell layers and a ~ 87 % Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 3 of 19 355 decrease in the volume of the lateral intercellular space . In this context , 30 min of cell compaction induces strong ERK activation ( Fig . 1A bottom ) . HeLa cells confined under constant compressive stress of 1 kPa ( similar to pressure in solid tumours , 0 . 21 – 20 kPa ) experience a tran - sient increase in ERK activation , statistically significant from 5 to 30 min of stress , with transient nuclear enrich - ment of GFP - tagged ERK2 [ 43 ] . On a similar timescale , hydrostatic pressure of + 50 mmHg ( ~ 6 . 7 kPa , emulat - ing the average blood pressure increase during exercise ) induces a transient increase in ERK phosphorylation that peaks within 5 min and returns to basal levels after 30 min of stress application in human umbilical vein endothelial cells , which is associated with endothelial tube formation [ 46 ] . Thus , pressure of kPa range can trigger ERK activa - tion in various contexts within few minutes . Mechanical stresses experienced in vivo Whilst some in vitro devices mimic the mechanical stresses that cells would experience in a physiological / pathological context , modulation of ERK activity by tissue / cell strain per - turbations has also been evidenced in various in vivo con - texts . In the developing Drosophila pupal notum ( a single layer epithelium in the thorax ) , local stretching / compaction of the epithelial monolayer transiently increases / downregu - lates ERK activity ( assessed by the nucleus accumulation of the ERK sensor miniCic ) , which subsequently modu - lates cell survival ( Fig . 1B ) [ 39 ] . This was on the one hand demonstrated by ectopic stretching driven by tissue stitch - ing to the cuticle through laser wounding , which triggers cell stretching and ERK activation anterior to the wound due to global tissue drift towards the anterior side and cell immobilisation on the posterior side ( Fig . 1B left ) . Con - versely , releasing pre - stress by a square pulsed - laser cut of the tissue induces rapid relaxation / densification of the tis - sue and a transient downregulation of ERK activity ( with a minima reached ~ 30 min after cutting ) ( Fig . 1B middle ) . Finally , local tissue compaction driven by the overgrowth of Ras V12 clones progressively downregulates ERK activity in WT - compacted cells , leading to WT cell elimination and clonal expansion ( Fig . 1B right ) . In the context of notum Table 1 Summary of the studies linking mechanical stress and regulation of ERK activity Stretch Compaction / hydrostatic pressure Shear Cell density and shape Matrix stiffness Membrane tension Reference Cellular and tissular context Mechanical stress modulating ERK activity ERK dynamics ERK activity detection Cellular outcome / Biological function Tanabe 2004 [ 19 ] Preadipocytes 3T3 - L1 cells ( in vitro ) Tension stress : 45 h 130 % uniaxial cyclic stretch Increased ERK phosphorylation p - ERK immunoblotting Inhibition of adipocyte differentiation Human foreskin fibroblasts ( in vitro ) Tension stress : 5 min 50 % uniaxial stretch Positive correlation between ERK phosphorylation intensity and tensile forces on stress fibers HaCaT cells ( in vitro ) Suspended epithelial bridges myosin - II - dependent p - ERK on actin bundles Mouse bladder distention ( in vivo ) Intermittent 100 - cm H 2 O intravesical pressure of 1 min at 9 min intervals or continuous 60 - cm H 2 O intravesical pressure for 30 min ERK activity peaking at 10 min after the first pressure overload and back to basal level 1 hour after the last overload for intermittent 100 - cm H 2 O intravesical pressure hTERT - immortalized human urothelial cells ( in vitro ) Tension stress : 30 min 50 % uniaxial stretch ERK activity peaking within 15 min Gudipaty 2017 [ 42 ] MDCK cells ( in vitro ) Tension stress : uniaxial stretch Increased p - ERK within 5 min after stretch p - ERK immunoblotting Cell division Local tissue relaxation / densification by laser square severing Transient ERK downregulation : peaking accumulation of miniCic in the nucleus ( ERK inactivation ) 30 min after tissue cutting Local Ras v12 clone - driven compaction Decreased ERK activity in compacted WT cells Local tissue stretching by laser wounding Transient increase in ERK activity anterior to the wound Human dermal fibroblasts ( in vitro ) Tension stress : 10 % stretch from 30 min to 3h Statistically significant increase of activated p - ERK within 1 hour of strain p - ERK immunoblotting and ERK immunostaining Mouse hypertrophic scar tissues ( in vivo ) Mechanical load - induced hypertrophic scar Increased ERK phosphorylation p - ERK immunohistochemistry Centrifugal force : 0 - 450 x g p - Erk2 is detectable after 3 min of centrifugation , peaking within 10 min Compressive stress : 30 % and 50 % strain , 5 min Increased p - Erk2 Xenopus laevis animal caps ( explant ) Tension stress : 1 . 5 - fold stretch , 5 min Increased p - Erk2 Tension stress : collective cell migration Cell strain rate along migration axis precedes ERK activation rate by 3 min Tension stress : 20 - 50 % uniaxial stretch , ERK activity monitoring 20 min after stretch Significant increase in ERK activity when strain amplitude exceeds 30 % Tension stress : collective cell migration Extension - shrinkage rate precedes ERK activity rate by 24 min Cochlear duct - extension by blebbistatin treatment Spatial expansion of ERK activity in the floor plane Tschumperlin 2004 [ 20 ] Normal human bronchial epithelial cells ( in vitro ) Compressive stress : 30 min apical to basal transcellular pressure gradient P - ERK increases after 30 min of strain application p - ERK immunoblotting / Yoshino 2020 [ 46 ] Human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( in vitro ) Hydrostatic pressure : + 50 mmHg , 5 - 30 min exposure P - ERK peaks within 5 min and returns to baseline after 30 min of stress application p - ERK immunoblotting and immunostaining Cell proliferation , endothelial tube formation Baschieri 2020 [ 43 ] HeLa , Hs578t , CACO2 , HepG2 cells ( in vitro ) Compressive stress : constant stress of 1 kPa Transient p - ERK increase and GFP - tagged ERK2 nuclear accumulation within 30 min of strain GFP - tagged ERK2 ( HeLa cells ) p - ERK immunoblotting / Shear stress : 12 dynes / cm 2 for 2 - 60 min P - ERK peaks within 5 min and returns to baseline after 60 min of stress application ( western blot ) , peaks within 10 min ( in - gel kinase assay ) Shear stress : 3 . 5 - 117 dynes / cm 2 for 5 min Top p - ERK activity for 12 - 35 dynes / cm 2 ( western blot ) Aoki 2013 [ 31 ] NRK - 52E cells ( in vitro ) Cell density : from 2 . 2 x 10 3 cells / cm 2 to 4 . 6 x 10 5 cells / cm 2 Bell - shaped modulation of ERK activity pulse frequency to cell density , peaking frequency at intermediate cell density ( 2 . 2 – 4 . 6 x 10 4 cells / cm 2 ) ERK FRET biosensor Cell proliferation rate Kawabata and Matsuda 2016 [ 48 ] MDCK cells ( in vitro ) Cell density : 0 . 5 x 10 4 cells / cm 2 and 4 x 10 4 cells / cm 2 High cell density suppresses basal ERK activity and stochastic ERK activity pulses ERK FRET biosensor p - ERK immunoblotting ( pY - ERK , pTpY - ERK , pT - ERK ) / Mouse developing lungs ( explant ) Tissue - scale curvature Compressive stress : PDMS - based uniaxial compression vertical or parallel to the distal - proximal axis Compressive stress : Osmolyte - based uniaxial compression Mouse lung epithelia cells ( ex vivo 2D culture ) Tensile and compressive stress : PDMS - based uniaxial stretch and compression Paszek 2005 [ 25 ] Mammary epithelial cells ( in vitro ) Matrix stiffness Higher and more sustained EGF - induced ERK activity on stiff matrix p - ERK immunoblotting Cell contractility Trappmann 2012 [ 50 ] Human epidermal stem cells ( in vitro ) Matrix stiffness : from 0 . 5 kPa to 230 kPa Reduction of ERK phosphorylation on soft matrix p - ERK immunoblotting Cell differentiation Yang 2018 [ 51 ] MCF7 cells ( in vitro ) Matrix stiffness : soft 0 . 5kPa or stiff 12 kPa Decreased sensitivity to EGF on soft substrate p - ERK immunoblotting ERK KTR / Farahani 2021 [ 34 ] MCF10A cells ( in vitro ) Primary mouse keratinocytes ( in vitro ) Matrix stiffness : from soft 0 . 1 kPa , medium 0 . 9 kPa , to stiff 4 kPa Higher and more pulsatile ERK activity on stiff matrix at steady state Stronger and more sustained ERK activity upon EGF stimulation on stiff matrix pp - ERK immunoblotting ERK KTR / De Belly 2021 [ 52 ] Mouse embryonic stem cells ( in vitro ) Membrane tension : exit from naive pluripotency Lowered ERK activation in cells that maintain a high membrane tension ( iEZR _ CA cells ) compared to control cells p - ERK immunoblotting ERK FRET biosensor Cell differentiation Sano 2016 [ 45 ] Hirashima and Matsuda biorXiv 2022 [ 49 ] Mouse lung epithelia cells ( ex vivo 3D culture ) ERK activation at positive tissue curvature ERK FRET biosensor Gao 2019 [ 41 ] Cell junction remodeling > increase in tissue stiffness Phosphoproteomic analysis p - ERK immunoblotting and immunostaining Xenopus laevis embryos ( in vivo ) Tseng 1995 [ 17 ] Bovine aortic endothelial cells ( in vitro ) p - ERK immunoblotting western blot and in - gel kinase assay / Murine developing cochlear duct ( ex vivo 3D culture ) ERK FRET biosensor Cell contraction ( suggested by cross - correlation analysis between tissue curvature and ERK activity ) > collective cell migration Ishii 2021 [ 57 ] Apical actin polymerization > extension of cell apical side > decrease in tissue curvature p - ERK immunostaining Hino 2020 [ 33 ] MDCK cells ( in vitro ) Polarized cell contraction > collective cell migration ERK FRET biosensor Pathological angiogenesis , hypertrophic scar formation Cell elimination / survival / ERK nuclear - to - cytosolic translocation reporter ( miniCic ) Moreno 2019 [ 39 ] Drosophila pupal notum ( in vivo ) Hirata 2015 [ 40 ] / ERK FRET biosensor Kinoshita 2020 [ 47 ] Summary of the main relevant parameters outlined in various studies connecting mechanical stress to ERK regulation . This includes the biologi - cal context , the type of mechanical perturbations , the characteristic timescales , the methodology to measure ERK variation as well as putative outputs and biological functions F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 4 of 19 increased decreased C A P B A Drosophila pupal notum ( in vivo ) laser wound stretching uniaxial lateral stretch Mouse developing lung ( explant culture ) Tissue curvature Cultured cells stretchable polymer substrate transcellular pressure gradient silicon plug Fig . 1 In vitro and in vivo mechanical regulation of ERK activity . A – C Modulation of ERK activity under mechanical stress is pre - sented in a binary fashion , with cells turning red due to increased ERK activity , and conversely blue due to decreased ERK activity . A In vitro application of mechanical strain to cultured cells . Top : cells plated on an extensible polymer substrate are deformed upon lateral uniaxial stretching of the substrate , associated with an increase in ERK activity . Bottom : Bronchial epithelial cells cultured at air – liq - uid interface on a microporous substrate . Pressure application through a port in a silicon plug places cells in a pressure chamber over the cell apical surface , with the cells experiencing compressive stress via an apico - basal transcellular pressure gradient [ 20 ] . Both lateral stretching and apico - basal compaction induce increased ERK activ - ity in epithelial cells . B Mechanical perturbations in the Drosophila pupal notum [ 39 ] . Left : laser wounding of the notum epithelial mon - olayer triggers local tissue stretching and a transient increase in ERK activity anterior to the wound due to anterior - oriented tissue drift ( big arrow ) and posterior - oriented wound closure ( smaller arrows ) . A stands for anterior and P for posterior . Middle : Laser cutting of a notum square induces local relaxation / densification of the tissue and a decrease in apical cell surface area , triggering transient ERK down - regulation . Right : Compaction of WT cells by increased growth of surrounding Ras v12 clones in the context of cell competition progres - sively reduces ERK activity in compacted WT cells . C Tissue curva - ture of the murine developing lung epithelium instructs ERK activity , which is higher in convex than in concave regions [ 49 ] Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 5 of 19 355 development , local positive and negative tissue strains are therefore associated with opposite ERK activity outcomes that instruct whether cells survive or die . This places the ERK pathway in a central position in the mechanical fine - tuning of cell elimination . In vertebrates , bladder distention by elevated intra - ves - ical pressure activates ERK in mouse urothelial cells [ 45 ] . These observations were permitted by intravital imaging of the mouse bladder , and intra - vesical pressure applications , with a FRET sensor to monitor ERK activity . In this respect , application of intermittent 100 - cm H 2 O intra - vesical pres - sure ( ~ 10 kPa ) for 1 min at 9 - min intervals is sufficient to rapidly activate ERK in urothelial cells ( peaking at 10 min after the first pressure overload and returning to basal lev - els 1 h after pressure release ) . Moreover , continuous 60 - cm H 2 O ( 6 kPa ) intra - vesical pressure application for 30 min , mimicking bladder urinary retention , induces strong ERK activation in the urothelium [ 45 ] , illustrating the physiologi - cal relevance of this pressure - induced ERK activation . In Xenopus laevis embryos , ectodermal cells activate ERK2 during gastrulation , during which the cells are alleg - edly exposed to tensile forces induced by gastrulation move - ments [ 47 ] . Centrifugation of Xenopus embryos triggers embryo deformation , from spherical to flattened , which enhances ERK activity . Phospho - ERK2 is detectable as early as 3 min after centrifugation and peaks within 10 min . Simi - larly , subjecting embryos to compressive stress or stretching animal caps explants for 5 min leads to embryo deforma - tion that promotes ERK2 phosphorylation , illustrating that ERK is an early target of mechanical force during Xenopus embryogenesis . ERK regulation by tissue / cell shape and density We have reported so far ERK modulations triggered by mechanical perturbations of tissue / cell strain . ERK activity has also been documented to respond directly to steady - state tissue / cell shape and density . Cellular density A clear link has been established between modulation of ERK activity dynamics and cell density in epithelial cells , correlating with the rate of cell proliferation and the sensi - tivity of ERK activity to upstream oncogene proteins . Cul - tured NRK - 52E ( Normal Rat Kidney 52E ) and MDCK cells exhibit heterogeneous stochastic ERK activity pulses whose frequency varies as a function of cell density in a bell shape [ 31 , 48 ] . ERK peak is observed at an intermediate density of 2 . 2 – 4 . 6 × 10 4 cells / cm 2 for NRK - 52E cells ( which vary between 2 . 2 × 10 3 cells / cm 2 and 4 . 6 × 10 5 cells / cm 2 at conflu - ence ) [ 31 ] . Interestingly , a similar density in MDCK cells ( 4 × 10 4 cells / cm 2 ) abrogates stochastic ERK activity pulses [ 48 ] , suggesting that the quantitative relationship between density and ERK is cell type - dependent . Importantly , the induction of active Ras and BRaf in MDCK cells does not bypass ERK activity suppression by high cell density , sug - gesting that density sensing acts relatively downstream in the pathway . This is another illustration of the context - depend - ant outcome of oncogene activation . Thus , cell density can directly modulate the frequency of ERK pulses which will eventually modulate the rate of cell proliferation [ 31 ] . Tissue curvature Recently , Hirashima and Mastuda demonstrate that ERK activity also correlates with tissue - scale curvature [ 49 ] . In the lobes of developing murine lungs , epithelial ERK activ - ity displays a distinct spatial distribution , with higher activ - ity in convex regions where the basal cell area is larger , and low activity in concave regions where basal area is small , suggesting an interplay between ERK activity and cell mor - phology ( Fig . 1C ) . This spatial pattern is also visible in 3D culture of isolated lung epithelial tissue embedded in FGF1 - containing Matrigel , suggesting that it is not driven by enhanced ligand secretion in convex regions . Live imag - ing ex vivo outlined a spatio - temporal correlation between decrease of tissue curvature at the tip apex and decrease of ERK activity with an averaged delay of 97 min . Further - more , local modulation of tissue curvature through parallel or vertical compression using PDMS or hydrostatic pressure was also sufficient to modulate ERK activity . Subcellular force modulation regulating ERK activity We have so far restricted our attention to the modulation of ERK activity upon global modulation of cell / tissue strain and shape . This section focuses more specifically on mechanical stress at the subcellular level that regulates ERK activity . In this regard , ERK activity has been associated with stress sensing at the cell – substrate interface via changes in underlying matrix stiffness [ 25 , 34 , 50 , 51 ] , forces con - veyed by cell – cell junctions in the context of collective cell migration [ 33 ] , to modulation of cell membrane tension associated with cell differentiation [ 52 ] . Cell – substrate interface ERK activity has been shown to respond to mechanical stress applied at the cell – substrate contact and specifically associated with subcellular compartments at the inter - face with the substrate . The most obvious link between cell – substrate interaction and ERK was first illustrated through the impact of substrate stiffness . The finding that the dynamics of ERK activity can be mediated by F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 6 of 19 matrix stiffness is particularly relevant in the context of tumorigenesis . Matrix rigidity is a common feature of the solid tumour microenvironment during tumorigenesis and induces modulation of various tumour cell outcomes , such as tissue invasion and proliferation [ 53 ] . The link between substrate rigidity and variation in ERK activ - ity has been established by culturing mammalian cancer cell lines on matrices with different elastic moduli , rang - ing from healthy tissue stiffness ( 0 . 1 kPa ) to stiffness of rigid mammary tumours ( around 4 kPa ) . Several studies demonstrated that stiff matrices increase the frequency of EGF - induced ERK activity pulses and foster a shift towards more sustained and higher ERK activity [ 25 , 34 , 51 ] . In MCF7 cells ( Michigan Cancer Foundation 7 ) , cells cultured on a soft 0 . 5 kPa or rigid 12 kPa substrate dis - play a different response sensitivity to EGF stimulation , which is decreased on soft substrates . In addition , fewer pulses of ERK activity are measured on soft versus rigid substrates for the same EGF concentration stimulation , as indicated by the frequency of ERK KTR nuclear exit [ 51 ] . In MCF10A cells cultured on fibronectin - coated pol - yacrylamide hydrogels , the stiff matrices foster a higher and more pulsatile ERK activity at the steady state , and a stronger ERK activity shifted towards sustained signalling upon EGF stimulation [ 34 ] . Similarly , MEC cells exhibit a higher and more sustained EGF - induced ERK activity on stiffer matrices , associated with enhanced cell con - tractility [ 25 ] . Substrate rigidity also plays an instructive role in stem cell fate through modulation of ERK activ - ity , as shown by the differentiation of human epidermal stem cells associated with decreased ERK activity on soft polyacrylamide substrates [ 50 ] . Altogether , these works suggest that soft substrate acts as an attenuator of ERK activity , which influences downstream cell contractility and fate . ERK activity is also coupled to subcellular structures located on the basal part of the cell , which may act as sen - sors of substrate stiffness and strain , and modulate the dynamics of ERK activity . In human foreskin fibroblasts , phospho - ERK colocalises with stress fibres in a myosin - II and tension - dependent manner [ 40 ] . Uniaxial substrate stretching after myosin - II inhibition treatment increases P - ERK recruitment specifically on more tensed stress fibres parallel to the stretching axis . Individual stress fibres thus act as mechanosensors for ERK activation , which may be relevant for locally directing ERK signalling to precise sub - cellular sites . ERK activity is also coupled to dynamic cel - lular protrusions which is further enhanced on stiff matrix stiffness [ 51 ] . In MDCK cells , the specification of leader cells during collective migration is mediated by persistent ERK activation , promoted by lamellipodia at the free edges and a positive feedback loop between HGF receptor activa - tion and cell protrusion [ 54 ] . Cell – cell interface In addition to ECM – cell interaction , ERK is also modulated by mechanical forces transmitted at the cell – cell interface through adherens junctions . In collective cell migration , a leading edge of cells transmits guided mechanical forces to following cells in an orderly , coordinated fashion , promoting directional cell migration and tissue expansion associated with morphogenesis and tissue repair [ 55 ] . In this context , waves of ERK activity were observed in the opposite direc - tion to cell migration in MDCK monolayers , mouse cochlea and mouse epidermis [ 33 , 56 , 57 ] . In MDCK cells , ERK activation triggers polarised rear contraction , which induces the pulling and the stretching of the neighbouring following cells , propagating ERK activity and the migration unidirec - tionality on a large scale in a self - sustaining manner [ 33 ] . Mechanical coupling through adherens junction is essential for ERK wave propagation and long - range coordination of cell migration [ 33 ] . The parameters and the properties of this coordination will be discussed in greater detail in the third section of the review . During MDCK cell collective cell migration , cross - correlation analysis reveals that cell strain rate along the migration axis ( evaluated by particle image velocimetry ) precedes ERK activation rate by 3 min , outlining a rapid impact of cell deformation on ERK sig - nalling [ 33 ] . Retrograde ERK waves were also described in 3D ex vivo culture of the developing murine cochlear duct opposite to the base - to - apex global tissue flow [ 57 ] . Here , the extension – shrinkage rate precedes ERK activity rate by 24 min [ 57 ] . Whilst these numbers are mostly based on cross - correlation and should be interpreted with cau - tion given the complex temporal pattern generated by the mutual regulation between ERK and cell mechanics , these differences are nonetheless interesting and may be due to different characteristic cell size ( 4 µm for cochlear duct cells compared to 20 µm for MDCK cells , in line with the slower ERK wave propagation speed in the cochlear duct ) , difference between 2 and 3D culture , or differences in the upstream signal ( FGFR - dependent in the developing cochlea channel , and EGFR - dependent for MDCK cells ) . Membrane tension modulation Global modulation of membrane tension has also been associated with ERK regulation . The spreading of mouse embryonic stem cells on an extracellular substrate is con - comitant with a decrease in plasma membrane tension and an increase in ERK endosomal activity , hence promoting cell fate transition and exit from naïve pluripotency [ 52 ] . Tension reduction is prompted by a decrease in ERM ( Ezrin Radixin Moesin ) protein phosphorylation driven by a β - catenin - mediated reduction of RhoA activity . During the exit from pluripotency , cells that maintain high membrane Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 7 of 19 355 tension by expressing a constitutively active form of Ezrin have a reduced global ERK activity compared to control cells , reduced ERK activity at early endosomes , as well as deregulation of ERK - targeted genes evidenced by RNA - Seq . In conclusion , co - option of ERK signalling appears to be a general mechanism deployed by cells subjected to mechanical stress . ERK activity is regulated by the three standard mechanical stresses ( tension , pressure and shear ) , whether extrinsic or intrinsic in origin , together with tis - sue / cell morphology . In some cases , ERK activity gradu - ally rises as the degree of mechanical stress increases [ 33 , 47 ] , whilst in others , it adapts in a biphasic manner , with a maximised frequency of ERK activity pulses at intermediate stress [ 31 ] . In most of the cases , the most relevant mechani - cal / geometrical input remains hard to identify ( e . g . : strain rate versus absolute shape , cortex versus membrane ten - sion , apical area versus cell height , see [ 58 ] for a similar discussion ) . However , some commonalities can be found in apparently opposite mechanical perturbations . For instance , centrifugation , compaction and stretching result in similar ERK activation outputs in Xenopus embryos most likely because they all lead to cell flattening and spreading [ 47 ] . Similarly , epithelia lateral stretching [ 33 ] and apico - basal compaction [ 20 ] both lead to ERK activation and an increase of cell apical area relative to cell height , and conversely for epithelial cell lateral compaction [ 39 ] ( Fig . 1A ) . This is also in good agreement with the strong reduction of ERK pulse frequencies at high cell density , associated with low apical area and high cell height [ 31 ] . This may point to a univer - sal role of cell shape ( high apical / basal area relative to cell height ) with squamous - like shape being more permissive for ERK activation relative to columnar shape . Furthermore , although the cellular systems , the type of mechanical stress and cellular outcomes differs , most of these studies outline similar short timescales of ERK modulation , in the order of few minutes ( Table 1 ) . This suggests the existence of regula - tory mechanism based on protein – protein interaction / protein conformation / phosphorylation , rather than gene expression - based regulation . This prompts us to review the cellular and the molecular mechanisms that convey mechanical stress to the modulation of ERK activity . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of ERK mechanical regulation Having described the different contexts associating cell / tissue deformation and shape with ERK activity , we now explore the molecular mechanisms by which mechanics drives variation in ERK activity . In particular , we review the key parameters of cellular sensing , and their associ - ated putative molecular mechanisms inducing ERK sig - nalling . So far , no consensus has been reached on a single regulatory mechanism , suggesting the existence of multi - ple mechanisms , each of which has been substantiated in their associated experimental system ( Fig . 2 ) . Two com - mon mechanisms have been documented to date : ( 1 ) an indirect contribution of mechanical stress to ERK vari - ation via sensing of cell / tissue shape and extracellular space geometry ; ( 2 ) a direct sensing of cell mechanics modulation . We conclude this section by discussing the epistatic link between mechanics and ERK modulation and identifying the core components of the pathways that can be modulated by geometry / mechanical inputs . Sensing of tissue / cell shape and intercellular space geometry It has been well documented that cell geometry and sur - face of the cell – cell interface can modulate the output of signalling pathways [ 59 – 61 ] . For instance , cell density and associated cell shape modulation polarise the localisation of TGF - β receptors on the cell basal side , altering TGF - β signal transduction [ 62 ] . The same applies to changes in the volume of the intercellular space , which can increase the concentration of available soluble factors and binding to membrane receptors . Here we describe two mechanisms by which mechanical stress modulates cell / tissue geometry or the shape of the intercellular space , fostering enhanced ERK activity . Change in intercellular space volume In bronchial epithelial cells , ERK activation depends on the shedding of EGF family ligands from the basolateral surface , as inhibition of matrix metalloprotease activity reduces both baseline and compaction - induced ERK phos - phorylation [ 20 ] . Alongside , the application of apico - basal compressive stress results in a ~ 10 % reduction in cell layer thickness , which is not due to a significant reduction in total cell volume , but to a sharp decrease ( 87 % ) in the vol - ume of the compliant lateral intercellular space ( Fig . 2A ) [ 20 ] . The study predicts that with a constant ligand shed - ding rate , the concentration of EGF family ligands in the intercellular volume is inversely proportional to the width of the lateral intercellular space , thus leading to an approx - imately eightfold increase in effective ligand concentration following a 10 % reduction of cell thickness . This matches the increase in HB - EGF ligand required experimentally to mimic strain - induced ERK phosphorylation . Thus , tissue geometry / compression can be encoded in variation of the lateral intercellular space which will be sensed through the modulation of EGFR ligand concentration . F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 8 of 19 Cell morphology sensing Variations in cell geometry , such as changes in cell aspect ratio and apical and / or basal area , could also alter the number of transmembrane receptors that can bind extracellular ligands , thus modulating downstream signal transduction . This would be relevant in conditions where ligands or receptors are spe - cifically enriched on one specific side of the cell ( apical , basal or lateral ) . In the lobes of developing murine lungs , whilst all FGFR are expressed homogenously , FGF1 is produced by mesenchymal cells surrounding the epithelial basal side [ 49 ] , suggesting that FGFR activation may be restricted to the basal side . Accordingly , convex regions with larger cell basal area also display high ERK activity . Moreover , FGF1 is endocytosed specifically at the basal surface of positive curved regions during ex vivo culture in Matrigel with homogeneous FGF1 . This is all in agreement with a curvature sensing mech - anism based on modulation of cell basal surface and FGFR ligand accessibility . However , nothing excludes at this stage a contribution of curvature - dependent difference in membrane tension which could also modulate ERK activation . Direct sensing of changes in cell mechanics In addition to the indirect perception of mechanical cues by cell and tissue shape , direct sensing of cell mechanics can be transmitted intracellularly to signalling pathways via force - induced conformational / state changes in mechanosensory pro - teins [ 1 ] . In this respect , force changes at cell adhesion sites or changes in cell membrane tension translate then biochemi - cally into set points for ERK signalling . This was reported for force - sensitive ion channels [ 42 ] , integrins and focal adhesion components [ 25 , 41 ] , as well as actin bundles operating as signalling platforms [ 40 ] . Fig . 2 Cellular and molecu - lar mechanisms coupling mechanics to ERK activity . A Apico - basal compaction of epithelial cells reduces the volume of the lateral intercel - lular space , increasing ligand concentration and triggering EGFR - ERK signalling [ 20 ] . B Mechanical stretch induces the opening of the stretch - activated Piezo1 channel and an influx of calcium activating ERK [ 42 ] . C EGFR monomer and E - cadherin homodimers form a heterotri - meric complex at the plasma membrane that sequesters EGFR monomer . Forces applied to homophilic E - cadherin bonds disrupts the complex , enabling EGFR dimerization and signal - ling upon ligand binding [ 65 ] . D Matrix stiffness induces integrin clustering and focal adhesion assembly , enhancing ERK acti - vation [ 25 ] . E Decreased cell membrane tension during early differentiation of embryonic stem cells increases FGFR1 endocytosis and endocytic ERK signalling [ 52 ] Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 9 of 19 355 Stress sensing through increased transmembrane channel flow In MDCK cells , rapid activation of ERK upon stretching depends on the stretch - activated Piezo1 channel and calcium influx ( Fig . 2B ) [ 42 ] . MDCK cells stretched at steady state by wounding or with a uniaxial stretching device result in a rapid increase in Piezo1 - mediated cell division , as validated by Piezo1 knockdown and GFP - tagged Piezo1 rescue , as well as pharmacological calcium inhibition . The stretch - induced increase in ERK phosphorylation in this context is abrogated when cells are incubated with gadolinium , a non - specific inhibitor of stretch - activated channels . This places Piezo1 signalling in a pivotal position in the stretch - sensing mechanism , instructing a rapid increase in ERK activation , which enhances cell division of early G 2 cells . Similarly in endothelial cells , transient ERK activation under hydrostatic pressure also relies on force - induced transmembrane channel flow [ 46 ] . Transient ERK activation by hydrostatic pressure is mediated by water efflux via the aquaporin 1 channel , which induces a decrease in relative cell area and activation of protein kinase C / Ras - ERK pathway via specific G pro - tein - coupled receptors ( α1 - adrenergic receptor and serotonin receptor type 2A ) [ 46 ] . Interestingly , lateral cell stretching and hydrostatic pressure are both sensed by transmembrane molecular / ionic flux , triggering a rapid ( 5 min ) increase in ERK activity [ 42 , 46 ] . This sensing mechanism appears rel - evant to the rapid co - option of ERK signalling , which could be suitable for short time - scale stress . Sensing of cell membrane tension via modulated receptor endocytosis In addition to stretch - activated ion channels , cell membrane tension can be sensed by a modulation of endocytosis of growth factor components , altering downstream ERK sig - nalling . A close interplay has indeed been reported between membrane tension and clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 63 ] . In mouse embryonic stem cells , the exit from naïve pluri - potency is mediated by FGF - ERK signalling via a drop in effective membrane tension ( Fig . 2E ) [ 52 ] . Decreased membrane tension in this setting induces increased levels of endocytosis , assessed by a fluid phase uptake assay with pH - sensitive fluorescent dextran , whilst high membrane tension antagonises endocytosis . FGFR1 internalisation is reduced in cells of high membrane tension expressing a constitutively active form of Ezrin , whilst Rab5a overexpres - sion raises receptor internalisation to levels similar to those in WT cells . Consistently , pharmacological reduction of endocytosis rate decreases ERK activity in early endosomes ( assessed by a FRET sensor of endosomal ERK activity ) and Rab5a overexpression - mediated increase in endocytosis enhances ERK activity independently of membrane tension . In embryonic stem cells , cell membrane tension thus acts as a regulator of cell fate transition by directing FGF recep - tor endocytosis and endosomal ERK signalling , therefore instructing whether cells remain in a naive state or undergo early differentiation [ 52 ] . Conversely in HeLa cells , mechanical stress is also sensed via frustration of clathrin - coated endocytosis , where unre - solved endocytic buddings form Clathrin - Coated Struc - tures ( CCS ) —also named Clathrin plaques— can oper - ate as signalling platforms [ 43 ] . Cell compaction drives a global increase in the lifetime of CCS and rapid recruitment of EGFR and HGFR to CCS , followed by transient ERK activation [ 43 ] . Similar CCS dynamics and EGFR / HGFR trapping was observed on stiff substrates in HeLa cells on the membrane side facing the substrate [ 64 ] . CCS would thus prevent the limited number of activated receptors from being internalised , and potentiate their signalling , ensuing reliable ERK signalling under stress . Although cell mem - brane tension was not directly assessed in these studies , the compression - induced increase in cell area and plasma mem - brane blebs are consistent with an increase in membrane tension upon compaction [ 43 ] . Thus , membrane tension and receptor endocytosis can have opposite effect on ERK sig - nalling . In one case , the decrease in membrane tension and the subsequent increased receptor endocytosis enable ERK signalling localised to endosomes [ 52 ] , whilst in the other situation , increased membrane tension and impaired endo - cytosis would potentiate receptor signalling on local mem - brane platforms [ 43 , 64 ] . Differences in the EGFR / HGFR trafficking routes ( e . g . : recycling versus degradation ) and resident time in the various endosomes could explain these opposite effects . Investigating how the mechanical environ - ment modulates the trafficking route of receptors could be a promising line of future research . Stress sensing involving integrins and focal adhesion components Stress conveyed by the extracellular substrate is sensed by force modulation at the ECM / cell interface , involving inte - grins and focal adhesion components . In dermal fibroblasts , increase in ERK phosphorylation upon tension stress is mediated by focal adhesion kinases ( FAK ) [ 41 ] . FAK phos - phorylation increases upon 10 % stretch , and FAK inhibition decreases stretch - induced ERK activation . In mammary epi - thelial cells , matrix rigidity is sensed via integrin clustering and focal adhesion assembly / stabilisation ( Fig . 2D ) [ 25 ] . A stiff substrate promotes integrin clustering , FAK phospho - rylation ( FAKpY397 ) , vinculin recruitment to β1 integrin adhesions , and EGF - induced ERK activity . These results are substantiated using β1 - integrin mutants with enhanced trans - membrane associations , resulting in larger integrin adhe - sions and increased EGF - induced ERK activation on soft F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 10 of 19 substrates . Furthermore , in MCF7 cells , the stiff substrate is sensed by localised protrusions which operate as mechanical and growth factor integrators that regulate ERK dynamics [ 51 ] . Protrusion generation is an integral part of a positive feedback loop involving coordinated Ras - PIK3 signalling , actin polymerisation , and cellular adhesion that drives ERK activity pulses . Importantly , inhibition of protrusion forma - tion by latrunculin and inhibition of FAK both attenuate matrix stiffness - dependent ERK activity [ 51 ] . Protrusions and focal adhesion components therefore fulfil a key func - tion in probing the mechanical environment and converting it into dynamics of ERK activity . Epistasis of ERK pathway modulation by mechanics We have so far reviewed mechanical stress / inputs as well as putative molecular mechanisms of force and shape sensing that will eventually affect ERK . We will review now which components of the pathway upstream of ERK are affected by mechanics and discuss the epistatic relationship between mechanical inputs and ERK pathway . Growth factor ligand – receptor interaction Although various cellular parameters can be sensed to mod - ulate ERK activity upon mechanical stress , several studies converge to a central role of receptor – ligand interaction modulation . This regulation could be achieved by a variety of receptor - based mechanisms , including variations in EGFR expression levels [ 34 ] , ligand shedding [ 33 ] , ligand – receptor binding and internalisation [ 34 , 52 ] or receptor subcellular localisation / trapping [ 43 , 64 , 65 ] . An example of this regula - tion at the very apex of the ERK pathway is the modulation of ERK activity dynamics as a function of matrix stiffness . In MCF10A cells , changes in the mechanical microenviron - ment are sensed at the extracellular , but not intracellular , section of the EGFR - ERK pathway [ 34 ] . This was elegantly demonstrated using synthetic optogenetic stimulation of different nodes of EGFR - ERK signalling and testing their sensitivity to substrate stiffness . Synthetic EGFR activation by blue light - induced clustering and autophosphorylation of EGFR cytosolic domains , as well as downstream light - induced activation of Ras , lead to similar sustained ERK activity irrespective of substrate stiffness ( which normally modulates both the strength and sustainability of ERK activ - ity , see " Introduction " ) . Accordingly , the attenuation of ERK signalling by a soft matrix relies largely on the reduction of EGF membrane binding and EGFR activation and , to a lesser extent , on the modulation of EGFR expression lev - els [ 34 ] . Similarly , ERK activation upon stretching is also abolished upon EGFR depletion in the Drosophila pupal notum [ 39 ] and in MDCK cells [ 33 ] , suggesting that the modulation of the pathway operates upstream or at the level of the membrane receptor . Sequestration / release of growth factor receptors from complexes localised to the plasma membrane is an addi - tional mechanism that links mechanical stress to signalling . As mentioned above , recruitment of EGFR to clathrin - coated structures upon cell compaction provides a plat - form for potentiating signalling [ 43 , 64 ] . Conversely , the release of EGFR trapped in heteroreceptor complexes , such as E - cadherin - EGFR complexes , drives EGFR signalling upon mechanical stress [ 65 ] . Several studies have indeed addressed the epistatic link between E - cadherin and EGFR related to mechanics [ 65 – 68 ] . In multilayered epithelia , E - cadherin spatiotemporally regulates EGFR activity and localisation at the tissue level in a tension - dependent manner [ 67 ] . Additionally , it has been documented that monomeric EGFR can be trapped in a heterotrimeric complex of E - cad - herin homodimers at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 2C ) [ 65 ] . In this framework , forces applied to homophilic E - cadherin bonds disrupt the complex , releasing EGFR monomers and enabling their dimerisation and signalling upon EGF binding ( Fig . 2C ) . E - cadherin could be considered an integral part of ERK mechanotransduction , directly transducing forces to the E - cadherin – EGFR complex upon mechanical stress and bridging junction tension to EGFR - ERK signalling . Interestingly , ERK signalling under mechanical stress could also be triggered in a ligand - independent manner . In the ectoderm of Xenopus laevis embryos , mechanical ERK2 activation is mediated by FGFR in a FGF - independent man - ner [ 47 ] . In fibroblasts , although not showed to be linked to ERK , the EGFR activity required for rigidity sensing on stiff substrates could be enabled in the absence of ligand by Src - dependent activation [ 69 ] . Concordantly , in HeLa cells , Piezo1 activation results in non - canonical serine phospho - rylation of EGFR in an SFK - p38 - dependent manner , asso - ciated with cellular outcomes different from the canonical ligand - dependent signalling [ 70 ] . This provides an engaging paradoxical framework in which mechanical forces can both promote receptor – ligand interaction and unconventionally bypass the ligand requirement for receptor activation . Towards more downstream activation of ERK signalling ? Other results point in the direction of a more direct and downstream regulation of ERK activity . In fibroblasts , quan - tification of tension and P - ERK on individual stress fibres reveals a quasi - linear tailoring of ERK phosphorylation to tension [ 40 ] . Although the mechanism of ERK recruitment and activation on stress fibres is not described , it is pos - sible that the requirement for ligand – receptor interaction is bypassed in this context , which could be consistent with a putative direct modulation of ERK by mechanics . Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 11 of 19 355 Collectively , the above studies point to a plethora of cel - lular and molecular mechanisms that regulate ERK activity under mechanical stress . The underlying conundrum is to determine which key cellular parameter is sensed during stress and translated molecularly into ERK signalling . This is a complex issue to resolve , as variables , such as cell shape and mechanics , are closely linked and difficult to uncouple experimentally . By altering cell shape , cell mechanics can be affected accordingly , making the aetiology of ERK signal - ling difficult to elucidate . The variety of mechanism of ERK regulations observed in different cellular and stress setting may illustrate different options that have been co - opted as the most adaptive for a given perturbation . This underlines the versatile and the plural nature of ERK signalling whose downstream decoding also leads to a wide range of cellular responses and biological functions . Physiological and pathological functions of ERK mechanosensing We have discussed so far the various conditions during which ERK activity can be modulated by cell shape and mechanical stress . What are then the novel tissue / cell prop - erties than can be generated by the connexion between ERK and mechanics ? ERK pathways have numerous targets , which through phosphorylation or transcriptional regula - tion can affect key cellular properties , from the cytoskeleton and cell morphology [ 71 ] , cell differentiation [ 72 , 73 ] , cell cycle regulation / cell division [ 31 , 73 – 75 ] , to cell survival [ 76 – 79 ] . As a result , the whole repertoire of ERK targets may be influenced by its connexion with cell shape and cell mechanics . Rather than listing the physiological functions of ERK mechanosensing , we will discuss here the new proper - ties that are directly based on ERK mechanosensing trying to outline the one that are specific to ERK mechanosensing dynamics ( relative to other mechanosensitive pathways ) . This will include the role of ERK mechano - chemical feed - back for long - range cell – cell coordination and its role in self - organisation and the spontaneous emergence of spatio - temporal pattern . Eventually , we will discuss how the same modules can be co - opted to promote the emergence and evo - lution of pathologies . Mechano‑chemical feedback and long‑range coordination Complex spatio - temporal dynamics of ERK were described in various cell lines and in vivo . This includes cyclic waves propagating over large spatial scales . ERK waves were first described during collective migration of MDCK cells with cyclic waves moving away from the migrating front up to one mm with a period of 50 – 90 min and moving at a speed of roughly 2 µm / min [ 33 , 54 , 56 , 80 , 81 ] . These long - range propagations are driven by the coupling between cell stretch - ing , which activates ERK after few minutes , which then activates cell contractility and MyoII through ROCK after 12 min , thus stretching the neighbouring cells and propagat - ing ERK activation [ 33 , 82 ] ( Fig . 3A ) . These long - range propagating waves are essential to coordinate collective migration by aligning cell polarity and protrusions opposite to wave’s propagation direction over large distances . Accord - ingly , drug inhibition of EGFR or MEK , as well as inhibi - tion of ADAM - 17 ( a metalloprotease required for pro - EGFR ligand release from the membrane ) inhibit wave formation and significantly reduce migration speed [ 33 , 56 ] . Recent work outlined the redundant role of several EGFR ligands for ERK waves , including a predominant role of EGF , but also a contribution of HBEGF , TGFα and EREG ( Epiregu - lin ) [ 83 ] . Importantly , the collective migration and the global alignment of cell polarity could be rescued despite inhibition of MMPs or EGFR through the generation of artificial ERK waves by optogenetics , with an optimum for waves travel - ling at a similar speed to the physiological waves ( ~ 2 µm / min ) , whilst global ERK activation did not elicit collective movements . Similar ERK waves were also observed in vivo during wound healing in the mouse epidermis with similar propagation speed [ 84 ] , or during the elongation of the coch - lea , where propagation is slightly slower ( 0 . 42 µm / min ) [ 57 ] , and are both associated with long - range collective migra - tion opposite to wave propagation . These results suggest that long - range propagating ERK waves are essential for large - scale coordination of cell migration in various contexts . Which properties of the system are required for this long - range coordination and global tissue polarisation ? A recent combination of theory and experiments explored more sys - tematically the properties of mechanochemical ERK waves . Using a 1D model encapsulating tension , traction forces , polarity and the mutual feedback between ERK and junc - tional tension was sufficient to recapitulate quantitatively ERK wave properties ( length scale of 7 – 16 cells , period of 50 – 90 min , speed of 2 µm / min ) . This was performed using only three characteristic times estimated experimentally : the delay between cell deformation and ERK activation ( 4 – 8 min ) , the delay between ERK activation and neighbour - ing cell stretching ( 100 – 140 min ) , and the characteristic time of mechanical stress dissipation through friction ( 5 – 16 min , which defines the length scale of deformation propagation ) . How to explain then that cells behave differently to the front and the back of ERK waves , in other words , how does the system break symmetry and drive unidirectional cell polari - sation ? The authors first included a polarity term aligning cell polarisation along tension . Symmetry breaking emerges then from the phase difference between ERK activity and mechanical stress , combined with negative impact of ERK on the coupling between stress and polarity . As such , cells F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 12 of 19 are relatively insensitive to the incoming mechanical wave whilst responding strongly to the decreasing phase of the wave , thus breaking symmetry and promoting movement opposite to wave propagation . Of note , this allows global polarisation without long - range gradient and pre - existing polarising cues . Importantly , the model predicts that opti - mal polarisation will occur for a range of wave properties perfectly matching experimental measurements ( predicted length scale of 10 – 35 cells , period of 2 to 7 h , versus waves of 20 cells and 1 – 5 h measured in MDCK cells [ 33 , 56 , 84 ] ) and the optimal wave speed characterised with optoge - netics ( 2 µm / min [ 56 ] ) . Altogether , this suggests that the parameters of ERK mechanochemical waves are optimised for long - range polarisation and coordination . Importantly , since these wave parameters are set by the characteristic time delay between mechanical stress and ERK modulation ( few Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 13 of 19 355 minutes ) , this may nicely explain why ERK pathway ( rather than other mechanosensitive pathways ) may have been co - opted for this long - range coordination . ERK waves were also described in other physiological contexts , whilst not formally connected to ERK mecha - nosensation . For instance , ERK waves were described in vicinity of MCF10A oncogenic cell expressing active BRAF , MEK or apoptotic cells [ 85 ] . These waves are also mediated by release of EGFR ligands ( most likely AREG ) through ADAM17 metalloprotease and promote convergent migra - tion of WT cells towards the oncogenic / dying cells , hence facilitating aberrant cell extrusion . However , these waves propagate at a much more limited range ( few cells raw ) compared to the mechanochemical waves . Similarly , ERK waves were also described during tracheal cell invagination in the Drosophila embryo [ 86 ] . ERK waves are also EGFR - dependent and driven by a transcriptional switch relay where ERK activity promotes Rhomboid transcription ( a protease essential for EGFR ligand activation and secretion ) , hence increasing ligand secretion and ERK / Rhomboid activation in the neighbouring cell . These waves promote polarised MyoII recruitment and tracheal pit invagination . Here , the range of propagation is defined by the domain of expression of the transcription factor Trachealess . Importantly , this tran - scriptional - driven propagation occurs at a relatively slower speed compared to the mechanochemical wave described above ( 1 cell— ~ 5 µm—every 15 min , 0 . 33 µm / min ) . Simi - lar transcription - driven long - range ERK waves were also described recently during zebrafish osteoblast regeneration [ 87 ] , where slow ERK waves ( 1 cell per hour , 0 . 17 µm / min ) travel along the full fish scale ( 10 µm ) at very low frequency ( 1 wave every 48 h ) . These waves are driven by transcrip - tional upregulation of FGFR ligand by ERK signalling combined with delayed negative feedback ( preventing back propagation ) and promote scale regeneration . Altogether , these works illustrate that long - range ERK waves are not a specificity of mechano - chemical waves and can also be triggered by alternative more classic trigger - wave mechanisms . However , their timescales are usually much slower , which is not necessarily compatible with the fast information processing required for collective migration . Thus , the relatively fast ( ~ minutes ) ERK mechanosensitive module is instrumental for fast long - range coordination . Importantly , this characteristic time may explain why it was co - opted for long - range coordination of cell migration . Self‑organisation and emergence of complex spatio‑temporal pattern of cell fate So far , we have described one example of complex spatio - temporal pattern ( waves ) which modulate cell migration . ERK mechanosensing is also involved in self - organised properties that will affect cell fate and tissue shape . For instance , the emergence of leader cells during MDCK col - lective cell migration is driven by persistent ERK activa - tion which is mediated by the positive feedback between cell lamellipodia and HGF receptor ( MET ) activation , thus connecting border localisation with fate specification [ 54 ] . ERK modulation by geometry was also involved more recently in lung branching morphogenesis [ 49 ] . Using live imaging of ERK activity in ex vivo culture of mice lung , the authors found a striking correlation between epithelial curvature and ERK activity . Convex regions are associated with a higher basal surface which promotes the binding of FGF10 produced by the mesenchymal cells . Subsequently , ERK activity in epithelial cells promotes apical actin poly - merisation , which extends apical area and flattens locally the tissue . As a result , two new curved regions emerge on the lateral side which through ERK activation and actin polymerisation initiate two new branches ( Fig . 3B ) . Thus , the modulation of ERK activity by curvature is sufficient to trigger repetitive morphological patterns . Whilst the impact of ERK response delay was not formally discussed in this model , the persistence of cell curvature ( regulated by the turnover of F - actin ) has to be in a well - controlled Fig . 3 Physiological roles of ERK mechanochemical feedback . A ERK mechanochemical waves during collective migration . Sche - matic of a MDCK layer undergoing collective migration towards the right side ( black arrow ) . Blue to red represents ERK activation lev - els . High - persistent ERK activity is present at the leader front , whilst ERK waves ( pink ) propagate towards the back size ( opposite direc - tion to migration ) . Bottom scheme shows the detailed mechanism of ERK wave propagation . Cell stretching promotes ERK activation , which activates cell contractility and actomyosin recruitment towards the rear side ( blue ) whilst reducing the coupling with the substrate . Propagation of mechanical forces through adherens junction ( pur - ple ) stretch the neighbouring cell which will then activate ERK . ERK wave propagation also leads to long term polarisation of cells towards the migratory front . B ERK curvature sensing and branch - ing morphogenesis in the lung . Schematic of the embryonic mice lung . The alveola ( right ) is composed of the epithelial layer covering the lumen ( grey ) and the mesenchyme on the basal side ( pink ) . ERK activity levels ( blue to red ) correlates with tissue curvature ( more activity in convex regions and cell having a larger basal surface ) . Bottom scheme provides mechanistic details : FGF10 ( purple dots ) is homogenously produced by mesenchymal cell and preferentially activates ERK in cells with a high basal surface . ERK activation pro - motes branched actin polymerisation on the apical side which extends apical area ( whilst reducing basal surface due to volume conserva - tion ) . This flattens locally the tissue and increases curvature in the two neighbouring regions which will then activate ERK and initiate two new buds . C The role of ERK in cell death distribution regula - tion in the Drosophila pupal notum . Epithelial cell extrusion ( green cells , caspase activation ) stretches neighbouring cells , this correlates with ERK activation and a transient inhibition of Caspases , hence inhibiting transiently apoptosis and extrusion in the neighbouring cells and preventing the elimination of cells in clusters . The feedback is responsible for a more disperse spatio - temporal distribution of cell death . Without ERK pulses ( bottom , EGFR depletion ) , cell death distribution becomes random . Clusters of cell death can appear by chance which prevents proper extrusion and generates transient holes in the tissue ( sealing defect ) which are resorbed by wound healing ◂ F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 14 of 19 range to achieve proper branching morphogenesis . These results expand the repertoire of self - organised morphoge - netic processes which , through ERK response to curva - ture and ERK - dependent regulation of actin , can produce repetitive branching . Whilst so far we have mostly covered the role of ERK in self - organised morphogenesis , ERK has also been recently involved in the regulation of complex spatio - temporal pattern of cell death with essential functions in tissue homeostasis . MCF10A cells can self - organise in 3D acini which form a lumen through the apoptosis of internal cells . Recently , this process was shown to be regulated by ERK pulse frequency so that external cells are protected from death through spontaneous ERK waves , whilst inter - nal cells die because of lower frequency of ERK pulses [ 35 ] . Whilst this difference of ERK dynamics was not for - mally associated with ERK mechanosensing , differences in cell – cell connexion , geometry and ligand accessibility may be sufficient to trigger these frequency differences which , as such , will spontaneously regulate the spatial pattern of apoptosis and lumen formation . ERK pulses are also essential to fine - tune rate and distribution of cell death in 2D epithelia . Cell extrusion in the Drosophila pupal notum ( a single layer epithelium ) triggers tran - sient activation of ERK in the neighbouring cells , hence inhibiting caspases and protecting transiently ( for ~ 1 h ) neighbouring cells from apoptosis [ 78 ] . This transient and local protection is essential to prevent the formation of clusters of cell elimination , which otherwise forms gaps and affects epithelia sealing properties ( Fig . 3C ) . Whilst it is not yet absolutely clear whether such pulses are driven by mechanical stress , they correlate with the onset of cell extrusion ( with a 5 min delay ) and the stretching of the neighbouring cells and do not rely on ligand secre - tion from the dying cells . Importantly , this local feedback affects both the spatio - temporal distribution of cell death ( where a local refractory phase follows each extrusion ) as well as the total number of dying cells . A very simi - lar process was also described in MCF10A , MDCK and NRK - 52E cells , where apoptosis triggers a wave of ERK and Akt activation propagating other few cell rows [ 79 ] . This feedback tunes down the global rate of cell elimina - tion and prevents catastrophic increase of death rate and tissue collapse upon pro - apoptotic treatment ( doxorubicin or starvation ) . These waves require ADAM17 in the dying cell as well as EGFR , and do not rely on extracellular ligand diffusion . Whilst this was not formally tested , this could be compatible with a contribution of mechanical stress to ERK activation and propagation . Overall , these works illustrate how local ERK pulses rapidly mediated by apoptosis initiation ( few minutes ) are essential to redis - tribute cell death and prevent tissue collapse . This rapid response—faster than the characteristic time of apoptosis and extrusion induction—is essential to prevent clustered and massive cell death and may rely again on the timescale of ERK mechanosensitivity . To conclude , ERK mechanosensitivity provides a rapid relay to adjust cell fate to the local cell environment , whether for morphogenesis and cell fate specification or tissue home - ostasis . This modularity is essential for tissue plasticity and robustness in rapidly changing environment . It strongly relies on ERK modulation and relevant downstream target regulation being faster than the characteristic time of core cellular events ( apoptosis , mitosis and fate specification ) . Co‑optation of ERK mechanosensing during pathological conditions We have so far described several physiological functions of ERK mechanosensitivity , from tissue homeostasis and cell death regulation , to morphogenesis and collective move - ments . The same modules can however also be co - opted in pathological conditions and promote tumour cell transforma - tion and tissue invasion . Seminal work in breast cancer cells outlined the central role of aberrant tension homeostasis in tumour progression [ 25 , 88 ] . One hallmark of tumour is the formation of stiffer tissues which is regularly used for tumour diagnosis . Praszek and colleagues used a mechanical indentor to measure the mechanical properties of mammary tumours and confirmed the significant increase of stromal matrix stiffness near trans - formed cells and tumour [ 25 ] . Increasing matrix stiffness ( by increasing collagen concentration ) promotes MCF10A cell transformation , characterised by abnormal acini formation , destabilised adherens junctions and active protrusion . This transformation is driven by higher integrin clustering which through FAK activation promotes Rho and ERK phospho - rylation . Moreover , EGFR concentration and phosphoryla - tion are also increased on stiff substrate . ERK activation further enhances cell stiffness by promoting ROCK activa - tion , thus generating a positive feedback loop promoting cell transformation . Accordingly , inhibition of EGFR , ERK , Rho or integrin is sufficient to revert the transformation pheno - type on stiff matrix and restore the formation of polarised acini . Latter work confirmed this positive feedback and the central role of ERK for cell transformation , migration and proliferation [ 89 ] . Importantly , ERK depletion in MCF10A cells grown on stiff substrate was sufficient to restore 75 % of the modulated transcript back to soft matrix condition levels , suggesting that ERK is a major bottleneck regulating cell transformation on stiff substrate [ 89 ] . A very similar process was recently outlined in the mouse prostate upon ablation of a subpopulation of the stromal cells at the junc - tion between the prostate and the urethra [ 90 ] . Depletion of this Lgr5 positive population increases globally prostate stiffness , which leads to aberrant ERK activation through Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 15 of 19 355 FAK , promotes epithelial cell turnover . However , this study did not clearly delineate whether increased stiffness was a cause or a consequence of ERK activation . These works outline the central role of focal adhesion as stiffness sen - sor , which through FAK can modulate ERK activity and further enhance cell contractility and cell transformation in oncogenic cells . Other works outline alternative models of ERK modula - tion by mechanics during tumour progression . Squamous cell carcinoma invasiveness is also enhanced on stiffer matrix through the activation of EGFR ( higher expression levels and phosphorylation ) [ 91 ] . EGFR / ERK upregulates the L - type - dependent Ca 2 + channel Cav1 . 1 , which promotes Cdc42 , Myosin light chain activation and traction forces , hence promoting collective cell migration in spheroids and mice subcutaneous grafts . Interestingly , EGFR upregulation in stiff matrix is abrogated by YAP inhibition , suggesting that EGFR mechanosensitivity is indirect in this context . Matrix stiffness also promotes glioblastoma cell proliferation through EGFR clustering in vinculin positive focal adhe - sion which boosts proliferation through ERK , Akt and PI3K activation [ 92 ] . Thus , ERK modulation by matrix stiffness in tumour can also be independent of FAK and rely on EGFR activation . Finally , ERK activation can also be promoted by cell autonomous increase of contractility driven by the direct modulation of actomyosin by oncogenes . Accordingly , the proliferation of pre - invasive breast cancer cells ( MCF10A cells with conditional Src activation ) is promoted by the upregulation of the barbed - end actin capping protein Ena / VASP like , which stabilises stress fibres and stiffen cells , hence promoting ERK activation , proliferation and further enhancing Src activation [ 93 ] . All these examples illustrate the cell - autonomous impact of ERK mechanosensitivity in tumour cells , which through a positive feedback loop between matrix stiffness , cell con - tractility and ERK promotes on the long - term tumour cell transformation , migration and proliferation . However , ERK mechanosensitivity can also promote tumour progression through non - autonomous effects and interactions with neigh - bouring healthy cells . Cell competition is a context - depend - ent cell elimination process which can promote the elimina - tion of WT cells by oncogenic cells through apoptosis , cell differentiation or cell extrusion [ 94 ] . Differential sensitivity to mechanical stress can also promote the preferential elimi - nation of one population during cell competition [ 95 – 98 ] . Accordingly , conditional activation of the oncogene Ras V12 in Drosophila pupal notum clones promotes cell expansion and cell death resistance , which triggers neighbouring WT cell compaction , caspase activation and cell death through EGFR / ERK downregulation [ 39 ] . This compaction - driven ERK downregulation contributes significantly to Ras clone expansion . Accordingly , activation of EGFR / ERK in WT neighbouring cells blocks their elimination and significantly slows down Ras clone expansion [ 39 ] . This work illustrates how ERK mechanosensitivity role in cell survival can be co - opted by oncogenic cells to eliminate their neighbours . To conclude , the modulation of ERK by mechanics can also be co - opted by tumoural cells , in a cell - autonomous and non - autonomous manner , to promote their expansion and invasiveness . On the one hand , cell contractility and matrix stiffness promote ERK activation through FAK and / or EGFR which further enhance cell stiffening through Rho / ROCK activation , hence generating a positive feedback loop which promotes cell transformation , proliferation and migra - tory behaviours . On the other hand , tumoural cell growth can compact the neighbouring cells and trigger their elimi - nation through compaction - driven ERK downregulation . The modulations of ERK in these pathological conditions were mostly studied over long - time scales ( hours and days after mechanical stimulation ) . Thus , it is hard to exclude that ERK modulation may indirectly be connected to mechanics and triggered by other mechanosensitive pathways . Further work will be required to test if the complex spatio - temporal dynamics characterised in physiological contexts ( see above ) also play a role in tumour progression . Conclusion and perspectives In this review , we illustrated multiple cellular , tissular , physiological and pathological contexts during which ERK modulation was associated with geometrical and mechanical perturbations . Whilst various perturbations and timescales were reported , vast majority were associated with relatively fast phosphorylation of ERK ( few minutes ) following cell stretching . The downstream activity of ERK , which can both modulate transcription and phosphorylate a large variety of substrates , offers a fast modular mechanosensitive module which can adjust rapidly several cell properties to mechani - cal stimuli . Thus , ERK modulation within minute time scale expands the range of mechanosensitive modules com - plementing systems reacting in the order of seconds ( e . g . : membrane tension and mechanosensitive channels [ 99 ] ) to hours ( e . g . YAP / TAZ and its transcriptional outputs [ 100 , 101 ] ) . For instance , whilst the Hippo pathway may be very relevant for long - term regulation of tissue size , growth and fate specification ( taking place over hours or days ) [ 102 ] , ERK mechanosensitivity and its impact on the timescale of minutes help regulate fast cell fate transition , cell migra - tion , cell division or cell death upon rapid changes of the mechanical environment , a situation very relevant to cell migration , fast morphogenesis and fluctuating environment . The combination of various mechanosensitive modules acting at different timescales is probably essential for cell and tissues to adjust their state to a complex and changing environment . In this regard , ERK modulation by mechanics F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 16 of 19 plays essential roles in tissue robustness and plasticity [ 47 , 78 ] , can generate long - range coordination [ 33 ] , and generate complex spatiotemporal pattern of shape and cell fate [ 49 ] . Cells and tissues can be exposed to mechanical stress acting on very different timescales [ 103 ] . Assessing the modular - ity of cell responses to these various characteristic times remains extremely challenging and is a poorly explored ter - ritory . One fundamental difficulty lies in the nested char - acteristic timescales of the response , which is affected , on the one hand , by the mechanosensors themselves and their sensitivity to specific speed / frequency of deformation , which on the other hand is also blurred by the intrinsic timescales / delays of the downstream pathways and their targets . Under - standing how cells integrate various mechanical inputs to adapt their behaviour will probably require high multiplex imaging combining sensors of different pathways at different epistatic levels . Whilst further work is still required to fully elucidate the molecular mechanisms connecting cell mechanical state to ERK activation , studies over the last few years point to sev - eral alternative mechanisms that may coexist and modulate ERK pathway at different epistatic levels . This is very remi - niscent of the complex regulation of YAP / TAZ by mechan - ics , which on the one hand relies on the interaction between polarity protein , cytoskeleton and upstream regulators [ 104 ] , or acts through direct modulation of its nuclear import by nucleus deformation and pore opening [ 105 ] . The Hippo pathway illustrates that various mechano - sensitive modules located at different subcellular localisations ( cortex , nucleus ) and responding to different key parameters ( actin concentra - tion , tension , nuclear membrane stretching ) can all provide inputs to the same downstream pathway . It is as such not so surprising to find a similar complexity in the various mecha - nisms connecting cell mechanics to ERK modulation . Future work will help bridge these different mechanisms and study cell and tissue mechanosensing in a more integrated manner by bridging various mechanosensitive pathways / modules at different timescales in the same cells , most likely by devel - oping a large array of live sensors and through multiplex live imaging . Acknowledgements We thank members of RL lab for critical reading of the manuscript . We also apologise for relevant works that could not be quoted due to space limitation . Author contributions RL and FC discussed the organisation of the review and the relevant articles . FC wrote the Introduction , Part 1 and Part 2 , RL wrote Part 3 and the conclusion . Both authors finally edit and adjust the full manuscript . Funding FC is supported by a post - doctoral grant from the Labex Revive ( ANR - 10 - LABX - 0073 ) . Work in RL lab is supported by the Institut Pasteur , the European Union ( ERC , PrApEDoC , 101085444 ) , Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author ( s ) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council . Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them , the CNRS ( UMR 3738 ) , the ANR PRC CoECECa , the ANR PRC MAPEFLU , and the ANR - 10 - LABX - 0073 . Availability of data and material There are no data and no material associated with this manuscript . Declarations Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interest . Ethics approval and consent to participate There is no human subject , and this is a review , so there is no need for ethical approval and consent . Consent for publication There are no data in this manuscript , so this is not relevant . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri - bution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adapta - tion , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons licence , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this licence , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . References 1 . Martino F , Perestrelo AR , Vinarsky V , Pagliari S , Forte G ( 2018 ) Cellular mechanotransduction : from tension to function . Front Physiol 9 : 824 2 . Jaalouk DE , Lammerding J ( 2009 ) Mechanotransduction gone awry . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 63 – 73 3 . Dupont S , Morsut L , Aragona M , Enzo E , Giulitti S , Cordenonsi M , Zanconato F , Le Digabel J , Forcato M , Bicciato S et al ( 2011 ) Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 : 179 – 183 4 . Aragona M , Panciera T , Manfrin A , Giulitti S , Michielin F , Elvassore N , Dupont S , Piccolo S ( 2013 ) A mechanical check - point controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 154 : 1047 – 1059 5 . Panciera T , Azzolin L , Cordenonsi M , Piccolo S ( 2017 ) Mecha - nobiology of YAP and TAZ in physiology and disease . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18 : 758 – 770 6 . Coste B , Mathur J , Schmidt M , Earley TJ , Ranade S , Petrus MJ , Dubin AE , Patapoutian A ( 2010 ) Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically activated cation channels . Science 330 : 55 – 60 7 . Eisenhoffer GT , Loftus PD , Yoshigi M , Otsuna H , Chien CB , Morcos PA , Rosenblatt J ( 2012 ) Crowding induces live cell extrusion to maintain homeostatic cell numbers in epithelia . Nature 484 : 546 – 549 8 . Zhong M , Komarova Y , Rehman J , Malik AB ( 2018 ) Mechano - sensing Piezo channels in tissue homeostasis including their role in lungs . Pulm Circ 8 : 2045894018767393 9 . Kaunas R , Usami S , Chien S ( 2006 ) Regulation of stretch - induced JNK activation by stress fiber orientation . Cell Signal 18 : 1924 – 1931 Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 17 of 19 355 10 . Pereira AM , Tudor C , Kanger JS , Subramaniam V , Martin - Blanco E ( 2011 ) Integrin - dependent activation of the JNK sign - aling pathway by mechanical stress . PLoS One 6 : e26182 11 . Farge E ( 2003 ) Mechanical induction of twist in the Drosophila foregut / stomodeal primordium . Curr Biol 13 : 1365 – 1377 12 . Shyer AE , Rodrigues AR , Schroeder GG , Kassianidou E , Kumar S , Harland RM ( 2017 ) Emergent cellular self - organization and mechanosensation initiate follicle pattern in the avian skin . Sci - ence 357 : 811 – 815 13 . Wagstaff L , Goschorska M , Kozyrska K , Duclos G , Kucinski I , Chessel A , Hampton - O’Neil L , Bradshaw CR , Allen GE , Raw - lins EL et al ( 2016 ) Mechanical cell competition kills cells via induction of lethal p53 levels . Nat Commun 7 : 11373 14 . Ingallina E , Sorrentino G , Bertolio R , Lisek K , Zannini A , Azzolin L , Severino LU , Scaini D , Mano M , Mantovani F et al ( 2018 ) Mechanical cues control mutant p53 stability through a mevalonate - RhoA axis . Nat Cell Biol 20 : 28 – 35 15 . Lavoie H , Gagnon J , Therrien M ( 2020 ) ERK signalling : a master regulator of cell behaviour , life and fate . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 21 : 607 – 632 16 . Purvis JE , Lahav G ( 2013 ) Encoding and decoding cellular infor - mation through signaling dynamics . Cell 152 : 945 – 956 17 . Tseng H , Peterson TE , Berk BC ( 1995 ) Fluid shear stress stimu - lates mitogen - activated protein kinase in endothelial cells . Circ Res 77 : 869 – 878 18 . Jo H , Sipos K , Go Y - M , Law R , Rong J , McDonald JM ( 1997 ) Differential effect of shear stress on extracellular signal - regulated kinase and N - terminal Jun Kinase in endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 272 : 1395 – 1401 19 . Tanabe Y , Koga M , Saito M , Matsunaga Y , Nakayama K ( 2004 ) Inhibition of adipocyte differentiation by mechanical stretching through ERK - mediated downregulation of PPARγ2 . J Cell Sci 117 : 3605 – 3614 20 . Tschumperlin DJ , Dai G , Maly IV , Kikuchi T , Laiho LH , McVit - tie AK , Haley KJ , Lilly CM , So PT , Lauffenburger DA et al ( 2004 ) Mechanotransduction through growth - factor shedding into the extracellular space . Nature 429 : 83 – 86 21 . Kippenberger S , Bernd A , Guschel M , Müller J , Kaufmann R , Loitsch S , Bereiter - Hahn J ( 2000 ) Signaling of mechanical stretch in human keratinocytes via MAP kinases . J Investig Der - matol 114 : 408 – 412 22 . Neary JT , Kang Y , Willoughby KA , Ellis EF ( 2003 ) Activation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase by stretch - induced injury in astrocytes involves extracellular ATP and P2 purinergic recep - tors . J Neurosci 23 : 2348 – 2356 23 . Bastow ER , Lamb KJ , Lewthwaite JC , Osborne AC , Kavanagh E , Wheeler - Jones CPD , Pitsillides AA ( 2005 ) Selective activation of the MEK - ERK pathway is regulated by mechanical stimuli in forming joints and promotes pericellular matrix formation * . J Biol Chem 280 : 11749 – 11758 24 . Laboureau J , Dubertret L , Lebreton - De Coster C , Coulomb B ( 2004 ) ERK activation by mechanical strain is regulated by the small G proteins rac - 1 and rhoA . Exp Dermatol 13 : 70 – 77 25 . Paszek MJ , Zahir N , Johnson KR , Lakins JN , Rozenberg GI , Gefen A , Reinhart - King CA , Margulies SS , Dembo M , Boet - tiger D et al ( 2005 ) Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 : 241 – 254 26 . Hirashima T ( 2022 ) Live imaging approach of dynamic mul - ticellular responses in ERK signaling during vertebrate tissue development . Biochem J 479 : 129 – 143 27 . Komatsu N , Aoki K , Yamada M , Yukinaga H , Fujita Y , Kamioka Y , Matsuda M ( 2011 ) Development of an optimized backbone of FRET biosensors for kinases and GTPases . Mol Biol Cell 22 : 4647 – 4656 28 . Harvey CD , Ehrhardt AG , Cellurale C , Zhong H , Yasuda R , Davis RJ , Svoboda K ( 2008 ) A genetically encoded fluorescent sensor of ERK activity . Proc Natl Acad Sci 105 : 19264 – 19269 29 . Regot S , Hughey JJ , Bajar BT , Carrasco S , Covert MW ( 2014 ) High - sensitivity measurements of multiple kinase activities in live single cells . Cell 157 : 1724 – 1734 30 . de la Cova C , Townley R , Regot S , Greenwald I ( 2017 ) A real - time biosensor for ERK activity reveals signaling dynamics during C . elegans cell fate specification . Dev Cell 42 : 542 – 553 ( e544 ) 31 . Aoki K , Kumagai Y , Sakurai A , Komatsu N , Fujita Y , Shionyu C , Matsuda M ( 2013 ) Stochastic ERK activation induced by noise and cell - to - cell propagation regulates cell density - dependent pro - liferation . Mol Cell 52 : 529 – 540 32 . Toettcher JE , Weiner OD , Lim WA ( 2013 ) Using optogenetics to interrogate the dynamic control of signal transmission by the Ras / Erk module . Cell 155 : 1422 – 1434 33 . Hino N , Rossetti L , Marin - Llaurado A , Aoki K , Trepat X , Mat - suda M , Hirashima T ( 2020 ) ERK - mediated mechanochemical waves direct collective cell polarization . Dev Cell 53 : 646 – 660 ( e648 ) 34 . Farahani PE , Lemke SB , Dine E , Uribe G , Toettcher JE , Nelson CM ( 2021 ) Substratum stiffness regulates Erk signaling dynam - ics through receptor - level control . Cell Rep 37 : 110181 35 . Ender P , Gagliardi PA , Dobrzynski M , Frismantiene A , Dessauges C , Hohener T , Jacques MA , Cohen AR , Pertz O ( 2022 ) Spatiotemporal control of ERK pulse frequency coordi - nates fate decisions during mammary acinar morphogenesis . Dev Cell 57 : 2153 – 2167 ( e2156 ) 36 . Hirashima T , Hino N , Aoki K , Matsuda M ( 2023 ) Stretching the limits of extracellular signal - related kinase ( ERK ) signal - ing—cell mechanosensing to ERK activation . Curr Opin Cell Biol 84 : 102217 37 . Hirashima T ( 2021 ) Mechanical feedback control for multicel - lular tissue size maintenance : a minireview . Front Cell Dev Biol 9 : 820391 38 . Nayak AN , Hirashima T ( 2023 ) Tug - of - war via ERK signaling pathway for tissue organization—ERK activation to force genera - tion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 85 : 102249 39 . Moreno E , Valon L , Levillayer F , Levayer R ( 2019 ) Competition for space induces cell elimination through compaction - driven ERK downregulation . Curr Biol 29 : 23 – 34 ( e28 ) 40 . Hirata H , Gupta M , Vedula SR , Lim CT , Ladoux B , Sokabe M ( 2015 ) Actomyosin bundles serve as a tension sensor and a platform for ERK activation . EMBO Rep 16 : 250 – 257 41 . Gao Y , Zhou J , Xie Z , Wang J , Ho C - K , Zhang Y , Li Q ( 2019 ) Mechanical strain promotes skin fibrosis through LRG - 1 induc - tion mediated by ELK1 and ERK signalling . Commun Biol 2 : 1 – 15 42 . Gudipaty SA , Lindblom J , Loftus PD , Redd MJ , Edes K , Davey CF , Krishnegowda V , Rosenblatt J ( 2017 ) Mechanical stretch triggers rapid epithelial cell division through Piezo1 . Nature 543 : 118 – 121 43 . Baschieri F , Le Devedec D , Tettarasar S , Elkhatib N , Montagnac G ( 2020 ) Frustration of endocytosis potentiates compression - induced receptor signaling . J Cell Sci 133 : jcs239681 44 . Zhang Q , Matsui H , Horiuchi H , Liang X , Sasaki K ( 2016 ) A - Raf and C - Raf differentially regulate mechanobiological response of osteoblasts to guide mechanical stress - induced differentiation . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 476 : 438 – 444 45 . Sano T , Kobayashi T , Negoro H , Sengiku A , Hiratsuka T , Kamioka Y , Liou LS , Ogawa O , Matsuda M ( 2016 ) Intravital imaging of mouse urothelium reveals activation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase by stretch - induced intravesical release of ATP . Physiol Rep . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14814 / phy2 . 13033 F . Crozet , R . Levayer 1 3 355 Page 18 of 19 46 . Yoshino D , Funamoto K , Sato K , Kenry SM , Lim CT ( 2020 ) Hydrostatic pressure promotes endothelial tube formation through aquaporin 1 and Ras - ERK signaling . Commun Biol 3 : 152 47 . Kinoshita N , Hashimoto Y , Yasue N , Suzuki M , Cristea IM , Ueno N ( 2020 ) Mechanical stress regulates epithelial tissue integrity and stiffness through the FGFR / Erk2 signaling pathway during embryogenesis . Cell Rep 30 : 3875 – 3888 ( e3873 ) 48 . Kawabata N , Matsuda M ( 2016 ) Cell density - dependent increase in tyrosine - monophosphorylated ERK2 in MDCK cells express - ing active Ras or Raf . PLoS One 11 : e0167940 49 . Hirashima T , Matsuda M ( 2022 ) ERK - mediated curvature feed - back regulates branching morphogenesis in lung epithelial tissue . bioRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 07 . 11 . 451982 50 . Trappmann B , Gautrot JE , Connelly JT , Strange DGT , Li Y , Oyen ML , Cohen Stuart MA , Boehm H , Li B , Vogel V et al ( 2012 ) Extracellular - matrix tethering regulates stem - cell fate . Nat Mater 11 : 642 – 649 51 . Yang J - M , Bhattacharya S , West - Foyle H , Hung C - F , Wu TC , Iglesias PA , Huang C - H ( 2018 ) Integrating chemical and mechanical signals through dynamic coupling between cellular protrusions and pulsed ERK activation . Nat Commun 9 : 4673 52 . De Belly H , Stubb A , Yanagida A , Labouesse C , Jones PH , Paluch EK , Chalut KJ ( 2021 ) Membrane tension gates ERK - mediated regulation of pluripotent cell fate . Cell Stem Cell 28 : 273 – 284 ( e276 ) 53 . Deng B , Zhao Z , Kong W , Han C , Shen X , Zhou C ( 2022 ) Bio - logical role of matrix stiffness in tumor growth and treatment . J Transl Med 20 : 540 54 . Hino N , Matsuda K , Jikko Y , Maryu G , Sakai K , Imamura R , Tsukiji S , Aoki K , Terai K , Hirashima T et al ( 2022 ) A feedback loop between lamellipodial extension and HGF - ERK signaling specifies leader cells during collective cell migration . Dev Cell 57 : 2290 – 2304 ( e2297 ) 55 . Friedl P , Gilmour D ( 2009 ) Collective cell migration in mor - phogenesis , regeneration and cancer . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 445 – 457 56 . Aoki K , Kondo Y , Naoki H , Hiratsuka T , Itoh RE , Matsuda M ( 2017 ) Propagating wave of ERK activation orients collective cell migration . Dev Cell 43 : 305 – 317 ( e305 ) 57 . Ishii M , Tateya T , Matsuda M , Hirashima T ( 2021 ) Retrograde ERK activation waves drive base - to - apex multicellular flow in murine cochlear duct morphogenesis . Elife . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 61092 58 . Valon L , Levayer R ( 2019 ) Dying under pressure : cellular characterisation and in vivo functions of cell death induced by compaction . Biol Cell 111 : 51 – 66 59 . Shaya O , Binshtok U , Hersch M , Rivkin D , Weinreb S , Amir - Zilberstein L , Khamaisi B , Oppenheim O , Desai RA , Goodyear RJ et al ( 2017 ) Cell – cell contact area affects notch signaling and notch - dependent patterning . Dev Cell 40 : 505 – 511 ( e506 ) 60 . Levayer R , Hauert B , Moreno E ( 2015 ) Cell mixing induced by myc is required for competitive tissue invasion and destruction . Nature 524 : 476 – 480 61 . Guignard L , Fiúza U - M , Leggio B , Laussu J , Faure E , Michelin G , Biasuz K , Hufnagel L , Malandain G , Godin C et al ( 2020 ) Contact area – dependent cell communication and the mor - phological invariance of ascidian embryogenesis . Science 369 : eaar5663 62 . Nallet - Staub F , Yin X , Gilbert C , Marsaud V , Ben Mimoun S , Javelaud D , Leof EB , Mauviel A ( 2015 ) Cell density sensing alters TGF - beta signaling in a cell - type - specific manner , inde - pendent from Hippo pathway activation . Dev Cell 32 : 640 – 651 63 . Djakbarova U , Madraki Y , Chan ET , Kural C ( 2021 ) Dynamic interplay between cell membrane tension and clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biol Cell 113 : 344 – 373 64 . Baschieri F , Dayot S , Elkhatib N , Ly N , Capmany A , Schauer K , Betz T , Vignjevic DM , Poincloux R , Montagnac G ( 2018 ) Frustrated endocytosis controls contractility - independent mech - anotransduction at clathrin - coated structures . Nat Commun 9 : 3825 65 . Sullivan B , Light T , Vu V , Kapustka A , Hristova K , Leckband D ( 2022 ) Mechanical disruption of E - cadherin complexes with epi - dermal growth factor receptor actuates growth factor - dependent signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 119 : e2100679119 66 . Ramirez Moreno M , Bulgakova NA ( 2021 ) The cross - talk between EGFR and E - Cadherin . Front Cell Dev Biol 9 : 828673 67 . Rübsam M , Mertz AF , Kubo A , Marg S , Jüngst C , Goranci - Buzhala G , Schauss AC , Horsley V , Dufresne ER , Moser M et al ( 2017 ) E - cadherin integrates mechanotransduction and EGFR signaling to control junctional tissue polarization and tight junc - tion positioning . Nat Commun 8 : 1250 68 . Sehgal P , Kong X , Wu J , Sunyer R , Trepat X , Leckband D ( 2018 ) Epidermal growth factor receptor and integrins control force - dependent vinculin recruitment to E - cadherin junctions . J Cell Sci 131 : jcs206656 69 . Saxena M , Liu S , Yang B , Hajal C , Changede R , Hu J , Wolfenson H , Hone J , Sheetz MP ( 2017 ) EGFR and HER2 activate rigidity sensing only on rigid matrices . Nat Mater 16 : 775 – 781 70 . Pardo - Pastor C , Rosenblatt J ( 2023 ) Piezo1 activates noncanoni - cal EGFR endocytosis and signaling . Sci Adv 9 : eadi1328 71 . Nyga A , Ganguli S , Matthews HK , Baum B ( 2023 ) The role of RAS oncogenes in controlling epithelial mechanics . Trends Cell Biol 33 : 60 – 69 72 . Marshall CJ ( 1995 ) Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase sign - aling : transient versus sustained extracellular signal - regulated kinase activation . Cell 80 : 179 – 185 73 . Ryu H , Chung M , Dobrzynski M , Fey D , Blum Y , Lee SS , Peter M , Kholodenko BN , Jeon NL , Pertz O ( 2015 ) Frequency modu - lation of ERK activation dynamics rewires cell fate . Mol Syst Biol 11 : 838 74 . Albeck JG , Mills GB , Brugge JS ( 2013 ) Frequency - modulated pulses of ERK activity transmit quantitative proliferation signals . Mol Cell 49 : 249 – 261 75 . Chambard JC , Lefloch R , Pouyssegur J , Lenormand P ( 2007 ) ERK implication in cell cycle regulation . Biochim Biophys Acta 1773 : 1299 – 1310 76 . Kurada P , White K ( 1998 ) Ras promotes cell survival in Dros - ophila by downregulating hid expression . Cell 95 : 319 – 329 77 . Bergmann A , Agapite J , McCall K , Steller H ( 1998 ) The Dros - ophila gene hid is a direct molecular target of Ras - dependent survival signaling . Cell 95 : 331 – 341 78 . Valon L , Davidovic A , Levillayer F , Villars A , Chouly M , Cer - queira - Campos F , Levayer R ( 2021 ) Robustness of epithelial sealing is an emerging property of local ERK feedback driven by cell elimination . Dev Cell 56 : 1700 – 1711 ( e1708 ) 79 . Gagliardi PA , Dobrzynski M , Jacques MA , Dessauges C , Ender P , Blum Y , Hughes RM , Cohen AR , Pertz O ( 2021 ) Collective ERK / Akt activity waves orchestrate epithelial homeostasis by driving apoptosis - induced survival . Dev Cell 56 : 1712 – 1726 ( e1716 ) 80 . Matsubayashi Y , Ebisuya M , Honjoh S , Nishida E ( 2004 ) ERK activation propagates in epithelial cell sheets and regulates their migration during wound healing . Curr Biol 14 : 731 – 735 81 . Nikolic DL , Boettiger AN , Bar - Sagi D , Carbeck JD , Shvarts - man SY ( 2006 ) Role of boundary conditions in an experimental model of epithelial wound healing . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 291 : C68 - 75 82 . Boocock D , Hino N , Ruzickova N , Hirashima T , Hannezo E ( 2021 ) Theory of mechanochemical patterning and optimal migration in cell monolayers . Nat Phys 17 : 267 – 274 Emerging roles and mechanisms of ERK pathway mechanosensing 1 3 Page 19 of 19 355 83 . Lin S , Hirayama D , Maryu G , Matsuda K , Hino N , Deguchi E , Aoki K , Iwamoto R , Terai K , Matsuda M ( 2021 ) Redundant roles of EGFR ligands in the ERK activation waves during collective cell migration . Life Sci Alliance 5 : e202101206 84 . Hiratsuka T , Fujita Y , Naoki H , Aoki K , Kamioka Y , Matsuda M ( 2015 ) Intercellular propagation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase activation revealed by in vivo imaging of mouse skin . Elife 4 : e05178 85 . Aikin TJ , Peterson AF , Pokrass MJ , Clark HR , Regot S ( 2020 ) MAPK activity dynamics regulate non - cell autonomous effects of oncogene expression . Elife 9 : e60541 86 . Ogura Y , Wen FL , Sami MM , Shibata T , Hayashi S ( 2018 ) A switch - like activation relay of EGFR - ERK signaling regulates a wave of cellular contractility for epithelial invagination . Dev Cell 46 : 162 – 172 87 . De Simone A , Evanitsky MN , Hayden L , Cox BD , Wang J , Tornini VA , Ou J , Chao A , Poss KD , Di Talia S ( 2021 ) Control of osteoblast regeneration by a train of Erk activity waves . Nature 590 : 129 – 133 88 . Paszek MJ , Weaver VM ( 2004 ) The tension mounts : mechanics meets morphogenesis and malignancy . J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 9 : 325 – 342 89 . Provenzano PP , Inman DR , Eliceiri KW , Keely PJ ( 2009 ) Matrix density - induced mechanoregulation of breast cell phenotype , signaling and gene expression through a FAK - ERK linkage . Oncogene 28 : 4326 – 4343 90 . Wei X , Zhang L , Zhang Y , Cooper C , Brewer C , Tsai CF , Wang YT , Glaz M , Wessells HB , Que J et al ( 2022 ) Ablating Lgr5 - expressing prostatic stromal cells activates the ERK - mediated mechanosensory signaling and disrupts prostate tissue homeo - stasis . Cell Rep 40 : 111313 91 . Grasset EM , Bertero T , Bozec A , Friard J , Bourget I , Pisano S , Lecacheur M , Maiel M , Bailleux C , Emelyanov A et al ( 2018 ) Matrix stiffening and EGFR cooperate to promote the collective invasion of cancer cells . Cancer Res 78 : 5229 – 5242 92 . Umesh V , Rape AD , Ulrich TA , Kumar S ( 2014 ) Microenviron - mental stiffness enhances glioma cell proliferation by stimulating epidermal growth factor receptor signaling . PLoS One 9 : e101771 93 . Tavares S , Vieira AF , Taubenberger AV , Araujo M , Martins NP , Bras - Pereira C , Polonia A , Herbig M , Barreto C , Otto O et al ( 2017 ) Actin stress fiber organization promotes cell stiffening and proliferation of pre - invasive breast cancer cells . Nat Commun 8 : 15237 94 . Vishwakarma M , Piddini E ( 2020 ) Outcompeting cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 20 ( 3 ) : 187 – 198 95 . Wagstaff L , Goschorska M , Kozyrska K , Duclos G , Kucinski I , Chessel A , Hampton - O’Neil L , Bradshaw CR , Allen GE , Raw - lins EL et al ( 2016 ) Mechanical cell competition kills cells via induction of lethal p53 levels . Nat Commun 7 : 11373 – 11373 96 . Levayer R , Dupont C , Moreno E ( 2016 ) Tissue crowding induces caspase - dependent competition for space . Curr Biol 26 : 670 – 677 97 . Levayer R ( 2019 ) Solid stress , competition for space and cancer : the opposing roles of mechanical cell competition in tumour ini - tiation and growth . Semin Cancer Biol 63 : 69 – 80 98 . Matamoro - Vidal A , Levayer R ( 2019 ) Multiple influences of mechanical forces on cell competition . Curr Biol 29 : R762 – R774 99 . Wu J , Lewis AH , Grandl J ( 2017 ) Touch , tension , and transduc - tion—the function and regulation of piezo ion channels . Trends Biochem Sci 42 : 57 – 71 100 . Totaro A , Panciera T , Piccolo S ( 2018 ) YAP / TAZ upstream sig - nals and downstream responses . Nat Cell Biol 20 : 888 – 899 101 . Valon L , Marin - Llaurado A , Wyatt T , Charras G , Trepat X ( 2017 ) Optogenetic control of cellular forces and mechanotransduction . Nat Commun 8 : 14396 102 . Irvine KD , Shraiman BI ( 2017 ) Mechanical control of growth : ideas , facts and challenges . Development 144 : 4238 – 4248 103 . Wyatt T , Baum B , Charras G ( 2016 ) A question of time : tissue adaptation to mechanical forces . Curr Opin Cell Biol 38 : 68 – 73 104 . Genevet A , Tapon N ( 2011 ) The Hippo pathway and apico - basal cell polarity . Biochem J 436 : 213 – 224 105 . Elosegui - Artola A , Andreu I , Beedle AEM , Lezamiz A , Uroz M , Kosmalska AJ , Oria R , Kechagia JZ , Rico - Lastres P , Le Roux AL et al ( 2017 ) Force triggers YAP nuclear entry by regulating transport across nuclear pores . Cell 171 : 1397 – 1410 ( e1314 ) Publisher ' s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .