Understanding the Impact of Personal Feedback on Face - to - Face Interactions in the Workplace Afra Mashhadi † , Akhil Mathur † , Marc Van den Broeck ‡ , Geert Vanderhulst ‡ , Fahim Kawsar ‡ † Nokia Bell Labs , Dublin , Ireland , ‡ Nokia Bell Labs , Antwerp , Belgium ﬁrstname . lastname @ nokia - bell - labs . com ABSTRACT Face - to - face interactions have proven to accelerate team and larger organisation success . Many past research has explored the bene - ﬁts of quantifying face - to - face interactions for informed workplace management , however to date , little attention has been paid to un - derstand how the feedback on interaction behaviour is perceived at a personal scale . In this paper , we offer a reﬂection on the auto - mated feedback of personal interactions in a workplace through a longitudinal study . We designed and developed a mobile system that captured , modelled , quantiﬁed and visualised face - to - face in - teractions of 47 employees for 4 months in an industrial research lab in Europe . Then we conducted semi - structured interviews with 20 employees to understand their perception and experience with the system . Our ﬁndings suggest that the short - term feedback on personal face - to - face interactions was not perceived as an effective external cue to promote self - reﬂection and that employees desire long - term feedback annotated with actionable attributes . Our ﬁnd - ings provide a set of implications for the designers of future work - place technology and also opens up avenues for future HCI research on promoting self - reﬂection among employees . CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Ubiquitous and mobile com - puting systems and tools ; Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing ; Information visualization ; Keywords Face - to - Face Interaction , Personal Feedback , Social Sensing , Work - place Behaviour 1 . INTRODUCTION The collective behaviour of employees shapes the organisation culture and has proven to play a critical role in an organisation’s success [ 22 ] . Signiﬁcant efforts have been put into understand - ing how the collective behaviour patterns – energy levels , face - to - face interactions , unspoken and implicit signals across employ - ees – can directly affect employees’ collaboration and productivity . Indeed , spontaneous face - to - face interactions between employees ( e . g . , during coffee breaks ) have been shown to improve task com - pletions [ 38 ] , to foster innovation and creativity by enabling the ﬂow of ideas and inspiring fresh thinking [ 19 , 25 , 27 , 34 , 39 ] . To this end , a number of recent research studies leveraged per - vasive sensing technology to automatically capture face - to - face in - teractions to further augment our understanding of workplace be - haviour . Olguin et al . used wearable badges for measuring face - to - face interactions to understand employees’ job satisfaction [ 33 ] . Mark et al . investigated social network usage and face - to - face in - teractions captured through wearable cameras to understand work - place happiness [ 29 ] . Brown et al . reported the interaction diversity present in modern multi - cultural organisations by gathering face - to - face contact information [ 4 ] . This body of research has primar - ily aimed at offering collective feedback on workplace behaviour . These aggregated feedback have been shown to be useful to the management for informed decision making with respect to differ - ent organisation dynamics , e . g . , high performing team formation , rearrangement of workplace , etc . However to date , little is known as to how this information is perceived by employees themselves at a personal level . In the ﬁeld of psychology , literature has long studied the im - pact of cues as a way to help people develop self - knowledge which could help them to adapt their behaviour and attitude in life [ 2 , 13 ] . Cues are internal or external events which have a signalling signif - icance to an individual , subsequently affecting their learning and behaviour . For example , a blood pressure monitoring device could act as an external cue signalling an individual about their stress - level . Social psychologists have also argued that behavioural feed - back cues could affect how we experience ourselves as we some - times make inference about our own attitude based on observation of external cues derived from our interpersonal behaviour [ 2 ] . Fur - thermore , short - term feedbacks to individuals have been shown to play a critical role in creation of long term habits [ 10 ] . In this vein , several works in Computational Social Science have explored the impact of external cues as immediate personal feedback on work - place behaviour . Systems such as Chat Circles [ 37 ] , Second Mes - senger [ 9 ] and Meeting Mediator [ 26 ] have recurrently shown that these external cues were successful in inﬂuencing engagement and collaboration practices . While these works have investigated the impact of external cues on instant behavioural change ( e . g . , peo - ple’s attitude in vocal participation ) , their impact on non - immediate i . e . , long term voluntary self - reﬂection is yet to be studied . In this paper , we borrow tenets form the social psychology and evaluate an external cue which visualises employees’ face - to - face interaction patterns of recent past ( short - term ) in the workplace at a personal scale . We aim to understand how individuals perceive this external cue and whether this could augment their self - knowledge Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ICMI’16 , November 12 – 16 , 2016 , Tokyo , Japan ACM . 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4556 - 9 / 16 / 11 . . . $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2993148 . 2993187 362 and aid in long term voluntary self - reﬂection . We thus posit the following research question : is the short - term feedback on face - to - face interaction pattern at workplace an effective external cue to raise employees self - knowledge about their workplace behaviour ? To answer this research question , we designed and developed a novel mobile system that captures , models , quantiﬁes and visu - alises face - to - face interactions . Our system is composed of a mo - bile application ( Android and iOS ) , a location infrastructure based on Wi - Fi and Bluetooth , and a data processing infrastructure . Col - lectively , this system ﬁrst captures location traces left behind by users to detect co - located groups , then applies a classiﬁcation tech - nique to detect face - to - face interactions and ﬁnally visualises these interaction patterns in two distinct feedback that are designed with principles grounded on established literature [ 34 ] . We had a unique opportunity to deploy this system in an industrial research lab with 47 employees for a period of 4 months . We gathered application us - age data including the volume of interactions and impressions ( i . e . , the number of views of the visualisation feedback ) across all the users . We then interviewed 20 employees to understand their sub - jective perception and experience with the feedback application . We studied the effectiveness of the face - to - face interaction feed - back as an external cue by quantitatively analysing interactions , impressions and the relation between the two and qualitatively as - sessing the underlying reasoning . Our results suggest that the majority of the employees did not perceive the short term feedback on face - to - face interaction pattern as an effective external cue , and the feedback did not lead to any subliminal changes in interaction patterns . However , all the em - ployees desired long - term feedback capturing personal interaction patterns in the workplace together with actionable attributes . Taken together these and the rest of our ﬁndings uncover factors that most inﬂuence perceptions of personal behaviour feedback in the work - place . We thus make the following contributions : • Design , development and deployment of a cross - platform mo - bile system that captures , models , quantiﬁes and visualises face - to - face interactions at workplace ; • First of its kind longitudinal study of assessing the effect of quantifying and visualising face - to - face interactions with 47 employees over 4 months period in an industrial research lab , which is further qualiﬁed though in - depth semi structured in - terviews with 20 employees ; • A set of design implications for future workplace technology designers to develop applications and tools that could offer effective external cues to help employees improve their self - knowledge about their behaviour . 2 . RELATED WORK Face - to - face interaction is one of the implicit signals that has been identiﬁed as a key contributor in instigating collaborations and creating emotional bonds in modern organisations [ 19 , 27 ] . Our work is aimed at automatic capturing and visualisation of face - to - face interactions , with a belief that this feedback will assist indi - viduals in voluntary reﬂection of their workplace behaviour and attitude . 2 . 1 Face - to - Face Interaction A large body of literature in Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) and organisation science has studied multiple as - pects of collaboration to uncover what contributes to a successful workplace [ 6 , 15 , 21 ] . Fussell et al . [ 15 ] studied the coordina - tion techniques and communication tactics that would help improve team performance . Kraut et al . [ 28 ] showed that most successful collaborations happened when people were in the same team . Cum - mings et al . [ 6 ] studied impact of existing relations between dyadic collaborators and showed that prior experiences could help reduce the barriers such as distance and interdisciplinary gap , thus facil - itating a successful collaboration . Alternatively , a separate body of works has examined how collaborations are made and the fac - tors that contribute to the formation of face - to - face collaborations . In this vein , Zipf [ 39 ] demonstrated that human physical proxim - ity is a key that leads to communication . Other works have also resonated similar ﬁndings . For instance , works by Hagstrom and Kraut indicated that informal contact that results from frequent op - portunities for communication often leads to collaboration [ 19 , 27 ] . Hua et al . [ 23 ] have examined the effect of the workplace layout and topology on collaboration , and presented that the value of shared areas in workplace collaboration lies largely in their ability to ac - commodate impromptu encounters which can initiate interactions that lead to creative development . Recently , due to the proliferation of pervasive devices such as smart - phones and wireless badges , a more quantitative side of so - cial science has been explored to help understand individuals’ be - haviour in the workplace . These studies , ranging from uncovering sources of disruption [ 30 , 31 ] to capturing and visualising the mood of the organisation [ 14 , 16 , 29 ] , have taken an important ﬁrst step in helping management to understand the health of their organisation . Various technology probes have been used in the past to explore face - to - face interactions through active sensing [ 4 , 5 , 11 , 33 ] . Olguin et al . [ 33 ] have looked at using wearable electronic badges for mea - suring face - to - face interaction , conversations and physical proxim - ity . Brown et al . took a similar approach by using wearable badges to track serendipitous interactions in a workplace and evaluated the effect of workers’ cultural backgrounds on their interaction diversity [ 4 ] . Kelley’s Bell Stars study in a research organisation showed that the star performers had a diverse network of colleagues that they interacted with [ 25 ] . In the same vein of understanding how ideas ﬂow , Pentland [ 34 ] showed that patterns of communica - tions are important predictors of a team’s success , and that these patterns carry vital information for better people management . 2 . 2 Social Visualisation Providing social feedback during face - to - face interactions for the purpose of improving group communication is an active area of re - search . A number of systems , such as Chat Circles [ 37 ] , visuali - sations of turn taking based on audio input [ 24 ] have shown that social proxies inﬂuence collaboration behaviour . Research has also shown that the visual feedback on communication patterns dur - ing group meetings can lead to an immediate behavioural change amongst employees [ 9 , 26 ] . More precisely after a week long us - age of the proposed visualisation tool ( i . e . , the MeetingMediator ) the results showed that the participants took action regarding their ( lack of ) engagement in collaborations . Therefore the overall pat - tern of interactions amongst individuals had improved dramatically . These past studies either have been conducted to assess the im - pact of collective feedback on collaboration at an organisation scale , or they assessed the immediate impact of the visualisations on short term behavioural change . In contrast , in this paper we are inter - ested in taking an individual lens to understand how individuals perceive the visualisation of face - to - face interactions within the workplace as an external cue that could impact long term volun - tary self - reﬂection . That is if this cue is effective we expect users to report a raise in their self - knowledge of workplace behaviour , as well as a subliminal change in interaction pattern triggered by the changes in self - knowledge level . 363 3 . SYSTEM DESCRIPTION Our study is part of a larger multifaceted initiative that aims to uncover the hidden dynamics of modern enterprises grounded upon the past work in the published literature [ 32 , 36 ] . In this initia - tive , we gather various space metrics ( e . g . , spatio - temporal usage , noise , air quality ) and people metrics ( e . g . , location , dwell time , face - to - face interactions ) to offer actionable insights on various as - pects of an organisation for better space and people management . The system reported here essentially aims at facilitating personal growth through expansion on one’s self - knowledge of interpersonal behaviour at workplace . Our objective is to assess whether users found the visualisation of their face - to - face interaction as an effec - tive external cue , and whether the feedback helped them to make inferences about their own workplace behaviour . To this end , we capture face - to - face interactions from location traces left behind by users’ smartphones and then present them in a mobile application through carefully designed feedback . In the following , we describe the co - location detection engine , underlying interaction detection model , visualisation feedback design and implementation of the system that are used to facilitate this study . 3 . 1 ( Co - ) Location Detection Engine To detect face - to - face interaction , we ﬁrst need to identify when people are co - located in the workplace . To do so we ﬁrst need to track an individual’s location , and then derive co - location from location traces across individuals . Previous work has shown that people carry their mobile phone at the workplace , 48 % of the time within arm - reach and 82 % of time within 5 meters [ 8 ] , making the phone’s location a good approximation for users’ location in the ofﬁces . Grounded upon this rationale , tracking an individual’s lo - cation essentially means tracking the location of the individual’s phone . We build upon this heuristic and track mobile devices using a state - of - the - art localisation technique based on RSS ( Received Signal Strength ) ﬁngerprinting . Our localisation infrastructure re - lies on Wi - Fi and Bluetooth ( iBeacon ) 1 for supporting both An - droid and iOS devices . Following the standard RSS based localisa - tion methods , the entire workplace was ﬁngerprinted at a 1m x 1m granularity with available Wi - Fi access points and iBeacons , and the ﬁngerprint database was uploaded on the server backend . We leveraged 30 + existing Wi - Fi access points available in our work - place , and 45 iBeacons 2 which we placed at different locations within our ofﬁce . On the user end , we developed a smart - phone application both for Android 4 + and iOS 8 + platform that scans for the visible WiFi access points or iBeacons in a background process , and records their names and RSS every 15 seconds . This data is then sent to a backend where a localisation algorithm based on k - Nearest Neigh - bours matches it against the pre - populated ﬁngerprint database , and outputs a ( x , y ) coordinate for the location of the mobile device running the application . The locations of multiple mobile devices are then passed through a grouping algorithm that determines co - located devices by modelling temporal variations observed in the locations across a set of devices [ 36 ] . This in turn is used to deter - mine co - located individuals . An important aspect of our system is that it relies on ordinary smartphones and network infrastructure to detect interactions . This means that the participants did not require to wear or carry addi - tional hardware with them . This ensured that the burden on study participants was minimal and less privacy invasive as we did not 1 We selected both technologies as Wi - Fi scanning at the device end is not allowed on the iOS platform . 2 http : / / estimote . com use any audio or vision sensing . However , our system requires em - ployees to possess a smartphone ( running either Android or iOS ) equipped with the application that captures location traces in a background process . This means to capture a face - to - face inter - action , all the employees engaged in the interaction need to carry smartphones with our application running either in the foreground or in the background . 3 . 2 Interaction Detection Model Once we have detected co - location , we need to distinguish face - to - face interaction from simple co - presence . In order to do so , we build a model based on sociology theories [ 18 , 35 ] that reason upon the spatio - temporal properties of face - to - face interactions . More speciﬁcally , we leverage two variables that are exhibited in every co - located group engaged in a face - to - face interaction : duration and size . The duration ( d ) represents the amount of time that an interaction lasted , from the time of formation to its decomposition . Duration is a simple metric but a good indicator for differentiating various types of interactions . For example , a co - location with short dura - tion ( e . g . , less than 10 minutes ) could be more representative of spontaneous interactions ( i . e . , coffee breaks at the workplace and casual chats ) than a planned meeting . The size ( N ) represents the number of distinct individuals in the interaction . In the domain of social psychology [ 35 ] , size has been shown to play an important role in determining the nature of groups . That is as the size of the human group grows , the group becomes more depersonalised . Furthermore , as the number of per - sons in the interaction N increases , the duration of the interaction also increases so to allow the individuals to mutually involve in the communication and cognitive / visual attention [ 18 ] . For example , while a two minute interaction for 2 persons could be long enough for a social chat , a 5 person interaction might require more than 5 minutes . This is because as the number of persons increases , the longer it takes for the ceremonial rituals 3 of interactions formation and decomposition [ 17 ] . Moreover , it is more likely for the fo - cus of attention ( e . g . , topic of the conversation ) to be shifted when more individuals are part of a verbal interaction , leading to a longer duration . In addition , as the interaction duration ( d ) increases , the likelihood of an interaction between a large number of individuals decreases . This is because it is less conventional for a large num - ber of people to actively and mutually interact with each other for a long period of time ( e . g . , 10 people actively interacting for over 2 hours ) . We can model this property as a sub - linear growth . Figure 1 : The pipeline of the face - to - face interaction detection Accordingly when a co - located group is detected by co - location detection engine , we model the duration and size of the group against a log normal distribution with µ = 3 . 5 and σ = 0 . 9 to infer the composition ( and decomposition ) of a group engaged in face - to - 3 The ceremonial ritual refers to the conversations or actions that are necessary to keep participants in line and give a closure to the mutual activity sustained in the interaction . 364 Figure 2 : ( a ) Interaction history and ( b ) intensity feedback face interactions . The entire processing pipeline is depicted in Fig - ure . Two distinct advantages of our parametric classiﬁcation model is that it does not require any learning period and it can operate ef - ﬁciently at realtime . It should be noted here that this model for inferring face - to - face interactions is not absolute , i . e . , it cannot guarantee that all face - to - face interactions are captured , nor that all captured gather - ings are face - to - face interactions . With systematic evaluation using self - reported ground truth ( which is out of scope of this paper ) , we found that our system can capture approximately 80 % of the face - to - face interactions when all participants run our application in their smartphones [ 36 ] . 3 . 3 Mobile Application Experience Quantiﬁcation of face - to - face interactions can be visualised in many different ways . In “The New Science of Building Great Teams " , Pentland argued that the two important metrics for quan - tifying the patterns of informal communications in a workplace are energy and engagement [ 34 ] . Here , energy captures the num - ber of exchanges between an individual and her team members whereas engagement corresponds to the distribution of these ex - changes amongst the team members . Borrowing these metrics , we designed two distinct visualisations and presented them in the aforementioned mobile application : interaction history correspond - ing to energy and interaction intensity corresponding to engage - ment . These visualisations offered feedback on personal face - to - face interactions accumulated over the most recent 14 days ( i . e . , the near past as opposed to distant ) grounded upon the psychology principles that suggest that the critical role of short - term feedback in enhancing one’s self - knowledge about her own behaviour [ 10 ] . These two visualisations are described below . Interaction History : This visualisation as illustrated in Fig - ure 2 ( a ) provides a timeline of user’s face - to - face interactions with other colleagues in the recent past ( i . e . , 14 days ) . The visualisa - tion is independent of the nature of the interaction ( e . g . , duration of the interaction , topic ) , and purely focuses on the number of these exchanges ( i . e . , energy ) . The rationale behind this presentation is to provide a short - term feedback on spontaneous interactions , es - pecially to offer opportunities for follow - up connections with new contacts . Interaction Intensity : This visualisation as illustrated in Fig - ure 2 ( b ) presents the intensity and distribution of a user’s face - to - face interaction with different individuals . Essentially , each bubble represents an individual , and the size of the bubble represents the intensity of the user’s collaboration with that individual . The inten - sity represents the relative exchange between different individuals and captures two aspects : i ) interaction frequency - the number of times of the face - to - face interaction , and ii ) interaction duration - the total durations of the face - to - face interaction . Accordingly , we deﬁne an intensity metric which is computed as follows : P i = wa id + ( 1 − w ) a if ( 1 ) a id = d ( a i ) d max ( a ) ( 2 ) a if = ( 1 + log | S | | a is ∈ S | ) − 1 ( 3 ) Here P i is the interaction intensity with person i , | S | is the to - tal number of face - to - face interactions with all the persons , and a is is the number of face - to - face interactions with person i . d ( a i ) is the total interaction duration with person i and d max ( a ) is the maximum interaction duration across all persons . w is a weight parameter , and we set it to 0 . 6 to give higher weight to the face - to - face interaction duration . A higher P value indicates a stronger interaction intensity , and a lower value indicates the reverse . Finally , the application offers a number of location - based ser - vices , such as locating a colleague or an empty meeting room , and recommending the most popular area in the workplace based on the density of people’s locations . These services act as incentives for sharing their location . 4 . RESEARCH STUDY To understand the impact of personal feedback on face - to - face interactions in the workplace , we conducted an in situ study . The research was conducted between January 2015 to April 2015 in an industrial research labs in Western Europe . 4 . 1 Methodology Following the precision tracking methodology [ 29 ] , our goal was to capture as complete picture as possible about face - to - face inter - actions in the workplace . To this end , we conducted a mixed method study , in which we ﬁrst collected and analysed usage logs from the aforementioned mobile application to understand efﬁcacy of the in - teraction visualisation . We analysed two metrics : impression and interaction . The impression data allows us to get a sense as to the number of times each user viewed the visualisation feedback and serves as a proxy for understanding the effectiveness of this infor - mation as an external cue to promote self - reﬂection . Furthermore by analysing the relation between interaction and impressions we can get a sense as to whether the impressions caused any sublimi - nal changes in interaction patterns , that could have been triggered by improvement in self - knowledge . It is important to recognise that the quantitative analysis from the application data alone can only provide an approximation and cannot be used as evidence to fully to answer our research ques - tion . This is because user experience with the application might have been inﬂuenced by multiple factors , including internal factors such as the design of the application , as well as the external factors such as varying schedules in the workplace , job responsibilities , etc . Furthermore , as we have explained earlier that our system can - not guarantee that it captured every single face - to - face interactions across all our participants during the study period . Therefore , we complement our quantitative analysis with qualitative interviews to 365 gather insights regarding the effectiveness of the visualisation feed - back . We describe each component of our study methods next . 4 . 2 Application Usage Log The application was used by 47 employees ( 6 were female 4 ) for 87 working days ( excluding weekends and holidays ) . The applica - tion logged two metrics : interactions and impressions . Interactions refer to the face - to - face interactions among individuals as described earlier , whereas impressions refer to the events when a user viewed the application page that visualised interaction intensity and history ( Figure 2 ) . Two of the participants faced issues with running the app on their phones during the study , and thus we excluded their data from the subsequent quantitive analysis . Table 1 reports some statis - tics regarding the usage of the application by the participants . Accumulatively 657 . 59 hours ( µ = 13 . 99 , σ = 19 . 85 ) of applica - tion usage were recorded ; 7059 interactions and 5210 impressions were captured . Table 1 also reports the percentage of the participa - tion days by the users , as well as the number of active days in the system - wherein the former corresponds to the full duration a user was observed in the system even if not active throughout , while the latter corresponds to the total number of days that the system detected user activity ( including impressions , interactions or any other communication with the server ) . On an average , every user was engaged in 150 . 19 interactions ( σ = 204 . 98 ) throughout the study period . These interactions hap - pened amongst a limited set of contacts - on average each user met with 9 distinct others ( σ = 5 . 84 ) . Finally , we observed a skewed distribution in regards to the number of impressions per user ( µ = 110 . 85 , σ = 138 . 68 ) , with most of users with small num - ber of impressions and only a few with very high impression . We provide more details on these observations along with a thorough quantitative analysis in the Results section . Looking to these data through a gendered lens , we run Mann - Whitney’s U tests to evaluate whether the impression and interac - tion counts were differed by gender . For impression , we did not ﬁnd any effect of the gender group ( U = 89 . 5 , Z = − 1 . 36 , p > 0 . 05 ) . For interactions , however , we found a signiﬁcant effect of gender group ( U = 63 , Z = − 2 . 19 , p < 0 . 05 ) , which indicated that females had more interactions than males . Parameter µ Distribution σ Total Usage Hours 13 . 99 19 . 85 % of Participation in Days 48 % 38 % Number of Active Days 13 . 23 12 . 58 Total Interactions 150 . 19 204 . 98 Unique Contact Size 9 . 00 5 . 84 Total Impressions 110 . 85 138 . 68 Table 1 : The extracted logs and their properties per user basis 4 . 3 Semi - Structured Interviews Following our quantitive study and four months into the deploy - ment , we sent an email to the participants inviting them for semi - structured interviews . Out of the 47 users , 20 agreed to participate in the semi - structured interviews . They were aged between 28 and 61 years , and 4 were female . The interviews were semi - structured , 4 This gender ratio corresponds to the actual ratio of the female em - ployees in our organisation . involved one interviewer and one note taker , and lasted for an hour . The entire session was audio recored and later partially transcribed to complete the observer’s notes . In the interviews , we asked the participants about their percep - tion of the interaction visualisations and whether they altered their interaction behaviour due to the visualisations . We engaged in open ended discussions to gain a better understanding of the de - sign space of feedback visualisation . To this end , we followed an interview technique called laddering 5 to uncover the core values behind users’ reactions . We analysed the interview data by count - ing users’ answer to the effectiveness of the external cue and coding the subjective responses . Observations against these codes were then analysed using afﬁnity diagramming [ 3 ] to derive themes . Fi - nally , we also asked the participants about whether they considered themselves as introvert or extrovert . 5 . STUDY RESULTS In this section , we report the insights from our study by analysing the application usage logs and interview responses . In order to as - sess the efﬁcacy of the visualisation as an external cue to promote self - reﬂection , we ﬁrst study the impression volume and subjec - tive perception of the employees . We argue that the volume and temporal pattern of the impressions are good indicators of whether employees were interested in this feedback , and found them as a source to help expand their self - knowledge of their workplace be - haviour . That is , if the visualisation was effective as an external cue , from the quantitive analysis we except the users to have high volume of impression distributed across time . Figure 3 : Total number of impressions per user for each de - ployment month . Figure 3 illustrates the total number of impressions for each user at the given month of deployment . Based on this illustration we make two observations . Firstly , we notice that majority ( 70 % ) of the users had less than 200 impressions overall ( µ = 110 . 85 , σ = 134 . 68 ) , and that some of these users viewed the feedback only a handful number of times in the ﬁrst two months of the deployment . Secondly , we observe that a subset of the users had high volume of impressions , that were distributed across four months of the study . These ﬁndings from our quantitative analysis were supported by the user interviews . Only 5 participants ( out of 20 ) found the pre - sentation of the interaction history ( Figure 2 ( a ) ) useful . The major - 5 http : / / www . uxmatters . com / mt / archives / 2009 / 07 / laddering - a - research - interview - technique - for - uncovering - core - values . php 366 ity of the participants mentioned that they are already aware of their recent interactions with colleagues , and can easily recall them with - out the need of a supporting visualisation . The subjective feedback on the visualisation showing interaction intensity ( Figure 2 ( b ) ) was also similar as the majority ( n = 13 ) of the interviewees found the presented information intuitive and unsurprising . A particular remark was : “If you could add how productive were my collabora - tions with a teammate , it would be useful . Just know - ing the amount of interactions is not enough . . " Similar comments were received from other participants where they desired actionable attributes qualifying their face - to - face in - teraction patterns . The minority with high impression volume and rate , suggested different reasons for their interest in the feedback . One participant stated : “I ﬁnd the interaction history extremely useful as I am new in the company and the app helps me to make new connections . " Others stated that their job responsibilities ( e . g . , communication , sales , etc . ) require them to interact with others in the company frequently so they found the visualisation feedback useful . They mentioned that the feedback helped them to understand how many interactions they had and how these interactions were distributed amongst their contacts . Examining this minority group based on their self reported per - sonality traits ( introvert vs extrovert ) , we noticed that they cor - responded to the self - reported extroverts . Indeed , when examin - ing the volume of interactions and impressions under this lens for all the users , we observed signiﬁcant differences between the two groups ( p − value < 0 . 0001 ) revealed through the Fisher’s Exact test . The mean impression counts for introverts and extroverts were 159 and 315 respectively , while the mean interaction counts were 96 and 141 respectively . This demonstrates that the self - reported extroverts had more interactions and impressions per user as com - pared to self - reported introverts . These observations highlight that for many the visualisation feed - back did not offer information beyond the internal cues that the em - ployees already held regarding their workplace behaviour . Indeed a pattern that emerged out of our interviews was regarding the tempo - ral granularity of the visualised information . Participants ( n = 17 ) suggested that if this information was presented at a longer res - olution , corresponding to a monthly or yearly summary of their interactions at the workplace , they might ﬁnd it useful . It was high - lighted that the visualisation of data accumulated over a longer pe - riod could help , not only with memory augmentation but also to enable individuals to make a mental mapping of their productivity and their past behaviour . This ﬁnding is in contrast to the visual - isation techniques used in Quantiﬁed Self literature , wherein the focus is on providing short - term , in - the - moment feedback to the users and long term visualisation are typically provided as optional features in the system . Our interview results also suggest that the majority of the users ( n = 17 ) would not reﬂect on the visualised feedback in their cur - rent form to modify their workplace behaviour . One participant stated : “For me these charts wouldn’t be a reason to go and grab the person for coffee or talk to him . . " To support this observation with a bigger sample set , we delved into the interaction data from the application usage log . As it was reported in the Table 1 , users had varying degree of interactions with some users encountering more people than the others . We analyse the number of interactions of the application users over time to get a sense as to whether impressions were followed by any subliminal change in interaction patterns . More speciﬁcally , if the impressions had a positive impact on the user to seek an alternative behaviour at workplace , we would expect to see a positive ( or neg - ative ) trend of interactions over time . Figure 4 presents the number of interactions per active day per user and suggests that the rate of interaction do not show any upward or downward trend . Fur - thermore , we did not observe any differences in the interaction be - haviour between the subset of users with high impressions ( i . e . top 30 % ) versus the rest . Figure 4 : Number of interactions per participation day . To summarise , we observed that not all the participants perceive the feedback on face - to - face interaction pattern as an effective ex - ternal cue . Indeed majority claimed that the information that was provided corresponded to their internal cue and did not add any value . Another observation that stood out was the need for a rather longer - term feedback that could help employees to make a mental mapping between their interaction patterns and their longer goals . Furthermore , for the the visualisation feedback to be more effective external cue , the participants wanted concrete actionable attributes ( notions such as productivity ) that along with the interaction infor - mation could lead them towards their goal . 6 . DISCUSSION In the earlier section , we presented the results emerged from the study that suggest that short - term feedback on face - to - face interac - tion pattern in the workplace was not found to be an effective ex - ternal cue that promotes self - reﬂection . During the interviews , we engaged in open - ended discussions with the participants to explore alternative feedback modalities and different other factors that may or may not inﬂuence the design of future workplace technologies , especially intended to offer personalised feedback on workplace behaviour . In this section , we discuss two such factors that we found most compelling . We also present three suggestions for fu - ture workplace technology design based on the insights we gained in the study . Research on gamiﬁcation [ 7 ] has shown that the use of game de - sign elements such as leadership boards , badges and points could 367 act as participation incentives in non - game contexts [ 1 , 20 ] includ - ing in the enterprise environment [ 12 ] . Grounded upon these works , we wanted to understand whether this consensus regarding the ef - fect of gamiﬁcation holds for face - to - face interactions in the work - place . During the interview , we probed users on whether visual - ising their standings in the organisation in terms of personal inter - actions might cause them to self - reﬂect . We discussed concepts like leaderboard , or ranking that can reﬂect the extent to which an individual interacts with everybody else within the enterprise . We found that 16 out of 20 participants strongly opposed the quantiﬁcation and visualisation of their interaction ranking - par - ticularly in a shared setting , e . g . a leaderboard . Participants men - tioned that employees should not be judged based on their interac - tions in the workplace , and also raised concerns that a competition - based system may cause people to develop artiﬁcial behaviour in the workplace so to improve their ranking . One remark was : “Oh , I think this can easily be cheated . People will try to increase their ranking to appear on top . This is not good . " An interesting ﬁnding , albeit contrary to above , was that while most participants showed resistance against public rankings , many ( n = 10 ) expressed a desire to privately compare their own interac - tions against other employees in a subtle way . These suggests that competition is an interesting feedback dimension in the workplace that needs to be further explored , in particular to understand the ﬁne balance between public exposure and personal awareness . Previous works on social physics have shown that individuals beneﬁt from a diverse network of connections outside their imme - diate team [ 25 ] . Our discussions revealed that participants would prefer to see a relationship structure of employees in their work - place and suggestions on increasing their own interaction network , e . g . how one can connect to someone speciﬁc , and who is the best intermediary in one’s network to facilitate this new connection . A common feedback from the participants was regarding the possible annotation of the relationships , either qualifying past interactions results or expertise of the unknown contacts . This desire for net - work diversiﬁcation is not surprising as established literature on on - line social network analysis have shown this is as a natural human characteristics . However , embedding this into personal feedback on physical workplace behaviour is an interesting topic for future exploration . Before concluding this section , we present three design sugges - tions based on the insights uncovered in this work . We expect that these suggestions will guide future designers to assess carefully the functional space of workplace applications aimed at personal grat - iﬁcation . Furthermore , we hope that these suggestions will open up and shape interesting directions for future research in the work - place technology area . 1 . Design for Long - Term Feedback : We observed that all of our participants desired feedback on their workplace behaviour accumulated over a longer period of months or years . It was evident that the short - term feedback did not offer any addi - tional value than the internal cue . Delving into this during the interviews , we understood that long - term feedback is ap - pealing because not only it enables employees to recall their distant past interactions but also serves as an external cue that could help them to adapt their behaviour and attitude in the workplace , e . g . , managing and extending personal network , better management of time spent at workplace , etc . While we do not advocate completely ignoring the short - term feed - back , designers of future workplace technology intended to be used as behavioural feedback tool should pay particular attention to long - term feedback . 2 . Design with Actionable Attributes : One key insight emerged from this study is that it is absolutely critical to incorporate actionable attributes in the feedback design . It was evident from our analysis that majority of the employees did not ﬁnd the feedback informative as it lacked qualiﬁcation for action - able reﬂection . During the interviews we were constantly reminded that if those interaction moments could be quali - ﬁed with some subjective ( e . g . , a very productive chat , an exciting discussion etc . ) employees would have more ben - eﬁts . They mentioned that these would have allowed them to improve their self - knowledge and act as necessary , e . g . , to reconnect with speciﬁc individuals or to reassess the pro - ductivity of informal interactions . We thus call attention to workplace technology designers to accommodate actionable attributes in the feedback design . 3 . Design with Community Awareness : We observed differ - ential pattern by different user communities . For example , female employees had more interactions than their male coun - terparts , self - reported extroverts had higher engagement than their introvert colleagues . Also , we noticed that individu - als with different job responsibilities had striking differences in their impressions about the feedback application . We see interesting dynamics emerging here , different communities have different drives towards behavioural feedback , and it is important to recognise the personality , gender , and occu - pation differences while designing feedback to meet the de - mands of respective communities . 7 . CONCLUSIONS In this paper we explored the impact of offering personal feed - back on face - to - face interactions in an industrial workplace . Al - though previous literature has examined the impact of quantifying interactions in the workplace through collective feedback , to the best of our knowledge there are no previous works that address the impact of visualising this information at a personal scale . To ac - commodate this research we have designed and developed a mo - bile system consisting of a cross - platform mobile application , a location infrastructure and a data processing infrastructure . The system hosts a novel data processing pipeline to detect face - to - face interaction from location traces at real time without requiring any additional contact - sensing ( e . g . , microphone , infra - red badge , etc . ) or infra - structured sensing ( e . g . , camera , etc . ) . We had a unique op - portunity to deploy this system to study the impact of feedback on personal interactions in an industrial workplace with 47 employees over 4 months , accompanied by in - depth interviews of 20 employ - ees . Our results suggest that the majority of the employees did not perceive this feedback as an useful external cue to promote self - reﬂection . However , all the employees desired long - term feedback capturing personal behaviour in the workplace qualiﬁed with ac - tionable attributes . 8 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] A . Bandura . Self - efﬁcacy : toward a unifying theory of behavioral change . Psychological review , 84 ( 2 ) : 191 , 1977 . [ 2 ] D . J . Bem . Self - perception theory1 . 1973 . [ 3 ] H . Beyer and K . Holzblatt . Contextual Design . Morgan Kaufman , 1998 . [ 4 ] C . Brown , C . Efstratiou , I . Leontiadis , D . Quercia , and C . Mascolo . Tracking serendipitous interactions : how 368 individual cultures shape the ofﬁce . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM CSCW , pages 1072 – 1081 . ACM , 2014 . [ 5 ] C . Brown , C . Efstratiou , I . Leontiadis , D . Quercia , C . Mascolo , J . Scott , and P . Key . The architecture of innovation : Tracking face - to - face interactions with ubicomp technologies . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM UBICOMP , pages 811 – 822 , 2014 . [ 6 ] J . N . Cummings and S . Kiesler . Who collaborates successfully ? : prior experience reduces collaboration barriers in distributed interdisciplinary research . In Proceedings of the CSCW , pages 437 – 446 . ACM , 2008 . [ 7 ] S . Deterding , D . Dixon , R . Khaled , and L . Nacke . From game design elements to gamefulness : deﬁning gamiﬁcation . In Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference : Envisioning Future Media Environments , pages 9 – 15 . ACM , 2011 . [ 8 ] A . K . Dey , K . Wac , D . Ferreira , K . Tassini , J . - H . Hong , and J . Ramos . Getting closer : an empirical investigation of the proximity of user to their smart phones . In Proceedings of the Ubicomp , pages 163 – 172 , 2011 . [ 9 ] J . M . DiMicco , A . Pandolfo , and W . Bender . Inﬂuencing group participation with a shared display . In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM CSCW , pages 614 – 623 , 2004 . [ 10 ] M . Domjan . The principles of learning and behavior . Cengage Learning , 2014 . [ 11 ] C . Efstratiou , I . Leontiadis , M . Picone , K . K . Rachuri , C . Mascolo , and J . Crowcroft . Sense and sensibility in a pervasive world . In Pervasive Computing , pages 406 – 424 . Springer , 2012 . [ 12 ] R . Farzan , J . M . DiMicco , D . R . Millen , C . Dugan , W . Geyer , and E . A . Brownholtz . Results from deploying a participation incentive mechanism within the enterprise . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 563 – 572 . ACM , 2008 . [ 13 ] L . Festinger . A theory of cognitive dissonance , volume 2 . Stanford university press , 1962 . [ 14 ] A . for double - blind review . [ 15 ] S . R . Fussell , R . E . Kraut , F . J . Lerch , W . L . Scherlis , M . M . McNally , and J . J . Cadiz . Coordination , overload and team performance : effects of team communication strategies . In Proceedings of the CSCW , pages 275 – 284 . ACM , 1998 . [ 16 ] S . Gallacher , J . OConnor , J . Bird , Y . Rogers , L . Capra , D . Harrison , and P . Marshall . Mood squeezer : Lightening up the workplace through playful and lightweight interactions . 2015 . [ 17 ] E . Goffman . Interaction ritual : Essays in face to face behavior . AldineTransaction , 2005 . [ 18 ] E . Goffman . Behavior in public places . Simon and Schuster , 2008 . [ 19 ] W . O . Hagstrom . The scientiﬁc community , volume 304 . Basic books New York , 1965 . [ 20 ] J . Hamari , J . Koivisto , and H . Sarsa . Does gamiﬁcation work ? – a literature review of empirical studies on gamiﬁcation . In System Sciences ( HICSS ) , 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on , pages 3025 – 3034 . IEEE , 2014 . [ 21 ] J . D . Herbsleb , A . Mockus , T . A . Finholt , and R . E . Grinter . Distance , dependencies , and delay in a global collaboration . In Proceedings of the CSCW , pages 319 – 328 . ACM , 2000 . [ 22 ] G . Hofstede . Sage Publications , 2001 . [ 23 ] Y . Hua , V . Loftness , R . Kraut , and K . M . Powell . Workplace collaborative space layout typology and occupant perception of collaboration environment . Environment and planning . B , Planning & design , 37 ( 3 ) : 429 , 2010 . [ 24 ] K . Karahalios and T . Bergstrom . Visualizing audio in group table conversation . In Proceedings of TABLETOP , 2006 . [ 25 ] R . E . Kelley . How to be a star engineer . IEEE Spectr . , 36 ( 10 ) : 51 – 58 , Oct . 1999 . [ 26 ] T . Kim , A . Chang , L . Holland , and A . Pentland . Meeting mediator : enhancing group collaboration using sociometric feedback . In Proceedings of the CSCW 2008 , pages 457 – 466 , 2008 . [ 27 ] R . Kraut , C . Egido , and J . Galegher . Patterns of contact and communication in scientiﬁc research collaboration . In Proceedings of the CSCW , pages 1 – 12 . ACM , 1988 . [ 28 ] R . E . Kraut , S . R . Fussell , S . E . Brennan , and J . Siegel . Understanding effects of proximity on collaboration : Implications for technologies to support remote collaborative work . Distributed work , pages 137 – 162 , 2002 . [ 29 ] G . Mark , S . Iqbal , M . Czerwinski , and P . Johns . Capturing the mood : facebook and face - to - face encounters in the workplace . In Proceedings of the CSCW , pages 1082 – 1094 , 2014 . [ 30 ] G . Mark , S . Iqbal , M . Czerwinski , and P . Johns . Focused , aroused , but so distractible : Temporal perspectives on multitasking and communications . In Proceedings of the CSCW , pages 903 – 916 , 2015 . [ 31 ] G . Mark , S . T . Iqbal , M . Czerwinski , and P . Johns . Bored mondays and focused afternoons : the rhythm of attention and online activity in the workplace . In Proceedings of the CHI , pages 3025 – 3034 , 2014 . [ 32 ] A . Mathur , M . Van den Broeck , G . Vanderhulst , A . Mashhadi , and F . Kawsar . Tiny habits in the giant enterprise : understanding the dynamics of a quantiﬁed workplace . In Proceedings of the 2015 Ubicomp , pages 577 – 588 . ACM , 2015 . [ 33 ] D . O . Olguín , B . N . Waber , T . Kim , A . Mohan , K . Ara , and A . Pentland . Sensible organizations : Technology and methodology for automatically measuring organizational behavior . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , Part B : Cybernetics , 39 ( 1 ) : 43 – 55 , 2009 . [ 34 ] A . Pentland . The new science of building great teams . Harvard Business Review , 90 ( 4 ) : 60 – 69 , 2012 . [ 35 ] J . C . Turner . Social categorization and the self - concept : A social cognitive theory of group behavior . Advances in group processes , 2 : 77 – 122 , 1985 . [ 36 ] G . Vanderhulst , A . Mashhadi , M . Dashti , and F . Kawsar . Detecting human encounters from wiﬁ radio signals . In Proceedings of the MUM , pages 97 – 108 . ACM , 2015 . [ 37 ] F . B . Viégas and J . S . Donath . Chat circles . In Proceedings of the CHI , CHI ’99 , pages 9 – 16 , 1999 . [ 38 ] B . N . Waber , D . Olguin Olguin , T . Kim , and A . Pentland . Productivity through coffee breaks : Changing social networks by changing break structure . Available at SSRN 1586375 , 2010 . [ 39 ] G . K . Zipf . Human behavior and the principle of least effort . 1949 . 369