Review The GPI - anchor and protein sorting S . Chatterjee and S . Mayor * National Center for Biological Sciences , UAS - GKVK Campus , Bellary Road , Bangalore 560065 ( India ) , Fax + 91 80 363 6662 / 75 , e - mail : mayor @ ncbs . res . in Received 16 March 2001 ; received after revision 13 June 2001 ; accepted 15 June 2001 Abstract . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) are a diverse class of proteins that are anchored to the membrane solely via means of a post - translational lipid modification , the GPI - moiety . Since their discovery in the late 1970s , years of research have provided significant insight into the functions of this ubiquitous modification . In addition to the structure and biosynthesis of the GPI - moiety , perhaps the best - studied feature of this glycolipid is its ability to impart character - CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 58 ( 2001 ) 1969 – 1987 1420 - 682X / 01 / 141969 - 19 $ 1 . 50 + 0 . 20 / 0 © Birkhäuser Verlag , Basel , 2001 CMLS Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences istic membrane - trafficking properties to the proteins that it anchors . Study of the mechanism of sorting of GPI - APs has brought to light the importance of lateral hetero - geneities in cell membranes , termed rafts , in biological sorting processes . The focus of this review is to examine the emerging role of the GPI - anchor and mechanisms in - volved in GPI - AP sorting in the context of intracellular trafficking pathways . Key words . GPI - anchor ; membrane trafficking ; sorting ; endocytic pathway ; biosynthetic pathway ; rafts ; signaling ; sphingolipid ; cholesterol . The structure and biosynthesis of the glycosylphos - phatidylinositol - moiety The observation that certain proteins are likely to be an - chored to membranes via phosphatidylinositol ( PI ) - spe - cific phospholipase C ( PI - PLC ) - releasable lipidmodifi - cations was originally made in the late 1970s when highly purified PI - PLCs from bacteria were shown to specifi - cally release alkaline phosphatase ( AP ) , acetyl - cholinesterase ( AChE ) and 5 ¢ - nucleotidase from cell membranes of a variety of mammalian tissues [ 1 – 4 ] ; phospholipases with other specificities were unable to duplicate the effect of PI - PLC . That proteins are anchored to the plasma membrane via a glycosylphosphatidylinos - itol ( GPI ) - moiety became evident in 1985 when the struc - ture of the glycolipid anchor was characterized by analy - ses of the membrane anchors of Torpedo electric ray or - gan AChE [ 5 ] , human erythrocyte AChE [ 6 ] , rat brain and thymocyte Thy - 1 [ 7 ] , and the variant surface glycoprotein ( VSG ) protein of Trypanosoma brucei [ 8 , 9 ] . These stud - ies led to the characterization of the structure of the GPI - anchor ( fig . 1 ) . Below we summarize salient features of the structure and biosynthesis of the GPI - anchor . In addi - tion , we refer readers to recent reviews which contain similar comprehensive accounts [ 10 – 16 ] . Structural diversity of GPI - moieties The discovery of the phenomenon of GPI - anchoring re - sulted in an explosion in research into the distribution , structural analysis , biosynthesis , and function of this ubiquitous protein modification in many animal and cell types . Several studies have now established that GPI - APs represent a large class of functionally diverse proteins ( table 1 ) . The only common feature among these proteins is their attachment to the exoplasmic leaflet of the mem - brane via a post - translational lipid modification , the GPI - anchor ( fig . 1 ) [ 10 , 13 , 15 ] . * Corresponding author . On the basis of the glycan structure , GPI - moieties may be classified into three classes [ 13 ] : type - 1 which have a Man a 1 - 6Man a 1 - 4GlcN a 1 - 6PI motif , type - 2 which have a Man a 1 - 3Man a 1 - 4GlcN a 1 - 6PI motif , and type - 3 con - taining a hybrid GPI with a Man a 1 - 6 ( Man a 1 - 3 ) Man a 1 - 4GlcN a 1 - 6PI motif . The GPI - moiety present in GPI - APs belongs to the type - 1 class . There are close to 100 distinct GPI - APs identified so far [ 14 ] , only a few of which are listed in table 1 . The core structure of the GPI - anchor consists of a single phospholipid spanning the exoplas - mic membrane leaflet and a complex head - group consist - ing of a phosphodiester - linked inositol , a glucosamine linked to the inositol , a linear chain of three mannose su - gars linked to the glucosamine , and a phosphoe - thanolamine ( P - EtN ) linked to the terminal mannose residue ( fig . 1B ) . The protein is attached to the GPI via an amide bond between the carboxy - terminal residue of the protein and the amino group of the P - EtN ( fig . 1B ) . The core structure of the GPI - anchor is conserved across all species studied so far [ 10 , 14 ] . Variation in the structure of the GPI - anchor arises both due to compositional differences in the lipid portion and to numerous ( protein - cell - , or species - specific ) side - chain substitutions on the tetrasaccharide backbone of the conserved head - group ( fig . 1C ) [ 10 , 15 ] . The lipidic part of most GPI - anchors is made of diacyl chains ( e . g . , T . brucei VSG [ 8 ] , Torpedo AChE [ 17 ] ) . In a number of cases , however , the lipidic portion of the GPI - anchor con - sists of alkyl - acyl chains ( e . g . , decay - accelerating factor , DAF [ 18 ] , erythrocyte AChE [ 19 ] , placental alkaline phosphatase [ 20 ] , and folate - binding protein [ 21 ] ) , al - though other lipid structures are also present [ 15 ] . Further diversity in the core structure of the GPI - anchor arises due to an additional fatty acid ester linked to the inositol ring of many GPI - APs , rendering them resistant to cleav - age by PI - PLC ( human AChE in erythrocytes , fig . 1C [ 19 ] ; PARP in T . brucei [ 22 ] ; human alkaline phosphatase [ 23 ] ) . Diversity also arises due to side - chain substitutions of an additional one or two P - EtN residues on conserved mannoses seen in many GPI - anchors from different species ( e . g . , hAChE , fig . 1C [ 24 ] ; Thy - 1 , fig . 1C [ 25 ] ; gpi10 [ 26 ] ) . One of the most prominent reasons for GPI - anchor diversity is glycan substitution on the conserved mannose residues in several different species ( see fig . 1C ) [ 10 , 15 ] . GPI - moieties in a cell are not always found covalently linked to proteins ; many cells have a large pool of GPIs that are non - protein - linked or ‘free’ [ 10 , 15 ] . These in - clude free GPI - anchors which could represent excess ma - terial that is not consumed in protein or glycoconjugate anchoring , or type II GPIs that could be precursor end - products of the GPI biosynthetic pathway [ 15 ] . Some prominent examples of free GPIs in lower eukaryotes ( e . g . , Leishmania and trypanosomes ) include glycoino - sitolphospholipids ( GIPLs ; containing type I , type II , or 1970 S . Chatterjee and S . Mayor GPI anchor and protein sorting Figure 1 . ( A ) Membrane topology of GPI - anchored proteins in comparison to transmembrane ( TM ) proteins and fatty - acid linked proteins . ( B ) Core residues of the GPI - anchor . ( C ) Comparison of representative GPI - anchored proteins from Trypanosoma brucei ( VSG 117 ) , human erythrocytes ( hAChE ) , rat brain ( Thy - 1 ) , Leish - mania major surface protease ( gp63 ) , and T . cruzi antigen ( IG7 ) . Table 1 . Functional diversity of GPI - anchored proteins . Enzymes Surface antigens Acetylcholinesterase Thy - 1 , Ly - 6 ( TAP ) , Qa - 2 , alkalinephosphatase , 5 ¢ - Sca - 2 , CD24 , CD48 ( sgp - 60 ) , nucleotidase , dipeptidase , CD52 ( CAMPATH - 1 ) , CD - 5 lipoprotein lipase , ART1 ( DAF ) , CD59 , CD73 , ART2 ( RT6 ) cerebroglycan , Adhesion molecules ceruloplasmin , prion proteins NCAM , ApCAM , OBCAM Other ( lower eukaryotes ) F3 / F11 / contain ) , TAG - Variant surface glycoprotein 1 ( axonin - 1 ) , fasciclin II , ( VSG ) , SSp - 4 , sialic acid BIG - 1 , BIG - 2 , neurotrimin , acceptor , 160 - kDa flagellar LFA - 3 antigen , CS protein , MSP - 1 Receptors protease , MSP - 2 , MSP - 4 , Folate receptor , CNTFR - a gp63 metalloprotease , PSA - 2 , GDNFR - a , CD87 ( uPAR ) PARP / procyclin , NTNR - a , CD14 , glypicans GP - 2 Fc g RIIIb ,