Cell , Vol . 111 , 143 – 146 , October 18 , 2002 , Copyright  2002 by Cell Press Minireview Endocytosis : Driving Membranes around the Bend pit into a vesicle ? The process of clathrin polymerizing into a basket , linked to the membrane via adaptor pro - teins , is thought to physically pull the membrane inward James H . Hurley 1 , 3 and Beverly Wendland 2 , 3 1 Laboratory of Molecular Biology National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases toward the cytosol to initiate formation of an endocytic vesicle . Later , the accessory proteins amphiphysin , en - National Institutes of Health Bethesda , Maryland 20892 dophilin , and dynamin are concentrated at the narrow , highly curved membrane “necks” of deeply invaginated 2 Department of Biology Johns Hopkins University clathrin - coatedpits , wheretheyfunction inthefinalscis - sion step that converts the coated pit into a coated 3400 North Charles Street Baltimore , Maryland 21218 vesicle . The De Camilli and Hinshaw labs found that these three proteins can each , on their own , promote the tubulation or vesiculation of membranes ( reviewed in Hinshaw , 2000 ) . This is consistent with amphiphysin , When a nascent vesicle buds , the membrane must endophilin , and dynamin directly altering the conforma - curve . Several mechanisms have been proposed for tion of the lipid bilayer . Various mechanisms for this curvature creation or stabilization . Structural analysis process have been proposed , ranging from oligomeriza - of the ENTH domain of the endocytic protein epsin tion - driven mechanical deformation of the lipid bilayer has suggested a new mechanism , in which the ENTH by dynamin to enzymatic lipid remodeling activities of domain pushes its way into membranes , thus bending endophilin that alter the biophysical properties of the them into shape . lipid bilayer . In order for a protein to effect membrane curvature , The plasma membrane of cells presents a barrier to the it must first bind tomembranes . Each of these tubulating entry of large water - solubleparticles and nutrients , such proteins binds to membranes , often by interacting spe - as iron , folate , and LDL - cholesterol . This barrier is over - cifically with the phosphoinositide PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( PIP 2 ) . come through endocytosis , the process by which por - Recombinant dynamin , amphiphysin , or endophilin can tions of the plasma membrane and extracellular fluid transform artificial liposomes containing acidic phos - are taken up into a cell . Endocytosis is also critical for pholipids and / or PIP 2 into protein - wrapped tubules . It many physiological responses ; for instance , downregu - has been suggested that dynamin promotes scission lation of certain signaling receptors . Endocytosis can through a combination of binding activities , GTP - driven occur via several distinct pathways . The best - character - conformational changes of the dynamin oligomer , and ad - ized pathway depends upon the cytosolic protein com - ditional functions of associated proteins that conspire to - plex clathrin , along with its accessory factors ( reviewed gether to promote fission of the membrane ( Hinshaw , in Brodsky et al . , 2001 ; Kirchhausen , 2000 ) . The process 2000 ) . begins by gathering together plasma membrane pro - One concern about the biophysical contortions of the teinsandlipidsthroughinteractionswithcytosolicadap - membrane at the constricted neck is the high degree tors and accessory factors . Some of these cytosolic of curvature , both positive ( around the circumference factors bind to clathrin and stimulate its polymerization of the neck ) and negative ( the sharp bend as viewed into a spherical basket of pentagons and hexagons . As perpendicular to the plasma membrane ) ( see Figure 1 ) . the endocytic vesicle forms , the plasma membrane and One model that tried to account for these extremes associated proteins and adjacent extracellular fluid are in curvature suggested that the enzymatic activity of pulled inward into the cytosol . Upon scission , the endophilin ( thecondensationoflysophosphatidicacid (cid:1) clathrin - coated vesicle is released into the cytoplasm acyl CoA to form phosphatidic acid ) altered the curva - ( Figure 1 ) . ture of the membrane by physically changing the com - Clathrin accessory factors generally exhibit multiple position of the phospholipids from “inverted cone protein interaction domains that allow them to form a shaped” to “cone shaped , ” and thus affected the inher - web of contacts . Clathrin - coated vesicles are not highly ent disposition of the membrane ( Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) . enriched for accessory factors , thus , these factors are However , this model is now disfavored since endophilin not structural , but rather perform regulatory or catalytic lacking the enzymatic activity can still tubulate mem - functions at specific stages in endocytosis . One acces - branes ( Farsad et al . , 2001 ) . These final scission events sory factor , epsin , was discovered in 1998 by virtue of are likely to require quite different changes in membrane its binding to another accessory factor , eps15 ( Chen et structure and curvature as compared to those that initi - al . , 1998 ) . Epsin has become a focus of interest due to ate bud formation , to which we now turn our attention . its interactions with membranes , accessory proteins , ENTH Domains clathrin , ubiquitin , and possibly certain cargo proteins Studies of epsin by the De Camilli lab ( Chen et al . , 1998 ) ( Wendland , 2002 ) . and other groups have indicated a role for epsin in endo - Membranes Get Bent out of Shape cytosis , in particular the highly conserved amino termi - How do changes in curvature of the membrane bilayer nal region ( Wendland et al . , 1999 ) , which was christened occur during bud formation and resolution of the coated the epsin N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domain ( Kay et al . , 1998 ) . While many studies have indicated a central 3 Correspondence : james . hurley @ nih . gov ( J . H . H . ) ; bwendland @ jhu . edu ( B . W . ) role for epsin in the process of endocytosis , the precise Cell144 Figure 1 . The Process of Endocytosis Is Depicted as a Series of Events Beginning with the Initiation of a Bud and Culminating in the Release of a Clathrin - Coated Vesicle into the Cytoplasm Bud initiation is thought to occur in part by the association of epsin as well as adaptor proteins like AP2 binding sorting signals on receptor tails . As the bud forms and constricts , the activities of other proteins such as endophilin and amphiphysin cooperate at the edge of the growing clathrin coat to remodel the lipids at the bud neck . The GTPase activity of dynamin is required for the scission event that separates the vesicle from the plasma membrane . Negative and positive curvature are indicated by arrows in the inset . functions of epsin and its ENTH domain have remained ENTH domain when bound to the headgroup of PIP 2 , IP 3 . They came to the surprising conclusion that the elusive ( Wendland , 2002 ) . McMahon and colleagues have re - examined the structure of the epsin ENTH do - epsin ENTH binding site for IP 3 was different from the site on CALM and AP180 . This finding was unexpected , main , and their findings suggest that at least one func - tion of epsin may be to initiate the budding process but not unprecedented . The PIP 2 binding sites on the PH domains of phospholipase C - (cid:2) and spectrin , for ex - ( Ford et al . , 2002 ) . The first look at epsin’s ENTH domain was obtained ample , are in different places ( reviewed in Hurley and Misra , 2000 ) . The mostsurprising result wasthe contrast two years ago ( Hyman et al . , 2000 ) . In the absence of ligand , the ENTH domain has a structure that is simple of the high affinity of the interaction versus the small numberof hydrogenbonds observedbetween theENTH and elegant . It is an almost perfect superhelix of seven helices , with an eighth helix misaligned with the super - domain and the phosphoinositide headgroup . Enter the latest chapter in ENTH domain structural helical axis . The ENTH domain is related in structure to another superhelical trafficking motif , the VHS domain . biology . McMahon and his colleagues succeeded in crystallizing the epsin ENTH domain bound to IP 3 . The The similarity appears to end there : the primary se - quences of ENTH and VHS domains are not homolo - epsin ENTH domain , when bound to its ligand , has nine helices rather than the eight seen for the unliganded gous , and their known biological functions are different . Last year , three additional reports on ENTH domain structure . The additional helix , termed helix 0 , is amphi - pathic and has a remarkable feature : for a piece of a structures emerged . The ENTH domains of AP180 ( Mao et al . , 2001 ) and the AP180 homolog CALM ( Ford et al . , soluble protein it is turned inside - out . The polar residues line the inside face of the helix , where it is glued to 2001 ) both turned out to be extended , by two helices in the AP180 fragment , and by one in CALM . All of the the rest of the ENTH domain via the IP 3 . Reversing the pattern of water - soluble protein structures ( but con - helices fit the superhelical pattern , so in this respect the AP180 and CALM domains are more reminiscent of VHS forming to that of membrane proteins ) , it is the hy - drophobic residues of helix 0 that face the exterior . domains . McMahon and coworkers were able to solve the CALM structure in complex with a short - chain PIP 2 Welcoming ENTH to the Family of Membrane - Penetrating Domains lipid , as well as with two soluble inositol polyphos - phates . The structures revealed contacts between 3 Lys The ENTH domain / IP 3 complex fits beautifully into a pattern set by other membrane targeting domains . For and a His side - chain and the phosphates of the head - group . In comparison , 9 – 12 hydrogen bonds are found example , the protein kinase Cs ( PKCs ) are a family of signaling enzymes that tightly associate with and pene - in high affinity complexes of phosphoinositides with PH domains ( reviewed in Hurley and Misra , 2000 ) . Thus , the trate membranes upon activation . The structure of the diacylglycerol and phorbol ester binding C1 domain of (cid:1) 4 hydrogen bonds in the CALM / IP 3 complex are few in number and unusually exposed to solvent , which is proteinkinaseCshowshowalargehydrophobicsurfaceononefaceofthedomainpenetratesdeeplyintomem - completely consistent with the moderate affinity and specificity for PIP 2 . branes when the activator is bound ( reviewed in Hurley and Misra , 2000 ) . Likewise , the phosphatidylinositol In the third ENTH domain structural study , Itoh et al . ( 2001 ) found that the epsin ENTH domain binds PIP 2 3 - phosphate ( PI ( 3 ) P ) binding site of the FYVE domain is aligned with a hydrophobic tip such that the hydropho - with higher affinity than AP180 or CALM . They went on to anaylze NMR chemical shift changes in the epsin bic surface can penetrate membrane bilayers when Minireview145 Figure 2 . How epsin - ENTH Might Insert into a Bilayer Membrane The protein is shown with a translucent sur - face representation , colored green for hy - drophobic ; blue , basic ; red , acidic ; and gray , uncharged polar . The membrane is shown in a schematic representation , with the 15 A˚ thick interface region drawn to scale . Two dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine molecules are shown to indicate scale and potential non - specific interactions between the ENTH do - main and surrounding lipids . The large open arrow near one of the phosphatidylcholine moleculessuggeststhedirectioninwhichthelipidtailswouldneedtorepacktoaccommo - date the inserted helix 0 of the ENTH domain , which would potentially promote curvature . PI ( 3 ) Pis bound ( Hurley andMisra , 2000 ) . In thepredicted to penetrate membranes can therefore contribute to membrane affinity and be a driving force for targeting . ENTH / PIP 2 complex , the lipid tail points in the same direction as the exposed hydrophobic face of helix 0 , Signaling proteins that have membrane - penetrating domains—PKC is the most famous of these—have long leading to a consistent model for membrane penetration ( Figure 2 ) . been known to be sensitive to changes in membrane biophysical properties , including modulation of curva - The ENTH structure differs from the above - mentioned domains in that it is a single amphipathic helix that pene - ture , as shown by Epand , Sando , Stubbs , and others ( reviewed in Stubbs and Slater , 1996 ) . Now McMahon trates the membrane . This helix is conceptually separa - ble from the rest of the protein . Many proteins contain and coworkers have turned the equation around . They postulate that in the course of shoving its way into the amphipathic helices that bind to and penetrate bilayers in order to target these proteins to appropriate membra - membrane , the ENTH domain pushes surrounding lipids aside , producing a more curved surface . Instead of nous loci in cells . Certain naturally occurring peptide toxins , such as mellitin , also interact with and penetrate merely communicating news of changes in membrane physical properties to downstream signal receptors , the membranes as part of their biological function . Mellitin is perhaps the single best studied model system for the ENTH domain—like the gonzo journalist Hunter S . Thompson—is itself creating the news . Now the ENTH effects of insertion of an amphipathic helix on bilayer structure . At high concentrations , mellitin oligomerizes domain is an inducer rather than a mere reporter of curvature stress . and forms membrane - permeabilizing pores . At low con - centrations , individual mellitin helices insert into the bi - Bend it Like epsin One of the biggest surprises from Ford et al . ( 2002 ) was layer interface with the helix axis parallel to the surface of the membrane , much as proposed for helix 0 of the the ability of epsin to stimulate tubule formation in the absence of oligomerization . The proposed mechanism epsin ENTH domain . Under these conditions , mellitin monomers produce modest perturbations of membrane by which epsin induces membrane bending is quite dif - ferentfrompreviousmodels ; inthiscase , whentheepsin structure upon insertion ( Hirstova et al . , 2001 ) . What are the biological functions of membrane pene - ENTH domain binds its favored ligand PIP 2 , an amphi - pathichelixis inducedtofold . Thishelix formationinturn tration ? Lipid - dependent targeting domains such as C1 and FYVE have hydrophobic surfaces surrounding the causes membrane curvature when it becomes buried in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the bilayer ( see below ) . How binding site for the specific lipid activator . These hy - drophobicsurfaces interactnon - specificallywith thehy - well does this new model fit with what we know about membrane mechanics ? drocarbon core of the membrane . The interactions gained by membrane penetration greatly enhance the With the ENTH domain , the question arises whether effects on targeting efficiency can be separated from affinity for the membrane , by factors of as much as 10 4 . In a counterexample , the PH domain of phospholipase effects on membrane penetration . The challenges in dis - secting these functions center on the difficulty of modu - C - (cid:2) lacks such hydrophobic surfaces , does not signifi - cantly penetrate membranes , and binds soluble IP 3 sev - lating one membrane biophysical property without an - other . One of the most convincing ways to do this is to eral - foldbetterthanPIP 2 . Theextentofadomain’sability Cell146 find mutants in which the effects are uncorrelated . Many pathic helix of the ENTH domain of epsin . Perhaps the of the mutations , e . g . , of basic residues in the PIP 2 bind - proposed mechanism of action of the ENTH domain ing site , produce the expected effects : loss of in vivo in membrane curvature is not so unique after all ! The targeting and function , loss of membrane binding , and similarities between amphipathic helices in epsins , en - loss of membrane tubulation activity . On the other hand , dophilins , and amphiphysins suggest that this could be the ENTH L6W mutant protein reduces membrane affin - a commonly used way to bend a membrane . However , ity and decreases targeting efficiency , but it actually is given the inventiveness of nature , it is quite likely that better than the wild - type protein at promoting tubula - other mechanisms exist to produce architectural tion . Theseobservationssupporttheconceptthatdiffer - changes in a bilayer . Polymerization of actin at the cor - ent physical forces are at work in targeting versus tubu - tex of the cell might be capable of physically bending lation . a membrane . Proteins such ascaveolin may form invagi - Curvature induction can be conceptualized in terms nations through a combination of membrane insertion of microscopic interactions at the atomic level , as and oligomerization . Modulation of membrane lipid above , or in a macroscopic formalism in which the mem - composition may well regulate curvature directly . For brane is treated as a bulk material . The latter is the more example , phospholipase A 2 is required for tubule forma - helpful when it comes to estimating the energetics of tion from multiple organelles ( de Figueiredo et al . , 1998 ) . the process . The free energy per unit area of membrane The enzyme action of endophilin , although dispensable curvature is F (cid:3) 2B ( 1 / R ) 2 for a symmetric membrane , for tubulation , might still play a role at some stage where B is the elastic curvature modulus and R is the ( Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) . Other examples of epsin - indepen - radius of curvature . A back - of - the - envelope calculation dent budding events range from COPII - mediated bud - suggests a curvature free energy cost of 300 kcal / mol ding at the ER ( perhaps mechanically driven as originally to completelybend aplanar bilayerinto asphere ( Nossal proposedfor clathrin ? ) to theexciting newarea of“topo - and Zimmerberg , 2002 ) . While this may seem like a lot logically backward” vesicle budding from the cytoplasm for a single molecular event , the free energy change on into the lumen of a forming multivesicular body . Curva - a per lipid basis is much smaller , given perhaps (cid:1) 20 , 000 ture is complicated , and there will be a few more bends lipids in a 50 nm diameter vesicle . Thus the change in in the road before the story is all told . the physical environment and conformation of individual Selected Reading lipidmolecules , onaverage , neednotbegreat . However , budding is a cooperative phenomenon , in which a simul - Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , and Wakeham , taneous rearrangement of lipids must be involved , oc - D . E . ( 2001 ) . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 . curring with low probability if the membrane is acted Chen , H . , Fre , S . , Slepnev , V . I . , Capua , M . R . , Takei , K . , Butler , M . H . , upon only by thermal perturbations ( Nossal and Zim - Di Fiore , P . P . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Nature 394 , 793 – 797 . merberg , 2002 ) . In the case of a chemically asymmetric de Figueiredo , P . , Drecktrah , D . , Katzenellenbogen , J . A . , Strang , M . , membrane , there can be an imbalance between the in - and Brown , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 8642 – 8647 . terfacial tension and the internal surface pressure of the Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . , and De membrane . As shown in a set of classic 1974 papers Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 193 – 200 . by Singer and Sheetz , Evans , and Helfrich ( see Nossal Ford , M . G . J . , Pearse , B . M . F . , Higgins , M . K . , Vallis , Y . , Owen , D . J . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) . and Zimmerberg , 2002 , for original references ) , this Science 291 , 1051 – 1055 . asymmetry can drive an expansion or contraction that Ford , M . G . J . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . K . , Ev - leads to spontaneous curvature . The insertion of epsin ans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Nature 419 , 361 – 366 . ENTH domains into the cytoplasmic face of the plasma Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2000 ) . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 483 – 520 . membrane could increase the surface pressure on one Hirstova , K . , Dempsey , C . E . , and White , S . H . ( 2001 ) . Biophys . J . 80 , side of the membrane , creating an imbalance and low - 801 – 811 . ering the curvature energy . If epsin is only involved in Hurley , J . H . , and Misra , S . ( 2000 ) . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . the initial bud formation , the total area of the deformed Struct . 29 , 49 – 79 . membrane will be much less than that of the mature Hyman , J . , Chen , H . , Di Fiore , P . P . , De Camilli , P . , and Bru¨nger , A . T . vesicle . In this case , a handful to a few dozen epsin ( 2000 ) . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 537 – 546 . molecules might be enough to shift the balance to favor Itoh , T . , Koshiba , S . , Kigawa , T . , Kikuchi , A . , Yokoyama , S . , and the curved state , even if each insertion event only stabi - Takenawa , T . ( 2001 ) . Science 291 , 1047 – 1051 . lized curvature by as little as 1 kcal / mol . Consistent Kay , B . K . , Yamabhai , M . , Wendland , B . , andEmr , S . D . ( 1998 ) . Protein with this , studies on membrane deformation by mellitin Sci . 8 , 435 – 438 . suggest that the effects of inserting individual helices Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 699 – 727 . are small . By the same token , the energetic cost of the Mao , Y . X . , Chen , J . , Maynard , J . A . , Zhang , B . , and Quiocho , F . A . deformation is not great . The energy estimates suggest ( 2001 ) . Cell 104 , 433 – 440 . that it is not hard to induce curvature in membranes , and Nossal , R . , and Zimmerberg , J . ( 2002 ) . Curr . Biol . , in press . membranepenetrationseems asplausibleamechanism Schmidt , A . , Wolde , M . , Thiele , C . , Fest , W . , Kratzin , H . , Podtelejni - as any to accomplish this . kov , A . V . , Witke , W . , Huttner , W . B . , and Soling , H . - D . ( 1999 ) . Nature A General Mechanism for Membrane 401 , 133 – 141 . Curvature Induction ? Stubbs , C . D . , and Slater , S . J . ( 1996 ) . Chem . Phys . Lipids 81 , How general could this proposed mechanism for mem - 185 – 195 . brane curvature be ? Is insertion of an amphipathic helix Wendland , B . ( 2002 ) . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , in press . into a leaflet of a bilayer the only way to skin this cat ? Wendland , B . , Steece , K . E . , and Emr , S . D . ( 1999 ) . EMBO J . 18 , The tubulating activity of endophilin requires the amphi - 4383 – 4393 . pathicpropertiesofhelicalregion , similarlytotheamphi -