Glia maturation factor - (cid:1) mediates neutrophil chemotaxis Wulin Aerbajinai , * Lunhua Liu , † Kyung Chin , * Jianqiong Zhu , * Carole A . Parent , † and Grifﬁn P . Rodgers * , 1 * Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch , National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , and † Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology , Center for Cancer Research , National Cancer Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland , USA RECEIVED JULY 26 , 2010 ; REVISED APRIL 19 , 2011 ; ACCEPTED MAY 11 , 2011 . DOI : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0710424 ABSTRACT Chemotaxis is fundamental to the directional migration of neutrophils toward endogenous and exogenous che - moattractants . Recent studies have demonstrated that ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members play important roles in reorganizing the actin cytoskeleton by disassembling actin ﬁlaments . GMFG , a novel ADF / coﬁlin superfamily protein that is expressed in inﬂammatory cells , has been implicated in regulating actin reorganization in microendothelial cells , but its function in neutrophils remains unclear . Here , we show that GMFG is an im - portant regulator for cell migration and polarity in neu - trophils . Knockdown of endogenous GMFG impaired fMLF - and IL - 8 ( CXCL8 ) - induced chemotaxis in dHL - 60 cells . GMFG knockdown attenuated the formation of la - mellipodia at the leading edge of cells exposed to fMLF or CXCL8 , as well as the phosphorylation of p38 and PAK1 / 2 in response to fMLF or CXCL8 . Live cell imaging revealed that GMFG was recruited to the leading edge of cells in response to fMLF , as well as CXCL8 . Overex - pression of GMFG enhanced phosphorylation of p38 but not of PAK1 / 2 in dHL - 60 cells . In addition , we found that GMFG is associated with WAVE2 . Taken together , our ﬁndings suggest that GMFG is a novel factor in reg - ulating neutrophil chemotaxis by modulating actin cyto - skeleton reorganization . J . Leukoc . Biol . 90 : 000 – 000 ; 2011 . Introduction Neutrophils play a central role in the innate immune system . In response to chemotactic stimuli , neutrophils rapidly migrate to the sites of infection and provide the ﬁrst line of host de - fense against bacteria and other pathogens [ 1 ] . Directed mi - gration or chemotaxis of neutrophils occurs in response to a variety of molecules , including fMLF , a bacterial peptide , and chemokines , such as IL - 8 ( CXCL8 ) , which are released from sites of inﬂammation or injury . fMLF and CXCL8 bind to their receptors on neutrophils and trigger signaling - pathway activa - tion that induces a series of F - actin - based cytoskeleton rear - rangements . This migratory response requires a highly regu - lated multistep process that includes cell polarization , forma - tion of cell protrusions , directional sensing , and adhesion to the surrounding tissue [ 2 – 5 ] . Failure to regulate any of these events can lead to abnormal immune or inﬂammatory re - sponses , including immunodeﬁciency or aberrant inﬂamma - tory reactions ( e . g . , rheumatoid arthritis and inﬂammatory bowel disease ) [ 6 , 7 ] . Hence , understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying neutrophil migration may reveal effec - tive pharmacologic - targeted therapies for autoinﬂammatory diseases . Directional cell migration is accomplished by rearrangement of actin ﬁlaments , which protrude to form speciﬁc cellular structures called lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia at the leading edge of cells to determine the direction of movement [ 8 ] . In contrast , actin - based protrusions are inhibited at the trailing edge of cells , thereby generating forces required for move - ment and regulating adhesion to the ECM and other cells [ 9 , 10 ] . This asymmetry of cytoskeletal protein activities represents cell polarity . During cell polarization , highly dynamic and rapid assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments at the lead - ing edge of cells are essential for continuous migration , whereas cortical actin is oriented toward the trailing edge of cells . These changes of the actin cytoskeleton are spatially regu - lated . It is already well known that members of the Rho family of GTPases are crucial regulators of the actin cytoskeleton [ 11 – 13 ] . Moreover , two actin regulatory proteins that have been shown to be important for neutrophil migration—WASP and WAVE—also function by activating Arp2 / 3 - dependent ac - tin polymerization [ 14 – 17 ] . These proteins convert upstream 1 . Correspondence : Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch , Bldg . 10 , Room 9N - 113A , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 - 2560 , USA . E - mail : gr5n @ nih . gov Abbreviations : ADF (cid:1) actin depolymerization factor , Arp2 / 3 (cid:1) actin - related protein 2 / 3 , CI (cid:1) chemotactic index , dHL - 60 (cid:1) differentiated HL - 60 , GMFG / B (cid:1) glia maturation factor - gamma / beta , M - PER (cid:1) mammalian protein ex - traction reagent , NA (cid:1) numerical aperture , PAK (cid:1) p21 - activated kinase , siRNA (cid:1) small interfering RNA , WASP (cid:1) Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WAVE (cid:1) Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein family verprolin - homologous The online version of this paper , found at www . jleukbio . org , includes supplemental information . Article 0741 - 5400 / 11 / 0090 - 0001 © Society for Leukocyte Biology Volume 90 , September 2011 Journal of Leukocyte Biology 1 Epub ahead of print June 7 , 2011 - doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0710424 Copyright 2011 by The Society for Leukocyte Biology . molecular signals into coordinated rearrangements of the ac - tin cytoskeleton by direct involvement in actin polymerization . In addition , other actin - regulatory proteins , including proﬁlin , formins , coronin , and cortactin , have been implicated in con - trolling the actin - polymerization machinery [ 18 – 20 ] . Recently , ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members have emerged as important cytoskeletal regulators [ 21 – 23 ] . Among the ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members , GMFG may play an important role in neutrophil migration , as it is expressed in inﬂamma - tory cells and regulates actin - cytoskeletal reorganization through its interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 24 – 26 ] . With the use of the techniques of controlled stem cell differ - entiation , two - dimensional gel electrophoresis - based proteom - ics , and functional genomics , we reported previously that GMFG is induced by G - CSF and may mediate the pluripotenti - ality and lineage commitment of human hematopoietic stem cells [ 24 ] . GMF is a highly conserved protein throughout the eukaryotes from yeast to mammals , with two isoforms being expressed in mammals—GMFB and GMFG . However , the two GMF isoforms exhibit distinct tissue distribution , suggesting each has a speciﬁc function in various actin - related cellular processes in respective tissues . Recent functional studies of Sac - charomyces cerevisiae have shown that yeast GMF promotes re - modeling and / or disassembly and turnover of branched actin structures through binding of the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 25 ] . Regu - lation of actin ﬁlament branching and / or debranching is im - portant for generating lamellipodial protrusions , which turn over rapidly and exchange actin continuously during che - motaxis . Therefore , GMFG may play a crucial role in che - motaxis by modulating actin - ﬁlament debranching . In mam - mals , GMFG has been found to bind to the Arp2 / 3 complex and be phosphorylated at the N - terminal serine that is en - hanced by Rac1 and Cdc42 [ 26 ] . These results imply that GMFG - regulated reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton is likely controlled by its phosphorylation in response to extracel - lular stimulation . Although evidence suggests that GMFG interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex , its role in actin - cytoskeleton downstream event signaling remains largely unknown . In the present study , we examined the role of GMFG in the directed motility of neutrophils and dHL - 60 cells . Our ﬁndings indicate that GMFG is an important regulator for cell migration and polar - ity . Neutrophils in which GMFG has been down - regulated were demonstrated to have an impaired capacity for polarization , as well as impaired directional cell migration in response to the chemoattractants fMLF and CXCL8 . These functional defects appear to correlate with reduced phosphorylation of the PAK - p38 MAPK signaling pathway . MATERIALS AND METHODS Human neutrophil isolation and culture Primary human neutrophils were isolated from buffy coats of healthy adult donors according to a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board of the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , NIH ( Bethesda , MD , USA ) , and consistent with federal regulations . Red cells were eliminated by performing a HetaSep sedimentation of the buffy coats ( StemCell Technol - ogies , Seattle , WA , USA ) . Neutrophils were puriﬁed from the resulting leu - kocyte - rich cell suspension by negative selection using the EasySep human neutrophil enrichment cocktail , containing a combination of mAb speciﬁc for the CD2 , CD3 , CD9 , CD19 , CD36 , CD56 , and Glycophorin A antigens ( StemCell Technologies ) . This processing yielded (cid:2) 98 % purity of neutro - phils , as determined by examination of morphology following Giemsa stain - ing [ 27 ] . Neutrophils were suspended in HBSS ( without Ca 2 (cid:3) / Mg 2 (cid:3) ) on ice until use . dHL - 60 cells HL - 60 cells ( American Type Culture Collection , Manassas , VA , USA ) were induced to differentiate into human neutrophil - like cells ( dHL - 60 cells ) by the addition of 1 . 3 % ( vol / vol ) DMSO ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO , USA ) for 6 – 7 days [ 28 ] . Cell differentiation was assessed using ﬂow cytometric analysis of surface expression of differentiation - related antigens as de - scribed previously [ 29 ] . RT - PCR Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy mini kit ( Qiagen , Valencia , CA , USA ) , according to the manufacturer’s instructions . For reverse transcrip - tion , 1 (cid:2) g total RNA / sample was used as a template for cDNA synthesis using Superscript III ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) , following the manu - facturer’s guidelines . RT - PCR reactions ( MyiQ Icycler , Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA , USA ) were performed using prevalidated TaqMan primer / probe sets for GMFG and the control gene (cid:3) - actin , purchased as Assays - on - Demand gene expression products ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA , USA ) . Real - time PCR conditions were 5 min at 95°C and 40 cycles of 30 s at 95°C , fol - lowed by 1 min at 60°C . The cycle - threshold values were arbitrarily chosen from the linear part of the PCR - ampliﬁcation curve , where an increase in ﬂuorescence can be detected 10 or more sem above the background signal . RNA copy numbers were calculated by comparison with standard curves , generated from plasmid DNA encoding GMFG and control (cid:3) - actin tem - plates . RNA interference and plasmid constructions Day 4 dHL - 60 cells ( 2 (cid:4) 10 6 ) or freshly isolated neutrophils ( 3 (cid:4) 10 6 ) were transiently transfected with a GMFG siRNA pool , negative - control siRNA , or GFP - GMFG , GFP - actin , or His - tagged GMFG plasmid constructs using the Nucleofector Kit V and Nucleofector I Program T - 19 ( Amaxa Biosystems , Gaithersburg , MD , USA ) , according to the manufacturer’s protocol . To silence GMFG expression , two different sets of silencer siRNAs from Ap - plied Biosystems that target GMFG on Exons 4 and 2 ( Silencer Select siRNA s18303 , s18302 ) were pooled for use . The negative - control siRNA ( Neg - siRNA # 2 ) was also obtained from Applied Biosystems . Cells were har - vested for use in experiments 24 – 48 h after transfection . The expression vector for full - length human GMFG was obtained by RT - PCR using cDNA prepared from HL - 60 cells . The forward primer con - tained the HindIII site and the sequence of the 7 aa of the human GMFG protein , 5 (cid:5) - CCAAGCTTGATGTCTGACTCCCTGGTGGTG - 3 (cid:5) . The reverse primer contained the XhoI site and the sequence for the last 6 aa residues of the GMFG protein , 5 (cid:5) - CCCTCGAGCCACGAAAGAAAGACAACTT - 3 (cid:5) . To create a His - tagged GMFG expression vector , PCR ampliﬁcation fragments were excised with HindIII and XhoI , subsequently subcloned into the pcDNA3 . 1 / V5 - His vector ( Invitrogen ) , and the nucleotide sequence vali - dated . GFP - GMFG and Myc - tagged human GMFG in pCMV6 - Entry plasmid were obtained from Origene ( Rockville , MD , USA ) . A GFP - actin plasmid construct was purchased from Clontech ( Mountain View , CA , USA ) . Cell migration assay Neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells were resuspended at a density of 5 (cid:4) 10 5 cells / mL or 5 (cid:4) 10 6 cells / mL , respectively , in chemotaxis buffer ( RPMI (cid:3) 0 . 5 % BSA ) [ 30 ] . Cell suspension ( 200 (cid:2) L ) was placed in the upper chambers of Transwell plates separated from the lower wells by a 6 . 5 - mm diameter , 3 - (cid:2) m pore Nucleopore polycarbonate membrane ( VWR Interna - tional , West Chester , PA , USA ) . For the study of chemotaxis , fMLF ( 1 – 100 2 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 90 , September 2011 www . jleukbio . org nM ) or CXCL8 ( 1 – 100 ng / mL ) was added separately in 500 (cid:2) L che - motaxis buffer to the lower wells of the Transwell plates . For the study of random cell migration ( chemokinesis ) , no chemoattractant ( vehicle alone ) was added to the lower wells . For all assays , the Transwell plates were incu - bated for 3 h at 37°C under a 5 % CO 2 atmosphere . The number of cells that migrated to the lower wells was calculated by placing 10 - (cid:2) L aliquots of the media from the lower wells on a hemacytometer and counting four ﬁelds in duplicate . EZ - TAXIScan chemotaxis assay Chemotaxis experiments were conducted in an EZ - TAXIScan chamber , ac - cording to the manufacturer’s protocol ( Effector Cell Institute , Tokyo , Ja - pan ) . The EZ - TAXIScan is a visually accessible chemotactic chamber , in which one compartment containing chemoattractant and another compart - ment containing cells are connected by a microchannel . A stable concen - tration gradient of chemoattractant can be reproducibly formed and main - tained through the channel without medium ﬂow . Phase - contrast images of chemotaxing cells were acquired at 15 - s intervals for 30 min . Sequential image data were processed with ImageJ ( NIH ) . Cell migration analysis was conducted with Matlab software . Cell tracks were subsequently used to com - pute CI and speed for each tracked cell at each time - point , as well as the mean CI and speed for an experiment . Immunoblotting Total protein from HL - 60 cells , dHL - 60 cells , neutrophils , or dHL - 60 cells transfected with empty vector or His - tagged GMFG was extracted with the use of the M - PER protein extraction reagent ( Pierce Biotechnology , Rock - ford , IL , USA ) , as recommended by the manufacturer . dHL - 60 cells tran - siently transfected with negative - control siRNA or GMFG siRNA were stimu - lated with 100 nM fMLF ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 0 , 2 , 5 , or 15 min at 37°C and then lysed in M - PER lysis buffer . Equal amounts of total protein ( 30 (cid:2) g / lane ) were separated on 4 – 20 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane using standard methods . Blots were probed with primary antibodies for anti - GMFG ( Abgent , San Diego , CA , USA ) ; anti - (cid:3) - actin , antiphospho - PAK1 ( Ser144 ) / PAK2 ( Ser141 ) , antiphospho - p38 ( Thr180 / Tyr182 ) , antiphospho - Erk1 / 2 ( Thr202 / Tyr204 ) , or total p38 ( Cell Signaling Technology , Danvers , MA , USA ) ; or anti - Myc or anti - His - tag ( Ori - gene ) . HRP - conjugated secondary antibody was used to detect the primary antibodies . Immunoblots were developed using the ECL system ( Amersham Biosciences , Piscataway , NJ , USA ) . Immunoprecipitation Twenty - four hours after transfection with Myc - tagged GMFG plasmid , dHL - 60 cells were washed once with PBS and lysed in lysis buffer contain - ing 20 mM Tris - base at pH 8 . 0 , 1 % Nonidet - 40 , 10 % glycerol , 137 mM NaCl , 100 (cid:2) M sodium vanadate , and a protease inhibitor mix ( Sigma - Al - drich ) . Equal amounts of protein from cell lysates were precleared with IgG Dynabeads protein A ( Invitrogen ) for 10 min at 4°C , followed by over - night incubation at 4°C with antimouse IgG or anti - Myc antibody ( Ori - gene ) using Dynabeads protein A , according to the manufacturer’s instruc - tions . The immunoprecipitated Dynabeads complexes were washed three times with washing buffer and then eluted in 30 (cid:2) L SDS sample buffer . Extracts were resolved on 4 – 20 % gradient SDS - polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose . Anti - Myc ( Origene ; 1 : 100 ) or anti - WAVE2 ( In - vitrogen ; 1 : 500 ) antibody was used for protein detection by immunoblot - ting as described above . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy Neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells expressing GFP - GMFG were adhered to glass coverslips , coated with 2 . 5 (cid:2) g / mL ﬁbrinogen ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 / PBS , and stained with Alexa Fluor 546 phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . For stimulation experiments , dHL - 60 cells transiently transfected with control siRNA or GMFG siRNA were stimulated with a uniform concentration of 100 nM fMLF at 37°C for 1 and 10 min . Cells were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature , washed , permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 / PBS for 5 min , washed again , and then blocked with 2 % BSA / PBS for 30 min . Cells were costained for 2 h with Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) and anti - CD43 primary antibody ( BD Biosciences PharMingen , Franklin Lakes , NJ , USA ) , followed by detection with Alex Fluor 546 - conjugated secondary antibody ( Invitrogen ) . Stained samples were mounted and images collected and analyzed using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 ﬂuorescence microscope and a 40 (cid:4) objective , NA 1 . 3 , with ORCA - ER C4742 - 95 camera - driven MetaMorph imaging software ( Universal Imaging , Downingtown , PA , USA ) . Live ﬂuorescence microscopy and chemotaxis Fluorescence imaging of live cells was performed using time - lapse confocal microscopy . For each experiment , 5 (cid:4) 10 5 dHL - 60 cells or neutrophils were plated in chemotaxis buffer for 15 min on glass coverslips coated with 2 . 5 (cid:2) g / mL ﬁbrinogen . Cells were stimulated with a uniform concentration of chemoattractant or by a point source of chemoattractant emanating from a micropipette tip ( Femtotip ; Eppendorf , Hamburg , Germany ) ﬁlled with 100 nM fMLF . Images were recorded every 30 s for 7 min or every 20 s for 3 min at room temperature with a Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal system using 63 (cid:4) / 1 . 3 NA water objective ( Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) . Data are representative of three independent experiments performed in dupli - cate . Statistical analyses Statistical signiﬁcance for all experiments was determined by Student’s paired t test analyses . A P value of (cid:6) 0 . 05 was considered statistically signiﬁ - cant . RESULTS GMFG knockdown reduces chemotaxis in neutrophils and dHL - 60 cells Previous studies have demonstrated that GMFG is expressed in inﬂammatory cells [ 24 ] . To characterize the expression of GMFG in human neutrophils and neutrophil - like dHL - 60 cells , we performed RT - PCR and immunoblot analysis . We found that human neutrophils , HL - 60 cells , and dHL - 60 cells express endogenous GMFG ( Fig . 1A ) . To explore the possible role of GMFG in regulating neutrophil migration , we knocked down endogenous GMFG expression in neutrophil - like dHL - 60 cells using a siRNA - based loss - of - function approach . Transfection of dHL - 60 cells with GMFG siRNA signiﬁcantly decreased GMFG mRNA expression by almost 80 % compared with mock - trans - fected cells or cells transfected with an equal concentration of negative - control siRNA ( Fig . 1B ; lower panel ) . Immunoblot analysis of transfected dHL - 60 cells demonstrated that a mixed GMFG siRNA pool knocked down endogenous protein expres - sion compared with cells transfected with negative - control siRNA . The silencing effect of the GMFG siRNA did not affect the expression level of other proteins , such as (cid:3) - actin ( Fig . 1B ; upper panel ) . Thus , this mixed GMFG siRNA pool was used to assess the effect of GMFG in subsequent experiments . To determine the involvement of GMFG in neutrophil mi - gration , we ﬁrst evaluated the effect of GMFG knockdown on cell migration in response to two well - characterized chemoat - tractants—fMLF and CXCL8—using Transwell migration as - says of dHL - 60 cells transfected with GMFG siRNA . GMFG siRNA - or negative - control , siRNA - transfected cells were incu - bated on top of a permeable Transwell ﬁlter and allowed to Aerbajinai et al . GMFG regulates neutrophil chemotaxis www . jleukbio . org Volume 90 , September 2011 Journal of Leukocyte Biology 3 migrate through 3 - (cid:2) m pores into the lower well that contained varying concentrations of fMLF or CXCL8 . The number of cells in the lower well was then used to calculate the percent - age of cells migrated . Expression of the GMFG siRNA in dHL - 60 cells signiﬁcantly inhibited cell migration in response to fMLF and CXCL8 over a 100 - fold range of concentration when compared with dHL - 60 cells expressing negative - control siRNA ( Fig . 1C and D ) . To better study the effects of GMFG knockdown on chemotaxis , we examined the dynamics of di - rectional migration in cells expressing control siRNA or GMFG siRNA using an EZ - TAXIScan chemotaxis chamber . Cell move - ments toward a series of graded concentrations of fMLF or CXCL8 were time - lapse - recorded such that the path and mi - gration speed of individual cells could be determined . In these assays , the GMFG siRNA - transfected cells exhibited dramati - cally reduced chemotactic ability toward sources of fMLF or CXCL8 compared with negative - control , siRNA - transfected cells ( Fig . 1E and F and Supplemental Videos 1 – 8 ) . De - tailed analysis revealed that GMFG knockdown not only de - creased migration speed but also affected the directionality during chemotaxis ( Fig . 1G and H ) . These results suggest that loss of endogenous GMFG inhibits directional migra - tion and point to a role for GMFG in regulating neutrophil chemotaxis . GMFG regulates polarity during cell chemotaxis in neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells As our data suggest that GMFG regulates neutrophil che - motaxis , and GMFG has been previously reported to regulate actin - cytoskeleton reorganization , we next examined the intra - cellular localization of GMFG in neutrophils and dHL - 60 cells . We transiently transfected cells with GFP - GMFG and then ex - amined GMFG localization using an immunoﬂuorescence as - say . We found that GFP - GMFG was distributed uniformly in the cytoplasm around the cell membrane with a small fraction in the nucleus in resting dHL - 60 cells , whereas it partially colo - Figure 1 . GMFG mediates cell migration in neutrophils and dHL - 60 cells . ( A ) RT - PCR ( upper panels ) and immunoblotting analysis ( lower panels ) of endogenous GMFG expression in undifferentiated HL - 60 and dHL - 60 cells and human neutrophils . ( B ) RT - PCR and immunoblotting analysis of GMFG expression in dHL - 60 cells 48 h after mock transfection or transfection with a mixed GMFG siRNA pool or negative - control siRNA . ( C and D ) Transwell migration assays in response to vehicle alone ( chemokinesis ) or increasing concentration of fMLF ( used as fMLP throughout ﬁgures ; 1 – 100 nM ) or CXCL8 ( used as IL - 8 throughout ﬁgures ; 1 – 100 ng / mL ) in dHL - 60 cells expressing control siRNA or GMFG siRNA . The percentage of cells that migrated into the lower well was recorded . ( E and F ) EZ - TAXIScan assay chemotaxis toward fMLF or CXCL8 in dHL - 60 cells expressing control siRNA or GMFG siRNA . Cells were loaded onto the upper chamber , and the lower chamber was ﬁlled with 100 nM fMLF or 100 ng / mL CXCL8 . Data were collected at 30 - s intervals for 30 min . Representative images of migrating cells in a gradient of fMLF or CXCL8 at the indicated time - point are shown . Original scale bars , 20 (cid:2) m ( also see Supplemental Videos 1 – 8 ) . ( G and H ) EZ - TAXIScan assay chemotaxis of dHL - 60 cells 48 h after mock transfection or transfection with control siRNA or GMFG siRNA in response to increasing concentration of fMLF ( 1 – 100 nM ) or CXCL8 ( 1 – 100 ng / mL ) . Mean migration speed was quantiﬁed from the captured images during the course of the EZ - TAXIScan chemotaxis assay , as described in Materials and Methods ( G ) . The CI , deﬁned as the cosine of the angle between the motion vector of the cells at a given time and the vector pointing to direction of the gradient , was determined from the digital time - lapse movies ( H ) . Data are representative of at least three independent experiments and are expressed as mean (cid:7) sd . * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 versus control . 4 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 90 , September 2011 www . jleukbio . org calized with F - actin around the cell periphery in resting neu - trophils ( Fig . 2A ) . Upon fMLF or CXCL8 stimulation , GFP - GMFG redistributed and accumulated at the leading edge and the uropod of the cells to form a bipolar distribution ( Fig . 2B ) . These results suggest that GMFG may participate in regu - lating actin turnover in chemotactic dynamic processes . We then tested whether knockdown of GMFG in dHL - 60 cells af - fected F - actin cytoskeleton rearrangement . Confocal micro - scopic analysis was used to examine the staining patterns of F - actin and CD43 in response to fMLF or CXCL8 in dHL - 60 cells . In resting dHL - 60 cells , no difference was observed in overall morphology , as well as the distribution of F - actin around the entire cell membrane , between negative control siRNA - expressing cells and GMFG siRNA - expressing cells . After 1 min of chemoattractant ( fMLF or CXCL8 ) exposure , the majority of negative - control siRNA - expressing cells exhibited polarized morphology , with the accumulation of F - actin at the leading edge ; this polarity was maintained for more than 10 min ( Fig . 2C and D , left panels ) . In contrast , most of the GMFG knockdown cells were unable to form a well - demar - cated leading edge of F - actin in response to fMLF ( Fig . 2C , right panel ) or CXCL8 ( Fig . 2D , right panel ) ; instead , these cells demonstrated irregular , strong F - actin staining through - out their periphery upon stimulation over a similar time pe - riod . In addition , the accumulation of the uropod marker CD43 at the trailing edge of cells was markedly impaired in GMFG knockdown cells stimulated by fMLF compared with control siRNA - transfected cells ( Fig . 2C , right panel ) , indicat - ing a failure of tail retraction . Interestingly , we have not ob - served obvious accumulation of CD43 at the trailing edge in the control siRNA - transfected dHL - 60 in response to CXCL8 . It seems that CXCL8 - induced dHL - 60 cell polarity is weaker than fMLF - stimulated . Together , these ﬁndings suggest that GMFG may be involved in the regulation of cell polarity in response to fMLF and CXCL8 . GMFG redistributes to the cell leading edge during neutrophil and dHL - 60 cell chemotaxis To further deﬁne the dynamics of GMFG localization in live cells during cell migration , cells transiently transfected with GFP - Figure 2 . GMFG localizes to the leading edge and regu - lates F - actin polymerization during cell chemotaxis in neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells . ( A ) Localization of GFP - GMFG in neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells . Cells transiently transfected with GFP - tagged GMFG were adhered to glass coverslips and stained for F - actin with phalloidin A - 488 . Microscopy was used to analyze GMFG and F - ac - tin distribution . ( B ) Distribution of GFP - GMFG in re - sponse to chemoattranctant fMLF or CXCL8 stimula - tion in dHL - 60 cells upon dHL - 60 cells expressing GFP - GMFG was plated to glass coverslips and stimulated with 100 nM fMLF or 100 ng / mL CXCL8 for 10 min . ( C and D ) Distribution of F - actin and CD43 in response to fMLF ( C ) or CXCL8 ( D ) in negative - control , siRNA - or GMFG siRNA - expressing dHL - 60 cells . Cells transfected with negative - control siRNA or GMFG siRNA were adhered to glass coverslips and stimulated with a uniform concentration of fMLF ( 100 nM ) or CXCL8 ( 100 ng / mL ) for 0 , 1 , or 10 min . The cells were ﬁxed and stained with F - actin ( phal - loidin A - 488 ; in green ) and anti - CD43 primary antibody ( in red ) and confocal microscopy used to analyze distribution of staining and morpho - logic changes . Results shown are representative of three independent experiments . Original scale bar , 5 (cid:2) m . Aerbajinai et al . GMFG regulates neutrophil chemotaxis www . jleukbio . org Volume 90 , September 2011 Journal of Leukocyte Biology 5 GMFG were examined using time - lapse video microscopy in re - sponse to fMLF or CXCL8 gradient stimulation . Following expo - sure to fMLF or CXCL8 , dHL - 60 cells expressing GFP - GMFG un - derwent a shape change . The cells became highly polarized , and the GFP - GMFG largely translocated to the leading edge , whereas a partial fraction still remained at the trailing edge . This redistri - bution was in contrast to that observed in neutrophils that ex - pressed GFP alone , in which GFP was distributed diffusely in the cells during chemotaxis ( Fig . 3 ) . However , this redistribution is similar to that of GFP - actin in dHL - 60 cells following fMLF stimu - lation ( Fig . 4A ) . The features of chemoattractant - induced migra - tion of GFP - GMFG - expressing neutrophils displayed the typical behavior of neutrophil movement : pseudopod formation and extension , attachment , contraction of the cell causing the cell body to move forward , and release of rear attachment so the cell itself can move forward ( Fig . 3 and Supplemental Videos 9 and 10 ) . Time - lapse imaging revealed the dynamic redistribution of GFP - GMFG toward the leading edge of the cells within 1 min after exposure to fMLF , which occurred before the acquisition of a polarized morphology ( Fig . 3 ) . These ﬁndings demonstrate that asymmetric distribution of GFP - GMFG occurs rapidly after fMLF exposure and suggest that GMFG is a component of initial signal - ing events that deﬁne polarity . To test this possibility further , we examined whether positional changes in the chemoattractant gra - dient would alter the localization of GFP - GMFG . We found that moving the position of the fMLF - loaded micropipette resulted in immediate redistribution of GMFG toward the new source of che - moattractant ( data not shown ) . These observations suggest that GMFG is involved in the trafﬁcking of critical membrane compo - nents and participates in the formation of protein complexes at the cell leading edge . GMFG knockdown induces temporal instability of the leading edge To examine GMFG - mediated cell polarity in more detail , actin protrusion dynamics were investigated . The GFP - actin reporter was cotransfected with GMFG siRNA or control siRNA in dHL - 60 cells and then these cells exposed to an fMLF or CXCL8 gradient and examined by time - lapse microscopy . Con - trol siRNA - expressing neutrophils and dHL - 60 cells rapidly Figure 3 . GFP - GMFG redistributes to the cell leading edge during neutrophil and dHL - 60 cell chemotaxis . Time - lapse sequences of the migration of neutrophils and dHL - 60 cells expressing control GFP vector or GFP - GMFG toward a point source of fMLF or CXCL8 . Neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells were transfected with GFP vector or GFP - GMFG vector for 24 h , then plated on glass - bottom dishes coated with ﬁbrinogen , and exposed to a chemotactic gradient generated by the slow release of fMLF ( 100 nM ) or CXCL8 ( 100 ng / mL ) from a micropipette . Fluorescence time - lapse im - ages were taken at 30 - s intervals for 7 min . The direction of chemoattractant source is indicated by an arrow . Original scale bars , 5 (cid:2) m ( also see Supplemental Videos 9 and 10 ) . Fluorescence images were captured using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 ﬂuorescence microscope and a 40 (cid:4) objective , NA 1 . 3 , with ORCA - ER C4742 - 95 camera - driven MetaMorph imaging software ( Universal Imaging ) . 6 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 90 , September 2011 www . jleukbio . org polarized in the presence of fMLF or CXCL8 , as identiﬁed by their elongated shape and the polarized localization of F - actin at the leading edge , and moved persistently toward the che - moattractant ( fMLF or CXCL8 ) . Conversely , GMFG siRNA - expressing neutrophils and dHL - 60 cells exhibited rapidly ac - cumulating F - actin at the front of cells oriented toward gradi - ent chemoattractants ( fMLF or CXCL8 ) but induced the formation of several protrusions soon after initial polarity for - mation ; in addition , the cells failed to maintain persistent po - larization of F - actin at the leading edge compared with control siRNA - expressing cells in response to fMLF and CXCL8 ( Fig . 4A and B ) . The GMFG knockdown cells with several protru - sions developed lateral protrusions that caused deviations in the direction of cell movement and reduced cell motility to - ward chemoattractant in comparison with control siRNA - trans - fected cells . Therefore , these data suggest that GMFG regu - lates migration through maintaining cell polarity . As persistent polarity is essential for directional migration , the impaired mi - gration observed in GMFG knockdown cells was likely a result of a relative inability to become persistently polarized . GMFG regulates p38 and PAK phosphorylation and interacts with WAVE2 It has been demonstrated that the MAPK family mediates the regulation of cell migration [ 31 ] . ERK has been shown to reg - ulate focal adhesion turnover and migration in ﬁbroblasts , whereas p38 inhibits ﬁlopodia formation during chemotaxis . In addition , p38 MAPK is known to interact with PAK , and p38 and PAK mediate ﬁlopodia formation and stimulate che - motaxis [ 32 ] . To examine whether GMFG involves these sig - naling pathways , we evaluated the activity of these molecules in GMFG knockdown dHL - 60 cells after fMLF or CXCL8 stimula - tion using an immunoblotting assay . We observed a moderate activation of PAK1 / 2 activation in response to fMLF , as com - pared with stimulation with CXCL8 , in control siRNA - express - ing cells ( Fig . 5 ) . In control siRNA - expressing cells , stimulation with fMLF resulted in a time - dependent increase in the accu - mulation of phosphorylated PAK1 / 2 and p38 , which was maxi - mized at 2 min and absent at the 15 - to 30 - min time - point af - ter stimulation . Conversely , GMFG knockdown cells exhibited a marked reduction of phosphorylated PAK1 / 2 and p38 Figure 4 . GMFG knockdown induces temporal instability of the leading edge . Time - lapse sequential images showing the distribution of GFP - actin in negative - control , siRNA - or GMFG siRNA - expressing neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells during chemotaxis . GFP - actin - expressing neutrophils or dHL - 60 cells cotransfected with control siRNA or GMFG siRNA were plated on glass - bottom dishes coated with ﬁbrinogen and exposed to a che - motactic gradient generated by the slow release of fMLF ( 100 nM ; A ) or CXCL8 ( 100 ng / mL ; B ) from a micropipette . Fluorescence time - lapse images were recorded in a confocal microscope at 20 - s intervals for 3 min . The direction of chemoattractant source is indicated by arrows . Origi - nal scale bars , 5 (cid:2) m . Aerbajinai et al . GMFG regulates neutrophil chemotaxis www . jleukbio . org Volume 90 , September 2011 Journal of Leukocyte Biology 7 MAPK after fMLF stimulation compared with control siRNA - expressing cells ( Fig . 5A ) . Phosphorylation of ERK1 / 2 , how - ever , was not reduced in GMFG knockdown cells compared with control siRNA - expressing cells . The accumulation of phos - phorylated p38 increased in a time - dependent manner in re - sponse to CXCL8 ( Fig . 5B ) and was maximized at 2 min after stimulation and persisted to 30 min after stimulation . Simi - larly , knockdown of GMFG decreased CXCL8 - induced phos - phorylation of p38 levels compared with levels observed in control siRNA - expressing cells ( Fig . 5B ) . At the same time , overexpression of GMFG induced the phosphorylation of p38 ( Fig . 5C ) but did not phosphorylate PAK1 / 2 in dHL - 60 cells ( data not shown ) . These observations suggest that GMFG me - diates phosphorylation of p38 and PAK1 / 2 , which may be in - volved in regulation of neutrophil migration . WASP / WAVE family proteins are another class of cytoskel - etal regulators that link upstream Rho family GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Previous studies have shown that GMFG binds to the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 26 ] . There - fore , we hypothesize that GMFG might interact with WASP or WAVE proteins . To test this , a vector with Myc - tagged GMFG or an empty vector was transfected into dHL - 60 cells and pro - teins immunoprecipitated with anti - Myc antibody , which were then examined for the presence of WAVE . We observed that Myc - tagged GMFG coimmunoprecipitated with WAVE2 in dHL - 60 cells ( Fig . 5D ) but not with WAVE1 or WAVE3 ( data not shown ) . With the use of this same assay , we were unable to detect any interaction between GMFG and WASP proteins ( data not shown ) . These results suggest that GMFG recruits to the leading edge of cells in response to the chemoattractants may through its interaction with WAVE2 . However , further analysis is certainly required to conclude its functional rele - vance with WAVE2 . DISCUSSION Actin - cytoskeletal remodeling plays a pivotal role in neutrophil chemotactic responses and is tightly regulated by actin regula - tory proteins . Although ADF / coﬁlin superfamily members have emerged as important cytoskeletal regulators , the speciﬁc ( ADF ) / coﬁlin superfamily proteins that contribute to the asymmetric dynamics of membrane - cytoskeletal interaction during directed neutrophil migration are not fully deﬁned . Here , we show that GMFG , a novel ADF / coﬁlin family mem - ber expressed in human neutrophils and HL - 60 cells , regulates the motility of these cells and redistributes to lamellipodia at the leading edge of the migrating cells . Silencing of GMFG signiﬁcantly inhibited and directional cell migration in re - sponse to fMLF or CXCL8 . Chemoattractant ( fMLF or CXCL8 ) - induced F - actin accumulation and polarized morphol - ogy were also found to be defective in migrating GMFG knock - down cells , which developed multiple ﬁlopodia - like protru - sions rather than sustained lamellipodia at the leading edge of the cells . These data identify an important role for GMFG in neutrophil chemotaxis in response to fMLF or CXCL8 stimula - tion , which is consistent with a previous study showing that GMFG is involved in actin - based cellular functions of microvas - cular endothelial cells [ 26 ] . Polarization of neutrophils is the morphologic equivalent of intracellular processes , leading to an asymmetric distribution of cytoskeletal components at the front of cells . In this study , we have shown that GMFG undergoes redistribution during Figure 5 . GMFG regulates p38 and PAK phosphorylation and interacts with WAVE2 in dHL - 60 cells . ( A and B ) Immunoblot analysis of the phosphorylation ( p ) of PAK1 / 2 , p38 , and ERK1 / 2 at the indicated times after fMLF ( 100 nM ) or CXCL8 ( 100 ng / mL ) stimulation of dHL - 60 cells expressing negative - control siRNA or GMFG siRNA . Equal amounts of total cellular lysates were compared using total p38 antibody ( T - p38 ) . ( C ) dHL - 60 cells were mock - transfected or tran - siently transfected with His - tagged GMFG plasmid or empty vector for 24 h and then lysed . Cell lysates were subjected to immunoblot analy - sis using antibodies against phosphorylated p38 . Equal amounts of to - tal cellular lysates were compared using total p38 antibody . ( D ) Ly - sates prepared from dHL - 60 cells transfected with Myc - tagged GMFG ( (cid:3) ) or empty vector ( – ) were immunoprecipitated ( IP ) with anti - Myc antibody or IgG control , and then the immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to immunoblot analysis with anti - WAVE2 antibody . The same blot was stripped and reprobed with anti - Myc antibody . All ﬁg - ures are representative of at least three independent analyses . 8 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 90 , September 2011 www . jleukbio . org the polarization of neutrophils and accumulates at the leading edge , where rapid formation of new actin polymerization and coincident turnover of old branched actin ﬁlament networks nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex occur . Previous studies have shown that GMFG associates with Arp2 / 3 , regulating actin - cytoskeleton structure , and that GMFG stimulates disassembly and turnover of branched actin ﬁlaments in yeast by inhibiting the activated Arp2 / 3 complex [ 25 , 26 ] . Indeed , we show here that GMFG knockdown cells formed transient lamellipodia in response to fMLF or CXCL8 , but most were unable to form a single , stable , persistent lamellipodia or to maintain stable po - larity . Many of them formed multiple ﬁlopodia - like protrusions simultaneously or in rapid succession . This implies that silenc - ing of GMFG leads to lamellipodial instability and diminished persistent polarization , resulting in defective directional migra - tion . Hence , our results indicate that GMFG - mediated cytoskel - eton reorganization might occur via disassembly of actin nucle - ation or debranching ﬁlament activity conducted by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex depends on actin - regula - tory proteins , such as neuronal WASP and WAVE , which link Rac1 and Cdc42 and converge the stimulatory signals for actin polymerization [ 14 , 33 , 34 ] . The actin - regulatory proteins play a critical role in inducing the actin remodeling underpinning chemotaxis , as these proteins more directly link stimulatory signals to actin polymerization . Accordingly , WASP has been reported to localize to the leading and trailing edge of the cell during polarized cell migration and appears to be required for proper neutrophil polarity and chemotaxis [ 35 ] . DCs deﬁcient in WASP show an almost complete lack of migratory capacity [ 36 , 37 ] . The other WASP protein family member , WAVE / SCAR , mediates Rac - induced actin polymerization and is nec - essary for actin rearrangements and cell motility [ 38 , 39 ] . WASP / WAVE also plays a role in preventing lateral membrane protrusions [ 35 ] . In this study , we found that GMFG is associ - ated with WAVE2 in dHL - 60 cells . Together , these results indi - cate that GMFG is important for the stabilization of lamellipo - dia at the leading edge , presumably through its recruitment to this region by interacting with WAVE2 in polarized neutro - phils . This importance of GMFG function in neutrophil che - motaxis is demonstrated further by the signiﬁcantly reduced ability of GMFG knockdown cells to migrate toward fMLF or CXCL8 in Transwell assays and EZ - TAXIScan assays . Regulation of actin - cytoskeleton dynamics is important for determining the location of protrusions and contractions dur - ing cellular polarization . These processes are controlled by localized activation of signaling pathways at the leading edge and the trailing edge of cells . A previous study has indicated that GMFG - mediated cytoskeleton reorganization is presum - ably regulated by activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 [ 26 ] . In this study , we did not see any evidence that knockdown of GMFG expression affected fMLF - induced activation of Rac1 or Cdc42 in dHL - 60 cells ( as measured by pull - down assays ; data not shown ) . Therefore , we studied the Rac and Cdc42 downstream PAK effectors in GMFG knockdown cells after stimulation with fMLF or CXCL8 . Involvement of PAK1 in cytoskeletal rear - rangement has been reported [ 40 ] . PAK1 also colocalized with actin in activated human neutrophils stimulated with fMLF [ 41 ] . Furthermore , PAK interacts with the p38 MAPK to posi - tively regulate its activity [ 32 , 42 ] , and p38 signaling can regu - late chemotaxis by restricting ﬁlopodia to the leading edge and providing positional information to direct migration [ 43 , 44 ] . Indeed , our data clearly showed that the phosphorylation of PAK1 / 2 and p38 MAPK , typically induced by fMLF , is re - markably reduced in GMFG knockdown cells , whereas overex - pression of GMFG enhanced phosphorylation of p38 MAPK in dHL - 60 cells . Thus , these ﬁndings indicated that GMFG - medi - ated neutrophil chemotaxis in response to fMLF may occur through the PAK1 / 2 - p38 MAPK signaling pathway . In conclusion , this study provides strong evidence that GMFG is important for chemoattractant - stimulated directional migration in neutrophils , which regulate the polarization un - derpinning the neutrophil chemotaxis response via stabilizing F - actin ﬁlaments in the lamellipodia . Our previous work has identiﬁed GMFG as an important G - CSF response protein in myeloid cell development [ 24 ] . This study provides new in - sights into GMFG function in neutrophils , which could be use - ful for identifying potential targets for therapeutic intervention in neutrophil - mediated diseases . AUTHORSHIP W . A . designed and performed experiments and wrote the manuscript ; L . L and C . A . P . conducted the EZ - TAXIScan assay and some time - lapse video microscopy experiments ; K . C . con - ducted real - time PCR experiments ; J . Z . conducted some of the immunoblot analyses ; and G . P . R . designed and supervised the experiments and edited the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Drs . Christian A . Combs and Daniela A . Malide from the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute Light Mi - croscopy Core Facility for their skillful help with confocal mi - croscope imaging and Dr . Daniel Wright for helpful sugges - tions . REFERENCES 1 . Nathan , C . ( 2006 ) Neutrophils and immunity : challenges and opportuni - ties . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 6 , 173 – 182 . 2 . Ridley , A . J . , Schwartz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . R . ( 2003 ) Cell migration : integrat - ing signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . 3 . Van Haastert , P . J . , Devreotes , P . N . ( 2004 ) Chemotaxis : signaling the way forward . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 626 – 634 . 4 . Devreotes , P . , Janetopoulos , C . ( 2003 ) Eukaryotic chemotaxis : distinctions between directional sensing and polarization . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 20445 – 20448 . 5 . Webb , D . J . , Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . F . ( 2002 ) Adhesion assembly , dis - assembly and turnover in migrating cells—over and over and over again . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , E97 – E100 . 6 . Hull , K . M . , Shoham , N . , Chae , J . J . , Aksentijevich , I . , Kastner , D . L . ( 2003 ) The expanding spectrum of systemic autoinﬂammatory disorders and their rheumatic manifestations . Curr . Opin . Rheumatol . 15 , 61 – 69 . 7 . Weiss , S . J . ( 1989 ) Tissue destruction by neutrophils . N . Engl . J . Med . 320 , 365 – 376 . 8 . Le Clainche , C . , Carlier , M . F . ( 2008 ) Regulation of actin assembly associ - ated with protrusion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol . Rev . 88 , 489 – 513 . 9 . Niggli , V . ( 1999 ) Rho - kinase in human neutrophils : a role in signaling for myosin light chain phosphorylation and cell migration . FEBS Lett . 445 , 69 – 72 . Aerbajinai et al . GMFG regulates neutrophil chemotaxis www . jleukbio . org Volume 90 , September 2011 Journal of Leukocyte Biology 9 10 . Eddy , R . J . , Pierini , L . M . , Matsumura , F . , Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 2000 ) Ca2 (cid:3) - dependent myosin II activation is required for uropod retraction during neutrophil migration . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1287 – 1298 . 11 . Ridley , A . J . ( 2001 ) Rho GTPases and cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2713 – 2722 . 12 . Katoh , H . , Hiramoto , K . , Negishi , M . ( 2006 ) Activation of Rac1 by RhoG regulates cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 56 – 65 . 13 . Raftopoulou , M . , Hall , A . ( 2004 ) Cell migration : Rho GTPases lead the way . Dev . Biol . 265 , 23 – 32 . 14 . Higgs , H . N . , Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) Regulation of actin ﬁlament network formation through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of pro - teins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 . 15 . Rohatgi , R . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . ( 2000 ) Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1299 – 1310 . 16 . Takenawa , T . , Miki , H . ( 2001 ) WASP and WAVE family proteins : key molecules for rapid rearrangement of cortical actin ﬁlaments and cell movement . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1801 – 1809 . 17 . Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . , Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 – 6941 . 18 . Pollard , T . D . , Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 19 . dos Remedios , C . G . , Chhabra , D . , Kekic , M . , Dedova , I . V . , Tsubakihara , M . , Berry , D . A . , Nosworthy , N . J . ( 2003 ) Actin binding proteins : regula - tion of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 433 – 473 . 20 . Welch , M . D . , Mullins , R . D . ( 2002 ) Cellular control of actin nucleation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 247 – 288 . 21 . Goroncy , A . K . , Koshiba , S . , Tochio , N . , Tomizawa , T . , Sato , M . , Inoue , M . , Watanabe , S . , Hayashizaki , Y . , Tanaka , A . , Kigawa , T . , Yokoyama , S . ( 2009 ) NMR solution structures of actin depolymerizing factor homology domains . Protein Sci . 18 , 2384 – 2392 . 22 . Bernstein , B . W . , Bamburg , J . R . ( 2010 ) ADF / coﬁlin : a functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 20 , 187 – 195 . 23 . Pfaendtner , J . , De La Cruz , E . M . , Voth , G . A . ( 2010 ) Actin ﬁlament re - modeling by actin depolymerization factor / coﬁlin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 7299 – 7304 . 24 . Shi , Y . , Chen , L . , Liotta , L . A . , Wan , H . H . , Rodgers , G . P . ( 2006 ) Glia maturation factor (cid:1) ( GMFG ) : a cytokine - responsive protein during hema - topoietic lineage development and its functional genomics analysis . Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 4 , 145 – 155 . 25 . Gandhi , M . , Smith , B . A . , Bovellan , M . , Paavilainen , V . , Daugherty - Clarke , K . , Gelles , J . , Lappalainen , P . , Goode , B . L . ( 2010 ) GMF is a coﬁlin ho - molog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate ﬁlament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr . Biol . 20 , 861 – 867 . 26 . Ikeda , K . , Kundu , R . K . , Ikeda , S . , Kobara , M . , Matsubara , H . , Querter - mous , T . ( 2006 ) Glia maturation factor - (cid:1) is preferentially expressed in microvascular endothelial and inﬂammatory cells and modulates actin cytoskeleton reorganization . Circ . Res . 99 , 424 – 433 . 27 . Wei , S . , Liu , J . H . , Epling - Burnette , P . K . , Gamero , A . M . , Ussery , D . , Pearson , E . W . , Elkabani , M . E . , Diaz , J . I . , Djeu , J . Y . ( 1996 ) Critical role of Lyn kinase in inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis by granulocyte - mac - rophage colony - stimulating factor . J . Immunol . 157 , 5155 – 5162 . 28 . Hauert , A . B . , Martinelli , S . , Marone , C . , Niggli , V . ( 2002 ) Differentiated HL - 60 cells are a valid model system for the analysis of human neutro - phil migration and chemotaxis . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 34 , 838 – 854 . 29 . Lehman , J . A . , Paul , C . C . , Baumann , M . A . , Gomez - Cambronero , J . ( 2001 ) MAP kinase upregulation after hematopoietic differentiation : role of chemotaxis . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 280 , C183 – C191 . 30 . Weiner , O . D . , Servant , G . , Welch , M . D . , Mitchison , T . J . , Sedat , J . W . , Bourne , H . R . ( 1999 ) Spatial control of actin polymerization during neu - trophil chemotaxis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 75 – 81 . 31 . Huang , C . , Jacobson , K . , Schaller , M . D . ( 2004 ) MAP kinases and cell mi - gration . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 4619 – 4628 . 32 . Coles , L . C . , Shaw , P . E . ( 2002 ) PAK1 primes MEK1 for phosphorylation by Raf - 1 kinase during cross - cascade activation of the ERK pathway . Onco - gene 21 , 2236 – 2244 . 33 . Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . , Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 – 6941 . 34 . Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . ( 2006 ) The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nuclea - tor comes of age . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 713 – 726 . 35 . Myers , S . A . , Han , J . W . , Lee , Y . , Firtel , R . A . , Chung , C . Y . ( 2005 ) A Dic - tyostelium homologue of WASP is required for polarized F - actin assembly during chemotaxis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2191 – 2206 . 36 . Burns , S . , Thrasher , A . J . , Blundell , M . P . , Machesky , L . , Jones , G . E . ( 2001 ) Conﬁguration of human dendritic cell cytoskeleton by Rho GTPases , the WAS protein , and differentiation . Blood 98 , 1142 – 1149 . 37 . De Noronha , S . , Hardy , S . , Sinclair , J . , Blundell , M . P . , Strid , J . , Schulz , O . , Zwirner , J . , Jones , G . E . , Katz , D . R . , Kinnon , C . , Thrasher , A . J . ( 2005 ) Impaired dendritic - cell homing in vivo in the absence of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Blood 105 , 1590 – 1597 . 38 . Yamazaki , D . , Suetsugu , S . , Miki , H . , Kataoka , Y . , Nishikawa , S . , Fujiwara , T . , Yoshida , N . , Takenawa , T . ( 2003 ) WAVE2 is required for directed cell migration and cardiovascular development . Nature 424 , 452 – 456 . 39 . Beli , P . , Mascheroni , D . , Xu , D . , Innocenti , M . ( 2008 ) WAVE and Arp2 / 3 jointly inhibit ﬁlopodium formation by entering into a complex with mDia2 . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 849 – 857 . 40 . Bokoch , G . M . ( 2003 ) Biology of the p21 - activated kinases . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 743 – 781 . 41 . Dharmawardhane , S . , Brownson , D . , Lennartz , M . , Bokoch , G . M . ( 1999 ) Localization of p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) to pseudopodia , membrane rufﬂes , and phagocytic cups in activated human neutrophils . J . Leukoc . Biol . 66 , 521 – 527 . 42 . Zhang , S . , Han , J . , Sells , M . A . , Chernoff , J . , Knaus , U . G . , Ulevitch , R . J . , Bokoch , G . M . ( 1995 ) Rho family GTPases regulate p38 mitogen - acti - vated protein kinase through the downstream mediator Pak1 . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 23934 – 23936 . 43 . Affolter , M . , Weijer , C . J . ( 2005 ) Signaling to cytoskeletal dynamics dur - ing chemotaxis . Dev . Cell 9 , 19 – 34 . 44 . Heid , P . J . , Geiger , J . , Wessels , D . , Voss , E . , Soll , D . R . ( 2005 ) Computer - assisted analysis of ﬁlopod formation and the role of myosin II heavy chain phosphorylation in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2225 – 2237 . KEY WORDS : migration (cid:1) fMLF (cid:1) CXCL8 (cid:1) p38 10 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 90 , September 2011 www . jleukbio . org