Active dislocations and topological traps govern dynamics of spiraling ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria Xingting Gong † and Manu Prakash ∗ , ‡ , ¶ , § , (cid:107) , ⊥ † Department of Applied Physics , Stanford University ‡ Department of Bioengineering , Stanford University ¶ Department of Biology ( courtesy ) , Stanford University § Department of Oceans ( courtesy ) , Stanford University (cid:107) Woods Institute for the Environment , Stanford University ⊥ Chan Zuckerberg Biohub , San Francisco E - mail : manup @ stanford . edu 1 1 a r X i v : 2 3 05 . 12572v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 2 1 M a y 2023 Abstract Activity can organize matter in unique conﬁgurations inaccessible to equilibrium systems , including a sundry of spiraling shapes seen in nature that range from galaxies to living tissues to fossilized stromatolites . How these dynamic yet stable patterns form in motile active systems that span a range of length and time scales remains an open question . Here we study the collective gliding dynamics of ultra - long ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria conﬁned in two dimensions and present the discovery of an emergent pattern we call “active spirals” . Individual ﬁlaments in the spiral bulk remain conﬂuent due to adhesion forces and exhibit reversible gliding motility . Thus individual ﬁlaments undergo bidirectional movement and the spiral object as a whole has no ﬁxed vorticity . Using single ﬁlament tracking , we discover that spirals permit the radial ﬂux of material as ﬁlaments shear past one another . We demonstrate that these rearrangements can be entirely described by topological rules of interaction between ﬁlaments tips . We thus reduce the dynamics of a spiral to a set of active dislocations ( corresponding to the ﬁlament tips ) on a polar coordinate lattice and show that we can reproduce and predict the material ﬂux in the system . Finally , we present a discovery of a novel topological trap present in these spirals , and is induced purely by the geometric chirality of long winding ﬁlaments with winding number greater than zero . A topological trap creates boundaries in the spiral across which material cannot ﬂow , leading to persistent structures that are topologically locked for the lifetime of the system . The emergent mechanics of active spirals presented here sheds light on the critical role of adhesion forces , activity and geometry in the formation of long - term , stable , yet dynamic active patterns . 2 Introduction Active matter is a rich ﬁeld with the ability to inspire new paradigms in design and engi - neering due to its ability to collectively organize from the “bottom - up” . In active materials , complex and dynamic behaviors emerge naturally from local rules of interaction between energy - consuming particles , whereas systems in equilibrium evolve toward a limited set of states determined by externally applied boundary conditions . Despite the rich phenomena accessible to these systems , it is diﬃcult to disentangle the key rules of interaction that govern the emergent properties of interest , 1 and as such , engineering applications inspired by active materials are still in their infancy . 2 One active structure of intrigue is an “active spiral” . At the smallest length scales , these spiraling architectures can be seen in DNA torroids 3 for eﬃcient genome packing , spiraling springs such as ESCRT ﬁlaments 4 for membrane cessation , collective motility of malaria parasites , 5 or spiraling tissue structures in corneal epithelium . 6 In the non - living world , the most classical example consists of spiraling galaxies that form over billions of years at astronomical length scales . 7 Each above is an example of a spiral structure that self - assembles from simple rules arising from the interplay between activity and geometry . 8 Furthermore , many of these dynamic structures are incredibly stable over long time scales – some even immortalized as micro - fossils of ﬁlamentous bacteria from the Precambrian era 9 – while the individual components comprising the structure might be in ﬂux , akin to the assembly of a spindle . 10 What provides this degree of stability and robustness to active patterns in a highly dynamic environment remains an open question . A challenge in studying active systems at small length scales is the resolution at which micro - states can be imaged . Many systems such as reconstituted protein mixtures or in - vivo motor - ﬁlament suspensions 2 cannot be resolved at the resolution of their constituent particles ( single ﬁlaments and motor molecules ) . Usually , coarse grained parameters such as local nematic order is measured , which creates an incomplete picture of particle - particle interactions . 2 , 11 – 16 Machine learning is being used to tackle this challenge , but it again suﬀers 3 from interpretability of the local interaction rules that critically deﬁne the properties of these active materials . 17 Here we present the discovery of a unique active spiral formed by a species of gliding ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria , Oscillatoria sp . , where every individual ﬁlament is able to be resolved and tracked . When a dense clump of ﬁlaments is deposited on an agarose gel and compressed with a cover - slip , we observe the formation of beautiful two - dimensional spirals consisting of long , interwoven ﬁlaments ( Fig . 1 , Movie S1 ) . Once formed , these spirals persist stably for many hours until cell death , and consist of anywhere from a single to hundreds of ﬁlaments . The aforementioned motility of the ﬁlaments , refereed to as gliding , allows these ﬁlaments to self - propel across a surface without the aid of ﬂagella or cilia , with motion directed along the long - axis of the organism . 18 As ﬁlaments glide , collisions with other ﬁlaments cause them to locally align with their neighbors , and as such the system can be considered a dry active nematic . 19 In contrast to other active nematics that favor half - integer defects , 12 , 19 , 20 Oscillatoria sp . consistently form vortex - like spirals due to their ﬂexibility and long lengths . 21 – 24 It has been shown that self - propelled , ﬂexible ﬁlaments can curl into spirals due to self - interaction . 21 , 22 For multiple ﬁlaments , this acts as a key nucleation event which then recruits other neigh - boring ﬁlaments to wrap around it , forming a large spiral structure ( Fig . 1 ) . Although circulating vortex structures have been previously seen in gliding ﬁlament assays using mi - crotubules and actin , in both cases the resulting vortex diameters have been larger than their constituent ﬁlaments , such that individual ﬁlaments do not wind multiple times inside the structure . 25 , 26 In contrast , an Oscillatoria sp . ﬁlament consists of a row of cells that remain adjoined at the cell walls , and can be as short as a few microns to as long as a few millimeters , corresponding to a few to several hundreds of cells in a single ﬁlament . The large aspect ratio of Oscillatoria sp . ﬁlaments allows for multiple windings and the formation of true spirals that , as we will show in this manuscript , have unique topological properties . Though ﬁlament elasticity has been shown to play a key role in the class of patterns 27 in 4 active namatics , extremely long aspect ratios ( of order 1 : 1000 ) such as the ones observed here have been less explored . 28 Apart from their large aspect ratios , ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria have other properties that make them a nice system in which to study collective motion . Filament growth is minimal under uniform low - light conditions ( our chosen experimental condition ) , such that motility is isolated as the dominant driver of spiral dynamics ( Fig . S2 ) . When gliding on an elastic substrate , ﬁlaments exhibit spontaneous directional reversals that are coordinated at high speeds across the entire length of the multicellular organisms ( Fig . 2D ) . 29 This remarkable coordinated reversal adds an element of stochasticity to ﬁlament dynamics and the entangled spirals do not have a ﬁxed vorticity . In addition , the ﬁlaments are enclosed in a sheath of mucus which is secreted as they glide . 29 These slime layers play an important role in the collective behavior of this organism , as it helps the ﬁlaments adhere to both the surfaces and to each other . 23 , 30 – 32 All these individual properties ( substrate based gliding motility , long aspect ratio , directional reversal , particle - particle adhesion ) give rise to a unique active system exhibiting a number of interesting and complex behaviors . In the remainder of this paper , we ﬁrst characterize the physical properties and dynamics of spiral structures through single ﬁlament tracking . Our tracking reveals that the material within a spiral is highly dynamic , with ﬁlaments able to interweave and swap position . Since the structure is strictly two - dimensional with no out - of - plane cross - overs allowed , we demonstrate that this material ﬂux is governed only by rules of interactions between ﬁlament tips . We show that the entire system can be described by dislocation dynamics , where ﬁlament tips can be considered as active dislocations in a 2D polar lattice . Using this , we present a framework that reduces the collective motility of ﬁlaments to the dynamics at their tips . We show that it is possible to enumerate all the rules of tip - tip interactions on a polar coordinate lattice , which we then implement in silico to compute how the degree of material ﬂux within a spiral varies with reversal dynamics . Comparison of these results with experimental data strongly suggests the existence of biological feedback mechanisms 5 that control the rate of ﬁlament reversal . Finally , we conclude the manuscript with the discovery of a novel topological trap that prohibits the ﬂux of material in a spiral . These traps arise naturally from the geometry of long ﬁlaments with winding number greater than zero , and might provide an intriguing mechanism for the stability of active patterns over long time scales . Spiral dynamics We seed Oscillatoria sp . ﬁlaments on an agarose gel and conﬁne the system to two - dimensions by compressing it with a coverslip . Over the next few hours , the system naturally goes from an entangled mass to a well ordered active nematic system purely in two dimensions ( Fig . 1 , Movie S1 ) . Of interest to us are the regions of spontaneous spiral formation , particularly spirals that exist in isolation ( not touching neighboring streams of ﬁlaments ) . Spirals can vary in size from just a single ﬁlament that coils on itself , to several hundreds of ﬁlaments ( see Fig . S1 , Movies S2 - S7 for six diﬀerent tracked spirals of varying size ) . Fig . 2A depicts the largest tracked spiral with a total of 59 ﬁlaments , where each ﬁlament is given a unique coloring and tracked for a duration of 5 hours . During this time , the spiral has achieved a steady state size , where the mean size of its inner central area neither shrinks nor expands but oscillates about a steady state ( Fig . 2B ) . Filaments in this spiral span three orders of magnitude in length , ranging from the shortest being 7 µ m to the longest being 2965 µ m ( Fig . 2C ) . Growth rates for Oscillatoria have previously been measured to be slow , with a doubling rate of over 3 days when incubated at 20 ◦ C . 33 Indeed , our data shows negligible changes in length of the tracked ﬁlaments over the course of our experiments which are imagined under low light conditions ( see Fig . S2 ) . Hence , motility rather than growth accounts for the dynamics observed . Individual ﬁlaments are seen swirling in both clockwise and counterclockwise directions within a spiral , and are subject to spontaneous directional reversals . Fig . 2D depicts two 6 sample velocity traces , where the orange and blue curves in each panel correspond to the ( linear ) velocities of each of the ﬁlament tips , plotted separately . In these traces , a positive velocity denotes counter - clockwise ( CCW ) motion , whereas a negative value corresponds to clockwise ( CW ) motion . Reversal frequencies are measured to lie in the range λ ∈ ( 0 . 2 , 1 . 2 ) min − 1 , and appear to have a length dependence , with shorter ﬁlaments tending to reverse direction more frequently ( up to 5 fold increase , Fig . 2C ) . Cyanobacteria ﬁlaments exhibit phototaxic and photophobic behaviors , 34 , 35 suggesting that an active mechanism exists to control the direction of ﬁlament movement . However , all of our timelapses are taken under uniform , low - light conditions , minimizing the eﬀect of light - dependent directional biases in our experiments . With a few exceptions ( Fig S3 and Movie S8 ) , directional reversals occur instantaneously across the ﬁlament length ( or at least comparable to the frame rate of imaging ) . We also note that the instantaneous velocities of all ﬁlaments satisfy a symmetric bimodal distribution ( Fig . 2E ) , and on average half of the ﬁlaments move in one direction versus the other ( Fig . 2F ) . The spiral structure as a whole therefore exhibits no preference in direction . Our single ﬁlament tracking ( see Section III of supplementary materials for details ) re - veals , somewhat surprisingly , that the ﬂow of material is highly dynamic within a stable spiral . While the velocity of the ﬁlaments is primarily tangential , we ﬁnd that ﬁlaments are able to interweave and traverse radially inward and outward . In the depicted kymograph of Fig . 2G , we clearly see signatures of individual ﬁlament motion along the radial coordinate through a section at θ = 0 . Tracking the position of a single ﬁlament over time ( black dashed line , Fig 2G ) allows us to visualize this material ﬂow , where the pink ﬁlament traverses a radial distance of 52 µ m over the course of ﬁve hours ( Fig . 2H , Movie S9 ) . A ﬁnal important feature of these spirals arises from the slime trails , which are secreted by Oscillatoria sp . as they glide . This layer of slime helps ﬁlaments adhere to surfaces and to each other . 30 – 32 The presence of these adhesion forces is a central feature of active spirals presented here , as they enforce the bacterial layers to remain conﬂuent and suppress 7 any density ﬂuctuations ( regions of gaps with no ﬁlaments ) . By segmenting out the gaps within a spiral structure ( Fig . 3D , S4 ) , we make two observations : ( 1 ) gaps consistently account for less than 3 % of the spiral bulk , and ( 2 ) when gaps appear , they tend to localize around regions of unpaired tips , where the addition of a ﬁlament layer forces the neighboring ﬁlaments to bend around it . Spiral shape ﬂuctuations We now investigate further the details of elastic energy ﬂuctuations of a spiral , to gain insight into a speciﬁc mechanism of spiral shape relaxation . A key property of active spirals is their stability – once formed , they maintain a steady shape and size for long times , despite the activity of motile ﬁlaments in the bulk ( Fig . 2B , S5 ) . Fig . 3A depicts a spiral in which every segmented ﬁlament has been skeletonized , and the bending energy at each node is calculated using the formalism in Bergou et . al . 36 As expected , the local curvature of the ﬁlaments increases around sites of unpaired tips ( i . e . tips that are not “neutralized” by an adjacent tip in its lane , leading to a distortion of the ﬁlament layers surrounding them ) . In Fig . 3B , we plot the total bending energy ( normalized by α , the bending modulus ) of 6 tracked spirals as a function of time . The ﬁrst observation is that all spirals ﬂuctuate stably about some average energy , indicating that they have achieved a steady state conﬁguration and size . Secondly , the average values themselves show a reasonably large spread , suggesting that the ﬁlaments are ﬂexible and that the energy required to bend them does not exceed the energy of adhesion required to hold the spiral structure in place . Thirdly , we observe two distinct shape ﬂuctuation dynamics : spirals which ﬂuctuate mildly about their average bending energy ( 5 of the 6 tracked spirals ) , and spirals that show signiﬁcant oscillations ( Fig . 3B , light green curve ) . The light green curve corresponds to the most tightly wound spiral , with a ﬁlament of length ∼ 3300 µ m wrapped about a center of radius ∼ 20 µ m ( Fig . S1E , Movie S6 ) . The 8 oscillation events in the spiral energy correspond to directional reversals ( Fig . S6 ) , where the innermost ﬁlament winds and unwinds , allowing the spiral center to shrink and expand . This behavior , however , is not observed for the other 5 spirals . Plotting reversal frequencies as a function of ﬁlament bending energy suggests that tightly wound ﬁlaments tend to reverse more frequently , but only above an energy threshold ( Fig . S7 ) . Hence , ﬁlaments that are very tightly wound are capable of storing and releasing elastic energy by winding up to a point and then reversing direction . The remaining ﬁve spirals do not exhibit reversal - mediated shape oscillations , and instead ﬂuctuate mildly about an average size . In fact , ﬁlaments at the very center of the spiral can continue winding “inward” ( i . e . in toward the spiral center ) for extended periods of time , not only without leading to a net decrease in the size of the spiral center , but even while experiencing increases in size ( Fig . S5 , Movie S10 ) . This paradoxical phenomena dictates the necessity of radial slippage , such that ﬁlament velocities are not strictly tangential . In the absence of reversal , there are two possible mechanisms for spiral shape relaxation . In the ﬁrst mechanism , the spiral opens up like a torsional spring , experiencing radial slippage globally along its length as it continuously winds inward . 37 In the second mechanism , the spiral experiences local shape ﬂuctuations due to the combined eﬀects of tip dynamics and adhesion forces . Gaps ( which localize around unpaired tips ) appearing in the spiral bulk allow ﬁlaments in channels underneath it to expand outward , preventing the spiral center from shrinking even as an interior ﬁlament continues winding without reversal . To interrogate which of these two mechanisms explains our data , we correlate ﬂuctuations of the boundary against locations of unpaired tips . Let R 1 ( θ ) and R 2 ( θ ) denote the inner and outer boundaries of the spiral , with both curves parametrized by the polar angle θ ( Fig . 3E ) . Then W ( θ ) = R 2 ( θ ) − R 1 ( θ ) is the width of the spiral at a section θ . Let ∆ W ( θ ) denote the change in width at θ between two consecutive frames of a spiral timelapse . For sections where | ∆ W ( θ ) | > ∆ R or | ∆ W ( θ ) | < ∆ R , we can ask whether an unpaired tip exists in some neighborhood θ ± 12 ∆ θ . Performing this 9 analysis for the tracked spirals , we see that regions of the boundary with displacements greater than ∆ R = 2 . 2 µm ( approximately 60 % of the ﬁlament width ) are more consistently correlated with the presence of unpaired tips , and therefore gaps ( Fig . 3F , red curves ) , than are regions of the boundary with displacements | ∆ W ( θ ) | < ∆ R ( Fig . 3F , blue curves ) . Our data therefore strongly supports the second mechanism . If instead ﬁlaments behaved like torsional springs , we would expect displacements to occur globally and simultaneously along θ , rather than preferentially in regions of unpaired tips . Spiral shape ﬂuctuations are thus local rather than global phenomenon , and are governed by tip dynamics which generate gaps , and adhesion forces which close them . From the analysis of spiral shape ﬂuctuations , tips begin to emerge as important areas of localized activity , an idea we explore further in proceeding sections by using an analogy between tips and edge dislocations in crystals . Tips as active dislocations Unlike classical dislocation dynamics , out of equilibrium systems allows us to explore a rich set of phenomena due to the fact that individual tips are themselves “active” . 19 , 38 – 40 In this section , we ﬁnd a useful analogy between tips and edge dislocations in crystals ( Fig . 3C , bottom panel ) . In a crystal lattice , an edge dislocation is a line defect where an additional plane of atoms exists within the crystal structure . Similarly , in a spiral , an unpaired tip marks the point where an additional layer of material is inserted between channels of other ﬁlaments . Taking a loop around an unpaired tip , we can compute the burgers vector which points radially ( Fig . 3A inset ) . In a crystal , dislocations can move both perpendicular and parallel to the burgers vector , known as climb and glide dynamics , respectively . Due to the nature of a spiral where ﬁlament lengths remain contiguous , only climb dynamics are allowed ( Movie S11 ) . In a biophysical context , active climb dynamics have previously been explored in the context of bacterial cell wall growth . 41 The work by Amir et . al . modeled the growth of bacterial cell walls using dislocations , where dislocations in the cylindrical peptidoglycan 10 lattice represent potential sites of material insertion . By studying the dislocation dynamics on a cylindrical lattice , the authors were able to reproduce experimental phenomena such as the exponential growth of the bacterial cell wall , and the pinning of synthesis machinery at dislocation sites . Unlike the bacterial cell wall where linked peptidoglycan layers exist at ﬁxed intervals on a cylindrical lattice , ﬁlaments in a spiral do not have to break covalent bonds when inserting themselves in between their neighbors , needing only to overcome adhesion and bending forces as they push ﬁlaments in surrounding lanes out of the way . Thus , while elastic forces in Amir et . al . can cause pinning of motor activity at dislocation sites , we observe that bending energy in a spiral is not strong enough to stall the motion of ﬁlament tips . Recall that spirals exhibit material ﬂux – the ability for ﬁlaments to move radially and reorganize position . In two - dimensions , because ﬁlaments cannot glide over one another , the only way for two ﬁlaments to swap position is for their tips to interact : the leading tips of two ﬁlaments collide , allowing them to interweave and eventually change their radial ordering ( Fig . 3C ) . Hence , material ﬂux in a spiral is driven by active dislocations exhibiting climb dynamics ( Movie S11 ) . The reduced order description of an active material to its defects is not a new concept . Active nematics created by cytoskeletal suspensions are a well known example , in which + 12 disclination defects are self - propelled and drive ﬂows . 11 , 12 , 19 , 39 , 40 , 42 Furthermore , ± 12 disclination pairs can spontaneously nucleate and annihilate , all the while keeping the total topological charge in the system constant . The analogy to nucleation and annihilation events in a spiral is the ability of tips to pair and un - pair in the same channel ( Fig . 3C , Movie S11 ) , eﬀectively annihilating and creating dislocation pairs of opposite burgers vectors . Hence , the total number of dislocations at any given time is not constant , but is bounded by the total number of ﬁlament tips . We have shown so far that spirals are composed of layers of interwoven ﬁlaments which remain conﬂuent – the spiral bulk remains uniformly dense , with no density ﬂuctuations . Within the spiral bulk , dislocation dynamics – i . e . , activity at the tips – mediate both spiral 11 shape ﬂuctuations and material ﬂux , and are therefore a useful reduced order description . In the proceeding sections , we model a spiral on a polar - coordinate lattice and show that we can precisely enumerate all the possible rules of tip interactions . Endowed with these rules , we can then predict the ﬂux of material in a spiral as a function of reversal frequency . We focus on spiral dynamics below the threshold at which energy - dependent reversals become important . In fact , we go one step further and work in a limit where reversal frequencies are not modulated by external stresses , and aim to understand how a simple stochastic reversal process aﬀects and reproduces the material ﬂux observed in experiment . It has been shown that rod - shaped bacteria are able to control their collective formations by tuning their reversal frequencies . 43 , 44 The collective behavior of gliding , elongated bacteria is dominated by nematic alignment through mechanical collision and by reversal dynamics , which dictates the run - lengths that organisms can make before switching direction . Similar concepts apply to the geometry of a spiral , where reversal frequency aﬀects the movement of material in the system by either enhancing or decreasing the frequency of tip interactions . Hence , reversal frequency can be considered a parameter to optimize the search of space , which bacteria are known to regulate in response to environmental cues such as light and the availability of nutrients . 43 , 45 , 46 The question of how reversal dynamics aﬀects the inter - nal organization of material is therefore interesting from both an ecological and geometric perspective . Dislocations on polar grids as a reduced order model for tip interactions Material ﬂux in a spiral is governed by how tips interact with other tips within the densely packed spiral bulk . We show in this section that it is possible to enumerate all the tip - interaction rules to predict material ﬂux in a spiral . Moving forward , we denote the leading tip of a ﬁlament with a “ + ” symbol and trailing tips as “ – ” . As the ﬁlament moves , the 12 leading tip “adds” material as it passes through a cross section at θ , while the trailing tip “subtracts” material ( Fig . 4A ) . In addition , because we are concerned only with the ordering of material in a spiral , without loss of generality we ﬁx the inner boundary of the spiral and allow only the upper boundary to ﬂuctuate , with the radius of the inner boundary set to the average radius of the steady state spiral center . This simplifying assumption allows us to position the channels in which tips can move at discrete radii located at intervals set by the ﬁlament width ( Fig . 4A ) . As tips move in circular channels , they can interact via collision events or adhesion forces that cause them to move into other lanes . Because of the ﬁxed lower boundary in our model , when two tips collide there is a 50 % chance for either of the plus tips to get bumped up a channel ( that neither tip is allowed to move down a channel does not aﬀect the topological ordering of ﬁlaments ) . To ensure that the lengths of each ﬁlament remain constant even as tips hop between lanes , we update the leading tips according to an average linear velocity of 1 µ m / s , and update the trailing tips only when doing so does not cause the ﬁlament length to increase ( see Supplementary Information for implementation details ) . We now enumerate all the possible rules of tip interactions on a polar lattice . Let us ﬁrst consider collision events between tips moving in opposite directions . Since every tip is endowed with type ( plus or minus ) and direction ( CW or CCW ) , there are four possible ﬂavors of tips : { ( + , CCW ) , ( + , CW ) , ( − , CCW ) , ( − , CW ) } . Given these ﬂavors , there are four unique pairs of colliding tips moving in opposite directions : { ( + , CCW ) , ( + , CW ) } , { ( + , CCW ) , ( − , CW ) } , { ( + , CW ) , ( − , CCW ) } , and { ( − , CCW ) , ( − , CW ) } . The ﬁrst of these pairs corresponds to a collision between the plus tips of two oppositely moving ﬁlaments , as depicted in the ﬁrst row of Fig . 4B , i . For such an event , it is equally likely for either the CW - moving or CCW - moving tip to get pushed to the outside of the other . Collisions between the following two pairs { ( + , CCW ) , ( − , CW ) } , { ( + , CW ) , ( − , CCW ) } are mirror reﬂections of each other , and for simplicity we depict one of them in the second 13 row of Fig . 4B , i . Note that the collision between oppositely moving tips of opposite type is constrained by geometry , and the result of the collision is therefore deterministic – the minus tip must be pushed into the outer channel . Collision events between the ﬁnal pair { ( − , CCW ) , ( − , CW ) } is geometrically impossible to achieve in 2D , for it would require the two ﬁlament bodies to intersect . Thus , Fig . 4B , i depicts all collision events between pairs of oppositely moving tips . Now let us consider collisions between pairs of tips moving in the same direction . There are six possibilities : { ( + , CW ) , ( + , CW ) } , { ( + , CW ) , ( − , CW ) } , { ( − , CW ) , ( − , CW ) } , and their CCW mirror reﬂections . Schematics of these collision events are shown in Fig . 4B , ii . In order for tips moving in the same direction to collide , they must be moving at diﬀerent speeds ( the double arrow in Fig . 4B , ii labels the faster moving tip ) . In both our simulation and in experiment , the instantaneous speeds of individual tips is not a constant , and hence it is possible to achieve collisions between tips moving in the same direction ( see SI for details ) . As with Fig . 4B , i , the top row of Fig . 4B , ii is the only stochastic event , whereas the bottom row is deterministic due to geometric constraints . Finally , we consider tip interaction rules due to adhesion forces . The presence of adhesion between neighboring ﬁlaments enforces the closure of gaps that appear within a spiral due to the motion of trailing tips that subtract material as they move ( Fig . 3D ) . The left - hand side of Fig . 4B , iii shows what happens when a minus tip in a lower channel passes tips moving in upper channels . When faster moving tips move over ( on top of ) a minus tip , this corresponds to encountering the beginning of an edge dislocation , which causes the tips to move up a channel . Conversely , when slower moving tips slide behind a minus tip , this corresponds to a disappearing layer of material , and so tips merge down one lane . At no point are gaps created in the lattice during this process . A complementary set of rules for plus tips are listed on the right - hand side of Fig . 4B , iii . We have thus enumerated all possible rules of interaction between moving tips in a polar coordinate grid . In the next section , we implement these rules in silico to understand how 14 the internal ﬁlament organization within a spiral varies with reversal frequency . Material organization vs . reversal frequency To gain intuition for how reversal rates aﬀect ﬁlament organization in a spiral , it is useful to think of the extremes of inﬁnite and zero reversal frequency . The former case will lead to ﬁlaments oscillating in place , and it is obvious that material ﬂux will be minimal . The case of zero reversal frequency is more interesting : at long times , the spiral architecture will evolve to a stable conﬁguration that cannot support any new ﬁlament swaps even though ﬁlaments are actively moving . The schematic in Fig . 4C depicts what happens when two oppositely moving ﬁlaments begin to interweave due to a tip - collision event . Once the inner and outer ﬁlaments swap position , the two ﬁlaments cannot exchange again without reversal , for the ﬁlaments tips are now topologically prohibited from colliding and interweaving ( Fig . 4C , green circle ) . In the absence of reversal , the set of allowable tip interactions has shrunk , such that only lane merges become possible and tip - collisions are excluded . We thus posit that an optimal reversal frequency might exist that maximizes material ﬂux in a spiral . Figs . 4D , E show the results of our simulations ( modelled after the largest tracked spiral shown in Fig . 2A , see also Movie S12 ) at four diﬀerent reversal frequencies λ , all separated by an order of magnitude . We can measure the amount of material ﬂux in the system by representing the spiral at each time point as a connectivity graph , where each node is a ﬁlament and an edge between nodes signify that the ﬁlaments are touching in adjacent channels ( Fig 4F ) . Speciﬁcally ( though not shown in the ﬁgure ) , whether a ﬁlament is an inside or outside neighbor is recorded separately , such that ﬁlament swaps are detected . The hamming distance is then computed between the adjacency matrix of a graph at time t with the graph at time 0 . Figure 4G plots the hamming distances for experiment and simulation , which is repeated in triplicates for each value of λ . The average hamming distance reached is then plotted in Fig . 4H , which shows that the lowest reversal frequency 15 ( λ = 0 . 0006 min − 1 ) exhibits the least amount of material exchange , congruent with our intuition . At λ = 0 . 6 min − 1 we observe that the slope of the curve has changed sign . For λ → ∞ we expect the amount of material ﬂux to approach 0 , and so the fact that the curve in Fig . 4H reaches a maximum and begins to decline is again congruent with our intuition . By generalizing the schematic in Fig . 4C to an arbitrary number of ﬁlaments , one can prove that in the absence of reversal , a spiral will naturally phase separate into two bands : one that is clockwise - moving , and another that is counter - clockwise moving . If we were to compute the correlation in direction between ﬁlaments as a function of distance ( excluding self - interactions between ﬁlaments with winding number > 0 ) , we would expect in the per - fectly phase - separated case a correlation that equals + 1 for small inter - ﬁlament distances and - 1 for large inter - ﬁlament distances . The exact location at which this function hits zero depends on the width of each band . When reversal frequency is nonzero , the spiral will no longer phase separate into two distinct bands , and we expect the direction correlation function to reﬂect this change . Fig . 5 depicts the direction correlation graphs for both experiment and simulation ( as well as the corresponding kymographs , where each ﬁlament is now labelled by velocity ) . As expected , the simulation with the smallest reversal frequency has the clearest correlation trend that decreases from + 1 to - 1 ( Fig . 5E ) . Surprisingly , however , the simulation that most closely resembles the experimental result has a value of reversal frequency that is two orders of magnitude higher than what is measured experimentally ( Fig . 5D ) . The distribution of average reversal frequency ( Fig . 2C , blue ) has a range of ( 0 . 1min − 1 , 1 . 39min − 1 ) and mean 0 . 66 min − 1 . Already at a rate of 0 . 06 min − 1 , the signature of positive correlations at short lengths and negative at long lengths is wiped out ( Fig . 5C ) . We posited that perhaps a simple poisson process with constant reversal frequency for all ﬁlaments was too simple to reproduce the observed correlations . Fig . 2C , blue shows that there is a length dependence for average reversal rates . In addition , plotting the distribution of dwell - times ( times in between reversal ) for all ﬁlaments reveals a heavy - tail , suggesting 16 that ﬁlaments have an enhanced probability of making extremely long - runs before reversal ( Fig . S8 ) . This is further reﬂected in the histograms of instantaneous velocities broken down by individual ﬁlaments , some of which exhibit signiﬁcant skew in one direction versus another ( Fig . S9 ) . We thus ran two more simulations where we implemented length - dependent reversal rates in one , and sampled directly from the dwell - time distribution in the other . Neither simulations were able to reproduce the directional correlations , providing strong evidence that self - organization based on kinematics alone does not appropriately account for all interaction rules ( Fig . S10 ) . Biological feedback mechanisms which respond to bending or shear forces from neighboring ﬁlaments , for example , could be an important regulatory mechanism by which ﬁlaments modify their direction of motion . 47 Our simple reduced - order model suggests that these second - order eﬀects are important , and coupling elasticity and mechanical stress to reversal dynamics is an interesting avenue of future work . Geometric chirality and topological traps We conclude this manuscript with an interesting discovery that arises from the geometry of long , wound ﬁlaments . In the previous sections , we explored how reversal dynamics aﬀects the degree of material reorganization in a spiral . In this section , we discuss an important property which can place limits on material movement , a property we call geometric chirality . Fig . 6B and 6E show the kymographs of ﬁlament position for the two tracked spirals in Figs . 6A , D . Most notably , tracking the motion of the dark red spiral in Fig . 6B over time shows that it nearly weaves all the way from the inside to the outside . On the other hand , the kymograph in Fig . 6E shows distinct boundaries across which material does not appear to cross ( black dashed lines ) . Compared to the second spiral , material in the ﬁrst is more ﬂuid and able to traverse the entire bulk . To understand if this occurred by chance or due to an underlying mechanism , we came across an interesting observation . Tracing the length of the bright red ﬁlament in Fig . 6D ( which forms the outermost barrier at R 3 ) from its inside 17 tip to its outside tip shows that it winds geometrically in the counter - clockwise direction ( Fig . S11 ) . Here we deﬁne this ﬁlament to have CCW geometric chirality . Notably , tracing the length of any multiply - wound ﬁlament at R > R 3 shows that they all have clockwise geometric chiralities . What happens when two ﬁlaments of opposite geometric chirality are wrapped around each other ? In this scenario , the two ﬁlaments are topologically locked from inter - digitating . Fig . 6H shows a cartoon schematic of this situation , where the two colliding tips ( the outer tip of the inner ﬁlament , and the inner tip of the outer ﬁlament ) are labelled . When a collision event happens , the purple tip remains on the outside of the green tip , preventing the ﬁlaments from interweaving . This is true no matter what direction the two ﬁlaments are gliding . Two adjacent ﬁlaments of opposite geometric chirality therefore form a topological trap , preventing the ﬂux of material through them . In Figs . 6C , F we now label the ﬁlaments of each spiral by geometric chirality ( the unlabeled ﬁlaments have undeﬁned geometric chiralities due to the fact that the winding number is less than one ) . As expected , the spiral in the upper panel has uniform CCW - wound ﬁlaments , and material is free to move throughout the bulk of the entire spiral . The second spiral , on the other hand , exhibits alternating regions of CW and CCW wound ﬁlaments . The boundaries of these regions correspond exactly to the radial distances across which material cannot ﬂow ( see Movie S13 ) . Geometric chirality can thus limit material ﬂux altogether – two adjacent ﬁlaments of opposite geometric chirality give rise to a barrier across which material cannot enter or escape , and this so - called topological trap arises naturally from the geometry of ﬁlaments with winding number > 1 . We note for the sake of completeness that the spiral in Fig . 2 , after which our simulations were modelled , do not have topological traps within the spiral bulk , and as such do not impact the results in Figs . 4 and 5 . We view these traps as not only an interesting topological property that arises naturally from the geometry of long and wound ﬁlaments , but also a mechanism by which to program the internal organization of active spirals . 18 Discussion Our current work focuses on two - dimensional entangled spirals that form naturally in soft conﬁnement . We explicitly choose to study structures where no material is entering or exiting the spiral in order to understand both the dynamics and stability of these patterns . By utilizing dim and uniform lighting conditions , we avoid any signiﬁcant growth in these ﬁlaments during observations as well as any phototaxic behaviors that would bias motility patterns . Our single ﬁlament tracking reveals the rich dynamics of individual ﬁlaments that un - dergo radial ﬂux and directional reversals , all the while the overall spiral structure remains stable . In addition , the presence of adhesion forces ensure that the spiral bulk remains as a single conﬂuent layer , allowing us to model a spiral as a system of active dislocations moving in a polar coordinate lattice . Our simple model of stochastic reversals suggests the presence of force feedback mechanisms at play which may regulate bacterial reversal dy - namics . Cyanobacteria ﬁlaments can possibly sense mechanical parameters such as forces , conﬁnement pressure or bending beyond a certain radius of curvature . Coupling energetics to reversal events to build a model that captures the mechanobiological link between induced stress in ﬁlaments and their dynamics is an important avenue of further research . Other avenues of future work include exploring how this entangled structure can respond to external cues . Such experiments include using light as a parameter to perturb the forma - tion of the spiral structures by exploiting phototaxis . In addition , sonication techniques can be used to tune average ﬁlament lengths ( ﬁlaments that mechanically fracture continue to live as two separate ﬁlaments ) , potentially giving rise to diﬀerent patterns . Finally , we conclude our observations with the discovery of a topological trap – a char - acteristic unique to long ﬁlaments capable of winding more than once . No matter their direction of motion , two ﬁlaments of opposite geometric chirality will never be able to in - terweave , forming a barrier to material ﬂux . Reversal frequency and geometric chirality are therefore two parameters by which one can control the organization of material within a spi - 19 ral . We hope that the concept of a topological trap stabilizing a biological pattern will ﬁnd broad utility in active matter dynamics . Taken together , our results not only shed light on an interesting geometric and biological system , but moves the needle ever so slightly towards the ultimate goal of engineering and controlling active materials . Acknowledgments We thank all members of PrakashLab for helpful discussions . We particularly thanks Haripriya Mukundarajan , for engagement in early phases of this work . X . G and M . P conceptualized this work , designed the experiments and analysis techniques used . X . G conducted all the experiment after initial support from M . P . X . G developed all the code for data analysis and simulations . All authors contributed to interpreting data , and writing the manuscript . The work was supported by a HHMI Faculty Fellowship ( M . P . ) , Bio - Hub Investigator Fellowship ( M . P . ) , Schmidt Innovation Fellowship ( M . P . ) , Moore Foundation Research Grant ( M . P . ) and NSF CCC ( DBI1548297 ( M . P . ) ) . 20 Figure 1 : Active spirals formed from ﬁlamentous Oscillatoria sp . All unlabelled scale bars show 50 µ m . ( a ) Evolution of an intial clump of ﬁlaments placed on top of an agarose gel ( total surface area 1 . 5 × 1 . 6 cm and volume 65 µ L ) and compressed with a coverslip . Over time , ﬁlaments spread out into locally aligned 2D mats . Note the emergence of spiral structures composed of wound ﬁlaments . ( b ) The upper row depicts progressively zoomed in regions of the agarose gel . The second row shows close - ups of various spirals . All images are taken over 48 hours after initial plating . 21 Figure 2 : Dynamics and statistics of an active spiral . ( A ) A still image of a spiral with each ﬁlament labelled a unique color . A total of 59 ﬁlaments are segmented and tracked for 5 hours . “X” denotes the approximate spiral center . ( B ) Spiral bulk and inner center size as a function of time shows that the spiral achieves a steady state size . ( C ) Average ﬁlament speeds and reversal frequencies as a function of ﬁlament length . Shorter ﬁlaments reverse more frequently than longer ﬁlaments , but longer ﬁlaments move with higher average speed . ( D ) Example velocity traces of 2 tracked ﬁlaments for the ﬁrst 50 minutes . The orange and blue curves correspond to the linear velocities of each individual tip on a ﬁlament . Note the presence of multiple directional reversals . ( E ) A histogram of the instantaneous speeds of all tracked ﬁlaments across all times shows a symmetric , bimodal distribution with peaks close to ± 1 µ m / s . ( F ) The number of ﬁlaments moving counter - clockwise at any given time ﬂuctuates about a mean of approximately 49 % , suggesting that the spiral object as a whole does not favor one direction over another . ( G ) In order to identify material ﬂux along the radial direction , we plot a kymograph of ﬁlament identity taken at the slice θ = 0 . The horizontal axis represents radial distance ( in µ m ) from the defect center , while the vertical axis denotes forward evolution in time . Note that multiply - wound ﬁlaments will intersect at multiple locations along R . By tracking the columns of colors in the kymograph , one can track the internal rearrangement of ﬁlaments with respect to the spiral center . As an example , the two black stars denote the initial and ﬁnal positions of a pink ﬁlament that begins close to the spiral center . ( H ) Radial position of the pink ﬁlament whenever it crosses θ = 0 as a function of time . Over the course of 5 hours , the ﬁlament traverses a radial distance of 52 µ m . 22 Figure 3 : Tip dynamics and adhesion forces drive shape ﬂuctuations in an active spiral . All unlabelled scale bars show 20 µ m . ( A ) Individual ﬁlaments are skeletonized and the value of E bend / α is plotted . For ease of visualization , the max value of E bend / α is set to (cid:104) E bend / α (cid:105) + 3 ∗ σ E , of which 98 % of values fall under . The burgers vector always points radially ( inset ) . ( B ) The total bending energy of spiral structures plotted as a function of time reveals that the spirals achieve a constant size about which they ﬂuctuate . ( C ) Examples of paired and unpaired dislocations . Note that tips can switch from paired to unpaired states , which result in tips colliding and ﬁlaments interweaving . ( D ) Gaps in the spiral bulk can be segmented . Their total area as a function of time shows that gaps make up < 3 % of the spiral mass . This is a result of adhesion forces in the system , which tend to suppress gap formation ( bottom panel ) . ( E , F ) Spiral shape ﬂuctuations are correlated with the presence of dislocations . ( E ) Sections labelled in red correspond to regions where the change in width ∆ W ( θ ) > ∆ R between one frame and the next , while sections labelled in blue correspond to regions where ∆ W < ∆ R . ( F ) The fraction of events with a dislocation in a neighborhood θ ± ∆ θ . The blue curves denote events where ∆ W < ∆ R , while the red curves denote events where ∆ W > ∆ R . Each of the diﬀerent markers correspond to a diﬀerent tracked spiral . We see from these curves that the presence of dislocations are more strongly correlated with boundary displacement events . 23 Figure 4 : Tip interaction rules on a polar lattice predict material ﬂux . ( A ) Filament tips live on a discretized polar coordinate lattice , and interact via tip interaction rules listed in ( B ) . ( B , i ) Collision events between pairs of tips moving in the opposite direction . Only collision events between two plus tips are stochastic , with either tip having equal probability of being bumped up a channel . In the second case , the minus tip is constrained by geometry to be bumped up . ( B , ii ) Collision events between pairs of tips moving in the same direction . In this case , the collision event between the plus and minus tip is stochastic , and the remaining two are deterministic due to geometric constraints . ( B , iii ) Lane shifts of tips due to adhesion forces . On the left hand side , a minus tip in a lower channel causes tips above it to either shift up or down a lane depending on whether those tips move over or behind the minus tip . A complementary set of rules for plus tips moving in a lower channel is shown on the right hand side . ( C ) Cartoon schematic showing that in the absence of reversal , two oppositely moving ﬁlaments ( with the same geometric chirality ) will reach a steady state conﬁguration . ( D ) Simulation of tip interaction rules at time 0 , designed to mimic the experimental conﬁguration in Fig . 2A . 46 of the original 59 ﬁlaments are included in the simulation ( the shortest 13 ﬁlaments with lengths < 50 µ m are excluded ) . ( E ) Filament identity kymographs taken at θ = 0 for four diﬀerent reversal frequencies . ( F ) Each spiral snapshot can be converted into a connectivity graph , where nodes represent ﬁlaments and edges exist between ﬁlaments that touch due to being in adjacent channels . An edge can only exist if the two ﬁlaments touch for an angle of at least 14 ◦ . ( G ) Hamming distance as a function of time for various reversal dynamics . ( H ) Average steady state values of hamming distance show an optimum value with respect to reversal frequency . 24 Figure 5 : Filament direction correlation plots . ( A ) Snapshot of the spiral where each ﬁlament is labelled by direction of motion ( Red = CCW ; Blue = CW ) . ( B - E ) Left : Direction correlation as a function of inter - ﬁlament distance ( x - axis plotted in multiples of ﬁlament body - widths ) . Right : direction kymograph taken at θ = 0 . Comparing experimental data in ( B ) to simulation results ( C - E ) shows that a reversal frequency of λ = 0 . 006 min − 1 most closely reproduces experimental results . However , this value is two orders of magnitude smaller than the average measured reversal rate ( Fig . 2C , blue ) , suggesting that biological feedback mechanisms are at play which regulate ﬁlament motility . These higher order eﬀects are not captured by our simplistic model . 25 Figure 6 : Topological traps formed by ﬁlaments of opposite geometric chirality . All unla - belled scale bars show 20 µ m . Two labelled spirals ( A , D ) and their respective kymographs in ( B , E ) . The fact that material ﬂux is limited to the regions between the dotted lines in ( E ) is explained by the geometric chiralities of the ﬁlaments within each spiral . ( C , F ) The two spirals now labelled by geometric chirality , deﬁned as the physical winding of the ﬁlament as you trace its length from the inner tip ( see LEGEND inset ) . The spiral in ( A ) is uniformly composed of CCW wound ﬁlaments , whereas the spiral in ( D ) has alternating regions of CCW and CW ﬁlaments . ( G , H ) Schematics showing how geometric chirality limits radial ﬂux . 26 References ( 1 ) Falk , M . J . ; Alizadehyazdi , V . ; Jaeger , H . ; Murugan , A . Learning to control active matter . Phys . Rev . Res . 2021 , 3 , 033291 . ( 2 ) Ross , T . D . ; Lee , H . J . ; Qu , Z . ; Banks , R . A . ; Phillips , R . ; Thomson , M . Controlling organization and forces in active matter through optically deﬁned boundaries . Nature 2019 , 572 , 224 – 229 . ( 3 ) Hud , N . V . ; Downing , K . H . Cryoelectron microscopy of λ phage DNA condensates in vitreous ice : the ﬁne structure of DNA toroids . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2001 , 98 , 14925 – 14930 . ( 4 ) Chiaruttini , N . ; Redondo - Morata , L . ; Colom , A . ; Humbert , F . ; Lenz , M . ; Scheuring , S . ; Roux , A . Relaxation of loaded ESCRT - III spiral springs drives membrane deformation . Cell 2015 , 163 , 866 – 879 . ( 5 ) Patra , P . ; Beyer , K . ; Jaiswal , A . ; Battista , A . ; Rohr , K . ; Frischknecht , F . ; Schwarz , U . S . Collective migration reveals mechanical ﬂexibility of malaria parasites . Nature Physics 2022 , 18 , 586 – 594 . ( 6 ) Lobo , E . P . ; Delic , N . C . ; Richardson , A . ; Raviraj , V . ; Halliday , G . M . ; Di Girolamo , N . ; Myerscough , M . R . ; Lyons , J . G . Self - organized centripetal movement of corneal ep - ithelium in the absence of external cues . Nature communications 2016 , 7 , 1 – 8 . ( 7 ) Sellwood , J . A . ; Masters , K . L . Spirals in galaxies . Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 2022 , 60 , 73 – 120 . ( 8 ) Kruse , K . ; Joanny , J . - F . ; J¨ulicher , F . ; Prost , J . ; Sekimoto , K . Generic theory of active polar gels : a paradigm for cytoskeletal dynamics . The European Physical Journal E 2005 , 16 , 5 – 16 . ( 9 ) Schopf , J . W . Ecology of cyanobacteria II ; Springer , 2012 ; pp 15 – 36 . 27 ( 10 ) Dumont , S . ; Prakash , M . Emergent mechanics of biological structures . Molecular Biol - ogy of the Cell 2014 , 25 , 3461 – 3465 . ( 11 ) Keber , F . C . ; Loiseau , E . ; Sanchez , T . ; DeCamp , S . J . ; Giomi , L . ; Bowick , M . J . ; Marchetti , M . C . ; Dogic , Z . ; Bausch , A . R . Topology and dynamics of active nematic vesicles . Science 2014 , 345 , 1135 – 1139 . ( 12 ) Sanchez , T . ; Chen , D . T . ; DeCamp , S . J . ; Heymann , M . ; Dogic , Z . Spontaneous motion in hierarchically assembled active matter . Nature 2012 , 491 , 431 – 434 . ( 13 ) Huber , L . ; Suzuki , R . ; Kr¨uger , T . ; Frey , E . ; Bausch , A . Emergence of coexisting ordered states in active matter systems . Science 2018 , 361 , 255 – 258 . ( 14 ) Schaller , V . ; Weber , C . ; Semmrich , C . ; Frey , E . ; Bausch , A . R . Polar patterns of driven ﬁlaments . Nature 2010 , 467 , 73 – 77 . ( 15 ) Zhang , R . ; Redford , S . A . ; Ruijgrok , P . V . ; Kumar , N . ; Mozaﬀari , A . ; Zemsky , S . ; Dinner , A . R . ; Vitelli , V . ; Bryant , Z . ; Gardel , M . L . , et al . Spatiotemporal control of liquid crystal structure and dynamics through activity patterning . Nature materials 2021 , 20 , 875 – 882 . ( 16 ) Balchand , S . K . ; Mann , B . J . ; Wadsworth , P . The Mitotic Spindle ; Springer , 2016 ; pp 3 – 14 . ( 17 ) Schmitt , M . S . ; Colen , J . ; Sala , S . ; Devany , J . ; Seetharaman , S . ; Gardel , M . L . ; Oakes , P . W . ; Vitelli , V . Zyxin is all you need : machine learning adherent cell me - chanics . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2303 . 00176 2023 , ( 18 ) Halfen , L . N . ; Castenholz , R . W . Gliding motility in the blue - green alga Oscillatoria princeps1 . Journal of Phycology 1971 , 7 , 133 – 145 . ( 19 ) Doostmohammadi , A . ; Ign´es - Mullol , J . ; Yeomans , J . M . ; Sagu´es , F . Active nematics . Nature communications 2018 , 9 , 1 – 13 . 28 ( 20 ) Dell’Arciprete , D . ; Blow , M . ; Brown , A . ; Farrell , F . ; Lintuvuori , J . S . ; McVey , A . ; Marenduzzo , D . ; Poon , W . C . A growing bacterial colony in two dimensions as an active nematic . Nature communications 2018 , 9 , 1 – 9 . ( 21 ) Isele - Holder , R . E . ; Elgeti , J . ; Gompper , G . Self - propelled worm - like ﬁlaments : spon - taneous spiral formation , structure , and dynamics . Soft matter 2015 , 11 , 7181 – 7190 . ( 22 ) Duman , ¨O . ; Isele - Holder , R . E . ; Elgeti , J . ; Gompper , G . Collective dynamics of self - propelled semiﬂexible ﬁlaments . Soft matter 2018 , 14 , 4483 – 4494 . ( 23 ) Kurjahn , M . ; Deka , A . ; Girot , A . ; Abbaspour , L . ; Klumpp , S . ; Lorenz , M . ; B¨aumchen , O . ; Karpitschka , S . Quantifying gliding forces of ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria by self - buckling . 2023 . ( 24 ) Faluweki , M . K . ; Cammann , J . ; Mazza , M . G . ; Goehring , L . Active Spaghetti : Collec - tive Organization in Cyanobacteria . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2301 . 11667 2023 , ( 25 ) Sumino , Y . ; Nagai , K . H . ; Shitaka , Y . ; Tanaka , D . ; Yoshikawa , K . ; Chat´e , H . ; Oiwa , K . Large - scale vortex lattice emerging from collectively moving microtubules . Nature 2012 , 483 , 448 – 452 . ( 26 ) Sciortino , A . ; Bausch , A . R . Pattern formation and polarity sorting of driven actin ﬁlaments on lipid membranes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2021 , 118 . ( 27 ) Joshi , A . ; Putzig , E . ; Baskaran , A . ; Hagan , M . F . The interplay between activity and ﬁlament ﬂexibility determines the emergent properties of active nematics . Soft Matter 2019 , 15 , 94 – 101 . ( 28 ) Copenhagen , K . ; Alert , R . ; Wingreen , N . S . ; Shaevitz , J . W . Topological defects pro - mote layer formation in Myxococcus xanthus colonies . Nature Physics 2021 , 17 , 211 – 215 . 29 ( 29 ) Bryant , D . A . The molecular biology of cyanobacteria ; Springer Science & Business Media , 2006 ; Vol . 1 . ( 30 ) Hoiczyk , E . ; Baumeister , W . The junctional pore complex , a prokaryotic secretion organelle , is the molecular motor underlying gliding motility in cyanobacteria . Current Biology 1998 , 8 , 1161 – 1168 . ( 31 ) Morales - Garc´ıa , A . ; Bailey , R . ; Jana , S . ; Burgess , J . The role of polymers in cross - kingdom bioadhesion . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 2019 , 374 , 20190192 . ( 32 ) Formosa - Dague , C . ; Castelain , M . ; Martin - Yken , H . ; Dunker , K . ; Dague , E . ; Slet - moen , M . The role of glycans in bacterial adhesion to mucosal surfaces : how can single - molecule techniques advance our understanding ? Microorganisms 2018 , 6 , 39 . ( 33 ) Foy , R . Interaction of temperature and light on the growth rates of two planktonic Os - cillatoria species under a short photoperiod regime . British phycological journal 1983 , 18 , 267 – 273 . ( 34 ) Wilde , A . ; Mullineaux , C . W . Light - controlled motility in prokaryotes and the problem of directional light perception . FEMS microbiology reviews 2017 , 41 , 900 – 922 . ( 35 ) Nultsch , W . ; Wenderoth , K . Partial irradiation experiments with Anabaena variabilis ( K¨utz ) . Zeitschrift f¨ur Pﬂanzenphysiologie 1983 , 111 , 1 – 7 . ( 36 ) Bergou , M . ; Wardetzky , M . ; Robinson , S . ; Audoly , B . ; Grinspun , E . ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 papers ; 2008 ; pp 1 – 12 . ( 37 ) Xie , L . ; Ko , P . ; Du , R . The mechanics of spiral springs and its application in timekeep - ing . Journal of Applied Mechanics 2014 , 81 , 034504 . ( 38 ) Marchetti , M . C . ; Joanny , J . - F . ; Ramaswamy , S . ; Liverpool , T . B . ; Prost , J . ; Rao , M . ; 30 Simha , R . A . Hydrodynamics of soft active matter . Reviews of modern physics 2013 , 85 , 1143 . ( 39 ) Giomi , L . ; Bowick , M . J . ; Mishra , P . ; Sknepnek , R . ; Cristina Marchetti , M . Defect dynamics in active nematics . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A : Math - ematical , Physical and Engineering Sciences 2014 , 372 , 20130365 . ( 40 ) Giomi , L . ; Bowick , M . J . ; Ma , X . ; Marchetti , M . C . Defect annihilation and proliferation in active nematics . Physical review letters 2013 , 110 , 228101 . ( 41 ) Amir , A . ; Nelson , D . R . Dislocation - mediated growth of bacterial cell walls . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2012 , 109 , 9833 – 9838 . ( 42 ) Shendruk , T . N . ; Doostmohammadi , A . ; Thijssen , K . ; Yeomans , J . M . Dancing discli - nations in conﬁned active nematics . Soft Matter 2017 , 13 , 3853 – 3862 . ( 43 ) Thutupalli , S . ; Sun , M . ; Bunyak , F . ; Palaniappan , K . ; Shaevitz , J . W . Directional rever - sals enable Myxococcus xanthus cells to produce collective one - dimensional streams dur - ing fruiting - body formation . Journal of The Royal Society Interface 2015 , 12 , 20150049 . ( 44 ) Liu , G . ; Patch , A . ; Bahar , F . ; Yllanes , D . ; Welch , R . D . ; Marchetti , M . C . ; Thutu - palli , S . ; Shaevitz , J . W . Self - driven phase transitions drive Myxococcus xanthus fruit - ing body formation . Physical review letters 2019 , 122 , 248102 . ( 45 ) Großmann , R . ; Peruani , F . ; B¨ar , M . Diﬀusion properties of active particles with direc - tional reversal . New Journal of Physics 2016 , 18 , 043009 . ( 46 ) Wu , Y . ; Kaiser , A . D . ; Jiang , Y . ; Alber , M . S . Periodic reversal of direction allows Myxobacteria to swarm . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2009 , 106 , 1222 – 1227 . ( 47 ) Dinet , C . ; Michelot , A . ; Herrou , J . ; Mignot , T . Linking single - cell decisions to collective 31 behaviours in social bacteria . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 2021 , 376 , 20190755 . 32 Supplementary Information I . Organism and culture The organism Oscillatoria Sp . was purchased from carolina . com and cultured in glass petri dishes in an incubator set to a temperature of 22 ◦ C . A single ﬂuorescent light tube was used to illuminate the cultures , and set to a 12 hr day - night cycle . Alga - gro Freshwater Medium , also purchased from carolina , was used to culture the cyanobacteria . II . Timelapse set up The experimental set up used for imaging consists of Oscillatoria ﬁlaments sandwiched between a 2 % agarose gel and coverslip ( see Fig . 1 , main text ) . First , one side of a 65 µ L gene frame ( 1 . 5 x 1 . 6 cm in length and width ) is stuck to the surface of a glass side . Liquid agarose is then poured into the gene frame and compressed with a coverslip to ensure that it dries as a ﬂat surface . Note that this ﬁrst coverslip is removable , as the plastic cover of the free surface of the gene frame is not yet removed . When preparing the ﬁlaments for plating on the gel , a dense clump is ﬁrst placed on a glass slide . A pipette tip is then used to break up dense ﬁlament clumps , creating a more dilute sample with which to plate the gel . It is imperative that before the coverslip is set permanently on the gene frame , that enough water is allowed to evaporate . If too much water is trapped between the gel and coverslip , the ﬁlaments in between will not gain enough traction to glide . After waiting a few minutes for some of the water to evaporate , the plastic cover of the gene frame is removed and a fresh coverslip is laid carefully down . The entire system is thus sealed , preventing subsequent evaporation . Imaging is done under uniform , low - light conditions using a 20x objective lens . 33 III . Segmentation and Tracking Segmentation and tracking are two separate algorithmic steps needed to track the motion of individual ﬁlaments . Segmentation is essentially an image classiﬁcation problem , and entails identifying ﬁlament edges in every frame . Tracking is then built on top of the segmented im - ages , where individual segments are mapped to their corresponding identities in consecutive frames . Segmentation Segmentation was performed using a combination of Matlab’s image processing toolbox and a convolution - neural - network architecture called the UNET [ 1 ] . Speciﬁcally , the repository used was downloaded from https : / / github . com / zhixuhao / unet [ 2 ] . Classical image process - ing operations were ﬁrst performed in matlab , which then provided training images for the UNET . Though Matlab’s segmentation was decent , it was not robust against non - uniform imaging conditions or ﬂuctuations in the focal plane , which frequently occur during long timelapses . The remaining segmentation errors from the UNET outputs were manually corrected for in Adobe Illustrator . Tracking Given the segmentation , ﬁlaments in each frame were tracked using a greedy algorithm which maximized the score : s tij = overlap ( f ti , f t + 1 j ) ∆ L ij . Here , f ti denotes the segmented ﬁlament i in frame t , while f t + 1 j denotes a segmented ﬁlament j in the next frame , t + 1 . The greater the area of overlap between the two ﬁlaments , the higher the score . On the other hand , since ﬁlaments do not change in length from frame to frame , ∆ L ij penalizes assigning ﬁlaments with large discrepancies in length . IV . Individual Tip Dynamics In this section we discuss a subtlety of individual tip dynamics which plays a role both in understanding the spiral system and in implementing our simulations . We have shown that ﬁlament lengths grow negligibly over the course of our experiments , and so the constancy of 34 ﬁlament lengths is an important constraint . Intuitively , if one imagines an unwound ﬁlament gliding on a gel , one would expect that the two ﬁlament tips move at equal linear velocities . This implies then , in the case of a wound ﬁlament , that the angular velocities of the tips vary as a function of tip radial position ( speciﬁcally , ω ∼ 1 / R ) , where v = 1 µ m / s is the average measured tip linear velocity ( Fig . 2E , main text ) . Indeed , plotting the instantaneous angular velocities of the individual tips as a function of R shows that the data on average follows this trend ( Fig . S12B , S13B ) . If we return to the ﬁlament length constraint , however , this intuition breaks down . Take , for example , the innermost yellow ﬁlament of data set 06 - 30 - 2020 - xy1 ( Fig . S1B ) . This ﬁlament has winding number = 4 , and does not change radial position throughout the entire time lapse ( Movie S3 ) . Suppose the two tips move at constant linear velocity v , then this would imply that ω i = V / R i > ω o = V / R o , where ω i and ω o denote the inner and outer angular tip velocities , respectively . However , the yellow ﬁlament does not change radial position and moreover , tracking reveals that the two tips remain at the same radial coordinate even as the ﬁlament traverses multiples of 2 π . Then ω i > ω o would mean that the ﬁlament is increasing in length as it winds ! This contradiction suggests that the two ﬁlament tips must instead be moving at constant angular velocities , which is corroborated by the data in Fig . S13C , D ( bottom right hand panel ) . Hence , this teaches us that though on average tips move at linear velocities of 1 um / s , individual tips on a wound ﬁlament can have discrepancies in linear speeds to satisfy length constraint . These discrepancies may arise from radial slippage ( so that the velocity is not always tangential ) and adhesion fores ( that allow a wound ﬁlament to glide as though it is rotating like a solid body ) . V . Simulation Details In our simulation framework , we model active spirals as a system of self - propelled tips on a polar coordinate lattice . Each tip is thereby constrained to move on circular tracks , and traverse in either the CW or CCW directions . As explained in the main text , tips can shift 35 up or down into neighboring lanes according to the rules depicted in Fig . 4 ( main text ) . There is an additional subtly owing to how the tips move in the angular coordinate . The plus ( leading ) and minus ( trailing ) tips of a ﬁlament must move in a way that keeps the ﬁlament length constant , as we work in the limit of 0 growth . However , the plus and minus tips of a ﬁlament need not lie in the same channel ( i . e . they can have diﬀerent radial coordinates ) . If the two tips move at the same linear velocity , this would imply diﬀerent angular velocities , and hence a change in ﬁlament length ( see section IV above for a more detailed explanation ) . Hence , there is ambiguity in terms of how to deﬁne the instantaneous velocities at each tip . The simplest method to satisfy the ﬁlament length constraint , and the one implemented in our simulations , is to update the angular coordinate of the plus tips according to ∆ θ = ( v / R ) ∆ t , where v = 1 µ m / s is the linear velocity of the ﬁlament and R the radial coordinate , and update the minus tip such that ∆ L = 0 , with L the ﬁlament length . In other words , the minus tip simply “catches up” to the plus tip , keeping the ﬁlament length unchanged . Fig . S14 shows that ﬁlament lengths indeed remain constant over the course of each of the simulations . Finally , the radial coordinate of the tips are updated according to the rules prescribed in Fig . 4B of the main text . 36 VI . Supplementary ﬁgures Figure S1 : ( A - F ) 6 tracked spirals and their descriptions . Figure S2 : Filaments experience minimal growth under low light conditions . ( A - F ) Lengths vs . time of each tracked ﬁlament for the 6 spiral structures , with the lettering in this ﬁgure corresponding to the lettering in Fig . S1 . The perceived length changes in ( D ) and ( F ) are due to ﬁlaments gliding in and out of the ﬁeld of view . 37 Figure S3 : Filament tips can move in opposite directions for brief periods of time . ( A ) The inner - most , tightly wound ﬁlament depicted in blue , with inner and outer tips labelled in red and green , respectively . The labelled ﬁlament is 3305 µm long . ( B ) The net angle traced by each tip ( left ) and the tip velocities as a function of time ( right ) . Note that the two tips move in diﬀerent directions at times t < 5 min . ( C ) The average angular and linear speeds of each tip shows that there is a large discrepancy in the angular speeds while the linear speeds are approximately the same . The green ( outside ) tip moves at an angular speed that is only 30 % that of the red tip . ( D ) The outer most tip is depicted in blue with the inner and outer tips labelled accordingly . ( E ) Same as in ( B ) . Note that the two tips move much more synchronously than in ( B ) . ( F ) The average linear and angular velocities show very little discrepancy , owing to the fact that the two tips sit at approximately the same radial distance from the spiral center . 38 Figure S4 : ( A - F ) Gaps segmented from each of the 6 tracked spirals . Figure S5 : Radial slippage of ﬁlaments in a spiral helps drive spiral shape relaxation ( the spiral maintains steady state size ) . ( A ) The red and blue regions denote the locations of the inner and outer boundaries R 1 and R 2 , respectively , over the course of approximately 50 minutes . The dark red line overlaid in the red region shows a snapshot of the innermost ﬁlament . Hence , the boundaries are capable of radial slippage of distances thicker than a single ﬁlament width . ( B ) ( Top panel ) Kymograph of ﬁlament identities at θ = 0 over time . Note that from t > 178 min , the inner most ﬁlament remains constant ( labelled bright red ) . ( Bottom panel ) From t > 178 min , the inner most ( bright red ) ﬁlament continues to wind clockwise , yet the inner central area of the spiral does not net decrease . 39 Figure S6 : Oscillations in spiral ( Fig . S1 ( E ) data set ) bending energy corresponds to reversal events of the innermost ﬁlament . Figure S7 : At high bending energies , ﬁlament reversal frequency appears positively cor - related with bending energy . ( A ) Average ﬁlament bending energy vs . average reversal frequency are plotted for all ﬁlaments with average bending energy E bend / α > 4 . There appears to be a trend where the ﬁlaments reverse more frequently if more tightly wound . ( B ) The same curve is plotted for all ﬁlaments in the spiral of Fig . S1 ( A ) , which is also the least tightly wound spiral . In this case there is an inverse relationship between bending energy and reversal frequency , and the shape of this curve closely mimics that of Fig . 2C , blue . In other words , shorter ﬁlaments tend to have less bending energy and reverse the most frequently . 40 Figure S8 : The dwell times ( time in between reversal events ) for all ﬁlaments across all tracked spirals . Y - axis is in log - scale . The distribution shows a heavy tail , meaning there is an enhanced probability of long runs . Figure S9 : Speed histograms for individual ﬁlaments in the Fig . S1 ( A ) dataset are plotted . Note that some velocity distributions show signiﬁcant skew in one direction versus another . 41 Figure S10 : The directionality correlation plotted for simulations run by ( A ) introducing empirically measured length - dependent rates of reversal , and ( B ) by sampling dwell times from the empirically measured dwell - time distribution . Neither situation is able to reproduce the directionality - correlation observed experimentally . Figure S11 : The two ﬁlaments that form the boundary of a topological trap are highlighted . The inner ( red ) ﬁlament winds geometrically CCW , while the outer ( purple ) ﬁlament winds geometrically CW , together forming a barrier across which material cannot ﬂow . 42 Figure S12 : Individual tip dynamics for the Fig . S1 ( E ) data set show that tips on the same ﬁlament move at the same linear velocity . ( A ) Each of the 9 ﬁlaments within the spiral are individually highlighted . ( B ) The instantaneous angular tip velocities as a function of radial coordinate shows that it roughly follows ω ∼ 1 / R , where v = 1 µ m / s is the average linear velocity of the tips . ( C ) Histogram of tip linear velocities for each of the 9 ﬁlaments ( each panel corresponds to one of the ﬁlaments in ( A ) ) . The histograms for tips on the same ﬁlament are approximately overlapping . ( D ) Histogram of tip angular velocities show that angular velocities can have very diﬀerent distributions for tips on the same ﬁlament . 43 Figure S13 : Individual tip dynamics for the Fig . S1 ( B ) data set show that , in contrast to Fig . S12 , tips on the same ﬁlament tend to move at the same angular velocity . ( A ) Each of the 4 ﬁlaments within the spiral are individually highlighted . ( B ) The instantaneous angular tip velocities as a function of radial coordinate shows that it roughly follows ω ∼ 1 / R , where v = 1 µ m / s is the average linear velocity of the tips . ( C ) Histogram of tip linear velocities shows that tips on the same ﬁlament can have diﬀerent distributions , so to maintain a constant angular velocity . ( D ) Histogram of tip angular velocities show that tips on the same ﬁlament have overlapping distributions . 44 Figure S14 : Filament lengths remain constant for each of the 6 simulation set ups . 45 Movie 1 : This movie shows the formation of spirals after initial plating on an agarose gel . Movies 2 - 7 : Movies 2 - 7 show 6 segmented and tracked spirals . Every ﬁlament is individu - ally labelled within the spirals . Movie 8 : This movie shows the two tips of the long , innermost ﬁlament in Fig . S3A moving in opposite directions . The long ﬁlament is labelled in blue on the left hand panel , while the dynamics of the two tips ( denoted by red and green dots ) are individually shown in the right hand panel . Movie 9 : Radial ﬂux of ﬁlaments in a spiral ( data set Fig . S1 ( C ) ) . The left hand side of the movie shows the tracked spiral , while the right hand side shows how the ﬁlament kymograph ( taken at θ = 0 ) evolves over time . Movie 10 : Innermost ﬁlament of spiral ( data set Fig . S1 ( C ) ) continues winding inward without leading to net decrease in size of spiral center . Movie 11 : Spiral ( data set Fig . S1 ( C ) ) with all dislocations ( unpaired tips ) labelled . This is to illustrate that a spiral can be modelled as a system of active dislocations with climb dynamics ( movement of dislocation perpendicular to its burgers vector ) . Movie 12 : Sample simulation video , with ﬁlament conﬁgurations modelled after data set Fig . S1 ( A ) . Only ﬁlaments with length > 50 µ m are simulated , which incorporates 46 of the 59 ﬁlaments . The reversal frequency in this video is set to λ = 0 . 06 min − 1 . Movie 13 : Spiral in data set Fig . S1 ( D ) is shown with all ﬁlaments labelled by identity ( left hand side ) and all ﬁlaments labelled by geometric chirality ( right hand side ) . The boundaries where two neighboring ﬁlaments have opposite geometric chirality form topological traps , which material cannot move past . Movie 14 : The innermost ﬁlament of data set Fig . S1 ( B ) and the dynamics of its two tips shown side - by - side . The two tips move at constant angular velocity , and hence diﬀerent linear velocities . 46 SI References [ 1 ] O . Ronneberger , P . Fischer , and T . Brox , “U - net : Convolutional networks for biomed - ical image segmentation , ” in International Conference on Medical image computing and computer - assisted intervention ( Springer , 2015 ) pp . 234 – 241 . [ 2 ] zhixuhao , “Implementation of deep learning framework unet , using keras , ” https : / / github . com / zhixuhao / unet ( 2019 ) . 47