Commentary 1183 Introduction Knowledge of cell adhesion proteins and the molecules that associate with them has grown rapidly in recent years . Cadherins and integrins are involved in both bidirectional cell signaling events , and the physical linkages of cells to each other and to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . Physical adhesive linkages are crucial for the maintenance of tissue architecture and can also serve instructive roles by enabling cells to sense and respond to changes in their environments . In some cases , this occurs through translation of mechanical inputs into intracellular signals , a process known as mechanotransduction . A simple survey of adhesion - dependent cell signaling pathways reveals that many of the molecular components and functional outputs are common to several different types of adhesion . This leads to questions of how and where these signaling pathways intersect , and what functional consequences result from these interactions ? Although other adhesion molecules are likely to be involved and can be viewed as additional nodes in an overall cellular adhesive network , this review focuses on integrin - based cell – ECM interactions and cadherin - dependent cell – cell contacts because a more coherent picture of interactions between these functionally important adhesions is now emerging . Adhesive crosstalk – re - evaluation of concepts and the case for adhesive networks The term crosstalk is typically used to represent an interaction ( s ) between two or more independently initiated signaling pathways , the outcomes of which include the amplification or attenuation of individual pathways , or the initiation of new signals . In the context of signals transduced through integrins and cadherins these pathways intersect in ways that resemble more closely an integrated network rather than distinct cascades ( see Box 1 ) . Integrins and cadherins are both transmembrane adhesion receptors , have many signaling effector molecules in common , link to common scaffolding and cytoskeletal elements , and share the ability to influence crucial downstream functions , such as cell growth , survival and transcriptional activity . Owing to these common features and molecular associations , cell signaling pathways that depend on cadherins and integrins are likely to interact on multiple levels , and these interactions occur over varying time and length scales . We can distinguish such networks on the basis of both short - and long - range physical associations and cell signaling events . By these criteria we define three general modes of adhesive interactions ( Fig . 1 ) . In the most - indirect or - remote mode of adhesive interactions , signals that originate from one type of adhesion lead to a change in the functional activity of other adhesive contacts elsewhere in the cell ( Fig . 1A ) . We term this ‘long - range input – output’ signaling . For example , cell adhesion to specific ECM proteins or to neighboring cells might lead to changes in gene expression , which could include alterations in levels of adhesion molecules or other proteins involved in regulating adhesion ( Onodera et al . , 2010 ) . Alternatively , engagement or disengagement of one type of adhesion might modify the functional activities of another by effecting changes in membrane trafficking , cytoskeletal association and / or avidity or binding affinity ( Avizienyte et al . , 2002 ) . Another type of interaction between adhesions involves the convergence of independently initiated cell signaling events , often involving downstream effectors that are common to both integrin and cadherin adhesions ( Fig . 1B ) . These shared effectors include non - receptor tyrosine kinases , adaptor and scaffolding proteins , and small GTPases . In addition , cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions are also linked to the common structural elements that comprise the cytoskeleton . Actin , microtubules and intermediate filaments form distinct , but often spatially overlapping , macromolecular Summary Cell – cell and cell – extracellular - matrix ( cell – ECM ) adhesions have much in common , including shared cytoskeletal linkages , signaling molecules and adaptor proteins that serve to regulate multiple cellular functions . The term ‘adhesive crosstalk’ is widely used to indicate the presumed functional communication between distinct adhesive specializations in the cell . However , this distinction is largely a simplification on the basis of the non - overlapping subcellular distribution of molecules that are involved in adhesion and adhesion - dependent signaling at points of cell – cell and cell – substrate contact . The purpose of this Commentary is to highlight data that demonstrate the coordination and interdependence of cadherin and integrin adhesions . We describe the convergence of adhesive inputs on cell signaling pathways and cytoskeletal assemblies involved in regulating cell polarity , migration , proliferation and survival , differentiation and morphogenesis . Cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions represent highly integrated networks of protein interactions that are crucial for tissue homeostasis and the responses of individual cells to their adhesive environments . We argue that the machinery of adhesion in multicellular tissues comprises an interdependent network of cell – cell and cell – ECM interactions and signaling responses , and not merely crosstalk between spatially and functionally distinct adhesive specializations within cells . Key words : Adhesion , Cadherin , Crosstalk , Integrin , Mechanotransduction Journal of Cell Science 124 , 1183 - 1193 ©2011 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 064618 Integrins and cadherins join forces to form adhesive networks Gregory F . Weber , Maureen A . Bjerke and Douglas W . DeSimone * Department of Cell Biology , School of Medicine , University of Virginia Health System , Charlottesville , VA 22908 , USA * Author for correspondence ( dwd3m @ virginia . edu ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e assemblies . These cytoskeletal networks provide physical scaffolds that connect adhesion complexes not only proximally but also at a distance across cells and cell junctions . The lateral coupling of adhesion receptors can be viewed as a third form of interaction , which involves more short - range associations within the plane of the membrane ( Fig . 1C ) . In this instance , however , the proximal interactions of integrin and cadherin do not necessarily involve shared cytoskeletal linkages , or even cell – cell or cell – ECM engagement . Adaptor proteins , such as tetraspanins or growth factor receptors – e . g . the insulin - like growth factor 1 receptor ( IGF1R ) – can facilitate lateral associations of integrins and cadherins ( Chattopadhyay et al . , 2003 ; Canonici et al . , 2008 ) . One result of this type of interaction is that integrins promote stability of cell – cell adhesions ( Chattopadhyay et al . , 2003 ) . Although lateral integrin – cadherin associations are known to occur , their physiological significance remains unclear . Each of these three modes of adhesive interaction can also converge on a common pathway ( s ) , resulting in a complex feedback loop that , in turn , modulates the functions of one or more of the initiating signals ( Fig . 1D ) . For example , RhoGTPases act as both points of convergent signaling downstream of adhesions as well as upstream modifiers of functions of individual adhesion molecules . In the following sections we consider examples of adhesive networking in the context of the three types of general mechanism that are illustrated in Fig . 1A - C and Table 1 . Mechanisms for integrating adhesive signals RhoGTPases RhoGTPases are central to cell signaling pathways both upstream and downstream of cadherin and integrin adhesions ( Huveneers and Danen , 2009 ; Watanabe et al . , 2009 ) , making them prime candidates for mediating integration of adhesion - dependent signals . They are known to modulate a wide range of cellular behaviors including cytoskeletal organization , cell polarity , cell proliferation , and the formation and maturation of adhesive junctions ( Etienne - Manneville and Hall , 2002 ) . RhoGTPases have a primary role in regulating the assembly of integrin - based focal adhesions ( Hall , 1998 ) . Similarly , the assembly of cadherin - based adherens junctions requires the activity of Rho , Rac and Cdc42 ( Van Aelst and Symons , 2002 ) . Rho GTPases must be tightly regulated in the cell given that a certain degree of Rho activity is required for cell – cell adhesion but increased levels of Rho activity disrupt cadherin adhesions ( Zhong et al . , 1997 ) . Adhesion through classical cadherins results in increased Rac1 activity upon engagement but inhibits RhoA activity over the course of a few hours ( Noren et al . , 2001 ) . The effects of cadherin adhesion on RhoGTPases are known to require the cytoplasmic domain of cadherin , but the mechanism of signal transduction remains to be established ( Noren et al . , 2001 ; Watanabe et al . , 2009 ) . A number of proteins bind the cytoplasmic tails of cadherins and some of these have been shown to regulate RhoGTPase activity . p120 catenin binds to the juxtamembrane region of the cadherin tail and , when overexpressed , can decrease Rho activity while increasing Rac and Cdc42 activity ( Braga and Yap , 2005 ) . Another study suggested that p120 catenin interacts with p190 Rho GTPase activating protein ( RhoGAP ) , locally inhibiting Rho in response to 1184 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 8 ) S h a red s ign a ling effector protein s ( e . g . Rho GTP as e s ) Remote reg u l a tion of expre ss ion or a ctivity ( e . g . su ppre ss ion of c a dherin expre ss ion ) A Inp u t – o u tp u t s ign a ling C L a ter a l co u pling B Convergent s ign a ling Ad a ptor or s c a ffolding protein s S h a red s ign a ling effector protein s D Convergent s ign a ling with long - r a nge feed ba ck Down s tre a m s ign a ling effect s Down s tre a m s ign a ling effect s Down s tre a m s ign a ling c as c a de Fig . 1 . Different modes of adhesive interaction . ( A )  Input – output signaling is used to describe long - range interactions between cadherins ( monomers in blue ) and integrins ( heterodimers in green ) . Signaling from one adhesion receptor modulates the expression or activity of another adhesion type . The underlying mechanisms may involve changes in transcriptional activity or changes in signaling effector activity that regulate cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions . ( B )  Convergent signaling occurs when cadherins and integrins signal to common downstream effector molecules . These shared effectors include kinases , adaptor proteins and cytoskeletal components . Convergent signaling allows for cadherins and integrins to jointly affect cell physiology through redundant , additive or synergistic mechanisms . ( C )  Lateral coupling of adhesion receptors allows for signaling in the absence of extracellular matrix or cell – cell adhesion . Macromolecular complexes are formed by association of cadherins with integrins , often through interaction with other transmembrane proteins , such as tetraspanins ( orange ) or growth factor receptors ( purple ) . Cytoplasmic adaptor or scaffolding proteins ( pink oval ) , such as  - catenin together with cytoskeletal connections , can further support association of these molecular complexes . ( D )  All three modes shown in A – C may work in conjunction with one another . Box 1 . Adhesive networks The term ‘adhesive crosstalk’ is used widely to highlight presumed functional interactions between two distinct types of adhesion ( e . g . integrin and cadherin adhesions ; see Figure A , blue and green dots , respectively ) . Although often spatially distinct , integrin and cadherin adhesions activate many of the same signaling pathways and elicit similar cellular functions , supporting the notion that they should instead be considered as interdependent functional nodes in a larger adhesive network ( see Figure B ) . In some cellular contexts , cadherins and integrins are best perceived as functionally equivalent ( teal nodes ) with respect to output and network response . Modulation of one node influences adhesive function and signaling activities of adhesive nodes throughout the network , symbolized by the simple graphic representation . A S imple cro ss t a lk B Integr a ted network J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Rac activation ( Wildenberg et al . , 2006 ) . p190 RhoGAP is activated by integrin adhesion and is thought to be a convergence point for signaling by integrins and syndecans ( Bass et al . , 2008 ) . In epithelia and endothelia , in which both cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions are required , p190 RhoGAP is likely to be a point of convergent signaling between integrins and cadherins . Rho is transiently activated by the formation of new integrin adhesions ( Ren et al . , 1999 ; Bhadriraju et al . , 2007 ) , and this activation can have consequences for the adhesive functions of cadherins . There are several examples of RhoGTPases that act as signaling intermediaries between integrins and cadherins . The activities of Rho and Rac downstream of integrin signaling are thought to regulate the formation of adherens junctions in epithelial cells ( Playford et al . , 2008 ) . Integrin signaling in colon cancer cells promotes cell – cell junction formation through activation of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI 3 - kinase ) and Rac1B ( Chartier et al . , 2006 ) . In addition to these input – output pathways , RhoGTPases are also implicated in convergent signaling . For example , both integrin and cadherin adhesions have been shown to enhance cell proliferation by promoting the expression of cyclin D1 in a redundant manner through Rac ( Fig . 2 ) ( Fournier et al . , 2008 ) . Rho activation is a node in the convergent signaling network initiated by cadherins and integrins that can exert varied effects on adhesions depending on the downstream effectors involved ( Fig . 2 ) . Rho signaling through diaphamous Dia reorganizes the actin cytoskeleton to stabilize adherens junctions , whereas Rho - kinase ( ROCK ) is thought to disrupt cell – cell junctions by activating actomyosin contractility to excess ( Sahai and Marshall , 2002 ) . RhoA - mediated activation of the effector ROCK is regulated by cell – matrix adhesion , cell shape and cytoskeletal tension . In fact , tension generated by cell spreading is required for activation of ROCK by RhoA ( Bhadriraju et al . , 2007 ) . This suggests the existence of a positive feedback loop , in which tension generated by cell – matrix adhesion stimulates activation of ROCK , which in turn enhances the formation and maturation of integrin - based adhesions . Regulation of cytoskeletal tension is also crucial for the accumulation of E - cadherin at cell – cell contacts . ROCK regulates the activity of the motor protein nonmuscle myosin II downstream of initial E - cadherin ligation in order to stabilize newly formed cell – cell junctions ( Shewan et al . , 2005 ) . Cdc42 limits Rho signaling to achieve the crucial tension levels that are required to maintain cell – cell junctions , preventing excess tension that would probably lead to the dissociation of these adhesions ( Warner and Longmore , 2009 ) . Owing to the complex spatiotemporal regulation of RhoGTPases , it is difficult to separate their roles in the initial establishment of adhesions from those in the signaling events downstream of cadherin and integrin engagement . Furthermore , because these proteins are involved in so many pathways , localization and timing become extremely important in dictating cellular responses to a given stimulus . Rac1 is localized to sites of cell – cell contact where it might have a role in mediating rapid changes in actin organization concurrent with the formation of new cell – cell junctions ( Ehrlich et al . , 2002 ) . More recent work has shown that localization of both Rac and Rho to cell – cell contacts is essential for the formation and expansion of cadherin adhesions . The spatiotemporal localization 1185 Adhesive crosstalk Table 1 . Examples of interactions between cadherins and integrins Effector Type of signaling Cellular or Cadherin Integrin intermediate interaction Cell or tissue type physiological condition Citation E - cadherin  1 - integrin Rac1 , cyclin D1 Convergent MCF10A mammary Proliferation ( Fournier et al . , 2008 ) epithelial N - cadherin  1 - integrin PTP1B Convergent PC12 , chick neural Neurite outgrowth ( Pathre et al . , 2001 ) retina explants DE - cadherin  - integrin Rac , JNK Convergent , Drosophila border cells Collective cell migration ( Llense and Martin - input – output Blanco , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ) N - cadherin  1 - integrin Fer Convergent , Chick neural retina Neurite outgrowth ( Arregui et al . , 2000 ) input – output explants E - cadherin  5  1 - integrin Btbd7 Input – output Salivary gland Branching ( Sakai et al . , 2003 ; morphogenesis Onodera et al . , 2010 ) E - cadherin  v - or Src , ROCK or Input – output L fibroblasts , S180 Cell – cell adhesion ( Martinez - Rico et al . ,  5  1 - integrin MLCK mouse sarcoma , SCC13 2010 ) squamous cell carcinoma E - cadherin  1 - integrin FAK Input – output Human colon carcinoma Epithelial – mesenchymal ( Wang et al . , 2004 ) Moser cells transition E - cadherin Collagen receptor Matrix Input – output Ovarian carcinoma cells Epithelial – mesenchymal ( Symowicz et al . , metalloproteinase transition 2007 ) E - cadherin Fibronectin receptor Rap1 Input – output Fisher rat thyroid ( FRT ) Cell – matrix adhesion ( Balzac et al . , 2005 ) cells E - cadherin Laminin receptor Rac1b , PI 3kinase Input – output HT - 29 human colon Cell – cell adhesion ( Chariter et al . , 2006 ) adenocarcinoma N - cadherin  1 - and  3 - integrin Ca 2 + Input – output Neural crest cells Cell migration ( Monier - Gavelle and Duband , 1997 , Theveneau et al . , 2010 ) N - cadherin Fibronectin receptor Rac1 Input – output Human mesenchymal Myogenesis ( Gao et al . , 2010 ) stem cells VE - cadherin  v  3 - integrin VEGFR2 , Shc Input – output Bovine aortic endothelial Inflammation ( Tzima et al . , 2005 ; cells Liu et al . , 2008 ) E - cadherin  3  1 - integrin CD151 Lateral coupling Immortalized mouse Cell – cell adhesion ( Chattopadhyay et al . , kidney epithelia 2003 ) E - cadherin  v - integrin IGF - 1R ,  - catenin Lateral coupling Human colonic Cell migration ( Canonici et al . , 2008 ) adenocarcinoma J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e of both the GTPases and their effectors suggests specific roles in adhesion formation , with Rac facilitating actin remodeling and Rho stimulating actomyosin contractility ( Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ) . The downstream effects of RhoGTPase activation can differ dramatically depending on the site of activation . Rac is required for epithelial wound healing and promotes cell migration when activated at cell – matrix contact sites , but promotes cell – cell adhesion and formation of adherens junctions when activated at cell – cell junctions ( Van Aelst and Symons , 2002 ; Liu et al . , 2010 ) . Network complexity increases when we consider the functions of other GTPases , such as the Ras family member Rap1 , which has been implicated in regulation of integrin activity downstream of cadherins ( see Box 2 ) . Clearly , signaling through GTPases is a much - used mechanism for intracellular communication , and is influenced by both cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions . Only recently were suitable tools developed that enable GTPase activities to be visualized in time and space , thus revealing specific activation events that mediate interactions between adhesions ( Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Tyrosine kinases A number of tyrosine kinases are localized to cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions ( Giannone and Sheetz , 2006 ; McLachlan et al . , 2007 ) where they function as prominent nodes in the adhesive network . Activation of Src family kinases frequently accompanies the formation of both cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions . Src is recruited and activated upon E - cadherin ligation and this provides a positive feedback loop that signals through PI 3 - kinase to promote the stability of cell – cell contacts ( McLachlan et al . , 2007 ) . However , Src levels at cell – cell adhesions must be tightly regulated , because constitutively active Src disrupts cell – cell contacts and alters cell morphology ( Behrens et al . , 1993 ) . Integrin ligation also leads to Src activation and this has divergent downstream consequences , often involving RhoGTPases ( Huveneers and Danen , 2009 ) . In epithelial cells , constitutively active Src at sites of integrin – matrix adhesion leads to peripheral accumulation of activated myosin , which is disruptive to cell – cell junctions ( Avizienyte et al . , 2004 ) . However , moderate Src activation and regulation of actomyosin contractility by ROCK or myosin light - chain kinase ( MLCK ) are necessary for the integrin - mediated strengthening of E - cadherin adhesions ( Martinez - Rico et al . , 2010 ) . Although cytoskeletal tension is important for the formation of both cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions , excessive tension might serve to rip junctions apart or induce changes in protein conformation that lead to junctional instability . The focal adhesion kinase ( Fak , also known as PTK2 ) is another non - receptor tyrosine kinase , which as a primary signaling partner of Src is implicated in many of the same signaling pathways ( Playford and Schaller , 2004 ) . Unlike Src , however , Fak contains a focal adhesion targeting ( FAT ) sequence , consistent with its role as a downstream effector of integrin adhesion and signaling . For example , transforming growth factor -  ( TGF -  ) inhibits epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) in at least some colon cancer cells , and stimulates increased expression of ECM leading to 1186 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 8 ) Cell migr a tion S he a r s tre ss Infl a mm a tion Cell – cell j u nction di ss ol u tion Cell – cell a dhe s ion Cell – ECM a dhe s ion Cell – cell a dhe s ion Cyclic s tr a in ? Prolifer a tion S hc P Fer P Cort a ctin P NF - κ B ERK P S hc P Rho GTP ROCKRho GTP Di a Rho GTP Cyclin D1 R a c GTP P Fig . 2 . Molecular mechanisms for integration of adhesive signals . Activation of Rac by both cadherins ( dark blue ) and integrins ( light green ) upregulates proliferation in an additive manner through an increase in the expression of cyclin D1 ( orange arrows ) . Cyclic cell strain induces cadherin - dependent activation of Rac and cyclin D1 , but it has not yet been established how sensitive integrin - mediated promotion of proliferation is to cyclic strain . Cadherins and integrins antagonistically influence the activity of Rho GTPase and thus of Rho ( purple arrows ) . Active Rho has dramatically different effects on cell adhesion depending on the downstream effector it binds . Rho signaling through Dia produces reorganization of actin in a manner that strengthens cell – cell adhesion , whereas signaling through ROCK enhances actin contractility , which in turn promotes cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesion . However , a high level of Rho - and ROCK - mediated actin contractility is antagonistic to cell – cell junctions . Fer kinase is activated by cadherin and integrin adhesions , and activated Fer phosphorylates ( P ) the actin - organizing protein cortactin ( blue arrows ) . Reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton by cortactin can enhance either cell – cell adhesion or migration . Shear stress across endothelial cells leads to inflammation ( green arrows ) . Shear stress induces the assembly of a VEGFR – VE - cadherin – Shc complex ( VEGFR in purple ) and the phosphorylation of Shc , which then leads to activation of ERK1 / 2 and , subsequently , to inflammation . Phosphorylated Shc associates with integrins in a cadherin dependent manner and activates the NF -  B pathway , also resulting in inflammation . Solid lines represent direct interactions or effects , dashed lines indicate an indirect or unknown mechanism . The extracellular matrix is shown beneath the cells in blue and the actin cytoskeleton is represented by the pink lines . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e integrin engagement and activation of Fak ( Wang et al . , 2004 ) . Fak then promotes E - cadherin expression and cell cohesion ( Wang et al . , 2004 ) , but the mechanism by which this occurs remains unclear . Nonetheless , this is consistent with Fak knockdown studies , which report stimulation of EMT and inhibition of cadherin adhesion ( Yano et al . , 2004 ) . Because Fak is normally associated with integrin adhesions there is much speculation about its role in cell – cell junctions . Regulation of RhoGTPases is one possible mechanism of action because Fak can inhibit the activity of Rho , and constitutively active Rho mutants can phenocopy Fak loss - of - function ( Playford et al . , 2008 ) . Interestingly , Fak has also been shown to localize to cell – cell contacts , although the significance – if any – of its localization at cell – cell adhesions is unclear ( Crawford et al . , 2003 ; Playford et al . , 2008 ) . The non - receptor tyrosine kinase Fer is also reported to be involved in communication between cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesive contacts ( Arregui et al . , 2000 ) . Fer can be activated upon engagement of either cadherins or integrins ( El Sayegh et al . , 2005 ; Sangrar et al . , 2007 ) . The association of Fer with the actin - organizing protein cortactin might help coordinate cellular response to various adhesive inputs . Cortactin is required for cell spreading on fibronectin , and the activation of cortactin by Fer promotes cell motility ( Illes et al . , 2006 ; Sangrar et al . , 2007 ) . Phosphorylation of cortactin by Src and / or Fer downstream of E - cadherin ligation enhances cell – cell adhesion ( El Sayegh et al . , 2005 ; Ren et al . , 2009 ) . This suggests that Fer signaling feeds back to cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions by promoting cortactin - dependent reorganization of actin ( Fig . 2 ) . Several growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases are reported to regulate cadherin and integrin adhesive functions . For instance , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) signalling through the VEGF receptor 2 ( VEGFR2 , also known as KDR ) both increases integrin - dependent migration and decreases stability of vascular endothelial ( VE ) – cadherin adhesions ( Carmeliet et al . , 1999 ; Byzova et al . , 2000 ) . Receptor tyrosine kinases can also enable lateral molecular associations between different types of adhesion . IGF1R forms a ternary complex with E - cadherin and  v - integrins at cell – cell contacts . Binding of the ligand IGF1 causes the relocalization of  v - integrin to focal contacts and an increase in cell migration ( Canonici et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , IGF1R might sequester integrins at cell – cell contacts and inhibit migration in the absence of growth factor signaling . Phosphatases Given the central importance of kinases to many adhesion - dependent cell signaling pathways , it is crucial to also consider the role of phosphatases in the regulation of adhesive networks . There are a number of protein tyrosine phosphatases ( PTPs ) that associate with cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions – such as PTP1B , which localizes to the cytoplasmic tail of cadherins and also to focal adhesions ( Stoker , 2005 ; Burridge et al . , 2006 ; Sallee et al . , 2006 ) . The catalytic activity of PTP1B is required for dephosphorylation of  - catenin and association of N - cadherin with the actin cytoskeleton , both of which are crucial for the stability of cell – cell junctions ( Sallee et al . , 2006 ) . PTP1B is also involved in signaling from integrin adhesions , probably through dephosphorylation of the inhibitory tyrosine residue of Src , which leads to activation of Fak ( Arregui et al . , 1998 ) . Outgrowth of neurites depends on both cell – cell and cell – matrix interactions , and PTP1B has been shown to be required for this process , probably also through regulation of Src activity ( Pathre et al . , 2001 ) . PTP  is another member of the PTP family that is necessary for maintaining the integrity of cell – cell adhesions . In addition to its role in stabilizing cell – cell junctions through dephosphorylation of junctional components , PTP  might also recruit regulatory proteins to sites of cell – cell adhesion ( Sallee et al . , 2006 ) . Expression of PTP  in kidney epithelial cells is dependent on a complex between  3  1 - integrin and tetraspanin that associates with E - cadherin on the lateral membranes of cells . An interesting feature of this lateral complex coupling is that a specific subset of unligated integrins appears to associate with and promote stability of cell – cell adhesions , and that these are distinct from the subset of integrins involved in matrix adhesion ( Chattopadhyay et al . , 2003 ) . Scaffolding and adaptor proteins The consequences of cadherin and integrin engagement can vary greatly depending upon the specific intracellular environment at the site of signal initiation . Scaffolding and adaptor proteins are crucial elements of adhesion - dependent signaling cascades . They facilitate the localization of key downstream effectors , thereby increasing the probability of interactions between activated signaling components . Receptor for activated C kinase - 1 ( RACK1 , also known as GNB2L1 ) is a scaffolding protein that binds the cytoplasmic tails of integrins and interacts with intracellular signaling components such as protein kinase C ( PKC ) ( Besson et al . , 2002 ) . RACK1 is a crucial component of the E - cadherin and  3  1 - integrin – tetraspanin lateral signaling complex described above ( Chattopadhyay et al . , 2003 ) . Binding to PTP  might recruit RACK1 to cell – cell adhesions , serving to localize activated PKC or other effectors ( Mourton et al . , 2001 ) . PKC has numerous roles in promoting cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions ( Larsson , 2006 ) . Localization of active PKC by RACK1 might be key to specifying the types of adhesion that are affected by PKC signaling . 1187 Adhesive crosstalk Box 2 . Rap1 is poised between cadherins and integrins Rac , Rho and Cdc42 are not the only GTPases functioning in the signaling network that connects integrins and cadherins . Rap1 , a member of the RasGTPase family has also been implicated in the transmission of signals between cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions ( Retta et al . , 2006 ) . It is known to activate integrins in various cell types , demonstrating a role for Rap1 in inside - out integrin signaling ( Retta et al . , 2006 ) . Rap1 was also shown to be important for the formation and maintenance of cadherin adhesions ( Watanabe et al . , 2009 ) . These findings place Rap1 upstream of both adhesion types , but more recent work has demonstrated the regulation of Rap1 activity by E - cadherin adhesion ( Balzac et al . , 2005 ) . Disruption of E - cadherin adhesions results in a dramatic increase in Rap1 activity , which can then be downregulated by re - forming cell – cell junctions . Although this finding suggests that Rap1 functions both upstream and downstream of cadherins , the same is not true for integrins . Rap1 activity is not dependent on the substrate onto which the cells are plated , indicating that Rap1 is not regulated by integrin adhesions . Dissolution of cell – cell junctions does result in an increase in focal adhesions , and this is abrogated by inhibition of Rap1 activity . This places Rap1 neatly between cadherin and integrin adhesions . It is not yet clear how Rap1 activity is affected by endogenous disruption of cadherin adhesion , such as through increased actomyosin - mediated tension . Additional data suggest that internalization and endocytic trafficking of cadherins is required for Rap1 activation , although the precise mechanism of Rap1 regulation by cadherins is unknown . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e In general , adaptor proteins link signaling components but lack intrinsic enzymatic or kinase activities . Motifs such as the phosphotyrosine - binding Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) domain allow adaptors to bring signaling proteins together and propagate signaling cascades initiated by a diverse array of stimuli . The SH2 domain - containing ( Shc ) adaptor protein forms a complex with growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ( GRB2 ) and the Son of Sevenless ( SOS ) family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors to activate Ras and , subsequently , mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinases , the pathway of which is activated through many inputs including integrin signaling and mechanical force ( Ravichandran , 2001 ) . Shc has recently been shown to associate with both cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions in response to fluid flow across vascular endothelial cells ( Liu et al . , 2008 ) . Phosphorylated Shc is recruited to cell – cell junctions at the onset of fluid flow , particularly in areas of tissue where fluid - flow shear stresses are high and result in inflammation . Previous work demonstrated the assembly of a VEGFR2 – VE - cadherin complex in response to shear stress and it is now apparent that Shc interacts with components of this complex ( Shay - Salit et al . , 2002 ; Liu et al . , 2008 ) . Shc is also recruited to integrin adhesions in response to fluid flow , a process that requires the presence of VE - cadherin . Phosphorylation of the MAPK family members ERK1 / 2 and activation of NF -  B are increased by fluid flow in a Shc - dependent manner . Interestingly the activation of NF -  B , but not the activation of ERK1 / 2 , is dependent on ECM composition ( Liu et al . , 2008 ) . These data suggest that Shc is a central mediator of fluid flow - induced signaling events that include cadherin - dependent activation of signaling at cell – matrix junctions ( Fig . 2 ) . There are several other classes of protein that can act as adaptors even though they are not traditionally thought of as such . One example is the catenin family of proteins , of which some are involved in both cell – cell adhesion and cell signaling . Catenins are crucial for connecting cadherins to the cytoskeleton , although not necessarily through a direct physical link ( Nelson , 2008 ) . Catenins are required for the initiation of many signaling pathways downstream of cadherin adhesion , including those that regulate RhoGTPase activities , actomyosin organization and contractility , and stability of cell – cell junctions ( Perez - Moreno and Fuchs , 2006 ) . Plakoglobin ( Pkg , also known as JUP or g - catenin ) , associates with both desmosomes and adherens junctions where it helps maintain tissue integrity through interactions with  - catenin or desmoplakin ( Zhurinsky et al . , 2000 ; Acehan et al . , 2008 ) . By serving as a link between cadherin and either  - catenin or desmoplakin , Pkg connects cadherins to actin or intermediate filament networks , respectively . Pkg is reported to suppress motility of cell sheets and single keratinocytes on collagen ( Yin et al . , 2005 ) . Although the mechanism for regulation of cell motility by Pkg is not clear , there is some evidence that Pkg works through long - range mechanisms to promote fibronectin expression and inhibit Src function ( Yin et al . , 2005 ; Todorovic et al . , 2010 ) . Pkg is a known target of Src kinase activity , thus it is possible that the presence of Pkg at cell – cell junctions sequesters Src away from cell – matrix adhesions where it typically promotes cell migration ( Webb et al . , 2004 ; Lee et al . , 2010 ) . Cytoskeleton One consequence of the signalling events and mechanical linkages that are initiated by both cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions is the assembly and reorganization of cytoskeletal networks . Thus the regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics might be considered a consequence of convergent signaling . In turn , the cytoskeleton mediates both short - range and long - range physical interactions between adhesions throughout the cell . Linkage to the cytoskeleton provides structural integrity to adhesions and allows for cellular movement , maintenance of cell and tissue shape , and remodeling of the extracellular environment . Moreover , by coupling to molecular motors the cytoskeleton can exert forces that are then applied externally to the ECM and neighbouring cells . Actin filaments provide integral support to the cell by linking adhesive contacts on the cell surface to the interior . Actin is tethered by macromolecular complexes at points of integrin contact with ECM , and this association can be visualized in vitro on planar substrates as focal adhesions . Cadherin adhesions direct the assembly of actin filaments near the cell cortex where they provide strength to lateral contacts between adjacent cells . We refer the reader to a recent review article ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2010 ) , which details and summarizes a plethora of reported connections between cell adhesion molecules and the actin cytoskeleton . The overall emerging picture is that – by acting as a force - bearing scaffold between sites of integrin and cadherin adhesion – the actin cytoskeleton provides a direct physical basis for adhesive network interactions . Microtubule dynamic instability provides another mechanism for integrating the cytoskeleton with signaling pathways that are initiated by both cell – ECM and cell – cell adhesions . Microtubules are in a state of constant flux through processes of assembly and disassembly . Extension of microtubule plus ends into focal contacts promotes the dissolution of these adhesions ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ) . Association of microtubules with focal contacts promotes phosphorylation of kinases , including Fak , within the focal adhesion complex , inducing destabilization of protein – protein associations and resulting in the release of actin filaments from these contacts . Moreover , cadherins are reported to affect microtubule dynamics . In highly migratory and undifferentiated cells , the minus ends of microtubules are typically anchored in centrosomes . In terminally differentiated cells such as polarized epithelia , however , the minus ends of microtubules are instead stabilized by association with cadherin adhesions ( Chausovsky et al . , 2000 ; Meng et al . , 2008 ) . Likewise , plus ends of microtubules in these cells are stabilized by a linkage to the basal cortex through integrin adhesions ( Hotta et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , microtubules that are capable of regulating cell – ECM adhesions are also anchored and regulated by cadherins , providing another potential cytoskeleton - based mechanism for adhesive networking . Mitotic spindle orientation is a major determinant of the axis and symmetry of cell division ( Bringmann and Hyman , 2005 ) , which is established by the positioning of distally located microtubule minus - end anchors , the centrosomes ( Heald et al . , 1997 ) . In epithelial cells , centrosomes are localized to adherens junctions during mitosis allowing symmetrical cell division within the plane of the tissue ( Lu et al . , 2001 ; den Elzen et al . , 2009 ) . In other cell types – such as , for example , neural stem cells – cadherin and integrin adhesions are hypothesized to compete for microtubule association with centrosomes ( Loulier et al . , 2009 ) . Because of this competition , mitotic spindle orientation and cell division occur on an oblique axis . The result is an asymmetric cell division that leaves the neural stem cell in its niche while creating a daughter cell that moves into more differentiated regions of the central nervous system ( Kosodo et al . , 2004 ) . Although the precise mechanisms remain unclear , coordinated positioning of the spindle by the adhesion receptor network appears to have broad significance 1188 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 8 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e to adult stem cell niche maintenance ( Marthiens et al . , 2010 ) , organ development ( Baena - Lopez et al . , 2005 ) , and early embryonic morphogenesis ( Gong et al . , 2004 ) . Intermediate filaments also associate directly with both integrin and cadherin adhesions . In contrast to actin filaments , intermediate filaments exhibit high tensile strength , extensibility , elasticity and flexibility ( Fudge et al . , 2003 ) . Nonetheless , intermediate filaments are highly dynamic and capable of depolymerization and polymerization anywhere along an existing filament ( Godsel et al . , 2008 ; Colakoglu and Brown , 2009 ) . Although most studies of intermediate filaments have focused on their association with highly stable adhesive junctions , such as desmosomes and hemidesmosomes , they are also found in association with more dynamic adhesions that involve classical cadherins ( Kowalczyk et al . , 1998 ; Leonard et al . , 2008 ) and non - hemidesmosomal integrins ( Tsuruta and Jones , 2003 ; Bhattacharya et al . , 2009 ) . Intermediate filaments lack filament polarity , and the distinct ‘hubs’ of filament organization and polymerization ( Godsel et al . , 2008 ) that are characteristic of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Intermediate filament networks have yet to be implicated directly in functionally connecting different adhesions ; however , their role in anchoring and stabilizing adhesive junctions suggests that they are important , particularly in cases where adhesive networks are subject to mechanical forces . Different types of cytoskeletal network are further integrated through direct crosslinking by cytoskeletal scaffold proteins such as plectins , which contain binding sites for actin , microtubules and intermediate filaments ( Sonnenberg and Liem , 2007 ) . Moreover , motor proteins , such as myosin , kinesin and dynein , can be thought of as mobile crosslinkers that generate forces within and between cytoskeletal networks ( Chang and Goldman , 2004 ) . As a consequence of these varied molecular crosslinks , cadherin and integrin adhesions are able to form and maintain physical connections that are not necessarily limited to a single cytoskeletal network . Adhesive networks in mechanotransduction and multicellular processes As signaling through adhesive networks proceeds , the impact on cellular functions is substantial . Many of the pathways discussed above were elucidated using immortalized tumorigenic cell lines , so the functional implications for normal tissues are not immediately apparent . However , other studies that focused on a variety of tissues , developmental systems and primary cells have provided considerable insight into the physiological roles of adhesive interactions . Nearly all major cellular functions are reported to be influenced by a combination of integrin and cadherin signaling events , including proliferation , migration , differentiation ( Box 3 ) and apoptosis ( Fouquet et al . , 2004 ; Kang et al . , 2007 ) . Moreover , the coordinated initiation , strengthening and dissolution of cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions are crucial for morphogenesis and , thus , the directing of both form and function . Migration In cancer metastasis and EMT , integrin and cadherin adhesions display an antagonistic relationship that determines whether cells maintain associations with their neighbors or uncouple and initiate migration ( Avizienyte et al . , 2002 ; Guarino , 2007 ) . For example , in ovarian carcinoma cells , downregulation of E - cadherin through matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) - mediated proteolysis is initiated by integrin ligation to collagen ( Symowicz et al . , 2007 ) . This decreased cadherin - mediated cohesion allows the cells to disperse and migrate independently . Although this scenario might best reflect the behavior of metastatic cancer cells and other instances of EMT , it is important to consider that normal , intact tissues also undergo migratory processes . In collective cell migration , substrate traction is finely balanced with cell cohesion to maintain organization of the migratory tissue ( Fig . 3A ) . In fact , cadherin adhesions in normal tissues provide instructive signals that regulate the polarity of cells and , as a result , the direction of migration . As cells come in contact with one another , cadherin adhesions are formed , Cdc42 signaling is activated , and the centrosome reorients anteriorly relative to the cell nucleus ( Desai et al . , 2009 ; Dupin et al . , 2009 ) , indicating that a broad repolarization has occurred throughout the cell . Protrusive activity is suppressed locally near cadherin adhesions , and increased on opposing sides of the cell at sites of integrin – ECM adhesion ( Desai et al . , 2009 ; Borghi et al . , 2010 ) . Even highly migratory tissues , such as some cranial neural crest , maintain cell – cell 1189 Adhesive crosstalk Box 3 . Adhesive interactions in differentiation and morphogenesis Cell differentiation Differentiation of cells is influenced by cell adhesion receptors , which integrate several different adhesive inputs , including ECM composition , cell density and cell shape ( McBeath et al . , 2004 ; Messina et al . , 2005 ; Engler et al . , 2006 ; Rozario and DeSimone , 2010 ) . Actomyosin - generated tension is applied through integrin adhesions and provides an instructive signal for the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells into myoblasts ( Engler et al . , 2006 ; Gao et al . , 2010 ) . Integrin - mediated activation of Rac impacts cell – cell adhesions through increasing N - cadherin expression , a process necessary for myogenesis ( Gao et al . , 2010 ) . In myogenesis , cell – matrix adhesion signaling enhances cell – cell adhesions , but in some other cell types cadherins and integrins antagonize each other to carry out a differentiation program . For example , in terminally differentiating keratinocytes , cadherins are required for tissue stratification , expression of keratinocyte - specific genes and downregulation of integrins – all crucial steps in the keratinocyte differentiation program ( Hodivala and Watt , 1994 ; Watt , 2002 ) . These types of coordinated interaction between cadherins and integrins alter cell signaling , and change tissue architecture to promote the differentiated phenotype . Branching morphogenesis Branching morphogenesis is a crucial developmental process and responsible for the formation and functional organization of lung , kidney and most glandular tissues . During branching morphogenesis , fibronectin engagement by integrins results in localized decrease of cadherin expression at sites of cleft formation ( Sakai et al . , 2003 ) . This is an example of long - range input – output interactions ( Fig . 1A ) , by which – in this case integrin – signaling increases the expression of Btbd7 . How BTBD7 operates is not known , but its presence leads to changes in gene expression that include suppression of E - cadherin and induction of the cell - scattering snail homolog 2 ( Snai2 ) gene ( Onodera et al . , 2010 ) . Although localized suppression of E - cadherin expression promotes the cleft formation that precedes new branching , E - cadherin is more broadly required throughout the tissue to support columnar morphology , bud outgrowth and lumenal structure ( Walker et al . , 2008 ) . For branching morphogenesis , localized downregulation of cadherins by integrin – matrix engagement is a way of designating distinct areas of tissue to undergo morphogenetic growth . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e adhesions while they move , although these adhesions are dynamic and cell contacts transient . N - cadherin adhesions in neural crest cells are required for the subcellular localization of activated RhoGTPases in response to chemoattractants . Without N - cadherin the cells fail to migrate directionally or collectively ( Theveneau et al . , 2010 ) . Expression of N - cadherin at the cell surface is regulated locally through signaling pathways that are initiated by  1 - and  3 - integrins ( Monier - Gavelle and Duband , 1997 ) . In border cells of Drosophila melanogaster , asymmetric protrusions initiated by localized Rac activation in a single border cell can alter migratory direction of an entire cluster of border cells ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Cohesion of border cells is stabilized by both  - integrin and Rac signaling through the MAPK Jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) , and these signaling proteins are required for normal collective cell migration ( Llense and Martin - Blanco , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Migration of whole tissues is a recurring feature of development and morphogenesis , and wound healing . Collectively migrating tissues use a mechanism of distributed traction , whereby both leading edge cells and those that follow polarize and migrate in a directional manner ( Davidson et al . , 2002 ; Farooqui and Fenteany , 2005 ) . Substrate traction forces and intercellular tissue tension are developed as an intact tissue translocates . Trepat and co - workers reported that , although leading cells generate the highest substrate traction , intercellular tension increases progressively as a function of distance from the leading edge ( Trepat et al . , 2009 ) . Moreover , tension on cadherin adhesions recruits scaffolding proteins , such as vinculin and  - catenin , which mediate cytoskeletal reinforcement of the adhesions and the resultant strain - stiffening response ( Chu et al . , 2004 ; le Duc et al . , 2010 ; Yonemura et al . , 2010 ) . However , an important question remains when tying these observations together : does tension on cadherin adhesions have ramifications for protrusive activity and polarity of the cell ? We speculate that , because cadherins are responsive to mechanical force , changes in the physical linkage of cadherins to cytoskeletal networks and the association with scaffolding proteins have an important role in the polarization of migratory cells and tissues . Early embryonic morphogenesis Several examples of adhesive networks can be illustrated by using early - embryonic models of tissue morphogenesis . During convergent extension , mesodermal cells mediolaterally intercalate to form the notochord and drive axial elongation of the embryo ( Fig . 3B ) . The cells are not able to complete this process in the absence of fibronectin , when  5  1 - integrin is inhibited , or when cadherin adhesion is altered ( Marsden and DeSimone , 2003 ; Davidson et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , adhesion and signaling of  5  1 - integrin can modulate cadherin adhesion , which is required for cell intercalation and cell - sorting behaviors ( Marsden and DeSimone , 2003 ) , although the mechanism of signaling between these adhesions remains unclear . Communication between adhesion receptors in this system is also bidirectional . Tension on cadherin adhesions induces integrin - dependent assembly of fibronectin fibrils ( Fig . 3C ) ( Dzamba et al . , 2009 ) . Fibronectin fibril assembly is , in turn , required for normal morphogenetic movements in early embryogenesis , such as epiboly and mesendodermal migration ( Rozario et al . , 2009 ) . Activation of the planar cell polarity pathway ( PCP ) – a non - canonical Wnt signaling cascade – is required for convergence and extension movements , and also promotes the assembly of the fibronectin matrix by regulating cadherin adhesion and tissue tension ( Dzamba et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , PCP signaling is 1190 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 8 ) Fl u id - flow s he a r s tre ss Cyclic s tr a in Migr a tion Hydro s t a tic compre ss ion D V as c u l a r endotheli u m B Convergent exten s ion A Collective migr a tion Axi a l exten s ion C In vivo m a trix ass em b ly Fig . 3 . Mechanical inputs modulate adhesive networks in complex tissue systems . ( A )  Collective migration involves traction forces through integrin – matrix adhesions to drive the tissue forward ( green arrows ) . Extracellular matrix substratum is in purple . The tissue advances against intercellular tissue tension ( pink arrows ) that is mediated by cadherins ( pink rectangles ) . This intercellular tension is anisotropically distributed in the tissue and is greater within the tissue than at the leading edge . ( B )  Convergence and extension movements in gastrulation involve coordinated regulation of different adhesion types . Bidirectional protrusive activity ( green arrows ) mediated by PCP signaling and integrin – matrix adhesions enables sliding of cells past each other , which is a cadherin - dependent process ( cadherin adhesions are shown as pink rectangles ) . Intercalation behavior creates force in anterior and posterior directions , thereby driving axial elongation . ( C )  In vivo , assembly of matrix ( purple lines ) can be regulated by force transduced through cadherin adhesions ( pink rectangles ) . In multicellular tissues , cells pull on one another ( pink arrows ) through cadherin adhesions to increase local mechanical tension . It has been proposed that integrins translocate from sites of cell – cell contact across the free surface of the cell ( green arrows ) and promote matrix assembly . ( D )  Endothelial cells in vivo are simultaneously exposed to fluid - flow shear stress , cyclic strain and hydrostatic compression ( large open arrows ) , each representing a mechanical stress that applies force to cadherin and integrin adhesions ( filled arrows , color matched to the applicable force ) . Mechanical forces on cadherins and integrins initiate input – output and convergent type signaling across the adhesive network to regulate cell morphology and physiological responses such as cell proliferation . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e probably an important signaling pathway that links cadherin and integrin functions in the early embryo . Endothelial cell biology Vascular endothelial cells comprise the inner layer of blood vessels and are exposed to three major types of mechanical stress : shear stress , cyclic strain and hydrostatic pressure ( Fig . 3D ) . These cells are in tight cohesion with one another and with the underlying matrix , forming a semipermeable barrier against the pressurized bloodstream . Mechanical stress on this tissue is sensed and transduced , at least in part , by adhesion complexes . Shear stress induces alignment and elongation of cells in the direction of fluid flow , as well as expression of genes that result in an inflammatory response . VE - cadherin , platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule ( PECAM ) and VEGFR2 form a complex in response to flow , and this complex signals through Shc to activate the integrin response to shear ( Fig . 2 ) ( Tzima et al . , 2005 ; Liu et al . , 2008 ) . Cyclic strain induces proliferation in endothelial cells through a VE - cadherin – Rac1 - mediated pathway ( Liu et al . , 2007 ) . Integrin signaling has been demonstrated to increase cyclin D1 in endothelial cells to promote proliferation ( Schwartz and Assoian , 2001 ) , and cell strain induces proliferation in some cell types through integrin signaling ( Wilson et al . , 1995 ) . It remains to be determined , however , whether the proliferative effects of cyclic strain are mediated entirely by VE - cadherin or whether strain induction of endothelial proliferation also requires integrin - mediated cyclin D1 expression . Proliferation can also be stimulated by signaling through  v - integrins in endothelial cells under hydrostatic pressure ( Fig . 2 ) ( Schwartz et al . , 1999 ) . However , the signal to proliferate is negatively balanced by the presence of VE - cadherin - mediated cell contacts ( Ohashi et al . , 2007 ) , which are stabilized by physiological hydrostatic pressures ( Muller - Marschhausen et al . , 2008 ) . The point at which VE - cadherin and  v - integrin signals converge to regulate proliferation induced through hydrostatic pressure is unknown . Furthermore , it is not clear how VE - cadherins negatively regulate proliferation in this context yet promote proliferation that is induced by cyclic strain . Clearly , different types of stress on cadherin adhesions stimulate unique signaling pathways that differentially affect integrin signaling . Endothelial cells in vivo are exposed to multiple stresses simultaneously . The mechanism by which cells integrate these disparate inputs and orchestrate a cellular response is an important question for future research . Conclusions In this commentary we have presented an overview of emerging mechanisms through which cadherin - and integrin - dependent adhesion and signaling functions intersect and interact . Although cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesive complexes have variable compositions and mediate interactions at often topologically distinct positions in the cell , they share many structural similarities and signaling functions . Cadherins and integrins each coordinate responses to changes in the adhesive state through altered physical linkages with the cytoskeleton and by participating in bidirectional cell signaling events . Rather than thinking of cell – cell and cell – matrix adhesions in individual cells and tissues as operating largely in isolation , we argue that these complexes are part of a larger adhesive network wherein multiple types of cell adhesion necessarily interact . Much future effort in this area will continue to focus on elucidating the remaining signaling molecules , scaffolding and adapter proteins that comprise adhesive networks . However , the larger challenge is to understand how cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesion and signaling inputs are integrated to affect the responses of cells within contextually appropriate and dynamic microenvironments , such as those found within embryos , normal tissues and tumors . We thank our colleagues Bette Dzamba , Tania Rozario and Shuo Wei for reading and commenting on the manuscript . The authors were supported by USPHS grants F32 - GM83542 to G . F . W . , T32 - GM08136 to M . A . B . , and R01 - HD26402 / GM094793 to D . W . D . Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months . References Acehan , D . , Petzold , C . , Gumper , I . , Sabatini , D . D . , Muller , E . J . , Cowin , P . and Stokes , D . L . ( 2008 ) . Plakoglobin is required for effective intermediate filament anchorage to desmosomes . J . Invest . Dermatol . 128 , 2665 - 2675 . Arregui , C . O . , Balsamo , J . and Lilien , J . ( 1998 ) . Impaired integrin - mediated adhesion and signaling in fibroblasts expressing a dominant - negative mutant PTP1B . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 861 - 873 . Arregui , C . , Pathre , P . , Lilien , J . and Balsamo , J . ( 2000 ) . The nonreceptor tyrosine kinase fer mediates cross - talk between N - cadherin and beta1 - integrins . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1263 - 1274 . Avizienyte , E . , Wyke , A . W . , Jones , R . J . , McLean , G . W . , Westhoff , M . A . , Brunton , V . G . and Frame , M . C . ( 2002 ) . Src - induced de - regulation of E - cadherin in colon cancer cells requires integrin signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 632 - 638 . Avizienyte , E . , Fincham , V . J . , Brunton , V . G . and Frame , M . C . ( 2004 ) . Src SH3 / 2 domain - mediated peripheral accumulation of Src and phospho - myosin is linked to deregulation of E - cadherin and the epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 2794 - 2803 . Baena - Lopez , L . A . , Baonza , A . and Garcia - Bellido , A . ( 2005 ) . The orientation of cell divisions determines the shape of Drosophila organs . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1640 - 1644 . Balzac , F . , Avolio , M . , Degani , S . , Kaverina , I . , Torti , M . , Silengo , L . , Small , J . V . and Retta , S . F . ( 2005 ) . E - cadherin endocytosis regulates the activity of Rap1 : a traffic light GTPase at the crossroads between cadherin and integrin function . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4765 - 4783 . Bass , M . D . , Morgan , M . R . , Roach , K . A . , Settleman , J . , Goryachev , A . B . and Humphries , M . J . ( 2008 ) . p190RhoGAP is the convergence point of adhesion signals from alpha 5 beta 1 integrin and syndecan - 4 . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 1013 - 1026 . Behrens , J . , Vakaet , L . , Friis , R . , Winterhager , E . , Van Roy , F . , Mareel , M . M . and Birchmeier , W . ( 1993 ) . Loss of epithelial differentiation and gain of invasiveness correlates with tyrosine phosphorylation of the E - cadherin / beta - catenin complex in cells transformed with a temperature - sensitive v - SRC gene . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 757 - 766 . Besson , A . , Wilson , T . L . and Yong , V . W . ( 2002 ) . The anchoring protein RACK1 links protein kinase Cepsilon to integrin beta chains . Requirements for adhesion and motility . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 22073 - 22084 . Bhadriraju , K . , Yang , M . , Alom Ruiz , S . , Pirone , D . , Tan , J . and Chen , C . S . ( 2007 ) . Activation of ROCK by RhoA is regulated by cell adhesion , shape , and cytoskeletal tension . Exp . Cell Res . 313 , 3616 - 3623 . Bhattacharya , R . , Gonzalez , A . M . , Debiase , P . J . , Trejo , H . E . , Goldman , R . D . , Flitney , F . W . and Jones , J . C . ( 2009 ) . Recruitment of vimentin to the cell surface by beta3 integrin and plectin mediates adhesion strength . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1390 - 1400 . Borghi , N . , Lowndes , M . , Maruthamuthu , V . , Gardel , M . L . and Nelson , W . J . ( 2010 ) . Regulation of cell motile behavior by crosstalk between cadherin - and integrin - mediated adhesions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 13324 - 13329 . Braga , V . M . and Yap , A . S . ( 2005 ) . The challenges of abundance : epithelial junctions and small GTPase signalling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 466 - 474 . Bringmann , H . and Hyman , A . A . ( 2005 ) . A cytokinesis furrow is positioned by two consecutive signals . Nature 436 , 731 - 734 . Burridge , K . , Sastry , S . K . and Sallee , J . L . ( 2006 ) . Regulation of cell adhesion by protein - tyrosine phosphatases . I . Cell - matrix adhesion . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 15593 - 15596 . Byzova , T . V . , Goldman , C . K . , Pampori , N . , Thomas , K . A . , Bett , A . , Shattil , S . J . and Plow , E . F . ( 2000 ) . A mechanism for modulation of cellular responses to VEGF : activation of the integrins . Mol . Cell 6 , 851 - 860 . Canonici , A . , Steelant , W . , Rigot , V . , Khomitch - Baud , A . , Boutaghou - Cherid , H . , Bruyneel , E . , Van Roy , F . , Garrouste , F . , Pommier , G . and Andre , F . ( 2008 ) . Insulin - like growth factor - I receptor , E - cadherin and alpha v integrin form a dynamic complex under the control of alpha - catenin . Int . J . Cancer 122 , 572 - 582 . Carmeliet , P . , Lampugnani , M . G . , Moons , L . , Breviario , F . , Compernolle , V . , Bono , F . , Balconi , G . , Spagnuolo , R . , Oosthuyse , B . , Dewerchin , M . et al . ( 1999 ) . Targeted deficiency or cytosolic truncation of the VE - cadherin gene in mice impairs VEGF - mediated endothelial survival and angiogenesis . Cell 98 , 147 - 157 . Chang , L . and Goldman , R . D . ( 2004 ) . Intermediate filaments mediate cytoskeletal crosstalk . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 601 - 613 . Chartier , N . T . , Laine , M . , Gout , S . , Pawlak , G . , Marie , C . A . , Matos , P . , Block , M . R . and Jacquier - Sarlin , M . R . ( 2006 ) . Laminin - 5 - integrin interaction signals through PI 3 - kinase and Rac1b to promote assembly of adherens junctions in HT - 29 cells . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 31 - 46 . Chattopadhyay , N . , Wang , Z . , Ashman , L . K . , Brady - Kalnay , S . M . and Kreidberg , J . A . ( 2003 ) . alpha3beta1 integrin - CD151 , a component of the cadherin - catenin complex , regulates PTPmu expression and cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1351 - 1362 . 1191 Adhesive crosstalk J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Chausovsky , A . , Bershadsky , A . D . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2000 ) . Cadherin - mediated regulation of microtubule dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 797 - 804 . Chu , Y . S . , Thomas , W . A . , Eder , O . , Pincet , F . , Perez , E . , Thiery , J . P . and Dufour , S . ( 2004 ) . Force measurements in E - cadherin - mediated cell doublets reveal rapid adhesion strengthened by actin cytoskeleton remodeling through Rac and Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 1183 - 1194 . Colakoglu , G . and Brown , A . ( 2009 ) . Intermediate filaments exchange subunits along their length and elongate by end - to - end annealing . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 769 - 777 . Crawford , B . D . , Henry , C . A . , Clason , T . A . , Becker , A . L . and Hille , M . B . ( 2003 ) . Activity and distribution of paxillin , focal adhesion kinase , and cadherin indicate cooperative roles during zebrafish morphogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 3065 - 3081 . Davidson , L . A . , Hoffstrom , B . G . , Keller , R . and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2002 ) . Mesendoderm extension and mantle closure in Xenopus laevis gastrulation : combined roles for integrin alpha ( 5 ) beta ( 1 ) , fibronectin , and tissue geometry . Dev . Biol . 242 , 109 - 129 . Davidson , L . A . , Marsden , M . , Keller , R . and Desimone , D . W . ( 2006 ) . Integrin alpha5beta1 and fibronectin regulate polarized cell protrusions required for Xenopus convergence and extension . Curr . Biol . 16 , 833 - 844 . den Elzen , N . , Buttery , C . V . , Maddugoda , M . P . , Ren , G . and Yap , A . S . ( 2009 ) . Cadherin adhesion receptors orient the mitotic spindle during symmetric cell division in mammalian epithelia . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3740 - 3750 . Desai , R . A . , Gao , L . , Raghavan , S . , Liu , W . F . and Chen , C . S . ( 2009 ) . Cell polarity triggered by cell - cell adhesion via E - cadherin . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 905 - 911 . Dupin , I . , Camand , E . and Etienne - Manneville , S . ( 2009 ) . Classical cadherins control nucleus and centrosome position and cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 779 - 786 . Dzamba , B . J . , Jakab , K . R . , Marsden , M . , Schwartz , M . A . and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2009 ) . Cadherin adhesion , tissue tension , and noncanonical Wnt signaling regulate fibronectin matrix organization . Dev . Cell 16 , 421 - 432 . Ehrlich , J . S . , Hansen , M . D . and Nelson , W . J . ( 2002 ) . Spatio - temporal regulation of Rac1 localization and lamellipodia dynamics during epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Dev . Cell 3 , 259 - 270 . El Sayegh , T . Y . , Arora , P . D . , Fan , L . , Laschinger , C . A . , Greer , P . A . , McCulloch , C . A . and Kapus , A . ( 2005 ) . Phosphorylation of N - cadherin - associated cortactin by Fer kinase regulates N - cadherin mobility and intercellular adhesion strength . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5514 - 5527 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . and Discher , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 - 689 . Etienne - Manneville , S . and Hall , A . ( 2002 ) . Rho GTPases in cell biology . Nature 420 , 629 - 635 . Ezratty , E . J . , Partridge , M . A . and Gundersen , G . G . ( 2005 ) . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 581 - 590 . Farooqui , R . and Fenteany , G . ( 2005 ) . Multiple rows of cells behind an epithelial wound edge extend cryptic lamellipodia to collectively drive cell - sheet movement . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 51 - 63 . Fouquet , S . , Lugo - Martinez , V . H . , Faussat , A . M . , Renaud , F . , Cardot , P . , Chambaz , J . , Pincon - Raymond , M . and Thenet , S . ( 2004 ) . Early loss of E - cadherin from cell - cell contacts is involved in the onset of Anoikis in enterocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 43061 - 43069 . Fournier , A . K . , Campbell , L . E . , Castagnino , P . , Liu , W . F . , Chung , B . M . , Weaver , V . M . , Chen , C . S . and Assoian , R . K . ( 2008 ) . Rac - dependent cyclin D1 gene expression regulated by cadherin - and integrin - mediated adhesion . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 226 - 233 . Fudge , D . S . , Gardner , K . H . , Forsyth , V . T . , Riekel , C . and Gosline , J . M . ( 2003 ) . The mechanical properties of hydrated intermediate filaments : insights from hagfish slime threads . Biophys . J . 85 , 2015 - 2027 . Gao , L . , McBeath , R . and Chen , C . S . ( 2010 ) . Stem cell shape regulates a chondrogenic versus myogenic fate through Rac1 and N - cadherin . Stem Cells 28 , 564 - 572 . Giannone , G . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2006 ) . Substrate rigidity and force define form through tyrosine phosphatase and kinase pathways . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 213 - 223 . Godsel , L . M . , Hobbs , R . P . and Green , K . J . ( 2008 ) . Intermediate filament assembly : dynamics to disease . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 28 - 37 . Gong , Y . , Mo , C . and Fraser , S . E . ( 2004 ) . Planar cell polarity signalling controls cell division orientation during zebrafish gastrulation . Nature 430 , 689 - 693 . Guarino , M . ( 2007 ) . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition and tumour invasion . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 39 , 2153 - 2160 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 , 509 - 514 . Heald , R . , Tournebize , R . , Habermann , A . , Karsenti , E . and Hyman , A . ( 1997 ) . Spindle assembly in Xenopus egg extracts : respective roles of centrosomes and microtubule self - organization . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 615 - 628 . Hodivala , K . J . and Watt , F . M . ( 1994 ) . Evidence that cadherins play a role in the downregulation of integrin expression that occurs during keratinocyte terminal differentiation . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 589 - 600 . Hotta , A . , Kawakatsu , T . , Nakatani , T . , Sato , T . , Matsui , C . , Sukezane , T . , Akagi , T . , Hamaji , T . , Grigoriev , I . , Akhmanova , A . et al . ( 2010 ) . Laminin - based cell adhesion anchors microtubule plus ends to the epithelial cell basal cortex through LL5alpha / beta . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 901 - 917 . Huveneers , S . and Danen , E . H . ( 2009 ) . Adhesion signaling - crosstalk between integrins , Src and Rho . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1059 - 1069 . Illes , A . , Enyedi , B . , Tamas , P . , Balazs , A . , Bogel , G . , Melinda , Lukacs and Buday , L . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin is required for integrin - mediated cell spreading . Immunol . Lett . 104 , 124 - 130 . Kang , H . G . , Jenabi , J . M . , Zhang , J . , Keshelava , N . , Shimada , H . , May , W . A . , Ng , T . , Reynolds , C . P . , Triche , T . J . and Sorensen , P . H . ( 2007 ) . E - cadherin cell - cell adhesion in ewing tumor cells mediates suppression of anoikis through activation of the ErbB4 tyrosine kinase . Cancer Res . 67 , 3094 - 3105 . Kosodo , Y . , Roper , K . , Haubensak , W . , Marzesco , A . M . , Corbeil , D . and Huttner , W . B . ( 2004 ) . Asymmetric distribution of the apical plasma membrane during neurogenic divisions of mammalian neuroepithelial cells . EMBO J . 23 , 2314 - 2324 . Kowalczyk , A . P . , Navarro , P . , Dejana , E . , Bornslaeger , E . A . , Green , K . J . , Kopp , D . S . and Borgwardt , J . E . ( 1998 ) . VE - cadherin and desmoplakin are assembled into dermal microvascular endothelial intercellular junctions : a pivotal role for plakoglobin in the recruitment of desmoplakin to intercellular junctions . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 3045 - 3057 . Larsson , C . ( 2006 ) . Protein kinase C and the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . Cell . Signal . 18 , 276 - 284 . le Duc , Q . , Shi , Q . , Blonk , I . , Sonnenberg , A . , Wang , N . , Leckband , D . and de Rooij , J . ( 2010 ) . Vinculin potentiates E - cadherin mechanosensing and is recruited to actin - anchored sites within adherens junctions in a myosin II - dependent manner . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 1107 - 1115 . Lee , H . H . , Tien , S . C . , Jou , T . S . , Chang , Y . C . , Jhong , J . G . and Chang , Z . F . ( 2010 ) . Src - dependent phosphorylation of ROCK participates in regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3368 - 3377 . Leonard , M . , Chan , Y . and Menko , A . S . ( 2008 ) . Identification of a novel intermediate filament - linked N - cadherin / gamma - catenin complex involved in the establishment of the cytoarchitecture of differentiated lens fiber cells . Dev . Biol . 319 , 298 - 308 . Liu , W . F . , Nelson , C . M . , Tan , J . L . and Chen , C . S . ( 2007 ) . Cadherins , RhoA , and Rac1 are differentially required for stretch - mediated proliferation in endothelial versus smooth muscle cells . Circ . Res . 101 , e44 - e52 . Liu , Y . , Sweet , D . T . , Irani - Tehrani , M . , Maeda , N . and Tzima , E . ( 2008 ) . Shc coordinates signals from intercellular junctions and integrins to regulate flow - induced inflammation . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 185 - 196 . Liu , Z . , Tan , J . L . , Cohen , D . M . , Yang , M . T . , Sniadecki , N . J . , Ruiz , S . A . , Nelson , C . M . and Chen , C . S . ( 2010 ) . Mechanical tugging force regulates the size of cell - cell junctions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 9944 - 9949 . Llense , F . and Martin - Blanco , E . ( 2008 ) . JNK signaling controls border cell cluster integrity and collective cell migration . Curr . Biol . 18 , 538 - 544 . Loulier , K . , Lathia , J . D . , Marthiens , V . , Relucio , J . , Mughal , M . R . , Tang , S . C . , Coksaygan , T . , Hall , P . E . , Chigurupati , S . , Patton , B . et al . ( 2009 ) . beta1 integrin maintains integrity of the embryonic neocortical stem cell niche . PloS Biol . 7 , e1000176 . Lu , B . , Roegiers , F . , Jan , L . Y . and Jan , Y . N . ( 2001 ) . Adherens junctions inhibit asymmetric division in the Drosophila epithelium . Nature 409 , 522 - 525 . Marsden , M . and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2003 ) . Integrin - ECM interactions regulate cadherin - dependent cell adhesion and are required for convergent extension in Xenopus . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1182 - 1191 . Marthiens , V . , Kazanis , I . , Moss , L . , Long , K . and Ffrench - Constant , C . ( 2010 ) . Adhesion molecules in the stem cell niche - more than just staying in shape ? J . Cell Sci . 123 , 1613 - 1622 . Martinez - Rico , C . , Pincet , F . , Thiery , J . P . and Dufour , S . ( 2010 ) . Integrins stimulate E - cadherin - mediated intercellular adhesion by regulating Src - kinase activation and actomyosin contractility . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 712 - 722 . Maruthamuthu , V . , Aratyn - Schaus , Y . and Gardel , M . L . ( 2010 ) . Conserved F - actin dynamics and force transmission at cell adhesions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 583 - 588 . McBeath , R . , Pirone , D . M . , Nelson , C . M . , Bhadriraju , K . and Chen , C . S . ( 2004 ) . Cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Dev . Cell 6 , 483 - 495 . McLachlan , R . W . , Kraemer , A . , Helwani , F . M . , Kovacs , E . M . and Yap , A . S . ( 2007 ) . E - cadherin adhesion activates c - Src signaling at cell - cell contacts . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 3214 - 3223 . Meng , W . , Mushika , Y . , Ichii , T . and Takeichi , M . ( 2008 ) . Anchorage of microtubule minus ends to adherens junctions regulates epithelial cell - cell contacts . Cell 135 , 948 - 959 . Messina , G . , Blasi , C . , La Rocca , S . A . , Pompili , M . , Calconi , A . and Grossi , M . ( 2005 ) . p27Kip1 acts downstream of N - cadherin - mediated cell adhesion to promote myogenesis beyond cell cycle regulation . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1469 - 1480 . Monier - Gavelle , F . and Duband , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Cross talk between adhesion molecules : control of N - cadherin activity by intracellular signals elicited by beta1 and beta3 integrins in migrating neural crest cells . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1663 - 1681 . Mourton , T . , Hellberg , C . B . , Burden - Gulley , S . M . , Hinman , J . , Rhee , A . and Brady - Kalnay , S . M . ( 2001 ) . The PTPmu protein - tyrosine phosphatase binds and recruits the scaffolding protein RACK1 to cell - cell contacts . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 14896 - 14901 . Muller - Marschhausen , K . , Waschke , J . and Drenckhahn , D . ( 2008 ) . Physiological hydrostatic pressure protects endothelial monolayer integrity . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 294 , C324 - C332 . Nelson , W . J . ( 2008 ) . Regulation of cell - cell adhesion by the cadherin - catenin complex . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 36 , 149 - 155 . Noren , N . K . , Niessen , C . M . , Gumbiner , B . M . and Burridge , K . ( 2001 ) . Cadherin engagement regulates Rho family GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 33305 - 33308 . Ohashi , T . , Sugaya , Y . , Sakamoto , N . and Sato , M . ( 2007 ) . Hydrostatic pressure influences morphology and expression of VE - cadherin of vascular endothelial cells . J . Biomech . 40 , 2399 - 2405 . Onodera , T . , Sakai , T . , Hsu , J . C . , Matsumoto , K . , Chiorini , J . A . and Yamada , K . M . ( 2010 ) . Btbd7 regulates epithelial cell dynamics and branching morphogenesis . Science 329 , 562 - 565 . Pathre , P . , Arregui , C . , Wampler , T . , Kue , I . , Leung , T . C . , Lilien , J . and Balsamo , J . ( 2001 ) . PTP1B regulates neurite extension mediated by cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesion molecules . J . Neurosci . Res . 63 , 143 - 150 . Perez - Moreno , M . and Fuchs , E . ( 2006 ) . Catenins : keeping cells from getting their signals crossed . Dev . Cell 11 , 601 - 612 . 1192 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 8 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Playford , M . P . and Schaller , M . D . ( 2004 ) . The interplay between Src and integrins in normal and tumor biology . Oncogene 23 , 7928 - 7946 . Playford , M . P . , Vadali , K . , Cai , X . , Burridge , K . and Schaller , M . D . ( 2008 ) . Focal adhesion kinase regulates cell - cell contact formation in epithelial cells via modulation of Rho . Exp . Cell Res . 314 , 3187 - 3197 . Ravichandran , K . S . ( 2001 ) . Signaling via Shc family adapter proteins . Oncogene 20 , 6322 - 6330 . Ren , G . , Helwani , F . M . , Verma , S . , McLachlan , R . W . , Weed , S . A . and Yap , A . S . ( 2009 ) . Cortactin is a functional target of E - cadherin - activated Src family kinases in MCF7 epithelial monolayers . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 18913 - 18922 . Ren , X . D . , Kiosses , W . B . and Schwartz , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of the small GTP - binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the cytoskeleton . EMBO J . 18 , 578 - 585 . Retta , S . F . , Balzac , F . and Avolio , M . ( 2006 ) . Rap1 : a turnabout for the crosstalk between cadherins and integrins . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 283 - 293 . Rozario , T . and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2010 ) . The extracellular matrix in development and morphogenesis : a dynamic view . Dev . Biol . 341 , 126 - 140 . Rozario , T . , Dzamba , B . , Weber , G . F . , Davidson , L . A . and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2009 ) . The physical state of fibronectin matrix differentially regulates morphogenetic movements in vivo . Dev . Biol . 327 , 386 - 398 . Sahai , E . and Marshall , C . J . ( 2002 ) . ROCK and Dia have opposing effects on adherens junctions downstream of Rho . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 408 - 415 . Sakai , T . , Larsen , M . and Yamada , K . M . ( 2003 ) . Fibronectin requirement in branching morphogenesis . Nature 423 , 876 - 881 . Sallee , J . L . , Wittchen , E . S . and Burridge , K . ( 2006 ) . Regulation of cell adhesion by protein - tyrosine phosphatases : II . Cell - cell adhesion . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 16189 - 16192 . Sangrar , W . , Gao , Y . , Scott , M . , Truesdell , P . and Greer , P . A . ( 2007 ) . Fer - mediated cortactin phosphorylation is associated with efficient fibroblast migration and is dependent on reactive oxygen species generation during integrin - mediated cell adhesion . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 6140 - 6152 . Schwartz , E . A . , Bizios , R . , Medow , M . S . and Gerritsen , M . E . ( 1999 ) . Exposure of human vascular endothelial cells to sustained hydrostatic pressure stimulates proliferation . Involvement of the alphaV integrins . Circ . Res . 84 , 315 - 322 . Schwartz , M . A . and Assoian , R . K . ( 2001 ) . Integrins and cell proliferation : regulation of cyclin - dependent kinases via cytoplasmic signaling pathways . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2553 - 2560 . Shay - Salit , A . , Shushy , M . , Wolfovitz , E . , Yahav , H . , Breviario , F . , Dejana , E . and Resnick , N . ( 2002 ) . VEGF receptor 2 and the adherens junction as a mechanical transducer in vascular endothelial cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 9462 - 9467 . Shewan , A . M . , Maddugoda , M . , Kraemer , A . , Stehbens , S . J . , Verma , S . , Kovacs , E . M . and Yap , A . S . ( 2005 ) . Myosin 2 is a key Rho kinase target necessary for the local concentration of E - cadherin at cell - cell contacts . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 4531 - 4542 . Sonnenberg , A . and Liem , R . K . ( 2007 ) . Plakins in development and disease . Exp . Cell Res . 313 , 2189 - 2203 . Stoker , A . W . ( 2005 ) . Protein tyrosine phosphatases and signalling . J . Endocrinol . 185 , 19 - 33 . Symowicz , J . , Adley , B . P . , Gleason , K . J . , Johnson , J . J . , Ghosh , S . , Fishman , D . A . , Hudson , L . G . and Stack , M . S . ( 2007 ) . Engagement of collagen - binding integrins promotes matrix metalloproteinase - 9 - dependent E - cadherin ectodomain shedding in ovarian carcinoma cells . Cancer Res . 67 , 2030 - 2039 . Theveneau , E . , Marchant , L . , Kuriyama , S . , Gull , M . , Moepps , B . , Parsons , M . and Mayor , R . ( 2010 ) . Collective chemotaxis requires contact - dependent cell polarity . Dev . Cell 19 , 39 - 53 . Todorovic , V . , Desai , B . V . , Schroeder Patterson , M . J . , Amargo , E . V . , Dubash , A . D . , Yin , T . , Jones , J . C . and Green , K . J . ( 2010 ) . Plakoglobin regulates cell motility through Rho - and fibronectin - dependent Src signaling . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3576 - 3586 . Trepat , X . , Wasserman , M . R . , Angelini , T . E . , Millet , E . , Weitz , D . A . , Butler , J . P . and Fredberg , J . J . ( 2009 ) . Physical forces during collective cell migration . Nat . Phys . 5 , 426 - 430 . Tsuruta , D . and Jones , J . C . ( 2003 ) . The vimentin cytoskeleton regulates focal contact size and adhesion of endothelial cells subjected to shear stress . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4977 - 4984 . Tzima , E . , Irani - Tehrani , M . , Kiosses , W . B . , Dejana , E . , Schultz , D . A . , Engelhardt , B . , Cao , G . , DeLisser , H . and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2005 ) . A mechanosensory complex that mediates the endothelial cell response to fluid shear stress . Nature 437 , 426 - 431 . Van Aelst , L . and Symons , M . ( 2002 ) . Role of Rho family GTPases in epithelial morphogenesis . Genes Dev . 16 , 1032 - 1054 . Walker , J . L . , Menko , A . S . , Khalil , S . , Rebustini , I . , Hoffman , M . P . , Kreidberg , J . A . and Kukuruzinska , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Diverse roles of E - cadherin in the morphogenesis of the submandibular gland : insights into the formation of acinar and ductal structures . Dev . Dyn . 237 , 3128 - 3141 . Wang , H . , Radjendirane , V . , Wary , K . K . and Chakrabarty , S . ( 2004 ) . Transforming growth factor beta regulates cell - cell adhesion through extracellular matrix remodeling and activation of focal adhesion kinase in human colon carcinoma Moser cells . Oncogene 23 , 5558 - 5561 . Wang , X . , He , L . , Wu , Y . I . , Hahn , K . M . and Montell , D . J . ( 2010 ) . Light - mediated activation reveals a key role for Rac in collective guidance of cell movement in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 591 - 597 . Warner , S . J . and Longmore , G . D . ( 2009 ) . Cdc42 antagonizes Rho1 activity at adherens junctions to limit epithelial cell apical tension . J . Cell Biol . 187 , 119 - 133 . Watanabe , T . , Sato , K . and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2009 ) . Cadherin - mediated intercellular adhesion and signaling cascades involving small GTPases . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 , a003020 . Watt , F . M . ( 2002 ) . Role of integrins in regulating epidermal adhesion , growth and differentiation . EMBO J . 21 , 3919 - 3926 . Webb , D . J . , Donais , K . , Whitmore , L . A . , Thomas , S . M . , Turner , C . E . , Parsons , J . T . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 2004 ) . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 154 - 161 . Wildenberg , G . A . , Dohn , M . R . , Carnahan , R . H . , Davis , M . A . , Lobdell , N . A . , Settleman , J . and Reynolds , A . B . ( 2006 ) . p120 - catenin and p190RhoGAP regulate cell - cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism between Rac and Rho . Cell 127 , 1027 - 1039 . Wilson , E . , Sudhir , K . and Ives , H . E . ( 1995 ) . Mechanical strain of rat vascular smooth muscle cells is sensed by specific extracellular matrix / integrin interactions . J . Clin . Invest . 96 , 2364 - 2372 . Yamada , S . and Nelson , W . J . ( 2007 ) . Localized zones of Rho and Rac activities drive initiation and expansion of epithelial cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 517 - 527 . Yano , H . , Mazaki , Y . , Kurokawa , K . , Hanks , S . K . , Matsuda , M . and Sabe , H . ( 2004 ) . Roles played by a subset of integrin signaling molecules in cadherin - based cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 283 - 295 . Yin , T . , Getsios , S . , Caldelari , R . , Kowalczyk , A . P . , Muller , E . J . , Jones , J . C . and Green , K . J . ( 2005 ) . Plakoglobin suppresses keratinocyte motility through both cell - cell adhesion - dependent and - independent mechanisms . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 5420 - 5425 . Yonemura , S . , Wada , Y . , Watanabe , T . , Nagafuchi , A . and Shibata , M . ( 2010 ) . alpha - Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction development . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 533 - 542 . Zhong , C . , Kinch , M . S . and Burridge , K . ( 1997 ) . Rho - stimulated contractility contributes to the fibroblastic phenotype of Ras - transformed epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 2329 - 2344 . Zhurinsky , J . , Shtutman , M . and Ben - Ze’ev , A . ( 2000 ) . Plakoglobin and beta - catenin : protein interactions , regulation and biological roles . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3127 - 3139 . 1193 Adhesive crosstalk J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e