107 . T . C . Pierson , R . W . Doms , Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 281 , 1 ( 2003 ) . 108 . F . Reggiori , H . R . Pelham , NatureCellBiol . 4 , 117 ( 2002 ) . 109 . L . D . Hernandez , L . R . Hoffman , T . G . Wolfsberg , J . M . White , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 627 ( 1996 ) . 110 . We thank J . Heuser , J . Kartenbeck , and N . Pante for electron micrographs , and A . Tagawa and L . Ellgaard for critical reading of the manuscript . Supported by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation , the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology ( SEP ) , and the European Union ( Euro Gene Drug ) ( A . H . ) and by the Human Frontiers Science Program ( A . E . S . ) . R E V I E W Bacterial Invasion : The Paradigms of Enteroinvasive Pathogens Pascale Cossart 1 * and Philippe J . Sansonetti 2 * Invasive bacteria actively induce their own uptake by phagocytosis in normally nonphagocytic cells and then either establish a protected niche within which they survive and replicate , or disseminate from cell to cell by means of an actin - based motility process . The mechanisms underlying bacterial entry , phagosome matura - tion , and dissemination reveal common strategies as well as unique tactics evolved by individual species to establish infection . To establish and maintain a successful infec - tion , microbial pathogens have evolved a va - riety of strategies to invade the host , avoid or resist the innate immune response , damage the cells , and multiply in specific and nor - mally sterile regions . Based on their capacity to deal with these critical issues , bacteria can be grouped in different categories . Here we review the so - called invasive bacteria , i . e . , bacteria that are able to induce their own phagocytosis into cells that are normally nonphagocytic . We focus on the tactics used by enteroinvasive bacteria to trigger their uptake by epithelial cells and discuss their intracellular life - styles . The mechanisms of entry and life - styles of other intracellular patho - gens have been reviewed elsewhere ( 1 – 4 ) . During phagocytosis by phagocytes , bacteria play a passive role . In contrast , during bacterial - induced phagocytosis , the bac - terium is the key and active player in the complex interplay between the invading microbe and the host cell ( 5 ) . Another im - portant component is the cytoskeleton , whose plasticity is critical and optimally exploited . After internalization , some bac - teria remain in a vacuole , in which they replicate . They prevent the normal matura - tion and trafficking of the phagosome and impair its normal bacteriolytic activities . Other bacteria escape from the vacuole and replicate in the cytosol . In some cases , they also move and disseminate by means of an actin - based motility process . How the cell senses the bacterial intruders and adjusts its transcription and translation programs to its new life with a parasite is an important issue . Apoptosis and anti - apoptosis , as well as cell cycle – and inflam - mation - related signaling pathways , are repro - grammed after infection to help the cell to survive the stress induced by the infection . The success of an infection depends on the messages that the two players—the bacterium and the cell—send to each other . At each step of the infectious process , the bacterium exploits the host cell machinery to its own profit . Entry Mechanisms To enter nonphagocytic cells such as intesti - nal epithelial cells , some microbial pathogens express a surface protein able to bind eukary - otic surface receptors often involved in cell - matrix or cell - cell adherence . Expression of this protein leads to the formation of a vacu - ole that engulfs the bacterium through a “zip - pering” process in which relatively modest cytoskeletal rearrangements and membrane extensions occur in response to engagement of the receptor . The initial interactions be - tween the bacterial protein and its receptor trigger a cascade of signals , including protein phosphorylations and / or recruitment of adap - tors and effectors , and activation of cytoskel - eton components that culminate in phagocyt - ic cup closure and bacterial internalization . Other pathogens have devised mechanisms to bind a protein that can itself act as a bridge between the bacterium and a transmembrane receptor , which then mediates the entry pro - cess . Finally , pathogens can also bypass the first step of adhesion and interact directly with the cellular machinery that regulates the actin cytoskeleton dynamics by injecting ef - fectors through a dedicated secretory system . The effector molecules cause massive cy - toskeletal changes that trigger the formation of a macropinocytic pocket , loosely bound to the bacterial body . The Zipper Mechanism of Entry Yersinia pseudotuberculosis and Listeria monocytogenes both harness transmembrane cell - adhesion proteins as receptors for entry into mammalian cells ( Figs . 1A and 2A ) . Entry can be divided into three successive steps : ( i ) Contact and adherence . This step is independent of the actin cytoskeleton and involves only the bacterial ligand and its receptor . It leads to receptor clustering . ( ii ) Phagocytic cup formation . This step is trig - gered by the transient signals occurring after formation of the first ligand - receptor complexes and propagating around the in - vading microbe . These signals induce actin polymerization and membrane extension . ( iii ) Phagocytic cup closure and retraction , and actin depolymerization . The Yersinia outer - membrane protein in - vasin binds to integrin receptors that have the (cid:1) 1 chain and are normally implicated in ad - herence of cells to the extracellular matrix ( 6 ) . Invasin does not possess the RGD motif present in fibronectin , but both proteins inter - act with integrins by a structurally similar domain . Invasin has a higher affinity for in - tegrins and can oligomerize , inducing inte - grin clustering and efficient downstream sig - naling . The cytoplasmic tail of the (cid:1) 1 chain , which normally interacts with the cytoskele - ton in focal complexes of adhesion plaques , is critical for entry , but surprisingly , alter - ations of this domain that impair interaction with the cytoskeleton increase internaliza - tion . Thus , a lower affinity of the integrin for the cytoskeleton could allow higher mobility of the receptors in the membrane . Activation of integrins leads to tyrosine - phosphorylation events required for entry . The tyrosine kinase FAK ( focal adhesion ki - nase ) is the most attractive candidate for transmitting a signal from clustered integrins to the cytoskeleton , because the (cid:1) 1 - chain cy - toplasmic domain binds to FAK , and domi - nant - inhibitory mutations in FAK strongly impair invasin - mediated uptake ( 7 ) . Src , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI 3 - kinase ) , and 1 Unite´ des Interactions Bacte´ries - Cellules , INSERM Unite´ 604 , 2 Unite´ de Pathoge´nie Microbienne Mo - leculaire , INSERM Unite´389 , De´partement de Biologie Cellulaire et Infection , Institut Pasteur , 28 Rue du Docteur Roux , Paris 75015 , France . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : pcossart @ pasteur . fr ( P . C . ) ; psan . son @ pasteur . fr ( P . J . S . ) C E L L U L A R I N V A S I O N S 9 APRIL 2004 VOL 304 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 242 S P E C I A L S E C T I O N Rac are also involved in invasin - mediated uptake . Why there is a requirement for phos - phoinositide 3 - kinase is unknown . Efficient entry involves a Rac1 - Arp2 / 3 pathway which may involve N - WASP ( 8 – 10 ) . The local concentration of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate [ ( PIP 2 , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ] is critical for entry , and Arf6 may play a role in activa - tion of phosphoinositol - 4 - phosphate - 5 - kinase ( PIP 5 kinase ) and control of cytoskeleton re - arrangements and membrane traffic involved in closure of the phagocytic cup ( 11 ) . Several surface proteins contribute to entry of L . monocytogenes into nonphagocytic cells in vitro ( 12 ) . The best - characterized protein , in - ternalin ( InlA ) , is a surface protein that is co - valently anchored to the cell wall and belongs to a large family of leucine - rich repeat ( LRR ) pro - teins . As for invasin , coating of latex beads with internalin promotes their entry , thus facilitating dissection of the specific pathway . Entry of Lis - teria into cells involves interaction between the LRR region of internalin and the first ectodo - main of human E - cadherin , a transmembrane glycoprotein normally involved in homophilic E - cadherin – E - cadherin interactions at adherens junctions of polarized epithelial cells . The LRR domain surrounds the first ectodomain of E - cadherin ( 13 ) . This weak - affinity interaction cannot take place if proline - 16 is changed into glutamic acid , as in murine E cadherin ( 14 ) . Formation and maintenance of adherens junc - tions require the integrity of the E - cadherin cy - toplasmic domain that binds catenins ( (cid:2) , (cid:1) , and p120 catenins ) , which interact with the cell actin cytoskeleton ( 15 ) . Similarly , entry of Listeria into cells requires the terminal 35 amino acids of E - cadherin . The latter binds to (cid:1) - catenin , which recruits (cid:2) - catenin , which in turn interacts with actin . Actin polymerization during internalin - mediated entry is Rac dependent and mediated by Arp2 / 3 , but how Arp2 / 3 is activated is un - known ( 16 ) . Entry also requires an unconven - tional myosin , myosinVIIa , and its ligand veza - tin ( 17 ) . These two proteins probably play a role in the dynamics of the phagocytic cup . How the tension generated by the myosin motor is cou - pled to actin polymerization required for entry has not been established . The second well - characterized L . mono - cytogenes invasion protein is InlB ( 12 , 18 , 19 ) . This surface protein belongs to the LRR family of proteins and is only loosely attached by its C - terminal repeats to the bacterial surface , where it interacts with lipotechoic acids . Soluble InlB can reasso - ciate with the bacterial surface of an InlB mutant and promote entry . InlB interacts with three cellular ligands ( 12 , 18 ) . The most relevant one is Met , a transmem - brane receptor tyrosine kinase that upon interac - tion with its normal ligand , the hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , dimerizes and elicits phos - phorylation on two critical residues that act as docking sites to recruit signaling and adaptor molecules ( 20 ) . Met binding to the concave sur - face of the InlB LRRs also leads to its transient phosphorylation and to the recruitment and phos - phorylation of the adaptor proteins Cbl , Gab1 , and Shc , and activation of PI 3 - kinase with the generation of PIP 3 at the plasma membrane ( 21 ) . Optimal activity of Met requires the presence of glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) on the cell surface , probably promoting oligomerization of the growth factor and / or its protection from extra - cellular proteases . GAGs also increase Listeria InlB - dependent entry into the target cell . Heparin can detach InlB from the bacterial surface , rein - Fig . 1 . Mechanisms used by bacteria to enter cells . ( A ) The zipper mechanism used by Yersinia and Listeria . ( B ) The trigger mechanism used by Salmonella and Shigella . C E L L U L A R I N V A S I O N S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 304 9 APRIL 2004 243 S P E C I A L S E C T I O N forcing the hypothesis that InlB may act as a soluble protein . Thus , InlB mimics HGF , the normal Met ligand , and similarly to growth fac - tors , soluble InlB induces actin - rich membrane ruffles ( Fig . 2C ) . InlB also interacts with gC1qR / p32 , a ubiquitous protein first identified as the receptor for the globular part of the comple - ment component C1q ( 22 ) . However , the sub - cellular location and function of gC1qR re - main controversial , and its role in cell entry remains to be clarified . Contact between Met and InlB , present on the bacterium or released from its surface , ini - tiates actin nucleation and polymerization via the small guanosine triphosphatase ( GTPase ) Rac , WAVE , and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 19 , 23 ) . Actin filament elongation , which provides the driving force for membrane extension around the bacte - rium , involves VASP , which may act as an anticapping protein at the barbed ends . Cofilin also participates in this process . This protein increases actin turnover by triggering actin depolymerization at pointed ends of actin filaments and by creating new free ends for polymerization by severing actin filaments . In the initial steps of cell entry , cofilin activityismodulatedbyLIMkinase . Thenprogres - sive accumulation of cofilin on filaments favors filament disassembly and retraction of the phago - cytic cup . Thus , the InlB - Met interactions probably elicit both a Rac - WAVE - ARP2 / 3 and a Rac - PAK - LIM - kinase - cofilin cascade . It is still unknown how Rac is activated downstream of Met . The role of PI 3 - kinase is also unknown . The working hy - pothesis is that , as in phagocytosis , PI 3 - kinase facilitatescupclosure , probablybyrecruitingmem - brane vesicles and actin regulators . It may also induce sustained activation of Rac . InlB is thus a strong signaling protein that by itself acts as an invasin but may also potentiate other bacterial factors involved in Listeria entry and tissue tropism , such as internalin . Other pro - teins such as the autolysins Ami , Auto , and ActA contribute to Listeria adherence and entry ( 24 ) . In addition , listeriolysin O ( LLO ) , a pore - form - ing , cholesterol - dependent cytolysin involved mainly in escape from the internalization vacu - ole ( 25 , 26 ) and that , like other toxins , interacts with lipid rafts ( 27 ) , allows entry of extra - cellular calcium and stimulates entry ( 28 ) . Even in the absence of LLO , both interna - lin - and InlB - mediat - ed entry are depen - dent on the presence of raft microdomains , suggesting that for en - try , Listeria take ad - vantage of raft mi - crodomains , which are known to be en - riched in receptors and signaling mole - cules . Interestingly , cholesterol depletion does not affect the in - ternalin - and InlB - mediated pathways at the same step of the entry process ( 29 ) . The Trigger Mechanism of Entry Both Shigella and Salmonella use this mechanism to enter the cell ( Fig . 1B and Fig . 2B ) . Contact be - tween bacteria and cells is mediated by the type III secretory system ( TTSS ) ( Fig . 1 ) . The TTSS allows direct activation of components of the cy - toskeleton by delivery of dedicated bacterial effectors . In Salmonella , the TTSS is encoded by a chromosomal patho - genicity island ( SPI - 1 ) and in Shigella by a plasmid - located pathogenicity island ( PAI ) . These PAIs encode the structural components of the TTSS and some of their dedicated effectors . Two of these components ( i . e . , SipB / C in Salmonella , IpaB / C in Shigella ) form a pore , or translocator , that delivers the effectors into the cell cytoplasm , creating a continuum between the bacterial and eukary - otic cytoplasms ( 30 , 31 ) . The interaction of bacteria with their epithe - lial cell target occurs in four successive stages : 1 ) A pre - interaction stage . At 37°C , the ef - fector molecules stored in the bacterial cyto - plasm are associated with dedicated chaperones , whose major role is to avoid premature associa - tion of the effector molecules and their proteo - lytic degradation ( 32 ) . In exponentially growing bacteria , the TTSSs are properly assembled , but the secretion of effector proteins is repressed until the bacterium establishes contact with its cell target . Fig . 2 . The zipper and the trigger mechanisms . ( A ) : Zipper mechanism . From left to right : x - ray structure of internalin interacting with E - cadherin [ reprinted from ( 13 ) with permission from Elsevier ] ; scanning electron micrograph of Listeria entering into Caco2 cells ; immunoﬂuorescence images of Listeria entering into Vero cells ( red : Met ; green , actin ; and blue : bacteria ) . ( B ) Trigger mechanism . From left to right : Reconstitution of the TTSS ; scanning electron micrograph of Shigella entering into cells ; immunoﬂuorescence images of Shigella entering into Caco 2 cells ( red : cortactin ; green : actin ; and blue : bacteria ) . ( C ) InlB - mediated rufﬂing . Control cells and cells rufﬂing upon incubation with soluble InlB ( green : actin ) . ( D ) Shigella entering into Src dominant - negative cells ( red : cortactin ; green : actin ; and blue : bacteria ) . Src - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin is essential to trigger massive extension of actin ﬁlaments at a distance from the entry focus ; thus , cells expressing a Src dominant - negative construct form inefﬁcient entry foci with limited actin polymerization tightly around the entry vacuole . C E L L U L A R I N V A S I O N S 9 APRIL 2004 VOL 304 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 244 S P E C I A L S E C T I O N 2 ) An interaction stage . This stage encom - passes complex events leading to the formation of a signaling platform . A recognition event is likely to take place at the tip of the TTSS , activating the secretory process via a retroactive signaling , possibly involving an adenosine triphosphatase in the TTSS basal body ( 33 ) . In Shigella , the high - affinity binding of IpaB to CD44—the hyaluronic acid receptor that is strongly expressed on the basolateral membrane of intestinal epithelial cells and on the surface of many other cell types , including cells of myeloid lineage—may be a key step in achieving tran - sient adherence to the cell surface , activation of the secretory machinery , and insertion of the IpaB / C translocon into the eukaryotic cell mem - brane . Consistent with the association of CD44 with cholesterol and sphingolipid - rich mem - brane rafts , this step of the interaction is depen - dent on intact rafts ( 34 ) . Cholesterol extraction disrupts binding to and entry into epithelial cells , and IpaB and CD44 segregate in these rafts . Similarly , in Salmonella , the protein components of the SipB / C translocon also segregate in rafts . The initial interaction may take place in these membrane subdomains because ( i ) the targeted receptor is enriched in rafts ; ( ii ) the lipid com - position of rafts is optimal for the formation of the pore and translocon , in a way similar to the cholesterol dependence of several hemolysins ( 27 ) ; and ( iii ) these domains are enriched in signaling molecules such as tyrosine kinases of the src family . 3 ) The formation of a macropinocytic pocket . This stage involves localized but massive rear - rangements of the cell surface , characterized by the formation of intricate filopodial and lamelli - podial structures that appear similar in Salmonel - la and Shigella . Rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton largely account for the formation of the entry focus . At the early stage of Shigella entry , VirA , a plasmid - encoded protein secreted through the TTSS , induces local destabilization of the microtubules that results in their depoly - merization ( 35 ) . The latter affects the early events of actin rearrangement through the deac - tivation of RhoA , leading to Rac1 activation and formation of Rac1 - IRSp53 - WAVE2 complex that recruits Arp2 / 3 . IpaC in Shigella ( 36 ) and SipC in Salmonella ( 37 ) initiate actin nucle - ation through their C - terminal domain , which is exposed to the cytoplasm of the eukaryotic cell , via the IpaB / C or SipB / C pore . The mech - anism of initial actin nucleation , however , re - mains uncertain . SipC can nucleate actin alone in vitro ( 37 ) , but IpaC requires activation of Cdc42 and Rac 1 ( 36 ) . Massive extension of the actin filaments that form entry foci seems to respond to different mechanisms in Salmonella and Shigella . In Sal - monella , the translocated SopE proteins ( SopE1 and SopE2 ) act as exchange factors for the Cdc42 and Rac - 1 GTPases , thus massively boosting the initial nucleation event ( 38 ) . More - over , SopB / SigD , a TTSS - secreted phosphati - dylinositol phosphatase ( 39 ) , stimulates actin re - arrangements and mediates bacterial entry , whereas SipA binds and stabilizes actin fila - ments ( 40 ) . Shigella has evolved a similar pro - cess of boosting cytoskeletal rearrangements , al - though through different molecular mechanisms . The C - terminal domain of IpaC is central to the activation of Cdc42 and Rac - 1 , which is quickly followed by activation of the tyrosine kinase c - src upon contact with IpaC ( 41 ) , recruitment of cortactin to the membrane upon its c - src – medi - ated tyrosine phosphorylation , and further mas - sive actin polymerization in the vicinity of the original actin cup via the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 42 ) ( Fig . 2C ) . This process is amplified by IpgD , a Shigella homolog of SopB / SigD . IpgD expresses a phospatidylinositol phosphatase activity that hydrolyzes PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 into PI ( 5 ) P [ phosphatidyl - inositol 5 - phosphate ] , thus disconnecting the ac - tin subcortical cytoskeleton from the membrane and favoring actin dynamics at the entry site ( 43 ) . The Abl family of tyrosine kinases is also involved in Shigella entry through phosphoryl - ation of the adaptor molecule Crk ( 44 ) . 4 ) Actin depolymerization and closing of the macropinocytic pocket . This final stage is similar in Shigella and Salmonella , despite important differences between the effectors involved and the molecular mechanisms ex - ploited . In the case of Salmonella , SptP , a TTSS - secreted protein , has two activities : ( i ) a tyrosine - phosphatase activity that regulates activity of the mitogen - activated protein ki - nase ( MAPK ) induced by entry ; and ( ii ) a GAP ( GTPase - activating protein ) activity on Cdc42 and Rac that antagonizes the activity of SopE , thus leading to shrinking of the entry focus by blocking further actin poly - merization ( 45 ) . It may seem strange that proteins of opposite functions are injected simultaneously into the target cell . Recent evidence indicates that , despite equivalent amounts delivered by the TTSS , SopE is rapidly degraded through a proteasome - dependent pathway , whereas SptP is more stable ( 46 ) . In the case of Shigella , IpaA , a TTSS - secreted protein , binds the N - terminal head domain of vinculin , a key protein in the formation of cell - adherence plaques , and in - duces actin depolymerization ( 47 ) . Intracellular Life - Styles After internalization , bacteria remain in a vacuole or escape to the cytosol , where they replicate . Some intracytosolic bacteria may also move by a process of polarized actin polymerization that takes place at one pole of the bacterium and provides the force for bac - terial locomotion inside the cytosol and to - ward neighboring cells . The Vacuole as an Intracellular Replication Compartment Bacteria that replicate inside the internalization vacuole have developed an impressive array of strategies ( 4 ) aimed at surviving in a hostile and changing environment characterized by poor nu - trient content , progressive decrease of the pH , and delivery of antibacterial peptides and lyso - somal enzymes as late endosomes mature to lysosomes . In macrophages , these conditions are even more drastic and exacerbated by the deliv - ery of reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermedi - ates . Two major strategies can be recognized , although a given species may use a combination of both : ( i ) Bacteria may adapt to and eventually resist these hostile conditions , thus developing a state of metabolic adaptation to the stress im - posed by these conditions ; ( ii ) alternatively , bac - teria may alter the biogenesis and dynamics of their vacuolar compartment , thus creating for themselves a less hostile niche that is permissive for their survival and growth . Salmonella repre - sents a paradigm of the complex combination of these two survival and growth strategies ( Fig . 3 ) . After a few hours of invasion , bacteria reside in an atypical acidic compartment called the SCV ( Salmonella containing vacuole ) , which is nei - ther a late nor an early endosome ( 48 ) . How bacteria redirect the fate of this compartment away from the normal phagosomal pathway in - volves transient acquisition of rab5 , PI3 - kinase , EEA1 , and finally rab7 ( 49 ) . In addition , merg - ing of the SCV with the endoplasmic reticulum appears to contribute to early SCV maturation ( 50 ) and membranes of the trans - Golgi network surround the SCV at late times of infection ( 51 ) , suggesting interactions with both the endocytic and the biosynthetic pathway . Numerous bacte - rial genes are required for survival and replica - tion . A key role is played by the SPI2 effector SifA—a protein required for the formation of Sifs , filaments enriched in lysosomal glycopro - teins ( Lgps ) , and extensions of the SCV , in epithelial cells ( 52 ) . The function of SifA may be to mediate the recruitment of vesicles and in - crease the SCV membrane surface area to ac - commodate replicating bacterial cells . Life in the Cytosol and Actin - Based Intra - and Intercellular Motility Some intracellular pathogens able to induce their own phagocytosis into epithelial cells escape from the internalization vacuole , rep - licate in the cytosol , and move by recruiting and polymerizing actin ( 53 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . Actin polymerization at one pole of the bacterium provides the energy for movement and en - ables the bacteria to reach the plasma mem - brane , where they form protrusions that are endocytosed by neigboring cells , allowing the formation of a two - membrane vacuole , cell to cell spread , and tissue dissemination . For Listeria , escape from the vacuole is me - diated by a pore - forming toxin called listerioly - sin O ( LLO ) , a potent signaling molecule that activates nuclear factor (cid:3) B ( NF - (cid:3) B ) and a vari - ety of other pathways ( 25 ) . Intracytosolic repli - cation requires expression of a sugar - uptake system , which is absent in the nonpathogenic C E L L U L A R I N V A S I O N S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 304 9 APRIL 2004 245 S P E C I A L S E C T I O N species L . innocua ( 25 ) . Actin recruitment by Listeria and polymerization are triggered by the surface protein ActA , which recruits and acti - vates the seven - protein Arp2 / 3 complex , hence generating a dendritic network of branched actin filaments ( 54 ) . Modulation and control of actin - based movements involve several other proteins : ( i ) cofilin ; ( ii ) capping protein , which caps the barbed ends of actin filaments ; ( iii ) profilin , which binds to monomeric actin and , in complex with actin , to actin - filament barbed ends , hence providing actin monomers to growing barbed ends ; ( iv ) (cid:2) - actinin , which cross - links actin fil - aments ; and ( v ) VASP , which binds to ActA and F - actin and modulates branch density and move - ment . Shigella , after escaping from the vacuole upon the action of IpaB , expresses on its surface an outer - membrane protein called IcsA / VirG . This protein , which is unrelated to ActA , recruits the cellular protein called N - WASP ( 55 , 56 ) . Cellular N - WASP is functionally and structural - ly related to bacterial ActA and can recruit and activate the Arp2 / 3 complex , highlighting how bacteria may either mimic or recruit mammalian proteins to harness eukaryotic pathways ( 5 ) . Even though Rickettsia is not an enteroinva - sive microorganism , it is worth mentioning that after its escape into the cytoplasm , it forms actin tails made of long , unbranched actin fila - ments , which differ from those generated by ActA or IcsA / N - WASP ( Fig . 4 ) . Similar to proteins of the WASP family , the bacterial surface protein involved , RickA ( 57 ) , is composed of three regions , with a central proline - rich region and a C - terminal part that recruits Arp2 / 3 . Because Arp2 / 3 gener - ates a network of branched actin filaments , the discovery that RickA activates Arp2 / 3 in vitro and is recruited on the McRettsial sur - face was unexpected , providing a new tool to address Arp2 / 3 regulation . Cell Responses to Intracellular Pathogens In addition to the transient posttranslational modifications occurring upon entry , intracel - lular bacteria induce drastic changes in the pattern of transcription and translation of in - fected cells . This is particularly true for in - testinal epithelial cells that , upon invasion by Salmonella or Shigella , behave as sentinels by inducing a transcriptional program whose major function is to up - regulate innate im - mune defense mechanisms ( 58 ) . This pro - gram occurs largely in response to the induc - tion of NF - (cid:3) B that regulates a large portion of the pro - inflammatory genes . The pro - inflammatory program of epithelial cells—in contrast to the outside - in signaling pathway that Toll - like receptors mediate in phagocytic cells , in the presence of bacterial PAMPs ( pathogen - associated molecular patterns ) — appears to be mediated by an intracellular sensing system involving cytosolic proteins of the Nod family ( 59 ) . Nod1 is prevalent in intestinal epithelial cells and shows specific recognition for muropeptides originating from the peptidoglycan of Gram - negative mi - croorganisms ( 60 , 61 ) . Another cytosolic pro - tein , Nod2 , recognizes peptidoglycans from any bacterial species , essentially because it is able to recognize muramyl - dipeptide , a struc - ture common to all peptidoglycans . Through their capacity to regulate gene tran - scription and by other pathways , intracellular bacteria can take over the fate of their host cell . Among the most striking paradigms are bacteria that manipulate cell apoptotic processes . Three major pathways have so far been identified : ( i ) Intracellular Shigella and Salmonella , respec - tively , secrete IpaB and SipB through their TTSS . These two proteins activate the pro - apop - totic cysteine protease caspase - 1 , which causes apoptotic death of infected macrophages while also initiating an inflammatory response through processing or maturation of two potent pro - in - flammatory cytokines , interleukin - 1 (cid:1) ( IL - 1 (cid:1) ) and IL - 18 ( 62 , 63 ) . ( ii ) Yersinia translocate plas - mid - encoded Yop proteins , one of which , YopP / YopJ , binds to and neutralizes the activity of a MAPK kinase , thereby blocking the activation of NF - (cid:3) B , an essential system supporting cell sur - vival ( 64 ) . ( iii ) The third pathway , although not yet clearly described in enteroinvasive bacteria , is worth mentioning . Upon interaction of Neis - seria gonorrhoeae with epithelial cells , the se - creted protein PorB causes Ca 2 (cid:4) fluxes that ac - tivate caspases , and consequently cell apoptosis ( 65 ) . PorB creates mitochondrial pores , thus in - ducing apoptosis through the release of cyto - chrome c . Finally , epithelial cells infected by Shigella undergo activation of their connexin - constituted hexameric hemichannels . The infect - ed cells release ATP , which acts as a paracrine mediator activating Ca 2 (cid:4) fluxes in neighboring cells , thus increasing their competence for bac - terial invasion and cell - to - cell spread ( 66 ) . Fig . 3 . Intracellular life - styles . Schematic representation of the Salmonella - containing vacuole ( see text ) . Listeria and Shigella lyse the vacuole and move in the cytosol by an actin - based motility process mediated by ActA or IcsA / VirG , which interact with Arp2 / 3 or N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 , respectively . EE : early endosome ; LE : late endosome ; Ly : lysosome ; ER : endoplasmic reticulum Fig . 4 . Actin - based motility of Listeria , Rickettsia , and Shigella . Electron micrographs of actin tails labeled with fragment S1 of myosin ( 69 ) [ reprint - ed with permission from Journal of Cell Science ] . C E L L U L A R I N V A S I O N S 9 APRIL 2004 VOL 304 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 246 S P E C I A L S E C T I O N Fig . 5 . The invasive strategies of enteroinvasive pathogens . Intestinal epithelial cells ( IECs ) maintain a physical barrier against commensal ﬂora , although specialized sites such as the follicle - associated epithelium ( FAE ) allow constant sampling of the luminal ﬂora through M cells . Translo - cated bacteria thus exposed to macrophages , dendritic cells ( DCs ) , and B lymphocytes are captured , killed , processed , and presented to the im - mune system . Invasive pathogens take advantage of this route to cross the epithelial barrier . Once translocated , bacteria must survive attack by macrophages . The four bacterial species considered have solved this issue differently : L . monocytogenes are phagocytosed but escape into the cytoplasm , and thus avoid being killed in lysosomal compartments . Yersinia adopt an antiphagocytic strategy by intracellular injection of YopE , H , and T that inactivate the actin cytoskeleton . In addition , they adopt an anti - inﬂammatory strategy , with YopP / J blocking tumor necro - sis factor – (cid:2) production , which prevents further local recruitment of predators such as monocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Alter - natively , phagocytosed Yersinia may cause YopP / J - dependent apoptosis of their host cell . Shigella not only cause apoptosis of macrophages and monocytes , thus ensuring their own survival , but also trigger early mucosal inﬂammation through the release of mature IL - 1 (cid:1) and IL - 18 , which disrupts epithelial impermeability and facilitates bacterial spread at a distance . Finally , Salmonella remodel their phagosomes , thus avoid - ing its transition to a lysosome and creating an intracellular niche that allows their efﬁcient replication ; this Spi2 - dependent process is an alternative to the Spi1 - dependent apoptotic killing of macrophages similar to that caused by Shigella . Having crossed the epithelial barrier and circumvented the threat of phagocytosis , the bacterial species considered here proceed along different pathways . L . monocytogenes disseminate systemically , possibly inside circulating monocytes and DCs . Yersinia may invade IECs through their basolateral pole , a process medi - ated by invasin ; they also cause local and mesenteric abscesses in local and loco - regional lymphoid structures . Shigella proceeds to TTSS / Ipa - dependent entry into epithelial cells followed by escape into the cyto - plasm , intracellular motility , and cell - to - cell spread , thus establishing the infectious process at the mucosal level , without extensive systemic dissemination . Salmonella may , like Shigella , enter IECs through their basolateral pole in a TTSS / Sop - dependent manner . Alternative routes of invasion involve IECs directly , away from the FAE . In particular , invasion by L . monocytogenes is mediated by internalin ( InlA ) and possibly InlB . In addition , Salmonella are able to dislocate the brush border cytoskeleton and cause an apical entry rufﬂe . Shigella and Yersinia seem unable to disrupt the epithelial barrier from a luminal position unless massive inocula are used . A third process of translocation may involve DCs crawling between IECs or sending pseudopods to capture luminal bacte - ria and retract in a subepithelial position . Salmonella are able to trans - locate in this way , possibly followed by systemic diffusion of Salmonella - loaded DCs . It is not yet clear whether this type of translocation occurs in the other invasive species . C E L L U L A R I N V A S I O N S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 304 9 APRIL 2004 247 S P E C I A L S E C T I O N Bacterial Invasion : In Vivo Veritas A major issue is to validate , in vivo , the molec - ular and cellular events analyzed in vitro . If one focuses on invasion of the intestinal barrier , it is clear that L . monocytogenes , Shigella , Salmonel - la , and Yersinia , despite their shared capacity to invade epithelial cells in vitro , differ with regard to ( i ) the capacity to disrupt , invade , and even - tually cause the inflammatory destruction of the epithelium ; and ( ii ) the possibility of proceeding to systemic dissemination and possibly coloni - zation of organs at a distance . A major handicap to studying the respective invasive phenotypes in vivo has been the lack of a mouse model simulating the intestinal and systemic diseases observed in humans ( 67 ) . This was particularly the case for L . monocyto - genes , until a transgenic mouse line expressing the human E - cadherin receptor of internalin became available , thus unlocking the transintes - tinal route for this pathogen , i . e . , via invasion of enterocytes ( 68 ) . A relevant animal model has yet to be found for Shigella because , unlike infected humans , mice do not undergo exten - sive invasion and inflammatory destruction of their rectal and colonic mucosae . Despite these limitations , a picture is emerging ( Fig . 5 ) concerning the various strategies used by these pathogens . In conclusion , although current work aims to elucidate the in vivo relevance of the now well - understood mechanisms used by inva - sive bacteria in vitro , future efforts should focus on understanding both bacterial and host cell transcription and translation pro - grams during infection , in various cells and tissues . This information should provide vital clues in the ongoing battle against bacterial disease and for elaborating new therapeutic strategies . References and Notes 1 . C . R . Roy , L . G . Tilney , J . Cell Biol . 158 , 415 ( 2002 ) . 2 . K . A . Fields , T . Hackstadt , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 221 ( 2002 ) . 3 . C . R . Hauck , T . F . Meyer , Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 6 , 43 ( 2003 ) . 4 . C . C . Scott , R . J . Botelho , S . Grinstein , J . Membr . Biol . 193 , 137 ( 2003 ) . 5 . B . B . Finlay , P . Cossart , Science 276 , 718 ( 1997 ) . 6 . R . R . Isberg , P . Barnes , J . Cell Sci . 114 , 21 ( 2001 ) . 7 . M . A . Alrutz , R . R . Isberg , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 13658 ( 1998 ) . 8 . M . A . Alrutz et al . , Mol . Microbiol . 42 , 689 ( 2001 ) . 9 . K . McGee , M . Zettl , M . Way , M . Fallman , FEBS Lett . 509 , 59 ( 2001 ) . 10 . K . McGee , P . Holmfeldt , M . Fallman , FEBS Lett . 533 , 35 ( 2003 ) . 11 . K . W . Wong , R . R . Isberg , J . Exp . Med . 198 , 603 ( 2003 ) . 12 . P . Cossart , J . Pizarro - Cerda , M . Lecuit , Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 23 ( 2003 ) . 13 . W . D . Schubert et al . , Cell 111 , 825 ( 2002 ) . 14 . M . Lecuit et al . , EMBO J . 18 , 3956 ( 1999 ) . 15 . M . Lecuit et al . , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 10008 ( 2000 ) . 16 . S . Sousa , M . Lecuit , P . Cossart , in preparation . 17 . S . Sousa et al . , J . Cell Sci . , in press . 18 . H . Bierne , P . Cossart , J . Cell Sci . 115 , 3357 ( 2002 ) . 19 . H . Bierne et al . , in preparation . 20 . Y . Shen , M . Naujokas , M . Park , K . Ireton , Cell 103 , 501 ( 2000 ) . 21 . K . Ireton et al . , Science 274 , 780 ( 1996 ) . 22 . L . Braun , B . Ghebrehiwet , P . Cossart , EMBO J . 19 , 1458 ( 2000 ) . 23 . H . Bierne et al . , J . Cell Biol . 155 , 101 ( 2001 ) . 24 . O . Dussurget , J . Pizarro - Cerda , P . Cossart , Annu . Rev . Microbiol . , in press . 25 . J . A . Vazquez - Boland et al . , Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 14 , 584 ( 2001 ) . 26 . A . L . Decatur , D . A . Portnoy , Science 290 , 992 ( 2000 ) . 27 . F . G . Van der Goot , T . Harder , Semin . Immunol . 13 , 89 ( 2001 ) . 28 . S . Dramsi , P . Cossart , Infect . Immun . 71 , 3614 ( 2003 ) . 29 . S . Seveau , S . Giroux , H . Bierne , P . Cossart , in preparation . 30 . J . E . Galan , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 53 ( 2001 ) . 31 . P . J . Sansonetti , FEMS Microbiol . Rev . 25 , 3 ( 2001 ) . 32 . C . Parsot , C . Hamiaux , A . L . Page , Curr . Opin . Micro - biol . 6 , 7 ( 2003 ) . 33 . A . Blocker , K . Komoriya , S . Aizawa , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 3027 ( 2003 ) . 34 . F . Lafont , G . Tran Van Nhieu , K . Hanada , P . San - sonetti , F . G . van der Goot , EMBO J . 21 , 4449 ( 2002 ) . 35 . S . Yoshida et al . , EMBO J . 21 , 2923 ( 2002 ) . 36 . G . Tran Van Nhieu , E . Caron , A . Hall , P . J . Sansonetti , EMBO J . 18 , 3249 ( 1999 ) . 37 . R . D . Hayward , V . Koronakis , EMBO J . 18 , 4926 ( 1999 ) . 38 . W . D . Hardt , L . M . Chen , K . E . Schuebel , X . R . Bustelo , J . E . Galan , Cell 93 , 815 ( 1998 ) . 39 . F . A . Norris , M . P . Wilson , T . S . Wallis , E . E . Galyov , P . W . Majerus , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 14057 ( 1998 ) . 40 . D . Zhou , M . S . Mooseker , J . E . Galan , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 10176 ( 1999 ) . 41 . J . Mounier , P . J . Sansonetti , G . Tran Van Nhieu , in preparation . 42 . L . Bougne ` res et al . , in preparation . 43 . K . Niebuhr et al . , EMBO J . 21 , 5069 ( 2002 ) . 44 . E . A . Burton , R . Plattner , A . M . Pendergast , EMBO J . 22 , 5471 ( 2003 ) . 45 . C . E . Stebbins , J . E . Galan , Mol . Cell 6 , 1449 ( 2000 ) . 46 . T . Kubori , J . E . Galan , Cell 115 , 333 ( 2003 ) . 47 . R . Bourdet - Sicard et al . , EMBO J . 18 , 5853 ( 1999 ) . 48 . D . W . Holden , Trafﬁc 3 , 161 ( 2002 ) . 49 . S . Meresse , O . Steele - Mortimer , B . B . Finlay , J . P . Gorvel , EMBO J . 18 , 4394 ( 1999 ) . 50 . O . Steele - Mortimer , S . Meresse , J . P . Gorvel , B . H . Toh , B . B . Finlay , Cell . Microbiol . 1 , 33 ( 1999 ) . 51 . S . P . Salcedo , D . W . Holden , EMBO J . 22 , 5003 ( 2003 ) . 52 . F . Garcia - del Portillo , M . B . Zwick , K . Y . Leung , B . B . Finlay , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 90 , 10544 ( 1993 ) . 53 . F . Frischknecht , M . Way , Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 30 ( 2001 ) . 54 . M . D . Welch et al . , Science 281 , 105 ( 1998 ) . 55 . T . Suzuki , H . Miki , T . Takenawa , C . Sasakawa , EMBO J . 17 , 2767 ( 1998 ) . 56 . C . Egile et al . , J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1319 ( 1999 ) . 57 . E . Gouin et al . , Nature 427 , 457 ( 2004 ) . 58 . M . F . Kagnoff , in Microbial Pathogenesis and the Intestinal Epithelial Cell , G . A . Hecht , Ed . ( American Society for Microbiology , Washington , DC , 2003 ) . 59 . S . E . Girardin et al . , EMBO Rep . 2 , 736 ( 2001 ) . 60 . S . E . Girardin et al . , Science 300 , 1584 ( 2003 ) . 61 . M . Chamaillard et al . , Nature Immunol . 4 , 702 ( 2003 ) . 62 . H . Hilbi et al . , J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 32895 ( 1998 ) . 63 . D . Hersh et al . , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 2396 ( 1999 ) . 64 . K . Orth et al . , Science 285 , 1920 ( 1999 ) . 65 . A . Muller et al . , EMBO J . 18 , 339 ( 1999 ) . 66 . G . Tran Van Nhieu et al . , Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 720 ( 2003 ) . 67 . M . Lecuit , P . Cossart , Trends Mol . Med . 8 , 537 ( 2002 ) . 68 . M . Lecuit et al . , Science 292 , 1722 ( 2001 ) . 69 . E . Gouin et al . , J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1697 ( 1999 ) . 70 . We thank E . Veiga , E . Gouin , and O . Dussurget for help with manuscript preparation and H . Bierne , L . Bougne ` res , and G . Tran van Nhieu for generously pro - viding unpublished ﬁgures . The authors are internation - al Scholars of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . R E V I E W Intracellular Parasite Invasion Strategies L . D . Sibley Intracellular parasites use various strategies to invade cells and to subvert cellular signaling pathways and , thus , to gain a foothold against host defenses . Efﬁcient cell entry , ability to exploit intracellular niches , and persistence make these parasites treacherous pathogens . Most intracellular parasites gain entry via host - mediated processes , but apicomplexans use a system of adhesion - based motility called “glid - ing” to actively penetrate host cells . Actin polymerization – dependent motility facilitates parasite migration across cellular barriers , enables dissemination within tissues , and powers invasion of host cells . Efﬁcient invasion has brought widespread success to this group , which includes Toxoplasma , Plasmodium , and Cryptosporidium . Parasites exist in virtually every conceivable niche , but none is so specialized as that of the obligate intracellular parasite , which must gain entry into the cells of its host to survive . Most intracellular parasites are protozoans , many of which are responsible for lethal and debilitating diseases in animals and humans . Our defenses present an array of barriers to infection , including skin , mucosa , connective tissue , and an active surveillance system to detect and destroy foreign objects . Overcom - ing these defenses and breaching the final barrier imposed by the cell membrane is a formidable challenge . By entering into the confines of a host cell , the parasite assures itself of both a ready source of nutrients and a potential means to avoid immune clearance . Parasites that practice this life - style have typ - ically given up the capacity for extracellular growth , which leaves them vulnerable if en - try is impeded . Defining how parasites gain entry into their host cells is thus important for rational design of improved therapies . Para - sites are among the earliest branching eu - karyotes ( 1 ) ; their study expands our knowl - C E L L U L A R I N V A S I O N S 9 APRIL 2004 VOL 304 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 248 S P E C I A L S E C T I O N