This article was downloaded by : [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] On : 24 May 2017 , At : 14 : 18 Publisher : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ( INFORMS ) INFORMS is located in Maryland , USA Organization Science Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org Evading the Boomerang Effect : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability from Technology Licensing Deals http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 2763 - 3989Keld Laursen , Solon Moreira , Toke Reichstein , Maria Isabella Leone To cite this article : http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 2763 - 3989Keld Laursen , Solon Moreira , Toke Reichstein , Maria Isabella Leone ( 2017 ) Evading the Boomerang Effect : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability from Technology Licensing Deals . Organization Science Published online in Articles in Advance 24 May 2017 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2017 . 1130 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used only for the purposes of research , teaching , and / or private study . Commercial use or systematic downloading ( by robots or other automatic processes ) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval , unless otherwise noted . For more information , contact permissions @ informs . org . The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy , completeness , merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , or non - infringement . Descriptions of , or references to , products or publications , or inclusion of an advertisement in this article , neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee , endorsement , or support of claims made of that product , publication , or service . Copyright © 2017 , INFORMS Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research , management science , and analytics . For more information on INFORMS , its publications , membership , or meetings visit http : / / www . informs . org ORGANIZATION SCIENCE Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / journal / orsc / ISSN 1047 - 7039 ( print ) , ISSN 1526 - 5455 ( online ) Evading the Boomerang Eﬀect : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability from Technology Licensing Deals Keld Laursen , a , b Solon Moreira , c Toke Reichstein , d Maria Isabella Leone e a DRUID , Department of Innovation and Organizational Economics , Copenhagen Business School , 2000 Frederiksberg , Denmark ; b Department of Industrial Economics and Technology Management , Norwegian University of Science and Technology , 7491 Trondheim , Norway ; c Entrepreneurship Department , IESE Business School , 08034 Barcelona , Spain ; d Department of Strategic Management and Globalization , Copenhagen Business School , 2000 Frederiksberg , Denmark ; e Department of Business and Management , LUISS Guido Carli University , 00197 Rome , Italy Contact : kl . ino @ cbs . dk , http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 2763 - 3989 ( KL ) ; smoreira @ iese . edu ( SM ) ; tre . smg @ cbs . dk ( TR ) ; mleone @ luiss . it ( MIL ) Received : May 31 , 2014 Revised : August 21 , 2015 ; December 31 , 2016 Accepted : February 23 , 2017 Published Online in Articles in Advance : May 24 , 2017 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2017 . 1130 Copyright : © 2017 INFORMS Abstract . Technology licensing agreements potentially can create future appropriability problems . Drawing on the appropriability literature , we argue that the inclusion of a grant - back clause in technology licensing agreements is an attempt to balance the gains from and protection of the focal ﬁrms’ technologies . We hypothesize that the closer the licensed technology is to the licensor’s core patented technologies , the more likely the licensing agreement will include a grant - back clause , while the closer the licensed technology is to the licensee’s core patent portfolio , the less likely the agreement will include a grant - back clause . We hypothesize also that technological uncertainty is a positive moderator in the decision to include a grant - back clause , if the licensed technology is close to either the licensee’s or the licensor’s core technologies . We employ a hierarchical nested decision model to test the hypotheses on a sample of 397 licensed technologies . This method allows us to model the choice to include a grant - back clause as nested in the decision about which technologies to license out . We ﬁnd broad support for our theoretical arguments . Funding : M . I . Leone acknowledges ﬁnancial support under the Italian PRIN - MIUR Project “Market and nonmarket mechanisms for the exchange and diﬀusion of innovation : When they work , when they don’t work , and why should we care” [ Grant CUP B41J12000160008 ] . Keywords : grant - back clause • technology licensing • core technology • appropriability Introduction Although there may be potentially large mutual gains from technology transfer and joint technology devel - opment between ﬁrms , the many appropriability prob - lems related to such activities can act as a deterrent ( Agrawal et al . 2015 , Arora 1995 , Arrow 1962 ) . Thus , technology - related agreements are not a priority for many high - tech ﬁrms ( Arora and Gambardella 2010 ) . However , from the strategy literature on contract design ( see e . g . , Argyres et al . 2007 , Mayer and Argyres 2004 , Ryall and Sampson 2009 ) , we know that ﬁrms learn to contract with each other based on prior experi - ence , and that control provisions force the contracting parties to dedicate time and eﬀort to fulﬁlling their responsibilities rather than to minimizing eﬀort and reneging on the contract arrangements ( Malhotra and Lumineau 2011 ) . Well - designed contracts that include clauses that align the actions of the involved parties can reduce the appropriability problems inherent in technology agreements . Nevertheless , although our understanding of con - tract design in relation to appropriability in technology - related agreements has advanced signiﬁcantly , most studies ( see e . g . , Cebrián 2009 , Duplat and Lumineau 2016 , Oxley 1997 , Oxley and Sampson 2004 , Somaya et al . 2011 ) focus on what Ahuja et al . ( 2013 , p . 248 ) describe as “primary appropriability , ” i . e . , ﬁrms’ “eﬀec - tiveness in exploiting a given invention by translating it into a product or licensable solution for users” ( empha - sis added ) . Few works investigate appropriation in rela - tion to future inventions spawned by a ﬁrm’s tech - nologies ( Alexy et al . 2013 , Allen 1983 , Harhoﬀ et al . 2003 , Yang et al . 2010 ) covered by previous technology - related agreements . This type of appropriability can be described as “generative appropriability” or the “ﬁrm’s eﬀectiveness in capturing the greatest share of future inventions spawned by its existing inventions” ( Ahuja et al . 2013 , p . 248 ; emphasis added ) . In the present paper we focus on generative appropriability in the context of technology licensing agreements , which are an impor - tant channel for knowledge exchange ( e . g . , Ceccagnoli and Jiang 2013 , Fosfuri 2006 , Hill 1992 , Mulotte 2014 , Ruckman and McCarthy 2016 , Schilling and Steensma 2002 ) . Anand and Khanna ( 2000 , p . 103 ) suggest that “Licensing . . . is one of only a few signiﬁcant methods of technology transfer between ﬁrms , and one of the 1 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 2 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS most commonly observed inter - ﬁrm contractual agree - ments . ” Given that the direction of developments and the application of technologies in the product market are fundamentally uncertain ( Choi 2002 , Dosi 1988 ) , in the context of licensing , a central appropriability prob - lem is the possibility that the licensee will develop the focal technology further , and eventually , will overtake the licensor—a phenomenon that has been described as the “the boomerang eﬀect” ( Choi 2002 , Van Dĳk 2000 ) . In cases where the licensor’s value creation from the invention could ( potentially ) be damaged due to weak appropriability , a control provision in the form of a grant - back clause in the licensing contract is essen - tial to facilitate knowledge transfer , which otherwise would not take place ( Choi 2002 ) . A grant - back clause “requires the potential licensee to agree to grant back to the patentee [ i . e . , the licensor ] rights to improvement patents developed by the licensee that relate to the original patent as partial consideration for the license rights” ( Schmalbeck 1975 , p . 733 ) . A grant - back clause can prove very important for the licensor because it protects against licensees building future inventions based on the in - licensed technology , i . e . , it protects the licensor’s generative appropriability . We examine how the importance of the traded tech - nology to the trading parties’ technology portfolios inﬂuences the inclusion of a grant - back clause , and how these relationships are contingent on the level of technological uncertainty in the traded technology . The economics ( Choi 2002 , Van Dĳk 2000 ) and strategic management ( Leone and Reichstein 2012 ) literatures include important contributions related speciﬁcally to technology licensing , which demonstrate how the inclusion of a grant - back clause aﬀects the behavior of the exchanging partners . However , most work focuses exclusively on the licensor and generally does not iden - tify under what circumstances this type of clause is included in licensing contracts . A deeper understand - ing is needed of this type of contractual detail , which is crucial for interorganizational arrangements that allow licensor and licensee to guard against potential threats to their future ability to produce inventions and future technology - based rents while not reduc - ing ﬁrms’ mutual interests in further investment in the traded asset . Taking the more recent literature on generative ap - propriability ( Ahuja et al . 2013 ) as our theoretical point of departure , we examine the contingencies that could leave ﬁrms particularly vulnerable to a skillful licens - ing partner’s development of future inventions based on the licensing ﬁrm’s inventions . The combination of these contingencies , the heterogeneity among licensees and licensors , and the level of uncertainty associated with the technology might explain the inclusion of a grant - back clause in a technology licensing agree - ment . To our knowledge , this attempt to systematically explain this phenomenon is unique . Crucial to our argument is the notion that the contracting ﬁrms’ core technological areas are more central to their ability to create value compared to other technological areas . We suggest that the combination of ( generative ) appropri - ability protection and incentive eﬀects results in licens - ing agreements being increasingly likely to include a grant - back clause , the closer the licensed technology is to the licensor’s core patents . On the licensee’s side , this same combination of eﬀects results in licensing agreements being increasingly less likely to include a grant - back clause the closer the licensed technology is to the licensee’s core patents . In addition , since tech - nological uncertainty is central to the boomerang eﬀect and the grant - back clause , we propose that technolog - ical uncertainty moderates the relationships described above . That is , technological uncertainty increases the positive eﬀect of the focal technology’s proximity to the licensor’s core technologies and decreases the neg - ative eﬀect of the focal technology’s proximity to the licensee’s core technologies . We test our hypotheses using a sample of 397 li - censed technologies over the period 1984 – 2004 , ex - tracted from Recap , the Recombinant Capital Biotech Alliance Database . We merge information retrieved on licensing deals with patent data from the National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) patent project and ﬁrm information from Compustat . This allows us to focus on deals where the licensor is a public ﬁrm . We employ a hierarchical nested decision model to account for the inclusion in a licensing contract of a grant - back clause , nested in the decision about which technologies to out - license . Accordingly , the empirical model comprises a two - level asymmetric nested tree in which the grant - back clause option is available only if the licensor decides to out - license the technology . To implement the technique , we use the unique United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce ( USPTO ) patent number assigned to each technology in the licensing database to estimate the likelihood that a speciﬁc tech - nology will be licensed . Overall , we ﬁnd support for our hypotheses . Theoretical Background We depart from the idea that the determinants of generative appropriability comprise two components including ( Ahuja et al . 2013 , p . 251 ) the following : ( a ) a cumulative invention component , deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s eﬀectiveness in creating a new invention that builds on its existing inventions , and ( b ) a preclusive component deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s eﬀectiveness in preventing oth - ers from basing their inventions on its own inventions . We discuss these two aspects and how they relate to our setup . In relation to cumulative invention , although we do not directly consider ﬁrms’ eﬀectiveness at creating D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 3 new inventions , we focus on the involved parties’ core technologies . Consistent with the innovation literature ( see for instance , Patel and Pavitt 1997 , Song et al . 2003 ) we consider the types of technologies in which the ﬁrm has accumulated substantial technological experi - ence to have become the core technologies of the ﬁrm . A given ﬁrm will have a portfolio of core and noncore technologies related to its activities . Our paper builds on the notion that the focal ﬁrm’s core technologies are more important than other technologies for its gener - ative appropriability , and thus the ﬁrm’s sustainable long run value creation ability . We assume also that ﬁrms’ appropriability is more important if it is related to future appropriation of returns from a core technol - ogy due to the level and importance of the technology ( ceteris paribus ) compared to technologies in which the ﬁrm has less experience . 1 Core technologies are important in the context of appropriability in particular because ﬁrms’ technolog - ical specialization proﬁles across domains are often path dependent ( Cantwell and Fai 1999 , Patel and Pavitt 1997 ) . This suggests that the ﬁrm’s production of new knowledge is built on what it has learned in the past , in part because previous knowledge constrains current search for solutions and in part because knowl - edge raises questions that cause new searches ( Breschi et al . 2003 , Nelson and Winter 1982 , Rosenberg 1976 ) . Ahuja et al . ( 2013 , p . 263 ) note that the extent of a ﬁrm’s prior experience in an inventive knowledge domain strongly aﬀects the ﬁrm’s subsequent invention success in that same domain . That knowledge is cumulative and path dependent implies that the ﬁrm’s generative appropriability is particularly critical if it is related to the ﬁrm’s core technologies , precisely because these technologies are very likely to form the basis for its future inventions . In other words , from the ﬁrm’s point of view , the cumulative invention component of gener - ative appropriability is likely to be based strongly on the ﬁrm’s core technologies . We posit that the grant - back clause can be seen as a type of preclusive condition driving appropriabil - ity . In line with the innovation literature , we assume that most technology has an important tacit compo - nent which makes it only partially codiﬁable ( see , for instance , Pavitt 1988 ) , and also that innovation “is inherently uncertain , given the impossibility of pre - dicting accurately the costs and performance of a new artifact , and the reaction of users to it” ( Pavitt 2005 , p . 88 ) . These technology and innovation characteris - tics make it impossible to specify a complete con - tract to cover eﬃcient and precisely deﬁned knowl - edge transfer . The inability to specify a complete licensing contract introduces the possibility that the licensor’s primary appropriability , and the preclusive component of its generative appropriability , might be eroded by a licensee’s follow - on invention ( Choi 2002 ) . In this context , a grant - back protects the licensor’s core technologies directly but may erode the cumula - tive invention component of generative appropriability linked to the licensee’s core technologies . We describe these eﬀects as ( generative ) appropriability protection eﬀects arising from the inclusion or noninclusion of a grant - back clause . If it is impossible ( or too costly ) to specify a com - plete contract that covers each of the trading partner’s rights related to a particular asset , it might be opti - mal for the licensee to purchase those asset rights not deﬁned explicitly in the contract ( Aghion and Tirole 1994 , Grossman and Hart 1986 ) . The ownership is endowed by the purchase of residual control rights and creates an incentive to invest in the asset . Thus , the grant - back clause shifts the residual rights of control over a future asset ( improvements made to the licensed technology ) to the licensor from the licensee , which in turn aﬀects the incentives of both parties to invest in the asset in the future . We argue that these eﬀects are particularly strong if the focal in - licensed technology is essential to the licensor or licensee . The shift in own - ership gives rise to ( generative ) appropriability incentive eﬀects from the inclusion in a technology licensing con - tract of a grant - back clause . The combined eﬀects of appropriability protection and incentive provided by a grant - back clause , in conjunction with the proximity of a given licensed technology to the core expertise of the licensor or licensee , will determine the inclusion or not of a grant - back clause . Hypotheses Licensors’ Core Technologies The licensing literature generally does not consider licensing of core technologies because of the potential for reduced primary appropriability ( see e . g . , Caves et al . 1983 ) . However , ﬁrms will license out a core tech - nology if this can be achieved without creating direct competition ( for an overview , see Leone and Laursen 2011 ) . In such cases , the licensing contract is more likely to include a grant - back clause for two main rea - sons . First , a grant - back clause reduces the licensor’s risks by inducing an appropriability protection eﬀect . This allows the ﬁrm to beneﬁt from primary ( ﬂowing from existing inventions ) and generative appropriabil - ity related to its own inventions , even if future inven - tions are generated by the licensee . This is similar to the mechanism described in the literature on selec - tive revealing ( Alexy et al . 2013 , Harhoﬀ et al . 2003 ) and knowledge spillover reabsorption ( Alnuaimi and George 2016 , Yang et al . 2010 ) , where the main motive for revealing is to encourage other organizations to invest in research and development ( R & D ) to appro - priate generative returns at a later stage . This potential boomerang eﬀect will be more severe for the licensor if a core technology is involved , since this represents a central part of the focal ﬁrm’s technological experience . If the implied ability to produce value is lost through D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 4 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS the boomerang eﬀect , the consequences for the licensor of eventual obsolescence of the core technology , com - bined with the lost ability to generate new inventions based on the previous one , can be severe . Market com - petition increases , new competitors emerge , and the possibility for the ﬁrm to build on its own inventions is reduced . From the licensee’s perspective , although the inclusion of a grant - back clause may reduce the potential beneﬁts from the investment , a license still ensures access to a promising technology . The poten - tial gain from the technology could represent a ﬁrm - speciﬁc value for the licensee that exceeds the potential loss incurred by the inclusion of a grant - back clause . Second , assigning greater residual rights of control to the licensor can induce an appropriability incen - tive eﬀect by shifting the incentives for opportunistic and distorting behavior based on lower ex post returns to the licensee . As a result , the licensee will commit fewer resources to the development of the in - licensed technology because the potential for achieving gener - ative appropriability will be reduced . Van Dĳk ( 2000 , p . 1433 ) states that “Future exchange clauses obviously weaken [ the licensee’s ] incentives to improve current technology . ” In sum , for licensees , the potential rents derived from technology improvements are reduced because any advances achieved have to be transferred to the licensor . For the licensor , the risk of being over - taken by the licensee in a core technology is reduced by the inclusion of a grant - back clause , since this increases the chances of maintaining the primary appropriability advantages related to the core technology and obtain - ing stronger generative appropriability . In contrast , the licensor will have less interest in reducing the licensee’s incentive to invest in noncore technologies , since these technologies have less potential to damage the licen - sor ﬁrm’s primary and generative appropriability . We propose the following : Hypothesis 1 . Technology license agreements , ceteris paribus , are increasingly likely to include a grant - back clause the closer the licensed technology is to the core of the licen - sor’s patent portfolio . Licensees’ Core Technologies There are many reasons why ﬁrms choose to in - license technologies . In the standard licensing litera - ture , potential licensees are attracted by rapid access to technologies that have been developed and proven in other competing arenas ( Atuahene - Gima 1992 , 1993 ) . In this literature , in - licensing is seen as a tactical re - sponse to a shortfall in internal R & D capabilities ( Lowe and Taylor 1998 ) . However , in - licensing is considered also to be a mechanism that enables combinations of complementary internal and external knowledge ( Choi 2002 , Johnson 2002 , Laursen et al . 2010 , Leone and Reichstein 2012 , Lowe and Taylor 1998 ) . According to Choi ( 2002 , p . 807 ) , “licensing of a new technology serves as a stepping stone for further developments of the licensed technology . ” If the licensed technology is closely related to the licensee’s core patents , there are two reasons why the licensing agreement is less likely to contain a grant - back clause . The ﬁrst refers to an appropriability protection eﬀect . Given that the ﬁrm’s core activities and technol - ogy portfolio underpin its ability to earn rents , potential licensees will be reluctant to engage in licensing deals if the contract dictates the sharing of the property rights on future inventions , and especially if the technology is close to the licensee’s own core strengths . Given strong path - dependence in ﬁrm - level technological develop - ments ( see , Helfat 1994 , Patel and Pavitt 1997 ) , it is most likely that the licensee also will depend on that technology ( or a closely related one ) for its genera - tive appropriability . In this context , the preclusive ele - ment in the licensee’s generative appropriability could be compromised if some of the property rights to the core technology were shared with the licensor through a grant - back clause . This might allow the licensor to become a future competitor . In this case , the licensee would likely abandon the deal or require the grant - back clause to be excluded . In contrast , if the in - licensed tech - nology is mostly unrelated to the licensee’s core tech - nologies , the licensee will be less concerned about these potential problems and the inclusion of a grant - back clause in the licensing contract . The second reason is related to the appropriability incentive eﬀect and the degree of absorptive capac - ity needed to integrate the in - licensed technology ( Laursen et al . 2010 ) . Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 , p . 128 ) argue that the ﬁrm’s absorptive capacity is “largely a function of the level of prior related knowl - edge . ” This related prior knowledge allows “the ﬁrm to better understand and therefore evaluate the import of intermediate technological advances that provide sig - nals to the eventual merit of a new technological devel - opment” ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 , p . 136 ) . If the licensee’s core technologies are close to the in - licensed technology , it is likely that the licensee will be able to assimilate and exploit the knowledge contained in the in - licensed technology ( for a similar logic applied to R & D - related strategic alliances , see Mowery et al . 1996 ) . Based on its prior knowledge , the licensee will be able to understand and use the externally acquired technology . However , in the case of an unfamiliar in - licensed technology , its integration into the licensee’s activities and appropriation of the returns from inte - gration will be diﬃcult . In this case , a grant - back clause will create an incentive for the licensor to help the licensee to integrate and develop the new technology ( Aghion and Tirole 1994 , Leone and Reichstein 2012 ) . In the case of a proximate technology this cooperation will be redundant . We posit the following : Hypothesis 2 . Technology license agreements , ceteris pari - bus , are decreasingly likely to include a grant - back clause the D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 5 closer the licensed technology is to the core of the licensee’s patent portfolio . The Moderating Eﬀect of Uncertain Technology An important aspect aﬀecting contract structure is the licensed technology’s level of uncertainty . According to Ziedonis ( 2007 , p . 1624 ) , technological uncertainty is related to “the commercial potential of the patent [ . . . ] and is likely to be higher for technologies that are more ‘basic’ or more ‘distant’ from commercialization . ” It is more diﬃcult to forecast the technical performance and feasibility of these types of technologies ( Fleming and Sorenson 2004 ) . In line with this deﬁnition , our con - cept of technological uncertainty is intended to reﬂect the level of uncertainty related to future developments of the licensed technology and the consequent uncer - tain future application of the resulting invention . Here we posit that the eﬀect of technological uncertainty on the inclusion of the grant - back clause is ambiguous , because the eﬀect will be contingent on the closeness of the traded technology to the licensor’s and licensee’s core expertise . In this respect , we argue that even in the case of a core technology if the licensee’s potential develop - ments are considered predictable and “safe , ” then a grant - back clause is likely to be considered unneces - sary because of the much reduced risk of a boomerang eﬀect . Similarly , a grant - back clause is likely to be con - sidered unnecessary if the technology is uncertain and noncore , since the potential damage to the licensor from a boomerang eﬀect is likely to be small . How - ever , if the technology is related to the licensor’s cen - tral area of expertise ( a core technology ) , and future opportunities are uncertain , then there is potential for major damage to the licensor’s generative appropriabil - ity . In this case , the appropriability protection eﬀects and the incentive eﬀects conveyed by the inclusion of a grant - back clause in the case of licensing out a core technology will be further enhanced by the additional appropriability protection eﬀect provided by the grant - back clause in the case of an uncertain technology . We hypothesize the following : Hypothesis 3 . Ceteris paribus , the positive relationship between the likelihood of a grant - back clause being included in a technology licensing agreement , and the closeness of the licensed technology to the core of the licensor’s patent port - folio , increases with the level of uncertainty associated to the technology . We have argued that the inclusion of a grant - back clause is less likely if the licensed technology is close to the licensee’s core technologies . However , in the case of both technological uncertainty and a technol - ogy that is close to the licensee’s core technologies , we argue that the eﬀect will weaken with an increase in technological uncertainty . The appropriability pro - tection and incentive eﬀects that make the grant - back clause undesirable for the licensee in the case of a tech - nology that is core to the licensee , is counterbalanced by the appropriability protection eﬀect the grant - back clause confers on the licensor in these circumstances . In the case of an uncertain technology , predicting the eventual importance of the technology for the licen - sor’s generative appropriability , and predicting where future technology - based competition might emerge , will be even more diﬃcult . In this case licensors are likely to hesitate before licensing out a technology to a licensee with potentially strong ability to absorb and further develop the technology , based on experience with similar technology ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 , Mowery et al . 1996 ) . Again , in this case , the licensee ﬁrm potentially could achieve generative appropri - ability based on the in - licensed technology , regardless of its importance to the licensor . Future competition could emerge from improvements to the out - licensed technology given its uncertain direction and applica - tion . This potential competition might lead to fewer licensing deals because the inclusion of a grant - back clause would not be in the interests of the licensee ( Hypothesis 2 ) . However , if a deal potentially creates high ﬁrm - speciﬁc value for the licensee , then the deal will likely be concluded although the licensor will be more likely to insist on the inclusion of a grant - back clause in the contract . Uncertain and potentially path - breaking technologies ultimately might be very valu - able to the licensee , especially in the case of ﬁrms with high absorptive capacity ( Ziedonis 2007 ) , i . e . , licensees whose core technologies are close to the in - licensed technology . In these circumstances , the licensee will be more likely to accept an otherwise undesirable grant - back clause . Accordingly , we conjecture the following : Hypothesis 4 . Ceteris paribus , the negative relationship between the likelihood of a grant - back clause being included in a technology licensing agreement , and the closeness of the licensed technology to the core of the licensee’s patent port - folio , reduces with the level of uncertainty associated to the technology . Data and Method Data The study exploits multiple data sources . First , it uses information on U . S . pharmaceutical industry tech - nology licensing contracts drawn from the Recap database . Recap data are used extensively in the licensing literature making this study comparable and integral to other work in this area ( e . g . , Ceccagnoli et al . 2010 , 2014 ; Hess and Rothaermel 2011 ; Schilling 2009 ) . These data provide information on original deals , inspection , and cross checking of contracts , and detailed and precise information on the technology , the contracting parties , and the contractual speciﬁ - cations . Recap includes several types of contractual D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 6 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS arrangements ( e . g . , research alliances , joint ventures ) . The present study considers only technology licensing contracts and speciﬁcally those involving the transfer of inventions registered with the USPTO . Technology licenses that involve universities are excluded . Uni - versity incentive structures diﬀer substantially from businesses , and these licenses may have diﬀerent underlying determinants . Contract renewals also are excluded , since they often involve only minor revisions to existing contracts . Their inclusion would result in double - counting of speciﬁc agreements and could cre - ate econometric complications to little or no beneﬁt . Subcontracts are also excluded , since given that the licensor is not the original developer of the technol - ogy being transferred , subcontracting generally diﬀers from regular contracting . Finally , we exclude contracts that for conﬁdentiality reasons do not disclose the transferred technology . Information on the technology is required to calculate the key variables . We investi - gated the degree to which these omitted contracts are more or less inclined to include a grant - back clause and found no particular bias in either direction . Therefore , it is unlikely these exclusion criteria aﬀect the study . Based on these restrictions , we obtained an initial sam - ple of 858 licensed technologies . Company name , address , and industry aﬃliation ex - tracted from Recap were used to identify those licens - ing contracts where the licensor was a public ﬁrm listed on Compustat . Restricting the analysis to public ﬁrms ensures consistent ﬁnancial information over diﬀerent time periods , and restricting the study to ﬁrms listed on Compustat reduces the chances of missing ( unre - ported ) licensing activities . Recap is compiled based on press releases , Securities and Exchange Commission contracts , analysts’ reports , clinical trials , and requests under the Freedom of Information Act , which provides extensive coverage of the activities of large pharma - ceutical ﬁrms . Compustat listed ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly more likely than small biotech companies to reveal their licensing activities ; thus , our focus reduces con - cern over unreported contracts . The ﬁnancial informa - tion extracted from Compustat was used to compute some of the explanatory variables for licensor charac - teristics . We excluded 369 technologies licensed - out by a licensor but not listed on Compustat . This left a sam - ple of 489 technologies . 2 Licensors and licensees were identiﬁed using USPTO data . This information allows us to extract patents granted to ﬁrms and is used to compute licensors’ and licensees’ technological proﬁles before the licensing event . We used data on patent applications ﬁve years prior to a licensing contract . Not all ﬁrms use patenting as a means of appropriation , which means some ﬁrms’ technological proﬁles are unobserved and not included in our analysis . However , since patenting is often a necessary condition for technology licensing , our anal - ysis captures the majority of ﬁrms that consider licens - ing a potential tactical or strategic activity . Previous studies show a connection between patenting behav - ior and licensing activity , suggesting that “the presence of a patent is almost essential for licensing” ( Arora and Ceccagnoli 2006 , p . 294 ) . Arora and Ceccagnoli show that less than 10 % of licensors do not patent . In addition , using only patented inventions to compare licensed versus nonlicensed technologies ensures ana - lytical consistency . We lost 64 observations since not all licensees ( 51 ) and licensors ( 13 ) had submitted a patent application during the ﬁve years prior to the licens - ing activity . This reduced the number of technologies available for scrutiny to 425 . However , the results are comparable to other studies of the markets for technol - ogy ( see e . g . , Parrotta and Pozzoli 2012 , Ziedonis 2007 ) . Finally , the seven - digit USPTO patent numbers were used to connect individual licensed technologies with the corresponding patent listed in the Harvard Patent Network Dataverse , which includes all USPTO patents granted between 1975 and 2010 . This database contains important information on the nature of the backward citations in each patent , the date of public disclosure by the patentee of the licensed technology , and the tech - nology class to which the USPTO assigned the patent . We use Dataverse to calculate uncertainty , age , radical - ness , and scope of the licensed technologies . Linking these four databases produced a ﬁnal sample of 397 unique technologies ( patents ) licensed out by 81 diﬀer - ent licensors , and licensed in by 117 diﬀerent licensees . Only 17 of the contracts have the same licensee - licensor combinations . The 397 technologies refer to 253 licens - ing contracts . The combination of multiple data sources allows em - pirical testing of the eﬀect of ﬁrm and technology speciﬁc characteristics on contracting behavior . This empirical setting avoids potential bias inherent in using the same data source to compute the depen - dent and the independent variables . In our case , the dependent variable is based on licensing data ( Recap ) , and the key independent variables are based on patent data . The control variables include variables extracted grant - back clause from licensing deal data ( Recap ) , U . S . patent data , and from Compustat . Dependent Variable The dependent variable is a dummy for whether or not the contract attached to the transfer of a technol - ogy includes a grant - back clause . We scrutinized the contracts for indications of a grant - back clause . Some contracts refer explicitly to a grant - back clause ; others indicate that the licensor has the rights to any improve - ments to the licensed technology by the licensee . We interpret both descriptions as expressing contractual agreement to a grant - back clause . The dependent vari - able takes the value 0 for a licensed technology without D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 7 the grant - back clause , and 1 for a licensed technology with the grant - back clause . Independent Variables Core Technology . This variable is measured as the ﬁrm’s patenting activity prior to the licensing agree - ment operationalized as the focal index proposed by Ziedonis ( 2007 ) , which captures the degree of corre - spondence between the ﬁrm’s core technologies and the licensed technology . Higher values indicate closer proximity of the licensed technology to the licensor’s or licensee’s core patent portfolio . The measure is com - puted as follows : Licensor / Licensee core technology (cid:3) (cid:20) (cid:0) (cid:80) tt − 6 (cid:80) j ˜ C i · ρ i (cid:1) c (cid:0) (cid:80) tt − 6 (cid:80) j ˜ C i · ρ i ) (cid:21) , where t represents the date the license agreement became eﬀective , ( (cid:80) tt − 6 (cid:80) j ˜ C i · ρ i ) c is the citation - weighted sum of ﬁrm i ’s patents applied for within six years of the date of the license agreement t and which belongs to the same primary patent class c as the licensed technology , and ( (cid:80) tt − 6 (cid:80) j ˜ C i · ρ i ) is the sum of all citation - weighted patents issued to the ﬁrm j applied for by date t . The use of weighted citations allows us to capture the relative importance of each patent in the ﬁrm’s portfolio ( Griliches 1990 ) . The index is calculated separately for licensors and licensees . It ranges between 0 and 1 , where 1 indicates that the technology is a core technology and that there is complete correspondence between the primary patent class of the licensed technology and the focal ﬁrm’s technologies . Technological Uncertainty . In line with the theory sec - tion , we use the underlying knowledge used to create the focal licensed technology to measure technological uncertainty . Recombining several “newly created” or recent bodies of knowledge within a technology is con - sidered a proxy for greater uncertainty concerning the technology’s development and trajectory compared to proven bundles of technologies / knowledge . This is in line with the idea that uncertainty is related to genera - tive appropriability . Technological uncertainty is com - puted using the age of the backward citations in the licensed patents in our sample . We calculate the aver - age age in months for all the backward citations in each of the patents in our sample , based on the date of application of the backward citation , and the date of the focal patent application . This is in line with prior studies investigating the uncertainty of technological trajectories . It has been used to capture temporal explo - ration , and the eﬀect of “recency” in relation to new knowledge recombinations ( Nerkar 2003 , p . 214 ) , and to deﬁne emerging technologies and distinguish between ﬁrms working primarily with old technologies , and ﬁrms working on the development of up to date tech - nologies ( Ahuja and Lampert 2001 , p . 533 ) . The ratio - nale is that the more recent the knowledge used to create a new technology , the greater the related uncer - tainty . The opposite should hold also ; i . e . , that a new technology which is developed based on knowledge that has been available and in use for a long time should present a less uncertain future trajectory . To capture the eﬀect of higher uncertainty , we invert this variable by multiplying by ( − 1 ) the average age of the backward citations in the focal patent . Control Variables Royalty Rate . The inclusion of royalty payments in the remuneration structure of licensing contracts gives the licensor a greater incentive to commit to transferring the knowledge required by the licensee to fully exploit the licensed - in technology . We control for a contractu - ally speciﬁed ﬁxed royalty rate that the licensee must pay to the licensor . 3 Exclusivity . Another important contractual condition is exclusivity . The inclusion of an exclusivity clause in a licensing contract implies that the licensor agrees to work with only one licensee , preventing other ﬁrms from acquiring the same technology ( Somaya et al . 2011 ) . An exclusivity clause has implications for both parties . For the licensee it provides an incentive to com - mit more resources and engage actively in exploiting the licensed technology . For the licensor it is a contrac - tual mechanism to ensure commercial success from the deal . Given the value creation possibilities associated with this clause , we expect that the grant - back clause is more likely to be used in exclusive licensing contracts . Downstream Assets . The decision to license out a tech - nology is aﬀected strongly by the licensor’s product market complementary assets ( Fosfuri 2006 ) . To con - trol for the eﬀect of the licensor’s downstream assets on the likelihood of the contract including a grant - back clause , we use the licensor’s advertising / promotional costs ( radio , television , print media ) in the given year . While in the markets for technology , downstream assets have been shown to be associated negatively to licens - ing rates , we expect them to have a diﬀerent eﬀect on the inclusion of a grant - back clause . Having decided to license out a technology , possession of downstream market assets should make the licensor less con - cerned about its technology being overtaken by the licensee . Licensee Size . To account for the eﬀect of the licen - sees’ characteristics on the likelihood of a licensing contract including a grant - back clause , we control for licensee’s size using the total number of patents ﬁled by the licensee in the years prior to the licensing deal . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 8 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS Technological Overlap . The decision to include a grant - back clause might be aﬀected also by the extent to which the licensor and licensee build on the same technological ﬁelds . We use the measure proposed by Jaﬀe ( 1986 ) , which indicates the technological positions of ﬁrm A relative to ﬁrm B in terms of the technol - ogy classes in which they have patented . This measure takes values between 0 and 1 , with higher scores indi - cating a higher degree of overlap between the ﬁrms . Same Sector . Based on industry and ﬁrm information extracted from Recap , we compute a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if licensor and licensee operate in the same sector ( biotech , pharma , medical ) and 0 otherwise . In line with previous studies ( Choi 2002 , Fosfuri 2006 ) , we expect this variable to have a positive eﬀect on the likelihood of a grant - back clause in the licensing contract . Technological Superiority . The likelihood of a grant - back clause in a technology licensing contract may be associated with the licensee’s and licensor’s rela - tive technological capabilities . Technologically supe - rior licensors will have fewer incentives to include a grant - back clause , given that the recipient ﬁrm is unlikely to develop the technology at a rate or in a direction that would threaten the licensor in the tech - nology or product markets . The licensor’s technologi - cal superiority is measured as the diﬀerence between the logarithm of the licensor’s and licensee’s patent stock accumulated over the eight years prior to the licensing year . Positive values indicate that the licensor is technologically superior . Patent Value . Following the convention in patent stud - ies ( Lahiri 2010 , Trajtenberg 1990 , Yang et al . 2010 , Ziedonis 2007 ) , we proxy the economic value of a tech - nology with a time invariant measure of the total num - ber of forward citations received by a patent from its date of publication to 2006 , the latest year available in the NBER patent database at the time of the study . Patent value may introduce heterogeneity in the deci - sion to enter the technology market . Technology Radicalness . The radicalness of the tech - nology is measured following Rosenkopf and Nerkar ( 1999 ) and is based on the total count of diﬀerent three - digit level International Patent Classiﬁcation ( IPC ) cat - egories related to the patents cited by the patent for the focal technology , excluding the class of the focal patent . Backward citations referring to IPC classes other than its own indicate that the invention builds on several diﬀerent technological ﬁelds ( Shane 2001 ) . Technology Scope . Technology scope refers to the applicability of the technology , which may indicate the potential for further development , and may increase the licensor’s incentive to include a grant - back clause in a licensing contract with another ﬁrm . We use the measure for scope proposed in Lerner ( 1994 ) that con - siders the number of IPCs that the USPTO assigns to a patent as an indication of the breadth of its technology base and intellectual property protection . Technology Age . The age of the technology can inﬂu - ence the licensor’s decision to commercialize it by exploiting it or licensing it out . Studies suggest that licensors are less likely to license out technologies that might undermine their competitive position in the industry ( see e . g . , Leone and Reichstein 2012 ) . There - fore , ﬁrms will be less likely to commercialize more recent inventions , given that these technologies sup - posedly are at the technological frontier in terms of their inventive activities . Licensor Technological Specialization . The ﬁrm’s level of technological specialization is likely to aﬀect the way it operates in the markets for technology : narrower technological scope renders the ﬁrm more susceptible to rent dissipation when licensing core technologies . Therefore , we include a measure of tech - nological specialization by calculating the Herﬁndahl index for the number of patents in ﬁrm i ’s patent port - folio , accumulated during the seven years before the license agreement . We operationalize this measure as follows : Licensor technological specialization (cid:3) 1 − (cid:88) j (cid:3) 1 (cid:18) N jit N it (cid:19) 2 , where N it represents the total number of patents granted to the licensor in the previous seven years , and N jit is the number of patents assigned to the technol - ogy class j among the licensor’s total patents in the same period . The ﬁnal measure is calculated by sub - tracting 1 from the value reﬂecting the concentration of patent classes across diﬀerent technology domains . Licensor Market Diversiﬁcation . We control for the number of diﬀerent markets in which the licensor operates by counting the number of diﬀerent stan - dard industry classiﬁcation ( SIC ) codes reported in the Compustat database at year t . Licensor Size . We control for ﬁrm size using the loga - rithm of total number of employees in a given year . Firm Slack . The availability of slack resources can aﬀect innovation novelty ( Nohria and Gulati 1996 ) . Given that the ﬁrm’s ability to introduce highly novel innovations might aﬀect the ﬁrm’s licensing decision , we control for licensor i ’s slack , using the ratio of cur - rent assets to current liabilities in year t . R & D Intensity . Relative R & D expenditure can aﬀect technology licensing decisions . R & D intensive ﬁrms are likely to be less dependent on speciﬁc technologies , while less R & D intensive ﬁrms will likely have fewer D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 9 technological opportunities ( Dosi et al . 2006 ) . Heavy investors in R & D are more likely to pursue technology - based strategies which do not include traditional com - mercialization , and to depend on intellectual property exchanges . R & D intensity is measured as the ﬁrm i ’s total of R & D investment divided by its sales in year t . Sales Changes . Licensors that experience decreased sales may be under pressure to generate short - term revenue by licensing their more valuable technologies ( Katz and Shapiro 1986 ) . The percentage change in the licensor’s sales in the licensing years t to t − 1 is used to control for a licensing decision motivated by ﬁnancial pressure . Product Market Competition . To control for the eﬀect of increased product market competition on the licen - sor’s decision to license out , we use a Herﬁndahl index calculated on ﬁrm sales data . We exploit ﬁnancial infor - mation from Compustat to identify ﬁrms operating in the same primary four - digit SIC code in a given year t . This takes account of the sales of all ﬁrms operating in the same industry , regardless of whether they are in our licensing sample . The index is calculated as follows : Product market competition j (cid:3) 1 − I (cid:88) i (cid:3) 1 S 2 ij , where S ij is the market share of ﬁrm i in industry j . We perform the above calculations for each year and each industry , and attach the resulting measure to the licen - sors . This measure has been used in previous studies ( e . g . , Hou and Robinson 2006 , Lang and Stulz 1992 ) to measure the eﬀect of product market competition on several dimensions of ﬁrm behavior . Also , licens - ing propensity varies across years and industry seg - ments . To account for these eﬀects , we include sector and period dummy variables . Econometric Analysis and Model Choice The dependent variable is a dummy representing whether the technology licensing contract included a grant - back clause . However , the grant - back clause can - not be considered independent of the likelihood that the technology is licensed - out . The two decisions are intertwined , producing binary independence between whether to license out a technology and whether to use a grant - back clause . Thus , we extracted all patents applied for by the licensor in the same year as the technology was licensed . We identiﬁed a total of 2 , 669 technologies of which 2 , 272 ( approx . 85 % ) were not identiﬁed in Recap as being licensed out during the period 1984 – 2004 . Among the 397 ( approx . 15 % ) licensed technologies , 66 ( just over 2 % ) were subject to a grant - back clause , and as a result , only 17 % of our tech - nology licensing contracts contain a grant - back clause . We model the two binary variables as codependent , which allows us to test the hypotheses directly . We apply a hierarchical nested logit speciﬁcation to model the likelihood that a grant - back clause will be included in the licensing contract . This type of speciﬁcation splits the categorical values into “nests” of mutually dependent decisions ( Manski and McFadden 1981 ) and enables joint estimation of the impacts of ﬁrm and technology characteristics on the licensing decision , and the decision to include a grant - back clause . We apply a two - level nested logit model with random utility maximization , and full information maximum - likelihood estimation . For similar nested logit model applications , see for instance Drucker and Puri ( 2005 ) and Ziedonis ( 2007 ) . Figure 1 shows that the nest splits the sample across the three levels of the dependent categorical variable , creating an asymmetric tree structure . The ﬁrst nest utilizes all USPTO patents granted to the licensor in the same year as the licensed technology , based on the assumption that they are included in the portfo - lio of technologies that the licensor potentially could oﬀer on the technology market . To restrict the num - ber of observations in the category nonlicensed technol - ogy to those technologies produced in the same period as the licensed technology , we focus on the patents produced in the same year by the same licensor . By including only patents produced in the same year we avoid concern that the ﬁrst nest might be aﬀected by changes to the ﬁrm’s licensing strategy over time . The second nest includes only observations that have been licensed . The likelihood of the technology being licensed is estimated in the ﬁrst nest ; the likelihood that the technology license will include a grant - back clause is considered in the second nest . We investigate whether our assumption about bi - nary dependence is justiﬁed by running a multinomial logistic regression on a three - level categorical variable ( not licensed , licensed without grant - back , licensed with grant - back ) , and apply the Brant test which con - siders whether our assumption of independent irrel - evant alternatives ( IIA ) is violated . We ﬁnd strong evidence of violation of the IIA assumption when applying multinomial logit estimation , thus justifying the use of the nested logit speciﬁcation . Results Descriptive Statistics and Correlations Table 1 reports the mean , standard deviation , and min - imum and maximum values of the variables and the sample ; since nonlicensed technologies are not related to a contract those statistics refer only to the obser - vations in the second nest of our model . The mean values are 0 . 51 for Licensor core technology and 0 . 09 for Licensee core technology . These statistics are in D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 10 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS Figure 1 . The Hierarchical Nested Tree Structure Licensed397 ( 15 % ) Not licensed 2 , 272 ( 85 % ) Nest Grant - back clause ( N = 66 ( 17 % ) ) No grant - back clause ( N = 331 ( 83 % ) ) p l 0 P ( l = 0 ⎪ x 1 ) p l 1 P ( l = 1 ⎪ x 1 ) p l 1 g 0 = p l 1 × p g 0 ⎪ l 1 P ( g = 0 ⎪ x 2 Ÿ p l 1 ) p l 1 g 1 = p l 1 × p g 1 ⎪ l 1 P ( g = 1 ⎪ x 2 Ÿ p l 1 ) line with our expectations since the licensed technolo - gies are more likely to be embedded in the licensors’ than in the licensee’s main technological activities . The variable technological uncertainty presents a mean of − 131 . 37 . Given that this variable is measured in months , this value corresponds to an average age of 11 years for the backward citations in the patents in our sample . To investigate the nature of the grant - back clause further , we consider its use by diﬀerent licensors and Table 1 . Descriptive Statistics for the Contracts in the Sample ( N (cid:3) 397 ) Variable Mean S . D . Min Max Grant - back clause 0 . 17 0 . 36 0 1 Licensor core technology 0 . 51 0 . 34 0 1 Licensee core technology 0 . 09 0 . 21 0 1 Technological uncertainty − 131 . 37 119 . 55 − 315 . 66 − 1 Royalty rate 6 . 29 8 . 33 0 50 Exclusivity 0 . 73 0 . 45 0 1 Downstream assets 60 . 2 309 . 49 0 3 , 399 Licensee size 556 . 18 961 . 96 2 4 , 473 Technological overlap 0 . 33 0 . 34 0 1 Same sector 0 . 41 0 . 49 0 1 Technological superiority 0 . 27 3 . 77 − 7 . 15 7 . 17 Patent value 42 . 26 115 . 69 0 1 , 555 Technology radicalness 2 . 46 2 . 83 0 18 Technology scope 2 . 44 1 . 55 1 17 Technology age 5 3 . 49 0 19 Licensor technological specialization 0 . 41 0 . 2 0 . 08 1 Licensor market diversiﬁcation 2 . 96 3 . 74 1 34 Licensor size 5 . 79 2 . 37 1 11 . 49 Firm slack 7 . 02 37 . 48 154 . 77 526 . 85 R & D intensity 113 . 21 135 . 54 0 . 01 1 , 001 . 4 Sales change 3 . 19 18 . 28 0 . 01 343 . 32 Product market competition 0 . 79 0 . 21 0 . 21 0 . 95 licensees . The data show that approximately 40 % of the 81 licensors and 27 % of the 117 licensees considered licensed at least one technology under a contract with a grant - back clause . Combined with the fact that only 17 % of the technologies are licensed under contracts with a grant - back clause , these results indicate that among our sample , inclusion of a grant - back clause is not restricted to a small group of ﬁrms and is not standard practice among a select group . We interpret this as a ﬁrst indication that grant - back clauses are included only in particular circumstances . Table 2 reports the Pearson correlation coeﬃcients for the variables considered in the analysis ( N (cid:3) 2 , 669 ) . None of the correlations raise concerns about mul - ticollinearity in the regression analysis . This is con - ﬁrmed by a variance inﬂation factor ( VIF ) analysis . The maximum VIF for any of the independent variables is 3 . 84 ( mean VIF (cid:3) 1 . 86 ) . Regression Results Table 3 summarizes the results of the regression ana - lysis . Model I reports the results considering only the controls and the direct eﬀect of technological un - certainty ; Models II – V introduce the explanatory vari - ables and their interactions sequentially . The regres - sions provide support for Hypothesis 1 that the closer the technology to the licensor’s core technological areas the more likely the contract will include a grant - back clause . Hypothesis 2 is supported across the mod - els , with the coeﬃcient of licensee core technology stable and statistically signiﬁcant . We ﬁnd support also for Hypotheses 3 and 4 on the moderating eﬀects of technological uncertainty on the main relationships referred to in Hypotheses 1 and 2 . We ﬁnd evidence that increasing levels of uncertainty strengthen the D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 11 Table 2 . Correlation Coeﬃcients ( N (cid:3) 2 . 669 ) Variables [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 1 ] Licensor core technology 1 [ 2 ] Licensee core technology 0 . 01 1 [ 3 ] Technological uncertainty − 0 . 01 0 . 04 1 [ 4 ] Royalty rate 0 . 00 0 . 07 0 . 07 1 [ 5 ] Exclusivity 0 . 00 − 0 . 09 − 0 . 10 0 . 14 1 [ 6 ] Downstream assets 0 . 01 − 0 . 15 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 26 0 . 24 1 [ 7 ] Licensee size 0 . 24 0 . 05 0 . 07 0 . 13 − 0 . 10 − 0 . 17 1 [ 8 ] Technological overlap 0 . 10 0 . 22 0 . 22 0 . 05 0 . 14 0 . 01 0 . 15 1 [ 9 ] Same sector − 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 05 0 . 23 0 . 09 − 0 . 39 − 0 . 24 − 0 . 13 1 [ 10 ] Technological superiority − 0 . 41 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 10 0 . 09 0 . 26 − 0 . 73 − 0 . 38 0 . 23 1 [ 11 ] Patent value 0 . 14 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 0 . 08 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 1 0 . 04 0 . 02 0 . 06 − 0 . 07 1 [ 12 ] Technology radicalness 0 . 04 0 . 03 0 . 06 0 . 02 0 . 01 − 0 . 18 0 . 21 0 . 17 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 29 0 . 03 [ 13 ] Technology scope 0 . 20 0 . 05 0 . 05 0 . 04 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 08 0 . 08 0 . 04 − 0 . 12 0 . 15 [ 14 ] Technology age − 0 . 33 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 19 − 0 . 13 0 . 13 − 0 . 20 − 0 . 27 − 0 . 23 0 . 42 − 0 . 03 [ 15 ] Licensor technological specialization 0 . 54 − 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 15 0 . 00 − 0 . 20 0 . 36 − 0 . 02 0 . 13 − 0 . 54 0 . 08 [ 16 ] Licensor market diversiﬁcation − 0 . 13 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 23 0 . 21 0 . 35 − 0 . 17 0 . 10 − 0 . 29 0 . 22 − 0 . 08 [ 17 ] Licensor size − 0 . 34 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 07 0 . 55 − 0 . 33 − 0 . 22 − 0 . 24 0 . 61 − 0 . 10 [ 18 ] Firm slack 0 . 07 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 06 − 0 . 05 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 05 − 0 . 11 0 . 00 [ 19 ] R & D intensity 0 . 24 0 . 12 0 . 13 − 0 . 02 0 . 19 − 0 . 20 0 . 17 0 . 29 0 . 10 − 0 . 38 − 0 . 05 [ 20 ] Sales change 0 . 06 0 . 05 0 . 05 − 0 . 01 0 . 09 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 01 0 . 12 − 0 . 10 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 01 [ 21 ] Product market competition − 0 . 18 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 31 0 . 09 0 . 25 − 0 . 21 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 17 0 . 34 − 0 . 21 Variables [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 13 ] Technology radicalness 1 [ 14 ] Technology scope − 0 . 01 1 [ 15 ] Technology age − 0 . 11 − 0 . 15 1 [ 16 ] Licensor technological specialization 0 . 16 0 . 11 − 0 . 48 1 [ 17 ] Licensor market diversiﬁcation 0 . 09 − 0 . 03 0 . 47 − 0 . 38 1 [ 18 ] Licensor size − 0 . 26 − 0 . 12 0 . 43 − 0 . 5 0 . 38 1 [ 19 ] Firm slack 0 . 03 0 . 03 − 0 . 08 0 . 12 − 0 . 04 − 0 . 17 1 [ 20 ] R & D intensity 0 . 11 0 . 07 − 0 . 41 0 . 34 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 47 0 . 01 1 [ 21 ] Sales change 0 . 06 0 . 03 − 0 . 11 0 . 07 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 23 0 . 01 0 . 14 1 [ 22 ] Product market competition − 0 . 05 − 0 . 16 0 . 33 − 0 . 24 0 . 29 0 . 4 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 07 1 positive eﬀect of licensor’s core technology on inclu - sion of a grant - back clause . The interaction between licensor core technology and technological uncertainty is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the conven - tional levels . The results reported in Table 3 support the idea in Hypothesis 4 about the positive moderation of uncertainty on the relationship between licensee core technology and the inclusion of a grant - back clause . The coeﬃcient of the interaction between licensee core technology and technological uncertainty is positive and highly signiﬁcant . To check whether the moderating eﬀects of uncer - tainty are robust to diﬀerent proxies , we employ two alternative measures for technological uncertainty . First , we use as a proxy the rate of scientiﬁc refer - ences in the backward citations of the focal patents in a sample . This is based on the idea that the uncertainty associated to the technology will likely be higher if the underlying knowledge is at an early stage of develop - ment ( Ziedonis 2007 ) , and we argue that while “early - stage” technologies often are based on basic research ( scientiﬁc knowledge ) , technologies closer to applica - tion include fewer citations to basic knowledge and more to other patented inventions ( Narin et al . 1987 , Rosenberg 1996 ) . Table 3 reports the results using the rate of scientiﬁc backward citations as an uncertainty measure in Model VI . With the exception of the interac - tion between licensor core technology and technologi - cal uncertainty , the results are similar to those obtained using our primary uncertainty measure . To compute the second proxy for uncertainty ( results not reported here for reasons of space ) , we examined each contract to identify the most advanced stage of development among the licensed technologies in Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) trials based on data extracted from Recap . This information was used to create a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the drug in a licens - ing contract was licensed before the clinical stage , and 0 otherwise ( Banerjee 2012 ) . A limitation of this measure in the context of the present paper is that we expect the measure to be more closely related to uncertainty related to product market commercialization of given products than to the future development and poten - tial trajectory of the licensed technologies . The results obtained using this alternative measure were compara - ble ( in sign and signiﬁcance ) to those based on average D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 12 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS Table 3 . Nested Logit Results for Grant - Back Clause and Licensing Decisions Variables Model I Model II Model III Model IV Model V Model VI Grant - back clause equation ( N (cid:3) 397 ) Licensor core technology 0 . 434 ∗∗∗ 0 . 422 ∗∗∗ 0 . 439 ∗∗∗ 0 . 451 ∗∗∗ 3 . 999 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 134 ) ( 0 . 134 ) ( 0 . 136 ) ( 0 . 136 ) ( 1 . 326 ) Licensee core technology − 0 . 344 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 335 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 426 ∗∗∗ − 4 . 780 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 121 ) ( 0 . 124 ) ( 0 . 124 ) ( 1 . 299 ) Licensor core technology 0 . 254 ∗∗ 0 . 272 ∗∗ − 2 . 543 × Technological uncertainty ( 0 . 115 ) ( 0 . 116 ) ( 1 . 683 ) Licensee core technology 0 . 197 ∗∗ 8 . 454 ∗∗ × Technological uncertainty ( 0 . 090 ) ( 3 . 811 ) Technological uncertainty − 0 . 190 + − 0 . 206 + − 0 . 145 − 0 . 145 − 0 . 168 2 . 967 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 098 ) ( 0 . 109 ) ( 0 . 108 ) ( 0 . 110 ) ( 0 . 109 ) ( 0 . 717 ) Royalty rate 0 . 039 0 . 035 0 . 026 0 . 019 0 . 025 0 . 020 ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 031 ) Exclusivity 0 . 846 ∗∗ 0 . 931 ∗∗ 0 . 837 + 0 . 840 + 0 . 841 + 0 . 788 ( 0 . 399 ) ( 0 . 458 ) ( 0 . 459 ) ( 0 . 458 ) ( 0 . 459 ) ( 0 . 542 ) Downstream assets − 0 . 000 − 0 . 001 − 0 . 001 + − 0 . 001 + − 0 . 001 ∗∗ − 0 . 001 ∗∗ ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) Licensee size 0 . 002 ∗∗∗ 0 . 003 ∗∗∗ 0 . 002 ∗∗∗ 0 . 002 ∗∗ 0 . 002 ∗∗ 0 . 002 + ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) ( 0 . 001 ) Technological overlap 1 . 973 ∗∗∗ 2 . 179 ∗∗∗ 2 . 455 ∗∗∗ 2 . 471 ∗∗∗ 2 . 692 ∗∗∗ 0 . 348 ∗∗ ( 0 . 662 ) ( 0 . 692 ) ( 0 . 712 ) ( 0 . 706 ) ( 0 . 732 ) ( 0 . 160 ) Same Sector 1 . 326 ∗∗∗ 1 . 382 ∗∗∗ 1 . 200 ∗∗ 1 . 200 ∗∗ 1 . 146 ∗∗ 0 . 933 + ( 0 . 471 ) ( 0 . 481 ) ( 0 . 482 ) ( 0 . 482 ) ( 0 . 481 ) ( 0 . 559 ) Technological superiority − 0 . 208 ∗∗ − 0 . 177 + − 0 . 162 + − 0 . 164 + − 0 . 185 + − 0 . 311 ∗∗ ( 0 . 090 ) ( 0 . 097 ) ( 0 . 097 ) ( 0 . 097 ) ( 0 . 100 ) ( 0 . 122 ) Technology licensing equation ( N (cid:3) 2 . 272 ) Technology characteristics Patent value 0 . 006 ∗∗∗ 0 . 005 ∗∗∗ 0 . 005 ∗∗∗ 0 . 005 ∗∗∗ 0 . 005 ∗∗∗ 0 . 005 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) ( 0 . 002 ) Technology radicalness 0 . 038 0 . 041 + 0 . 038 0 . 039 0 . 040 0 . 063 ∗∗ ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 024 ) ( 0 . 026 ) Technology scope − 0 . 042 − 0 . 053 − 0 . 051 − 0 . 048 − 0 . 047 − 0 . 060 ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 044 ) Technology age 0 . 125 ∗∗∗ 0 . 134 ∗∗∗ 0 . 125 ∗∗∗ 0 . 124 ∗∗∗ 0 . 121 ∗∗∗ 0 . 131 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 026 ) Firm characteristics Licensor technological specialization 2 . 958 ∗∗∗ 2 . 522 ∗∗∗ 2 . 525 ∗∗∗ 2 . 546 ∗∗∗ 2 . 519 ∗∗∗ 2 . 417 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 417 ) ( 0 . 439 ) ( 0 . 439 ) ( 0 . 440 ) ( 0 . 439 ) ( 0 . 442 ) Licensor market diversiﬁcation − 0 . 022 − 0 . 024 − 0 . 024 − 0 . 021 − 0 . 017 − 0 . 022 ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 021 ) ( 0 . 021 ) Licensor size − 0 . 164 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 145 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 138 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 135 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 125 ∗∗∗ − 0 . 129 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 038 ) ( 0 . 039 ) ( 0 . 039 ) ( 0 . 039 ) ( 0 . 040 ) ( 0 . 040 ) Firm slack 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 000 ) R & D intensity 0 . 045 0 . 036 0 . 038 0 . 040 0 . 040 0 . 028 ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 058 ) Sales change 0 . 002 0 . 003 0 . 004 0 . 004 0 . 004 0 . 004 ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 005 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) ( 0 . 006 ) Product market competition − 0 . 960 ∗∗ − 0 . 873 + − 0 . 935 ∗∗ − 0 . 943 ∗∗ − 0 . 982 ∗∗ − 0 . 856 + ( 0 . 450 ) ( 0 . 451 ) ( 0 . 448 ) ( 0 . 449 ) ( 0 . 450 ) ( 0 . 448 ) Constant − 1 . 668 ∗∗∗ − 2 . 171 ∗∗∗ − 2 . 126 ∗∗∗ − 2 . 124 ∗∗∗ − 2 . 154 ∗∗∗ − 2 . 570 ∗∗∗ ( 0 . 353 ) ( 0 . 389 ) ( 0 . 397 ) ( 0 . 398 ) ( 0 . 395 ) ( 0 . 489 ) Number of observations 2 . 669 2 . 669 2 . 669 2 . 669 2 . 669 2 . 669 Log likelihood − 1 , 072 . 904 − 1 , 065 . 224 − 1 , 061 . 296 − 1 , 058 . 746 − 1 , 056 . 275 − 1 , 053 . 107 Chi2 468 . 923 ∗∗∗ 378 . 558 ∗∗∗ 378 . 670 ∗∗∗ 373 . 762 ∗∗∗ 364 . 237 ∗∗∗ 320 . 190 ∗∗∗ Likelihood ratio comparison 15 . 359 ∗∗∗ 7 . 856 ∗∗∗ 5 . 101 ∗∗∗ 4 . 942 ∗∗∗ — Note . 1 . Period and sector dummies are used in the estimations but omitted from the table . + p < 0 . 10 , ∗∗ p < 0 . 05 , ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 01 ( 2 - tailed tests for all variables ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 13 age of backward citations . However , using trial data as an uncertainty measure also has some empirical shortcomings . Given the way that trials information is reported in Recap , we cannot directly connect the licensed patents to diﬀerent stages of the FDA approval process . However , the fact that the results of using both alternative measures point in the same direction as our main uncertainty variable strengthens our conﬁdence in the results . The results for the controls in the second nest ( grant - back equation ) suggest that licensors tend to use a grant - back clause when licensing out to ﬁrms operat - ing in the same sector . Downstream assets appear to be negatively associated to the use of a grant - back clause , suggesting that licensors with product market capa - bilities are less concerned about the boomerang eﬀect . There is also a negative association between use of a grant - back clause and a technologically superior licen - sor . The parameter for exclusivity remains positive and signiﬁcant across Models I to V . The results of the ﬁrst nest ( technology licensing equation ) suggest that more valuable patents and older technologies are more likely to be licensed . At ﬁrm - level , the results indicate that it is technologically spe - cialized and smaller ﬁrms that engage in the markets for technology . We ﬁnd support also for the idea that increasing product market competition is negatively associated with licensing - out rates . These ﬁndings are in line with prior studies . Margins of Main and Interaction Eﬀects To test whether including the main explanatory vari - ables improves the model ﬁt signiﬁcantly , we use a log likelihood comparison test to compare the unre - stricted and restricted models in Table 3 . The statis - tics show that including the independent variables provides additional explanatory power regarding the inclusion of a grant - back clause in a licensing contract . We test also for whether the inclusion of the interac - tion terms ( Hypotheses 3 and 4 ) adds further explana - tory power to Models IV and V ; the test statistics are signiﬁcant . To assess the magnitude of the eﬀect of a marginal change in the explanatory variables on the probability of observing a grant - back clause in a technology license contract , we estimate the average marginal eﬀects . This requires partially diﬀerentiating the probability of a grant - back clause with respect to the explanatory vari - ables . Since there is no standardized means of cap - turing marginal eﬀects in a nested logit , we compute the marginal eﬀects manually following the procedure suggested in Cameron and Trivedi ( 2009 , p . 501 ) : First , we predict the probabilities associated with the sec - ond nest using the observed values of the variables . We then calculate a new predicted probability for the second nest after adding a small increment to the focal Table 4 . Marginal Eﬀects ( dp / dx ) from Table 3 , Model IV Variable ( dp / dx ) Second nest—Grant - back clause equation Licensor core technology 0 . 060 Licensee core technology − 0 . 056 Technological uncertainty − 0 . 000 Royalty rate 0 . 001 Exclusivity 0 . 020 Downstream assets − 0 . 000 Licensee size 0 . 000 Technological overlap 0 . 059 Same sector 0 . 028 Technological superiority − 0 . 004 First nest—Technology licensing equation Patent value 0 . 000 Technology radicalness 0 . 001 Technology scope − 0 . 001 Technology age 0 . 003 Licensor technological specialization 0 . 061 Licensor market diversiﬁcation − 0 . 001 Licensor size − 0 . 003 Firm slack 0 . 000 R & D intensity 0 . 000 Sales change 0 . 000 Product market competition − 0 . 023 variable ( its standard deviation divided by 1 , 000 ) . We obtain the diﬀerence between the two predicted proba - bilities and divide it by the same increment for each of the observations . Finally , we calculate the mean across observations for the focal variable to obtain the average marginal eﬀect . We repeat these steps for all the vari - ables of interest . 4 Table 4 reports the average marginal eﬀects corresponding to the estimates in Model V ( see Table 3 ) . The marginal eﬀects reveal that the small increase in the importance ( core ) of the technology to the licensor results in a 6 % increase in the probability of a grant - back clause for the average observation . For the licensee it means a 5 % decrease in the probability of a grant - back clause . We supplement the marginal eﬀects to further inves - tigate the moderating eﬀects by providing graphical representations of the eﬀects . Figures 2 and 3 provide representations of the moderating eﬀect of uncertainty on the relationship between both licensor and licensee core technology and the probability of including a grant - back clause . To compute the graphs , we split technological uncertainty into ﬁve categories and use the observations in the ﬁrst and the ﬁfth categories to plot high versus low levels of technological uncertainty . Figure 2 shows that as uncertainty increases , the posi - tive eﬀect of licensor core technology on the probability of including a grant - back clause turns more positive . Also , as uncertainty increases , the negative association between licensee core technology and the probability of a grant - back clause moves in a less negative ( posi - tive ) direction ( see Figure 3 ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 14 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS Figure 2 . The Moderating Eﬀect of Technological Uncertainty on Licensor Core Technology 0 . 025 0 . 020 0 . 030 0 . 040 0 . 035 P r obab ili t y o f i n c l ud i ng t he g r an t - ba ck c l au s e 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Licensor core technology Low technological uncertainty High technological uncertainty Sensitivity Analysis Additional analyses ensure that results are not byprod - ucts of our empirical choices . First , we consider those variables with a time window , and vary the time dimensions ( ± 2 years ) . We ﬁnd no evidence that these choices have an impact on the model’s overall results . We consider also that some ﬁrms appear more than once in the data set since they licensed - out more than one technology . This means that not all observations are independent of one another , which potentially could introduce some bias in our estimates . Although the descriptive statistics would suggest otherwise , it might be standard practice for some ﬁrms to include grant - back clauses , rather than being the result of cir - cumstances in a random sample of observations . Thus , some observations may not be independent . To avoid this potential source of bias , we run a nested logit model with bootstrap speciﬁcation ; the bootstrap pro - cedure mimics the fact that the data are a pooled cross section in which the reappearance of the same con - tractual partner is a random draw , not an endogenous event . The results are similar to those from the main analysis suggesting this potential source of bias is of limited concern . Finally , the potential lack of indepen - dence among observations could lead to underesti - mated standard errors . To conﬁrm whether the main Figure 3 . The Moderating Eﬀect of Technological Uncertainty on Licensee Core Technology 0 . 025 0 . 030 0 . 035 P r ob a b il i t y o f i n c l ud i ng t h e g r an t - ba ck c l au s e 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Licensee core technology Low technological uncertainty High technological uncertainty results are spuriously signiﬁcant due to correlated data , we reestimate the models clustering the error terms at licensee level and then at licensor level . The size and signiﬁcance of the coeﬃcients are comparable with the reported results . Conclusion and Discussion We began by discussing the boomerang eﬀect pro - posed in the theoretical technological licensing liter - ature . We examined the eﬀect of the match between licensed technologies , licensors’ and licensees’ charac - teristics , and the type of technology , on the probability of including a grant - back clause in the licensing agree - ment . Building on concepts and insights from the inno - vation and appropriability literatures , we proposed theoretical arguments related to the contracting ﬁrms’ need to protect their core technological resources , and ﬁrms’ incentives to invest in developing the focal tech - nology . We theorized and found empirical support for the idea that licensing agreements are increasingly likely to contain a grant - back clause if the licensed tech - nology is close to the licensor’s core technologies . We found also that licensing agreements are decreasingly likely to contain a grant - back clause if the licensed tech - nology is close to the licensee’s core technologies . We argued also that technology licensing agree - ments involving technologies that are core to the licensor and are uncertain should further increase the probability of including a grant - back clause . We found empirical support for the idea that technological uncer - tainty positively ( making it more positive ) moderates the relationship between the proximity of a licensed technology to the core of the licensor’s patent portfo - lio and use of a grant - back clause . Finally , we explored whether the decreasing likelihood of a grant - back clause in a technology licensing agreement involving a technology that is core to the licensee is partially oﬀset by the licensed technology being uncertain . We found empirical support for this argument . Our work provides two main contributions . First , we extend the theoretical understanding in the strate - gic management literature of the functioning of the markets for technology ( e . g . , Ceccagnoli and Jiang 2013 , Fosfuri 2006 ) by theoretically identifying the future potential beneﬁciaries of a licensing relationship that precludes potentially mutually beneﬁcial deals . We show that undesirable potential rents accruing to licensing partners can be prevented by appropriate contract design . In other words , we provide further evidence that the design of contracts matters for ﬁrm behavior . Firms not only learn how to contract over time ( Mayer and Argyres 2004 , Poppo and Zenger 2002 , Ryall and Sampson 2009 ) , they include provisions to encourage the contracting parties to focus on creat - ing joint value rather than squeezing out private ben - eﬁts ( Malhotra and Lumineau 2011 ) . We show that ﬁrms use an important control provision related to D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 15 ﬁrm - speciﬁc vulnerabilities pertaining to the technolo - gies that are particularly important for ﬁrms’ ability to create value in the longer run , and that ﬁrms fac - tor in the technological uncertainly associated to the licensed technology . Moreover , the previous literature focuses almost exclusively on licensing problems from the licensor’s perspective ; we contribute by including licensors and licensees in the same conceptual and econometric model . Also , previous research on tech - nological licensing mostly investigates how ﬁrms can protect their current technology and value - generating activities ( primary appropriability ) through the use of appropriability mechanisms such as patents ( Ceccag - noli 2009 , Cohen et al . 2000 , Oxley 1997 , Teece 1986 ) . We contribute by demonstrating that not only do ﬁrms strive to generate value by investing in technological resources and means for appropriating returns from their current inventions , buyers and sellers of techno - logical services try also to protect their potential future sources of value generation ( generative appropriabil - ity ) using contractual means . Second , but related to the latter point , we extend the generative appropriability literature by specify - ing how ﬁrms can both harm ( arguably the focus of Ahuja et al . 2013 ) and enhance the focal ﬁrm’s genera - tive appropriability through technology - related activ - ities depending on contract design . This argument is in line with work on selective revealing ( Alexy et al . 2013 , Harhoﬀ et al . 2003 ) , and reabsorption of knowl - edge spillovers ( Alnuaimi and George 2016 , Yang et al . 2010 ) . In the case of licensing , our results are consistent with the idea that the inclusion of a grant - back clause allows the licensor to enhance its generative appro - priability by exploiting the eﬀorts of the licensee and will be more likely to do so if the licensed technology is in an area where the licensor has substantial tech - nological experience . Inclusion of a grant - back clause can enhance the licensee’s generative appropriability in noncore areas by encouraging joint eﬀorts with the licensor . The ﬁndings from this study have implications for managerial practice . Licensing potentially is useful to increasetherentsfrominnovationforbothlicenseesandlicensors . However , as we argued in the introduction , many potential transactions are hampered by market imperfections in a highly uncertain environment which provides few safeguards . Our research suggests that some of these problems can be resolved by an appro - priate contract design which takes account of these transactional diﬃculties . Our research suggests also that licensors and licensees should be especially con - cerned about contract design if the traded technology is uncertain , and if it is related to core technologies that underpin the ﬁrms’ generative appropriability . This study has several limitations . First , testing the hypotheses developed in this paper requires an empir - ical setting in which the market for technology suﬀers from little friction . The pharmaceutical industry is spe - ciﬁc in that licensing contracts frequently are used to trade knowledge and technologies . The mechanisms described in this paper may not apply to other indus - tries where licensing is less common . This limitation suggests opportunities for future research . Second , due to the need for consistent ﬁnancial information our empirical setting is restricted to public licensors . This prevents generalization of the results to small ﬁrms whose reasons for including a grant - back clause when licensing out may be diﬀerent . However , our setup helps to remove unobserved heterogeneity related to ﬁrm size which otherwise might be a problem . Third , ﬁrms may choose not to disclose certain licens - ing deals for secrecy and strategic reasons in which case , selection issues might aﬀect the representative - ness of our database . However , we have no reason to expect that if ﬁrms choose not to report certain deals those unreported observations should be correlated systematically with the dependent variable . Fourth , our licensing data set does not allow us to identify whether licensors and licensees have relationships that extend the scope of the licensing deals . For example , it is possible that the deals in our sample could be one dimension of a supplier - buyer relationship . Although we believe that the number of ﬁrm - and market - level control variables in our econometric models minimizes this limitation , extending the analysis to involve other modes of interaction between licensing partners would be an interesting direction for future research . It might provide insights for managers involved in decisions about how to manage and design technology commer - cialization agreements . Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge comments on earlier ver - sions of the paper from Ashish Arora , Hakan Ener , Andrea Fosfuri , Stefan Haeﬂiger , Thomas Klueter , Elena Novelli , Thomas Rønde , Scott Shane , Salvatore Torrisi , Chris Zott , and the audiences at Cass Business School , Solvay Business School , University of Aarhus , University of Udine , the 2013 DRUID Summer Conference , the 2013 Academy of Manage - ment Conference , and the 2015 FinKT Rimini Conference on Knowledge Transfer and Entrepreneurship . They owe special thanks to Editor - in - Chief Gautam Ahuja and two anonymous reviewers of this journal for very helpful comments and sug - gestions . The usual caveats apply . Endnotes 1 In addition , a core technology often underpins a number of goods in the product market ( Granstrand et al . 1997 ) . This implies that the ﬁrm is particularly vulnerable to primary appropriability if it concerns a core technology . 2 We tested whether these exclusion criteria were likely to have an impact on the overall result by comparing the mean values of the main explanatory variables for observations , which allowed us to calculate these variables . We found no reasons for concern . 3 Royaltyratesandagrant - backclausemaybeintegraltothecontrac - tual negotiation and normally would require a modeling approach D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability 16 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS that accounts for simultaneity in their determination . This would redeﬁne the royalty rate from a control to an endogenous variable . Since our focus here is not on royalty rates , and because these two variables exhibit very low levels of correlation ( Pearson correlations and Chi2 test statistics in a 2 × 2 matrix ) , we do not choose this approach . 4 This method ensures that the marginal eﬀect is based on the stan - darddeviationoftheexplanatoryvariableandnotaone - unitchange , which raises concern for variables ranging between 0 and 1—the “core” variables and the uncertainty variable . References Aghion P , Tirole J ( 1994 ) The management of innovation . Quart . J . Econom . 109 ( 4 ) : 1185 – 1209 . Agrawal A , Cockburn I , Zhang L ( 2015 ) Deals not done : Sources of failure in the market for ideas . Strategic Management J . 36 ( 7 ) : 976 – 986 . Ahuja G , Lampert CM ( 2001 ) Entrepreneurship in the large corpora - tion : A longitudinal study of how established ﬁrms create break - through inventions . Strategic Management J . 22 ( 6 – 7 ) : 521 – 543 . Ahuja G , Lampert CM , Novelli E ( 2013 ) The second face of appropri - ability : Generative appropriability and its determinants . Acad . Management Rev . 38 ( 2 ) : 248 – 269 . Alexy O , George G , Salter AJ ( 2013 ) Cui bono ? Theselective revealing of knowledge and its implications for innovative activity . Acad . Management Rev . 38 ( 2 ) : 270 – 291 . Allen RC ( 1983 ) Collective invention . J . Econom . Behav . Organ . 4 ( 1 ) : 1 – 24 . Alnuaimi T , George G ( 2016 ) Appropriability and the retrieval of knowledge after spillovers . Strategic Management J . 37 ( 7 ) : 1263 – 1279 . Anand BN , Khanna T ( 2000 ) The structure of licensing contracts . J . Indust . Econom . 48 ( 1 ) : 103 – 135 . Argyres NS , Bercovitz J , Mayer KJ ( 2007 ) Complementarity and evo - lution of contractual provisions : An empirical study of it ser - vices contracts . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 1 ) : 3 – 19 . Arora A ( 1995 ) Licensing tacit knowledge : Intellectual property rights and the market for know - how . Econom . Innovation New Tech . 4 ( 1 ) : 41 – 60 . Arora A , Ceccagnoli M ( 2006 ) Patent protection , complementary assets , and ﬁrms’ incentives for technology licensing . Manage - ment Sci . 52 ( 2 ) : 293 – 308 . Arora A , Gambardella A ( 2010 ) Ideas for rent : An overview of mar - kets for technology . Indust . Corporate Change 19 ( 3 ) : 775 – 803 . Arrow KJ , ed . ( 1962 ) Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention . The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activ - ity ( Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ ) , 104 – 119 . Atuahene - Gima K ( 1992 ) Inward technology licensing as an alterna - tive to internal R & D in new product development : A conceptual framework . J . Product Innovation Management 10 ( 2 ) : 156 – 167 . Atuahene - Gima K ( 1993 ) Determinants of inward technology licens - ing intentions : An empirical analysis of Australian engineering ﬁrms . J . Product Innovation Management 10 ( 3 ) : 230 – 240 . Banerjee T ( 2012 ) Aspects of research and development contract termsinthe bio / pharmaceuticalsector . BolinK , KaestnerR , eds . The Economics of Medical Technology ( Emerald Group Publishing Ltd . , Bingley , UK ) , 1 – 33 . Breschi S , Lissoni F , Malerba F ( 2003 ) Knowledge - relatedness in ﬁrm technological diversiﬁcation . Res . Policy 32 ( 1 ) : 69 – 87 . Cameron AC , Trivedi PK ( 2009 ) Microeconometrics Using Stata ( Stata Press , College Station , TX ) . Cantwell J , Fai F ( 1999 ) Firms as the source of innovation and growth : The evolution of technological competence . J . Evolution - ary Econom . 9 ( 3 ) : 331 – 366 . Caves RE , Crookell H , Killing JP ( 1983 ) The imperfect market for technology licenses . Oxford Bull . Econom . Statist . 45 ( 3 ) : 249 – 267 . Cebrián M ( 2009 ) The structure of payments as a way to alleviate con - tractual hazards in international technology licensing . Indust . Corporate Change 18 ( 6 ) : 1135 – 1160 . Ceccagnoli M ( 2009 ) Appropriability , preemption , and ﬁrm perfor - mance . Strategic Management J . 30 ( 1 ) : 81 – 98 . Ceccagnoli M , Jiang L ( 2013 ) The cost of integrating external tech - nologies : Supply and demand drivers of value creation in the markets for technology . Strategic Management J . 34 ( 4 ) : 404 – 425 . Ceccagnoli M , Higgins MJ , Palermo V ( 2014 ) Behind the scenes : Sources of complementarity in R & D . J . Econom . Management Strategy 23 ( 1 ) : 125 – 148 . Ceccagnoli M , Graham S , Higgings M , Lee J ( 2010 ) Productivity and the role of complementary assets in ﬁrms’ demand for technol - ogy innovations . Indust . Corporate Change 19 ( 3 ) : 839 – 869 . Choi JP ( 2002 ) A dynamic analysis of licensing : The “boomerang” eﬀect and grant - back clauses . Internat . Econom . Rev . 43 ( 3 ) : 803 – 829 . Cohen WM , Levinthal DA ( 1990 ) Absorptive capacity : A new per - spective on learning and innovation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 ( 1 ) : 128 – 152 . Cohen WM , Nelson RR , Walsh J ( 2000 ) Protecting their intellectual assets : Appropriability conditions and why U . S . manufacturing ﬁrms patent ( or not ) . Working Paper 7552 , National Bureau of Economic Research , Cambridge , MA . Dosi G ( 1988 ) Sources , procedures and microeconomic eﬀects of innovation . J . Econom . Literature 26 ( 3 ) : 1120 – 1171 . Dosi G , Marengo L , Pasquali C ( 2006 ) How much should society fuel the greed of innovators ? On the relations between appropri - ability , opportunities and rates of innovation . Res . Policy 35 ( 8 ) : 1110 – 1121 . Drucker S , Puri M ( 2005 ) On the beneﬁts of concurrent lending and underwriting . J . Finance 60 ( 6 ) : 2763 – 2799 . Duplat V , Lumineau F ( 2016 ) Third parties and contract design : The case of contracts for technology transfer . Managerial Decision Econom . 37 ( 6 ) : 424 – 444 . Fleming L , Sorenson O ( 2004 ) Science as a map in technological search . Strategic Management J . 25 ( 8 – 9 ) : 909 – 928 . Fosfuri A ( 2006 ) The licensing dilemma : Understanding the determi - nants of the rate of technology licensing . Strategic Management J . 27 ( 12 ) : 1141 – 1158 . Granstrand O , Patel P , Pavitt K ( 1997 ) Multi - technology corporations : Why they have “distributed” rather than “distinctive core” com - petencies . California Management Rev . 39 ( 4 ) : 8 – 25 . Griliches Z ( 1990 ) Patent statistics as economic indicators—A survey . J . Econom . Literature 28 ( 4 ) : 1661 – 1707 . Grossman SJ , Hart OD ( 1986 ) The costs and beneﬁts of ownership : A theory of vertical and lateral integration . J . Political Econom . 94 ( 4 ) : 691 – 719 . Harhoﬀ D , Henkel J , Von Hippel E ( 2003 ) Proﬁting from voluntary information spillovers : How users beneﬁt by freely revealing their innovations . Res . Policy 32 ( 10 ) : 1753 – 1769 . Helfat C ( 1994 ) Evolutionary trajectories in petroleum ﬁrm R & D . Management Sci . 40 ( 12 ) : 1720 – 1747 . Hess AM , Rothaermel FT ( 2011 ) When are assets complementary ? Star scientists , strategic alliances , and innovation in the pharma - ceutical industry . Strategic Management J . 32 ( 8 ) : 895 – 909 . Hill CWL ( 1992 ) Strategies for exploiting technological innovations : When and when not to license . Organ . Sci . 3 ( 3 ) : 428 – 441 . HouK , RobinsonDT ( 2006 ) Industryconcentrationandaveragestock returns . J . Finance 61 ( 4 ) : 1927 – 1956 . Jaﬀe AB ( 1986 ) Technological opportunity and spillovers of R & D : Evidence from ﬁrm’s patents , proﬁts and market value . Work - ing Paper 1815 , National Bureau of Economic Research , Cam - bridge , MA . Johnson DKN ( 2002 ) “Learning - by - licensing” : R & D and technology licensing in Brazilian invention . Econom . Innovation New Tech . 11 ( 3 ) : 163 – 177 . Katz ML , Shapiro C ( 1986 ) Technology adoption in the presence of network externalities . J . Political Econom . 94 ( 4 ) : 822 – 841 . Lahiri N ( 2010 ) Geographic distribution of R & D activity : How does it aﬀect innovation quality ? Acad . Management J . 53 ( 5 ) : 1194 – 1209 . Lang LHP , Stulz R ( 1992 ) Contagion and competitive intra - industry eﬀects of bankruptcy announcements . J . Financial Econom . 32 ( 1 ) : 45 – 60 . Laursen K , Leone MI , Torrisi S ( 2010 ) Technological exploration through licensing : New insights from the licensee’s point of view . Indust . Corporate Change 19 ( 3 ) : 871 – 897 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Laursen et al . : Using the Grant - Back Clause to Further Generative Appropriability Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2017 INFORMS 17 Leone MI , Laursen K ( 2011 ) Patent exploitation strategies and value creation . Munari F , Oriani R , eds . The Economic Valuation of Patents ( Edward Elgar , Cheltenham , UK ) , 82 – 106 . Leone MI , Reichstein T ( 2012 ) Licensing - in fosters rapid invention ! The eﬀect of the grant - back clause and technological unfamil - iarity . Strategic Management J . 33 ( 8 ) : 965 – 985 . Lerner J ( 1994 ) The importance of patent scope : An empirical analy - sis . RAND J . Econom . 25 ( 2 ) : 319 – 333 . Lowe J , Taylor P ( 1998 ) R & D and technology purchase through licence agreements : Complementary strategies and complemen - tary assets . R & D Management 28 ( 4 ) : 263 – 278 . Malhotra D , Lumineau F ( 2011 ) Trust and collaboration in the after - math of conﬂict : The eﬀects of contract structure . Acad . Manage - ment J . 54 ( 5 ) : 981 – 998 . Manski CF , McFadden D ( 1981 ) Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Mayer KJ , Argyres NS ( 2004 ) Learning to contract : Evidence from the personal computer industry . Organ . Sci . 15 ( 4 ) : 394 – 410 . Mowery DC , Oxley JE , Silverman BS ( 1996 ) Strategic alliances and interﬁrm knowledge transfer . Strategic Management J . 17 ( S2 ) : 77 – 91 . Mulotte L ( 2014 ) Do experience eﬀects vary across governance modes ? Evidence from new product introduction in the global aircraft industry , 1948 – 2000 . Organ . Sci . 25 ( 3 ) : 757 – 775 . Narin F , Noma E , Perry R ( 1987 ) Patents as indicators of corporate technological strength . Res . Policy 16 ( 2 – 4 ) : 143 – 155 . Nelson RR , Winter SG ( 1982 ) The Schumpeterian trade - oﬀ revisited . Amer . Econom . Rev . 67 ( 1 ) : 114 – 132 . Nerkar A ( 2003 ) Old is gold ? The value of temporal exploration in the creation of new knowledge . Management Sci . 49 ( 2 ) : 211 – 229 . Nohria N , Gulati R ( 1996 ) Is slack good or bad for innovation ? Acad . Management J . 39 ( 5 ) : 1245 – 1264 . Oxley JE ( 1997 ) Appropriability hazards and governance in strategic alliances : A transaction cost approach . J . Law , Econom . Organ . 13 ( 2 ) : 387 – 409 . Oxley JE , Sampson RC ( 2004 ) The scope and governance of interna - tional R & D alliances . Strategic Management J . 25 ( 8 – 9 ) : 723 – 749 . Parrotta P , Pozzoli D ( 2012 ) The eﬀect of learning by hiring on pro - ductivity . RAND J . Econom . 43 ( 1 ) : 167 – 185 . Patel P , Pavitt KLR ( 1997 ) The technological competencies of the world’s largest ﬁrms : Complex and path dependent , but not much variety . Res . Policy 26 ( 2 ) : 141 – 156 . Pavitt KLR ( 1988 ) International patterns of technological accumu - lation . Hood N , Vahlne JE , eds . Strategies in Global Competetion ( Croom Helm , London ) , 126 – 157 . Pavitt KLR ( 2005 ) Innovation processes . Fagerberg J , Mowery DC , Nelson RR , eds . The Oxford Handbook of Innovation ( Oxford Uni - versity Press , Oxford , UK ) , 86 – 114 . Poppo L , Zenger T ( 2002 ) Do formal contracts and relational gover - nance function as substitutes or complements ? Strategic Manage - ment J . 23 ( 8 ) : 707 – 725 . Rosenberg N ( 1976 ) Perspectives on Technology ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ) . Rosenberg N ( 1996 ) Uncertainty and technological change . Lan - dau R , Taylor T , Wright G , eds . The Mosaic of Economic Growth ( Stanford University Press , Palo Alto , CA ) , 334 – 353 . Rosenkopf L , Nerkar A ( 1999 ) On the complexity of technologi - cal evolution : Exploring coevolution within and across hierar - chical levels in optical disc technology . Campbell DT , Baum J , McKelvey W , eds . Variations in Organization Science ( Sage Publi - cations , Thousand Oaks , CA ) , 169 – 183 . Ruckman K , McCarthy I ( 2016 ) Why do some patents get licensed while others do not ? Indust . Corporate Change , ePub ahead of print November 25 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / icc / dtw046 . Ryall MD , Sampson RC ( 2009 ) Formal contracts in the presence of relational enforcement mechanisms : Evidence from technology development projects . Management Sci . 55 ( 6 ) : 906 – 925 . Schilling MA ( 2009 ) Understanding the alliance data . Strategic Man - agement J . 30 ( 3 ) : 233 – 260 . Schilling MA , Steensma HK ( 2002 ) Disentangling the theories of ﬁrm boundaries : A path model and empirical test . Organ . Sci . 13 ( 4 ) : 387 – 401 . Schmalbeck R ( 1975 ) The validity of grant - back clauses in patent licensing agreements . Univ . Chicago Law Rev . 42 ( 4 ) : 733 – 748 . Shane S ( 2001 ) Technological opportunities and new ﬁrm creation . Management Sci . 47 ( 2 ) : 205 – 220 . Somaya D , Kim Y , Vonortas NS ( 2011 ) Exclusivity in licensing alliances : Using hostages to support technology commercializa - tion . Strategic Management J . 32 ( 2 ) : 159 – 186 . Song J , Almeida P , Wu G ( 2003 ) Learning – by – hiring : When is mobil - ity more likely to facilitate interﬁrm knowledge transfer ? Man - agement Sci . 49 ( 4 ) : 351 – 365 . Teece D ( 1986 ) Proﬁtting from technological innovation : Implications for integration collaboration , licencing and public policy . Res . Policy 15 ( 6 ) : 285 – 305 . Trajtenberg M ( 1990 ) A penny for your quotes : Patent citations and the value of innovations . RAND J . Econom . 21 ( 1 ) : 172 – 187 . Van Dĳk T ( 2000 ) License contracts , future exchange clauses , and technological competition . Eur . Econom . Rev . 44 ( 8 ) : 1431 – 1448 . Yang H , Phelps C , Steensma HK ( 2010 ) Learning from what others have learned from you : The eﬀects of knowledge spillovers on originating ﬁrms . Acad . Management J . 53 ( 2 ) : 371 – 389 . Ziedonis A ( 2007 ) Real options in technology licensing . Management Sci . 53 ( 10 ) : 1618 – 1633 . Keld Laursen is professor of economics and management of innovation at Copenhagen Business School and Professor II at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology . His current research focuses on open and distributed inno - vation processes and on organizational practices and innova - tionoutcomes . Hisresearchhasbeenpublishedinoutletssuch as Strategic Management Journal , Organization Science , Journal of International Business Studies , and Research Policy . He is a coed - itor of Research Policy and is the 2016 / 2017 chair of the TIM Division of the Academy of Management . Solon Moreira is assistant professor in the Entrepreneur - ship Department at IESE Business School . He received his Ph . D . in technological innovation , entrepreneurship , and strategy from Copenhagen Business School . His research focuses on the sources of cross - ﬁrm heterogeneity in terms of the capacity to innovate and to generate ideas using external knowledge . In particular , he studies technology commercial - ization and appropriability strategies . TokeReichstein isprofessorofeconomicsofentrepreneur - ship and innovation at Copenhagen Business School . Reich - stein has published in the areas of strategic management and entrepreneurship in various journals including Management Science , Strategic Management Journal , Journal of Business Ven - turing , Industrial and Corporate Change , and Regional Studies . He codirects the CBS Entrepreneurship BiS Platform . Reich - stein also sits as a member of the Symbion Creators Floor advisory board and is the cofounder of the Danish Centre for Entrepreneurship Research ( DCER ) . Maria Isabella Leone is assistant professor of innovation and a member of the graduate faculty at LUISS Guido Carli University . She received her Ph . D . in management from the University of Bologna . Her research interests include intel - lectualpropertymanagementandvaluation , openinnovation strategies , with speciﬁc focus on both incumbents’ and start - ups’ technology licensing practices , as catalyst for technologi - cal recombination , learning and invention activity and speed . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 132 . 239 . 1 . 231 ] on 24 M a y 2017 , a t 14 : 18 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .