Knowledge , Resources and Markets : What Economic System of Valuation ? HUGUES JEANNERAT * and LEÏLA KEBIR † * Institute of Sociology , University of Neuchâtel , Fbg de l ’ Hôpital 27 , CH - 2000 Neuchâtel , Switzerland . Email : hugues . jeannerat @ unine . ch † Ecole des ingénieurs de la Ville de Paris , 80 rue Rébeval , F - 75019 Paris , France . Email : leila . kebir @ unine . ch J EANNERAT H . and K EBIR L . Knowledge , resources and markets : what economic system of valuation ? , Regional Studies . Exploring in ever more detail learning processes at the root of economic change , main territorial innovation models ( TIMs ) remain focused on production today . Thus consumption is most often assessed as an abstract demand expressed by exogenous market mechanisms . In a socio - institutional approach , this article conceptualizes an economic system in which knowledge is a constructed resource valued in a market through the co - evolution of a production and a consumption system . From a meta - synthesis of various case studies , the paper draws four ideal types of economic systems and their related territorial knowledge dynamics ( TKDs ) : knowledge marketization , knowledge improvement , knowledge adaptation and knowledge co - development . Territorial innovation models ( TIMs ) Territorial knowledge dynamics ( TKDs ) Resources Markets Economic system of valuation EURODITE J EANNERAT H . and K EBIR L . 知 识 、 资 源 与 市 场 ： 什 麽 样 的 评 价 经 济 系 统 ？ 区 域 研 究 。 目 前 探 讨 经 济 变 迁 的 根 源 内 更 为 细 緻 的 学 习 过 程 中 ， 主 要 的 领 域 创 新 模 式 （ TIMs ） 仍 然 维 持 聚 焦 于 生 产 面 向 。 因 此 ， 消 费 多 半 经 常 被 评 估 为 抽 象 的 需 求 ， 并 由 外 生 的 市 场 机 制 表 达 之 。 本 文 在 社 会 — 制 度 方 法 中 ， 概 念 化 一个 经 济 系 统 ， 其 中 知 识 是 在 市 场 上 透 过 生 产与 消 费 系 统 共 变 所 建 构 的 资 源 。 本 文 从 各 种 案 例 研 究 的 综 合 集 成 中 ， 汲 取 四 种 经 济 系 统 的 理 想 型 ， 以 及 相 关 的 领 域 知 识 动 态 （ TKDs ）： 知 识 市 场 化 、 知 识 促 进 、 知 识 调 适 与 知 识 共 同 发 展 。 领 域 创 新 模 式 （ TIMs ） 领 域 知 识 动 态 （ TKDs ） 资 源 市 场 评 价 经 济 系 统 EURODITE J EANNERAT H . et K EBIR L . Connaissance , ressources et marchés : quel système économique de valuation ? , Regional Studies . Examinant toujours plus en détail les processus d ’ apprentissage à l ’ origine du changement économique , les modèles territoriaux d ’ innovation en vigueur ( territorial innovation models ; TIMs ) sont centrés sur la production . La consommation reste souvent une demande abstraite exprimée par des mécanismes exogènes de marché . Dans une perspective socio - institutionnelle , cet article conceptualise un système économique dans lequel la connaissance est une ressource construite et valorisée , au sein d ’ un marché , par une co - évolution des systèmes de production et de consommation . Quatre types de systèmes économiques et différentes dyna - miques territoriales de connaissance sont ensuite esquissés à travers une méta - synthèse de plusieurs études de cas : la marchéisation , l ’ amélioration , l ’ adaptation et le co - développement de la connaissance . Modèles de l ’ innovation territoriaux ( TIM ) Dynamique des connaisances territoriales ( TKDs ) Ressources Marchés Système économique d ’ évaluation EURODITE J EANNERAT H . und K EBIR L . Wissen , Ressourcen und Märkte : welches wirtschaftliche Bewertungssystem ? , Regional Studies . Die wichtigsten territorialen Innovationsmodelle der Gegenwart untersuchen immer ausführlicher die Lernprozesse , die dem wirtschaftlichen Wandel zugrundeliegen , und konzentrieren sich dabei auf die Produktion . Auf diese Weise wird der Konsum meist als abstrakte , durch exogene Marktmechanismen ausgedrückte Nachfrage bewertet . In diesem Beitrag wird in einem sozioinstitutionellen Ansatz ein Wirtschaftssystem konzeptualisiert , in dem das Wissen eine konstruierte Ressource darstellt , die auf dem Markt durch die gemeinsame Entwicklung eines Produktions - und Konsumsystems bewertet wird . Ausgehend von einer Metasynthese verschiedener Fallstudien werden in dem Beitrag vier Idealtypen von Wirtschaftssystemen und ihrer zugehörigen territorialen Wissensdynamik entwickelt : Wissensvermarktung , Wissensverbesserung , Wissensanpassung und gemeinsame Wissensentwicklung . Territoriale Innovationsmodelle ( TIM ) Territoriale Wissensdynamik Ressourcen Märkte Wirtschaftliches Bewertungssystem EURODITE 1 Published in Regional Studies 50 , issue 2 , pp . 274 - 288 , 2016 which should be used for any reference to this work J EANNERAT H . y K EBIR L . Conocimientos , recursos y mercados : ¿qué sistema económico de valoración ? , Regional Studies . Los principales modelos actuales de innovación territorial estudian cada vez más a fondo los procesos de aprendizaje en los cimientos del cambio económico y se concentran en la producción . De este modo , se evalúa con más frecuencia el consumo como una demanda abstracta exprimida por los mecanismos exógenos del mercado . Desde una perspectiva socio - institucional , en este artículo se conceptualiza un sistema económico donde el conocimiento es un recurso construido que se valora en el mercado a través de la coevolución de un sistema de producción y consumo . A partir de una metasíntesis de varios estudios de casos , se analizan cuatro tipos ideales de sistemas económicos y sus dinámicas territoriales de conocimiento relacionadas : la comercialización , la mejora , la adaptación y el codesarrollo del conocimiento . Modelos de innovación territorial Dinámicas territoriales de conocimiento Recursos Mercados Sistema económico de valoración EURODITE JEL classi ﬁ cations : R1 , R5 , R10 , R58 INTRODUCTION In 1982 , N A THAN R OSENBERG published his book Inside the Black Box : Technology and Economics . Through various researched cases , he demonstrated , against domi - nant economic theories , that scienti ﬁ c and technological learning is not exogenous , but endogenous , to econ - omic change . Beyond its speci ﬁ c contribution to inno - vation theory , Rosenberg ’ s title symbolizes a general research agenda that has since developed within regional studies and economic geography . This agenda has been to investigate and explain how knowledge is a constitu - tive resource of economic change in time and space . Over the last 30 years , territorial innovation models ( TIMs ) ( M OULAERT and S EKIA , 2003 ) have high - lighted how geographical proximity can shape localized knowledge processes and enhance regional endogenous development . In various ways , these models have emphasized how different regional production systems may derive competitive advantage in the global market from a cumulative generation and exploitation of knowledge resources . By further exploring Rosenberg ’ s black box , TIMs have primarily focused on production processes to explain economic and territorial innovation . Con - sumption has tended to be approached as an abstracted demand relayed by a market conceived as a mechanism of selection or information that is exogenous to the investigated knowledge processes . In this sense , the place of consumption in economic valuation still remains an unexplored black box in regional studies and economic geography ( B ERNDT and B OECKLER , 2011 ) . This article revisits the traditional approach to terri - torial innovation by introducing a systematic re ﬂ ection on role of production and consumption in the market valuation of knowledge . It is argued that territorial knowledge dynamics ( TKDs ) are not only shaped by the cumulative reproduction and renewal of knowledge resources taking place within speci ﬁ c regions and sectors , but also that they develop across those regions and sectors , organized across interdependent production – consumption processes and institutionalized on various scales ( C REVOISIER and J EANNERAT , 2009 ) . Adopting a relational and institutional approach , the ﬁ rst part of this paper conceptualizes the general frame - work of an economic system of valuation whereby knowledge is turned into an economic resource through the co - evolution of a production and a con - sumption system . This conceptual framework is con - structed in discussion with established theories and recent debates in regional studies . Drawing upon differ - ent case studies realized within the European project EURODITE , particular economic systems of knowl - edge valuation are distinguished . Through the ideal types of knowledge marketization , knowledge improvement , knowledge adaptation and knowledge co - development various TKDs are examined . WHAT KIND OF ECONOMIC SYSTEM OF KNOWLEDGE VALUATION ? Knowledge , production and territorial innovation Knowledge , in its various forms , contents and dynamics has , since the late 1990s , received speci ﬁ c scienti ﬁ c and policy attention as the fundamental social lever of inno - vation in a ‘ knowledge economy ’ . Not merely a factor of change , knowledge has also been increasingly con - sidered as the key resource valued in a ‘ knowledge - based economy ’ ( L UNDVALL and J OHNSON , 1994 ; C OOKE and L EYDESDORFF , 2006 ) . There are two different ways of looking at this resource : knowledge can be regarded either as a substan - tive resource ( or given factor ) , with inherent and prede - termined consequences in production and market competition , or as a constructed resource developed , maintained and valued within particular relational and institutional con ﬁ gurations embedding and evolving in time and space ( K EBIR and C REVOISIER , 2004 , 2008 ; B ATHELT and G LÜCKLER , 2005 ) . In this second approach , knowledge is not ‘ by nature ’ an economic resource . It has its own material and imma - terial ‘ raison d ’ être ’ , embodied in objects ( e . g . , machines , books or technology ) , embrained in people ( e . g . , a personal experience or competence ) and embedded in social relations and practices ( e . g . , 2 language , culture and tradition ) . It is shared and trans - formed within social communities and , in turn , contrib - utes to the building of these communities and their meaning and identity ( W ENGER , 1998 ; A M IN and C OHENDET , 2004 ; A M IN and R OBERTS , 2008 ) . Knowledge develops in an on - going dynamic of repro - duction and renewal over time and is generated , used and combined in a dialectical process of creation ( learn - ing ) and destruction ( forgetting ) ( G REGERSEN and J OHNSON , 1997 ) . Knowledge becomes an economic resource when exploited within a production system ( K EBIR and C REVOISIER , 2007 ) . In a knowledge - based economy , the production system turns knowledge into an economic resource by incorporating it into innovative goods and services or commodifying it as a private good ( through patent trading , for example ) ( A NTONELLI , 2005 ) . Yet the development of knowledge and knowledge resources is not a ﬁ nite process , but one that continues over time , co - evolving along with the production system ( N ORGAARD , 1994 ) . Furthermore , knowledge and knowledge resources are constantly transformed according to the context in which they develop , in response , for example , to market changes , cultural evolution and new social or economic practices . Such changes can either reinforce or weaken the relation between knowledge and production processes and may have various effects , therefore , such as renewable growth , erosion , depletion , setting off or shortage ( K EBIR and C REVOISIER , 2007 ) . Regional studies have widely investigated how terri - torial development draws on the social construction of particular knowledge resources ( Fig . 1 ) . Numerous studies have highlighted the fact that innovation is not the by - product of an exogenous knowledge change but emerges from endogenous learning processes taking place within particular production systems orga - nized in time and space . The TIMs ( M OULAERT and S EKIA , 2003 ) developed since the mid - 1980s have high - lighted the particular learning processes driving regional competitiveness . Originally attached to the analysis of industrial change and technological innovation , the early ‘ indus - trial district ’ ( B ECATTINI , 1990 ) and ‘ innovative milieu ’ ( A YDALOT , 1986 ) TIMs have pointed to the cumulative and diffusive learning processes that underlie the ﬂ exible specialization of milieus able to innovate in a post - Fordist economy characterized by the evolution of a more speci ﬁ c and changing demand ( S IMMIE , 2005 ) . Learning processes have subsequently become the subject of more speci ﬁ c investigations and systematic conceptualizations , and innovative regions have increas - ingly been regarded as ‘ learning regions ’ able to adapt local production through a continuous renewal of knowledge resources ( M ORGAN , 1997 ) . Conceptual models such as ‘ regional innovation systems ’ ( B RACZYK et al . , 1998 ) and ‘ clusters ’ ( P ORTER , 1998 ) have proposed operational understandings of these learning processes and have actively contributed to per - forming regional innovation policies ( D OLOREUX , 2002 ; M A RTIN and S UNLEY , 2003 ; C O OKE , 2008 ) . From various perspectives , TIMs have emphasized how geographical proximity can foster the reproduction and renewal of knowledge resources , particularly in local production systems . They have also pointed to technological change as the elementary lever of inno - vation . Regional innovation has been illustrated through the capacity of a local production system to reproduce and renew knowledge resources through cumulative learning processes along sectoral and tech - nological trajectories , or by the implementation of local scienti ﬁ c research into a ( new ) production Fig . 1 Conceptualizing an economic system of knowledge valuation Source : Authors ’ own elaboration 3 system . This approach to regional development has inspired various technological and innovation policies , most of which have been translated into public support for local research and development activities ( A SHEIM et al . , 2011 ) . In the past decade , TIMs have been the object of further investigation and conceptual reconsiderations in a context of more open and permanent learning pro - cesses . Various works have pointed to the rise of an immaterial economy , where knowledge - intensive business services ( KIBS ) and cultural industries lead to new forms of spatial agglomeration and of regional / urban competitiveness ( e . g . , P OWER and S COTT , 2004 ; S I MMIE and S TRAMBACH , 2006 ; C O OKE and L AZZERETTI , 2008 ; D O LOREUX and S HEARMUR , 2012 ) . Primary to techno - scienti ﬁ c innovation , ‘ creativity ’ is regarded as the driver of the constant reproduction and renewal of knowledge resources for local production systems ( FLORIDA , 2002 ) . In contrast to the cumulative knowledge trajectories described in early TIMs , local creativity and innovation are increasingly perceived through a new mode of knowledge production based on ad hoc processes of combination and exploitation ( G IBBONS et al . , 1994 ) . Local production systems have increasingly been regarded as ‘ project arenas ’ ( G RABHER , 2002 ; Q V ORTRUP , 2006 ) or as multi - sectoral ‘ platforms ’ ( A SHEIM et al . , 2011 combining d ifferent types of knowledge base ( e . g . , analytic , synthetic and symbolic ) in a creative and reactive manner , according to both short and perpetual cycles of development . Besides renewed considerations regarding the repro - duction and renewal of knowledge resources in particu - lar local production systems , a growing literature has also emphasized the importance of understanding territorial development beyond the boundaries and scales of speci ﬁ c regions . Various works have pointed to the fact that regional innovation is not only driven by endogenous dynamics of knowledge use , generation and combination , but also fuelled by external knowl - edge ﬂ ows ( O INAS and M ALECKI , 2002 ; B A THELT et al . , 2004 ; L A GENDIJK and O INAS , 2005 ) . Certain studies have , for instance , highlighted how innovation occurs through the global production networks ( GPNs ) of multinational companies ( C OE et al . , 2004 ) or through the circulation of skilled workers ( S AXENIAN , 2006 ) . Local production systems appear more than ever as interacting milieus producing and renewing knowledge resources in relation with other distant milieus within global innovation networks ( C HEN , 2007 ) . Territorial knowledge dynamics ( TKDs ) in a broader economic system of valuation In this attempt to explain in ever more detail the complex learning processes that are at the root of econ - omic change , older and newer TIMs have mostly remained focused on production ( M ALMBERG and P OWER , 2005 ; G R ABHER et al . , 2008 ) . In this ‘ produc - tionist ’ approach ( C OE et al . , 2008 ) , the economic value of knowledge is generally assessed as the ( global ) compe - titiveness of speci ﬁ c ( regional ) innovation systems . Ter - ritorial competitiveness is the function of localized production factors ( e . g . , enterprises , labour forces , research and education facilities and investments ) and is measured in terms of productivity , employment , export - based revenues and standard of living ( S TEINLE , 1992 ; P O RTER , 2000 ; C A MAGNI , 2002 ; G ARDINER et al . , 2004 ; K I TSON et al . , 2004 ) . In such an approach , the socio - economic foundations of the market economy remain largely unexplored ( P ECK , 2005 ; B E RNDT and B OECKLER , 2011 ) : the economic value of knowledge and innovation is seen as the observed result of an exogenous market mechanism of information and selection . To put it in another way , regional studies and economic geography have analysed in ever more complex ways the endogenous knowledge processes driving economic change in production , but have usually left aside the question of how this change is endogenously valued in and related to market construction . Analysing a knowledge - based economy from a socio - economic and territorial perspective consists not merely in depicting how knowledge is turned into production resources across time and space . It also consists in under - standing how such resources are valued within a market , rather than by the market . The market is to be regarded not as an economic end to or from which learning , technologies and production processes are oriented , but as being endogenously constructed within a particular economic system of valuation . Economic valuation encompasses here the relational and institutional dynamics by which different objects and activities are socially valorized ( i . e . transformed and commercialized ) and evaluated ( interpreted , recognized , legitimated and appraised ) in the market ( D EWEY , 1939 ; A SPERS and B ECKERT , 2011 ; K J ELLBERG et al . , 2013 ; V A TIN , 2013 ) . The market is thus not taken for granted as an exogenous force , but conceived as a social order of uncertainty that must be dealt with by the actors of the economic system ( B ECKERT , 2009 ) . In this sense , com - petitiveness is not per se a state of economic value , inherent to a particular productive con ﬁ guration , or given by an auto - regulated market mechanism . Instead , it re ﬂ ects a dynamic and perpetual process of market ‘ quali ﬁ cation and requali ﬁ cation ’ ( C ALLON et al . , 2002 ) taking place within and between a pro - duction and a consumption system ( Fig . 1 ) . In a production system , actors coordinate their actions with regard to the market signals provided by a demand and by the strategic positioning of other pro - ducers ( W HITE , 2002 ) . Thus knowledge resources are turned into goods or services that are to be compared with and distinguished from others in a market . In a consumption system , actors coordinate their actions in 4 order to in ﬂ uence and express the ‘ attachment and detachment ’ of consumers to these different objects ( C ALLON et al . , 2002 ) . Thus different market objects are made identi ﬁ able , understandable , comparable , dis - tinguishable , and appropriable through complex and in ﬂ uential distribution processes ( C OCHOY , 2008 ) . These processes include , for instance , activities under - taken by end consumers and other intermediaries ( e . g . , distributors , retailers , the media , opinion leaders and groups of interest ) to create , enable , motivate , mediate or legitimate a consumptive attachment to or detach - ment from various market offerings . This attachment or detachment is in turn expressed by consumer demand and evaluation , and is relayed , aggregated or enhanced by different actors and technical devices ( through consumer protection organizations , online participative forums , social movements and civil lobbies , for example ) . Thus , at different stages of the valuation process , the same market actor may be involved both in the production and the consumption systems . Markets also build upon instrumentalized , consoli - dated and transforming institutions that both pre - exist and outlast individual actor relations ( H ODGSON , 2007 ) . Institutions are mobilized and arranged by market actors to coordinate their activities and to deal with the uncertainty of ‘ unsatisfactory innovation ’ ( L UNDVALL , 1988 ) . They build on institutionalized quality conventions ( F AVEREAU et al . , 2002 ) against which different market offerings are compared and dif - ferentiated ( e . g . , technical / security standards and norms of authenticity ) and also establish equivalency principles , against which actors justify , legitimate , adjust and direct their activity of production , consumption and interme - diation . In addition , institutions frame market cooperation and competition ( through regulations or property rights , for example ) and at the same time act as constraints and opportunities for action ( L OASBY , 2000 ) . These are the rules of game that the actors of an economic system have to play with . These rules are subject to political power and potential con ﬂ icts in their establishment , control and transformation ( F LIGSTEIN , 1996 ) , and are also instrumentalized according to strategic choices . For instance , intellectual property rights ( IPRs ) may be utilized to protect a market offer - ing or , on the contrary , to give access to new resources in production . In a relational and institutional approach , a market does not appear as a disruptive mechanism of selection or information between production and consumption . Productive strategies occurring within the production system imply the establishment and / or control of par - ticular distribution / diffusion channels within the con - sumption system and , in turn , the evaluation constructed within the consumption system provides feedback . This contributes to the institutionalization of particular strategic choices within the production system ( A RTHUR , 1990 ) . The production and consumption systems thus co - evolve interdependently in time and space , according to various relational con - ﬁ gurations and institutional arrangements . In such a view , the mobilization of knowledge resources in pro - duction is not ‘ pulled ’ by the market or ‘ pushed ’ by science . Rather , it is constitutive of market construction : it shapes , and is shaped by , the continuous ( re ) quali ﬁ ca - tion of market goods ( C ALLON et al . , 2002 ) and is part of the socio - institutional coordination of market actors . In such an economic system of valuation , socio - economic actors face important uncertainty in establishing , main - taining and organizing a relational and institutional con - tinuum between the reproduction / renewal of particular knowledge resources and the ﬁ nal consumers ’ attach - ment to or detachment from particular market goods and services . This leads to the question of how such a continuum is socially and institutionally organized in time and space . Dealing with a similar question , L UNDVALL ( 1988 ) laid the early conceptual foundations of a knowledge economic system within which organized markets and user – producer interactions are endogenous to techno - logical change and are institutionalized in particular national systems of innovation . Beyond technological and national contexts , this conceptualization of market construction should now , more than ever , be pursued , broadened and consolidated within regional studies . Studying TKDs in their embedding economic system should not be limited to analysing particular technologi - cal , sectoral and regional cumulative trajectories of inno - vation . Instead , it is important to consider how knowledge resources are increasingly used and gener - ated through combinatorial knowledge dynamics taking place within and across various places and sectors ( C REVOISIER and J EANNERAT , 2009 ) . This in turn leads naturally to a consideration of how TKDs shape and are shaped by their economic valuation in a market , and how they develop and evolve in different economic systems of valuation . CONTRASTING DIFFERENT ECONOMIC SYSTEMS OF KNOWLEDGE VALUATION Drawing upon various empirical illustrations , the next sections highlight the particular relational and insti - tutional con ﬁ gurations and the prevailing TKDs that characterize different economic systems of knowledge valuation . Four different systems are distinguished and typi ﬁ ed : the economic systems of knowledge marketi - zation , knowledge improvement , knowledge adap - tation and knowledge co - development ( Table 1 ) . This typology has been built from a qualitative meta - synthesis ( S ANDELOWSKI et al . , 1997 ) of 23 case studies realized in the framework of the European Commission FP6 - funded project EURODITE led between 2005 and 2010 . 1 This project explored the particularities of knowledge dynamics in the contemporary economic 5 Table 1 Contrasting economic systems of knowledge valuation Knowledge marketization Knowledge improvement Knowledge adaptation Knowledge co - development Central issue To make ‘ viable ’ the construction of a novel market process of valuation To evolve with a sectoral trajectory and to position in a strategic market niche To be resilient to an external shock To turn consumers ’ common knowledge into a resource Purpose of uncertainty in actors ’ coordination Market failure , sunk costs Keeping up to date with the evolution of the demand ; conserving market position ; path dependence Mastering the production of a new supply or reaching a new demand Consumers ’ loyalty to a product and adequate evaluation of its particularities Relational organization ( con ﬁ guration of actors and important technical devices ) Scienti ﬁ c communities ; pioneer entrepreneurs ; hybrid consortia ; universities as knowledge incubators ; fundamental research programmes ; military funding Competing lead producers ; specialized pools of suppliers , dedicated KIBS and universities ; targeted research ; positioned goods in market ; devices of comparison and certi ﬁ cation Multinational service and trend providers ; universities as translators of new practices ; infrastructural basis ( technological / organizational ) ; established best practices Original creators ; initiators ; knowledgeable audience ; in ﬂ uential connoisseurs ; goods and services as technical / cultural toolkit ; acknowledgement awards , labels of origin Institutionalarrangements ( standards and intellectual property rights ( IPRs ) ) Imposing new standards ; IPR instrumentalized as pre - market knowledge monetization Standards as positioning tool ; IPR to protect market position and to control market entry Standards as transition opportunity and reducer of uncertainty ; IPR to control knowledge in speci ﬁ c applications Standards and IPR to acknowledge / authenticate shared knowledge between producers and consumers Territorial knowledge dynamics ( TKDs ) Global scienti ﬁ c / ﬁ rm consortia ; local anchoring though devising new products ; upper - scale institutionalized consumption Knowledge combination within global production networks ; local anchoring in dedicated and specialized production systems ; global distribution networks Globalized market trends and multi - local exchange of best practices ; local anchoring through the ( re ) generation of the production system ; localized consumption systems as opportunity to exploit knowledge application Organized producer – consumer co - presence ( physical and virtual ) through multi - local stages of experience , initiation or legitimation ; local anchoring by staging common knowledge in production and consumption In ﬂ uential policies Funding of fundamental research programmes at supra - regional level ; regional policy of science transfer ( e . g . , triple helix ) ; institutionalization of supra - regional standards of consumption Signi ﬁ cant dependency on large multinational companies ; dedicated and specialized intervention ; policy path dependences First impulse to regional transition ; ﬁ nancial support for pre - market transition ; platform policy for sectoral ( re ) combination ; supra - regional exchange of best practices ; negotiated access and exploitation of standards Legitimating consumers ’ voice and participation in local stage setting ; public authentication and certi ﬁ cation ; localized speci ﬁ city Illustrative cases Global navigation satellite systems in the Midi - Pyrénées ( France ) ; laser technology in Aquitaine ( France ) ; biotech in Wageningen ( Netherlands ) , Bavaria ( Germany ) and Centro ( Portugal ) Dedicated KIBS in Baden - Württemberg ( Germany ) ; in - car electronics in south - east Lower Saxony ( Germany ) ; crash safety technology in Västra Götaland ( Sweden ) ; industrial design solutions in Veneto ( Italy ) Tourism - based regeneration in the Ruhr valley ( Germany ) ; transition to Russian tourism in Antalya ( Turkey ) ; implementation of information technology services in Slovenia and Slovakia ; food biotechnology platforms in Wales and Aquitaine ( France ) Film tourism in Skåne ( Sweden ) ; branded and experience food in Bornholm ( Denmark ) ; authentic manufacture of cars and watches in the West Midlands ( UK ) and Switzerland Source : Authors ’ own elaboration . 6 development of European regions ( M AC N EILL and C OLLINGE , 2010 ) . The case studies report on the way knowledge is generated , used and combined within and across different ﬁ rms , sectors and regions through speci ﬁ c entrepreneurial projects or policy initiatives . Contrary to other forms of meta - analysis or compara - tive studies , the objective of the meta - synthesis per - formed here was not to aggregate , summarize and compare the various reported cases , but to deconstruct the case studies and use them as idiographic material from which to reconstruct a new theoretical interpret - ation ( S ANDELOWSKI et al . , 1997 ) . Building on the con - ceptual re ﬂ ection provided in the ﬁ rst part of this paper , elements of speci ﬁ c economic systems of knowledge have been reconstructed around ﬁ ve major issues : ( 1 ) the form of uncertainty characterizing the system ; ( 2 ) the types of actor and relation involved in the system ; ( 3 ) the institutional arrangements governing the system ( in particular IPR , technical standards and public regulations ) ; ( 4 ) the territorial organization of the system ( in various locations and on various spatial scales ) ; and ( 5 ) the in ﬂ uential policies at stake in the system . These particular qualitative elements were then ‘ translated ’ from one case to another ( T HORNE et al . , 2004 ) in order to create a set of contrasting ideal types of economic systems of knowledge valuation , which were then discussed with regard to established socio - economic theories in relation to markets , technical change and territorial innovation . These four ideal types cover the diversity of the case studies examined . The empirical illustrations emphasized in the typol - ogy discussed below provide a selective account of the case studies . They are not used as empirical evidence of the existence of the different economic systems of knowledge valuation highlighted here , but represent emblematic examples re ﬂ ecting different issues that came across in a certain number of cases . They are used in a heuristic and comprehensive way to illuminate different aspects of the ﬁ ve issues highlighted above and to contrast the four proposed ideal types . The economic system of knowledge ‘ marketization ’ The term ‘ marketization ’ here designates the general process by which knowledge generation and renewal are given a market orientation through the construction of a new production system and a new consumption system . In this kind of valuation process , there is often uncertainty relating to the potential market failure that may occur when turning previously non - commercia - lized or publicly funded knowledge resources into market - based production and consumption . Marketiza - tion also implies managing the sunk costs inherent to the fundamental temporal lag between knowledge explora - tion and market exploitation ( A MENDOLA and G AFFARD , 1994 ; M A RCH , 1991 ) . The relational , institutional and territorial dynamics of the economic system thus re ﬂ ect a need to make ‘ viable ’ , in time and space , the construction of a novel market process of knowl - edge valuation . Different aspects of this type of knowledge valuation can be highlighted through the French cases of the Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) developed in the Midi - Pyrénées ( B ALLAND and V ICENTE , 2009 ; V ICENTE et al . , 2011 ) and the fundamental laser tech - nology developed in Aquitaine ( C ARRINCAZEAUX et al . , 2009a , 2009b ) . Elements of this are also high - lighted in the cases of the biotech start - ups in the regions of Wageningen ( the Netherlands ) ( V ISSERS and D ANKBAAR , 2009 ) , Bavaria ( Germany ) ( K AISER et al . , 2008 ; K AISER and L IECKE , 2009 ) and Centro ( Portugal ) ( V ALE et al . , 2009 ; V A LE and C ARVALHO , 2012 ) . In all these cases , new fundamental knowledge is essentially generated within transnational techno - scien - ti ﬁ c communities . Public funding through national and supranational research , education and military pro - grammes ( e . g . , the European Framework Program , the European Regional Development Fund and mobility grants for researchers ) is determinant in the develop - ment and maintenance of these communities . These cases also demonstrate multinational and hybrid research consortia , which are archetypal forms of cooperation . They provide coordinated solutions to cover sunk costs and to share complementary knowledge , and also promote a multilateral con ﬁ guration of public and private actors that enable companies to invest in joint research beyond their traditional sectors . Mobile knowledge generated within transnational scienti ﬁ c communities and hybrid consortia is locally anchored through the construction of particular pro - duction systems organized around a ‘ selective devising ’ process ( A MENDOLA and G AFFARD , 1994 ) . Devising implies here the development of new market appli - cations based on the ‘ productive options ’ offered by the creation of new potential knowledge resources . For instance , the productive valuation of the GNSS or of the laser technologies developed in Midi - Pyrénées and Aquitaine relies on the devising development of new market products such as in - car devices or telecom - munication services in the former case ( B ALLAND and V ICENTE , 2009 ; V ICENTE et al . , 2011 ) , and new medical or imagery applications in the latter ( C ARRIN - CAZEAUX et al . , 2009a , 2009b ) . In this local devising process , university research lab - oratories are determinant players participating in an emerging local production system as well as contributing to the creation of mobile knowledge . As illustrated by the devising of new biotech applications in the Centro region , the pioneer entrepreneurs driving economic change most often do so from within scienti ﬁ c commu - nities . They are therefore able both to understand new fundamental knowledge and to identify it as a potential resource for a new market offering . Policy support to local devising and knowledge anchoring operates 7 primarily in a classical ‘ triple helix ’ con ﬁ guration : it intermediates local synergies and knowledge transfers between science and industry ( E TZKOWITZ and L EY - DESDORFF , 2000 ; E TZKOWITZ , 2006 ) . In the various aforementioned cases , localized public intervention is crucial in the emergence of a production system . It provides strategic and ﬁ nancial backup for pre - competitive knowledge development ( e . g . , the provision of venture capital , military spending , strategic research funding and the creation of strategic science parks and incubators ) and promotes the projects of pioneer entrepreneurs ( through start - up grants and awards , for example ) . Knowledge marketization does not lead only to the productive organization and promotion of potential radical innovations or new technological trajectories ( D OSI , 1982 ; N E LSON and W INTER , 1982 ) , but also consists in implementing a new consumption system that incites consumers to attach to the new devised offerings . This implies integrating , within knowledge and production dynamics , the negative or positive social predispositions of a new potential demand . For instance , ecological lobbies and critical press coverage constitute in ﬂ uential forces that reinforce and relay public suspicion regarding genetically modi ﬁ ed organisms ( GMOs ) within Europe . Biotech ﬁ rms willing to exploit genetic sciences in agro - food and plant production thus have to deal with this negative predisposi - tion . As a result , communication campaigns are launched to promote a more favourable opinion and to advocate the need to adopt new consumption stan - dards . In a similar view , the adoption of the new GNSS technology requires the adoption of new techni - cal standards not only in the production of new goods and services but also in their consumption within local contexts . Institutions frame the possibility of ‘ marketizing ’ new goods and services within the overall economic system . For instance , the institutionalization of supranational standards and their adoption by local providers of tailor - made applications condition the future economic success of GNSS knowledge and technology . In a similar way , national or European moratoria on GMOs compel biotech companies to combine leading - edge genetic science with more conventional seed - breeding techniques and practices . Institutions also make possible the marketization of knowledge upstream to its implementation into goods or services . IPR , for instance , enables biotech companies in the Bavarian region to develop fundamental knowledge by ‘ in - licensing ’ , which consists in buying existing licences in order to develop and resell them to other companies . Regulations , standards and structures institutiona - lized at national , European and international levels cannot be dissociated from the economic success of local productive innovations ( H AMDOUCH and M OU - LAERT , 2006 ) . In other words , TKDs operate beyond a local productive devising of new knowledge resources . Their economic valuation draws upon transnational knowledge ﬂ ows and extra - local consumption dynamics that take place across multi - local relations and multi - scalar institutions . The economic system of knowledge ‘ improvement ’ In contrast to knowledge marketization , knowledge improvement occurs in an established market context , in which production and consumption processes are stabilized around identi ﬁ ed goods , services and industrial processes . In such contexts , production resources are well - identi ﬁ ed and mastered within a dominant design ( A BERNATHY and U TTERBACK , 1978 ) and evolve in an integrative life cycle of product and process inno - vations ( K LEPPER , 1997 ) . The case studies from the automotive industry are particularly illustrative of such an economic system of knowledge valuation . These include the develop - ment of specialized KIBS in Baden - Württemberg ( Germany ) ( S TRAMBACH et al . , 2009 ) , of in - car elec - tronics in south - east Lower Saxony ( Germany ) ( B LÖCKER and J ÜRGENS , 2009 ) , of crash safety tech - nology in Västra Götaland ( Sweden ) ( L ARSSON , 2009 ) , and of designed solution for mature industries ( e . g . , car manufacturing ) in Veneto ( Italy ) ( S TOCHETTI et al . , 2009 ) . Complementary aspects to this valuation process can also be emphasized by the knowledge investments of large pharmaceutical companies in the biotech activities of Wageningen ( V ISSERS and D ANK - BAAR , 2009 ) . In this archetypal economic system , the production system is governed by leading producers competing within similar knowledge resources . For instance , the automotive industry is organized around multinational car manufacturers , all competing on the basis of similar products ( cars ) and basic technologies ( airbag technol - ogy , fuel injection systems , and so on ) , and all relying on the same original equipment manufacturers ( OEM ) . These lead producers and suppliers are multina - tional corporate principals and investors , which domi - nate the overall economic system of knowledge valuation . They accompany , orient and control new knowledge generation from the early stages of develop - ment ( B LÖCKER and J ÜRGENS , 2009 ) and rely on highly specialized and dependent research institutes , subcontractors and KIBS ( S TRAMBACH et al . , 2009 ) . Within the consumption system , distribution chan - nels are established and specialized right to the end con - sumer ( e . g . , through specialized retailers and press coverage ) . Various intermediaries relay and express opinions regarding the evolution of an aggregated demand ( e . g . , consumer organizations and critical groups of interest ) , and regulated quality standards insti - tutionalize this aggregated demand and in ﬂ uence product and process innovations ( e . g . , security or environmental norms ) . 8 Uncertainty in knowledge valuation thus relates to the capacity of producers to keep up with the evolution of their basic technology , to adapt to general demand changes and to defend their market niche ( W HITE , 2002 ) . New knowledge , meanwhile , is developed within the cumulative trajectory of a speci ﬁ c sector ( M ALERBA , 2002 ) – for instance , the generalization of electronics in automotive engineering or the adoption of new environmental regulations lead all car manufac - turers to integrate new knowledge into their core tech - nology ( B LÖCKER and J ÜRGENS , 2009 ; M A C N EILL et al . , 2009 ) . New knowledge may also be generated in order to reinforce or maintain a strategic market posi - tioning . Volvo , for instance , developed new pioneer crash safety technology in order to maintain its market position as a highly reliable and safe car manufacturer ( L ARSSON , 2009 ) . TKDs are thus organized primarily around pro - duction issues . Production is strongly standardized and organized by multinational companies in GPNs ( H ESS and Y EUNG , 2006 ) in which knowledge circu - lates across space . Stable and standardized quality con - ventions established on supranational scales support the creation of distant distribution channels and the global aggregation of a demand , while technical / security standards and IPR reinforce and protect the strategic positioning of producers in a market . For instance , in the mature pharmaceutical industry , large leading companies purchase strategic patents to maintain , reinforce or secure their market position against other competitors ( V ISSERS and D ANKBAAR , 2009 ) . On the local scale , public and private initiatives seek to provide specialized solutions within such production processes . In the home regions of lead producers , tech - nological policies , education programmes and structural interventions support specialized knowledge dynamics and designed solutions ( S TRAMBACH et al . , 2009 ) . For instance , strategic support is given to electronic research in collaboration with Volkswagen in south - east Lower Saxony , and to the development of safety solutions with Volvo in Västra Götaland ( Sweden ) ( B LÖCKER and J ÜRGENS , 2009 ; L A RSSON , 2009 ) . Af ﬁ liated regions organized around major international suppliers also develop specialized and complementary knowledge resources . For instance , various public and private initiatives have taken place in the Veneto region to develop particular specialized solutions for international mature industries ( e . g . , nanotech or design for large international production companies ) ( S TOCHETTI et al . , 2009 ) . KIBS are specialized inter - mediaries able to tap extra - regional and extra - sectoral knowledge and to turn it into dedicated resources for the production system ( S TRAMBACH et al . , 2009 ) . Innovation policies are here confronted with the challenge of positioning , specializing and maintaining particular regions within GPNs while preventing the over - specialization – and potential lock - in – of local knowledge dynamics and reducing dependency on single lead producers . The economic system of knowledge adaptation Knowledge adaptation occurs when the production system undertakes a reactive transition to adapt with regard to an expressed demand and identi ﬁ ed knowledge resources . It differs from knowledge marketization , as adaptation occurs within an existing production system , as well as from knowledge improvement , as new knowl - edge resources in production are oriented towards a new demand . Knowledge adaptation can be induced by an ‘ external shock ’ ( a sudden change in demand , new regu - lations , industrial or ﬁ nancial crisis , etc . ) that challenges the resilience capacity of the production system ( P ENDALL et al . , 2010 ; S I MMIE and M ARTIN , 2010 ) . Various cases studies illustrate such a situation . For instance , increased global competition has led the indus - trial production system of the Ruhr region ( Germany ) to mobilize new knowledge resources in tourism and event organization ( B UTZIN and W IDMAIER , 2009 ) . Furthermore , the sudden increase of Russian tourists in the Antalya region has led the local production system to adapt its practices ( e . g . , languages , skills and services ) to the new demand ( D ULUPÇU et al . , 2009 ) . Similarly , in Slovakia and Slovenia , local information technology service providers have had to adapt in response to the opening of borders and the rapid increase in domestic demand for new information and communication technologies ( R EHAK et al . , 2009 ; S TANOVNIK and M UROVEC , 2009 ) . Knowledge adaptation can also be motivated by a new identi ﬁ ed market opportunity . This is the case , for instance , in Aquitaine ( France ) and Wales , where new knowledge combinations are occurring between biotech and agro - food activities in response to the increasing demand for green and healthy food ( C AR - RINCAZEAUX et al . , 2009a , 2009b ; D E L AURENTIS and C OOKE , 2009 ) . In such cases , the emergence of new consumption trends leads to the development of new knowledge platforms ( H ARMAAKORPI , 2006 ; A SHEIM et al . , 2011 ) . Within such an economic system , uncertainty may be introduced by an inability of actors involved in the con - struction of the new production system to implement productive continuity between new identi ﬁ ed knowl - edge resources and a new identi ﬁ ed demand . Such a knowledge economic system primarily implies a process of change in the production system , such as the regeneration of industrial activities through tourism , or the adoption of new technological solutions . As knowl - edge adaptation often implies a preliminary phase of tran - sition before the new resources become competitive in a market , public incentives are particularly in ﬂ uential . It is vital to have technical backup for this phase , in the form of speci ﬁ c programmes supporting cross - sectoral collab - orations and exchanges of best practice . 9 There are many kinds of actor involved in knowl - edge adaptation . Large multinational companies form one kind , and are often the providers of new generic knowledge . For instance , in Bratislava ( Slovakia ) , inter - national consultancy ﬁ rms are major players in the importation of information technology knowledge ( R EHAK et al . , 2009 ) . Likewise , in Antalya ( Turkey ) , large European tour operators play a strategic role in the adoption of new tourism business models ( D ULUPÇU et al . , 2009 ) . More particular small and medium - sized enterprises attempt to appropriate generic knowledge in order to implement particular sol - utions , while universities or KIBS tap into existing knowledge and contribute to the design of tailored applications in the production system . On the territorial level , knowledge adaptation to European or international institutionalized standards , best practices or new consumption trends facilitate the identi ﬁ cation of new potential knowledge resources or market opportunities . For instance , standardized or branded events such as international conferences , exhi - bitions , fairs , sport tournaments and cultural events are often used to boost the adaptation of traditional econ - omic activities ( B UTZIN and W IDMAIER , 2009 ) . At the same time , the establishment and control of these institutions are subject to political power . For instance , in Slovenia and Slovakia , multinationals mastering information technology standards are determinant for the development on new local KIBS . Local production systems adapt to their changing socio - economic environment , to new potential knowl - edge resources or to new market opportunities in various ways . In some cases , they may adapt in a generic way by mobilizing standardized resources and by implementing generic activities addressed by the demand . Imagine , for instance , that a region adopts a standardized tourism strategy to promote new economic activities ( e . g . , organization of mainstream events ) . Such a generic adaptation is quite fragile , as it relies on common undifferentiated knowledge ( e . g . , cost differ - entiation ) . For this reason , the adaptation of the regional production system most often relates to speci ﬁ c adap - tation and , of course , regional speci ﬁ cation takes various forms , as will be shown below . In some cases , speci ﬁ cation consists in mobilizing generic knowledge through best practices and combin - ing it with the local production system ( e . g . , a tourism initiative related to the manufacturing heritage of the Ruhr area ) . In other cases , it is based on a speci ﬁ c demand ( e . g . , speci ﬁ cation to Russian tourists in the Antalya region ( Turkey ) , or to the domestic information and communication technology demand in the Brati - slava region ( Slovakia ) . Speci ﬁ cation can also be orga - nized through the combination of two or more existing local production systems in the context of an identi ﬁ ed generic demand ( e . g . , bio - food production in Aquitaine or Wales ) . In all these cases , local public support plays an important initiating role , and local research structures provide access to mobile knowledge and anchor it in a speci ﬁ c way . A regional innovation policy is thus here more about partaking to knowledge ﬂ ows and to standard de ﬁ nition than instigating new cutting - edge knowledge resources . The economic system of knowledge co - development In knowledge marketization , improvement and adap - tation , the consumption system expresses either positive or negative feedback regarding a general demand : in other words , producers know about consumers . In some cases , however , the very knowledge that consumers have and develop becomes a resource . In such cases , the products are usually not ﬁ nished goods or services , but ‘ toolkits ’ co - developed in the market by the consump - tion system ( VON H IPPEL , 2005 ) . The case of open - source software development is often mentioned as an iconic example of this . However , the notion of co - devel - opment should not only be restrained to sophisticated and technical use . With the rise of cultural and leisure indus - tries , consumer knowledge is also increasingly engaged in the symbolic valuation of goods and services . It is the socio - cultural dimension of knowledge co - development that is emphasized by various case studies . This is the case , for instance , in Skåne ( Sweden ) , where speci ﬁ c tourism activities capitalize on the knowledge of readers of Wallander detective novels ( D AHLSTRÖM et al . , 2009 ) . Additionally , on the island of Bornholm , local food producers promote branded products based on particular imaginaries and songs learned at school by Danish pupils ( M ANNICHE et al . , 2009 ; M ANNICHE and L ARSEN , 2013 ) . In another example , car manufacturers in the West Midlands ( UK ) and Swiss watch manufacturers seek to evade mass competitors with authentic products that rely on consumer knowledge about their speci ﬁ c cul - tural and technical value ( M AC N EILL et al . , 2009 ; J EANNERAT et al . , 2009 ; J EANNERAT , 2013 ) . Consumers ’ knowledge about mechanical watches enables Swiss watch manufacturers to establish their legitimacy through the development of new mechanical complications ( J EANNERAT , 2013 ) , while the new cars developed by Morgan Motors conserve certain histori - cal particularities recognized by consumers as authentic , such as ﬂ owing wings , a ﬂ at windscreen and an ash frame ( M AC N EILL et al . , 2009 ) . In such cases , inno - vation in production is oriented by the identi ﬁ cation of consumers ’ common knowledge , which is turned into a resource that enables producers to build a speci ﬁ c authenticity or to sell a ‘ memorable experience ’ ( P INE and G ILMORE , 1999 ) . In the case of knowledge co - development , uncer - tainty is about the capacity that the actors of the econ - omic system have to develop and exploit consumer ’ s knowledgeability . Companies organize initiation pro - cesses for consumers , such as training activities , visits to production sites or pedagogical exhibitions . They also 10 set up experiential stages to merge consumers within their production environment and create a context in which consumers can learn about the particularities of their products ( visit of production sites or of places of historical imaginaries ) . Thus the socio - institutional organization of the system supports the initiation of intermediaries and end consumers who become ‘ connoisseurs ’ ( J EANNERAT , 2013 ) . In this context , particular ‘ hybrid communities ’ develop and evolve around shared knowledge ( G RABHER et al . , 2008 ) . These are funded either by producers ( as with the exclusive Aston Martin and Morgan car clubs ) ( M AC N EILL et al . , 2009 ) or by con - sumers ( e . g . , an online community of watch a ﬁ ciona - dos ) ( J EANNERAT et al . , 2009 ) . In addition , speci ﬁ c collaborations between complementary producers sharing similar imaginaries may be established to reinforce common knowledge ( e . g . , joint events between luxury car and watch brands ) . At such events , intermediaries such as journalists , product ambassadors and event organizers ensure the initiation into and legit - imation of common knowledge within market evalu - ation ( J EANNERAT et al . , 2009 ; M A C N EILL et al . , 2009 ; M A NNICHE and L ARSEN , 2013 ) . Public intervention can also legitimate common knowledge by providing formally independent voices ( e . g . , public patronage of awards or public labelling ) . In addition , institutions such as copyrights or quality labels ( ‘ Bornholm food ’ or ‘ Swiss Made ’ ) are not merely mobilized to protect production processes , but are also utilized to recognize the common knowledge shared by producers , consumers and intermediaries regarding valuation criteria ( e . g . , certi ﬁ cation of authenticity ) . On the territorial level , knowledge resources are mainly mobilized within GPNs ( standard solutions ) , while speci ﬁ ed relations with consumers are organized through various forms of co - presence between produ - cers and consumers . Such co - presence may be virtual , as in the case of online forums , or geographical , through the physical proximity of producers to consu - mers . In the cases examined in this study , geographical co - presence remains within and is ritualized through the stages of ( 1 ) production , for example through the promotion of food products through tourism activities or visits to factories by strategic consumers or ambassa - dors ; ( 2 ) consumption , through experiential retailing , initiation programmes and travelling exhibitions , for example ; and ( 3 ) intermediation , as was the case with the Le Man racing cup for Aston Martin , for instance . Such multi - local knowledge dynamics support knowl - edge exchange about speci ﬁ c products and production contexts , and through consumers ’ experience . CONCLUSIONS The analytical focus progressively placed on knowledge by regional studies has enabled an understanding of the complex dynamics of territorial development . Never - theless , the shift from innovation to knowledge in the conceptualization of economic change has still left unanswered the question of market valuation . Schema - tically , knowledge is studied as the main resource of innovation , while the economic value of innovation is revealed as the competitiveness of a production process ( G ARDINER et al . , 2004 ) . In this approach , com - petitiveness tends to be not only an elusive ( K ITSON et al . , 2004 ) , but also an eluding , concept , which fails to answer the question of how innovation and knowl - edge are actually valued within a market . In line with critical theories developed by the econ - omic sociology of markets , we have advocated in this paper the need to conceptualize TKDs within a broader economic system . In particular , we have argued that knowledge is economically valued through the co - construction and co - evolution of a pro - duction and a consumption system . This approach echoes the fundamental theories , largely retrieved from regional studies , which advocate the need to go beyond a linear model of innovation ( e . g . , K LINE and R OSENBERG , 1986 ; L UNDVALL , 1988 ) . Introducing a systematic approach to production and consumption processes in order to understand TKDs provides the opportunity to extend and complement established TIMs . On the one hand , the industrial paradigm upon which TIMs have been built primarily highlights the technological and sectorial trajectories driving ﬁ rms and their upstream relations of supply and R & D activi - ties . Downstream processes of innovation related to consumption processes have largely been neglected , however ( G RABHER et al . , 2008 ) . ( Re ) introducing con - sumption to the core analysis and core conception of innovation does not necessarily mean that end consu - mers are always the ﬁ rst drivers of economic change and of territorial development , but may encourage more generally a consideration of the actors and insti - tutional arrangements in ﬂ uencing and intermediating the consumer ’ s voice and participation in the economic valuation of knowledge . Their in ﬂ uence may be rea - lized through general ( negative or positive ) feedback on potential radical changes in production . In other cases , consumers may in ﬂ uence incremental changes in production through the aggregated voice of an estab - lished community of users . Sometimes , they might stimulate new production processes by expressing and making identi ﬁ able a new demand ; in some other con - texts , they may contribute more directly to the econ - omic value of innovation by mobilizing their knowledgeable skills in the co - production , interpret - ation or experimentation of goods and services . Nonetheless , the increasing prominence of cultural activities and symbolic knowledge bases in innovation , as well as the new centrality of interactive communi - cation platforms ( e . g . , online media , communities or networks ) enhances the role of consumers ’ engagement 11 in economic valuation today . In this perspective , not only is knowledge co - development called to become central in future economic systems : knowledge market - ization , improvement and adaptation also develop an ‘ economy of qualities ’ ( C ALLON et al . , 2002 ) , built on complex and in ﬂ uential consumption systems . On the other hand , the increasing focus on knowl - edge as the object of analysis and comprehension has progressed some distance from the meso - level interpret - ation of territorial development in favour of ever more microprocesses taking place at the level of ﬁ rms and actors ( L AGENDIJK , 2006 ) . This cognitive emphasis placed on innovation processes has blurred the broader context within which knowledge use and generation make economic sense ( M ARTIN and S UNLEY , 2001 ) . It will be important for future research to consider the market not as an external device but as a constitutive element of a learning system ( P OTTS , 2001 ) , in order to enable the interpretation of knowledge , innovation and creativity in their broader economic context . Through the archetypal economic systems of knowl - edge marketization , improvement , adaptation and co - development ( Table 1 ) , this paper proposes that knowl - edge valuation is not merely assimilated to knowledge exploration and exploitation ( M ARCH , 1991 ) . It also advocates the need to go beyond policy approaches tra - ditionally focused on techno - science transfers . Territor - ial innovation must be understood in a broader economic system of valuation institutionalized on various spatial scales ( G ERTLER , 2010 ) and organized across interdependent milieus of production , control , intermediation and consumption . These four analytical categories are not mutually exclusive , but shed light in different ways on different regional policies conceived not only in terms of technological and sectoral develop - ment , but also in terms of market organization : an organization not passively left to an ‘ invisible hand ’ but actively handled as a matter of complex relational and institutional constructions . Acknowledgements – The authors gratefully acknowl - edge the European Commission for its support to the FP6 research project EURODITE ( Contract Number 006187 ) as well as all the researchers who were involved in this project . This paper would not have been possible without them . The authors thank all those who have commented on a previous version of this paper , in particular Christoph Carrincazeaux , Olivier Crevoisier , Gernot Grabher and Simone Strambach . Thanks also to the four anonymous refer - ees and to Arnoud Lagendijk for their precious advice . They signi ﬁ cantly clari ﬁ ed our intentions . Of course , the responsi - bility for the interpretation proposed in this paper remains entirely that of the authors alone . Funding – L . Kebir undertook the writing of this paper under a fellowship from the Swiss National Science Foun - dation at UMR SAD - APT / INRA , France . NOTE 1 . EURODITE – Regional Trajectories to the Knowledge Economy : A Dynamic Model ( EU - FP6 , Contract Number 006187 ) . REFERENCES A BERNATHY W . and U TTERBACK J . ( 1978 ) Patterns of industrial innovation , Technology Review 80 , 4 0 – 47 . A MENDOLA M . and G AFFARD J . - L . ( 1994 ) Markets and organizations as coherent systems of innovation , Research Policy 23 , 627 – 635 . A MIN A . and C OHENDET P . ( 2004 ) Architectures of Knowledge . Firms , Capabilities and Communities . Oxford University Press , Oxford . A MIN A . and R OBERTS J . ( 2008 ) Knowing in action : beyond communities of practice , Research Policy 37 , 353 – 369 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2007 . 11 . 003 A NTONELLI C . ( 2005 ) Models of knowledge and systems of governance , Journal of Institutional Economics 1 , 5 1 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S1744137405000044 A RTHUR W . B . ( 1990 ) Positive feedbacks in the economy , Scienti ﬁ c American 262 , 9 2 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1038 / scienti ﬁ camerican0290 - 92 A SHEIM B . , B OSCHMA R . and C OOKE P . ( 2011 ) Constructing regional advantage : platform policies based on related variety and differentiated knowledge bases , Regional Studies 45 , 893 – 904 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343404 . 2010 . 543126 A SPERS P . and B ECKERT J . ( 2011 ) Value in markets , in B ECKERT J . and A SPERS P . ( Eds ) The Worth of Goods : Valuation & Pricing in the Economy , pp . 3 – 38 . Oxford University Press , Oxford . A YDALOT P . ( 1986 ) Milieux innovateurs en Europe . Groupe de Recherche Européen sur les Milieux Innovateurs ( GREMI ) , Paris . B ALLAND P . - A . and V ICENTE J . ( 2009 ) The Structural Properties of the Midi - Pyrenean Knowledge Dynamics in the GNSS Technological Field . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . LEREPS , University of Toulouse , Toulouse . B ATHELT H . and G LÜCKLER J . ( 2005 ) Resources in economic geography : from substantive concepts towards a relational perspective , Environment and Planning A 37 , 1545 – 1563 . doi : 10 . 1068 / a37109 B ATHELT H . , M ALMBERG A . and M ASKELL P . ( 2004 ) Clusters and knowledge : local buzz , global pipelines and the process of knowl - edge creation , Progress in Human Geography 28 , 3 1 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1191 / 0309132504ph469oa B ECATTINI G . ( 1990 ) The Marshallian industrial district as a socio - economic notion , in P YKE F . , B ECATTINI G . and S ENGENBERGER W . ( Eds ) Industrial Districts and Inter - ﬁ rms Cooperation in Italy , pp . 37 – 51 . International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , Geneva . B ECKERT J . ( 2009 ) The social order of markets , Theory and Society 38 , 245 – 269 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11186 - 008 - 9082 - 0 B ERNDT C . and B OECKLER M . ( 2011 ) Geographies of markets : materials , morals and monsters in motion , Progress in Human Geogra - phy 35 , 559 – 567 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0309132510384498 12 B LÖCKER A . and J ÜRGENS U . ( 2009 ) Automotive TKDs in Southeast Lower Saxony . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin für Sozialforschung GmbH , Berlin . B RACZYK H . , C OOKE P . and H EIDENREICH M . ( 1998 ) Regional Innovation Systems : The Role of Governances in a Globalized World . UCL Press , London . B UTZIN A . and W IDMAIER B . ( 2009 ) Tourism - Based TKDs in the Ruhr Area . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Institut Arbeit und Technik , Gelsenkirchen . C ALLON M . , M ÉADEL C . and R ABEHARISOA V . ( 2002 ) The economy of qualities , Economy and Society 31 , 194 – 217 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 03085140220123126 C AMAGNI R . ( 2002 ) On the concept of territorial competitiveness : sound or misleading ? , Urban Studies 39 , 2395 – 2411 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0042098022000027022 C ARRINCAZEAUX C . , G ASCHET F . and B ECUE M . ( 2009a ) Lasers and Photonic TKDs in Aquitaine . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Université Montesquieu – Bordeaux IV , Bordeaux . C ARRINCAZEAUX C . , G ASCHET F . and B ECUE M . ( 2009b ) Pharma - food TKDs in Aquitaine . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Université Montesquieu – Bordeaux IV , Bordeaux . C HEN Y . - C . ( 2007 ) The upgrading of multinational regional innovation networks in China , Asia Paci ﬁ c Business Review 13 , 373 – 403 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13602380701291941 C OCHOY F . ( 2008 ) Du lien au coeur de l ’ échange , Sciences de la société 73 , 105 – 121 . C OE N . M . , D ICKEN P . and H ESS M . ( 2008 ) Global production networks : realizing the potential , Journal of Economic Geography 8 , 271 – 295 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jeg / lbn002 C OE N . M . , H ESS M . , Y EUNG H . , D ICKEN P . and H ENDERSON J . ( 2004 ) ‘ Globalizing ’ regional development : a global production networks perspective , Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 29 , 468 – 484 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 0020 - 2754 . 2004 . 00142 . x C OOKE P . ( 2008 ) Regional innovation systems : origin of the species , International Journal of Technological Learning , Innovation and Development 1 , 393 – 409 . doi : 10 . 1504 / IJTLID . 2008 . 019980 C OOKE P . and L AZZERETTI L . ( Eds ) ( 2008 ) Creative Cities , Cultural Clusters and Local Economic Development . Edward Elgar , Cheltenham . C OOKE P . and L EYDESDORFF L . ( 2006 ) Regional development in the knowledge - based economy : the construction of advantage , Journal of Technology Transfer 31 , 5 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10961 - 005 - 5009 - 3 C REVOISIER O . and J EANNERAT H . ( 2009 ) Territorial knowledge dynamics : from the proximity paradigm to multi - location milieus , European Planning Studies 17 , 1223 – 1241 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09654310902978231 D AHLSTRÖM M . , Ö STBERG S . , D YMÉN C . , H EDIN S . , H ENRIKSSON S . and S MED O LSEN L . ( 2009 ) Film tourism TKDs in Skåne . EURO - DITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Nordregio , Stockholm . D E L AURENTIS C . and C OOKE P . ( 2009 ) TKDs in the Welsh Agro - food and Biotechnology Activities . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Cardiff University , Cardiff . D EWEY J . ( 1939 ) Theory of valuation , International Encyclopedia of Uni ﬁ ed Science 2 , 1 – 67 . D OLOREUX D . ( 2002 ) What we should know about regional systems of innovation , Technology in Society 24 , 243 – 263 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0160 - 791X ( 02 ) 00007 - 6 D OLOREUX D . and S HEARMUR R . ( 2012 ) Collaboration , information and the geography of innovation in knowledge intensive business services , Journal of Economic Geography 12 , 7 9 – 105 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jeg / lbr003 D OSI G . ( 1982 ) Technological paradigms and technological trajectories : a suggested interpretation of the determinants and direc - tions of technical change , Research Policy 11 , 147 – 162 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0048 - 7333 ( 82 ) 90016 - 6 D ULUPÇU M . A . , S EZGIN A . , D EMIREL O . , C EVHER E . , G ÖKHAN O . , S UNGUR O . , Ç IFTLIKLI B . and G ÖÇEN S . ( 2009 ) Tourism - Based TKDs in the Antalya Region . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Suleyman Demirel University , Isparta . E TZKOWITZ H . ( 2006 ) The new visible hand : an assisted linear model of science and innovation policy , Science and Public Policy 33 , 310 – 320 . doi : 10 . 3152 / 147154306781778911 E TZKOWITZ H . and L EYDESDORFF L . ( 2000 ) The dynamics of innovation : from national systems and ‘ Mode 2 ’ to a triple helix of university – industry – government relations , Research Policy 29 , 109 – 123 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0048 - 7333 ( 99 ) 00055 - 4 F AVEREAU O . , B IENCOURT O . and E YMARD - D UVERNAY F . ( 2002 ) Where do markets come from ? From ( quality ) conventions ! , in F AVEREAU O . and L AZEGA E . ( Eds ) Conventions and Structures in Economic Organization : Markets , Networks , and Hierarchies , pp . 213 – 252 . Edward Elgar , Cheltenham . F LIGSTEIN N . ( 1996 ) Markets as politics : a political – cultural approach to market institutions , American Sociological Review 61 , 656 – 673 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2096398 F LORIDA R . ( 2002 ) The Rise of the Creative Class . And How It ’ s Transforming Work , Leisure and Everyday Life . Basic , New York , NY . G ARDINER B . , M ARTIN R . and T YLER P . ( 2004 ) Competitiveness , productivity and economic growth across the European regions , Regional Studies 38 , 1037 – 1059 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0034340042000292638 G ERTLER M . S . ( 2010 ) Rules of the game : the place of institutions in regional economic change , Regional Studies 44 , 1 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343400903389979 G IBBONS M . , L IMOGES C . , N OWOTNY H . , S CHWARTZMAN S . , S COTT P . and T ROW M . ( 1994 ) The New Production of Knowledge . The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies . Sage , London . G RABHER G . ( 2002 ) The project ecology of advertising : tasks , talents and teams , Regional Studies 36 , 245 – 262 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343400220122052 G RABHER G . , I BERT O . and F LOHR S . ( 2008 ) The neglected king : the customer in the new knowledge ecology of innovation , Economic Geography 84 , 253 – 280 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1944 - 8287 . 2008 . tb00365 . x 13 G REGERSEN B . and J OHNSON B . ( 1997 ) Learning economies , innovation systems and European integration , Regional Studies 31 , 479 – 490 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343409750132270 H AMDOUCH A . and M OULAERT F . ( 2006 ) Knowledge infrastructure , innovation dynamics , and knowledge creation / diffusion / accumulation processes : a comparative institutional perspective , Innovation : European Journal of Social Science Research 19 , 25 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13511610600607676 H ARMAAKORPI V . ( 2006 ) Regional Development Platform Method ( RDPM ) as a tool for regional innovation policy 1 , European Planning Studies 14 , 1085 – 1104 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09654310600852399 H ESS M . and Y EUNG H . W . C . ( 2006 ) Whither global production networks in economic geography ? Past , present , and future , Environment and Planning A 38 , 1193 – 1204 . doi : 10 . 1068 / a38463 H ODGSON G . M . ( 2007 ) Institutions and individuals : interaction and evolution , Organization Studies 28 , 9 5 – 116 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0170840607067832 J EANNERAT H . ( 2013 ) Staging experience , valuing authenticity : towards a market perspective on territorial development , European Urban and Regional Studies 20 , 370 – 384 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0969776412454126 J EANNERAT H . , K EBIR L . and C REVOISIER O . ( 2009 ) Symbolic - Based TKDs in the Swiss Watch Industry . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . University of Neuchâtel , Neuchâtel . K AISER R . and L IECKE M . ( 2009 ) Regional knowledge dynamics in the biotechnology industry : a conceptual framework for micro - level analysis , International Journal of Technology Management 46 , 371 – 385 . doi : 10 . 1504 / IJTM . 2009 . 023386 K AISER R . , L IEKE M . and K RIPP M . ( 2008 ) Biotechnology - Based TKDs in the Bavarian Region . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Ludwig - Maximilians - Universitaet Muenchen , Munich . K EBIR L . and C REVOISIER O . ( 2004 ) Dynamique des ressources et milieux innovateurs , in M AILLAT D . , C AMAGNI R . and M ATTÉAC - CIOLI A . ( Eds ) Ressources naturelles et culturelles , milieux et développement local , pp . 261 – 290 . EDES - GREMI , Neuchâtel . K EBIR L . and C REVOISIER O . ( 2007 ) Resources development and actors coordination : what role for innovative milieus ? , Inter - national Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management 7 , 204 – 222 . doi : 10 . 1504 / IJEIM . 2007 . 012882 K EBIR L . and C REVOISIER O . ( 2008 ) Cultural resources and the regional development : the case of the cultural legacy of watchmak - ing , in C OOKE P . and L AZZERETTI L . ( Eds ) Creatives Cities , Cultural Cluster and Local Economic Development , pp . 48 – 69 . Edward Elgar , Cheltenham . K ITSON M . , M ARTIN R . and T YLER P . ( 2004 ) Regional competitiveness : an elusive yet key concept ? , Regional Studies 38 , 991 – 999 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0034340042000320816 K JELLBERG H . , M ALLARD A . , A RJALIÈS D . - L . , A SPERS P . , B ELJEAN S . , B IDET A . , C ORSIN A . , D IDIER E . , F OURCADE M . , G EIGER S . , H OEYER K . , L AMONT M . , M ACKENZIE D . , M AURER B . , M OURITSEN J . , S JÖGREN E . , T RYGGESTAD K . , V ATIN F . and W OOLGAR S . ( 2013 ) Valuation studies ? Our collective two cents , Valuation Studies 1 , 1 1 – 30 . doi : 10 . 3384 / vs . 2001 - 5992 . 131111 K LEPPER S . ( 1997 ) Industry life cycles , Industrial and Corporate Change 6 , 145 – 182 . doi : 10 . 1093 / icc / 6 . 1 . 145 K LINE S . and R OSENBERG N . ( 1986 ) An overview of innovation , in L ANDAU R . and R OSENBERG N . ( Eds ) The Positive Sum Strategy : Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth , pp . 275 – 305 . National Academy Press , Washington , DC . L AGENDIJK A . ( 2006 ) Learning from conceptual ﬂ ow in regional studies : framing present debates , unbracketing past debates , Regional Studies 40 , 385 – 399 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343400600725202 L AGENDIJK A . and O INAS P . ( 2005 ) Proximity , external relations , and local economic development , in L AGENDIJK A . and O INAS P . ( Eds ) Proximity , Distance and Diversity : Issues on Economic Interaction and Local Development , pp . 3 – 20 . Ashgate , Aldershot . L ARSSON A . ( 2009 ) Automotive TKDs in Västra Götaland . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Göteborgs Universitet , Gothenburg . L OASBY B . ( 2000 ) Market institutions and economic evolution , Journal of Evolutionary Economics 10 , 297 – 309 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s001910050016 L UNDVALL B . A . ( 1988 ) Innovation as an interactive process – from user – producer interaction to the national system of innovation , in D OSI G . , F REEMAN C . , N ELSON R . , S ILVERBERG G . and S OETE L . ( Eds ) Technical Change and Economic Theory , pp . 349 – 369 . Pinter , London . L UNDVALL B . A . and J OHNSON B . ( 1994 ) The learning economy , Journal of Industry Studies 1 , 2 3 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13662719400000002 M AC N EILL S . and C OLLINGE C . ( 2010 ) The rationale for EURODITE and an introduction to the sector studies , in C OOKE P . , D E L AURENTIS C . , M AC N EILL S . and C OLLINGE C . ( Eds ) Platforms of Innovation : Dynamics of New Industrial Knowledge Flows , pp . 38 – 52 . Edward Elgar , Cheltenham . M AC N EILL S . , J AMES L . , C OLLINGE C . and S TAINES A . ( 2009 ) Automotive TKD in West Midlands . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . University of Birmingham , Birmingham . M ALERBA F . ( 2002 ) Sectoral systems of innovation and production , Research Policy 31 , 247 – 264 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0048 - 7333 ( 01 ) 00139 - 1 M ALMBERG A . and P OWER D . ( 2005 ) On the role of global demand in local innovation processes , in F UCHS G . and S HAPIRA P . ( Eds ) Rethinking Regional Innovation and Change : Path Dependency of Regional Breakthrough ? , pp . 273 – 290 . Springer , New York , NY . M ANNICHE J . and L ARSEN K . ( 2013 ) Experience staging and symbolic knowledge : the case of Bornholm culinary products , European Urban and Regional Studies 20 , 401 – 416 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0969776412453146 M ANNICHE J . , T OPSØ L ARSEN K . and P ETERSEN T . ( 2009 ) Food - Based TKDs in Bornholm . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Centre for Regional and Tourism Research , Bornholm . M ARCH J . G . ( 1991 ) Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning , Organization Science 2 , 7 1 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2 . 1 . 71 M ARTIN R . and S UNLEY P . ( 2001 ) Rethinking the ‘ economic ’ in economic geography : broadening our vision or losing our focus ? , Antipode 33 , 148 – 161 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8330 . 00173 14 M ARTIN R . and S UNLEY P . ( 2003 ) Deconstructing clusters : chaotic concept or policy panacea ? Journal of Economic Geography 3 , 5 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jeg / 3 . 1 . 5 M ORGAN K . ( 1997 ) The learning region : institutions , innovation and regional renewal , Regional Studies 31 , 491 – 503 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343409750132289 M OULAERT F . and S EKIA F . ( 2003 ) Territorial innovation models : a critical survey , Regional Studies 37 , 289 – 302 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0034340032000065442 N ELSON R . R . and W INTER S . G . ( 1982 ) An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . N ORGAARD R . B . ( 1994 ) Development Betrayed . Routledge , New York , NY . O INAS P . and M ALECKI E . J . ( 2002 ) The evolution of technologies in time and space : from national and regional to spatial inno - vation systems , International Regional Science Review 25 , 102 – 131 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 016001702762039402 P ECK J . ( 2005 ) Economic sociologies in space , Economic Geography 81 , 129 – 175 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1944 - 8287 . 2005 . tb00263 . x P ENDALL R . , F OSTER K . A . and C OWELL M . ( 2010 ) Resilience and regions : building understanding of the metaphor , Cambridge Journal of Regions , Economy and Society 3 , 7 1 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cjres / rsp028 P INE B . J . and G ILMORE J . H . ( 1999 ) The Experience Economy : Work Is Theatre & Every Business a Stage . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . P ORTER M . E . ( 1998 ) Clusters and the new economics of competition , Harvard Business Review 76 , 77 – 90 . P ORTER M . E . ( 2000 ) Localisation , competition , and economic development : local clusters in a global economy , Economic Devel - opment Quarterly 14 , 15 – 34 . P OTTS J . ( 2001 ) Knowledge and markets , Journal of Evolutionary Economics 11 , 413 – 431 . P OWER D . and S COTT A . J . ( Eds ) ( 2004 ) Cultural Industries and the Production of Culture . Routledge , London . Q VORTRUP L . ( 2006 ) The new knowledge regions : from simple to complex innovation theory , in C OOKE P . and P ICCALUGA A . ( Eds ) Regional Development in the Knowledge Economy , pp . 246 – 271 . Routledge , Abingdon . R EHAK S . , P ASTOR R . and S URANOVA J . ( 2009 ) ICT - and KIBS - Based TKDs in the Bratislava Region . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Univerzita V Bratislave , Bratislava . R OSENBERG N . ( 1982 ) Inside the Black Box : Technology and Economics . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . S ANDELOWSKI M . , D OCHERTY S . and E MDEN C . ( 1997 ) Qualitative metasynthesis : issues and techniques , Research in Nursing and Health 20 , 365 – 371 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1098 - 240X ( 199708 ) 20 : 4 < 365 : : AID - NUR9 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - E S AXENIAN A . ( 2006 ) The New Argonauts : Regional Advantage in a Global Economy . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . S IMMIE J . ( 2005 ) Innovation and space : a critical review of the literature , Regional Studie s 39 , 2 6 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343400500213671 S IMMIE J . and M ARTIN R . ( 2010 ) The economic resilience of regions : towards an evolutionary approach , Cambridge Journal of Regions , Economy and Society 3 , 2 7 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cjres / rsp029 S IMMIE J . and S TRAMBACH S . ( 2006 ) The contribution of KIBS to innovation in cities ; an evolutionary and institutional perspective , Journal of Knowledge Management 10 , 2 6 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1108 / 13673270610691152 S TANOVNIK P . and M UROVEC N . ( 2009 ) ICT - Based TKDs in Slovenia . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Intitut za Ekonomska Raziskovanja , Ljubljana . S TEINLE W . J . ( 1992 ) Regional competitiveness and the single market , Regional Studies 26 , 307 – 318 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343409212331347011 S TOCHETTI A . , V OLPATO G . and F INOTTO V . ( 2009 ) Creativity - Based TKDs in the Veneto Region . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Università Ca ’ Foscari Venezia , Venice . S TRAMBACH S . , S TOCKHORST J . and S ANDMÜLLER M . ( 2009 ) Territorial Knowledge Dynamics in the Automotive Industry of Baden - Würt - temberg – The Contribution of Engineering Services and Visual Computing Services . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5e ) , 36 . Philipps - Universität Marburg , Marburg . T HORNE S . , J ENSEN L . , K EARNEY M . H . , N OBLIT G . and S ANDELOWSKI M . ( 2004 ) Qualitative metasynthesis : re ﬂ ections on meth - odological orientation and ideological agenda , Qualitative Health Research 14 , 1342 – 1365 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1049732304269888 V ALE M . and C ARVALHO L . ( 2012 ) Knowledge networks and processes of anchoring in Portuguese biotechnology , Regional Studies 47 , 1018 – 1033 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343404 . 2011 . 644237 V ALE M . , C ARVALHO L . and S ILVA S . ( 2009 ) Health Technology TKDs in the Centro Region . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Fundação da Universidade de Lisboa , Lisbon . V ATIN F . ( 2013 ) Valuation as evaluating and valorizing , Valuation Studies 1 , 3 1 – 50 . doi : 10 . 3384 / vs . 2001 - 5992 . 131131 V ICENTE J . , B ALLAND P . A . and B ROSSARD O . ( 2011 ) Getting into networks and clusters : evidence from the Midi - Pyrenean Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) collaboration network , Regional Studies 45 , 1059 – 1078 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343401003713340 V ISSERS G . and D ANKBAAR B . ( 2009 ) Plant Biotechnology TKDs in the Wageningen Region . EURODITE Internal Report ( D5c ) . Radboud University of Nijmegen , Nijmegen . V ON H IPPEL E . ( 2005 ) Democratizing Innovation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . W ENGER E . ( 1998 ) Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning and Identity . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . W HITE H . ( 2002 ) Markets from Networks : Socioeconomic Models of Production . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . 15