Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cognition journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cognit Original Articles Abstraction promotes creative problem - solving in rhesus monkeys William W . L . Sampson a , Sara A . Khan a , Eric J . Nisenbaum a , Jerald D . Kralik a , b , ⁎ a Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences , Dartmouth College , 6207 Moore Hall , Hanover , NH 03755 , United States b Department of Bio and Brain Engineering , Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ( KAIST ) , 291 Daehak - ro , Yuseong - gu , Daejeon 34141 , South Korea A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Abstract rules Decision - making Executive control Primate cognition Number Reverse - reward task Evolution of cognition A B S T R A C T Abstraction allows us to discern regularities beyond the speci ﬁ c instances we encounter . It also promotes creative problem - solving by enabling us to consider unconventional problem solutions . However , the mechan - isms by which this occurs are not well understood . Because it is often di ﬃ cult to isolate human high - level cognitive processes , we utilized a nonhuman primate model , in which rhesus monkeys appear to use similar processes to consider an unconventional solution to the di ﬃ cult reverse - reward problem : i . e . , given the choice between a better and worse food option they must select the worse one to receive the better one . After solving this problem with only one speci ﬁ c example — one vs . four half - peanuts — three of four monkeys immediately transferred to novel cases : novel quantities , food items , non - food items , and to the choice between a larger , but inferior vegetable and a smaller , but superior food item ( either grape or marshmallow ) , in which they selected the inferior vegetable to receive the superior option . Thus , we show that nonhuman animals have the capacity to comprehend abstract non - perceptual features , to infer them from one speci ﬁ c case , and to use them to override the natural preference to select the superior option . Critically , we also found that three monkeys had a large learning and performance advantage over the fourth monkey who showed less generalization from the original one and four half - peanuts . This di ﬀ erence suggests that abstraction promoted problem - solving via cascading activation from the two food item options to the relation between them , thus providing access to an initially nonapparent problem solution . 1 . Introduction It is impossible to encounter truly identical situations . The Greek philosopher Heraclitus recognized that the natural world is too dynamic and varied to step in the same river twice , as the particles that con - stitute it are always in motion . In face of this challenge , we discern regularities beyond the speci ﬁ c incidents we encounter . These regula - rities arise from inductive abstraction processes that generalize speci ﬁ c events , enabling us to process novel experiences e ﬃ ciently and react accordingly ( Holyoak & Morrison , 2012 ) . Moreover , such inductive processing occurs at multiple levels of abstraction , allowing us to identify a novel sensory input as an instance of , for example , a known object , category , concept , or relation ( Badre , Ho ﬀ man , Cooney , & D ' Esposito , 2009 ; Herrnstein , 1990 ; Holyoak & Morrison , 2012 ; Kowaguchi , Patel , Bunnell , & Kralik , 2016 ; Kralik , 2012 ; Kralik & Hauser , 2002 ; Rosch , 1978 ; Tenenbaum , Kemp , Gri ﬃ ths , & Goodman , 2011 ) . Abstraction also has the power to promote creative problem - solving . Although creativity is di ﬃ cult to de ﬁ ne , it is important to distinguish noncreative and creative problem - solving . Problem - solving in general entails generating a representation of the problem and then solving it by determining the proper sequence of actions to reach the goal state ( Bassok & Novick , 2012 ) . Creativity can be introduced into the pro - blem - solving process in one of two places : either in the formulation of the problem itself , or in the delineation of the path taken to solve it . Although there has been considerable research progress examining how agents ﬁ nd solution paths when faced with relatively well - de ﬁ ned problems , less is known about how problem representations are gen - erated and updated ( i . e . , restructured ) ( Bassok & Novick , 2012 ; Sutton & Barto , 1998 ; van Steenburgh , Fleck , Beeman , & Kounios , 2012 ) . We therefore have focused on the mechanisms of problem formulation and the use of creativity therein . The curse of dimensionality in real - world problems necessitates a selection process : typical problem - solving involves considering only the most apparently relevant factors to represent the problem . It is up to the observer to determine which factors facilitate a solution . For example , to ﬁ nd a new path to a restaurant one normally considers the most obvious means of transportation ( e . g . , walk , subway , car ) , and will take https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2018 . 02 . 021 Received 26 June 2014 ; Received in revised form 16 August 2017 ; Accepted 20 February 2018 ⁎ Corresponding author at : Department of Bio and Brain Engineering , Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ( KAIST ) , 291 Daehak - ro , Yuseong - gu , Daejeon 34141 , South Korea . E - mail address : jerald . kralik @ kaist . ac . kr ( J . D . Kralik ) . Cognition 176 ( 2018 ) 53 – 64 Available online 20 March 2018 0010 - 0277 / © 2018 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . T